



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Mr. Lovelace, in continuation of his last letter,
No. vi. gives an account to his Friend, pretty
much to the same effect with the Lady's, of what
passed between them at the inns, in the journey,
and till their fixing at Mrs. Sorlings's. To avoid
repetition, those passages in his account are only
extracted, which will serve to embellish hers; to 

open his views; or to display the humourous talent
he was noted for. 
At their alighting at the inn at St. Alban's on Monday
night, thus he writes. 
The people who came about us, as we alighted,
seemed, by their jaw-fallen faces, and goggling eyes,
to wonder at beholding a charming young lady, majesty
in her air and aspect, so composedly dressed, yet
with features so discomposed, come off a journey,
which had made the cattle smoke, and the servants
sweat. I read their curiosity, and my beloved's uneasiness. 
She cast a conscious glance as she alighted,
upon her habit, which was no habit, and repulsively,
as I may say, quitting my assisting hand, hurried into
the house as fast as she could. *** 
Ovid was not a greater master of metamorphoses
than thy friend. To the mistress of the house I instantly
changed her into a sister, brought off by surprize
from a near relation's (where she had winter'd),
to prevent her marrying a confounded Rake [I love
always to go as near the truth as I can], whom her
father and mother, her elder sister, and all her loving
uncles, aunts, and cousins, abhorred. This accounted
for my charmer's expected sullens; for her
displeasure when she was to join me again, were it
to hold; for her unsuitable dress upon a road; and,
at the same time, gave her a proper and seasonable
assurance of my honourable views. 
Upon the debate between the lady and him, and particularly
upon that part where she upbraids him
with putting a young creature upon making a sacrifice
of her duty and conscience, he writes— 
All these, and still more mortifying things, she said. 
I heard her in silence. But when it came to
my turn, I pleaded, I argued, I answered her, as
well as I could. —And when humility would not 

do, I raised my voice, and suffer'd my eye to sparkle
with anger; hoping to take advantage of that sweet
cowardice which is so amiable in the Sex [which
many of them, indeed, fantastically affect], and to
which my victory over this proud beauty is principally
owing. 
She was not intimidated, however; and was going
to rise upon me in her temper; and would have broke
in upon my defence. But when a man talks to a lady
upon such subjects, let her be ever so much in Alt,
'tis strange, if he cannot throw out a tub to the
whale;—if he cannot divert her from resenting one
bold thing, by uttering two or three full as bold; but
for which more favourable interpretations will lie. 
To that part, where she tells him of the difficulty she
made to correspond with him at first, thus he writes. 
Very true, my precious! —And innumerable have
been the difficulties thou hast made me struggle with. 
But one day thou mayest wish, that thou hadst spared
this boast; as well as those other pretty haughtinesses,
—That thou didst not reject Solmes for my sake: That
my glory, if I valued myself upon carrying thee off,
was thy shame: —That I have more merit with myself,
than with thee, or any-body else: [What a coxcomb
she makes me, Jack!] That thou wishest thyself in
thy father's house again, whatever were to be the consequence. 
—If I forgive thee, charmer, for these hints,
for these reflections, for these wishes, for these contempts,
I am not the Lovelace I have been reputed to
be; and that thy treatment of me shews that thou
thinkest I am— 
In short, her whole air throughout this debate,
expressed a majestic kind of indignation, which implied
a believed superiority of talents over the man she
spoke to. 
Thou hast heard me often expatiate upon the pitiful
figure a man must make, whose wife has, or believes 

she has, more sense than himself. A thousand
reasons could I give, why I ought not to think of
marrying Miss Clarissa Harlowe: At least till I can
be sure, that she loves me with the preference I must
expect from a wife. 
I begin to stagger in my resolutions. Ever averse
as I was to the Hymeneal shackles, how easily will
old prejudices recur! —Heaven give me the heart to
be honest to her! —There's a prayer, Jack! —If
I should not be heard, what a sad thing would that be,
for the most admirable of women! —Yet, as I do not
often trouble Heaven with my prayers, who knows
but this may be granted? 
But there lie before me such charming difficulties,
such scenery for intrigue, for stratagem, for enterprize
—What a horrible thing that my talents point
all that way! —When I know what is honourable and
just; and would almost wish to be honest? —Almost, I
say; for such a varlet am I, that I cannot altogether
wish it, for the soul of me! —Such a triumph over
the whole Sex, if I can subdue this lady! —My maiden
vow, as I may call it! —For did not the Sex begin
with me? —And does this lady spare me? —Think'st
thou, Jack, that I should have spared my Rosebud,
had I been set at defiance thus? —Her grandmother
besought me, at first, to spare her Rosebud; and
when a girl is put, or puts herself, into a man's power,
what can he wish for further? while I always consider'd
opposition and resistance as a challenge to do
my worst (a) . 
Why, why, will the dear creature take such pains
to appear all ice to me? —Why will she, by her pride,
awaken mine? —Hast thou not seen, in the above,
how contemptibly she treats me? —What have I not
suffer'd for her, and even from her? —Is it tolerable
to be told, that she will despise me, if I value myself
above that odious Solmes!— 

Then she cuts me short in all my ardors. To vow
fidelity, is, by a cursed turn upon me, to shew, that
there is reason, in my own opinion, for doubt of it. — 
The very same reflection upon me, once before (a) . 
In my power, or out of my power, all one to her. — 
So, Belford, my poor vows are cramm'd down my
throat, before they can well rise to my lips. And
what can a lover say to his mistress, if she will neither
let him lye nor swear? 
One little piece of artifice I had recourse to: When
she push'd so hard for me to leave her, I made a request
to her, upon a condition she could not refuse; 
and pretended as much gratitude upon her granting it,
as if it were a favour of the last consequence. 
And what was This? but to promise what she had
before promised, Never to marry any other man,
while I am living, and single, unless I should give
her cause for high disgust against me. This, you
know, was promising nothing, because she could be
offended at any time; and was to be the sole judge of
the offence. But it shew'd her, how reasonable and
just my expectations were; and that I was no encroacher. 
She consented; and ask'd, What security I expected? 
Her word only. 
She gave me her word: But I besought her excuse
for sealing it: And, in the same moment [since to have
waited for consent, would have been asking for a denial],
saluted her. And, believe me, or not, but, as
I hope to live, it was the first time I had the courage
to touch her charming lips with mine. And This I tell
thee, Belford, that That single pressure (as modestly
put too, as if I were as much a virgin as herself, that
she might not be afraid of me another time) delighted
me more than ever I was delighted by the Ultimatum
with any other woman. —So precious does awe, reverence, 

and apprehended prohibition, make a favour! 
I am only afraid, that I shall be too cunning; for
she does not at present talk enough for me. I hardly
know what to make of the dear creature yet. 
I topt the brother's part on Monday night before
the landlady at St. Albans; asking my sister's pardon
for carrying her off so unprepar'd for a journey; prated
of the joy my father and mother, and all our friends,
would have on receiving her; and This with so many
circumstances, that I perceived, by a look she gave
me, that went thro' my very reins, that I had gone
too far. I apologiz'd for it, indeed, when alone; 
but I could not penetrate for the soul of me, whether
I made the matter better or worse by it. —But I am of
too frank a nature: My success, and the joy I have,
because of the jewel I am half in possession of, has not
only unlock'd my bosom, but left the door quite
open. 
This is a confounded sly Sex. Would she but
speak out, as I do—But I must learn reserves of her. 
She must needs be unprovided of money: But has
too much pride to accept of any from me. I would
have her go to town [to town, if possible, must I get
her to consent to go], in order to provide herself with
the richest of silks which That can afford. But neither
is this to be assented to. And yet, as my intelligencer
acquaints me, her implacable relations are resolved
to distress her all they can. 
These wretches have been most gloriously raving,
it seems, ever since her flight; and still, thank Heaven,
continue to rave; and will, I hope, for a twelve-month
to come. —Now, at last, it is my day!— 
Bitterly do they regret, that they permitted her
poultry-visits, and garden-walks, which gave her the
opportunity they know she had (tho' they could not
find out how) to concert, as they suppose, her
pre-concerted escape. For, as to her dining in the 

Ivy-bower, they had a cunning design to answer
upon her in that permission, as Betty told Joseph her
love (a) . 
They lost, they say, an excellent pretence for more
closely confining her, on my threatening to rescue her,
if they offer'd to carry her against her will to old
Antony's moated house (b) . For this, as I told thee
at the Hart, and as I once hinted to the dear creature
herself (c) , they had it in deliberation to do; apprehending,
that I might attempt to carry her off, either
with or without her consent, on some one of those
connived-at excursions. 
But here my honest Joseph, who gave me the information,
was of admirable service to me. I had
taught him to make the Harlowes believe, that I was
as communicative to my servants, as their stupid
James was to Joseph (d) : Joseph, as they supposed,
by tampering with Will (e) , got at all my secrets, and
was acquainted with all my motions: And having
undertaken to watch all his young Lady's too (f) ; 
the wise family were secure; and so was my beloved,
and so was I. 
I once had it in my head [and I hinted it to thee in
a former (g) ,] in case such a step should be necessary,
to attempt to carry her off by surprize from the
wood-house; as it is remote from the dwelling-house. 
This, had I attempted, I should certainly have effected,
by the help of the Confraternity: And it would
have been an action worthy of us All. —But Joseph's
conscience, as he called it, stood in my way; 
for he thought, it must have been known to be done by 

his connivance. I could, I dare say, have overcome
this scruple, as easily as I did many of his others, had
I not depended, at one time, upon her meeting me at
a midnight or late hour; when, if she had, it would
have cost me a fall, had she gone back; at other
times, upon the cunning family's doing my work for
me, by driving her into my arms. 
And then I knew, that James and Arabella were
determin'd never to leave off their foolish trials and
provocations, till, by tiring her out, they had either
made her Solmes's wife; or guilty of such a rashness
as should throw her for ever out of the favour of
both her uncles. 