


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Saturday, May 6. 
I Thank you, Harriet, for yours. What must your
fellows think of you? In this gross age, your delicacy
must astonish them. There used to be more
of it formerly. But how should men know any-thing
of it, when women have forgot it? Lord be thanked,
we females, since we have been admitted into so constant
a share of the public diversions, want not courage. 
We can give the men stare for stare where-ever
we meet them. The next age, nay, the rising
generation, must surely be all heroes and heroines. 
But whither has this word delicacy carried me? Me,
who, it seems, have faults to be corrected for of another 

sort; and who want not the courage for which I
congratulate others? 
But to other subjects. I could write a vast deal of
stuff about my Lord and Self, and Lord and Lady L.
who assume parts which I know not how to allow
them: And sometimes they threaten me with my brother's
resentments, sometimes with my Harriet's; so
that I must really have leading-strings fastened to my
shoulders. O my dear! a fond husband is a surfeiting
thing; and yet I believe most women love to be
made monkeys of. 
* *
But all other subjects must now give way. We
have heard of, tho' not from, my brother. A particulat
friend of Mr. Lowther was here with a Letter from
that gentleman, acquainting us, that Sir Charles and
he were arrived at Paris. 
Mr. Beauchamp was with us when Mr. Lowther's
friend came. He borrowed the Letter on account of
the extraordinary adventure mentioned in it. 
Make your heart easy, in the first place, about Sir
Hargrave. He is indeed in town; but very ill. He
was frighted into England, and intends not ever again
to quit it. In all probability, he owes it to my brother
that he exists. 
Mr. Beauchamp went directly to Cavendish Square,
and informed himself there of other particulars relating
to the affair, from the very servant who was present
and acting in it; and from those particulars, and
Mr. Lowther's Letter, wrote one for Dr. Bartlett. 
Mr. Beauchamp obliged me with the perusal of what
he wrote; whence I have extracted the following account:
For his Letter is long and circumstantial; 
and I did not ask his leave to take a copy, as he seemed
desirous to hasten it to the doctor. 
On Wednesday, the 
of April, in the evening, as
my brother was pursuing his journey to Paris, and was 

within two miles of that capital, a servant-man rode
up, in visible terror, to his post-chaise, in which were
Mr. Lowther and himself, and besought them to hear
his dreadful tale. The gentlemen stopt, and he told
them, that his master, who was an Englishman, and
his friend of the same nation, had been but a little
while before attacked, and sorced out of the road in
their post-chaise, as he doubted not, to be murdered,
by no less than seven armed horsemen; and he pointed
to a hill, at distance, called Mont Martre, behind
which they were, at that moment, perpetrating their
bloody purpose. He had just before, he said, addressed
himself to two other gentlemen, and their retinue,
who drove on the faster for it. 
The servant's great coat was open; and Sir Charles
observing his livery, asked him, If he were not a servant
of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen? and was answered in
the affirmative. 
There are, it seems, trees planted on each side the
road from St. Denis to Paris, but which, as France is
an open and uninclosed country, would not, but for
the hill, have hindered the seeing a great way off, the
scuffling of so many men on horseback. There is
also a ditch on either hand; but places lest for
owners to come at their grounds, with their carts, and
other carriages. Sir Charles ordered the post boy to
drive to one of those passages; saying, He could not
forgive himself, if he did not endeavour to save Sir
Hargrave, and his friend, whose name the man told
him was Merceda. 
His own servants were three in number, besides
one of Mr. Lowther. My brother made Mr. Lowther's
servant dismount; and, getting himself on his
horse, ordered the others to follow him. He begged
Mr. Lowther to continue in the chaise, bidding the
dismounted servant stay, and attend his master, and
galloped away towards the hill. His ears were soon
pierced with the cries of the poor wretches; and 

presently he saw two men on horseback holding the
horses of four others, who had under them the two
gentlemen, struggling, groaning, and crying out for
mercy. 
On the approach of Sir Charles, who was a good
way a-head of his servants, he calling out to spare the
gentlemen, and bending his course to relieve the prostrate
sufferers, two of the four quitted their prey,
and mounting, joined the other two horsemen, and
advanced to meet Sir Charles, with a shew of supporting
the two men on foot in their violence; who continued
laying on the wretches, with the but-ends of
their whips, unmercifully. 
As the assailants offered not to fly, and as they had
more than time enough to execute their purpose, had
it been robbery and murder; Sir Charles concluded, it
was likely that these men were actuated by a private
revenge. He was confirmed in this surmise, when
the four men on horseback, tho' each had his pistol
ready drawn, as Sir Charles also had his, demanded a
conference; warning Sir Charles how he provoked his
fate by his rashness; and declaring, that he was a dead
man if he fired. 
Forbear, then, said Sir Charles, all further violences
to the gentlemen, and I will hear what you have to
say. 
He then put his pistol into his holster; and one of
his servants being come up, and the two others at
hand (to whom he called out, not to fire till they had
his orders), he gave him his horse's reins; bidding
him have an eye to the holsters of both, and leapt
down; and, drawing his sword, made towards the
two men who were so cruelly exercising their whips; 
and who, on his approach, retired to some little distance,
drawing their hangers. 
The four men on horseback joined the two on foot,
just as they were quitting the objects of their fury; 
and one of them said, Forbear, for the present, further 

violence, brother; the gentleman shall be told
the cause of all this. —Murder, Sir, said he, is not
intended; nor are we robbers: The men whom you
are solicitous to save from our vengeance, are villains. 
Be the cause what it will, answered Sir Charles,
you are in a country noted for doing speedy justice,
upon proper application to the magistrates. In the
same instant he raised first one groaning man, then the
other. Their heads were all over bloody, and they
were so much bruised, that they could not extend their
arms to reach their wigs and hats, which lay near
them; nor put them on without Sir Charles's help. 
The men on foot by this time had mounted their
horses, and all six stood upon their defence; but one
of them was so furious, crying out, that his vengeance
should be yet more complete, that two of the others
could hardly restrain him. 
Sir Charles asked Sir Hargrave and Mr. Merceda,
Whether they had reason to look upon themselves as
injured men, or injurers? One of the assailants answered,
That they both knew themselves to be villains. 
Either from consciousness, or terror, perhaps from
both, they could not speak for themselves, but by
groans; nor could either of them stand or sit upright. 
Just then came up, in the chaise, Mr. Lowther
and his servant, each a pistol in his hand. He quitted
the chaise, when he came near the suffering men; 
and Sir Charles desired him instantly to examine whether
the gentlemen were dangerously hurt, or not. 
The most enraged of the assailants, having slipt by
the two who were earnest to restrain him, would
again have attacked Mr. Merceda; offering a stroke
at him with his hanger: But Sir Charles (his drawn
sword still in his hand) caught hold of his bridle; 
and, turning his horse's head aside, diverted a stroke, 

which, in all probability, would otherwise have been a
finishing one. 
They all came about Sir Charles, bidding him, at
his peril, use his sword upon their friend: And Sir
Charles's servants were coming up to their master's
support, had there been occasion. At that instant
Mr. Lowther, assisted by his own servant, was examining
the wounds and bruises of the two terrified
men, who had yet no reason to think themselves safe
from further violence. 
Sir Charles repeatedly commanded his servants not
to fire, nor approach nearer, without his orders. The
persons, said he, to the assailants, whom you have so cruelly
used, are Englishmen of condition. I will protect
them. Be the provocation what it will, you must
know that your attempt upon them is a criminal one; 
and if my friend last come up, who is a very skilful
surgeon, shall pronounce them in danger, you shall
find it so. Still he held the horse of the furious one; 
and three of them, who seemed to be principals, were
beginning to express some resentment at this cavalier
treatment, when Mr. Lowther gave his opinion, that
there was no apparent danger of death: And then Sir
Charles, quitting the man's bridle, and putting himself
between the assailants and sufferers, said, That as
they had not either offered to fly, or to be guilty of
violence to himself, his friend, or servants; he was
afraid they had some reason to think themselves ill
used by the gentlemen. But, however, as they could
not suppose they were at liberty, in a civilized country,
to take their revenge on the persons of those who
were intitled to the protection of that country; he
should expect, that they would hold themselves to be
personally answerable for their conduct at a proper
tribunal. 
The villains, one of the men said, knew who they
were, and what the provocation was; which had merited
a worse treatment than they had hitherto met 

with. You, Sir, proceeded he, seem to be a man
of honour, and temper: We are men of honour, as
well as you. Our design, as we told you, was not
to kill the miscreants; but to give them reason to remember
their villainy as long as they lived; and to
put it out of their power ever to be guilty of the like. 
They have made a vile attempt, continued he, on a
Lady's honour at Abbeville; and, finding themselves
detected, and in danger, had taken round about ways,
and shifted from one vehicle to another, to escape the
vengeance of her friends. The gentleman whose
horse you held, and who has reason to be in a passion,
is the husband of the Lady [A Spanish husband,
surely, Harriet; not a French one, according to our
notions]. That gentleman, and that, are her brothers. 
We have been in pursuit of them two days; 
for they gave out, in order, no doubt, to put us on a
wrong scent, that they were to go to Antwerp. 
And it seems, my dear, that Sir Hargrave and his
collegue had actually sent some of their servants that
way; which was the reason that they were themselves
attended but by one. 
The gentleman told Sir Charles that there was a
third villain in their plot. They had hopes, he said,
that he would not escape the close pursuit of a manufacturer
at Abbeville, whose daughter, a lovely young
creature, he had seduced, under promises of marriage. 
Their government, he observed, were great
countenancers of the manufacturers at Abbeville; and
he would have reason, if he were laid hold of, to think
himself happy, if he came off with being obliged to
perform his promises. 
This third wretch must be Mr. Bagenhall. The
Lord grant, say I, that he may be laid hold of; and
obliged to make a ruined girl an honest woman, as they
phrase it in Lancashire. Don't you wish so, my
dear? And let me add, that had the relations of the
injured Lady completed their intended vengeance on 

those two Libertines (A very proper punishment, I
ween, for all Libertines), it might have helped them
to pass the rest of their lives with great tranquillity; 
and honest girls might, for any contrivances of theirs,
have passed to and from masquerades without molestation. 
Sir Hargrave and his companion intended, it seems,
at first, to make some resistance; four only, of the
seven, stopping the chaise: But when the other three
came up, and they saw who they were, and knew
their own guilt, their courage sailed them. 
The seventh man was set over the post-boy, whom
he had led about half a mile from the spot they had
chosen as a convenient one for their purpose. 
Sir Hargrave's servant was secured by them at their
first attack; but after they had disarmed him and his
masters, he sound an opportunity to slip from them,
and made the best of his way to the road, in hopes of
procuring assistance for them. 
While Sir Charles was busy in helping the bruised
wretches on their feet, the seventh man came up to
the others, followed by Sir Hargrave's chaise. The
assailants had retired to some distance, and, after a
consultation together, they all advanced towards Sir
Charles; who, bidding his servants be on their guard,
leapt on his horse, with that agility and presence of
mind, for which, Mr. Beauchamp says, he excels most
men; and leading towards them, Do you advance,
gentlemen, said he, as friends, or otherwise?—Mr.
Lowther took a pistol in each hand, and held himself
ready to support him; and the servants disposed themselves
to obey their master's orders. 
Our enmity, answered one of them, is only to
these two inhospitable villains: Murder, as we told
you, was not our design. They know where we are
to be found; and that they are the vilest of men, and
have not been punished equal to their demerits. Let
them on their knees ask this gentleman's pardon; 

pointing to the husband of the insulted Lady. We
insist upon this satisfaction; and upon their promise,
that they never more will come within two leagues of
Abbeville; and we will leave them to your protection. 
I fansy, Harriet, that these women-frightening heroes
needed not to have been urged to make this promise. 
Sir Charles, turning towards them, said, If you
have done wrong, gentlemen, you ought not to scruple
asking pardon. If you know yourselves to be innocent,
tho' I should be loth to risque the lives of my
friend and servants, yet shall not my countrymen make
so undue a submission. 
The wretches kneeled; and the seven men, civilly
saluting Sir Charles and Mr. Lowther, rode off; to
the joy of the two delinquents, who kneeled again to
their deliverer, and poured forth blessings upon the
man whose life, so lately, one of them sought; and
whose preservation he had now so much reason to rejoice
in, for the sake of his own safety. 
My brother himself could not but be well pleased
that he was not obliged to come to extremities, which
might have ended fatally on both sides. 
By this time Sir Hargrave's post-chaise was come
up. He and his collegue were with difficulty lifted
into it. My brother and Mr. Lowther went into
theirs; and being but a small distance from Paris, they
proceeded thither in company; the poor wretches
blessing them all the way; and at Paris found their
other servants waiting for them. 
Sir Charles and Mr. Lowther saw them in bed in
the lodgings that had been taken for them. They
were so stiff with the bastinado they had met with,
that they were unable to help themselves. Mr. Merceda
had been more severely (I cannot call it more
cruelly) treated than the other; for he, it seems,
was the greatest malefactor in the attempt made upon 

the Lady: And he had, besides, two or three gashes,
which, but for his struggles, would have been but
one. 
As you, my dear, always turn pale when the word
Masquerade is mentioned; so, I warrant, will Abbeville
be a word of terror to these wretches, as long
as they live. 
Their enemies, it seems, carried off their arms; 
perhaps, in the true spirit of French chivalry, with a
view to lay them, as so many trophies, at the feet of
the insulted Lady. 
Mr. Lowther writes, that my brother and he are
lodged in the Hôtel of a man of quality, a dear friend
of the late Mr. Danby, and one of the three whom
he has remembered in his will; and that Sir Charles
is extremely busy in relation to the executorship; 
and, having not a moment to spare, desired Mr. Lowther
to engage his friend, to whom he wrote, to let us
know as much; and that he was hastening everything
for his journey onwards. 
Mr. Beauchamp's narrative of this affair, is, as I
told you, very circumstantial. I thought to have
shortened it more than I have done. I wish I have
not made my abstract confused, in several material
places: But I have not time to clear it up. Adieu,
my dear. 
Charlotte G. 

