



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

But now I have cleared myself of any intentional levity
on occasion of my beloved's meditation; which,
as thou observest, is finely suited to her case (that is to say,
as she and you have drawn her case); I cannot help expressing
my pleasure, that by one or two verses of it (the
arrow, Jack, and what she feared being come upon her!) 
I am encouraged to hope, what it will be very surprising
to me if it do not happen: That is, in plain English, that
the dear creature is in the way to be a mamma. 
This cursed arrest, because of the ill effects the terror
might have had upon her, in that hoped-for circumstance,
has concerned me more than on any other account. It would
be the pride of my life to prove, in this charming frost-piece,
the triumph of nature over principle, and to have a young
Lovelace by such an angel: And then, for its sake, I am
confident she will live, and will legitimate it. And what 

a meritorious little cherub would it be, that should lay an
obligation upon both parents before it was born, which neither
of them would be able to repay! —Could I be sure it
is so, I should be out of all pain for her recovery: Pain,
I say; since, were she to die—(Die! abominable word!
how I hate it!) I verily think I should be the most miserable
man in the world. 
As for the earnestness she expresses for death, she has
found the words ready to her hand in honest Job; else she
would not have delivered herself with such strength and
vehemence. 
Her innate piety (as I have more than once observed) will
not permit her to shorten her own life, either by violence
or neglect. She has a mind too noble for that; and would
have done it before now, had she designed any such thing: 
For, to do it, like the Roman matron, when the mischief
is over, and it can serve no end; and when the man, however
a Tarquin, as some may think him, in this action,
is not a Tarquin in power, so that no national point can
be made of it; is what she has too much good sense to
think of. 
Then, as I observed in a like case, a little while ago,
the distress, when this was written, was strong upon her; 
and she saw no end of it: But all was darkness and
apprehension before her. Moreover, has she it not in
her power to disappoint, as much as she has been disappointed? 
Revenge, Jack, has induced many a woman to
cherish a life, which grief and despair would otherwise
have put an end to. 
And, after all, death is no such eligible thing, as Job
in his calamities, makes it. And a death desired merely
from wordly disappointment shews not a right mind, let
me tell this lady, whatever she may think of it (a) . You 

and I, Jack, altho' not afraid in the height of passion
or resentment to rush into those dangers which might be
followed by a sudden and violent death, whenever a point
of honour calls upon us, would shudder at his cool and
deliberate approach in a lingering sickness, which had debilitated
the spirits. 
So we read of a French general, in the reign of Harry
the IVth (I forget his name, if it were not Mareschal Biron)
who, having faced with intrepidity the ghastly varlet
on an hundred occasions in the field, was the most dejected
of wretches, when, having forfeited his life for treason,
he was led with all the cruel parade of preparation, and
surrounding guards, to the scaffold. 
The poet says well: 

'Tis not the Stoic lesson, got by rote,
The pomp of words, and pedant dissertation,
That can support us in the hour of terror.
Books have taught cowards to talk nobly of it:
But when the trial comes, they start, and stand aghast.
Very true: For then it is the old man in the fable, with
his bundle of sticks. 
The lady is well read in Shakespeare, our English pride
and glory; and must sometimes reason with herself in his
words, so greatly expressed, that the subject, affecting as
it is, cannot produce any thing more so. 

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible, warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice:
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
Or blown, with restless violence, about
The pendent worlds; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and uncertain thought
Imagines howling: 'Tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loaded worldly life,
That pain, age, penury, and imprisonment,
Can lay on nature, is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

I find, by one of thy three letters, that my beloved had
some account from Hickman of my interview with Miss
Howe, at Col. Ambrose's. I had a very agreeable time
of it there; altho' severely raillied by several of the assemblée. 
It concerns me, however, not a little, to find our
affair so generally known among the Flippanti of both sexes. 
It is all her own fault. There never, surely, was such an
odd little soul as this. —Not to keep her own secret, when
the revealing of it could answer no possible good end; and
when she wants not (one would think) to raise to herself
either pity or friends, or to me enemies, by the proclamation! 
—Why, Jack, must not all her own sex laugh
in their sleeves at her weakness! What would become of
the peace of the world, if all women should take it into
their heads to follow her example? What a fine time of
it would the heads of families have? Their wives always
filling their ears with their confessions; their daughters
with theirs: Sisters would be every day setting their brothers
about cutting of throats, if they had at heart the honour
of their families, as it is called; and the whole world
would either be a scene of confusion, or cuckoldom must
be as much the fashion as it is in Lithuania (a) . 
I am glad, however, that Miss Howe, as much as she
hates me, kept her word with my cousins on their visit to
her, and with me at the Colonel's, to endeavour to persuade
her friend to make up all matters by matrimony; 
which, no doubt, is the best, nay, the only method she
can take, for her own honour, and that of her family. 
I had once thoughts of revenging myself on that little
vixen, and, particularly, as thou mayst (b)  remember, had
planned something to this purpose on the journey she is
going to take, which had been talked of some time. But,
I think—Let me see—Yes, I think, I will let this Hickman
have her safe and intire, as thou believest the fellow
to be a tolerable sort of a mortal, and that I had made the
worst of him: And I am glad, for his own sake, he has
not launched out too virulently against me to thee. 

And thus, if I pay thee not in quality, I do in quantity
(and yet leave a multitude of things unobserved upon): 
For I begin not to know what to do with myself here— 
Tired with Lord M. who, in his recovery, has play'd upon
me the fable of the nurse, the crying child, and the wolf— 
Tired with my cousins Montague, tho' charming girls,
were they not so near of kin—Tired with Mowbray and
Tourville, and their everlasting identity—Tired with the
country—Tired of myself: Longing for what I have not; 
I must go to town; and there have an interview with the
charmer of my soul: For desperate diseases must have desperate
remedies; and I only wait to know my doom from
Miss Howe; and then, if it be rejection, I will try my fate,
and receive my sentence at her feet. —But I will apprise
thee of it before-hand, as I told thee, that thou mayst keep
thy parole with the lady, in the best manner thou canst. 