



From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. In Answer to Letters XXXV. and XXXVI. 


My dear Miss Darnford,
I Skip over the little Transactions of several Days,
to let you know how much you rejoice me, in
telling me*  Sir Simon has been so kind as to comply
with my Wishes. Both your charming Letters came
to my Hand together, and I thank you an hundred
times for them; and I thank your dear Mamma, and
Sir Simon too, for the Pleasure they have given me
in this obliging Permission. How happy shall we
be together! But how long will you be permitted to
stay, tho'? –––All the Winter, I hope: —And then,
when that is over, let us set out together, if God
shall spare us, directly for Lincolnshire, and so pass
most of the Summer too in each other's Company. 
What a sweet Thought is this! –––Let me indulge it
a little while. 
Mr. B. read your Letters, and says, You are a
charming young Lady, and surpass yourself in every 

Letter. I told him, that he was more interested in
the Pleasure I took in this Favour of Sir Simon's,
than he imagin'd. As how, my Dear? said he. A
plain Case, Sir, reply'd I: For endeavouring to improve
myself by Miss Darnford's Conversation and
Behaviour, I shall every Day be more worthy of
your Favour. He kindly would have it, that nobody,
no, not Miss Darnford herself, excelled me. 
'Tis right, you know, Miss, he should think so––– 
tho' I must know nothing at all, if I was not sensible
how inferior I am to my dear Miss Darnford: And
yet, when I look abroad now-and-then, I could be
a proud Slut, if I would, and not yield the Palm
to many others. —But don't let every body know
how vain I am. Yet they may too, if they take
in, at the same time, that I have some Excuse, when I
have won so happily the Favour of two such Judges,
as Mr. B. and Miss Darnford, and had the good
Fortune, too, to rejoice in that of Lady Davers,
and the Countess of C. 
Well, my dear Miss, 




Is past and gone, as happily as the last; the two
Ladies, and, at their earnest Request, Sir Jacob,
bearing us Company, in the Evening Part. My
Polly was there, Morning and Evening, with her
Heart broken almost, poor Girl! —I put her in a
Corner of my Closet, because her Concern should
not be minded. Mrs. Jervis gives me great Hopes
of her:—And she seems to abhor the Thought of
Mr. H. —But as there proves to be so little of real
Love in her Heart, tho' even, if there had, she
would have been without Excuse—is she not the
wickeder by half for that, Miss? To consent, and
take Earnest, as I may say, to live with a Man, 

who did not pretend to marry her! —How inexcusable
this! —What a Frailty! —Yet so modest in
Appearance, so honestly descended, and an Example
so much better—forgive me to say—before her— 
Dear, dear! how could it be! 
Sir Jacob was much pleased with our Family
Order, and said, 'Twas no Wonder I kept so good
myself, that was his Word, and made others so; 
and he was of Opinion, that the four Rakes (for
he run on, how much they admir'd me) would
be converted, if they saw how well I passed my
Time, and how chearful and easy every one, as well
as myself, was under it. He said, when he came
home, he thought he must take such a Method
himself in his Family; for, he believed, it would
make not only better Masters and Mistresses, but better
Children, and better Servants too. But, poor
Gentleman! he has, I doubt, a great deal to mend
in himself, before he can begin such a Practice with
Efficacy in his Family. 




In the Afternoon, Sir Jacob took his Leave of us,
highly satisfy'd with us both, and particularly— 
so he said—with me; and promised that my two
Cousins, as he call'd his Daughters—and his Sister,
an old Maiden Lady, if they went to Town this
Winter, should visit me, and be improved by me— 
that was his Word. Mr. B. accompany'd him some
Miles on his Journey, attended by Mr. Colbrand and
Abraham; and the two Ladies, and Lord Davers,
and I, took an Airing in the Coach. 
Mr. B. was so kind, as to tell me, when he came
home, with a Whisper, that Miss Goodwin presented
her Duty to me. –––I have got a Multitude of fine 

Things for the dear little Creature, and Mr. B. promises
to give me a Dairy-house Breakfast, when our
Guests are gone. 
I inclose the History of this little Charmer*  , by my Beloved's Consent, since you are to do us
the Honour, as he (as well as I) pleases himself, to
be one of our Family–––But keep it to yourself,
whatever you do. I am Guaranty, that you will; and
have put it in a separate Paper, that you may burn
it as soon as you have read it. –––For I shall want
your Advice, may-be, on this Subject, having a
great Desire to get this Child into my Possession; 
and yet Lady Davers has given me an†  Hint, that
dwells a little with me. When I have the Pleasure
I hope for, I will lay all before you, and be determined,
and proceed, as far as I have Power, by you. 
You, my good Father and Mother, know the Story
by my former Papers. 




You must know, I pass over the Days thus
swiftly, not that I could not fill them up with
Writing, as ample as I have done the former: But
having a Mind to give you a general Idea of our
Way of Life and Conversation, and having gone
thro' a whole Week and more, you may judge pretty
well, how it is, one Day with another. Now-and-then
neighbourly Visits received and paid. Needlework
sometimes. Musick now-and-then. Cards
sometimes, tho' I don't love them–––One more benevolent
Round–––Improving Conversations with my
dear Mr. B. and my two good Ladies–––A Lesson, 

when alone, either in French, or Latin; which
my Master always learns me on his Knee–––– 
There's Encouragement! A new Pauper Case or
two–––A Visit from the good Dean–––Mr. Williams's
Departure, in order to put the new-projected Alteration
in Force, which is to deprive me of my Chaplain
–––By the way the Dean is highly pleased with
this Affair, and the Motives for it, Mr. Adams
being a Favourite of his, and a distant Relation of
his Lady–––Mr. H.'s and Polly's mutual Endeavour
to avoid one another––– My Lessons to the poor
Girl, and Cautions, as if she was my Sister––– These,
my dear Miss, and my honoured Father and Mother,
are the pleasant Imployments of our Time; 
so far as we Females are concern'd–––for the Gentlemen
hunt, ride out, and divert themselves in their
way, and bring us home the News and Occurrences
they meet with abroad, and now-and-then a
straggling Gentleman they pick up in their Diversions. 
–––And so I shall not inlarge upon these Articles,
after the tedious Specimens I have given already. 
Yet the Particulars of one Conversation, possibly, I
may give you another Time, when I have least to
do, because Three young Ladies, Relations of Mrs.
Towers and Mrs. Arthur, were brought to visit
me, for the Benefit of my Instructions; for that
was the kind Compliment of those Ladies to me. 




Could you ever have thought, Miss, that Husbands
have a Dispensing Power over their
Wives, which Kings are not allowed over the
Laws? I have this Day had a smart Debate with
Mr. B. and I fear it will not be the only one upon
this Subject. Can you believe, that if a Wife thinks 

a Thing her Duty to do, and her Husband does
not approve of her doing it, he can dispense with
her performing it, and no Sin shall lie at her Door? 
Mr. B. maintains this Point. I have great Doubts
about it; particularly one; that if a Matter be my
Duty, and he dispenses with my Performance of it,
whether, even altho' that were to clear me of the
Sin, it will not fall upon himself? And to be sure,
Miss, a good Wife would be as much concern'd
at this, as if it was to remain upon her. Yet he seems
set upon it. What can one do? —Did you ever
hear of such a Notion before, Miss? Of such a
Prerogative in a Husband? Would you care to subscribe
to it? This is one of Mr. B.'s Particularities. 
He has several of them, the Effects, as I take it,
of his former too free Life. Polygamy, as I have
mentioned heretofore, is another. That is a bad
one indeed. Yet he is not so determin'd on this,
as he seems to be on the other, in a certain Case,
that is too nice for me, at present, to explain to
you; and so I might as well have taken no Notice
of it, as yet–––Only the Argument was so present
to my Mind: Held within this Hour, and I
write a Journal, you know, of what passes. But I
will, some time hence, submit it, at least to your
Judgments, my Father and Mother. You are well
read in the Scriptures, and have gone thro' the
Occasion often; and both Mr. B. and I found
our Arguments on Scripture, tho' we are so different
in our Opinions. He says, my Ladies are
of his Opinion. I'm afraid they are, and so will
not ask them. But perhaps, I mayn't live, and other
things may happen; and so I'll say no more of it
at present* . 




My Lady urging me to procure her the Verses
you also desire about the Love Quarrel, I
this Day prevailed upon Mr. B. to favour me with
a Sight of them; and he was so kind as to give us
the following History of the Parties and the Quarrel. 
A fine Gentleman, his Friend, blest with an ample
Fortune, and extraordinary Qualities, but not
free from Faults as great as his Perfections, principally
with regard to Ladies, was approved of by the
Parents of a Lady beautiful as a May Morning,
tender and meek as a Lamb; ––and prudent and witty; 
but so diffident, that she had hardly a Will of her
own; which subjected her to Inconveniencies. 
The Gentleman made a Campaign, as a Voluntier,
having a Fondness for the Military Life, and no
Inclination to marry; but being slightly wounded,
and coming over to be cured, and the Match being
proposed, their Fortunes very great on both
Sides, he so well approved the Proposal, and the
Lady fell so much in Love with him, that it was
in a manner concluded upon. 
The Lady's Uncle Sir G. K. a Man of a very
waspish, positive, and sordid Temper, to whose large
Estate, as well as her Father's, the young Lady was
Heiress, opposes the Match; it is put off to please
him. The Gentleman makes another Campaign. 
Her Father dies mean time, leaving Sir G. her Guardian; 
but with express Desire to see her marry'd
to that Gentleman, and no other. Sir G. endeavours
to bring about another Match for the Lady, with
a Man of Quality, notwithstanding his Brother's
Desire; but the Lady, who had fixed her Affections on 

the Gentleman, rejects the Proposal: And her Lover
coming over at the End of the Campaign, the Lady
consents to perform her Father's Will; a Will so
conformable to her own Inclinations; but would not
fix the Day, till he had made up with her Uncle, and
got his Consent; which the old spiteful Knight was
resolved not to give, and, for a great while, the Gentleman
not to ask, despising the Knight, and having
a Spirit above suppling himself to an unworthy
Mind for sordid Interest sake. 
At last, however, she prevails: Her Lover, with
no good Will, resolves to court Sir George, who, to
have a Pretence to break the Matter off, treats him
with great Indignity, setting his Servants to insult
him. This the young Gentleman resenting, the
Knight following him with Outrage to the Top of
a Pair of Stains, he twirled him from Top to Bottom
almost; and sprain'd the Knight's Foot in the
Fall, and went away with Indignation. 
This being reported to the Lady, who lived not
at that Time with Sir George, but at her paternal
Seat, and being greatly aggravated to her, she flies
to her Uncle, resolves to break with her Lover,
and takes up her Residence with Sir George for a
while; the old Knight keeping up her Resentment,
and prevailing on her to refuse Access to the Man
to whom she was betrothed, believing, poor Lady!
that her Affections were more in her own Power
than she afterwards found them, to her Sorrow. 
For she carry'd the Point so far, renouncing him,
thro' fresh Aggravations invented against him, tho',
indeed, he had formerly given himself too great Liberties,
that he went abroad again, giving her quite
for lost, and enter'd into other Engagements, which
made them both unhappy to the End of their
Lives. 

This is the Introduction, as briefly as I can give
it; now come the Verses, in a Letter from the
Lover, when abroad, to his Friend, who knew the
whole Transaction. 


 Fain would'st thou, O my Friend, thou say'st, in Verse,
Have me my last short Interview rehearse
With my MARIA. Once I thought her so!
But can a Mind surcharg'd with so much Woe,
Harmoniously, in easy Numbers flow?
But yet, to shew your Pow'r, and my Esteem,
Hard tho' it be, your Choice shall fix my Theme.


 By various Means, in vain, I'd oft essay'd
To see and pacify the angry Maid:
With idle Tales still the malicious Knight
Keeps up her Wrath, and hides her from my Sight.
The more I beg, the humbler I appear,
The haughtier still's the too resenting Fair.
Proud of her Pow'r, she makes me meanly sue,
Nor doubts to bring me to her Uncle's View.


 Thus barr'd Access, I by a common Friend
My Innocence endeavour to defend.
Our Friend reports her Temper fix'd. I find
A way by Letter to express my Mind.
The haughty Maid still with such Anger burns,
The Seal unbroke, the suppliant Scroll returns.
What can I do? I hate myself to find
Such vile unwonted Meanness in my Mind.
For well thou know'st, till so much Excellence
Engag'd my Soul, I scorn'd dull Wedlock's Fence.
And, but I thought, the Charmer met my Flame,
Had never wish'd to propagate my Name.



Is not this very insolent, Miss? Did he not deserve
some Punishment? But it seems, he had a
most noble Mind, great and good Qualities, tho'
intermingled with bad ones; as it is observable, that
those who have great Beauties of Mind, have often
great Defects; and that Persons of Parts seldom
commit small Faults. You'll find, however, that
one Reason (tho' he puts it not ungenerously) for
his Pride of Spirit, to the Lady, is, he thinks, she
loves him; and that to be sure she did, or else a Lady
of her Virtue would not have been betrothed to
him with her own Consent. Thus he proceeds; 
making her, however, more oblig'd to his Generosity,
than Affection, as one would think. 


 Now fearful, that if I my former View,
The savage military Life, pursue,
The charming Maid, (my Innocence too late
Appearing) should lament her new-born Hate,
And her soft Mind, with Love's Extreme annoy'd,
Unable to support her present Pride,
Returning Love should feel, and she should grieve
To find me gone, and lost beyond Retrieve:
Charge to herself the Ills that might attend
The vagrant Life of so sincere a Friend;
Lest this should be the Case, I write once more,
And, humbly, her returning Love implore:
Protest my Innocence; beg to be heard,
And claim, but as I make it clear, Regard:
Then fix a Time for th' angry Fair to prove
The happy Impulse of rekindled Love:
And vow, if after that, she hold her Hate,
To quit my Suit, and seek a kinder Fate.


 This, I resolve, myself, if Speech deny'd,
Humbly to offer at her Chariot-side,

Next Morn, if she, as usual, shall repair
To the delightful Downs, to take the Air.
Accordingly, I mount my Steed next Morn,
About the Time she us'd the Meads t'adorn.
The Fair-one comes!—Submissive I approach.
But Oh! her watchful Dragon's in the Coach.
“Good Morrow, Polly!” –––Jobn, more gently drive––
“How can you thus my honest Nature grieve?
Too well you know your Pow'r! But, lovely'st Maid,
Sure, you've not learnt your Tyrant Sex's Trade!
O let me not your Scorn the rather meet,
Because you see me prostrate at your Feet!
You know my Temper: Long I cannot bear
Hard Usage, ev'n from You. Once taught Despair,
I'm lost for ever!”––––


Be you ever lost!
Who finds you next, will find you to their Cost,
Her Uncle interrupts. Mean time, I spy,
I think, Compassion in her down-cast Eye;
But yet the charming Maid makes no Reply.
Her throbbing Breasts, thought I, her Mind confess:
She sighs; but would her struggling Sighs suppress.
This way, and that, she looks with wild Amaze,
And down her Cheeks a Pearl escaped strays.
But soon, alas! this hopeful Dawn's o'ercast:
The beamy Sunshine was too gay to last.
Where are you, Niece? Her sordid Uncle cries:
Can be, who'd murder me, delight your Eyes?


 I saw her Temper hard'ning, as I thought,
And her full Mind with various Passions fraught;
Still more and more insulted by the Knight,
I fear'd to act some Rashness in her Sight:
So, fresh Offence t'avoid, I in her Lap,
With Air submissive, the fond Letter drop.



This the Lady, as you'll hear, throws out of the
Coach. To be sure, as Things had proceeded between
them, in a Case of Betrothment, and she had
acknowleg'd her Love to him, it was enough to
provoke such a high Spirit. —And see how her Conduct
surprises him: 


 But can it be believ'd! –––I saw't! –––These Eyes,
Beheld the Fair, with Rage unwonted, rise,
Self-mov'd! The Act her own! –––Mine the Reproach!
Whirl it, with wild Disdain, from out the Coach!
My Servant takes it up. –––Judge my Surprize! –––
Indeed I hardly could believe my Eyes.
How art thou chang'd, O charming Maid! Canst thou
So soon forget, what thou so late didst vow?
Can idle Tales so much reverse my Fate?
And so much Love so soon be turn'd to Hate?


 But yet, I think, Extremes can never last,
The Maid's all Softness. –––When this Storm is past,
Her Error seen, Love will again return,
And then she'll with more gen'rous Ardor burn.
This Rub surmounted, sweet 'twill be to tell
The diff'rent Passions that our Bosoms swell!
Sweet will it be to hear the Charmer own
Her faulty Wrath, and in my Bosom moan
The Pangs she gave me; promise future Guard
Against my Foes, and all those Pangs reward!


 Once more I'll try. But how, or when, or where,
Can I have wish'd Access? The House of Pray'r,
When next she visits; all serene her Mind;
Hopeful (for who not Mercy wants?) to find
The gracious God of Mercy, Peace, and Love,
Propitious to her earnest Wishes prove:

When she has offer'd up her Pray'rs to Heav'n,
And hopes, as she forgives, to be forgiv'n.
Here I'll present my self, and once more try,
If my Fate's fix'd, and if I cannot spy
Some Rays relenting in her soften'd Eye.
But if her usual Piety, the Place,
The Holy Service, alter not the Case,
Well may I then conclude no Hope is left,
And that her Heart of Love to me's bereft:
Well may I then my former Schemes pursue,
And bid for ever Love and Her Adieu.


 When the next happy Sabbath, set apart
To mend the Mind, and purify the Heart,
Oft-wish'd, arrives, impatient I repair
With decent Equipage to th' House of Pray'r.
As up the Ayle, with Mind disturb'd, I walk,
I find our Diff'rence made the Gentry's Talk.
See there! –––for so they said ––– the handsome 'Squire!
See! see! his lovely Mistress all on Fire!
See! whisper they, she cannot stand his Sight!
O born to plague each other, and delight!


 I take my Seat. Sh' averts her Face. Thought I,
This sweet Emotion, sure, should give me Joy:
She can't indiff'rent be; much less can hate
The Man who can this soft Distress create.
Well, I forgive thee, Charmer; and I know
Too much of Love, to make thee stoop too low.
I see thou lov'st me still. All, all, I fear,
Is that vile Demon Uncle at thy Ear.


He then gives a pretty Description of the Country
Lads and Lasses at Church; and ends it with a Reflection,
that shews, had the Lady been less diffident
of herself, more diffident of those who hated her 

Lover, and had placed a greater Confidence in the
Man she lov'd, they might have been very happy
together, for he could not surely have a bad Heart,
who could write thus. It seems, he was Patron of
the Church: Thus he says, 
 I then look round, and pleas'd, behold the Swains 
And guileless Nymphs, whom no vile Action stains; 
I made Polly read this Piece to me, to see I transcribed
it right; and when she came to this last
Line, she was cover'd, poor Girl! with Blushes. ––– 
Read that again, Polly. 
And guileless Nymphs, (read she, blushing and
weeping) whom no–– whom no ––– vile –– vile–– Action
––– stains! 

With wholsome Cheeks, and neat from Top to Toe,
Trip to their Benches, a delightful Row.
And tho', as Patron, I've an upper Seat,
I join in Pray'r with them, and God intreat,
That at the last Account, in the Great Day,
When all Distinction's set aside, I may
Be found as worthy (and be bless'd) as they.

Then follow the Lines I gave you in a former
Letter; which will bear repeating. 


 But Oh! forgive me, Heav'n, if oft my Fair
Robs thee of my Devoir, disturbs my Pray'r,
Confounds my best Resolves, and makes me prove,
That she's too much a Rival in thy Love!


But better Thoughts my happier Hopes suggest,
When once this stormy Doubt's expell'd my Breast;

When once this agitated Flame shall turn
To steadier Heat, and more intensely burn,
My dear Maria then, thought I, will join,
And we, one Heart, one Soul, shall all be thine.


 The Service ended, oft, in vain, I watch
A side-long Look, or stollen Glance to catch:
I'm glad, thought I, thyself thou dar'st not trust,
Nor glance this Way, for fear thou shouldst be just
To both our Passions. But this open War
Take care, my Fair, thou carry'st not too far.
Once could I think thy Sex in thee too strong,
Fair as thou art, I could not bear it long.


 I see I must go first. The stubborn Maid
Moves not her trembling Feet, nor turns her Head.


 Mean-soul'd Sir George! I see thee as thou art:
Thy rage-swoln Face displays thy ranc'rous Heart,
Trembling with Malice, and a thousand Fears,
Thou'rt safe beneath the Refuge of thy Years.
The Charmer mine thou know'st; and must my Fate
In doubtful Balance hang for thy Estate?
And can the lovely Maid so sordid be
To bow herself, and hope to supple me
To Views so mean?–––Empire itself can't have
Attractions strong enough my Mind t'enslave.
If this must be the Case, my Fair, Adieu!
I wo'not stoop thus low,–––not ev'n for You!


 I quit my Seat, and, ere I'm well aware,
Bow to the Pew, that holds th' averted Fair;
Walk slowly down. My Tenants in a Row,
With grateful Blessings, hail me as I go:
For, well thou know'st, by no Rack-rents opprest,
They're honest to their Landlord and their Priest.



The Meaning of this Mr. B. explain'd, That it
was the Gentleman's Custom, whenever he granted
or renewed a Lease, which he always did without
exacting a Fine of the Descendants of the old Tenants
to the Estate, to remind the Tenant, that he
lett him but Nine Parts of his Farm, that he might
think himself concern'd in Conscience to pay the
Tenth where due. A Method Mr. B. always takes
on the like Occasions. 


 As thro' the Porch, to trifle Time, I pass,
Call by their Name each neighb'ring Lad and Lass,
Ask honest Roger, how my Godson thrives;
If ready for his second Coat? —The Wives
I see not, of their Health inquire. —I know
What keeps 'em hence! —Ha, William, i'n't it so?
Increasing Blessings! –––Ah! your Honour's right!
When was she brought to Bed? –––At Ten last Night.
What has God sent her? –––Oh! a thumping Boy!
Welcome the little Stranger! –––Give her Joy
From me. Tell her, I'll not forget her;
And ev'ry Day be sure you love her better!


It seems, Miss, that if he stood not himself, or
procur'd not Gossips for the Christening of the Children
of his poorer Tenants, he always sent them a
large rich Cake, and good Store of Sugar, Sack, and
October, on the Occasion. What pity such good
Qualities had any Intermixtures! 


 Now comes the haughty Maid, (led by the Knight)
So late my Joy, my Rapture and Delight.
Her sullen Aspect, well I see, reveals
She cherishes: Resentment, thro' false Tales,
And balances my Love in Passion's partial Scales.

The tim'rous Knight, conscious of his Deserts,
Quits the fair Prize, and to the Chariot starts.
Her half-unwilling Hand I seize, to lead
Her to her Chariot; and thus, whisp'ring, plead:


 “O hear me, Polly! –––Shall the partial Knight,
Thy half-soul'd Uncle, banish me thy Sight?
Conscious of native Honour, faithful, true,
My Soul's high-set, and cannot meanly sue.
'Tis not my Happiness I wish alone,
In seeking thee; but, Heav'n's my Judge, thy own.
Our Fortunes, Fam'lies, thy dear Parents Will,
All give thee mine: And, pardon, if I've Skill,
Thy own kind Wishes: Yea, thy plighted Vows
Confirm the Choice: Thou canst no other 'spouse.
Faults black enough, I own, my Life have curst:
But Oh! long since, dear Maid, thou'st known the worst.
Against myself I've always own'd the Truth,
And thou'st forgiv'n the Lapses of my Youth.”


 With Scorn she turns her lovely Face –––“No more
Urge thy vain Suit: But quit my Chariot-Door;
If e'er I wish'd thee well, know, now, my Hate
Exceeds my former Love––––I'm fix'd as Fate!”


 “One Visit more permit. If I not prove
I'm greatly wrong'd, for e'er renounce my Love.
I'd clear the Matter up: –––Indeed I'm loth
To take such Measures as may hurt us both.
When, past Recall, thou find'st my Innocence,
Thou'lt wish thou'dst heard me in my own Defence.”


 “Go where thou wilt; so I ne'er see thee more:
Nor hear thy Name once mention'd in my Door,
I shall be happy.”



“Happy may'st thou be,
Whatever Fate betides unhappy me!
In Twelve diurnal Suns, if I not hear
Thou'st chang'd thy Mind, I surely disappear.
The Wand'rer then takes place, and thou in vain
Shalt wish th' unhappy Fugitive again.”


 With fix'd Disdain she to her Chariot flings,
Draws up the Glass, and leaves me, with a thousand
Stings.
Adieu, dear Maid! –––May ne'er returning Love
Give thee this Action rash to disapprove!
Unhappy wilt thou be; nor blame me for't,
If thou th' Heroine still canst not support.
I'll stay the promis'd Time. But faintly burns
That Love which not in Twelve Days Space returns.


 Forgive, my Friend, this tedious Scrawl. 'Tis hard
To quit the Subjects of our first Regard.
Once Love takes place, no other Subject shares
Our Thoughts: For Love absorbs all other Cares.


 I turn about; assume a sprightly Air,
Salute the Gentry round, to hide my Care;
Haste to my Chariot, with the Rev'rend Priest;
With chearful Visage, but with Heart opprest.


 The Gentry censure, as they pass along,
Th' unusual Scene; nor less the rural Throng.
Some sad Offence, they cry, must sure be meant,
That so much Sweetness could so much resent.
Some say, 'T was this; some, That: Some lay't to Spite;
But most agree to blame the ranc'rous Knight.
But each young Lady does her Triumph show
That Lady L. has brought his Pride so low.

“Our Sex is well reveng'd,” the Fair-ones cry:
“Look to't, how ye offend.” Their Lovers by,
The threat'ning Fan, and the arch Look revere,
And my unwonted Tameness justly jeer.


 Now, my best Friend, I'm got to Foreign Shores,
I charge thee tell me not, the Fair deplores
Her Rashness past: that Love once more returns
In her soft Breast: But that her Wrath still burns;
Still hardens her dear Heart: Believes m' Offence,
And banishes my Love for ever thence!
For, Oh! should she relent, one Torment know,
Now 'tis too late, 'twould fill my Mind with Woe.


 Preserve her, bounteous Heav'n! conserve her free
From ev'ry Thought of Love, and ev'ry Thought of me,
Till you shall raise for her some finish'd Youth,
Worthy, if Man can be, her Charms, her Truth,
Her Piety. And may the Fair-one see
Those many happy Years, she hoped once with me!


I expect, Miss, you will thank me for this Piece,
which is in no other Hand, and was not so much as
transcribed before by any body. But Mr. B. was so
obligingly kind to us both, as to say, He would
deny nothing to me, that he thought would enable
me to give Miss Darnford Pleasure. 




Mr. H. and my Lord and Lady Davers, and
the excellent Countess of C&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;, having left us
this Day, a good deal to my Regret, and, as it seemed
to their own, the former put the following Letter 

into my Hands, with an Air of Respect, and even
Reverence. 

‘Dear good Madam,
I Cannot content myself with common Thanks,
on leaving yours and Mr. B.'s hospitable House,
because of that there Affair, which I need not
mention; and truly am ashamed to mention, as I
have been to look you in the Face, ever since it
happen'd. I don't know how it came about; but
I thought but at first of Joking a little or so; and
seeing Polly heard me with more Attentiveness than
I expected, I was encouraged to proceed; and so,
now I recollect, it came about. 
‘But she is innocent for me; and I don't know
how that came about neither; for we were out
one Moon-light Night together, in the Garden,
walking about, and afterwards took a Nap of two
Hours, I believe, in the Summer-house in the
little Garden, being over-powered with Sleep; for
I would make her lay her Head upon my Breast,
till, before we were aware, we fell asleep together. 
But before that, we had agreed on what you discover'd. 
‘This is the whole Truth, and all the Intimacies
we ever had, to speak of. But I believe we should
have been better acquainted, had you not, luckily
for me! prevented it, by being at home, when we
thought you abroad. For I was to come to her
when she hemm'd two or three times; for having
made a Contract, you know, Madam, it was natural
enough to take the first Occasion to put it in
Force. 
‘She could not keep her own Secret, and may
have told you more, perhaps, than is true: So what
I write is to clear myself; and to tell you, how
sorry I am, in such a good House as yours, and 

where there is so much true Godliness, that I should
ever be drawn away to have a Thought to dishonour
it. But I will take care of being overfamiliar
for the future with Underlings; for see,
how a Man may be taken in! —If she had resented
it at first, when I began to kiss her, or so, (for,
you know, we young Fellows, will take Liberties
sometimes where they don't become us, to our
own Disparagements chiefly, that's true) I should
have had an Awe upon me; or if she had told you;
or but said she would; I should have flown, as
soon as had any Thoughts further about the matter. 
—But what had one of our Sex to do, you
know, Madam, when they find little Resistance,
and that she would stand quietly, and tell no Tales,
and make no great Struggle, and not keep out of
one's Way neither, but to dilly-dally on, till one
brought it to more than one at first intended? 
‘Poor Polly! I pity her too. Don't think the
worse of her, dear Madam, so as to turn her away,
because it may be her Ruin. I don't desire to see
her. I might have been drawn in to do strange
foolish things, and been ruin'd at the long Run; 
for who knows where this thing might have ended? 
My Uncle would have never seen me. My Father
too (his Lordship you know, Madam, is a
very cross Man, and never lov'd me much) might
have cut off the Intail. My Aunt would have
despis'd me, and scorn'd me. I should have been
her foolish Fellow in Earnest, not in Jest, as now. 
You would have resented it, and Mr. B. who
knows? might have called me to Account, (for he
is bloody passionate, I saw that at the Hall, and has
fought two or three Duels, as I have heard) for
abusing the Freedom of his House, and breaking the
Laws of Hospitality, as you told me; and so, it
is not unlikely, I might have dy'd like a Dog in a 

Ditch; and there would have been an End of a
noble Family, that have been Peers of the Realm
Time out of Mind. What a sad thing would this
have been! A publick as well as private Loss:
For you know, Madam, what my Lady Countess
said, and nobody says better things, or knows more
of the Matter, than her Ladyship, That every Peer
of the Realm is a Jewel in the Crown. A fine
Saying! God grant I may keep it in Mind, when
my Time comes, and my Father shall happen to die! 
‘Well, but, good Madam, can you forgive me? 
You see how happy I am in my Disappointment. 
But I must take another Sheet of Paper. —I did
not think to write so much;—for I don't love
it: But on this Occasion, know not how to leave
off. —I hope you can read my Letter: I know I
write a clumsy Hand, and spell most lamentably;
for I never had a Talent for these things. I was
readier by half to admire the Orchard-robbing Picture
in Lily's Grammar, than any other Part of
the Book. Excuse my Nonsense, Madam: But
many a time have I help'd to fill a Satchel; and always
supposed that Picture was put there on purpose
to tell Boys what Diversions are allowed them,
and are proper for them. Several of my School-fellows
took it for granted, as well as I, and we
could never reconcile it to our Reason, why we
should be punished for practising a Lesson taught
us by our Grammars. 
‘But, hey, whither am I running! I never writ to
you before, and never may again, unless you, or
Mr. B. command it, for your Service. So pray
excuse me, Madam. 
‘I know I need give no Advice to Polly, to take
care of first Encouragements. Poor Girl! she
might have suffer'd sadly, as well as I. —For if
my Father, and my Uncle and Aunt, had requir'd 

me to turn her off, you know it would have been
undutiful to have refus'd them, notwithstanding
our Bargain. And Want of Duty to them would
have been to have added Fault to Fault: As you
once observed, I remember, that one Fault never
comes alone, but draws after it generally five or
six, to hide or vindicate it, and they every one
perhaps as many more each. 
‘I shall neyer forget several of your wise Sayings. 
I have been vex'd, may I be hang'd if I have not,
many a time, that I could not make such Observations
as you make; who am so much older too,
and a Man besides, and a Peer's Son, and a Peer's
Nephew! But my Talents lie another way; and
by that time my Father dies, I hope to improve
myself, in order to cut such a Figure, as may make
me be no Disgrace to my Name or Country; for
I shall have one Benefit over many young Lords; 
that I shall be more fond of making Observations
than Speeches, and so shall improve of course,
you know. 
‘Well, but what is all this to the Purpose? –––I
will keep close to my Text; and that is, to thank
you, dear Madam, for all the Favours I have received
in your House; to thank you for disappointing
me, and for convincing me, in so kind, yet so
shaming a manner, how wrong I was in the Matter
of that Polly; and for not exposing my Folly
to any body but myself (for I should have been
ready to hang myself, if you had); and to beg your
Pardon for it, and to assure you, that I will never
offer the like as long as I breathe. I am, Madam,
with the greatest Respect, 
‘Your most obliged, most faithful, and
most obedient humble Servant,
J. H. 
‘Pray excuse Blots and Blurs.’ 


Well, Miss Darnford, what shall we say to this
fine Letter? —You'll allow it to be an Original, I
hope. Yet, may-be not. For how does one know,
but it may be as well written and as sensible a Letter
as this Class of People generally write? —But what
then shall we be able to say for such poor Creatures
of our Sex as are taken in, as Mr. H. calls it, by such
pretty Fellows as this; who if they may happen to
write better, hardly think better, or design to act
better, and are not so soon brought to Repentance,
and Promises of Amendment? 
Mr. H. dresses well, is not a contemptible Figure
of a Man, laughs, talks, where he can be heard,
and his Aunt is not present;—and cuts, to use his own
Word, a considerable Figure in a Country Town— 
But see—Yet I will not say what I might—He is
Lord Davers's Nephew; and if he makes his Observations,
and forbears his Speeches, I mean, can be
silent, and only laugh when he sees somebody of
more Sense laugh, and never approve or condemn but
in Leading-strings, he may, possibly, pass in a Croud
of Gentlemen. —But poor, poor Polly Barlow! 
What can I say for Polly Barlow? 
I have a Time in View, when, possibly, my Papers
may fall under the Inspection of a dear Gentleman,
to whom, next to God, I am accountable for all
my Actions and Correspondencies; so I will either
write an Account of the Matter, and seal it up, separately,
for Mr. B. or, at a proper Opportunity,
will break it to him, and let him know (under Secrecy,
if I can engage him to promise it) the Steps
I took in it; for fear something should arise hereafter,
when I cannot answer for myself, to render any thing
dark or questionable in it. A Method I believe very
proper to be taken by every marry'd Lady; and I
presume the rather to say so, having had a good Example
for it: For I have often thought of a little 

seal'd-up Parcel of Papers, my Lady made me burn
in her Presence about a Month before she dy'd. — 
They are, Pamela, said she, such as I have no Reason
to be concern'd about, let who will see them,
could they know the Springs and Causes of them:
But, for Want of a Clue, my Son might be at a
Loss what to think of several of those Letters, were
he to find them, in looking over my other Papers,
when I am no more. 
Let me add, that nothing could be more endearing
than our Parting with our noble Guests. My Lady
repeated her Commands for what she often engaged
me to promise, that is to say, to renew the Correspondence
begun between us, so much (as she was
pleased to say) to her Satisfaction. 
I could not help shewing her Ladyship, who was
always inquiring after my Writing Imployment,
most of what pass'd between you and me, Miss; 
and she admires you much, and wish'd Mr. H. had
more Wit, that was her Word: She should in that
Case, she said, be very glad, to set on Foot a Treaty
between you and him. 
But that, I fansy, can never be tolerable to you,
and I only mention it en passant. —There's a French
Woman for you! 
The Countess was full of her kind Wishes for my
Happiness; and my Lady Davers told me, That if I
could give them timely Notice, she would be present
on a certain Occasion. 
But, my dear Miss, what could I say? —I know
nothing of the Matter! —Only, that I am a sad Coward,
and have a thousand Anxieties, which I cannot
mention to any body. 
But, if I have such in the honourable Estate of
Matrimony, what must those poor Souls have, who
have been seduced, and have all Manner of Reason
to apprehend, that the Crime shall be followed by a 

Punishment so natural to it? A Punishment in kind,
as I may say; which if it only ends in Forfeiture of
Life, following the Forfeiture of Fame, must be
thought merciful and happy beyond Expectation; 
for how shall they lay Claim to the Hope that is
given to Persons in their Circumstance, that they
shall be saved in Child-bearing, since the Condition
is, if they continue in Faith and Charity, and
Holiness with Sobriety? 
Now, my honoured Mother, and my dear Miss, since
I am upon this affecting Subject, does not this Text
seem to give a comfortable Hope to a virtuous Woman
who shall die in this Circumstance, that she shall
be happy in the Divine Mercies? For the Apostle,
in the Context, says, That he suffers not a Woman
to teach, nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but
to be in Silence—And what is the Reason he gives? 
Why, a Reason that is a natural Consequence of the
Curse on the first Disobedience, that she shall be in
Subjection to her Husband. —For, says he, Adam
was not deceived; but the Woman, being deceived,
was in the Transgression. As much as to say, “Had
it not been for the Woman, Adam had kept his
Integrity, and therefore her Punishment shall be,
as it is said, I will greatly multiply thy Sorrow in
thy Conception: In Sorrow shalt thou bring forth
Children,—and thy Husband shall rule over thee. 
But nevertheless, if thou shalt not survive the
Sharpness of thy Sorrow, thy Death shall be
deemed to be such an Alleviation of thy Part of the
intailed Transgression, that thou shalt be saved, if
thou hast continued in Faith, and Charity, and
Holiness with Sobriety.” 
This, my honoured Parents, and my dear Friend,
is my Paraphrase; and I reap no small Comfort from
it, when I meditate upon it. 

But I shall make you as serious as myself; and, my
dear Miss, perhaps, frighten you from entering into
a State, in which our poor Sex suffer so much, from
the Bridal Morning, let it rise as gayly as it will upon
a thoughtful Mind, to that affecting Circumstance,
(throughout its whole Progression) for which nothing
but a tender, a generous, and a worthy Husband
can make them any Part of Amends. —And when
one is so bless'd, one has so many Fears added to one's
Sorrows; and so much Apprehension, thro' human
Frailty, of being separated from so beloved a Partner,
that a body had need of all one's Fortitude to support
one's self. But may-be I am the weakest and most
apprehensive of my Sex—May-be I am! —And
when one sees how common the Case is, and yet
how few die in it; how uneasy many Ladies are not
to be in this Circumstance, (my good Lady Davers
particularly, at times) and Rachel and Hannah in
Holy Writ; and then how a childless Estate might
lessen one in the Esteem of one's Husband, one
ought to bring these Considerations in Balance, and to
banish needless Fears. And so I will, if I can. 
But a Word or two more, as to the parting with
our honoured Guests. I was a little indispos'd, and
my Ladies would excuse me, against my Will, from
attending them in the Coach some Miles, which
their dear Brother did. Both Ladies most tenderly
saluted me, twice and thrice apiece, folding their
kind Arms about me, and wishing my Safety and
Health, and charging me to think little, and hope
much; for they saw me thoughtful at times, tho' I
endeavoured to hide it from them. 
My Lord Davers was pleased to say, with a Goodness
of Temper that is his Peculiar, My dearest, dear
Sister,—May God preserve you! —and multiply
your Comforts! I shall pray for you more than
ever I did for myself, tho' I have so much more need 

of it! —I must leave you—But I leave a Lady that
I love and honour next to Lady Davers, and ever
shall. 
Mr. H. looked conscientiously silly. —I can say
nothing, Madam—but (saluting me) that I shall
never forget your Goodness to me. —Adding, in his
frothy Way, Now can I say, I have saluted an Angel,
if ever there was an Angel on Earth. 
I had before, in Mrs. Jervis's Parlour, taken
Leave of Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley, my Lady's
Women: They each, stole, as it were, at the same
time, a Hand of mine, and kissed it, begging Pardon,
as they said, for the Freedom. But I answer'd,
taking each by her Hand, and kissing her, I shall always
think of you with Pleasure, my good Friends,
for you have encouraged me constantly by your Presence
in my private Duties. And may God bless
you, and the worthy Families you so laudably serve,
as well for your sakes, as their own! 
They turned away with Tears, and Mrs. Worden
would have said something to me, but could not. — 
Only both taking Mrs. Jervis by her Hand, Happy,
happy, Mrs. Jervis! said they, almost in a Breath. 
—And happy, happy I, too, repeated I, in my Mrs.
Jervis, and in such kind and worthy Well-wishers
as Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley. Wear this,
Mrs. Worden; wear this, Mrs. Lesley, for my sake; 
—And I gave each of them a Ring, with a Crystal
and Brilliants set about it, which my dearest
Mr. B. had bought a Week before for this very
Purpose; for he has a great Opinion of both the
good Folks, and often praised their Prudence, and
their quiet and respectful Behaviour to every body,
so different from the Impertinence, that was his Word,
of most Ladies Women, who are Favourites. 
Mrs. Jervis said, I have enjoyed many happy
Hours in your Conversation, Mrs. Worden and Mrs.
Lesley: I shall miss you very much. 

I must endeavour, said I, taking her Hand, to
make it up to you, my good Friend, as well as I
can. And of late we have not had so many Opportunities
together as I should have wished, had I
not been so agreeably engaged as you know. — 
So we must each try to comfort the other, when we
have lost, I such noble, and you such worthy Guests. 
Mrs. Jervis's honest Heart, before touched by
the Parting, shew'd itself at her Eyes—Wonder
not, my good Friends, said I, to the two Gentle-women,
wiping with my Handkerchief her venerable
Cheeks, that I always endeavour thus to dry up
all my good Mrs. Jervis's Tears; and then I kissed
her, thinking of you, my dear Mother; and I was
forced to withdraw a little abruptly, lest I should
be too much moved myself, because I was going
up to our noble Guests, who, had they inquired
into the Occasion, would perhaps have thought it
derogatory (tho' I should not) to my present Station,
and too much retrospecting to my former. 
I could not, in Conversation between Mr. B. and
myself, when I was gratefully expatiating upon the
amiable Characters of our noble Guests, and of
their Behaviour and Kindness to me, help observing,
that I had little expected, from some*  Hints
which formerly dropt from Mr. B. to find my
good Lord Davers so polite and so sensible a
Nobleman. 
He is a very good-natur'd Man, reply'd Mr. B.
I believe I might once or twice drop some disrespectful
Words of him. But it was the Effect of
Passion, at the Time, and with a View to two or
three Points of his Conduct in publick Life; for
which I took the Liberty to find fault with him,
and received very unsatisfactory Excuses. One of 

these, I remember particularly, was in a Conference
between a Committee of each House of Parliament,
in which he behaved in a way I could not
wish from a Gentleman so nearly ally'd to me by
Marriage; for all he could talk of, was the Dignity
of their House, when the Reason of the Thing
was strong with the other; and it fell to my Lot
to answer what he said; which I did with some
Asperity, which occasioned a Coolness between us
for some Time. 
But no Man makes a better Figure in private
Life than Lord Davers; especially now, that my
Sister's good Sense has got the better of her Passions,
and she can behave with tolerable Decency
towards him. For, formerly, Pamela, it was not so; 
the Violence of her Spirit making him appear in
a Light too little advantageous either to his Quality
or Merit. But now his Lordship improves upon
me every time I see him. 
You know not, my Dear, continued Mr. B. what
a Disgrace a haughty and passionate Woman brings
upon her Husband, and upon herself too, in the
Eye of her own Sex, as well as ours. Nay,
even those Ladies, who would be as glad of Dominion
as she, if they might be permitted to exercise
it, despise others who do, and the Man most,
who suffers it. 
And let me tell you, my Pamela, said the dear
Gentleman, with an Air that shew'd he was satisfy'd
with his own Conduct in this Particular, that
you cannot imagine how much a Lady owes to her
Husband, as well with regard to her own Peace of
Mind, as to both their Reputations, (however it may
go against the Grain with her sometimes) if he be
a Man, who has Discretion to keep her incroaching
Passions under a genteel and reasonable Controul! 

How do you like this Doctrine, Miss? —I'll warrant
you believe, that I could do no less, than drop
Mr. B. one of my best Court'sies, in Acknowlegement
of my Obligation to him, for so considerately
preserving to me my Peace of Mind, and my Reputation,
as well as his own, in this Case. 
But after all, when one duly weighs the Matter,
I can't tell but what he says may be right in the
main; for I have not been able to contradict him,
partial as I am to my Sex, when he has pointed out
to me Instances in the Behaviour of certain Ladies,
who, like Children, the more they have been humour'd,
the more humoursome they have grown; 
which must have occasion'd as great Uneasiness to
themselves, as to their Husbands. Will you excuse
me, Miss? —This is between ourselves; for
I did not own as much to Mr. B. —For one should
not give up one's Sex you know, if one can help
it; for the Men will be as apt to impose, as the Ladies
to incroach, I doubt. 

Well but here, my honoured Father and Mother,
and my dear Miss Darnford, at last, I end my Journal-wise
Letters, as I may call them; our noble
Guests being gone, and our Time and Imployments
rolling on in much the same manner, as in
the past Days, of which I have given an Account. 
If any thing new or uncommon, or more particularly
affecting to me than usual, occurs, I shall
not fail to trouble you with it, as I have Opportunity. 
But I have now my Correspondence with
Lady Davers to resume; and how shall I do about
that? —Oh! I can easily tell; It is but trespassing
a little on your indulgent Allowance for me, my
ever-dear Parents—And you, my dear Miss, will
find it a Relief, instead of an Occasion for Regret,
to be eased of a great many Impertinencies, which
I write to you in my Heart's Confidence, and in the 

Familiarity of Friendship—Besides, I shall have the
Happiness of changing our Paper-Correspondence
into personal Conversation with you, when at London
—And what a sweet Change for me will that
be! —I will end with the joyful Thought; and
with the Assurance, that I am, 
My dearest Father and Mother,
and best-beloved Miss,
Your dutiful and affectionate
P. B. 
