



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

June 23. Friday morning. 
I went out early this morning, on a design that I
know not yet whether I shall or shall not pursue; 
and on my return found Simon Parsons, my Lord's
Berkshire Bailiff (just before arrived), waiting for me
with a message in form, sent by all the family, to
press me to go down, and that at my Lord's particular
desire; who wants to see me before he dies. 
Simon has brought my Lord's chariot-and-six (perhaps
my own by this time), to carry me down. I
have ordered it to be in readiness by four to-morrow
morning. The cattle shall smoke for the delay; and
by the rest they'll have in the interim, will be better
able to bear it. 
I am still resolved upon matrimony, if my fair
Perverse will accept of me. But, if she will not— 
why then I must give an uninterrupted hearing, not
to my conscience, but to these women below. 
Dorcas had acquainted her lady with Simon's arrival
and errand. My Beloved had desired to see him. 
But my coming in prevented his attendance on her,
just as Dorcas was instructing him what questions he
should not answer to, that might be asked of him. 
I am to be admitted to her presence immediately,
at my repeated request—Surely the acquisition in view
will help me to make all up with her—She is just gone
up to the dining-room. 
* *
Nothing will do, Jack! —I can procure no favour
from her, tho' she has obtained from me the
point which she had set her heart upon. 
I will give thee a brief account of what passed between
us. 
I first proposed instant marriage; and this in the
most fervent manner: But was denied as fervently. 

Would she be pleased to assure me, that she would
stay here only till Tuesday morning? I would but
just go down, and see how my Lord was—To know
whether he had any thing particular to say, or injoin
me, while yet he was sensible, as he was very earnest
to see me—Perhaps I might be up on Sunday— 
Concede in something! —I beseech you, Madam,
shew me some little consideration. 
Why, Mr. Lovelace, must I be determined by
your motions? —Think you, that I will voluntarily
give a sanction to the imprisonment of my person? 
Of what importance to me ought to be your stay or
your return? 
Give a sanction to the imprisonment of your person! 
Do you think, Madam, that I fear the Law?— 
I might have spared this foolish question of defiance
—But my pride would not let me. I thought
she threatened me, Jack. 
I don't think so, Sir—You are too brave to have
any regard either to moral or divine sanctions. 
'Tis well, Madam! —But ask me any thing I can
do to oblige you; and I will oblige you, tho' in nothing
will you oblige me. 
Then I ask you, then I request of you, to let me
go to Hamstead. 
I paused—and at last—By my soul you shall— 
This very moment I will wait upon you, and see
you fixed there, if you'll promise me your hand on
Thursday, in presence of your uncle. 
I want not you to see me fixed—I will promise nothing. 
Take care, Madam, that you don't let me see,
that I can have no reliance upon your future favour. 
I have been used to be threatened by you, Sir— 
But I will accept of your company to Hamstead— 
I will be ready to go in a quarter of an hour—My
cloaths may be sent after me. 
You know the condition, Madam—Next Thursday. 
You dare not trust— 

My infinite demerits tell me, that I ought not— 
Nevertheless I will confide in your generosity—Tomorrow
morning (no new cause arising to give reason
to the contrary), as early as you please, you may go
to Hamstead. 
This seemed to oblige her. But yet she looked
with a face of doubt. 
I will go down to the women. And having no
better judges at hand, will hear what they say upon
my critical situation with this proud beauty, who has
so insolently rejected a Lovelace kneeling at her
feet, tho' making an earnest tender of himself for a
husband, in spite of all his prejudices to the state of
shackles. 