



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sunday Night, July 9. 
Now, Jack, have I a subject with a vengeance. 
I am in the very height of my tryal for all my
sins to my beloved Fugitive. For here to-day, at
about Five o'Clock, arrived Lady Sarah Sadleir and
Lady Betty Lawrance, each in her Chariot-and-six. 
Dowagers love Equipage; and these cannot travel ten
miles without a Set, and half a dozen horsemen. 
My time had hung heavy upon my hands; and
so I went to Church after dinner. Why may not
handsome fellows, thought I, like to be looked at, as
well as handsome wenches? I fell in, when Service
was over, with Major Warneton; and so came not
home till after Six; and was surprised, at entering the
Court-yard here, to find it littered with equipages and
servants. I was sure the owners of them came for no
good to me. 
Lady Sarah, I soon found, was raised to this visit
by Lady Betty; who has health enough to allow her
to look out of herself, and out of her own affairs,
for business. Yet congratulation to Lord M. on his
amendment [Spiteful devils on both accounts!] was
the avowed errand. But coming in my absence, I 

was their principal subject; and they had opportunity
to set each other's heart against me. 
Simon Parsons hinted this to me, as I passed by
the Steward's office; for it seems they talked loud; 
and he was making up some accounts with old
Pritchard. 
However, I hastened to pay my duty to them. 
Other people not performing theirs, is no excuse for
the neglect of our own, you know. 
And now I enter upon my Tryal. 
With horrible grave faces was I received. The
two Antiques only bowed their tabby heads; 
making longer faces than ordinary; and all the old
lines appearing strong in their furrowed foreheads and
fallen cheeks; How do you, Cousin? and, How do
you, Mr. Lovelace? looking all round at one another,
as who should say, Do You speak first; 
and, Do You: For they seemed resolved to lose no
time. 
I had nothing for it, but an air as manly, as theirs
was womanly. Your servant, Madam, to Lady
Betty; and, Your servant, Madam—I am glad to see
you abroad, to Lady Sarah. 
I took my seat. Lord M. looked horribly glum; 
his fingers claspt, and turning round and round, under
and over, his but just disgouted thumbs; his sallow
face, and goggling eyes, cast upon the floor,
on the fire-place, on his two Sisters, on his two
Kinswomen, by turns; but not once deigning to look
upon me. 
Then I began to think of the Laudanum, and Wet
Cloth, I told thee of long ago; and to call myself in
question for a tenderness of heart that will never do
me good. 
At last, Mr. Lovelace! —Cousin Lovelace! — 
Hem! —Hem! —I am sorry, very sorry, hesitated 

Lady Sarah, that there is no hope of your ever taking
up— 
What's the matter now, Madam? 
The matter now! —Why, Lady Betty has two
Letters from Miss Harlowe, which have told us what's
the matter—Are all women alike with you? 
Yes; I could have answered; 'bating the difference
which Pride makes. 
Then they all chorus'd upon me—Such a character
as Miss Harlowe's! cried one—A Lady of so much
generosity and good sense! another—How charmingly
she writes! the two maiden monkies, looking at her
fine hand-writing: Her perfections my crimes. What
can you expect will be the end of these things? cried
Lady Sarah—Damn'd, damn'd doings! vociferated
the Peer, shaking his loose-flesh'd wabbling chaps,
which hung on his Shoulders like an old cow's dewlap. 
For my part, I hardly knew whether to sing or say,
what I had to reply to these all-at-once attacks upon
me! —Fair and softly, Ladies—One at a time, I beseech
you. I am not to be hunted down without being
heard, I hope. Pray let me see these Letters. I
beg you will let me see them. 
There they are: —That's the first—Read it out, if
you can. 
I opened a Letter from my Charmer, dated Thursday,
June 29. our Wedding-day, that was to be, and
written to Lady Betty Lawrance. By the contents,
to my great joy, I find the dear creature is alive and
well, and in charming spirits. But the direction where
to send an answer was so scratched out, that I could
not read it; which afflicted me much. 
She puts three questions in it to Lady Betty. 
1st, About a Letter of hers, dated June 7. congratulating
me on my Nuptials, and which I was so
good as to save Lady Betty the trouble of writing— 
A very civil thing of me, I think! 

Again—“Whether she and one of her Nieces
Montague were to go to town, on an old Chancery-Suit?” 
And, “Whether they actually did go to
town accordingly, and to Hamstead afterwards?” 
and, “Whether they brought to town from thence
the young creature whom they visited;” was the
subject of the second and third questions. 
A little inquisitive dear rogue! and what did she
expect to be the better for these questions? —But
curiosity, damn'd curiosity, is the itch of the Sex— 
Yet when didst thou know it turned to their benefit? 
—For they seldom enquire, but when they fear— 
And the proverb, as my Lord has it, says, It comes
with a fear. That is, I suppose, what they fear generally
happens, because there is generally occasion
for the fear. 
Curiosity indeed she avows to be her only motive
for these interrogatories: For tho' she says, her Ladyship
may suppose the questions are not asked for
good to me, yet the answer can do me no harm, nor
her good, only to give her to understand—whether I
have told her a parcel of damn'd lyes; that's the plain
English of her enquiry. 
Well, Madam, said I, with as much philosophy
as I could assume; and may I ask—Pray, what was
your Ladyship's Answer? 
There's a copy of it, tossing it to me, very disrespectfully. 
This Answer was dated July 1. A very kind and
complaisant one to the Lady, but very So-so to her
poor Kinsman—That people can give up their own
flesh and blood with so much ease! —She tells her
“how proud all our family would be of an alliance
with such an excellence.” She does me justice in
saying how much I adore her, as an angel of a woman; 
and begs of her for I know not how many
sakes, besides my Soul's sake, “that she will be so
good as to have me for an husband:” And answers
—thou wilt guess how—to the Lady's questions. 

Well, Madam; and, pray, may I be favoured
with the Lady's other Letter? I presume it is in reply
to yours. 
It is, said the Peer: But, Sir, let me ask you a
few questions, before you read it —Give me the Letter,
Lady Betty. 
There it is, my Lord. 
Then on went the spectacles, and his head moved
to the lines—A charming pretty hand! —I have often
heard, that this Lady is a genus. 
And so, Jack, repeating my Lord's wise comments
and questions will let thee into the contents of
this merciless Letter. 
“Monday, July 3.” [reads my Lord]—Let me
see! —That was last Monday; no longer ago! “Monday,
July the third—Madam—I cannot excuse myself” 
—um, um, um, um, um, um [humming
inarticulately, and skipping]—“I must own to you,
Madam, that the honour of being related”— 
Off went the spectacles—Now, tell me, Sir-r,
Has not this Lady lost all the friends she had in the
world, for your sake? 
She has very implacable friends, my Lord: We all
know That. 
But has she not lost them all for your sake? —Tell
me That. 
I believe so, my Lord. 
Well then! —I am glad thou art not so graceless as
to deny That. 
On went the spectacles again—“I must own to you,
Madam, that the honour of being related to Ladies
as eminent for their virtue, as for their descent”— 
Very pretty, truly! said my Lord, repeating “as eminent
for their virtue as for their descent, was, at
first, no small inducement with me to lend an ear
to Mr. Lovelace's address.” 
There is dignity, born dignity, in this Lady, cried
my Lord. 

Lady Sarah. She would have been a grace to our
family. 
Lady Betty. Indeed she would. 
Lovel. To a Royal Family, I will venture to say. 
Lord M. Then what a devil— 
Lovel. Please to read on, my Lord. It cannot be
her Letter, if it does not make you admire her more
and more as you read. Cousin Charlotte, Cousin
Patty, pray attend—Read on, my Lord. 
Miss Charlotte. Amazing fortitude! 
Miss Patty only lifted up her dove's eyes. 
Lord M. [reading] “And the rather, as I was determined,
had it come to effect, to do every-thing
in my power to deserve your favourable opinion.” 
Then again they chorus'd upon me! 
A blessed time of it, poor I! —I had nothing for it
but impudence! 
Lovel. Pray read on, my Lord—I told you how
you would all admire her—Or, shall I read? 
Lord M. Damn'd assurance! [then reading] “I
had another motive, which I knew would of itself
give me merit with your whole family [They were
all ear]: A presumptuous one; a punishably presumptuous
one, as it has proved: In the hope that
I might be an humble means in the hand of Providence,
to reclaim a man who had, as I thought,
good sense enough at bottom to be reclaimed; or
at least gratitude enough to acknowlege the intended
obligation, whether the generous hope were
to succeed or not.” —Excellent young creature!— 
Excellent young creature! echoed the Ladies, with
their handkerchiefs at their eyes, attended with nose-music. 
Lovel. By my soul, Miss Patty, you weep in the
wrong place: You shall never go with me to a
Tragedy. 
Lady Betty. Hardened wretch! 
His Lordship had pulled off his spectacles to wipe
them. His eyes were misty; and he thought the
fault in his spectacles. 

I saw they were all cocked and primed—To be sure
that is a very pretty sentence, said I—That is the excellency
of this Lady, that in every line, as she writes
on, she improves upon herself. Pray, my Lord, proceed
—I know her style; the next sentence will still
rise upon us. 
Lord M. Damn'd fellow! [again saddling, and
reading] “But I have been most egregiously mistaken
in Mr. Lovelace!” —[Then they all clamoured
again] “The only man, I persuade myself—” 
Lovel. Ladies may persuade themselves to any-thing: 
But how can she answer for what other men
would or would not have done in the same circumstances? 
I was forced to say any-thing to stifle their outcries. 
Pox take ye all together, thought I; as if I had not
vexation enough in losing her! 
Lord M. [reading] “The only man, I persuade
myself, pretending to be a gentleman, in whom I
could have been so much mistaken.” 
They were all beginning again—Pray, my Lord,
proceed! —Hear, hear—Pray, Ladies, hear! —Now,
my Lord, be pleased to proceed. The Ladies are
silent. 
So they were; lost in admiration of me, hands and
eyes uplifted. 
Lord M. I will, to thy confusion; for he had looked
over the next sentence. 
What wretches, Belford, what spiteful wretches,
are poor mortals! —So rejoiced to sting one another!
to see each other stung! 
Lord M. [reading] “For while I was endeavouring
to save a drowning wretch, I have been, not
accidentally, but premeditatedly, and of set purpose,
drawn in after him.” —What say you to this,
Sir r? 
Lady S. Lady B. Ay, Sir, what say you to this? 

Lovel. Say! Why I say it is a very pretty metaphor,
if it would but hold. —But, if you please, my
Lord, read on. Let me hear what is further said,
and I will speak to it all together. 
Lord M. I will. —“And he has had the glory to
add to the List of those he has ruined, a name that
I will be bold to say, would not have disparaged
his own.” 
They all looked at me, as expecting me to speak. 
Lovel. Be pleased to proceed, my Lord: I will
speak to this by-and-by—How came she to know, I
kept a List? —I will speak to this by-and-by. 
Lord M. [reading on] “And this, Madam, by
means, that would shock humanity to be made acquainted
with.” 
Then again, in a hurry, off went the spectacles. 
This was a plaguy stroke upon me. I thought myself
an oak in impudence; but, by my troth, this had
almost felled me. 
Lord M. What say you to this, SIR-R!— 
Remember, Jack, to read all their Sirs in this dialogue
with a double rr, Sir-r! denoting indignation
rather than respect. 
They all looked at me, as if to see if I could blush. 
Lovel. Eyes off, my Lord! —Eyes off, Ladies!
[looking bashfully, I believe]—What say I to this,
my Lord! —Why, I say, that this Lady has a strong
manner of expressing herself! —That's all—There
are many things that pass among Lovers, which a
man cannot explain himself upon before grave
people. 
Lady Betty. Among Lovers, Sir-r! But, Mr. Lovelace,
can you say that this Lady behaved either like a
weak, or a credulous person? —Can you say— 
Lovel. I am ready to do the Lady all manner of
justice. —But, pray now, Ladies, if I am to be thus
interrogated, let me know the contents of the rest of
the Letter, that I may be prepared for my defence, 

as you are all for my arraignment. For, to be required
to answer piecemeal thus, without knowing
what is to follow, is a cursed ensnaring way of proceeding. 
They gave me the Letter: I read it thro' to myself: 
—And by the repetition of what I said, thou wilt
guess at the remaining contents. 
You shall find, Ladies, you shall find, my Lord,
that I will not spare myself. Then holding the Letter
in my hand, and looking upon it, as a Lawyer upon his Brief; 
Miss Harlowe says, “That when your Ladyship” 
[turning to Lady Betty] “shall know, that in the
progress to her ruin, wilful falshoods, repeated forgeries,
and numberless perjuries, were not the least
of my crimes, you will judge that she can have no
principles that will make her worthy of an alliance
with Ladies of yours, and your noble Sister's character,
if she could not, from her soul, declare,
that such an alliance can never now take place.” 
Surely, Ladies, this is passion! This is not reason. 
If our family would not think themselves dishonoured
by my marrying a person whom I had so treated; but,
on the contrary, would rejoice that I did her this
justice; and if she has come out pure gold from the
assay; and has nothing to reproach herself with; why
should it be an impeachment of her principles, to consent
that such an alliance should take place? 
She cannot think herself the worse, justly she cannot,
for what was done against her will. 
Their countenances menaced a general uproar— 
But I proceeded. 
Your Lordship re'd to us, That she had an hope,
a presumptuous one; nay, a punishably presumptuous
one, she calls it; “that she might be a means in the
hands of Providence, to reclaim me; and that this,
she knew, if effected, would give her a merit with
you all.” But from what would she reclaim me? 

—She had heard, you'll say (but she had only heard,
at the time she entertained That Hope) that, to express
myself in the womens dialect, I was a very
wicked fellow: —Well, and what then?—Why,
truly, the very moment she was convinced, by her
own experience, that the charge against me was more
than hearsay; and that, of consequence, I was a fit
subject for her generous endeavours to work upon; 
she would needs give me up. Accordingly, she flies
out, and declares, that the Ceremony which would
repair all, final never take place! —Can this be from
any other motive than female resentment? 
This brought them all upon me, as I intended it
should: It was as a tub to a whale; and after I had
let them play with it awhile, I claimed their attention,
and, knowing that they always loved to hear me prate,
went on. 
The Lady, it is plain, thought, that the reclaiming
of a man from bad habits was a much easier task than,
in the nature of things, it can be. 
She writes, as your Lordship has re'd, “That in
endeavouring to save a drowning wretch, she had
been, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and of
set purpose, drawn in after him.” But how is
this, Ladies? —You see by her own words, that I am
still far from being out of danger myself. Had she
found me, in a quagmire suppose, and I had got out of
it by her means, and left her to perish in it; that
would have been a crime indeed. —But is not the fact
quite otherwise? Has she not, if her allegory prove
what she would have it prove, go out herself, and
left me floundering still deeper and deeper in? —What
she should have done, had she been in earnest to save
me, was, to join her hand with mine, that so we might
by our united strength help one another out. —I held
out my hand to her, and besought her to give me
hers: —But, no truly! she was determined to get out
herself as fast as she could, let me sink or swim: Refusing

her assistance (against her own principles) because
she saw I wanted it. —You see, Ladies, you
see, my Lord, how pretty tinkling words run away
with ears inclined to be musical. 
They were all ready to exclaim again: But I went
on, proleptically, as a Rhetorician would say, before
their voices could break out into words. 
But my fair accuser says, That, “I have added to
the List of those I have ruined, a name, that would
not have disparaged my own.” It is true, I have
been gay and enterprizing. It is in my constitution
to be so. I know not how I came by such a constitution: 
But I was never accustomed to check or controul; 
that you all know. When a man finds himself
hurried by passion into a flight offence, which,
however slight, will not be forgiven, he may be made
desperate: As a thief, who only intends a robbery,
is often by resistance, and for self-preservation, drawn
in to commit a murder. 
I was a strange, a horrid wretch with every one. 
But he must be a silly fellow who has not something
to say for himself, when every cause has its
black and its white side. —Westminster-hall, Jack,
affords every day as confident defences as mine. 
But what right, proceeded I, has this Lady to complain
of me, when she as good as says—Here, Lovelace,
you have acted the part of a villain by me— 
You would repair your fault: But I won't let you,
that I may have the satisfaction of exposing you; 
and the pride of refusing you? 
But, was that the case? Was that the case? Would
I pretend to say, I would now marry the Lady, if she
would have me? 
Lovel. You find she renounces Lady Betty's mediation— 
Lord M. [interrupting me] Words are wind; but
deeds are mind: What signifies your cursed quibbling,
Bob? —Say plainly, If she will have you, will you 

have her? Answer me, Yes or no; and lead us not a
wild-goose-chace after your meaning. 
Lovel. She knows I would. But here, my Lord,
if she thus goes on to expose herself and me, she will
make it a dishonour to us both to marry. 
Charl. But how must she have been treated— 
Lovel. [interrupting her] Why now, Cousin Charlotte,
chucking her under the chin, would you have
me tell you all that has passed between the Lady and
me? Would You care, had you a bold and enterprizing
Lover, that Proclamation should be made of
every little piece of amorous roguery, that he offered
to you? 
Charlotte reddened. They all began to exclaim. 
But I proceeded. 
The Lady says, “She has been dishonoured” (devil
take me, if I spare myself!) “by means, that
would shock humanity to be made acquainted
with them.” She is a very innocent Lady, and
may not be a judge of the means she hints at. Over-niceness
may be Under-niceness: Have you not such a
proverb, my Lord?—tantamount to, One extreme
produces another! —Such a Lady as This, may possibly
think her case more extraordinary than it is. This I
will take upon me to say, That if she has met with
the only man in the world who would have treated
her, as she says I have treated her, I have met in her
with the only woman in the world who would have
made such a rout about a case that is uncommon
only from the circumstances that attend it. 
This brought them all upon me; hands, eyes,
voices, all lifted up at once. But my Lord M. who
has in his head (the last seat of retreating lewdness) as
much wickedness as I have in my heart, was forced
(upon the air I spoke this with, and Charlotte's and
all the rest reddening) to make a mouth that was big
enough to swallow up the other half of his face; crying
out, to avoid laughing, Oh! Oh!—as if under the
power of a gouty twinge. 

Hadst thou seen how the two tabbies and the young
grimalkins looked at one another, at my Lord, and
at me, by turns, thou too wouldst have been ready
to split thy ugly face just in the middle. Thy mouth
has already done half the work. And, after all, I
found not seldom in this conversation, that my humorous
undaunted airs forced a smile into my service
from the prim mouths of the young Ladies. &dotup;They
perhaps, had they met with such another intrepid
fellow as myself, who had first gained upon their
affections, would not have made such a rout as my
Beloved has done, about such an affair as that we
were assembled upon. Young Ladies, as I have
observed on an hundred occasions, fear not half so
much for themselves, as their Mothers do for them. 
But here the Girls were forced to put on grave airs,
and to seem angry, because the Antiques made the
matter of such high importance. Yet so lightly sat
anger and fellow-feeling at their hearts, that they
were forced to purse in their mouths, to suppress the
smiles I now-and-then laid out for: While the Elders
having had Roses (that is to say, Daughters)
of their own, and knowing how fond men are of a
Trifle, would have been very loth to have had them
nipt in the bud, without saying, By your leave,
Mrs. Rose-bush, to the mother of it.&dotup; 
The next article of my indictment was for Forgery; 
and for personating of Lady Betty and my
Cousin Charlotte. Two shocking charges, thou'lt
say: And so they were! —The Peer was outrageous
upon the Forgery-charge. The Ladies vowed never
to forgive the personating part. Not a peacemaker
among them. So well all turned women, and
scolded. 
My Lord told me, That he believed in his conscience
there was not a viler fellow upon God's Earth,
than me. —What signifies mincing the matter? said
he—And that it was not the first time I had forged his hand. 

To this I answered, that I supposed, When the
Statute of Scandalum Magnatum was framed, there
were a good many in the Peerage, who knew they
deserved hard names; and that that Law therefore
was rather made to privilege their Qualities, than to
whiten their Characters. 
He called upon me to explain myself, with a Sir-r,
so pronounced, as to shew, that one of the most ignominious
words in our language was in his head. 
People, I said, that were fenced in by their quality,
and by their years, should not take freedoms that a
man of spirit could not put up with, unless he were
able heartily to despise the insulter. 
This set him in a violent passion. He would send
for Pritchard instantly. Let Pritchard be called. He
would alter his Will; and all he could leave from me,
he would. 
Do, do, my Lord, said I: I always valued my
own Pleasure above your Estate. But I'll let Pritchard
know, that if he draws, he shall sign and seal. 
Why, what would I do to Pritchard? —Shaking his
crazy head at me. 
Only, what he, or any man else, writes with his
pen, to despoil me of what I think my right, he shall
seal with his ears; that's all, my Lord. 
Then the two Ladies interposed. 
Lady Sarah told me, That I carried things a great
way; and that neither Lord M. nor any of them,
deserved the treatment I gave them. 
I said, I could not bear to be used ill by my Lord,
for two reasons; first, Because I respected his Lordship
above any man living; and next, Because it
looked as if I were induced by selfish considerations
to take that from Him, which nobody else would
offer to me. 
And what, returned he, shall be my inducement to
take what I do at your hands? —Hay, Sir? 
Indeed, Cousin Lovelace, said Lady Betty, with 

great gravity, we do not any of us, as Lady Sarah
says, deserve at your hands the treatment you give
us: And let me tell you, that I don't think my
character, and your Cousin Charlotte's, ought to be
prostituted, in order to ruin an innocent Lady. She
must have known early the good opinion we all have
of her, and how much we wished her to be your wife. 
This good opinion of ours has been an inducement to
her (You see she says so) to listen to your address. 
And this, with her friends folly, has helpt to throw
her into your power. How you have requited her,
is too apparent. It becomes the character we all
bear, to disclaim your actions by her. And let me
tell you, that to have her abused by wicked people
raised up to personate us, or any of us, makes a double
call upon us to disclaim them. 
Lovel. Why this is talking somewhat like. I would
have you all disclaim my actions. I own I have done
very vilely by this Lady. One step led to another. I
am curst with an enterprizing spirit. I hate to be
foiled. 
Foiled! interrupted Lady Sarah. What a shame to
talk at this rate! —Did the Lady set up a contention
with you? All nobly sincere, and plain-hearted, have
I heard Miss Clarrisa Harlowe is: Above Art, above
Disguise; neither the Coquet, nor the Prude! —Poor
Lady! She deserved a better fate from the man for
whom she took the step which she so freely blames! 
This above half affected me—Had this dispute been
so handled by every one, I had been ashamed to look
up. I began to be bashful. 
Charlotte asked, If I did not still seem inclinable
to do the Lady justice, if she would accept of me? 
It would be, she dared to say, the greatest felicity the
family could know (She would answer for one) that
this fine Lady were of it. 
They all declared to the same effect; and Lady
Sarah put the matter home to me. 

But my Lord Marplot would have it, that I could
not be serious for six minutes together. 
I told his Lordship, that he was mistaken; light as
he thought I made of this subject, I never knew any
that went so near my heart. 
Miss Patty said, She was glad to hear that: Indeed
she was glad to hear that: And her soft eyes glistened
with pleasure. 
Lord M. called her Sweet Soul, and was ready to cry. 
Not from humanity neither, Jack. This Peer has
no bowels; as thou mayest observe by his treatment
of me. But when peoples minds are weakened by a
sense of their own infirmities, and when they are
drawing on to their latter ends, they will be moved
on the slightest occasions, whether those offer from
within or without them. And this, frequently, the
unpenetrating world calls Humanity; when all the
time, in compassionating the miseries of human nature,
they are but pitying themselves; and were they
in strong health and spirits, would care as little for
any-body else as thou or I do. 
Here broke they off my Tryal for this Sitting. 
Lady Sarah was much fatigued. It was agreed to
pursue the subject in the morning. They all, however,
retired together, and went into private conference. 