


I Have the following Answer: 

‘Dearest Madam,
I am utterly confounded, and must plead guilty
to all your just Reproaches. O that I was
Master of half your Caution and Discretion! I
hope, after all, this is only a Touch of this ill
Woman's Temper, to shew her Power and Importance: 
For I think Mr. B. neither can nor dare
deceive me in so black a manner. I would expose
him all the World over, if he did. But it is
not, cannot be in him. I have received a Letter
from John Arnold; in which he tells me, that the
'Squire is preparing for his London Journey; and
believes, afterwards, he will come into these Parts. 

But he says, Lady Davers is at their House, and
is to accompany her Brother to London, or meet
him there, he knows not which. He professes
great Zeal and Affection to your Service. But I
find he refers to a Letter he sent me before, but
which is not come to my Hand. I think there
can be no Treachery; for it is a particular Friend
at Gainsborough, that I have order'd him to direct
to; and this is come safe to my Hands by this
means; for well I know, I durst trust nothing to
Brett, at the Post-house here. This gives me a
little Pain; but I hope all will end well, and we
shall soon hear, if it be necessary to pursue our
former Intentions. If it be, I will lose no Time
to provide a Horse for you, and another for myself; 
for I can never do either God or myself
better Service, tho' I were to forego all my Expectations
for it here. I am 
Your most faithful humble Servant. 
‘I was too free indeed with Mrs. Jewkes, led' to
it by her Dissimulation, and by her Concern
to make me happy with you. I hinted, that I
would not have scrupled to have procured
your Deliverance by any means; and that I
had proposed to you, as the only honourable
one, Marriage with me. But I assured her, tho'
she would hardly believe me, that you discouraged
my Application. Which is too
true! But not a Word of the Baek-door,
Key, &c.’ 

Mrs. Jewkes continues still sullen and ill-natur'd; 
and I am afraid, almost, to speak to her. She
watches me as close as ever, and pretends to wonder
why I shun her Company as I do. 

I have just put under the Tiles these Lines; inspired
by my Fears, which are indeed very strong; 
and, I doubt, not without Reason. 

‘Sir,
Every thing gives me additional. Disturbance. 
The miss'd Letter of John Arnold's
makes me suspect a Plot. Yet am I loth to think
myself of so much Importance, as to suppose every
one in a Plot against me. Are you sure, however,
the London Journey is not to be a Lincolnshire one? 
May not John, who has been once a Traitor, be
so again? —Why need I be thus in doubt? —If
I could have this Horse, I would turn the Reins on
his Neck, and trust to Providence to guide him for
my Safeguard! For I would not indanger you, now
just upon the Edge of your Preferment. Yet, Sir,
I fear your fatal Openness will make you suspected
as accessary, let us be ever so cautious. 
‘Were my Life in question, instead of my Honesty,
I would not wish to involve you, or any
body, in the least Difficulty for so worthless a poor
Creature. But, O Sir! my Soul is of equal Importance
with the Soul of a Princess; though
my Quality is inferior to that of the meanest
Slave. 
‘Save then, my Innocence, good God, and preserve
my Mind spotless; and happy shall I be to
lay down my worthless Life, and see an End to all
my Troubles and Anxieties! 
‘Forgive my Impatience: But my presaging Mind
bodes horrid Mischiefs! –––Every thing looks dark
around me; and this Woman's impenetrable Sullenness
and Silence, without any apparent Reason,
from a Conduct so very contrary, bids me fear
the worst. –––Blame me, Sir, if you think me 

wrong; and let me have your Advice what to do; 
which will oblige 
‘Your most afflicted Servant.’ 

