



Dear Mother,
I Broke off abruptly my last Letter; for I fear'd he
was coming; and so it happen'd. I thrust the
Letter into my Bosom, and took up my Work, which
say by me; but I had so little of the Artful, as he 

called it, that I look'd as confused, as if I had been
doing some great Harm. 
Sit still, Pamela, said he, and mind your Work,
for all me. —You don't tell me I am welcome home
after my Journey to Lincolnshire. It would be hard,
Sir, said I, if you was not always welcome to your
Honour's own House. 
I would have gone; but he said, Don't run away,
I tell you. I have a Word or two to say to you. 
Good Sirs, how my Heart went pit-a-pat! When I
was a little kind, said he, to you in the Summerhouse,
and you carry'd yourself so foolishly upon it,
as if I had intended to do you great harm, did I not
tell you, you should take no Notice of what pass'd,
to any Creature? And yet you have made a common
Talk of the Matter, not considering either my
Reputation or your own. —I made a common Talk
of it, Sir, said I! I have nobody to talk to, hardly! 
He interrupted me, and said, Hardly! you little
Equivocator! what do you mean by hardly? Let
me ask you, Have you not told Mrs. Jervis for one? 
Pray your Honour, said I, all in Agitation, let me
go down; for 'tis not for me to hold an Argument
with your Honour. Equivocator, again! said he,
and took my Hand, what do you talk of an Argument? 
Is it holding an Argument with me, to answer
a plain Question? Answer me what I asked. O
good, Sir, said I, let me beg you will not urge me
further, for fear I forget myself again, and be sawcy. 
Answer me then, I bid you, says he, Have you
told Mrs. Jervis? It will be sawcy in you, if you
don't answer me directly to what I ask. Sir, said I,
and fain would have pulled my Hand away, may be
I should be for answering you by another Question,
and that would not become me. What is it, says
he, you would say? Speak out! 

Then, Sir, said I, why should your Honour be so
angry I should tell Mrs. Jervis, or any body else, what
passed, if you intended no harm? 
Well said, pretty Innocent and Artless! as Mrs.
Jervis calls you, said he; and is it thus you taunt
and retort upon me, insolent as you are! But still I
will be answered directly to my Question? Why
then, Sir, said I, I will not tell a Lye for the World:
I did tell Mrs. Jervis; for my Heart was almost
broke; but I open'd not my Mouth to any other. 
Very well, Boldface, said he, and Equivocator, again! 
You did not open your Mouth to any other; but did
you not write to some other? Why now, and please
your Honour, said I, (for I was quite courageous just
then) you could not have asked me this Question,
if you had not taken from me my Letter to my Father
and Mother, in which, I own, I had broke my
Mind freely to them, and asked their Advice, and
poured forth my Griefs! 
And so I am to be exposed, am I, said he, in my
House, and out of my House, to the whole World,
by such a Sawcebox as you? No, good Sir, said I,
and I hope your Honour won't be angry with me; 
it is not me that expose you if I say nothing but the
Truth. So, taunting again! Assurances as you are,
said he! I will not be thus talk'd to. 
Pray, Sir, said I, who can a poor Girl take Advice
of, if it must not be of her Father and Mother,
and such a good Woman as Mrs. Jervis, who
for her Sex-sake, should give it me when asked? 
Insolence! said he, and stamp'd with his Foot, Am
I to be question'd thus by such a one as you? I fell
down on my Knees, and said, For God's sake, your
Honour, pity a poor distressed Creature, that knows
nothing of her Duty, but how to cherish her Virtue
and good Name! I have nothing else to trust
to; and tho' poor and friendless here, yet I have always 

been taught to value Honesty above my Life. 
Here's ado with your Honesty, said he, foolish Girl! 
Is it not one Part of Honesty, to be dutiful and grateful
to your Master, do you think? Indeed, Sir, said I,
it is impossible I should be ingrateful to your Honour,
or disobedient, or deserve the Names of Boldface and
Insolent, which you call me, but when your Commands
are contrary to that first Duty, which shall
ever be the Principle of my Life! 
He seem'd to be moved, and rose up, and walked
into the great Chamber two or three Turns, leaving
me on my Knees; and I threw my Apron over my
Face, and laid my Head on a Chair, and cry'd as if
my Heart would break, having no Power to stir. 
At last he came in again, but, alas! with Mischief
in his Heart! and raising me up, he said, Rise,
Pamela, rise; you are your own Enemy. Your
perverse Folly will be your Ruin! I tell you this, that
I am very much displeased with the Freedoms you
have taken with my Name to my House-keeper,
as also to your Father and Mother; and you may
as well have real Cause to take these Freedoms with
me, as to make my Name suffer for imaginary ones:
And saying so, he offer'd to take me on his Knee,
with some Force. O how I was terrify'd! I said,
like as I had read in a Book a Night or two before,
Angels, and Saints, and all the Host of Heaven, defend
me! And may I never survive one Moment,
that fatal one in which I shall forfeit my Innocence. 
Pretty Fool! said he, how will you forfeit your Innocence,
if you are oblig'd to yield to a Force you
cannot withstand? Be easy, said he; for let the worst
happen that can, you'll have the Merit, and I the
Blame; and it will be a good Subject for Letters to
your Father and Mother, and a Tale into the Bargain
for Mrs. Jervis. 

He by Force kissed my Neck and Lips; and said,
Who ever blamed Lucretia, but the Ravisber only?
and I am content to take all the Blame upon me; 
as I have already borne too great a Share for what I
have deserv'd. May I, said I, Lucretia like, justify
myself with my Death, if I am used barbarously? 
O my good Girl! said he, tauntingly, you are well
read, I see; and we shall make out between us, before
we have done, a pretty Story in Romance, I
warrant ye! 
He then put his Hand in my Bosom, and the
Indignation gave me double Strength, and I got
loose from him, by a sudden Spring, and ran out of
the Room; and the next Chamber being open, I
made shift to get into it and threw-to the Door,
and the Key being on the Inside, it locked; but he
follow'd me so close, he got hold of my Gown,
and tore a Piece off, which hung without the Door. 
I just remember I got into the Room; for I
knew nothing further of the Matter till afterwards; 
for I fell into a Fit with my Fright and Terror, and
there I lay, till he, as I suppose, looking through the
Key-hole, spy'd me lying all along upon the Floor,
stretch'd out at my Length; and then he call'd Mrs.
Jervis to me, who, by his Assistance, bursting open
the Door, he went away, seeing me coming to myself; 
and bid her say nothing of the Matter, if she
was wise. 
Poor Mrs. Jervis thought it was worse, and cry'd
over me like as if she was my Mother; and I was
two Hours before I came to myself; and just as I
got a little up on my Feet, he coming in, I went
away again with the Terror; and so he withdrew
again: But he staid in the next Room to let nobody
come near us, that his foul Proceedings might not
be known. 

Mrs. Jervis gave me her Smelling-bottle, and had
cut my Laces, and sat me in a great Chair, and he
call'd her to him: How is the Girl, said he? I never
saw such a Fool in my Life. I did nothing at
all to her. Mrs. Jervis could not speak for crying. 
So, he said, she has told you, it seems, that I was
kind to her in the Summer-house, tho' I'll assure
you, I was quite innocent then as well as now; and
I desire you to keep this Matter to yourself, and let
me not be nam'd in it. 
O Sir, said she, for your Honour's sake, and for
Christ's sake—But he would not hear her, and
said—For your own sake, I tell you, Mrs. Jervis,
say not a Word more. I have done her no harm. 
And I won't have her stay in my House; prating,
perverse Fool, as she is! But since she is so apt to
fall into Fits, or at least pretend to do so, prepare
her to see me To-morrow after Dinner, in my Mother's
Closer, and do you be with her, and you shall
hear what passes between us. 
And so he went out in a Pet, and order'd his Chariot
and Four to be got ready, and went away a
Visiting somewhere. 
Mrs. Jervis then came to me, and I told her all
that had happen'd, and said I was resolv'd not to
stay in the House; and she saying, He seem'd to
threaten as much; I said, Thank God; then I shall
be easy: So she told me all he had said to her, as I
have said above. 
Mrs. Jervis is very loth I should go; and yet,
poor Woman! she begins to be afraid for herself; 
but would not have me ruin'd for the World. She
says, To be sure he means no good; but may be,
now he sees me so resolute, he will give over all
Attempts: And that I shall know what to do better
after To-morrow, when I am to appear before a very
bad Judge, I doubt! 

O how I dread this To-morrow's Appearance! But
be assured, my dear Parents, of the Honesty of your
poor Child! As I am sure I am of your Prayers for 
Your dutiful Daughter. 
Oh! this frightful To-morrow! how I dread it! 

