



My dearest Daughter,
I need not repeat to you the Sense your
good Mother and I have of our Happiness,
and of our Obligations to your honoured Spouse:
You both were pleased Witnesses of it every Hour
of the happy Fortnight you passed with us. But
still, my Dear, we hardly know how to address
ourselves even to you, much less to the Squire,
with the Freedom he so often invited us to take:
For, I don't know how it is, but tho' you are our
Daughter, and are so far from being lifted up
by your high Condition, that we see no Difference
in your Behaviour to us your poor Parents; 

yet, when we look upon you as the Lady of so
fine a Gentleman, we cannot forbear having a
kind of Respect, and—I don't know what to
call it,—that lays a little Restraint upon us! 
And yet we would not, methinks, let our Minds
be run away with the Admiration of worldly
Grandeur, so as to set too much by it. 
But your Merit, and your Prudence, my
dear Daughter, is so much above all we could
ever have any Notion of! —And to have
Gentry come only to behold you, and admire
you, not so much for your Genteelness and
Amiableness neither, as for your Behaviour, and
your Affability to Poor as well as Rich, and to
hear every one calling you an Angel, and saying,
You deserve to be what you are; makes us hardly
know how to look upon you, but as an Angel
indeed! I am sure you have been a good Angel
to us! —Since, for your sake, God Almighty
has put it into your honour'd Husband's Heart, to
make us the happiest Couple in the World: But
little less, indeed, we should have been, had
we only, in some far distant Land, heard of our
dear Child's Happiness, and never partaken of
the Benefits of it ourselves. But thus to be provided
for! —Thus kindly to be owned, and
called Father and Mother by such a brave Gentleman; 
and thus to be placed, that we have nothing
to do, but to bless God, and bless him, and
bless you, and hourly pray for you both, is such
a Providence, my dear Child, as is too mighty
to be borne by us with Equalness of Temper; and
we kneel together every Morning, Noon, and 

Night, and weep and rejoice, and rejoice and
weep, to think how our Unworthiness is distinguished,
and how God has provided for us in
our latter Days, when all that we had to fear,
was, that, as we grew older, and more infirm,
and worn out by hard Labour, we should be
troublesome, where not our Pride, but our
industrious Wills, would have made us wish not
to be so; but to be intitled to a happier Lot:
For this would have grieved us the more, for
the sake of you, my dear Child, and your unhappy
Brother's Children: For it is well known,
that, tho' we pretend not to boast of our Family,
and indeed had no Reason, yet none of us were
ever sunk so low as I was:—To be sure, partly
by my own Fault; for had it been for your poor
aged Mother's sake only, I ought not to have
done what I did for John and William; for, so
unhappy were they, poor Lads, that what I could
do, was but as a Drop of Water to a Bucket. 
But yet the Issue has shewn, that (if I may
presume to say so) what I did, was not displeasing
to God; inasmuch as I have the Comfort to
see, that my Reliance on Him, while I was doing
what tho' some thought imprudent Things, yet
not wrong Things, is so abundantly rewarded,
beyond Expectation and Desert. Blessed be His
holy Name for it! 
You command me—Let me, as writing to
Mr. B.'s Lady, say command, tho', as to my dear
Daughter, I will only say desire: And indeed
I will not, as you wish'd me not to do, let the
one Condition, which was accidental, put the 

other, which was natural, out of my Thought:
You spoke it in better Words, but this was the
Sense—But you have the Gift of Utterance; 
and Education is a fine thing, where it meets
with such Talents to improve upon as God has
given you. —But let me not forget what I was
going to say. —You command—or, if you
please—you desire me to write long Letters, and
often. —And how can I help it, if I would? For
when here, in this happy Dwelling, and this well-stock'd
Farm, in these rich Meadows, and well-cropp'd
Acres, we look around us, and, which
Way soever we turn our Heads, see Blessings
upon Blessings, and Plenty upon Plenty; see
Barns well-stored, Poultry increasing, the Kine
lowing and crouding about us, and all fruitful; 
and are bid to call all these our own—And
then think, that all is the Reward of our Child's
Virtue! —O my dear Daughter, who can bear
these Things! —Excuse me—I must break
off a little, for my Eyes are as full as my Heart; 
and I will retire to bless God, and your honour'd
Husband. 
So—my dear Child—I now again take
up my Pen. —But reading what I had written,
in order to carry on the Thread, I can hardly
forbear again being in like sort affected. —But
do you think I will call all these Things my own! 
—Do you think I will live Rent-free! —Do
you think I would? Can the honoured 'Squire
believe, that having such a generous Example
before me, if I had no Gratitude in my Temper 

before, I could help being touched by such an
one as he sets me? —If his Goodness makes
him know no Mean in giving, shall I be so greedy
as to know none in receiving? —Come, come,
my dear Child, your poor Father is not so sordid
a Wretch neither: He will shew the World,
that all these Benefits are not thrown away upon
one, who will disgrace you as much by his Temper,
as by his Condition: What tho' I cannot be
as worthy of all these Favours as I wish? I will be
as worthy as I can. And, let me tell you, my dear
Child, if the King and his Royal Family (God
bless them!) be not ashamed to receive Taxes
and Duties from his Subjects; if Dukes and
Earls, and all the top Gentry, cannot support
their Bravery, without having their Rents paid; 
I hope I shall not affront the 'Squire, to pay to
his Steward, what any other Person would pay
for this noble Stock, and improving Farm: And
I will do it, an' it please God to bless me with
Life and Health—I should not be worthy to
crawl on the Earth, if I did not. And what did
I say to Mr. Longman? the faithful Mr. Longman!
sure no Gentleman had ever a more worthy
Steward than he: It was as we were walking
over the Grounds together—and observing in
what good Order every thing was; he was praising
some little Contrivances of my own, for the
Improvement of the Farm, and saying, how
comfortably he hoped we might live upon it. 
Ay, Mr. Longman, said I, comfortably indeed:
But do you think I could be properly said to
live, if I was not to pay as much Rent for it as 



another? —I can tell you, said he, the 'Squire
will not receive any thing from you, Goodman
Andrews. —Why, Man, he has no Occasion
for it: He's worth a Power of Money, besides a
noble and clear Estate in Land. —Ads-heartlikins,
you must not affront him, I can tell you
that: For he's as generous as a Prince where he
takes: but he is hasty, and will have his own
way. —Why, for that Reason, Mr. Longman,
said I, I was thinking to make you my Friend! 
—Make me your Friend! You have not a better
in the World, to my Power, I can tell you
that; nor your Dame neither; for I love such
honest Hearts: I wish my own Brother would
let me love him as well; but let that pass. — 
What I can do for you, I will; and here's my
Hand upon it. 
Well then, said I, it is this: Let me account
to you at the Rent Farmer Dickins offered; and
let me know, what the Stock cost, and what the
Crops are valued at; and pay the one as I can,
and the other quarterly; and not let the 'Squire
know it, till you can't chuse; and I shall be as
happy as a Prince: For I doubt not, by God's
Blessing, to make a comfortable Livelihood of
it, besides. —Why, dost believe, Goodman
Andrews, said he, that I would do such a thing? 
—Would not his Honour think, if I hid one
thing from him, I might hide another? —Go
to, go to, honest Heart, I love thee dearly:
But can the 'Squire do too much for his Lady,
think'st thou? Come, come, (and he jeer'd me
so, I could not tell what to say to him) I wish at 

Bottom there is not some Pride in this;—what,
I warrant, you would not be too much beholden
to his Honour, would you? —No, good Mr.
Longman, said I—it is not that, I am sure. 
If I have any Pride, it is only in my dear Child,
to whom, under God, all this is owing! — 
But some how or other it shall be so. 
And so, my dear Daughter, I resolve it shall:
And it will be, over and above, one of the greatest
Pleasures to me, to do the good 'Squire Service,
as well as to be so much benefited and obliged
by him. 
Our eldest Grandson, Thomas, is very desirous
to come and live with us: The Boy is
honest; and, they tell me, industrious. And
Cousin Burroughs wants me to imploy his Son
Roger, who understands the Business of a Farm
very well. It is no wonder, that all one's Relations
should wish to partake of our happy Lot; 
and if they can, and will, do their Business as well
as others, I see not why Relationship should be
an Objection. But yet, I think, one would not
beleaguer, as one may say, your honoured Husband
with one's Relations. You, my best Child,
will give me always your Advice, as to my Carriage
in this my new Lot; for I would not for
the World be thought an Incroacher. And I
am sure, you have so much Prudence, that there
is nobody's Advice fitter to be followed than
yours. 
Our Blessings (I am sure you have blessed us!)
attend you, my dearest Child; and may you be
as happy as you have made us (I cannot wish you 

to be happier, because I have no Notion how it
can be, in this Life) conclude us, 
Your ever loving Father and Mother,
John and Eliz. Andrews. 
May we not hope to be favour'd now-and-then
with a Letter from you, my dear Child,
like some of your former, to let us know
how you go on? It would be a great Joy
to us: Indeed it would. —But we know
you'll have enough to do, without obliging
us in this way; so must acquiesce. 

