


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday Mar. 23. 
We sat down early to breakfast this morning:
Miss Grandison dismissed the attendants, as
soon as Sir Charles entered the room. 
He addressed himself to me, the moment he saw
me: Admirable Miss Byron, said he, what an entertainment
have your Letters given me, down to a certain
period! —How, at, and after that, have they distressed
me, for your sufferings from a savage—It is
well for him, and perhaps for me, that I saw not
sooner this latter part of your affecting story: I have
read thro' the whole parcel. 
He took it from his bosom, and, with a respectful
air, presented it to me—Ten thousand thanks for the
favour—I dare not hope for farther indulgence—Yet
not to say, how desirous I am—But, forgive me— 
Think me not too great an incroacher— 
I took them. 
Surely, brother, said Miss Grandison, you cannot
already have read the whole! 
I have—I could not leave them—I sat up late— 
And so, thought I, did your sister Harriet, Sir. 
Well, brother, said Miss Grandison, and what are
the faults? 
Faults! Charlotte. —Such a noble heart! such an
amiable frankness! No prudery! No coquetry! Yet
so much, and so justly admired by as many as have
had the happiness to approach her! —Then, turning to
me, I adore, madam, the goodness, the greatness of
your heart. Woman is the glory of all created existence:
—But you, madam, are more than woman! 
How I blushed! how I trembled! How, tho' so
greatly flattered, was I delighted! 

Is Miss Byron, in those Letters, all perfect, all
faultless, all excellence, Sir Charles? asked Miss
Grandison: Is there no—But I am sensible, tho' you
have raised my envy, I assure you, that Miss Byron's
is another sort of heart than your poor Charlotte's. 
But I hope, Sir, said I, that you will correct— 
You called upon me yesterday, interrupted he, to
attend to the debate between you and Mr. Walden:
I think I have something to observe upon that subject. 
I told you, that beauty should not bribe me. I have
very few observations to make upon it. 
Lady L. Will you give us, brother, your opinion,
in writing, of what you have read?(a)  
Sir Ch. That would fill a volume: And it would
be almost all panegyric. 
How flattering—But this foreign Lady, Lucy!— 
Lady L. began another subject.— 
Pray, brother, said she, let me revive one of the
topics of yesterday—Concerning Lord G. and Sir
Walter Watkyns—And I hope you, Charlotte, will
excuse me. 
Miss Gr. If it can be revived, without reviving
the memory of my flippant folly—Not else will I excuse
you, Lady L. And, casting her eye bashfully
round her, Dr. Bartlett withdrew; but as if he had
business to do. 
Lady L. Then let me manage this article for my
sister. You said, brother, that you have engaged to
give Lord G. either hope, or otherwise— 
Sir Ch. Lord G. was very earnest with me for my
interest with my sister. I, supposing that she is now
absolutely disengaged, did undertake to let him know
what room he had for hope, or if any; but told him,
That I would not, by any means, endeavour to influence
her. 
Lady L. Charlotte is afraid, that you would not, of
yourself, from displeasure, have revived the subject— 
Not that she values— 

There she stopt. 
Sir Ch. I might, at the time, be a little petulant:
But I should have revived the subject, because I had
engaged myself to procure an answer for an absent
person, to a question that was of the highest importance
to him: But, perhaps, I should have entered into
the subject with Charlotte when we were alone. 
Lady L. She can have no objection, I believe, to
let all of us, who are present, know her mind, on this
occasion. 
Miss Gr. To be sure I have not. 
Lady L. What signifies mincing the matter? I
undertook, at her desire, to recal the subject, because
you had seemed to interest yourself in it. 
Sir Ch. I think I know as much of Charlotte's
mind already, from what you have hinted, Lady L. as
I ought to be inquisitive about. 
Lady L. How so, brother? What have I said? 
Sir Ch. What meant the words you stopt at—Not
that she values? —Now, tho' I will not endeavour to
lead her choice in behalf of a prince; yet would I be
earnest to oppose her marriage with a man for whom
she declaredly has no value. 
Lady L. You are a little sudden upon me, Sir
Charles. 
Sir Ch. You must not think the words you stopt
at, Lady L. slight words: Principle, and Charlotte's
future happiness, and that of a worthy man, are concerned
here. But perhaps you mean no more, than to
give a little specimen of Lady-like pride in those
words. It is a very hard matter for women, on such
occasions as these, to be absolutely right. —Dear Miss
Byron, bowing to me, excuse me. —There is one
Lady in the world that ought not, from what I have
had the honour to see, on her own account, to take
amiss my freedom with her sex, tho' she perhaps will
on that of those she loves. But have I not some
reason for what I say, when even Lady L. speaking 

for her sister on this concerning subject, cannot help
throwing in a salvo for the pride of her sex? 
Harriet. I doubt not, Sir, but Lady L. and Miss
Grandison will explain themselves to your satisfaction. 
Lady L. then called upon her sister. 
Miss Gr. Why, as to value—and all that—To be
sure—Lord G.—is not a man, that—(and she looked
round her on each person)—that a woman—Hem!— 
that a woman—But, brother, I think you are a little
too ready—to—to—A word and a blow, as the saying
is, are two things.—Not that—And there she stopt. 
Sir Ch. (smiling) O my dear Lord L.! What
shall we say to these Not that's? Were I my cousin
Everard, I am not sure but I should suppose, when
Ladies were suspending unnecessarily, or with affectation,
the happiness of the man they resolve to marry,
that they were reflecting on themselves by an indirect
acknowlegement of self denial— 
Miss Gr. Good God! brother. 
I was angry at him, in my mind. How came this
good man, thought I, by such thoughts as these, of
our sex? What, Lucy, could a woman do with such
a man, were he to apply to her in courtship, whether
she denied or accepted of him? 
Sir Ch. You will consider, Lady L. that you and
Charlotte have brought this upon yourselves. That I
call female pride, which distinguishes not either time,
company, or occasion. You will remember, that
Lord G. is not here; we are all brothers and sisters:
And why, Charlotte, do you approve of entering upon
the subject in this company; yet come with your exceptions,
as if Lord G. had his father present, or pleading
for him? These Not that she values, and so-forth,
are so like the dealings between petty chapmen and
common buyers and sellers, that I love properly (observe
that I say properly) to discourage them among
persons of sense and honour. But come, Charlotte,
enter into your own cause: You are an excellent 

pleader, on occasion. You know, or at least you
ought to know, your own mind. I never am for encouraging
agency (Lady L. excuse me—Will you give
up yours?) where principals can be present. 
Lady L. With all my heart. I stumbled at the
very threshold. E'en, Charlotte, be your own advocate. 
The cause is on. 
Miss Gr. Why, I don't know what to say. —My
brother will be so peremptory, perhaps— 
Sir Ch. A good sign for somebody—Don't you
think so, madam? to me. —But the snail will draw in
its horns, if the finger hastily touch it—Come, no
good sign, perhaps, Charlotte. —I will not be peremptory. 
You shall be indulged, if you have not already
been indulged enough, in all the pretty circumambages
customary on these occasions. 
Miss Gr. This is charming! —But pray, Sir, What
is your advice, on this subject? 
Sir Ch. In our former conversation upon it, I told
you what I thought of my Lord's good humour; 
what of your vivacity—Can you, Charlotte, were you
the wife of Lord G. content yourself now-and-then
to make him start, by the lancet-like delicacy of your
wit, without going deeper than the skin? Without
exposing him (and yourself for doing so) to the ridicule
of others? Can you bear with his foibles, if he
can bear with yours? And if the forbearance is greater
on his side, than on yours, can you value him for it,
and for his good-humour? 
Miss Gr. Finely run off, upon my word! 
Sir Ch. I am afraid only, that you will be able,
Charlotte, to do what you will with him. I am sorry
to have cause to say, that I have seen very good women
who have not known how to bear indulgence! — 
Waller was not absolutely wrong, as to such, when he
said, “that women were born to be controuled.” If
controul is likely to be necessary, it will be with
women of such charming spirits as you know whose, 

Charlotte, who will not confine to time and place
their otherwise agreeable vivacities. 
Miss Gr. Well, but, Sir, if it should chance to
be so, and I were Lord G.'s upper servant; for controul
implies dominion; what a fine advantage would
he have in a brother, who could direct him so well
(tho' he might still, perhaps, be a bachelor) how to
manage a wife so flippant! 
Sir Ch. Bachelors, Charlotte, are close observers. 
It is not every married couple, if they were sollicitous
to have a bachelor marry, that should admit him into
a very close intimacy with themselves. 
Miss Gr. (archly) Pray, Lord L. Did we not once
hear our cousin Everard make an observation of this
nature? 
Sir Ch. Fairly retorted, Charlotte! —But how
came your cousin Everard to make this observation? 
I once heard you say, that he was but a common observer. 
Every married pair is not Lord and Lady L. 
Miss Gr. Well, well, I believe married people
must do as well as they can. But may I ask you,
brother, Is it owing to such observations as those you
have been making, that you are now a single man? 
Sir Ch. A fair question from you, Charlotte. I
answer, It is not. 
Miss Gr. I should be glad, with all my heart, to
know what is. 
Sir Ch. When the subject comes fairly on the carpet,
your curiosity may perhaps be gratified. But tell
me, Do you intend that the subject you had engaged
Lady L. to introduce, in relation to Lord G. and Sir
Walter Watkyns, should be dismissed, at present? I
mean not to be peremptory, Charlotte: Be not afraid
to answer. 
Miss Gr. Why that's kind. No, I can't say, that
I do: And yet I frankly confess, that I had much rather
ask, than answer questions. You know, Sir, that
I have a wicked curiosity. 

Sir Ch. Well, Charlotte, you will find me, wicked
as you call it, very ready, at a proper time, to gratify
it. To some things that you may want to know, in
relation to my situation, you needed not now to have
been a stranger, had I had the pleasure of being more
with you, and had you yourself been as explicit as I
would have wished you to be. But the crisis is at
hand. When I am certain myself, you shall not be
in doubt. I would not suppose, that my happiness is a
matter of indifference to my sisters; and if it be not,
I should be ungrateful, not to let them know everything
I know, that is likely to affect it. 
See! Lucy. What can be gathered from all this? 
But yet this speech has a noble sound with it: Don't
you think it has? It is, I think, worthy of Sir
Charles Grandison. But by what clouds does this sun
seem to be obscured? He says, however, that the
crisis is at hand—Solemn words, as they strike me. 
Ah Lucy! —But this is my prayer—May the crisis produce
happiness to him, let who will be unhappy! 
Miss Gr. You are always good, noble, uniform— 
Curiosity, get thee behind me, and lie still! —And yet,
brother, like a favoured squirrel repulsed, I am afraid
it will be soon upon my shoulder, if the crisis be suspended. 
“Crisis is at hand,” Lucy! —I cannot get over
these words; and yet they make my heart ake. 
Sir Ch. But now, Charlotte, as to your two admirers— 
Miss Gr. Why, Sir, methinks I would not be a
petty-chapwoman, if I could help it: And yet, What
can I say? —I don't think highly of either of the
men—But, pray now, what—Lady L. (affecting an
audible whisper) Will you ask a question for me?— 
Lady L. What is it, Charlotte? 
Miss Gr. whispering (but still loud enough for every
one to hear). What sort of a man is Beauchamp? 
Lady L. Mad girl! —You heard the question,
brother. 

Miss Gr. No! —You did not hear it, Sir, if it will
displease you. The whispers in conversation are no
more to be heard, than the asides in a play. 
Sir Ch. Both the one and the other are wrong,
Charlotte. Whisperings in conversation are censurable,
to a proverb: The asides, as you call them, and
the soliloquies, in a play, however frequent, are very
poor (because unnatural) shifts of bungling authors,
to make their performances intelligible to the audience. 
But am I to have heard your whisper, Charlotte,
or not? 
Miss Gr. I think the man my brother so much
esteems, must be worth an hundred of such as those
we have just now heard named. 
Sir Ch. Well, then, I am supposed to be answered,
I presume, as to the two gentlemen. I will
shew you the Letter, when written, that I shall send
to Sir Walter Watkyns. I shall see Lord G. I suppose,
the moment he knows I am in town— 
Miss Gr. The Lord bless me, brother! —Did you
not say, you would not be peremptory? 
Lord L. Very right. Pray, Sir Charles, don't let
my sister part with the two, without being sure of a
third. 
Miss Gr. Pray, Lord L. do you be quiet: Your
sister is in no hurry, I do assure you. 
Sir Ch. The female drawback again, Lady L.— 
Not that she values. 
Harriet. Well, but, Sir Charles, may I, without
offence, repeat Miss Grandison's question in relation to
Mr. Beauchamp? 
Miss Gr. That's my dear creature! 
Sir Ch. It is impossible that Miss Byron can give
offence. —Mr. Beauchamp is an excellent young man; 
about Five-and-twenty, not more: He is brave,
learned, sincere, chearful; gentle in his manners,
agreeable in his person. Has my good Miss Byron
any farther questions to ask? Your frankness of heart, 

madam, intitles you to equal frankness. Not a question
you can ask, but the answer shall be ready upon
my lips. 
Is the Lady, Sir, whom you could prefer to all
others, a foreign or an English Lady? —Ah, Lucy! 
And do you think I asked him this question? —O no!
but I had a mind to startle you. I could have asked it,
I can tell you: And if it had been proper, it would
have been the first of questions with me. Yet had not
the answer been such as I had liked, perhaps I should
not have been able to stay in company. 
I only bowed, and I believe blushed with complacency,
at the kind manner in which he spoke to me:
Every one, by their eyes, took notice of it with
pleasure. 
Lady L. Well, brother, and what think you of
the purport of Charlotte's question? Charlotte says,
That she does not think highly of either of the other
men. 
Sir Ch. That, at present, is all that concerns me to
know. I will write to Sir Walter; I will let Lord G.
know, that there is a man in the clouds that Charlotte
waits for: That Ladies must not be easily won. 
Milton justifies you, in his account of the behaviour
of your common grandmother, on the first interview
between her and the man for whom she was created. 
Charming copiers! You, Miss Byron, are an exception. 
You know nothing of affectation. You— 
Miss Gr. (unseasonably interrupting him) Pray,
Sir, be pleased, since we are such fine copiers of the
old lady you mentioned, to repeat the lines: I have
no remembrance of them. 
Sir Ch. 

She heard me thus; and, tho' divinely brought,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That wou'd be woo'd, and not unsought be won,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turn'd.
I follow'd her. She what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approv'd
My pleaded reason—


I have looked for the passage, since, Lucy. He
missed several lines. 
Now, Charlotte, said Sir Charles, tho' these lines are a
palpable accommodation to the future practice of daughters
of the old lady, as you call her, and perhaps intended
for an instruction to them, since it could not be a natural
behaviour in Eve, who was divinely brought to
be the wife of Adam, and it being in the state of innocence,
could not be conscious of dishonour in receiving
his address; yet, if you know what is meant
by obsequious majesty, you had as good try for it: And
as you are followed, and should not follow, approve
of the pleaded reason of one or other of your admirers. 
Miss Gr. After hearing the pleaded reason of both,
should you not say? I have the choice of two; that
had not Eve. But, hold! I had like to have been
drawn in to be flippant, again; and then you would
have enquired after my cousin Everard, and-so-forth,
and been angry. 
Sir Ch. Not now, Charlotte: We are now at play
together. I see there is constitution in your fault. The
subjects we are upon, courtship and marriage, cannot,
I find, be talked seriously of by a Lady, before company. 
Shall I retire with you to solitude? Make a
Lover's Camera Obscura for you? Or, could I place
you upon the mossy bank of a purling stream, gliding
thro' an enamelled mead; in such a scene, a now despised
Lord G. or a Sir Walter, might find his account,
sighing at your feet. No witnesses but the
grazing herd, lowing love around you; the feathered
songsters from an adjacent grove, contributing to harmonize
and fan the lambent flame— 
Miss Gr. (interrupting) Upon my word, brother,
I knew you had travelled thro' Greece, but dreamt not
that you had dwelt long in the fields of Ar-ca-dy! — 
But, one question let me ask you, concerning your
friend Beauchamp—We women don't love to be 

slighted—Whether do you think him too good, or not
good enough, for your sister? 
Sir Ch. The friendship, Charlotte, that has for
some years subsisted, and I hope will for-ever subsist,
between Mr. Beauchamp and me, wants not the tie of
relation to strengthen it. 
Lord L. Happy Beauchamp! 
Sir Ch. Lord L. himself is not dearer to me, brother,
as I have the honour to call him, than my Beauchamp. 
It is one of my pleasures, my Lord, that I
am assured you will love him, and he you. 
Lord L. bowed, delighted; and if he did, his good
Lady, you may be sure, partook of her Lord's delight. 
They are an happy pair! They want not sense; they
have both fine understandings! But O! my Lucy,
they are not the striking, dazling qualities in men and
women, that make happy. Good sense, and solid
judgment, a natural complacency of temper, a desire
of obliging, and an easiness to be obliged, procure
the silent, the serene happiness, to which the fluttering,
tumultuous, impetuous, fervors of passion can never
contribute. Nothing violent can be lasting. 
Miss Gr. Not that I value—There, brother—You
see, I am a borrower of Lady L.— 
Lady L. Upon my honour, Charlotte, I believe
you led me into those words; so don't say you borrowed
them. 
Sir Ch. Far be it from me to endeavour to cure
women of affectation on such subjects as that which
lately was before us—I don't know what is become of
it (looking humorously round, as if he had lost something
which he wanted to recover); but that, permit
me, Ladies, to say, may be an affectation in one company,
that is but a necessary reserve in another. —Charlotte
has genius enough, I am sure, to vary her humour
to the occasion; and, if she would give herself
time for reflexion, to know when to be grave, when to
be airy. 

Miss Gr. I don't know that, brother: But let me
say for Charlotte, that I believe you sometimes think
better of her (as in the present case), sometimes worse,
than she deserves. Charlotte has not much reflexion; 
she is apt to speak as the humour comes upon her,
without considering much about the fit or the unfit. 
It is constitution, you know, brother; and she cannot
easily cure it: But she will try. —Only, Sir, be so
good as to let me have an answer to my last question,
Whether you think your friend too good, or not good
enough? Because the answer will let me know what
my brother thinks of me; and that, let me tell you,
is of very high importance with me. 
Sir Ch. You have no reason, Charlotte, to endeavour
to come at this your end, by indirect or comparative
means. Your brother loves you— 
Miss Gr. With all my faults, Sir?— 
Sir Ch. With all your faults, my dear; and I had
almost said, for some of them. I love you for the
pretty playfulness, on serious subjects, with which you
puzzle yourself, and bewilder me: You see I follow
your lead. As to the other part of your question
(for I would always answer directly, when I can), my
friend Beauchamp deserves the best of women. You
are excellent in my eyes; but I have known two very
worthy persons, who, taken separately, have been admired
by every one who knew them, and who admired
each other before marriage, yet not happy
in it. 
Miss Gr. Is it possible? To what could their unhappiness
be owing? —Both, I suppose, continuing
good? 
Sir Ch. To an hundred almost nameless reasons— 
Too little consideration on one side; too much on
the other: Diversions different: Too much abroad
the man—Too much at home will sometimes have
the same effect: Acquaintance approved by the one— 
Disapproved by the other: One liking the town; 

the other the country: Or either preferring town or
country in different humours, or at different times of
the year. Human nature, Charlotte— 
Miss Gr. No more, no more. I beseech you, brother
—Why this human nature, I believe, is a very
vile thing! I think, Lady L. I won't marry at all. 
Sir Ch. Some such trifles, as these I have enumerated,
will be likely to make you, Charlotte, with all
your excellencies, not so happy as I wish you to be. If
you cannot have a man of whose understanding you
have an higher opinion than of your own, you should
think of one who is likely to allow to yours a superiority. If— 
Miss Grandison interrupted him again: I wished
she would not so often interrupt him: I wanted to find
out his notions of our sex. I am afraid, with all his
politeness, he thinks us poor creatures. But why
should not the character of a good, a prudent woman,
be as great as that of a good, a prudent man? 
Miss Gr. Well, but, Sir; I suppose the gentleman
abroad has more understanding than I have. 
Sir Ch. A good deal will depend upon what you'll
think of that: Not what I, or the world, will judge. 
Miss Gr. But the judgment of us women generally
goes with the world. 
Sir Ch. Not generally, in matrimonial instances. A
wife, in general, may allow of a husband's superior
judgment; but in particular cases, and as they fall out
one by one, the man may find it difficult, to have it
allowed in any one instance. 
Miss Gr. I think you said, Sir, that bachelors
were close observers. 
Sir Ch. We may in the sister, sometimes, see the
wife. I admire you, myself, for your vivacity; but
I am not sure that a husband would not think himself
hurt by it, especially if it be true, as you lay, “that
Charlotte has not much reflexion, and is apt to 

speak as the humour comes upon her, without
troubling herself about the fit or the unfit.” 
Miss Gr. O, Sir, what a memory you have! I
hope that the man who is to call me his (that's the dialect,
i'n't it?) will not have half your memory. 
Sir Ch. For his sake, or your own, do you hope
this, Charlotte? 
Miss Gr. Let me see—Why for both our sakes, I
believe. 
Sir Ch. You'll tell the man, in courtship, I hope,
that all this liveliness is “constitution;” and “that
you know not how to cure it.” 
Miss Gr. No, by no means, Sir: Let him in the
mistress, as somebody else in the sister, guess at the
wife, and take warning. 
Sir Ch. Very well answered, Charlotte, in the play
we are at; but I am willing to think highly of my
sister's prudence, and that she will be happy, and
make the man so, to whom she may think fit to give
her hand at the altar. And now the question recurs,
What shall I say to Lord G.? What to Sir Walter? 
Miss Gr. Why I think you must make my compliments
to Sir Walter, if you will be so good; and,
after the example of my sister Harriet to the men she
sends a grazing, very civilly tell him, he may break
his heart as soon as he pleases; for that I cannot be
his. 
Sir Ch. Strange girl! But I wish not to lower this
lively spirit—You will put your determination into
English. 
Miss Gr. In plain English, then, I can by no
means think of encouraging the address of Sir Walter
Watkyns. 
Sir Ch. Well, And what shall I say to Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. Why that's the thing! —I was afraid it
would come to this—Why, Sir, you must tell him, I
think—I profess I can't tell what—But, Sir, will 

you let me know what you would have me tell
him? 
Sir Ch. I will follow your lead as far as I can— 
Can you, do you think, love Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. Love him! love Lord G? What a question
is that! —Why no! I verily believe, that I can't
say that. 
Sir Ch. Can you esteem him? 
Miss Gr. Esteem! —Why that's a quaint word,
tho' a female one. I believe, if I were to marry the
honest man, I could be civil to him, if he would be
very complaisant, very observant, and all that—Pray,
brother, don't, however, be angry with me. 
Sir Ch. I will not, Charlotte, smiling. It is constitution,
you say. —But if you cannot be more than civil; 
and if he is to be very observant; you'll make it your
agreement with him, before you meet him at the altar,
that he shall subscribe to the woman's part of the
vow; and that you shall answer to the man's. 
Miss Gr. A good thought, I believe! I'll consider
of it. If I find, in courtship, the man will bear
it, I may make the proposal. —Yet I don't know, but
it will be as well to suppose the vow changed, without
conditioning for it, as other good women do; and act
accordingly. One would not begin with a singularity,
for fear of putting the parson out. I heard an
excellent Lady once advise a good wife, who, however,
very little wanted it, to give the man a hearing,
and never do any thing that he would wish to be done,
except she chose to do it. If the man loves quiet,
he'll be glad to compound. 
Harriet. Nay now, Miss Grandison, you are much
more severe upon your sex, and upon matrimony,
than Sir Charles. 
Sir Ch. Have I been severe upon either, my dear
Miss Byron? 
Harriet. Indeed I think so. 
Sir Ch. I am sorry for it: I only intended to be

just. See, Charlotte, what a censure, from goodness
itself, you draw upon me! —But I am to give encouragement (am I?) to Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. Do as you please, Sir. 
Sir Ch. That is saying nothing. Is there a man
in the world you prefer to Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. In the world, Sir! —A very wide place,
I profess. 
Sir Ch. You know what I mean by it. 
Miss Gr. Why no—Yes—No—What can I say
to such a question? 
Sir Ch. Help me, Lady L. You know, better than
I, Charlotte's language: Help me to understand it. 
Lady L. I believe, brother, you may let Lord G.
know, that he will not be denied an audience, if he
come— 
Sir Ch. “Will not be denied an audience, if he
come!” And this to Charlotte's brother! Women! 
Women! Women! —You, Miss Byron, I repeat with
pleasure, are an exception—In your Letters and behaviour
we see what a woman is, and what she ought to
be—But I know, as you once told Sir Rowland Meredith,
that you have too much greatness of mind, to
accept of a compliment made you at the expence of
your sex—But my heart does you justice. 
Lord L. See, however, brother Grandison, this
excellence in the two sisters! You say, indeed, but
just things in praise of Miss Byron; but they are
more than women: For they enjoy that praise, and
the acknowleged superiority of the only woman in
Britain to whom they can be inferior. 
Do you think I did not thank them both for compliments
so high? I did. 
You Did, Harriet? 
Ah, Lucy! I had a mind to surprise you again. I
did thank them; but it was in downcast silence, and
by a glow in my cheeks, that was even painful to me
to feel. 

The sisters have since observed to me (flattering
Ladies!) that their brother's eyes—But is it not
strange, Lucy, that they did not ask him, in this long
conversation, Whether his favourite of our sex is a
foreigner, or not? If she be, what signifies the eye of
pleasure cast upon your Harriet? 
But be this as it may, you see, Lucy, that the
communicating of my Letters to Lord L. and the
two Ladies, and of some of them to their brother,
has rivetted the three first in my favour, and done me
honour with Sir Charles Grandison. 
But what do you think was Miss Grandison's address
to me, on this agreeable occasion? You, my
grandmamma, will love her again, I am sure, tho'
she so lately incurred your displeasure. 
Sweet and ever-amiable Harriet! said she; Sister! 
Friend! enjoy the just praises of two of the best of
men! —You can enjoy them with equal modesty and
dignity; and we can (What say you, Lady L.?) find
our praise in the honour you do our sex, and in being
allowed to be seconds to you. 
And what do you think was the answer of Lady L.
(generous woman!) to this call of her sister? 
I can chearfully, said she, subscribe to the visible
superiority of my Harriet, as shewn in all her Letters,
as well as in her whole conduct: But then you, my
Lord, and you, my brother, who in my eye are the
first of men, must not let me have cause to dread,
that your Caroline is sunk in yours. 
I had hardly power to sit, yet had less to retire; as
I had, for a moment, a thought to do. I am glad
I did not attempt it: My return to company must
have been aukward, and made me look particular. 
But, Lucy, what is in my Letters, to deserve all
these fine speeches? —But my Lord and his sisters are
my true friends, and zealous well-wishers: No fear
that I shall be too proud, on this occasion. It is humbling
enough to reflect, that the worthy three thought 

it all no more than necessary to establish me with
somebody; and yet, after all, if there be a foreign
Lady—What signify all these fine things? 
But how (you will ask) did the brother acknowlege
these generous speeches of his sisters and Lord L.? — 
How? Why as he ought to do. He gave them for
their generous goodness to their Harriet, in preference
to themselves, such due praises, as more than restored
them, in my eye, to the superiority they had so nobly
given up. 
Sir Charles afterwards addressed himself to me
jointly with his sisters: I see, with great pleasure,
said he, the happy understanding that there is between
you three Ladies: It is a demonstration, to me, of
surpassing goodness in you all. To express myself in
the words of an ingenious man, to whose works your
sex, and if yours, ours, are more obliged, than to those
of any single man in the British world, 

Great souls by instinct to each other turn,
Demand alliance, and in friendship burn.

The two sisters and your Harriet bowed as they sat. 
Encouraged by this happy understanding among
you, let me hope, proceeded he, that you, Miss
Byron, will be so good as to inform your-self, and let
me know, what I may certainly depend upon to be our
Charlotte's inclinations with respect to the two gentlemen
who court her favour; and whether there is any
man that she can or does prefer to the most favoured
of either of them. From you I shall not meet with
the “Not that she values”—The depreciating indifferences,
the affected slights, the female circumambages,
if I may be allowed the words; the coldly-expressed
consent to visits not deserving to be discouraged,
and perhaps not intended to be so, that I have
had to encounter with in the past conversation. I have
been exceedingly diverted with my sister's vivacity:
But as the affair is of a very serious nature; as I would 

be extremely tender in my interposition, having really
no choice but hers; and wanting only to know on
whom that choice will fall, or whether on any man,
at present; on your noble frankness I can rely; and
Charlotte will open her mind to you: If not, she has
very little profited by the example you have set her in
the Letters you have permitted her to read. 
He arose, bowed, and withdrew; Miss Grandison
called after him, Brother, brother, brother—One
word—Don't leave us—But he only kissed his hand
to us at the door; and bowing, with a smiling air,
left us looking at each other in a silence that held a
few moments. 

