


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Monday Night Tuesday Morn. Feb. 6 & 7. 
Sir Rowland and his Nephew, tea being not quite
ready, sat down with my Cousins; and the Knight,
leaving Mr. Fowler little to say, expatiated so handsomely 

on his Nephew's good qualities, and great
passion for me, and on what he himself proposed to
do for him in addition to his own fortune, that my
Cousins, knowing I liked not the gentlemen in our
own neighbourhood, and thought very indifferently of
Sir Hargrave, were more than half inclined to promote
the addresses of Mr. Fowler; and gave them
both room to think so. 
This favourable disposition set the two gentlemen
up. They were impatient for tea, that they might
see me. 
By the time I had sealed up my letters, word was
brought me that tea was ready; and I went down. 
The Knight, it seems, as soon as they heard me
coming, jogged Mr. Fowler. —Nephew, said he,
pointing to the door, see what you can say to the
Primrose of your heart! —This is now the Primrose
season with us in Caermarthen, Mr. Reeves. 
Mr. Fowler, by a stretch of complaisance, came
to meet and introduce me to the company, tho' at
home. The Knight nodded his head after him,
smiling; as if he had said, Let my Nephew alone to
galant the Lady to her seat. 
I was a little surpris'd at Mr. Fowler's approaching
me, the moment I appeared, and with his taking my
hand, and conducting me to my seat, with an air; 
not knowing how much he had been rais'd by the conversation
that had passed before. 
He bowed. I courtesied, and look'd a little sillier
than ordinary, I believe. 
Your servant, young Lady, said the Knight. Lovelier,
and lovelier, by Mercy! How these blushes become
that sweet face! —But, forgive me, Madam, it
is not my intent to dash you. 
Writing, Miss Byron, all day! said Mrs. Reeves. 
We have greatly missed you. 
My Cousin seemed to say this, on purpose to give
me time to recover myself. 

I have blotted several sheets of paper, said I, and
had just concluded. 
I hope, Madam, said the Knight, leaning forward
his whole body, and peering in my face under his
bent brows, that we have not been the cause of hastening
you down. 
I stared. But as he seemed not to mean any-thing,
I would not help him to a meaning by my own overquickness. 
Mr. Fowler had done an extraordinary thing, and
sat down, hemm'd, and said nothing; looking, however,
as if he was at a loss to know whether he or his
Uncle was expected to speak. 
The cold weather was then the subject; and the
two gentlemen rubb'd their hands and drew nearer the
fire, as if they were the colder for talking of it. 
Many hems passed between them, now the Uncle
looking on the Nephew, now the Nephew on the
Uncle: At last they fell into talk of their new-built
house at Caermarthen; and the furnishing of it. 
They mention'd afterwards their very genteel neighbourhood,
and gave the characters of half a dozen
people, of whom none present but themselves ever
heard; but all tending to shew how much they were
valued by the best gentry in Caermarthenshire. 
The Knight then related a conversation that had
once passed between himself and the late Lord Mansell,
in which that Nobleman had complimented him on an
estate of a clear 3000l. a year, besides a good deal of
ready cash, and with supposing that he would set up
his Nephew when at age (for it was some years ago)
as a representative for the county. And he repeated
the prudent answer he gave his Lordship, disavowing
such a design, as no better than a gaming propensity,
as he called it; which had ruined many a fair estate. 
This sort of talk, in which his Nephew could bear
a part (and indeed they had it all between them) held
the tea-time; and then having given themselves the 

consequence they had seemed to intend, the Knight,
drawing his chair nearer to me, and winking to his
Nephew, who withdrew, began to set forth to me,
the young gentleman's good qualities; to declare the
passion he had for me; and to beg my encouragement
of so worthy, so proper, and so well-favoured a young
man; who was to be his sole heir; and for whom he
would do such things, on my account, as, during his
life, he would not do for any other woman breathing. 
There was no answering a discourse so serious with
the air of levity which it was hardly possible to avoid
assuming on the first visit of the Knight. 
I was vex'd that I found myself almost as bashful,
as silly, and as silent, as if I had thoughts of encouraging
Mr. Fowler's addresses. My Cousins seemed
pleased with my bashfulness. The Knight I once
thought, by the tone of his voice and his hum, would
have struck up a Welsh tune, and danced for joy. 
Shall I call in my Kinsman, Madam, to confirm
all I have said, and to pour out his whole soul at your
feet? My boy is bashful: But a little favour from that
sweet countenance will make a man of him. Let
me, let me, call in my boy. I will go for him myself. 
And was going. 
Let me say one word, Sir Rowland—before Mr.
Fowler comes in—before you speak to him—You
have explain'd yourself unexceptionably. I am obliged
to you and Mr. Fowler for your good opinion: But
this can never be. 
How, Madam! Can never be! —I will allow that
you shall take time for half a dozen visits or so, that
you may be able to judge of my Nephew's qualities
and understanding, and be convinced from his own
mouth, and heart, and soul, as I may say, of his
love for you. No need of time for him. He, poor
man! is fix'd, immoveably fix'd: But say you will
take a week's time or so, to consider what you can do,
what you will do—And that's all I at present crave,
or indeed, Madam, can allow you. 

I cannot doubt now Sir Rowland, of what my mind
will be a week hence, as to this matter. 
How, Madam! —Why we are all in the suds then! 
—Why, Mr. Reeves, Mrs. Reeves! —Whew! with
an half-whistle—Why, Madam, we shall, at this rate,
be all untwisted! —But (after a pause) by Mercy I will
not be thus answer'd! —Why, Madam, would you
have the conscience to break my poor boy's heart? — 
Come, be as gracious as you look to be—Give me
your hand—[He snatch'd my hand. In respect to his
years I withdrew it not] And give my boy your heart. 
—Sweet soul! Such sensible, such good-natur'd mantlings! 
—Why you can't be cruel, if you would! — 
Dear Lady! Say you will take a little time to consider
of this matter. Don't repeat those cruel words, “It
can never be.” —What have you to object to my
boy? 
Mr. Fowler, both by character and appearance, Sir
Rowland, is a worthy man. He is a modest man; 
and modesty— 
Well, and so he is—Mercy! I was afraid that his
modesty would be an objection— 
It cannot, Sir Rowland, with a modest woman. I
love, I revere, a modest man: But, indeed, I cannot
give hope, where I mean not to encourage any. 
Your objection, Madam, to my Nephew? —You
must have seen something in him you dislike. 
I do not easily dis-like, Sir; but then I do not easily
like. And I never will marry any man, to whom I
cannot be more than indifferent. 
Why, Madam, he adores you—He— 
That, Sir, is an objection, unless I could return his
love. My gratitude would be endanger'd. 
Excellent notions! —With these notions, Madam,
you could not be ungrateful. 
That, Sir, is a risque I will never run. How many
bad wives are there, who would have been good ones,
had they not married either to their dislike, or with 

indifference? Good beginnings, Sir Rowland, are necessary
to good progresses, and to happy conclusions. 
Why so they are. But beginnings that are not bad,
with good people, will make no bad progresses, no
bad conclusions. 
No bad is not good, Sir Rowland; and in such a
world as this, shall people lay themselves open to the
danger of acting contrary to their duty? Shall they
suffer themselves to be bribed, either by conveniencies,
or superfluities, to give their hands, and leave their
hearts doubtful or indifferent? It would not be honest
to do so. 
You told me, Madam, the first time I had the honour
to see you, that you were absolutely and bona
side disengaged— 
I told you truth, Sir. 
Then, Madam, we will not take your denial. We
will persevere. We will not be discouraged! What a
duce! Have I not heard it said, that faint heart never
won fair lady? 
I never would give an absolute denial, Sir, were I
to have the least doubt of my mind. If I could balance,
I would consult my friends, and refer to them; 
and their opinion should have due weight with me. 
But for your Nephew's sake, Sir Rowland, while his
esteem for me is young and conquerable, urge not
this matter farther. I would not give pain to a worthy
heart. 
As I hope for mercy, Madam, so well do I like
your notions, that if you will be my Niece, and let
me but converse with you once a day, I will be contented
with 100l. a year, and settle upon you all I
have in the world. 
His eyes glisten'd; his face glow'd; an honest earnestness
appear'd in his countenance. 
Generous man! Good Sir Rowland! said I. I was
affected. I was forced to withdraw. 
I soon return'd, and found Sir Rowland, his handkerchief 

in his hand, applying very earnestly to my
Cousins. And they were so much affected too, that
on his resuming the subject to me, they could not
help putting in a word or two on his side of the question. 
Sir Rowland then proposed to call in his Nephew,
that he might speak for himself. My boy may be
over-awed by love, Madam: True love is always
fearful: Yet he is no milksop, I do assure you. To
men he has courage. How he will behave to you,
Madam, I know not; for really, notwithstanding
that sweetness of aspect, which I should have thought
would have led one to say what one would to you (in
modesty I mean) I have a kind of I cannot-tell-what
for you myself. Reverence it is not neither, I
think—I only reverence my Maker—And yet I believe
it is. Why, Madam, your face is one of God Almighty's
wonders in a little compass! —Pardon me— 
You may blush—But be gracious now! —Don't shew
us, that, with a face so encouragingly tender, you
have an hard heart. 
O Sir Rowland, you are an excellent advocate:
But pray tell Mr. Fowler— 
I will call him in—And was rising. 
No, don't. But tell Mr. Fowler that I regard him,
on a double account; for his own worth's sake, and for
his Uncle's: But subject me not, I once more entreat
you, to the pain of repulsing a worthy man. I repeat,
that I am under obligation to him for the value he has
for me: I shall be under more, if he will accept of my
thanks as all I have to return. 
My dear Miss Byron, said Mr. Reeves, oblige Sir
Rowland so far, as to take a little time to consider— 
God bless you on earth and in heaven, Mr. Reeves,
for this! You are a good man—Why, ay, take a
little time to consider—God bless you, Madam, take
a little time. Say you will consider. You know not
what a man of understanding my Nephew is. Why, 

madam, modest as he is, and awed by his love for
you, he cannot shew half the good sense he is master
of. 
Modest men must have merit, Sir. But how can
you, Mr. Reeves, make a difficult task more difficult? 
And yet all is from the goodness of your heart. You
see Sir Rowland thinks me cruel: I have no cruelty in
my nature. I love to oblige. I wish to match you in
generosity, Sir Rowland—Ask me for any-thing but
myself, and I will endeavour to oblige you. 
Admirable, by mercy! Why every-thing you say,
instead of making me desist, induces me to persevere. 
There is no yielding up such a prize, if one can obtain
it. Tell me, Mr. Reeves, where there is such another
woman to be had, and we may give up Miss Byron:
But I hope she will consider of it. —Pray, madam—But
I will call in my nephew. And out he went in haste,
as if he were afraid of being again forbidden. 
Mean time my cousins put it to me—But before I
could answer them, the knight, followed by his nephew,
returned. 
Mr. Fowler enter'd, bowing in the most respectful
manner. He looked much more dejected than when
he approached me at my first coming down. His uncle
had given him an hint of what had passed between us. 
Mr. Fowler and I had but just sat down, when the
knight said to Mr. Reeves (but took him not by the
button, as in his first visit) one word with you, Sir— 
Mr. Reeves, one word with you, if you please. 
They withdrew together; and presently after Mrs.
Reeves went out at the other door; and I was left alone
with Mr. Fowler. 
We both sat silent for about three or four minutes. 
I thought I ought not to begin; Mr. Fowler knew not
how. He drew his chair nearer to me; then sat a little
farther off; then drew it nearer again; stroked his
ruffles, and hemm'd two or three times; and at last,
You cannot, madam, but observe my confusion, my 

concern, my, my, my confusion! —It is all owing to
my reverence, my respect, my reverence, for you— 
hem! —He gave two gentle hems, and was silent. 
I could not enjoy the modest man's aukwardness. — 
Every feature of his face working, his hands and his
knees trembling, and his tongue faltering, how barbarous
had I been, if I could. —O Lucy, what a disqualifier
is Love, if such agitations as these are the natural
effects of that passion! 
Sir Rowland has been acquainting me, Sir, said I,
with the good opinion you have of me. I am very
much obliged to you for it. I have been telling Sir
Rowland— 
Ah, madam! Say not what you have been telling
Sir Rowland: He has hinted it to me. I must indeed
confess my unworthiness; yet I cannot forbear aspiring
to your favour. Who that knows what will make
him the happiest of men, however unworthy he may
be, can forbear seeking his happiness? I can only say,
I am the most miserable of men, if— 
Good Mr. Fowler, interrupted I, indulge not an
hope that cannot be answer'd. I will not pretend to
say, that I should not merit your esteem, if I could
return it; because, to whomsoever I should give my
hand, I would make it a point of duty to deserve his
affection: But for that very reason, and that I may
have no temptation to do otherwise, I must be convinced
in my own mind that there is not a man in the
world whom I could value more than him I chose. 
He sighed. I was assured, madam, said he, that your
heart was absolutely disengaged: On that assurance I
founded my presumptuous hope. 
And so it is, Mr. Fowler. I have never yet seen a
man whom I could wish to marry. 
Then, madam, may I not hope, that time, that
my assiduities, that my profound reverence, my unbounded
love— 
O Mr. Fowler, think me not either insensible or 

ungrateful. But time, I am sure, can make no alteration
in this case. I can only esteem you, and that
from a motive which I think has selfishness in it, because
you have shewn a regard for me. 
No selfishness in this motive, madam; it is amiable
gratitude. And if all the services of my life, if all
the adoration— 
I have a very indifferent notion of sudden impressions,
Mr. Fowler: But I will not question the sincerity
of a man I think so worthy. Sir Rowland has
been very urgent with me: He has wish'd me to take
time to consider. I have told him I would, if I could
doubt: But that I cannot. For your own sake therefore,
let me entreat you to place your affections elsewhere. 
And may you place them happily! 
You have, madam, I am afraid, seen men whom
you could prefer to me— 
Our acquaintance, Mr. Fowler, is very short. It
would be no wonder if I had. Yet I told you truly,
that I never yet saw a man whom I could wish to
marry. 
He look'd down, and sigh'd. 
But, Mr. Fowler, to be still more frank and explicit
with you, as I think you a very worthy man; I will
own, that were any of the gentlemen I have hitherto
known to be my lot, it must be, I think, in compassion
(in gratitude I had almost said) one (who
nevertheless it cannot be) who has professed a love for
me ever since I was a child. A man of honour, of
virtue, of modesty; such a man as I believe Mr. Fowler
is. His fortune indeed is not so considerable as Sir
Rowland says yours will be: But, Sir, as there is no
other reason on the comparison, why I should prefer
Mr. Fowler to him, I should think the worse of myself
as long as I lived, if I gave a preference over such
a try'd affection to fortune only. And now, Sir, I
expect that you will make a generous use of my frankness,
lest the gentleman, if you should know him, 

may hear of it. And this I request for his sake, as I
think I never can be his; as for yours I have been thus
explicit. 
I can only say, that I am the most miserable of men! 
—But will you, madam, give me leave to visit Mr.
Reeves now-and-then? 
Not on my account, Mr. Fowler. Understand it
so; and if you see me, let it be with indifference,
and without expectation from me; and I shall always
behave myself to you, as to a gentleman who has obliged
me by his good opinion. 
He bowed: Sat in silence: Pulled out his handkerchief. 
—I pitied him. 
But let me ask all you, my friends, who love Mr.
Orme, Was I wrong? I think I never could love
Mr. Fowler, as a wife ought to love her husband— 
May he meet with a worthy woman who can! And
surely so good, so modest a man, and of such an ample
fortune, easily may: While it may be my lot, if
ever I marry, to be the wife of a man, with whom
I may not be so happy, as either Mr. Orme or Mr.
Fowler would probably make me, could I prevail upon
myself to be the wife of either. —O my uncle, often
do I reflect on your mercer's shop. 
Mr. Fowler arose, and walked disconsolately about
the room, and often profoundly, and, I believe (not
Greville-like) sincerely sighed. His motion soon
brought in the knight and Mr. Reeves at one door,
and Mrs. Reeves at the other. 
Well! What news? What news? —Good, I hope,
said the knight with spread hands—Ah my poor boy! 
Thus alamort! Surely, madam— 
There he stopt and look'd wistfully at me; then at
my cousins—Mr. Reeves, Mrs. Reeves, speak a good
word for my boy. The heart that belongs to that
countenance cannot be adamant surely. —Dear young
lady, let your power be equalled by your mercy. 
Mr. Fowler, Sir Rowland, has too much generosity 

to upbraid me, I dare say. Nor will you think me
either perverse or ungenerous, when he tells you what
has passed between us. 
Have you given him hope, then? God grant it, tho'
but distant hope! Have you said you will consider— 
Dear, blessed lady!— 
O Sir, interrupted I, how good you are to your
nephew! How worthily is your love placed on him! 
What a proof is it of his merit, and of the goodness
of your heart! —I shall always have an esteem for you
both! —Your excuse, Sir Rowland: Yours, Mr.
Fowler. Be so good as to allow me to withdraw. 
I retired to my own apartment, and throwing myself
into a chair, reflected on what had passed; and
after a while recollected myself to begin to write it
down for you. 
As soon as I had withdrawn, Mr. Fowler, with a
sorrowful heart, as my cousins told me, related all
that I had said to him. 
Mr. Reeves was so good as to praise me for what
he called my generosity to Mr. Orme, as well as for
my frankness and civility to Mr. Fowler. 
That was the duce of it, Sir Rowland said, that
were they to have no remedy, they could not find any
fault in me to comfort themselves with. 
They put it over and over to my cousin, Whether
time and assiduity might not prevail with me to change
my mind? And whether an application to my friends
in the country might not, on setting every-thing fairly
before them, be of service? But Mr. Reeves told
them, that now I had open'd so freely my mind, and
had spoken so unexpectedly, yet so gratefully favourably
of Mr. Orme, he feared there could be no hopes. 
However, both gentlemen, at taking leave, recommended
themselves to Mr. and Mrs. Reeves for their
interests; and the knight vowed that I should not
come off so easily. 

So much and adieu, my Lucy, for the addresses of
worthy Mr. Fowler. Pray however for your Harriet,
that she may not draw a worse lot. 
Tuesday Morning. 
At a private concert last night with my cousins
and Miss Clements; and again to be at the play this
night; I shall be a racketer, I doubt. 
Mr. Fowler called here this morning. Mrs. Reeves
and I were out on a visit. But Mr. Reeves was at
home, and they had a good deal of discourse about
me. The worthy man spoke so despairingly of his
success with me, that I hope for his own sake, I shall
hear no more of his addresses; and with the more
reason, as Sir Rowland will in a few days set out for
Caermarthen. 
Sir Rowland called afterwards: But Mr. Reeves
was abroad; and Mrs. Reeves and I were gone to
Ludgate-hill, to buy a gown, which is to be made
up in all haste, that I may the more fashionably attend
lady Betty Williams to some of the public entertainments. 
I have been very extravagant: But it is partly
my cousin's fault. I send you inclosed a pattern of
my silk. I thought we were high in the fashion in
Northamptonshire; but all my cloaths are altering,
that I may not look frightful, as the phrase is. 
But shall I as easily get rid of the Baronet, think
you, as I hope I have of Mr. Fowler? He is come to
town, and by his own invitation (in a card to Mr.
Reeves) is to be here to-morrow afternoon. What
signifies my getting out of the way? He will see me at
another time; and I shall increase my own difficulties,
and his consequence, if he thinks I am afraid of him. 

