



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, June 16. 
I am sorry to hear of thy misfortune; but hope
thou wilt not long lie by it. Thy servant tells
me, what a narrow escape thou hadst with thy neck. 
I wish it may not be ominous: But I think thou
seemest not to be in so enterprising a way as formerly; 
and yet, merry or sad, thou seest a Rake's neck
is always in danger, if not from the hangman, from
his own horse. But 'tis a vicious toad, it seems; 
and I think thou shouldst never venture upon his back
again; for 'tis a plaguy thing for rider and horse both
to be vicious. 
Thy fellow tells me, thou desirest me to continue
to write to thee in order to divert thy chagrin on thy
forced confinement: But how can I think it in my
power to divert, when my subject is not pleasing to
myself? 
Cæsar never knew what it was to be hypped, I will
call it, till he came to be what Pompey was; that is
to say, till he arrived at the height of his ambition: 
Nor did thy Lovelace know what it was to be
gloomy, till he had completed his wishes upon the
most charming creature in the world. 
And yet why say I, completed? when the will, the
consent, is wanting—And I have still views before
me of obtaining that? 
Yet I could almost join with thee in the wish,
which thou sendest me up by thy servant, unfriendly 

as it is, that I had had thy misfortune before Monday
night last: For here, the poor Lady has run into
a contrary extreme to that I told thee of in my last: 
For now is she as much too lively, as before she was
too stupid; and, 'bating that she has pretty frequent
lucid intervals, would be deemed raving mad, and I
should be obliged to confine her. 
I am most confoundedly disturbed about it: For I
begin to fear, that her intellects are irreparably hurt. 
Who the devil could have expected such strange
effects from a cause so common, and so slight? 
But these high-souled and high-sensed girls, who
had set up for shining lights and examples to the rest
of the Sex, are with such difficulty brought down to
the common standard, that a wise man, who prefers
his peace of mind to his glory in subduing one of that
exalted class, would have nothing to say to them. 
I do all in my power to quiet her spirits, when I
force myself into her presence. 
I go on, begging pardon one minute; and vowing
truth and honour another. 
I would at first have persuaded her, and offered to
call witnesses to the truth of it, that we were actually
married. Tho' the Licence was in her hands, I
thought the assertion might go down in her disorder; 
and charming consequences I hoped would follow. 
But this would not do.— 
I therefore gave up that hope: And now I declare
to her, that it is my resolution to marry her, the
moment her Uncle Harlowe informs me, that he
will grace the Ceremony with his presence. 
But she believes nothing I say; nor (whether in her
senses, or not) bears me with patience in her sight. 
I pity her with all my soul; and I curse myself,
when she is in her wailing fits, and when I apprehend,
that intellects, so charming, are for ever damped. 
But more I curse these women, who put me upon
such an expedient! —Lord! Lord! what a hand have
I made of it! —And all for what? 

Last night, for the first time since Monday last,
she got to her pen and ink: But she pursues her
writing with such eagerness and hurry, as shew too
evidently her discomposure. 
I hope, however, that this employment will help
to calm her spirits. 
* *
Just now Dorcas tells me, that what she writes
she tears, and throws the paper in fragments under
the table, either as not knowing what she does, or
disliking it: Then gets up, wrings her hands, weeps,
and shifts her seat all round the room: Then returns
to her table, sits down, and writes again. 
* *
One odd Letter, as I may call it, Dorcas has this
moment given me from her—Carry this, said she, to
the vilest of men. Dorcas, a toad, brought it, without
any further direction, to me. I sat down, intending
(tho' 'tis pretty long) to give thee a copy of
it: But, for my life, I cannot; 'tis so extravagant. 
And the original is too much an original to let it go
out of my hands. 
But some of the scraps and fragments, as either
torn through, or flung aside, I will copy, for the
novelty of the thing, and to shew thee how her mind
works now she is in this whimsical way. Yet I
know I am still furnishing thee with new weapons
against myself. But spare thy comments. My own
reflections render them needless. Dorcas thinks her
Lady will ask for them: So wishes to have them to
lay again under her table. 
By the first thou'lt guess, that I have told her,
that Miss Howe is very ill, and can't write; that she
may account the better for not having received the
Letter designed for her. 


PAPER I.
(Torn in two pieces.) 
My dearest Miss Howe!
O what dreadful, dreadful things have I to tell
you! But yet I cannot tell you neither. But
say, Are you really ill, as a vile, vile creature informs
me you are? 
But he never yet told me truth, and I hope has
not in this: And yet, if it were not true, surely I
should have heard from you before now! —But what
have I to do, to upbraid? —You may well be tired of
me! —And if you are, I can forgive you; for I am
tired of myself: And all my own relations were tired
of me long before you were. 
How good you have always been to me, mine own
dear Anna Howe! —But how I ramble! 
I sat down to say a great deal—My heart was full
—I did not know what to say first—And thought,
and grief, and confusion, and (O my poor head!) I
cannot tell what—And thought, and grief, and confusion,
came crouding so thick upon me; one would
be first, another would be first, all would be first; so
I can write nothing at all. —Only that, whatever they
have done to me, I cannot tell; but I am no longer
what I was in any one thing. —In any one thing
did I say? Yes, but I am; for I am still, and I ever
will be, 
Your true— 
Plague on it! I can write no more of this eloquent
nonsense myself; which rather shews a raised, than a
quenched, imagination: But Dorcas shall transcribe
the others in separate papers, as written by the whimsical
Charmer: And some time hence, when all is
over, and I can better bear to read them, I may ask
thee for a sight of them. Preserve them therefore; 

for we often look back with pleasure even upon the
heaviest griefs, when the cause of them is removed. 

PAPER II.
(Scratch'd thro', and thrown under the Table.) 
—And can you, my dear honoured Papa, resolve
for ever to reprobate your poor child? —But
I am sure you would not, if you knew what she has
suffered since her unhappy—And will nobody plead
for your poor suffering girl? —No one good body? — 
Why, then, dearest Sir, let it be an act of your own
innate goodness, which I have so much experienced,
and so much abused. I don't presume to think you
should receive me—No, indeed—My name is—I
don't know what my name is! —I never dare to wish
to come into your family again! —But your heavy
curse, my Papa—Yes, I will call you Papa, and
help yourself as you can—for you are my own dear
Papa, whether you will or not—And tho' I am an
unworthy child—yet I am your child— 

PAPER III.
A lady took a great fancy to a young Lion, or a
Bear, I forget which—But a Bear, or a Tyger,
I believe, it was. It was made her a present of,
when a whelp. She fed it with her own hand: She
nursed up the wicked cub with great tenderness; and
would play with it, without fear or apprehension of
danger: And it was obedient to all her commands: 
And its tameness, as she used to boast, encreased
with its growth; so that, like a Lap-dog, it would
follow her all over the house. But mind what followed: 
At last, some-how, neglecting to satisfy its
hungry maw, or having otherwise disobliged it on
some occasion, it resumed its nature; and on a sudden
fell upon her, and tore her in pieces. —And who
was most to blame, I pray? The Brute, or the Lady? 

The Lady, surely! —For what she did, was out
of nature, out of character, at least: What it did,
was in its own nature. 

PAPER IV.
How art thou now humbled in the dust, thou
proud Clarissa Harlowe! Thou that never steppedst
out of thy Father's house, but to be admired! 
Who wert wont to turn thine eye, sparkling with
healthful life, and self-assurance, to different objects
at once, as thou passedst, as if (for so thy penetrating
Sister used to say) to plume thyself upon the expected
applauses of all that beheld thee! Thou that usedst to
go to rest satisfied with the adulations paid thee in the
past day, and couldst put off every-thing but thy Vanity!— 

PAPER V.
Rejoie not now, my Bella, my Sister, my Friend; 
but pity the humbled creature, whose foolish
heart you used to say you beheld thro' the thin veil
of humility which covered it. 
It must have been so! My fall had not else been
permitted— 
You penetrated my proud heart with the jealousy
of an Elder Sister's searching eye. 
You knew me better than I knew myself. 
Hence your upbraidings, and your chidings, when
I began to totter. 
But forgive now those vain triumphs of my heart. 
I thought, poor proud wretch that I was, that what
you said was owing to your envy. 
I thought I could acquit my intention of any such
vanity. 
I was too secure in the knowlege I thought I had
of my own heart. 
My supposed advantages became a snare to me. 
And what now is the end of all?— 


PAPER VI.
What now is become of the prospects of a happy
life, which once I thought opening before
me? —Who now shall assist in the solemn preparations? 
Who now shall provide the nuptial ornaments,
which soften and divert the apprehensions of the fearful
virgin? No court now to be paid to my smiles! No
encouraging compliments to inspire thee with hope of
laying a mind not unworthy of thee under obligation! 
No elevation now for conscious merit, and
applauded purity, to look down from on a prostrate
adorer, and an admiring world, and up to pleased
and rejoicing parents and relations! 

PAPER VII.
Thou pernicious Caterpiller, that preyest upon
the fair leaf of Virgin Fame, and poisonest those
leaves which thou canst not devour! 
Thou fell Blight, thou Eastern Blast, thou overspreading
Mildrew, that destroyest the early promises
of the shining year! that mockest the laborious toil,
and blastest the joyful hopes, of the painful Husbandman! 
Thou fretting Moth, that corruptest the fairest
garment! 
Thou eating Canker-worm, that preyest upon the
opening Bud, and turnest the damask Rose into livid
yellowness! 
If, as Religion teaches us, God will judge us, in
a great measure, by our benevolent or evil actions to
one another—O wretch! bethink thee, in time bethink
thee, how great must be thy condemnation! 

PAPER VIII.
At first, I saw something in your Air and Person
that displeased me not. Your Birth and Fortunes
were no small advantages to you. —You acted 

not ignobly by my passionate Brother. Every-body
said you were brave: Every-body said you were generous. 
A brave man, I thought, could not be a
base man: A generous man could not, I believed, be
ungenerous, where he acknowleged obligation. Thus
prepossessed, all the rest that my soul loved and
wished for in your Reformation, I hoped! —I knew
not, but by report, any flagrant instances of your
vileness. You seemed frank, as well as generous: 
Frankness and Generosity ever attracted me: Whoever
kept up those appearances, I judged of their
hearts by my own; and whatever qualities I wished
to find in them, I was ready to find; and, when found,
I believed them to be natives of the soil. 
My Fortunes, my Rank, my Character, I thought
a further security. I was in none of those respects
unworthy of being the Niece of Lord M. and of his
two noble Sisters. —Your vows, your imprecations
—But, Oh! you have barbarously and basely conspired
against that Honour, which you ought to have
protected: And now you have made me—What is
it of vile, that you have not made me?— 
Yet, God knows my heart, I had no culpable
inclinations! —I honoured Virtue! —I hated Vice! — 
But I knew not, that you were Vice itself! 

PAPER IX.
Had the happiness of any the poorest Outcast in
the world, whom I had never seen, never
known, never before heard of, lain as much in my
power, as my happiness did in yours, my benevolent
heart would have made me fly to the succour of such
a poor distressed—With what pleasure would I have
raised the dejected head, and comforted the desponding
heart! —But who now shall pity the poor wretch,
who has encreased, instead of diminished, the number
of the miserable! 


PAPER X.

Lead me, where my own thoughts themselves may lose me;
Where I may doze out what I've left of Life,
Forget myself, and that day's guilt!—
Cruel Remembrance!—how shall I appease thee? 
 —Oh! you have done an act
That blots the face and blush of modesty;
  Takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent Love,
And makes a blister there!—
  Then down I laid my head,
Down on cold earth, and for a while was dead;
And my freed Soul to a strange Somewhere fled!
  Ah! sottish Soul! said I,
When back to its cage again I saw it fly;
  Fool! to resume her broken chain,
 And row the galley here again!
  Fool! to that Body to return,
Where it condemn'd and destin'd is to mourn!
O my Miss Howe! if thou hast friendship, help me,
And speak the words of peace to my divided Soul,
  That wars within me,
And raises ev'ry sense to my confusion.
  I'm tott'ring on the brink
Of peace; and thou art all the hold I've left!
Assist me—in the pangs of my affliction! 
When Honour's lost, 'tis a relief to die:
Death's but a sure retreat from infamy.
Then farewel, Youth,
 And all the joys that dwell
With Youth and Life!
 And Life itself, farewel! 
For Life can never be sincerely blest.
Heav'n punishes the Bad, and proves the Best.
After all, Belford, I have just skimmed over
these transcriptions of Dorcas; and I see there are method 

and good sense in some of them, wild as others
of them are; and that her memory, which serves her
so well for these poetical flights, is far from being
impaired. And this gives me hope, that she will
soon recover her charming intellects—Tho' I shall
be the sufferer by their restoration, I make no doubt. 
But, in the Letter she wrote to me, there are yet
greater extravagancies; and tho' I said it was too affecting
to give thee a copy of it, yet, after I have let
thee see the loose papers inclosed, I think I may
throw in a transcript of that. Dorcas therefore shall
here transcribe it. I cannot. The reading of it affected
me ten times more than the severest reproaches
of a regular mind could do. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
I never intended to write another line to you. I
would not see you, if I could help it. —O that I
never had! 
But tell me of a truth, Is Miss Howe really and
truly ill? —Very ill? —And is not her illness poison? 
And don't you know who gave it her? 
What you, or Mrs. Sinclair, or somebody (I cannot
tell who) have done to my poor head, you best
know: But I shall never be what I was. My head
is gone. I have wept away all my brain, I believe; 
for I can weep no more. Indeed I have had my
full share; so it is no matter. 
But, good now, Lovelace, don't set Mrs. Sinclair
upon me again. I never did her any harm. She so
affrights me, when I see her! —Ever since—When
was it? I cannot tell. You can, I suppose. She may
be a good woman, as far as I know. She was the
wife of a man of honour—Very likely—Tho' forced
to lett lodgings for her livelihood. Poor gentlewoman! 
Let her know I pity her: But don't let her
come near me again—Pray don't! 
Yet she may be a very good woman— 

What would I say! —I forget what I was going
to say. 
O Lovelace, you are Satan himself; or he helps
you out in every-thing; and that's as bad! 
But have you really and truly sold yourself to him? 
And for how long? What duration is your reign to
have? 
Poor man! The contract will be out: And then
what will be your fate! 
O Lovelace! if you could be sorry for yourself, I
would be sorry too—But when all my doors are fast,
and nothing but the key-hole open, and the key of
late put into that, to be where you are, in a manner
without opening any of them—O wretched, wretched
Clarissa Harlowe! 
For I never will be Lovelace—let my Uncle take
it as he pleases. 
Well, but now I remember what I was going to
say—It is for your good—not mine—For nothing can
do me good now! —O thou villainous man! thou
hated Lovelace! 
But Mrs. Sinclair may be a good woman—If you
love me—But that you don't—But don't let her
bluster up with her worse than mannish airs to me
again! O she is a frightful woman! If she be a woman! 
She needed not to put on that fearful mask to
scare me out of my poor wits. But don't tell her
what I say—I have no hatred to her—It is only fright,
and foolish fear, that's all. —She may not be a bad
woman—But neither are all men, any more than all
women, alike—God forbid they should be like you! 
Alas! you have killed my head among you—I
don't say who did it! —God forgive you all! —But
had it not been better to have put me out of all your
ways at once? You might safely have done it! For
nobody would require me at your hands—No, not
a soul—Except, indeed, Miss Howe would have
said, when she should see you, What, Lovelace, 

have you done with Clarissa Harlowe? —And then you
could have given any slight gay answer—Sent her beyond-sea; 
or, She has run away from me, as she
did from her parents. And this would have been
easily credited; for you know, Lovelace, she that
could run away from them, might very well run
away from you. 
But this is nothing to what I wanted to say. Now
I have it!— 
I have lost it again—This foolish wench comes
teazing me—For what purpose should I eat? For
what end should I wish to live? —I tell thee, Dorcas,
I will neither eat nor drink. I cannot be worse
than I am. 
I will do as you'd have me—Good Dorcas, look
not upon me so fiercely—But thou canst not look so
bad as I have seen somebody look. 
Mr. Lovelace, now that I remember what I took
pen in hand to say, let me hurry off my thoughts,
lest I lose them again—Here I am sensible—And yet
I am hardly sensible neither—But I know my head is
not as it should be, for all that—Therefore let me
propose one thing to you: It is for your good—not
mine: And this is it: 
I must needs be both a trouble and an expence to
you. And here my Uncle Harlowe, when he knows
how I am, will never wish any man to have me: 
No, not even you, who have been the occasion of it
—Barbarous and ungrateful! —A less complicated
villainy cost a Tarquin—But I forget what I would
say again— 
Then this is it—I never shall be myself again: I
have been a very wicked creature—a vain, proud,
poor creature—full of secret pride—which I carried
off under an humble guise, and deceived every-body
—My Sister says so—And now I am punished—So let
me be carried out of this house, and out of your sight; 
and let me be put into that Bedlam privately, which 

once I saw: But it was a sad sight to me then! Little
as I thought what I should come to myself! —That
is all I would say: This is all I have to wish for— 
Then I shall be out of all your ways; and I shall be
taken care of; and Bread and Water, without your
tormentings, will be dainties; and my Straw-bed
the easiest I have lain in—for—I cannot tell how
long! 
My cloaths will sell for what will keep me there,
perhaps, as long as I shall live. But, Lovelace, dear
Lovelace I will call you; for you have cost me
enough, I'm sure!—don't let me be made a shew of,
for my family's sake; nay, for your own sake, don't
do that—For when I know all I have suffered, which
yet I do not, and no matter if I never do—I may be
apt to rave against you by name, and tell of all your
baseness to a poor humbled creature, that once was
as proud as any-body—But of what I can't tell— 
Except of mine own folly and vanity—But let that
pass—since I am punished enough for it— 
So, suppose, instead of Bedlam, it were a private
madhouse, where nobody comes! —That will be
better a great deal. 
But, another thing, Lovelace: Don't let them use
me cruelly when I am there—You have used me
cruelly enough, you know! —Don't let them use me
cruelly; for I will be very tractable; and do as anybody
would have me do—Except what you would
have me do—for that I never will. —Another thing,
Lovelace: Don't let this good woman; I was going
to say vile woman; but don't tell her that—Because
she won't let you send me to this happy refuge perhaps,
if she were to know it— 
Another thing, Lovelace: And let me have pen,
and ink, and paper, allowed me—It will be all my
amusement—But they need not send to any-body I
shall write to, what I write, because it will but trouble
them: And somebody may do you a mischief, 

may-be—I wish not that any-body do any-body a
mischief upon my account. 
You tell me, that Lady Betty Lawrance, and your
Cousin Montague, were here to take leave of me; 
but that I was asleep, and could not be waked. So
you told me at first, I was married, you know; and
that you were my husband—Ah! Lovelace! look to
what you say. —But let not them (for they will sport
with my misery) let not that Lady Betty, let not that
Miss Montague, whatever the real ones may do; 
nor Mrs. Sinclair neither, nor any of her Lodgers,
nor her Nieces, come to see me in my place—Real
ones, I say; for, Lovelace, I shall find out all your
villainies in time—Indeed I shall—So put me there
as soon as you can—It is for your good—Then all
will pass for ravings that I can say, as, I doubt not,
many poor creatures exclamations do pass, tho' there
may be too much truth in them for all that—And
you know I began to be mad at Hamstead—So you
said. —Ah! villainous man! what have you not to
answer for! 
* *
A little interval seems to be lent me. I had
begun to look over what I have written. It is not
fit for any one to see, so far as I have been able to
re-peruse it: But my head will not hold, I doubt, to
go through it all. If therefore I have not already
mentioned my earnest desire, let me tell you, it is
this: That I be sent out of this abominable house
without delay, and locked up in some private Madhouse
about this town; for such it seems there are; 
never more to be seen, or to be produced to any-body,
except in your own vindication, if you should be
charged with the murder of my person; a much
lighter crime, than that of my honour, which the
greatest villain on earth has robbed me of. And
deny me not this my last request, I beseech you; 

and one another, and that is, Never to let me see
you more! This surely may be granted to 
The miserably abused
Clarissa Harlowe. 
I will not hear thy heavy preachments, Belford,
upon this affecting Letter. So, not a word of that
sort! The paper, thou'lt see, is blister'd with the
tears even of the harden'd transcriber; which has
made her ink run here-and-there. 
Mrs. Sinclair is a true heroine, and, I think, shames
us all. And she is a woman too! Thou'lt say, The
best things corrupted become the worst. But this is
certain, that whatever the Sex set their hearts upon,
they make thorough work of it. And hence it is, that
a mischief which would end in simple robbery among
men rogues, becomes murder, if a woman be in it. 
I know thou wilt blame me for having had recourse
to Art. But do not physicians prescribe opiates in
acute cases, where the violence of the disorder would
be apt to throw the patient into a fever or delirium? 
I aver, that my motive for this expedient was mercy; 
nor could it be any-thing else. For a Rape, thou
knowest, to us Rakes, is far from being an undesirable
thing. Nothing but the Law stands in our
way, upon that account; and the opinion of what a
modest woman will suffer rather than become a viva
voce accuser, lessens much an honest fellow's apprehensions
on that score. Then, if these somnivolencies
[I hate the word opiates on this occasion] have turned
her head, that is an effect they frequently have
upon some constitutions; and in this case was rather
the fault of the dose than the design of the giver. 
But is not Wine itself an opiate in degree? —How
many women have been taken advantage of by wine,
and other still more intoxicating viands? —Let me
tell thee, Jack, that the experience of many of the
passive Sex, and the consciences of many more of the 

active, appealed to, will testify that thy Lovelace is
not the worst of villains. Nor would I have thee put
me upon clearing myself by comparisons. 
If she escape a settled delirium when my plots unravel,
I think it is all I ought to be concerned about. 
What therefore I desire of thee, is, That, if two
constructions may be made of my actions, thou wilt
afford me the most favourable. For this, not only
friendship, but my own ingenuousness, which has
furnished thee with the knowlege of the facts against
which thou art so ready to inveigh, require of thee. 
* *
Will is just returned from an errand to Hamstead; 
and acquaints me, that Mrs. Townsend was
yesterday at Mrs. Moore's, accompanied by three or
four rough fellows; a greater number (as supposed)
at a distance. She was strangely surprised at the news
that my spouse and I are entirely reconciled; and
that two fine Ladies, my relations, came to visit her,
and went to town with her: Where she is very happy
with me. She was sure we were not married, she
said, unless it was while we were at Hamstead: And
they were sure the Ceremony was not performed
there. But that the Lady is happy and easy, is unquestionable: 
And a fling was thrown out by Mrs.
Moore and Mrs. Bevis at mischief-makers, as they
knew Mrs. Townsend to be acquainted with Miss
Howe. 
Now, since my Fair-one can neither receive, nor
send away Letters, I am pretty easy as to this Mrs.
Townsend and her employer. And I fansy Miss
Howe will be puzzled to know what to think of the
matter, and afraid of sending by Wilson's conveyance; 
and perhaps suppose that her friend slights her; 
or has changed her mind in my favour, and is ashamed
to own it; as she has not had an answer to what she
wrote; and will believe that the Rustic delivered her
last Letter into her own hand. 

Mean time I have a little project come into my
head, of a new kind; just for amusement-sake, that's
all: Variety has irresistible charms. I cannot live
without intrigue. My Charmer has no passions; 
that is to say, none of the passions that I want her
to have. She engages all my reverence. I am at
present more inclined to regret what I have done,
than to proceed to new offences: And shall regret it
till I see how she takes it when recovered. 
Shall I tell thee my project? 'Tis not a high one. 
—'Tis this—To get hither Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins,
and my Widow Bevis; for they are desirous to
make a visit to my spouse, now we are so happy together. 
And, if I can order it right, Belton, Mowbray,
Tourville, and I, will shew them a little more
of the ways of this wicked town, than they at present
know. Why should they be acquainted with a man
of my character, and not be the better and wiser for
it? —I would have every-body rail against Rakes
with judgment and knowlege, if they will rail. Two
of these women gave me a great deal of trouble: And
the third, I am confident, will forgive a merry evening. 
&dotup;Thou wilt be curious to know, what the persons
of these women are, to whom I intend so much
distinction. I think I have not heretofore mentioned
any-thing characteristic of their persons. 
&dotup;Mrs. Moore is a widow of about Thirty-eight; a
little mortified by misfortunes; but those are often
the merriest folks, when warmed. She has good
features still; and is what they call much of a gentlewoman,
and very neat in her person and dress. She
has given over, I believe, all thoughts of our Sex: 
But when the dying embers are raked up about the
half-consumed stump, there will be fuel enough left,
I dare say, to blaze out, and give a comfortable
warmth to a half-starved by-stander. 
&dotup;Mrs. Bevis is comely; that is to say, plump; a 

lover of mirth, and one whom no grief ever dwelt
with, I dare say, for a week together; about
Twenty-five years of age: Mowbray will have very
little difficulty with her, I believe; for one cannot
do every-thing one's self. And yet sometimes women
of this free cast, when it comes to the point,
answer not the promises their chearful forwardness
gives a man who has a view upon them. 
&dotup;Miss Rawlins is an agreeable young Lady
enough; but not beautiful. She has sense, and would
be thought to know the world, as it is called; but,
for her knowlege, is more indebted to Theory than
Experience. A mere whipt-syllabub knowlege this,
Jack, that always fails the person who trusts to it,
when it should hold to do her service. For such
young Ladies have so much dependence upon their
own understanding and wariness, are so much above
the cautions that the less opinionative may be benefited
by, that their presumption is generally their
overthrow, when attemped by a man of experience,
who knows how to flatter their vanity, and to magnify
their wisdom, in order to take advantage of
their folly. But, for Miss Rawlins, if I can add
Experience to her Theory, what an accomplished
person will she be! —And how much will she be
obliged to me; and not only she, but all those who
may be the better for the precepts she thinks herself
already so well qualified to give! Dearly, Jack,
do I love to engage with these precept-givers, and
example-setters. 
&dotup;Now, Belford, altho' there is nothing striking in
any of these characters; yet may we, at a pinch,
make a good frolicky half-day with them, if, after
we have softened their wax at table by encouraging
viands, we can set our women and them into
dancing: Dancing, which all women love, and
all men should therefore promote, for both their
sakes. 

&dotup;And thus, when Tourville sings, Belton fiddles,
Mowbray makes rough love, and I smooth; and
thou, Jack, wilt be by that time well enough to
join in the chorus; the devil's in't, if we don't
mould them into what shape we please—our own
women, by their laughing freedoms, encouraging
them to break thro' all their customary reserves: 
For Women to Women, thou knowest, are great
darers and incentives; not one of them loving to
be outdone or outdared, when their hearts are thoroughly
warmed. 
&dotup;I know, at first, the difficulty will be the accidental
absence of my dear Mrs. Lovelace, to whom
principally they will design their visit: But if we
can exhilarate them, they won't then wish to see
her; and I can form twenty accidents and excuses,
from one hour to another, for her absence, till each
shall have a subject to take up all her thoughts.&dotup; 
I am really sick at heart for a frolick, and have no
doubt but this will be an agreeable one. These women
already think me a wild fellow; nor do they like
me the less for it, as I can perceive; and I shall take
care, that they shall be treated with so much freedom
before one another's faces, that in policy they shall
keep each other's counsel. And won't this be doing
a kind thing by them? since it will knit an indissoluble
band of union and friendship between three women
who are neighbours, and at present have only
common obligations to one another: For thou wantest
not to be told, that Secrets of Love, and Secrets of
this nature, are generally the strongest cement of female
friendships. 
But, after all, if my Beloved should be happily restored
to her intellects, we may have scenes arise between
us, that will be sufficiently busy to employ all
the faculties of thy friend, without looking out for
new occasions. Already, as I have often observed, 

has she been the means of saving scores of her Sex; 
yet without her own knowlege. 
Saturday Night. 
By Dorcas's account of her Lady's behaviour, the
dear creature seems to be recovering. I shall give
the earliest notice of this to the worthy Capt. Tomlinson,
that he may apprise Uncle John of it. I
must be properly enabled, from that quarter, to pacify
her, or at least, to rebate her first violence. 