



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
[In Answer to Letter lxxi.] 

M Hall, Wedn. Night, July 19. 
You might well apprehend, that I should think
you were playing me booty in communicating my
Letter to the Lady. 

You ask, Who would think you might not read
to her the least exceptionable parts of a Letter written
in my own defence? —I'll tell you who—The man,
who, in the same Letter that he asks this question,
tells the friend whom he exposes to her resentment,
“That there is such an air of Levity runs thro' his
most serious Letters, that those of his are least fit
to be seen, which ought to be most to his credit:” 
And now, what thinkest thou of thy self-condemned
folly? Be, however, I charge thee, more circumspect
for the future, that so this clumsy error may stand
singly by itself. 
“It is painful to her to think of me!” “Libertine
froth!” “So pernicious and so despicable a
plotter!” “A man whose friendship is no credit
to any-body!” “Hardened wretch!” “The devil's
counterpart!” “A wicked, wicked man!” — 
But did she, could she, dared she, to say or imply all
this? —And say it to a man whom she praises for humanity,
and prefers to myself for that virtue; when
all the humanity he shews, and she knows it too, is by
my direction—So robs me of the credit of my own
works? Admirably entitled, all this shews her, to thy
refinement upon the words Resentment and Revenge. 
But thou wert always aiming and blundering at something
thou never couldst make out. 
The praise thou givest to her ingenuousness, is another
of thy peculiars. I think not as thou dost, of
her tell-tale recapitulations and exclamations: —What
end can they answer? —Only that thou hast an holy
Love for her [The devil fetch thee for thy oddity!]
or it is extremely provoking to suppose one sees such a
charming creature stand upright before a Libertine,
and talk of the sin against her, that cannot be forgiven! 
—I wish at my heart, that these chaste Ladies
would have a little modesty in their anger! —It would
sound very strange, if I Robert Lovelace should pretend
to have more true delicacy, in a point that requires
the utmost, than Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

I think I will put it into the head of her Nurse
Norton, and her Miss Howe, by some one of my
agents, to chide the dear novice for her proclamations. 
But to be serious: Let me tell thee, that, severe as
she is, and saucy, in asking so contemptuously, “What
a man is your friend, Sir, to set himself to punish
guilty people!” I will never forgive the cursed
woman, who could commit this last horrid violence
on so excellent a creature. 
The barbarous insults of the two Nymphs, in their
visits to her; the choice of the most execrable den
that could be found out, in order, no doubt, to induce
her to go back to theirs; and the still more execrable
attempt, to propose to her a man who would
pay the debt; a snare, I make no question, laid for
her despairing and resenting heart by that devilish Sally
(thinking her, no doubt, a woman) in order to ruin
her with me; and to provoke me, in a fury, to give
her up to their remorseless cruelty; are outrages,
that, to express myself in her style, I never can, never
will, forgive. 
But as to thy opinion, and the two womens at
Smith's, that her heart is broken; that is the true
womens language: I wonder how thou camest into it: 
Thou who hast seen and heard of so many female deaths
and revivals. 
I'll tell thee what makes against this notion of theirs. 
Her time of life, and charming constitution: The
good she ever delighted to do, and fansied she was
born to do; and which she may still continue to do,
to as high a degree as ever; nay, higher; since I am
no sordid varlet, thou knowest: Her religious turn; 
a turn that will always teach her to bear inevitable
evils with patience: The contemplation upon her last
noble triumph over me, and over the whole crew; 
and upon her succeeding escape from us all: Her will
unviolated: And the inward pride of having not deserved
the treatment she has met with. 

How is it possible to imagine, that a woman, who
has all these Consolations to reflect upon, will die of a
broken heart? 
On the contrary, I make no doubt, but that, as
she recovers from the dejection into which this last
scurvy villainy (which none but wretches of her own
Sex could have been guilty of) has thrown her, returning
Love will re-enter her time-pacified mind: Her
thoughts will then turn once more on the conjugal
pivot: Of course she will have livelier notions in her
head; and these will make her perform all her circumvolutions
with ease and pleasure; tho' not with so
high a degree of either, as if the dear proud rogue
could have exalted herself above the rest of her Sex, as
she turned round. 
Thou askest, on reciting the bitter invectives that
the Lady made against thy poor friend (standing before
her, I suppose, with thy fingers in thy mouth) What
couldst thou say FOR me? 
Have I not, in my former Letters, suggested an
hundred things, which a friend, in earnest to vindicate
or excuse a friend, might say, on such an occasion? 
But now to current topics, and the present state of
matters here. —It is true, as my servant told thee, that
Miss Howe had engaged, before this cursed woman's
officiousness, to use her interest with her friend in my
behalf: And yet she told my Cousins, in the visit they
made her, that it was her opinion, that she would
never forgive me. I send to thee inclosed Copies of
all that passed on this occasion between my Cousins
Montague, Miss Howe, myself, Lady Betty, Lady
Sarah, and Lord M. 
I long to know what Miss Howe wrote to her friend,
in order to induce her to marry the despicable plotter; 
the man whose friendship is no credit to any-body; the
wicked, wicked man. Thou hadst the two Letters in
thy hand. Had they been in mine, the Seal would
have yielded to the touch of my warm finger [Perhaps 

without the help of the Post-office Bullet]; and
the folds, as other plications have done, opened of
themselves, to oblige my curiosity. A wicked omission,
Jack, not to contrive to send them down to me,
by man and horse! It might have passed, that the
messenger, who brought the second Letter, took them
both back. I could have returned them by another,
when copied, as from Miss Howe, and nobody but
myself and thee the wiser. 
&dotup;That's a charming girl! Her spirit, her delightful
spirit! —Not to be married to it—How I wish to
get that lively Bird into my cage! How would I
make her flutter and fly about! —Till she left a feather
upon every wire! 
&dotup;Had I begun there, I am confident, as I have
heretofore said (a)  that I should not have had half
the difficulty with her, as I have had with her
charming friend. For these passionate girls have
high pulses, and a clever fellow may make what
sport he pleases with their unevennesses—Now too
high, now too low, you need only to provoke and
appease them by turns; to bear with them, and forbear; 
to teaze, and ask pardon; and sometimes to
give yourself the merit of a sufferer from them; then
catching them in the moment of concession, conscious
of their ill usage of you, they are all your own. 
&dotup;But these sedate, contemplative girls, never out
of temper but with reason; when that reason is
given them, hardly ever pardon, or afford you another
opportunity to offend. 
&dotup;It was in part the apprehension that this would be
so with my dear Miss Harlowe, that made me carry
her to a place where I believed she would be unable
to escape me, altho' I were not to succeed in my first
attempts. Else widow Sorlings's would have been
as well for me, as widow Sinclair's. For early I
saw, that there was no credulity in her to graft 

upon: No pretending to whine myself into her
confidence. She was proof against amorous persuasion. 
She had reason in her love. Her penetration
and good sense made her hate all compliments that
had not truth and nature in them. What could I
have done with her in any other place? And yet
how long, even there, was I kept in awe, in spite
of natural incitement, and unnatural instigations (as
I now think them) by the mere force of that native
dignity, and obvious purity of mind and manners,
which fill every one with reverence, if not with
holy Love, as thou callest it (a) , the moment he sees
her! —Else, thinkest thou not, it was easy for me
to be a fine gentleman, and a delicate Lover, or, at
least, a specious and flattering one?&dotup; 
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, finding the treaty upon
the success of which they have set their foolish hearts,
likely to run into length, are about departing to their
own seats; having taken from me the best security
the nature of the case will admit of, that is to say, my
word, to marry the Lady, if she will have me. 
&dotup;And after all (methinks thou askest) Art thou
still resolved to repair, if reparation be put into thy
power? 
&dotup;Why, Jack, I must needs own, that my heart
has now-and-then some retrograde motions, upon
thinking seriously of the irrevocable ceremony. We
do not easily give up the desire of our hearts, and what
we imagine essential to our happiness, let the expectation
or hope of compassing it be ever so unreareasonable
or absurd in the opinion of others. Recurrings
there will be; hankerings that will, on
every but remotely-favourable incident (however before
discouraged and beaten back by ill success) pop
up, and abate the satisfaction we should otherwise
take in contrariant overtures. 
&dotup;'Tis ungentlemanly, Jack, man to man, to lye. — 

But Matrimony I do not heartily love—altho' with
a Clarissa—Yet I am in earnest to marry her. 
&dotup;But I am often thinking, that if now this dear
creature, suffering time, and my penitence, my relations
prayers, and Miss Howe's mediation, to
soften her resentments [Her revenge thou hast prettily
(a)  distinguished away] and to recal repulsed inclination,
should consent to meet me at the altar—How
vain will she then make all thy eloquent periods of
execration! —How many charming interjections of
her own will she spoil! And what a couple of old
Patriarchs shall we become, going on in the mill-horse
round; getting sons and daughters; providing
nurses for them first, Governors and Governesses
next; teaching them lessons their Father never
practised, nor which their Mother, as her Parents
will say, was much the better for! And at last
perhaps, when life shall be turned into the dully-sober
Stilness, and I become desirous to forget all my past
Rogueries, what comfortable reflections will it afford,
to find them all revived, with equal, or probably
greater trouble and expence, in the persons
and manners of so many young Lovelaces of the
Boys; and to have the Girls run away with varlets
perhaps not half so ingenious as myself; clumsy
fellows, as it might happen, who could not afford
the baggages one excuse for their weakness, besides
those disgraceful ones of Sex and Nature! —O Belford!
who can bear to think of these things! — 
Who, at my time of life especially, and with such
a byas for mischief! 
&dotup;Of this I am absolutely convinced, that if a man
ever intends to marry, and to enjoy in peace his own
reflections; and not be afraid of retribution, or of
the consequences of his own example; he should
never be a Rake. 
&dotup;This looks like Conscience; don't it, Belford?&dotup; 

But, being in earnest still, as I have said, All I have
to do in my present uncertainty, is, to brighten up
my faculties, by filing off the rust they have contracted
by the town smoke, a long imprisonment in my close
attendance to so little purpose on my fair Perverse; 
and to brace up, if I can, the relaxed fibres of my
mind, which have been twitched and convulsed like
the Nerves of some tottering Paralytic, by means of
the tumults she has excited in it; that so I may be
able to present to her a Husband as worthy as I can
be of her acceptance; or, if she reject me, be in a
capacity to resume my usual gaiety of heart, and shew
others of the misleading Sex, that I am not discouraged
by the difficulties I have met with from this sweet individual
of it, from endeavouring to make myself as
acceptable to them as before. 
In this latter case, one Tour to France and Italy, I
dare say, will do the business. Miss Harlowe will by
that time have forgotten all she has suffered from her
ungrateful Lovelace: Tho' it will be impossible that
her Lovelace should ever forget a woman whose equal
he despairs to meet with were he to travel from one end
of the world to the other. 
If thou continuest paying off the heavy debts my
long Letters, for so many weeks together, have made
thee groan under, I will endeavour to restrain myself
in the desires I have (importunate as they are) of going
to town, to throw myself at the Feet of my Soul's
Beloved. Policy, and honesty, both join to strengthen
the restraint my own promise and thy engagement have
laid me under on this head. I would not afresh provoke: 
On the contrary, would give time for her resentments
to subside, that so all that follows may be
her own act and deed. 
* *
Hickman [I have a mortal aversion to that fellow!]
has, by a line which I have just now received,
requested an interview with me on Friday at Mr. Dormer's, 

as at a common friend's. Does the business he
wants to meet to meet me upon, require that it should
be at a common friend's? —A challenge implied: Is it
not, Belford? —I shall not be civil to him, I doubt. 
He has been an intermeddler! —Then I envy him on
Miss Howe's account: For if I have a right notion
of this Hickman, it is impossible that that virago can
ever love him. 
&dotup;Every one knows, that the Mother (saucy as the
Daughter sometimes is) crams him down her throat. 
Her Mother is one of the most violent-spirited women
in England. Her late Husband could not stand
in the matrimonial contention of Who should? but
tipt off the perch in it, neither knowing how to
yield, nor how to conquer.&dotup; 
A charming encouragement for a man of intrigue,
when he has reason to believe, that the woman he
has a view upon has no Love for her Husband! What
good Principles must that Wife have, who is kept in
against temptation by a sense of her duty, and plighted
faith, where affection has no hold of her! 
Pr'ythee let's know, very particularly, how it fares
with poor Belton. —'Tis an honest fellow. —Something
more than his Thomasine seems to stick with
him. 
&dotup;Thou hast not been preaching to him Conscience
and Reformation; hast thou? —Thou shouldst not
take liberties with him of this sort, unless thou
thoughtest him absolutely irrecoverable. A man in
ill health, and cropsick, cannot play with these solemn
things, as thou canst, and be neither better nor worse
for them. —Repentance, Jack, I have a notion,
should be set about while a man is in health and spirits. 
What's a man fit for [Not to begin a new
work surely!] when he is not himself, nor master of
his faculties? —Hence, as I apprehend, it is that a
death-bed repentance is supposed to be such a precarious
and ineffectual thing. 

&dotup;As to myself, I hope I have a great deal of time
before me; since I intend one day to be a Reformed
man. I have very serious reflections now-and-then. 
Yet am I half afraid of the truth of what my Charmer
once told me, that a man cannot repent when he will. 
—Not to hold it, I suppose she meant! By fits and
starts I have repented a thousand times. 
&dotup;Casting my eye over the two preceding paragraphs,
I fansy there is something like contradiction in them. 
But I will not reconsider them. The subject is a
very serious one. I don't, at present, quite understand
it. But now for one more airy.&dotup; 
Tourville, Mowbray, and myself, pass away our
time as pleasantly as possibly we can without thee. I
wish we don't add to Lord M's gouty days by the joy
we give him. 
This is one advantage, as I believe I have elsewhere
observ'd, that we Male-delinquents in Love-matters
have of the other Sex: —For while they, poor things!
sit sighing in holes and corners, or run to woods and
groves to bemoan themselves on their baffled hopes,
we can rant and roar, hunt and hawk; and, by New
Loves, banish from our hearts all remembrance of the
Old ones. 
Merrily, however, as we pass our time, my reflections
upon the injuries done to this noble creature
bring a qualm upon my heart very often. But I
know she will permit me to make her amends, after
she has plagued me heartily; and that's my consolation. 
An honest fellow still! —Clap thy wings, and crow,
Jack!— 