


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday, February 13. 
I Have received my uncle's long letter. And I thank
him for the pains he has taken with me. He is
very good. But my grandmamma and my aunt are
equally so, and, in the main, much kinder, in acquitting
me of some charges which he is pleased to
make upon his poor Harriet. But, either for caution
or reproof, I hope to be the better for his letter. 
James is set out for Northamptonshire: Pray receive
him kindly. He is honest: And Sally has given
me an hint, as if a sweetheart is in his head: If so,
his impatience to leave London may be accounted for. 
My grandmamma has observ'd, that young people of
small or no fortunes should not be discouraged from
marrying: Who that could be masters or mistresses
would be servants? The honest poor, as she has often
said, are a very valuable part of the creation. 
Mr. Reeves has seen several footmen, but none
that he gave me the trouble of speaking to till just
now; when a well-looking young man, about twenty-six
years of age, offer'd himself, and whom I believe I
shall like. Mrs. Reeves seems mightily taken with
him. He is well-behaved, has a very sensible look,
and seems to merit a better service. 
Mr. Reeves has written for a character of him to
the last master he lived with, Mr. Bagenhall, a young
gentleman in the neighbourhood of Reading: Of
whom he speaks well in the main; but modestly objected
to his hours, and free way of life. The young
man came to town but yesterday, and is with a widow
sister, who keeps an inn in Smithfield. I have a mind
to like him, and this makes me more particular about
him. 

His name is William Wilson: He asks pretty high
wages: But wages to a good servant are not to be
stood upon. What signify forty or fifty shillings a
year? An honest servant should be enabled to lay up
something for age and infirmity. Hire him at once,
Mrs. Reeves says. She will be answerable for his honesty
from his looks, and from his answers to the
questions ask'd him. 
Sir Hargrave has been here again. Mrs. Reeves,
Miss Dolyns, Miss Clements, and I, were in the back
room together. We had drank tea; and I excused
myself to his message, as engaged. 
He talk'd a good deal to Mr. Reeves: Sometimes
high, sometimes humble. He had not intended, he
said, to have renewed his visits. My disdain had
stung him to the heart: Yet he could not keep away. 
He called himself names. He was determined I
should be his; and swore to it. A man of his fortune
to be refused, by a lady who had not (and whom
he wish'd not to have) an answerable fortune, and no
preferable liking to any other man [There Sir Hargrave
was mistaken; for I like almost every man I
know better than him]; his person not contemptible
[And then, my cousin says, he surveyed himself from
head to foot at the glass]; was very, very unaccountable. 
He asked if Mr. Greville came up with any hopes? 
Mr. Reeves told him that I was offended at his
coming, and he was sure he would not be the better
for his journey. 
He was glad of that, he said. There were two or
three free things, proceeded he, said to me in conversation
by Mr. Greville; which I knew not well what
to make of: But they shall pass, if he has no more
to boast of than I. I know Mr. Greville's blustering
character; but I wish the carrying of Miss Byron
were to depend upon the sword's point between us. 
I would not come into so paltry a compromise with
him as Fenwick has done. But still the imputing 

want of morals to me, sticks with me. Surely I am
a better man in point of morals, than either Greville
or Fenwick. What man on earth does not takes liberties
with the sex? Hay, you know, Mr. Reeves! 
Women were made for us: And they like us not the
worse for loving them. Want of morals! —And objected
to me by a lady! —Very extraordinary, by
my soul! —Is it not better to sow all one's wild oats
before matrimony, than run riot afterwards? —What
say you, Mr. Reeves? 
Mr. Reeves was too patient with him. He is a
mild man: Yet wants not spirit, my cousin says, on
occasion. He gave Sir Hargrave the hearing; who
went away, swearing, that I should be his, in spite of
man or devil. 
Monday Night. 
Mr. Greville came in the evening. He begged to
be allowed but ten words with me in the next room. 
I desired to be excused. You know, Sir, said I, that
I never comply'd with a request of this nature, at
Selby-house. He looked hard at my cousins; and
first one, then the other, went out. He then was
solicitous to know what were Sir Hargrave's expectations
from me. He expressed himself uneasy upon
his account. He hoped such a man as that would not
be encouraged. Yet his ample fortune—Woman!
woman! —But he was neither a wiser nor a better
man than himself: And he hoped Miss Byron would
not give a preference to fortune, merely against a man
who had been her admirer for so long a time; and
who wanted neither will nor power to make her
happy. 
It was very irksome to me, I answer'd, to be obliged
so often to repeat the same things to him. I
would not be thought affronting to any-body, especially
to a neighbour with whom my friends were
upon good terms: But I did not think myself answerable
to him, or to any one out of my own family, 

for my visitors; or for whom my cousin Reeves's thought
fit to receive as theirs. 
Would I give him an assurance, that Sir Hargrave
should have no encouragement? 
No, Sir, I will not. Would not that be to give
you indirectly a kind of controul over me? Would not
that be to encourage an hope, that I never will encourage? 
I love not my own soul, madam, as I love you:
I must, and will persevere. If I thought Sir Hargrave
had the least hope, by the great God of heaven, I
would pronounce his days number'd. 
I am but too well acquainted with your rashness,
Mr. Greville. What formerly passed between you
and another gentleman, gave me pain enough. In
such an enterprize your own days might be number'd
as well as another's. But I enter not into this subject
—Henceforth be so good as not to impute incivility
to me, if I deny myself to your visits. 
I would have withdrawn— 
Dear Miss Byron (stepping between me and the
door) leave me not in anger. If matters must stand
as they were, I hope you can, I hope you will, assure
me, that this Sir Fopling— 
What right have you, Sir, to any assurance of this
nature from me? 
None, madam—But from your goodness—Dear
Miss Byron, condescend to say, that this Sir Hargrave
shall not make any impression on your heart. For his
sake say it, if not for mine. I know you care not what
becomes of me; yet let not this milk-faced, and
tyger-hearted fop, for that is his character, obtain favour
from you. Let your choice, if it must fall on
another man, and not on me, fall on one to whose
superior merit, and to whose good fortune, I can subscribe. 
For your own fame's sake, let a man of unquestionable
honour be the happy man; and vouchsafe
as to a neighbour, and as to a well-wishing friend 

only (I ask it not in the light of a lover) to tell me
that Sir Hargrave Pollexfen shall not be the man. 
What, Mr. Greville, let me ask you, is your business
in town? 
My chief business, madam, you may guess at. I
had an hint of this man's intentions given me; and
that he has the vanity to think he shall succeed. But
if I can be assured that you will not be prevailed upon
in favour of a man, whose fortune is so ample— 
You will then return to Northamptonshire? 
Why, madam, I can't but say that now I am in
town, and that I have bespoke a new equipage, and
so-forth— 
Nay, Sir, it is nothing to me, what you will or
will not do: Only be pleased to remember, that as
in Northamptonshire your visits were to my uncle
Selby, not to me, they will be here in London, to my
cousin Reeves's only. 
Too well do I know that you can be cruel if you
will: But is it your pleasure that I return to the country? 
My pleasure, Sir! Mr. Greville is surely to do as
he pleases. I only wish to be allowed the same liberty. 
You are so very delicate, Miss Byron! So very
much afraid of giving the least advantage— 
And men are so ready to take advantage—But yet,
Mr. Greville, not so delicate as just. I do assure you,
that if I were not determined— 
Determined! —Yes, yes! You can be steady, as
Mr. Selby calls it! I never knew so determined a woman
in my life. I own, it was a little inconvenient
for me to come to town just now: And say, that you
would wish me to leave London; and that neither
this Sir Hargrave, nor that other man, your new father's
nephew (What do you call him? Fore-gad,
madam, I am afraid of these new relations) shall make
any impression on your heart; and that you will not 

withdraw when I come here; and I will set out next
week; and write this very night to let Fenwick know
how matters stand, and that I am coming down but
little the better for my journey: And this may save
you seeing your other tormentor, as your cousin Lucy
says you once called that poor devil, and the still
poorer devil before you. 
You are so rash a man, Mr. Greville (and other
men may be as rash as you) that I cannot say but it
would save me some pain— 
O take care, take care, Miss Byron, that you express
yourself so cautiously, as to give no advantage
to a poor dog, who would be glad to take a journey
to the farthest part of the globe to oblige you. But
what say you about this Sir Hargrave, and about your
new brother? —Let me tell you, madam, I am so
much afraid of those whining, insinuating, creeping
dogs, attacking you on the side of your compassion,
and be d—n'd to them (Orme for that) that I must
have a declaration. And now, madam, can't you
give it with your usual caution? Can't you give it, as
I put it, as to a neighbour, as to a well-wisher, and-so-forth,
not as to a lover? 
Well then, Mr. Greville, as a neighbour, as a well-wisher;
and since you own it was inconvenient to
your affairs to come up—I advise you to go down
again. 
The devil! how you have hit it! Your delicacy
ought to thank me for the loop-hole. The condition,
madam; the condition, if I take your neighbourly advice? 
Why, Mr. Greville, I do most sincerely declare to
you, as to a neighbour and well-wisher, that I never,
yet, have seen the man to whom I can think of giving
my hand. 
Yes, you have! By heaven you have (snatching
my hand): You shall give it to me! —And the strange
wretch pressed it so hard to his mouth, that he made
prints upon it with his teeth. 

Oh! cry'd I, withdrawing my hand, surpriz'd, and
my face, as I could feel, all in a glow. 
Aud Oh! said he, mimicking (and snatching my
other hand, as I would have run from him) and patting
it, speaking thro' his closed teeth, You may be
glad you have an hand left. By my soul, I could eat
you. 
This was your disconsolate, fallen-spirited, Greville,
Lucy! 
I rush'd into the company in the next room. He
followed me with an air altogether unconcerned, and
begged to look at my hand; whispering to Mrs.
Reeves; By Jupiter, said he, I had like to have eaten
up your lovely cousin. I was beginning with her
hand. 
I was more offended with this instance of his assureance
and unconcern, than with the freedom itself; 
because that had the appearance of his usual gaiety
with it. I thought it best, however, not to be too
serious upon it. But next time he gets me by himself,
he shall eat up both my hands. 
At taking leave, he hoped his mad flight had not
discomposed me. See, Miss Byron, said he, what
you get by making an honest fellow desperate! —But
you insist upon my leaving the town? As a neighbour,
as a well-wisher, you advise it, madam? Come, come,
don't be afraid of speaking after me, when I endeavour
to hit your cue. 
I do advise you— 
Conditions, remember! You know what you have
declared—Angel of a woman! said he again thro'
his shut teeth. 
I left him; and went up stairs; glad I had got rid
of him. 
He has since seen Mr. Reeves, and told him, he
will make me one visit more before he leave London:
And pray tell her, said he, that I have actually written
to my brother-tormentor Fenwick, that I am returning
to Northamptonshire. 

I told you, that Miss Clements was with me when
Sir Hargrave came last. I like her every time I see
her, better than before. She has a fine understanding,
and if languages, according to my grandfather's
observation, need not be deemed an indispensable part
of learning, she may be look'd upon as learned. 
She has engaged me to breakfast with her to-morrow
morning; when she is to shew me her books, needleworks,
and other curiosities. Shall I not fansy myself
in my Lucy's closet? How continually, amid all this
fluttering scene, do I think of my dear friends in
Northamptonshire! Express for me love, duty, gratitude,
every sentiment that fills the heart of 
Your Harriet Byron. 

