



My dear Parents,
I know you longed to hear from me soon; 
and I send to you as soon as I could. 
Well, you may believe how uneasily I
passed the Time, till his appointed Hour came. 
Every Minute, as it grew nearer, my Terrors
increased; and sometimes I had great Courage,
and sometimes none at all; and I thought I
should faint, when it came to the Time my
Master had dined. I could neither eat nor
drink, for my part; and, do what I could, my
Eyes were swell'd with crying. 
At last he went up to the Closet, which
was my good Lady's Dressing-room; a Room I
once lov'd, but then as much hated. 
Don't your Heart ake for me? —I am sure
mine flutter'd about like a new-caught Bird in
a Cage. O Pamela, said I to myself, why
art thou so foolish and fearful! Thou hast
done no Harm! What, if thou fearest an unjust
Judge, when thou art innocent, wouldst
thou do before a just one, if thou wert guilty? 
Have Courage, Pamela, thou knowest the 

worst! And how easy a Choice Poverty and
Honesty is, rather than Plenty and Wickedness! 
So I chear'd myself; but yet my poor Heart
sunk, and my Spirits were quite broken. Every
thing that stirred, I thought was to call me to
my Account. I dreaded it, and yet I wish'd
it to come. 
Well, at last he rung the Bell; O, thought
I, that it was my Passing-bell! Mrs. Jervis
went up, with a full Heart enough, poor good
Woman! He said, Where's Pamela? Let her
come up, and do you come with her. She came
to me; I was ready to go with my Feet, but
my Heart was with my dear Father and Mother,
wishing to share your Poverty and Happiness. 
I went up, however. 
O how can wicked Men seem so steady and
untouch'd, with such black Hearts, while poor
Innocents stand like Malefactors before them! 
He look'd so stern, that my Heart fail'd me,
and I wish'd myself any-where but there, tho' I
had before been summoning up all my Courage. 
Good Heaven, said I to myself, give
me Courage to stand before this naughty Master! 
O soften him, or harden me! 
Come in, Fool, said he, angrily, as soon as
he saw me (and snatch'd my Hand with a Pull); 
you may well be ashamed to see me, after your
Noise and Nonsense, and exposing me as you
have done. I ashamed to see you! thought I. 
Very pretty indeed! —But I said nothing. 

Mrs. Jervis, said he, here you are both together:
Do you sit down; but let her stand, if
she will (Ay, thought I, if I can; for my
Knees beat one against the other). Did you
not think, when you saw the Girl in the Way
you found her in, that I had given her the
greatest Occasion for Complaint, that could
possibly be given to a Woman; and that I had
actually ruined her, as she calls it? Tell me,
could you think any thing less? Indeed, said
she, I fear'd so at first. Has she told you what
I did to her, and all I did to her, to occasion
all this Folly, by which my Reputation might
have suffer'd in your Opinion, and in that of
all the Family? —Inform me, what has she
told you? 
She was a little too much frighted, as she
own'd afterwards, at his Sternness; and said,
Indeed she told me you only pull'd her on your
Knee, and kiss'd her. 
Then I pluck'd up my Spirit a little: Only! 
Mrs. Jervis, said I; and was not that enough
to shew me what I had to fear? When a Master
of his Honour's Degree demeans himself to be
so free as that to such a poor Servant as me,
what is the next to be expected? —But your
Honour went further; and threaten'd me what
you would do, and talked of Lucretia, and
her hard Fate. —Your Honour knows you
went too far for a Master to a Servant, or
even to his Equal; and I cannot bear it. So I
fell a crying most sadly. 

Mrs. Jervis began to excuse me, and to
beg he would pity a poor Maiden, that had
such a Value for her Reputation. He said, I
speak it to her Face, I think her very pretty,
and I thought her humble, and one that would
not grow upon my Favours, or the Notice I
took of her; but I abhor the Thought of
forcing her to any thing. I know myself
better, said he, and what belongs to me: And,
to be sure, I have enough demean'd myself, to
take Notice of such an one as she; but I was
bewitch'd by her, I think, to be freer than
became me; tho' I had no Intention to carry
the Jest farther. 
What poor Stuff was all this, my dear
Mother, from a Man of his Sense! But see
how a bad Cause, and bad Actions, confound
the greatest Wits! —It gave me a little more
Courage then; for Innocence, I find, in a low
Fortune, and weak Mind, has many Advantages
over Guilt, with all its Riches and Wisdom. 
So I said, Your Honour may call this Jest or
Sport, or what you please; but indeed, Sir, it
is not a Jest that becomes the Distance between
a Master and a Servant. Do you hear, Mrs.
Jervis? said he, Do you hear the Pertness
of the Creature? I had a good deal of this
Sort before in the Summer-house, and Yesterday
too, which made me rougher with her
than perhaps I had otherwise been. 
Says Mrs. Jervis, Pamela, don't be pert
to his Honour: You should know your Distance; 

you see his Honour was only in Jest. — 
O dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, don't you blame
me too. It is very difficult to keep one's
Distance to the greatest of Men, when they
won't keep it themselves to their meanest Servants. 
See again! said he; could you believe this
of the young Baggage, if you had not heard
it? Good your Honour, said the well-meaning
Gentlewoman, pity and forgive the poor Girl:
She is but a Girl, and her virtue is very dear
to her; and I will pawn my Life for her, she
will never be pert to your Honour, if you'll
be so good as not to molest her any more, nor
frighten her again. You saw, Sir, by her Fit,
she was in Terror; she could not help it; and
tho' your Honour intended her no Harm, yet
the Apprehension was almost Death to her; and
I had much ado to bring her to herself again. 
O the little Hypocrite! said he; she has all the
Arts of her Sex; they were born with her; and
I told you a-while ago, you did not know her. 
But this was not the Reason principally of my
calling you before me together: I find I am
likely to suffer in my Reputation by the Perverseness
and Folly of this Girl. She has told
you all, and perhaps more than all; nay, I
make no doubt of it; and she has written Letters
(for I find she is a mighty Letter-writer!)
to her Father and Mother, and others, as far as
I know; in which, representing herself as an
Angel of Light, she makes her kind Master and
Benefactor, a Devil incarnate. —(O how People 

will sometimes, thought I, call themselves by
their right Names!—) And all this, added he,
I won't bear; and so I am resolved she shall return
to the Distresses and Poverty she was taken
from; and let her be careful how she uses my
Name with Freedom, when she is gone from
me. 
I was brighten'd up at once with these welcome
Words: And I threw myself upon my
Knees at his Feet, with a most sincere, glad
Heart; and I said, May your Honour be for
ever blessed for your Resolution! Now I shall
be happy. And permit me, on my bended
Knees, to thank you for all the Benefits and
Favours you have heap'd upon me; for the Opportunities
I have had of Improvement and
Learning, thro' my good Lady's Means, and
yours. I will now forget all your Honour has
offer'd to me: And I promise you, that I will
never let your Name pass my Lips, but with
Reverence and Gratitude: And so God Almighty 
bless your Honour, for ever and ever,
Amen! 
Then rising from my Knees, I went away
with another-guise sort of Heart than I came
into his Presence with: And so I fell to writing
this Letter. And thus all is happily over. 
And now, my dearest Father and Mother,
expect to see soon your poor Daughter, with
an humble and dutiful Mind returned to you:
And don't fear, but I know how to be as happy
with you as ever: For I will lie in the Loft,
as I used to do; and pray let my little Bed be 

got ready; and I have a small matter of
Money, which will buy me a Suit of Cloaths,
fitter for my Condition than what I have; and
I will get Mrs. Mumford to help me to some
Needle-work; and fear not, that I shall be a
Burden to you, if my Health continues. I
know I shall be blessed, if not for my own
sake, for both your sakes, who have, in all
your Trials and Misfortunes, preserved so much
Integrity, as makes every body speak well of
you both. But I hope he will let good Mrs.
Jervis give me a Character, for fear it should
be thought I was turn'd away for Dishonesty. 
And so, my dear Parents, may you be blest
for me, and I for you! And I will always pray
for my Master and Mrs. Jervis. So Good-night; 
for it is late, and I shall be soon call'd
to bed. 
I hope Mrs. Jervis is not angry with me. 
She has not call'd me to Supper; tho' I could
eat nothing, if she had. But I make no Doubt
I shall sleep purely To-night, and dream that
I am with you, in my dear, dear, happy Loft
once more. 
So good Night again, my dear Father and
Mother, says 
Your honest poor Daughter. 
May-hap I shan't come this Week, because
I must get up the Linen, and leave in Order
every thing belonging to my Place. 
So send me a Line, if you can, to let
me know if I shall be welcome, by John, 

who'll call for it as he returns. But say
nothing of my coming away to him, as
yet; for it will be said, I blab every thing. 

