


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Wednesday, May 10–21. 
I Told you, my dear and reverend friend, that I
should hardly write to you till I arrived in this
city. 
The affair of my executorship obliged me to stay a
day longer at Paris than I intended; but I have put
every-thing relating to that trust in such a way, as to
answer all my wishes. 
Mr. Lowther wrote to Mr. Arnold, a friend of his
in London, the particulars of the extraordinary affair
we were engaged in between St. Denis and Paris; 
with desire that he would inform my friends of our arrival
at that capital. 
We were obliged to stop two days at St. Jean de
Maurienne: The expedition we travelled with was
too much for Mr. Lowther; and I expected, and was
not disappointed, from the unusual backwardness of the
season, to find the passage over Mount Cenis less
agreeable than it usually is in the beginning of May. 
The Bishop of Nocera had offered to meet me anywhere
on his side of the mountains. I wrote to him
from Lyons, that I hoped to see him at Parma, on or
about the very day that I was so fortunate as to reach
the palace of the Count of Belvedere in that city; 
where I found, that he and Father Marescotti had arrived
the evening before. They, as well as the
Count, expressed great joy to see me; and when I
presented Mr. Lowther to them, with the praises due
to his skill, and let them know the consultations I
had had with eminent physicians of my own country,
on Lady Clementina's case, they invoked blessings upon
us both, and would not be interrupted in them by
my eager questions after the health and state of mind 

of the two dearest persons of their family—Unhappy!
very unhappy! said the Bishop. Let us give you some
refreshment, before we come to particulars. 
To my repeated enquiries, Jeronymo, poor Jeronymo!
said the Bishop, is living, and that is all we
can say. —The sight of you will be a cordial to his
heart. Clementina is on her journey to Bologna from
Naples. You desired to find her with us, and not at
Naples. She is weak; is obliged to travel slowly. 
She will rest at Urbino two or three days. Dear
creature! What has she not suffered from the cruelty
of her cousin Laurana, as well as from her malady! 
The General has been, and is, indulgent to her. He
is married to a Lady of great merit, quality, and
fortune. He has, at length, consented that we shall
try this last experiment, as the hearts of my mother
and now lately of my father, as well as mine, are in
it. His Lady would not be denied accompanying my
sister; and as my brother could not bear being absent
from her, he travels with them. I wish he had
stay'd at Naples. I hope, however, he will be as
ready, as you will find us all, to acknowlege the favour
of this visit, and the fatigue and trouble you
have given yourself on our account. 
As to my sister's bodily health, proceeded he, it is
greatly impaired. We are almost hopeless, with regard
to the state of her mind. She speaks not; she
answers not any questions. Camilla is with her. 
She seems regardless of any-body else. She has been
told, that the General is married. His Lady makes
great court to her; but she heeds her not. We are
in hopes, that my mother, on her return to Bologna,
will engage her attention. She never yet was so bad
as to forget her duty, either to God, or her Parents. 
Sometimes Camilla thinks she pays some little attention
to your name; but then she instantly starts, as
in terror; looks round her with fear; puts her finger
to her lips, as if she dreaded her cruel cousin Laurana 

should be told of her having heard it mentioned. 
The Bishop and Father both regretted that she had
been denied the requested interview. They were
now, they said, convinced, that if that had been
granted, and she had been left to Mrs. Beaumont's
friendly care, a happy issue might have been hoped
for: But now, said the Bishop—Then sighed, and
was silent. 
I dispatched Saunders, early the next morning, to
Bologna, to procure convenient lodgings for me, and
Mr. Lowther. 
In the afternoon we set out for that city. The
Count of Belvedere found an opportunity to let me
know his unabated passion for Clementina, and that
he had lately made overtures to marry her, notwithstanding
her malady; having been advised, he said,
by proper persons, that as it was not an hereditary,
but an accidental disorder, it might be, in time, cureable. 
He accompanied us about half way in our
journey; and, at parting, Remember, Chevalier,
whispered he, that Clementina is the Soul of my
hope: I cannot forego that hope. No other woman
will I ever call mine. 
I heard him in silence: I admired him for his attachment:
I pitied him. He said, he would tell me
more of his mind at Bologna. 
We reached Bologna on the 15th, N.S. Saunders
had engaged for me the lodgings I had before. 
Our conversation on the road turned chiefly on the
case of Signor Jeronymo. The Bishop and Father
were highly pleased with the skill, founded on practice,
which evidently appeared in all that Mr. Lowther said
on the subject: And the Bishop once intimated, that,
be the event what it would, his journey to Italy should
be made the most beneficial affair to him he had ever
engaged in. Mr. Lowther replied, that as he was
neither a necessitous nor a mean-spirited man, and 

had reason to be entirely satisfied with the terms I had
already secured to him; he should take it unkindly, if
any other reward were offered him. 
Think, my dear Dr. Bartlett, what emotions I
must have on entering, once more, the gates of the
Porretta palace, tho' Clementina was not there. 
I hastened up to my Jeronymo, who had been apprized
of my arrival. The moment he saw me, Do
I once more, said he, behold my friend, my Grandison? 
Let me embrace the dearest of men. Now,
now, have I lived long enough. He bowed his head
upon his pillow, and meditated me; his countenance
shining with pleasure, in defiance of pain. 
The Bishop entered: He could not be present at our
first interview. 
My Lord, said Jeronymo, make it your care that
my dear friend be treated, by every soul of our family,
with the gratitude and respect which are due to his
goodness. Methinks I am easier and happier, this
moment, than I have been for the tedious space of
time since I last saw him. He named that space of
time to the day, and to the very hour of the day. 
The Marquis and Marchioness signifying their pleasure
to see me, the Bishop led me to them. My reception
from the Marquis was kind; from his Lady
it was as that of a mother to a long-absent son. I
had ever been, she was pleased to say, a fourth son
in her eye; and now, that she had been informed
that I had brought over with me a surgeon of experience,
and the advice in writing of eminent physicians
of my country, the obligations I had laid on their
whole family, whatever were the success, were unreturnable. 
I asked leave to introduce Mr. Lowther to them. 
They received him with great politeness, and recommended
their Jeronymo to his best skill. Mr. Lowther's
honest heart was engaged, by a reception so
kind. He never, he told me afterwards, beheld so 

much pleasure and pain struggling in the same countenance,
as in that of the Lady; so fixed a melancholy,
as in that of the Marquis. Mr. Lowther is a
man of spirit, tho' a modest man. He is, as on every
proper occasion I found, a man of piety; and has a
heart tender as manly. Such a man, heart and hand,
is qualified for a profession which is the most useful
and certain in the art of healing. He is a man of
sense and learning out of his profession, and happy in
his address. 
The two surgeons who now attend Signor Jeronymo,
are both of this country. They were sent for. 
With the approbation, and at the request, of the family,
I presented Mr. Lowther to them; but first
gave them his character, as a modest man, as a man
of skill, and experience; and told them, that he had
quitted business, and wanted not either fame or fortune. 
They acquainted him with the case, and their methods
of proceeding. Mr. Lowther assisted in the
dressings that very evening. Jeronymo would have
me to be present. Mr. Lowther suggested an alteration
in their method, but in so easy and gentle a manner,
as if he doubted not, but such was their intention
when the state of the wounds would admit of
that method of treatment, that the gentlemen came
readily into it. A great deal of matter had been collected,
by means of the wrong methods pursued; and
he proposed, if the patient's strength would bear it,
to make an aperture below the principal wound, in
order to discharge the matter downward; and he suggested
the dressing with hollow tents and bandage, and
to dismiss the large tents, with which they had been
accustomed to distend the wound, to the extreme anguish
of the patient, on pretence of keeping it open,
to assist the discharge. 
Let me now give you, my dear friend, a brief history
of my Jeronymo's case, and of the circumstances 

which have attended it; by which you will
be able to account for the difficulties of it, and how it
has happened, that, in such a space of time, either
the cure was not effected, or that the patient yielded
not to the common destiny. 
In lingering cases, patients or their friends are sometimes
too apt to blame their physicians, and to listen
to new recommendations. The surgeons attending
this unhappy case, had been more than once changed. 
Signor Jeronymo, it seems, was unskilfully treated
by the young surgeon of Cremona, who was first engaged:
He neglected the most dangerous wound; 
and, when he attended to it, managed it wrong, for
want of experience. He was therefore very properly
dismissed. 
The unhappy man had at first three wounds: One
in his breast, which had been for some time healed; 
one in his shoulder, which, through his own impatience,
having been too suddenly healed up, was obliged
to be laid open again; the other, which is the
most dangerous, in the hip-joint. 
A surgeon of this place, and another of Padua,
were next employed. The cure not advancing, a
surgeon of eminence, from Paris, was sent for. 
Mr. Lowther tells me, that this man's method was
by far the most eligible; but that he undertook too
much; since, from the first, there could not be any
hope, from the nature of the wound in the hip-joint,
that the patient could ever walk, without sticks or
crutches: And of this opinion were the other two surgeons:
But the French gentleman was so very pragmatical,
that he would neither draw with them, nor
give reasons for what he did; regarding them only as
his assistants. They could not long bear this usage,
and gave up to him in disgust. 
How cruel is punctilio, among men of this science,
in cases of difficulty and danger! 
The present operators, when the two others had 

given up, were not, but by leave of the French gentleman,
called in. He valuing himself on his practice
in the Royal Hospital of Invalids at Paris, looked upon
them as Theorists only; and treated them with as
little ceremony as he had shewn the others: So that
at last, from their frequent differences, it became necessary
to part with either him, or them. His pride,
when he knew that this question was a subject of debate,
would not allow him to leave the family an
option. He made his demand: It was complied
with; and he returned to Paris. 
From what this gentleman threw out at parting, to
the disparagement of the two others, Signor Jeronymo
suspected their skill; and from a hint of this
suspicion, as soon as I knew I should be welcome
myself, I procured the favour of Mr. Lowther's attendance. 
All Mr. Lowther's fear is, that Signor Jeronymo
has been kept too long in hand by the different managements
of the several operators; and that he will
sink under the necessary process, through weakness of
habit. But, however, he is of opinion, that it is requisite
to confine him to a strict diet, and to deny
him wine and fermented liquors, in which he has hitherto
been indulged, against the opinion of his own
operators, who have been too complaisant to his appetite. 
An operation somewhat severe was performed on
his shoulder yesterday morning. The Italian surgeons
complimented Mr. Lowther with the lancet. They
both praised his dexterity; and Signor Jeronymo,
who will be consulted on every-thing that he is to
suffer, blessed his gentle hand. 
At Mr. Lowther's request, a physician was yesterday
consulted; who advised some gentle aperitives, as
his strength will bear it; and some balsamics, to
sweeten the blood and juices. 
Mr. Lowther told me just now, that the fault of 

the gentlemen who have now the care of him, has
not been want of skill, but of critical courage, and a
too great solicitude to oblige their patient; which, by
their own account, had made them forego several
opportunities which had offered to assist nature. In
short, Sir, said he, your friend knows too much of
his own case to be ruled, and too little to qualify him
to direct what is to be done, especially as symptoms
must have been frequently changing. 
Mr. Lowther doubts not, he says, but he shall soon
convince Jeronymo that he merits his confidence,
and then he will exact it from him; and, in so doing,
shall not only give weight to his own endeavours to
serve him, but rid the other two gentlemen of embarrasments
which have often given them diffidencies,
when resolution was necessary. 
Mean time the Marquis, his Lady, the Bishop,
and Father Marescotti, are delighted with Mr. Lowther. 
They will flatter themselves, they say, with
hopes of their Jeronymo's recovery; which however
Mr. Lowther, for fear of disappointment, does not
encourage. Jeronymo himself owns, that his spirits
are much revived; and we all know the power that
the mind has over the body. 
Thus have I given you, my reverend friend, a general
notion of Jeronymo's case, as I understand it
from Mr. Lowther's as general representation of it. 
The family have prevailed upon him to accept of
an apartment adjoining to that of his patient. Jeronymo
said, that when he knows he has so skilful a
friend near him, he shall go to rest with confidence; 
and good rest is of the highest consequence to him. 
What a happiness, my dear Dr. Bartlett, will fall
to my share, if I may be an humble instrument, in
the hand of Providence, to heal this brother; and if
his recovery shall lead the way to the restoration of his
sister; each so known a lover of the other, that the
world is more ready to attribute her malady to his 

misfortune and danger, than to any other cause! But
how early days are these, on which my love and my
compassion for persons so meritorious, embolden me to
buld hopes so forward! 
Lady Clementina is now impatiently expected by
every one. She is at Urbino. The General and his
Lady are with her. His haughty spirit cannot bear
to think she should see me, or that my attendance
on her should be thought of so much importance to
her. 
The Marchioness, in a conversation that I have
just now had with her, hinted this to me, and besought
me to keep my temper, if his high notion of
family and female honour should carry him out of his
usual politeness. 
I will give you, my dear friend, the particulars of
this conversation. 
She began with saying, that she did not, for her
part, now think, that her beloved daughter, whom
once she believed hardly any private man could deserve,
was worthy of me, even were she to recover
her reason. 
I could not but guess the meaning of so high a compliment. 
What answer could I return that would
not, on one hand, be capable of being thought cool;
on the other, of being supposed interested, and as if I
were looking forward to a reward that some of the
family still think too high? But while I knew my
own motives, I could not be displeased with a Lady
who was not at liberty to act, in this point, according
to her own will. 
I only said (and it was with truth) That the calamity
of the noble Lady had endeared her to me,
more than it was possible the most prosperous fortune
could have done. 
I, my good Chevalier, may say any-thing to you. 
We are undetermined about every-thing. We know
not what to propose, what to consent to. Your 

journey, on the first motion, tho' but from some of
us, the dear creature continuing ill; you in possession
of a considerable estate, exercising yourself in doing
good in your native country [You must think we took
all opportunities of enquiring after the man once so
likely to be one of us]; the first fortune in Italy,
Olivia, tho' she is not a Clementina, pursuing you in
hopes of calling herself yours (for to England we
hear she went, and there you own she is) What obligations
have you laid upon us! —What can we determine
upon? What can we wish? 
Providence and you, madam, shall direct my
steps. I am in yours and your Lord's power. The
same uncertainty, from the same unhappy cause,
leaves me not the thought, because not the power of
determination. The recovery of Lady Clementina
and her brother, without a view to my own interest,
sills up, at present, all the wishes of my heart. 
Let me ask, said the Lady (it is for my own private
satisfaction) Were such a happy event, as to
Clementina, to take place, could you, would you,
think yourself bound by your former offers? 
When I made those offers, madam, the situation
on your side was the same that it is now: Lady Clementina
was unhappy in her mind. My fortune, it is
true, is higher: It is indeed as high as I wish it to be. 
I then declared, That if you would give me your Clementina,
without insisting on one hard, on one indispensable
article, I would renounce her fortune, and
trust to my father's goodness to me for a provision. 
Shall my accession to the estate of my ancestors alter
me? —No! madam: I never yet made an offer, that
I receded from, the circumstances continuing the
same. If, in the article of residence, the Marquis,
and you, and Clementina, would relax; I would
acknowlege myself indebted to your goodness, but
without conditioning for it. 
I told you, said she, that I put this question only 

for my own private satisfaction: And I told you truth. 
I never will deceive or mislead you. Whenever I
speak to you, it shall be as if, even in your own concerns,
I spoke to a third person; and I shall not doubt
but you will have the generosity to advise, as such,
tho' against yourself. 
May I be enabled to act worthy of your good opinion! 
I, madam, look upon myself as bound: You
and yours are free. 
What a pleasure is it, my dear Dr. Bartlett, to the
proud heart of your friend, that I could say this! — 
Had I sought, in pursuance of my own inclinations,
to engage the affections of the admirable Miss Byron,
as I might with honour have endeavoured to do, had
not the woes of this noble family, and the unhappy
state of mind of their Clementina, so deeply affected
me; I might have involved myself, and that loveliest
of women, in difficulties which would have made
such a heart as mine still more unhappy than it is. 
Let me know, my dear Dr. Bartlett, that Miss
Byron is happy. I rejoice, whatever be my own destiny,
that I have not involved her in my uncertainties. 
The Countess of D. is a worthy woman: The
Earl, her son, is a good young man: Miss Byron merits
such a mother; the Countess such a daughter. 
How dear, how important, is her welfare to me! — 
You know your Grandison, my good Dr. Bartlett. 
Her friendship I presumed to ask: I dared not to wish
to correspond with her. I rejoice, for her sake, that I
trusted not my heart with such a proposal. What
difficulties, my dear friend, have I had to encounter
with! —God be praised, that I have nothing, with regard
to these two incomparable women, to reproach
myself with. I am persuaded that our prudence, if
rashly we throw not ourselves into difficulties, and if
we will exert it, and make a reliance on the proper
affistance, is generally proportioned to our trials. 
I asked the Marchioness after Lady Sforza, and her
daughter Laurana; and whether they were at Milan? 

You have heard, no doubt, answered she, the
cruel treatment that my poor child met with from her
cousin Laurana. Lady Sforza justifies her in it. We
are upon extreme bad terms, on that account. They
are both at Milan. The General has vowed, that he
never will see them more, if he can avoid it. The
Bishop, only as a Christian, can forgive them. You,
Chevalier, know the reason why we cannot allow our
Clementina to take the veil. 
The particular reasons I have not, madam, been
inquisitive about; but have always understood them to
be family ones, grounded on the dying request of one
of her grandfathers. 
Our daughter, Sir, is intitled to a considerable
estate which joins to our own domains. It was purchased
for her by her two grandfathers; who vied
with each other in demonstrating their love of her by
solid effects. One of them (my father) was, in his
youth, deeply in Love with a young Lady of great
merit; and she was thought to love him: But, in a
fit of pious bravery, as he used to call it, when everything
between themselves, and between the friends on
both sides, was concluded on, she threw herself into
a Convent; and, passing steadily through the probationary
forms, took the veil; but afterwards repented,
and took pains to let it be known that she was unhappy. 
This gave him a disgust against the sequestred
life, tho' he was, in other respects, a zealous Catholic. 
And Clementina having always a serious turn; 
in order to deter her from embracing it (both grandfathers
being desirous of strengthening their house, as
well in the female as male line) they inserted a clause
in each of their wills, by which they gave the estate
designed for her, in case she took the veil, to Laurana,
and her descendants; Laurana to enter into
possession of it on the day that Clementina should be
professed. But if Clementina married, Laurana was
then to be intitled only to a handsome legacy, that 

she might not be entirely disappointed: For the reversion,
in case Clementina had no children, was to
go to our eldest son; who, however, has been always
generously solicitous to have his sister marry. 
Both grandfathers were rich. Our son Giacomo,
on my father's death, as he had willed, entered upon
a considerable estate in the kingdom of Naples,
which had for ages been in my family: He is therefore,
and will be, greatly provided for. Our second
son has great prospects before him, in the church:
But you know he cannot marry. Poor Jeronymo! 
We had not, before his misfortune, any great hopes
of strengthening the family by his means: He, alas!
(as you well know, who took such laudable pains to
reclaim him, before we knew you) with great qualities,
imbibed free notions from bad company, and
declared himself a despiser of marriage. This the
two grandfathers knew, and often deplored; for Jeronymo
and Clementina were equally their favourites. 
To him and the Bishop they bequeathed great legacies. 
We suspected not, till very lately, that Laurana
was deeply in Love with the Count of Belvedere; 
and that her mother and she had views to drive our
sweet child into a convent, that Laurana might enjoy
the estate; which they hoped would be an inducement
to the Count to marry her. Cruel Laurana! 
Cruel Lady Sforza! So much love as they both pretended
to our child; and, I believe, bad, till the temptation,
strengthened by power, became too strong for
them. Unhappy the day that we put her into their
hands! 
Besides the estate so bequeathed to Clementina, we
can do great things for her: Few Italian families are
so rich as ours. Her brothers forget their own interest,
when it comes into competition with hers:
She is as generous as they. Our four children never
knew what a contention was, but who should give up 

an advantage to the other. This child, this sweet
child, was ever the delight of us all, and likewise of
our brother the Conte della Porretta. What joy
would her recovery and nuptials give us! —Dear creature! 
We have sometimes thought, that she is the
fonder of the sequestred life, as it is that which we
wish her not to embrace—But can Clementina be perverse? 
She cannot. Yet that was the life of her
choice, when she had a choice, her grandfathers
wishes notwithstanding. 
Will you now wonder, Chevalier, that neither our
sons nor we can allow Clementina to take the veil? 
Can we so reward Laurana for her cruelty? Especially
now, that we suspect the motives for her barbarity? 
Could I have thought that my sister Sforza— 
But what will not Love and Avarice do, their powers
united to compass the same end; the one reigning in
the bosom of the mother, the other in that of the
daughter? Alas! alas! they have, between them,
broken the spirit of my Clementina. The very name
of Laurana gives her terror—So far is she sensible. 
But, O Sir, her sensibility appears only when she is
harshly treated! To tenderness she had been too
much accustomed, to make her think an indulgent
treatment new, or unusual. 
I dread, my dear Dr. Bartlett, yet am impatient,
to see the unhappy Lady. I wish the General were
not to accompany her. I am afraid I shall want temper,
if he forget his. My own heart, when it tells
me, that I have not deserved ill usage (from my equals
and superiors in rank, especially) bids me not bear it. 
I am ashamed to own to you, my reverend friend,
that pride of spirit, which, knowing it to be my
fault, I ought long ago to have subdued. 
Make my compliments to every one I love. Mr.
and Mrs. Reeves are of the number. 
Charlotte, I hope, is happy. If she is not, it must
be her own sault. Let her know, that I will not 

allow, when my love to both sisters is equal, that she
shall give me cause to say, that Lady L. is my best
sister. 
Lady Olivia gives me uneasiness. I am ashamed,
my dear Dr. Bartlett, that a woman of a rank so considerable,
and who has some great qualities, should
lay herself under obligation to the compassion of a
man who can only pity her. When a woman gets
over that delicacy, which is the test or bulwark, as I
may say, of modesty—Modesty itself may soon lie at
the mercy of an enemy. 
Tell my Emily, that she is never out of my mind; 
and that, among the other excellent examples she has
before her, Miss Byron's must never be out of hers. 
Lord L. and Lord G. are in full possession of my
brotherly love. 
I shall not at present write to my Beauchamp. In
writing to you, I write to him. 
You know all my heart. If in this, or my future
Letters, any-thing should fall from my pen, that
would possibly in your opinion affect or give uneasiness
to any one I love and honour, were it to be communicated; 
I depend upon your known and unquestionable
discretion to keep it to yourself. 
I shall be glad you will enable yourself to inform
me of the way Sir Hargrave and his friends are in. 
They were very ill at Paris; and, it was thought, too
weak, and too much bruised, to be soon carried over
to England. Men! Englishmen! thus to disgrace
themselves, and their country! —I am concerned for
them! 
I expect large pacquets by the next mails from my
friends. England, which was always dear to me,
never was half so dear as now, to 
Your ever-affectionate
Grandison. 

