



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sat. Night. 
Thy servant gives me a dreadful account of thy
raving unmanageableness. I wonder not at it. But
as nothing violent is lasting, I dare say, that thy habitual
gaiety of heart will quickly get the better of thy frenzy: 
And the rather do I judge so, as thy fits are of the raving
kind (suitable to thy natural impetuosity) and not of that
melancholy species which seizes flower souls. 
For this reason I will proceed in writing to thee, that
my narrative may not be broken by thy discomposure; 
and that the contents of it may find thee, and help thee to
reflection, when thou shalt be restored. 
Harry is returned from carrying the posthumous letters
to the family and to Miss Howe; and that of the Colonel
which acquaints James Harlowe with his sister's death, and
with her desire to be interred near her grandfather. 
Harry was not admitted into the presence of any of the
family. They were all assembled together, it seems, at
Harlowe-place, on occasion of the Colonel's letter which
informed them of the lady's dangerous way (a) ; and were
comforting themselves, as Harry was told, with hopes,
that Mr. Morden had made the worst of her state, in order
to quicken their resolutions. 
It is easy then to judge what must be their grief and
surprise on receiving the fatal news which the letters Harry
sent in to them communicated. 
He staid there long enough to find the whole house in
confusion; the servants running different ways; lamenting
and wringing their hands as they run; the female servants
particularly; as if some body (poor Mrs. Harlowe no
doubt; and perhaps Mrs. Hervey too) were in fits. 
All were in such disorder, that he could get no commands,
nor obtain any notice of himself. The servants
seemed more inclined to execrate than welcome him—O
master! O young man! cry'd three or four together,
what dismal tidings have you brought! —They helped him
to his horse (which with great civility they had put up on 

his arrival) at the very first word: And he went to an inn; 
and pursued on foot his way to Mrs. Norton's; and finding
her come to town, left the letter he carried down for her
with her son (a fine youth:) who, when he heard the fatal
news, burst out into a flood of tears—first lamenting the
lady's death, and then crying out, What, what, would become
of his poor mother? —How would she support herself,
when she should find on her arrival in town, that the
dear lady who was so deservedly the darling of her heart,
was no more! 
He proceeded to Miss Howe's, with the letter for
her. That lady, he was told, had just given orders for
a young man, a tenant's son, to post to London, to bring
her news of her dear friend's condition, and whether she
should herself be encouraged, by an account of her being
still alive, to make her a visit; every thing being ordered
to be in readiness for her going up, on his return with the
news she wished and prayed for with the utmost impatience. 
And Harry was just in time to prevent the man's
setting out. 
He had the precaution to desire to speak with Miss
Howe's woman or maid, and communicated to her the
fatal tidings, that she might break them to her young
lady. The maid was herself so affected, that her old lady
(who, Harry said, seemed to be every where at once) came
to see what ailed her; and what herself so struck with the
communication, that she was forced to sit down in a chair; 
O the sweet creature! said she—And is it come to this! 
—O my poor Nancy! —How shall I be able to break the
matter to my Nancy! 
Mr. Hickman was in the house. He hastened in to
comfort the old lady—But he could not restrain his own
tears. He feared, he said, when he was last in town, that
this sad event would soon happen: But little thought it
would be so very soon! —But she is happy, I am sure,
said he! 
Mrs. Howe, when a little recovered, went up, in
order to break the news to her daughter. She took
the letter, and her salts in her hand. And Harry could
perceive, that they had occasion for them. For the
housekeeper soon came hurrying down into the kitchen, 

her face overspread with tears—Her young mistress had
fainted away, she said—Nor did she wonder at it—Never
did there live a lady more deserving of general admiration
and lamentation, than Miss Clarissa Harlowe! And never
was there a stronger friendship dissolved by death than between
her young lady and her. She hurried with a lighted
wax-candle, and with feathers, to burn under the nose of
her young mistress; which shewed that she continued in
fits. 
Mr. Hickman afterwards, with his usual humanity, directed
that Harry should be taken care of all night; it
being then the close of day. He asked him after my health. 
He expressed himself excessively afflicted, as well for the
deprivation, as for the just grief of the lady whom he so
passionately loves. But he called the departed lady an
Angel of Light. We dreaded, said he (tell your master)
to read the letter sent—But we needed not—'Tis a blessed
letter, written by a blessed hand! —But the consolation she
aims to give, will for the present heighten the sense we
all shall have of the loss of so excellent a creature! Tell
Mr. Belford, that I thank God I am not the man who had
the unmerited honour to call himself her brother. 
I know how terribly this great catastrophe (as I may
call it, since so many persons are interested in it) affects
thee. I should have been glad to have had particulars of
the distress which the first communication of it must have
given to the Harlowes. Yet who but must pity the unhappy
mother? 
The answer which James Harlowe returned to Colonel
Morden's letter of notification of his sister's death, and to
her request as to interrment, will give a faint idea of what
their concern must be. Here follows a copy of it. 

To William Morden, Esq;
Saturday, Sept. 9. 
Dear Cousin,
I cannot find words to express what we all suffer on the
mournfullest news that ever was communicated to us. 
My Sister Arabella (but, alas! I have now no other Sister)
was preparing to follow Mrs. Norton up; and I had resolved
to escorte her, and to have looked in upon the dear
creature. 

God be merciful to us all! To what purpose did the
doctor write if she was so near her end! —Why, as everybody
says, did he not send sooner? —or why at all? 
The most admirable young creature that ever swerved!
—not one friend to be with her! —Alas! Sir, I fear my
mother will never get over this shock—She has been in
hourly fits ever since she received the fatal news. My poor
father has the gout thrown into his stomach; and heaven
knows—O Cousin, O Sir! —I meant nothing but the honour
of the family; yet have I all the weight thrown upon
me—[O this cursed Lovelace! may I perish if he escape
the deserved vengeance (a) !] 
We had begun to please ourselves that we should soon see
her here—Good heaven! that her next entrance into this
house, after she abandoned us so precipitately, should be
in a coffin! 
We can have nothing to do with her Executor (another
strange step of the dear creature's!) He cannot expect we
will—nor, if he be a gentleman, will he think of acting. 
Do You therefore be pleased, Sir, to order an undertaker
to convey the body down to us. 
My mother says she shall be for ever unhappy, if she
may not in death see the dear creature whom she could
not see in life: Be so kind therefore as to direct the lid to
be only half-screwed down—that (if my poor mother cannot
be prevailed upon to dispense with so shocking a spectacle)
she may be obliged—She was the darling of her
heart! 
If we know her will in relation to the funeral, it shall be
punctually complied with: As shall every thing in it that
is fit or reasonable to be performed; and This without the
intervention of strangers. 
Will you not, dear Sir, favour us with your presence at
this melancholy time? Pray do;—and pity and excuse
what passed at our last meeting with that generosity which
is natural to the Brave and the Wise. Every one's respects
attend you. And I am, Sir, 
Your inexpressibly afflicted Cousin and Servant,
Ja. Harlowe, jun. 

Every thing that is Fit or Reasonable, to be performed!
(repeated I to the Colonel, from the above letter on his
reading it to me) That is every thing which she has directed,
that can be performed. I hope, Colonel, that I
shall have no contention with them. I wish no more for
their acquaintance than they do for mine. But you, Sir,
must be the mediator between them and me; for I shall
insist upon a literal performance in every article. 
The Colonel was so kind as to declare that he would
join to support me in my resolution. 