



My dearest Father and Mother,
I Now write again, as I told you I should in my last
–––But I am half afraid to look back on the Copy
of it; for your worthy Hearts, so visible in your 

Letter, and my best Beloved's kind Deportment
upon shewing it to him, raised me into a Frame
of Mind, that was bordering on Ecstasy: Yet am I
sure, I wrote my Heart. But you must not, my
dear Father, write to your poor Pamela so affectingly. 
Your steadier Mind could hardly bear your
own moving Strain, and you was forced to lay down
your Pen, and retire: How then could I, who love
you so dearly, if you had not, if I may so say, increased
that Love by fresh and stronger Instances of
your Worthiness, forbear being affected, and raised
above myself?––– But I will not again touch upon this
Subject. 
You must know then, that my dearest Spouse
commands me, with his kind Respects, to tell you,
that he has thought of a Method to make your worthy
Hearts easy; those were his Words—And this is,
said he, by putting that whole Estate, with the new
Purchase, under your Father's Care, as I at first intended* ; and he shall receive and pay, and order
every thing as he pleases, and Longman, who grows
in Years, shall be eased of that Burden. Your Father
writes, said he, a very legible Hand, and he
shall take what Assistants he pleases: And do you,
Pamela, see to that, that this new Task may be made
as easy and pleasant to him as possible. He shall make
up his Accounts only to you, my Dear. And there
will be several Pleasures arise to me upon it, continued
he: First, That it will be a Relief to honest
Longman, who has Business enough on his
Hands besides. Next, It will make the good
Couple easy, that they have an Opportunity of enjoying
that as their Due, which now their too grateful
Hearts give them so many causeless Scruples about 

Thirdly, it will employ your Father's Time, more suitably
to your Liking, and mine, because with more
Ease to himself; for you see his industrious Will cannot
be satisfied without doing something. In the
fourth Place, the Management of this Estate will gain
him more Respect and Reverence among the Tenants
and his Neighbours; and yet be all in his own way. 
–––For, my Dear, added he, you'll see, that it is always
one Point in View with me, to endeavour to
convince every one, that I esteem and value them
for their own intrinsick Merit, and want not any body
to distinguish them in any other Light than that in
which they have been accustomed to appear. 
So, my dear Father, the Instrument will be drawn
and brought you by honest Mr. Longman, who will
be with you in a few Days, to put the last Hand to
the new Purchase, and to give you Possession of your
new Commission, if you please to accept it; as I
hope you will; and the rather, for my dear Mr. B's
third Reason; and because I know, that this Trust
will be discharged as worthily and as sufficiently, after
you are used to it, as if Mr. Longman himself was
in it–––And better it cannot be Mr. Longman is
very fond of this Relief, and longs to be down to
settle every thing with you, as to the proper Powers,
the Method, &c. ––– and he says, in his usual way of
Phrasing, that he'll make it as easy to you as a Glove. 
If you do accept it, my best Beloved will leave
every thing to you, as to Rent, where not already
fixed, and likewise as to Acts of Kindness and Favour
to be done where you think proper; and he is
pleased to say, That, with all his bad Qualities, he was
ever deemed a kind Landlord; and this I can confirm
in fifty Instances to his Honour: So that the old
Gentleman, said he, need not be afraid of being put
upon severe or harsh Methods of Proceeding, where
Things will do without; and he'll always have it in 

his Power to befriend an honest Man: So that the
Province will be intirely such a one as suits with his
Inclination. If any thing difficult or perplexing
arises, continued he, or where a little Knowledge
in Law-matters is necessary, Longman shall do all
that: And your Father will see, that he will not have
in those Points a Coadjutor that will be too hardhearted
for his Wish: For it was a Rule my Father
set me, and I have strictly followed, that tho' I have
a Lawyer for my Steward, it was rather to know
how to do right Things, than oppressive ones; and
Longman has so well answered this Intention, that he
was always more noted for composing Differences,
than promoting Law-suits. 
I dare say, my dear Father, this will be an acceptable
Employment to you, on the several Accounts
my dearest Mr. B. was pleased to mention: And
what a charming Contrivance is here!––– God forever
bless his considerate Heart for it!––– To make
you useful to him, and easy to yourself; as well as
respected by, and even a Benefactor to all around
you! What can one say to all these Things?––– But
what signifies exulting in one's Gratitude for one
Benefit!––– Every Hour the dear Gentleman heaps
new ones upon us, and we have hardly Time to thank
him for one, but a second, and a third, and so on
to countless Degrees, confound one, and throw back
one's Words upon one's Heart before they are well
formed, and oblige one to sit down under all with
profound Silence and Admiration. 
As to what you mention of the Desire of Cousin
Thomas, and Roger, to come to live with you, I endeavoured
to sound what our dear Benefactor's Opinion
was. He was pleased to say, I have nothing to
chuse in this Case, my Dear. Your Father is his own
Master: He may employ whom he pleases; and, if
they are not wanting in Respect to him and your 

Mother, I think, as he rightly observes, Relationship
should rather have the Preference; and as he
can remedy Inconveniences, if he finds any, by
all means let every Branch of your Family have
Reason to rejoice with him. 
But I have thought of this Matter a good deal,
since I had the Favour of your Letter; and I hope,
since you condescend to ask my Advice, you will excuse
me, if I give it freely; yet intirely submitting all
to your own Liking. 
In the first Place, then, I think it would be better
to have any body than Relations; and that for
these Reasons: 
One is apt to expect more Regard from Relations,
and they more Indulgence, than Strangers can have
Reason for. 
That where there is such a Difference in the Expectations
of both, it is hardly possible but Uneasiness
must arise. 
That this will subject you to bear it, or to resent it,
and to part with them. If you bear it, you will know
no End of Impositions: If you dismiss them, it will
occasion Ill-will. They will call you unkind; and
you them ungrateful; and as, it may be, your
prosperous Lot will raise you Enviers, such will be
apt to believe them, rather than you. 
Then the World will be inclined to think, that we
are crouding upon a generous Gentleman, a numerous
Family of indigent People; and tho' they may
be ever so deserving, yet it will be said, The Girl is
filling every Place with her Relations, and beleaguering,
as you significantly express it, a worthy Gentleman. 
And this will be said, perhaps, should one's
Kindred behave ever so worthily; And so, 

In the next Place, one would not, for their Sakes,
that this should be done; who may live with less Reproach,
and equal Benefit, any-where else: For I
would not wish any one of them to be lifted out of
his Station, and made independent, at Mr. B.'s
Expence, if their Industry will not do it; altho'
I would never scruple to do any thing reasonable to
promote or assist that Industry, in the way of their
Callings. 
Then it will possibly put others of our Relations
upon the same Expectations, of living with you; 
and this may occasion Ill-will among them, if some
be preferred to others in your Favour. 
Then, my dear Father, I apprehend, that our beloved
and honoured Benefactor would be under some
Difficulty, from his natural Politeness, and Regard for
you and me. –––You see how kindly, on all Occasions,
he treats you both, not only as the Father and
Mother of his Pamela, but as if you were his
own Father and Mother: And if you had any
body as your Servants there, who called you Cousin,
or Grandfather, or Uncle, he would not care,
when he came down, to treat them on the Foot
of common Servants, tho' they might nevertheless
think themselves honoured (as they would be, and
as I am sure I shall always think myself) with his
Commands. And would it not, if they are modest
and worthy, be as great a Difficulty upon
them, to be thus distinguished, as it would be to
him, and to me, for his sake? For otherwise,
(believe me, I hope you will, my dear Father
and Mother) I could sit down and rejoice with
the meanest and remotest Relation I have. But
in the World's Eye, to every body but my best
of Parents, I must, if I have ever so much Reluctance
to it, appear in a Light that may not give
Discredit to his Choice. 

Then again, as I hinted, you will have it in your
Power, without the least Injury to our common
Benefactor, to do kinder Things by any of our
Relations, when not with you, than you can do,
if they live with you. 
You may lend them a little Money, to put them
in a way, if any thing offers that you think will
be to their Advantage. You can fit out my She-Cousins
to good reputable Places. —The younger
you can put to School, or, when fit, to Trades, according
to their Talents, and so they will be of
course in a way to get an honest and creditable
Livelihood. 
But, above all things, one would as much discourage
as one could, such a proud and ambitious
Spirit in any of them, as should want to raise itself
by Favour instead of Merit; and this the rather,
for that, undoubtedly, there are many more
happy Persons in low than in high Life, take Number
for Number, all the World over. 
I am sure, altho' four or five Years of different Life
had passed with me, I had so much Pride and Pleasure
in the Thought of working for my Living with you,
my dear Parents, if I could but get honest to you,
that it made my Confinement the more grievous to
me, and even, if possible, aggravated the Apprehensions
attending it. 
But I must beg of you, not to harbour a Thought,
that these my Reasons proceed from the bad Motives
of a Heart tainted with Pride on its high
Condition. Indeed there can be no Reason for it,
to one who thinks after this manner:–––The greatest
Families on Earth have some among them who are
unhappy, and low in Life; and shall such an one
reproach me with having twenty low Relations, because
they have, peradventure, not above Five? or
with Ten, because they have but one, or two, or 

three? –––Or should I, on the other hand, be asham'd
of Relations who had done nothing blame-worthy,
and whose Poverty (a very necessary State in the
Scale of Beings) was all their Crime; when there is
hardly any great Family but has produced Instances
of Persons guilty of bad Actions, really bad, which
have reduced them to a Distress we never knew? Let
the Person who would reproach me with low Birth,
which is no Disgrace, and what I cannot help, give
me no Cause to retort upon him low Actions, which
are a Disgrace to any Station, the more so, the higher
it is, and which he can help; or else I shall smile with
Contempt at his empty Reproach: And could I be
half so proud with Cause, as he is without, glory in
my Advantage over him. 
Let us then, my dear Father and Mother, endeavour
to judge of one another, as God, at the
last Day, will judge of us all: And then the honest
Peasant will stand fairer in our Esteem, than the
guilty Peer. 
In short, this shall be my own Rule—Every
one who acts justly and honestly, I will look upon
as my Relation, whether he be so or not, and the
more he want my Assistance, the more intitled to
it he shall be, as well as to my Esteem: While
those who deserve it not, must expect nothing but
Compassion from me, and my Prayers, were they
my Brothers or Sisters. 'Tis true, had I not been poor
and lowly, I might not have thought thus: But if
it be a right way of Thinking, it is a Blessing that
I was so; and that shall never be matter of Reproach
to me, which one Day will be matter of
Justification. 
Upon the Whole then, I should think it adviseable,
my dear Father and Mother, to make such
kind Excuses to the offered Services of my Cousins,
as your better Reason shall suggest to you; and to do 

any thing else for them of more Value, as their Circumstances
may require, or Occasions offer to serve
them. 
But if the employing them, and having them
about you, will add any one Comfort to your Lives,
I give up intirely my own Opinion, and doubt not
every thing will be thought well of, that you shall
think fit to do. 
And so I conclude with assuring you, that I am,
my ever-dear Parents, 
Your dutiful and happy Daughter. 
The Copy of this Letter I will keep to myself, till
I have your Answer to it, that you may be under
no Difficulty how to act in either of the Cases
mentioned in it. 

