



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday, March 20. 
Your last so sensibly affects me, that I must
postpone every other consideration, however
weighty, to reply to it: And this I will do very distinctly,
and with all the openness of heart which our
mutual friendship demands. 
But let me observe, in the first place, gratefully
observe, That if I have in fifty passages of my Letters
given you such undoubted proofs of my value for Mr.
Lovelace, that you have spared me for the sake of my
explicitness, it is acting by me with a generosity worthy
of yourself. 
But lives the man, think you, who is so very bad,
that he does not give even a doubting mind reason at
one time to be better pleased with him than at another? 
And when that reason offers, is it not just to
express one's self accordingly? I would do the man
who addresses me as much justice, as if he did not
address me: It has such a look of tyranny, it appears
so ungenerous, methinks, in our Sex, to use a man
worse for his respect to us (no other cause for disrespect
occurring) that I would not by any means be
that person who should do so. 
But, altho' I may intend no more than justice, it
will perhaps be difficult to hinder those who know
the man's views, from construing it as a partial favour: 
And especially if the eager-eyed observer has
been formerly touched herself, and would triumph that
her friend had been no more able to escape than she. 

Noble minds, emulative of perfection (and yet the
passion properly directed, I do not take to be an imperfection
neither) may be allowed a little generous
envy, I think. 
If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge,
it is but a revenge, my dear, in the soft sense of the
word. I love, as I have told you, your pleasantry. 
Altho' at the time your reproof may pain me a little; 
yet on recollection, when I find in it more of the
cautioning friend, than of the satirizing observer, I
shall be all gratitude upon it. All the business will be
This; I shall be sensible of the pain in the present Letter
perhaps; but I shall thank you in the next, and ever
after. 
In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for
a little of that sensibility which you will find above,
and perhaps still more, as I proceed. —You frequently
remind me, by an excellent example, your own to
me, that I must not spare you! 
I am not conscious, that I have written any-thing
of this man, that has not been more in his dispraise
than in his favour. Such is the man, that I think I
must have been faulty, and ought to take myself to
account, if I had not: But if you think otherwise, I
will not put you upon labouring the proof, as you call
it. My conduct must then have a faulty appearance
at least, and I will endeavour to rectify it. But of
this I assure you, That whatever interpretation my
words were capable of, I intended not any reserve to
you. I wrote my heart, at the time: —If I had had
thoughts of disguising it, or been conscious, that there
was reason for doing so, perhaps I had not given you
the opportunity of remarking upon my curiosity after
his relations esteem for me; nor upon my conditional
liking, and such-like. All I intended by the first, I
believe, I honestly told you at the time: To that
Letter I therefore refer, whether it make for me, or
against me: And by the other, that I might bear in 

mind, what it became a person of my Sex and Character
to be and to do, in such an unhappy situation,
where the imputed Love is thought an undutiful, and
therefore a criminal passion; and where the supposed
object of it is a man of faulty morals too. And
I am sure you will excuse my desire of appearing at
those times the person I ought to be; had I no other
view in it but to merit the continuance of your good
opinion. 
But that I may acquit myself of having reserves— 
O, my dear, I must here break off!— 