



My dearest Mr. B.
I have been considering of your Commands, in
relation to Mr. Locke's Book; and since you are
pleas'd to give me Time to acquit myself of the 

Task, I shall take the Liberty to propose to include
in a little Book my humble Sentiments, as I did to
Lady Davers, in that I shew'd you in relation to the
Plays I had seen. And, since you confine me not
to Time or Place, perhaps, I shall be three or four
Years in completing it, because I shall reserve some
Subjects to my further Experience in Childrens Ways
and Tempers, and in order to benefit myself by those
good Instructions, which I shall receive from your
delightful Conversation, in that Compass of Time,
if God spare us to one another: And then it will,
moreover, be still worthier, than it can otherwise
be, of the Perusal of the most honour'd and best
beloved of all my Correspondents, much honour'd
and beloved, as they all are. 
I must needs say, my dear Mr. B. that this is a
Subject, to which I was always particularly attentive; 
and among the Charities your bountiful Heart permits
me to dispense to the Poor and Indigent, I have
had always a watchful Eye upon the Children of
such, and endeavour'd, by Questions put to them,
as well as to their Parents, to inform myself of their
little Ways and Tempers, and how Nature delights
to work in different Minds, and how it might be
pointed to their Good, according to their respective
Capacities; and I have for this Purpose erected,
with your Approbation, a little School of Seven or
Eight Children, among which are Four in the earliest
Stages, when they can but just speak, and call
for what they want, or love: And I am not a little
pleas'd to observe, when I visit them in their Schooltime,
that Principles of Goodness and Virtue may
be instilled into their little Hearts much earlier
than is usually imagin'd. And why should it not 

be so? For may not the Child, that can tell its
Wants, and make known its Inclination, be easily
made sensible of yours, and what you expect from
it, provided you take a proper Method? For, sometimes,
Signs and Tokens, (and even Looks) uniformly
practis'd, will do as well as Words; as we
see in such of the Young of the Brute Creation, as
we are dispos'd to domesticate, and to teach to
practise those little Tricks, of which the Aptness or
Docility of their Natures makes them capable. 
But yet, dearest Sir, I know not enough of the
next Stage, the maturer Part of Life, to touch upon
that, as I wish to do; and yet there is a natural
Connection and Progression from the one to the
other: And I would not be thought a vain Creature,
who believes herself equal to every Subject, because
she is indulg'd with the good Opinions of her Friends,
in a few, which are supposed to be within her own
Capacity. 
For, I humbly conceive, that it is no small Point
of Wisdom to know, and not to mistake, one's own
Talents; and for this Reason, permit me, dear Sir,
to suspend, till I am better qualify'd for it, even my
own Proposal of beginning my little Book; and, in
the mean time, to touch upon a few Places of the
admirable Author you have put into my Hand, that
seem to me to warrant another way of Thinking,
than that which he prescribes. 
But, dear Sir, let me premise, that all that your
dear Babies can demand of my Attention for some
time to come, is their Health; and it has pleas'd
God to bless them with such sound Limbs, and, to
all Appearance, good Constitutions, that I have very
little to do, but to pray for them every time I pray 

for their dear Papa; and that is hourly; and yet not
so often as you confer upon me Benefits, and Favours,
and new Obligations, even to the Prevention
of all my Wishes, were I to sit down to study
for what must be the next. 
As to this Point of Health, Mr. Locke gives these
plain and easy to be observed Rules. 
He prescribes, First, Plenty of open Air. That
this is right, the Infant will inform one, who, tho'
it cannot speak, will make Signs to be carry'd abroad,
and is never so well pleas'd, as when it is enjoying
the open and free Air; for which Reason I conclude,
that this is one of those natural Pointings, as one
may call them, that are implanted in every Creature,
teaching it to chuse its Good, and to avoid its
Evil. 
Sleep is the next, which he injoins to be indulg'd
to its utmost Extent: An admirable Rule,
as I humbly conceive; since sound Sleep is one of
the greatest Nourishers in Nature. both to the once
Young, and to the twice Young, if I may be allow'd
the Phrase. And I the rather approve of this
Rule, because it keeps the Nurse unimploy'd, who
otherwise, perhaps, would be doing it the greatest
Mischief, by cramming and stuffing its little Bowels,
till they were ready to burst. And, if I am right,
what an inconsiderate, and foolish, as well as pernicious
Practice is it, for a Nurse to waken the Child
from its nourishing Sleep, for fear it should suffer by
Hunger, and instantly pop the Breast into its pretty
Mouth, or provoke it to feed, when it has no Inclination
to either; and, for want of Digestion, must
have its Nutriment turn to Repletion, and bad
Humours! 

Excuse me, dear Sir, these lesser Particulars. 
Mr. Locke begins with them; and surely they may
be allowed in a young Mamma, writing (however
it be to a Gentleman of Genius and Learning) to a
Papa, on a Subject, that in its lowest Beginnings
ought not to be unattended to by either. I will
therefore pursue my excellent Author without further
Apology, since you have put his Work into
my Hands. 
The next Thing then, which he prescribes, is
plain Diet. This speaks for itself; for the Baby
can have no corrupt Taste to gratify: All is pure,
as out of the Hand of Nature; and what is not
plain and natural, must vitiate and offend. 
Then, no Wine, or strong Drink. Equally
just; and for the same Reasons. 
Little or no Physick. Undoubtedly right. 
For the Use of Physick, without Necessity, or by
way of Precaution, as some call it, begets the Necessity
of Physick; and the very Word supposes Distemper
or Disorder; and where there is none, would
a Parent beget one, or, by frequent Use, render the
salutary Force of Medicine ineffectual, when it was
wanted? 
Next, he forbids too warm and too streight
Cloathing. Dear Sir, this is just as I wish it. How
has my Heart ached, many and many a time, when
I have seen poor Babies roll'd and swath'd, ten or
a dozen times round; then Blanket upon Blanket,
Mantle upon that; its little Neck pinn'd down to
one Posture; its Head, more than it frequently
needs, triple crown'd like a young Pope, with Covering
upon Covering; its Legs and Arms, (as if
to prevent that kindly Stretching, which we rather 

ought to promote, when it is in Health, and which
is only aiming at Growth and Inlargement) the
former bundled up, the latter pinn'd down; and
how the poor Thing lies on the Nurse's Lap, a miserable
little pinion'd Captive, goggling and staring
with its Eyes, the only Organs it has at Liberty, as
if it were supplicating for Freedom to its fetter'd
Limbs! Nor has it any Comfort at all, till, with a
Sigh or two, like a dying Deer, it drops asleep?
and happy then will it be, till the officious Nurse's
Care shall awaken it for its undesired Food, just as
if the good Woman were resolv'd to try its Constitution,
and were willing to see how many Difficulties
it could overcome. 
Then this Gentleman advises, that the Head and
Feet should be kept cold; and the latter often us'd
to cold Water, and expos'd to Wet, in order to lay
the Foundation, as he says, of an healthy and hardy
Constitution. 
Now, Sir, what a Pleasure is it to your Pamela,
that her Notions, and her Practice too, fall in so
exactly with this learned Gentleman's Advice, that,
excepting one Article, which is, that your Billy has
not yet been accustom'd to be wet-shod, every other
Particular has been observ'd! —And don't you see
what a charming, charming Baby he is? —Nay,
and so is your little Davers, for his Age—pretty
Soul! 
Perhaps some, were they to see this, would
not be so ready, as I know you will be, to excuse
me; and would be apt to say, What Nursery Impertinencies
are these, to trouble a Man with! — 
But, with all their Wisdom, they would be mistaken; 
for if a Child has not good Health, (and 

are not these Rules, the moral Foundation, as I may
say, of that Blessing?) its animal Organs will play
but poorly in a weak or crazy Case. These, therefore,
are necessary Rules to be observed for the first
two or three Years; for then the little Buds of their
Minds will begin to open, and their watchful Mamma
will be imploy'd, like a skilful Gardener, in assisting
and encouraging the charming Flower thro' its
several hopeful Stages to Perfection, when it shall
become one of the principal Ornaments of that delicate
Garden, your honour'd Family. Pardon me,
Sir, if in the above Paragraph I am too figurative. 
I begin to be afraid I am out of my Sphere, writing
to your dear Self, on these important Subjects. 
But be that as it may, I will here put an End to
this my first Letter, (on the earliest Part of my Subject)
rejoicing in the Opportunity you have given
me of producing a fresh Instance of that Duty and
Affection, wherewith I am, and shall ever be, my
dearest Mr. B. 
Your gratefully happy
P. B. 

