



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Miss Arab. Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 22. 
Write to me, my hard-hearted Sister, in what
manner you please, I shall always be thankful
to you for your notice. But (think what you will of
me) I cannot see Mr. Ackland and the Counsellor on
such a business as you mention. 
The Lord have mercy upon me indeed! For none else
will. 
Surely I am believed to be a creature past all shame,
or it could not be thought of sending two Gentlemen
to me on such an errand. 
Had my Mother required of me (or would Modesty
have permitted You to enquire into) the particulars of
my sad Story, or had Mrs. Norton been directed to
receive them from me, methinks it had been more
fit: And I presume to think, that it would have
been more in every one's character too, had they been 

required of me before such heavy judgment had been
passed upon me, as has been passed. 
I know that this is Dr. Lewen's opinion. He has
been so good as to enforce it in a kind Letter to me. 
I have answered his Letter; and given such reasons
as I hope will satisfy him. I could wish it were
thought worth while to request of him a sight of my
Answer (a) . 
To your other proposal, of going to Pensylvania; 
this is my answer—If nothing happen within a month
which may full as effectually rid my parents and
friends of that world of cares, and fears, and scandals,
which you mention, and if I am then able to be carried
on board of ship, I will chearfully obey my Father
and Mother, altho' I were sure to die in the
passage. And, if I may be forgiven for saying so
(for indeed it proceeds not from a spirit of reprisal)
you shall set over me, instead of my poor obliging,
but really unculpable Hannah, your Betty Barnes; 
to whom I will be answerable for all my conduct. 
And I will make it worth her while to accompany me. 
I am equally surprised and concerned at the hints
which both you and my Uncle Antony give of new
points of misbehaviour in me! —What can be meant
by them? 
I will not tell you, Miss Harlowe, how much I
am afflicted at your severity, and how much I suffer
by it, and by your hard-hearted Levity of style, because
what I shall say may be construed into jingle
and period, and because I know it is intended, very
possibly for kind ends, to mortify me. All I will
therefore say, is, That it does not lose its end, if
that be it. 
But, nevertheless (divesting myself as much as possible
of all resentment) I will only pray, that Heaven 

will give you, for your own sake, a kinder heart,
than at present you seem to have; since a kind heart,
I am convinced, is a greater blessing to its possessor,
than it can be to any other person. Under this conviction
I subscribe myself, my dear Bella, 
Your ever affectionate Sister,
Cl. Harlowe. 