



Mrs. Harlowe, To Mrs. Judith Norton. 

Sunday, July 30. 
We all know your virtuous prudence, worthy
woman: We all do. But your partiality to
this your rash Favourite is likewise known. And we
are no less acquainted with the unhappy body's power
of painting her distresses so as to pierce a stone. 
Every one is of opinion, that the dear naughty
creature is working about to be forgiven and received; 
and for this reason it is, that Betty has been
forbidden [Not by me, you may be sure!] to mention
any more of her Letters; for she did speak to my
Bella of some moving passages you read to her. 
This will convince you, that nothing will be heard
in her favour. To what purpose then should I mention
any-thing about her? —But you may be sure that
I will, if I can have but one second. However, that
is not at all likely, until we see what the consequences
of her crime will be: And who can tell that? —She
may—How can I speak it, and my once darling
daughter unmarried? —She may be with child! — 
This would perpetuate her stain. Her Brother may
come to some harm; which God forbid! —One
child's ruin, I hope, will not be followed by another's
murder! 

As to her grief, and her present misery, whatever
it be, she must bear with it; and it must be short of
what I hourly bear for her! Indeed I am afraid nothing
but her being at the last extremity of all will
make her Father, and her Uncles, and her other
friends, forgive her. 
The easy pardon perverse children meet with, when
they have done the rashest and most rebellious thing
they can do, is the reason (as is pleaded to us every
day) that so many follow their example. They depend
upon the indulgent weakness of their Parents
tempers, and, in that dependence, harden their own
hearts: And a little humiliation, when they have
brought themselves into the foretold misery, is to be
a sufficient atonement for the greatest perverseness. 
But for such a child as this [I mention what others
hourly say, but what I must sorrowfully subscribe to] to
lay plots and stratagems to deceive her Parents, as well
as herself; and to run away with a Libertine; Can
there be any atonement for her crime? And is she
not answerable to God, to Us, to You, and to all
the world who knew her, for the abuse of such talents
as she has abused? 
You say her heart is half-broken: Is it to be wondered
at? Was not her sin committed equally against
warning, and the light of her own knowlege? 
That he would now marry her, or that she would
refuse him, if she believed him in earnest, as she has
circumstanced herself, is not at all probable; and were
I inclined to believe it, nobody else here would. He
values not his relations; and would deceive them as
soon as any others: His aversion to Marriage he has
always openly declared; and still occasionally declares
it. But if he be now in earnest; which every one
who knows him must doubt; Which do you think
(hating us too as he professes to hate and despise us
all) would be most eligible here, To hear of her
Death, or of her Marriage with such a vile man? 

To all of us, yet, I cannot say! For, Oh! my
good Mrs. Norton, you know what a Mother's tenderness
for the child of her heart would make her chuse,
notwithstanding all that Child's faults, rather than
lose her for ever! 
But I must sail with the tide; my own judgment
also joining with the general resentment; or I should
make the unhappiness of the more worthy still greater
[my dear Mr. Harlowe's particularly]; which is already
more than enough to make them unhappy for
the remainder of their days. This I know; If I were
to oppose the rest, our Son would fly out to find this
Libertine; and who could tell what would be the
issue of that with such a man of violence and blood as
that Lovelace is known to be? 
All I can expect to prevail for her, is, that in a
week, or so, Mr. Brand may be sent up to enquire
privately about her present state, and way of life, and
to see she is not altogether destitute: For nothing she
writes herself will be regarded. 
Her Father indeed has, at her earnest request, withdrawn
the Curse, which, in a passion, he laid upon
her, at her first wicked flight from us. But Miss Howe
[It is a sad thing, Mrs. Norton, to suffer so many
ways at once] had made matters so difficult by her undue
Liberties with us all, as well by Speech in all companies,
as by Letters written to my Bella, that we
could hardly prevail upon him to hear her Letter read. 
These Liberties of Miss Howe with us; the general
Cry against us abroad, where-ever we are spoken of; 
and the visible, and not seldom audible disrespectfulness,
which High and Low treat us with to our faces,
as we go to and from Church, and even at Church
(for no-where else have we the heart to go) as if none
of us had been regarded but upon her account; and
as if she were innocent, we all in fault; are constant
aggravations, you must needs think, to the whole
family. 

She has made my Lot heavy, I am sure, that was
far from being light before! —To tell you truth, I am
enjoined not to receive any-thing of hers, from any
hand, without leave. Should I therefore gratify my
yearnings after her, so far as to receive privately the
Letter you mention, what would the case be, but to
torment myself, without being able to do her good? — 
And were it to be known—Mr. Harlowe is so passionate
—And should it throw his Gout into his Stomach,
as her rash Flight did—Indeed, indeed, I am very unhappy! 
—For, Oh my good woman, she is my Child
still! —But unless it were more in my power—Yet do
I long to see the Letter—You say it tells of her present
way and circumstances. —The poor child, who
ought to be in possession of thousands! —And will! — 
For her Father will be a faithful Steward for her. — 
But it must be in his own way, and at his own time. 
And is she really ill? —so very ill? —But she ought to
sorrow. —She has given a double measure of it. 
But does she really believe she shall not long trouble
us? —But, O my Norton! —She must, she will, long
trouble us—For can she think her Death, if we should
be deprived of her, will put an end to our afflictions? 
—Can it be thought, that the fall of such a Child will
not be regretted by us to the last hour of our lives? 
But, in the Letter you have, does she, without reserve,
express her contrition? Has she in it no reflecting
hints? Does she not aim at extenuations? —If I
were to see it, will it not shock me so much, that my
apparent grief may expose me to harshnesses? —Can
it be contrived— 
But to what purpose? —Don't send it—I charge
you don't—I dare not see it— 
Yet— 
But, alas!— 
O forgive the almost distracted Mother! You can. 
—You know how to allow for all this. —So I will 

let it go. —I will not write over again this part of my
Letter. 
But I chuse not to know more of her, than is communicated
to us all—No more than I dare own I have
seen—And what some of them may rather communicate
to me, than receive from me: And this for the
sake of my outward quiet: Altho' my inward peace
suffers more and more by the compelled reserve. 
* *
I was forced to break off. But I will now try to
conclude my long Letter. 
I am sorry you are ill. But if you were well, I
could not, for your own sake, wish you to go up, as
Betty tells us you long to do. If you went, nothing
would be minded that came from you. As they already
think you too partial in her favour, your going
up would confirm it, and do yourself prejudice, and
her no good. And as every-body values you here, I
advise you not to interest yourself too warmly in her
favour, especially before my Bella's Betty, till I can
let you know a proper time. Yet to forbid you to
love the dear naughty creature, who can? O my
Norton! you must love her! —And so must I! 
I send you five guineas, to help you in your present
illness, and your son's; for it must have lain
heavy upon you. What a sad, sad thing, my dear
good woman, that all your pains, and all my pains,
for Eighteen or Nineteen years together, have, in so
few months, been rendered thus deplorably vain! 
Yet I must be always your friend, and pity you, for
the very reason that I myself deserve every one's pity. 
Perhaps I may find an opportunity to pay you a visit,
as in your illness; and then may weep over the Letter
you mention, with you. But, for the future, write
nothing to me about the poor girl that you think may
not be communicated to us all. 
And I charge you, as you value my friendship, as
you wish my peace, not to say any-thing of a Letter 

you have from me, either to the naughty-one, or to
any-body else. It was some little relief (the occasion
given) to write to you, who must, in so particular a
manner, share my affliction. A Mother, Mrs. Norton,
cannot forget her Child, tho' that Child could
abandon her Mother; and, in so doing, run away
with all her Mother's comforts! —As I can truly say,
is the case of 
Your unhappy Friend,
Charlotte Harlowe. 