


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Will proceed with the family-history. 
Sir Charles forgot not, on his arrival in England,
to pay an early visit to Lord W. his mother's
brother, who was then at his house near Windsor. 
I have told you, that my Lord had conceived a
dislike to him; and that for no other reason, but because
his father loved him. Lord W. was laid up
with the gout when he came: But he was instantly
admitted to his stately presence. The first salutations, 

on one side, were respectful; on the other, coldly
civil. My Lord often survey'd his kinsman from
head to foot, as he sat; as if he were loth to like him,
I suppose; yet knew not know to help it. He found
fault with Sir Thomas. Sir Charles told him, That
it was a very ingrateful thing to him to hear his father
spoken slightly of. He desired his Lordship to forbear
reflections of that sort. My father, said he, is
no more. I desire not to be made a party in any disputes
that may have happen'd between him and your
Lordship. I come to attend you as a duty which I
owe to my mother's memory; and I hope this may
be done without wounding that of my father. 
You say well, said my Lord; but I am afraid,
kinsman, by your air and manner, and speech too,
that you want not your father's proud spirit. 
I revere my father for his spirit, my Lord. It
might not always be exerted as your Lordship, and
his other relations, might wish: But he had a manly
one. As to myself, I will help your Lordship to my
character at once. I am, indeed, a very proud man. 
I cannot stoop to flatter, and, least of all men, the
great and the rich: Finding it difficult to restrain this
fault, it is my whole study to direct it to laudable
ends; and I hope, that I am too proud to do anythiug
unworthy of my father's name, or of my mother's virtue. 
Why, Sir (and look'd at him again from head to
foot) your father never in his whole life said so good
a thing. 
Your Lordship knew not my father as he deserved
to be known. Where there are misunderstandings
between two persons, tho' relations, the character of
either is not to be taken from the other. But, my
Lord, this is, as I said before, a visit of duty: I have
nothing to ask of your Lordship, but your good opinion; 
and that no longer than I deserve it. 
My Lord was displeased. “You have nothing to 

ask of me!”—repeated he. Let me tell you, independent
Sir, that I like not your speech. You may
leave me, if you please: And when I want to see
you again, I will send for you. 
Your servant, my Lord. And let me say, that I
will not again attend you, till you do. But when you
do, the summons of my Mother's brother shall be
chearfully obeyed, notwithstanding this unkind treatment
of Lord W. 
The very next day, my Lord, hearing he was still
at Windsor, viewing the curiosities of the place, sent
to him: He directly went. My Lord expressed himself
highly pleased with his readiness to come, and
apologized to him for his behaviour of the day before. 
He called him Nephew, and swore, that he was just
such a young man as he had wished to see. Your
mother used to say, proceeded he, that you could do
what you would with her, should you even be unreasonable:
And I beg of you to ask me no favour but
what is fit for me to grant, for fear I should grudge
it after I had granted it; and call in question, what
no man is willing to do, my own discretion. 
He then asked him about the methods he intended
to take with regard to his way of life. Sir Charles
answered, That he was resolved to dispose of his racers,
hunters, and dogs, as soon as he could: That he
would take a survey of the timber upon his estate,
and sell that which would be the worse for standing; 
and doubted not but that a part of it in Hampshire
would turn to good account: But that he would
plant an oakling for every oak he cut down, for the
sake of posterity: He was determined, he said, to
lett the house in Essex; and even to sell the estate
there, if it were necessary, to clear incumbrances; 
and to pay off the mortgage upon the Irish estate; 
which he had a notion was very improveable. 
What did he purpose to do for his sisters; who were
left, he found, absolutely in his power? 

Marry them, my Lord, as soon as I can. I have
a good opinion of Lord L. My elder sister loves him. 
I will enquire what will make him easy: And easy I
will make him, on his marriage with her, if it be in
my power. I will endeavour to make the younger
happy too. And when these two points are settled,
but not before, because I will not deceive the family
with which I may engage, I will think of myself. 
Bravo! bravo! said my Lord; and his eyes, that
were brimful some moments before, then ran over. 
As I hope to be saved, I had a good mind to—to— 
to—And there he stopt. 
I ask only for your approbation, my Lord, or correction,
if wrong. My father has been very regardful
of my interests. He knew my heart, or he would
perhaps have been more solicitous for his daughters. 
I don't find that my circumstances will be very narrow:
And if they are, I will live within compass,
and even lay up. I endeavour to make a virtue of
my pride, in this respect: I cannot live under obligation. 
I will endeavour to be just; and then, if I can,
I will be generous. That is another species of my
pride. I told your Lordship, that if I could not
conquer it, I would endeavour to make it innocent
at least. 
Bravo! bravo! again cried my Lord—And threw
his arms about his neck, and kissed his cheek, tho'
he screamed out at the same time, having hurt his
gouty knee with the effort. 
And then, and then—said my Lord, you will
marry yourself. And if you marry with discretion,
good Lord, what a great man you will be! —And
how I shall love you! —Have you any thoughts of
marriage, kinsman? —Let me be consulted in your
match,—and—and—and—you will vastly oblige me. 
Now I believe, I shall begin to think the name of
Grandison has a very agreeable sound with it. What
a fine thing it is, for a young man to be able to clear 

up his mother's prudence so many years after she is
gone, and lessen his father's follies! Your father did
not use me well; and I must be allowed sometimes
to speak my mind of him. 
That, my Lord, is the only point on which your
Lordship and I can differ. 
Well, well, we won't differ—Only one thing, my
dear kinsman: If you sell, give me the preference. 
Your father told me, that he would mortgage to any
man upon God's earth sooner than to me. I took
that very heinously. 
There was a misunderstanding between you, my
Lord. My father had a noble spirit. He might
think, that there would be a selfishness in the appearance,
had he ask'd of your Lordship a favour. Little-spirited
men sometimes choose to be obliged to relations,
in hopes that payment will be less rigorously
exacted, than by a stranger— 
Ah kinsman! kinsman! —That's the white side of
the business. 
Indeed, my Lord, that would be a motive with me
to avoid troubling your Lordship in an exigence, were
it to happen. For mistrusts will arise from possibilities
of being ungrateful, when perhaps there is no room,
were the heart to be known, for the suspicion. 
Well said, however. You are a young man that
one need not be afraid to be acquainted with. But
what would you do as a lender? Would you think
hardly of a man that wanted to be obliged to you? 
O no! —But in this case I would be determined by
prudence. If my friend regarded himself as the first
person in the friendship; me but as the second, in
cases that might hurt my fortune, and disable me from
acting up to my spirit, to other friends; I would then
let him know, that he thought as meanly of my understanding
as of my justice. 
Lord W. was delighted with his nephew's notions. 
He over and over prophesied, That he would be a
a great man. 

Sir Charles, with wonderful dispatch, executed
those designs, which he had told Lord W. he would
carry into effect. And the sale of the timber he cut
down in Hampshire, and which lay convenient for
water-carriage, for the use of the government, furnished
him with a very considerable sum. 
I have mentioned, that Sir Charles, on his setting
out from Florence to Paris, to attend his father's leave
for his coming to England, had left his ward Miss
Jervois, at the former place, in the protection of
good Dr. Bartlett. He soon sent for them both over,
and placed the young lady with a discreet widow-gentlewoman,
who had three prudent daughters; sometimes
indulging her with leave to visit his sisters, who
are very fond of her, as you have heard. And now
let me add, That she is an humble petitioner to me,
to procure her the felicity, as she calls it, to be constantly
resident with Miss Grandison. She will be,
she says, the best girl in the world, if she may be
allowed this favour: And not one word of advice,
either of her guardian, or of Miss Grandison, or of
Lady L. shall be lost upon her—And besides, as good
women, said she, as Mrs. Lane and her daughters
are, what protection can women give me, were my
unhappy mother to be troublesome, and resolve to
have me, as she is continually threatening? 
What a new world opens to me, my Lucy, from
the acquaintance I am permitted to hold with this family! 
God grant that your poor Harriet pay not too
dearly for her knowlege! —She would, I believe
you think, were she to be entangled in an hopeless
Love. 

