



From Miss Darnford. In Answer to Mrs. B.'s, p. 106.
My dear Mrs. B. 


You are highly obliging to me in expressing so
warmly your Wishes to have me with you. I
know not any body in this World, out of our own
Family, in whose Company I should be happier: But
my Papa won't part with me, I think; tho' I had
secur'd my Mamma in my Interest; and I know Nancy
would be glad of my Absence, because the dear
perversly Envious thinks me more valued than she is; 
and yet, foolish Girl, she don't consider, that if her
Envy be well-grounded, I should return with more
than double Advantages to what I now have, improv'd
by your charming Example and Conversation. 

My Papa affects to be in a fearful Pet at your
lecturing of him so justly; for my Mamma would
shew it him; and he says he will positively demand
Satisfaction of Mr. B. for your treating him so freely. 
And yet he shall hardly think him, he says, on a Rank
with him, unless Mr. B. will, on Occasion of the
new Commission, take out his Dedimus: And then if
he will bring you down to Lincolnshire, and join with
him to commit you Prisoner for a Month at the Hall,
all shall be well. 
It is very obliging in Mr. B. to join in your kind
Invitation: But ––– yet I am loth to say it to you ––– But
the Character of your worthy Gentleman, I doubt,
stands a little in the Way with my Papa: For he
will have it, that he is just such a Rake as is to be
liked by a Lady; one that saves common Appearances,
and that's all; and is too handsome, too witty,
and too enterprizing, for any honest Man, that's Sir
Simon's Phrase, to trust his Daughter with. 
My Mamma pleaded his being marry'd. ––––Adsdines,
Madam, said he, what of all that! What
married Man, when a pretty Girl's in the Way,
minds his Wife, except she has made him stand in
Fear of her? and that's far from the Case here. Why
I tell you, added his peevish Highness, if our Polly
should happen to slip, (I thank him for his Supposition)
he'd make his Lady nurse both her and the
Bastard, (another of his polite Expressions) if he had
a mind to it, and she durst not refuse him. And
would you trust such a spritely Girl as Polly, in the
House with such a Fellow as that? 
These, it seems, were his Words and Reasonings:
I thank him for his Opinion of his Daughter. It becomes
not me to say, by what Rules my Papa judges
of Mankind; Rules, however, that are not much
to the Credit of his Sex: ––––But it made me put on
very grave Airs when I came to Supper, (for after 

this Repulse, and the Reasons given for it, I pretended
Indisposition, not to dine with my Papa, being
half-vex'd, and half-afraid of his Raillery) and
he said, Why, how now, Polly! What! in the Sullens,
Girl? I said, I should have hoped, that I never
gave my Papa Cause to suspect my Conduct, and
that he would have had a better Opinion of the Force
which the Example and Precepts of my good Mamma
had upon me. 
Not your Papa's Example then. ––––Very well,
Saucebox: I understand you. 
But, Sir, said I, I hope, if I may not go to Bedfordshire,
you'll permit me to go to London when
Mrs. B. goes. 
No, said he, positively no! 
Well, Sir, I have done. I could hope, however,
you would inable me to give a better Reason to good
Mrs. B. why I am not permitted to accept of her
kind Invitation, than that which I understand you
have been pleased to assign. 
He stuck his Hands in his Sides, with his usual humourous
Positiveness, Why then tell her, she is a
very saucy Lady, for her, last Letter to you; and
that her Lord and Master is not to be trusted; and it
is my absolute Will and Pleasure, that you ask me no
more Questions about it. 
I will very faithfully make this Report, Sir. Do so. 
–––And so I have. –––And your poor Polly Darnford
is disappointed of one of the greatest Pleasures
she could have had. 
I can't help it. –––And if you truly pity me, I can
put you in a Way to make me easier under the Disappointment,
than otherwise I can possibly be; and
that is, to favour me with an Epistolary Conversation,
since I am deny'd a Personal one; and this my
Mamma joins to request of you; and particularly,
to let us know how Lady Davers's first Visit passes; 

which Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Jones, who know my
Lady so well, likewise long to hear: And this will
make us the best Amends in your Power for the Loss
of your good Neighbourhood, which we had all promis'd
to ourselves. 
This Denial of my Papa comes out, since I wrote
the above, to be principally owing to a Proposal
made him of an humble Servant to one of his Daughters:
He won't say which, he tells us, in his usual
humourous Way, lest we should fall out about it. 
I suppose, I tell him, the young Gentleman is to
pick and chuse which of the two he likes best. But
be he a Duke, 'tis all one to Polly, if he is not something
above our common Lincolnshire Class of Foxhunters. 
I have shewn Mr. and Mrs. Peters your Letter. 
They admire you beyond Expression; and
Mr. Peters says, He does not know that ever he did
any thing in all his Life, that ever gave him so much
inward Reproach, as his denying you the Protection
of his Family, which Mr. Williams*  sought to move
him to afford you, when you were confined at the
Hall, before Mr. B. came down to you, with his
Heart bent on Mischief; and all he comforts himself
with is, that that very Denial, as well as the other
Hardships you met with, were necessary to bring
about that Work of Providence which was to reward
your unexampled Virtue. 
Yet, he says, he doubts he shall not be thought excusable
by you, who are so exact in your own Duty,
as he had the Unhappiness to lose such an Opportunity
to have done Honour to his Function, had he
had the Fortitude to have done his; and he begg'd of
me, some how or other, and at some time or other,
to hint his Concern to you on this Head; and to hope, 

in his Name, that neither Religion nor his Cloth may
suffer in your Opinion, for the Fault of one of its
Professors, who never was wanting in his Duty so
much before. 
He had it often upon his Mind, he says, to write
to you on this very Subject; but he had not the
Courage; and besides, did not know how Mr. B.
might take it, if he should see that Letter, as the
Cale had such delicate Circumstances in it, that in
blaming himself, as he should very freely have done,
he must, by Implication, have cast still greater Blame
upon him. 
Mr. Peters is certainly a very good Man, and my
Favourite for that Reason; and I hope you, that
could so easily forgive the late wicked, but now penitent
Jewkes, will overlook with Kindness a Fault
in a good Man, that proceeded more from Pusillanimity
and Constitution, than from Want of Principle:
And once, talking of it to my Mamma and
me, he accused himself on this score, to her, with
Tears in his Eyes. She, good Lady, would have
given you this Protection, at Mr. William's Desire; 
but wanted the*  Power to do it. 
So you see, my dear Mrs. B. how your Virtue has
shamed every one into such a Sense of what they
ought to have done, that Good, Bad and Indifferent
are seeking to make Excuses for past Misbehaviour,
and to promise future Amendment, like penitent
Subjects returning to their Duty to their conquering
Sovereign, after some unworthy Defection. 
Happy, happy Lady! may you be ever so! May
you always convert your Enemies, confirm the Lukewarm,
and every Day multiply your Friends, prays, 
Your most affectionate
Polly Darnford. 

P. S. How I rejoice in the Joy of your honest
Parents! God bless'em! I am glad Lady Davers
is so wise. Every one I have named desire their
best Respects. Let me hear from you oftener,
and omit not the minutest Thing: For every
Line of yours carries Instruction with it. 

