



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, May 9. 
If, my dear, you approve of the application to my
Uncle Harlowe, I wish it may be made as soon as
possible. We are quite out again. I have shut myself
up from him. The offence indeed not very great— 
And yet it is too. He had like to have got a Letter. 
One of yours. But never will I write again, or re-peruse
my papers, in an apartment where he thinks
himself entitled to come. He did not read a line of
it. Indeed he did not. So don't be uneasy. And
depend upon future caution. 
Thus it was. The Sun being upon my closet, and
Mr. Lovelace abroad— 
She then gives Miss Howe an account of his coming
in by surprize upon her: Of his fluttering speech: 
Of his bold address: Of her struggle with him for
the Letter, &c. 
And now, my dear, proceeds she, I am more and
more convinced, that I am too much in his power to
make it prudent to stay with him. And if my friends 

will but give me hope, I will resolve to abandon him
for ever. 
&dotup;O my dear! he is a fierce, a foolish, an insolent
creature! —And in truth, I hardly expect, that we
can accommodate. How much unhappier am I
already with him, than my Mother ever was with
my Father after marriage! Since (and that without
any reason, any pretence in the world for it)
he is for breaking my spirit before I am his; and
while I am, or ought to be [O my folly, that I am
not!] in my own power.&dotup; 
Till I can know whether my friends will give me
hope or not, I must do what I never studied to do
before in any case; that is, try to keep this difference
open: And yet it will make me look little in my own
eyes; because I shall mean by it more than I can own. 
But this is one of the consequences of a step I shall ever
deplore! &dotup;The natural fruits of all engagements,
where the minds are unpaired—dis-paired, in my
case may I say. 
&dotup;Let this evermore be my caution to individuals
of my Sex—Guard your eye: 'Twill ever be in a
combination against your judgment. If there are
two parts to be taken, it will for ever, traitor as it
is, take the wrong one. 
&dotup;If you ask me, my dear, How this caution befits
me? let me tell you a secret which I have but very
lately found out upon self-examination, altho' you
seem to have made the discovery long ago; That
had not my foolish eye been too much attached, I
had not taken the pains to attempt, so officiously
as I did, the prevention of mischief between him
and some of my family, which first induced the correspondence
between us, and was the occasion of
bringing the apprehended mischief with double
weight upon myself. My vanity and conceit, as
far as I know, might have part in the inconsiderate
measure: For does it not look as if I thought myself 

more capable of obviating difficulties, than anybody
else of my family? 
&dotup;But you must not, my dear, suppose my heart
to be still a confederate with my eye. That deluded
eye now clearly sees its fault, and the misled heart
despises it for it. Hence the application I am
making to my Uncle: Hence it is, that I can say
(I think truly) that I would atone for my fault at
any rate, even by the sacrifice of a limb or two, if
that would do. 
&dotup;Adieu, my dearest friend! —May your hearr
never know the hundredth part of the pain mine at
present feels! prays 
&dotup;Your Clarissa Harlowe.&dotup; 