


For the future, I will always mistrust most,
when Appearances look fairest. O your
poor Daughter! what has she not suffer'd since
what I wrote on Sunday Night! —My worst
Trial, and my fearfullest Danger! O how I shudder
to write you an Account of this wicked Interval
of Time! For, my dear Parents, will you
not be too much frighten'd and affected with
my Distress, when I tell you, that his Journey
to Stamford was all abominable Pretence? For
he came home privately, and had well-nigh
effected all his vile Purposes, and the Ruin of
your poor Daughter; and that by such a Plot as
I was not in the least apprehensive of: And Oh!
you'll hear what a vile unwomanly Part that
wicked Wretch, Mrs. Jewkes, acted in it. 
I left off with letting you know how much
I was pleased, that I had one Night's Reprieve
added to my Honesty. But I had less Occasion
to rejoice than ever, as you will judge by
what I have said already. Take then the dreadful
Story as well as I can relate it. 
The Maid Nan is a little apt to drink, if she
can get at Liquor; and Mrs. Jewkes happen'd,
or design'd, as is too probable, to leave a Bottle
of Cherry-brandy in her way, and the Wench
drank some of it more than she should; and
when she came to lay the Cloth, Mrs. Jewkes
perceiv'd it, and fell a rating at her most sadly; 
for she has too many Faults of her own, to suffer 

any of the like sort in any body else, if she can
help it; and she bad her get out of her Sight,
when we had supp'd, and go to-bed, to sleep
off her Liquor, before we came to-bed. And
so the poor Maid went muttering up-stairs. 
About Two Hours after, which was near
Eleven o'Clock, Mrs. Jewkes and I went up to
go to-bed; I pleasing myself with what a charming
Night I should have. We lock'd both
Doors, and saw poor Nan, as I thought, (but
Oh! 'twas my abominable Master, as you shall
hear by-and-by) sitting fast asleep, in an Elbow-chair,
in a dark Corner of the Room, with her
Apron thrown over her Head and Neck. And
Mrs. Jewkes said, There is that Beast of a Wench
fast asleep, instead of being a-bed! I knew, said she,
she had taken a fine Dose. I'll wake her, said I. 
No, don't, said she, let her sleep on; we shall lie
better without her. Ay, said I, so we shall; but
won't she get Cold? 
Said she, I hope you have no Writing to-night. 
No, reply'd I, I will go to bed with
you, Mrs. Jewkes. Said she, I wonder what
you can find to write about so much; and am
sure you have better Conveniencies of that kind,
and more Paper, than I am aware of; and I had
intended to romage you, if my Master had not
come down; for I spy'd a broken Tea-cup with
Ink, which gave me a Suspicion; but as he is
come, let him look after you, if he will; and
if you deceive him, it will be his own Fault. 
All this time we were undressing ourselves:
And I fetch'd a deep Sigh! What do you sigh 

for? said she. I am thinking, Mrs. Jewkes,
answer'd I, what a sad Life I live, and how hard
is my Lot. I am sure the Thief that has robb'd,
is much better off than I, 'bating the Guilt; and
I should, I think, take it for a Mercy, to be
hang'd out of the way, rather than live in these
cruel Apprehensions. So, being not sleepy, and
in a prattling Vein, I began to give a little History
of myself, as I did once before to Mrs.
Jervis; in this manner. 
Here, said I, were my poor honest Parents; 
they took care to instil good Principles into my
Mind, till I was almost Twelve Years of Age; and
taught me to prefer Goodness and Poverty to the
highest Condition of Life; and they confirm'd
their Lessons by their own Practice; for they were
of late Years remarkably poor, and always as remarkably
honest, even to a Proverb; for, As honest
as Goodman Andrews, was a Bye-word. 
Well, then, said I, comes my late dear
good Lady, and takes a Fancy to me, and said,
she would be the making of me, if I was a good
Girl; and she put me to sing, to dance, to play
on the Spinnet, in order to divert her melancholy
Hours; and also taught me all manner of
fine Needle-work; but still this was her Lesson,
My good Pamela, be virtuous, and keep the
Men at a Distance. Well, so I was, I hope,
and so I did; and yet, tho' I say it, they all
loved me, and respected me; and would do
any thing for me, as if I was a Genltewoman. 
But then, what comes next? —Why, it
pleased God to take my good Lady; and then 

comes my Master: And what says he? —Why,
in Effect, it is, Be Not Virtuous, Pamela. 
So here have I lived above Sixteen Years in
Virtue and Reputation, and, all at once, when
I come to know what is Good, and what is
Evil, I must renounce all the Good, all the
whole Sixteen Years Innocence, which, next to
God's Grace, I owed chiefly to my Parents and
my Lady's good Lessons and Examples, and
chuse the Evil; and so, in a Moment's Time,
become the vilest of Creatures! And all this,
for what, I pray? Why truly for a Pair of Diamond
Ear-rings, a Necklace, and a Diamond
Ring for my Finger; which would not become
me: For a few paltry fine Cloaths; which, when
I wore them, would make but my former Poverty
more ridiculous to every body that saw
me; especially when they knew the base Terms
I wore them upon. But indeed, I was to have
a great Parcel of Guineas beside; I forget how
many; for had there been ten times more, they
would not have been so much to me, as the
honest Six Guineas you trick'd me out of, Mrs.
Jewkes. 
Well, forsooth! but then I was to have I
know not how many Pounds a Year for my Life; 
and my poor Father (there was the Jest of it!)
was to be the Manager for the abandon'd Prostitute
his Daughter: And then, (there was the
Jest again!) my kind, forgiving, virtuous Master,
would pardon me all my Misdeeds. 
Yes, thank him for nothing, truly! And
what, pray, are all these violent Misdeeds? — 

Why, they are, for daring to adhere to the good
Lessons that were taught me; and not learning a
new one, that would have reversed all my former; 
for not being contented, when I was run
away with, in order to be ruin'd; but contriveing,
if my poor Wits had been able, to get out
of Danger, and preserve myself honest. 
Then was he once jealous of poor John,
tho' he knew John was his own Creature, and
helped to deceive me. 
Then was he outrageous against poor Parson
Williams; and him has this good, merciful
Master thrown into Gaol; and for what? Why
truly, for that being a Divine, and a good Man,
he had the Fear of God before his Eyes, and was
willing to forego all his Expectations of Interest,
and assist an oppressed poor Creature. 
But to be sure, I must be forward, bold,
saucy, and what not? to dare to run away from
certain Ruin, and to strive to escape from an
unjust Confinement; and I must be married to
the Parson, nothing so sure! 
He would have had but a poor Catch of me,
had I consented; but he and you too, know, I
did not want to marry any body. I only wanted
to go to my poor Parents, and to have my own
Liberty; and not to be laid under such an unlawful
Restraint; and which would not have
been attempted, but only that I am a poor,
destitute, young Body, and have no Friend that
is able to right me. 
So, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, here is my History
in brief. And I am a very unhappy young Creature, 

to be sure! —And why am I so? — 
Why, because my Master sees something in my
Person that takes his present Fancy; and because
I would not be undone,—why therefore, to
chuse, I must, and I shall be undone! —And
this is all the Reason that can be given! 
She heard me run on all this time, while
I was undressing, without any Interruption; 
and I said, Well, I must go to the Two
Closets, ever since an Affair of the Closet
at the other House, tho' he is so far off. And
I have a good Mind to wake this poor Maid. 
No, don't, said she, I charge you. I am very
angry with her, and she'll get no Harm there; 
and if she wakes, she may come to-bed well
enough, as long as there is a Candle in the
Chimney. 
So I looked into the Closets, and kneeled
down in my own, as I used to do, to say my
Prayers, and this with my Under-cloaths in my
Hand, all undress'd; and passed by the poor
sleeping Wench, as I thought, in my Return. 
But, Oh! little did I think, it was my wicked,
wicked Master in a Gown and Petticoat of hers,
and her Apron over his Face and Shoulders. What
Meannesses will not Lucifer make his Votaries
stoop to, to gain their abominable Ends! 
Mrs. Jewkes by this time was got to-bed,
on the further Side, as she used to be; and, to
make room for the Maid, when she should
awake, I got into Bed, and lay close to her. 
And I said, Where are the Keys? tho', said I,
I am not so much afraid To-night. Here, said 

the wicked Woman, put your Arm under mine,
and you shall find them about my Wrist, as they
used to be. So I did, and the abominable Designer
held my Hand with her Right-hand, as
my Right-arm was under her Left. 
In less than a quarter of an Hour, I said,
There's poor Nan awake; I hear her stir. Let
us go to sleep, said she, and not mind her: She'll
come to-bed, when she's quite awake. Poor
Soul! said I, I'll warrant she will have the Head-ach
finely To-morrow for this! Be silent, said
she, and go to sleep; you keep me awake; 
and I never found you in so talkative a Humour
in my Life. Don't chide me, said I; I will
say but one thing more: Do you think Nan
could hear me talk of my Master's Offers? No,
no, said she, she was dead asleep. I'm glad of
that, said I; because I would not expose my
Master to his common Servants; and I knew
you were no Stranger to his fine Articles. 
Said she, I think they were fine Articles, and
you were bewitch'd you did not close with them:
But let us go to sleep. So I was silent; and the
pretended Nan (O wicked, base, villainous
Designer! what a Plot, what an unexpected
Plot was this!) seem'd to be awaking; and Mrs.
Jewkes, abhorred Creature! said, Come, Nan! 
—What, are you awake at last? Pr'ythee come
to-bed, for Mrs. Pamela is in a talking Fit,
and won't go to sleep one while. 
At that, the pretended She came to the Bedside; 
and sitting down in a Chair, where the
Curtain hid her, began to undress. Said I, 

Poor Mrs. Ann, I warrant your Head akes most
sadly! How do you do? –––She answer'd not one
Word. Said the superlatively wicked Woman,
You know I have order'd her not to answer you. 
And this Plot, to be sure, was laid when she
gave her these Orders the Night before. 
I heard her, as I thought, breathe all quick
and short: Indeed, said I, Mrs. Jewkes, the
poor Maid is not well. What ails you, Mrs.
Ann? And still no Answer was made. 
But, I tremble to relate it! the pretended
She came into Bed, but trembled like an Aspen-leaf; 
and I, poor Fool that I was! pitied her
much. —But well might the barbarous Deceiver
tremble at his vile Dissimulation, and
base Designs. 
What Words shall I find, my dear Mother,
(for my Father should not see this shocking Part)
to describe the rest, and my Confusion, when
the guilty Wretch took my Left Arm, and laid
it under his Neck, as the vile Procuress held my
Right; and then he clasp'd me round the Waist! 
Said I, Is the Wench mad? Why, how
now, Confidence? thinking still it had been
Nan. But he kissed me with frightful Vehemence; 
and then his Voice broke upon me like
a Clap of Thunder: Now, Pamela, said he,
is the dreadful Time of Reckoning come, that I
have threaten'd! —I scream'd out in such a manner,
as never any body heard the like. But there
was nobody to help me: And both my Hands
were secured, as I said. Sure never poor Soul
was in such Agonies as I. Wicked Man! said 

I; wicked, abominable Woman! O God! my
God! this Time, this one Time! deliver me
from this Distress! or strike me dead this Moment. 
And then I scream'd again and again. 
Says he, One Word with you, Pamela;
one Word, hear me but; and hitherto you see
I offer nothing to you. Is this nothing, said I,
to be in Bed here? To hold my Hands between
you? I will hear, if you will instantly leave the
Bed, and take this villainous Woman from me! 
Said she, (O Disgrace of Womankind!) 
What you do, Sir, do; don't stand dilly-dallying. 
She cannot exclaim worse than she has
done. And she'll be quieter when she knows
the worst. 
Silence! said he to her; I must say one
Word to you, Pamela; it is this: You see,
now you are in my Power! —You cannot
get from me, nor help yourself: Yet have I not
offer'd any thing amiss to you. But if you
resolve not to comply with my Proposals, I will
not lose this Opportunity: If you do, I will yet
leave you. 
O Sir, said I, leave me, leave me but, and
I will do any thing I ought to do. —Swear
then to me, said he, that you will accept my
Proposals!—and then (for this was all detestable
Grimace) he put his Hand in my Bosom. 
With Struggling, Fright, Terror, I fainted
away quite, and did not come to myself soon; 
so that they both, from the cold Sweats that I
was in, thought me dying—And I remember
no more, than that, when, with great Difficulty, 

they brought me to myself, she was sitting
on one side of the Bed, with her Cloaths
on; and he on the other with his, and in his
Gown and Slippers. 
Your poor Pamela cannot answer for the Liberties
taken with her in her deplorable State of
Death. And when I saw them there, I sat up in
my Bed, without any Regard to what Appearance
I made, and nothing about my Neck; and he
soothing me, with an Aspect of Pity and Concern,
I put my Hand to his Mouth, and said,
O tell me, yet tell me not, what I have suffer'd
in this Distress! And I talked quite wild,
and knew not what; for, to be sure, I was on
the Point of Distraction. 
He most solemnly, and with a bitter Imprecation,
vow'd, that he had not offer'd the least
Indecency; that he was frighten'd at the terrible
Manner I was taken with the Fit: That he
would desist from his Attempt; and begg'd but to
see me easy and quiet, and he would leave me
directly, and go to his own Bed. O then, said
I, take with you this most wicked Woman,
this vile Mrs. Jewkes, as an Earnest that I may
believe you! 
And will you, Sir, said the wicked Wretch,
for a Fit or two, give up such an Opportunity
as this? —I thought you had known the Sex
better. —She is now, you see, quite well again! 
This I heard; more she might say; but I
fainted away once more, at these Words, and
at his clasping his Arms about me again. And
when I came a little to myself, I saw him sit 

there, and the Maid Nan, holding a Smelling-bottle to my Nose, and no Mrs. Jewkes. 
He said, taking my Hand, Now will I vow
to you, my dear Pamela, that I will leave you
the Moment I see you better, and pacify'd. 
Here's Nan knows, and will tell you, my Concern
for you. I vow to God, I have not offered
any Indecency to you. And since I found
Mrs. Jewkes so offensive to you, I have sent
her to the Maid's Bed, and the Maid shall lie
with you To-night. And but promise me, that
you will compose yourself, and I will leave
you. But, said I, will not Nan also hold my
Hand? And will not she let you come in again
to me? —He said, By Heaven! I will not come
in again To-night, Nan, undress yourself, go
to-bed, and do all you can to comfort the dear
Creature: And now, Pamela, said he, give
me but your Hand, and say you forgive me, and I
will leave you to your Repose. I held out my
trembling Hand, which he vouchsafed to kiss; 
and I said, God forgive you, Sir, as you have
been just in my Distress; and as you will be just
to what you promise! And he withdrew, with
a Countenance of Remorse, as I hoped; and
she shut the Doors, and, at my Request, brought
the Keys to-bed. 
This, O my dear Parents! was a most dreadful
Trial. I tremble still to think of it; and dare
not recal all the horrid Circumstances of it. I
hope, as he assures me, he was not guilty of Indecency; 
but have Reason to bless God, who, 

by disabling me in my Faculties, impower'd me
to preserve my Innocence; and when all my
Strength would have signified nothing, magnified
himself in my Weakness. 
I was so weak all Day on Monday, that I
could not get out of my Bed. My Master shew'd
great Tenderness for me; and I hope he is really
sorry, and that this will be his last Attempt; but
he does not say so neither. 
He came in the Morning, as soon as he heard
the Door open: And I began to be fearful. He
stopp'd short of the Bed, and said, Rather than
give you Apprehensions, I will come no further. 
I said, Your Honour, Sir, and your Mercy, is
all I have to beg. —He sat himself on the Side
of the Bed, asked kindly, How I did?—begged
me to be compos'd; said, I still look'd a
little wildly. And I said, Pray, good Sir, let
me not see this infamous Mrs. Jewkes; I doubt
I cannot bear her Sight. She shan't come near
you all this Day, if you'll promise to compose
yourself. Then, Sir, I will try. He pressed
my Hand very tenderly, and went out. What
a Change does this shew! —O may it be lasting! 
—But, alas! he seems only to have alter'd
his Method of Proceeding; and retains, I
doubt, his wicked Purpose! 
On Tuesday about Ten o'Clock, when my
Master heard I was up, he sent for me down
into the Parlour. As soon as he saw me, he
said, Come nearer to me, Pamela. I did so, and
he took my Hand, and said, You begin to look 

well again: I am glad of it. You little Slut,
how did you frighten me on Sunday Night! 
–––Sir, said I, pray name not that Night; and my
Eyes overflow'd at the Remembrance, and I
turn'd my Head aside. 
Said he, Place some little Confidence in
me: I know what those charming Eyes mean,
and you shall not need to explain yourself: For
I do assure you, that as soon as I saw you change,
and a cold Sweat bedew your pretty Face,
and you fainted away, I quitted the Bed, and
Mrs. Jewkes did so too. And I put on my
Gown, and she fetch'd her Smelling-bottle, and
we both did all we could to restore you; and my
Passion for you was all swallow'd up in the Concern
I had for your Recovery; for I thought I never
saw a Fit so strong and violent in my Life; and
fear'd we should not bring you to yourself again; 
for what I saw you in once before, was nothing
to it. This, said he, might be my Folly, and
my Unacquaintedness with what Passion your
Sex can shew, when they are in Earnest. But
this I repeat to you, that your Mind may be
intirely comforted ––––––– Whatever I offer'd to
you was before you fainted away; and that, I
am sure, was innocent. 
Sir, said I, that was very bad: And it was
too plain, you had the worst Designs. When,
said he, I tell you the Truth in one Instance,
you may believe me in the other. I know not,
I declare, beyond this lovely Bosom, your Sex; 
but that I did intend what you call the worst, is
most certain: And tho' I would not too much 

alarm you now, I could curse my Weakness
and my Folly, which makes me own, that I love
you beyond all your Sex, and cannot live without
you. But, if I am Master of myself, and my own
Resolution, I will not attempt to force you to any
thing again. Sir, said I, you may easily keep
your Resolution, if you will send me out of your
way, to my poor Parents; that is all I beg. 
'Tis a Folly to talk of it, said he. You must
not, shall not go! And if I could be assur'd you
would not attempt it, you should have better
Usage, and your Confinement should be made
easier to you. But to what End, Sir, am I to stay?
said I: You yourself seem not sure you can keep
your own present good Resolutions; and do you
think, if I was to stay, when I could get away, and
be safe, it would not look, as if either I confided
too much in my own Strength, or would tempt
my Ruin? And as if I was not in Earnest to wish
myself safe, and out of Danger? —And then,
how long am I to stay? And to what Purpose? 
And in what Light must I appear to the World? 
Would not that censure me, altho' I might be
innocent? And you will allow, Sir, that if there
be any thing valuable or exemplary in a good
Name, or fair Reputation, one must not despise
the World's Censure, if one can avoid it. 
Well, said he, I sent not for you on this
Account, just now; but for Two Reasons: The
first is, that you promise me, that for a Fortnight
to come you will not offer to go away without
my express Consent; and this I expect for your
own sake, that I may give you a little more Liberty. 

And the second is, That you will see
and forgive Mrs. Jewkes: She takes on much,
and thinks, that, as all her Fault was her Obedience
to me, it would be very cruel to sacrifice
her, as she calls it, to your Resentment. 
As to the first, Sir, said I, it is a hard Injunction,
for the Reasons I have mentioned. 
And as to the second, considering her vile unwomanly
Wickedness, and her Endeavours to
instigate you more to ruin me, when your returning
Goodness seem'd to have some Compassion
upon me, it is still harder. But to shew my
Obedience to your Commands, (for you know,
my dear Parents, I might as well make a Merit of
my Compliance, when my Refusal would stand
me in no stead) I will consent to both; and to
every thing else, that you shall be pleased to injoin,
which I can do with Innocence. 
That's my good Girl! said he, and kiss'd
me. This is quite prudent, and shews me, that
you don't take insolent Advantage of my Favour
for you; and will, perhaps, stand you in
more stead than you are aware of. 
So he rung the Bell, and said, Call down
Mrs. Jewkes. She came down, and he took
my Hand, and put it into hers; and said, Mrs.
Jewkes, I am oblig'd to you for all your Diligence
and Fidelity to me; but Pamela, I must
own, is not; because the Service I employ'd
you in was not so very obliging to her, as I could
have wish'd she would have thought it; and you
were not to favour her, but obey me. But yet
I'll assure you, at the very first Word, she has 

once obliged me, by consenting to be Friends with
you; and if she gives me no great Cause, I shall
not, perhaps, put you on such disagreeable Service
again. —Now, therefore, be you once
more Bed-fellows and Board-fellows, as I may
say, for some Days longer; and see that Pamela
sends no Letters nor Messages out of the House,
nor keeps a Correspondence unknown to me,
especially with that Williams; and, as for the
rest, shew the dear Girl all the Respect that is
due to one I must love, if she will deserve it,
as I hope she will yet; and let her be under no
unnecessary or harsh Restraints. But your watchful
Care is not, however, to cease: And remember,
that you are not to disoblige me, to oblige
her; and that I will not, cannot, yet part with her. 
Mrs. Jewkes look'd very sullen, and as if
she would be glad still to do me a good Turn,
if it lay in her Power. 
I took Courage then to drop a Word or
two for poor Mr. Williams; but he was angry
with me for it, and said, he could not endure
to hear his Name in my Mouth; so I was forced
to have done for that time. 
All this time my Papers, that I had bury'd
under the Rose-bush, lay there still; and I
begg'd for Leave to send a Letter to you. So I
should, he said, if he might read it first. But
this did not answer my Design; and yet I would
have sent you such a Letter as he might see, if
I had been sure my Danger was over. But that
I cannot; for he now seems to take another
Method, and what I am more afraid of, because, 

may-be, he will watch an Opportunity,
and join Force with it, on Occasion, when I
am least prepar'd: For now he seems to abound
with Kindness, and talks of Love without Reserve,
and makes nothing of allowing himself
in the Liberty of kissing me, which he calls
innocent; but which I do not like, and especially
in the manner he does it: but for a Master
to do it at all to a Servant, has Meaning too
much in it, not to alarm an honest Body. 
