


Sir Charles Grandison, To Miss Jervois. 


Wedn. Nov. 1.
I Write to the dear child of my tenderest cares, because
she requests me to write: Else, I had hastened
to her in person, to comfort her doubting heart; 
and to assure her, that nothing but a fault premeditated,
and persisted in, that might have affected her
present or future reputation, and consequently her happiness,
could make me, for half an hour, offended
with her. Your good intentions, my dear child, will
ever be your security with me. Men, as well as
women, are often misled by their love of surprizes:
But the greatest surprize my Emily could give me,
would be, if she could do any one thing that would
shew a faulty heart. 
Once more, my dear, pay your duty to your mother
in the chariot which has been the causless occasion
of so much concern to you; and tell her, and
Mr. O-Hara, that they have greatly obliged me in
declining the acceptance of the chariot, so dutifully
presented, till they knew my mind: But that, not so
much in the compliment paid to me, as your guardian,
as because it has given me an opinion of their
own generosity and discretion. Tell them, that I
greatly approve of this instance of your duty to your
mother, and of your regard, for her sake, to Mr.
O-Hara: Tell them, that I join with my ever-amiable
ward in requesting their acceptance of it; and do you, 

my dear, tell Miss Jervois, that I greatly honour her
for this new instance of her goodness of heart. 
I inclose a note, and will, to make you easy, carry
it to its proper account, that will enable you to pay
the debt which you with so dutiful an intention have
contracted. —Forgive you, my dear! I love, I admire,
you for it. I will not have you stint yourself, as
you call it, in order to contribute to the future expence
of the chariot. The present is but a handsome
one, respecting your fortune. Be therefore, for your
mother's life, the whole expence yours; and it may
possibly contribute not a little to the ease of mind of
both (as they now live together not unhappily) if you
have the goodness to assure Mr. O-Hara, that you are
so well satisfied with his kind treatment of your mother,
that you will, on supposition of the continuance
of it, before you enter into engagements which may
Iimit your own power, or make your will dependent
on that of another person, secure a handsome provision
for him, for his life, in case he survive your mother. 
I thank you, my dearest ward, for the affection
you express for my beloved Miss Byron. She loves
you so tenderly, that it would have been a concern to
me, had she not engaged your love and confidence. 
You highly oblige me by promising to consult her on
all material occasions. The benefit you will receive
from her prudent advice and example, and the delight
she will receive from your company, will be a happiness
to all three. My Emily may depend upon everything
to make it completely so, that shall be in the
power of 
Her faithful Friend,
and humble Servant,
Charles Grandison. 

