


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Friday, Feb. 24. 
My cousin Reeves has given assurance to the sister
of that Wilson, that he may, unmolested by any
of us, pursue the best means he can fall upon for the
obtaining of an honest livelihood. 
In every-thing it is determined to follow the advice
of my deliverer. 
What a letter is that fellow's! What men are there
in the world! 
Of such we have read: But I hoped, that I might
have escaped suffering by any such. 
We are extremely disturbed at the fellow's post-script; 
and the more, as we are told by several people,
that Sir Hargrave will not sit down quietly; but
threatens vengeance upon Sir Charles. I wish I had
not come to London. 
I hope my grandmamma's spirits are not affected by
what she knows of the matter. It was very good of
my aunt Selby to take the measures she did, in softening
every circumstance, and not to let her know any-thing
till the danger was over. But indeed it was but
the natural effect of that prudence which regulates all
the actions of my honoured aunt. 
My grandmamma has such strength of mind, that
now she knows I am safe, and not unhappy, I dare
say she will by degrees bear to hear my narrations
read. She will be more uneasy if she thinks any-thing
is kept from her. 
Yet I know that her tenderness and her love for her
Harriet will cost her some anguish, some sighs; some
tears, as she reads, or hears read, the cruelty her
girl has been treated with: Who, so tenderly brought
up, so greatly indulg'd, never before knew what harshness 

was, and had only read of the words cruelty,
barbarity, and such-like words. But then she will
have more joy I hope, in my deliverance than she
will have pain in my sufferings. And pray let her
know, that I am every day less and less sensible of the
pain in my stomach, of which I was so apprehensive,
as really at the time to think it a mortal blow. My
grandmamma has told us girls, you know, my Lucy,
twenty and twenty frightful stories of the vile enterprizes
of men, against innocent creatures; and will
therefore call to mind stories which have concluded
much worse than, blessed be God, mine has done. 
* *
Just now I have received a congratulatory pacquet
of letters: 
One from my aunt Selby, such a sweetly kind,
such a truly maternal letter! 
One from my dearest grandmamma. I will put it
next my heart, whenever I feel there any of that pain,
of which she is so kindly apprehensive. 
One from Nancy—Dear girl! —She is very, very
generous to forget her own malady to condole and
congratulate me. Your brother James, my Lucy, has
written me a very kind letter. He is a very good
young man: God keep him so! What a mischievous
creature is a bad man! 
I have a charming letter, by the post, from my
godfather: He has heard nothing of what has happened; 
and I am sure is too sollicitous for my welfare,
to take it well, if I do not let him know something
about it: I will therefore soon write to him. 
But your letter, my Lucy! —What, I warrant,
you thought I had forgot your letter in the enumeration
of the contents of the precious pacquet! If I had,
your goodness, your love, might have made you forgive
me: But I never would have forgiven myself. 
But you and I, my dear, write for all to see what
we write: And so I reserved yours to be last-mention'd. 

Only I slid in my papa Deane's between; not because I
love him better than I do my Lucy—No, that is impossible! 
—But because I had a mind to shew you, that
I was hastening to be quite well, and so assumed my
little saucy tricks, and surprizes, as if it were possible
for me to be heedless, where my love to my Lucy was
in the question. 
And so you expect the particular character and description
of the persons of this more than amiable
brother and sister. Need you to have told me that
you do? And could you think that after having wasted
so many quires of paper in giving you the characters of
people, many of whom deserved not to be drawn out
from the common croud of mortals, I would forbear
to give you those of persons who adorn the age in
which they live, and even human nature? 
You don't question, you say, if I begin in their
praises, but my gratitude will make me write in a sublime
stile; so you phrase it; and are ready, you promise
me, to take with allowance, all the fine things
from me, which Mr. Reeves has already taught you
to expect. 
You may be right, in your expectations, as far as
I know; for my grandfather (so many years ago) used
to say, that his little Byron was an enthusiast in her
gratitude. But, however, when I say any-thing of the
exalted minds, of the expanded hearts, of the amiable
manners, of this happy brother and sister, which
seems to exceed, in my praises, the bounds you will all
be willing to set me, then let the overflowings be carried
to account of the grateful enthusiasm, and only
to that. 
Which shall I begin with? You will have a sharp
look-out upon me, you say: Ah, my Lucy! I know
what you mean. But I am safe from every-thing but
my gratitude, I will assure you. 
And so, if I begin with the character of the Brother,
then will you join with my uncle, shake your 

head, and cry, Ah! my Harriet! If I begin with the
sister, will you not say, that I save my choicest subject
for the last? How difficult is it to avoid censure,
when there is a resolution taken to be censorious! 
Well, but keep a look-out, if you please, my Lucy:
Not the least shadow of reserve shall it give to my
heart: My pen shall be honest to that heart; and I
shall be benefited, I am sure, by the faithful wounds
of such affectionate, and equally-beloved as revered
friends—And so, Pen, take thy course. 
Miss Grandison—Yes, my volant, my self-conducted
quill, begin with the Sister, say my Lucy what
she pleases— 
Miss Grandison is about twenty-four: Of a fine
stature: She has dignity in her aspect; and a very penetrating
black eye, with which she does what she
pleases: Her hair is black, very fine, and naturally
curls: She is not fair, but her complexion is delicate
and clear, and promises a long duration to her loveliness:
Her features are generally regular: Her nose
is a little aquiline; but that is so far from being a
blemish, that it gives a kind of majesty to her other
features: Her teeth are white and even: Her mouth
is perfectly lovely; and a modest archness appears in
her smiles, that makes one both love and fear her,
when she begins to speak: She is finely shaped; and,
in her air and whole appearance, perfectly genteel. 
She herself says, That before her brother came to
England, she was thought to be proud, pert, and
lofty: But I hardly believe her; for the man lives
not, it is my belief, who in fourteen months time
(and Sir Charles has not been longer arrived) could so
totally eradicate those qualities in a mind of which
they had taken possession, as that they should not occasionally
shew themselves. 
She has charming spirits. I dare say she sings well,
from the airs she now-and-then warbles in the gaiety
of her charming heart, as she goes up and down 

stairs: She is very polite; yet has a vein of raillery,
that were she not polite, would give one too much
apprehension for one's ease: But I am sure she is frank,
easy, and good-humoured: And, by turning over all
the just and handsome things which are attributed to
herself, to her brother's credit, she must be equally
humble and generous. 
She says, she has but lately taken a very great liking
to reading: But I am ready to question what she
says, when she speaks any-thing that some would construe
to her disadvantage. She pretends, that she was
too volatile, too gay, too airy, to be confined to sedentary
amusements. Her father, however, according
to the genteelest and most laudable modern education
for women, had given her a master, who taught
her History and Geography; in both which she acknowleges
she made some progress. In Music, she owns she
has skill: But I am told by her maid who attended
me by her young lady's direction, and who delights
to praise her mistress, that she reads and speaks French
and Italian; that she writes finely, and is greatly admired
for her wit, prudence, and obligingness. Nobody,
said Jenny (who is a sensible young woman, a
clergyman's daughter, well educated, and very obligeing)
can stand against her good-natured raillery: Her
brother, she says, is not spared: But he takes delight
in her vivacity, and gives way to it, when it is easy
to see, that he could take her down, if he pleased. 
And then, added this good young woman, she is an
excellent manager in a family, finely as she is educated
[I rejoiced to hear that, for the honour of our
reading ladies, as in Miss Clements's case]: She
knows every-thing, and how to direct what should be
done, from the private family-dinner, to a sumptuous
entertainment: And every day inspects, and approves,
or alters, the bill of fare: By the way, my Lucy, she
is an early riser—Do you mind that? And so can do
every-thing with ease, pleasure, and without hurry 

and confusion: For all her servants are early risers of
course. What servants can for shame be in bed, at a
reasonable hour to be up, when they have a master
or mistress's example for early rising? 
Yet this fine lady loves to go to the public places,
and often goes, and makes a brilliant figure there. She
has time for them, and earns her pleasures by her early
rising. 
Miss Grandison, Jenny tells me, has two humble
servants [I wonder she has not two-and-twenty]: One
is Sir Walter Watkyns, a man of a large estate in
Somersetshire; the other is Lord G. eldest son of the
Earl of G.; but neither of them highly approved by
her: Yet Jenny says, they are both of them handsome
men, and admired by the ladies: This makes me
afraid, that they are modern men; and pay their court
by the exterior appearance, rather than by interior
worth. Who, my Lucy, that has heard what my
late grandfather has said, and my grandmamma still
says, of the men in their youthful days, will not say,
that we have our lots cast in an age of Petits Maitres,
and Insignificants. 
Such an amiable woman is Miss Charlotte Grandison
—May I be found, on further acquaintance, but
half as lovely in her eyes, as she is mine! —Don't be
jealous, Lucy! I hope I have a large heart. I hope
there is room in it for half a dozen sweet female
friends! —Yes, altho' another love were to intervene. 
I could not bear, that even the affection due to the
man of my choice, were I to marry, should, like
Aaron's rod, swallow up all the rest. 
But now for her Brother—My deliverer!— 
But pray now, Lucy, don't you come with your
sharp look-out: I warrant you will expect on this occasion
to read the tumults of the poor girl's heart in
her character and description of a man, to whom she
is so much obliged! —But what if she disappoint you,
and yet do justice to his manifold excellencies? 

What if she find some faults in him, that his sister
has not? 
Parading Harriet, methinks you say! Teazing girl! 
Go on, go on, leave it to us to find you out: And
take care that the very faults you pretend to discover,
do not pass for a colour only, and lead to your detection. 
Thank you, Lucy, for your caution: But I will
not be obliged to it. My pen shall follow the dictates
of my heart; and if it be as honest to me, as I think
it is to every-body else, I hope I have nothing to fear
either from your look-out, or, which is still a sharper,
my uncle Selby's. 
Sir Charles Grandison, in his person, is really, a
very fine man. He is tall; rather slender than full:
His face in shape is a fine oval: He seems to have
florid health; health confirmed by exercise. 
His complexion seems to have been naturally too
fine for a man: But as if he were above being regardful
of it, his face is overspread with a manly sunniness
[I want a word] that shews he has been in warmer
climates than England: And so it seems he has; since
the Tour of Europe has not contented him. He has
visited some parts of Asia, and even of Afric, Egypt
particularly. 
I wonder what business a man has for such fine teeth,
and so fine a mouth, as Sir Charles Grandison might
boast of, were he vain. 
In his aspect there is something great and noble,
that shews him to be of rank. Were kings to be
chosen for beauty and majesty of person, Sir Charles
Grandison would have few competitors. His eye— 
Indeed, my Lucy, his eye shews, if possible, more
of sparkling intelligence than that of his sister— 
Now pray be quiet, my dear uncle Selby! What
is beauty in a man to me? You all know, that I
never thought beauty a qualification in a man. 
And yet, this grandeur in his person and air is accompanied 

with so much ease and freedom of manners,
as engages one's love with one's reverence. His
good breeding renders him very accessible. His sister
says, he is always the first to break thro' the restraints,
and to banish the diffidences, that will generally attend
persons on a quite new acquaintance. He may,
for he is sure of being acceptable in whatever he does
or says. 
Very true, Lucy: Shake your head if you please. 
In a word, he has such an easy, yet manly politeness,
as well in his dress, as in his address (no singularity
appearing in either) that were he not a fine figure
of a man, but were even plain and hard-featured, he
would be thought (what is far more eligible in a man,
than mere beauty) very agreeable. 
Sir Charles Grandison, my dear, has travelled we
may say, to some purpose. 
Well might his sister tell Mr. Reeves, that whenever
he married, he would break half a score hearts. 
Upon my word Lucy, he has too many personal
advantages for a woman who loved him with peculiarity,
to be easy with, whatever may be his virtue,
from the foible our sex in general love to indulge for
handsome men. For, O my dear, womens eyes are
sad giddy things; and will run away with their sense,
with their understandings, beyond the power of being
overtaken either by stop thief, or hue-and-cry. 
I know that here you will bid me take care not to
increase the number of the giddy. And so I will, my
Lucy. 
The good sense of this real fine gentleman is not,
as I can find, rusted over by sourness, by moroseness:
He is above quarreling with the world for trifles: But
he is still more above making such compliances with
it, as would impeach either his honour or conscience. 
Once Miss Grandison, speaking of her brother, said,
My brother is valued by those who know him best,
not so much for being an handsome man; not so 

much for his birth and fortune; nor for this or that
single worthiness; as for being, in the great and yet
comprehensive sense of the word, a good man. And
at another time she said, that he lived to himself, and
to his own heart; and that tho' he had the happiness
to please every-body, yet he made the judgment or
approbation of the world matter but of second consideration. 
In a word, added she, Sir Charles Grandison,
my Brother (and when she looks proud, it is
when she says, my Brother) is not to be misled either
by false glory, or false shame, which he calls, The
great snares of virtue. 
What a man is this, so to act! —What a woman
is this, so to distinguish her brother's excellencies! 
What a poor creature am I, compared to either of
them! And yet I have had my admirers. So perhaps
may still more faulty creatures among their inferiors. 
If, my Lucy, we have so much good sense as to make
fair comparisons, what have we to do but to look forward,
rather than backward, in order to obtain the
grace of humility? 
But let me tell you, my dear, that Sir Charles does
not look to be so great a self-denier, as his sister seems
to think him, when she says, he lives to himself, and
to his own heart, rather than to the opinion of the
world. 
He dresses to the fashion, rather richly, 'tis true,
than gaudily; but still richly: So that he gives his-fine
person its full consideration. He has a great deal of
vivacity in his whole aspect; as well as in his eye. 
Mrs. Jenny says, that he is a great admirer of handsome
women. His equipage is perfectly in taste, tho'
not so much to the glare of taste, as if he aimed either
to inspire or shew emulation. He seldom travels without
a set, and suitable attendants; and, what I think
seems a little to savour of singularity, his horses are
not docked: Their tails are only tied up when they
are on the road. This I took notice of when we came 

to town. I want, methinks, my dear, to find some
fault in his outward appearance, were it but to make
you think me impartial; my gratitude to him, and
my veneration for him, notwithstanding. 
But if he be of opinion that the tails of these noble
animals are not only a natural ornament, but are
of real use to defend them from the vexatious insects
that in summer are so apt to annoy them (as Jenny just
now told me was thought to be his reason for not depriving
his cattle of a defence, which nature gave them)
how far from a dispraise is this humane consideration! 
And how, in the more minute as well as we may suppose
in the greater instances, does he deserve the character
of the man of mercy, who will be merciful to
his beast! 
I have met with persons, who call those men good,
that yet allow themselves in liberties which no good
man can take. But I dare say, that Miss Grandison
means by good, when she calls her brother, with so
much pride, a good man, what I, and what you, my
Lucy, would understand by the word. 
With so much spirit, life, and gallantry in the first
appearance of Sir Charles Grandison, you may suppose,
that had I not been so dreadfully terrified and illused,
and so justly apprehensive of worse treatment; 
and had I been offered another protection; I should
hardly have acted the frighted bird flying from the
hawk, to which, as Mr. Reeves tells me, Sir Charles
(tho' politely, and kindly enough, yet too sensibly for
my recollection) compared me. 
Do you wonder, Lucy, that I cannot hold up my
head, when I recollect the figure I must make in
that odious Masquerade-habit hanging by my clasping
arms about the neck of such a young gentleman? 
Can I be more effectually humbled than by such a recollection? 
And yet is not this an instance of that
false shame in me, to which Sir Charles Grandison is
so greatly superior? 

Surely, surely, I have had my punishment for my
compliances with this foolish world. False glory, and
false shame, the poor Harriet has never been totally
above. Why was I so much indulged? Why was I
allowed to stop so many miles short of my journey's
end, and then complimented, as if I had no farther
to go? —But surely, I was past all shame, when I
gave my consent to make such an appearance as I
made, among a thousand strangers, at a Masquerade! 
But now, I think, something offers of blame in the
character of this almost faultless man, as his sister, and
her Jenny, represent him to be. 
I cannot think, from a hint given by Miss Grandison,
that he is quite so frank, and so unreserved, as
his sister is. Nay, it was more than an hint: I will
repeat her very words: She had been mentioning her
own openness of heart, and yet confessing that she
would have kept one or two things from him, that
affected him not. ‘But as for my brother, said she,
he winds one about, and about, yet seems not to
have more curiosity than one would wish him to
have. Led on by his smiling benignity, and fond of
his attention to my prattle, I have caught myself in
the midst of a tale of which I intended not to tell
him one syllable. 
‘O Sir Charles, where am I got? have I said; and
suddenly stopt. 
‘Proceed, my Charlotte! No reserves to your
nearest friend. 
‘Yet he has his, and I have winded and winded
about him, as he had done about me; but all to no
purpose. 
‘Nevertheless, he has found means, insensibly, to
set me on again with my own story, till I had told
him all I knew of the matter; and all the time I was
intending only that my frankness should be an example
to him; when he, instead of answering my
wishes, double-locked the door of his heart, and left 

not so much as the key-hole uncovered by which I
might have peeped into it; and this in one or two
points, that I thought it imported me to know. And
then have I been ready to scold.’ 
Now this reserve to such a sister, and in points that
she thinks it imports her to know, is what I do not
like in Sir Charles. A friend as well as a sister! ought
there to be a secret on one side, when there is none
on the other? Very likely, he would be as reserved to
a wife: And is not marriage the highest state of friendship
that mortals can know? And can friendship and
reserve be compatible? Surely, No. 
His sister, who cannot think he has one fault, excuses
him, and says, that her brother has no other view
in drawing her on to reveal her own heart, but the
better to know how to serve and oblige her. 
But then, might not the same thing be said in behalf
of the curiosity of so generous a sister? Or, is
Sir Charles so conscious of his own superiority, as to
think he can give advice to her, but wants not hers to
him? Or, thinks he meanly of our sex, and highly
of his own? Yet are there but two years difference
in their age: And from sixteen to twenty-four, I believe
women are generally more than two years afore-hand
with the men in ripeness of understanding; tho',
after that time, the men may ripen into a superiority. 
This observation is not my own; for I heard a very
wise man once say, That the intellects of women
usually ripen sooner than those of men; but that,
when ripened, those of men, like trees of slow growth,
generally hold longer, are capable of higher perfection,
and serve to nobler purposes. 
Sir Charles has seen more of the world, it may be
said, than his sister has. He has travelled. But is not
human nature the same in every country, allowing
only for different customs? —Do not love, hatred, anger,
malice, all the passions, in short, good or bad,
shew themselves by like effects in the faces, hearts, 

and actions of the people of every country? And let
men make ever such strong pretensions to knowlege,
for their far-fetch'd and dear-bought experience, cannot
a penetrating spirit learn as much from the passions
of a Sir Hargrave Pollexfen in England, as it could
from a man of the same or like ill qualities, in Spain,
in France, or in Italy? And why is the Grecian
Homer, to this day, so much admired, as he is in all
these nations, and in every other nation where he has
been read, and will be, to the world's end, but because
he writes to nature? And is not the language of nature
one language throughout the world, tho' there
are different modes of speech to express it by? 
But I shall go out of my depth. All I mean (and,
from the frankness of my own heart, you will expect
from me such a declaration) is, that I do not love that
a man so nearly perfect, be his motives what they
will, should have reserves to such a sister. Don't you
think, Lucy, that this seems to be a kind of fault in
Sir Charles Grandison? Don't you think, that it would
mingle some fear in a sister's love of him? And should
one's love of so amiable a brother be dashed or allayed
with fear? He is said to be a good man: And a good
man I dare say he is: What secrets can a good
man have, that such a sister, living with him in the
same house, and disdaining not, but, on the contrary,
priding herself in, the title of her brother's housekeeper,
should not be made acquainted with? Will a man so
generous look upon her as he would upon a mere
housekeeper? —Does not confidence engage confidence? 
—And are they not by nature, as well as inclination,
friends? 
But I fansy I am acting the world, in its malevolence,
as well as impertinence: That world, which
thinks itself affronted by great and superior merit; 
and takes delight to bring down exalted worth to its
own level. But, at least, you will collect from what
I have written, an instance of my impartiality; and 

see, that, tho' bound to Sir Charles by a tie of gratitude
which never can be dissolved, I cannot excuse
him, if he be guilty of a diffidence and reserve to his
generous sister, which she is above shewing to him. 
If I am allowed to be so happy, as to cultivate this
desirable acquaintance [And I hope it is not their way
to leave those whom they have relieved and raised, in
order to shine upon, and bless only new objects of compassion]
then will I closely watch every step of this
excellent man; in hope, however, to find him as perfect
as report declares him, that I may fearlesly make
him my theme, as I shall delight to make his sister my
example. And if I were to find any considerable faults
in him, never fear, my dear, but my gratitude will
enlarge my charity in his favour. But I shall, at the
same time, arm my heart with those remembred failings,
lest my gratitude should endanger it, and make
me an hopeless fool. 
Now, my uncle, do not be very hard on your niece. 
I am sure, very sure, that I am not in danger as yet:
And indeed I will tell you, by my Lucy, whenever I find
out that I am. Spare, therefore, my dear uncle Selby,
all your conjectural constructions. 
And indeed you should in pity spare me, my dear
Sir, at present; for my spirits are still weak: I have
not yet forgiven myself for the masquerade affair; 
especially since Mr. Reeves has hinted to me, that Sir
Charles Grandison (as he judges from what he dropt
about that foolish amusement) approves not of masquerades. 
And yet self-partiality has suggested
several strong pleas in my favour, indeed by way of
extenuation only. How my judge, Conscience, will
determine upon those pleas, when counsel has been
heard on both sides, I cannot say. Yet I think, that
an acquittal from this brother and sister, would go a
great way to make my conscience easy. 
I have not said one half of what I intended to say
of this extraordinary man. But having imagined, from 

the equal love I have to his admirable sister, that I had
found something to blame him for, my impartiality
has carried me out of my path; and I know not how
to recover it, without going a great way back. Let
therefore what I have further to say, mingle in with
my future narratives, as new occasions call it forth. 
But yet will I not suffer any other subject to interfere
with that which fills my heart with the praises,
the due praises of this worthy brother and sister; to
which I intended to consecrate this rambling and very
imperfect letter: And which here I will conclude, with
assurances (however needless I hope they are) of duty,
love, and gratitude, where so much due from 
Your Harriet Byron. 

