



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dearest Lady,
I must beg Pardon, for having been in this
great Town, more than a Week, and not
having found an Opportunity to tender my 

Devoirs to your Ladyship. You know, dear
Madam, what Hurries and Fatigues must attend
such a Journey, to one in my Way, and in an
intire new Settlement, in which an hundred
things must be done, and attended to, with a
Preference to other Occasions, however delightful. 
Yet, I must own, we found a stately, a
well-order'd, and a convenient House: But although
it is not far from the Fields, and has an
airy Opening to its back Part, and its Front to a
Square, as it is called, yet I am not reconciled
to it so intirely as to the beloved Mansion we left. 
My dear Mr. B. has been, and is busily imployed
in ordering some few Alterations, to make
Things still more commodious. He has furnished
me out a little pretty Library; and has
allotted me very convenient Apartments besides:
And the Furniture of every Place is rich, as
befits the Mind and Fortune of the generous
Owner. But I shall not offer at Particulars,
because we hope to have the Honour of a Visit
from my good Lord, and your Ladyship, before
the Winter Weather sets in, to make the Roads
too dirty and deep; but it is proper to mention,
that the House is so large, that we can make a
great Number of Beds, the more conveniently
to receive the Honours your Ladyship, and my
Lord, and Mr. B.'s other Friends, will do us. 
I have not yet been at any of the publick
Diversions. Mr. B. has carry'd me, by gentle
Turns, out of his Workmens Way, Ten Miles
round this over-grown Capital, and through the
principal of its numerous Streets. The Villages, 

that lie spangled about this vast Circumference,
as well on the other Side the noble Thames,
(of which I had before a Notion from Sir John
Denham's celebrated Cooper's Hill) as on the
Middlesex Side, are beautiful, both by Buildings
and Situation, beyond what I had imagined; and
several of them seem larger than many of our
Country Towns of Note. But it would be impertinent
to trouble your Ladyship with these
Matters, who are no Stranger to what is worthy
of Notice in London. But I was surpris'd, when
Mr. B. observed to me, that this whole County,
and the Two Cities of London and Westminster,
are represented by no more than Eight Members
of Parliament, when so many Borough Towns
in England are inferior to the meanest Villages
about London. 
I am in daily Expectation of the Arrival
of Miss Darnford, and then I shall wish (accompanied
by a young Lady of so polite a Taste)
to see a good Play. Mr. B. has already shewn
me the Opera-house, and the Two Play-houses,
tho' silent, as I may say; that, as he was pleased
to observe, they should not be new to me, and
that the Sight might not take off my Attention
to the Performance, when I went to the Play:
So that I can conceive a tolerable Notion of every
thing, from the Disposition of the Seats, the
Boxes, the Galleries, the Pit, the Musick, the
Scenes, and the Stage; and so shall have no
Occasion to gaze about me like a Country Novice; 
whereby I might attract a Notice, that I 

should not wish, either for my own Credit, or
your dear Brother's Honour. 
I have had a Pleasure, which I had not in
Bedfordshire; and that is, that on Sunday I was
at Church, without gaping Crouds to attend us,
and Blessings too loud for my Wishes. Yet, I
was more gazed at, (and so was Mr. B.) than I
expected, considering there were so many well-dress'd
Gentry, and some Nobility there; and
they stared as much as any body; but will not
do so, I hope, when we cease to be a Novelty. 
We have already had several Visitors to welcome
Mr. B. to Town, and to congratulate him
on his Marriage;—but some, no doubt, to
see, and to find Fault with, his Rustick; for it
is impossible, you know, Madam, that a Gentleman
so distinguished by his Merit and Fortune,
should have taken a Step of such Consequence to
himself and Family, and not be known by every
body so to have done. 
Sir Thomas Atkyns is in Town, and has taken
Apartments in the new-built stately Pile of Edifices,
called Hanover-square; and he brought
with him a younger Brother of Mr. Arthur,
who, it seems, is a Merchant. 
Lord F. has been to pay his Respects to
Mr. B. likewise, whose School-fellow he was
at Eton, the little time Mr. B. was there. His
Lordship promises, that his Lady shall make me
a Visit, and accompany me to the Opera, as
soon as we are fully settled. 
A Gentleman of the Temple, Mr. Turner
by Name, and Mr. Fanshaw, of Greys-Inn, 

both Lawyers, and of Mr. B.'s former Acquaintance,
very sprightly and modish Gentlemen,
have also welcomed us to Town, and made
Mr. B. abundance of gay Compliments on my
account, to my Face, all in the common frothy
Run. 
They may be polite Gentlemen; but I can't
say I over-much like them. There is something
so forward, so opinionated, so seemingly insensible
of Rebuke, either from within or without,
and yet not promising to avoid deserving one
occasionally, that I could as lieve wish, Mr. B.
and they would not renew their former Acquaintance. 
I am very bold, your Ladyship will say— 
But you command me to write freely: Yet I
would not be thought to be uneasy, with regard
to your dear Brother's Morals, from these
Gentlemen; for, O Madam, I am a blessed
Creature, and am hourly happier and happier
in the Confidence I have as to that Particular:
But I imagine they will force themselves upon
him, more than he himself may wish, or would
permit, were the Acquaintance now to begin; 
for they are not of his Turn of Mind, as it
seems to me; being, by a Sentence or two that
dropp'd from them, very free, and very frothy,
in their Conversation; and by their laughing at
what they say themselves, taking that for Wit,
which will not stand the Test, if I may be
allowed to say so. 
But they have heard, no doubt, what a
Person Mr. B.'s Goodness to me, has lifted into 

Notice; and they think themselyes warranted
to say any thing before his Country Girl. 
He was pleased to ask me, when they were
gone, How I liked his Two Lawyers? And said,
They were Persons of Family and Fortune. 
I am glad of it, Sir, said I, for their own
sakes. 
Then you don't approve of them, Pamela? 
They are your Friends, Sir; and I cannot
have any Dislike to them. 
They say good Things sometimes, returned
he. 
I don't doubt it, Sir: But you say good
Things always. 
'Tis happy for me, my Dear; you think so. 
But tell me, What think you of 'em? 
I shall be better able, Sir, to answer your
Question, if I see them a second time. 
But we form Notions of Persons, at first
Sight, sometimes, my Dear; and you are seldom
mistaken in yours. 
I only think, Sir, that they have neither of
them any Diffidence: But their Profession, perhaps,
may set them above that. 
They don't practise, my Dear; their Fortunes
enable them to live without it; and they
are too studious of their Pleasures, to give
themselves any Trouble they are not obliged to
take. 
They seem to me, Sir, to be qualified for
Practice: They would make great Figures at
the Bar, I fansy. 
Why so: 

Only, because they seem prepared to think
well of what they shall say themselves; and
lightly of what other People say, or may think
of them. 
That indeed, my Dear, is the necessary
Qualification of a publick Speaker, be he Lawyer,
or what he will: The Man who cannot
doubt himself, and can think meanly of his
Auditors, never fails to speak with Self-applause
at least. 
But you'll pardon me, good Sir, for speaking
my Mind so freely, and so early, of there
your Friends. 
I never, my Love, ask you a Question,
I wish you not to answer; and always expect
your Answer should be without Reserve; for
many times I may ask your Opinion, as a
Corrective or a Confirmation of my own Judgment. 
How kind, how indulgent was this, my
good Lady? But you know how generously your
dear Brother treats me, on all Occasions; and
this makes me so bold as I often am. 
It may be necessary, my dear Lady, to give
you an Account of our Visitors, in order to
make the future Parts of my Writing the more
intelligible; because what I may have to write,
may turn sometimes upon the Company we see:
For which Reason, I shall also just mention Sir
George Stuart, a Scotish Gentleman, with whom
Mr. B. came acquainted in his Travels, who
seems to be a polite, and (Mr. B. says, is) a
learned Man, and a Virtuoso: He, and a Nephew 

of his, of the same Name, a bashful
Gentleman, and who, for that Reason, I imagine,
has a Merit that lies deeper than a first
Observation can reach, are just gone from us, and
were received with so much Civility by Mr. B.
as intitles them to my respectful Regard. 
Thus, Madam, do I run on, in a manner,
without Materials; and only to shew you the
Pleasure I take in obeying you. I hope my
good Lord Davers enjoys his Health, and continues
me in his Favour; which I value extremely,
as well as your Ladyship's. Mr. H. I hope,
like wise enjoys his Health. But let me not forget
my particular and thankful Respects to the
Countess, for her Ladyship's Favour and Goodness
to me, which I shall ever place next, in
my grateful Esteem, to the Honours I have received
from your Ladyship on so many Occasions; 
and which bind me to be, with the greatest Respect, my dear Lady, 
Your faithful and obliged Servant,
P. B. 

