



Miss Ar. Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers of Saturday, July 29. p. 316.] 

Thursday morn. Aug. 3. 
Sister Clary,
I wish you would not trouble me with any more of your
letters. You had always a knack at writing; and depended
upon making every one do what you would, when
you wrote. But your wit and your folly have undone you. 
And now, as all naughty creatures do, when they can't
help themselves, you come begging and praying, and
make others as uneasy as yourself. 
When I wrote last to you, I expected that I should not
be at rest. 
And so you'd creep on, by little and little, till you'll
want to be received again. 
But you only hope for forgiveness, and a blessing, you 

say. A blessing for what, sister Clary? Think for what? 
—However, I read your letter to my father and mother. 
I won't tell you what my papa said—One who has the
true sense you boast to have of your misdeeds, may guess,
without my telling you, what a justly incensed father would
say on such an occasion. 
My poor mamma—O wretch! What has not your ingrateful
folly cost my poor mamma! —Had you been less
a darling, you would not, perhaps, have been so graceless: 
But I never in my life saw a cocker'd favourite come to
good. 
My heart is full, and I can't help writing my mind; 
for your crimes have disgraced us all; and I am afraid,
and ashamed, to go to any public or private assemblée or
diversion: And why? —I need not say why, when your
actions are the subjects, either of the open talk, or of the
affronting whispers, of both sexes, at all such places. 
Upon the whole, I am sorry I have no more comfort to
send you: But I find no-body willing to forgive you. I
don't know what time may do for you; and when it is
seen, that your penitence is not owing more to disappointment
than true conviction: For it is too probable, Miss
Clary, that, had you gone on as swimmingly as you expected,
and had not your feather-headed villain abandoned
you, we should have heard nothing of these moving supplications: 
Nor of any-thing, but defiances from him, and
a guilt gloried in from you. And this is every-one's opinion,
as well as that of 
You grieved Sister,
Arabella Harlowe. 
I send this by a particular hand, who undertakes to give
it you, or leave it for you, by to-morrow night. 