



Mr. Belford, To William Morden, Esq; 

Saturday, Sept. 16. 
Dear Sir,
I once had thoughts to go down privately, in order,
disguised, to see the last solemnity performed. But
there was no need to give myself this melancholy trouble,
since your last Letter so naturally describes all that
passed, that I have every scene before my eyes. 
You croud me, Sir, methinks, into the silent slow
procession—Now with the sacred Bier do I enter the
awful Porch: Now measure I, with solemn paces, the
venerable Eyle: Now, ambitious of a relationship to
her, placed in a near pew to the eye-attracting coffin,
do I listen to the moving Eulogy: Now, thro' the
buz of gaping, eye-swoln crouds, do I descend into
the clammy vault, as a true Executor, to see that part
of her Will performed with my own eyes. There,
with a soul filled with musing, do I number the surrounding
monuments of mortality, and contemplate the
present stillness of so many once busy vanities, crouded
all into one poor vaulted nook, as if the living grudged
room for the corpse of those, for which, when animated,
the earth, the air, and the waters, could hardly
find room. Then seeing her placed at the feet of him
whose earthly delight she was; and who, as I find,
ascribes to the pleasure she gave him, the prolongation
of his own life (a) ; sighing, and with averted face, 

I quit the solemn mansion, the symbolic coffin, and,
for ever, the glory of her Sex; and ascend with those,
who, in a few years, after a very short blaze of life,
will fill up other spaces of the same vault, which now
(while they mourn only for her, whom they jointly
persecuted) they press with their feet. 
Nor do your affecting descriptions permit me here
to stop: But, ascended, I mingle my tears and my
praises with those of the numerous spectators. I accompany
the afflicted mourners back to their uncomfortable
mansion; and make one in the general concert of
unavailing woe; till retiring, as I imagine, as they
retire, like them, in reality, I give up to new scenes
of solitary and sleepless grief; reflecting upon the perfections
I have seen the end of; and having no relief
but from an indignation, which makes me approve of
the resentments of others against the unhappy man, and
those equally unhappy relations of hers, to whom the
irreparable loss is owing. 
Forgive me, Sir, these reflections; and permit me,
with This, to send you what you declined receiving
till the Funeral was over— 
He gives him then an account of the money and effects
which he sends him down by this opportunity, for
the Legatees at Harlowe-Place, and in its neighbourhood; 
which he desires him to dispose of according
to the Will. 
He also sends him an account of other steps he has taken
in pursuance of the Will; and desires to know, if
Mr. Harlowe expects the discharge of the funeral
expences from the effects in his hands; and the
reimbursement of the sums advanced to the Testatrix
since her Grandfather's death. 
These expeditious proceedings, says he, will convince
Mr. James Harlowe, that I am resolved to see
the Will completely executed; and yet, by my manner
of doing it, that I desire not to give unnecessary 

mortifications to the family, since everything that relates
to them shall pass thro' your hands. 