


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Now, Charlotte, said he (as if he had fully answered
the questions put to him—O these
men!) let me ask you a question or two—I had a visit
made me yesterday, by Lord G. What, my dear, do
you intend to do, with regard to him? —But, perhaps,
you would choose to withdraw with me, on this
question. 
Miss Gr. I wish I had made to you the same
overture of withdrawing, Sir Charles, on the questions
I put to you; I should have had more satisfaction given
me, I fansy, than I can now boast of, if I had. 
Sir Ch. I will withdraw with you, if you please,
and hear any other questions you have to put to me. 
Miss Gr. You can put no questions to me, Sir,
that I shall have any objection to answer before this
company. 
Sir Ch. You know my question, Charlotte. 
Miss Gr. What would you advise me to do in that
affair, brother? 
Sir Ch. I have only one piece of advice to give
you:—It is, That you will either encourage or discourage
his address, if you know your own mind. 
Miss Gr. I believe, brother, you want to get rid
of me. 
Sir Ch. Then you intend to encourage Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. Does that follow, Sir? 
Sir Ch. Or you could not have supposed, that I
wanted to part with you. But, come Charlotte, let
us retire. It is very difficult to get a direct answer to
such questions as these, from Ladies, before company,
tho' the company be ever so nearly related to them. 
Miss Gr. I can answer, before this company, any
questions that relate to Lord G. 

Sir Ch. Then you don't intend to encourage him? 
Miss Gr. I don't see how that follows, neither,
from what I said. 
Sir Ch. It does, very clearly. I am not an absolute
stranger to the language of women, Charlotte. 
Miss Gr. I thought my brother too polite to reflect
upon the sex. 
Sir Ch. Is it to reflect upon the sex, to say, that I
am not an absolute stranger to their language? 
Miss Gr. I protest, I think so, in the way you
spoke it. 
Sir Ch. Well, then, try if you cannot find a language
to speak in, that may not be capable of such an
interpretation. 
Miss Gr. I am afraid you are displeased with me,
brother. I will answer more directly. 
Sir Ch. Do, my Charlotte: I have promised Lord
G. to procure him an answer— 
Miss Gr. Is the question he puts, Sir, a brief one— 
On, or off? 
Sir Ch. Trust me, Charlotte: You may, even
with your punctilio. 
Miss Gr. Will you not advise me, Sir? 
Sir Ch. I will—To pursue your inclination. 
Miss Gr. Suppose, if I knew yours, that that would
turn the scale? 
Sir Ch. Is the balance even? 
Miss Gr. I can't say that, neither. 
Sir Ch. Then dismiss my Lord G. 
Miss Gr. Indeed, brother, you are angry with me. 
Sir Ch. (addressing himself to me) I am sure, Miss
Byron, that I shall find, in such points as this, a very
different sister in you, when I come to be favoured
with the perusal of your Letters. Your cousin
Reeves once said, That when you knew your own
mind, you never kept any one in suspense. 
Miss Gr. But I can't say that I know my mind,
absolutely. 

Sir Ch. That is another thing. I am silent. Only
when you do, I shall take it for a favour, if you will
communicate it to me for your service. 
Miss Gr. I am among my best friends—Lord L.
what is your advice! Sir Charles does not incline to
give me his. 
Sir Ch. It is owing to my regard to your own inclinations,
and not to displeasure or petulance, that I
do not. 
Lord L. I have a very good opinion of Lord G. 
What is yours, my dear? to Lady L. 
Lady L. I really think very well of my Lord G. 
What is yours, Miss Byron? 
Harriet. I believe Miss Grandison must be the
sole determiner, on this occasion. If she has no objection,
I presume to think, that no one else can have
any. 
Miss Gr. Explain, explain, Harriet— 
Sir Ch. Miss Byron answers as she always does:
Penetration and prudence, with her, never quit company. 
If I have the honour to explain her sentiments
in giving mine, take both as follow: My Lord G. is a
good-natured, mild man: He will make a woman
happy, who has some share of prudence, tho' she has
a still greater share of will. Charlotte is very lively:
She loves her jest almost as well as she loves her
friend— 
Miss Gr. How, brother! 
Sir Ch. And Lord G. will not stand in competition
with her, in that respect: There should not be a rivalry
in particular qualities, in marriage. I have
known a poet commence an hatred to his wife, on
her being complimented with making better verses than
he. Let Charlotte agree upon those qualities in which
she will allow her husband to excel; and he allow, in
her, those she has a desire to monopolize; and all
may do well. 
Miss Gr. Then Lord G. must not be disputed 

with, I presume, were I to be his wife, on the subject
of moths and butterflies. 
Sir Ch. Yet Lord G. may give them up, when he
has a more considerable trifle to amuse himself with. 
Pardon me, Charlotte—Are you not, as far as we
have gone in this conversation, a pretty trifler? 
Miss Gr. (bowing) Thank you, brother. The
epithets pretty, and young, and little, are great qualifiers
of harsh words. 
Sir Ch. But do you like Sir Walter Watkyns better
than Lord G.? 
Miss Gr. I think not. He is not, I believe, so
good-natured a man as the other. 
Sir Ch. I am glad you make that distinction,
Charlotte. 
Miss Gr. You think it a necessary one in my case,
I suppose, Sir? 
Sir Ch. I have a Letter of his to answer. He is
very urgent with me for my interest with you. I am
to answer it. Will you tell me, my sister (giving her
the Letter), what I shall say? 
Miss Gr. (after perusing it) Why, ay, poor man!
he is very much in love: But I should have some
trouble to teach him to spell. And yet, they say, he
has both French and Italian at his fingers ends. 
She then began to pull in pieces the Letter. 
Sir Ch. I will not permit that, Charlotte. Pray
return me the Letter. No woman is intitled to ridicule
a Lover whom she does not intend to encourage. 
If she has a good opinion of herself, she will pity him. 
Whether she has or not, if she wounds, she should
heal. Sir Walter may address himself to an hundred
women, who, for the sake of his gay appearance and
good estate, will forgive him his indifferent spelling. 
Miss Gr. The fluttering season is approaching. 
One wants now-and-then a dangling fellow or two
after one in public: Perhaps I have not seen enough
of either of these to determine which to choose. Will 

you not allow one, since neither of them have very
striking merits, to behold them in different lights, in
order to enable one's self to judge which is the most
tolerable of the two? Or, whether a still more tolerable
wretch may not offer? 
She spoke this in her very archest manner, serious
as the subject was; and seriously as her brother wished
to know her inclinations. 
Sir Charles turned to Lord L. and gravely said, I
wonder how our cousin Everard is amusing himself, at
this instant, at the Hall. 
She was sensible of the intended rebuke, and asked
him to forgive her. 
Wit, my Lord, continued he, inattentive to the pardon
she asked, is a dangerous weapon: But that species
of it which cannot shine without a foil, is not a
wit to be proud of. The Lady before me (what is her
name?) and I, have been both under a mistake: I
took her for my sister Charlotte: She took me for
our cousin Everard. 
Every one felt the severity. It seemed to pierce me,
as if directed to me. So unusually severe from Sir
Charles Grandison; and delivered with such serious
unconcern in the manner; I would not, at that moment,
have been Miss Grandison for the world. 
She did not know which way to look. Lady L.
(amiable woman!) felt it for her sister: Tears were
in the eyes of both. 
At last, Miss Grandison arose. I will take away
the impostor, Sir; and when I can rectify my mistake,
and bring you back your sister, I hope you will receive
her with your usual goodness. 
My Charlotte! my Sister! (taking her hand) you
must not be very angry with me. I love to feel the
finer edge of your wit: But when I was bespeaking
your attention upon a very serious subject; a subject
that concerned the happiness of your future life, and,
if yours, mine; and you could be able to say something 

that became only the mouth of an unprincipled
woman to say; how could I forbear to wish that some
other woman, and not my sister, had said it? —Times
and occasions, my dear Charlotte! 
No more, I beseech you, Sir: I am sensible of my
folly. Let me retire. 
I, Charlotte, will retire; don't you; but take the
comfort your friends are disposed to give you. Emily,
one word with you, my dear. She flew to him, and
they went out together. 
There, said Miss Grandison, has he taken the girl
with him, to warn her against falling into my folly. 
Dr. Bartlett retired in silence. 
Lady L. expressed her concern for her sister; but
said, Indeed, Charlotte, I was afraid you would carry
the matter too far. 
Lord L. blamed her. Indeed, sister, he bore with
you a great while; and the affair was a serious one. 
He had engaged very seriously, and even from principle,
in it. O Miss Byron! he will be delighted with
you, when he comes to read your papers, and sees
your treatment of the humble servants you resolved
not to encourage. 
Yes, yes, Harriet will shine, at my expence; but
may she! —Since I have lost my brother's favour, I
pray to heaven, that she may gain it: But he shall
never again have reason to say, I take him for my
cousin Everard. But was I very wicked, Harriet! — 
Deal fairly with me: Was I very wicked? 
I thought you wrong all the way: I was afraid for
you. But for what you last said, about encouraging
men to dangle after you, and seeming to aim at making
new conquests, I could have chidden you, had you
not had your brother to hear it. Will you forgive
me? (whispering her) They were the words of a very
coquet, and the air was so arch! —Indeed, my Charlotte,
you were very much out of the way. 
So! Every-body against me! —I must have been
wrong, indeed— 

The time, the occasion, was wrong, sister Charlotte,
said Lord L. Had the subject been of less weight,
your brother would have passed it off as pleasantly as
he has always before done your vivacities. 
Very happy, replied she, to have such a character,
that every-body must be in fault who differs from him,
or offends him. 
In the midst of his displeasure, Charlotte, said Lady
L. he forgot not the brother. The subject, he told
you, concerned the happiness of your future life; and,
if yours, his. 
One remark, resumed Lord L. I must make, to
Sir Charles's honour (take it not amiss, sister Charlotte):
Not the least hint did he give of your error
relating to a certain affair; and yet he must think of
it, so lately as he has extricated you from it. His aim,
evidently, is, to amend, not to wound. 
I think, my Lord, retorted Miss Grandison, with a
glow in her cheeks, you might have spared your remark. 
If the one brother did not recriminate, the
other needed not to remind. My Lord, you have not
my thanks for your remark. 
This affected good Lady L. Pray, sister, blame
not my Lord: You will lose my pity, if you do. 
Are not we four united in one cause? Surely, Charlotte,
we are to speak our whole hearts to each other! 
So! I have brought man and wife upon me now. 
Please the Lord I will be married, in hopes to have
somebody on my side. But, Harriet, say, Am I wrong
again? 
I hope, my dear Miss. Grandison, replied I, that
what you said to my Lord, was in pleasantry: And,
if so, the fault was, that you spoke it with too grave
an air. 
Well, well, let me take hold of your hand, my
dear, to help me out of this new difficulty. I am
dreadfully out of luck to-day. I am sorry I spoke not
my pleasantry with a pleasant air—Yet were not you 

likewise guilty of the same fault, Lady L.? Did not
you correct me with too grave an air? 
I am very willing, returned Lady L. it should pass
so: But, my dear, you must not, by your petulance,
rob yourself of the sincerity of one of the best hearts
in the world; looking with complacency at her Lord. 
He bowed to her with an affectionate air. —Happy
couple! 
As I hope to live, said Miss Grandison, I thought
you all pitied me, when Sir Charles laid so heavy an
hand upon me: And so he seemed to think, by what
he said at going out. How did you deceive me, all of
you, by your eyes! 
I do assure you, said my Lord, I did pity you: But
had I not thought my sister in fault, I should not. 
Your servant, my Lord. You are a nice distinguisher. 
And a just one, Charlotte, rejoined Lady L. 
No doubt of it, Lady L. and that was your motive
too. I beseech you, let me not be deprived of your
pity. I have yours also, Harriet, upon the same kind
consideration. 
Why now this archness becomes you, Charlotte,
said I [I was willing it should pass so, Lucy]: This
is pretty pleasantry. 
It is a pretty specimen of Charlotte's penitence, said
Lady L. 
I was glad Lady L. spoke this with an air of good
humour; but Miss Grandison withdrew upon it, not
well pleased. 
We heard her at her harpsichord, and we all joined
her. Emily also was drawn to us, by the music. Tell
me, my dear, said Miss Grandison to her (stopping),
Have you not had all my faults laid before you, for
your caution? 
Indeed, madam, my guardian said but one word
about you; and this was it: I love my sister: She
has amiable qualities: We are none of us right at all 

times. You see, Emily, that I, in chiding her, spoke
with a little too much petulance. 
God for ever bless my brother! said Miss Grandison,
in a kind of rapture: But now his goodness makes my
flippancy odious to myself—Sit down, my child, and
play your Italian air. 
This brought in Sir Charles. He entered with a
look of serenity, as if nothing had passed to disturb
him. 
When Emily had done playing, and singing, Miss
Grandison began to make apologies: But he said, Let
us forget each other's failings, Charlotte. 
Notice being given of dinner, Lord L. took my
hand, and Sir Charles complaisantly led his sister Charlotte
to her seat at the table; Lady L. being gone into
the dining parlour before. 
A most intolerable superiority! —I wish he would do
something wrong; something cruel: If he would but
bear malice, would but stiffen his air by resentment,
it would be something. As a Man, cannot he be
lordly, and assuming, and where he is so much regarded,
I may say feared, nod his imperial significance
to his vassals about him? —Cannot he be imperious to
servants, to shew his displeasure with principals? — 
No! it is natural to him to be good and just. His
whole aim, as my Lord observed, is, “to convince
and amend; and not to wound or hurt.” 
After dinner, Miss Grandison put into my hands
the parcel of my Letters which I had consented Sir
Charles should see. Miss Byron, Sir, said she, will
oblige you with the perusal of some of her Letters. 
You will in them see another sort of woman than
your Charlotte. May I amend, and be but half as
good! —When you have read them, you will say,
Amen; and, if your prayer take place, will be satisfied
with your sister. 
He received them from me, standing up, bowing,
and kissed the papers, with an air of gallantry that I 

thought greatly became him. [O the vanity of the
girl! methinks my uncle says, at this place.] He put
them in his pocket. 
Without conditions, Harriet? said Miss Grandison. 
Except those of candor, yet correction, answered I. 
Again he bowed to me. 
I don't know what to say to it, Lucy; but I think
Sir Charles looks highly pleased to hear me praised; 
and the Ladies and my Lord miss no opportunity to
say kind things of me. But could he not have answered
Miss Grandison's question, Whether his favourite
was a foreigner, or not? —Had any other
question arisen afterwards, that he had not cared to
answer, he could but have declined answering it, as he
did that. 
What a great deal of writing does the reciting of
half an hour or an hour's conversation make, when
there are three or four speakers in company; and one
attempts to write what each says in the first person! 
I am amazed at the quantity, on looking back. But
it will be so in narrative Letter-writing. Did not
you, Lucy, write as long Letters, when you went
with your brother to Paris? —I forget. Only this I
remember, that I always was sorry when I came to
the end of them. I am afraid it is quite otherwise
with mine. 
By the way, I am concerned that Lady D. is angry
with me: Yet, methinks, she shews, by her anger,
that she had a value for me. As to what you tell me,
of Lord D.'s setting his heart on the proposed alliance; 
I am not so much concerned at that, because
he never saw me: And had the affair been in his own
power, 'tis likely he would not have been very solicitous
about his success. Many a one, Lucy, I believe,
has found an ardor, when repulsed, which they
would never have known, had they succeeded. 
Lady Betty, and Miss Clements, were so good as to
make me a visit, this afternoon, in their way to 

Windsor, where they are to pass two or three days. 
They lamented my long absence from town; and
Lady Betty kindly regretted for me, the many fine
entertainments I had lost, both public and private, by
my country excursion at this unpropitious season of
the year, as she called it, shrugging her shoulders, as
if in compassion for my rustic taste. 
Good Lady! she knew not that I am in company
that want not entertainments out of themselves. They
have no time to kill, or to delude: On the contrary,
our constant complaint is, that time flies too fast:
And I am sure, for my part, I am forced to be a
manager of it; since, between conversation and
writing, I have not a moment to spare: And I never
in my life devoted so few hours to rest. 
I have often wished for Miss Clements to be with
us; and so I told her: Sir Charles spoke very handsomely
of her, on occasion of Miss Grandison's saying,
She was a plain, but good young woman. She
is not a beauty, said he; but she has qualities that are
more to be admired than mere beauty. 
Would she not, asked Lady L. make a good wife
for Lord W.? There is, said Sir Charles, too great
a disparity in years. She has, and must have, too
many hopes. My Lord W.'s wife will, probably, be
confined six months, out of twelve, to a gouty man's
chamber. She must therefore be one who has outlived
half her hopes: She must have been acquainted with
affliction, and known disappointment. She must consider
her marriage with him, tho' as an act of condescension,
yet partly as a preferment. Her tenderness
will, by this means, be engaged; yet her dignity
supported: And if she is not too much in years to
bring my Lord an heir, he will then be the most
grateful of men to her. 
My dear Brother, said Miss Grandison, forgive me
all my faults: Your actions, your sentiments, shall 

be the rule of mine! —But who can come up to you? 
The Danby's—Lord W.— 
Any-body may, Charlotte, interrupted Sir Charles,
who will be guided by the well-known rule of Doing
to others, as you would they should do unto you. Were
you in the situation of the Danby's, of Lord W.
would you not wish to be done by, as I have done,
and intend to do, by them? What must be those who,
with hungry eyes, wait and wish for the death of a
relation? May they not be compared to savages on
the sea-shore, who look out impatiently for a wreck,
in order to plunder and prey upon the spoils of the
miserable? Lord W. has been long an unhappy man
from want of principles: I shall rejoice, if I can be a
means of convincing him, by his own experience,
that he was in a wrong course, and of making his latter
days happy. Would I not, in my decline, wish
for a nephew that had the same notions? And can I
expect such an one, if I set not the example? 
Pretty soon after supper, Sir Charles left us; and
Miss Grandison, seeing me in a resverie, said, I will
lay my life, Harriet, you fansy my brother is gone up
to read your Letters—Nay, you are in the right; for
he whispered as much to me, before he withdrew. 
But do not be apprehensive, Harriet (for she saw me
concerned); you have nothing to fear, I am sure. 
Lady L. said, That her brother's notions and mine
were exactly alike, on every subject: But yet, Lucy,
when one knows one's cause to be under actual examination,
one cannot but have some heart-akes. —Yet
why? —If his favourite woman is a foreigner, what
signifies his opinion of my Letters? —And yet it does:
One would be willing to be well thought of by the
worthy. 

