


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Morning, Feb. 14. 
I have passed an agreeable two hours with Miss
Clements, and am just returned. She is extremely
ingenious, and perfectly unaffected. I am told, that
she writes finely; and is a madame de Sevigne to her
correspondents. I hope to be one of them. But
she has not, I find, suffered her pen to run away with
her needle; nor her reading to interfere with that
housewifry which the best judges hold so indispensable
in the character of a good woman. 
I revere her for this, as her example may be produced
as one, in answer to such as object (I am afraid
sometimes too justly, but I hope too generally) against
learning in women. Methinks, however, I would
not have learning the principal distinction of the woman
I love. And yet, where talents are given, should we
wish them to be either uncultivated or unacknowleged? 
Surely, Lucy, we may pronounce, that where no
duty is neglected for the acquirement; where modesty, 

delicacy, and a teachable spirit, are preserved, as characteristics
of the sex, it need not be thought a disgrace
to be supposed to know something. 
Miss Clements is happy, as well as your Harriet,
in an aunt, that loves her. She has a mother living,
who is too great a self-lover, to regard any-body else
as she ought. She lives as far off as York, and was
so unnatural a parent to this good child, that her aunt
was not easy till she got her from her. Mrs. Wimburn
looks upon her as her daughter, and intends to
leave her all she is worth. 
The old lady was not very well; but she obliged
us with her agreeable company for half an hour. 
We agreed to fall in occasionally upon each other
without ceremony. 
I should have told you, that the last master of the
young man, William Wilson, having given him in
writing a very good character, I have entertained him; 
and his first service was attending on me to Miss Clements. 
Lady Betty called here in my absence. She is, it
seems, very full of the dresses, and mine in particular:
But I must know nothing about it, as yet. We are
to go to her house to dress, and to proceed from thence
in chairs. She is to take care of every thing. You
shall know, my Lucy, what figure I am to make, when
I know it myself. 
The baronet also called at my cousins while I was
out. He saw only Mr. Reeves. He staid about a
quarter of an hour. He was very moody and sullen,
it seems. Quite another man, Mr. Reeves said, than
he had ever seen him before. Not one laugh; not
one smile. All that fell from his lips was Yes or No; 
or by way of invective against the sex. It was “The
devil of a sex.” It was a cursed thing, he said, that
a man could neither be happy with them, nor without
them. Devil's baits was another of his compliments
to us. He hardly mentioned my name. 

Mr. Reeves at last began to rally him upon his moodiness; 
and plainly saw, that to avoid shewing more
of his petulance (when he had not a right to shew any)
to a man of Mr. Reeves's consideration, and in his
own house, he went away the sooner. His footmen
and coachmen, he believed, had an ill time of it; 
for, without reason, he cursed them, swore at them,
and threatened them. 
What does the man haunt us for? —Why brings he
such odious humours to Mr. Reeves's? 
But no more of such a man, nor of any thing
else till my next. Only, 
Adieu, my Lucy. 

