



Miss Montague, To Miss Howe. 

M. Hall, July 18. 
Dear Madam,
In pursuance of my promise, I will minutely inform
you of every-thing we know, relating to this shocking
transaction. 
When we returned from you on Thursday night,
and made our report of the kind reception both we
and our message met with, in that you had been so
good as to promise to use your interest with your dear
friend; it put us all into such good humour with one
another, and with my cousin Lovelace, that we resolved
upon a little tour of two days, the Friday and
Saturday, in order to give an airing to my Lord, and
Lady Sarah; both having been long confined, one by
illness, the other by melancholy. My Lord, Lady
Sarah, Lady Betty, and myself, were in the coach; 
and all our talk was of dear Miss Harlowe, and of our
future happiness with her. Mr. Lovelace and my
Sister (who is his favourite, as he is hers) were in his
Phaeton: And whenever we joined company, that
was still the subject. 
As to him, never man praised woman, as he did
her: Never man gave greater hopes, and made better
resolutions. He is none of those that are governed by
Interest. He is too proud for that. But most sincerely
delighted was he in talking of her; and of his
hopes of her returning favour. He said, however,
more than once, that he feared she would not forgive
him; for, from his heart, he must say, he deserved
not her forgiveness: And often and often, that there
was not such a woman in the world. 
This I mention to shew you, Madam, that he could
not at this very time be privy to such a barbarous and
disgraceful treatment of her. 
We returned not till Saturday night, all in as good 

humour with one another as we went out. We never
had such pleasure in his company before. If he
would be good, and as he ought to be, no man would
be better beloved by relations than he. But never
was there a greater alteration in man when he came
home, and received a Letter from a messenger, who,
it seems, had been flattering himself in hopes of a
reward, and had been waiting for his return from the
night before. In such a fury! —The man fared but
badly. He instantly shut himself up to write, and
ordered man and horse to be ready to set out before
day-light the next morning, to carry the Letter to a
friend in London. 
He would not see us all that night; neither breakfast
nor dine with us next day. He ought, he said,
never to see the light; and bid my Sister, whom he
called an Innocent (and who was very desirous to
know the occasion of all this) shun him; saying, He
was a wretch, and made so by his own inventions,
and the consequences of them. 
None of us could get out of him what so disturbed
him. We should too soon hear, he said, to the utter
dissipation of all his hopes, and of all ours. 
We could easily suppose, that all was not right with
regard to the worthy young Lady and him. 
He was out each day; and said, he wanted to run
away from himself. 
Late on Monday night he received a Letter from
Mr. Belford, his most favoured friend, by his own
messenger; who came back in a foam, man and
horse. Whatever were the contents, he was not easier,
but like a madman rather: But still would not let us
know the occasion. But to my Sister he said, Nobody,
my dear Patsey, who can think but of half the
plagues that pursue an intriguing spirit, would ever
quit the fore-right path. 
He was out, when your messenger came: But
soon came in; and bad enough was his reception from 

us all. And he said, that his own torments were
greater than ours, than Miss Harlowe's, or yours,
Madam, all put together. He would see your Letter. 
He always carries every-thing before him: And
said, when he had read it, that He thanked God, he
was not such a villain, as you, with too great an appearance
of reason, thought him. 
Thus then he owned the matter to be. 
He had left general directions to the people of the
lodgings the dear Lady went from, to find out where
she was gone to, if possible, that he might have an opportunity
to importune her to be his, before their difference
was public. The wicked people (officious at
least, if not wicked) discovered where she was on
Wednesday; and, for fear she should remove before
they could have his orders, they put her under a
gentle restraint, as they call it; and dispatched away
a messenger to acquaint him with it; and to take his
orders. 
This messenger arrived on Friday afternoon; and
staid here till we returned on Saturday night: —And
when he read the Letter he brought—I have told you,
Madam, what a fury he was in. 
The Letter he retired to write, and which he
dispatched away so early on Sunday morning, was to
conjure his friend Mr. Belford, on receipt of it, to
fly to the Lady, and set her free; and to order all her
things to be sent her; and to clear him of so black
and villainous a fact, as he justly called it. 
And by this time he doubts not that all is happily
over; and the Beloved of his Soul (as he calls her at
every word) in an easier and happier way than she was
before the horrid fact. And now he owns, that the
reason why Mr. Belford's Letter set him into stronger
ravings, was because of his keeping him wilfully
(and on purpose to torment him) in suspense; and
reflecting very heavily upon him (for Mr. Belford,
he says, was ever the Lady's friend and advocate); and 

only mentioning, that he had waited upon her; referring
to his next for further particulars; which Mr.
Belford could have told him at the time. 
He declares, and we can vouch for him, that he
has been, ever since last Saturday night, the most
miserable of men. 
He forbore going up himself, that it might not be
imagined he was guilty of so black a contrivance; and
that he went up to complete any base views in consequence
of it. 
Believe us all, dear Miss Howe, under the deepest
concern at this unhappy accident; which will, we
fear, exasperate the charming Sufferer; not too much
for the occasion, but too much for our hopes. 
O what wretches are these free-living men, who
love to tread in intricate paths; and, when once they
err, know not how far out of the way their head-strong
course may lead them! 
My Sister joins her thanks with mine to your good
Mother and Self, for the favours you heaped upon us
last Thursday. We beseech your continued interest
as to the subject of our visit. It shall be all our studies
to oblige and recompense the dear Lady to the utmost
of our power, for what she has suffered from
the unhappy man. 
We are, dear Madam,
Your obliged and faithful Servants,
Charlotte Montague.
Martha Montague. 

Dear Miss Howe,
We join in the above request of Miss Charlotte
and Miss Patty Montague, for your favour
and interest; being convinced, that the accident was
an accident; and no plot or contrivance of a wretch
too full of them. We are, Madam, 
Your most obedient humble Servants,
M.
Sarah Sadleir.
Eliz. Lawrance. 


Dear Miss Howe,
After what is written above, by names and
characters of such unquestionable honour, I
might have been excused signing a name almost as
hateful to myself, as I KNOW it is to you. But
the above will have it so. Since therefore I must
write, it shall be the truth; which is, That, if I
may be once more admitted to pay my duty to the
most deserving and most injured of her Sex, I will be
content to do it with a Halter about my neck; and,
attended by a Parson on my right-hand, and the hang-man
on my left, be doomed, at her will, either to
the Church or the Gallows. 
Your most humble Servant,
Robert Lovelace. 
Tuesday,
July 18. 