



From Sir Simon Darnford, in Reply. 


Hark ye me, 'Squire B.––––A Word in your
Ear!–––– I like neither you, nor your Wife, to
be plain with you, well enough to trust my Polly
with you. What! you are to shew her, in your
Lady's Case, all the Game of a Lying-in, I suppose; 
and, at least, set the Girl a longing to make one in
the Dance, before I have found out the proper Man
for her Partner! 
But here's War declar'd against my poor Gums, it
seems. Well, I will never open my Mouth before
your Lady, as long as I live, if I can help it. I have
for these Ten Years avoided to put on my Cravat; 
and for what Reason, do you think? –––Why, because
I could not bear to see what Ruins a few Years have
made in a Visage, that us'd to inspire Love and
Terror as it pleas'd. –––And here your –––What-shall-I-call-her
of a Wife, with all the Insolence of Youth 

and Beauty on her Side, follows me with a Glass, and
would make me look in it, whether I will or not. 
I'm a plaguy good-humour'd old Fellow–––if I am an
old Fellow–––or I should not bear the Insults contain'd
in your Letter. Between you and your Lady,
you make a wretched Figure of me, that's certain––– 
And yet, 'tis  taking my Part, with a P&sblank;&sblank;x to you,
Mr. B. I would have said; but on your Lady's Account
–––You see I have as much more Charity than
her, as she has Purity than me; or I should not have
put in that Saving Clause in her Behalf. 
Dismounted Spectacles, arch Mouth, Gums of
shining Jet, and such-like fine Descriptions, are
these yours, or your Lady's? I'd be glad to know
that, Mr. B.— 
Well but, What a D&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;l must a Man do?––– I'd be
glad at any Rate to stand in your Lady's Graces,
that I would: Nor would I be the last Rake and
Libertine unreform'd by her Example, which I suppose
will make Virtue the Fashion, if she goes on at
the Rate she does. But here I have been us'd to cut
a Joke, and toss the Squib about; and, as far as I
know, it has help'd to keep me alive in the midst of
Pains and Aches, and with two Women-grown
Girls, and the rest of the Mortifications that will attend
on advanced Years; for I won't (hang me if I
will) give it up as absolute Old-age!–––– 
I love, I own it, to make a pretty Woman blush; 
it is double-damasking a fine Rose, as it were; and
till I saw your––– [Do, let me call her some free
Name or other! I always lov'd to be free with pretty
Women! Till I saw your–––––Methinks I like her
Arcadian Name, tho' I'm so old a Swain, as not to
merit any thing but Rebuke at her Hands –––– Well
then, till I saw your] –––– Pamela –––– I thought all
Ladies, in their Hearts, lov'd a little Squib of that
kind. For why should they not, when it adds so 

much Grace to their Features, and improves their
native Charms? –––And often have I toss'd the Joke
about, as much, in my Intention, to oblige them as
myself.–– Yet no one can say, but that I always wrapt
it up in clean Linen, as the Saying is ––– Only suiting
myself to my Company, till I had made the dear
Rogues sensible, and shew they could apprehend. 
But now, it seems, I must leave all this off, or I
must be mortify'd with a Looking-glass held before
me, and every Wrinkle must be made as conspicuous
as a Cable-rope. —And what, pray, is to succeed
to this Reformation? —I can neither fast nor pray,
I doubt. —And besides, if my Stomach and my Jest
depart from me, farewel, Sir Simon Darnford! 
But cannot I pass as one necessary Character, do
you think; as a Foil (as by-the-bye some of your
own Actions have been to your Lady's Virtue) to set
off some more edifying Example, where Variety of
Characters make up a Feast in Conversation? 
I beseech you, Mr. B.'s Pamela, stick me into
some Posy among your finer Flowers—And if
you won't put me in your Bosom, let me stand in
some gay Flower-pot in your Chimney Corner:
I may serve for Shew, if not for Smell. Or, let me
be the Bass in your Musick, or permit my humourous
Humdrum to serve as a pardonable kind of
Discord to set off your own Harmony. —I verily
think, I cannot be so good as you'd have me to be:
So pray let your poor Anacreon go off with what
he loves. It will be very cruel, if you won't. 
Well but, after all, I believe I might have trusted
you with my Daughter, under your Lady's Eye,
Rake as you have been yourself. And Fame says
wrong, if you have not been for your Time, a
bolder Sinner than ever I was, (with your Maxim of
touching Ladies Hearts, without wounding their Ears,
which made surer Work with them, that was all) 

tho' 'tis to be hoped you are now reformed; and if
you are, the whole Country round you, East, West,
North and South, owe great Obligations to your
fair Reclaimer. But here is a fine prim young Fellow
coming out of Norfolk, with one Estate in one
County, another in another, and Jointures and Settlements
in his Hands, and more Wit in his Head, as
well as more Money in his Pocket, than he can tell
what to do with, to visit our Polly; tho' I tell her
I much question the former Quality, his Wit, if he
is for marrying. —And would you have her be attending
your Wife's Nursery, when she may possibly
be put in a Way to have a Raree-shew of her own? 
Here then is the Reason I cannot comply with
your kind Mrs. B.'s Request. But if this Matter
should go off; if he should not like her, or she him;
or if I should not like his Terms, or he mine ;–––or,
still another Or, if he should like Nancy better ––– 
why, then, perhaps, if Polly be a good Girl, I may
trust to her Virtue, and to your Honour, and let her
go for a Month or two (for the Devil's in you, if
you'd attempt to abuse such a generous Confidence)
—As to the Superiority of Beauty in your own Lady,
I depend nothing on that, with you young Fellows,
to whom Variety has generally greater Charms. 
Now, when I have said this, and when I say further,
that I can forgive your severe Lady, and yourself
too, (who, however, are less to be excus'd in
the Airs you assume, which looks like one Chimney-sweeper
calling another sooty Rascal) I give a Proof
of my Charity, which I hope with Mrs. B. will cover
a Multitude of Faults; and the rather, since,
tho' I cannot be a Follower of her Virtue in the
strictest Sense, I can be an Admirer of it; and that
is some little Merit: And indeed all that can be at
present pleaded by yourself, I doubt, any more than 
Your humble Servant,
Simon Darnford. 

