



Miss Howe, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, Oct. 2. 
When you question me, Sir, as you do, and
on a subject so affecting to me, in the character
of the representative of my best-beloved friend, and
have in every particular hitherto acted up to that character,
you are entitled to my regard: Especially as
you are joined in your questioning of me by a gentleman
whom I look upon as the dearest and nearest (because
worthiest) relation of my dear friend: And who,
it seems, has been so severe a censurer of my conduct,
that your politeness will not permit you to send me his
Letter, with others of his; but a copy only, in which
the passages reflecting upon me are omitted. 

I presume, however, that what is meant by this
alarming freedom of the Colonel, is no more than
what you both have already hinted to me; as if you
thought I were not inclined to pay so much regard to
my beloved creature's Last Will, in my own case, as
I would have others pay to it. A charge that I ought
not to be quite silent under. 
You have observed, no doubt, that I have seemed to
value myself upon the freedom I take in declaring my
sentiments without reserve upon every subject that I
pretend to touch upon: And I can hardly question that
I have, or shall, in your opinion, by my unceremonious
treatment of you upon so short an acquaintance,
run into the error of those, who, wanting to be thought
above hypocrisy and flattery, fall into rusticity, if not
ill-manners; a common fault with such, who, not
caring to correct constitutional failings, seek to gloss
them-over by some nominal virtue; when all the time,
perhaps, these failings are entirely owing to native arrogance; 
or, at least, to a contracted rust, that they
will not, because it would give them pain, submit to
have filed off. 
You see, Sir, that I can, however, be as free with
myself as with you: And, by what I am going to
write, you will find me still more free: And yet I am
aware, that such of my Sex as will not assume some
little dignity, and exact respect from yours, will render
themselves cheap; and perhaps, for their modesty and
diffidence, be repaid with scorn and insult. 
But the scorn I will endeavour not to deserve; and
the insult I will not bear. 
In some of the dear creature's papers which you have
had in your possession, and must again have in order
to get transcribed, you will find several friendly, but
severe reprehensions of me, on account of a natural, or,
at least, an habitual, warmth of temper, which she
was pleased to impute to me. 
I was thinking to give you her charge against me in 

her own words, from one of her Letters delivered to
me with her own hands, on taking leave of me, on
the last visit she honoured me with. But I will supply
that charge by confession of more than it imports; to
wit, ‘That I am haughty, uncontroulable, and violent
in my temper;’ This I say: ‘Impatient of contradiction,’ was my Beloved's charge [From any-body
but her dear self, she should have said]; ‘and aim not
at that affability, that gentleness next to meekness,
which, in the Letter I was going to communicate,
she tells me are the peculiar and indispensable characteristics
of a real fine Lady; who, she is pleased
to say, should appear to be gall-less as a dove; and
never should know what warmth or high spirit is,
but in the cause of Religion or Virtue; or in cases
where her own honour, the honour of a friend, or
that of an innocent person, is concerned.’ 
Now, Sir, as I must needs plead guilty to this indictment,
do you think I ought not to resolve upon a
Single Life? —I, who have such an opinion of your
Sex, that I think there is not one man in an hundred
whom a woman of sense and spirit can either honour or
obey, tho' you make us promise both, in that solemn
form of words which unites or rather binds us to you
in marriage? 
When I look round upon all the married people of
my acquaintance, and see how they live, and what
they bear who live best, I am confirmed in my dislike
to the State. 
Well do your Sex contrive to bring us up fools and
idiots, in order to make us bear the yoke you lay upon
our shoulders; and that we may not despise you from
our hearts (as we certainly should, if we were brought
up as you are) for your ignorance, as much as you often
make us do (as it is) for your insolence. 
These, Sir, are some of my notions. And, with
these notions, let me repeat my question, Do you think
I ought to marry at all? 

If I marry either a sordid or an imperious wretch,
can I, do you think, live with him? And ought a
man of a contrary character, for the sake of either of
our reputations, to be plagued with me? 
Long did I stand out against all the offers made
me, and against all the persuasions of my Mother; 
and, to tell you the truth, the longer, and with the
more obstinacy, as the person my choice would have
first fallen upon, was neither approved by my Mother,
nor by my dear friend. This riveted me to my pride,
and to my opposition: For altho' I was convinced after
a while, that my choice would neither have been prudent
nor happy; and that the specious wretch was not
what he had made me believe he was; yet could I not
easily think of any other man: And indeed, from the
detection of him, took a settled aversion to the whole
Sex. 
At last Mr. Hickman offered himself; a man worthy
of a better choice. He had the good fortune [He
thinks it so] to be agreeable (and to make his proposals
agreeable) to my Mother. 
As to myself; I own, that were I to have chosen a
Brother, Mr. Hickman should have been the man; 
virtuous, sober, sincere, friendly, as he is. But I
wished not to marry: Nor knew I the man in the
world whom I could think deserving of my beloved
Friend. But neither of our parents would let us live
single. 
The accursed Lovelace was proposed warmly to her,
at one time; and, while she was yet but indifferent to
him, they by ungenerous usage of him (for then, Sir,
he was not known to be Beelzebub himself) and by endeavouring
to force her inclinations in favour first of
one worthless man, then of another, in antipathy to
him, thro' her foolish Brother's caprice, turned that
indifference (from the natural generosity of her soul)
into a regard which she never otherwise would have
had for a man of his character. 

Mr. Hickman was proposed to me. I refused him
again and again. He persisted: My Mother his advocate. 
My Mother made my beloved Friend his advocate
too. I told him my dislike of all men: Of
him: Of matrimony. —Still he persisted. I used him
with tyranny: Led indeed partly by my temper, partly
by design; hoping thereby to get rid of him; till the
poor man (his character unexceptionably uniform) still
persisting, made himself a merit with me by his patience. 
This brought down my pride [I never, Sir,
was accounted very ungenerous, nor quite ungrateful]
and gave me, at one time, an inferiority in my own
opinion to him; which lasted just long enough for my
friends to prevail upon me to promise him encouragement; 
and to receive his addresses. 
Having so done, when the weather-glass of my pride
got up again, I found I had gone too far to recede. 
My Mother and my Friend both held me to it. Yet
I tried him; I vexed him an hundred ways; and not
so much neither with design to vex him, as to make
him hate me, and decline his suit. 
He bore this, however; and got nothing but my
pity: Yet still my Mother and my Friend, having obtained
my promise (made, however, not to him, but
to them] and being well assured that I valued no man
more than Mr. Hickman (who never once disobliged
me in word, or deed, or look, except by his foolish
perseverance) insisted upon the performance. 
While my dear Friend was in her unhappy uncertainty,
I could not think of marriage: And now,
what encouragement have I? —She, my Monitress, my
Guide, my Counsel, gone, for ever gone! —By whose
advice and instructions I hoped to acquit myself tolerably
in the State into which I could not avoid entering. 
For, Sir, my Mother is so partially Mr. Hickman's
friend, that I am sure, should any difference arise, she
would always censure me, and acquit him; even were
he ungenerous enough to remember me in his day. 

This, Sir, being my situation, consider how difficult
it is for me to think of marriage. Whenever we
approve, we can find an hundred good reasons to justify
our approbation. Whenever we dislike, we can find
a thousand to justify our dislike. Every-thing in the
latter case is an impediment: Every shadow a bugbear. 
—Thus can I enumerate and swell perhaps only imaginary
grievances; ‘I must go whither he would have
me to go: Visit whom he would have me to visit: 
Well as I love to write (tho' now, alas! my grand
inducement to write is over) it must be to whom he
pleases:’ And Mrs. Hickman (who, as Miss Howe,
cannot do wrong) would hardly ever be able to do right. 
Thus, the tables turned upon me, I am reminded of
my vowed obedience; Madam'd up perhaps to matrimonial
perfection, and all the wedded warfare practised
comfortably over between us (for I shall not be
passive under insolent treatment) till we become curses
to each other, a bye-word to our neighbours, and the
jest of our own servants. 
But there must be bear and forbear, methinks some
wise body will tell me: But why must I be teazed
into a State where that must be necessarily the case; 
when now I can do as I please, and wish only to be
let alone to do as best pleases me? And what, in effect,
does my Mother say? ‘Anna Howe, you now do
every-thing that pleases you: You now have nobody
to controul you: You go and you come; you
dress and you undress; you rise and you go to rest; 
just as you think best: But you must be happier still,
child!—’ 
As how, Madam? 
‘Why, you must marry, my dear, and have
none of these options; but, in every-thing, do as
your Husband commands you.’ 
This is very hard, you will own, Sir, for such a
one as me to think of. And yet, engaged to enter
into that State, as I am, how can I help myself? My 

Mother presses me; my Friend, my beloved Friend,
writing as from the dead, presses me; and You, and
Mr. Morden, as Executors of her Will, remind me; 
the Man is not afraid of me [I am sure, were I the
man, I should not have half his courage]; and I think
I ought to conclude to punish him (the only effectual
way I have to do it) for his perverse adherence and
persecution, with the grant of his own wishes; a punishment
which many others who enjoy theirs very commonly
experience. 
Let me then assure you, Sir, that when I can find,
in the words of my charming Friend in her Will,
writing of her Cousin Hervey, that my grief for her
is mellowed by time into a remembrance more sweet than
painful, that I may not be utterly unworthy of the passion
a man of some merit has for me, I will answer the
request of my dear Friend, so often repeated, and so
earnestly pressed; and Mr. Hickman shall find, if he
continue to deserve my gratitude, that my endeavours
shall not be wanting to make him amends for the patience
he has had, and must still a little while longer
have with me: And then will it be his own fault (I
hope not mine) if our marriage answer not those happy
prognostics, which filled her generous presaging mind,
upon this view, as she once, for my encouragement,
and to induce me to encourage him, told me. 
Thus, Sir, have I, in a very free manner, accounted
to you, as to the Executor of my beloved Friend, for
all that relates to you, as such, to know; and even for
more than I needed to do, against myself: Only that
you will find as much against me in some of her Letters; 
and so, losing nothing, I gain the character of
ingenuousness with you. 
And thus much for the double reprimand, on my
delaying my part of the performance of my dear Friend's
Will. 
And now, while you are admonishing me on this
subject, let me remind you of one great article relating 

to yourself: It is furnished me by my dear Creature's
posthumous Letter to you—I hope you will not forget,
that the most benevolent of her Sex expresses herself as
earnestly concerned for your thorough reformation, as
she does for my marrying. You'll see to it then, that
her wishes are as completely answered in that particular,
as you are desirous they should be in all others. 
I have, I own, disobeyed her in one article; and
that is, where she desires that I will not put myself
into mourning. I could not help it. 
I send this and mine of Saturday last together: And
will not add another word, after I have told you, that
I think myself 
Your obliged Servant,
A. Howe. 