



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. 


My dearest Pamela,
Talk not to us of unreturnable Obligations,
and all that, as in your last Letter. You do
more for us, in the Entertainment you give us all
by your Letters, than we have done, or ever can
do, for you. And as to me, I know no greater
Pleasure in the World, than that which my Brother's
Felicity and yours gives me. God continue
this Felicity to you both! I am sure it will be his
Fault, and not yours, if it be at all diminish'd. 
We have heard some idle Rumours here, as
if you were a little uneasy of late; and having not
had a Letter from you for this Fortnight past, it
makes me write, to ask, How you all do? and,
Whether you expected an Answer from me to your
last? 
I hope you won't be punctilious with me, my
Pamela. For we have nothing to write to you
about, except it be, how much we all love and
honour you; and that you believe already, or else
you don't do us Justice. 
I suppose you'll be going out of Town soon,
now the Parliament is rising. My Lord is resolv'd
to put his Proxy into another Hand, and intends, I
believe, to take my Brother's Advice in it. Both
the Earl and his Lordship are highly pleased with
my Brother's moderate and independent Principles. 
He has got great Credit among all unprejudic'd Men,
by the Part he acted throughout the last Sessions, 

in which he has shewn, that he would no more join
to distress and clog the Wheels of Government, by
an unreasonable Opposition, than he would do the
dirty Work of an Administration. As he has so
noble a Fortune, and wants nothing of any body,
he would be doubly to blame, to take any other
Part than that of his Country, in which he has so
great a Stake. 
May he act out of the House, and in the House,
with equal Honour; and he will be his Country's
Pride, and your Pride, and mine too! Which is
the Wish of 
Your affectionate Sister,
B. Davers. 
If you want a Pretence to kiss my dear Boy, give
him, now-and-then, one for me. I hope he
improves, under the Eye of so careful a Mamma; 
the little Rogue will else be unworthier
than I wish him to be. I hope you proceed
with my Book. I must see your Observations
on Locke too. 'Twas a charming pretty Thought
of yours, that of Miss Goodwin. A hasty
Wretch! How could be angry? —'Twas
well he so soon consider'd of the Matter, and
ask'd Pardon. 

