



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Watford, Wedn. June 14. 
O thou savage-hearted monster! What work hast
thou made in one guilty hour, for a whole age of
repentance! 

I am inexpressibly concerned at the fate of this
matchless Lady! She could not have fallen into the
hands of any other man breathing, and suffered as she
has done with thee. 
I had written a great part of another long Letter, to
try to soften thy flinty heart in her favour; for I thought
it but too likely, that thou shouldst succeed in getting
her back again to the accursed woman's. But I find it
would have been too late, had I finished it, and sent it
away. Yet cannot I forbear writing, to urge thee to
make the only amends thou now canst make her, by a
proper use of the Licence thou hast obtained. 
Poor, poor Lady! It is a pain to me, that I ever saw
her. Such an adorer of virtue to be sacrificed to the
vilest of her Sex; and Thou their implement in the
devil's hands, for a purpose so base, so ungenerous, so
inhumane! —Pride thyself, O cruellest of men, in this
reflection; and that thy triumph over a woman, who
for thy sake was abandoned of every friend she had in
the world, was effected, not by advantages taken of
her weakness and credulity; but by the blackest artifice; 
after a long course of studied deceits had been
tried to no purpose. 
I can tell thee, it is well either for thee or for me,
that I am not the Brother of the Lady. Had I been
her Brother, her violation must have been followed by
the blood of one of us. 
Excuse me, Lovelace; and let not the Lady fare the
worse for my concern for her. And yet I have but one
other motive to ask thy excuse; and that is, because I
owe to thy own communicative pen the knowlege I
have of thy barbarous villainy, since thou mightest, if
thou wouldst, have passed it upon me for a common
seduction. 
Clarissa lives, thou sayst. That she does, is
my wonder; and these words shew, that thou thyself
(tho' thou couldst, nevertheless, proceed) hardly expectedst 

she would have survived the outrage. What
must have been the poor Lady's distress (watchful as
she had been over her honour) when dreadful Certainty
took place of cruel Apprehension! —And yet
a man may guess what it must have been, by that which
thou paintest, when she suspected herself tricked, deserted,
and betrayed, by the pretended Ladies. 
That thou couldst behold her phrensy on this occasion,
and her half-speechless, half-fainting prostration
at thy feet, and yet retain thy evil purposes, will
hardly be thought credible, even by those who know
thee, if they have seen her. 
Poor, poor Lady! With such noble qualities as
would have adorned the most exalted married life, to
fall into the hands of the only man in the world, who
could have treated her as thou hast treated her! —And
to let loose the old dragon, as thou properly callest her,
upon the before-affrighted innocent, what a barbarity
was that! What a poor piece of barbarity! in order
to obtain by Terror, what thou despairedst to gain by
Love, tho' supported by stratagems the most insidious! 
O Lovelace! Lovelace! had I doubted it
before, I should now be convinced, that there must be a
World after this, to do justice to injured merit,
and to punish barbarous perfidy! Could the divine Socrates,
and the divine Clarissa, otherwise have
suffered? 
But let me, if possible, for one moment, try to forget
this villainous outrage on the most excellent of
women. 
I have business here, which will hold me yet a few
days; and then perhaps I shall quit this house for
ever. 
I have had a solemn and tedious time of it. I should
never have known, that I had half the respect I really
find I had for the old gentleman, had I not so closely,
at his earnest desire, attended him, and been a witness
of the tortures he underwent. 

This melancholy occasion may possibly have contributed
to humanize me: But surely I never could
have been so remorsless a caitiff as thou hast been, to
a woman of half this Lady's excellence. 
But pr'ythee, dear Lovelace, if thou'rt a man, and
not a devil, resolve, out of hand, to repair thy sin of
ingratitude, by conferring upon thyself the highest honour
thou canst receive, in making her lawfully thine. 
But if thou canst not prevail upon thyself to do her
this justice, I think I should not scruple a tilt with thee
[An everlasting rupture at least must follow] if thou
sacrificest her to the accursed women. 
Thou art desirous to know what advantage I reap
by my Uncle's demise. I do not certainly know; for
I have not been so greedily solicitous on this subject, as
some of the kindred have been, who ought to have
shewn more decency; as I have told them, and suffered
the corpse to have been cold before they had begun
their hungry enquiries. But, by what I gathered from
the poor man's talk to me, who, oftener than I wished,
touched upon the subject, I deem it will be upwards of
5000l. in cash, and in the funds, after all Legacies paid,
besides the real estate, which is a clear 1000l. a year. 
I wish from my heart, thou wert a Money-lover! 
Were the Estate to be of double the value, thou shouldst
have it every shilling; only upon one condition [for my
circumstances before were as easy as I wish them to
be while I am single]—That thou would permit me
the honour of being this fatherless Lady's Father, as it
is called, at the altar. 
Think of this! my dear Lovelace: Be honest: And
let me present thee with the brightest jewel that man
ever possessed; and then, body and soul, wilt thou
bind to thee for ever, thy 
Belford. 