



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Morn. 8 o'Clock (Apri 8.). 
Whether you will blame me or not, I cannot tell,
but I have deposited a Letter confirming my
resolution to leave this house on Monday next, within
the hours mentioned in my former, if possible. I have
not kept a copy of it. But this is the substance: 
I tell him, ‘That I have no way to avoid the
determined resolution of my friends in behalf of
Mr. Solmes, but by abandoning this house by his
assistance.’ 
I have not pretended to make a merit with him on
this score; for I plainly tell him, ‘That could I,
without an unpardonable sin, die when I would, I
would sooner make death my choice, than take a
step, which all the world, if not my own heart,
will condemn me for taking.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I shall not try to bring any
other cloaths with me, than those I shall have on; 
and those but my common wearing-apparel; lest I
should be suspected. That I must expect to be 

denied the possession of my Estate: But that I am
determined never to consent to a litigation with my
Father, were I to be reduced to ever so low a state: 
So that the protection I am to be obliged for to
any one, must be alone for that distress sake. That,
therefore, he will have nothing to hope for from
this step, that he had not before: And that, in every
light, I reserve to myself to accept or refuse his address,
as his behaviour and circumspection shall appear
to me to deserve.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I think it best to go into a private
lodging, in the neighbourhood of Lady Betty
Lawrance; and not to her Ladyship's house; that
it may not appear to the world, that I have refuged
myself in his family; and that a Reconciliation with
my friends may not, on that account, be made impracticable: 
That I will send for thither my faithful
Hannah; and apprise only Miss Howe where I
am: That he shall instantly leave me, and go to
London, or to one of Lord M's Seats; and (as he
had promised) not come near me, but by my leave; 
contenting himself with a correspondence by Letter
only. 
‘That if I find myself in danger of being discovered,
and carried back by violence, I will then
throw myself directly into the protection either of
Lady Betty or Lady Sarah: But This only in case
of absolute necessity; for that it will be more to my
reputation, for me, by the best means I can (taking
advantage of my privacy) to enter by a second or
third hand into a treaty of Reconciliation with my
friends. 
‘That I must, however, plainly tell him, That if
in this treaty, my friends insist upon my resolving
against marrying him, I will engage to comply with
them; provided they will allow me to promise him,
that I will never be the Wife of any other man while
he remains single, or is living: That this is a compliment 

I am willing to pay him, in return for the
trouble and pains he has taken, and the usage he
has met with, on my account: Altho' I intimate,
that he may, in a great measure, thank himself (by
reason of the little regard he has paid to his reputation)
for the slights he has met with.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I may, in this privacy, write to
my Cousin Morden, and, if possible, interest him
in my cause.’ 
‘I take some brief notice then of his alternatives.’ 
You must think, my dear, that this unhappy force
upon me, and this projected flight, make it necessary
for me to account to him much sooner than I should
otherwise chuse to do, for every part of my conduct. 
‘It is not to be expected, I tell him, that your Mother
will embroil herself, or suffer you or Mr. Hickman
to be embroiled, on my account: And as to his
proposal of my going to London, I am such an absolute
stranger to every-body there, and have such
a bad opinion of the place, that I cannot by any
means think of going thither; except I should be induced,
some time hence, by the Ladies of his family
to attend them. 
‘As to the meeting he is desirous of, I think it by
no means proper; especially as it is so likely that I may
soon see him. But that if any-thing occurs to induce
me to change my mind, as to withdrawing, I will
then take the first opportunity to see him, and give him
my reasons for that change.’ 
This, my dear, I the less scrupled to write, as it
might qualify him to bear such a disappointment, should
I give it him; he having, besides, behaved so very unexceptionably
when he surprised me some time ago in
the lonely Woodhouse. 
Finally, ‘I commend myself, as a person in distress,
and merely as such , to his honour, and to the protection
of the Ladies of his family. I repeat [most
cordially, I am sure!] my deep concern for being 

forced to make a step so disagreeable, and so derogatory
to my honour. And having told him, that I
will endeavour to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy Summer-house
(a) , and to send Betty of some errand,
when there, I leave the rest to him; but imagine,
that about Four o'clock will be a proper time for
him to contrive some signal to let me know he is at
hand, and for me to unbolt the garden-door.’ 
I added, by way of postscript, ‘That their suspicions
seeming to encrease, I advise him to contrive
to send or come to the usual place, as frequently as
possible, in the interval of time till Monday morning
Ten or Eleven o'clock; as something may possibly
happen to make me alter my mind.’ 
O my dear Miss Howe!—what a sad, sad thing is
the necessity, forced upon me, for all this preparation
and contrivance! —But it is now too late! —But how! 
—Too late, did I say? —What a word is that!—what
a dreadful thing, were I to repent, to find it to be too
late to remedy the apprehended evil! 
Saturday, Ten o'Clock. 
Mr. Solmes is here. He is to dine with his new
relations, as Betty tells me he already calls them. 
He would have thrown himself in my way once
more: But I hurried up to my prison, in my return
from my garden-walk, to avoid him. 
I had, when in the garden, the curiosity to see if
my Letter were gone: I cannot say with an intention
to take it back again if it were not, because I see not 

how I could do otherwise than I have done; yet,
what a caprice! when I found it gone, I began (as
yesterday-morning) to wish it had not: For no other
reason, I believe, than because it was out of my power. 
A strange diligence in this man! —He says, he almost
lives upon the place; and I think so too. 
He mentions, as you will see in his Letter, four
several disguises, which he put on in one day. It is
a wonder, nevertheless, that he has not been seen by
some of our tenants: For it is impossible that any disguise
can hide the gracefulness of his figure. But this
is to be said, that the adjoining grounds being all in
our own hands, and no common foot-paths near that
part of the garden, and thro' the Park and Coppice,
nothing can be more bye and unfrequented. 
Then they are less watchful, I believe, over my
garden-walks, and my poultry-visits, depending, as
my Aunt hinted, upon the bad character they have
taken so much pains to fasten upon Mr. Lovelace. 
This, they think (and justly think) must fill me with
doubts. And then the regard I have hitherto had for
my reputation, is another of their securities. Were
it not for these two, they would not surely have used
me as they have done; and at the same time left me
the opportunities which I have several time had, to
get away, had I been disposed to do so (a) : And indeed
their dependence on both these motives would
have been well founded, had they kept but tolerable
measures with me. 
Then, perhaps, they have no notion of the back-door; 
as it is seldom opened, and leads to a place so
pathless and lonesome (b) . If not, there can be no 

other way to escape (if one would) unless by the plashy
Lane, so full of springs, by which your servants reaches
the solitary Woodhouse; to which Lane one must
descend from a high bank, that bounds the poultry-yard. 
For, as to the front-way, you know, one must
pass thro' the house to That, and in sight of the parlours,
and the servants hall; and then have the open
court-yard to go through, and, by means of the iron-gate,
be full in view, as one passes over the Lawn,
for a quarter of a mile together; the young plantations
of Elms and Limes affording yet but little shade or
covert. 
The Ivy Summer-house is the most convenient for
this heart-affecting purpose, of any spot in the garden,
as it is not far from the back-door, and yet in another
alley, as you may remember. Then it is seldom resorted
to by any-body else, except in the summer-months,
because it is cool. When they loved me,
they would often, for this reason, object to my long
continuance in it: —But now, it is no matter what
becomes of me. Besides, Cold is a bracer, as my
Brother said yesterday. 
Here I will deposit what I have written. Let me
have your prayers, my dear; and your approbation,
or your censure, of the steps I have taken: For yet it
may not be quite too late to revoke the appointment.
I am 
Your most affectionate and faithful
Cl. Harlowe. 
Why will you send your servant empty-handed? 