


Signor Jeronymo della Porretta, To Sir Charles Grandison. 
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


Bologna, Oct. 18. N. S.
I Gave you, my dear Grandison, in mine of the 5th,
the copy of a paper written by my sister, which
filled us with hopes of her compliance with the wishes
of all her family. She took time for deliberation; 
time was given her; but still she insisted on receiving
your next Letters before she came to any resolution. 
Mrs. Beaumont herself was of opinion, that the dear
creature only meditated delay: That also was ours. 
What, invincibly determined, as she is, to adhere to the
resolution she has so greatly taken, can she hope for,
(said we among ourselves) from the expected Letters? 
For she had declared herself to be so determined, to
my brother Giacomo, who actually assured her of all
our consents to an alliance with you, if she repented
of that resolution. 
All this time we offered not to introduce, nor even
to name, to her, the Count of Belvedere. Awed by
her former calamity, and by an excursiveness of imagination,
which at times shewed itself in her words
and behaviour, we avoided saying or doing any-thing
that was likely to disturb her. Giacomo himself, tho'
he wanted to return to Naples, had patience with her
pretty trifling, beyond our expectation. At last arrived
yours of the 29th of September(a) ; kindly inclosing
a copy of yours to her, of the same date(b) . 
We question not but your reply to mine of the 5th
current, is on the road; nor that the contents will be
such as we may hope for, from considerations of our
happiness and your own: But these, we thought, 

without waiting for that, would answer the desired end. 
I will tell you what was said by every one, on the perusal
of both. 
Is this the man, said the General, whom I sometimes
so rudely treated? I rejoice that we were reconciled
before he left us. I had formed a notion to his
disadvantage; that he was capable of art, and hoped
to keep his hold in my sister's affections, in view of
some turn in his favour: But he is the most single-hearted
of men. These two Letters will strengthen
our arguments. Clementina, who has more than
once declared that she wishes him married to an English
woman, cannot now, that she will see there is a
woman with whom he thinks he can be happy, wish
to stand in his way. These will furnish us with means
to attack her in her strongest hold; in her generosity,
her delicacy; and will bring to the test her veracity. 
The contents of these Letters will confirm her
before half-taken resolution, as in her paper, to oblige
us(a) . Let Laurana, as the Chevalier says, go into a
nunnery: Clementina will marry, or she is a false
girl; and the Sforza women will be disappointed. 
My mother applauded you, and rejoiced to hear
that there is a woman of your own nation who is capable
of making you more happy than her daughter
could. 
What difficulties, said the young Marchioness,
(ever your friend) must a situation so critical have laid
him under! A man so humane! And what further
difficulties must he have to surmount, in offering to a
woman, whom even Olivia, as he says, admires, a
hand that has been refused by another? May this admired
woman be propitious to his suit! 
She must, she must, said the Bishop. If she has
a heart disengaged, she cannot refuse a man so accomplished. 
Jeronymo, hasten to be well. If she
favour him, we will all go over, and congratulate
them both. 

I, for my part, said I, would give up years of life
to see my friend as happy in marriage as he deserves to
be. 
We must tell Clementina, said my father, as our
Giacomo has hinted, that it will not become her generosity
to stand in the way of the Chevalier's happiness. 
We sent up your Letter to our sister, by Camilla. 
She was busy (Mrs. Beaumont sitting by her at work)
in correcting the proportion which once you found
fault with, in a figure in her piece of Noah's Ark, and
the rising Deluge. A Letter, madam, from the Chevalier
—To me! said she; and overturned the table
on which her materials lay, in haste to take it. 
When we thought she had had time to consider of
the contents, we sent up to request the favour of
speaking with Mrs. Beaumont. We owned to her,
that we had a copy of your Letter to Clementina; 
and asked, What the dear creature said to the contents
of it? 
She read it, answered Mrs. Beaumont, in her own
closet. I thought she was too long by herself. I went
to her. She was in tears. O Mrs. Beaumont! as
soon as she saw me, holding out the Letter—See
here! —The Chevalier is against me! —Cruel, I could
almost say, cruel Grandison! —He turns my own
words upon me. I have furnished him with arguments
against myself—What shall I do? —I have for
many days past repented that I gave, under my hand,
reason to my friends to expect my compliance. I cannot,
cannot, confirm the hopes I gave! —What shall I
do? 
I took it, read it, continued Mrs. Beaumont, and
told her, that the Chevalier's arguments were unanswerable. 
I dwelt upon some of them. She wept,
and was silent. 
We then, my dear Grandison, shewed Mrs. Beaumont
your Letter to me. She read it—How, said 

she, has this excellent young man been embarassed! 
I know, from some of my countrymen, the character
of the Lady whom he mentions: She is an excellent
woman! —May I take up this Letter, and read it to
Lady Clementina? 
By all means, answered the General; and support,
dear madam, the contents of both with your weight. 
It will be from perverseness now, if she withstand us. 
Bid her remember, that she has had once at her feet a
kneeling father! Bid her remember the written hopes
she has given us! 
Mrs. Beaumont went up with it. I will give you an
account of what my sister said as she read it. O
Grandison! read it but cursorily: You will more and
more admire and love the Clementina, who, before her
malady, was always considered as one of the first of
women; and the glory of our house! 
She desired to have it in her own hands: Mrs.
Beaumont, to whose pen we owe the account, looked
over her, and followed her eye, as she read(a) . 
‘And did he still, said she, after he had got to
England, hope for a change in my resolution?’ — 
Heaven knows—She stopt; sighed, and read on. 
‘He foresaw that my friends would press me to
marry!’ —I foresaw it too! —I have indeed been
pressed; vehemently pressed! 
‘Rather than any other’—Ah, Chevalier! —Why,
why, were the obstacles Religion and Country! None
less should have—She stopt—Then, reading to herself,
proceeded: 
‘It was not presumptuous to hope’ —No, Grandison; 
presumptuous it could not be. 
‘It was justice to Clementina, to attend the event,
and to wait for the promised Letter.’ Kind, considerate
Grandison! —You were all patience, all goodness! 
—O that—There she stopt. Then proceeding: 

‘Fourth brother! Not interested in the event.’ — 
Indeed I did write so— 
‘Give up all his hopes!’ —Dear Grandison! 
‘It could not be expected that he should give the
argument all its weight.’ —He has given it too much! 
‘Duty to yield to the entreaties of all my friends;’ 
Ah, Grandison! 
‘Difficult situations!’ —Difficult indeed! And here
am I, who have more than any other in the world,
enhanced his difficulties! —Unhappy Clementina! — 
Then reading on— 
Good God! Mrs. Beaumont! ‘There is an English
Lady, with whom he was actually—Does he not
hint in Love?’ —Nay, then—Take it, take it, Mrs.
Beaumont! —I can read no further—Compassion
only, I suppose, brought him over to me! —I cannot
bear that! —Yet snatching it from her, and reading, 
‘Beauty her least perfection’ —[Happy English
Lady!] ‘Either in my eyes, or her own!’ —Have I
not wished him such a woman? —‘Had I never known
Clementina!’ —How could I be so captious! 
‘Loves her with a flame as pure as the heart of
Clementina’ —Thank you, Chevalier! Indeed I
have no impurity in my Love—My God only have I
preferred to you: And I bless God for enabling me to
give so due a preference! —‘or, as her own heart can
boast.’ —Just such a wife did I wish him; and shall
I not rejoice, if such a one will hold out her hand to
make him happy? 
She sighed often, as she read on; but spoke not, till
she came to the words, ‘That she was to you, what
you might truly call, a first Love;’ A first Love,
repeated she: He was indeed mine! Permit me to
say, my dear friends, a first and only one. 
‘It became him, he says, in honour, in gratitude,
tho' the difficulties in his way seemed insuperable
(And so they must seem) to hold himself in suspense,
and not offer to make his addresses to any other 

woman.’ —Generous, noble Grandison! —He did
love me—Discouraged as he was; nay, insulted by
some of us [Giacomo hears me not, looking round
her]; He, the generous Grandison, did love me. She
wiped her eyes. 
Recovering herself, and reading on—See here, Mrs.
Beaumont—‘He thought himself obliged, in honour
to me, and to the persons themselves, to decline
proposals of advantage.’ Surely he must think me
an ingrateful creature. 
But (reading on) did he ‘balance in his mind between
this Lady and me?’ —He did. But it was
because of his uncertainty with me. 
Reading to herself, to the words, ‘Almost an
equal interest,’ How is that, said she, repeating
them? —O, it is explained—‘But when his dear
Clementina’ [Do I go too fast for your eye, Mrs.
Beaumont?] ‘began to shew signs of recovery,’ 
[She sighed] ‘and seemed to confirm the hopes I had
given him of my partiality for him,’ [Modest, good
man!] ‘then did I content myself, says he [Look,
Mrs. Beaumont] with wishing another husband to
the English Lady, more worthy of her than my
unhappy situation could have made me.’ —Excellent
English Lady! If it were in my power, I
would make you amends for having shared a heart
with you (so it seems) that ought, my circumstances
and your merit considered, to have been all your
own! 
‘What a disappointment was my rejection of
him?’ —See, these are his words. —And these too; 
that ‘he admires me, however, for my motives. 
‘Marriage, he says, is not in his power; for there
is but one woman in the world, now I have refused
him, that he can think worthy of succeeding me.’ — 
What honour he does me. Thank God she is an
English woman! O that I had any influence over her! 
Sweet Lady! amiable English woman, let not punctilio 

deprive you of such a man as this! —Shew her
this Letter, my good Grandison! Let me transcribe
from it, rather, for your perusal, happy English Lady!
certain passages in it, so delicate, so worthy of himself,
and of you. 
‘Thousands, of whom he is not worthy,’ he says. 
How, how can he say so? 
‘She has for an admirer every one who knows
her.’ —She shall have me for an admirer, Mrs. Beaumont,
if she will accept of my fourth brother. She
will accept of him, if she deserves the character he
gives her: Let me tell you, Lady, that your heart
is narrower than that of Clementina, if you think it a
diminution to your honour, that he has loved that
Clementina. Why cannot you and I be Sisters? My
love shall be but a sisterly love. You may depend upon
the honour of the Chevalier Grandison. He will do
his duty in every relation of life! What can be your
doubts? 
‘Even Olivia, he says, admires you!’ —And will
such a woman stand upon punctilious observances, like
women of ordinary consequence, having to deal with
common men? —O that I knew this Lady! I would
convince her, that he ‘can do justice to her greater,
and to my lesser merits; and yet not appear to be
divided by a double Love; altho' he should own to
all the world, as he says he will,’ [See, see, Mrs.
Beaumont, these are his very words] ‘his affection
for Clementina, and glory in it!’ 
O Mrs. Beaumont! how my Soul, putting her hand
to her forehead, then to her heart, loves his Soul!
nor but for one obstacle, that would have shaken my
Faith, and endangered my Salvation (had I got over
it) should his Soul only have been the object of my
Love. 
Let me but continue single, my dear friends; indulge
me in the wish that has been so long next my heart; 
and take not advantage of the hopes I have given 

you in writing; and I shall pass happily through this
short life; a life that deserves not the bustle which we
make about it. Ask me not either to ‘set or follow
the example you propose to me:’ I cannot, cannot,
do either. Unkind Chevalier, why, why would you
strengthen their hands, and weaken mine? —Yet, if it
became your justice, what had I but justice to expect
from a just man; who has so eminently performed all
his own duties, and particularly the filial; which he
here calls an article of Religion? 
When she came to the concluding part of this Letter,
and your wishes for her perfect recovery, health
and welfare, and for the happiness of us all; May
every blessing, said she, he wishes us, be his! 
Then folding up the Letter, and putting it in her
bosom; This Letter, and that which accompanied it,
(meaning yours to her) I must read over and over! 
Shall I say, my Grandison, that I half-pity the
lovely Harriet Byron, tho' her name should be changed
to yours? You must love Clementina: Were a sovereign
Princess her rival, you must. Clementina!
who so generously can give up a Love as fervent as
ever glowed in a virgin heart, on superior motives; 
motives which regard Eternity; and receive joy in
the prospect of your happiness with another woman,
on a persuasion that that woman can make you happier
than she herself could, because of a difference in
Religion. 
My sister choosing to retire to her closet, to reperuse
the two Letters, Mrs. Beaumont, knowing our
curiosity, put down what had passed; intending, as
she said, to write a copy of it for you. 
How were we all, on perusing it, charmed with
our Clementina! —I insisted, that nothing, at present,
should be said to her of the Count of Belvedere, and
of our wishes in his favour. My father gave into my
opinion. He said, he thought the properest time to 

mention the Count to her was, when we had an answer
to the Letter I wrote to you on the 5th current,
if that could give us assurances that you had made your
addresses to the charming Byron, and were encouraged. 
The General was impatient; but he acquiesced,
on finding every one come into my motion; 
but said, that if all this lenity did not do, he must
beg leave to have his own measures pursued. 
* *
Some little particularity has appeared in the dear
creature since I have written the above. She has been
exceedingly earnest with her mother, to use her interest
with my father, and us, to be allowed to go to
England: But desires not the permission till you are
actually married. She pleads my health, because of
the salutary springs you mentioned to me. 
Several other pleas she offered; but, to say truth,
they carried with them such an air of flightiness, that
I am loth to mention them: Yet all of them were
innocent, all of them were even laudable. But (shall
I say?) that some of them appeared too romantic for a
settled brain to be so earnest, as she was, in having
them carried into execution. 
We have no doubt, but all her view is, to avoid
marriage, by such a strange excursion. Dear creature,
said the Bishop, speaking of her just now, the veil denied
her, she must have some point to carry: I wish
we saw less rapidity in her manner. 
I, Grandison, for my part, remember how much she
and we all suffered by denying her the farewel-visit
from you, on your taking leave of Italy the time before
the last. 
But we think an expedient has offered, that will
divert her from this wildness, as I must call it: Mrs.
Beaumont has requested, that she may be allowed to
take her with her to Florence for some weeks. Clementina
is pleased with our readiness to oblige them
both; and they will soon go. 

But all this time she is uniform and steady in her
wishes for your marriage. She delights to hear Mrs.
Beaumont talk of the perfections of the Lady to whom
we are all desirous of hearing you are united. You
had written, it seems, to Mrs. Beaumont, a character
given of this young Lady by Olivia, upon a personal
knowlege of her. Mrs. Beaumont shewed it to Clementina. 
How generously did the dear creature rejoice in it! 
Just such a woman, said she, did I wish for the Chevalier. 
Olivia has shewn greatness of mind in this
instance. Perhaps I have thought too hardly of Olivia. 
Little did I think, I should ever have requested a
copy of any-thing written by Olivia. Ill-will disables
us from seeing those beauties in the person who is the
object of it, which would otherwise strike us to her
advantage. You must oblige me, added she, with a
copy of this Extract. 
Oct. 20. N.S. 
You will be pleased, I know, my Grandison, with
every particular that shall tend to demonstrate the
pleasure the dear Clementina takes in hoping you will
be soon the happy man we all wish you to be. 
This morning she came down with her work into
my chamber. I invite myself, Jeronymo, said she. 
I will sit down by you, till you are disposed to rise. 
She then, of her own motion, began to talk of you; 
and I, putting it to her (as her mother did yesterday)
whether she would be really glad to hear of your nuptials,
received the same answer she then made; She
sincerely should: She hoped the next Letters would
bring an account that it was so. But then, Jeronymo,
continued she, I shall be teazed, persecuted. Let me
not, my brother, be persecuted. I don't know, whether
downright compulsion is not more tolerable than
over-earnest entreaty. A child, in the first instance,
may contract herself, as I may say, within her own
compass; may be hardened: But the entreaty of such 

friends as undoubtedly mean one's good, dilates
and disarms one's heart, and makes one wish to
oblige them; and so renders one miserable, whether
we do or do not comply. Believe me, Jeronymo,
there is great cruelty in persuasion, and still more to
a soft and gentle temper, than to a stubborn one:
Persuaders know not what they make such a person
suffer. 
My dearest Clementina, said I, you have shewn so
glorious a magnanimity, that it would be injuring you,
to suppose you are not equal to every branch of duty. 
God forbid that you should be called to sustain an unreasonable
trial—In a reasonable one, you must be
victorious. 
Ah Jeronymo! How little do I deserve this fine
compliment! —Magnanimity, my brother! —You
know not what I yet, at times, suffer! —And
have you not seen my reason vanquished in the
unequal conflict? She wept. But let the Chevalier
be married, and to the Angel that is talked of; and
let me comfort myself, that he is not a sufferer by
my with-holding my hand—And then let me be indulged
in the single life, in a place consecrated to retirement
from this vain world; and we shall both be
happy! 
Mrs. Beaumont came to seek her. I prevailed on
her to sit down, and on my sister to stay a little longer. 
I extolled my sister to her: She joined in the just
praise. But one act of magnanimity, said Mrs. Beaumont,
seems wanting to complete the greatness of
your character, my Love, in this particular case of the
expected marriage of the Chevalier Grandison. 
What is that, Mrs. Beaumont?—all attention. 
You see his doubts, his apprehensions, of appearing
worthy of the Lady so highly spoken of, because of
that delicacy of situation (which, as you observe, Olivia
also hints at) from what may be called a divided
Love: Miss Byron may very well imagine, as his 

Love of you commenced before he knew her, that
she may injure you if she receive his addresses: You
had the generosity to wish, when you were reading
those his apprehensions, that you knew the Lady, and
were able to influence her in his favour. 
Well, Mrs. Beaumont— 
Can I doubt that Lady Clementina is able to set her
name to the noble sentiments, that so lately, on reading
his Letter, flowed from her lips? 
What would Mrs. Beaumont have me do? 
Let me lead you to your own closet. Pen, ink,
and paper, are always before you there. Assume your
whole noble Self, and we shall see what that assumption
will produce. 
All that is in my power, to do, replied she, for
promoting the happiness of a man who has suffered
so much through my means, it is my duty to do. 
She gave her hand to Mrs. Beaumont; who led her
to her closet, and left her there. The following is
the result. Generous, noble creature! —But does it
not shew a raised imagination? especially in the disposition
of the lines? 

Best of Men! Be ye One. 
Best of Women! Be ye One. 
Clementina wishes it! 
Grandison, Lady, will make you happy. 
Be it your study to make Him so!— 
Happy, as Clementina would have made him, 
Had not obstacles invincible intervened. 
This will lessen her regrets: 
For 
His Felicity, Temporal and Eternal, 
Was ever the wish next her heart. 
GOD be merciful to you both, 
And lead you into his paths: 
Then will everlasting Happiness be your portion. 
Be it the portion of Clementina!— 

Pray for Her!— 
That, after this transitory life is over, 
She may partake of Heavenly Bliss: 
And 
(Not a stranger to you, Lady, Here) 
Rejoice with you both Hereafter! 
Clementina della Porretta. 

The admirable creature gave this to Mrs. Beaumont:
Send this, madam, said she, if you think
proper, to your friend and my friend, the Chevalier
Grandison. Tell him, that I shall think myself very
happy, if it may serve as a testimonial, to the Lady
whose merits intitle her to his Love, of my sincere
wishes for their mutual happiness: Tell him, that at
present I wish for nothing more ardently, than to hear
of his Nuptials being celebrated. 
Dear Grandison! let your next give us an opportunity
to felicitate you on this desirable event. In this
wish joins every one of a family to whom you are,
and ever will be, dear. Witness, for them all, 
The Marquis and Marchioness della Porretta. 
I. T. R. Bishop of Nocera. 
Jeronymo della Porretta. 
J. P. M. Marescotti. 
Hortensia Beaumont. 

