



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

And now it is time to confess (and yet I know
that thy Conjectures are aforehand with my Exposition)
that this Captain Tomlinson, who is so great
a favourite with my Charmer, and who takes so much
delight in healing breaches, and reconciling differences,
is neither a greater man nor a less, than honest Patrick
McDonald, attended by a discarded footman of his own
finding out. 
Thou knowest what a various-lifed rascal he is; 
and to what better hopes born and educated. But
that ingenious knack of Forgery, for which he was
expelled the Dublin-University, and a detection since
in Evidenceship, have been his ruin. For these have
thrown him from one Country to another; and at
last, into the way of life, which would make him a
fit Husband for Miss Howe's Townsend with her contrabands. 
He is, thou knowest, admirably qualified
for any enterprize that requires adroitness and solemnity. 
And can there, after all, be a higher piece 

of justice, than to keep one Smuggler in readiness to
play against another? 
‘Well but, Lovelace (methinks thou questionest)
how camest thou to venture upon such a contrivance
as this, when, as thou hast told me, the
Lady used to be a month at a time at this Uncle's; 
and must therefore, in all probability, know, that
there was not a Captain Tomlinson in all the
neighbourhood; at least no one of the name so
intimate with him, as this man pretends to be?’— 
This objection, Jack, is so natural a one, that I
could not help observing to my Charmer, that she
must surely have heard her Uncle speak of this gentleman. 
No, she said, she never had. Besides, she
had not been at her Uncle Harlowe's for near ten
months [This I had heard her say before]: And there
were several gentlemen who used the same Green,
whom she knew not. 
We are all very ready, thou knowest, to believe
what we like. 
And what was the reason, thinkest thou, that she
had not been of so long time at this Uncle's? —Why,
this old sinner, who imagines himself entitled to call
me to account for my Freedoms with the Sex, has
lately fallen into familiarities, as it is suspected, with
his Housekeeper; who assumes airs upon it. —A
cursed deluding Sex! —In Youth, Middle age, or
Dotage, they take us all in. 
Dost thou not see, however, that this Housekeeper
knows nothing, nor is to know any-thing, of the
Treaty of Reconciliation designed to be set on foot; 
and therefore the Uncle always comes to the Captain,
the Captain goes not to the Uncle? And this I surmised
to the Lady. And then it was a natural suggestion,
that the Captain was the rather applied to,
as he is a stranger to the rest of the family—Need I
tell thee the meaning of all this? 
But this intrigue of the Antient is a piece of private 

history, the truth of which my Beloved cares not to
own, and indeed affects to disbelieve: As she does
also some puisny gallantries of her foolish Brother; 
which, by way of recrimination, I have hinted at,
without naming my informant in their family. 
‘Well but, methinks, thou questionest again, Is
it not probable that Miss Howe will make enquiry
after such a man as Tomlinson? —And when she
cannot—’ 
I know what thou wouldst say—But I have no
doubt, that Wilson will be so good, if I desire it, as
to give into my own hands any Letter that may be
brought by Collins to his house, for a week to come. 
And now I hope thou art satisfied. 
I will conclude with a short Story. 
‘Two neighbouring Sovereigns were at war together,
about some pitiful chuck-farthing thing or
other; no matter what; for the least trifles will set
princes and children at loggerheads. Their armies
had been drawn up in battalia some days, and the
news of a decisive action was expected every hour
to arrive at each court. At last, issue was joined; 
a bloody battle was fought; and a fellow, who had
been a spectator of it, arriving with the news of a
complete victory, at the capital of one of the princes
some time before the appointed couriers, the bells
were set a ringing, bonfires and illuminations were
made, and the people went to bed intoxicated with
joy and good liquor. But the next day all was reversed: 
The victorious enemy, pursuing his advantage,
was expected every hour at the gates of
the almost defenceless capital. The first reporter
was hereupon sought for, and found; and being
questioned, pleaded a great deal of merit, in that
he had, in so dismal a situation, taken such a space
of time from the distress of his fellow-citizens, and
given it to festivity, as were the hours between the
false good news and the real bad.’ 

Do thou, Belford, make the application. This I
know, that I have given greater joy to my Beloved,
than she had thought would so soon fall to her share. 
And as the human life is properly said to be chequer-work,
no doubt but a person of her prudence will
make the best of it, and set off so much good against
so much bad, in order to strike as just as balance as
possible. 
The Lady, in three several Letters, acquaints her
friend with the most material passages and conversations
contained in those of Mr. Lovelace preceding. 
These are her words, on relating what
the commission of the pretended Tomlinson was, after
the apprehensions that his distant enquiry had
given her: 
At last, my dear, all these doubts and fears were
cleared up, and banished; and, in their place, a delightful
prospect was opened to me. For it comes
happily out (but at present it must be an absolute Secret,
for reasons which I shall mention in the sequel)
that the gentleman was sent by my Uncle Harlowe
[I thought he could not be angry with me for ever]; 
all owing to the conversation that passed between
your good Mr. Hickman and him. For although
Mr. Hickman's application was too harshly rejected
at the time, my Uncle could not but think better of
it afterwards, and of the arguments that worthy gentleman
used in my favour. 
Who, upon a passionate repulse, would despair of
having a reasonable request granted? —Who would
not, by gentleness and condescension, endeavour to
leave favourable impressions upon an angry mind; 
which, when it comes coolly to reflect, may induce
it to work itself into a condescending temper? To
request a favour, as I have often said, is one thing; 
to challenge it as our due, is another. And what
right has a petitioner to be angry at a repulse, if 

he has not a right to demand what he sues for as a
debt? 
She describes Captain Tomlinson, on his breakfast visit,
to be, a grave good sort of man. And in another
place, a genteel man, of great gravity, and
a good aspect; she believes upwards of fifty
years of age. ‘I liked him, says she, as soon
as I saw him.’ 
As her prospects are now, as she says, more favourable
than heretofore, she wishes, that her hopes
of Mr. Lovelace's to often promised reformation
were better grounded than she is afraid they
can be. 
We have both been extremely puzzled, my dear,
says she, to reconcile some parts of Mr. Lovelace's
character with other parts of it: His good with his
bad; such of the former in particular, as, His generosity
to his tenants; His bounty to the innkeeper's
Daughter; His readiness to put me upon doing kind
things by my good Norton, and others. 
A strange mixture in his mind, as I have told him! 
For he is certainly (as I have reason to say, looking
back upon his past behaviour to me in twenty instances)
a hard-hearted man. —Indeed, my dear, I
have thought more than once, that he had rather see
me in tears, than give me reason to be pleased with
him. 
My Cousin Morden says, that free livers are remorsless
(a) . And so they must be in the very nature
of things. 
Mr. Lovelace is a proud man. We have both long
ago observed, that he is. And I am truly afraid,
that his very Generosity is more owing to his Pride 

and his Vanity, than to that Philanthropy (shall I call
it?) which distinguishes a beneficent mind. 
Money he values not, but as a means to support
his Pride and his Independence. And it is easy, as I
have often thought, for a person to part with a secondary
appetite, when, by so doing, he can promote
or gratify a first. 
I am afraid, my dear, that there must have been
some fault in his Education. His natural byas was
not, I fansy, sufficiently attended to. He was instructed
perhaps (as his power was likely to be large)
to do good and beneficent actions; but not, I doubt,
from proper motives. 
If he had, his Generosity would not have stopt at
Pride, but would have struck into Humanity; and
then would he not have contented himself with doing
praise-worthy things by Fits and Starts, or, as if
relying on the doctrine of Merits, he hoped by a
good action to atone for a bad one (a) ; but he would
have been uniformly noble, and done the good for
its own sake. 
O my dear! what a Lot have I drawn! Pride
this poor man's virtue; and Revenge his other predominating
quality! —This one consolation, however, 

remains: He is not an Infidel, an Unbeliever: 
Had he been an Infidel, there would have been no
room at all for hope of him; but (priding himself,
as he does, in his fertile invention) he would have
been utterly abandoned, irreclaimable, and a savage. 
When she comes to relate those occasions, which Mr.
Lovelace in his narrative acknowleges himself to
be affected by, she thus expresses herself: 
He endeavoured, as once before, to conceal his
emotion. But why, my dear, should these men (for
Mr. Lovelace is not singular in this) think themselves
above giving these beautiful proofs of a feeling heart? 
Were it in my power again to chuse, or to refuse, I
would reject the man with contempt, who sought to
suppress, or offered to deny, the power of being visibly
affected upon proper occasions, as either a savage-hearted
creature, or as one who was so ignorant of
the principal glory of the human nature, as to place
his pride in a barbarous insensibility. 
These lines translated from Juvenal by Mr. Tate,
I have been often pleased with: 

 Compassion proper to mankind appears:
Which nature witness'd, when she lent us Tears.
Of tender sentiments We only give
These proofs: To weep is Our prerogative:
To shew by pitying looks, and melting eyes,
How with a suff'ring friend we sympathize.
 Who can all sense of others ills escape,
 Is but a brute at best, in human shape.
&dotup;It cannot but yield me some pleasure, hardly as
I have sometimes thought of the people of the house,
that such a good man, as Captain Tomlinson, had
spoken well of them, upon enquiry. 
&dotup;And here I stop a minute, my dear, to receive,
in fancy, your kind congratulation. 

&dotup;My next, I hope, will confirm my present, and
open still more agreeable prospects. Mean time be
assured, that there cannot possibly any good fortune
befal me, which I shall look upon with equal
delight to that I have in your friendship. 
&dotup;My thankful compliments to your good Mr.
Hickman, to whose kind intervention I am so much
obliged on this occasion, conclude me, my dearest
Miss Howe, 
Your ever-affectionate and grateful
Cl. Harlowe. 