


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Selby House, Jan. 16. 
I Return you inclosed, my Lucy, Mr. Greville's
strange letter. As you asked him for it, he will
have no doubt that you shewed it to me. It is better
therefore, if he make enquiry whether you did or not,
to own it. In this case he will be curious to know
my sentiments upon it. He is sensible that my whole
heart is open to you. 
Tell him, if you think proper, in so many words,
that I am far more displeased with him for his impetuosity,
than gratified by his flattery. 
Tell him, that I think it very hard, that, when
my nearest relations leave me so generously to my
liberty, a man to whom I never gave cause to treat
me with disrespect, should take upon himself to
threaten and controul me. 

Ask him, What are his pretences for following me
to London, or elsewhere? 
If I had not had reasons before to avoid a more than
neighbourly civility to him, he has now furnished me
with very strong ones. The threatening Lover must
certainly make a tyrant Husband. Don't you think
so, Lucy? —But make not supposals of Lover or
Husband to him: These bold men will turn shadows
into substance in their own favour. 
A woman who is so much exalted above what she
can deserve, has reason to be terrified, were she to
marry the complimenter (even could she suppose him
so blinded by his passion as not to be absolutely insincere)
to think of the height she must fall from in
his opinion, when she has put it into his power to
treat her but as what she is. 
Indeed I both despise and fear a very high complimenter. 
—Despise him for his designing flattery, supposing
him not to believe himself; or, if he mean
what he says, for his injudiciousness. I fear him, lest
he should (as in the former case he must hope) be able
to raise a vanity in me, that would sink me beneath
his meanness, and give him cause to triumph over my
folly, at the very time that I am full of my own
wisdom. 
High-strain'd compliments, in short, always pull
me down; always make me shrink into myself. Have
I not some vanity to guard against? I have no doubt
but Mr. Greville wished I should see this letter: And
this gives me some little indignation against myself;
for does it not look as if, from some faults in my conduct,
Mr. Greville had formed hopes of succeeding
by treating me like a fool? 
I hope these gentlemen will not follow me to town,
as they threaten. If they do, I will not see them, if I
can any way avoid it. Yet, for me to appear to them
solicitous on this head, or to desire them not to go, will
be in some measure to lay myself under an obligation to 

their acquiescence. It is not therefore for me to hope
to influence them in this matter, since they expect too
much in return for it from me; and since they will
be ready to found a merit in their passion even for
disobliging me. 
I cannot bear, however, to think of their dangling
after me where-ever I go. These men, my dear,
were we to give them importance with us, would be
greater infringers of our natural freedom than the
most severe Parents; and for their own sakes: Whereas
Parents, if ever so despotic (if not unnatural ones indeed)
mean solely our good, tho' headstrong girls do
not always think so. Yet such, even such, can be
teazed out of their wills, at least out of their duty,
by the men who stile themselves Lovers, when they
are invincible to all the entreaties and commands of
their Parents. 
O that the next eight or ten years of my life, if I
find not in the interim a man on whom my whole
undivided heart can fix, were happily over! As happily
as the last alike important four years! To be able to
look down from the elevation of thirty years, my
principles fix'd, and to have no capital folly to reproach
myself with, what a happiness would that be! 
My Cousin Reeves's time of setting out holds; the
indulgence of my dearest friends continues; and my
resolution holds. But I will see my Nancy before I
set out. What! shall I enter upon a party of pleasure,
and leave in my heart room to reflect, in the
midst of it, that there is a dear suffering friend who
had reason to think I was afraid of giving myself pain,
when I might, by the balm of true love and friendly
soothings, administer comfort to her wounded heart? — 
No, my Lucy, believe me, if I have not generosity
enough, I have selfishness enough, to make me avoid
a sting so severe as this would be, to 
Your Harriet Byron. 

