



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday Evening. 
Just returned from an Airing with my Charmer,
complied with after great importunity. She was
attended by the two Nymphs. They both top their
parts; kept their eyes within bounds; made moral
reflections now-and-then. O Jack! what devils are
women, when all tests are got over, and we have
completely ruined them! 
The coach carried us to Hamstead, to Highgate,
to Muswell-hill; back to Hamstead to the Upper-Flask: 
There, in compliment to the Nymphs, my
Beloved consented to alight, and take a little repast. 
Then home early by Kentish Town. 

Delightfully easy she: And so respectful and obliging
I, all the way, and as we walked out upon the
Heath, to view the variegated prospects which that
agreeable elevation affords, that she promised to take
now-and-then a little excursion with me. I think,
Miss Howe, I think, said I to myself, every now-and-then
as we walked, that thy wicked devices are
superseded. 
&dotup;But let me give thee a few particulars of our conversation
in the circumrotation we took, while in
the coach—She had received a Letter from Miss
Howe yesterday, I presumed? 
&dotup;She made no answer. How happy should I
think myself to be admitted into their correspondence! 
I would joyfully make an exchange of communications. 
&dotup;So, tho' I hoped not to succeed by her consent
[and little did she think I had so happily in part succeeded
without it] I thought it not amiss to urge
for it, for several reasons: Among others, that I
might account to her for my constant employment
at my pen; in order to take off her jealousy,
that she was the subject of thy correspondence and
mine: And that I might justify my secrecy and uncommunicativeness
by her own. 
&dotup;I proceeded therefore—That I loved Familiar-letter-writing,
as I had more than once told her,
above all the species of writing: It was writing
from the heart (without the fetters prescribed by
method or study) as the very word Cor-respondence
implied. Not the heart only; the soul was in it. 
Nothing of body, when friend writes to friend; 
the mind impelling sovereignly the vassal-fingers. 
It was, in short, friendship recorded; friendship
given under hand and seal; demonstrating that the
parties were under no apprehension of changing
from time or accident, when they so liberally gave
testimonies, which would always be ready, on 

failure, or infidelity, to be turned against them. — 
For my own part, it was the principal diversion I
had in her absence: But for this innocent amusement,
the distance she so frequently kept me at,
would have been intolerable. 
&dotup;Sally knew my drift; and said, She had had the
honour to see two or three of my letters, and of
Mr. Belford's; and she thought them the most entertaining
that she had ever read. 
&dotup;My friend Belford, I said, had a happy talent in
the Letter-writing way; and upon all subjects. 
&dotup;I expected my Beloved would have been inquisitive
after our subjects: But (lying perdue, as
I saw) not a word said she. So I touched upon
this article myself. 
&dotup;Our topics were various and diffuse: Sometimes
upon literary articles [She was very attentive upon
this]; sometimes upon the public entertainments; 
sometimes amusing each other with the fruits of the
different correspondencies we held with persons
abroad, with whom we had contracted friendships; 
sometimes upon the foibles and perfections of our
particular friends; sometimes upon our own present
and future hopes; sometimes aiming at humour
and raillery upon each other. —It might indeed
appear to savour of vanity, to suppose my Letters
would entertain a Lady of her delicacy and
judgment: But yet I could not but say, that perhaps
she would be far from thinking so hardly of
me as sometimes she had seemed to do, if she were
to see the Letters which generally passed between
Mr. Belford and me [I hope, Jack, thou hast
more manners, than to give me the lye, tho' but
in thy heart]. 
&dotup;She then spoke: After declining my compliment
in such a manner, as only a person could do, who
deserved it, she said, For her part, she had always
thought me a man of sense [A man of sense, Jack! 

What a niggardly praise!] —And should therefore
hope, that, when I wrote, it exceeded even my
speech: For that it was impossible, be the Letters
written in as easy and familiar a style as they would,
but that they must have that advantage from sitting
down to write them which prompt speech could
not always have. She should think it very strange,
therefore, if my Letters were barren of sentiment; 
and as strange, if I gave myself liberties upon premeditation,
which could have no excuse at all, but
from a thoughtlessness, which itself wanted excuse. 
—But if Mr. Belford's Letters and mine were upon
subjects so general, and some of them equally
(she presumed) instructive and entertaining, she
could not but say, that she should be glad to see
any of them; and particularly those which Miss
Martin had seen and praised. 
&dotup;This was put close. 
&dotup;I looked at her, to see if I could discover any
tincture of jealousy in this hint; that Miss Martin
had seen what I had not shewn to her. But she did
not look it: So I only said, I should be very proud
to shew her not only those, but all that passed between
Mr. Belford and me; but I must remind
her, that she knew the condition. 
&dotup;No, indeed! with a sweet lip pouted out, as
saucy as pretty; implying a lovely scorn, that yet
can only be lovely in youth so blooming, and beauty
so divinely distinguished. 
&dotup;How I long to see such a motion again! Her
mouth only can give it. 
&dotup;But I am mad with Love—Yet eternal will be the
distance, at the rate I go on: Now fire, now ice,
my soul is continually upon the hiss, as I may say. 
In vain, however, is the trial to quench—what,
after all, is unquenchable. 
&dotup;Pry'thee, Belford, forgive my nonsense, and my
Vulcan-like metaphors—Did I not tell thee, not 

that I am sick of Love, but that I am mad with it? 
Why brought I such an angel into such a house?
into such company? —And why do I not stop my
ears to the Sirens, who, knowing my aversion to
wedlock, are perpetually touching that string? 
&dotup;I was not willing to be answered so easily: I
was sure, that what passed between two such young
Ladies (friends so dear) might be seen by everybody: 
I had more reason than any-body to wish to
see the Letters that passed between her and Miss
Howe; because I was sure they must be full of
admirable instruction, and one of the dear correspondents
had deigned to wish my entire reformation. 
&dotup;She looked at me, as if she would look me thro': 
I thought I felt eye-beam, after eye-beam, penetrate
my shivering reins. —But she was silent. Nor
needed her eyes the assistance of speech. 
&dotup;Nevertheless, a little recovering myself, I hoped
that nothing unhappy had befallen either Miss Howe
or her Mother. The Letter of yesterday sent by a
particular hand; she opening it with great emotion
—seeming to have expected it sooner—were the
reasons for my apprehensions. 
&dotup;We were then at Muswell-hill: A pretty country
within the eye, to Polly, was the remark, instead of
replying to me. 
&dotup;But I was not so to be answered—I should expect
some charming subjects and characters from
two such pens: I hoped every-thing went on well
between Mr. Hickman and Miss Howe. Her Mother's
heart, I said, was set upon that match: Mr.
Hickman was not without his merits: He was what
they Ladies called a Sober man: But I must needs
say, that I thought Miss Howe deserved a husband
of a very different cast! 
&dotup;This, I supposed, would have engaged her into
a subject from which I could have wiredrawn something: 

—For Hickman is one of her favourites— 
Why, I can't divine, except for the sake of opposition
of character to that of thy honest friend. 
&dotup;But she cut me short by a look of disapprobation,
and another cool remark upon a distant
view; and, How far off, Miss Horton, do you think
that clump of trees may be? pointing out of the
coach—So I had done. 
&dotup;Here endeth all I have to write concerning our
conversation on this our agreeable airing.&dotup; 
We have both been writing ever since we came
home. I am to be favoured with her company for
an hour, before she retires to rest. 
All that obsequious Love can suggest, in order to
engage her tenderest sentiments for me against tomorrow's
sickness, will I aim at when we meet. 
But at parting will complain of a disorder in my
stomach. 
* *
We have met. All was Love and unexceptionable
Respect on my part. Ease and Complaisance
on hers. She was concerned for my Disorder. So
sudden! —Just as we parted! But it was nothing. I
should be quite well by morning. 
Faith, Jack, I think I am sick already. Is it possible
for such a giddy fellow as me to persuade myself
to be ill? I am a better Mimic at this rate than I
wish to be. But every nerve and fibre of me is always
ready to contribute its aid, whether by health
or by ailment, to carry a resolved-on roguery into
execution. 
Dorcas has transcribed for me the whole Letter of
Miss Howe, dated Sunday May 14 (a) . of which before
I had only extracts. She found no other Letter
added to that parcel: But this, and that which I copied
myself in character last Sunday while she was at 

church, relating to the smuggling scheme (a) , are
enough for me. 
* *
Dorcas tells me, that her Lady has been removing
her papers from the mahogany-chest into a
wainscot-box, which held her linen, and which she
put into her dark closet. We have no key of that
at present. No doubt but all her Letters, previous
to those I have come at, are in that box. Dorcas is
uneasy upon it: Yet hopes that her Lady does not
suspect her; for she is sure that she laid in everything
as she found it. 