



To the same. 


My honoured Papa and Mamma,
I Have received your joint Commands, and intend
to set out on Wednesday next Week. I hope I
shall find my Papa in better Health than he is at
present, and in better Humour too; for I am very
sorry he is displeased with my petitioning for a little
longer Time in London. It is very severe to impute 

to me Want of Duty and Affection to you both,
which would, if deserved, make me very unworthy
of your Indulgence. 
Mr. B. and his dear Lady are resolved to accompany
me in their Coach and Six, till your Chariot
meets me, if you will be pleased to permit it so to
do; and even set me down at your Gate, if it do
not; but he vows, that he will not alight at your
House, nor let his Lady neither. But I say, that
this is a misplaced Resentment, because I ought to
think it a Favour, that you have indulg'd me so
much as you have. And yet even this is likewise a
Favour on their Side to me, because it is an Instance
of their Fondness for your unworthy Daughter's
Company. 
Mrs. B. is, if possible, more lovely since her Lying-in,
than before. She has so much Delight in
her Nursery, that I fear it will take her off from her
Pen, which will be a great Loss to all whom she
used to oblige with her Correspondence. Indeed,
this new Object of her Care is a charming Child; 
and she is exceedingly pleased with her Nurse;–––for
she is not permitted, as she very much desired, to
perform that Office herself. 
She makes a great Proficiency in the French and
Italian Languages; and well she may; for she has
the best Schoolmaster in the World, and one whom
she loves better than Lady ever loved a Tutor. He
is lofty, and won't be disputed with; but I never
saw a more polite and tender Husband, for all that; 
and well may a Lady, bless'd as she is, bear with a
little Imperiousness sometimes; which, however,
she nips in the Bud, by her Sweetness of Temper,
and ready Compliance. But then he is a Man of
Sense; and a Lady need be the less concern'd to
yield a Point to a Man of Sense, and of Generosity,
as he is: Who is incapable of treating her the worse 

for her Resignation and Complacency. Whenever
I marry, it shall be to a Man of Sense, and a generous
Man, against the World; for such an one cannot
treat a Woman ill; as Mrs. B. often observes. 
We had a splendid Christening, and exceedingly
well order'd, and every body was highly delighted at
it. The Quality Gossips went away but on Tuesday;
and my Lady Davers took Leave of her charming
Sister, with all the Blessings, and all the Kindness,
and affectionate Fondness to her, that could be express'd. 
Mr. Andrews, that worthy old Man, came up to
see his Grandson Yesterday, and in order to attend
his Wife down. You would never have forgotten
the good Man's Behaviour (had you seen it) to his
Daughter, and to the charming Child: I wish I could
describe it to you; but I am apt to think Mrs. B.
will take notice of it to Lady Davers; and if she
enters into the Description of it while I stay, I will
beg a Copy of it, to bring down with me; because
I know you were pleas'd with the sensible, plain,
good Man, and his Ways, when at the Hall in your
Neighbourhood, 
The Child is named William, that I should have
told you; but I write without any manner of Connection,
just as things come uppermost: But don't,
my dear Papa, construe this too as an Instance of
Disrespect. I wish you was not so angry with me; 
it makes me almost afraid to see you! —As I said, I
shall set out next Wednesday in Mr. B.'s Coach and
Six; and as we shall keep the main Road all the
Way, I shall see, by my being met, how I am to
be received, or whether pardon'd or not. Mr. B.
says, he will take me back again, if my dear Papa
frown at me ever so little, and he will not deliver
me up into any other Hands but his neither. 

We have been at several Plays, and at the Opera
divers times; for we make the best of our Time,
as it is so short; and we fear'd how it would be; 
tho' I hoped I should not have Anger neither. 
Mrs. B. is taken up with writing, between whiles,
Remarks upon the Plays, &c. she sees, in a little
Book, for Lady Davers. She sent that Lady her Remarks
upon one or two, with which she is so well
pleased, that she will not let even her Nursery pass
for an Excuse from writing on upon those Subjects; 
and this will so ingross the dear Lady's Pen, that I
shall not be favour'd so much as I used to be; but
Lady Davers promises me to lend me the Book,
when she has read it; so that will be some Satisfaction. 
I see but one thing that can possibly happen to
disturb the Felicity of this charming Couple; and
that I will mention, in Confidence. Mr. B. and
Mrs. B. and myself, were at the Masquerade, before
she lay-in: There was a Lady greatly taken with
Mr. B. She was in a Nun's Habit, and followed
him where-ever he went; and Mr. Turner, a Gentleman
of one of the Inns of Court, who visits
Mr. B. sometimes, and is an old Acquaintance of
his, tells me by the Bye, that the Lady took an Opportunity
to unmask to Mr. B. Mr. Turner has
since found she is the young Countess Dowager of
&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;, a fine Lady; but not the most prudent in her
Conduct of late, since her Widowhood. And he
has since discovered, as he says, that a Letter or two
has passed between Mr. B. and that Lady, if not
more. 
Now Mrs. B. with all her Perfections, has, as
she owns, a little Spice of Jealousy; and should she
be once alarm'd, I tremble for the Consequences
to both their Happiness. 

It is my Opinion, that if ever any thing makes a
Misunderstanding between them, it will be from
some such Quarter as this. But 'tis a thousand pities
it should. And I hope, as to the actual Correspondence
begun, Mr. Turner is mistaken. 
But be it as it will, I would not for the World,
the first Hints of this Matter should come from me. 
—Mr. B. is a very enterprising and gallant Gentleman,
is a fine Figure of a Man, and very genteel, and I
don't wonder a Lady may like him. But he seems
so pleas'd, so satisfy'd with his Lady, and carries it
to her with so much Tenderness and Affection, that
I hope her Merit, and this his Affection for her, will
secure his conjugal Fidelity. 
If it prove otherwise, and she discovers it, I know
no one that would be more miserable than Mrs. B.
as well from Motives of Piety and Virtue, as from
the excessive Love she bears him. —But I hope for
better Things, for both their sakes.— 
My humble Thanks for all your Indulgences to
me, with Hopes, that you will not, my dear Papa
and Mamma, hold your Displeasure against me,
when I throw myself at your Feet, as I now soon
hope to do, conclude me 
Your dutiful Daughter,
M. Darnford. 

