


Mr. Deane, To Mrs. Selby. 


London, Friday Night, Mar. 17. 
You wished me, my dear Mrs. Selby, as I was
obliged to go to London on my own affairs, to
call at Colnebrooke, and to give you my observations
on the state of matters there; and whether there were
any likelihood of the event we are all so desirous
should be brought about; and particularly, if an opportunity
offered, that I would at distance sound Sir
Charles himself on the subject. I told you, that you
need not be afraid of my regard to our dear child's
delicacy; and that she herself should not have reason
to mistrust me on this nice subject. 
It seems his great engagements in town, and some
he has had in Kent, have hindered him from giving
Lord L. and his sisters much of his company, tho' 

our Harriet is there; which they all extremely regret. 
I dined at Colnebrooke. Lord L. is a very worthy
and agreeable man. Lady L. and Miss Grandison are
charming women. Miss Jervois is a pretty young
Lady. —But more of her by-and-by. —The cousin
Grandison you spoke of, is gone down to Grandison-hall; 
whither Sir Charles himself thinks shortly of
going—But this and other distant matters I refer to
our Harriet's own account. 
My visit to Sir Charles is most in my head, and I
will mention that, and give a place to other observations
afterwards. 
After dinner I pursued my journey to London. As
my own business was likely to engage me for the whole
time I had to stay in town, I alighted at his house in
St. James's Square; and was immediately, on sending
in my name, introduced to him. 
Let me stop to say, He is indeed a very fine gentleman. 
Majesty and sweetness are mingled in every
feature of his face; and the latter, rather than the
former, predominates in his whole behaviour. Well
may Harriet love him. 
I told him, that I hoped, on my coming to town
on particular affairs, he would excuse the intrusion of
a man who was personally a stranger to him; but
who had long wished for an opportunity to thank him
for the relief he had given to a young lady in whom I
claimed an interest that was truly paternal. At the
same time I congratulated him on the noble manner
in which he had extricated himself, to the confusion
of men, whom he had taught to find out, and to be
ashamed, that they were savages. 
He received my compliments as a man might be
supposed to do, to whom praise is not a new thing; 
and made me very handsome ones, declaring himself
acquainted with my character, with my connexions with
your family, and with one of the most excellent of 

young Ladies. This naturally introduced the praises
of our Harriet; in which he joined in so high and so
just a strain, that I saw his heart was touched. I am
sure it is: So set yours at rest. It must do. Everything
is moving, and that not slowly, to the event so
desirable. I led to the graces of her person; he to
those of her mind: He allowed her to be, for both,
one of the most perfect beauties he had ever seen. In
short, Mrs. Selby, I am convinced, that the important
affair will ripen of itself. His sisters, Lord L.
Dr. Bartlett, all avowedly in our lovely girl's favour,
and her merit so extraordinary; it must do. Don't
you remember what the old song says? 

When Phœbus does his beams display,
To tell men gravely, that 'tis day,
 Is, to suppose them blind.

All I want, methinks, is, to have them oftener together. 
Idleness, I believe, is a great friend to Love. 
I wish his affairs would let him be a little idle. They
must be dispatched soon, be they what they will; for
Lord L. said, that when he is master of a subject, his
execution is as swift as thought, Sir Charles hinted,
that he should soon be obliged to go to France. Seas
are nothing to him. Dr. Bartlett said, that he considers
all nations as joined on the same continent; and
doubted not but if he had a call, he would undertake
a journey to Constantinople or Pekin, with as little
difficulty as some others would (he might have named
me for one) to the Land's-end. Indeed he appears to
be just that kind of man. Yet he seems not to have
any of that sort of fire in his constitution, that goes
off with a bounce, and leaves nothing but vapour and
smoke behind it. 
You are in doubt about our girl's fortune. It is not
a despicable one. He may, no question, have a woman
with a much greater; and so may she a man. —What
say you to Lady D's proposal, rejected for his sake; 

at hap-hazard too, as the saying is? But let it once
come to that question, and leave it to me to answer it. 
You bid me remark how Harriet looks. She is as
lovely as ever: but I think, not quite so lively, and
somewhat paler; but it is a clear and healthy, not a
sickly paleness: And there is a languor in her fine
eyes, that I never saw in them before. She never was
a pert girl; but she has more meekness and humility
in her countenance, than, methinks, I would wish her
to have; because it gives to Miss Grandison, who has
fine spirits, some advantages, in conversation, over
Harriet, that, if she had, methinks she should not
take. But they perfectly understand one another. 
But now for a word or two about Miss Jervois. I
could not but take notice to our Miss Byron, of the
greediness, with which she eats and drinks the praises
given her guardian; of the glow that overspreads her
cheeks, and of a sigh that now-and-then seems to
escape even her own observation, when he is spoken
of; so like a niece of mine, that drew herself in, and
was afterwards unhappy; and by these symptoms conclude,
that this young creature is certainly giving way
to Love. She has a very great fortune, is a pretty girl,
and an improving beauty. She is tall and womanly. 
I thought her sixteen or seventeen; but, it seems, she
is hardly fourteen. There is as much difference in
girls, as in fruits, as to their maturing, as I may say. 
My mother, I remember, once said of an early bloom
in a niece of her's, that such were born to woe. I
hope it won't be so with this; for she certainly is a
good young creature, but has not had great opportunities
of knowing either the world, or herself. Brought
up in a confined manner in her father's house at Leghorn,
till twelve or thirteen; what opportunities could
she have? No mother's wings to be sheltered under; 
Her mother's wickedness giving occasion the more to
streighten her education, and at a time of life so young,
and in so restraining a country as Italy, for girls and 

young maidens; and, since brought over, put to board
with a retired country gentlewoman—What can she
know, poor thing? She has been but a little while
with Miss Grandison, and that but as a guest: So that
the world before her is all new to her: And, indeed,
there seems to be in her pretty wonder, and honest
declarations of her whole heart, a simplicity that
sometimes borders upon childishness, tho' at other
times a kind of womanly prudence. I am not afraid
of her on our Harriet's account; and yet Harriet
(Lover-like, perhaps!) was alarmed at my hinting it
to her: But I am on her own. I wish, as I said before,
Sir Charles was more among them: He would soon
discover whose Love is fit to be discountenanced, and
whose to be encouraged; and, by that means, give ease
to twenty hearts. For I cannot believe that such a
man as this would be guilty (I will call it) of reserve
to such a young Lady as ours, were he but to have
the shadow of a thought that he has an interest in her
heart. 
My affairs are more untoward than I expected:
But on my return to Peterborough I will call at Shirley-house
and Selby-manor—and then (as I hope to see
Sir Charles again, either in London, or at Colnebrooke)
I will talk to you of all these matters. Mean time,
believe me to be 
Your affectionate and faithful humble servant,
Thomas Deane. 

