


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


My Lord repeated his request, that he might have
Sir Thomas's consent to his nuptials, upon his
own terms; and promised never to expect a single
shilling in dowry, but to leave the whole of that to
time, and to his own convenience and pleasure. 
We know, said Sir Thomas, what all this means. 
You talk, my Lord, like a young man. You ought
not to think (You once said it yourself) of involving a
young woman you love, as well as yourself, in difficulties,
I know the world, and what is best to be done,
if you will think no more of my daughter. I hope she
has discretion. First love is generally first folly. It is
seldom fit to be encouraged. Your quality, my Lord,
to say nothing of your merit, will procure you a rich 

wife from the city. And the city now is as genteel,
as polite, as the court was formerly. The wives and
daughters of citizens, poor fellows! are apes of us
gentry; and succeed pretty well, as to outward appearance,
in the mimicry. You will, by this means,
shake off all your father's sins. I speak in the language
of young fellows, who expect a father to live
solely for them, and not for himself. Some sober
young men of quality and fortune, affrighted at the gaiety
and extravagance of the modern women, will find
out my girls: Who, I hope, will have patience. If
they have not, let them pursue their inclinations: Let
them take their fill of love, as Solomon says; and if
they run their heads into an hedge, let them stick there
by the horns, with all my heart! 
See, my dear, what a man a rakish father is! —O
my good Lady Grandison, how might your choice
have punished your children! 
I pray to God, Sir Thomas, said my Lord, bowing,
but angry; I pray to God, to continue me in a different
way of thinking form yours, if this be yours. Give
me leave to say, you are too young a gentleman to be
a father of grown-up children. But I must love Miss
Grandison; and still, if possible, poor young lady!
more than ever, for what has passed in this conversation. 
And saying this, he withdrew. 
Sir Thomas was very angry at this spirited speech. 
He sent for his daughter, and forbad her to receive
my Lord's addresses. He order'd her never to think
of him: And directing Miss Charlotte to be called in,
repeated his commands before her; and threatened to
turn them both out of his house, if they presumed to
encourage any address, but with his knowlege. And
don't think, said he, of going on to engage your affections,
as a sensual forwardness is called, and then hope
to take advantage of my weakness, to countenance your
own. I know the world: I know your sex. —Your
sister, I see, Charlotte, is a whining fool: See how 

she whimpers! Begone from my presence, Caroline! 
And remember, Charlotte (for I suppose this impertinent
Lord's address to your sister will go near to set
you agog) that I expect, whether absent or present, to
know of any application that may be made to you, before
your liking has taken root in love, as it is called,
and while my advice may have the weight that the permission
or dissent of a father ought to have. 
They both wept, courtesied, and withdrew. 
At dinner, Miss Caroline begged to be excused attending
her gay and arbitrary father; being excessively
grieved, and unfit, as she desired her sister to say, to be
seen. But he commanded her attendance. 
Miss Charlotte Grandison told me what this wicked
man [Shall I call Sir Charles Grandison's father so?]
said on the occasion: “Womens tears are but, as the
Poet says, the sweat of eyes. Caroline's eyes will
not misbecome them. The more she is ashamed of
herself, the less reason will she give me to be ashamed
of her. —Let me see how the fool looks, now she
is conscious of her folly. Her bashful behaviour
will be an half-confession; and this is the first step
to amendment. Tell her, that a woman's grief for
not having been able to carry her point, has always
been a pleasure to me. I will not be robbed of my
pleasure. She owes it me for the pain she has given
me.” 
Lord L. and she had parted. He had, on his knees,
implored her hand. He would not, he said, either
ask or expect a shilling of her father: His estate would
and should work itself clear, without injury to his sisters,
or postponing their marriage. Her prudence and
generosity he built upon: They would enable him to
be just to every one, and to preserve his own credit. 
He would not, he generously said, for the beloved
daughter's sake, utter one reflecting word upon her father,
after he had laid naked facts before her. Those,
however, would too well justify him, if he did. And 

he again urged for her hand, and for a private marriage. 
Can I bear to think with patience, my dearest
Miss Grandison, added he, that you and your sister,
according to Sir Thomas's scheme, shall be carried to
town, with minds nobler than the minds of any women
in it, as adventurers, as female fortune hunters,
to take the chance of attracting the eyes and hearts of
men, whether worthy or unworthy, purely to save
your father's pocket? No, madam: Believe me, I
love you not for my own sake merely, tho' heaven
knows you are dearer to me than my life, but for yours
as well: And my whole future conduct shall convince
you, that I do. My love, madam, has friendship for its
base; and your worthy brother, once, in an argument,
convinced me, that love might be selfish; that friendship
could not; and that in a pure flame they could not
be disunited; and when they were, that love was a
cover only to a baseness of heart, which taught the
pretender to it to seek to gratify his own passion, at the
expence of the happiness or duty of the object pretended
to be beloved. 
See, my Lucy! —Did we girls ever think of this
nice, but just, distinction before? And is not friendship
a nobler band than love? —But is not Lord L. a
good man? Don't you love him, Lucy? —Why have
I not met with these notions before in the men I have
known? 
But Miss Caroline was not less generous than my
Lord L. No scheme of my father's shall make me
forget, said she, the merits of Lord L. Your Lordship's
affairs will be made easier by time. I will not
embarrass you. Think not yourself under any obligation
to me. Whenever any opportunity offers to make
you easy all at once (for a mind so generous ought not
to be laid under difficulties) embrace it: Only let me
look upon you as my friend, till envy to an happier
woman, or other unworthiness in Caroline Grandison,
make me forfeit your good opinion. 

Generous creature! said my Lord. Never will I
think of any other wife while you are single. Yet will
I not fetter her, who would leave me free. —May I,
madam, hope, if you will not bless me with your
hand now, that my letters will be received? —Your
father, in forbidding my address to you, has forbidden
me his house. He is, and ought to be, master in it. — 
May I hope, madam, a correspondence— 
I am unhappy, said she, that, having such a brother
as sister never had, I cannot consult him. The dear
Charlotte is too partial to me, and too apt to think
of what may be her own case. But, my Lord, I depend
upon your honour, which you have never given
me reason to doubt, that you will not put me upon
doing a wrong thing, either with regard to my duty to
my father, or to my own character. Try me not with
a view to see the power you have over me. That
would be ungenerous. I own you have some: Indeed
a great deal. 

