



To Miss Arabella Harlowe. 
[Inclosed to Miss Howe in the preceding.] 

St. Albans, Apr. 11. 
My dear Sister,
I have, I confess, been guilty of an action which
carries with it a rash and undutiful appearance. 
And I should have thought it an inexcusable one, had
I been used with less severity than I have been of late; 
and had I not had too great reason to apprehend, that
I was to be made a sacrifice to a man I could not bear
to think of. But what is done, is done—Perhaps I
could wish it had not; and that I had trusted to the
relenting of my dear and honoured parents. —Yet this
from no other motives, but those of duty to them. — 
To whom I am ready to return (if I may not be permitted
to retire to The Grove) on conditions which I
before offered to comply with. 
Nor shall I be in any sort of dependence upon the
person by whose means I have taken this truly reluctant
step, inconsistent with any reasonable engagement I 

shall enter into, if I am not farther precipitated. Let
me not have it to say, Now at this important crisis!
that I have a Sister, but not a Friend in that Sister. 
My Reputation dearer to me than life (whatever you
may imagine from the step I have taken) is suffering. 
A little lenity will, even yet, in a great measure, restore
it, and make that pass for a temporary misunderstanding
only, which otherwise will be a stain as durable as
life, upon a creature who has already been treated
with great unkindness, to use no harsher a word. 
For your own sake therefore, for my Brother's sake,
by whom (I must say) I have been thus precipitated,
and for all the family's sake, aggravate not my fault,
if, on recollecting every-thing, you think it one; 
nor by widening the unhappy difference, expose a
Sister for ever—Prays 
Your affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
I shall take it for a very great favour, to have my
cloaths directly sent me, together with Fifty guineas,
which you will find in my Escritoire (of
which I inclose the key); as also the Divinity and
Miscellany classes of my little Library; and, if it
be thought fit, my Jewels—Directed for me, To
be left, till called for, at Mr. Osgood's, near
Soho-Square. 