


Miss Byron. In Continuation.
[On Sir Charles's first Letter from Bologna, Vol. IV.
Letter XL. p. 277.] 


Wednesday, May 31* .
I Am greatly obliged to you, my dear Lady G. for
dispatching to me, in so extraordinary a way, the
first Letter of your brother to Dr. Bartlett. I thank
God for his safe arrival at the destined place; and for
the faint hopes given in it of his friend's life. The
Almighty will do his own work, and in his own way. 
And that must be best. 
You ask me for my opinion of the contents of this
Letter, at large—What can I say? —Thus much I
must say— 
I admire, more and more, your brother: I pity
the family he is gone to comfort and relieve: And I
pray for Clementina and Jeronymo; and this as well
for your brother's sake as theirs. 

He generously rejoices, that he did not pursue his
own Inclinations—I am very happy in what he
says of your Harriet. Indeed, my dear, I am. Tho'
we may be conscious of not deserving the praises bestowed
upon us, yet are we fond of standing high in
the opinion of those we love. Two paragraphs I
have got by heart. I need not tell you which they
are. But, alas! his greatly favour'd friend is not so
free, as he hoped she was. It is a pleasure to me,
however, because it is such to him, that it is not his
fault, but her own, that she is not. 
The Countess, whom he so justly praises, writes
to me; and I answer—But to what purpose? I am
afraid, that a very important observation of his comes
not in time to do me service; since if my prudence is
proportion'd to my trials, I ought to have endeavour'd
to exert it sooner. 
But, it seems, there is an insuperable objection
against the poor Lady's going into a Nunnery. I never
heard of that before. It seems right to the Marchioness,
that the young Lady, who is intitled to a great share
of this world's goods, should not be dedicated to
heaven. This may be so in the family eye, for ought
I know: But I am persuaded, that if there is any
one of it, who would not have pleaded this obstacle to
a divine dedication, it would be Clementina herself. 
And yet I own, I can allow of their regret, that the
cruel Laurana should be a gainer by Clementina's being
lost, as I may say, to the world. 
Your brother's kind remembrance of Mr. and Mrs.
Reeves, is an honour done to me, as well as to them. 
I must take it so, Lady G. And what he says of me
in the paragraph in which he mentions Emily, adds to
the pride he had raised in me before. 
Dr. Bartlett is extremely obliging, in not offering
to with-hold any passage in your brother's Letters from
us. I have let him know, that I think him so; and
have begged him not to spare any-thing out of tenderness 

to me, on a supposition that I may be affected,
or made uneasy, by what your brother shall write to
him. This is speaking very plainly, my dear: But
it is to Dr. Bartlett; and he signified to us, more than
once, that he could not be a stranger to the heart of
your Harriet. 
And now, my dear Lady G. let me ask you, in
my turn, What you think of one passage in your
brother's Letter, of which you have not taken the least
notice in yours to me? “Charlotte, I hope, is happy. 
If she be not, it must be her own fault.” 
You have honestly owned in your last (yet too
roguishly for a true penitent) that it was evidently so
in the debate about being presented. Miss Grandison
used to like the drawing-room well enough. Her
brother has owned, in my hearing, as well as in yours,
that had he not been so long out of England, and,
since his return to it, so seldom in town, he would
have made it a part of his duty, to pay his attendance
there, at proper times. But Lady G. forsooth, disdained
to appear as the property [Reflect but, my dear,
how absurd] of a worthy man, to whom she had
vowed love, honour, and obedience. 
I should not remind you thus of past flippancies,
did not new ones seem to spring up every day. 
For heaven's sake, my dear Lady G. let it not be
carried from England to Italy, that Lord G. is not so
happy with a sister of Sir Charles Grandison, as might
be expected; lest it be asked, Whether that sister,
and this brother, had the same mother. I have written
before all that I could possibly say on this subject. 
You know yourself to be wrong. It would be impertinence
to expostulate further on a duty so known,
and acknowleged: No more, therefore, on this head
(authorize me to say) for ever! 
As to my health—I would fain be well. I am more
sorry, that I am not, for the sake of my friends (who
are incessantly grieving for me) than for my own. I 

have not, I think I have not, any-thing to reproach
myself with; nor yet any-body to reproach me. To
whom have I given cause of triumph over me, by my
ill usage, or insolence to him? I yield to an event to
which I ought to submit: And to a woman, not less, but
more worthy than myself; and who has a prior claim. 
I long to hear of the meeting of this noble pair. 
May it be propitious! May Sir Charles Grandison
have the satisfaction, and the merit with the family, of
being the means of restoring to reason (a greater restoration
than to health) the woman, every faculty
of whose soul ought, in that case, to be devoted to
God, and to him! Methinks I have at present but
one wish; it is, that I may live to see this Lady, if
she is to be the happy woman. Could I, do you think,
Lady G. if I were to have this honour, cordially congratulate
her as Lady Grandison? Heaven only knows! 
But it would be my glory, if I could; for then I should
not scruple to put myself in a rank with Clementina; 
and to demand her hand, as that of my sister. 
But, poor Olivia! —Shall I not pity the unhappy
woman, who, I am afraid, is too short-sighted to
look forward to that only consolation which can
weaken the force of worldly disappointments. 
My cousin Reeves, in a joyful Letter, just now received,
acquaints me with the birth of the fine boy
his wife has presented to him: An event that exceedingly
rejoices us all. He tells me in it, how good
you are. Continue to them, my dear Lady G. your
affectionate regards. They ever loved you: Even for
your very faults, so bewitchingly lively are you. But
I have told Mr. Reeves, that his partiality for you
shews that he feels not for Lord G. as he would for
himself, were his wife a Lady G. 
I will write to my other friends. Dear creature! 
Don't let me say, that I love Lord G. better than I
do Lady G.: Yet, were the aggressor in a quarrel
my own sister, endeared to me by a thousand generous 

offices, I would, I must love the sufferer best; at least,
while he is a sufferer. Witness, 
Harriet Byron. 

