



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, Aug. 25. 
You are very obliging, my dear Miss Howe,
to account to me for your silence. I was easy
in it, as I doubted not, that among such near and
dear friends as you are with, you was diverted from
writing by some such agreeable excursion as that you
mention. 
I was in hopes that you had given over, at this
time of day, those very sprightly airs, which I have
taken the liberty to blame you for as often as you
have given me occasion to do so; and that has been
very often. 
I was always very grave with you upon this subject: 
And while your own and a worthy man's future
happiness are in the question, I must enter into it,
whenever you forget yourself, altho' I had not a day
to live: And indeed I am very ill. 
I am sure, it was not your intention to take your
future Husband with you to the little island to make
him look weak and silly among those of your relations
who never before had seen him. Yet do you
think it possible for them (however prepared and resolved
they may be to like him) to forbear smiling at
him when they see him suffering under your whimsical
penances? A modest man should no more be
made little in his own eyes, than in the eyes of others. 
If he be, he will have a diffidence, which will give
an aukwardness to every-thing he says or does: And
this will be no more to the credit of your choice,
than to that of the approbation he meets with from
your friends, or to his own credit. 

I love an obliging, and even an humble deportment
in a man to the woman he addresses. It is a mark
of his politeness, and tends to give her that opinion
of herself, which it may be supposed bashful merit
wants to be inspired with. But if the woman exacts
it with an high hand, she shews not either her own
politeness or gratitude; altho' I must confess she does
her courage. I gave you expectation that I would
be very serious with you. 
O my dear, that it had been my lot (as I was
not permitted to live single) to have met with a man
by whom I could have acted generously and unreservedly! 
Mr. Lovelace, it is now plain, in order to have a
pretence against me, taxed my behaviour to him
with stiffness and distance. You, at one time,
thought me guilty of some degree of Prudery. Difficult
Situations should be allowed for; which often
make seeming occasions for censure unavoidable. I
deserved not blame from him who made mine difficult. 
And you, my dear, if I had had any other
man to deal with, or had he had but half the merit
which Mr. Hickman has, should have found that
my doctrine on this subject should have governed my
practice. 
But to put myself out of the question—I'll tell you
what I should think, were I an indifferent by-stander,
of these high airs of yours, in return for Mr. Hickman's
humble demeanour. ‘The Lady thinks of
having the gentleman, I see plainly, would I say. 
But I see, as plainly, that she has a very great indifference
to him. And to what may this indifference
be owing? To one or all of these considerations,
no doubt: That she receives his addresses
rather from motives of convenience than
choice: That she thinks meanly of his endowments
and intellects; at least more highly of her own:
Or, she has not the generosity to use that power 

with moderation, which his great affection for her
puts into her hands.’ 
How would you like, my dear, to have any of
these things said? 
Then to give but the shadow of a reason for free-livers
and free-speakers to say, or to imagine, that
Miss Howe gives her hand to a man who has no reason
to expect any share in her heart, I am sure you
would not wish that such a thing should be so much
as supposed. Then all the regard from you to come
afterwards; none to be shewn before; must, I should
think, be capable of being construed as a compliment
to the Husband made at the expence of the Wife's
and even of the Sex's delicacy. 
There is no fear that attempts could be formed by
the most audacious [Two Lovelaces there cannot be!]
upon a character so revered for virtue, and so charmingly
spirited, as Miss Howe's: Yet, to have any
man encouraged to despise a Husband by the example
of one who is most concerned to do him honour; 
what, my dear, think you of that? It is but too natural
for envious men (and who that knows Miss
Howe, will not envy Mr. Hickman?) to scoff at,
and to jest upon, those who are treated with or will
bear indignity from a woman. 
If a man so treated have a true and ardent Love for
the woman he addresses, he will be easily over-awed
by her displeasure: And this will put him upon acts
of submission, which will be called Meanness. And
what woman of true spirit would like to have it said,
that she would impose any-thing upon the man from
whom she one day expects protection and defence,
that should be capable of being construed as a meanness,
or unmanly abjectness in his behaviour, even
to herself? —Nay, I am not sure, and I ask it of you,
my dear, to resolve me, whether, in your own opinion,
it is not likely, that a woman of spirit will despise
rather than value more, the man who will take 

patiently an insult at her hands; especially before
company. 
I have always observed, that prejudices in disfavour
of a person at his first appearance, fix deeper, and are
much more difficult to be removed when fixed, than
prejudices in favour: Whether owing to envy, or to
that malignant principle so eminently visible in little
minds, which makes them wish to bring down the
more worthy characters to their own low level, I
pretend not to determine. When once, therefore, a
woman of your good sense gives room to the world
to think she has not an high opinion of the Lover,
whom, nevertheless, she entertains, it will be very
difficult for her afterwards, to make that world think
so well as she would have it, of the Husband she has
chosen. 
Give me leave to observe, that to condescend with
dignity, and to command with such kindness, and
sweetness of manners, as should let the condescension,
while in a single state, be seen and acknowleged, are
points, which a wise woman, knowing her man,
should aim at: And a wise woman, I should think,
would chuse to live single all her life rather than give
herself to a man whom she thinks unworthy of a treatment
so noble. 
But when a woman lets her Lover see, that she
has the generosity to approve of and reward a well-meant
service; that she has a mind that lifts her above
the little captious follies, which some (too licentiously,
I hope) attribute to the Sex in general: That she resents
not (if ever she thinks she has reason to be displeased)
with petulance, or through pride: Nor
thinks it necessary to insist upon little points, to come
at or secure great ones, perhaps not proper to be
aimed at: Nor leaves room to suppose she has so
much cause to doubt her own merit, as to put the
Love of the man she intends to favour, upon disagreeable
or arrogant trials: But lets Reason be 

the principal guide of her actions—She will then never
fail of that true respect, of that sincere veneration,
which she wishes to meet with; and which will make
her judgment after Marriage consulted, sometimes
with a preference to a man's own; at other times,
as a delightful confirmation of his. 
And so much, my beloved Miss Howe, for this subject
now, and I dare say, for ever! 
I will begin another Letter by-and-by, and send
both together. Mean time, I am, &c. 