



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Just come from the women. 
‘Have I gone so far, and am I afraid to go
farther? —Have I not already, as it is evident by her 

behaviour, sinned beyond forgiveness? —A Woman's
tears used to be to me but as water sprinkled on a
glowing fire, which gives it a fiercer and brighter
blaze: What defence has this Lady, but her Tears
and her Eloquence? She was before taken at no weak
advantage. She was insensible in her moments of
trial. Had she been sensible, she must have been
sensible. So they say. The methods taken with her
have augmented her glory and her pride. She has now
a Tale to tell, that she may tell, with honour to herself. 
No accomplice-inclination. She can look me
into confusion, without being conscious of so much
as a thought, which she need to be ashamed of.’ 
This, Jack, is the substance of the womens reasonings
with me. 
To which let me add, that the dear creature now
sees the necessity I am in to leave her. Detecting me
is in her head. My contrivances are of such a nature,
that I must appear to be the most odious of men, if I
am detected on this side Matrimony. And yet I have
promised, as thou seest, that she shall set out to Hamstead
as soon as she pleases in the morning, and that
without condition on her side. 
Dost thou ask, What I meant by this promise? 
No new cause arising, was the proviso on my side,
thou'lt remember. But there will be a new cause. 
Suppose Dorcas should drop the promisory-note given
her by her Lady? Servants, especially those who cannot
read or write, are the most careless people in the
world of written papers. Suppose I take it up? —At a
time, too, that I was determined that the dear creature
should be her own mistress? —Will not this detection
be a new cause? —A cause that will carry with it
against her the appearance of ingratitude! 
That she designed it a Secret to me, argues a fear of
detection, and indirectly a sense of guilt. I wanted a
pretence. Can I have a better? —If I am in a violent
passion upon the detection, is not passion an universally 

allowed extenuator of violence? —Is not every man and
woman obliged to excuse that fault in another, which
at times they find attended with such ungovernable effects
in themselves? 
The Mother and Sisterhood, suppose, brought to sit
in judgment upon the vile corrupted—The least benefit
that must accrue from the accidental discovery, if not a
pretence for perpetration [which, however, may be the
case] an excuse for renewing my orders for her detention
till my return from M. Hall [the fault her own]; 
and for keeping a stricter watch over her than before; 
with direction to send me any Letters that may be
written by her or to her. —And when I return, the devil's
in it if I find not a way to make her chuse lodgings
for herself (since these are so hateful to her) that shall
answer all my purposes; and yet I no more appear to
direct her choice, than I did before in these. 
Thou wilt curse me, when thou comest to this place. 
I know thou wilt. But thinkest thou, that, after such
a series of contrivance, I will lose this inimitable woman
for want of a little more? A Rake's a Rake, Jack! 
—And what Rake is with-held by Principle from the
perpetration of any evil his heart is set upon, and in
which he thinks he can succeed? —Besides, am I not in
earnest as to Marriage? —Will not the generality of
the world acquit me, if I do marry? And what is that
injury which a Church-Rite will at any time repair? Is
not the Catastrophe of every Story that ends in Wedlock
accounted happy, be the difficulties in the progress to it
ever so great? 
But here, how am I engrossed by this Lady, while
poor Lord M. as Simon tells me, lies groaning in the
most dreadful agonies! —What must he suffer! — 
Heaven relieve him! —I have a too compassionate heart. 
And so would the dear creature have found, could I have
thought that the worst of her sufferings is equal to the
lightest of his. I mean as to fact; for, as to that part
of hers, which arises from extreme sensibility, I know 

nothing of that; and cannot therefore be answerable
for it. 