



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, March 31. 
You have very kindly accounted for your silence. 
People in misfortune are always in doubt. They
are too apt to turn even unavoidable accidents into
slights and neglects; especially in those whose favourable
opinion they wish to preserve. 
I am sure I ought evermore to exempt my Anna
Howe from the supposed possibility of her becoming
one of those who bask only in the Sunshine of a friend: 
But nevertheless her friendship is too precious to me,
not to doubt my own merits on the one hand, and
not to be anxious for the preservation of it, on the
other. 
You so generously give me liberty to chide you,
that I am afraid of taking it, because I could sooner 

mistrust my own judgment, than that of a beloved
friend, whose ingenuousness in acknowleging an imputed
error seems to set her above the commission of a wilful
one. This makes me half-afraid to ask you, If
you think you are not too cruel, too ungenerous shall
I say? in your behaviour to a man who loves you so
dearly, and is so worthy and so sincere a man? 
Only it is by You, or I should be ashamed to be
outdone in that true magnanimity, which makes one
thankful for the wounds given by a true friend. I
believe I was guilty of a petulance, which nothing
but my uneasy situation can excuse; if that can. I am
almost afraid to beg of you, and yet I repeatedly do,
to give way to that charming spirit, whenever it rises
to your pen, which smiles, yet goes to the quick of
my fault. What patient shall be afraid of a probe in
so delicate a hand? —I say, I am almost afraid to pray
you to give way to it, for fear you should, for that
very reason, restrain it. For the edge may be taken
off, if it does not make the subject of its raillery wince
a little. Permitted or desired Satire may be apt, in a
generous Satirist, mending as it raillies, to turn too
soon into Panegyric. Yours is intended to instruct; 
and tho' it bites, it pleases at the same time: No fear
of a wound's wrankling or festering by so delicate a
point as you carry; not envenomed by personality,
not intending to expose, or ridicule, or exasperate. 
The most admired of our moderns know nothing of
this Art: Why? Because it must be founded in good-nature,
and directed by a right heart. The man, not
the fault, is generally the subject of their Satire: And
were it to be just, how should it be useful; how should
it answer any good purpose; when every gash (for
their weapon is a Broad-Sword, not a Lancet) lets in
the air of public ridicule, and exasperates where it
should heal? Spare me not therefore because I am your
friend. For that very reason spare me not. I may
feel your edge, fine as it is. I may be pained: You 

would lose your end if I were not: But after the first
sensibility (as I have said more than once before) I
will love you the better, and my amended heart shall
be all yours; and it will then be more worthy to be
yours. 
You have taught me what to say to, and what to
think of, Mr. Lovelace. You have, by agreeable
anticipation, let me know how it is probable he will
apply to me to be excused. I will lay every-thing before
you that shall pass on the occasion, if he do apply,
that I may take your advice, when it can come
in time; and when it cannot, that I may receive your
correction; or approbation, as I may happen to merit
either. —Only one thing must be allowed for me; 
that whatever course I shall be permitted or be forced
to steer, I must be considered as a person out of her
own direction. Tost to and fro by the high winds of
passionate controul (and, as I think, unreasonable severity)
I behold the desired Port, the Single State,
into which I would fain steer; but am kept off by the
foaming billows of a Brother's and Sister's Envy, and
by the raging winds of a supposed invaded Authority; 
while I see in Lovelace, the Rocks on one hand, and
in Solmes, the Sands on the other; and tremble, lest
I should split upon the former, or strike upon the
latter. 
But you, my better pilot, to what a charming hope
do you bid me aspire, if things come to extremity! — 
I will not, as you caution me, too much depend upon
your success with your Mother in my favour; for well
I know her high notions of implicit duty in a child: 
But yet I will hope too; because her seasonable protection
may save me perhaps from a greater rashness: 
And in This case, she shall direct me in all my ways: 
I will do nothing but by her orders, and by her advice
and yours: Not see any-body: Not write to anybody: 
Nor shall any living soul, but by her direction
and yours, know where I am. In any Cottage place 

me, I will never stir out, unless, disguised as your
servant, I am now-and-then permitted an evening-walk
with you: And this private protection to be
granted for no longer time than till my Cousin Morden
comes; which, as I hope, cannot be long. 
I am afraid I must not venture to take the hint you
give me, to deposit some of my Cloaths; altho' I will
some of my Linen, as well as Papers. 
I will tell you why—Betty had for some time been
very curious about my wardrobe, whenever I took
out any of my things before her. 
Observing this, I once, on taking one of my garden-airings,
left my keys in the locks; and on my
return surprised the creature with her hand upon the
keys, as if shutting the door. 
She was confounded at my sudden coming back. I
took no notice: But, on her retiring, I found my
cloaths were not in the usual order. 
I doubted not, upon this, that her curiosity was
owing to the orders she had received; and being afraid
they would abridge me of my Airings, if their suspicions
were not obviated, it has ever since been my
custom (among other contrivances) not only to leave
my keys in the locks; but to employ the wench now-and
then in taking out my cloaths, suit by suit, on
pretence of preventing their being rumpled or creased,
and to see that the flowered silver suit did not tarnish; 
sometimes declaredly to give myself employment,
having little else to do: With which employment
(superadded to the delight taken by the Low as well
as by the High of our Sex in seeing fine cloaths) she
seemed always, I thought, as well pleased as if it answered
one of the offices she had in charge. 
To this, and to the confidence they have in a Spy
so diligent, and to their knowing, that I have not one
confidante in a family in which nevertheless I believe
every servant loves me; nor have attempted to make
one; I suppose, I owe the freedom I enjoy of my 

Airings: And perhaps (finding I make no movements
towards going away) they are the more secure, that I
shall at last be prevailed upon to comply with their
measures: Since they must think, that, otherwise,
they give me provocation enough to take some rash
step in order to free myself from a treatment so disgraceful; 
and which [God forgive me, if I judge
amiss!] I am afraid my Brother and Sister would not
be sorry to drive me to take. 
If therefore such a step should become necessary
(which I yet hope will not) I must be contented to
go away with the cloaths I shall have on at the time. 
My custom to be dressed for the day, as soon as breakfast
is over, when I have had no houshold-employments
to prevent me, will make such a step (if I am
forced to take it) less suspected. And the Linen I
shall deposit, in pursuance of your kind hint, cannot
be missed. 
This custom, altho' a prisoner (as I may too truly
say) and neither visited nor visiting, I continue. We
owe to ourselves, and to our Sex, you know, to be
always neat; and never to be surprised in a way we
should be pained to be seen in. 
Besides, people in adversity (which is the State of
Trial of every good quality) should endeavour to preserve
laudable customs, that, if Sunshine return, they
may not be losers by their Trial. 
Does it not, moreover, manifest a firmness of mind,
in an unhappy person, to keep hope alive? To hope
for better days, is half to deserve them: For could
we have just ground for such a hope, if we did not
resolve to deserve what that hope bids us aspire to? — 
Then who shall befriend a person who forsakes herself? 
These are reflections by which I sometimes endeavour
to support myself. 
I know you don't despise my grave airs, altho'
(with a view no doubt to irradiate my mind in my
misfortunes) you railly me upon them. Every-body 

has not your talent of introducing serious and important
lessons in such a happy manner as at once to delight
and instruct. 
What a multitude of contrivances may not young
people fall upon, if the mind be not engaged by acts of
kindness and condescension! I am not used by my
friends of late as I always used their servants. 
When I was entrusted with the family-management,
I always found it right, as well in Policy as Generosity,
to repose a trust in them. Not to seem to expect or
depend upon justice from them, is in a manner to bid
them take opportunities, whenever they offer, to be
unjust. 
Mr. Solmes (to expatiate a little on this low, but
not unuseful subject) in his more trifling solicitudes,
would have had a sorry key-keeper in me. Were I
mistress of a family, I would not either take to myself,
or give to servants, the pain of keeping those I had
reason to suspect. People low in station have often
minds not sordid. Nay, I have sometimes thought,
that (even take number for number) there are more
honest low people, than honest high. In the one,
Honesty is their chief pride. In the other, the Love
of Power, of Grandeur, of Pleasure, mislead; and
That and their Ambition induce a paramount Pride,
which too often swallows up the more laudable one. 
Many of the former would scorn to deceive a confidence. 
But I have seen, among the most ignorant
of their class, a susceptibility of resentment, if their
honesty has been suspected: And have more than
once been forced to put a servant right, whom I have
heard say, That, altho' she valued herself upon her
honesty, no master or mistress should suspect her for
nothing. 
How far has the comparison I had in my head, between
my friends treatment of me, and my treatment
of their servants, carried me! But we always allowed
ourselves to expatiate on such subjects, whether low 

or high, as might tend to enlarge our minds, or mend
our management, whether notional or practical, and
whether such expatiating respected our present, or
might respect our probable future situations. 
What I was principally leading to, was to tell you,
how ingenious I am in my contrivances and pretences
to blind my gaoleress, and to take off the jealousy of
her principals on my going down so often into the garden
and poultry-yard. People suspiciously treated are
never I believe at a loss for invention. Sometimes I
want air, and am better the moment I am out of my
chamber—Sometimes spirits; and then my Bantams
and Pheasants or the Cascade divert me; the former,
by their inspiriting liveliness; the latter, more solemnly,
by its echoing dashings, and hollow murmurs. 
—Sometimes, Solitude is of all things my wish; 
and the awful silence of the night, the spangled element,
and the rising and setting Sun, how promotive
of contemplation! —Sometimes, when I intend nothing,
and expect not Letters, I am officious to take
Betty with me; and at others, bespeak her attendance,
when I know she is otherwise employed, and cannot
give it me. 
These more capital artifices I branch out into lesser
ones, without number. Yet all have not only the
face of truth, but are real truth; altho' not my principal
motive. How prompt a thing is will! What
impediments does dislike furnish! —How swiftly, thro'
every difficulty, do we move with the one! —How
tardily with the other! —Every trifling obstruction
weighing us down, as if Lead were fastened to our
feet! 
Friday Morning, Eleven o'Clock. 
I have already made up my parcel of Linen. My
heart aked all the time I was employed about it; and
still akes, at the thoughts of its being a necessary precaution. 
When the parcel comes to your hands, as I hope it 

safely will, you will be pleased to open it. You will
find in it two parcels sealed up; one of which contains
the Letters you have not yet seen; being those
written since I left you: In the other are all the Letters
and Copies of Letters that have passed between
you and me since I was last with you; with some
o her papers on subjects so much above me, that I
cannot wish them to be seen by any-body whose indulgence
I am not so sure of, as I am of yours. If my
judgment ripen with my years, perhaps I may review
them. 
Mrs. Norton used to say, from her reverend Father,
that Youth was the time of life for Imagination
and Fancy to work in: Then, were a writer to lay
by his works till riper years and experience should direct
the fire rather to glow, than to flame out; something
between both might perhaps be produced that would
not displease a judicious eye. 
In a third division, folded up separately, are all Mr.
Lovelace's Letters written to me since he was forbidden
this house, and copies of my Answers to them. 
I expect that you will break the seals of this parcel,
and when you have perused them all, give me your
free opinion of my conduct. 
By the way, Not a line from that man! —Not one
line! —Wednesday I deposited mine. It remained
there on Wednesday night. What time it was taken
away yesterday I cannot tell: For I did not concern
myself about it, till towards night; and then it was
not there. No return at Ten this day. I suppose he
is as much out of humour, as I. —With all my heart! 
He may be mean enough perhaps, if ever I should
put it into his power, to avenge himself for the trouble
he has had with me. —But that now, I dare say, I
never shall. 
I see what sort of a man the encroacher is. And I
hope we are equally sick of one another. —My heart
is vexedly-easy, if I may so describe it. —Vexedly—because 

of the apprehended Interview with Solmes, and
the consequences it may be attended with: Or else
I should be quite easy; for why? I have not deserved
the usage I receive: —And could I be rid of Solmes,
as I presume I am of Lovelace, their influence over
my Father, Mother, and Uncles, against me, could
not hold. 
The five guineas tied up in one corner of a handkerchief
under the Linen, I beg you will let pass as
an acknowlegement for the trouble I give your trusty
servant. You must not chide me for this. You know
I cannot be easy unless I have my way in these little
matters. 
I was going to put up what little money I have,
and some of my ornaments; but they are portable,
and I cannot forget them. Besides, should they (suspecting
me) desire to see any of the jewels, and were
I not able to produce them, it would amount to a
demonstration of an intention which would have a
guilty appearance to them. 
Friday, One o'Clock, in the Woodhouse. 
No Letter yet from this man! I have luckily deposited
my Parcel, and have your Letter of last night. 
If Robert take This without the Parcel, pray let him
return immediately for it. But he cannot miss it, I
think; and must conclude that it is put there for him
to take away. You may believe, from the contents
of yours, that I shall immediately write again.— 
Clarissa Harlowe. 