



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, May 16. 
I think once more, we seem to be in a kind of
train; but through a storm. I will give you the
particulars. 
I heard him in the dining-room at five in the morning. 
I had rested very ill, and was up too: But
opened not my door till six: When Dorcas brought
me his request for my company. 
He approached me, and taking my hand, as I enter'd
the dining-room, I went not to bed, Madam, till
two, yet slept not a wink. For God's sake, torment
me not, as you have done for a week past. 
He paus'd. I was silent. 
At first, proceeded he, I thought your resentment
of a mere unavailing curiosity could not be deep; 

and that it would go off of itself: But when I found,
it was to be kept up till you knew the success of some
new overtures which you had made, and which comply'd
with, might have deprived me of you for ever; 
how, Madam, could I support myself under the
thoughts of having, with such an union of interests,
made so little impression upon your mind in my favour? 
He paus'd again. I was still silent. He went on. 
I acknowlege that I have a proud heart, Madam. 
I cannot but hope for some instance  of previous and
preferable favour from the lady I am ambitious to call
mine; and that her choice of me should not appear,
not fragrantly appear, directed by the perverseness of
her selfish persecutors, and my irreconcileable enemies 
More to the same purpose he said: You know, my
dear, the room he had given me to recriminate upon
him, in twenty instances: I did not spare him: But
I need not repeat those instances to you. Every one
of these instances, I told him, convinced me of his
pride, indeed, but not of his merit. I confessed, that
I had as much pride as himself; altho' I hoped it was
of another kind, than that he so readily avowed. 
But that if he had the least mixture in his of the true 
pride (a pride worthy of his birth, of his family, and
of his fortune), he should rather wish, I would presume
to say, to promote mine, than either to suppress,
or to regret that I had it: That hence it was, that I
thought it beneath me to disown what had been my
motives for declining, for some days past, any conversation
with him, or visit from Mr. Mennell, that
might lead to points out of my power to determine
upon, until I heard from my uncle Harlowe; whom,
I confessed, I had caused to be sounded, whether I
might be favoured with his interest, to obtain for me
a reconciliation with my friends, upon terms which I
had caused to be proposed to him. 

He knew not, he said, and supposed must not presume
to ask, what these terms were. But he could
but too well guess at them; and that he was to have
been the preliminary sacrifice. But I must allow him
to say, That as much as he admired the nobleness of
my sentiments in general, and in particular that true 
pride in me, which I had spoken of; he wish'd, that
he could compliment me with such an uniformity in
it, as should have set me as much above all submission
to minds implacable and unreasonable (he hoped he
might, without offence, say that my brother's and
sister's were such), as it had above all favour and
condescension to him. 
Duty and nature, Sir, call upon me to make the
submissions you speak of: There is a father, there is
a mother, there are uncles, in the one case, to justify
and demand those submissions—What, pray, Sir, can
be pleaded for the condescension, as you call it? — 
Will you say, your merits, either with regard to
them, or to myself, may? 
This to be said, after the persecution  of those relations! 
After what you have suffer'd! After what
you have made me hope! Let me ask you, Madam
(we talk'd of pride just now), What sort of pride
must his be, which could dispense with inclination
and preference in his lady's part of it? —What must
be that love— 
Love, Sir! who talks of love? —Was not merit the
thing we were talking of? —Have I ever professed; 
have I ever required of you professions of a passion of
that nature? But there is no end of these debatings; 
each so faultless, each so full of self— 
I do not think myself faultless, Madam: —But— 
But what, Sir! —Would you evermore argue with
me, as if you were a child? —Seeking palliations,
and making promises? —Promises of what, Sir? Of
being in future the man it is a shame a gentleman
is not? —Of being the man— 

Good God! interrupted he, with eyes lifted up, if
thou wert to be thus severe— 
Well, well, Sir, impatiently—I need only to observe,
that all this vast difference in sentiments shews
how unpair'd our minds are—So let us— 
Let us what, Madam! —My soul is rising into tumults! 
And he look'd so wildly, that it startled me a
good deal—Let us what, Madam— 
Why, Sir, let us resolve to quit every regard for
each other—[Nay, flame not out—I am a poor
weak-minded creature in some things: But where
what I should be, or not deserve to live, if I am not,
is in the question, I have great and invincible spirit,
or my own conceit betrays me]. —Let us resolve to
quit every regard for each other that is more than
civil. This you may depend upon; you may, if it
will fewel your pride, gratify it with this assurance; 
That I will never marry any other man. I have seen
enough of your sex; at least of you. —A single life
shall ever be my choice—While I will leave you at
liberty to pursue your own. 
Indifference, worse than indifference! said he, in
a passion— 
Interrupting him—Indifference let it be—You have
not, in my opinion, at least, deserved it should be
other: If you have in your own, you have cause, at
least your pride has, to hate me for misjudging you.— 
Dearest, dearest creature! snatching my hand with
wildness, let me beseech you to be uniformly noble! 
Civil regards, Madam! —Civil regards! —Can you
so expect to narrow and confine such a passion as
mine!— 
Such a passion as yours, Mr. Lovelace, deserves to
be narrow'd and confin'd. —It is either the passion
you do not think it; or I do not. —I question whether
your mind is capable of being so narrow'd and
so widen'd, as is necessary to make it be what I wish 

it to be. Lift up your hands and your eyes, Sir, in
that emphatical silent wonder, as you please: But
what does it express, what does it convince me of; 
but that we are not born for one another? 
By his soul, he said, and grasp'd my hand with an
eagerness that hurt it, we were born for one another: 
I must be his—I should be his (and put his other arm
round me), altho' his damnation were to be the purchase!— 
I was terrify'd! —Let me leave you—or begone
from me, Sir—Is the passion you boast, to be thus
shockingly declared! 
You must not go, Madam! —You must not leave
me in anger— 
I will return—I will return—When you can be
less violent—less shocking. 
And he let me go. 
The man quite frighted me; insomuch that when I
got into my chamber, I found a sudden flow of tears
a great relief to me. 
In half an hour, he sent a little billet, expressing
his concern for the vehemence of his behaviour, and
praying to see me. 
I went—Because I could not help myself, I went. 
He was full of his excuses. —O my dear, what
would you, even you, do with such a man as this; and
in my situation? 
It was very possible for him now, he said, to account
for the workings of a frenzical disorder. For
his part, he was near distraction. All last week to
suffer as he had suffer'd; and now to talk of civil regards
only, when he had hoped from the nobleness of
my mind— 
Hope what you will, interrupted I; I must insist
upon it, that our minds are by no means suited to
each other. You have brought me into difficulties. 
I am deserted of every friend but Miss Howe. My 

true sentiments I will not conceal: It is against my
will, that I must submit to owe protection from a brother's
projects, which Miss Howe thinks are not
given over, to you, who have brought me into these
streights; not with my own concurrence brought me
into them; remember that— 
I do remember that, Madam! So often reminded,
how can I forget it? 
Yet I will owe to you this protection, if it be necessary,
in the earnest hope, that you will shun rather
than seek mischief, if any further inquiry after me be
made. But what hinders you from leaving me? — 
Cannot I send to you? The Widow Fretchville, it
is plain, knows not her own mind: The people here
indeed are civiller every day than other: But I had rather
have lodgings more agreeable to my circumstances. 
I best know what will suit them; and am
resolved not to be obliged to any body. If you leave
me, I will take a civil leave of these people, and retire
to some one of the neighbouring villages, and
there, secreting myself, wait my cousin Morden's arrival
with patience. 
He presumed, he told me, from what I said, that
my application to my relations was unsuccessful: 
That therefore he hoped I would give him leave now
to mention the terms in the nature of settlements,
which he had long intended to propose to me; and
which having till now delay'd to do, thro' accidents
not proceeding from himself, he had thoughts of urging
to me the moment I enter'd upon my new house; 
and upon finding myself as independent in appearance
as I was in fact. Permit me, Madam, to propose
these matters to you: —Not with an expectation
of your immediate answer; but for your consideration. 
Were not hesitation, a self-felt glow, a downcast
eye, more than enough? Your advice was too much
in my head: I hesitated. 

He urg'd on upon my silence: He would call God
to witness to the justice, nay to the generosity of his intentions
to me, if I would be so good as to hear what
he had to propose to me, as to settlements. 
Could not the man have fallen into the subject
without this parade? Many a point, you know, is
refused, and ought to be refused, if leave be asked to
introduce it; and when once refused, the refusal must
in honour be adhered to: —Whereas, had it been slid
in upon one, as I may say, it might have merited further
consideration. If such a man as he knows not
this, who should? 
I thought myself obliged, tho' not to depart from
this subject intirely, yet, to give it a more diffuse turn; 
in order, on the one hand, to save myself the mortification
of appearing too ready in my compliance, after
such a distance as had been between us; and on
the other, to avoid (in pursuance of your advice)
the necessity of giving him such a repulse, as might
again throw us out of the course. 
A cruel alternative to be reduced to! 
You talk of generosity, Mr. Lovelace, said I; and
you talk of justice; perhaps without having consider'd
the force of the words, in the sense you use them on
this occasion. —Let me tell you what generosity is, in
my sense of the word—True Generosity is not
confined to pecuniary instances: It is more than politeness: 
It is more than good faith: It is more than
honour: It is more than justice: Since all these are but
duties, and what a worthy mind cannot dispense with. 
But True Generosity is greatness of soul: It incites
us to do more by a fellow-creature, than can be
strictly required of us: It obliges us to hasten to the
relief of an object that wants relief; anticipating even
hope or expectation: Generosity, Sir, will not surely
permit a worthy mind to doubt of its honourable and
beneficent intentions: Much less will it allow itself
to shock, to offend any one; and, least of all, a person 

thrown by adversity, mishap, or accident, into
its protection. 
What an opportunity had he to clear his intentions,
had he been so disposed, from the latter part of this
home observation! —But he run away with the first,
and kept to that. 
Admirably defin'd! he said. —But who at this rate,
Madam, can be said to be generous to you? —Your
generosity I implore; while, justice, as it must be my
sole merit, shall be my aim. Never was there a woman
of such nice and delicate sentiments! 
It is a reflection upon yourself, Sir, and upon the
company you have kept, if you think these notions
either nice or delicate. Thousands of my sex are
more nice than I; for they would have avoided the
devious path I have been surprized into: The consequences
of which surprize have laid me under the sad
necessity of telling a man, who has not delicacy
enough to enter into those parts of the female character,
which are its glory and distinction, what True
Generosity is. 
His divine monitress, he called me! —He would endeavour
to form his manners, as he had often promised,
by my example. But he hoped I would now
permit him to mention briefly the justice he proposed
to do me, in the terms of the settlement; a subject
so proper, before now, to have been enter'd upon; 
and which would have been enter'd upon long ago,
had not my frequent displeasure taken from him the
opportunity he had often wish'd for: But now having
ventur'd to lay hold of this, nothing should divert
him from improving it. 
I have no spirits just now, Sir, to attend to such
weighty points. What you have a mind to propose,
write to me: And I shall know what answer to return. 
Only one thing let me remind you of, that if
you touch upon any subject, in which my papa has 

a concern, I shall judge by your treatment of the
father, what value you have for the daughter. 
He looked, as if he would choose rather to speak
than write: But had he said so, I had a severe return
to have made upon him; as possibly he might see by
my looks. 
* *
In this way are we now: A sort of calm, as I said,
succeeding a storm: —What may happen next, whether
a storm or a calm, with such a spirit as I have to
deal with, who can tell? 
But be that as it will, I think, my dear, I am not
meanly off: And that is a great point with me; and
which I know you'll be glad to hear: If it were only,
that I can see this man without losing any of that
dignity (what other word can I use, speaking of myself,
that betokens decency, and not arrogance?) which
is so necessary to enable me to look up, or rather,
with the mind's eye, I may say, to look down upon a
man of this man's cast. 
Altho' circumstances have so offer'd, that I could
not take your advice as to the manner of dealing with
him; yet you gave me so much courage by it, as has
enabled me to conduct things to this issue; as well as
determin'd me against leaving him: Which before, I
was thinking to do, at all adventures. Whether,
when it came to the point, I should have done so, or
not, I cannot say, because it would have depended
upon his behaviour at the time. 
But let his behaviour be what it will, I am afraid,
with you, that, should any thing offer, at last, to
oblige me to leave him, I shall not mend my situation
in the world's eye; but the contrary. And yet I will
not be treated by him with indignity, while I have any
power to help myself. 
You, my dear, have accused me of having modesty'd-away,
as you phrase it, several opportunities of being,
—Being what, my dear? —Why, the wife of a libertine: 

And what a libertine and his wife are, my cousin
Morden's letter tells us. —Let me here, once for all,
endeavour to account for the motives of my behaviour
to this man, and for the principles I have proceeded
upon, as they appear to me upon a close self-examination. 
Be pleased then to allow me to think, that my motives
on this occasion, arise not altogether from maidenly
niceness; nor yet from the apprehension of what
my present tormentor, and future husband, may think
of a precipitate compliance, on such a disagreeable
behaviour as his: But they arise principally from what
offers to my own heart, respecting, as I may say, its
own rectitude, its own judgment of the fit and the
unfit; as I would, without study, answer for myself to
myself, in the first place; to him, and to the world,
in the second only. Principles, that are in my mind; 
that I found there; implanted, no doubt, by the first
gracious Planter: Which therefore impell me, as I may
say, to act up to them, that thereby I may, to the best
of my judgment, be enabled to comport myself worthily
in both states (the single and the married), let others
act as they will by me. 
I hope, my dear, I do not deceive myself, and, instead
of setting about rectifying what is amiss in my
heart, endeavour to find excuses for habits and peculiarities,
which I am unwilling to cast off or overcome. 
The heart is very deceitful: Do you, my dear friend,
lay mine open (but, surely, it is always open before you!)
and spare me not, if you find or think it culpable. 
This observation, once for all, as I said, I thought
proper to make, to convince you, that, to the best of
my judgment, my errors, in matters as well of the
lesser moment, as the greater, shall rather be the fault
of my understanding than of my will. 
I am, my dearest friend, 
Your ever-obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 