



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday Night, or rather Sat. Morn. 1 o'Clock. 
I thought I should not have had either time or inclination
to write another line before I got to M. Hall. 

But have the first; must find the last; since I can neither
sleep, nor do anything but write, if I can do
that. I am most confoundedly out of humour. The
reason let it follow; if it will follow—No preparation
for it, from me. 
I tried by Gentleness and Love to soften—What? — 
Marble. A heart incapable either of Love or Gentleness. 
Her past injuries for ever in her head. Ready to
receive a favour; the permission to go to Hamstead; 
but neither to deserve it, nor return any. So my Scheme
of the gentle kind was soon given over. 
I then wanted her to provoke me: Like a Coward
Boy, who waits for the first blow before he can persuade
himself to fight, I half-challenged her to challenge
or defy me: She seemed aware of her danger; and
would not directly brave my resentment: But kept
such a middle course, that I neither could find a pretence
to offend, nor reason to hope: Yet she believed my
tale, that her Uncle would come to Kentish Town; 
and seemed not to apprehend, that Tomlinson was an
impostor. 
She was very uneasy, upon the whole, in my company: 
Wanted often to break from me: Yet so held
me to my promise of permitting her to go to Hamstead,
that I knew not how to get off it; altho' it was impossible,
in my precarious situation with her, to think
of performing it. 
In this situation; the women ready to assist; and,
if I proceeded not, as ready to ridicule me; what had
I left me, but to pursue the concerted scheme, and to
seek a pretence to quarrel with her, in order to revoke
my promised permission, and to convince her, that I
would not be upbraided as the most brutal of Ravishers
for nothing? 
I had agreed with the women, that if I could not find
a pretence in her presence to begin my operations, the
Note should lie in my way, and I was to pick it up,
soon after her retiring from me. But I began to doubt 

at near Ten o'clock (so earnest was she to leave me,
suspecting my over-warm behaviour to her, and eager
grasping of her hand two or three times, with eyestrings,
as I felt, on the strain, while her eyes shewed
uneasiness and apprehension) that if she actually retired
for the night, it might be a chance, whether it would
be easy to come at her again. Loth therefore to run
such a risque, I stept out at a little after Ten, with intent
to alter the preconcerted disposition a little; saying
I would attend her again instantly. But as I returned,
I met her at the door, intending to withdraw for the
night. I could not persuade her to go back: Nor had
I presence of mind (so full of complaisancy as I was to
her just before) to stay her by force: So she slid thro'
my hands into her own apartment. I had nothing to
do therefore, but to let my former concert take place. 
I should have premised (but care not for order of
time, connexion, or any-thing else) that, between
Eight and Nine in the evening, another servant of
Lord M. on horseback, came, to desire me to carry
down with me Dr. S. the old Peer having been once
(in extremis, as they judge he is now) relieved and reprieved
by him. I sent, and engaged the Doctor to
accompany me down; and am to call upon him by
Four this morning: Or the devil should have both my
Lord and the Doctor, if I'd stir, till I got all made up. 
Poke thy damn'd nose forward into the event, if
thou wilt—Curse me if thou shalt have it till its proper
time and place—And too soon then. 
She had hardly got into her chamber, but I found a
little paper, as I was going into mine; which I took
up; and, opening it (for it was carefully pinned in another
paper) what should it be, but a Promisory Note,
given as a bribé, with a further promise of a Diamond
Ring, to induce Dorcas to favour her mistress's escape? 
How my temper changed in a moment! —Ring,
ring, ring, ring, I my bell, with a violence enough
to break the string, and as if the house were on fire. 

Every devil frighted into active life: The whole house
in an uproar: Up runs Will.—Sir—Sir—Sir!—Eyes
goggling, mouth distended—Bid the damn'd toad Dorcas
come hither (as I stood at the stair-head) in a horrible
rage, and out of breath, cried I. 
In sight came the trembling devil—but standing
aloof, from the report made her by Will. of the passion
I was in, as well as from what she heard. 
Flash came out of my Sword immediately; for I had
it ready on—Cursed, confounded, villainous, Bribery
and Corruption!— 
Up runs she to her Lady's door, screaming out for
safety and protection. 
Good your Honour, interposed Will. for God's sake! 
—O Lord, O Lord!—receiving a good cuff.— 
Take that, varlet, for saving the ungrateful wretch
from my vengeance!— 
Wretch! I intended to say; but if it were some other
word of like ending, passion must be my excuse. 
Up ran two or three of the Sisterhood, What's the
matter! What's the matter! 
The matter! (for still my Beloved opened not her
door; on the contrary, drew another bolt) This abominable
Dorcas! —(Call her Aunt up! —Let her see
what a traitress she has placed about me! —And let her
bring the toad to answer for herself)—has taken a bribe,
a provision for life, to betray her trust; by that means
to perpetuate a quarrel between a man and his wife, and
frustrate for ever all hopes of reconciliation between us! 
Let me perish, Belford, if I have patience to proceed
with the farce! 
* *
If I must resume, I must— 
Up came the Aunt puffing and blowing. —As she
hoped for mercy, she was not privy to it! —She never
knew such a plotting perverse Lady in her life! —Well
might servants be at the pass they were, when such Ladies
as Mrs. Lovelace made no conscience of corrupting 

them. For her part, she desired no mercy for the
wretch: No Niece of hers, if she were not faithful to
her trust! —But what was the proof?— 
She was shewn the paper— 
But too evident! —Cursed, cursed Toad, Devil,
Jade, passed from each mouth: —And the vileness of
the corrupted, and the unworthiness of the corruptress,
were inveighed against. 
Up we all went, passing the Lady's door into the
Dining-room, to proceed to trial— 
Stamp, stamp, stamp up, each on her heels; Rave,
rave, rave, every tongue— 
Bring up the creature before us all, this instant— 
And would she have got out of the house, say you?— 
These the noises, and the speeches, as we clattered by
the door of the fair briberess. 
Up was brought Dorcas (whimpering) between two,
both bawling out—You must go—You shall go—'Tis
fit you should answer for yourself—You are a discredit
to all worthy servants—as they pulled and pushed her up
stairs. —She whining, I cannot see his Honour—I cannot
look so good and so generous a gentleman in the
face—O how shall I bear my Aunt's ravings!— 
Come up, and be d&wblank;n'd—Bring her forward, her
imperial judge—What a plague, it is the detection, not
the crime, that confounds you. You could be quiet
enough for days together, as I see by the date, under
the villainy. Tell me, ungrateful devil, tell me, who
made the first advances? 
Ay, disgrace to my family and blood, cried the old
one —Tell his Honour—Tell the truth;—Who made
the first advances?— 
Ay, cursed creature, cried Sally, Who made the first
advances? 
I have betrayed one trust already! —O let me not
betray another! —My Lady is a good Lady! —O let not
her suffer!— 

Tell all you know. Tell the whole truth, Dorcas,
cried Polly Horton—His Honour loves his Lady too
well, to make her suffer much; little as she requites his
Love!— 
Every-body sees that, cried Sally—Too well indeed,
for his Honour, I was going to say. 
Till now, I thought she deserved my Love—But to
bribe a servant thus, who she supposed had orders to
watch her steps, for fear of another Elopement; and to
impute that precaution to me as a crime! —Yet I must
love her—Ladies, forgive my weakness!— 
Curse upon my grimaces! —If I have patience to repeat
them! —But thou shalt have it all—Thou canst not
despise me more than I despise myself!— 
* *
But suppose, Sir, said Sally, you have my Lady and
the Wench face to face! You see she cares not to confess. 
O my carelessness! cried Dorcas—Don't let my poor
Lady suffer! —Indeed, if you all knew what I know,
you would say, Her Ladyship has been cruelly treated— 
See, see, see, see!—repeatedly, every one at once— 
Only sorry for the detection, as your Honour said—Not
for the fault— 
Cursed creature, and devilish creature, from every
mouth. 
Your Lady won't, she dare not come out to save
you, cried Sally; tho' it is more his Honour's mercy,
than your desert, if he does not cut your vile throat this
instant. 
Say, repeated Polly, was it your Lady, that made
the first advances, or was it you, you creature?— 
If the Lady has so much honour, bawled the Mother,
excuse me, So—Excuse me, Sir [Confound the old
wretch! she had like to have said Son!] —If the Lady
has so much honour, as we have supposed, she will appear
to vindicate a poor servant, misled, as she has been,
by such large promises! —But I hope, Sir, you will do
them both justice: I hope you will! —Good lack! Good 

tack! clapping her hands together, to grant her everything
she could ask—To indulge her in her unworthy
hatred to my poor innocent house! —To let her go to
Hamstead, tho' your Honour told us, you could get no
condescension from her; no, not the least—O Sir—O
Sir—I hope—I hope—If your Lady will not come out
—I hope, you will find a way to hear this cause in her
presence. I value not my doors on such an occasion as
this. Justice I ever loved. I desire you will come at
the bottom of it in clearance to me. I'll be sworn I had
no privity in this black corruption. 
Just then, we heard the Lady's door unbar, unlock,
unbolt— 
Now, Sir! 
Now, Mr. Lovelace! 
Now, Sir! from every encouraging mouth!— 
But, O Jack, Jack, Jack! I can write no more! 
* *
If you must have it all, you must! 
Now, Belford, see us all sitting in judgment, resolved
to punish the fair briberess—I, and the Mother,
the hitherto dreaded Mother, the Nieces Sally, Polly,
the traitress Dorcas, and Mabell, a guard, as it were,
over Dorcas, that she might not run away, and hide
herself: —All pre-determined, and of necessity pre-determined,
from the journey I was going to take, and
my precarious situation with her—And hear her unbolt,
unlock, unbar, the door; then, as it proved afterwards,
put the key into the lock on the outside, lock the door,
and put it in her pocket—Will. I knew, below, who
would give me notice, if, while we were all above, she
should mistake her way, and go down stairs, instead of
coming into the Dining-room: The Street-doors also
doubly secured, and every shutter to the windows round
the house fastened, that no noise or screaming should be
heard [Such was the brutal preparation]—And then hear
her step towards us, and instantly see her enter among
us, confiding in her own innocence; and with a majesty 

in her person and manner, that is natural to her; 
but which then shone out in all its glory! —Every tongue
silent, every eye awed, every heart quaking, mine, in
a particular manner, sunk, throbless, and twice below its
usual region, to once at my throat: —A shameful recreant! 
—She silent too, looking round her, first on Me; 
then on the Mother, as no longer fearing her; then on
Sally, Polly; and the culprit Dorcas! —Such the glorious
power of Innocence exerted at that awful moment! 
She would have spoken, but could not, looking down
my guilt into confusion. A mouse might have been
heard passing over the floor: Her own light feet and
rustling silks could not have prevented it; for she seemed
to tread air, and to be all soul. She passed backwards and
forwards, now towards me, now towards the door, several
times, before speech could get the better of indignation; 
and at last, after twice or thrice hemming, to recover
her articulate voice—‘O thou contemptible and abandoned
Lovelace, thinkest thou that I see not thro'
this poor villainous plot of thine, and of these thy
wicked accomplices? 
‘Thou, woman [looking at the Mother] once my
terror! always my dislike! but now my detestation!
shouldst once more (for thine perhaps was the preparation)
have provided for me intoxicating potions, to
rob me of my senses— 
‘And then Thou, wretch, [turning to me] mightest
more securely have depended upon such a low contrivance
as this! 
‘And ye, vile women, who perhaps have been the
ruin, body and soul, of hundreds of innocents (you
shew me how, in full assembly) know, that I am not,
married—Ruined as I am, by your help, I bless God,
I am not married, to this miscreant—And I have
friends that will demand my honour at your hands! — 
And to whose authority I will apply; for none has
this man over me. Look to it then, what further
insults you offer me, or incite him to offer me. I am 

a person, tho' thus vilely betrayed, of rank and fortune. 
I never will be his; and, to your utter ruin,
will find friends to pursue you: And now I have this
full proof of your detestable wickedness, and have
heard your base incitements, will have no mercy upon
you!’ 
They could not laugh at the poor figure I made. — 
Lord! how every devil, conscience-shaken, trembled!— 
What a dejection must ever fall to the lot of guilt,
were it given to innocence always thus to exert itself!— 
‘And as for thee, thou vile Dorcas! Thou double
deceiver!—whining out thy pretended Love for me! 
—Begone, wretch! —Nobody will hurt thee! —Begone,
I say! —Thou hast too well acted thy part to
be blamed by any here but myself—Thou art safe: 
Thy guilt is thy security in such a house as this! — 
Thy shameful, thy poor part, thou hast as well acted,
as the low farce could give thee to act! —As well as
they each of them (thy superiors, tho' not thy betters)
thou seest, can act theirs. —Steal away into darkness! 
No enquiry after this will be made, whose the first advances,
thine or mine.’ 
And, as I hope to live, the wench, confoundedly
frightened, slunk away; so did her centinel Mabell; 
tho' I, endeavouring to rally, cried out for Dorcas to
stay—But I believe the devil could not have stopt her,
when an angel bid her begone. 
Madam, said I, let me tell you; and was advancing
towards her, with a fierce aspect, most cursedly vexed,
and ashamed too— 
But she turned to me; ‘Stop where thou art, O
vilest and most abandoned of men! —Stop where thou
art! —Nor, with that determined face, offer to touch
me, if thou wouldst not that I should be a corpse at
thy feet!’ 
To my astonishment, she held forth a penknife in her
hand, the point to her own bosom, grasping resolutely
the whole handle, so that there was no offering to take it
from her. 

‘I offer not mischief to any-body but myself. You,
Sir, and ye, women, are safe from every violence of
mine. The Law shall be all my resource: The
LAW,’ and she spoke the word with emphasis, The
Law! that to such people carries natural terror with it,
and now struck a panic into them. 
No wonder, since those who will damn themselves to
procure ease and plenty in this world, will tremble at
every-thing that seems to threaten their methods of obtaining
that ease and plenty.— 
‘The LAW only shall be my refuge!—’ 
The infamous Mother whispered me, that it were
better to make terms with this strange Lady, and let
her go. 
Sally, notwithstanding all her impudent bravery at
other times, said, If Mr. Lovelace had told them what
was not true of her being his wife— 
And Polly Horton, That she must needs say, the
Lady, if she were not my wife, had been very much
injured; that was all. 
That is not now a matter to be disputed, cried I: 
You and I know, Madam— 
‘We do,—said she; and I thank God, I am not
thine—Once more, I thank God for it—I have no
doubt of the further baseness that thou hadst intended
me, by this vile and low trick: But I have my Senses,
Lovelace: And from my heart I despise thee, thou
very poor Lovelace! —How canst thou stand in my
presence! —Thou, that—’ 
Madam, Madam, Madam—These are insults not to
be borne—And was approaching her. 
She withdrew to the door, and set her back against it,
holding the pointed knife to her heaving bosom; while
the women held me, beseeching me not to provoke the
violent Lady—For their house sake, and be curs'd to
them, they besought me—and all three hung upon me
—While the truly-heroic Lady braved me, at that
distance: 

‘Approach me, Lovelace, with resentment, if thou
wilt. I dare die. It is in defence of my Honour. 
God will be merciful to my poor Soul! I expect no
mercy from thee! I have gained this distance, and
two steps nearer me, and thou shalt see what I dare
do!—’ 
Leave me, women, to myself, and to my angel! — 
They retired at a distance—O my beloved creature, how
you terrify me! —Holding out my arms, and kneeling
on one knee—Not a step, not a step farther, except to
receive my death at that injured hand which is thus held
up against a life far dearer to me than my own! I am a
villain! the blackest of villains! —Say you will sheath
your knife in the injurer's, not the injured's heart; and
then will I indeed approach you, but not else. 
The Mother twanged her damn'd nose; and Sally
and Polly pulled out their handkerchiefs, and turned
from us. They never in their lives, they told me afterwards,
beheld such a scene— 
Innocence so triumphant: Villainy so debased, they
must mean! 
Unawares to myself, I had moved onward to my
Angel—‘And dost thou, dost thou, still disclaiming,
still advancing—Dost thou, dost thou, still insidiously
move towards me?’ [And her hand was extended]
‘I dare—I dare—Not rashly neither—My heart from
principle abhors the act, which thou makest necessary! 
—God, in thy mercy! [lifting up her eyes, and hands]
God, in thy mercy!—’ 
I threw myself to the farther end of the room. An
ejaculation, a silent ejaculation, employing her thoughts
that moment; Polly says the whites of her lovely eyes
were only visible: And, in the instant that she extended
her hand, assuredly to strike the fatal blow [How the
very recital terrifies me!] she cast her eye towards me,
and saw me at the utmost distance the room would allow,
and heard my broken voice—My voice was utterly broken; 
nor knew I what I said, or whether to the purpose 

or not—And her charming cheeks, that were all
in a glow before, turned pale, as if terrified at her own
purpose; and lifting up her eyes—‘Thank God! — 
Thank God! said the Angel—Delivered for the present; 
for the present delivered—from myself!—Keep,
Sir, keep that distance’ [looking down towards me,
who was prostrate on the floor, my heart pierced, as
with an hundred daggers!] ‘That distance has saved a
life; to what reserved, the Almighty only knows!—’ 
To be happy, Madam; and to make happy! —And
O let me but hope for your favour for To-morrow—I
will put off my journey till then—And may God— 
Swear not, Sir! —With an awful and piercing aspect
—You have too-too often sworn!—God's eye is upon
us! —His more immediate eye; and looked wildly. — 
But the women looked up to the ceiling, as if afraid of
God's eye, and trembled. And well they might; and
I too, who so very lately had each of us the devil in
our hearts. 
If not To-morrow, Madam, say but next Thursday,
your Uncle's Birth-day; say but next Thursday! 
‘This I say, of This you may assure yourself, I
never, never will be yours. —And let me hope, that
I may be entitled to the performance of your promise,
to be permitted to leave this innocent house, as one
called it (but long have my ears been accustomed to
such inversions of words) as soon as the day breaks.’ 
Did my perdition depend upon it, that you cannot,
Madam, but upon terms. And I hope you will not
terrify me—Still dreading the accursed knife. 
‘Nothing less than an attempt upon my Honour
shall make me desperate. I have no view, but to defend
my Honour: With such a view only I entered
into treaty with your infamous agent below. The
resolution you have seen, I trust, God will give me
again, upon the same occasion. But for a less, I wish
not for it. —Only take notice, women, that I am no
wife of this man: Basely as he has used me, I am not 

his wife. He has no authority over me. If he go
away by-and-by, and you act by his authority to detain
me, look to it.’ 
Then, taking one of the lights, she turned from us; 
and away she went, unmolested. —Not a soul was able
to molest her. 
Mabell saw her, tremblingly, and in a hurry, take
the key of her chamber-door out of her pocket, and unlock
it; and, as soon as she entered, heard her double
lock, bar, and bolt it. 
By her taking out her key, when she came out of
her chamber to us, she no doubt suspected my design: 
Which was, to have carried her in my arms thither, if
she made such force necessary, after I had intimidated
her; and to have been her companion for that night. 
She was to have had several bedchamber-women to
assist to undress her upon occasion: But, from the moment
she entered the Dining-room with so much intrepidity,
it was absolutely impossible to think of prosecuting
my villainous designs against her. 
* *
This, This, Belford, was the hand I made of a
contrivance from which I expected so much! —And
now am I ten times worse off than before. 
Thou never sawest people in thy life look so like fools
upon one another, as the Mother, her Partners, and I,
did for a few minutes. And at last, the two devilish
Nymphs broke out into insulting ridicule upon me; 
while the old wretch was concerned for her house, the
reputation of her house. I cursed them all together; and,
retiring to my chamber, locked myself in. 
And now it is time to set out: All I have gained,
detection, disgrace, fresh guilt by repeated perjuries,
and to be despised by her I doat upon; and, what is still
worse to a proud heart, by myself. 
Success, success in projects, is every-thing. What an
admirable contriver did I think myself till now! Even
for this scheme among the rest! But how pitifully foolish 

does it now appear to me! —Scratch out, erase, never
to be read, every part of my preceding Letters,
where I have boastingly mentioned it. And never presume
to railly me upon the cursed subject: For I cannot
bear it. 
But for the Lady, by my Soul I love her, I admire
her, more than ever! I must have her. I will have
her still—With honour, or without, as I have often
vowed. My cursed fright at her accidental bloody nose,
so lately, put her upon improving upon me thus. Had
she threatened ME, I should soon have been master of
one arm, and in both! But for so sincere a Virtue to
threaten herself, and not offer to intimidate any other,
and with so much presence of mind, as to distinguish,
in the very passionate intention, the necessity of the act
in defence of her Honour, and so fairly to disavow lesser
occasions; shewed such a deliberation, such a choice,
such a principle; and then keeping me so watchfully at
a distance, that I could not seize her hand, so soon as
she could have given the fatal blow; how impossible
not to be subdued by so true and so discreet a magnanimity! 
But she is not gone. She shall not go. I will press
her with Letters for the Thursday. She shall yet be
mine, legally mine. For, as to Cohabitation, there is
now no such thing to be thought of. 
The Captain shall give her away, as proxy for her
Uncle. My Lord will die. My fortune will help my
will, and set me above every-thing and every-body. 
But here is the curse—She despises me, Jack! —What
man, as I have heretofore said, can bear to be despised
—especially by his Wife? —O Lord! O Lord! What
a hand, what a cursed hand, have I made of this plot! 
—And here ends 
The History of the Lady and the Penknife!!! —The
devil take the Penknife! —It goes against me to say, 
God bless the Lady! 
Near 5, Sat. Morn. 