


Miss Grandison, To Miss Byron. 


Thursday Night. 
Unreasonable, wicked, cruel, Byron! To expect
a poor creature, so near her execution, to write
an account of other peoples behaviour in the same
tremendous circumstances! The matrimonial noose
has hung over my head for some time past; and now
it is actually fitted to my devoted neck. —Almost 

choaked, my dear! —This moment done hearing
read, the firsts, seconds, thirds, fourths, to near a
dozen of them—Lord be merciful to us! —And the
villainous lawyer rearing up to me his spectacled-nose,
as if to see how I bore it! Lord G. insulting me, as I
thought, by his odious leers: Lady Gertrude simpering; 
little Emily ready to bless herself—How will the
dear Harriet bear these abominable recitatives? —But
I am now up stairs from them all, in order to recover
my breath, and obey my Byron. 
Well, but what am I now to say about the Danby's? 
Richard has made his report; Sir Charles has
told us some things: Yet I will only give you heads:
Make out the rest. 
In the first place, my brother went to Mrs. Harrington's
(Miss Danby's aunt): She did every-thing
but worship him. She had with her two young ladies,
relations of her late husband, dainty damsels of
the city, who had procured themselves to be invited,
that they might see the man whom they called, A
wonder of generosity and goodness. Richard heard
one of them say to the other, Ah, sister! This is a
king of a man! What pity there are not many such! 
But, Harriet, if there were an hundred of them, we
would not let one of them go into the city for a wife; 
would we, my dear? 
Sir Charles praised Miss Danby. She was full of
gratitude; and of humility, I suppose. Meek, modest,
and humble, are qualities of which men are
mighty fond in women. But matrimony, and a sense
of obligation, are equally great humblers even of spirits
prouder than that of Miss Danby; as your poor Charlotte
can testify. 
The young gentlemen, with the rest, were to meet
Sir Charles, the Bride, and these Ladies, at St. Helen's,
I think the church is called. 
As if wedlock were an honour, the Danby girl, in
respect to Sir Charles, was to be first yoked. He gave 

her away to the son Galliard. The father Galliard
gave his daughter to Edward Danby: But first Mr.
Hervey gave his niece to the elder. 
One of the brides, I forget which, fainted away; 
another half-fainted—Sav'd by timely salts: The third,
poor soul, wept heartily—as I suppose I shall do, on
Tuesday. 
Never surely was there such a matrimony-promoter,
as my brother. God give me soon my revenge
upon him, in the same way! 
The procession afterwards was triumphant—Six
coaches, four silly souls in each; and to Mr. Poussin's
at Enfield they all drove. There they found another
large company. My brother was all chearfulness; 
and both men and women seemed to contend for his
notice: But they were much disappointed at finding
he meant to leave them early in the evening. 
One married Lady, the wife of Sir—Somebody
(I am very bad at remembring the names of cityknights)
was resolved, she said, since they could not
have Sir Charles to open the Ball, to have one dance
before dinner with the handsomest man in England. 
The music was accordingly called in; and he made
no scruple to oblige the company on a day so happy. 
Do you know, Harriet, that Sir Charles is supposed
to be one of the finest dancers in England? Remember,
my dear, that on Tuesday—(Lord help me! I
shall be then stupid, and remember nothing) you
take him out yourself: And then you will judge for
yourself of his excellence in this science—May we
not call dancing a science? If we judge by the few
who perform gracefully in it, I am sure we may; and
a difficult one too. 
Sir Charles, it seems, so much delighted every-body,
that they would not be denied his dancing with the
bride that was so lately Galliard, who was known to be
a fine dancer. And when he had so done, he took out
the other two brides in turn. 

O! —And remember, Harriet, that you get somebody
to call upon him to sing. —You shall play—I believe
I shall forget in that only agreeable moment of
the day (for you have a sweet finger, my love) that I
am the principal fool in the play of the evening. 
O Harriet!—how can I, in the circumstances I am
in, write any more about these soft souls, and silly? 
Come to me, my love, by day-dawn, and leave me
not till—I don't know when. Come, and take my
part, my dear: I shall hate this man: He does nothing
but hop, skip, and dance about me, grin and
make mouths; and every-body upholds him in it. 
Must this (I hope not!) be the last time that I write
myself to you 
Charlotte Grandison? 

