


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Colnebrooke, Sunday Evening. 
Poor Emily! her heart is almost broken. This
ignoble passion, what a mean-spirited creature
had it like to have made me! —Be quiet, be quiet,
Lucy! —I will call it ignoble. Did you ever know
me before so little? —And had it not like to have put
me upon being hard-hearted, envious, and I can't tell
what, to a poor fatherless girl, just starting into
woman, and therefore into more danger than she ever
was in before; wanting to be protected—from whom? 
From a mother. —Dreadful circumstance! —Yet I am
ready to grudge the poor girl her guardian, and her
innocent prattle! —But let me be despised by the man
I love, if I do not conquer this new-discovered envy, 

jealousy, littleness, at least with regard to this unhappy
girl, whose calamity endears her to me. 
Dear child! sweet Emily! You shall go down
with me, if it be proposed. My grandmamma, and
uncle, and aunt, will permit me to carry you with
me. They are generous: They have no little passion
to mislead their beneficence: They are what I hope to
be, now I have found myself out—And what if her
gratitude shall make her heart overflow into Love,
has she not excuse for it, if Harriet has any? 
Well, but to the occasion of the poor Emily's distress. 
—About twelve this day, soon after Lord L. and
the two sisters and I, came from church (for Emily
happened not to go), a coach and four stopped at the
gate, and a servant in a sorry livery, alighting from
behind it, enquired for Lord L. Two gentlemen,
who by their dress and appearance were military men,
and one Lady, were in it. 
My Lord ordered them to be invited to alight, and
received them with his usual politeness. 
Don't let me call this unhappy woman Emily's mother; 
O Hara is the name she owns. 
She addressed herself to my Lord: I am the mother
of Emily Jervois, my Lord: This gentleman, Major
O Hara, is my husband. 
The Major bowed, strutted, and acknowleged her
for his wife: And this gentleman, my Lord, said he,
is Captain Salmonet; a very brave man: He is in foreign
service. His Lady is my own sister. 
My Lord took notice of each. 
I understand, my Lord, that my daughter is here. 
I desire to see her. 
One of my Lord's servants, at that time, passing
by the door, which was open, Pray, Sir, said she to
him, let Miss Jervois know, that her mamma is come
to see her. Desire her to come to me. 
Major. I long to see my new daughter: I hear she
is a charming young Lady. She may depend upon the
kindness of a father from me. 

Capt. De man of honour and good nature be my
broder's general cha-ract-er, I do assure your Lordship. 
He spoke English as a Frenchman, my Lord says; 
but pronounced the word character as an Irishman. 
Major (bowing). No need of this, my dear friend. 
My Lord has the cha-ract-er of a fine gentleman
himself, and knows how to receive a gentleman who
waits upon him with due respect. 
Lord L. I hope I do. But, madam, you know
whose protection the Lady is in. 
Mrs. O-Hara. I do, my Lord. Sir Charles Grandison
is a very fine gentleman. 
Capt. De vinest char-ract-er in de vorld. By my
salvation, every-body say so. 
Mrs. O-Hara. But Sir Charles, my Lord, is a
very young gentleman to be a guardian to so young a
creature; especially now that she is growing into
woman. I have had some few faults, I own. Who
lives, that has not? But I have been basely scandalized. 
My first husband had his; and much greater
than I had. He was set against me by some of his
own relations: Vile creatures! —He left me, and
went abroad; but he has answered for all by this time; 
and for the scanty allowance he made me, his great
fortune considered: But as long as my child will be
the better for it, that I can forgive. —Emily, my
dear!— 
She stepped to the door on hearing the rustling of
silks, supposing her at hand; but it was Miss Grandison,
followed by a servant with chocolate, to afford
her a pretence to see the visitors; and at the same time
having a mind to hint to them, that they were not to
expect to be asked to stay to dinner. 
It is to Miss Grandison that I owe the description
of each, the account of what passed, and the broken
dialect. 
Mrs. O-Hara has been an handsome woman; but 

well might Sir Charles be disgusted with her aspect. 
She has a leering, sly, yet confident eye; and a very
bold countenance. She is not ungenteel; yet her
very dress denotes her turn of mind. Her complexion,
sallowish, streaked with red, makes her face
(which is not so plump as it once has been) look like
a withering John-apple that never ripened kindly. 
Miss Grandison has a way of saying ill-natured
things in such a good-natured manner, that one cannot
forbear smiling, tho' one should not altogether
approve of them; and yet sometimes one would be
ready to wonder how she came by her images. 
The Major is pert, bold, vain, and seemed particularly
fond of his new scarlet coat and laced waistcoat. 
He is certainly, Miss Grandison says, a low
man, tho' a soldier. Anderson, added she, is worth
fifty of him. His face, fiery and highly pimpled, is set
off to advantage by an enormous solitaire. His bad
and straggling teeth are shewn continually by an affected
laugh, and his empty discourse is interlarded
with oaths; which, with my uncle's leave, I shall omit. 
Captain Salmonet, she says, appeared to her in a
middle way between a French beau and a Dutch boor; 
aiming at gentility, with a person and shape uncommonly
clumsy. 
They both assumed military airs, which not sitting
naturally, gave them what Miss Grandison called,
The swagger of soldierly importance. 
Emily was in her own apartment, almost fainting
with terror: For the servant, to whom Mrs. O-Hara
had spoken, to bid her daughter come to her, had officiously
carried up the message. 
To what Mrs. O-Hara had said in defence of her
own character, my Lord answered, Mr. Jervois had
a right, madam, to do what he pleased with a fortune
acquired by his own industry. A disagreement in
marriage is very unhappy; but in this case, as in a
duel, the survivor is hardly ever in fault. I have 

nothing to do in this matter. Miss Jervois is very
happy in Sir Charles Grandison's protection. She
thinks so; and so does every-body that knows her. 
It is your misfortune if you do not. 
Mrs. O Hara. My Lord, I make no dispute of
Sir Charles's being the guardian of her fortune; but
no father can give away the authority a mother has, as
well as himself, over her child. 
Major. That child a daughter too, my Lord. 
Lord L. To all this I have nothing to say. You
will not be able, I believe, to persuade my brother
Grandison to give up his ward's person to you,
madam. 
Mrs. O-Hara. Chancery may, my Lord— 
Lord L. I have nothing to say to this, madam. 
No man in England knows better what is to be done,
in this case, than Sir Charles Grandison; and no man
will be readier to do what is just and fitting, without
law: But I enter not into the case; you must not
talk to me on this subject. 
Miss Gr. Do you think, madam, that your marriage
intitles you the rather to have the care of Miss
Jervois? 
Major (with great quickness). I hope, madam,
that my honour and my cha-ract-er— 
Miss Gr. Be they ever so unquestionable, will not
intitle you, Sir, to the guardianship of Miss Jervois's
person. 
Major. I do not pretend to it, madam. But I hope
that no father's will, no guardian's power, is to set
aside the natural authority which a mother has over her
child. 
Lord L. This is not my affair. I am not inclined
to enter into a dispute with you, madam, on this
subject. 
Mrs. O-Hara. Let Emily be called down to her
mother. I hope I may see my child. She is in this
house, my Lord. I hope I may see my child. 

Major. Your Lordship, and you, madam, will
allow, that it would be the greatest hardship in the
world, to deny to a mother the sight of her child. 
Capt. De very greatest hardship of all hardships. 
Your Lordship will not refuse to let de daughter come
to her moder. 
Lord L. Her guardian perhaps will not deny it. 
You must apply to him. He is in town. Miss Jervois
is here but as a guest. She will be soon in town. 
I must not have her alarmed. She has very weak
spirits. 
Mrs. O-Hara. Weak spirits, my Lord! —A child
to have spirits too weak to see her mother! —And she
felt for her handkerchief. 
Miss Gr. It sounds a little harshly, I own, to deny
to a mother the sight of her daughter: But unless
my brother were present, I think, my Lord, it cannot
be allowed. 
Major. Not allowed, madam! 
Capt. A moder to be denied to see her daughter! 
Jesu! And he crossed himself. 
Mrs. O-Hara (putting her handkerchief to hide
her eyes, for it seems she wept not). I am a very unhappy
mother indeed— 
Major (embracing her). My dearest life! My best
love! I must not bear these tears—Would to God
Sir Charles was here, and thought fit—But I came
not here to threaten—You, my Lord, are a man of
the greatest honour; so is Sir Charles. —But whatever
were the misunderstandings between husband and wife,
they should not be kept up and propagated between
mother and child. My wife at present desires only to
see her child: That's all, my Lord. Were your
brother present, madam, he would not deny her this. 
Then again embracing his wife, my dear soul, be
comforted. You will be allowed to see your daughter; 
no doubt of it. I am able to protect and right you. 
My dear soul, be comforted. 

She sobbed, Miss Grandison says; and the good-natured
Lord L. was moved—Let Miss Jervois be
asked, If she chooses to come down. 
I will go to her myself, said Miss Grandison. 
She came down presently again— 
Miss Byron and Miss Jervois, said she, are gone
out together in the chariot. 
Major. Nay, madam— 
Capt. Upon my salvation this must not pass—And
he swaggered about the room. 
Mrs. O-Hara looked with an air of incredulity. 
It was true, however: For the poor girl being ready
to faint, I was called in to her. Lady L. had been
making a visit in the chariot; and it had just brought
her back. O save me, save me, dear madam, said
Miss Emily, to me, wringing her hands. I cannot,
I cannot see my mother out of my guardian's presence:
And she will make me own her new husband. 
I beseech you, save me; hide me! 
I saw the chariot from the window, and, without
asking any questions, I hurried Miss Emily down
stairs, and conducted the trembling dear into it; and
whipping in after her, ordered the coachman to drive
any-where, except towards London: And then the
poor girl threw her arms about my neck, smothering
me with her kisses, and calling me by all the tender
names that terror and mingled gratitude could suggest
to her. 
Miss Grandison told the circumstances pretty near
as above; adding, I think, my Lord, that Miss Emily
wants not apology for her terror on this occasion. 
That Lady, in her own heart, knows that the poor
girl has reason for it. 
Madam, said the Major, my wife is cruelly used. 
Your brother—But I shall talk to him upon the subject. 
He is said to be a man of conscience and honour:
I hope I shall find him so. I know how to
protect and right my wife. 

And I will stand by my broder and his lady, said
the Captain, to de very last drop of my blood. —He
looked fierce, and put his hand on his sword, 
Lord L. You don't by these airs mean to insult
me, gentlemen—If you do— 
Major. No, no, my Lord. But we must seek our
remedy elsewhere. Surprising! that a mother is denied
the sight of her daughter! Very surprising! 
Capt. Very surprising, indeed! —Ver dis to be
done in my country—In France—English liberty! 
Begar ver pretty liberty! —A daughter to be supported
against her moder—Whew! Ver pretty liberty, by
my salvation!— 
Mrs. O-Hara. And is indeed my vile child run
away to avoid seeing her mother? —Strange! Does
she always intend to do thus? —She must see me— 
And dearly shall she repent it! 
And she looked fierce, and particularly spiteful; 
and then declared, that she would stay there till Emily
came back, were it midnight. 
Lord L. You will have my leave for that, madam? 
Major. Had we not best go into our coach, and
let that drive in quest of her? —She cannot be far off. 
It will be easy to trace a chariot. 
Lord L. Since this matter is carried so far, let me
tell you, that, in the absence of her guardian, I will
protect her. Since Miss Jervois is thus averse, she
shall be indulged in it. If you see her, madam, it
must be by the consent, and in the presence, of her
guardian. 
Major. Well, my dear, since the matter stands
thus; since your child is taught to shun you thus; 
let us see what Sir Charles Grandison will say to it. He
is the principal in this affair, and is not privileged. 
If he thinks fit—And there he stopped, and blustered; 
and offered his hand to his bride. —I am able both to
protect and right you, madam; and I will. But you
have a letter for the girl, written on a supposition that 

she was not here. —Little did you think, or I think,
that she was in the house when we came; and that she
should be spirited away to avoid paying her duty to
her mother. 
Very true. Very true. And, Very true, said each; 
and Mrs. O-Hara pulled out the letter, laying it on
one of the chairs; and desired it might be given to
her daughter. And then they all went away, very
much dissatisfied; the two men muttering and threatning,
and resolving, as they said, to make a visit to
Sir Charles. 
I hope we shall see him here very soon. I hope
these wretches will not insult him, or endanger a life
so precious. Poor Emily! I pity her from my heart. 
She is as much grieved on this occasion, as I was, in
dread of the resentment of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 
Let me give you some account of what passed between
Emily and me: You will be charmed with her
beautiful simplicity. 
When we were in the chariot, she told me, that the
last time she saw her mother, it was at Mrs. Lane's:
The bad woman made a pretence of private business
with her daughter, and withdrew with her into another
room, and then insisted that she should go off
with her, unknown to any-body. And because I desired
to be excused, said she, my mother laid her hands
upon me, and said she would trample me under her
foot. It is true, (unhappy woman!) she was— 
[Then the dear girl whispered me, tho' no-body was
near us—sweet modest creature, loth to reveal this
part of her mother's shame even to me aloud, and
blushed as she spoke—] she was in her cups. —My
mamma is as naughty as some men in that respect:
And I believe she would have been as good as her
word; but on my screaming (for I was very much
frighted) Mrs. Lane, who had an eye upon us, ran in
with two servants, and one of her daughters, and
rescued me. She had torn my cap—Yet it was a sad 

thing, you know, madam, to see one's mother put out
of the house against her will. And then she raised the
neighbourhood. Lord bless me, I thought I should
have died. I did fall into fits. Then was Mrs. Lane
forced to tell every one what a sad woman my mother
was! —It was such a disgrace to me! —It was a month
before I could go to church, or look any-body in the
face. But Mrs. Lane's character was of her side; 
and my guardian's goodness was a help—Shall I say a
help against my mother? —Poor woman! we heard
afterwards, she was dead; but my guardian would
not believe it. If it would please God to take me, I
should rejoice. Many a tear does my poor mother,
and the trouble I give to the best of men, cost me,
when nobody sees me; and many a time do I cry
myself to sleep, when I think it impossible I should
get such a kind relief. 
I was moved at the dear girl's melancholy tale. I
clasped my arms about her, and wept on her gentle
bosom. Her calamity, which was the greatest that
could happen to a good child, I told her, had endeared
her to me: I would love her as my sister. 
And so I will: Dear child, I will for ever love
her. And I am ready to hate myself for some passages
in my last letter. O how deceitful is the heart! 
I could not have thought it possible that mine could
have been so narrow. 
The dear girl rejoiced in my assurances, and promised
grateful love to the latest hour of her life. 
Indeed, madam, I have a grateful heart, said she,
for all I am so unhappy in a certain relation. I have
none of those sort of faults that give me a resemblance
in any way to my poor mother. But how shall I
make out what I say? You will mistrust me, I fear:
You will be apt to doubt my principles. But will
you promise to take my heart in your hand, and guide
it as you please? —Indeed it is an honest one. I wish
you saw it thro' and thro'. —If ever I do a wrong 

thing, mistrust my head, if you please, but not my
heart. But in every-thing I will be directed by you; 
and then my head will be as right as my heart. 
I told her, that good often resulted from evil. It
was an happy thing perhaps for both, that her mother's
visit had been made. Look upon me, my dear
Emily, as your entire friend: We will have but one
heart between us. 
Let me add, Lucy, that if you find me capable of
drawing this sweet girl into confessions of her infant
love, and of making ungenerous advantage of them,
tho' the event were to be fatal to my peace if I did
not; I now call upon all you, my dear friends, to
despise and renounce the treacherous friend in Harriet
Byron. 
She besought me to let her write to me; to let her
come to me for advice, as often as she wanted it,
whether here, in my dressing-room or chamber, or at
Mr. Reeves's, when I went from Colnebrooke. 
I consented very chearfully, and at her request (for
indeed, said she, I would not be an intruder for the
world) promised by a nod at her entrance, to let her
know, if she came when I was busy, that she must
retire, and come another time. 
You are too young a Lady, added she, to be called
my mamma—Alas! I have never a mamma, you
know: But I will love you, and obey you, on the
holding up of your finger, as I would my mother,
were she as good as you. 
Does not the beautiful simplicity of this charming
girl affect you, Lucy? But her eyes swimming in
tears, her earnest looks, her throbbing bosom, her hands
now clasped about me, now in one another, added
such graces to what she said, that it is impossible to
do justice to it: And yet I am affected as I write; 
but not so much, you may believe, as at the time she
told her tender tale. 
Indeed her calamity has given her an absolute possession 

of my heart. I, who had such good parents,
and have had my loss of them so happily alleviated,
and even supplied, by a grandmamma and an aunt so
truly maternal, as well as by the love of every one to
whom I have the happiness to be related; how unworthy
of such blessings should I be, if I did not
know how to pity a poor girl who must reckon a living
mother as her heaviest misfortune! 
Sir Charles, from the time of the disturbance which
this unhappy woman made in Mrs. Lane's neighbourhood,
and of her violence to his Emily, not only
threatened to take from her that moiety of the annuity
which he is at liberty to withdraw; but gave
orders that she should never again be allowed to see
his ward but in his presence: And she has been quiet
till of late, only threatening and demanding. But
now she seems, on this her marriage with Major
O-Hara, to have meditated new schemes, or is aiming,
perhaps, at new methods to bring to bear an old
one; of which Sir Charles had private intimation
given him by one of the persons to whom, in her cups,
she once boasted of it: Which was, that as soon as
Miss Emily was marriageable, she would endeavour,
either by fair means, or foul, to get her into her
hands: And if she did, but for one week, she should
the next come out the wife of a man she had in view,
who would think half the fortune more than sufficient
for himself, and make over the other half to her; and
then she should come into her right, which she deems
to be half of the fortune of which her husband died
possessed. 
This that follows is a copy of the letter left for
Emily by this mother; which, tho' not well-spelled,
might have been written by a better woman, who had
hardships to complain of which might have intitled
her to pity: 


My dear Emily,
If you have any love, any duty, left, for an unhappy
mother whose faults have been barbarously
aggravated, to justify the ill usage of a husband who
was not faultless; I conjure you to insist upon making
me a visit, either at my new lodgings in Dean-street,
Soho; or that you will send me word where I can see
you, supposing I am not permitted to see you as this
day, or that you should not be at Colnebrooke,
where, it seems, you have been some days. I cannot
believe that your guardian, for his own reputation-sake,
as well as for justice-sake, as he is supposed to be a good
man, will deny you, if you insist upon it; as you ought
to do, if you have half the love for me, that I have
for you. 
Can I doubt that you will insist upon it? I cannot. 
I long to see you: I long to lay you in my bosom. 
And I have given hopes to Major O-Hara, a man of
one of the best families in Ireland, and a very worthy
man, and a brave man too, who knows how to right
an injured wife, if he is put to it, but who wishes to
proceed amicably, that you will not scruple, as my
husband, to call him father. 
I hear a very good account of your improvements,
Emily; and I am told, that you are grown very tall,
and pretty. O my Emily! —What a grievous thing
is it to say, that I am told these things; and not to
have been allowed to see you; and to behold your
growth, and those improvements, which must rejoice
my heart, and do, tho' I am so basely belied as I have
been! Do not you, Emily, despise her that bore you. 
It is a dreadful thing, with such fortunes as your
father left, that I must be made poor and dependent; 
and then be despised for being so. 
But if you, my child, are taught to be, and will
be, one of those; what, tho' I have such happy prospects
in my present marriage, will be my fate, but a 

bitter death, which your want of duty will hasten? 
For what mother can bear the contempts of her
child? And in that case your great fortune will not
set you above God's judgments. But better things are
hoped of my Emily, by her 
Indulgent, tho' heretofore
unhappy Mother,
Helen O-Hara. 
Saturday, March 18. 

My Lord thought fit to open this letter: He is sorry
that he did; because the poor girl is so low-spirited,
that he does not choose to let her see it; but will
leave it to her guardian to give it to her, or not, as he
pleases. 
Miss Grandison lifted up her hands and eyes as she
read it. Such a wretch as this, said she, to remind
Emily of God's judgments; and that line written as
even as the rest! How was it possible, if her wicked
heart could suggest such words, that her fingers could
steadily write them? But indeed she verifies the words
of the wise man; There is no wickedness like the wickedness
of a woman. 
We all long to see Sir Charles. Poor Emily, in
particular, will be unhappy till he comes. 
While we expect a favoured person, tho' rich in
the company of the friends we are with, what a diminution
does it give to enjoyments that would be
complete were it not for that expectation? The mind
is uneasy, not content with itself, and always looking
out for the person wanted. 
Emily was told, that her mother left a letter for
her; but is advised not to be solicitous to see it till
her guardian comes. My Lord owned to her, that
he had opened it; and pleaded tenderness, as he justly
might, in excuse of having taken that liberty. She
thanked his Lordship, and said, It was for such girls
as she to be directed by such good and kind friends. 
She has just now left me. I was writing, and 

wanted to close. I gave her a nod, with a smile, as
agreed upon a little before. Thank you, thank you,
dear madam, said she, for this freedom. She stopped
at the door, and, with it in her hand, in a whispering
accent, bending forwards, Only tell me, that you love
me as well as you did in the chariot. 
Indeed, my dear, I do; and better, I think, if possible:
Because I have been putting part of our conversation
upon paper, and so have fastened your merits
on my memory. 
God bless you, madam, I am gone. And away she
tript. 
But I will make her amends, before I go to rest; 
and confirm all that I said to her in the chariot; for
most cordially I can. 
I am, my dear Lucy, and will be, 
Ever yours,
Harriet Byron. 

