


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


June 12–23.
We have now, thank God, some hopes of our
Jeronymo. The opening made below the
great wound answers happily its intention; and that
in the shoulder is once more in a fine way. 
Lady Clementina has been made to understand,
that he is better; and this good news, and the method
she is treated with, partly in pursuance of the advice
of the English physicians, leave us not without hopes
of her recovery. 
The General and his Lady are gone to Naples, in
much higher spirits than when they left that city. 

His Lady seconding his earnest invitation, I was not
able to deny them the promise of a visit there. 
Every one endeavours to sooth and humour Lady
Clementina; and the whole family is now satisfied,
that this was the method which always ought to have
been taken with her; and lay to the charge of Lady
Sforza and Laurana, perhaps much deeper views than
they had at first; tho' they might enlarge them afterwards,
and certainly did extend them, when the poor
Lady was deemed irrecoverable. 
Let me account to you, my dear friend, for my
silence of near a month since the date of my last. 
For a fortnight together, I was every day once with
Lady Clementina. She took no small pleasure in
seeing me. She was very various all that time in her
absences; sometimes she had sensible intervals, but
they were not durable. She generally rambled much; 
and was very incoherent. Sometimes she fell into
her silent fits: But they seldom lasted long when I
came. Sometimes she aimed to speak to me in English:
But her ideas were too much unfixed, and her
memory too much shattered, to make herself understood
for a sentence together, in the tongue she had
so lately learned, and for some time disused. Yet, on
the whole, her reason seemed to gather strength. It
was a heavy fortnight to me; and the heavier, as I
was not very well myself—Yet I was loth to forbear
my daily visits. 
Mrs. Beaumont, at the fortnight's end, made the
family and me a visit of three days. In that space,
Lady Clementina's absences were stronger, but less
frequent than before. 
I had, by Letter, been all this time preparing the
persons who had the management of Mr. Jervois's
affairs, to adjust, finally, the account relating to his
estate, which remained unsettled; and they let me
know, that they were quite ready to put the last hand
to them. It was necessary for me to attend those gentlemen 

in person: And as Mrs. Beaumont could not
conveniently stay any longer than the three days, I
acquainted the Marchioness, that I should do myself
the honour of attending her to Florence. 
As well Mrs. Beaumont, as the Marchioness, and
the Bishop, thought I should communicate my intention,
and the necessity of pursuing it, to Lady Clementina; 
lest, on her missing me, she should be impatient,
and we should lose the ground we had gained. 
I laid before the young Lady, in presence of her
mother and Mrs. Beaumont, in a plain and simple
manner, my obligation to leave her for a few days,
and the reason for it. To Florence, said she? Does
not Lady Olivia live at Florence? —She does, usually,
answered Mrs. Beaumont: But she is abroad on her
travels. 
Well, Sir, it is not for me to detain you, if you
have business: But what will become of my poor
Jeronymo in the mean time? —But, before I could
answer, What a silly question is that? I will be his
comforter. 
Father Marescotti just then entered—O Father!
rambled the poor Lady, you have not prayed with me
for a long time. O, Sir, I am an undone creature! 
I am a lost soul! —She fell on her knees, and with
tears bemoaned herself. 
She endeavoured, after this, to recollect what she
had been talking of before. We make it a rule not
to suffer her, if we can help it, to puzzle and perplex
herself, by aiming at recollection; and therefore I
told her what was our subject. She fell into it again
with chearfulness—Well, Sir, and when may Jeronymo
expect you again? —In about ten days, I told
her. And taking her hint, I added, that I doubted
not but she would comfort Signor Jeronymo in my
absence. She promised she would; and wished me
happy. 
I attended Mrs. Beaumont accordingly. I concluded, 

to my satisfaction, all that remained unadjusted
of my Emily's affairs, in two days after my
arrival at Florence. I had a happy two days more
with Mrs. Beaumont, and the Ladies her friends; 
and I stole a visit out of the ten days to the Count of
Belvedere, at Parma. 
This excursion was of benefit to my health; and
having had a Letter from Mr. Lowther, as I had desired,
at Modena, in my way to Parma, with very
favourable news, in relation both to the sister and brother,
I returned to Bologna, and met with a joyful reception
from the Marquis, his Lady, the Bishop, and
Jeronymo; who all joined to give me a share in
the merit that was principally due to Mr. Lowther,
and his assistants, with regard to the brother's amendment,
and to their own soothing methods of treating
the beloved sister; who followed strictly the prescriptions
of her physicians. 
I was introduced to Lady Clementina by her mother,
attended only by Camilla. The young Lady met
me at the entrance of her antechamber, with a dignity
like that which used to distinguish her in her happier
days. You are welcome, Chevalier, said she:
But you kept not your time. I have set it down; 
pulling out her pocket-book—Ten days, madam:
I told you ten days. I am exactly to my time—You
shall see that: I cannot be mistaken, smiling. But her
smiles were not quite her own. 
She referred me to her book. You have reckoned
two days twice over, madam. See here— 
Is it possible? —I once, Sir, was a better accomptant. 
Well, but we will not stand upon two days in so many. 
I have taken great care of Jeronymo in your absence. 
I have attended him several times; and would have
seen him oftener; but they told me there was no need. 
I thanked her for her care of my friend— 
That's good enough, said she, to thank me for the
care of myself. Jeronymo is myself. 

Signor Jerenymo, replied I, cannot be dearer to
his sister than he is to me. 
You are a good man, returned she; and laid her
hand upon my arm; I always said so. But, Chevalier,
I have quite forgot my English. I shall never recover
it. What happy times were those, when I was innocent,
and was learning English! 
My beloved young Lady, said Camilla, was always
innocent. 
No, Camilla! —No! —And then she began to
ramble—And taking Camilla under the arm, whispering,
Let us go together, to that corner of the
room, and pray to God to forgive us. You, Camilla,
have been wicked as well as I. 
She went and kneeled down, and held up her hands
in silence: Then rising, she came to her mother, and
kneeled to her, her hands lifted up—Forgive me, forgive
your poor child, my mamma! 
God bless my child! Rise, my Love! —I do forgive
you! —But do you forgive me, tears trickling down
her cheeks, for ever suffering you to go out of my
own sight? for delivering you into the management
of less kind, and less indulgent relations? 
And God forgive them too, rising. Some of them
made me crasy, and then upbraided me with being
so. God forgive them! I do. 
She then came to me; and, to my great surprize,
dropt down on one knee. I could not, for a few moments,
tell what to do, or what to say to her. Her
hands held up, her fine eyes supplicating—Pray, Sir,
forgive me! 
Humour, humour the dear creature, Chevalier, said
her mother, sobbing. 
Forgive you, madam! —Forgive you, dear Lady!
for what? —You have not offended! You could not
offend. 
I raised her; and, taking her hand, pressed it with
my lips! Now, madam, forgive me—For this freedom
forgive me! 

O Sir, I have given you, I have given every-body,
trouble! —I am an unhappy creature; and God and
you are angry with me—And you will not say you
forgive me? 
Humour her, Chevalier. 
I do, I do forgive you, most excellent of women. 
She hesitated a little; then turned round to Camilla,
who stood at distance, weeping; and running to her,
cast herself into her arms, hiding her face in her bosom
—Hide me, hide me, Camilla! What have I done! 
—I have kneeled to a man! —She put her arm under
Camilla's, and hurried out of the room with her. 
Her mother seeing me in some confusion; Rejoice
with me, Chevalier, said she, yet weeping, that we
see, tho' her reason is imperfect, such happy symptoms. 
Our child will, I trust in God, be once more
our own. And you will be the happy instrument of
restoring her to us. 
The Marquis, and the Bishop, were informed of
what had passed. They also rejoiced, in these further
day-breaks, as I may call them, of their Clementina's
reason, accompanied with that delicacy, that never,
in so innocent a mind, can be separated from it. 
You will observe, my dear Dr. Bartlett, that I only
aim to give you an account of the greater and more
visible changes that happen in the mind of this unhappy
Lady; omitting those conversations between
her and her friends, in which her situation varied but
little from those before described. By this means, you
will be able to trace the steps to that recovery of her
reason, which we presume to hope will be the return
to our fervent prayers, and humble endeavours. 

