



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

But now I have cleared myself of any intentional
Levity on occasion of my Beloved's Meditation; 
which, as you observe, is finely suited to her case
(that is to say, as she and you have drawn her case); 
I cannot help expressing my pleasure, that by one or
two verses of it [The arrow, Jack, and what she
feared being come upon her!] I am encouraged to hope,
what it will be very surprising to me if it do not happen: 
That is, in plain English, that the dear creature
is in the way to be a Mamma. 
This cursed Arrest, because of the ill effects the
terror might have had upon her, in that hoped-for circumstance,
has concerned me more than on any other
account. It would be the pride of my life to prove,
in this charming Frost-piece, the Triumph of Nature
over Principle, and to have a young Lovelace by such
an angel: And then, for its sake, I am confident
she will live, and will legitimate it. And what a
meritorious little Cherub would it be, that should
lay an obligation upon both parents before it was
born, which neither of them would be able to repay! 
—Could I be sure it is so, I should be out of all pain
for her recovery: Pain, I say; since, were she to
die—[Die! abominable word! how I hate it!] I
verily think I should be the most miserable man in
the world. 
As for the earnestness she expresses for death, she
has found the words ready to her hand in honest Job; 
else she would not have delivered herself with such
strength and vehemence. 
Her innate piety (as I have more than once observed)
will not permit her to shorten her own life,
either by violence or neglect. She has a mind too
noble for that; and would have done it before now, 

had she designed any such thing: For to do it, like
the Roman Matron, when the mischief is over, and
it can serve no end; and when the man, however a
Tarquin, as some may think me in this action, is not
a Tarquin in power, so that no national point can be
made of it; is what she has too much good sense to
think of. 
Then, as I observed in a like case, a little while
ago, the distress, when this was written, was strong
upon her; and she saw no end of it: But all was
darkness and apprehension before her. Moreover,
has she it not in her power to disappoint, as much as
she has been disappointed? Revenge, Jack, has induced
many a woman to cherish a life, to which grief
and despair would otherwise have put an end. 
And after all, death is no such eligible thing, as
Job in his calamities, makes it. And a death desired
merely from worldly disappointments shews not a
right mind, let me tell this Lady, whatever she may
think of it (a) . You and I, Jack, altho' not afraid,
in the height of passion or resentment, to rush into
those dangers which might be followed by a sudden
and violent death, whenever a point of honour calls
upon us, would shudder at his cool and deliberate
approach in a lingering sickness, which had debilitated
the spirits. 
So we read of a famous French general [I forget
as well the reign of the prince, as the name of
the man] who, having faced with intrepidity the
ghastly varlet on an hundred occasions in the field,
was the most dejected of wretches, when, having 

forfeited his life for treason, he was led with all the
cruel parade of preparation, and surrounding guards,
to the scaffold. 
The poet says well: 

'Tis not the Stoic lesson, got by rote,
The pomp of words, and pedant dissertation,
That can support us in the hour of terror.
Books have taught cowards to talk nobly of it:
But when the trial comes, they start, and stand aghast.
Very true: For then it is the old man in the fable,
with his bundle of sticks. 
The Lady is well read in Shakespeare, our English
pride and glory; and must sometimes reason
with herself in his words, so greatly expressed, that
the subject, affecting as it is, cannot produce anything
greater. 

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible, warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice:
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
Or blown, with restless violence, about
The pendent worlds; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and uncertain thought
Imagines howling: 'Tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loaded worldly life,
That pain, age, penury, and imprisonment,
Can lay on nature, is a paradise
To what we fear of death.—
I find, by one of thy three Letters, that my Beloved
had some account from Hickman of my interview
with Miss Howe, at Col. Ambrose's. I had a
very agreeable time of it there; altho' severely raillied 

by several of the Assembly. It concerns me,
however, not a little, to find our affair so generally
known among the Flippanti of both Sexes. It is all
her own fault. There never, surely, was such an
odd little soul as this. —Not to keep her own Secret,
when the revealing of it could answer no possible
good end; and when she wants not (one would think)
to raise to herself either pity or friends, or to me
enemies, by the proclamation! —Why, Jack, must
not all her own Sex laugh in their sleeves at her
weakness? What would become of the peace of the
world, if all women should take it into their heads to
follow her example? What a fine time of it would
the heads of families have? Their Wives always filling
their ears with their confessions; their Daughters
with theirs: Sisters would be every day setting
their Brothers about cutting of throats, if the Brothers
had at heart the honour of their families, as it is
called; and the whole world would either be a scene
of confusion; or cuckoldom as much the fashion as
it is in Lithuania (a) . 
I am glad, however, that Miss Howe (as much as
she hates me) kept her word with my Cousins on their
visit to her, and with me at the Colonel's, to endeavour
to persuade her friend to make up all matters by
Matrimony; which, no doubt, is the best, nay, the
only method she can take, for her own honour, and
that of her family. 
I had once thoughts of revenging myself on that
Vixen, and, particularly, as thou mayst (b)  remember,
had planned something to this purpose on the
journey she is going to take, which had been talked
of some time. But, I think—Let me see—Yes, I
think, I will let this Hickman have her safe and entire, 

as thou believest the fellow to be a tolerable sort
of a mortal, and that I had made the worst of him: 
And I am glad, for his own sake, he has not launched
out too virulently against me to thee. 
&dotup;But thou seest, Jack, by her refusal of money
from him, or Miss Howe (a) , that the dear Extravagant
takes a delight in oddnesses, chusing to
part with her cloaths, tho' for a song. Dost think
she is not a little touched at times? I am afraid she
is. A little spice of that insanity, I doubt, runs
thro' her, that she had in a stronger degree, in the
first week of my operations. Her contempt of life; 
her proclamations; her refusal of matrimony; and
now of money from her most intimate friends; are
sprinklings of this kind, and no other way, I think,
to be accounted for. 
&dotup;Her Apothecary is a good honest fellow. I like
him much. But the silly dear's harping so continually
upon one string, dying, dying, dying, is
what I have no patience with. I hope all this melancholy
jargon is owing entirely to the way I
would have her to be in. And it being as new to
her, as the Bible beauties to thee (b) , no wonder
she knows not what to make of herself; and so
fansies she is breeding death, when the event will
turn out quite the contrary. 
&dotup;Thou art a sorry fellow in thy remarks on the
education and qualification of Smarts and Beaux of
the Rakish order; if by thy We's and Us's thou
meanest thyself or me (c) : For I pretend to say,
that the picture has no resemblance of Us, who
have read and conversed as we have done. It may
indeed, and I believe it does, resemble the generality
of the fops and coxcombs about town. But
That let them look to; for, if it affects not me,
to what purpose thy random shot? —If indeed thou 

findest, by the new light darted in upon thee, since
thou hast had the honour of conversing with this
admirable creature, that the cap fits thy own head,
why then, according to the Qui capit rule, e'en
take and clap it on: And I will add a string of
bells to it, to complete thee for the fore-horse of
the idiot team. 
&dotup;Altho' I just now said a kind thing or two for
this fellow Hickman; yet I can tell thee, I could
(to use one of my noble Peer's humble phrases) eat
him up without a corn of salt, when I think of his
impudence to salute my charmer twice at parting (a) : 
And have still less patience with the Lady herself
for presuming to offer her cheek or lip [Thou sayest
not which] to him, and to press his clumsy fist between
her charming hands. An honour worth a
King's ransom; and what I would give—What
would I not give? to have! —And then he, in return,
to press her, as thou sayest he did, to his
stupid heart; at that time, no doubt, more sensible,
than ever it was before! 
&dotup;By thy description of their parting, I see thou
wilt be a delicate fellow in time. My mortification
in this Lady's displeasure, will be thy exaltation
from her conversation. I envy thee as well for thy
opportunities, as for thy improvements: And such
an impression has thy concluding paragraph (b)  made
upon me, that I wish I do not get into a Reformation
humour as well as thou: And then what a
couple of lamentable puppies shall we make, howling
in recitative to each other's discordant music! 
&dotup;Let me improve upon the thought, and imagine
that, turned Hermits, we have opened the two old
Caves at Hornsey, or dug new ones; and in each
of our Cells set up a death's head, and an hour-glass,
for objects of contemplation—I have seen
such a picture: But then, Jack, had not the old 

penitent fornicator a suffocating long grey beard? 
What figures would a couple of brocaded or laced-waistcoated
toupets make with their sour screw'd
up half-cock'd faces, and more than half shut eyes,
in a kneeling attitude, recapitulating their respective
rogueries? This scheme, were we only to
make trial of it, and return afterwards to our old
ways, might serve to better purpose by far, than
Horner's in the Country Wife, to bring the pretty
wenches to us. 
&dotup;Let me see; The Author of Hudibras has somewhere
a description that would suit us, when met
in one of our Caves, and comparing our dismal notes
together. This is it. Suppose me described— 

&dotup;—He sat upon his rump,
&dotup;His head like one in doleful dump;
&dotup;Betwixt his knees his hands apply'd
&dotup;Unto his cheeks, on either side:
&dotup;And by him, in another hole,
&dotup;Sat stupid Belford, cheek by jowl.
&dotup;I know thou wilt think me too ludicrous. I
think myself so. It is truly, to be ingenuous, a
forced put: For my passions are so wound up, that
I am obliged either to laugh or cry. Like honest
drunken Jack Daventry [Poor fellow! —What an
unhappy end was his!] —Thou knowest, I used to
observe, that whenever he rose from an entertainment,
which he never did sober, it was his way,
as soon as he got to the door, to look round him,
like a carrier pigeon just thrown up, in order to
spy out his course; and then, taking to his heels,
he would run all the way home, tho' it were a
mile or two, when he could hardly stand, and must
have tumbled on his nose if he had attempted to
walk moderately. This then be my excuse, in this
my unconverted estate, for a conclusion so unworthy
of the conclusion to thy third Letter.&dotup; 

What a length have I run! —Thou wilt own, that
if I pay thee not in quality, I do in quantity: And
yet I leave a multitude of things unobserved upon. 
Indeed I hardly at this present know what to do with
myself but scribble. Tired with Lord M. who, in
his recovery, has played upon me the Fable of the
Nurse, the crying Child, and the Wolf—Tired with
my Cousins Montague, tho' charming girls, were
they not so near of kin—Tired with Mowbray and
Tourville, and their everlasting identity—Tired with
the country—Tired of myself—Longing for what I
have not—I must go to town; and there have an interview
with the Charmer of my Soul: For desperate
diseases must have desperate remedies; and I only
wait to know my doom from Miss Howe; and
then, if it be rejection, I will try my fate, and receive
my sentence at her feet. —But I will apprise
thee of it beforehand, as I told thee, that thou mayst
keep thy Parole with the Lady in the best manner
thou canst. 