


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Thursday, May 11.
I Write on purpose to acquaint you, that I have had
a visit from Lady Olivia. She dined with me; 
and is just set out for Northampton. We all joined,
in the most cordial manner, to entreat her to favour
us with her company till morning: But she was not
to be prevailed upon. Every one of us equally admires,
and pities her. Indeed she is a finer woman,
than you, Lady G. would allow her to be, in the
debate between us in town, on that subject. 
After dinner, she desired a quarter of an hour's
discourse with me alone. We retired into the cedar
parlour. 

She opened, as she said, her whole heart to me. 
What an hatred has she to the noble Lady Clemenmentina! 
She sometimes frighted me by her threatenings
—Poor unwomanly Lady! 
I took the liberty to blame her. I told her, she
must excuse me; it was ever my way with those I
respected. 
She would fain have got me to own, that I loved
Sir Charles Grandison. I acknowleged gratitude and
esteem—But as there are no prospects (hopes I had like
to have said), I would go no further. But she was
sure it was so. I did say, and I am in earnest, that
I never could be satisfied with a divided heart. She
clasped me in her arms upon this, and put her cheek
to my forehead. 
She told me, that she admired him for his virtue. 
She knew he had resisted the greatest temptations that
ever man was tried with. I hope, poor woman, that
none of them were from her! —For her own sake (notwithstanding
what Dr. Bartlett once whispered, and,
good man as he is) I hope so! —The Chevalier, she
said, was superior to all attempts that were not grounded
on honour and conscience. She had heard of women
who had spread their snares for him in his early
youth: But women, in her country, of slight fame,
she said, had no way to come at him: And women
of virtue were secure from his attempts. Yet would
you not have thought, asked she, that beauty might
have marked him for its own? Such an air, such an
address, so much personal bravery, accustomed to shine
in the upper life; all that a woman can value in a
man, is the Chevalier Grandison! 
She, at last, declared, that she wished him to be
mine, rather than any woman's on earth. 
I was very frank, very unreserved. She seemed
delighted with me; and went away, professing to
every one, as well as to me, that she admired me for
my behaviour, my sincerity, my prudence (she was 

pleased to say) and my artlessness, above all the women
she had ever conversed with. 
May her future conduct be such, as may do credit
to her birth, to her high fortune, to her sex, and I
shall then forgive her for an attempt (as it was frustrated)
that I thought she ought never to be forgiven
for; and which made me, as we sat, often look upon
her with terror, and deprecation, may I say? 
In answer to your kind enquiries about my health— 
I only say, What must be, will—Sometimes better
than at others. If I could hear you were good, I
should be better, I believe. Adieu, my dear Lady G.:
Adieu. 

