


From the Countess of D. To Miss Byron. 
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


July 1.
My dear Harriet has allowed me to write to her
with the affectionate freedom of a mother: As
such, I may go on to urge a subject disagreeable to her; 
when not only the welfare of both my children is concerned
in it, but when her own honour, her own delicacy
of sentiment, is peculiarly interested. 
Pure and noble as your heart is, it is misleading you,
my Love; Oh, my Harriet, into what a labyrinth! — 
Have you kept a copy, my dear, of your last Letter to
me? It is all amiable, all yourself—But it is Harriet
Byron again, in need of a rescuer—Shall I, my child,
save you from being run away with by these tyrannous
over-refinements? Yes, you will say, could I do it 

disinterestedly. Well, I will, if I can, imagine myself
quite disinterested; suppose my son out of the case. 
And since I have told you, more than once, that I cannot
allow the sacredness young people are apt to imagine
in a first Love; I must, you know, take it for
granted, that even his to you is not absolutely unconquerable. 
Let us then consider a little the bright fairy schemes,
for so I must call them, which you have formed in the
Letter that lies before me (a) . Do not your excellent
grandmamma and aunt see them in the same light? 
I dare say they do: But to one I love so dearly, how
can I omit to offer my hand to extricate her out of a
maze of bewildering fancy, in which she may else
tread many a weary step, that ought to be advancing
forward in the paths of happiness and duty? 
Think but, my dear child, what fortitude of soul,
what strength even of constitution, you answer for,
when you talk of living happy in a friendship with
two persons, when they are united by indissoluble
ties, the very thought of whose union makes your
cheek fade, and your health languish. Ah, my beloved
Harriet! is not this a fairy-scheme? 
Mistake me not, my Love; I suspect not that your
sentiments would want any-thing of the purity, the
generosity, the true heroism required in the idea of a
friendship, like that you talk of. I suspect not in the
noble pair [Does that phrase hurt you, my Miss Byron? 
Think then how your heart would suffer in the
lasting conflict that must accompany the situation
which you have proposed to yourself] I suspect not,
in either of them, sentiments or behaviour unsuitable
to your excellence: Yet let me ask you one thing:
Would not the example of such an attachment subsisting
between persons known to have once had different
views, and tenderer affections, mislead less delicate
and less guarded minds into allowances dangerous 

to them; and subject souls, less great than Clementina,
to jealousies, whether warrantable or not,
of friendships that should plead yours for a precedent? 
Do not be impatient, my dear; I have a great deal
more to say. This friendship, what is it to be? Not
more than friendship, disguised under the name of it:
For how can that consist with your peace of mind,
your submission to the dictates of reason, your resignation
to the will of Providence? If then it be only
friendship, how is it inconsistent with your forming
an attachment of a nearer kind with a person of merit,
who approves of, and will join in it? What think
you, my dear, is that Love which we vow at the altar? 
Surely, not adoration: Not a preference of that object
absolutely, as in excellence superior to every other
imaginable being. No more, surely, in most cases,
than such a preferable choice (all circumstances considered)
as shall make us with satisfaction of mind,
and with an affectionate and faithful heart, unite ourselves
for life with a man whom we esteem; who we
think is no disagreeable companion, but deserves our
grateful regard; that his interest from henceforth
should be our own, and his happiness our study. And
is not this very consistent, my dear, with admiring
and loving the excellence of angels; and even with
seeing and pitying, in this partner of our lives, such
imperfections as make him evidently their inferior? 
Inferior even to such human angels, as you and I have
in our heads at this moment. 
Observe, my dear, I say only that such friendship
is very consistent with being more nearly united to
one who knows and approves it: For concealment of
any thought, that much affects the heart, is, I think,
in such a case (with very few exceptions from very
particular circumstances) utterly unallowable, and
blameably indelicate. 
You are, my dear, I will not offend you, by saying
to what degree, a reasonable and prudent young woman; 

pious, dutiful, and benevolent. Consider then,
how much better you would account for the talents
committed to you; how much more joy you would
give to the best of friends; how much more good you
would do to your fellow-creatures, by permitting yourself
to be called out into active life, with all its variety
of relations, than you can while you continue obstinately
in a single state, on purpose to indulge a remediless
sorrow. The domestic connexions would engage
you in a thousand, not unpleasing, new cares and attentions,
that must inevitably wear out, in time, impressions
which you would feel it unfit to indulge. All
that is generous, grateful, reasonable, in your very just
attachment, would remain; every-thing that passion
and imagination have added, every unreasonable, every
painful emotion, would be banished; and the friendship
between the two families become a source of lasting
happiness to both. 
Adieu, my Harriet! I am afraid of being tedious
on an unpleasing subject. If I have omitted anything
material in this argument, the excellent parents
you are with, can abundantly supply it from their own
reason, and experience of the world. Assure them of
my unfeigned regard; and believe me, my dear child,
with a degree of esteem, that no young creature ever
merited half so well, 
Your truly-affectionate
M. D. 


Pinned on by Lady G.
“Don't you think, Lady L. that the contents of
this Letter ought to have the more weight with Harriet,
as, were she to be Lady Grandison, they would
suit her own case and Emily's, were Emily to make
the same pretensions to a perpetual single life, on
the improbability of marrying her first Love? I shall
freely speak my mind upon this subject, when Harriet
can better bear the argument.” 

