


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Do not intend, madam, to trouble you with an
history of all that part of my life which I was
obliged to pass abroad from about the Seventeenth to
near the Twenty-fifth year of my age; tho' perhaps
it has been as busy a period as could well be, in the
life of a man so young, and who never sought to tread
in oblique or crooked paths. After this entrance into
it, Dr. Bartlett shall be at liberty to satisfy your curiosity
in a more particular manner; for he and I
have corresponded for years with an intimacy that
has few examples between a youth and a man in advanced
life. And here let me own the advantages I
have received from his condescension; for I found the
following questions often occur to me, and to be of
the highest service in the conduct of my life—‘What 

account shall I give of this to Dr. Bartlett?’ ‘How,
were I to give way to this temptation, shall I report
it to Dr Bartlett?’ —Or, ‘Shall I be an hypocrite,
and only inform him of the best, and meanly
conceal from him the worst?’ 
Thus, madam, was Dr. Bartlett in the place of a
second conscience to me: And many a good thing did
I do, many a bad one avoid, for having set up such
a monitor over my conduct. And it was the more
necessary that I should, as I am naturally passionate,
proud, ambitious; and as I had the honour of being
early distinguished (Pardon, madam, the seeming vanity)
by a sex, of which no man was ever a greater
admirer; and, possibly, the more distinguished, as, for
my safety sake, I was as studious to decline intimacy
with the gay ones of it, however dignified by rank,
or celebrated for beauty, as most young men are to
cultivate their favour. 
Nor is it so much to be wondered at, that I had
advantages which every-one who travels, has not. 
Residing for some time at the principal courts, and
often visiting the same places, in the length of time I
was abroad, I was considered, in a manner, as a native,
at the same time, that I was treated with the respect
that is generally paid to travellers of figure, as
well in France, as Italy. I was very genteelly supported:
I stood in high credit with my countrymen,
to whom I had many ways of being serviceable. 
They made known to every-body my father's affection
for me; his magnificent spirit; the antient families,
on both sides, from which I was descended. I
kept the best company; avoided intrigues; made not
myself obnoxious to serious or pious people, tho' I
scrupled not to avow, when called upon, my own
principles. From all these advantages, I was respected
beyond my degree. 
I should not, madam, have been thus lavish in my
own praise, but to account to you for the favour I 

stood in with several families of the first rank; and to
suggest an excuse for more than one of them, which
thought it no disgrace to wish me to be allied with
them. 
Lord L. mentioned to you, madam, and my sisters,
a Florentine Lady, by the name of Olivia. She is,
indeed, a woman of high qualities, nobly born, generous,
amiable in her features, genteel in her person,
and mistress of a great fortune in possession, which is
entirely at her own disposal; having not father,
mother, brother, or other near relations. The first
time I saw her was at the opera. An opportunity
offered in her sight, where a Lady, insulted by a
Lover made desperate by her just refusal of him,
claimed and received my protection. What I did,
on the occasion, was generally applauded: Olivia, in
particular, spoke highly of it. Twice, afterwards, I
saw her in company where I was a visiter: I had
not the presumption to look up to her with hope; 
but my countryman Mr. Jervois gave me to understand,
that I might be master of my own fortune
with Lady Olivia. I pleaded difference of religion:
He believed, he said, that matter might be made easy— 
But could I be pleased with the change, would she
have made it, when passion, not conviction, was likely
to be the motive? —There could be no objection to
her person: Nobody questioned her virtue; but she
was violent and imperious in her temper. I had never
left Mind out of my notions of Love: I could not
have been happy with her, had she been queen of the
globe. I had the mortification of being obliged to
declare myself to the Lady's face: It was a mortification
to me, as much for her sake as my own. I was
obliged to leave Florence upon it, for some time; 
having been apprized, that the spirit of revenge had
taken place of a gentler passion, and that I was in
danger from it. 
How often did I lament the want of that refuge in a 

father's arms, and in my native country, which subjected
me to evils that were more than a match for
my tender years, and to all the inconveniencies that
can attend a banished man! Indeed I often considered
myself in this light; and, as the inconveniencies happened,
was ready to repine; and the more ready, as I
could not afflict myself with the thought of having
forfeited my father's love; on the contrary, as the
constant instances which I received of his paternal
goodness, made me still more earnest to acknowlege it
at his feet. 
Ought I to have forborn, Lucy, shewing a sensibility
at my eyes on this affecting instance of filial gratitude? 
If I ought, I wish I had had more command
of myself: But consider, my dear, the affecting subject
we were upon. I was going to apologize for the
trickling tear, and to have said, as I truly might,
Your filial goodness, Sir, affects me: But, with the
consciousness that must have accompanied the words,
would not that, to so nice a discerner, have been to
own, that I thought the tender emotion wanted an
apology? These little tricks of ours, Lucy, may satisfy
our own punctilio, and serve to keep us in countenance
with ourselves (and that, indeed, is doing
something); but, to a penetrating eye, they tend only
to shew, that we imagined a cover, a veil, wanting; 
and what is that veil, but a veil of gauze? 
What makes me so much afraid of this man's discernment? 
Am I not an honest girl, Lucy? 
He proceeded. 
From this violent Lady I had great trouble; and to
this day—But this part of my story I leave to Dr.
Bartlett to acquaint you with. I mention it as a matter
that yet gives me concern, for her sake, and as
what I find has given some amusement to my sister
Charlotte's curiosity. 
But I hasten to the affair which, of all others, has
most embarrassed me; and which, engaging my compassion, 

tho' my honour is free, gives torture to my
very soul. 
I found myself not well—I thought I should have
fainted—The apprehension of his taking it as I wished
him not to take it (for indeed, Lucy, I don't think it
was that) made me worse. Had I been by myself,
this faintishness might have come over my heart. I
am sure it was not that: But it seized me at a very
unlucky moment, you'll say. 
With a countenance full of tender concern, he
caught my hand, and rang. In ran his Emily. My
dear Miss Jervois, said I, leaning upon her—Excuse
me, Sir—And I withdrew to the door: And, when
there, finding my faintishness going off, I turned to
him, who attended me thither: I am better, Sir, already; 
I will return, instantly. I must beg of you to
proceed with your interesting story. 
I was well the moment I was out of the Study. It
was kept too warm, I believe; and I sat too near the
fire: That was it, to be sure; and I said so, on my
return; which was the moment I had drank a glass of
cold water. 
How tender was his regard for me! He did not
abash me by causlesly laying my disorder on his story,
and by offering to discontinue or postpone it. Indeed,
Lucy, it was not owing to that; I should easily have
distinguished it, if it had: On the contrary, as I am
not generally so much affected at the moment when
any-thing unhappy befals me, as I am upon reflexion,
when I extend, compare, and weigh consequences, I
was quite brave in my heart. Any-thing, thought I,
is better than suspense. Now will my fortitude have
a call to exert itself; and I warrant I bear, as well as
he, an evil that is inevitable. At this instant, this
trying instant, however, I found myself thus brave:
So, my dear, it was nothing but the too great warmth
of the room which overcame me. 
I endeavoured to assume all my courage; and desired 

him to proceed; but held by the arm of my chair, to
steady me, lest my little tremblings should increase. 
The faintness had left some little tremblings upon me,
Lucy; and one would not care, you know, to be
thought affected by any-thing in his story. He proceeded. 
At Bologna, and in the neighbourhood of Urbino,
are seated two branches of a noble family, marquises
and counts of Porretta, which boasts its pedigree
from Roman princes, and has given to the
church two cardinals; one in the latter age, the
other in the beginning of this. 
The Marchese della Porretta, who resides in Bologna,
is a nobleman of great merit: His Lady is illustrious
by descent, and still more so for her goodness
of heart, sweetness of temper, and prudence. 
They have three sons, and a daughter— 
[Ah, that daughter! thought I.] 
The eldest of the sons is a general officer, in the
service of the king of the two Sicilies; a man of
equal honour and bravery, but passionate and haughty,
valuing himself on his descent. The second is devoted
to the church, and is already a Bishop. The
interest of his family, and his own merits, it is not
doubted, will one day, if he lives, give him a place in
the sacred college. The third, Signor Jeronymo (or,
as he is sometimes called, the Barone) della Porretta,
has a regiment in the service of the king of Sardinia. 
The sister is the favourite of them all. She is lovely
in her person, gentle in her manners, and has high,
but just, notions of the nobility of her descent, of
the honour of her sex, and of what is due to her own
character. She is pious, charitable, beneficent. Her
three brothers preferred her interests to their own. 
Her father used to call her, The pride of his life; her
mother, Her other self; her own Clementina. 
[Clementina! —Ah! Lucy, what a pretty name
is Clementina!] 

I became intimate with Signor Jeronymo at Rome,
near two years before I had the honour to be known
to the rest of his family, except by his report, which
he made run very high in my favour. He was master
of many fine qualities; but had contracted friendship
with a set of dissolute young men of rank, with whom
he was very earnest to make me acquainted. I allowed
myself to be often in their company; but, as they
were totally abandoned in their morals, it was in hopes,
by degrees, to draw him from them: But a love of
pleasure had got fast hold of him; and his other companions
prevailed over his good-nature. He had courage,
but not enough to resist their libertine attacks
upon his morals. 
Such a friendship could not hold, while each stood
his ground; and neither would advance to meet the
other. In short, we parted, nor held a correspondence
in absence: But afterwards meeting, by accident,
at Padua, and Jeronymo having, in the interim, been
led into inconveniencies, he avowed a change of
principles, and the friendship was renewed. 
It however held not many months: A Lady, less
celebrated for virtue than beauty, obtained an influence
over him, against warning, against promise. 
On being expostulated with, and his promise
claimed, he resented the friendly freedom. He was
passionate; and, on this occasion, less polite than it
was natural for him to be: He even defied his friend. 
My dear Jeronymo! how generously has he acknowleged
since, the part his friend, at that time, acted! 
But the result was, they parted, resolving never more
to see each other. 
Jeronymo pursued the adventure which had occasioned
the difference; and one of the Lady's admirers,
envying him his supposed success, hired Brescian
bravoes to assassinate him. 
The attempt was made in the Cremonese. They
had got him into their toils in a little thicket at some 

distance from the road. I, attended by two servants,
happened to be passing, when a frighted horse ran cross
the way, his bridle broken, and his saddle bloody:
This making me apprehend some mischief to the rider,
I drove down the opening he came from, and soon
beheld a man struggling on the ground with two ruffians; 
one of whom was just stopping his mouth, the
other stabbing him. I leapt out of the post-chaise,
and drew my sword, running towards them as fast as
I could; and, calling to my servants to follow me,
indeed calling as if I had a number with me, in order
to alarm them. On this, they fled; and I heard them
say, Let us make off; we have done his business. 
Incensed at the villainy, I pursued and came up with
one of them, who turned upon me. I beat down his
trombone, a kind of blunderbuss, just as he presented
it at me, and had wounded and thrown him on the
ground; but seeing the other ruffian turning back to
help his fellow, and, on a sudden, two others appearing
with their horses, I thought it best to retreat, tho'
I would fain have secured one of them. My servants
then seeing my danger, hastened, shouting, towards
me. The bravoes (perhaps apprehending there were
more than two) seemed as glad to get off with their
rescued companion, as I was to retire. I hastened then
to the unhappy man: But how much was I surprised,
when I found him to be the Barone della Porretta, who,
in disguise, had been actually pursuing his amour! 
He gave signs of life. I instantly dispatched one of
my servants to Cremona, for a surgeon: I bound up,
mean time, as well as I could, two of his wounds,
one in his shoulder, the other in his breast. He had
one in his hip-joint, that disabled him from helping
himself, and which I found beyond my skill to do anything
with; only endeavouring, with my handkerchief,
to stop its bleeding. I helped him into my
chaise, stept in with him, and held him up in it, till
one of my men told me, they had, in another part of 

the thicket, found his servant bound and wounded,
his horse lying dead by his side. I then alighted, and
put the poor fellow into the chaise, he being stiff
with his hurts, and unable to stand. 
I walked by the side of it, and in this manner
moved towards Cremona, in order to shorten the way
of the expected surgeon. 
My servant soon returned with one. Jeronymo
had fainted away. The surgeon dressed him, and proceeded
with him to Cremona. Then it was, that,
opening his eyes, he beheld, and knew me; and being
told, by the surgeon, that he owed his preservation to
me, O Grandison! said he, that I had followed your
advice! that I had kept my promise with you! —How
did I insult you! —Can my deliverer forgive me? 
You shall be the director of my future life, if it please
God to restore me. 
His wounds proved not mortal; but he never will
be the man he was: Partly from his having been unskilfully
treated by this his first surgeon; and partly
from his own impatience, and the difficulty of curing
the wound in his hip-joint. Excuse this particularity,
madam. The subject requires it; and Signor Jeronymo
now deserves it, and all your pity. 
I attended him at Cremona, till he was fit to remove. 
He was visited there by his whole family from
Bologna. There never was a family more affectionate
to one another: The suffering of one, is the suffering
of every one. The Barone was exceedingly beloved
by his father, mother, sister, for the sweetness of his
manners, his affectionate heart, and a wit so delightfully
gay and lively, that his company was sought by
every-body. 
You will easily believe, madam, from what I have
said, how acceptable to the whole family the service
was which I had been so happy as to render their
Jeronymo. They all joined to bless me; and the
more, when they came to know that I was the person 

whom their Jeronymo, in the days of our intimacy,
had highly extolled in his Letters to his sister, and to
both brothers; and who now related to them, by word
of mouth, the occasion of the coldness that had passed
between us, with circumstances as honourable for me,
as the contrary for himself: Such were his penitential
confessions, in the desperate condition to which he
found himself reduced. 
He now, as I attended by his bed or his couch-side,
frequently called for a repetition of those arguments
which he had, till now, derided. He besought
me to forgive him for treating them before with levity,
and me with disrespect, next, as he said, to insult:
And he begged his family to consider me not
only as the preserver of his life, but as the restorer of
his morals. This gave the whole family the highest
opinion of mine; and still more to strengthen it, the
generous youth produced to them, tho', as I may say,
at his own expence (for his reformation was sincere),
a Letter which I wrote to lie by him, in hopes to enforce
his temporary convictions; for he had a noble
nature, and a lively sense of what was due to his character,
and to the love and piety of his parents, the
Bishop, and his sister; tho' he was loth to think he
could be wrong in those pursuits in which he was
willing to indulge himself. 
Never was there a more grateful family. The noble
father was uneasy, because he knew not how to acknowlege,
according to the largeness of his heart to
a man in genteel circumstances, the obligation laid
upon them all. The mother, with a freedom more
amiably great than the Italian Ladies are accustomed
to express, bid her Clementina regard as her fourth
brother, the preserver of the third. The Barone declared,
that he should never rest, nor recover, till he
had got me rewarded in such manner as all the world
should think I had honour done me in it. 
When the Barone was removed to Bologna, the 

whole family were studious to make occasions to get
me among them. The General made me promise,
when my relations, as he was pleased to express himself,
at Bologna, could part with me, to give him my
company at Naples. The Bishop, who passed all the
time he had to spare from his diocese, at Bologna,
and who is a learned man, in compliment to his
fourth brother, would have me initiate him into the
knowlege of the English tongue. 
Our Milton has deservedly a name among them. 
The friendship that there was between him and a
learned nobleman of their country, endeared his memory
to them. Milton, therefore, was a principal
author with us. Our lectures were usually held in
the chamber of the wounded brother, in order to divert
him: He also became my scholar. The father
and mother were often present; and at such times
their Clementina was seldom absent. She also called
me her tutor; and, tho' she was not half so often present
at the lectures as they were, made a greater proficiency
than either of her brothers. 
[Do you doubt it, Lucy?] 
The father, as well as the Bishop, is learned; the
mother well read. She had had the benefit of a French
education; being brought up by her uncle, who resided
many years at Paris in a public character: And
her daughter had, under her own eye, advantages in
her education which are hardly ever allowed or sought
after by the Italian Ladies. In such company, you
may believe, madam, that I, who was kept abroad
against my wishes, passed my time very agreeably. I
was particularly honoured with the confidence of the
Marchioness, who opened her heart to me, and consulted
me on every material occurrence. Her Lord,
who is one of the politest of men, was never better
pleased than when he found us together; and not seldom,
tho' we were not engaged in lectures, the fair 

Clementina claimed a right to be where her mother
was. 
About this time, the young Count of Belvedere
returned to Parma, in order to settle in his native
country. His father was a favourite in the court of
the princess of Parma, and attended that Lady to
Madrid, on her marriage with the late king of Spain,
where he held a very considerable post, and lately died
there immensely rich. On a visit to this noble family,
the young Lord saw, and loved Clementina. 
The Count of Belvedere is a handsome, a gallant,
a sensible man; his fortune is very great: Such an alliance
was not to be slighted. The Marquis gave his
countenance to it: The Marchioness favoured me
with several conversations upon the subject. She was
of opinion, perhaps, that it was necessary to know
my thoughts, on this occasion; for the younger brother,
unknown to me, declared, that he thought
there was no way of rewarding my merits to the family,
but by giving me a relation to it. Dr. Bartlett,
madam, can shew you, from my Letters to him,
some conversations, which will convince you, that in
Italy, as well as in other countries, there are persons
of honour, of goodness, of generosity; and who are
above reserve, vindictiveness, jealousy, and those
other bad passions by which some persons mark indiscriminately
a whole nation. 
For my own part, it was impossible (distinguished
as I was by every individual of this noble family, and
lovely as is this daughter of it, mistress of a thousand
good qualities, and myself absolutely disengaged in
my affections) that my vanity should not sometimes
be awakened, and a wish arise, that there might be a
possibility of obtaining such a prize: But I checked
the vanity, the moment I could find it begin to play
about and warm my heart. To have attempted to
recommend myself to the young Lady's favour, tho' 

but by looks, by assiduities, I should have thought an
infamous breach of the trust and confidence they all
reposed in me. 
The pride of a family so illustrious in its descent; 
their fortunes unusually high for the country which,
by the goodness of their hearts, they adorned; the
relation they bore to the church; my foreign extraction
and interest; the Lady's exalted merits, which
made her of consequence to the hearts of several illustrious
youths, before the Count of Belvedere made
known his passion for her; none of which the fond
family thought worthy of their Clementina, nor any
of whom could engage her heart; but, above all, the
difference in religion; the young Lady so remarkably
stedfast in hers, that it was with the utmost difficulty
they could restrain her from assuming the veil; and
who once declared, in anger, on hearing me, when
called upon, avow my principles, that she grudged to
an heretic the glory of having saved the Barone della
Porretta; all these considerations outweighed any
hopes that might otherwise have arisen in a bosom so
sensible of the favours they were continually heaping
upon me. 
About the same time, the troubles, now so happily
appeased, broke out in Scotland: Hardly any thing
else was talked of, in Italy, but the progress, and supposed
certainty of success, of the young invader. I
was often obliged to stand the triumphs and exultations
of persons of rank and figure; being known to
be warm in the interest of my country. I had a
good deal of this kind of spirit to contend with, even
in this more moderate Italian family; and this frequently
brought on debates which I would gladly have
avoided holding: But it was impossible. Every new
advice from England revived the disagreeable subject; 
for the success of the rebels, it was not doubted, would
be attended with the restoration of what they called
the Catholic religion: And Clementina particularly 

pleased herself, that then her heretic tutor would take
refuge in the bosom of his holy mother, the church:
And she delighted to say things of this nature in the
language I was teaching her, and which, by this time,
she spoke very intelligibly. 
I took a resolution, hereupon, to leave Italy for a
while, and to retire to Vienna, or to some one of the
German courts that was less interested than they were
in Italy, in the success of the Chevalier's undertaking; 
and I was the more desirous to do so, as the displeasure
of Olivia against me began to grow serious, and to be
talked of, even by herself, with less discretion than was
consistent with her high spirit, her noble birth, and
ample fortune. 
I communicated my intention to the Marchioness
first: The noble Lady expressed her concern at the
thoughts of my quitting Italy, and engaged me to put
off my departure for some weeks; but, at the same
time, hinted to me, with an explicitness that is peculiar
to her, her apprehensions, and her Lord's, that I
was in Love with her Clementina. I convinced her
of my honour, in this particular; and she so well satisfied
the Marquis, in this respect, that, on their
daughter's absolute refusal of the Count of Belvedere,
they confided in me to talk to her in favour of that
gentleman. The young Lady and I had a conference
upon the subject; Dr. Bartlett can give you the particulars. 
The father and mother, unknown to us
both, had placed themselves in a closet adjoining to the
room we were in, and which communicated to another,
as well as to that: They had no reason to be
dissatisfied with what they heard me say to their
daughter. 
The time of my departure from Italy drawing near,
and the young Lady repeatedly refusing the Count of
Belvidere, the younger brother (still unknown to me,
for he doubted not but I should rejoice at the honour
he hoped to prevail upon them to do me) declared in 

my favour. They objected the more obvious difficulties
in relation to religion, and my country: He
desired to be commissioned to talk to me on those subjects,
and to his sister on her motives for refusing the
Count of Belvedere; but they would not hear of his
speaking to me on this subject; the Marchioness giving
generous reasons, on my behalf, for her joining in
the refusal; and undertaking herself to talk to her
daughter, and to demand of her, her reasons for rejecting
every proposal that had been made her. 
She accordingly closeted her Clementina. She
could get nothing from her, but tears: A silence,
without the least appearance of sullenness, had for
some days before shewn, that a deep melancholy had
begun to lay hold of her heart: She was, however,
offended when Love was attributed to her; yet her
mother told me, that she could not but suspect, that
she was under the dominion of that passion without
knowing it; and the rather, as she was never chearful
but when she was taking lessons for learning a
tongue, that never, as the Marchioness said, was
likely to be of use to her. 
[‘As the Marchioness said’—Ah my Lucy!] 
The melancholy increased. Her tutor, as he
was called, was desired to talk to her. He did. 
It was a task put upon him, that had its difficulties. 
It was observed, that she generally assumed a chearful
air while she was with him, but said little; 
yet seemed pleased with every thing he said to her; 
and the little she did answer, tho' he spoke in Italian
or French, was in her newly-acquired language: But
the moment he was gone, her countenance fell, and
she was studious to find opportunities to get from
company. 
[What think you of my fortitude, Lucy? Was I
not a good girl? But my curiosity kept up my spirits. 
When I come to reflect, thought I, I shall have it all
upon my pillow.] 

Her parents were in the deepest affliction. They
consulted physicians, who all pronounced her malady
to be Love. She was taxed with it; and all the indulgence
promised her that her heart could wish, as to
the object; but still she could not, with patience,
bear the imputation. Once she asked her woman,
who told her that she was certainly in Love, Would
you have me hate myself? —Her mother talked to her
of the passion in favourable terms, and as laudable:
She heard her with attention, but made no answer. 
The evening before the day I was to set out for
Germany, the family made a sumptuous entertainment,
in honour of a guest on whom they had conferred
so many favours. They had brought themselves
to approve of his departure the more readily,
as they were willing to see, whether his absence
would affect their Clementina; and, if it did, in
what manner. 
They left it to her choice, Whether she would appear
at table, or not. She chose to be there. They
all rejoiced at her recovered spirits. She was exceeding
chearful: She supported her part of the conversation,
during the whole evening, with her usual
vivacity and good sense, insomuch that I wished to
myself, I had departed sooner. Yet it is surprising,
thought I, that this young Lady, who seemed always
to be pleased, and even since these resveries have had
power over her, to be most chearful in my company,
should rejoice in my departure; should seem to owe
her recovery to it; a departure which every one else
kindly regrets: And yet there was nothing in her behaviour 
or looks that appeared in the least affected. 
When acknowlegements were made to me of the
pleasure I had given to the whole family, she joined
in them: When my health and happiness were wished,
she added her wishes by chearful bows, as she sat:
When they wished to see me again, before I went to
England, she did the same. So that my heart was 

dilated: I was overjoyed to see such an happy alteration. 
When I took leave of them, she stood forward
to receive my compliments, with a polite French
freedom. I offered to press her hand with my lips:
My brother's deliverer, said she, must not affect this
distance, and, in a manner, offered her cheek; adding,
God preserve my tutor where-ever he sets his
foot (and in English, God convert you too, Chevalier!) 
May you never want such an agreeable friend as you
have been to us! 
Signor Jeronymo was not able to be with us. I
went up to take leave of him: O my Grandison!
said he, and flung his arms about my neck, and will
you go? —Blessings attend you! —But what will become
of a brother and sister, when they have lost you? 
You will rejoice me, replied I, if you will favour
me with a few lines, by a servant whom I shall leave
behind me for a few days, and who will find me at
Inspruck, to let me know how you all do; and whether
your sister's health continues. 
She must, she shall be yours, said he, if I can
manage it. Why, why, will you leave us? 
I was surprised to hear him say this: He had never
before been so particular. 
That cannot, cannot be, said I. There are a thousand
obstacles— 
All of which, rejoined he, that depend upon us, I
doubt not to overcome. Your heart is not with
Olivia? 
They all knew, from that Lady's indiscretion, of
the proposals that had been made me, relating to her; 
and of my declining them. I assured him, that my
heart was free. 
We agreed upon a correspondence, and I took leave
of one of the most grateful of men. 
But how much was I afflicted when I received at
Inspruck the expected Letter, which acquainted me,
that this sunshine lasted no longer than the next day! 

The young Lady's malady returned, with redoubled
force. Shall I, madam, briefly relate to you the
manner in which, as her brother wrote, it operated
upon her? 
She shut herself up in her chamber, not seeming to
regard or know that her woman was in it; nor did
she answer to two or three questions that her woman
asked her; but, setting her chair with its back towards
her, over-against a closet in the room, after a
profound silence, she bent forwards, and, in a low
voice, seemed to be communing with a person in the
closet. —‘And you say he is actually gone? Gone
for ever? No, not for ever!’ 
Who gone, madam? said her woman. To whom
do you direct your discourse? 
‘We were all obliged to him, no doubt. So
bravely to rescue my brother, and to pursue the bravoes; 
and, as my brother says, to put him in his
own chaise, and walk on foot by the side of it— 
Why, as you say, assassins might have murdered
him: The horses might have trampled him under
their feet.’ Still looking as if she was speaking to
somebody in the closet. 
Her woman stept to the closet, and opened the
door, and left it open, to take off her attention to
the place, and to turn the course of her ideas; but
still she bent forwards towards it, and talked calmly,
as if to somebody in it: Then breaking into a faint
laugh, ‘In Love!—that is such a silly notion: And
yet I love every-body better than I love myself.’ 
Her mother came into the room just then. The
young Lady arose in haste, and shut the closet-door,
as if she had somebody hid there, and, throwing
herself at her mother's feet, My dear, my ever-honoured
mamma, said she, forgive me for all the trouble
I have caused you—But I will, I must, you can't
deny me; I will be God's child, as well as yours. I
will go into a nunnery. 

It came out afterwards, that her confessor, taking
advantage of confessions extorted from her of regard
for her tutor, tho' only such as a sister might bear to
a brother, but which he had suspected might come to
be of consequence, had filled her tender mind with
terrors, that had thus affected her head. She is, as I
have told you, madam, a young Lady of exemplary
piety. 
I will not dwell on a scene so melancholy. How I
afflict your tender heart, my good Miss Byron! 
[Do you think, Lucy, I did not weep? —Indeed I
did—Poor young Lady! —But my mind was fitted for
the indulging of scenes so melancholy. Pray, Sir,
proceed, said I: What a heart must that be, which
bleeds not for such a distress! Pray, Sir, proceed.] 
Be it Dr. Bartlett's task to give you further particulars. 
I will be briefer—I will not indulge my own
grief. 
All that medicine could do, was tried: But her
confessor, who, however, is an honest, a worthy man,
kept up her fears and terrors. He saw the favour
her tutor was in with the whole family: He knew
that the younger brother had declared for rewarding
him in a very high manner: He had more than once
put this favoured man upon an avowal of his principles; 
and, betwixt her piety and her gratitude, had
raised such a conflict as her tender nature could not
bear. 
At Florence lives a family of high rank and honour,
the Ladies of which have with them a friend noted
for the excellency of her heart, and her genius; and
who, having been robbed of her fortune early in life,
by an uncle to whose care she was committed by her
dying father, was received both as a companion and
a blessing, by the Ladies of the family she has now
for many years lived with. She is an English woman,
and a Protestant; but so very discreet, that her being
so, tho' at first they hoped to proselyte her, gives 

them not a less value for her; and yet they are all
zealous Roman Catholics. These two Ladies, and
this their companion, were visiting one day at the
Marchese della Porretta's; and there the distressed
mother told them the mournful tale: The Ladies,
who think nothing that is within the compass of human
prudence impossible to their dear Mrs. Beaumont,
wished that the young Lady might be entrusted
for a week to her care, at their own house at
Florence. 
It was consented to, as soon as proposed; and
Lady Clementina was as willing to go; there having
always been an intimacy between the families; and
she (as every-body else) having an high opinion of
Mrs. Beaumont. They took her with them on the
day they set out for Florence. 
Here, again, for shortening my story, I will refer to
Dr. Bartlett. Mrs. Beaumont went to the bottom of
the malady: She gave her advice to the family upon
it. They were resolved (Signor Jeronymo supporting
her advice) to be governed by it. The young Lady
was told, that she should be indulged in all her wishes. 
She then acknowleged what those were; and was the easier
for the acknowlegement, and for the advice of such
a prudent friend; and returned to Bologna (Mrs. Beaumont
accompanying her) much more composed than
when she left it. The tutor was sent for, by common
consent; for there had been a convention of the
whole family; the Urbino branch, as well as the General,
being present. There the terms to be proposed
to the supposed happy man were settled; but they
were not to be mentioned to him, till after he had seen
the Lady: A wrong policy, surely. 
He was then at Vienna. Signor Jeronymo, in his
Letter, congratulated him in high terms; as a man,
whom he had it now, at last, in his power to reward:
And he hinted, in general, that the conditions would
be such, as it was impossible but he must find his very 

great advantage in them: As to fortune, to be sure,
he meant. 
The friend so highly valued could not but be affected
with the news: Yet, knowing the Lady, and
the family, he was afraid that the articles of Residence
and Religion would not be easily compromised between
them. He therefore summoned up all his prudence to
keep his fears alive, and his hope in suspense. 
He arrived at Bologna. He was permitted to pay
his compliments to Lady Clementina in her mother's
presence. How agreeable, how nobly frank, was the
reception from both mother and daughter! How high
ran the congratulations of Jeronymo! He called the
supposed happy man brother. The Marquis was ready
to recognize the fourth son in him. A great fortune,
additional to an estate bequeathed her by her two
grandfathers, was proposed. My father was to be invited
over, to grace the nuptials by his presence. 
But let me cut short the rest. The terms could not be
complied with: For I was to make a formal renunciation
of my religion, and to settle in Italy; only once,
in two or three years, was allowed, if I pleased, for two
or three months, to go to England; and, as a visit of
curiosity, once in her life, if their daughter desired it,
to carry her thither, for a time to be limited by them. 
What must be my grief, to be obliged to disappoint
such expectations as were raised by persons who had
so sincere a value for me! You cannot, madam,
imagine my distress: So little as could be expected to
be allowed by them to the principles of a man whom
they supposed to be in an error that would inevitably
cast him into perdition! But when the friendly brother
implored my compliance; when the excellent
mother, in effect, besought me to have pity on her
heart, and on her child's head; and when the tender,
the amiable Clementina, putting herself out of the
question, urged me, for my soul's sake, to embrace
the doctrines of her holy mother, the church—What,
madam—But how I grieve you! 

[He stopt—His handkerchief was of use to him, as
mine was to me—What a distress was here!] 
And what, and what, Sir, sobbing, was the result? 
Could you, could you resist? 
Satisfied in my own faith; Entirely satisfied! Having
insuperable objections to that I was wished to embrace! 
—A lover of my native country too—Were
not my God and my Country to be the sacrifice, if I
complied! But I laboured, I studied, for a compromise. 
I must have been unjust to Clementina's merit,
and to my own Character, had she not been dear to
me. And indeed I beheld graces in her then, that I had
before resolved to shut my eyes against; her Rank next
to princely; her Fortune high as her rank; Religon; 
Country; all so many obstacles that had appeared to
me insuperable, removed by themselves; and no apprehension
left of a breach of the laws of hospitality,
which had, till now, made me struggle to behold one
of the most amiable and noble-minded of women with
indifference. —I offered to live one year in Italy, one in
England, by turns, if their dear Clementina would live
with me there; if not, I would content myself with passing
only three months, in every year, in my native country. 
I proposed to leave her entirely at her liberty, in the
article of religion; and, in case of children by the marriage,
the daughters to be educated by her, the sons by
me; a condition to which his Holiness himself, it was
presumed, would not refuse his sanction, as there were
precedents for it. This, madam, was a great sacrifice
to Compassion, to Love. —What could I more! 
And would not, Sir, would not Clementina consent
to this compromise? 
Ah the unhappy Lady! It is this reflexion that
strengthens my grief. She would have consented:
She was earnest to procure the consent of her friends
upon these terms. This her earnestness in my favour,
devoted as she was to her religion, excites my compassion,
and calls for my gratitude. 
What scenes, what distressful scenes, followed!— 

The noble father forgot his promised indulgence; 
the mother indeed seemed, in a manner, neutral; 
the youngest brother was still, however, firm in my
cause; but the Marquis, the General, the Bishop,
and the whole Urbino branch of the family, were not
to be moved; and the less, as they considered the
alliance as highly honourable to me (a private, an obscure
man, as now they began to call me) as derogatory
to their own honour. In short, I was allowed,
I was desired, to depart from Bologna; and not suffered
to take my leave of the unhappy Clementina, tho' on
her knees she begged to be allowed a parting interview
—And what was the consequence? —Dr. Bartlett
must tell the rest. —Unhappy Clementina! —Now
they wish me to make them one more visit at Bologna! 
—Unhappy Clementina! —To what purpose? 
I saw his noble heart was too much affected, to
answer questions, had I had voice to ask any. 
But, O my friends! you see how it is! Can I be
so unhappy as he is? As his Clementina is? Well
might Dr. Bartlett say, that this excellent man is not
happy. Well might he himself say, that he has suffered
greatly, even from good women. Well might
he complain of sleepless nights. Unhappy Clementina!
let me repeat after him; and not happy Sir
Charles Grandison! —And who, my dear, is happy? 
Not, I am sure, 
Your Harriet Byron. 

