



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sat. Night. 
Your servant gives me a dreadful account of
your raving unmanageableness. I wonder not at
it. But as nothing violent is lasting, I dare say, that
your habitual gaiety of heart will quickly get the better
of your phrensy: And the rather do I judge so, as your
fits are of the raving kind (suitable to your natural impetuosity)
and not of that melancholy species which
seizes flower souls. 
For this reason I will proceed in writing to you,
that my narrative may not be broken by your discomposure; 
and that the contents of it may find you, and
help you to reflection, when you shall be restored. 
Harry is returned from carrying the posthumous Letters
to the family and to Miss Howe; and that of the
Colonel which acquaints James Harlowe with his Sister's
death, and with her desire to be interred near her
Grandfather. 
Harry was not admitted into the presence of any of 

the family. They were all assembled together, it
seems, at Harlowe-place, on occasion of the Colonel's
Letter which informed them of the Lady's dangerous
way (a) ; and were comforting themselves, as Harry
was told with hopes, that Mr. Morden had made the
worst of her state, in order to quicken their resolutions. 
It is easy then to judge what must be their grief and
surprize on receiving the fatal news which the Letters
Harry sent in to them communicated. 
He staid there long enough to find the whole house
in confusion; the servants running different ways; lamenting
and wringing their hands as they ran; the
female servants particularly; as if somebody (poor
Mrs. Harlowe no doubt; and perhaps Mrs. Hervey
too) were in fits. 
Every one was in such disorder, that he could get
no commands, nor obtain any notice of himself. The
servants seemed more inclined to execrate than welcome
him—O master! O young man! cried three or
four together, what dismal tidings have you brought! — 
They helped him, at the very first word, to his horse; 
which with great civility they had put up on his arrival: 
And he went to an Inn; and pursued on foot his way
to Mrs. Norton's; and finding her come to town, left
the Letter he carried down for her with her son (a fine
youth); who, when he heard the fatal news, burst out
into a flood of tears-first lamenting the Lady's death,
and then crying out, What, what, would become of
his poor Mother! —How would she support herself,
when she should find on her arrival in town, that the
dear Lady, who was so deservedly the darling of her
heart, was no more! 
He proceeded to Miss Howe's, with the Letter for
her. That Lady, he was told, had just given orders
for a young man, a tenant's son, to post to London,
to bring her news of her dear friend's condition, and 

whether she should herself be encouraged, by an account
of her being still alive, to make her a visit; everything
being ordered to be in readiness for her going up,
on his return with the news she wished and prayed for
with the utmost impatience. And Harry was just in
time to prevent the man's setting out. 
He had the precaution to desire to speak with Miss
Howe's woman or maid, and communicated to her
the fatal tidings, that she might break them to her
young Lady. The maid was herself so affected, that
her old Lady (who, Harry said, seemed to be everywhere
at once) came to see what ailed her; and was
herself so struck with the communication, that she was
forced to sit down in a chair: O the sweet creature!
said she—And is it come to this! —O my poor Nancy! 
—How shall I be able to break the matter to my
Nancy! 
Mr. Hickman was in the house. He hastened in
to comfort the old Lady—But he could not restrain his
own tears. He feared, he said, when he was last in
town, that this sad event would soon happen: But little
thought it would be so very soon! —But she is happy,
I am sure, said the good Gentleman. 
Mrs. Howe, when a little recovered, went up, in
order to break the news to her Daughter. She took
the Letter, and her Salts in her hand. And they had
occasion for the latter. For the housekeeper soon
came hurrying down into the kitchen, her face overspread
with tears—Her young mistress had fainted away,
she said—Nor did she wonder at it—Never did there
live a Lady more deserving of general admiration and
lamentation, than Miss Clarissa Harlowe! And never
was there a stronger friendship dissolved by death than
between her young Lady and her. 
She hurried with a lighted wax-candle, and with
feathers, to burn under the nose of her young mistress; 
which shewed that she continued in fits. 
Mr. Hickman afterwards, with his usual humanity, 

directed that Harry should be taken care of all night; 
it being then the close of day. He asked him after my
health. He expressed himself excessively afflicted, as
well for the death of the most excellent of women, as
for the just grief of the Lady whom he so passionately
loves. But he called the departed Lady an Angel of
Light. We dreaded, said he (tell your master) to
read the Letter sent—But we needed not—'Tis a
blessed Letter, written by a blessed hand! —But the
consolation she aims to give, will for the present
heighten the sense we all shall have of the loss of so
excellent a creature! Tell Mr. Belford, that I thank
God I am not the man who had the unmerited honour
to call himself her Brother. 
I know how terribly this great catastrophe (as I may
call it, since so many persons are interested in it) affects
thee. I should have been glad to have had particulars
of the distress which the first communication of it must
have given to the Harlowes. Yet who but must pity
the unhappy Mother? 
The Answer which James Harlowe returned to Colonel
Morden's Letter of notification of his Sister's
death, and to her request as to Interrment, will give a
faint idea of what their concern must be. Here follows
a copy of it. 

To William Morden, Esq;
Saturday, Sept. 9. 
Dear Cousin,
I cannot find words to express what we all suffer on
the most mournful news that ever was communicated
to us. 
My Sister Arabella (but, alas! I have now no other
Sister) was preparing to follow Mrs. Norton up; and
I had resolved to escorte her, and to have looked in
upon the dear creature. 
God be merciful to us all! To what purpose did the
Doctor write if she was so near her end? —Why, as
every-body says, did he not send sooner?—or why at
all? 

The most admirable young creature that ever swerved! 
—Not one friend to be with her! —Alas! Sir, I
fear my Mother will never get over this shock—She
has been in hourly fits ever since she received the fatal
news. My poor Father has the gout thrown into his
stomach; and heaven knows—O Cousin, O Sir! — 
I meant nothing but the honour of the family; yet
have I all the weight thrown upon me—[O this cursed
Lovelace! may I perish if he escape the deserved vengeance!] (a) . 
We had begun to please ourselves that we should
soon see her here—Good Heaven! that her next entrance
into this house, after she abandoned us so precipitately,
should be in a coffin! 
We can have nothing to do with her Executor (another
strange step of the dear creature's!): He cannot
expect we will—nor, if he be a gentleman, will he
think of acting. Do You therefore be pleased, Sir,
to order an Undertaker to convey the body down to us. 
My Mother says she shall be for ever unhappy, if she
may not in death see the dear creature whom she could
not see in life: Be so kind therefore as to direct the lid
to be only half-screwed down—that (if my poor Mother
cannot be prevailed upon to dispense with so shocking
a spectacle) she may be obliged—She was the darling
of her heart! 
If we know her Will in relation to the funeral, it
shall be punctually complied with: As shall every thing
in it that is fit or reasonable to be performed; and
This without the intervention of strangers. 
Will you not, dear Sir, favour us with your presence
at this melancholy time? Pray do;—and pity and excuse,
with the generosity which is natural to the Brave
and the Wife, what passed at our last meeting. Every
one's respects attend you. And I am, Sir, 
Your inexpressibly afflicted Cousin and Servant,
Ja. Harlowe jun. 

Every-thing that is Fit or Reasonable to be performed!
[repeated I to the Colonel from the above Letter on
his reading it to me:] That is every-thing which she
has directed, that can be performed. I hope, Colonel,
that I shall have no contention with them. I wish no
more for their acquaintance than they do for mine. 
But you, Sir, must be the mediator between them and
me; for I shall insist upon a literal performance in
every article. 
The Colonel was so kind as to declare that he would
support me in my resolution. 