



Miss Clarissa Harlowe; In Continuation. 

I was very ill, and obliged to lay down my pen. 
I thought I should have fainted. But am better
now—So will proceed. 
The pretended Ladies, the more we talked, seemed to be
the fonder of me. And The Lady Betty had Mrs. Moore
called up; and asked her, If she had accommodations for
her niece and self, her woman, and two men-servants,
for three or four days? 
Mr. Lovelace answered for her, that she had. 
She would not ask her dear niece Lovelace [Permit me,
my dear, whispered she, this charming style before strangers! 
–––I will keep your uncle's secret] whether she should be
welcome or not to be so near her. But for the time she
should stay in these parts, she would come up every
night–––What say you, niece Charlotte? 
The pretended Charlotte answered, she should like to
do so, of all things. 
The Lady Betty called her an obliging girl. She liked
the place, she said. Her cousin Leeson would excuse her. 
The air, and my company, would do her good. She never
chose to lie in the smoaky town, if she could help it. 
In short, my dear, said she to me, I will stay till you
hear from Miss Howe; and till I have your consent to
go with me to Glenham-Hall. Not one moment will I
be out of your company, when I can have it. Stedman
my solicitor, as the distance from town is so small, may
attend me here for instructions. Niece Charlotte, one
word with you, child. 
They retired to the farther end of the room, and talked
about their night-dresses. 
The Miss Charlotte said, Morrison might be dispatched
for them. 
True, the other said: —But she had some letters in 

her private box, which she must have up. And you know,
Charlotte, that I trust nobody with the keys of that. 
Could not Morrison bring up that box? 
No. She thought it safest where it was. She had
heard of a robbery committed but two days ago, at the
foot of Hamstead-hill; and she should be ruined, if she
lost her box. 
Well then, it was but going to town to undress, and
she would leave her jewels behind her, and return; and
should be the easier a great deal on all accounts. 
For my part, I wondered they came up with them. 
But that was to be taken as a respect paid to me. And
then they hinted at another visit of ceremony which they
had thought to make, had they not found me so inexpressibly
engaging. 
They talked loud enough for me to hear them; on
purpose, no doubt, tho' in affected whispers; and concluded
with high praises of me. 
I was not fool enough to believe, or to be puffed up
with their encomiums; yet not suspecting them, I was
not displeased at so favourable a beginning of acquaintance
with ladies (whether I were to be related to them
or not) of whom I had always heard honourable mention. 
And yet at the time, I thought, highly as they
exalted me, that in some respects (tho' I hardly knew
in what) they fell short of what I expected them to be. 
The grand deluder was at the farther end of the room,
another way; probably to give me an opportunity to
hear these preconcerted praises–––looking into a book,
which, had there not been a preconcert, would not have
taken his attention for one moment. It was Taylor's
Holy Living and Dying. 
When the pretended ladies joined me, he approached
me, with it in his hand–––A smart book, This, my dear! 
–––This old divine affects, I see, a mighty flowery stile
upon a very solemn subject. But it puts me in mind of
an ordinary country funeral, where the young women,
in honour of a defunct companion, especially if she were
a virgin, or passed for such, make a flower-bed of her
coffin. 
And then, laying down the book, turning upon his 

heel, with one of his usual airs of gaiety, And are you
determined, Ladies, to take up your lodgings with my
charming creature? 
Indeed they were. 
Never were there more cunning, more artful impostors,
than these women. Practised creatures, to be sure: Yet
genteel; and they must have been well-educated–––once,
perhaps, as much the delight of their parents, as I was
of mine: And who knows by what arts ruined, body and
mind! –––O my dear! how pregnant is this reflection! 
But the man! –––Never was there a man so deep! Never
so consummate a deceiver! except that detested Tomlinson; 
whose years, and seriousness, joined with a solidity
of sense and judgment, that seemed uncommon, gave him,
one would have thought, advantages in villainy, the
other had not time for. Hard, very hard, that I should
fall into the knowledge of two such wretches; when
two more such I hope are not to be met with in the
world: –––Both so determined to carry on the most barbarous
and perfidious projects against a poor young creature,
who never did or wished harm to either! 
Take the following slight account of these womens
and of this man's behaviour to each other before me. 
Mr. Lovelace carried himself to his pretended aunt
with high respect, and paid a great deference to all she
said. He permitted her to have all the advantage over
him in the repartees and retorts that passed between them. 
I could, indeed, easily see, that it was permitted; and that
he forbore that acumen, that quickness, which he never
spared shewing to the pretended Miss Montague; and
which a man of wit seldom knows how to spare shewing,
when an opportunity offers to display his wit. 
The pretended Miss Montague was still more reverent
in her behaviour to her aunt. While the aunt kept up
the dignity of the character she had assumed, raillying
both of them with the air of a person who depends upon
the superiority which years and fortune give over younger
persons; who might have a view to be obliged to her,
either in her life, or at her death. 
The severity of her raillery, however, was turned
upon Mr. Lovelace, on occasion of the character of the 

people who kept the lodgings, which, she said, I had
thought my self so well warranted to leave privately. 
This startled me. For having then no suspicion of
the vile Tomlinson, I concluded (and your letter of the
7th (a)  favoured my conclusions),  that if the house were
notorious, either he, or Mr. Mennell, would have given
me or him some hints of it–––Nor, altho' I liked not the
people, did I observe any thing in them very culpable,
till the Wednesday night before, that they offered not to
come to my assistance, altho' within hearing of my distress
(as I am sure they were), and having as much reason
to be frighted as I, at the fire, had it been real. 
I looked with indignation upon Mr. Lovelace, at this
hint. 
He seemed abashed. I have not patience, but to recollect
the specious looks of this vile deceiver. But how
was it possible, that even this florid countenance of his
should enable him to command a blush at his pleasure? 
For blush he did, more than once: And the blush, on
this occasion, was a deep-dyed crimson, unstrained for,
and natural, as I thought—But he is so much of the
actor, that he seems able to enter into any character; 
and his muscles and features appear intirely under obedience
to his wicked will (b) . 
The pretended Lady went on, saying, She had taken
upon herself to inquire after the people, on hearing that
I had left the house in disgust; and tho' she heard not
any thing much amiss, yet she heard enough to make
her wonder, that he would carry his spouse, a person of
so much delicacy, to a house, that, if it had not a bad
fame, had not a good one. 
You must think, my dear, that I liked the pretended
Lady Betty the better for this. I suppose it was designed
I should. 

He was surprised, he said, that her Ladyship should
hear a bad character of the people. It was what he had
never before heard that they deserved. It was easy, indeed,
to see, that they had not very great delicacy, tho' they
were not indelicate. The nature of their livelihood,
letting lodgings, and taking people to board (and yet he
had understood that they were nice in these particulars),
led them to aim at being free and obliging: And it
was difficult, he said, for persons of chearful dispositions,
so to behave, as to avoid censure: Openness of
heart and countenance in the Sex (more was the pity!)
too often subjected good population, whose fortunes did not
set them above the world, to uncharitable censure. 
He wished, however, that her Ladyship would tell what
she had heard: Altho' now it signified but little, because
she would never ask me to set foot within their doors
again: And he begged she would not mince the matter. 
Nay, no great matter, she said. But she had been
informed, that there were more women lodgers in the
house than men: Yet that their visitors were more men
than women. And this had been hinted to her (perhaps
by ill-willers, she could not answer for that) in such
a way, as if somewhat further were meant by it, than
was spoken. 
This, he said, was the true innuendo way of characterizing,
used by detractors. Every-body and every-thing
had a black and a white side, as ill-willers and well-willers
were pleased to report. He had observed, that the front
house was well lett, and he believed, more to the one sex,
than to the other; for he had seen, occasionally passing
to and fro, several genteel modest-looking women; and
who, it was very probable, were not so ill-beloved, but
they might have visitors and relations of both sexes: 
But they were none of them any-thing to us, or we to
them: We were not once in any of their companies: 
But in the genteelest and most retired house of the two,
which we had in a manner to ourselves, with the use of
a parlour to the street, to serve us for a servants hall, or
to receive common visitors, or our traders only, whom
we admitted not up-stairs. 
He always loved to speak as he found. No man in 

the world had suffered more from calumny than he himself
had done. 
Women, he owned, ought to be more scrupulous than
men needed to be where they lodged. Nevertheless, he
wished, that fact, rather than surmise, were to be the
foundation of their judgments, especially when they
spoke of one another. 
He meant no reflection upon her Ladyship's informants,
or rather surmisants (as he might call them), be they
who they would: Nor did he think himself obliged to
defend characters impeached, or not thought well of, by
women of virtue and honour. Neither were these people
of importance enough to have so much said about
them. 
The pretended Lady Betty said, All who knew her
would clear her of censoriousness: That it gave her
some opinion, she must needs say, of the people, that
he had continued there so long with me; that I had rather
negative than positive reasons of dislike to them
and that so shrewd a man, as she heard Capt. Tomlinson
was, had not objected to them. 
I think, niece Charlotte, proceeded she, as my nephew
has not parted with these lodgings, you and I (for
as my dear Miss Harlowe dislikes the people, I would not
ask her for her company) will take a dish of tea with my
nephew there, before we go out of town, and then we
shall see what sort of people they are. I have heard
that Mrs. Sinclair is a mighty forbidding creature. 
With all my heart, Madam. In your Ladyship's company
I shall make no scruple of going any-whither. 
It was Ladyship at every word; and as she seemed
proud of her title, and of her dress too, I might have
guessed that she was not used to either. 
What say you, cousin Lovelace? Lady Sarah, tho'
melancholy woman, is very inquisitive about all your
affairs. I must acquaint her with every particular circumstance
when I go down. 
With all his heart. He would attend her whenever
she pleased. She would see very handsome apartments
and very civil people. 
The duce is in them, said The Miss Montague, if they
appear other to us. 

They then fell into family-talk: Family-happiness on
my hoped-for accession into it. They mentioned Lord M.'s
and Lady Sarah's great desire to see me. How many
friends and admirers, with up-lift hands, I should have! 
[O my dear, what a triumph must these creatures, and he,
have over the poor Devoted all the time!] —What a happy
man he would be—They would not, The Lady Betty
said, give themselves the mortification but to suppose,
that I should not be one of Them! 
Presents were hinted at. She resolved that I should go
with her to Glenham-Hall. She would not be refused,
altho' she were to stay a week beyond her time for me. 
She long'd for the expected letter from you. I must
write to hasten it, and to let Miss Howe know how
every thing stood since I wrote last. That might dispose
me absolutely in their favour, and in her nephew's; and
then she hoped there would be no occasion for me to
think of entering upon any new measures. 
Indeed, my dear, I did at the time intend, if I heard
not from you by morning, to dispatch a man and horse
to you, with the particulars of all, that you might (if
you thought proper), at least, put off Mrs. Townsend's
coming up to another day. —But I was miserably prevented. 
She made me promise, that I would write to you upon
this subject, whether I heard from you, or not. One of
her servants should ride post with my letter, and wait for
Miss Howe's answer. 
She then launched out in deserved praises of you, my
dear. How fond should she be of the honour of your
acquaintance! 
The pretended Miss Montague joined in with her, as
well for herself as for her sister. 
Abominably well-instructed were they both. 
O my dear! What risques may poor giddy girls run,
when they throw themselves out of the protection of
their natural friends, and into the wide world? 
They then talked again of reconciliation and intimacy
with every one of my friends; with my mother particularly; 
and gave the dear good lady the praises that every
one gives her, who has the happiness to know her. 

Ah, my dear Miss Howe! I had almost forgot my resentments
against the pretended nephew! —So many
agreeable things said, made me think, that, if you should
advise it, and if I could bring my mind to forgive
the wretch for an outrage so premeditatedly vile, and
could forbear despising him for that and his other ingrateful
and wicked ways, I might not be unhappy in an alliance
with such a family. Yet, thought I at the time,
With what intermixtures does every thing come to me,
that has the appearance of good! —However, as my lucid
hopes made me see fewer faults in the behaviour of these
pretended Ladies, than recollection and abhorrence have
helped me since to see, I began to reproach myself, that
I had not at first thrown myself into their protection. 
But amidst all these delightful prospects, I must not,
said The Lady Betty, forget that I am to go to town. 
She then ordered her coach to be got to the door— 
We will all go to town together, said she, and return
together. Morrison shall stay here, and see every thing
as I used to have it, in relation to my apartment, and my
bed; for I am very particular in some respects. My
cousin Leeson's servants can do all I want to be done
with regard to my night-dresses, and the like. And it
will be a little airing for you, my dear, and a good opportunity
for Mr. Lovelace to order what you want of
your apparel to be sent from your former lodgings to
Mrs. Leeson's; and we can bring it up with us from
thence. 
I had no intention to comply. But as I did not imagine
that she would insist upon my going to town with
them, I made no answer to that part of her speech. 
I must here lay down my tired pen! 
Recollection! Heart-affecting Recollection! How it
pains me! 