



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Night, May 7. 
When you reflect upon my unhappy situation,
which is attended with so many indelicate
and even shocking circumstances, some of which
my pride will not let me think of with patience; all
aggravated by the contents of my Cousin's affecting
Letter; you will not wonder, that the vapourishness
which has laid hold of my heart, should rise to my
pen. And yet it would be more kind, more friendly
in me, to conceal from you, who take such a generous
interest in my concerns, that worst part of my
griefs, which communication and complaint cannot
relieve. 
But to whom can I unbosom myself but to you? 
When the man who ought to be my protector, as he
has brought upon me all my distresses, adds to my
apprehensions; when I have not even a servant on
whose fidelity I can rely, or to whom I can break
my griefs as they arise; and when his bountiful temper
and gay heart attach every one to him; and I
am but a cypher, to give him significance, and myself
pain? —These griefs, therefore, do what I can, will
sometimes burst into tears; and these mingling with
my ink, will blot my paper. And I know you will
not grudge me the temporary relief. 
But I shall go on in the strain I left off with in my
last; when I intended rather to apologize for my melancholy. 
But let what I have above written, once
for all, be my apology. My misfortunes have given
you a call to discharge the noblest offices of the friendship
we have vowed to each other, in advice and consolation; 
and it would be an injury to it, and to you,
to suppose it needed even that call. 

She then tells Miss Howe, that now her cloaths are
come, Mr. Lovelace is continually teazing her to
go abroad with him in a coach, attended by whom
she pleases of her own Sex, either for the air, or
to the public diversions. 
She gives the particulars of a conversation that has
passed between them on that subject, and his several
proposals. But takes notice, that he says not
the least word of the Solemnity which he so much
pressed for before they came to town; and which,
as she observes, was necessary to give propriety to
his proposals. 
Now, my dear, says she, I cannot bear the life I
live. I would be glad at my heart to be out of his
reach. If I were, he should soon find the difference. 
If I must be humbled, it had better be by those to
whom I owe duty, than by him. My Aunt writes
in her Letter (a) , that She dare not propose anything
in my favour. You tell me, that, upon enquiry,
you find (b) , that, had I not been unhappily
seduced away, a change of measures was actually resolved
upon; and that my Mother particularly, was
determined to exert herself for the restoration of the
family-peace; and, in order to succeed the better,
had thoughts of trying to engage my Uncle Harlowe
in her party. 
Let me build on these foundations. I can but
try, my dear. It is my duty to try all probable methods
to restore the poor Outcast to favour. And
who knows but that once indulgent Uncle who has
very great weight in the family, may be induced to
interpose in my behalf? I will give up all right and
title to my Grandfather's devises and bequests, with
all my heart and soul, to whom they please, in order
to make my proposal palatable to my Brother. And
that my surrender may be effectual, I will engage
never to marry. 

What think you, my dear, of this expedient? 
Surely they cannot resolve to renounce me for ever. 
If they look with impartial eyes upon what has happened,
they will have something to blame themselves
for, as well as me. 
I presume, that you will be of opinion, that this
expedient is worth trying. But here is my difficulty: 
If I should write, my hard-hearted Brother has so
strongly confederated them all against me, that my
Letter would be handed about from one to another,
till he had hardened every one to refuse my request; 
whereas, could my Uncle be engaged to espouse my
cause, as from himself, I should have some hope; as I
presume to think he would soon have my Mother and
my Aunt of his party. 
What therefore I am thinking of, is this—‘Suppose
Mr. Hickman, whose good character has gained
him every-body's respect, should put himself in my
Uncle Harlowe's way? And (as if from your
knowlege of the state of things between Mr. Lovelace
and me) assure him not only of the above
particulars, but that I am under no obligations that
shall hinder me from taking his directions?’ 
I submit the whole to your discretion, whether to
pursue it at all, or in what manner. But if it be
pursued, and if my Uncle refuses to interest himself
in my favour upon Mr. Hickman's application as
from you (for so, for obvious reasons, it must be put)
I can then have no hope; and my next step, in the
mind I am in, shall be to throw myself into the protection
of the Ladies of his family. 
It were an impiety to adopt the following lines,
because it would be throwing upon the Decrees of
Providence a fault too much my own. But often do
I revolve them, for the sake of the general similitude
which they bear to my unhappy, yet undesigned
error. 


To you, great gods! I make my last appeal:
Or clear my virtues, or my crimes reveal.
If wand'ring in the maze of life I run,
And backward tread the steps I sought to shun,
Impute my error to your own decree:
My Feet are guilty; but my Heart is free.
The Lady dates again on Monday, to let Miss Howe
know, that Mr. Lovelace, on observing her uneasiness,
had introduced to her Mr. Mennell, Mrs.
Fretchville's kinsman, who managed all her affairs. 
She calls him a young officer of sense and
politeness, who gave her an account of the house
and furniture, to the same effect that Mr. Lovelace
had done before (a) ; as also of the melancholy
way Mrs. Fretchville is in. 
She tells Miss Howe, how extremely urgent Mr.
Lovelace was with the gentleman, to get his Spouse
(as he now always calls her before company) a
sight of the house: And that Mr. Mennell undertook
that very afternoon to shew her all of it,
except the apartment Mrs. Fretchville should be
in when she went. But that she chose not to take
another step till she knew how she approved of
her scheme to have her Uncle sounded; and with
what success, if tried, it would be attended. 
Mr. Lovelace, in his humourous way, gives his
friend an account of the Lady's peevishness and
dejection, on receiving a Letter with her cloaths. 
He regrets that he has lost her confidence; which
he attributes to his bringing her into the company
of his four companions. Yet he thinks he must
excuse them, and censure her for over-niceness; 
for that he never saw men behave better, at least
not them. 
Mentioning his introducing Mr. Mennell to her, 

Now, Jack, says he, was it not very kind of Mr.
Mennell [Captain Mennell I sometimes called him; 
for among the military men there is no such officer,
thou knowest, as a Lieutenant, or an Ensign—Was
it not very kind in him] to come along with me so
readily as he did, to satisfy my Beloved about the
vapourish Lady and the House? 
But who is Captain Mennell? methinks thou askest: 
I never heard of such a man as Captain Mennell. 
Very likely. But knowest thou not young Newcomb,
honest Doleman's Nephew? 
O-ho! Is it he? 
It is. And I have changed his name by virtue of
my own single authority. Knowest thou not, that I
am a great Name-father? Preferments I bestow, both
military and civil. I give Estates, and take them
away at my pleasure. Quality too I create. And
by a still more valuable prerogative, I degrade by
virtue of my own imperial will, without any other
act of forfeiture than for my own convenience. 
What a poor thing is a monarch to me! 
But Mennell, now he has seen this angel of a woman,
has qualms; that's the devil! —I shall have
enough to do to keep him right. But it is the less
wonder, that he should stagger, when a few hours
conversation with the same Lady could make four
much more hardened varlets find hearts. —Only, that
I am confident, that I shall at last reward her virtue,
if her virtue overcome me, or I should find it impossible
to persevere —For at times, I have confounded
qualms myself. But say not a word of them to the
Confraternity: Nor laugh at me for them thyself. 
In another Letter, dated Monday night, he writes as
follows: 
This perverse Lady keeps me at such distance,
that I am sure something is going on between her and
Miss Howe, notwithstanding the prohibition from 

Mrs. Howe to both: And as I have thought it some
degree of merit in myself to punish others for their
transgressions, I am of opinion, that both these girls
are punishable for their breach of parental injunctions. 
And as to their Letter-carrier, I have been enquiring
into his way of living; and finding him to be a common
poacher, a deer-stealer, and warren-robber, who,
under pretence of higgling, deals with a set of customers,
who constantly take all he brings, whether
fish, fowl, or venison, I hold myself justified (since
Wilson's conveyance must at present be sacred) to
have him stript and robbed, and what Money he has
about him given to the Poor; since, if I take not
Money as well as Letters, I shall be suspected. 
To serve one's self, and punish a villain at the same
time, is serving public and private. The Law was
not made for such a man as me. And I must come at
correspondencies so disobediently carried on. 
But, on second thoughts, if I could find out that
the dear creature carried any of her Letters in her
Pockets, I can get her to a Play or to a Concert, and
she may have the misfortune to lose her Pockets. 
But how shall I find this out; since her Dorcas
knows no more of her dressing or undressing than
her Lovelace? For she is dressed for the day, before
she appears even to her servant. Vilely suspicious! 
Upon my soul, Jack, a suspicious temper is a punishable
temper. If a woman suspects a rogue in an honest
man, is it not enough to make the honest man
who knows it, a rogue? 
But as to her Pockets, I think my mind hankers
after them, as the less mischievous attempt. But they
cannot hold all the Letters that I should wish to see. 
And yet a woman's Pockets are half as deep as she
is high. Tied round the sweet Levities, I presume,
as Ballast-bags, lest the wind, as they move with
full sail, from whale-ribbed canvas, should blow away
the gypsies. 

He then, in apprehension that something is meditating
between the two Ladies, or that something
may be set on foot to get Miss Harlowe out of his
hands, relates several of his contrivances, and
boasts of his instructions given in writing to a Dorcas
and to his servant Will. Summers; and says,
that he has provided against every possible accident,
even to bring her back if she should escape,
or in case she should go abroad, and then refuse
to return; and hopes so to manage, as that,
should he make an attempt, whether he succeed
in it, or not, he may have a pretence to detain
her. 
He then proceeds as follows: 
I have ordered Dorcas to cultivate by all means
her Lady's favour; to lament her incapacity as to
writing and reading; to shew Letters to her Lady,
as from pretended country relations; to beg her advice
how to answer them, and to get them answered; 
and to be always aiming at scrawling with a pen, lest
inky fingers should give suspicion. I have moreover
given the wench an ivory-leafed pocket-book,
with a silver pencil, that she may make memoranda
on occasion. 
And let me tell thee, that the Lady has already
(at Mrs. Sinclair's motion) removed her cloaths out
of the trunks they came in, into an ample mahogany
repository, where they will lie at full length, and
which has drawers in it for linen. —A repository, that
used to hold the richest suits which some of the nymphs
put on, when they are to be dressed out, to captivate,
or to ape Quality. For many a Countess, thou
knowest, has our mother equipped; nay, two or three
Duchesses, who live upon Quality-terms with their
Lords. But this to such as will come up to her price,
and can make an appearance like Quality themselves
on the occasion: For the Reputation of persons of 

Birth must not lie at the mercy of every under-degreed
sinner. 
A master-key which will open every lock in this
chest, is put into Dorcas's hands; and she is to take
care, when she searches for papers, before she removes
any-thing, to observe how it lies, that she may replace
all to a hair. Sally and Polly can occasionally help
to transcribe. Slow and sure with such an Argus-eyed
charmer must be all my movements. 
It is impossible that one so young and so inexperienced
as she is, can have all her caution from herself; 
the behaviour of the women so unexceptionable; 
no revellings, no company ever admitted into this
inner-house; all genteel, quiet, and easy, in it; the
Nymphs well-bred, and well-read; her first disgusts
to the Old one got over —It must be Miss Howe
therefore [Who once was in danger of being taken in
by one of our class, by honest Sir George Colmar, as
thou hast heard] that makes my progress difficult. 
Thou seest, Belford, by the above precautionaries,
that I forget nothing. As the Song says, it is not to
be imagined 

 On what slight strings
 Depend those things,
On which men build their glory!
So far, so good. I shall never rest till I have discovered
in the first place, where the dear creature puts
her Letters; and in the next till I have got her to a
Play, to a Concert, or to take an Airing with me
out of town for a day or two. 
* *
I gave thee just now some of my Contrivances. 
Dorcas, who is ever attentive to all her Lady's motions,
has given me some instances of her mistress's
precautions. She wafers her Letters, it seems, in
two places; pricks the wafers; and then seals upon
them. No doubt but the same care is taken with regard 

to those brought to her; for she always examines
the Seals of the latter before she opens them. 
I must, I must come at them. This difficulty
augments my curiosity. Strange, so much as she
writes, and at all hours, that not one sleepy or forgetful
moment has offered in our favour! 
&dotup;A fair contention, thou seest: Nor plead thou in
her favour her Youth, her Beauty, her Family, her
Fortune. Credulity, she has none; and with
regard to her tender years, Am I not a young
fellow myself? As to Beauty; pr'ythee, Jack, do
thou, to spare my modesty, make a comparison
between my Clarissa for a Woman, and thy Lovelace
for a Man. For her Family, That was not
known to its country a Century ago: And I hate
them all but her. Have I not cause? —For her
Fortune; Fortune, thou knowest, was ever a
stimulus with me; and this for reasons not ignoble. 
Do not girls of Fortune adorn themselves on
purpose to engage our attention? Seek they not
to draw us into their snares? Depend they not,
generally, on their Fortunes, in the views they
have upon us, more than on their Merits? Shall
we deprive them of the benefit of their principal
dependence? —Can I, in particular, marry every
girl who wishes to obtain my notice? If therefore,
in support of the libertine principles for which none
of the sweet rogues hate us, a woman of fortune
is brought to yield homage to her Emperor, and
any consequences attend the Subjugation, is not such
a one shielded by her fortune, as well from insult
and contempt, as from indigence? —All, then, that
admits of debate between my Beloved and me, is
only this—Which of the two has more Wit, more
Circumspection—And that remains to be tried.&dotup; 
A sad Life however, this Life of Doubt and Suspense,
for the poor Lady to live, as well as for me; 
that is to say, if she be not naturally jealous—If she 

be, her uneasiness is constitutional, and she cannot
help it; nor will it, in that case, hurt her. For a
suspicious temper will make occasions for doubt, if none
were to offer to its hand. My Fair-one therefore,
if naturally suspicious, is obliged to me for saving her
the trouble of studying for these occasions—But after
all, the plainest paths in our journeys through life are
the safest and best I believe, although it is not given
me to chuse them. I am not, however, singular in the
pursuit of the more intricate paths; since there are
thousands and ten thousands, who had rather fish in
troubled waters than in smooth. 