



Mrs. Norton, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Monday Night, July 3. 
O the barbarous villainy of this detestable man! 
And is there a man in the world, who could
offer violence to so sweet a creature! 
And are you sure you are now out of his reach? 
You command me to keep secret the particulars of
the vile treatment you have met with; or else, upon
an unexpected visit which Miss Harlowe favoured me
with, soon after I had received your melancholy Letter,
I should have been tempted to own I had heard
from you, and to have communicated to her such
parts of your two Letters as would have demonstrated
your penitence, and your earnestness to obtain the revocation
of your Father's Malediction, as well as his
protection from outrages that may still be offered to
you. But then your Sister would probably have expected
a sight of the Letters, and even to have been
permitted to take them with her to the family. 
Yet they must one day be acquainted with the sad
Story: —And it is impossible but they must pity you,
and forgive you, when they know your early penitence,
and your unprecedented sufferings; and that
you have fallen by the brutal Force of a barbarous Ravisher,
and not by the vile Arts of a seducing Lover. 
The wicked man gives it out at Lord M's, as Miss
Harlowe tells me, that he is actually married to you: — 
Yet she believes it not; nor had I the heart to let her
know the truth. 
She put it close to me, Whether I had not corresponded
with you from the time of your going away? 
I could safely tell her (as I did) that I had not: But
I said, that I was well informed, that you took extremely
to heart your Father's Imprecation; and that,
if she would excuse me, I would say, it would be a 

kind and Sisterly part, if she would use her interest to
get you discharged from it. 
Among other severe things, she told me, that my
partial fondness for you made me very little consider
the honour of the rest of the family: But, if I had
not heard this from you, she supposed I was set on
by Miss Howe. 
She expressed herself with a good deal of bitterness
against that young Lady: Who, it seems, everywhere,
and to every-body (for you must think, that
your Story is the subject of all conversations) rails
against your family; treating them, as your Sister
says, with contempt, and even with ridicule. 
I am sorry such angry freedoms are taken, for two
reasons; first, Because such liberties never do any
good. I have heard you own, that Miss Howe has
a satirical vein; but I should hope, that a young
Lady of her sense, and right cast of mind, must
know, that the end of Satire is not to exasperate,
but amend; and should never be personal. If it be,
as my good Father used to say, it may make an impartial
person suspect, that the Satirist has a natural
spleen to gratify; which may be as great a fault in
him, as any of those which he pretends to censure and
expose in others. 
Perhaps a hint of this from you will not be thrown
away. 
My second reason is, That these freedoms, from so
warm a friend to you as Miss Howe is known to be,
are most likely to be charged to your account. 
My resentments are so strong against this vilest of
men, that I dare not touch upon the shocking particulars
which you mention, of his baseness. What
defence, indeed, could there be against so determined
a wretch, after you were in his power? I will only
repeat my earnest supplication to you, that, black
as appearances are, you will not despair. Your
calamities are exceeding great; but then you have 

talents proportioned to your trials. This every-body
allows. 
Suppose the worst, and that your family will not
be moved in your favour, your Cousin Morden will
soon arrive, as Miss Harlowe told me. If he should
even be got over to their side, he will however see
justice done you; and then may you live an Exemplary
Life, making hundreds happy, and teaching
young Ladies to shun the snares in which you have
been so dreadfully entangled. 
As to the man you have lost, Is an union with such
a perjured heart as his with such an admirable one as
yours, to be wished for? A base, low-hearted wretch,
as you justly call him, with all his pride of Ancestry; 
and more an enemy to himself with regard to his present
and future happiness, than to you, in the barbarous
and ungrateful wrongs he has done you: I need
not, I am sure, exhort you to despise such a man as
this; since not to be able to do so, would be a reflection
upon a Sex to which you have always been an
honour. 
Your Moral Character is untainted: The very nature
of your sufferings, as you well observe, demonstrates
that. Chear up, therefore, your dear heart,
and do not despair: For is it not God who governs
the world, and permits some things, and directs
others, as He pleases? And will he not reward temporary
sufferings, innocently incurred, and piously
supported, with eternal felicity? —And what, my
dear, is this poor Needle's point of NOW to a
boundless Eternity? 
My heart, however, labours under a double affliction: 
For my poor boy is very, very bad—A violent
fever—Nor can it be brought to intermit—Pray for
him, my dearest Miss—for his Recovery, if God see
fit. —I hope God will see fit. —If not (how can I bear
to suppose That!)—pray for me, that He will give 

me that Patience and Resignation which I have been
wishing to you. I am, my dearest young Lady, 
Your ever-affectionate
Judith Norton. 