


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


The Music parlour [I can hardly mention it without
breaking into raptures] is adorned with a
variety of fine carvings, on subjects that do honour to
poetry and music. Be it Lucy's task to describe
them. Let me mention other instances of his tender
goodness to one of the happiest creatures on earth. 
You know, madam, Sir Charles, when in North-hamptonshire,
offered me my choice of servants of
both sexes; and when I told him, that I chose not to
take with me any one of either but my Sally, he said,
that when I came to Grandison-hall, where they
would be all together, I should choose which of the
men-servants I would more particularly call my own. 
He gave me just now the names and qualities of each. 
Frederic I had seen at Selby-house, an observant,
sensible-looking young man (but are not all his servants 

so?): I chose him. He called him in (my aunt
Selby present): All my servants, Frederic, said he,
are as much your Lady's as mine: But you will devote
yourself more particularly to her commands. I
mean not, however, any distinction in your favour,
where you all equally merit distinction. The power,
madam, of change or dismission thro' the house is
entirely yours. 
To-morrow, I am to go over all the bridal ostentation
again at the parish-church. On Monday Lady
Mansfield and her family are to be here. —Your
guests, my dear, said Sir Charles to me, before all
our friends, I hope, for a week at least. This was
the first notice he gave of it to Lord and Lady W.
What joy and gratitude appeared in her countenance
upon it. 
Tuesday, by general approbation (Sir Charles submitting
the choice of the day to his guests) we are
to have the neighbouring gentry here to dinner, and
for the rest of the day. Sir Charles has been long
wished by them all to reside among them. He breaks
thro' the usual forms, and chose this way, at once,
to receive the visits of all his neighbours, and in both
our names gave the invitation. He shewed us a list
of the persons invited. It is a very large one. My
dearest life, said he, we shall be all half-familiarized
to them, they to us, even to-morrow, by the freedom
of this invitation for the Tuesday following. 
Mrs. Curzon came to me for directions about the
bedchambers. I took that opportunity to tell her,
that I should add to the number of female servants,
only my Sally, of whose discretion I had no doubt. 
You must introduce to me, said I, at a proper time,
the female servants. If you, Mrs. Curzon, approve
of them, I shall make no changes. I am, myself,
the happiest of women: Every one who deserves it,
shall find her happiness in mine. 
You will rejoice all their hearts, madam, by this 

early declaration of your goodness to them. I can
truly say, that the best of masters has not the worst of
servants: But Dr. Bartlett would make bad servants
good. 
I shall want no other proof, said I, of their goodness,
than their love and respect to Dr. Bartlett. 
In company of my aunt, Lady W. Lucy, Miss Jervois,
attended by Mrs. Curzon, we went to choose our
rooms; and those for our expected guests of Monday. 
We soon fixed on them. My aunt with her usual goodness,
and Lady W. with that condescension that is natural
to her, took great notice of Mrs. Curzon, who seemed
delighted with us all; and said, that she should be
the happier in the performance of her duty, as she had
been informed, we were managing Ladies. It was a
pleasure, she said, to receive commands from persons
who knew when things were properly done. You,
my dearest grandmamma, from my earliest youth,
have told me, that to be respected even by servants,
it is necessary to be able to direct them, and not
be thought ignorant in those matters that it becomes
a mistress of a family to be acquainted with. They
shall not find me pragmatical, however, in the little
knowlege I have in family-matters. 
Will nothing happen, my dear grandmamma— 
But no more of this kind—Shall I by my diffidences
lessen the enjoyments of which I am in full possession? 
My joy may not be sufficient to banish fear; but I
hope it will be a prudent one, which will serve to increase
my thankfulness to Heaven, and my gratitude
to the man so justly dear to me. 
But do you, my grandmamma, whenever you pray
for the continuance of your Harriet's happiness, pray
also for that of Lady Clementina: That only can be
wanting in my present situation, to complete the felicity
of 
Your ever-grateful, ever-dutiful,
Harriet Grandison. 

