



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday Night, Aug. 4. 
I have actually delivered to the Lady the Extracts
she requested me to give her from your Letters. 
I do assure you that I have made the very best of the
matter for you, not that conscience, but that friendship,
could oblige me to make. I have changed or
omitted some free words. The warm description of
her Person in the Fire-Scene, as I may call it, I have
omitted. I have told her, that I have done justice to
you, in the justice you have done to her unexampled
virtue. But take the very words which I wrote to
her immediately following the Extracts: 
‘And now, Madam,’—See the paragraph marked
with inverted commas [‘ thus] p. 67. 
The Lady is extremely uneasy at the thoughts of
your attempting to visit her. For Heaven's sake
(your word being given) and for Pity's sake (for she
is really in a very weak and languishing way) let me
beg of you not to think of it. 
Yesterday afternoon she received a cruel Letter (as
Mrs. Lovick supposes it to be, by the effect it had
upon her) from her Sister, in answer to one written
last Saturday, entreating a Blessing and Forgiveness
from her Parents. 
She acknowleges, that if the same decency and justice
are observed in all your Letters, as in the Extracts 

I have obliged her with (as I have assured her
they are) she shall think herself freed from the necessity
of writing her own Story: And this is an advantage
to thee which thou oughtest to thank me
for. 
But what thinkest thou is the second request she had
to make to me? No other than that I would be her
Executor! —Her motives will appear before thee in
proper time; and then, I dare to answer, will be
satisfactory. 
You cannot imagine how proud I am of this Trust. 
I am afraid I shall too soon come into the execution
of it. As she is always writing, what a melancholy
pleasure will the perusal and disposition of her papers
afford me! Such a sweetness of temper, so much
patience and resignation, as she seems to be mistress
of; yet writing of and in the midst of present distresses! 
How much more lively and affecting, for that
reason, must her style be; her mind tortured by the
pangs of uncertainty (the events then hidden in the
womb of Fate) than the dry, narrative, unanimated
style of persons, relating difficulties and dangers surmounted; 
the relator perfectly at ease; and if himself
unmoved by his own Story, not likely greatly to
affect the Reader! 
Saturday Morning, Aug. 5. 
I am just returned from visiting the Lady, and
thanking her in person for the honour she has done
me; and assuring her, if called to the Sacred Trust, of
the utmost fidelity and exactness. 
I found her very ill. I took notice of it. She said,
She had received a second hard-hearted Letter from
her Sister; and she had been writing a Letter (and
that on her knees) directly to her Mother; which,
before, she had not had the courage to do. It was
for a Last Blessing, and Forgiveness. No wonder,
she said, that I saw her affected. Now that I had 

accepted of the last charitable office for her (for
which, as well as for complying with her other request,
she thanked me) I should one day have all
these Letters before me: And could she have a kind
one in return to that she had been now writing, to
counterbalance the unkind one she had from her Sister,
she might be induced to shew me both together— 
otherwise, for her Sister's sake, it were no matter
how few saw the poor Bella's Letter. 
I knew she would be displeased if I had censured
the cruelty of her relations: I therefore only said,
That surely she must have enemies, who hoped to
find their account in keeping up the resentments of
her friends against her. 
It may be so, Mr. Belford, said she: The Unhappy
never want enemies. One fault, wilfully
committed, authorizes the imputation of many more. 
Where the ear is opened to accusations, accusers will
not be wanting; and every one will officiously come
with Stories against a disgraced child, where nothing
dare be said in her favour. I should have been wise
in time, and not have needed to be convinced, by
my own misfortunes, of the truth of what common
experience daily demonstrates. Mr. Lovelace's baseness,
my Father's inflexibility, my Sister's reproaches,
are the natural consequences of my own rashness; so
I must make the best of my hard lot. Only, as these
consequences follow one another so closely, while
they are new, how can I help being anew affected? 
I asked, If a Letter written by myself, by her
Doctor or Apothecary, to any of her friends, representing
her low state of health, and great humility,
would be acceptable? Or if a journey to any of them
would be of service, I would gladly undertake it in
person, and strictly conform to her orders, to whomsoever
she would direct me to apply. 
She earnestly desired, that nothing of this sort might
be attempted, especially without her knowlege 

and consent. Miss Howe, she said, had done harm
by her kindly-intended zeal; and if there were room
to expect favour by mediation, she had ready at hand
a kind friend, Mrs. Norton, who for piety and prudence
had few equals; and who would let slip no opportunity
to endeavour to do her service. 
I let her know, that I was going out of town till
Monday: She wished me pleasure; and said, she
should be glad to see me on my return. 
Adieu! 