



Colonel Morden. In Continuation. 

When the unhappy mourners were all retired, I
directed the lid of the coffin to be unscrewed, and
caused some fresh aromatics and flowers to be put into it. 

The corpse was very little altered, notwithstanding
the journey. The sweet smile remained. 
The maids who brought the flowers were ambitious
of strewing them about it: They poured forth fresh
lamentations over her; each wishing she had been so
happy as to have been allowed to attend her in London. 
One of them particularly, who is, it seems, my Cousin
Arabella's personal servant, was more clamorous in her
grief than any of the rest; and the moment she turned
her back, all the others allowed she had reason for it. I
enquired afterwards about her, and found, that this
creature was set over my dear Cousin, when she was
confined to her chamber by indiscreet severity. 
Good heaven! that hey should treat, and suffer thus
to be treated, a young Lady, who was qualified to give
laws to all her family! 
When my Cousins were told, that the lid was unscrew'd,
they press'd in again, all but the mournful
Father and Mother, as if by consent. Mrs. Hervey
kissed her pale lips. Flower of the world! was all she
could say; and gave place to Miss Arabella; who kissing
the forehead of her whom she had so cruelly treated,
could only say, to my Cousin James (looking upon the
corpse, and upon him) O Brother! —While he, taking
the fair lifeless hand, kissed it, and retreated with precipitation. 
Her two Uncles were speechless. They seemed to
wait each other's example, whether to look upon the
corpse, or not. I ordered the lid to be replaced; and
then they pressed forward, as the others again did, to
take a last farewel of the casket which so lately contained
so rich a jewel. 
Then it was that the grief of each found fluent expression; 
and the fair corpse was addressed to, with all
the tenderness that the sincerest love and warmest admiration
could inspire; each according to their different
degrees of relationship, as if none of them had before
looked upon her. She was their very Niece, both Uncles 

said! The injured Saint, her Uncle Harlowe! The
same smiling Sister, Arabella! —The dear creature! all
of them! —The same benignity of countenance! The
same sweet composure! The same natural dignity! — 
She was questionless happy! That sweet smile betokened
her being so! Themselves most unhappy! —And then,
once more, the Brother took the lifeless hand, and vowed
revenge upon it, on the cursed author of all this distress. 
The unhappy parents proposed to take one last view
and farewell of their once darling Daughter. The Father
was got to the parlour-door, after the inconsolable Mother: 
But neither of them were able to enter it. The
Mother said, She must once more see the child of her
heart, or she should never enjoy herself. But they both
agreed to refer their melancholy curiosity till the next
day; and hand in hand retired inconsolable, and speechless
both, their faces overspread with woe, and turned
from each other, as unable each to behold the distress of
the other. 
When all were withdrawn, I retired, and sent for
my Cousin James, and acquainted him with his Sister's
request in relation to the discourse to be pronounced at
her interrment; telling him how necessary it was, that
the Minister, whoever he were, should have the earliest
notice given him that the case would admit. He lamented
the death of the reverend Dr. Lewen, who, as he said,
was a great admirer of his Sister, as she was of him,
and would have been the fittest of all men for that office. 
He spoke with great asperity of Mr. Brand, upon
whose light enquiry after his Sister's character in town,
he was willing to lay some of the blame due to himself. 
Mr. Melvill, Dr. Lewen's assistant, must, he said,
be the man; and he praised him for his abilities, his
elocution, and unexceptionable manners; and promised
to engage him early in the morning. 
He called out his Sister, and she was of his opinion. 
So I left this upon them. 

They both, with no little warmth, hinted their disapprobation
of you, Sir, for their Sister's Executor, on
the score of your intimate friendship with the author of
her ruin. 
You must not resent any-thing I shall communicate
to you of what they say on this occasion: Depending
that you will not, I shall write with the greater freedom. 
I told them how much my dear Cousin was obliged
to your friendship and humanity: The injunctions she
had laid you under, and your own inclination to observe
them. I said, That you were a man of honour: That
you were desirous of consulting me, because you would
not willingly give offence to any of them; and that I
was very fond of cultivating your favour and correspondence. 
They said, There was no need of an Executor out of
their family; and they hoped that you would relinquish
so unnecessary a trust, as they called it. My Cousin
James declared, that he would write to you as soon as
the funeral was over, to desire that you would do so,
upon proper assurances that all that the Will prescribed
should be performed. 
I said, You were a man of resolution: That I thought
he would hardly succeed; for that you made a point of
honour of it. 
I then shewed them their Sister's posthumous Letter
to you; in which she confesses her obligations to you,
and regard for you, and for your future welfare (a) . 
You may believe, Sir, they were extremely affected
with the perusal of it. 
They were surprised, that I had given up to you the
produce of her Grandfather's Estate, since his death. I
told them plainly, that they must thank themselves if
any-thing disagreeable to them occurred from their Sister's
devise; deserted, and thrown into the hands of
strangers, as she had been. 

They said, they would report all I had said to their
Father and Mother; adding, That great as their trouble
was, they found they had more still to come. But
if Mr. Belford were to be the Executor of her Will,
contrary to their hopes, they besought me to take the
trouble of transacting every-thing with you; that a
friend of the man to whom they owed all their calamity,
might not appear to them. 
They were extremely moved at the Text their Sister
had chosen for the subject of the funeral dicourse (a) . I
had extracted from the Will that article, supposing it
probable, that I might not so soon have an opportunity
to shew them the Will itself, as would otherwise have
been necessary, on account of the interrment: Which
cannot be delayed. 
Monday Morning between Eight and Nine. 
The unhappy family are preparing for a mournful
meeting at breakfast. Mr. James Harlowe, who has
had as little rest as I, has written to Mr. Melvill, who
has promised to draw up a brief Eulogium on the deceased. 
Miss Howe is expected here by-and-by, to see,
for the last time, her beloved friend. 
Miss Howe, by her messenger, desires she may not
be taken any notice of. She shall not tarry Six minutes,
was the word. Her desire will be easily granted her. 
Her servant, who brought the request, if it were denied,
was to return, and meet her; for she was ready
to set out in her chariot, when he got on horseback. 
If he met her not with the refusal, he was to stay
here till she came. I am, Sir, 
Your faithful humble Servant,
William Morden. 