



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[The preceding Letter not received.] 

Saturday Afternoon. 
Already have I an ecstatic Answer, as I may call
it, to my Letter. 
‘He promises compliance with my will in every
article: Approves of all I propose; particularly of
the private lodging: And thinks it a happy expedient
to obviate the censures of the Busy and the
Unreflecting: And yet he hopes, that the putting
myself into the protection of either of his Aunts
(treated as I am treated) would be far from being
looked upon by any-body in a disreputable light. 
But every-thing I enjoin or resolve upon must, he
says, be right, not only with respect to my present
but future Reputation; with regard to which, he
hopes so to behave himself, as to be allowed to be,
next to myself, more properly solicitous than anybody. 
He will only assure me, that his whole family
are extremely desirous to take advantage of the
persecutions I labour under, to make their court and
endear themselves to me, by their best and most 

chearful services: Happy, if they can in any measure
contribute to my present freedom and future
happiness. 
‘He will this afternoon, he says, write to Lord M.
and to Lady Betty and Lady Sarah, that he is now
within view of being the happiest man in the world,
if it be not his own fault; since the only woman
upon earth that can make him so, will be soon out
of danger of being another man's; and cannot possibly
prescribe any terms to him that he shall not
think it his duty to comply with. 
‘He flatters himself now (my last Letter confirming
my resolution) that he can be in no apprehension of
my changing my mind, unless my friends change
their manner of acting by me; which he is too sure
they will not (a) . And now will all his Relations,
who take such a kind and generous share in his interests,
glory and pride themselves in the prospects
he has before him.’ 
Thus artfully does he hold me to it. 
‘As to fortune, he begs of me not to be solicitous
on that score: That his own Estate is sufficient for
us both; not a nominal, but a real, two thousand
pounds per annum, equivalent to some Estates reputed
a third more: That it never was encumbred: 
That he is clear of the world, both as to book and
bond debts; thanks, perhaps, to his pride, more
than to his virtue: That Lord M. moreover resolves
to settle upon him a thousand pounds per annum
on his nuptials. And to this, he will have it, his
Lordship is instigated more by motives of justice,
than of generosity; as he must consider it was but an
equivalent for an Estate which he had got possession
of, to which his (Mr. Lovelace's) Mother had better
pretensions. That his Lordship also proposed 

to give him up either his Seat in Hertfordshire, or
that in Lancashire, at his own or at his Wife's option,
especially if I am the person. All which it
will be in my power to see done, and proper Settlements
drawn, before I enter into any farther engagements
with him; if I will have it so.’ 
He says, ‘That I need not be under any solicitude
as to apparel: All immediate occasions of That sort
will be most chearfully supplied by the Ladies of his family: 
As my others shall, with the greatest pride and
pleasure (if I will allow him that honour) by himself. 
‘He assures me, That I shall govern him as I please,
with regard to any-thing in his power towards effecting
a Reconciliation with my friends:’ A point
he knows my heart is set upon. 
‘He is afraid, that the time will hardly allow of
his procuring Miss Charlotte Montague's attendance
upon me, at St. Alban's, as he had proposed
she should; because, he understands, she keeps her
chamber with a violent cold and sore throat. But
both she and her Sister, the first moment she is able
to go abroad, shall visit me at my private lodgings; 
and introduce me to Lady Sarah and Lady Betty,
or those Ladies to me, as I shall chuse; and accompany
me to town, if I please; and stay as long in
it with me, as I shall think fit to stay there. 
‘Lord M. will also, at my own time, and in my
own manner (that is to say, either publicly or privately)
make me a visit. And, for his own part, when
he has seen me in safety, either in their protection,
or in the privacy I prefer, he will leave me, and
not attempt to visit me but by my own permission. 
‘He had thoughts once, he says, on hearing of
his Cousin Charlotte's indisposition, to have engaged
his Cousin Patty's attendance upon me, either at
or about the neighbouring village, or at St. Alban's: 
But, he says, she is a low-spirited, timorous girl,
and would but the more have perplexed us.’ 

So, my dear, the enterprize requires courage and
high spirits, you see! —And indeed it does! —What
am I about to do!— 
He himself, it is plain, thinks it necessary that I
should be accompanied with one of my own Sex. — 
He might, at least, have proposed the woman of one
of the Ladies of his family. —Lord bless me! —What
am I about to do!— 
* *
After all, far as I have gone, I know not but I
may still recede: And if I do, a mortal quarrel I
suppose will ensue. —And what if it does? —Could
there be any way to escape this Solmes, a breach with
Lovelace might make way for the Single Life to take
place, which I so much prefer: And then I would,
defy the Sex. For I see nothing but trouble and vexation
that they bring upon ours: And when once entered,
one is obliged to go on with them, treading,
with tender feet, upon thorns, and sharper thorns,
to the end of a painful journey. 
What to do I know not. The more I think, the
more I am embarassed! —And the stronger will be my
doubts as the appointed time draws near. 
But I will go down, and take a little turn in the
garden; and deposit This, and his Letters all but the
two last, which I will inclose in my next, if I have
opportunity to write another. 
Mean time, my dear friend—But what can I
desire you to pray for? —Adieu then! —Let me only
say—Adieu!— 