



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morning. 
I will now take some notice of your last favour. 
But being so far behind-hand with you, must be
brief. 
In the first place, as to your reproofs, thus shall I
discharge myself of that part of my subject. —Is it
likely, think you, that I should avoid deserving them
now-and-then, occasionally, when I admire the manner
in which you give me your rebukes, and love you
the better for them? And when you are so well entitled
to give them? For what faults can you possibly
have, unless your relations are so kind as to find you
a few to keep their many in countenance? —But they
are as kind to me in This, as to you; for I may venture
to affirm, That any one who should read your
Letters, and would say you were right, would not on
reading mine condemn me for being quite wrong. 
Your resolution not to leave your Father's house is
right—if you can stay in it, and avoid being Solmes's
Wife. 
I think you answered Solmes's Letter, as I should
have answered it. —Will you not compliment me and
yourself at once, by saying, that That was right? 
You have, in your Letters to your Uncle and the
rest, done all that you ought to do. You are wholly
guiltless of the consequence, be it what it will. To
offer to give up your Estate! —That would not I have
done! You see this offer staggered them: They took
time to consider of it. They made my heart ake in
the time they took. I was afraid they would have
taken you at your word: And so, but for shame, and
for fear of Lovelace, I dare say they would. You are
too noble for them. This, I repeat, is an offer I
would not have made. Let me beg of you, my dear,
never to repeat the temptation to them. 

I freely own to you, that their usage of you upon
it, and Lovelace's different treatment of you (a)  in
his Letter received at the same time, would have made
me his, past redemption. The duce take the man, I
was going to say, for not having had so much regard
to his character and morals, as would have entirely
justified such a step in a Clarissa, persecuted as she is! 
I wonder not at your appointment with him. I may
further touch upon some part of this subject by-and-by. 
Pray—pray—I pray you now, my dearest friend,
contrive to send your Betty Barnes to me! —Does the
Coventry Act extend to women, know ye? —The
least I will do, shall be, to send her home well soused
in and dragged through our deepest horsepond. I'll
engage, if I get her hither, that she shall keep the anniversary
of her deliverance as long as she lives. 
I wonder not at Lovelace's saucy Answer, saucy as
it really is (b) . If he loves you as he ought, he must be
vexed at so great a disappointment. The man must
have been a detestable hypocrite, I think, had he not
shewn his vexation. Your expectations of such a
Christian command of temper in him, in a disappointment
of this nature especially, are too early by almost
half a century in a man of his constitution. But nevertheless
I am very far from blaming you for your resentment. 
I shall be all impatience to know how this matter
ends between you and him. But a few inches of brickwall
between you so lately; and now such mountains! 
—And you think to hold it? —May be so! 
You see, you say, that the temper he shewed in
his preceding Letter was not natural to him. And
did you before think it was? Wretched creepers and
insinuators! Yet when opportunity serves, as insolent
encroachers! —This very Hickman, I make no doubt,
would be as saucy as your Lovelace, if he dared. He
has not half the arrogant bravery of the other, and 

can better hide his horns; that's all. But whenever
he has the power, depend upon it, he will butt at one
as valiantly as the other. 
If ever I should be persuaded to have him, I shall
watch how the obsequious Lover goes off; and how the
imperative Husband comes upon him; in short, how he
ascends, and how I descend, in the matrimonial wheel,
never to take my turn again, but by fits and starts,
like the feeble struggles of a sinking State for its dying
Liberty. 
All good-natured men are passionate, says Mr. Lovelace. 
A pretty plea to a beloved object in the plenitude
of her power! As much as to say, ‘Greatly as I value
you, Madam, I will not take pains to curb my
passions to oblige you.’ —Methinks, I should be glad
to hear from Mr. Hickman such a plea for good-nature
as this. 
Indeed, we are too apt to make allowances for such
tempers as early indulgence has made uncontroulable; 
and therefore habitually evil. But if a boisterous temper,
when under obligation, is to be thus allowed for,
what, when the tables are turned, will it expect? You
know a Husband, who, I fansy, had some of these
early allowances made for him: And you see that neither
himself nor any-body else is the happier for it. 
The suiting of the tempers of two persons who are to
come together, is a great matter: And yet there should
be boundaries fixed between them, by consent as it
were, beyond which neither should go: And each
should hold the other to it; or there would probably be
encroachments in both. To illustrate my assertion by
a very high, and by a more manly (as some would
think it) than womanly instance—If the boundaries of
the Three Estates that constitute our Political Union
were not known, and occasionally asserted, what
would become of the Prerogatives and Privileges of
each? The two branches of the Legislature would encroach
upon each other; and the Executive power
would swallow up both. 

But if two persons of discretion, you'll say, come
together— 
Ay, my dear, that's true: But, if none but persons
of discretion were to marry—And would it not
surprise you if I were to advance, that the persons of
discretion are generally single? —Such persons are apt
to consider too much, to resolve. —Are not you and
I complimented as such? —And would either of us
marry, if the fellows, and our friends, would let us
alone? 
But to the former point;—Had Lovelace made his
addresses to me (unless indeed I had been taken with
a liking for him more than conditional) I would have
forbid him, upon the first passionate instance of his
good-nature, as he calls it, ever to see me more: 
‘Thou must bear with me, honest friend, might I
have said [had I condescended to say any-thing to
him] an hundred times more than This: —Be-gone
therefore! —I bear with no passions that are predominant
to That thou hast pretended for me!’ 
But to one of your mild and gentle temper, it
would be all one, were you married, whether the man
were a Lovelace or a Hickman in his spirit. —You are
so obediently principled, that perhaps you would have
told a mild man, that he must not entreat, but command; 
and that it was beneath him not to exact from
you the obedience you had so solemnly vowed to him
at the Altar. —I know of old, my dear, your meek
regard to that little piddling part of the marriage-vow
which some Prerogative-monger foisted into the office,
to make That a duty, which he knew was not a right. 
Our way of training-up, you say, makes us need the
protection of the brave. Very true: And how extremely
brave and gallant is it, that this brave man will free
us from all insults but those which will go nearest to
our hearts; that is to say, His own! 
How artfully has Lovelace, in the abstract you
give me of one of his Letters, calculated to your meridian! 

Generous spirits hate compulsion! —He is certainly
a deeper creature by much than once we thought
him. He knows, as you intimate, that his own wild
pranks cannot be concealed; and so owns just enough
to palliate (because it teaches you not to be surprised
at) any new one, that may come to your ears; and
then, truly, he is, however faulty, a mighty ingenuous
man; and by no means an hypocrite: A character
the most odious of all others, to our Sex, in a Lover,
and the least to be forgiven, were it only because,
when detected, it makes us doubt the justice of those
praises which we are willing to believe he thought to
be our due. 
By means of this supposed ingenuity, Lovelace obtains
a praise, instead of a merited dispraise; and, like
an absolved confessionaire, wipes off as he goes along
one score, to begin another: For an eye favourable
to him will not see his faults thro' a magnifying glass; 
nor will a woman, willing to hope the best, forbear to
impute to ill-will and prejudice all that charity can
make so imputable. And if she even give credit to
such of the unfavourable imputations as may be too
flagrant to be doubted, she will be very apt to take-in
the future hope, which he inculcates, and which to
question would be to question her own power, and
perhaps merit: And thus may a woman be inclined
to make a slight, even a fansied merit atone for the
most glaring vice. 
I have a reason, a new one, for this preachment
upon a text you have given me. But, till I am better
informed, I will not explain myself. If it come out,
as I shrewdly suspect it will, the man, my dear, is a
devil; and you must rather think of—I protest I had
like to have said Solmes than him. 
But let This be as it will, shall I tell you, how,
after all his offences, he may creep in with you again? 
I will. Thus then: It is but to claim for himself
the good-natured character: And This, granted, will 

blot out the fault of passionate insolence: And so he
will have nothing to do, but This hour to accustom
you to insult; the Next, to bring you to forgive him,
upon his submission: The consequence must be, that
he will by this teazing break your resentment all to
pieces: And then, a little more of the insult, and a
little less of the submission, on his part, will go down,
till nothing else but the first will be seen, and not a
bit of the second: You will then be afraid to provoke
so offensive a spirit; and at last will be brought so
prettily, and so audibly, to pronounce the little reptile
word Obey, that it will do one's heart good to hear
you. The Muscovite Wife then takes place of the
managed Mistress. —And if you doubt the progression,
be pleased, my dear, to take your Mother's judgment
upon it. 
But no more of This just now. Your Situation is
become too critical to permit me to dwell upon these
sort of topics. And yet this is but an affected Levity
with me. My heart, as I have heretofore said, is a
sincere sharer in all your distresses. My sun-shine
darts but thro' a drizly cloud. My eye, were you
to see it, when it seems to you so gladdened, as you
mentioned in a former, is more than ready to overflow,
even at the very passages perhaps upon which you impute
to me the archness of exultation. 
But now the unheard-of cruelty and perverseness of
some of your friends [Relations, I should say—I am
always blundering thus!] the as strange determinedness
of others; your present quarrel with Lovelace; 
and your approaching Interview with Solmes, from
which you are right to apprehend a great deal; are
such considerable circumstances in your Story, that it
is fit they should engrofs all my attention. 
You ask me to advise you how to behave upon
Solmes's visit. I cannot for my life. I know they
expect a great deal from it: You had not else had
your long day complied with. All I will say is, That 

if Solmes cannot be prevailed for, now, that Lovelace
has so much offended you, he never will. When the
Interview is over, I doubt not but that I shall have reason
to say, that All you did, that All you said, was
right, and could not be better: Yet, if I don't think
so, I won't say so; that I promise you. 
Only let me advise you to pull up a spirit, even to
your Uncle, if there be occasion. Resent the vile and
foolish treatment you meet with, in which he has
taken so large a share, and make him ashamed of it,
if you can. 
I know not, upon recollection, but This Interview
may be a good thing for you, however designed. For
when Solmes sees (if that be to be so) that it is impossible
he should succeed with you; and your relations
see it too; the one must, I think, recede, and the
other come to terms with you, upon offers, that it is
my opinion, will go hard enough with you to comply
with; when the still harder are dispensed with. 
There are several passages in your last Letters, as
well as in your former, which authorize me to say
This. But it would be unseasonable to touch this
subject further just now. 
But, upon the whole, I have no patience to see you
thus made the sport of your Brother's and Sister's
cruelty: For what, after so much steadiness on your
part, in so many trials, can be their hope? Except
indeed it be to drive you to extremity, and to ruin
you in the opinion of your Uncles, as well as Father. 
I urge you by all means to send out of their reach
all the Letters and Papers you would not have them
see. Methinks, I would wish you to deposit likewise
a parcel of cloaths, linen, and the like, before your
Interview with Solmes; lest you should not have an
opportunity for it afterwards. Robin shall fetch it
away on the first orders, by day or by night. 
I am in hopes to procure from my Mother, if things
come to extremity, leave for you to be privately with
us. 

I will condition to be good-humour'd, and even
kind, to Her favourite, if she will shew me an indulgence
that shall make me serviceable to Mine. 
This alternative has been a good while in my head. 
But as your foolish Uncle has so strangely attached my
Mother to their views, I cannot promise that I shall
succeed as I wish. 
Do not absolutely despair, however. What tho'
the contention will be between Woman and Woman? 
I fansy I shall be able to manage it, by the help of a
little female perseverance. Your quarrel with Lovelace,
if it continue, will strengthen my hands. And
the offers you made in your Answer to your Uncle
Harlowe's Letter of Sunday night last, duly dwelt upon,
must add force to my pleas. 
I depend upon your forgiveness of all the perhaps
unseasonable flippancies of your naturally too lively,
yet most sincerely sympathizing, 
Anna Howe. 