


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


London, Tuesday, Sept. 5.
COngratulate us, my dearest Miss Byron, on the
arrival of my brother. He came last night. It
was late. And he sent to us this morning; and to
others of his friends. My Lord and I hurried away
to breakfast with him. Ah, my dear! we see too
plainly that he has been very much disturbed in mind. 
He looks more wan, and is thinner, than he was:
But he is the same kind brother, friend, and good
man. 
I expected a little hint or two from him on my
past vivacities; but not a word of that nature. He
felicitated my good man and me; and when he spoke
of Lord and Lady L. and his joy in their happiness, 

he put two sisters and their good men together, as
two of the happiest pairs in England. Politic enough; 
for as we sat at breakfast, two or three toysome things
were said by my Lord (no ape was ever so fond!) and
I could hardly forbear him: But the reputation my
brother gave me, was a restraint upon me. I see,
one may be flattered, by undeserved compliments, into
good behaviour, when we have a regard to the complimenter. 
Aunt Nell was all joy and gladness: She was in
raptures last night, it seems, at her nephew's first arrival. 
He rejoiced to see her; and was so thankful to
her for letting him find her in town, and at his house,
that she resolves she will not leave him till he is married. 
The good old soul imagines she is of importance
to him, in the direction of the family matters,
now I have left him—I, Harriet! there's self-importance! 
—But, good creatures, these old virgins! they do
so love to be thought useful—Well, and is not that a
good sign, on aunt Nell's part? Does it not look as if
she would have been an useful creature in the days
of nightrail and notableness, had she been a wife in
good time? I always think, when I see those badgerly
virgins fond of a parrot, a squirrel, a monkey, or a
lap-dog, that their imagination makes out husband
and children in the animals—Poor things! —But as to
her care, I dare say, that will only serve to make
bustle and confusion, where else would be order and
regularity; for my brother has the best of servants. 
I wished her in Yorkshire fifty times, at we sat at
breakfast: For when I wanted to ask my brother
twenty thousand questions, and to set him on talking,
we were entertained with her dreams of the night before
his arrival, and last night—Seas crossed, rivers
forded—Dangers escaped by the help of angels and
saints, for the resveries of the former night; and for
the last, the music of the spheres, heaven, and joy,
and festivity—The plump creature loves good chear, 

Harriet. —In short, hardly a word could we say, but
what put her upon recollecting a part of one of her
dreams: Yet, some excuse lies good, for an old soul,
whose whole life has been but one dream, a little fal-lal-ishly
varied—And, would you think it? (yes, I believe
you would) My odd creature was once or twice put
upon endeavouring to recollect two or three dreams
of his own, of the week past; and would have gone
on, if I had not silenced him by a frown, as he looked
upon me for his cue, as a tender husband ought. 
Beauchamp came in, and I thought would have
relieved us: But he put my aunt in mind of an almost-forgotten
part of her dream; for just such a joyful
meeting, just such expressions of gladness, did she
dream of, as she now beheld, and heard, between
my brother and him felicitating each other. Duce
take these dreaming souls, to remember their resveries,
when realities infinitely more affecting are before
them! But Reflexion and Prognostic are ever inspiriting
parts of the pretension of people who have
lived long; dead to the Present; the Past and the
Future filling their minds: And why should not they
be indulged in the thought that they know something
more than those who are less abstracted; and
who are contented with looking no further than the
Present? 
Sir Charles enquired after Sir Harry's health. Mr.
Beauchamp, with a concern that did him credit,
lamented his declining way; and he spoke so respectfully
of Lady Beauchamp, and of her tenderness to
his father, as made my brother's eyes glisten with
pleasure. 
Lord and Lady L. Dr. Bartlett, and Emily, were
at Colnebrook: But as they had left orders to be
sent for, the moment my brother arrived (for you need
not doubt but his last Letter prepared us to expect
him soon) they came time enough to dine with us. 
There was a renewal of joy among us. 

Emily, the dear Emily, fainted away, embracing
the knees of her guardian, as she, unawares to him,
threw herself at his feet, with joy that laboured for
expression, but could not obtain it. He was affected. 
So was Beauchamp. So were we all. She was carried
out, just as she was recovering to a shame and
confusion of face, for which only her own modesty
could reproach her. 
There are susceptibilities which will shew themselves
in outward acts; and there are others which cannot
burst out into speech. Lady L's joy was of the former,
mine of the latter, sort. But she is used to
tenderness of heart. Mine are ready to burst my
heart, but never hardly can rise to my lips—My eyes,
however, are great talkers. 
The pleasure that Sir Charles, Lord L. and Dr.
Bartlett, mutually expressed to see each other, was
great, tender, and manly. My bustling nimble Lord
enjoyed over again his joy, at that of every other person; 
and he was ready, good-naturedly, to sing and
dance—That's his way, poor man, to shew his joy; 
but he is honest, for all that. Don't despise him,
Harriet! He was brought up as an only son, and to
know that he was a Lord, or else he would have made
a better figure in your eyes. The man wants not
sense, I assure you. You may think me partial; but
I believe the most foolish thing he ever did in his life,
was at church, and that at St. George's, Hanover-square. 
Poor soul! He might have had a wife better suited to
his taste, and then his very foibles would have made
him shine. But, Harriet, it is not always given to
us to know what is best for ourselves. Black women,
I have heard remarked, like fair men; fair men, black
women; and tempers suit best with contraries. Were
we all to like the same person or thing equally, we should
be for-ever engaged in broils: As it is, human nature
(vile rogue! as I have heard it called) is quarrelsome
enough: So my Lord, being a soft man, fell in love, 

if it please you, with a saucy woman. He ought to
be meek and humble, you know. He would not let
me be quiet, till I was his. We are often to be punished
by our own choice. But I am very good to
him now. I don't know, Harriet, whether it is best
for me to break him of his trifling, or not: Unless
one were sure, that he could creditably support the alteration. 
Now can I laugh at him; and, if the baby
is froppish, can coax him into good humour. A sugar-plumb,
and a courtesy, will do at any time; and,
by setting him into a broad grin, I can laugh away
his anger. But should I endeavour to make him wise,
as the man has not been used to it, and as his education
has not given him a turn to significance, don't
you think he would be aukward; and, what is worse,
assuming? Well, I'll consider of this, before I attempt
to new-cast him. Mean time, I repeat—Don't
you, my dear, for my sake, think meanly of Lord
G.—Ha, ha, ha, hah! —What do I laugh at, do you
ask me, Harriet? —Something so highly ridiculous— 
I have—I have—sent him away from me, so much
ashamed of himself—He bears any-thing from me
now, that he knows I am only in play with him, and
have so very right a heart—I must lay down my pen— 
Poor soul! Hah, hah, hah, hah! —I do love him for
his simplicity! 
* *
Well, I won't tell you what I laughed at just now,
for fear you should laugh at us both. My brother's
arrival has tuned every string of my heart to joy. 
The holding up of a straw will throw me into titteration
—I can hardly forbear laughing again, to think of
the shame the poor soul shewed, when he slunk
away from me. After all, he ill brooks to be laughed
at. Does not that look as if he were conscious? — 
But what, Harriet (will you ask) mean I, by thus
trifling with you, and at this time particularly? — 
Why, I would be glad to make you smile, either with 

me, or at me: I am indifferent which, so that you
do but smile—You do! —I protest you do! —Well!
now that I have obtained my wishes, I will be serious. 
We congratulated my brother on the happy turn in
the healths of his Italian friends, without naming
names, or saying a word of the sister we had like to
have had. He looked earnestly at each of us; bowed
to our congratulations; but was silent. Dr. Bartlett
had told us, that he never, in his Letters to my brother,
mentioned your being not well; because he
knew it would disturb him. He had many things to
order and do; so that, except at breakfast, when aunt
Nell invaded us with her dreams, and at dinner, when
the servants attendance made our discourse general,
we had hardly any opportunity of talking to him. But
in the space between tea-time and supper, he came
and told us, that he was devoted to us for the remainder
of the day. Persons present were, Lord and Lady
L. myself, and my good man, Dr. Bartlett, Mr.
Beauchamp, and Emily, good girl! quite recovered,
and blyth as a bird, attentive to every word that passed
the lips of her guardian—O, but aunt Nell was
also present! —Poor soul! I had like to have forgot
her! 
In the first place, you must take it for granted, that
we all owned, we had seen most of what he had written
to Dr. Bartlett. 
What troubles, what anguish of mind, what a
strange variety of conflicts, has your heart had to contend
with, my dear Sir Charles, began Mr. Beauchamp; 
and, at last, What a strange disappointment,
from one of the noblest of women! 
Very true, my Beauchamp. He then said great
and glorious things of Lady Clementina. We all
joined in admiring her. He seemed to have great pleasure
in hearing us praise her—Very true, Harriet! — 
But you have generosity enough to be pleased with
him for that. 

Aunt Eleanor (I won't call her aunt Nell any more
if I can help it) asked him, If he thought it were possible
for the Lady to hold her resolution? Now you
have actually left Italy, nephew, and are at such a
distance, don't you think her Love will return? 
Good soul! She has substantial notions still left, I
find, of ideal Love! Those notions, I fansy, last a
long time, with those who have not had the opportunity
of gratifying the silly passion! —Be angry, if you
will, Harriet, I don't care. 
Well, but, thus gravely, as became the question, answered
my brother—The favour which this incomparable
Lady honoured me with, was never disowned:
On the contrary, it was always avowed, and to the
very last. She had therefore no uncertainty to contend
with: She had no balancings in her mind. Her
contention, as she supposed, was altogether in favour
of her duty to Heaven. She is exemplarily pious. 
While she remains a zealous Roman Catholic, she
must persevere; and I dare say she will. 
I don't know what to make of these Papists, said
our old Protestant aunt Nell—(Aunt Nell, did I say? 
Cry mercy!) —Thank God you are come home safe
and sound, and without a papistical wife! —It is very
hard, if England cannot find a wife for you, nephew. 
We all smiled at aunt Nell—The duce is in me, I
believe! —Aunt Nell again! —But let it go. 
When, Lady G. (asked Lady L.) saw you or heard
you from, the dowager Countess of D.? 
Is there any other Countess of D. Lady L.? said
Sir Charles: A fine glow taking possession of his
cheeks. 
Your servant, brother, thought I; I am not sorry
for your charming apprehensiveness. 
No, Sir, replied Lady L. 
Would you, brother, said Boldface (You know who
that is, Harriet) that there should be another Countess
of D.? 

I wish my Lord D. happy, Charlotte. I hear him
as well spoken of as any of our young nobility. 
You don't know what I mean, I warrant, Sir
Charles! resumed, with an intentional archness, your
saucy friend. 
I believe I do, Lady G. I wish Miss Byron to be
one of the happiest women in the world, because she
is one of the best—My dear, to Emily, I hope you
have had nothing to disturb or vex you, from your
mother's husband— 
Nor from my mother, Sir—All is good, and as it
should be. You have overcome— 
That's well, my dear—Would not the Bath-waters
be good for Sir Harry? my dear Beauchamp. 
A second remove, thought I! But I'll catch you,
brother, I'll warrant (as rustics sometimes, in their
play, do a ball) on the rebound. 
Now you will be piqued, I warrant, Harriet. Your
delicacy will be offended, because I urged the question. 
I see a blush of disdain arising in your lovely cheek,
and conscious eye, restoring the roses to the one, and
its natural brilliancy to the other. Indeed we all began
to be afraid of a little affectation in my brother. 
But we needed not. He would not suffer us to put
him upon the subject again. After a few other general
questions and answers, of who and who; and how
and how; and what, and when, and-so-forth; he turned
to Dr. Bartlett. 
My dear friend, said he, you gave me pain a little
while ago, when I asked you after the health of Miss
Byron, and her friends: You evaded my question, I
thought, and your looks alarmed me. I am afraid
poor Mrs. Shirley—Miss Byron spoke of her always
as in an infirm state: How, Charlotte, would our dear
Miss Byron grieve, were she to lose so good a relation! 
I intended not, answered the Doctor, that you
should see I was concerned: But I think it impossible, 

that a father can love a daughter better than I
love Miss Byron. 
You would alarm me indeed, my dear friend, if
Lady G. had not, by her usual liveliness just now, put
me out of all apprehensions for the health of Miss Byron. 
I hope Miss Byron is well. 
Indeed she is not, said I, with a gravity becoming
the occasion. 
God forbid! said he; with an emotion that pleased
every-body—Not for your sake, Harriet—Be not affectedly
nice now; but for our own— 
His face was in a glow—What, Lady L. what,
Charlotte, said he, ails Miss Byron? 
She is not well, brother, replied I; but the most
charming sick woman that ever lived. She is chearful,
that she may give no uneasiness to her friends. 
She joins in all their conversations, diversions, amusements. 
She would fain be well; and likes not to be
thought ill. Were it not for her faded cheeks, her
pale lips, and her changed complexion, we should not
know from herself that she ailed any-thing. Some
people reach perfection sooner than others; and are as
swift in their decay—Poor Miss Byron seems not to be
built for duration. 
But should I write these things to you, my dear? 
Yet I know that Lady Clementina and You are sisters
in magnanimity. 
My brother was quite angry with me—Dear Dr.
Bartlett, said he, explain this speech of Charlotte. 
She loves to amuse—Miss Byron is blessed with a good
constitution: She is hardly yet in the perfection of her
bloom. Set my heart at rest. I love not either of
my Sisters, more than I do Miss Byron. Dear Charlotte,
I am really angry with you. 
My good-natured Lord reddened up to his naked
ears, at hearing my brother say he was angry with
me. Sir Charles, said he, I am sorry you are so soon 

angry with your sister. It is too true, Miss Byron is
ill: She is, I fear, in a declining way— 
Pardon me, my dear Lord G.—Yet I am ready to
be angry with any-body that shall tell me, Miss Byron
is in a declining way—Dr. Bartlett—Pray— 
Indeed, Sir, Miss Byron is not well—Lady G. has
mingled her fears with her love, in the description. 
Miss Byron cannot but be lovely: Her complexion is
still fine. She is chearful, serene, resigned— 
Resigned, Dr. Bartlett! —Miss Byron is a saint. 
She cannot but be resigned, in the solemn sense of
the word—Resignation implies hopelessness. If she is
so ill, would not you, my dear Dr. Bartlett, have informed
me of it—Or was it from tenderness—You
must be kind in all you do. 
I did not apprehend, said Lady L. that Miss Byron
was so very much indisposed. Did you my Lord?
(to Lord L.) Upon my word, Doctor, Sister, it
was unkind, if so, that you made me not acquainted— 
And then her good-natured eye dropt a tear of love
for her Harriet. 
I was sorry this went so far. My brother was very
uneasy. So was Mr. Beauchamp, for him, and for
you, my dear. 
That she is, and endeavours to be, so chearful, said
Beauchamp, shews, that nothing lies upon her mind— 
My father's illness only can more affect me, than Miss
Byron's. 
Emily wept for her Miss Byron. She has always
been afraid, that her illness would be attended with
ill consequences. 
My dear Love, my Harriet, you must be well. See
how every-body loves you. I told my brother, that I
expected a Letter from Northamptonshire, by the next
post; and I would inform him truly of the state of
your health, from the contents of it. 
I would not for the world have you think, my
Harriet, that I meant to excite my brother's attention 

to you, by what I said. Your honour is the honour
of the Sex. For are you not one of the most delicate-minded,
as well as frankest, of it? It is no
news to say, that my brother dearly loves you. I did
not want to know his solicitude for your health. 
Where he once loves, he always loves. Did you not
observe, that I supposed it a natural decline? God
grant that it may not be so. And thus am I imprudently
discouraging you, in mentioning my apprehensions
of your ill health, in order to shew my regard
for your punctilio: But you shall, you will, be well; 
and the wife of—the best of men—God grant it may
be so! —But, however that is to be, we have all laid
our heads together, and are determined, for your delicacy-sake,
to let this matter take its course; since,
after an opening so undesignedly warm, you might
otherwise imagine our solicitude in the affair capable
of being thought too urgent. I tell you, my dear,
that, worthy as Sir Charles Grandison is of a princess,
he shall not call you by his name, but with all his
soul. 
As my brother laid it out to us this evening, I find
we shall lose him for some days. The gamesters
whom Mr. Grandison permitted to ruin him, are at
Winchester; dividing, I suppose, and rejoicing over,
their spoils of the last season. Whether my brother
intends to see them or not, I cannot tell. He expects
not to do any-thing with them. They, no doubt, will
shew the foolish fellow, that they can keep what he
could not: And Sir Charles aims only at practicable
and legal, not at romantic, redresses. 
Sir Charles intends to pay his respects to Lord and Lady
W. at Windsor; and to the Earl of G. and Lady
Gertrude, who are at their Berkshire seat. My honest
Lord has obtained my leave, at the first asking, to attend
him thither. —My brother will wait on Sir Harry, and
Lady Beauchamp, in his way to Lady Mansfield's— 
Beauchamp will accompany him thither. Poor Grandison, 

as humble as a mouse, tho' my brother does all
he can to raise him, desires to be in his train, as he
calls it, all the way, and never to be from under his
wing. My brother intends to make a short visit to
Grandison-hall, when he is so near as at Lady Mansfield's:
Dr. Bartlett will accompany him thither, as
all the way; and hopes he will approve of every-thing
he has done there, and in that neighbourhood, in his
absence. The good man has promised to write to me. 
Emily is sometimes to be with me, sometimes with
aunt Eleanor, at the Antient's request; tho' Lord and
Lady L. mutter at it. My brother's trusty Saunders is
to be left behind, in order to dispatch to his master,
by man and horse, any Letters that may come from
abroad; and I have promised to send him an account
of the healths, and-so-forth, of our Northamptonshire
friends. I think it would be a right thing in him to
take a turn to Selby-house. I hope you think so too. 
Don't fib, Harriet. 
Adieu, my dear. For God's sake be well, prays
your Sister, your Friend, and the Friend of all your
Friends, ever-affectionate and obliged, 
Charlotte G. 

