



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Morning, Mar. 26. 
How soothing a thing is praise from those we
love! —Whether conscious or not, of deserving
it, it cannot but give us great delight, to see one's
self stand high in the opinion of those whose favour
we are ambitious to cultivate. An ingenuous mind
will make this farther use of it, that if it be sensible,
that it does not already deserve the charming attributes,
it will hasten, before its friend finds herself mistaken,
to obtain the graces it is complimented for: And
this it will do, as well in honour to itself, as to preserve
its friend's opinion, and justify her judgment! — 
May This be always my aim! —And then you will
not only give the praise, but the merit; and I shall
be more worthy of that friendship, which is the only
pleasure I have to boast of. 
Most heartily I thank you for the kind dispatch of
your last favour. How much am I indebted to you!
and even to your honest servant! —Under what obligations
does my unhappy situation lay me! 
But let me answer the kind contents of it, as well
as I may. 
As to getting over my disgusts to Mr. Solmes, it is
impossible to be done; while he wants Generosity,
Frankness of Heart, Benevolence, Manners, and every
qualification that distinguishes a worthy man. O
my dear! what a degree of patience, what a greatness
of soul, is required in the wife, not to despise
a husband who is more ignorant, more illiterate,
more low-minded, than herself? —The wretch, vested 

with prerogatives, who will claim rule in virtue of
them (and not to permit whose claim, will be as disgraceful
to the prescribing wife, as to the govern'd
husband); How shall such a husband as This be borne,
were he, for reasons of convenience and interest, even
to be one's Choice? But, to be compelled to have
such a one, and that compulsion to arise from motives
as unworthy of the prescribers as of the prescribed, who
can think of getting over an aversion so justly founded? 
How much easier to bear the temporary persecutions
I labour under, because temporary, than to resolve to
be such a man's for life? Were I to comply, must I
not leave my relations, and go to him? One month
will decide the one perhaps: But what a duration of
woe will the other be! —Every day, it is likely, rising
to witness to some new breach of an Altar-vow'd duty! 
Then, my dear, the man seems already to be meditating
vengeance upon me for an aversion I cannot
help: For yesterday, my saucy gaoleress assured
me, That all my oppositions would not signify that
pinch of snuff, holding out her genteel finger and
thumb: That I must have Mr. Solmes: That therefore,
I had not best carry my jest too far; for that
Mr. Solmes was a man of spirit, and had told Her,
that as I should surely be his, I acted very unpoliticly; 
since, if he had not more mercy (that was her word; 
I know not if it were his) than I had, I might have
cause to repent the usage I gave him, to the last day
of my life. 
But enough of this man; who, by what you repeat
from Sir Harry Downeton, has all the insolence
of his Sex, without any one quality to make that insolence
tolerable. 
I have received two letters from Mr. Lovelace,
since his visit to you; which made three that I had
not answer'd. I doubted not his being very uneasy; 
but in his last he complains in high terms of my
silence; not in the still small voice, or rather style, of 

an humble Lover, but in a style like that, which
would probably be used by a slighted Protector. And
his pride is again touched, that like a thief or eves-dropper,
he is forced to dodge about in hopes of a
letter, and return five miles, and then to an inconvenient
lodging, without any. 
His letters, and the copy of mine to him, shall
soon attend you: Till when, I will give you the substance
of what I wrote to him yesterday. 
I take him severely to task, for his freedom in
threatening me, thro' you, with a visit to Mr. Solmes,
or to my brother. I say, ‘That, surely, I must be
thought to be a creature sit to bear any-thing: That
violence and menaces from some of my own family
are not enough for me to bear, in order to make
me avoid him; but that I must have them from him
too, upon a supposition that I will oblige those,
whom it is both my inclination and duty to oblige in
every-thing that is reasonable, and in my power. 
‘Very extraordinary, I tell him, that a violent spirit
shall threaten to do a rash and unjustifiable thing,
which concerns me but little, and himself a great
deal, if I do not something as rash, my character
and sex consider'd, to divert him from it. 
‘I even hint, that, however it may affect me, if
any mischief shall be done on my account, yet there
are persons, as far as I know, who, in my case,
would not think there would be reason for much
regret, were such a committed rashness as he threatens
Mr. Solmes with, to rid her of two persons,
whom had she never known, she had never been unhappy.’ 
This is plain-dealing, my dear! And I suppose he
will put it into still plainer English for me. 
I take his pride to task, on his disdaining to watch
for my letters; and for his eves-dropping language: 
And say, ‘That, surely, he has the less reason to
think to hardly of his situation, since his faulty morals 

are the original cause of all; and since faulty
morals deservedly level all distinction, and bring
down rank and birth to the Canaille; and to the
necessity, of which he complains, of appearing, if I
must descend to his language, as an eves-dropper
and a thief. And then I forbid him ever to expect
another letter from me, that is to subject him to
such disgraceful hardships. 
‘That as to the solemn vows and protestations, he
is so ready, upon all occasions, to make, they have
the less weight with me, as they give a kind of demonstration,
that he himself thinks, from his own
character, there is reason to make them. Deeds are
to me the only evidences of intentions. And I am
more and more convinced of the necessity of breaking-off
a correspondence with a person, whose addresses
I see it is impossible either to expect my
friends to encourage, or him to deserve that they
should. 
‘What therefore I repeatedly desire is, That since
his birth, alliances, and expectations, are such, as
will at any-time, if his immoral character be not an
objection, procure him, at least, equal advantages, in
a woman whose taste and inclinations, moreover,
might be better adapted to his own; I insist upon
it, as well as advise it, that he give up all thoughts
of me: And the rather, as he has all along, by his
threatening and unpolite behaviour to my friends,
and whenever he speaks of them, given me reason
to conclude, that there is more malice to them, than
regard to me, in his perseverance.’ 
This is the substance of the letter I have written to him. 
The man, to be sure, must have the penetration
to observe, that my correspondence with him hitherto
is owing more to the severity I meet with, than to a
very high value for him. And so I would have him
think. What a worse than Moloch-deity is That, 

which expects an offering of reason, duty, and discretion,
to be made to its shrine! 
Your mamma is of opinion, that at last my friends
will relent. Heaven grant that they may! —But my
brother and sister have such an influence over everybody,
and are so determin'd; so pique themselves
upon subduing me, and carrying their point; that I
despair that they will: —And yet, if they do not, I
frankly own, I would not scruple to throw myself
upon any not disreputable protection, by which I
might avoid my present persecutions, on one hand,
and not give Lovelace advantage over me, on the
other. —That is to say, were there manifestly no other
way left me: For, if there were, I should think the
leaving my father's house, without his consent, one
of the most inexcusable actions I could be guilty of,
were the protection to be ever so unexceptionable; 
and This notwithstanding the independent fortune
willed me by my grandfather. And indeed I have
often reflected with a degree of indignation and disdain,
upon the thought of what a low, selfish creature
that child must be, who is to be rein'd-in only
by what a parent can or will do for her. 
But notwithstanding all this, I owe it to the sincerity
of friendship to confess, that I know not what
I should have done, had your advice been conclusive
any way. Had you, my dear, been witness to my
different emotions, as I read your letter, when, in
one place, you advise me of my danger, if I am carry'd
to my uncle's; in another, when you own you
could not bear what I bear, and would do any thing
rather than marry the man you hate: yet, in another,
represent to me my reputation suffering in the
world's eye; and the necessity I should be under to
justify my conduct, at the expense of my friends,
were I to take a rash step: in another, insinuate the
dishonest figure I should be forced to make, in so compell'd
a matrimony; endeavouring to cajole, fawn 

upon, and play the hypocrite with a man I have an
aversion to; who would have reason to believe me an
hypocrite, as well from my former avowals, as from
the sense he must have, (if common sense he has) of
his own demerits: —The necessity you think there
would be for me, the more averse I really was, to
seem to fonder of him: A fondness, were I capable
of so much dissimulation, that would be imputable to
the most disgraceful motives; as it would be too visible,
that love, either of person or mind, could be
neither of them: —Then his undoubted, his ever
constitutional narrowness: His too probable jealousy
and unforgivingness, bearing in mind my declared
aversion, and the unfeigned despights I took all opportunities
to do him, in order to discourage his address: 
A preference avow'd against him from the same motive:
with the pride he professes to take in curbing,
and sinking the spirits of a woman he had acquired a
right to tyrannize over: —Had you, I say, been witness
of my different emotions as I read; now leaning
This way; now That; now perplexed; now apprehensive; 
now angry at one, then at another; now resolving; 
now doubting;—you would have seen the
power you have over me; and would have had reason
to believe, that, had you given your advice in any determin'd
or positive manner, I had been ready to have
been concluded by it. So, my dear, you will find,
from these acknowlegements, that you must justify me
to those Laws of Friendship, which require undisguised
frankness of heart; altho' your justification of me in
that particular, will perhaps be at the expence of my
prudence. 
But, upon the whole, This I do repeat—That nothing
but the last extremity shall make me abandon
my father's house, if they will permit me to stay; and
if I can, by any means, by any honest pretences, but
keep off my evil destiny in it, till my cousin Morden
arrives. As one of my trustees, his is a protection 

that I may, without discredit, throw myself into, if
my other friends should remain determin'd. And
This (altho' they seem too well aware of it) is all my
hope: For, as to Lovelace, were one to be sure of
his tenderness to one's-self, and even of his reformation,
must not the thoughts of embracing the offer'd
protection of his family, be the same in the world's
eye, as accepting of his own? —Could I avoid receiving
his visits at his own relations? Must I not be
his, whatever, on seeing him in a nearer light, I should
find him out to be. For you know, it has always
been my observation, that both sexes too generally
cheat each other, by the more distant. Oh! my
dear! how wise have I endeavour'd to be! how anxious
to choose, and to avoid every-thing, precautiously,
as I may say, that might make me happy, or
unhappy; yet all my wisdom now, by a strange fatality,
likely to become foolishness. 
Then you tell me, in your usual, kindly-partial
manner, what is expected of me, more than would be
of some others. This should be a lesson to me. Whatever
my motives, the world would not know them: 
To complain of a brother's unkindness, that one might
do: It is too common a case, where interests clash: 
But where the unkind father cannot be separated
from the faulty brother; who could bear to lighten
herself, by loading a father? —Then, in this particular
case, must not the hatred Mr. Lovelace expresses
to every-one of my family, altho' in return
for their hatred of him, shock one extremely? Must it
not shew, that there is something implacable, as well
as highly unpolite, in his temper? —And what creature
can think of marrying so as to live at continual enmity
with all her own relations? 
But here, having tir'd myself, and I dare say you,
I will lay down my pen. 
* *
Mr. Solmes is almost continually here: So is my 

aunt Hervey: So are my two uncles. Something is
working against me, I doubt. What an uneasy state
is suspense! —When a naked sword, too, seems hanging
over one's head! 
I hear nothing but what this confident creature,
Betty, throws out in the wantonness of office. Now
it is, Why, Miss, don't you look up your things? 
You'll be call'd upon, depend upon it, before you
are aware! —Another time she intimates darkly, and
in broken sentences, as if on purpose to teaze me,
what one says, what another; with their inquiries,
how I dispose of my time? And my brother's insolent
question comes frequently in, Whether I am not
writing a history of my sufferings? 
But I am now used to her pertness: And as it is
only thro' that, that I can hear of any thing intended
against me, before it is to be put in execution; and
as she pleads a commission, when she is most impertinent; 
I bear with her: Yet, now-and-then, not
without a little of the heart-burn. 
I will deposite thus far. Adieu, my dear. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
Written on the Cover, after she went down, with a pencil: 
On coming down, I found your second letter of
yesterday's date (a) . I have read it; and am in
hopes, that the within will, in a great measure, answer
your mamma's expectations of me. 
My most respectful acknowlegements to her for it,
and for her very kind admonitions. 
You'll read to her what you please of the inclosed. 
