


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Mar. 3. 
I Had not recovered myself after Sir Hargrave's visit,
when Lady L. and Miss Grandison called, as they
said, for a moment; however, this agreeable moment
lasted two hours. Miss Grandison, the instant she
saw me, challenged me—Hey-day! What's the
matter with our Harriet, Mrs. Reeves? And, patting
my neck, Why these flutters, child? —Perturbations
delightful, or undelightful, Harriet, whether? 
I told her who had been here, and but just left me; 
and, by the help of my cousins, gave them the particulars
of what had passed. 
They were greatly pleased; and the more, they
said, as their brother, on seeing them uneasy, had acquainted
them, that all matters between him and Sir
Hargrave were accommodated; but had not had opportunity
to tell them more. 
Let me reckon with you, Harriet, said Miss Grandison
(taking my hand with a schooling air): I am
half-jealous of you: Lady L. has got the start of me
in my brother's affections: But she is my elder sister; 
first come, first served. I can bear that; but I will
not be cut out by a younger sister. 
What is now to follow? thought I; and I flutter'd
like a fool; the more for her arch look, as if she would
read my heart in my eyes. 
Increased palpitation (O the fool!) made it look as 

if I took her jest for earnest. What a situation am I
in! 
Dear Charlotte, said Lady L. smiling, you shall not
thus perplex our sweet sister. —My dear, don't mind
her. You'll know her better in time. 
Be quiet, Lady L. I shall have it all out. 
All what out? said I. O Miss Grandison, how
you love to alarm! 
Well, well, I'll examine farther into these perturbations
another time. I have beat the bush before
now for one hare, and out have popt two. But all I
mean is; a paper, a letter (my brother called it a paper)
was brought to him sealed up. He rewarded the
bringer; but sent it directly away, unopened (that we
found out) to you, Harriet. Now, child, if I allow of
his reserves, I will not allow of yours. Pray answer
me fairly and truly; What are the contents of that
paper? 
They give the particulars of the conversation that
passed in the alarming interview between Sir Charles— 
And Sir Hargrave. That's my good girl. You see,
Lady L. how this young thief will steal away the affections
of our brother from us both. He has shewed
us nothing of this. But if you would not have me
jealous, Harriet, be sure keep no one secret of your
heart from me— 
That relates merely to myself, I think I will not. 
Then you'll be a good girl: And I'll give my love
for you the reins, without a pull-back. 
Just then a servant came in with a card. 
“Lady D's compliments to Mrs. Reeves and Miss
Byron; and if it would be agreeable, she will
wait on them presently, for one quarter of an
hour. She is obliged to go out of town early
in the morning.” 
What shall I do now? said I. I was in a flutters
not being fully recovered from that into which Sir
Hargrave's visit had thrown me. 

What now? —What now? said Miss Grandison. 
Ah! Harriet, we shall find you out by degrees. 
By the way, Lucy, you are fond of plays; and it
is come into my head, that, to avoid all says-I's and
says-she's, I will henceforth, in all dialogues, write
names in the margin: So fansy, my dear, that you
are reading in one of your favourite volumes. 
Harriet. Do you know Lady D.? 
Miss Gr. Very well: But I did not know that
you did, Harriet. 
Lady L. And I know she has a son: And I know
she wants him to marry. 
Harriet. That I may keep no secrets from my two
sisters, my aunt Selby has written to me— 
Miss Gr. Lately? 
Harriet. Very lately. 
Miss Gr. O! because you had not told me of
that. 
Mrs. Reeves. And pray, Ladies, what is Lady
D.'s character? 
Lady L. She is a very good woman. She is a sensible
and prudent woman. 
Miss Gr. I am not very intimate with her: But
have seen her in two or three of my visits. I have
always thought her so. —And pray, Harriet, don't you
want to know what character my Lord bears? 
Harriet. My Lord is nothing to me. I have answered. 
I have given my negative. 
Miss Gr. The duce you have! —Why, the man
has a good 12,000l. a year. 
Harriet. I don't care. 
Miss Gr. What a duce ails the girl! 
Then humourously telling on her fingers—Orme,
one; Fenwick, two; Greville, three; Fowler,
four—I want another finger; but I'll take in my
thumb—Sir Hargrave, five—And now (putting
the forefinger of one hand on the thumb of the other) 

Lord D. six! —And none of them the man! —Depend
upon it, girl, pride will have a fall. 
What could she mean by that? —Sir Charles Grandison's
sisters, I hope, will not—But I believe she
meant nothing. 
Have I pride, Miss Grandison? coldly and gravely,
as my cousin observed to me afterwards, asked I. 
Miss Gr. Have you pride? —Yes that you have; 
or you have worse. 
What could this mad lady mean by this? —And
what could I mean? For I had tears in my eyes. I
was very low-spirited at that moment. 
Lady L. Well, but, Miss Byron, shall we be impertinent,
if we stay to see the lady? —I have a great
value for her. She has been an admirable executrix
and trustee for her son; and was as good a wife. I
was just going: but will stay to pay my compliments
to her, as she goes out of town to-morrow. We can
withdraw till you have had your talk. 
Miss Gr. Does she come to persuade you, Harriet,
to retract your refusal? 
Harriet. I know not her business. I wrote my
mind to my aunt Selby. But I believe my aunt could
not have written, and the countess received what she
wrote, by this time. But do not go: We can have no
private talk. 
Miss Gr. Well, but now I will tell you, without
punishing your curiosity farther, what Lord D.'s character
is. He is as sober a man as most of the young
nobility. His fortune is great. In sense he neither
abounds, nor is wanting; and that class of men, take
my word for it, are the best qualified of all others to
make good husbands to women of superior talents. 
They know just enough to induce them to admire
in her, what they have not in themselves. If a
woman has prudence enough to give consequence
to such a one before folks, and will behave as if 

she thought him her superior in understanding, she
will be able to make her own will a law to him; by
the way of I will, Shall I? —Or, If you please, my
dear, I will do—what I think fit. But a fool and a
wit are the extreme points, and equally unmanageable. 
And now tell me, Harriet, what can be your
motive for refusing such a man as this? 
Harriet. I wish, my dear, you would not talk to
me of these men. I am sick of them all—Sir Hargrave
has cured me— 
Miss Gr. You fib, my dear—But did you ever see
Lord D.? 
Harriet. No, indeed! 
Miss Gr. “No, indeed!” —Why then you are a
simpleton, child. What, refuse a man, an Earl too!
in the bloom of his years, 12,000 good pounds a year!
yet never have seen him—Your motives, child! Your
motives! —I wish you are not already—There she
stopt. 
Harriet. And I wish, Miss Grandison, with all my
heart, if that would tame you, that you were in love
over head and ears, and could not help it! 
Miss Gr. And wish you me that for spite, or to
please me? —I am in love, my dear; and nothing
keeps me in countenance, but having company among
the grave ones. Dearly do I love to find girls out. 
Why, I found out Lady L. before she would own a
tittle of the matter. So prim! —“And how can you
think so, Charlotte? Who, I, in love! No indeed! 
No man has a place in my heart! —” Then I
was resolved to have her secret out. I began with
my roundabouts, and my suppose's—A leer—as thus— 
[I was both vex'd and pleased with her archness] And
then a suppose—Then came a blush—“Why, Charlotte,
I cannot but say, that if I were obliged to have
the one man or the other—” Then came a sigh,
endeavoured in haste to be returned to the heart
whence it came; and when it could not find its way 

back, to be cut into three-halves, as the Irishman
said; that is, into two half-sighs, and a hem; and a
“Get you gone, for an impertinent.” —As much as to
say, “You have it!” —And when I found I had, and
she own'd it; why then I put my mad head to her
grave one; and we had but one heart betwixt us. 
Lady L. (laughing)—Out of breath, Charlotte, I
hope. 
Miss Gr. Not yet. —How often have I kept watch
and ward for her! Sometimes have I lent her my
dressing-room for their love-meetings: Yet, for the
world, she would not marry without her papa's consent:
No, but like the rest of us, she would suffer her
affections to be engaged, without letting him know a
syllable of the matter. —Very true, Lady L. what signifies
looking serious? 
Lady L. Strange creature! 
Miss Gr. Once or twice did I change dresses with
her. In short, I was a perfect Abigail to her in the
affair: And, let me tell you, two sisters, agreed to
manage a love-affair, have advantages over even a
lady and her woman. 
Lady L. Mad creature! 
Miss Gr. All this I did for her without fee or reward; 
only from the dear delight of promoting the good
work, and upon the Christian principle of Do as you
would be done by. —Is not all this true, Lady L.? Deny
it if you can. 
Lady L. And have you done, Charlotte? Ah! my
dear Miss Byron, you'll never do any thing with this
girl, except you hear all she has to say. And if you
have a secret, 'tis better to let her know it at first. 
Charlotte is a generous girl, after all: But sometimes,
as now, a very impertinent one— 
What could these ladies mean by this, I wonder? 
If they suspect me to love somebody, surely this is not
the way, that two such ladies, in generosity, should
take; when they think I have no engagement; and 

know that the doubt must lie on their brother's side,
whom, with all their roundabouts, as they call them,
they cannot fathom. 
I would give any-thing, methinks, to know if Sir
Charles was ever in love. 
Just then a rapping at the door made us suppose it
was the countess. It was. After compliments to
Mrs. Reeves and me, she embraced Lady L. very affectionately,
and Miss Grandison kindly; asking the
first after Lord L.'s health, and the other after her
brother: He is the man of all men, Miss Grandison,
said she, that I want to see. We shall be in town
soon, for a month or two; and then you must make
me known to one, whom every-body calls the best of
men: As here, said she, coming up again to me, I
have longed to be acquainted with one of the best of
women. 
Lady L. Miss Byron is, indeed, an excellent young
woman. We do ourselves the honour of calling her
sister. 
Lady D. What an encouragement is that to be
good? Even in this age, bad as it is, true merit will
never want admirers. And let me say, that where
beauty and goodness meet, as here, they adorn each
other. 
Agreeable Lady D.! thought I: My heart will not
suggest a thought in favour of your son; but I shall
easily be in love with you. The heart hardly deserves
praise, my Lucy, that is not fond of it from the
worthy. 
Her Ladyship took Lady L. aside; and said something
to her. Lady L. answered with a No, as I suppose:
To which Lady D. replied, I am glad of that; 
adding, I am not afraid of saying any-thing to a person
of Lady L.'s known prudence. 
Ah! my Lucy! She asked Lady L. I dare say,
whether the acknowleged sisterhood extended to the
brother, as a brother, or as—something else—And, 

by her chearful and condescending court to me afterwards,
and to Mrs. Reeves, was satisfied by Lady
L's answer, I make no doubt, that there is room for
Lord D.'s address, for any-thing on Sir Charles's part. 
I will not be mean, Lucy! Greatly as I admire
somebody, these excellent sisters shall not find me entangled
in an hopeless passion. 
Her Ladyship took my hand, and led me to the
window. I was brought to town, said she, on an extraordinary
occasion, two days ago; and must set out
on my return in the morning. I thought I would not
miss the opportunity of paying my compliments to a
young lady, of whom I had heard every-body speak
with great commendation. I make no doubt but your
good aunt Selby has—There she stopt. 
My aunt has sent me up two of your Ladyship's
letters, and copies of her answers. 
I am pleased with your frankness, my dear. It was
that part of your character that engaged me. Young
women, in these cases, are generally either so affected,
so starched (as if they thought there were something
shameful in a treaty of this kind) or they are so aukward,
that I have not patience with them. You have
all the modesty—Indeed, my dear, your goodness of
heart shines out in every feature of your face. 
Your Ladyship does me high honour. 
I am pleased even with that acknowlegement. The
discretion of a person is often most seen in minutenesses. 
Another would have made disqualifying
speeches—But compliments made to the heart by one
who is not accustomed to flatter; such compliments, I
mean, as it would be culpable for a person not to be
able to verify; should not be disclaimed. To say
truth, my dear, I did not intend to mention one
word of the matter to you, on this first visit. I only
wanted to see you, and to converse with you a little,
that I might make report accordingly to my son; 
who, however, knows not that I should pay my compliments 

to you: But the moment I saw you, your
aspect confirmed all that I had heard said in your favour; 
and seeing you also so much caressed by two
ladies of characters so establish'd; and no less pleased
with what I observed of Mr. and Mrs. Reeves [You
are a family of good people]; I was resolved to be as
frank as you are, and as your aunt Selby has been— 
She is a good woman— 
Indeed, madam, she is— 
Accordingly, I have singled you out, in the face of
every-body present—You will have the discretion to
caution them on this subject, till you have seen my
son (I am sure there can be no doubt on his side)— 
and till you know whether you shall approve of our
proposals, or not: And, without hesitation, I bespeak
your good opinion of me till then. I am sure, my
dear, we shall be very happy in each other. If you
and my Lord are happy, you and I must be so—But,
when the knot is tied, I will be only your visitor, and
that at your own invitation. I am thought to be a managing
woman: Managing women are not generally
the best to live with. You, I understand, are an excellent
oeconomist (A glorious character in this age
for a young woman! —Persons of the highest quality
ought not to think themselves above it). One person's
methods may differ from another's; yet both may be
equally good, and reach the same end. My son has
found the benefit of my oeconomy: Nevertheless, his
wife shall not have cause to think, that, where she
means well, I will prefer my methods to hers. If ever
I give advice, it shall be only when you ask it: And
then, if you do not take it, I will not be angry; but
allow, that, having weighed the matter well, you
prefer your own judgment, on the best convictions. 
People who are to act for themselves, should be always
left to judge for themselves; because they only are answerable
for their own actions. You blush, my dear! 

I hope I don't oppress you. I would not oppress a
modesty so happily blended with frankness. 
I was affected with her goodness. What an amiable
frankness! O that all husbands mothers were
like your Ladyship! said I—What numbers of happy
daughters-in-law would there then be, that now are
not so! 
Charming creature! said she. Proceed. I am
glad I don't oppress you with my prate. 
Oppress me, madam! —You delight me! Talk of
a bad world! —I ought, I am sure, to think it a good
one! —In every matronly lady I have met with a mother:
In many young ladies, as those before us, sisters:
In their brother, a protector: If your Ladyship has
not heard on what occasion, I shall be ready to acquaint you with it. 
Sweet child! Charming frankness! I have seen, I
have heard enough of you for my present purpose— 
We will return to company—Such company as I find
you in, is not to be had at all times. I will restore
you to them. 
But, madam, declining her leading hand— 
But, what, my dear! 
Have you not, madam? —But your Ladyship could
not have received any letter from my aunt Selby—I
wrote— 
I have not, my dear. I could not, as you say. 
But I shall find a letter from her, perhaps, on my return. 
You approve, I hope, of the proposal, if you
shall have no objection to my son? 
My aunt, madam, will let you know— 
I will not have it otherwise than I wish it to be— 
Remember that I value you for the frankness you are
praised for—A little female trifling to my son, if you
will, in order to be assured of his value for you (and
men love not all halcyon courtships) but none to me,
my love. I'll assist you, and keep your counsel, in
the first case, if it be necessary. He shall love you 

above all the women on earth, and convince you that
he does, or he shall not call you his—But no female
trifling to his mother, child! We women should always
understand one another. 
Because I would not be thought to be an insincere
creature, a trifler, I think I ought to mention to your
Ladyship, that it would be a great, a very great part
of my happiness, to be deemed worthy of your friendship— 
without— 
Without what? —You do well perhaps to blush! 
Without what? 
Without the relation—if you please. 
I was confounded with her goodness, Lucy. Here,
my dear, is another superior character—I fansy her
maiden-name was Grandison. 
But I don't please. So no more of this. Let us
join company. And, taking my hand, with the goodness
of a real mother; yet her brow a little overclouded; 
she made apologies to them for taking me
aside; and said, she could trust to their prudence, she
was sure, as they must needs guess at her view; and
therefore she offered not to put a limit to their conjectures; 
since denial or evasion would but, in this
case, as it generally did, defeat its own end, and
strengthen what it aimed to weaken. 
Is there no obtaining such a mother, thought I,
without marrying Lord D.? —And should I refuse to
see him, if an interview is desired, especially when
Lady L. has seemed to encourage the countess to
think, that somebody has no thoughts—Indeed I don't
desire that that somebody should—If—I don't know
what I was going to add to that if: But pray tell my
grandmamma, that I hope her Harriet will never give
her cause to lament her being entangled in an hopeless
passion. No, indeed! 
But, my Lucy, one silly question to you, who have
been a little entangled, and more happily disentangled
—I catch myself of late in saying him and be, and 

writing to you somebody, and such-like words, instead
of saying and writing boldly, as I used to do, Sir
Charles, and Sir Charles Grandison; which would
sound more respectfully, and yet am sure I want not
respect. What is the meaning of this? —Is it a sign
—Ah! my Lucy! you said you would keep a sharp
look-out; and did I not say I would upon myself? 
Surely I said truth: Surely you will think so, when
you see such little silly things as these do not escape
me. But when you think me too trifling, my dear,
don't expose me. Don't read it out in the venerable
circle. That to some may appear very weak and
silly, which by others will be thought excusable, because
natural. It would be wrong (as I yet never did
it) to write separately to you. And what have I in
my heart, were it to be laid open to all the world, that
I should be—afraid—I was going to write, that I
should be ashamed of? But I think I am a little
ashamed, at times, for all that—Ah, Lucy! don't
add, And so I ought. 
Lady D. repeated her desire of being acquainted
with Sir Charles. She has no daughter: So it was
purely for the sake of his great character. She heard,
she said, that he was the politest of brothers. That
was always a good sign with her. He gives you,
Miss Grandison, I am told, a great deal of his company. 
Miss Grandison said, that their brother, she believed,
was one of the busiest men in the kingdom,
who was not engaged in public affairs; and yet the
most of a family-man. I endeavour, said she, to
make home delightful to him. I never break in upon
him when he is in his study, without leave: Indeed I
seldom ask it; for when he is inclined to give me his
company, he sends his compliments to me, and requests,
as a favour from me, what I am always ready
to consider as one done to me. And I see he loves
me: He is not uneasy in my company: He comes 

for half an hour, and stays an hour—But don't set
me into talking of him; for my heart always dilates,
when I enter into the agreeable subject, and I know
not where to stop. 
Lady L. Charlotte is a happy girl. 
Miss Gr. And Lady L. is a happy woman; for
he loves her as well as he loves me. Indeed he is so
good as to say (but I know it is to keep us from pulling
caps) that he knows not which he loves best: We
have different qualities, he says; and he admires in
each what the other has not. 
Lady D. But what are his employments? What
can he be so much busied in? 
Miss Gr. A continual round of good offices. He
has a ward. She has a large fortune. The attention he
pays to her affairs takes up a good deal of his time. He
is his own steward; and then he has a variety of other
engagements, of which we ask him not one word; 
yet long to know something about them. —But this
we are sure of, that, if he thinks any-thing will give
us pleasure, we shall hear of it: If the contrary, he is
as secret as the night. 
Will nobody say one bad or one indifferent thing of
this man, Lucy? There is no bearing these things! 
O my dear, what a Nobody is your poor Harriet? 
Lady D. He is one of the handsomest men in England,
they tell me. 
Miss Gr. Sisters are not judges. They may be
partial. His benignity of heart makes his face shine. 
Had I a lover but half as handsome as I think my
brother, I should make no objection to him on the
account of person. 
Lady L. But he is the genteelest of men! —What
think you, sister Harriet? 
Harriet. Sisters are not judges. They may be
partial. 
What meant Lady L. to apply to me? But I had
been some time silent. She could not mean any-thing: 

And both sisters complimented me on recognizing the
relation. 
Lady D. asked me how long I should stay in
town? 
I said, I believed not long. I had leave for three
months. Those would be soon elapsed; and as my
friends were so good as to be pleased with my company,
I should rather choose to walk within than step
out of my limits. 
The countess, with a nod of approbation, said,
With good young people it will be always so: And
this is more praise-worthy in Miss Byron, as she may
do what she pleases. 
Then, taking me a little aside—I hope, my dear,
you meant nothing contrary to my wishes, when you
referred, in so doubtful a manner, to what you had
written to your aunt. You don't answer me! This
is a call upon your frankness. Women, when anything
is depending, on which they have set their
hearts, are impatient—Don't you know that? —They
love not suspense. 
It is painful to me, madam, to decline a proposal
that would give me a relation to so excellent a woman
—But— 
But what, my dear? —Let not maidenly affectation
step in with its cold water. You are above it. Woman
to woman, daughter to mother—You are
above it. 
Then, turning to the ladies, and to my cousins— 
You don't know, any of you (We are by ourselves)
that Miss Byron's heart is engaged? Miss Grandison,
let me apply to you: Maiden ladies open their
hearts to one another. Know you whether Miss Byron
has yet seen the man to whom she wishes to give
her hand? Her aunt Selby writes to me, that she has
not. 
Miss Gr. We young women, madam, often know
least of our own hearts. We are almost as unwilling 

to find out ourselves in certain cases, as to be found
out by others. Speak, sister Harriet: Answer for
yourself. 
Was not this grievous, Lucy? And yet what ailed
me, that I could not speak without hesitation! But
this lady's condescending goodness—Yet this wicked
Sir Hargrave! His attempt, his cruel treatment of
me, has made me quite another creature than I was. 
My aunt Selby, madam, wrote the truth. To
say I wish not to marry for some time to come, may
sound like an affectation, because I have ever honoured
the state—But something has happen'd that has put
me out of conceit with myself, and with men too. 
Lady D. With all men, child? —I will allow for
a great many things in a weak mind, that I will not
in yours. I have had an hint or two about an insult,
or I know not what, from Sir Hargrave Pollexfen,
since I came to town; for I have ask'd after you, my
dear: But what is that but a confirmation of your
merits? What a disagreeable woman must she be,
whom but one man in the world could like? 
But excuse me, Miss Byron. I have said abundance
of impertinent things: I have gone further on this first
visit than I intended. You must thank for this that ingenuous
and open countenance, which confirms, at first
sight, the character I had heard given by every-body
who spoke of you. I shall see, perhaps, what your
aunt Selby, to whom you refer, writes, when I get
down. I shall soon be in town, as I said, for the rest
of the winter; and then I will make myself mistress of
your whole history from these ladies, and from yourself:
And there shall end all my enquiries, and, I
hope, all my solicitudes, on an article that is next my
heart. —Mean time, adieu, my dear—Adieu. 
She then, courtesying to all round, gave her hand
to Mr. Reeves, who led her to her chair; leaving us
all full of her praises. 
Miss Gr. (looking archly) I say nothing as to her 

particular errand, because I would not be too curious; 
and because you ask me no questions, Harriet. 
Lady L. This must do, Miss Byron: Who would
not wish for such a mother? 
Harriet. Is the mother to be the principal inducement
in such an article as this? 
Miss Gr. Why, my dear, do you pretend, in such
an age of petits-maitres as this, to live single, till you
meet with a man who deserves you? —But, Harriet,
you must voluntarily open your heart to me. I have
a good deal of curiosity; and, whenever you are disposed
to gratify it, will not withdraw my attention. 
Harriet. I will read to you this moment, if you
please, Ladies, as to my sisters, what Lady D. wrote
to my aunt Selby; and what my aunt answered on the
occasion. 
Miss Gr. That's my best Harriet! I love to hear
how and every-thing about these sort of matters. 
Lady L. These girls, Mrs. Reeves, delight in lovesubjects:
There is a kind of enthusiasm in these matters
that runs away with them. 
Miss Gr. Say you so, Lady L.? And pray had
you ever any of this enthusiasm? And if you had,
did matrimony cure you of it? —See, Harriet! My
sister has not been married many months; yet how
quietly she now talks of the enthusiasm of love to us
maidens! —Ah! my dear Lady L.! women, I see,
have their free-masonry, as well as men! Don't you
think so, Mrs. Reeves? A poor secret, after all, I
believe, on both sides, whisper'd the lively lady, but
loud enough for every-one to hear what she said. 
Lady L. called her a mad girl. But let us be favour'd,
said she to me, with your communications. 
I pulled out the letters. I read the two first paragraphs
in my aunt's letter to me, entire; for they propose
the matter, and nothing else. 

What follows, said I, is full of love and care, and so
forth: But here is one paragraph more I can read to you. 
Miss Gr. As much reserve as you please, sister
Harriet. I am learning how to deal with you. 
Lady L. Why that, Charlotte? No fear that you
will tell us more than you have a mind we should
know. Regard not, therefore, this threatening, Miss
Byron. 
Harriet. To own the truth, I cannot read everything
my aunt writes: But the countess of D.'s proposal,
and what relates to that, I will read, if you
please. 
Miss Gr. What you will—Read what you will. 
I find we are not at present so well acquainted, as we
shall be hereafter. 
What could Miss Grandison mean by that? 
I read the last paragraph but one, in which my aunt
proposes my coming down; and that I will either encourage
the countess's proposal, or accept of Mr.
Orme; ending with the earnest desire of my friends
to have me married. 
I then gave into Miss Grandison's hand the countess's
first letter; and she read it out. 
She gave it me back, and thanked me. Were all
women, said she, capable of acting thus frankly, the
sex would leave affectation to the men-monkeys. Remember,
Harriet, that your openness of heart is one
of the graces for which I principally admire you. 
Lady L. O the rogue! Take care of her, Miss
Byron! She tells you this, to get out of you all your
secrets. 
Miss Grandison may easily obtain her end, madam. 
She need only tell me, what she best likes I should be; 
and I must try to be that. 
Miss Gr. Good girl! And take this along with
you; that when you convince me, that you will not
hide, I will convince you, that I will not seek. But
what is next? 

I then gave into her hand the copy of my aunt
Selby's answer. 
Miss Gr. May I read it all? 
Harriet. If you please: The fondness of my aunt,
and the partiality of— 
Miss Gr. Away! away! —No affectation, child? 
She read it out. Both sisters praised the heart of
the dear and thrice-indulgent writer! and called her
their aunt Selby. 
I then gave Miss Grandison the countess's second
letter. They were no less pleased with that than with
the first. 
Miss Gr. But now your opinion of the proposal,
child? Will you trust us with that? Have you a copy
of what you wrote? 
Harriet. I kept a copy only of what immediately
respected the proposal; and that, because it was possible
I might want to have recourse to it, as my aunt
might, or might not, write farther about it. 
I took it out of my pocket-book, and gave it to
her to read. 
Thank you, child, said she: I should have no curiosity,
if I did not love you. 
She read it out: It was the paragraph that begins
with “You will, upon the strength of what I have
said,” &c.—ending with “Such is my meaning.” — 
Luckily, I had not transcribed the concluding sentence
of that paragraph; having been ashamed of the odd
words, Hope of your hope. 
Lady L. But why should that be your meaning, my
dear? 
Harriet. I added, I remember, that I was pained
by the teazings of these men, one after another; that
I never took delight in their airy adulation, and was
now the more pained, because of the vile attempt of
Sir Hargrave, which had given me a surfeit of the sex. 
Miss Gr. A temporary surfeit! It is over, I hope,
by this time. But, my dear—And yet as I owe to 

your generosity the communication, I would not take
occasion from it to teaze you— 
Harriet. Miss Grandison will oblige me, say what
she pleases. 
Miss Gr. As you intend to marry—As your friends
are very desirous that you should—As Lady D. is an
excellent woman—As her son is, as men go, a tolerable
man—As he is a peer of the realm; which is
something in the scale, tho' it is not of weight, singly
consider'd—As his estate is very considerable—As you
may have your own terms—As you like not any one
of your numerous admirers:—All these As's considered,
why, why, in the name of goodness, should you give
so flat a denial? Yet have not seen the gentleman, and
therefore can have no dislikes either to his sense or person? 
I wish, my dear, you would give such a reason
for your denial, a denial so strongly expressed, as one
would imagine such a woman as the countess of D.
would be satisfied with, from such a one as Miss Byron. 
Lady L. Perhaps, now that Miss Byron has seen
what a lady the countess of D. is— 
Miss Gr. And now that she has overcome the temporary
surfeit— 
Lady L. She will change her mind. 
Are you not, my dear aunt Selby, are you not, my
Lucy, distressed for me at this place? I was at the
time greatly so for myself. 
Harriet. My mind has been greatly disturbed by
Sir Hargrave's violence; and by apprehensions of fatal
mischiefs that might too probably have followed the
generous protection given me. I was teazed before
by good men—Mr. Orme, and Sir Rowland Meredith
in behalf of his nephew; and by men not so good, Mr.
Greville, and Mr. Fenwick. And when I had hoped to
have a little respite, a little leisure to look about me, and
to collect my almost dissipated spirits, to have this new
proposal made to my friends, and to me; and by a lady
so worthy; wonder not, Ladies, if I am unable, on a 

sudden, to give such reasons for having refused to listen
to it, as you require; altho', at the same time, I find
not in my heart the least inclination to encourage it. 
Miss Gr. You have had your difficulties of late,
my Harriet, to contend with: And those you must
look upon as a tax to be paid by a merit so conspicuous. 
Even in this slighter case, as you love to
oblige, I can pity you for the situation you are likely
to be in, betwixt the refused son and the deserving
mother. But when you consider, that the plagues of
the discreet proceed from other people, those of the indiscreet
from themselves, you will sit down with a just
compliment to yourself, and be content. You see I
can be grave now-and-then, child. 
Harriet. May I deserve to be called prudent and
discreet! On that condition, I am willing to incur
the penalty. 
Lady L. Come, come; that is out of the question,
my dear: So you are contented of course, or in the
way to be so. 
The Ladies took their leave, and seemed pleased
with their visit. 
It is now, my dear friends, some-how or other, become
necessary, I think, to let you minutely into my
situation, that you may advise, caution, instruct me— 
For, I protest, I am in a sort of wilderness. —Pray, my
Lucy, tell me—But it cannot be from Love: So I
don't care—Yet to lie under such a weight of obligation; 
and to find myself so much surpassed by these
ladies—Yet it is not from Envy, surely: That is a
very bad passion. I hope my bosom has not a place
in it for such a mean self tormentor. Can it be from
Pride? Pride is a vice that always produces mortification:
And proud you all made me of your favour— 
Yet I thought it was grateful to be proud of it. 
I wish I were with you, Lucy. I should ask you
abundance of questions; and repose my anxious heart
on your faithful bosom; and, at the same time, from 

your answers, arm it against too great a sensibility, before
it was too late. But pray, don't I remember, that
you said, you found sighing a relief to you, on a certain
occasion? I am serious, my dear. That there
was a sort of you-know-not-what of pleasure in sighing? 
Yet that it was involuntary? —Did you not say,
that you were ready to quarrel with yourself, you knew
not why? —And, pray, had you not a fretting, gnawing
pain in your stomach, that made you I can't tell
how to describe it; yet were humble, meek, as if looking
out for pity from every-body, and ready to pity
every-body? —Were you not attentive to stories of
people, young women especially, labouring under
doubts and difficulties? —Was not your humanity
raised? your self-consequence lower'd? But did you
not think suspense the greatest of all torments? —I
think, my dear, you lived without eating or drinking; 
yet look'd not pining, but fresh. —Pure Love is,
perhaps, to lovers as the manna of heaven was to the
Israelites: But yet, Israelite-like, we may be uneasy
and murmur at the too-much of it. —Your rest—I remember
it was broken. In your sleep you seemed to
be disturbed. You were continually rolling-down
mountains, or tumbling from precipices—or were borne
down by tempests, carried away with sudden inundations; 
or sinking in deep waters; or flying from fires,
thieves, robbers— 
How apt are we to recollect, or to try to recollect,
when we are apprehensive, that a case may possibly
be our own, all those circumstances, of which, while
another's (however dear that other might be to us) we
had not any clear or adequate ideas! —But I know,
that such of these as I recollect not from you, must be
owing to the danger, to the terror, I was in from the
violence of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. Often and often
do I dream over again what I suffered from him. 
I am now imploring mercy from him; and meet
with nothing but upbraidings and menaces. He is 

now stopping my mouth with his handkerchief: His
horrible clergyman, if a clergyman he was, is reading
the Service quite through: And I am contending
against the legality of the asserted marriage. At other
times, I have escaped; and he is pursuing me: He
gains upon my flying feet; and I wake myself with
endeavouring in vain to cry out for help. 
But when fancy is more propitious to me, then
comes my rescuer, my deliverer: And he is sometimes
a mighty prince (dreams then make me a
perfect romancer) and I am a damsel in distress. 
The milk-white palfrey once came in. All the Marvelous
takes place; and lions and tygers are slain, and
armies routed, by the puissance of his single arm. 
Now, do not these resveries convince you, that I
owe all my uneasiness to what I suffered from Sir Hargrave's
barbarity? I think I must take my aunt's advice; 
leave London; and then I shall better find out,
whether, as all my friends suspect, and as, to be ingenuous,
I myself now begin sometimes to fear, a passion
stronger than gratitude has not taken hold of my
heart. Of this I am sure: My reasoning faculties are
weaken'd. Miss Grandison says, that, in my illness
at Colnbrooke, I was delirious; and that the doctor
they called in was afraid of my head: And should I
suffer myself to be entangled in an hopeless passion, there
will want no further proof, that my intellects have
suffer'd. 
Adieu, my Lucy! What a letter have I written! 
The conclusion of it, I doubt, will of itself, be a sufficient
evidence of the weakness I have mentioned,
both of head and heart, of 
Your Harriet. 

