


Let.
I. II.Lovelace, To Belford. Two Letters entirely characteristic
yet intermingled with lessons and observations not unworthy
of a better character. He has great hopes from Miss Howe's
mediation in his favour. Picture of two Rakes turned Hermits, in
their penitentials.
III.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. She now greatly approves of her rejection
of Lovelace. Admires the noble example she has given her Sex of a
passion conquered. Is sorry she wrote to Arabella: But cannot imitate
her in her self-accusations, and acquittals of others who are all in
fault. Her notions of a Husband's prerogative. Hopes she is employing
herself in penning down the particulars of her tragical story. Uses
to be made of it to the advantage of her Sex. Her Mother earnest
about it.
IV.Miss Howe, To Misses Montague. With Clarissa's Letter, No. ci.
of Vol. VI. Her own sentiments of the villainous treatment her beloved
friend has met with from their kinsman. Prays for vengeance upon
him, if she do not recover.
V.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Acquaints her with some of their movements
at Harlowe-Place. Almost wishes she would marry the wicked
man. And why. Useful reflections on what has befallen a young Lady
so universally beloved. Must try to move her Mother in her favour.
But by what means, will not tell her, unless she succeed. 
VI.Mrs. Norton, To Mrs. Harlowe. 
VII.Mrs. Harlowe's affecting Answer.
VIII.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. Earnestly begs, for reasons equally
generous and dutiful, that she may be left to her own way of working
with her Relations. Has received her Sister's Answer to her Letter,
No xcv. of Vol. VI. She tries to find an excuse for the severity of it,
tho' greatly affected by it. Other affecting and dutiful reflections.
IX.Her Sister's cruel Letter, mentioned in the preceding.
X.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Is pleased that she now at last approves of
her rejecting Lovelace. Desires her to be comforted as to her. Promises,
that she will not run away from life. Hopes she has already got
above the shock given her by the ill-treatment she has met with from
Lovelace. Has had an Escape, rather than a Loss. Impossible, were
it not for the outrage, that she could have been happy with him. And
why. Sets in the most affecting, the most dutiful and generous lights,
the grief of her Father, Mother, and other Relations, on her account.
Has begun the particulars of her tragical story; but would
fain avoid proceeding with it. And why. Opens her design to make
Mr. Belford her Executor, and gives her reasons for it. Her Father
having withdrawn his Malediction, she has now only a Last Blessing
to supplicate for.

XI.Clarissa, To her Sister. Beseeching her, in the most humble and
earnest manner, to procure her a last Blessing.
XII.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Mr. Brand to be sent up to enquire
after her way of life and health. His pedantic character. Believes
they will with-hold any favour, till they hear his report. Doubts not
that matters will soon take a happy turn.
XIII.Clarissa. In Answer. The grace she asks for is only a blessing to
die with, not to live with. Their favour, if they design her any,
may come too late. Doubts her Mother can do nothing for her of herself.
A strong confederacy against a poor girl, their Daughter, Sister,
Niece. Her Brother perhaps got it renewed before he went to Edinburgh.
He needed not, says she; his work is done, and more than
done.
XIV.Lovelace, To Belford. Is mortified at receiving the Letters of
rejection. Charlotte writes to the Lady in his favour, in the name of
all the family. Every-body approves of what she has written; and he
has great hopes from it.
XV.Copy of Miss Montague's Letter to Clarissa; beseeching her, in the
names of all their noble family, to receive Lovelace to favour.
XVI.Belford, To Lovelace. Proposes to put Belton's Sister into possession
of Belton's House for him. The Lady visibly altered for the
worse. Again insists upon his promise not to molest her.
XVII.Clarissa, To Miss Montague. In Answer to hers, No xv.
XVIII.Belford, To Lovelace. Has just now received a Letter from
the Lady, which he incloses, requesting Extracts from the Letters
written to him by Mr. Lovelace within a particular period. The reasons
which determine him to oblige her.
XIX.Belford, To Clarissa. With the requested extracts; and a plea
in his friend's favour.
XX.Clarissa, To Belford. Thanks him for his communications. Requests
that he will be her Executor; and gives her reasons for her
choice of him for that solemn office.
XXI.Belford, To Clarissa. His chearful acceptance of the trust.
XXII.Belford, To Lovelace. Brief account of the extracts delivered in
to the Lady. Tells him of her appointing him her Executor. The
melancholy pleasure he shall have in the perusal of her papers. Much
more lively and affecting, says he, must be the style of those who write
in the height of a present distress, than the dry, narrative, unanimated
style of a person relating difficulties surmounted, can be.
XXIII.Arabella, To Clarissa. In Answer to her Letter, No xi. requesting
a Last Blessing.
XXIV.Clarissa, To her Mother. Written in the fervor of her spirit,
yet with the deepest humility, and on her knees, imploring her Blessing,
and her Father's, as what will sprinkle comfort thro' her last
hours.
XXV.Miss Montague, To Clarissa. In Reply to hers, No. xvii. All
their family love and admire her. Their kinsman has not one friend
among them. Beseech her to oblige them with the acceptance of an
annuity, and the first payment now sent her, at least till she can be

put in possession of her own Estate. This Letter signed by Lord M.
Lady Sarah, Lady Betty, and her Sister and self.
XXVI.Lovelace, To Belford. Raves against the Lady for rejecting
him; yet adores her the more for it. Has one half of the house to
himself, and that the best; having forbidden Lord M. and the Ladies
to see him, in return for their forbidding him to see them. Incensed
against Belford for the extracts he has promised from his Letters. Is
piqued to death at her proud refusal of him. Curses the vile women,
and their potions. But for these latter, the majesty of her virtue, he
says, would have saved her, as it did once before.
XXVII.From the same. He shall not, he tells him, be her
Executor. Nobody shall be any-thing to her but himself. What a
reprobation of a man, who was once so dear to her! Further instances
of his raving impatience.
XXVIII.Lovelace, To Clarissa. A Letter full of penitence, promises,
praises and admiration of her virtue. Has no hopes of escaping perdition
but by her precepts and example. All he begs for the present,
is a few lines to encourage him to hope for forgiveness, if he can
justify his vows by his future conduct.
XXIX.Clarissa, To Lord M. and the Ladies of his house. Thankfully
declines accepting of their offered Bounty. Pleads for their being reconciled
to their kinsman, for reasons respecting her own peace. Hopes
that they may be enabled to rejoice in the effects of his reformation,
many years after she is laid low and forgotten.
XXX.Belford, To Lovelace. Brief account of his expelling Thomasine,
her sons, and her gallant. Further reflections on Keeping. A
state not calculated for a sick bed. Gives a short journal of what had
passed relating to the Lady since his last. Mr. Brand enquires after
her character and behaviour of Mrs. Smith. His Starchedness, Conceit,
and Pedantry.
XXXI.From the same. Further particulars relating to the Lady. Power
left her by her Grandfather's Will.
XXXII.Clarissa, To Lovelace. In Answer to his Letter, No. xxviii.
XXXIII.Her Uncle Harlowe's cruel Letter, in Answer to hers to her
Mother, No. xxiv. Meditation stitched to it with black silk.
XXXIV.Clarissa, To her Uncle Harlowe. In Reply.
XXXV.Miss Howe, from the Isle of Wight. In Answer to hers, No. x.
Approves not of her choice of Belford for her Executor; yet thinks
she cannot appoint for that office any of her own family. Hopes she
will live many years.
XXXVI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Sends her a large packet of Letters; 
but (for her Relations sake) not all she has received. Must
now abide by the choice of Mr. Belford for her Executor; but further
refers to the papers she sends her, for her justification on this head.
XXXVII.Antony Harlowe, To Clarissa. A Letter more taunting and
reproachful than that of her other Uncle. To what owing.
XXXVIII.Clarissa. In Answer. Wishes that the circumstances of her
case had been enquired into. Concludes with a solemn and pathetic
prayer for the happiness of the whole family.

XXXIX.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Her friends, thro' Brand's reports,
as she imagines, intent upon her going to the Plantations. Wishes
her to discourage improper visitors. Difficult situations the tests of
prudence as well as of virtue. Dr. Lewen's solicitude for her welfare.
Her Cousin Morden arrived in England. Further pious consolations.
XL.Clarissa. In Answer. Sends her a packet of papers, which, for
her Relations sake, she cannot communicate to Miss Howe. From these
she will collect a good deal of her story. Defends, yet gently blames
her Mother. Afraid that her Cousin Morden will be set against her; 
or, what is worse, that he will seek to avenge her. Her affecting
conclusion on her Norton's divine consolations.
XLI.Lovelace, To Belford. Is very ill. The Lady, if he die, will
repent her refusal of him. One of the greatest felicities that can befal
a woman, what. Extremely ill. His ludicrous behaviour on
awaking, and finding a clergyman and his friends praying for him by
his bedside.
XLII.Belford, To Lovelace. Concerned at his illness. Wishes that
he had died before last April. The Lady, he tells him, generously
pities him; and prays that he may meet with the mercy he has not
shewn.
XLIII.Lovelace, To Belford. In raptures on her goodness to him. His
deep regrets for his treatment of her. Blesses her.
XLIV.Belford, To Lovelace. Congratulates him on his amendment.
The Lady's exalted charity to him. Her story a fine subject for Tragedy.
Compares with it, and censures, the Play of the Fair Penitent. She
is very ill; the worse for some new instances of the implacableness
of her relations. A Meditation on that subject. Poor Belton, he tells
him, is at death's door; and desirous to see him.
XLV.Belford, To Clarissa. Acquaints her with the obligation he is
under to go to Belton, and (lest she should be surprised) with Lovelace's
resolution (as signified in the next Letter) to visit her.
XLVI.Lovelace, To Belford. Resolves to throw himself at the Lady's
feet. Lord M. of opinion, that she ought to admit of one Interview.
XLVII.From the same. Arrived in London, he finds the Lady gone
abroad. Suspects Belford. His unaccountable freaks at Smith's. His
motives for behaving so ludicrously there. The vile Sally Martin entertains
him with her mimicry of the divine Lady.
XLVIII.From the same. His frightful Dream. How affected by it.
Sleeping or waking, his Clarissa always present with him. Hears
she is returned to her lodgings. Is hastening to her.
XLIX.From the same. Disappointed again. Is affected by Mrs. Lovick's
expostulations. Is shewn a Meditation On being hunted after
by the enemy of her soul, as it is intitled. His light comments upon
it. Leaves word that he resolves to see her. Makes several other
efforts for that purpose.
L.Belford, To Lovelace. Reproaches him that he has not kept his
honour with him. Inveighs against, and severely censures him for
his light behaviour at Smith's. Belton's terrors and despondency.
Mowbray's impenetrable behaviour.

LI.Belford, To Lovelace. Mowbray's impatience to run from a dying
Belton to a too lively Lovelace. Mowbray abuses Mr. Belton's servant
in the language of a Rake of the common class. Reflection on the
brevity of life.
LII.Lovelace, To Belford. Receives a Letter from Clarissa, written by way
of allegory to induce him to forbear hunting after her. Copy of it.
He takes it in a literal sense. Exults upon it. Will now hasten down
to Lord M. and receive the gratulations of all his family on her returning
favour. Gives an interpretation of his frightful dream to
his own liking.
LIII. LIV.From the same. Pities Belton, Rakishly defends him on the
issue of a duel, which now adds to the poor man's terrors. His
opinion of death, and the fear of it. Reflections on the conduct of
Play-writers with regard to servants. He cannot account for the
turn his Clarissa has taken in his favour. Hints at one hopeful cause
of it. Now Matrimony seems to be in his power, he has some retrograde
motions.
LV.Belford, To Lovelace. Continuation of his narrative of Belton's
last illness and impatience. The poor man abuses the gentlemen of
the Faculty. Belford censures some of them for their greediness after
fees. Belton dies. Serious reflections on the occasion.
LVI.Lovelace, To Belford. Hopes Belton is happy. And why, He
is setting out for Berks.
LVII.Belford, To Lovelace. Attends the Lady. She is extremely ill,
and receives the Sacrament. Complains of the harasses his friend had
given her. Two different persons (from her Relations, he supposes)
enquire after her. Her affecting address to the Doctor, Apothecary,
and himself. Disposes of some more of her apparel, for a very affecting
purpose.
LVIII.Dr. Lewen, To Clarissa. Writes on his pillow, to prevail upon
her to prosecute Lovelace for his Life.
LIX.Her pathetic and noble Answer.
LX.Miss Arabella Harlowe, To Clarissa. Proposes, in a most taunting
and cruel manner, the prosecution of Lovelace; or, if not, her
going to Pennsylvania.
LXI.Clarissa's affecting Answer.
LXII. LXIII.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Her Uncle's cruel Letter to
what owing. Colonel Morden resolved on a visit to Lovelace.—Mrs.
Hervey, in a private conversation with her, accounts for, yet blames,
the cruelty of her Family. Miss Dolly Hervey wishes to attend her.
LXIV.Clarissa. In Answer. Thinks she has been treated with great
rigour by her relations. Expresses more warmth than usual on this
subject. Yet soon checks herself. Grieves that Colonel Morden resolves
on a visit to Lovelace. Touches upon her Sister's taunting Letter.
Requests Mrs. Norton's Prayers for Patience and Resignation.
LXV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Approves now of her appointment of
Belford for an Executor. Admires her greatness of mind in despising
Lovelace. Every-body she is with, taken with Hickman. Yet she
cannot help wantoning with the power his obsequious Love gives her
over him.

LXVI. LXVII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Instructive lessons and observations
on her treatment of Hickman.—Acquaints her with all
that has happened since her last. Fears that her Allegorical Letter is
not strictly right. Is forced by illness to break off. Resumes. Wishes
her married.
LXVIII.Mr. Wyerley, To Clarissa. A generous renewal of his address
to her now in her calamity; and a tender of his best services.
LXIX.Her open, kind, and instructive Answer.
LXX.Lovelace, To Belford. Uneasy, on a suspicion that her Letter
to him was a stratagem only. What he will do, if he find it so.
LXXI.Belford, To Lovelace. Brief account of his proceedings in Belton's
affairs. The Lady extremely ill. Thought to be near her end.
Has a low-spirited day. Recovers her spirits; and thinks herself
above this world. She bespeaks her coffin. Confesses that her Letter
to Lovelace was Allegorical only. The light in which Belford beholds
her.
LXXII.From the same. An affecting conversation that passed between
the Lady and Dr. H. She talks of Death, he says, and prepares for
it, as if it were an occurrence as familiar to her, as dressing and undressing.
Worthy behaviour of the Doctor. She makes observations
on the vanity of life, on the wisdom of an early preparation for death,
and on the last behaviour of Belton.
LXXIII. LXXIV. LXXV.Lovelace, To Belford. Particulars of what
passed between himself, Colonel Morden, Lord M. and Mowbray, on
the visit made him by the Colonel. Proposes Belford to Miss Charlotte
Montague, by way of Raillery, for an husband.—He incloses
Brand's Letter, which misrepresents (from credulity and officiousness,
rather than from ill-will) the Lady's conduct.
LXXVI.Belford, To Lovelace. Expatiates on the baseness of deluding
young creatures, whose confidence has been obtained by oaths, vows,
promises. Evil of Censoriousness. People deemed good too much addicted
to it. Desires to know what he means by his ridicule with regard
to his charming Cousin.
LXXVII.From the same. A proper test of the purity of writing. The
Lady again makes excuses for her Allegorical Letter. Her calm behaviour,
and generous and useful reflections, on his communicating to
her Brand's misrepresentations of her conduct.
LXXVIII.Colonel Morden, To Clarissa. Offers his assistance and service
to make the best of what has happened. Advises her to marry
Lovelace, as the only means to bring about a general Reconciliation.
Has no doubt of his resolution to do her justice. Desires to know if
she has.
LXXIX.Clarissa. In Answer.
LXXX.Lovelace, To Belford. His reasonings and ravings on finding
the Lady's Letter to him only an Allegorical one. In the midst of
these, the natural gaiety of his heart runs him into ridicule on Belford.
His ludicrous image drawn from a monument in Westminster-abbey.
Resumes his serious disposition. If the worst happen (The Lord of
Heaven and Earth, says he, avert that worst!) he bids him only
write that he advises him to take a trip to Paris. And that will stab
him to the heart.

LXXXI.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady's coffin brought up stairs.
He is extremely shocked and discomposed at it. Her intrepidity.
Great minds, he observes, cannot avoid doing uncommon things. Reflection
on the curiosity of women.
LXXXII.From the same. Description of the coffin, and devices on
the lid. It is placed in her bedchamber. His serious application to
Lovelace on her great behaviour.
LXXXIII.From the same. Astonished at his levity in the Abbey-instance.
The Lady extremely ill.
LXXXIV.Lovelace, To Belford. All he has done to the Lady, a jest
to die for; since her triumph has ever been greater than her sufferings.
He will make over all his possessions and all his reversions to the
Doctor, if he will but prolong her life for one twelvemonth. How,
but for her calamities, could her Equanimity blaze out as it does! He
could now love her with an intellectual flame. He cannot bear to
think, that the last time she so triumphantly left him, should be the
last. His Conscience, he says, tears him. He is sick of the remembrance
of his vile plots.
LXXXV.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady alive, serene, and calm.
The more serene for having finished, signed and sealed her Last Will; 
deferred till now, for reasons of filial duty.
LXXXVI.Miss Howe, to Clarissa. Pathetically laments the illness of
her own Mother, and of her dear friend. Now all her pertnesses to the
former, she says, fly in her face. She lays down her pen; and resumes
it, to tell her, with great joy, that her Mother is better. She has had
a visit from her Cousin Morden. What passed in it.
LXXXVII.From the same. Displeased with the Colonel for thinking
too freely of the Sex. Never knew a man that had a slight notion of
the virtue of women in general, who deserved to be valued for his morals.
Why women must be either more or less virtuous than men. Useful
hints to young Ladies. Is out of humour with Mr. Hickman.
Resolves to see her soon in town.
LXXXVIII.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady writes and reads upon
her coffin, as upon a desk. The doctor resolves to write to her Father.
Her intense, yet chearful devotion.
LXXXIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. A Letter full of pious reflections,
and good advice, both general and particular; and breathing the true
Christian spirit of charity, forgiveness, patience, and resignation.
A just reflection, to her dear friend, upon the mortifying nature of pride.
XC.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Her account of an interesting conversation
at Harlowe-Place between the Family and Colonel Morden; 
and of another between her Mother and self. The Colonel incensed
against them all. Her advice concerning Belford, and other matters.
Miss Howe has obtained leave, she hears, to visit her. Praises Mr.
Hickman. Gently censures Miss Howe on his account. Her truly maternal
and pious comfortings.
XCI.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady's sight begins to fail her. She
blesses God for the serenity she enjoys. It is what, she says, she had
prayed for. What a blessing, so near to her dissolution, to have her
prayers answered! Gives particular directions to him about her Papers,
about her Last Will, and Apparel. Comforts the women and him on

their concern for her. Another Letter brought her from Colonel
Morden. The substance of it. Belford writes to hasten up the Colonel.
Dr. H. has also written to her Father; and Brand to Mr. John Harlowe
a Letter recanting his officious one.
XCII.Dr. H. To James Harlowe, senior, Esq;
XCIII.Copy of Mr. Belford's Letter to Colonel Morden, to hasten him
up.
XCIV.Lovelace, To Belford. He feels the torments of the damned,
in the remorse that wrings his heart, on looking back on his past
actions by this Lady. Gives him what he calls a faint picture of his
horrible uneasiness, riding up and down, expecting the return of his
servant as soon as he had dispatched him. Woe be to the man who
brings him the fatal news!
XCV.Belford, To Lovelace. Further particulars of the Lady's pious
and exemplary behaviour. She rejoices in the gradual death afforded
her. Her thankful acknowlegements to Mr. Belford, Mrs. Smith,
and Mrs. Lovick, for their kindness to her. Her edifying address to
Mr. Belford.
XCVI.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. In Answer to hers, No xc.
Afflicted only for her friends. Desires not now to see her Cousin
Morden, nor even herself, or Miss Howe. God will have no rivals,
she says, in the hearts of those whom He sanctifies. Advice to Miss
Howe, To Mr. Hickman. Blesses all her relations and friends.
XCVII.Lovelace, To Belford. A Letter of deep distress, remorse,
and impatience. Yet would he fain lighten his own guilt by reflections
on the cruelty of her Relations.
XCVIII.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady is disappointed at the Doctor's
telling her that she may yet live two or three days. Death from
grief, the slowest of deaths. Her solemn forgiveness of Lovelace, and
prayer for him. Owns, that once she could have loved him. Her generous
concern for his future happiness. Belford's good resolutions.
XCIX.Mr. Brand, To Mr. John Walton. In excuse of his credulity,
and the misreports
founded upon it.
C.Mr. Brand, To John Harlowe, Esq; In excuse of his credulity,
and the misreports founded
upon it.
CI.Lovelace, To Belford. Blesses him for sending him word the Lady
is better. Her charity towards him cuts him to the heart. He
cannot bear it. His vehement self-reproaches. Curses his contriving
genius; and his disbelief, that there could be such virtue in woman.
The world never saw such an Husband as he will make, if she recover,
and will be his.
CII.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady's pious frame. The approaches
of death how supportable to her. And why. She has no reason,
she says, to grieve for any-thing but the sorrow she has given to her
friends.
CIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Never prayed in his life, put all the
years of it together, as he has done for this fortnight past. Has
repented of all his baseness: And will nothing do? Conjures him
to send him good news in his next, as he would not be answerable
for consequences.

CIV.Belford, To Lovelace. Solemn leave taken of her by the
Doctor and Apothecary; who tell her she will hardly see the
next night. The pleasure with which she receives the intimation.
How unlike poor Belton's behaviour hers! A Letter from Miss Howe.
Copy of it. She cannot see to read it. Her exalted expressions on
hearing it read. Tries to write an answer to it; but cannot. Dictates
to Mrs. Lovick. Writes the subscriptive part herself on her knees.
Colonel Morden arrived in town.
CV.From the same. What passes on Colonel Morden's visit to his
Cousin. She enjoins the Colonel not to avenge her.
CVI.From the same. Her silent devotion. Strong symptoms of her
approaching dissolution. Comforts her Cousin and him. Wishes she
had had her Parents Last Blessing: But God, she says, would not let
her depend for comfort on any but Himself. Repeats her request to the
Colonel, that he will not seek to avenge her wrongs; and to Belford,
that he will endeavour to heal all breaches.
CVII.From the same. The Colonel writes to Mr. John Harlowe, that
they may now spare themselves the trouble of debating about a Reconciliation.
The Lady takes from her bosom a miniature picture of
Miss Howe, to be given to Mr. Hickman after her decease. Her affecting
address to it, on parting with it.
CVIII.Belford, To Mowbray. Desires him and Tourville to throw
themselves in the way of Lovelace, in order to prevent him doing
either mischief to himself or others, on the receipt of the fatal news
which he shall probably send him in an hour or two.
CIX.Lovelace, To Belford. A Letter filled with rage, curses, and
alternate despair and hope.
CX.Belford, To Lovelace. With the fatal hint, that he may take a
Tour to Paris, or where-ever else his destiny shall lead him.
CXI.Mowbray, To Belford. With the particulars, in his libertine
manner, of Lovelace's behaviour on his receiving the fatal breviate,
and of the distracted way he is in.