


Mr. Lowther, To John Arnold, Esq; (his Brother-in-Law) in London. 


Bologna, May 5–16. 
I Will now, my dear Brother, give you a circumstantial
account of our short, but flying journey. 
The 20th of April, O. S. early in the morning, we
left Paris, and reached Lyons the 24th, at night. 
Resting but a few hours, we set out for Pont Beauvoisin,
where we arrived the following evening:
There we bid adieu to France, and found ourselves
in Savoy, equally noted for its poverty and rocky
mountains. Indeed it was a total change of the
scene. We had left behind us a blooming-spring,
which enlivened with its verdure the trees and hedges
on the road we passed, and the meadows already
smiled with flowers. The chearful inhabitants were
busy in adjusting their limits, lopping their trees,
pruning their vines, tilling their fields: But when we
entered Savoy, nature wore a very different face; 

and I must own, that my spirits were great sufferers
by the change. Here we began to view on the nearer
mountains, covered with ice and snow, notwithstanding
the advanced season, the rigid winter, in frozen
majesty, still preserving its domains: And arriving at
St. Jean de Maurienne the night of the 26th, the
snow seemed as if it would dispute with us our passage; 
and horrible was the force of the boistrous
winds, which sat full in our faces. 
Overpowered by the fatigues I had undergone in
the expedition we had made, the unseasonable coldness
of the weather, and the fight of one of the worst
countries under Heaven, still cloathed in snow, and
deformed by continual hurricanes; I was here taken
ill. Sir Charles was greatly concerned for my indisposition,
which was increased by a great lowness of
spirits. He attended upon me in person; and never
had man a more kind and indulgent friend. Here
we stayed two days; and then, my illness being principally
owing to fatigue, I found myself enabled to
proceed. At two of the clock in the morning of
the 28th, we prosecuted our journey, in palpable darkness,
and dismal weather, tho' the winds were somewhat
laid, and reaching the foot of Mount Cenis by
break of day, arrived at Lanebourg, a poor little village,
so environed by high mountains, that, for three
months in the twelve, it is hardly visited by the chearing
rays of the sun. Every object which here presents
itself is excessively miserable. The people are
generally of an olive complexion, with wens under
their chins; some so monstrous, especially women, as
quite disfigure them. 
Here it is usual to unscrew and take in pieces the
chaises, in order to carry them on mules over the
mountain; and to put them together on the other
side: For the Savoy side of the mountain is much
more difficult to pass than the other. But Sir Charles
chose not to lose time; and therefore lest the chaise 

to the care of the inn-keeper; proceeding, with all
expedition, to gain the top of the hill. 
The way we were carried, was as follows: A
kind of horse, as it is called with you, with two
poles, like those of chairmen, was the vehicle; on
which is secured a sort of elbow chair, in which the
traveller sits. A man before, another behind, carry
this open machine with so much swiftness, that they
are continually running and skipping, like wild goats,
from rock to rock, the four miles of that ascent. If
a traveller were not prepossessed that these mountaineers
are the surest-footed carriers in the universe,
he would be in continual apprehensions of being overturned. 
I, who never undertook this journey before,
must own, that I could not be so fearless, on this occasion,
as Sir Charles was, tho' he had very exactly
described to me how every-thing would be. Then,
tho' the sky was clear when we passed this mountain,
yet the cold wind blew quantities of frozen snow in
our faces; insomuch that it seemed to me just as if
people were employed, all the time we were passing,
to wound us with the sharpest needles. They indeed
call the wind that brings this sharp-pointed snow, The
Tormenta. 
An adventure, which any-where else might have appeared
ridiculous, I was afraid would have proved fatal
to one of our chairmen, as I will call them. I
had flapt down my hat to screen my eyes from the
fury of that deluge of sharp-pointed frozen snow; 
and it was blown off my head, by a sudden gust,
down the precipices: I gave it for lost, and was about
to bind a handkerchief over the woollen cap, which
those people provide to tie under the chin; when one
of the assistant carriers (for they are always six in
number to every chair, in order to relieve one another)
undertook to recover it. I thought it impossible
to be done; the passage being, as I imagined, only
practicable for birds: However, I promised him a 

crown reward, if he did. Never could the leaps of the
most dextrous of rope-dancers be compared to those of
this daring fellow: I saw him sometimes jumping from
rock to rock, sometimes rolling down a declivity of
snow like a ninepin, sometimes running, sometimes
hopping, skipping; in short, he descended like lightning
to the verge of a torrent, where he found the
hat. He came up almost as quick, and appeared as
little fatigued, as if he had never left us. 
We arrived at the top in two hours, from Lanebourg; 
and the sun was pretty high above the horizon. 
Out of a hut, half-buried in snow, came some
mountaineers, with two poor sledges, drawn by mules,
to carry us through the Plain of Mount Cenis, as it is
called, which is about four Italian miles in length, to
the descent of the Italian side of the mountain. 
These sledges are not much different from the chairs,
or sedans, or horse, we then quitted; only the two
under-poles are flat, and not so long as the others,
and turning up a little at the end, to hinder them
from sticking fast in the snow. To the fore-ends of
the poles are fixed two round sticks, about two feet and
a half long, which serve for a support and help to the
man who guides the mule, who, running on the snow
between the mule and the sledge, holds the sticks with
each hand. 
It was diverting to see the two sledgemen striving
to out-run each other. Encouraged by Sir Charles's
generosity, we arrived at the other end of the plain in
less than two hours: The man who walked, or rather
run, between the sledge and the mule, made a continual
noise; hallooing and beating the stubborn beast
with his fists, which otherwise would be very slow in
its motion. 
At the end of this plain we found such another hut
as that on the Lanebourg side: Here they took off
the smoking mules from the sledges, to give them
rest. 

And now began the most extraordinary way of
travelling that can be imagined. The descent of the
mountain from the top of this side, to a small village
called Novalesa, is four Italian miles. When the
snow has filled up all the inequalities of the mountain,
it looks, in many parts, as smooth and equal as a
sugar-loaf. It is on the brink of this rapid descent
that they put the sledge. The man who is to guide
it, sits between the feet of the traveller, who is seated
in the elbow chair, with his legs at the outside of the
sticks fixed at the fore-ends of the flat poles, and holds
the two sticks with his hands; and when the sledge
has gained the declivity, its own weight carries it
down with surprising celerity. But as the immense
irregular rocks under the snow make now-and-then
some edges in the declivity, which, if not avoided,
would overturn the sledge; the guide, who foresees
the danger, by putting his foot strongly and dextrously
in the snow next to the precipice, turns the machine,
by help of the above-mentioned sticks, the contrary
way, and, by way of zig-zag, goes to the bottom. 
Such was the velocity of this motion, that we dispatched
these four miles in less than five minutes; 
and, when we arrived at Novalesa, hearing that the
snow was very deep most of the way to Susa, and
being pleased with our way of travelling, we had
some mules put again to the sledges, and ran all the
way to the very gates of that city, which is seven miles
distant from Mount Cenis. 
In our way we had a cursory view of the impregnable
fortress of Brunetta, the greatest part of which
is cut out of the solid rock, and commands that important
pass. 
We rested all night at Susa; and, having bought a
very commodious post-chaise, we proceeded to Turin,
where we dined; and from thence, the evening of
May 2. O. S. got to Parma by way of Alexandria
and Placentia, having purposely avoided the high road 

through Milan, as it would have cost us a few hours
more time. 
Sir Charles observed to me, when we were on the
plain or flat top of Mount Cenis, that, had not the
winter been particularly long and severe, we should
have had, instead of this terrible appearance of snow
there, flowers starting up, as it were, under our feet,
of various kinds, which are hardly to be met with anywhere
else. One of the greatest dangers, he told me,
in passing this mount in winter, arises from a ball of
snow, which is blown down from the top by the
wind, or falls down by some other accident; which,
gathering all the way in its descent, becomes instantly
of such a prodigious bigness, that there is hardly any
avoiding being carried away with it, man and beast,
and smothered in it. One of these balls we saw rolling
down; but as it took another course than ours,
we had no apprehensions of danger from it. 
At Parma we found expecting us, the Bishop of
Nocera, and a very Reverend Father, Marescotti by
name; who expressed the utmost joy at the arrival of
Sir Charles Grandison, and received me, at his recommendation,
with a politeness which seems natural
to them. I will not repeat what I have written before
of this excellent young gentleman: Intrepidity, bravery,
discretion, as well as generosity, are conspicuous
parts of his character. He is studious to avoid danger; 
but is unappalled in it. For humanity, benevolence,
providence for others, to his very servants, I
never met with his equal. 
My reception from the noble family to which he
has introduced me; the patient's case (a very unhappy
one!); and a description of this noble city, and the fine
country about it; shall be the subject of my next. 
Assure all my friends of my health, and good wishes
for them; and, my dear Arnold, believe me to be 
Ever Yours, &c. 

