



Dear Father and Mother,
Mrs. Jervis and I have liv'd very comfortably
together for this Fortnight past; for
my Master was all that time at his Lincolnshire
Estate, and at his Sister's the Lady Davers. 
But he came home Yesterday. He had some
Talk with Mrs. Jervis soon after, and mostly
about me. He said to her, it seems, Well, Mrs.
Jervis, I know Pamela has your good Word; 
but do you think her of any Use in the Family? 
She told me, she was surpris'd at the Question; 
but said, That I was one of the most virtuous
and industrious Creatures that ever she knew. 
Why that Word virtuous, said he, I pray you? 
Was there any Reason to suppose her otherwise? 
Or has any body taken it into their Heads
to try her? —I wonder, Sir, says she, you ask 

such a Question! Who dare offer any thing to
her in such an orderly and well-govern'd House as
yours, and under a Master of so good a Character
for Virtue and Honour? Your Servant,
Mrs. Jervis, says he, for your good Opinion; 
but pray, if any body did, do you think Pamela
would let you know it? Why, Sir, said she,
she is a poor innocent young Creature, and
I believe has so much Confidence in me,
that she would take my Advice as soon as she
would her Mother's. Innocent! again; and
virtuous, I warrant! Well, Mrs. Jervis, you
abound with your Epithets! but I take her to
be an artful young Baggage; and had I a young
handsome Butler or Steward, she'd soon make
her Market of one of them, if she thought it
worth while to snap at him for a Husband. 
Alack-a-day, Sir, said she, 'tis early Days with
Pamela; and she does not yet think of a Husband,
I dare say: And your Steward and Butler
are both Men in Years, and think nothing
of the Matter. No, said he, if they were
younger, they'd have more Wit than to think
of such a Girl. I'll tell you my Mind of her,
Mrs. Jervis: I don't think this same Favourite
of yours so very artless a Girl, as you imagine. 
I am not to dispute with your Honour, said
Mrs. Jervis; but I dare say, if the Men will
let her alone, she'll never trouble herself about
them. Why, Mrs. Jervis, said he, are there
any Men that will not let her alone, that you
know of? No, indeed, Sir, said she; she keeps
herself so much to herself, and yet behaves so 

prudently, that they all esteem her, and shew
her as great Respect, as if she was a Gentlewoman
born. 
Ay, says he, that's her Art, that I was speaking
of: But let me tell you, the Girl has Vanity,
and Conceit, and Pride too, or I am mistaken; 
and, perhaps, I could give you an Instance of it. 
Sir, said she, you can see further than such a
poor silly Woman as I am; but I never saw
any thing but Innocence in her. —And Virtue
too, I'll warrant ye! said he. But suppose I
could give you an Instance, where she has talk'd
a little too freely of the Kindnesses that have
been shew'd her from a certain Quarter; and
has had the Vanity to impute a few kind Words,
utter'd in mere Compassion to her Youth and
Circumstances, into a Design upon her, and even
dar'd to make free with Names that she ought
never to mention but with Reverence and Gratitude; 
what would you say to that? —Say,
Sir! said she, I cannot tell what to say. But
I hope Pamela incapable of such Ingratitude. 
Well, no more of this silly Girl, says he; 
you may only advise her, as you are her Friend,
not to give herself too much Licence upon the
Favours she meets with; and if she stays here,
that she will not write the Affairs of my Family
purely for an Exercise to her Pen and her Invention. 
I tell you, she is a subtle, artful Gypsey,
and Time will shew it you. 
Was ever the like heard, my dear Father
and Mother? It is plain he did not expect to
meet with such a Repulse, and mistrusts that 

I have told Mrs. Jervis, and has my long Letter
too, that I intended for you; and so is vex'd
to the Heart. But I can't help it. I had better
be thought artful and subtle, than be so, in his
Sense; and as light as he makes of the Words
Virtue and Innocence in me, he would have
made a less angry Construction, had I less deserved
that he should do so; for then, may-be,
my Crime would have been my Virtue with
him; naughty Gentleman as he is!— 
I will soon write again; but must now
end with saying, That I am, and shall always
be, 
Your honest Daughter. 

