


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Thursday, December 7. 
Lucy (my ever-honoured grandmamma) has
given you the particulars of the rapturous reception
I met with on Saturday, from my dear Lady L.
on the visit we made her in her chamber. She, as
well as her Lord, welcomed and congratulated us,
and herself, with such a grace! —They are a charming
pair! —We all rejoiced with her, on the addition she
had made to two families so worthy. 
Mrs. Eleanor Grandison received us also in raptures. 
How did the tenderly kind notice which Sir Charles
took of the lovely little infant (It is a fine child!)
delight the happy mother, and every-body! 
Lord and Lady G. met us at Lady L's; Emily,
and the Earl of G. and Lady Gertrude, with them. 
How affectionately did the dear girl welcome us, after
a few tears, which she endeavoured to hide, and
which we passed over as tears of joy! But Lucy has
given you all particulars (a) ; and the noble manner
also, in which Sir Charles gave me possession of his
house, on our first arrival. Every-body was charmed
with it. It cost my aunt some tears. 
The Christening was delayed till Monday; because
Sir Charles was desirous it should be performed at
church. He had some few difficulties to get over,
before he carried his point; and this was the substance
of his reasonings on the subject: People of
fashion, he said, should consider themselves as examples
to the lower orders of people. They should
shew a conformity to the laws of their country, both
ecclesiastical and civil, where they can do it with a
good conscience. In the present case, Baptism, said 

he, is one of our two sacraments; and shall it not
be performed, when it can, as the church directs; 
the child in full health? 
I will give you, my dear grandmamma, journalwise,
I think, an account of our proceedings; still
referring myself to my Lucy for such particulars as
now I shall not have time to give. For you know, my
dear grandmamma, that my time is not now my own,
as it used to be; tho' I shall think myself very ungrateful,
and undutiful too, if I permit my new duties so
wholly to engross me, as to furnish an excuse for the
neglect of those which from my very birth I owe to
you. 
I think Lucy has not mentioned to you the lively
conversations that passed in the evening, after the
christening, between Sir Charles and Lady G.; she
choosing to single out her brother (as she had threatened,
unknown to him, to do) in order to try once
more her strength with him, in vivacity and raillery. 
She delighted every-body with her wit: For it was
not so rapid and so unguarded as sometimes it is. 
He condescended, was Lucy's just observation, to return
wit for her wit, in order to follow her lead, as
he saw the company was delighted with their conversation; 
and was exceedingly brilliant. She complimented
herself on the merit of having drawn him out,
tho' to her own disadvantage. Finding herself overmatched,
she shifted her attacks, and made one upon
me; but with so much decorum and complaisance,
as shewed she intended to do me honour, rather than
herself. 
Tuesday evening.] Sir Charles is just returned from
visiting Sir Harry Beauchamp. The poor man numbers
his hours, and owned, that the three the best
of men gave him, as by his own watch (tho' Sir
Charles intended to be back in one) were more happy
ones than he had promised himself in this life. O
madam! How easy sits my Sir Charles's piety upon 

him! He can pity a dying friend, without saddening
his own heart; for he lives the life of duty as he goes
along, and fears not the inevitable lot! 
Wednesday.] He is just returned from a visit to
Sir Hargrave. Sir Hargrave, it seems, complimented
him, but with tears in his eyes, on his marriage. 
Great God! said he, how are you rewarded! How
am I punished! Is there not hope that I have all my
punishment in this life? I am sure, it is very, very
heavy. 
He visited the same day Mrs. Oldham, and her
children. 
He drank tea this afternoon with the Danby family
in full assembly, at the house of the elder brother; 
and came to my cousin Reeves's to supper. My
uncle, aunt, Mr. Deane, and Lucy, accompanied
me thither to tea and supper, where, as by promise,
we were joined by Lord and Lady G. Lord L. Mrs.
Eleanor Grandison, my Emily, and Mr. Beauchamp. 
Mr. Reeves had also invited Lady Betty Williams. 
What felicitations did she pour on me! She sighed,
poor Lady! for the unhappy step her daughter had
taken: And I sighed for the mother; who, tho' she
had not given her daughter a bad example, had not set
her a good one. 
Lucy will tell you what a charming evening we had. 
On Thursday,] Mr. Grandison presented his newmarried
Lady to Sir Charles and me, on account of our
marriage, and dined with us. Sir Charles received
the Lady, as well as his cousin, with the utmost politeness. 
She is far from being a disagreeable woman:
But, at first, the awe she had of the people of rank
in company, particularly of Lady G. as she owned
to me, gave her an air of aukwardness. But Sir
Charles's polite notice of her soon made her easy. 
Mr. Grandison found an opportunity to praise to
me her good sense and fine qualities; but in such a
way, as if he were making apologies for having given 

the honour of his name to a woman under his own rank
(ungrateful!) who yet had re-established him: He
concluded his panegyric with letting me know, that
she had already presented him with 25,000 pounds:
He looked as if he thought he deserved it all; and
actually called her a very discerning woman. I questioned
not, I told him, his gratitude to a Lady so deserving; 
and he as good as promised to reward her by
his Love; whispering, with an air of self-sufficiency,
sticking his hand in his side, and surveying himself
to the right and left, Her former husband, madam,
was a very plain, but an honest man. But I do
assure you she has taste! —O dear! O dear! thought
I to myself. 
Sir Charles invited them both to Grandison-hall,
and she seemed not a little proud on his calling her,
as he did several times, Cousin. 
Lord L. and Lord and Lady G. dined with us, as
did Mrs. Eleanor Grandison and Emily. Lady G.
in the main, behaved prettily enough to Mr. Grandison
and his Bride. But once a little forgetting herself,
and putting on a supercilious air, I whispered her,
Dear Lady G. consider, you can give pride to others
by your condescension: You must not yourself condescend
to be proud. 
Be you, my Harriet, re-whispered she, always my
monitress. It is the sorry fellow, not his wife, that
I look down upon. She, a widow Cit, might have done
still worse. 
Cit! Lady G. And in a trading kingdom? 
Ay, Cit, child! Have you not heard my brother
say, that even in the republic of Venice, there are
young nobility and old nobility: Distinctions in blood
every-where but at Amsterdam! 
Who, and what, at first, made the distinction,
my dear? asked I. 
Be quiet, Harriet! —I think I am very good— 
And at the height of your goodness, Charlotte? 

Be quiet, when I bid you; aloud. 
Sir Charles a little jealous of our whispering, for
the sake of his cousins, turning to Mr. Grandison,
Your cousin Charlotte, you know, Sir, is always hard
pressed, when she calls out, Be quiet. 
I was always rejoiced, replied he, when my cousin
was brought to that. 
Sir Charles has been twice at the Drawing-room,
since we have been in town. He admires the integrity
of heart of his Sovereign, as much as he reveres his
royal dignity. Once I remember, he wished that his
Majesty would take a summer's progress thro' his
British, another into his Irish, dominions; but expresly
with this proviso, That every gentleman and
woman of condition should be welcome at his court,
who came not in new dresses to pay their duty to
him; and this lest the gentry's vying with each other
in appearance, should hurt their private circumstances; 
and for the same reason, that he would graciously
treat, but not be treated by, any of the nobility
at their houses. 
To-morrow morning, Sir Charles, his grateful
Harriet, happy creature! my uncle and aunt Selby,
Mr. Deane, and Emily, are to set out by the way of
Windsor for Grandison-hall. We are to take an
early dinner there with Lord and Lady W.; who,
on that condition, have promised to attend their beloved
nephew, and his friends, to the Hall. 
Lord G. is allowed to stay a week with us, and
no more. He is then to attend his now but half-saucy
Lady, at one of the Earl of G's seats in Hertfordshire; 
where, by promise of long-standing, she
is to keep her Christmas: At which she mutters not
a little; because she would fain have been with us; 
and because she imagines, it will be proper for her to
confine herself at home, by the time they will part
with her. 
My aunt Selby, and even my uncle, will write. 

He must, he says, the over-flowings of his joy. 
Lucy loves to describe houses, furniture, gardens,
and such like. She says, she will sometimes give
conversations too, at which I shall not be present; 
but will leave to my pen persons, characters, and
what passes of the more tender sort in conversations
where I am by. But as well Lucy's Letters, as
mine, are to be sent to Lady G. unsealed; and she,
after shewing them to her sister, will hasten them to
Northamptonshire. Referring therefore to Lucy for
more particular accounts, I subscribe myself, with
all duty and grateful love to my grandmamma, as
well as with kindest remembrances to all my dear
friends, 
Your happy, thrice happy,
Harriet Grandison. 

