



Miss Ar. Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers of Friday July 21. Letter xcv. of Vol. VI.] 

Thursday, July 27. 
O my unhappy lost Sister!
What a miserable hand have you made of your
romantic and giddy expedition! —I pity you at
my heart. 
You may well grieve and repent! —Lovelace has left
you! —In what way or circumstances, you know best. 
I wish your conduct had made your case more
pitiable. But 'tis your own seeking! 
God help you! —For you have not a friend will
look upon you! —Poor, wicked, undone creature! 
—Fallen, as you are, against warning, against expostulation,
against duty! 
But it signifies nothing to reproach you. I weep
over you. 
My poor Mother! —Your rashness and folly have
made her more miserable than you can be. —Yet she
has besought my Father to grant your request. 
My Uncles joined with her; for they thought there
was a little more modesty in your Letter, than in the
Letters of your pert advocate: And my Father is
pleased to give me leave to write; but only these
words for him, and no more: “That he withdraws
the Curse he laid upon you, at the first hearing of
your wicked flight, so far as it is in his power to
do it; and hopes that your present punishment
may be all that you will meet with. For the rest,
He will never own you, nor forgive you; and
grieves he has such a Daughter in the world.” 

All this, and more, you have deserved from him,
and from all of Us: But what have you done to this
abandoned Libertine, to deserve what you have
met with at his hands? —I fear, I fear, Sister! —But
no more! —A blessed four months work have you
made of it. 
My Brother is now at Edinburgh, sent thither by
my Father [tho' he knows not this to be the motive]
that he may not meet your triumphant deluder. 
We are told he would be glad to marry you: But
why, then, did he abandon you? He had kept you
till he was tired of you, no question; and it is not
likely he would wish to have you but upon the terms
you have already without all doubt been his. 
You ought to advise your friend Miss Howe to concern
herself less in your matters than she does, except
she could do it with more decency. She has written
three Letters to me: Very insolent ones. Your favourer,
poor Mrs. Norton, thinks you know nothing
of the pert creature's writing. I hope you don't. But
then the more impertinent the writer. But, believing
the fond woman, I sat down the more readily
to answer your Letter; and I write with less severity
I can tell you, than otherwise I should have done, if
I had answered it at all. 
Monday last was your birth-day. Think, poor
ungrateful wretch, as you are! how we all used to
keep it; and you will not wonder to be told, that
we ran away from one another that day. But God
give you true penitence, if you have it not already! 
And it will be true, if it be equal to the shame and
the sorrow you have given us all. 
Your afflicted Sister,
Arabella Harlowe. 
Your Cousin Morden is every day expected in England. 
He, as well as others of the family, when
he comes to hear what a blessed piece of work you
have made of it, will wish you never had had a being. 