


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Grandison-hall, Saturday 12 o'clock, Dec. 9. 
O My dearest, dearest grandmamma! Here I am! 
The declared mistress of this spacious house,
and the happiest of human creatures! This is all at
this instant I can write. 
* *
Lord and Lady W. honoured us, as they had promised,
with their company; but detained us so long,
that we were obliged to lie one night on the road. 
But by eleven this morning we arrived here. 
At our alighting, Sir Charles clasping me in his
arms, I congratulate you, my dearest life, said he,
on your entrance into your own house. The last
Lady Grandison, and the present, might challenge
the whole British nation to produce their equals. 
Then turning to every one of his guests, those of
my family first, as they were strangers to the place, 

he said the kindest, the politest things that ever proceeded
from the mouth of man. I wept for joy. I
would have spoken, but could not. Every-body congratulated
the happy Harriet. 
Dr. Bartlett was approaching to welcome us, but
drew back till our mutual congratulations were over. 
He then appeared. I present to you, my dear Dr.
Bartlett, said the best of men, the lovely friend, whom
you have so long wished to see mistress of this house. 
He then offered my hand to the Doctor. 
God bless you, madam! tears in his eyes. —God
bless you both! Then kissed, instead of my hand, which
I withdrew, my offered cheek. He could say no
more: I could not speak distinctly. 
My dear Sir Charles led me, followed by all our
rejoicing friends, thro' a noble dining-room to the
drawing-room, called, The Lady's: The whole house,
my dear, said he, and every person and thing belonging
to it, is yours: But this apartment is more
particularly so. Let what is amiss in it, be altered as
you would have it. 
O Sir! grasping his presenting hand between both
mine, was all I could say. 
This room is elegantly furnished. It is hung with
a light green velvet, delicately ornamented; the
chairs of the same; the frames of them gilt; as is
the frame of a noble cabinet in it. —My mother's, my
dearest life, whispered he. It will be always fashionable:
And you, I know, will value it on her account. 
—Indeed I shall. —He presented me with the
keys. Here perhaps will you deposit your letters and
correspondencies; some of which (the continuation
of those I have had the honour to see) you will
allow me to peruse. But of choice, remember, madam. 
For your whole heart must be in the grant
of the favours you will confer upon me of this kind. 
Dear Sir, said I, leave me power of speech; my
will shall be yours, in every-thing. But you will 

find a strange, strange heart, laid open to you, if
you command from me a sight of the papers, that
probably will be reposited here, when all my matters
are brought from Northamptonshire. 
You shall have all the Letters you ever wrote to me,
and the venerable circle, said Lucy; a loan, not a
gift; if you will shew them to Sir Charles. 
Courage, Lucy, not inclination, will be only
wanting. 
Thank you, Lucy, said he. Thank you, my
Love, to me. You must make marks against the
passages in the Letters you shall have the goodness to
communicate, which you would not have me read. 
I will give you my honour that I will not pass the
bounds you prescribe. 
I will snatch another opportunity to proceed. — 
My dear Sir Charles indulges me. I have told him,
that if he now-and-then misses me, he must conclude
that I am doubling my joy, by communicating it as I
have opportunity, to my dear Grandmamma. 
* *
Every-body admires the elegance of this drawing-room. 
The finest japan china, that I ever saw,
except that of Lady G's, which she so whimsically
received at the hands of her Lord, took particularly
every female eye. 
Sir Charles led me into a closet adjoining—Your
Oratory, your Library, my Love, when you shall have
furnished it, as you desired you might, by your chosen
collection from Northamptonshire. 
It is a sweet little apartment, my dear grandmamma; 
elegant book-cases, unfurnished. Every other ornament
complete. How had he been at work to oblige
me, by Dr. Bartlett's good offices, while my heart perhaps
was torn, part of the time, with uncertainty! 
The housekeeper, a middle-aged woman, who is
noted, as you have heard her master say, for prudence,
integrity, and obligingness, a gentlewoman (born) 

appearing; Sir Charles presented her to me. Receive,
my Love, a faithful, a discreet gentlewoman,
who will think herself honoured with your commands. 
Mrs. Curzon (to her) you will be happy in
a mistress who is equally beloved and reverenced by
all who have the honour of her countenance, if she
approve of your services, and if you choose to continue
with us. 
I took her hand: I hope Mrs. Curzon, there is no
doubt but you will. You may depend upon everything
that is in my power to make you easy and
happy. 
She looked pleased; but answered only with a respectful
courtesy. 
Sir Charles led the gentlemen out to shew them his
Study. We just looked into a fine suite of rooms on
the same floor, and joined them there. 
We found my uncle and Mr. Deane admiring the
disposition of every-thing, as well as the furniture. 
The glass-cases are neat, and, as Dr. Bartlett told us,
stored with well-chosen books in all sciences. Mr.
Deane praised the globes, the orrery, and the instruments
of all sorts, for geographical, astronomical,
and other scientifical observations. It is ornamented
with pictures, some, as Dr. Bartlett told us, of the
best masters of the Italian and Flemish schools, statues,
bustoes, bronzes: And there also, placed in a distinguished
manner, were the two rich cabinets of medals,
gems, and other curiosities, presented to him
by Lady Olivia. He mentioned what they contained,
and by whom presented; and said, he would
shew us at leisure the contents. They are not mine,
added he. I only give them a place till the generous
owner shall make some worthy man happy. His
they must be. It would be a kind of robbery to take
them from a family, that, for near a century past,
have been collecting them. 
* *

Lucy says, she will be very particular in her Letters. 
This will take up time; especially as Lady G.
and Lady L. must see them in their way to Northhamptonshire; 
tho' they will not detain them. I shall
have an opportunity to send this to London on Monday. 
This makes me intent to snatch every opportunity
of writing. It will otherwise be too long before
you will hear from us by my hand. 
I do not intend to invade this slow girl's province; 
yet I will give you a slight sketch of the house and
apartments, as I go along. 
The situation is delightful. The house is very spacious. 
It is built in the form of an H; both fronts
pretty much alike. The hall, the dining-parlour,
two drawing-rooms, one adjoining to the study, the
other to the dining-parlour (which with the study,
mentioned already, and other rooms, that I shall
leave to Lucy to describe, make the ground-floor)
are handsome, and furnished in an elegant, but not
sumptuous taste; the hangings of some of them beautiful
paper only. There is adjoining to the study, a
room called The Music-parlour, so called in Sir Thomas's
time, and furnished with several fine musical
instruments: Sir Thomas was as great an admirer of
music as his son; and a performer. 
It is no news to you, madam, that Sir Charles
shews a great regard to every thing, place, and disposition,
that was his father's; and not absolutely inconvenient,
and inconsistent with the alterations he has
thought necessary to make: And which Dr. Bartlett
praises highly, and promises to particularize to me. 
We are to be shewn this Music-parlour by-and-by. 
The dining-room is noble and well proportioned:
It goes over the hall and dining-parlour. It is hung
with crimson-damask, adorned with valuable pictures. 
The furniture is rich, but less ornamented than that
of the Lady's drawing-room. 
The best bed chamber adjoining, is hung with 

fine tapestry. The bed is of crimson velvet, lined with
white silk; chairs and curtains of the same. Two
sine pictures drawn by Sir Godsrey, one of Sir Thomas,
the other of Lady Grandison, whole lengths,
took my eye: O with what reverence, that of my
Lady! —Lady L. Lady G. as girls, and Sir Charles
as a boy of about ten years of age, made three other
fine whole lengths. I must contemplate them, when
I have more leisure. 
The suite of rooms on the first floor which we
just stept into, are each denominated from the colour
of the hangings, which are generally of damask. 
Mrs. Curzon tells us, that, on occasion, they
make fifteen beds, within the house, in which the best
Lord in the land need not disdain to repose. —You remember,
madam, that Sir Charles, in his invitation to
the Italian family, tells them, he has room to receive
them. The offices are said to be exceedingly convenient. 
The gardens and lawn seem from the windows
of this spacious house to be as boundless as the mind
of the owner, and as free and open as his countenance. 
* *
[Miss Lucy Selby thus describes the situation of
the house, and the park, gardens, orchard, &c. in
one of her Letters which does not appear.] 
“This large and convenient house is situated in a
spacious park; which has several fine avenues leading
to it. 
“On the north side of the park, flows a winding
stream, that may well be called a river, abounding
with trout and other fish; the current quickened
by a noble cascade, which tumbles down its
foaming waters from a rock, which is continued
to some extent, in a kind of ledge of rock-work
rudely disposed. 
“The park itself is remarkable for its prospects, 

lawns, and rich-appearing clumps of trees of large
growth; which must therefore have been planted
by the ancestors of the excellent owner; who,
contenting himself to open and enlarge many fine
prospects, delights to preserve, as much as possible,
the plantations of his ancestors; and particularly
thinks it a kind of impiety to fell a tree, that was
planted by his father. 
“On the south side of the river, on a natural and
easy ascent, is a neat, but plain villa, in the rustic
taste, erected by Sir Thomas; the flat roof of
which presents a noble prospect. This villa contains
convenient lodging-rooms; and one large
room in which he used sometimes to entertain his
friends. 
“The gardener's house is a pretty little building. 
The man is a sober diligent man, he is in years:
Has a housewifely good creature of a wife. Content
is in the countenances of both: How happy
must they be! 
“The gardens, vineyard, &c. are beautifully laid
out. The orangery is flourishing; every-thing indeed
is, that belongs to Sir Charles Grandison; 
alcoves, little temples, seats, are erected at different
points of view: The orchard, lawns, and
grass-walks, have sheep for gardeners; and the
whole being bounded only by sunk fences, the eye
is carried to views that have no bounds. 
“The orchard, which takes up near three acres of
ground, is planted in a peculiar taste. A neat
stone bridge in the centre of it, is thrown over the
river: It is planted in a natural slope; the higher
fruit-trees, as pears, in a semicircular row, first; 
apples at further distances next; cherries, plumbs,
standard apricots, &c. all which in the season of
blossoming, one row gradually lower than another,
must make a charming variety of blooming sweets
to the eye, from the top of the rustic villa, which
commands the whole. 

“The outside of this orchard, next the north, is
planted with three rows of trees, at proper distances
from each other; one of pines; one of cedars; one
of Scotch firs, in the like semicircular order; which
at the same time that they afford a perpetual verdure
to the eye, and shady walks in the summer,
defend the orchard from the cold and blighting
winds. 
“This plantation was made by direction of Sir
Thomas, in his days of fancy. We have heard
that he had a poetical, and, consequently, a fanciful
taste.” [Thus far from Miss Selby. Lady Grandison
thus proceeds.] 
My uncle, once took my aunt out from the company,
in a kind of hurry. I saw his eyes glisten,
and was curious on her return, to know the occasion. 
This was his speech to her, unable to check
his emotion; What a man is this, dame Selby! We
were surely wanting in respect to him when he was
among us. To send such a one to an inn! —Fie
upon us! —Lord be good unto me! how are things
come about! —Who would have thought it? —Sometimes
I wonder the girl is not as proud as Luciser; 
at other times, that she is able to look him in the
sace! 
To this convenient house belongs an elegant little
chapel, neatly decorated. But Sir Charles, when
down, generally goes to the parish-church, of which
he is patron. 
The gallery I have not yet seen—Dr. Bartlett tells
me, it is adorned with a long line of ancestors. 
* *
After dinner, which was sumptuous and wellordered,
Sir Charles led us into the Music-parlour. 
O madam, you shall hear what honour was done me
there! —I will lead to it. 
Several of the neighbouring gentlemen, he told us,
are performers; and he hopes to engage them as opportunities 

shall offer. My dear Dr. Bartlett, said
he, your soul is harmony: I doubt not but all these
are in order—“May I ask you, my Harriet?” pointing
to the harpsichord. I instantly sat down to it. 
It is a fine instrument. Lord G. took up a violin; 
Lord L. a German flute; Mr. Deane a bass-viol; and
we had a little concert of about half an hour. 
Here is a noble organ: When the little concert was
over, he was so good himself, on my aunt's referring
to him with asking eyes, to shew us it was in tune. 
We all seated ourselves round him, on his preparing
to oblige us; I between my aunt and Lucy; and
he with a voice admirably suited to the instrument
(but the words, if I may be allowed to say so, still
more admirably to the occasion) at once delighted and
surprised us all, by the following Lines: 


I.
Accept, great Source of ev'ry bliss,
 The fulness of my heart,
Pour'd out in tuneful ecstasies,
 By this celestial art.


II.
My soul, with gratitude profound,
 Receive a Form so bright!
And yet, I boast a bliss beyond
 This angel to the sight.


III.
When charms of mind and person meet,
 How rich our raptures rise!
The Fair that renders earth so sweet,
 Prepares me for the skies!


How did our friends look upon one another, as
the excellent man proceeded! —I was astonished. It
was happy I sat between my aunt and Lucy! —They
each took one of my hands. Tears of joy ran down
my cheeks. Every one's eyes congratulated me. 

Every tongue but mine, encored him. I was speechless. 
Again he obliged us. I thought at the time, I
had a foretaste of the joys of heaven! —How sweet
the incense of praise from a husband! That husband
a good man! —My surrounding friends enjoying it! 
—How will you, madam, rejoice in such an instance
of a Love so pure, and so grateful! Long, long
may it be, for the sake of his Harriet, his and her
friends, for the world's sake, before his native skies
reclaim him! 
He approached me with tender modesty; as if
abashed by the applause he met with. But seeing me
affected, he was concerned. I withdrew with my
aunt and Lucy. He followed me. I then threw
myself at his feet; embraced his knees; and had speech
been lent me, would have offered him the fervent
vows of a heart overflowing with Love and Gratitude. 

