



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

At Mrs. Sinclair's, Monday Afternoon. 
All's right, as heart can wish! —In spite of all
objection—in spite of a reluctance next to fainting
—In spite of all her foresight, vigilance, suspicion,
once more is the charmer of my soul in her new
lodgings! 
Now throbs away every pulse! Now thump,
thump, thumps my bounding heart for something! 
But I have not time for the particulars of our management. 
My Beloved is now directing some of her cloaths
to be packed up—Never more to enter this house! 
Nor ever more will she, I dare say, when once again
out of it! 
Yet not so much as a condition of forgiveness! — 
The Harlowe-spirited Fair-one will not deserve my
mercy! —She will wait for Miss Howe's next letter; 
and then, if she find a difficulty in her new schemes
[Thank her for nothing]—will—Will what? — 
Why Even then will take time to consider, whether
I am to be forgiven, or for ever rejected. An indifference
that revives in my heart the remembrance of
a thousand of the like nature. —And yet Lady Betty
and Miss Montague [One would be tempted to think,
Jack, that they wish her to provoke my vengeance]
declare, that I ought to be satisfied with such a proud
suspension! 
They are intirely attached to her. Whatever she
says is, must be, gospel! —They are guarantees for
her return to Hamstead this night. They are to go
back with her. A supper bespoke by Lady Betty at
Mrs. Moore's. All the vacant apartments there, by
my permission (for I had engaged them for a month
certain), to be filled with them and their attendants, 

for a week at least, or till they can prevail upon the
dear Perverse, as they hope they shall, to restore me
to her favour, and to accompany Lady Betty to Oxfordshire. 
The dear creature has thus far condescended— 
That she will write to Miss Howe, and acquaint her
with the present situation of things. 
If she write, I shall see what she writes. But I
believe she will have other employment soon. 
Lady Betty is sure, she tells her, that she shall
prevail upon her to forgive me; tho' she dares say,
that I deserve not forgiveness. Lady Betty is too delicate
to inquire strictly into the nature of my offence. 
But it must be an offence against herself, against
Miss Montague, against the virtuous of the whole
Sex, or it could not be so highly resented. Yet she
will not leave her till she forgive me, and till she see
our nuptials privately celebrated. Mean time, as
she approves of her uncle's expedient, she will address
her as already my wife, before strangers. 
Stedman her solicitor may attend her for orders,
in relation to her Chancery-affair, at Hamstead. Not
one hour they can be favoured with, will they lose
from the company and conversation of so dear, so
charming a new relation. 
Hard then if she had not obliged them with her
company, in their coach-and-four, to and from their
cousin Leeson's, who longed (as they themselves had
done) to see a lady so justly celebrated! 
‘How will Lord M. be raptured when he sees her,
and can salute her as his niece! 
‘How will Lady Sarah bless herself! —She will
now think her loss of the dear daughter she mourns
for, happily supplied!’ 
Miss Montague dwells upon every word that falls
from her lips. She perfectly adores her new cousin: 
‘For her cousin she must be. And her cousin will
she call her! She answers for equal admiration in her
sister Patty.’ 

‘Ay, cry I (whispering loud enough for her to
hear), how will my cousin Patty's dove's eyes glisten,
and run over, on the very first interview! —So
gracious, so noble, so unaffected a dear creature!’ 
“What a happy family,” chorus we all, “will
ours be!” 
These, and such-like congratulatory admirations,
every hour repeated: Her modesty hurt by the ecstatic
praises: —‘Her graces are too natural to herself,
for her to be proud of them: —But she must be
content to be punished for excellencies that cast a
shade upon the most excellent!’ 
In short, we are here, as at Hamstead, all joy and
rapture: All of us, except my beloved, in whose
sweet face [her almost fainting reluctance to re-enter
these doors not overcome] reigns a kind of anxious
serenity! —But how will even that be changed in a
few hours! 
Methinks I begin to pity the half-apprehensive
Beauty! —But avaunt, thou unseasonably-intruding
pity! Thou hast more than once, already, well nigh
undone me! —And, Adieu reflection! Begone consideration!
and commiseration! I dismiss ye all, for,
at least, a week to come! —Be remembred her broken
word! Her flight, when my fond soul was meditating
mercy to her! —Be remembred her treatment
of me, in her letter on her escape to Hamstead! — 
Her Hamstead virulence! —What is it she ought not
to expect from an unchained Beelzebub, and a plotting
villain? 
Be her preference of the single life to me, also remembred! 
—That she despises me! —That she even
refuses to be my WIFE! —A proud Lovelace to be
denied a Wife! —To be more proudly rejected by
a daughter of the Harlowes! —The ladies of my own
family [She thinks them the ladies of my family] supplicating
in vain for her returning favour to their despised
kinsman, and taking laws from her still prouder
punctilio! 

Be the execrations of her vixen friend likewise remembred,
poured out upon me from her representations,
and thereby made her own execrations! 
Be remembred still more particularly, the Townsend
plot, set on foot between them, and now, in a
day or two, ready to break out; and the sordid threatenings
thrown out against me by that little fury. 
Is not this the crisis for which I have been long
waiting? Shall Tomlinson, shall these women, be
engaged; shall so many engines be set at work, at
an immense expence, with infinite contrivance; and
all to no purpose? 
Is not this the hour of her trial—And in her, of
the trial of the virtue of her whole Sex, so long premeditated,
so long threatened? —Whether her frost
is frost indeed? Whether her virtue is principle? 
Whether, if once subdued, she will not be always subdued? 
And will she not want the very crown of her
glory, the proof of her till now all-surpassing excellence,
if I stop short of the ultimate trial? 
Now is the end of purposes long over-awed, often
suspended, at hand. And need I to throw the sins
of her cursed family into the too weighty scale? 
Abhorred be force! —Be the thoughts of force! There's
no triumph over the will in force! This I know I have
said (a) . But would I not have avoided it, if I
could? —Have I not try'd every other method? And
have I any other recourse left me? Can she resent
the last outrage more than she has resented a fainter
effort? —And if her resentments run ever so high,
cannot I repair by matrimony? —She will not refuse
me, I know, Jack; the haughty Beauty will not refuse
me, when her pride of being corporally inviolate
is brought down; when she can tell no tales,
but when (be her resistance what it will) even her
own sex will suspect a yielding in resistance; and 

when that modesty, which may fill her bosom with
resentment, will lock up her speech. 
But how know I, that I have not made my own
difficulties? —Is she not a woman? —What redress
lies for a perpetrated evil? —Must she not live? — 
Her piety will secure her life. —And will not time
be my friend? —What, in a word, will be her behaviour
afterwards? —She cannot fly me! —She must
forgive me—And, as I have often said, once forgiven,
will be for ever forgiven. 
Why then should this enervating pity unsteel my
foolish heart?— 
It shall not. All these things will I remember; 
and think of nothing else, in order to keep up a resolution,
which the women about me will have it I
shall be still unable to hold. 
I'll teach the dear charming creature to emulate
me in contrivance! —I'll teach her to weave webs
and plots against her conqueror! —I'll shew her, that
in her smuggling schemes she is but a spider compared
to me, and that she has all this time been spinning
only a cobweb! 
* *
What shall we do now! —We are immersed in
the depth of grief and apprehension! —How ill do
women bear disappointment! —Set upon going to
Hamstead, and upon quitting for ever a house she
re-enter'd with infinite reluctance; what things she
intended to take with her, ready pack'd up; herself
on tip-toe to be gone; and I prepared to attend her
thither; she begins to be afraid, that she shall not go
this night; and, in grief and despair, has flung herself
into her old apartment; lock'd herself in; and,
thro' the key-hole, Dorcas sees her on her knees— 
praying, I suppose, for a safe deliverance. 
And from what? —And wherefore these agonizing
apprehensions? 
Why, here, this unkind Lady Betty, with the 

dear creature's knowlege, tho' to her concern, and
this mad-headed cousin Montague without it, while
she was employ'd in directing her package, have hurried
away in the coach to their own lodgings—Only,
indeed, to put up some night-cloaths, and so forth,
in order to attend their sweet cousin to Hamstead; 
and, no less to my surprize than hers, are not yet
returned. 
I have sent to know the meaning of it. 
In a great hurry of spirits, she would have had me
gone myself. Hardly any pacifying her! —The girl! 
God bless her! is wild with her own idle apprehensions! 
—What is she afraid of? 
I curse them both for their delay—My tardy villain,
how he stays! —Devil fetch them! Let them
send their coach, and we'll go without them. In
her hearing, I bid the fellow tell them so. —Perhaps
he stays to bring the coach, if any thing happens to
hinder the ladies from attending my Beloved this night. 
* *
Devil take them, again say I! —They promised
too, they would not stay, because it was but two
nights ago, that a chariot was robb'd at the foot of
Hamstead hill; which alarmed my fair-one, when
told of it! 
Oh! here's my aunt's servant, with a billet. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Monday Night. 
Excuse us, dear nephew, I beseech you, to my
dearest kinswoman. One night cannot break
squares. For here Miss Montague has been taken
violently ill with three fainting fits, one after another. 
The hurry of her joy, I believe, to find your
dear lady so much surpass all expectation (Never did
family-love, you know, reign so strong, as among us),
and the too eager desire she had to attend her, have 

occasioned it: For she has but weak spirits, poor
girl! well as she looks. 
If she be better, we will certainly go with you tomorrow
morning, after we have breakfasted with her,
at your lodgings. But, whether she be, or not, I
will do myself the pleasure to attend your lady to
Hamstead; and will be with you, for that purpose,
about nine in the morning. With due compliments
to your most worthily beloved, I am 
Yours affectionately,
Elizab. Lawrance. 
Faith and troth, Jack, I know not what to do
with myself: For here, just now, having sent in the
above note by Dorcas, out came my beloved with it
in her hand: In a fit of phrensy! —True, by my
soul! 
She had indeed complained of her head all the
evening. 
Dorcas ran to me, out of breath, to tell me, that
her lady was coming in some strange way: But she
followed her so quick, that the frighted wench had
not time to say in what way. 
It seems, when she read the billet—Now indeed,
said she, am I a lost creature! O the poor Clarissa
Harlowe! 
She tore off her head-cloaths; inquired where I
was: And in she came, her shining tresses flowing
about her neck; her ruffles torn, and hanging in
tatters about her snowy hands; with her arms spread
out; her eyes wildly turned, as if starting from their
orbits—Down sunk she at my feet, as soon as she
approached me; her charming bosom heaving to her
uplifted face; and, clasping her arms about my
knees, Dear Lovelace, said she, if ever—if ever—if
ever—And, unable to speak another word, quitting
her clasping hold, down prostrate on the floor sunk
she, neither in a fit nor out of one. 

I was quite astonished. —All my purposes suspended
for a few moments, I knew neither what to
say, nor what to do. But, recollecting myself, Am
I again, thought I, in a way to be overcome, and
made a fool of! —If I now recede, I am gone for
ever. 
I raised her: But down she sunk, as if quite disjointed; 
her limbs failing her—yet not in a fit neither. 
I never heard of, or saw, such a dear unaccountable: 
Almost lifeless, and speechless too for
a few moments! —What must her apprehensions
be at that moment! And for what? —An high-notioned
dear soul! —Pretty ignorance! thought I. 
Never having met with a repugnance so greatly
repugnant, I was stagger'd—I was confounded— 
Yet how should I know that it would be so till I
try'd? —And how, having proceeded thus far, could
I stop, were I not to have had the women to goad
me on, and to make light of circumstances, which
they pretended to be better judges of than me. 
I lifted her, however, into a chair; and, in words
of disordered passion, told her, All her fears were
needless: Wondered at them: Begg'd of her to be
pacified: Besought her reliance on my faith and honour: 
And re-vowed all my old vows, and poured
forth new ones. 
At last, with an heart-breaking sob, I see, I see,
Mr. Lovelace, in broken sentences she spoke—I see,
I see—that at last—at last—I am ruined! —Ruined— 
If your pity—Let me implore your pity! —And down
on her bosom, like a half-broken-stalk'd lily, top-heavy
with the overcharging dews of the morning, sunk
her head, with a sigh that went to my heart. 
All I could think of to re-assure her, when a little
recovered, I said. 
Why did I not send for their coach, as I had intimated? 
It might return in the morning for the ladies. 
I had actually done so, I told her, on seeing her 

strange uneasiness. But it was then gone to fetch a
doctor for Miss Montague, lest his chariot should
not be so ready. 
Ah! Lovelace! said she, with a doubting face; 
anguish in her imploring eye. 
Lady Betty would think it very strange, I told
her, if she were to know it was so disagreeable to
her to stay one night, for her company, in a house
where she had passed so many! 
She called me names upon this. —She had called
me names before. —I was patient. 
Let her go to Lady Betty's lodgings, then; directly
go; if the person I called Lady Betty was
really Lady Betty. 
If! my dear! Good Heaven! What a villain does
that IF shew you believe me to be! 
I cannot help it—I beseech you once more, Let
me go to Mrs. Leeson's, if that IF ought not to be
said. 
Then assuming a more resolute spirit—I will go! 
I will inquire my way! —I will go by myself! —And
would have rushed by me. 
I folded my arms about her to detain her; pleading
the bad way I heard poor Charlotte was in; and
what a farther concern her impatience, if she went,
would give her. 
She would believe nothing I said, unless I would
instantly order a coach (since she was not to have
Lady Betty's, nor was permitted to go to Mrs. Leeson's),
and let her go in it to Hamstead, late as it
was; and all alone; so much the better: For in the
house of people, of whom Lady Betty, upon inquiry,
had heard a bad character [Dropt foolishly This, by
my prating new relation, in order to do credit to herself,
by depreciating others]; every thing, and every
face, looking with so much meaning vileness, as well
as my own [Thou art still too sensible, thought I, my 

charmer!], she was resolved not to stay another
night. 
Dreading what might happen as to her intellects,
and being very apprehensive, that she might possibly
go thro' a great deal before morning (tho' more
violent she could not well be with the worst she
dreaded), I humoured her, and ordered Will. to go
and endeavour to get a coach directly, to carry us
to Hamstead; I cared not at what price. 
Robbers, whom I would have terrify'd her with,
she feared not—I was all her fear, I found; and this
house her terror: For I saw plainly, that she now
believed, that Lady Betty and Miss Montague were
both impostors. 
But her mistrust is a little of the latest to do her
service. 
And, O Jack, the rage of Love, the rage of Revenge
is upon me! By turns they tear me! —The
progress already made! —The womens instigations! — 
The power I shall have to try her to the utmost, and
still to marry her, if she be not to be brought to cohabitation! 
—Let me perish, Belford, if she escape me
now! 
* *
Will. is not yet come back. —Near eleven.— 
* *
Will. is this moment returned. —No coach to be
got, for love or money. 
Once more, she urges—To Mrs. Leeson's let me
go! —Lovelace! Good Lovelace! Let me go to Mrs.
Leeson's! —What is Miss Montague's illness to my
terror? —For the Almighty's sake, Mr. Lovelace!— 
her hands clasped— 
O my angel! What a wildness is this! —Do you
know, do you see, my dearest life, what an appearance
your causeless apprehensions have given you? — 
Do you know it is past eleven o'clock? 
Twelve, one, two, three, four—any hour—I 

care not—If you mean me honourably, let me go
out of this hated house! 
Thou'lt observe, Belford, that tho' this was written
afterwards, yet (as in other places) I write it as
it was spoken, and happened; as if I had retired to
put down every sentence as spoken. I know thou
likest this lively present-tense manner, as it is one of
my peculiars. 
Just as she had repeated the last words, If you
mean me honourably, let me go out of this hated house, in
came Mrs. Sinclair, in a great ferment. —And what,
pray, Madam, has this house done to you? —Mr.
Lovelace, you have known me some time; and, if
I have not the niceness of this lady, I hope I do not
deserve to be treated thus! 
She set her huge arms a-kembo: Hoh! Madam,
let me tell you, I am amazed at your freedoms with
my character! And, Mr. Lovelace (holding up, and
violently shaking, her head), if you are a gentleman,
and a man of honour— 
Having never before seen any thing but obsequiousness
in this woman, little as she liked her, she was
frighted at her masculine air, and fierce look—God
help me! cry'd she. What will become of me now! 
Then, turning her head hither and thither, in a wild
kind of amaze, Whom have I for a protector! What
will become of me now! 
I will be your protector, my dearest love! —But
indeed you are uncharitably severe upon poor Mrs.
Sinclair! Indeed you are! —She is a gentlewoman
born, and the relict of a man of honour; and tho'
left in such circumstances as oblige her to let lodgings,
yet would she scorn to be guilty of a wilful
baseness. 
I hope so—it may be so—I may be mistaken— 
But—But there is no crime, I presume, no treason,
to say I don't like her house. 
The old dragon straddled up to her, with her arms 

kembo'd again—Her eye-brows erect, like the bristles
upon a hog's back, and, scouling over her shortened
nose, more than half-hid her ferret eyes. Her
mouth was distorted. She pouted out her blubber-lips,
as if to bellows up wind and sputter into her
horse-nostrils; and her chin was curdled, and more
than usually prominent with passion. 
With two Hoh-Madams she accosted the frighted
fair-one; who, terrified, caught hold of my sleeve. 
I feared she would fall into fits; and, with a look
of indignation, told Mrs. Sinclair, that these apartments
were mine; and I could not imagine what
she meant, either by listening to what passed between
me and my spouse, or to come in, uninvited; much
less to give herself these violent airs. 
I may be to blame, Jack, for suffering this wretch
to give herself these airs: but her coming in was
without my orders. 
The old Beldam, throwing herself into a chair,
fell a blubbering and exclaiming. And the pacifying
of her, and endeavouring to reconcile the lady to
her, took up till near one a clock. 
And thus, between terror, and the late hour, and
what followed, she was diverted from the thoughts
of getting out of the house to Mrs. Leeson's, or anywhere
else. 