



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Uxbridge, Sept. 1. Twelve o'clock at Night. 
I send you the papers with this. You must account
to me honestly and fairly when I see you for the
earnestness with which you write for them. And
then also will we talk about the contents of your last
dispatch, and about some of your severe and unfriendly
reflections. 
Mean time, whatever thou dost, don't let the
wonderful creature leave us! Set before her the sin
of her preparation, as if she thought she could depart 

when she pleased. She'll persuade herself, at this
rate, that she has nothing to do, when all is ready,
but to lie down, and go to sleep: And such a lively
fancy as hers will make a reality of a jest at any
time. 
A jest, I call all that has passed between her and
me; a mere jest to die for—For has not her Triumph
over me, from first to last, been infinitely greater
than her Sufferings from me? 
Would the sacred regard I have for her purity, even
for her personal as well as intellectual purity, permit,
I could prove this as clear as the Sun. Tell therefore
the dear creature, that she must not be wicked in
her piety. There is a too much, as well as a too little,
even in righteousness. Perhaps she does not think
of that. —O that she would have permitted my attendance,
as obligingly as she does of thine! —The
dear Soul used to love Humour. I remember the
time that she knew how to smile at a piece of à propos
Humour. And, let me tell thee, a smile upon
the Lips, or a sparkling in the Eye, must have had
its correspondent chearfulness in a Heart so sincere as
hers. 
Tell the Doctor, I will make over all my Possessions,
and all my Reversions, to him, if he will but
prolong her life for one twelvemonth to come. But
for one twelvemonth, Jack! —He will lose all his
reputation with me, and I shall treat him as Belton
did his Doctor, if he cannot do this for me, on so
young a subject. But Nineteen, Belford! —Nineteen
cannot so soon die of grief, if the Doctor deserve
that name; and so blooming and so fine a constitution
as she had but three or four months ago! 
But what need the Doctor to ask her leave to write
to her friends? Could he not have done it, without
letting her know any-thing of the matter? That was
one of the likeliest means that could be thought of,
to bring some of them about her, since she is so desirous 

to see them. At least, it would have induced
them to send up her favourite Norton. But these
plaguy solemn fellows are great traders in parade. 
They'll cram down your throat their poisonous drugs
by wholesale, without asking you a question; and
have the assurance to own it to be prescribing: But,
when they are to do good, they are to require your
consent. 
How the dear creature's character rises in every
line of thy Letters! But it is owing to the uncommon
occasions she has met with that she blazes out upon
us with such a meridian lustre. How, but for those
occasions, could her noble sentiments, her prudent
consideration, her forgiving spirit, her exalted benevolence,
and her equanimity in view of the most
shocking prospects (which set her in a light so superior
to all her Sex, and even to the philosophers of antiquity)
have been manifested? 
I know thou wilt think I am going to claim some
merit to myself, for having given her such opportunities
of signalizing her virtues. But I am not; for,
if I did, I must share that merit with her implacable
relations, who would justly be entitled to two thirds
of it, at least: And my soul disdains a partnership in
any-thing with such a family. 
But this I mention as an answer to thy reproaches,
that I could be so little edified by perfections, to
which, thou supposest, I was for so long together
daily and hourly a personal witness—When, admirable
as she was in all she said, and in all she did, occasion
had not at that time ripened, and called forth,
those amazing perfections which now astonish and
confound me. 
Hence it is, that I admire her more than ever; 
and that my Love for her is less personal, as I may
say, more intellectual, than ever I thought it could be
to woman. 
Hence also it is, that I am confident (would it 

please the Fates to spare her, and make her mine) I
could love her with a purity that would draw on my
own FUTURE, as well as ensure her TEMPORAL
happiness. —And hence, by necessary consequence,
shall I be the most miserable of all men, if I am deprived
of her. 
Thou severely reflectest upon me for my levity: 
The Abbey instance in thine eye, I suppose. And I
will be ingenuous enough to own, that as thou seest
not my heart, there may be passages in every one of
my Letters, which (the melancholy occasion considered)
deserve thy most pointed rebukes. But, faith,
Jack, thou art such a tragi-comical mortal, with thy
leaden aspirations at one time, and thy flying hour-glasses
and dreaming terrors at another, that, as
Prior says, What serious is, thou turn'st to farce; 
and it is impossible to keep within the bounds of decorum
or gravity, when one reads what thou writest. 
But to restrain myself (for my constitutional gaiety
was ready to run away with me again) I will repeat,
I must ever repeat, that I am most egregiously affected
with the circumstances of the case: And, were
this Paragon actually to quit the world, should never
enjoy myself one hour together, tho' I were to live
to the age of Methusalem. 
Indeed it is to this deep Concern, that my Levity is
owing: For I struggle and struggle, and try to buffet
down my cruel reflections as they rise; and when I
cannot, I am forced, as I have often said, to try to
make myself laugh, that I may not cry; for one or
other I must do: And is it not philosophy carried to
the highest pitch, for a man to conquer such tumults
of soul as I am sometimes agitated by, and, in the
very height of the storm, to be able to quaver out
an horse-laugh? 
Your Seneca's, your Epictetus's, and the rest of
your Stoical tribe, with all their Apathy-nonsense,
could not come up to this. They could forbear wry 

faces: Bodily pains they could well enough seem to
support; and that was all: But the pangs of their
own smitten-down Souls they could not laugh over,
tho' they could at the follies of others. They re'd
grave lectures; but they were grave. This high
point of philosophy, to laugh and be merry in the
midst of the most soul-harrowing woes, when the
heart-strings are just bursting asunder, was reserved
for thy Lovelace. 
There is something owing to Constitution, I own; 
and that this is the laughing-time of my life. For
what a woe must that be, which for an hour together
can mortify a man of Six or Seven-and-twenty,
in high blood and spirits, of a naturally gay disposition,
who can sing, dance, and scribble, and take and
give delight in them all? —But then my grief, as my
joy, is sharper-pointed than most other mens; and,
like what Dolly Welby once told me, describing the
parturient throes, if there were not lucid intervals,
if they did not come and go, there would be no
bearing them. 
* *
After all, as I am so little distant from the dear
creature, and as she is so very ill, I think I cannot
excuse myself from making her one visit. Nevertheless,
if I thought her so near—[What word shall I
use, that my soul is not shocked at!] and that she
would be too much discomposed by a visit; I would not
think of it. —Yet how can I bear the recollection,
that, when she last went from me (her innocence so
triumphant over my premeditated guilt, as was
enough to reconcile her to life, and to set her above
the sense of injuries so nobly sustained, that) she
should then depart with an incurable fracture in her
heart; and that that should be the last time I should
ever see her! —How, how, can I bear this reflection! 
O Jack! how my Conscience, that gives edge 

even to thy blunt reflections, tears me! —Even this
moment would I give the world to push the cruel
reproacher from me by one ray of my usual gaiety! — 
Sick of myself! —Sick of the remembrance of my vile
plots; and of my light, my momentary ecstasy [Villainous
burglar, felon, thief, that I was!] which has
brought upon me such durable and such heavy remorse!
what would I give that I had not been guilty
of such barbarous and ungrateful perfidy to the most
excellent of God's creatures! 
I would end, methinks, with one sprightlier line! 
—But it will not be. —Let me tell thee then, and
rejoice at it if thou wilt, that I am 
Inexpressibly miserable! 