



To James Harlowe jun. Esq; 

Sir,
There was but one time, but one occasion,
after the rash step I was precipitated upon, that I
could hope to be excused looking up to you in the character
of a Brother and a Friend. And NOW is
that time, and THIS the occasion. Now, at reading
This, will you pity your late unhappy Sister! 
NOW will you forgive her faults, both supposed and
real! And NOW will you afford to her memory that
kind concern which you refused to her before! 
I write, my Brother, in the first place, to beg your
pardon for the offence my unhappy step gave to you
and to the rest of a family so dear to me. 
Virgin purity should not so behave as to be suspected: 
Yet, when you come to know all my Story, you
will find further room for pity, if not for more than
pity, for your late unhappy Sister! 
O that passion had not been deaf! That misconception
would have given way to enquiry! That your
rigorous heart, if it could not itself be softened (moderating
the power you had obtained over every one)
had permitted other hearts more indulgently to expand! 
But I write not to give pain. I had rather you
should think me faulty still, than take to yourself the
consequence that will follow from acquitting me. 
Abandoning therefore a subject which I had not intended
to touch upon (for I hope, at the writing of
this, I am above the spirit of recrimination) let me
tell you, Sir, that my next motive for writing to you
in this last and most solemn manner, is, To beg of
you to forego any active resentments (which may endanger
a life so precious to all your friends) against the
man to whose elaborate baseness I owe my worldly
ruin. 

For, ought an innocent man to run an equal risque
with a guilty one? —A more than equal risque, as the
guilty one has been long enured to acts of violence,
and is skilled in the arts of offence? 
You would not arrogate to yourself God's province,
who has said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. 
If you would, I tremble for the consequence: For
will it not be suitable to the Divine Justice to punish
the presumptuous Innocent (as you would be in this case)
in the very error, and that by the hand of the Self-defending
Guilty—Reserving him for a future day of
vengeance for his accumulated crimes? 
Leave then the poor wretch to the Divine Justice. 
Let your Sister's fault die with her. At least, let it
not be revived in blood. Life is a short stage where
longest. A little time hence, the now green head will
be grey, if it lives this little time: And if Heaven will
afford him time for repentance, why should not you? 
Then think, my Brother, what will be the consequence
to your dear Parents, if the guilty wretch who
has occasioned to them the loss of a Daughter, should
likewise deprive them of their best hope, an only Son,
more worth in the family—account than several Daughters? 
Would you add, my Brother, to those distresses
which you hold your Sister so inexcuseable for having
(altho' from involuntary and undesigned causes) given? 
Seek not then, I beseech you, to extend the evil
consequences of your Sister's error. His Conscience,
when it shall please God to touch it, will be sharper
than your Sword. 
I have still another motive for writing to you in this
solemn manner: It is, to entreat you to watch over
your passions. The principal fault I know you to be
guilty of, is, the violence of your temper when you
think yourself in the right; which you would oftener
be, but for that very violence. 
You have several times brought your life into danger
by it. 

Is not the man guilty of a high degree of injustice,
who is more apt to give contradiction, than able to bear
it? How often, with you, has impetuosity brought
on abasement? A consequence too natural. 
Let me then caution you, dear Sir, against a warmth
of temper, an impetuosity when moved, and you so
ready to be moved, that may hurry you into unforeseen
difficulties; and which it is in some measure a sin
not to endeavour to restrain. God enable you to do
it for the sake of your own peace and safety, as well
present as future! and for the sake of your family and
friends, who all see your fault, but are tender of speaking
to you of it! 
As for me, my Brother, my punishment has been
seasonable. God gave me grace to make a right use
of my sufferings. I early repented. I never loved the
man half so much as I hated his actions, when I saw
what he was capable of. I gave up my whole heart
to a better hope. God blessed my penitence and my
reliance upon Him. And now I presume to say, I
AM HAPPY. 
May Heaven preserve you in safety, health, and honour,
and long continue your life for a comfort and
stay to your honoured Parents! And may you in the
change of your Single State, meet with a wife as agreeable
to every one else as to yourself, and be happy in a
hopeful race, and not have one Clarissa among them,
to embitter your comforts when she should give you
most comfort! But may my example be of use to warn
the dear creatures whom once I hoped to live to see,
and to cherish, of the evils with which this deceitful
world abounds! are the prayers of 
Your affectionate Sister,
Clarissa Harlowe. 