


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Tuesday, May 16–27.
I Had a very restless night; and found myself so
much indisposed in the morning, with a feverish
disorder, that I thought of contenting myself with sending
to know how the brother and sister rested, and
of staying within, at least till the afternoon, to give
my hurried spirits some little repose: But my messenger
returned with a request from the Marchioness,
to see me presently. 
I obeyed. Clementina had asked, Whether she
had really seen me, or had only dreamed so. They
took this for a favourable indication; and therefore
sent the above request. 
I met the General in Jeronymo's apartment. He
took notice that I was not very well. Mr. Lowther
proposed to bleed me. I consented. I afterwards
saw my friend's wounds dressed. The three surgeons
pronounced appearances not to be unfavourable. 
We all then retired into Mr. Lowther's apartment. 
The Bishop introduced to us two of the faculty. 
The prescriptions of the English physicians were considered; 
and some of the methods approved, and agreed
to be pursued. 
Clementina, when I came, was retired to her own
apartment with Camilla. Her terrors on Laurana's
cruelty had again got possession of her imagination; 
and they thought it not adviseable that I should be
admitted into her presence, till the hurries she was in,
on that account, had subsided. 
But by this time, being a little more composed, her
mother led her into her dressing-room. The General,
and his Lady, were both present; and, by their
desire, I was asked to walk in. 

Clementina, when I entered, was sitting close to
Camilla; her head leaning on her bosom, silent, and,
seemingly, thoughtful. I bowed to her, to the two
Marchionesses, to the General. She raised her head,
and looked towards me; and, clasping her arms about
Camilla's neck, hid her face in her bosom for a few
moments; then, looking as bashful towards me, she
loosed her hands, stood up, and looked steadily at me,
and at Camilla, by turns, several times, as irresolute. 
At last, quitting Camilla, she moved towards me with a
stealing pace; but when near me, turning short, hurried
to her mother; and putting one arm about her
neck, the other held up, she looked at me, as if she were
doubtful whom she saw. She seemed to whisper to her
mother, but not to be understood. She went then by
her sister-in-law, who took her hand as she passed
her, with both hers, and kissed it; and coming to the
General, who sat still nearer me, and who had desired
me to attend to her motions, she stood by him, and
looked at me with a sweet irresolution. 
As she had stolen such advances towards me, I could
no longer restrain myself. I arose, and, taking her
hand, Behold the man, said I, with a bent knee, whom
once you honour'd with the name of tutor, your English
tutor! —Know you not the grateful Grandison,
whom all your family have honoured with their regard? 
O yes!—Yes,—I think I do. —They rejoiced to
hear her speak. —But where have you been all this
time? 
In England, madam—But returned, lately returned,
to visit you and your Jeronymo. 
Jeronymo! one hand held up; the other not withdrawn. 
Poor Jeronymo! 
God be praised! said the General: Some faint hopes. 
The two Marchionesses wept for joy. 
Your Jeronymo, madam, and my Jeronymo, is,
we hope, in a happy way. Do you love Jeronymo? 
Do I! —But what of Jeronymo? I don't understand
you. 

Jeronymo, now you are well, will be happy. 
Am I well? Ah, Sir! —But save me, save me,
Chevalier!—faintly screaming, and looking about her,
with a countenance of woe and terror. 
I will save you, madam. The General will also
protect you. Of whom are you afraid? 
O the cruel, cruel Laurana! —She withdrew her
hand in a hurry, and lifted up the sleeve of the other
arm—You shall see—O I have been cruelly used— 
But you will protect me. Forbearing to shew her
arm, as she seemed to intend. 
Laurana shall never more come near you. 
But don't hurt her! —Come, sit down by me, and
I will tell you all I have suffered. 
She hurried to her former seat; and sat down by
her weeping Camilla. I followed her. She motioned
to me to sit down by her. 
Why, you must know, Chevalier—She paused— 
Ah my head! putting her hand to it—Well, but,
now you must leave me. Something is wrong—Leave
me—I don't know myself— 
Then looking with a face of averted terror at me— 
You are not the same man I talked to just now! — 
Who are you, Sir? —She again faintly shrieked, and
threw her arms about Camilla's neck, once more hiding
her face in her bosom. 
I could not bear this. Not very well before, it was
too much for me. I withdrew. 
Don't withdraw, Chevalier, said the General, drying
his eyes. 
I withdrew, however, to Mr. Lowther's chamber. 
He not being there, I shut the door upon myself— 
So oppressed! my dear Dr. Bartlett, I was greatly
oppressed. 
Recovering myself in a few moments, I went to
Jeronymo. I had but just entered his chamber, when
the General, who seemed unable to speak, took my
hand, and in silence led me to his mother's dressing-room. 
As we entered it, She enquires after you, 

Chevalier, said he, and laments your departure. She
thinks she has offended you. Thank God, she has
recollection! 
When I went in, she was in her mother's arms; 
her mother soothing her, and weeping over her. 
See, see, my child, the Chevalier! you have not
offended him. 
She quitted her mother's arms. I approached her. 
I thought it was not you that sat by me, a while ago. 
But when you went away from me, I saw it could be
nobody but you. Why did you go away? Was you
angry? 
I could not be angry, madam. You bid me leave
you: And I obeyed. 
Well, but now what shall I say to him, madam? 
I don't know what I would say. You, madam,
stepping with a hasty motion towards her sister-in-law,
will not tell Laurana any-thing against me? 
Unhappy hour, said her mother, speaking to the
General, that I ever yielded to her going to the cruel
Laurana! 
The Marchioness took her hand; I hate Laurana,
my dear; I love nobody but you. 
Don't hate her, however—Chevalier, whisperingly,
Who is this Lady? 
The General rejoiced at the question; for this was
the first time she had ever taken any particular notice
of his Lady, or enquired who she was, notwithstanding
her generous tenderness to her. 
That Lady is your sister, your brother Signor Giacomo's
wife— 
My sister! how can that be? —Where has she been
all this time? 
Your sister by marriage: Your elder brother's wife. 
I don't understand it. But why, madam, did you
not tell me so before? I wish you happy. Laurana
would not let me be her cousin. Will you own me? 
The young Marchioness clasped her arms about her. 
My sister, my friend, my dear Clementina! Call
me your sister, and I shall be happy! 

What strange things have come to pass? 
How did these dawnings of reason rejoice every
one! 
Sir, turning to the General, let me speak with
you. 
She led him by the hand to the other end of the
room—Let nobody hear us, said she: Yet spoke not
low. What had I to say? —I had something to say to
you very earnestly. I don't know what— 
Well, don't puzzle yourself, my dear, to recollect
it, said the General. Your new sister loves you. She
is the best of women. She is the joy of my life. 
Love your new sister, my Clementina. 
So I will. Don't I love every-body? 
But you must love her better than any other woman,
the best of mothers excepted. She is my wife, and
your sister; and she loves both you, and our dear Jeronymo. 
And no-body else? Does she love no-body else? 
Whom else would you have her love? 
I don't know. But every-body, I think; for I do. 
Whomever you love, she will love. She is all
goodness. 
Why that's well. I will love her, now I know
who she is. But, Sir, I have some notion— 
Of what, my dear? 
I don't know. But pray, Sir, What brings the
Chevalier over hither again? 
To comfort you, your father, mother, Jeronymo:
To comfort us all. To make us all well, and
happy in each other. 
Why that's very good. Don't you think so? But
he was always good. Are you, brother, happy? 
I am, and should be more so, if you and Jeronymo
were. 
But that can never, never be. 
God forbid! my sister. The Chevalier has brought
over with him a skilful man, who hopes to cure our
Jeronymo— 

Has the Chevalier done this? Why did he not do
so before? 
The General was a little disconcerted; but generously
said, We were wrong; we took not right methods. 
I, for my part, wish we had followed his
advice in every-thing. 
Bless me!—holding up one hand. How came all
these things about! Sir, Sir, with quickness—I will
come again presently—And was making to the door. 
Camilla stept to her—Whither, whither, my dear
young Lady?—O! Camilla will do as well—Camilla,
laying her hand upon her shoulder, go to
Father Marescotti—Tell him—There she stopt:
Then proceeding, Tell him, I have seen a vision— 
He shall pray for us all. 
Then stepping to her mother, and taking her passive
hand, she kissed it, and stroked her own forehead
and cheek with it—Love me, madam, love your
child. You don't know, neither do I, what ails my
poor head. Heal it! Heal it! with your gentle
hand! Again stroking her forehead with it; then
putting it to her heart. 
The Marchioness, kissing her forehead, made her
face wet with her tears. 
Shall I, said Camilla, go to Father Marescotti? 
No, said the General, except she repeats her commands. 
Perhaps she has forgot him already. —She
said no more of Father Marescotti. 
The Marchioness thinks that she had some confused
notions of the former enmity of the General and
Father to me; and finding the former reconciled,
wanted the Father to be so too, and to pray for us all. 
I was willing, my dear Dr. Bartlett, to give you
minutely the workings of the poor Lady's mind on our
two first interviews. Every-body is rejoiced at so
hopeful an alteration already. 
We all thought it best, now, that she had so surprisingly
taken a turn, from observing a profound 

silence, to free talking, and shewn herself able, with
very little incoherence, to pursue a discourse, that
she should not exhaust herself; and Camilla was directed
to court her into her own dressing-room, and
endeavour to engage her on some indifferent subjects. 
I asked her leave to withdraw: She gave it me readily,
with these words, I shall see you again, I hope, before
you go to England. 
Often, I hope, very often, answered the General
for me. 
That is very good, said she; and, courtesying to
me, went up with Camilla. 
We all went into Jeronymo's apartment; and the
young Marchioness rejoiced him with the relation of
what had passed. That generous friend was for ascribing
to my presence the hoped-for happy alteration; 
while the General declared, that he never would have
her contradicted for the future, in any reasonable request
she should make. 
The Count her uncle, and Signor Sebastiano his
eldest Son, are set out for Urbino. They took leave
of me at my lodgings. He hoped, he said, that all
would be happy; and that I would be a Catholic. 
* *
I have received a large pacquet of Letters from
England. 
I approve of all you propose, my dear Dr. Bartlett. 
You shall not, you say, be easy, except I will inspect
your accounts. Don't refuse to give your own worthy
heart any satisfaction that it can receive, by consulting
your true friend: But otherwise, you need not ask
my consent to any-thing you shall think fit to do. 
Of one thing, methinks, I could be glad, that only
such children of the poor, as shew a peculiar ingenuity,
have any great pains taken with them in their
books. Husbandry and labour are what are most wanting
to be encouraged among the lower class of people. 
Providence has given to men different genius's and 

capacities, for different ends; and that all might become
useful links of the same great chain. Let us
apply those talents to Labour, those to Learning, those
to Trade, to Mechanics, in their different branches,
which point out the different pursuits, and then no
person will be unuseful; on the contrary, every one
may be eminent in some way or other. Learning,
of itself, never made any man happy. The ploughman
makes fewer mistakes in the conduct of life than
the scholar, because the sphere in which he moves is
a more contracted one. But if a genius arises, let us encourage
it: There will be rustics enough to do the
common services for the finer spirits, and to carry on
the business of the world, if we do not, by our own
indiscriminate good offices, contribute to their misapplication. 
I will write to congratulate Lord W. and his Lady. 
I rejoice exceedingly in their happiness. 
I will also write to my Beauchamp, and to Lady
Beauchamp, to give her joy on her enlarged heart. 
Surely, Dr. Bartlett, human nature is not so bad a
thing, as some disgracers of their own species have
imagined. I have, on many occasions, found, that
it is but applying properly to the passions of persons,
who, tho' they have not been very remarkable for
benevolence, may yet be induced to do right things
in some manner, if not always in the most graceful. 
But as it is an observation, that the miser's feast is often
the most splendid; so may we say, as in the cases of
Lord W. and Lady Beauchamp, the one to her son-in-law,
the other to his Lady and nieces, that when
such persons are brought to taste the sweets of a generous
and beneficent action, they are able to behave
greatly. We should not too soon, and without making
proper applications, give up persons of ability or
power, upon conceptions of their general characters; 
and then, with the herd, set our faces against them,
as if we knew them to be invincible. How many 

ways are there to overcome persons, who may not,
however, be naturally beneficent! Policy, a regard
for outward appearances, ostentation, love of praise,
will sometimes have great influences: And not seldom
is the requester of a favour himself in fault, who perhaps
shews as much self in the application, as the refuser
does in the denial. 
Let Charlotte know, that I will write to her when
she gives me a subject. 
I will write to Lord and Lady L. by the next mail. 
To write to either, is to write to both. 
I have already answered Emily's favour. I am very
glad that her mother, and her mother's husband, are
so wise as to pursue their own interests in their behaviour
to that good girl, and their happiness in their
conduct to each other. 
My poor cousin Grandison—I am concerned for
him. I have a very affecting Letter from him. But
I see the proud man in it, valuing himself on his
knowlege of the world, and rather vexed to be over-reached
by the common artifices of some of the worst
people in it, than from right principles. I know not
what I can do for him, except I were on the spot. 
I am grieved that he has not profited by other mens
wisdom: I wish he may by his own experience. I
will write to him; yet neither to reproach him, nor
to extenuate his folly, tho' I wish to free him from the
consequences of it. 
I write to my aunt Eleanor, to congratulate and
welcome her to London. I hope to find her there on
my return from Italy. 
The unhappy Sir Hargrave! The still unhappier
Merceda! What sport have they made of their health,
in the prime of their days; and with their reputation! 
How poor would have been their triumph, had they
escaped, by a flight so ignominious, the due reward of
their iniquitous contrivances! But to meet with such
a disgraceful punishment, and so narrowly to escape 

a still more disgraceful one—Tell me, Can the poor
men look out into open day? 
But poor Bagenhall! sunk as he is, almost beneath
pity, what can be said of him? 
We see, Dr. Bartlett, in the behaviour, and sordid
acquiescence with insults, of these three men, that
offensive spirits cannot be true ones. 
If you have any call or inclination to go to London,
I am sure you will look in upon the little Oldhams,
and their mother. 
My compliments to the young officer. I am glad
he is pleased with what has been done for him. 
I have Letters from Paris. I am greatly pleased
with what is done, and doing there, in pursuance of
my directions, relating to the moiety of 3000l. left
by the good Mr. Danby, to be disposed of at the
discretion of his executor, either in France or England. 
As he gained a great part of his considerable
fortune in France, I think it would have been agreeable
to him, to find out there half of the objects of his benevolence:
Why else named he France in his Will? 
The intention of the bequeather, in doubtful cases,
ought always to be considered. And another case has
offered, which, I think, as there is a large surplus in
my hands, after having done by his relations more
than they expected, and full as much as is necessary,
to put them in a flourishing way, I ought to consider
in that light. 
Mr. Danby, at his setting out in life, owed great
obligations to a particular family, then in affluent circumstances. 
This family fell, by unavoidable accidents,
into decay. Its descendents were numerous. 
Mr. Danby used to confer on no less than six grand-daughters,
and four grandsons, of this family, an
annual bounty, which kept them just above want. 
And he had put them in hopes, that he would cause
it to be continued to them, as long as they were unprovided
for: The elder girls were in services; the 

younger were brought up to be qualified for the same
useful way of life: The sons were neither idle nor
vicious. I cannot but think, that it was his intention
to continue his bounty to them by his last will, had
he not forgot them when he gave orders for drawing
it up; which was not till he thought himself in a
dying way. 
Proper enquiries have been made; and this affair
is settled. The numerous family think themselves
happy. And the supposed intention of my deceased
friend is fully answered; and no Legatee a sufferer. 
You kindly, my dear Dr. Bartlett, regret the
distance we are at from each other. I am the loser
by it, and not you; since I give you, by pen and ink,
almost as minute an account of my proceedings, as
I could do were we conversing together: Such are
your expectations upon, and such is the obedience
of, 
Your ever-affectionate and filial Friend,
Charles Grandison. 

