


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday Afternoon, October 20.
I was all confusion when he, looking as unconscious
as he used to do, entered my dressing-room. 
I turned my face from him. He seemed surprised at
my concern. Miss Byron, I hope, is well. Has anything
disturbed you, madam? 
My paper, my paper! You took it up—For the
world I would not—The poor Emily! —Give it me; 
Give it me; and I burst into into tears.— 
Was there ever such a fool? What business had I
to name Emily? 
He took it out of his pocket. I came to give it to
you; putting it into my hand. I saw it was your
writing, madam: I folded it up immediately: It has
not been unfolded since: Not a single sentence did I
permit myself to read. 
Are you sure, Sir, you have not read it; nor any
part of it?— 
Upon my honour, I have not. 

I cleared up at once. A blessed reward, thought
I, for denying my own curiosity, when pressed by my
Charlotte, to read a Letter clandestinely obtained! 
A thousand, thousand thanks to you, Sir, for not
giving way to your curiosity. I should have been
miserable, perhaps, for months, had you read that
paper. 
You now indeed raise my curiosity, madam. Perhaps
your generosity will permit you to gratify it; 
tho' I should not have forgiven myself, had I taken
advantage of such an accident. 
I will tell you the contents of some parts of it,
Sir. 
Those which relate to my Emily, if you please,
madam. The poor Emily, you said. —You have
alarmed me. Perhaps I am not to be quite happy! — 
What of poor Emily! Has the girl been imprudent? — 
Has she already—What of the poor Emily? 
And his face glowed, with impatience. 
No harm, Sir, of Emily! —Only a request of the
dear girl! [What better use could I have made of my
fright, Lady G?] But the manner of my mentioning
it, I would not for the world you should have seen. 
No harm, you say! —I was afraid, by your concern
for her—But can you love her, as well as ever? If you
can, Emily must still be good. 
I can: I do. 
What then, dear madam, of poor Emily? Why
poor Emily?— 
I will tell you. The dear girl makes it her request,
that I will procure of you one favour for her: Her
heart is set upon it. 
If Emily continue good, she shall only signify her
wish, and I will comply. If I am not a Father to
her, is she not fatherless? 
Allow me, Sir, to call you kind! good! humane! 
What I want of those qualities, Miss Byron will 

teach me, by her example. —But what would my
Emily?— 
She would live with her guardian, Sir— 
With me, madam? —And with you, madam? — 
Tell me, own to me, madam, And with you? 
That is her wish— 
And does my beloved Miss Byron think it a right
wish to be granted? Will she be the instructing friend,
the exemplary sister, now in that time of the dear
girl's life, when the eye, rather than the judgment, is
usually the director of a young woman's affections? 
I love the sweet Innocent: I could wish her to be
always with me. 
Obliging goodness! Then is one of my cares over. 
A young woman, from Fourteen to Twenty, is often
a troublesome charge upon a friendly heart. I could
not have asked this favour of you. You rejoice me
by mentioning it. Shall I write a Letter, in your
name, to Emily? 
There, Sir, is pen, ink, and paper. 
In your name, madam? 
I bowed assent; mistrusting nothing. 
He wrote; and doubling down, shewed me only
these words—‘My dear Miss Jervois, I have obtained
for you the desired favour—Will you not
continue to be as good as you have hitherto been? — 
That is all which is required of my Emily, by her
ever-affectionate’— 
I instantly wrote, ‘Harriet Byron.’ —But, Sir,
what have you doubled down? 
Charming confidence! —What must he be, who
could attempt to abuse it? —Read, madam, what you
have signed— 
I did. How my heart throbbed. —And could Sir
Charles Grandison, said I, thus intend to deceive? 
Could Sir Charles Grandison be such a plotter? Thank
God you are not a bad man. 
After the words, I have obtained for you the desired
favour, followed these: 

‘You must be very good. You must resolve to
give me nothing but joy; joy equal to the love I
have for you, and to the sacrifice I have made to
oblige you. Go down, my love, as soon as you
can, to Grandison-hall: I shall then have one of
the sisters of my heart there to receive me. If you
are there in less than a fortnight, I will endeavour
to be with you in a fortnight after. I sacrifice, at
least, another fortnight's punctilio to oblige you. 
And will you not continue to be as good as you have
hitherto been? That is all which is required of my
Emily, by, &c.’ 
Give me the paper, Sir; holding out my hand for
it. 
Have I forfeited my character with you, madam?— 
holding it back, with an air of respectful gaiety. 
I must consider, Sir, before I give you an answer. 
If I have, why should I not send it away; and, as
Miss Byron cannot deny her hand-writing, hope to
receive the benefit of the supposed deceit? Especially
as it will answer so many good ends: For instance,
your own wishes in Emily's favour; as it will increase
your own power of obliging; and be a means of accelerating
the happiness of a man whose principal joy
will be in making you happy. 
Was it not a pretty piece of deceit, Lady G? 
Shall I own, that my heart was more inclined to reward
than punish him for it? And really, for a moment,
I thought of the impracticableness of complying
with the request, as if I was seriously pondering upon
it, and was sorry it was not practicable. To get
away from my dear Mr. Deane, thought I, who will
not be in haste to part with us; some female bustlings
to be got over on our return to Selby-house; proposal
renewed, and a little paraded with [Why, Lady G.
did you tell me that our Sex is a foolish Sex?]; the
preparation; the ceremony; the awful ceremony!
the parting with the dearest and most indulgent 

friends that ever young creature was blessed with; and
to be at Grandison-hall, all within one month! —Was
there ever so precipitating a man? 
I believe verily, that I appeared to him as if I were
considering of it; for he took advantage of my silence,
and urged me to permit him to send away to Emily
what he had written; and offered to give reasons for
his urgency: Written as it is, said he, by me, and
signed by you, how will the dear girl rejoice at the
consent of both, under our hands! And will she not
take the caution given her in it from me, as kindly as
she will your mediation in her favour? 
Sure, Sir, said I, you expect not a serious answer! — 
Upon his honour, he did—How, Sir! Ought you not
rather to be thankful, if I forgive you, for letting me
see that Sir Charles Grandison was capable of such an
artifice, tho' but in jest; and for his reflexion upon
me, and perhaps meant on our Sex, as if decorum
were but punctilio? I beg my Lucy's pardon, added I,
for being half-angry with her when she called you a
designer. 
My dearest creature, said he, I am a designer. Who,
to accelerate a happiness on which that of his whole
life depends, would not be innocently so? I am, in this
instance, selfish: But I glory in my selfishness; because
I am determined, if power be lent me, that
every one, within the circle of our acquaintance, shall
have reason to congratulate you as one of the happiest
of women. 
Till this artifice, Sir, shewed me what you could do,
were you not a man of the strictest honour, I had nothing
but affiance in you. Give me the paper, Sir; 
and, for your own sake, I will destroy it, that it may
not furnish me with an argument, that there is not one
man in the world who is to be implicitly confided in
by a woman. 
Take it, madam (presenting it to me, with his usual
gracefulness); destroy it not, however, till you have 

exposed me as such a breach of confidence deserves, to
your aunt, your Lucy—To your uncle Selby; and
Mr. Deane, if you please. 
Ah, Sir! you know your advantages! I will not,
in this case, refer to them: I could sooner rely, dearly
as they love their Harriet, on Sir Charles Grandison's
justice, than on their favour, in any debate that should
happen between him and me. 
There never, madam, except in the case before us,
can be room for a reference: Your prudence, and my
gratitude, must secure us both. Even now, impatient
as I am to call you mine, which makes me willing to
lay hold of every opportunity to urge you for an early
day, I will endeavour to subdue that impatience, and
submit to your will. Yet let me say, that if I did not
think your heart one of the most laudably unreserved,
yet truly delicate, that woman ever boasted, and your
prudence equal, you would not have found me so acquiescent
a Lover, early as you suppose my urgency
for the happy day. 
And is it not early, Sir? Can Sir Charles Grandison
think me punctilious? —But you will permit me to
write to Miss Jervois myself, and acquaint her with her
granted wish, if— 
If! No if, madam—Whatever you think right to
be done, in this case, that do. Emily will be more
particularly your ward than mine, if you condescend
to take the trust upon you. 
You will be pleased, dear Lady G. to acquaint
Emily with the grant of her wish: She will rejoice. 
God give the dear creature reason for joy; and then I
shall have double pleasure in having contributed to her
obtaining of it. But, on second thoughts, I will write
to her myself; for I allow not that she shall see or hear
read every-thing I write to you. [Shall I own to you,
that my grandmamma, and aunt, and Lucy, are of
your mind? They all three wish—But who can deny
the dear Innocent the grant of a request on which she 

has so long set her heart? And would it not be pity,
methinks I hear the world say, some time hence, especially
if any mishap [God forbid it!] should befal her,
that Sir Charles Grandison, the most honourable of
men, should so marry, as that a young Lady of innocence
and merit, and mistress of a fortune, which, it
might be foreseen, would encourage the attempts of
designing men, could not have lived with his wife? — 
Poor child! —Then would the world have shaken its
wise head (allow the expression); and well for me if
it had judged so mildly of me. 
Our dear Mr. Deane, tho' reluctantly, has consented
that we shall leave him on Monday next. We
shall set out directly for Selby-house, where we propose
to be the same night. My aunt and I have been
urgent with him to go back with us; but he is cross,
and will be excused. 
Just now Lucy tells me, that Mr. Deane declared
to my uncle, aunt, and her, that he will not visit us
at Selby-house till we send for him and the settlements
together, which he will have ready in a week—Strange
expedition! Sure they are afraid your brother will
change his mind, and are willing to put it out of the
poor man's power to recede! Lucy smiles at me,
and is sure she says, that she may in confidence reveal
all these matters to me, without endangering my
life. My next Letter will be from Selby-house. 
While that life continues, my dear Ladies, look
upon me as assuredly 
Yours, Harriet Byron. 

