



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Ant. Harlowe, Esq; 

Sunday, Aug. 13. 
Honoured Sir, 
I am very sorry for my pert letter to my uncle Harlowe. 
Yet I did not intend it to be pert. People
new to misfortune may be too easily moved to impatience. 
The fall of a regular person, no doubt, is dreadful and
inexcusable. It is like the sin of apostasy. Would to Heaven, 

however, that I had had the circumstances of mine
inquired into! 
If, Sir, I make myself worse than I am in my health,
and better than I am in my penitence, it is fit I should be
punished for my double dissimulation: And you have the
pleasure of being one of my punishers. My sincerity in
both respects will, however, be best justified by the event. 
To that I refer . —May Heaven give you always as much
comfort in reflecting upon the reprobation I have met
with, as you seem to have pleasure in mortifying a poor
creature, extremely mortified; and that from a right sense,
as she presumes to hope, of her own fault! 
What you have heard of me I cannot tell. When the
nearest and dearest relations give up an unhappy wretch,
it is not to be wondered at, that those who are not related
to her are ready to take up and propagate slanders against
her. Yet I think I may defy calumny itself, and (excepting
the fatal, tho' involuntary step of April 10.) wrap
myself in my own innocence, and be easy. I thank you,
Sir, nevertheless, for your caution, mean it what it will. 
As to the question required of me to answer, and which
is allowed to be too shocking either for a mother to put to
a daughter, or a sister to a sister; and which, however,
you say, I must answer. —O Sir!—And must I answer? 
—This then be my answer: —‘A little time, a much less
time than is imagined, will afford a more satisfactory
answer to my whole family, and even to my brother and
sister, than I can give in words.’ 
Nevertheless, be pleased to let it be remembred, that I
did not petition for a restoration to favour. I could not
hope for that. Nor yet to be put in possession of any part
of my own estate. Nor even for means of necessary subsistence
from the produce of that estate—But only for a blessing; 
for a last blessing! 
And this I will further add, because it is true, that I
have no wilful crime to charge against myself: No free
living at bed and at board, as you phrase it! 
Why, why, Sir, were not other inquiries made of me, as
 well as this shocking one? —Inquiries that modesty would
have permitted a mother or a sister to make; and which, if I 

may be excused to say so, would have been still less improper,
and more charitable, to have been made by uncles, (were
the mother forbid, or the sister not inclined, to make them),
than those they have made. 
Altho' my humble application has brought upon me so
much severe reproach, I repent not that I have written to
my mamma (altho' I cannot but wish that I had not written
to my sister); because I have satisfied a dutiful consciousness
by it, however unanswered by the wished-for success. Nevertheless,
I cannot help saying, that mine is indeed a
hard fate, that I cannot beg pardon for my capital error,
without doing it in such terms, as shall be an aggravation
of the offence. 
But I had best leave off, lest, as my full mind, I find, is
rising to my pen, I have other pardons to beg, as I multiply
lines, where none at all will be given. 
God Almighty bless, preserve, and comfort my dear
sorrowing and grievously offended father and mother! — 
And continue in honour, favour, and merit, my happy
sister! —May God forgive my brother, and protect him
from the violence of his own temper, as well as from the
destroyer of his sister's honour! —And may you, my dear
uncle, and your no less now than ever dear brother, my
second papa, as he used to bid me call him, be blessed and
happy in them all, and in each other! —And, in order to
this, may you all speedily banish from your remembrance
for ever, 
The unhappy Clarissa Harlowe . 