



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday Morning, 10 o'Clock. 
Very ill—Exceeding ill—as Dorcas tells me, in
order to avoid seeing me—And yet the dear soul
may be so in her mind. But is not that equivocation? 
Some one passion predominating, in every human breast,
breaks thro' principle, and controuls us all. Mine is
Love and Revenge taking turns. Hers is Hatred. — 
But this is my consolation, that Hatred appeased, is
Love begun; or Love renewed I may rather say, if Love
ever had footing here. 
But reflectioning apart, thou seest, Jack, that her plot
is beginning to work. To-morrow it is to break out. 
I have been abroad, to set on foot a plot of circumvention. 
All fair now, Belford! 
I insisted upon visiting my indisposed Fair-one. Dorcas
made officious excuses for her. I cursed the wench
in her hearing for her impertinence; and stamp'd, and
made a clutter; which was improved into an apprehension
to the Lady, that I would have flung her faithful
confidante from the top of the stairs to the bottom. 
He is a violent wretch! —But, Dorcas [Dear Dorcas,
now it is] thou shalt have a friend in me to the last
day of my life. 
And what now, Jack, dost think the name of her
good angel is? —Why Dorcas Martindale, Christian 

and Super (no more Wykes) as in the promisory note in
my former—And the dear creature has bound her to her
by the most solemn obligations, besides the tie of interest. 
Whither, Madam, do you design to go when you
get out of this house? 
I will throw myself into the first open house I can
find; and beg protection till I can get a coach, or a
lodging in some honest family. 
What will you do for Cloaths, Madam? I doubt
you'll not be able to take any away with you, but what
you'll have on. 
O no matter for cloaths, if I can but get out of this
house. 
What will you do for Money, Madam? I have
heard his Honour express his concern, that he could not
prevail upon you to be obliged to him, tho' he apprehended
that you must be short of money. 
O, I have rings, and other valuables. Indeed I have
but four guineas, and two of them I found lately
wrapt up in a bit of Lace, designed for a charitable use: 
But now, alas! Charity begins at home! —But I have
one dear friend left, if she be living, as I hope in God
she is! to whom I can be obliged, if I want. O Dorcas!
I must ere now have heard from her, if I had had
fair play. 
Well, Madam, yours is a hard lot. I pity you at
my heart! 
Thank you, Dorcas! —I am unhappy, that I did
not think before, that I might have confided in thy
Pity, and in thy Sex! 
I pitied you, Madam, often and often: But you
were always, as I thought, diffident of me. And then
I doubted not but you were married; and I thought
his Honour was unkindly used by you. So that I thought
it my duty to wish well to his Honour, rather than to
what I thought to be your humours, Madam. Would
to Heaven, that I had known before that you were not
married! —Such a Lady! Such a Fortune! To be so
sadly betrayed!— 

Ah, Dorcas! I was basely drawn in! My youth— 
My ignorance of the world—And I have some things
to reproach myself with, when I look back. 
Lord, Madam, what deceitful creatures are these
men! —Neither oaths, nor vows—I am sure, I am
sure [And then with her apron she gave her eyes half a
dozen hearty rubs] I may curse the time that I came
into this house! 
Here was accounting for her bold eyes! And was
it not better for Dorcas to give up a house which her
Lady could not think worse of than she did, in order
to gain the reputation of sincerity, than by offering to
vindicate it, to make her proffered services suspected? 
Poor Dorcas! —Bless me! how little do we who have
lived all our time in the country, know of this wicked
town! 
Had I been able to write, cried the veteran wench, I
should certainly have given some other near relations I
have in Wales a little inkling of matters; and they would
have saved me from—from—from— 
Her Sobs were enough. The apprehensions of women
on such subjects are ever aforehand with speech. 
And then, sobbing on, she lifted her apron to her
face again. She shewed me how. 
Poor Dorcas! —Again wiping her own charming
eyes. 
All Love, all Compassion, is this dear creature to
every one in affliction, but me. 
And would not an Aunt protect her kinswoman? — 
Abominable wretch! 
I can't—I can't—I can't—say, my Aunt was privy
to it. She gave me good advice. She knew not for a
great while, that I was—that I was—that I was— 
ugh!—ugh!—ugh!— 
No more, no more, good Dorcas—What a world
do we live in! —What a house am I in! —But come,
don't weep (tho' she herself could not forbear): My being 

betrayed into it, tho' to my own ruin, may be a
happy event for thee: And if I live, it shall. 
I thank you, my good Lady, blubbering. I am sorry,
very sorry, you have had so hard a lot. But it may be
the saving of my soul, if I can get to your Ladyship's
house. Had I but known that your Ladyship was not
married, I would have eat my own flesh, before, before,
before— 
Dorcas sobbed and wept. The Lady sighed and
wept also. 
But now, Jack, for a serious reflection upon the
premises. 
How will the good folks account for it, that Satan
has such faithful instruments, and that the bond of wickedness
is a stronger bond than the ties of virtue; as if it
were the nature of the human mind to be villanous? 
For here, had Dorcas been good, and been tempted as
she was tempted to any-thing evil, I make no doubt
but she would have yielded to the temptation. 
And cannot our fraternity in an hundred instances
give proof of the like predominance of Vice over Virtue? 
And that we have risqued more to serve and promote
the interests of the former, than ever a good man did
to serve a good man or a good cause? For have we not
been prodigal of life and fortune? Have we not defied
the Civil Magistrate upon occasion? And have we not
attempted Rescues, and dared all things, only to extricate
a pounded profligate? 
Whence, Jack, can this be? 
O! I have it, I believe. The vicious are as bad as
they can be; and do the devil's work without looking
after; while he is continually spreading snares for the
others; and, like a skilful angler, suiting his baits to the
fish he angles for. 
Nor let even honest people, so called, blame poor
Dorcas for her fidelity in a bad cause. For does not the
General, who implicitly serves an ambitious Prince in
his unjust designs upon his neighbours, or upon his own 

oppressed subjects; and even the Lawyer, who, for the
sake of a paltry Fee, undertakes to whiten a black cause,
and to defend it against one he knows to be good; do
the very same thing as Dorcas? And are they not both
every whit as culpable? Yet the one shall be dubbed a
hero, the other called an admirable fellow, and be contended
for by every client, and his double-tongu'd abilities
shall carry him thro' all the high preferments of
the Law with reputation and applause. 
Well but, what shall be done, since the Lady is so
much determined on removing? —Is there no way to
oblige her, and yet to make the very act subservient to
my own views? —I fansy such a way may be found out. 
I will study for it— 
Suppose I suffer her to make an escape? Her heart is
in it. If she effect it, the triumph she will have over
me upon it will be a counterbalance for all she has suffered. 
I will oblige her if I can. 