



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday, April 27. 
I am sorry you sent back my Norris. But you must
be allowed to do as you please. So must I, in my
turn. We must neither of us perhaps expect absolutely
of the other what is the rightest to be done: And yet
few folks, so young as we are, better know, what that
rightest is. I cannot separate myself from you; altho'
I give a double instance of my vanity in joining myself
with you in this particular assertion. 
I am most heartily rejoiced, that your prospects are
so much mended; and that, as I hoped, good has been
produced out of evil. What must the man have been,
what must have been his views, had he not taken such
a turn, upon a Letter so vile, and upon a treatment so
unnatural, himself principally the occasion of it? 
You know best your motives for suspending: But I
wish you could have taken him at offers so earnest (a) . 
Why should you not have permitted him to send for
Lord M's Chaplain? If Punctilio only was in the way,
and want of a Licence, and of proper Preparations,
and such-like, my Service to you, my dear: And there
is ceremony tantamount to your ceremony. 
Do not, do not, my dear friend, again be so very
melancholy a decliner, as to prefer a shroud, when the 

matter you wish for is in your power; and when, as
you have justly said heretofore, persons cannot die when
they will. 
But it is a strange perverseness in human nature, that
we slight that when near us, which at a distance we
wish for. 
You have now but one point to pursue: That is
Marriage: Let that be solemnized. Leave the rest to
Providence; and, to use your own words in a former
Letter, follow as that leads. You will have a handsome
man; a genteel man; he would be a wise man,
if he were not vain of his endowments, and wild and
intriguing: But while the eyes of many of our Sex,
taken by so specious a form, and so brilliant a spirit,
encourage that vanity, you must be contented to stay
till grey hairs and prudence enter upon the stage together. 
You would not have every-thing in the same
man. 
I believe Mr. Hickman treads no crooked paths; but
he hobbles most ungracefully in a strait one. Yet Mr.
Hickman, tho' he pleases not my eye, nor diverts my
ear, will not, as I believe, disgust the one, nor shock
the other. Your man, as I have lately said, will always
keep up attention; you will always be alive with
him, tho' perhaps more from fears than hopes: While
Mr. Hickman will neither say any-thing to keep one
awake, nor yet, by shocking adventures, make one's
slumbers uneasy. 
I believe I now know which of the two men so prudent
a person as you would, at first, have chosen; nor
doubt I, that you can guess which I would have made
choice of, if I might. But proud as we are, the proudest
of us all can only refuse, and many of us accept the but
half-worthy, for fear a still worse should offer. 
If the men had chosen their mistresses for spirits like
their own, altho' Mr. Lovelace, at the long run, might
have been too many for me, I don't doubt but I should have
given heart-ake for heart-ake, for one half-year at least; 

while you, with my dull-swift, would have glided on
as serenely, as calmly, as accountably, as the succeeding
seasons; and varying no otherwise than they, to
bring on new beauties and conveniencies to all about
you. 
* *
I was going on in this style—But my Mother broke
in upon me, with a prohibitory aspect. ‘She gave me
leave for one Letter only.’ —She had just parted with
your odious Uncle; and they had been in close conference
again. 
She has vexed me. I must lay this by till I hear from
you again; not knowing whither to send it. 
Direct me to a Third Place, as I desired in my
former. 
I told my Mother (on her challenging me) that I
was writing indeed, and to you: But it was only to
amuse myself; for I protested, that I knew not where
to send to you. 
I hope that your next may inform me of your Nuptials,
altho' the next to that were to acquaint me, that
he was the ungratefullest monster on earth; as he must
be, if not the kindest husband in it. 
My Mother has vexed me. But so, on revising, I
wrote before. —But she has unhinged me, as you call it: 
Pretended to catechise Hickman, I assure you, for contributing
to our supposed correspondence. Catechise
him severely too, upon my word! —I believe I have a
sneaking kindness for the sneaking fellow; for I cannot
endure that any-body should treat him like a fool but
myself. 
I believe, between you and me, the good Lady forgot
herself. I heard her loud. She possibly imagined,
that my Father was come to life again. —Yet the meekness
of the man might have sooner convinced her, I
should have thought; for my Father, it seems, would
talk as loud as she. I suppose (tho' within a few yards
of each other) as if both were out of their way, and 

were hollowing at half a mile's distance, to get in
again. 
I know you'll blame me for this sauciness. —But I
told you I was vexed: And if I had not a spirit, my
parentage on both sides might be doubted. 
You must not chide me too severely, however, because
I have learned of you not to defend myself in an
error: And I own I am wrong: And that's enough: 
You won't be so generous in this case, as you are in
every other, if you don't think it is. 
Adieu, my dear! I must, I will love you; and love
you for ever! So subscribes your 
Anne Howe. 