



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Lintz, Nov. 28. / Dec. 9. 
I am now on my way to Trent, in order to meet Colonel
Morden, in pursuance of his Answer to my
Letter inclosed in my last. I had been at Presburgh,
and had intended to visit some other cities of Hungary: 
But having obliged myself to return first to Vienna, I
there met with his Letter: Which follows. 

Munich, Nov. 21. / Dec. 2. 
Sir,
Your Letter was at Florence Four days before I
arrived there. 
That I might not appear unworthy of your favour,
I set out for this city the very next morning. I knew
not but that the politeness of this Court might have engaged,
beyond his intention, a gentleman who has only
his pleasures to pursue. 
But being disappointed in my hope of finding you
here, it becomes me to acquaint you, that I have such
a desire to stand well in the opinion of a man of your
spirit, that I cannot hesitate a moment upon the option,
which I am sure Mr. Lovelace in my situation (thus
called upon) would make. 
I own, Sir, that I have, on all occasions, spoken of
your treatment of my ever-dear Cousin as it deserved. 
It would have been very surprising if I had not. And
it behoves me (now you have given me so noble an opportunity
of explaining myself) to convince you, that
no words fell from my lips, of you, merely because you 

were absent. I acquaint you, therefore, that I will attend
your appointment; and would, were it to the farthest
part of the globe. 
I shall stay some days at this Court; and if you please
to direct for me at M. Klienfurt's in this city, whether I
remain here or not, your commands will come safely
and speedily to the hands of, Sir, 
Your most humble Servant,
Wm. Morden. 
So you see, Belford, that the Colonel, by his ready,
his even eagerly-expressed acceptance of the offered interview,
was determined. And is it not much better
to bring such a point as this to an issue, than to give
pain to friends for my safety, or continue in suspense
myself; as I must do, if I imagined that another had
aught against me? 
This was my Reply: 

Vienna, Nov. 25. / Dec. 6. 
Sir,
I have this moment the favour of yours. I will suspend
a Tour I was going to take into Hungary, and
instantly set out for Munich: And, if I find you not
there, will proceed to Trent. This city, being on the
confines of Italy, will be most convenient, as I presume,
to you, in your return to Tuscany; and I shall hope to
meet you in it on the 3/14 of December. 
I shall bring with me only a French valet and an
English footman. Other particulars may be adjusted
when I have the honour to see you. Till when, I am,
Sir, 
Your most obedient Servant,
R. Lovelace. 
Now, Jack, I have no manner of apprehension of
the event of this meeting. And I think I may say, He
seeks me; not I him. And so let him take the consequence. 

What is infinitely nearer to my heart, is, my ingratitude
to the most excellent of women—My premeditated
ingratitude! —Yet all the while enabled to distinguish
and to adore her excellencies, in spite of the mean
opinion of the Sex which I had imbibed from early manhood. 
But this Lady has asserted the worthiness of her Sex,
and most gloriously has she exalted it with me now. Yet,
surely, as I have said and written an hundred times,
there cannot be such another woman. 
But as my loss in her departure is the greatest of any
man's, and as she was nearer to me, than to any other
person in the world, and once she herself wished to be so,
what an insolence in any man breathing to pretend to
avenge her on me! —Happy! happy! thrice happy!
had I known how to value, as I ought to have valued,
the glory of such a preference! 
I will aggravate to myself this aggravation of the Colonel's
pretending to call me to account for my treatment
of a Lady so much my own, lest, in the approaching
interview, my heart should relent for one so nearly
related to her, and who means honour and justice to her
memory; and I should thereby give him advantages
which otherwise he cannot have. For I know that I
shall be inclined to trust to my skill, to save a man who
was so much and so justly valued by her; and shall be
loth to give way to my resentment, as a threatened
man. And in this respect only am I sorry for his skill,
and his courage, lest I should be obliged, in my own
defence, to add a chalk to a score that is already too
long. 
* *
Indeed, indeed, Belford, I am, and shall be, to
my latest hour, the most miserable of beings. Such
exalted generosity! —Why didst thou put into my craving
hands the copy of her Will? Why sentest thou to
me the posthumous Letter? —What tho' I was earnest 

to see the Will? Thou knewest what they both were [I
did not]; and that it would be cruel to oblige me. 
The meeting of twenty Colonel Mordens, were
there twenty to meet in turn, would be nothing to me; 
would not give me a moment's concern, as to my own
safety: But my reflections upon my vile ingratitude to
so superior an excellence will ever be my curse. 
Had she been a Miss Howe to me, and treated me as
if I were an Hickman, I had had a call for revenge; 
and policy (when I had intended to be an husband) might
have justified my attempts to humble her. But a meek
and gentle temper was hers, tho' a true heroine, whenever
honour or virtue called for an exertion of spirit. 
Nothing but my cursed devices stood in the way of
my happiness. Remembrest thou not, how repeatedly,
from the first, I poured cold water upon her rising
flame, by meanly and ungratefully turning upon her the
injunctions, which virgin delicacy, and filial duty, induced
her to lay me under before I got her into my
power (a) ? 
Did she not tell me, and did I not know it, if she had
not told me, that she could not be guilty of affectation or
tyranny to the man whom she intended to marry (b) ? I
knew, as she once upbraided me, that from the time I
had got her from her Father's house, I had a plain path
before me (c) . True did she say, and I triumphed in
the discovery, that from that time I had held her soul in
suspense an hundred times (d) . My Ipecacuanha trial
alone was enough to convince an infidel, that she had a 

mind in which Love and Tenderness would have presided,
had I permitted the charming buds to put forth
and blow (a) . 
She would have had no reserves, as once she told me,
had I not given her cause of doubt (b) . And did she not
own to thee, that once she could have loved me; and,
could she have made me good, would have made me happy (c) ? 
O Belford! here was Love; a Love of the noblest
kind! A Love, as she hints in her posthumous Letter
(d) , that extended to the Soul; and which she not only
avowed in her dying hours, but contrived to let me
know it after death, in that Letter filled with warnings
and exhortations, which had for their sole end my eternal
welfare! 
The cursed women, indeed, endeavoured to excite
my vengeance, and my pride, by preaching to me eternally
her Doubts, her want of Love, and her Contempt
of me. And my pride was, at times, too much excited
by their vile insinuations. But had it even been as
they said; well might she, who had been used to be
courted and admired by every desiring eye, and worshiped
by every respectful heart—Well might such a woman
be allowed to draw back, when she found herself
kept in suspense, as to the great question of all, by a designing
and intriguing spirit; pretending awe and distance,
as reasons for reining-in a fervor, which, if
real, cannot be reined-in—Divine creature! Her very
doubts, her reserves (so justly doubting) would have
been my assurance, and my glory! —And what other
trial needed her virtue? What other needed a purity so
angelic (blessed with such a command of her passions in the
bloom of youth) had I not been a villain—and a wanton,
a conceited, a proud fool, as well as a villain? 
These reflections sharpened, rather than their edge
by time rebated, accompany me in whatever I do, and
where-ever I go; and mingle with all my diversions and 

amusements. And yet I go into gay and splendid Company. 
I have made new acquaintance in the different
Courts I have visited. I am both esteemed and sought
after, by persons of rank and merit. I visit the Colleges,
the Churches, the Palaces. I frequent the Theatre: 
Am present at every public Exhibition; and see all that
is worth seeing, that I had not seen before, in the Cabinets
of the Curious: Am sometimes admitted to the
Toilette of an eminent toast, and make one with distinction
at the Assemblies of others—Yet can think of
nothing, nor of any-body, with delight, but of my
Clarissa. Nor have I seen one woman with advantage
to herself, but as she resembles in Stature, Air,
Complexion, Voice, or in some Feature, that Charmer,
that only Charmer, of my Soul. 
What greater punishment, than to have these astonishing
perfections, which she was mistress of, strike
my remembrance with such force, when I have nothing
left me but the remorse of having deprived myself and
the world of such a blessing? Now-and-then, indeed,
am I capable of a gleam of comfort, arising (not ungenerously)
from the moral certainty which I have of her
everlasting happiness, in spite of all the machinations
and devices which I set on foot to ensnare her virtue,
and to bring down so pure a mind to my own level. 

For can I be, at worst [Avert that worst,
O Thou Supreme, who only canst avert it!]
So much a wretch, so very far abandon'd,
But that I must, ev'n in the horrid'st gloom,
Reap intervenient joy, at least some respite
From pain and anguish, in her bliss—
* *
If I find myself thus miserable abroad, I will soon
return to England, and follow your example, I think— 
turn hermit, or some plaguy thing or other, and see
what a constant course of penitence and mortification
will do for me. There is no living at this rate—D&wblank;n
me if there be! 

If any mishap should befal me, you'll have the particulars
of it from De la Tour. He indeed knows but
little of English: But every modern tongue is yours. 
He is a trusty and ingenious fellow: And, if any-thing
happen, will have some other papers, which I shall have
ready sealed up, for you to transmit to Lord M. And
since thou art so expert, and so ready at Executorships,
pr'ythee, Belford, accept of the office for Me, as well
as for my Clarissa—Clarissa Lovelace let me
call her. 
By all that's good, I am bewitched to her memory. 
Her very name, with mine joined to it, ravishes my
soul, and is more delightful to me than the sweetest
music. 
Had I carried her [I must still recriminate] to any
other place that to that accursed woman's—For the potion
was her invention and mixture; and all the persisted-in
violence was at her instigation, and at that of
her wretched daughters, who have now amply revenged
upon me their own ruin, which they lay at my door— 
But this looks so like the confession of a thief at the
gallows, that possibly thou wilt be apt to think, I am
intimidated in prospect of the approaching interview. 
But far otherwise. On the contrary, most chearfully
do I go to meet the Colonel; and I would tear my heart
out of my breast with my own hands, were it capable
of fear or concern on that account. 
Thus much only I know, that if I should kill him
[which I will not do, if I can help it] I shall be far from
being easy in my mind: That shall I never more be. 
But as the meeting is evidently of his own seeking,
against an option fairly given to the contrary, and I cannot
avoid it, I'll think of that hereafter. It is but repenting
and mortifying for all at once: For I am as sure
of victory, as I am that I now live, let him be ever so
skilful a swordsman; since, besides that I am no unfleshed
novice, this is a sport, that when provoked to
it, I love as well as my food. And, moreover, I shall 

be as calm and undisturbed as the Bishop at his prayers: 
While he, as is evident by his Letter, must be actuated
by revenge and passion. 
Doubt not, therefore, Jack, that I shall give a good
account of this affair. Mean time, I remain 
Yours most affectionately, &c.
Lovelace. 