


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Saturday Morning, Apr. 15. 
O Lucy, Sir Charles Grandison is gone! Gone indeed! 
He sat out at three this morning; on
purpose, no doubt, to spare his sisters, and the two
brothers-in-law, and Lord W. as well as himself, concern. 
We broke not up till after two. Were I in
the writing humour which I have never known to fail
me till now, I could dwell upon an hundred things,
some of which I can now only briefly mention. 
Dinner-time yesterday passed with tolerable chearfulness:
Every one tried to be chearful. O what pain
attends loving too well, and being too well beloved! 
He must have pain, as well as we. 
Lady Olivia was the most thoughtful, at dinnertime; 
yet poor Emily! Ah the poor Emily! she
went out four or five times to weep; tho' only I perceived
it. 
Nobody was chearful after dinner but Sir Charles. 
He seemed to exert himself to be so. He prevailed on
me to give them a lesson on the harpsichord. Lady
L. played: Lady G. played: We tried to play, I
should rather say. He himself took the violin, and 

afterwards sat down to the harpsichord, for one short
lesson. He was not known to be such a master: But
he was long in Italy. Lady Olivia indeed knew him
to be so. She was induced to play upon the harpsichord:
She surpassed every-body. Italy is the land
of harmony. 
About seven at night he singled me out, and surprised
me greatly by what he said. He told me, that
Lady D. had made him a visit. I was before low: I
was then ready to sink. She has asked me questions,
madam. 
Sir, Sir! was all I could say. 
He himself trembled as he spoke. —Alas! my dear,
he surely loves me! Hear how solemnly he spoke— 
God Almighty be your director, my dear Miss Byron! 
I wish not more happiness to my own Soul, than I do
to you. —In discharge of a promise made, I mention
this visit to you: I might otherwise have spared you,
and myself— 
He stopt there—Then resumed; for I was silent—I
could not speak—Your friends will be entreated for a
man that loves you; a very worthy young nobleman. 
—I give you emotion, madam. —Forgive me. —I have
performed my promise. He turned from me with a
seeming chearful air. How could he appear to be
chearful! 
We made parties at cards. I knew not what I
played. Emily sighed, and tears stole down her
cheeks, as she played. O how she loves her guardian! 
Emily, I say—I don't know what I write! 
At supper we were all very melancholy. Mr. Beauchamp
was urgent to go abroad with him. He changed
the subject, and gave him an indirect denial, as I may
call it, by recommending the two Italian Ladies to
his best services. 
Sir Charles, kind, good, excellent! wished to Lord
L. to have seen Mr. Grandison! —Unworthy as that
man has made himself of his attention. 

He was a few moments in private with Lady Olivia. 
She returned to company with red eyes. 
Poor Emily watched an opportunity to be spoken to
by him alone—So diligently! —He led her to the window
—About one o'clock it was—He held both her
hands. He called her, she says, his Emily. He
charged her to write to him. 
She could not speak; she could only sob; yet
thought she had a thousand things to say to him. 
He contradicted not the hope his sisters and their
Lords had of his breakfasting with them. They invited
me; they invited the Italian Ladies: Lady L.
Lord L. did go, in expectation: But Lady G. when
she found him gone, sent me and the Italian Ladies
word, that he was. It would have been cruel, if she
had not. How could he steal away so! I find, that he
intended that his morning visit to me (as indeed I half-suspected)
should be a taking leave of my cousins, and
your Harriet. How many things did he say then— 
How many questions ask—In tender woe—He wanted
to do us all service—He seemed not to know what to
say—Surely he hates not your poor Harriet—What
struggles in his noble bosom! —But a man cannot
complain: A man cannot ask for compassion, as a
woman can. But surely his is the gentlest of manly
minds! 
When we broke up, he handed my cousin Reeves
into her coach. He handed me. Mr. Reeves said,
We see you again, Sir Charles, in the morning? He
bowed. At handing me in, he sighed—He pressed my
hand—I think he did—That was all. —He saluted nobody. 
—He will not meet his Clementina as he parted
with us. 
But, I doubt not, Dr. Bartlett was in the secret. 
* *
He was. He has just been here. He found my
eyes swelled. I had had no rest; yet knew not, till
seven o'clock, that he was gone. 

It was very good of the doctor to come: His visit
soothed me: Yet he took no notice of my red eyes. 
Nay, for that matter, Mrs. Reeves's eyes were swelled,
as well as mine. Angel of a man! How is he beloved! 
The doctor says, that his Sisters, their Lords, Lord
W. are in as much grief as if he were departed for
ever—And who knows—But I will not torment myself
with supposing the worst: I will endeavour to bear
in mind what he said yesterday morning to us, no
doubt for an instruction, that he would have joy. 
And did he then think that I should be so much
grieved as to want such an instruction? —And therefore
did he vouchsafe to give it? —But, vanity, be
quiet—Lie down, hope—Hopelesness, take place! — 
Clementina shall be his. He shall be hers. 
Yet his emotion, Lucy, at mentioning Lady D.'s
visit—O! but that was only owing to his humanity. 
He saw my emotion; and acknowleged the tenderest
friendship for me! Ought I not to be satisfied with that? 
I am. I will be satisfied. Does he not love me with
the love of mind? The poor Olivia has not this to
comfort herself with. The poor Olivia! If I see her
sad and afflicted, how I shall pity her! All her expectations
frustrated; the expectations that engaged
her to combat difficulties, to travel, to cross many
waters, and to come to England—to come just time
enough to take leave of him; he hastening on the
wings of Love and Compassion to a dearer, a deservedly
dearer object, in the country she had quitted, on
purpose to visit him in his—Is not hers a more grievous
situation than mine? —It is. Why, then, do I
lament? 
But here, Lucy, let me in confidence hint, what I
have gathered from several intimations from Dr. Bartlett,
tho' as tenderly made by him as possible, that
had Sir Charles Grandison been a man capable of
taking advantage of the violence of a Lady's passion 

for him, the unhappy Olivia would not have scrupled,
great, haughty, and noble, as she is, by birth and fortune,
to have been his, without conditions, if she
could not have been so with: The Italian world is of
this opinion, at least. Had Sir Charles been a Rinaldo,
Olivia had been an Armida. 
O that I could hope, for the honour of the Sex,
and of the Lady who is so fine a woman, that the
Italian world is mistaken! —I will presume that it is. 
My good Dr. Bartlett, will you allow me to accuse
you of a virtue too rigorous? That is sometimes the
fault of very good people. You own that Sir Charles
has not, even to you, revealed a secret so disgraceful to
her. You own, that he has only blamed her for having
too little regard for her reputation, and for the
violence of her temper: Yet how patiently, for one
of such a temper, has she taken his departure, almost
on the day of her arrival! He could not have given
her an opportunity to indicate to him a conceslion so
criminal: She could not, if he had, have made the
overture. Wicked, wicked world! I will not believe
you! And the less credit shall you have with me,
Italian world, as I have seen the Lady. The innocent
heart will be a charitable one. Lady Olivia is only
too intrepid. Prosperity, as Sir Charles observed, has
been a snare to her, and set her above a proper regard
to her reputation. —Merciless world! I do not love
you. Dear Dr. Bartlett, you are not yet absolutely
perfect! These hints of yours against Olivia, gathered
from the malevolence of the envious, are proofs (the
first indeed that I have met with) of your imperfection! 
Excuse me, Lucy: How have I run on! Disappointment
has mortified me, and made me goodnatured. 
—I will welcome adversity, if it enlarge my
charity! 
The doctor tells me, that Emily, with her halfbroken
heart, will be here presently. If I can be of 

comfort to her—But I want it myself, from the same
cause. We shall only weep over each other. 
As I told you, the doctor, and the doctor only,
knew of his setting out so early. He took leave of
him. Happy Dr. Bartlett! —Yet I see by his eyes,
that this parting cost him some paternal tears. 
Never father better loved a son than this good man
loves Sir Charles Grandison. 
Sir Charles, it seems, had settled all his affairs three
days before. His servants were appointed. Richard
Saunders is one of the three he has taken with him. 
Happy servants! to be every day in the presence of
such a master. 
The doctor tells me, that he had last week presented
the elder Mr. Oldham with a pair of colours,
which he had purchased for him. Nobody had heard
of this. 
Lord W. he says, is preparing for Windsor; Mr.
Beauchamp for Hampshire, for a few days; and then he
returns to attend the commands of the noble Italians. 
Lady Olivia will soon have her equipage ready. She
will make a great appearance. But Sir Charles
Grandison will not be with her. What is grandeur
to a disturbed heart? The Earl of G. and Lady
Gertrude are setting out for Hertfordshire. Lord and
Lady L. talk of retiring, for a few weeks, to Colnebrooke:
The Doctor is preparing for Grandison-hall; 
your poor Harriet for Northamptonshire—Bless me,
my dear, what a dispersion! —But Lord W.'s nuptials
will collect some of them together at Windsor. 
* *
Emily, the dear weeping girl! is just come. She
is with my cousins. She expects my permission for
coming up to me. Imagine us weeping over each
other; praying for, blessing the guardian of us both. 
Your imagination cannot form a scene too tender. 
Adieu, my Lucy. 

