



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Morning, Six o'Clock. 
Mrs. Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked
of but of my going to my Uncle Antony's. 
She has been ordered, she says, to get ready to attend
me thither: And, upon my expressing my averseness
to go, had the confidence to say, That having heard
me often praise the romantic-ness of the place, she 

was astonished (her hands and eyes lifted up) that I
should set myself against going to a house so much in
my taste. 
I asked, If this was her own insolence, or her young
mistress's observation? 
She half-astonished me by her answer; That it was
hard she could not say a good thing, without being
robbed of the merit of it. 
As the wench looked as if she really thought she
had said a good thing, without knowing the boldness
of it, I let it pass. But, to say the truth, this creature
has surprised me on many occasions with her
smartness: For, since she has been employed in this
controuling office, I have discovered a great deal of
wit in her assurance, which I never suspected before. 
This shews, that insolence is her talent; and that Fortune,
in placing her as a Servant to my Sister, had not
done so kindly by her as Nature; for that she would
make a better figure as her Companion. And indeed
I can't help thinking sometimes, that I myself was
better fitted by Nature to be the Servant of both,
that the Mistress of the one, or the Sister of the
other. And within these few months past, Fortune
has acted by me, as if she were of the same mind. 
Friday, Ten o'Clock. 
Going down to my Poultry-yard, just now, I
heard my Brother and Sister and that Solmes laughing
and triumphing together. The high Yew Hedge between
us, which divides the Yard from the Garden,
hindered them from seeing me. 
My Brother, as I found, had been reading part, or
the whole perhaps, of the copy of his last Letter— 
Mighty prudent, and consistent, you'll say, with their
views to make me the Wife of a man from whom
they conceal not what, were I to be such, it would be
kind in them to endeavour to conceal, out of regard to
my future peace! —But I have no doubt, that they
hate me heartily. 

Indeed you was up with her there, Brother, said
my Sister. You need not have bid her not write to
you. I'll engage, with all her wit, she'll never pretend
to answer it. 
Why, indeed, said my Brother, with an air of College-sufficiency,
with which he abounds (for he thinks
no-body writes like himself) I believe I have given
her a choak-pear. What say you, Mr. Solmes? 
Why, Sir, said he, I think it is unanswerable. But
will it not exasperate her more against me? 
Never fear, Mr. Solmes, said my Brother, but
we'll carry our point, if she do not tire you out first. 
We have gone too far in this method to recede. Her
Cousin Morden will soon be here: So all must be
over before that time, or she'll be made independent
of us all. 
There, Miss Howe, is the reason given for their
Jehu-driving! 
Mr. Solmes declared, that he was determined to
persevere while my Brother gave him any hopes, and
while my Father stood firm. 
My Sister told my Brother, that he hit me charmingly
on the reason why I ought to converse with Mr.
Solmes: But that he should not be so smart upon
the Sex, for the faults of this perverse girl. 
Some lively, and I suppose, witty answer, my Brother
returned; for he and Mr. Solmes laughed outrageously
upon it, and Bella, laughing too, called
him a naughty man: But I heard no more of what
they said; they walking on into the Garden. 
If you think, my dear, that what I have related
did not again fire me, you will find yourself mistaken
when you read at this place the inclosed copy
of my Letter to my Brother; struck off—while the
iron was red-hot. 
No more call me meek and gentle, I beseech you. 


To Mr. James Harlowe.
Friday Morning. 
Sir,
If, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be
silent, on occasion of your last, you would perhaps
conclude, that I was consenting to go to my Uncle
Antony's upon the condition you mention. My Father
must do as he pleases with his child. He may
turn me out of his doors, if he think fit, or give you
leave to do it; but (loth as I am to say it) I should
think it very hard to be carried by force to any-body's
house when I have one of my own to go to. 
Far be it from me, notwithstanding yours and my
Sister's provocations, to think of taking my Estate into
my own hands, without my Father's leave: But why,
if I must not stay any longer here, may I not be permitted
to go thither? I will engage to see nobody
they would not have me see, if this favour be permitted. 
Favour I call it, and am ready to receive
and acknowlege it as such, altho' my Grandfather's
Will has made it matter of Right. 
You ask me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the
postscript to your Letter, if I have not some new proposals
to make? I HAVE (since you put the question)
three or four; New ones all, I think; tho' I will
be bold to say, that, submitting the case to any one
person whom you have not set against me, my old
ones ought not to have been rejected. I think This; 
why then should I not write it? —Nor have you any
more reason to storm at your Sister for telling it you
(since you seem in your Letter to make it your boast
how you turned my Mother and my Aunt Hervey
against me) than I have to be angry with my Brother,
for treating me as no Brother ought to treat a Sister. 
These, then, are my new proposals. 
That, as above, I may not be hindered from going
to reside (under such conditions as shall be prescribed
to me, which I will most religiously observe) at my 

Grandfather's late house. I will not again in this
place call it mine. I have reason to think it a great
misfortune, that ever it was so—Indeed I have. 
If this be not permitted, I desire leave to go for a
month, or for what time shall be thought fit, to Miss
Howe's. I dare say her Mother will consent to it, if
I have my Father's permission to go. 
If this, neither, be allowed, and I am to be turned
out of my Father's house, I beg I may be suffered to go
to my Aunt Hervey's, where I will inviolably observe
her commands, and those of my Father and Mother. 
But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my humble
request, that I may be sent to my Uncle Harlowe's,
instead of my Uncle Antony's. I mean not by this
any disrespect to my Uncle Antony: But his Moat,
with his Bridge threatened to be drawn up, and perhaps
the Chapel there, terrify me beyond expression,
notwithstanding your witty ridicule upon me for that
apprehension. 
If this likewise be refused, and if I must be carried to
the Moated-house, which used to be a delightful one
to me, let it be promised me, that I shall not be compelled
to receive Mr. Solmes's visits there; and then
I will as chearfully go, as ever I did. 
So here, Sir, are my new proposals. And if none
of them answer your end, as each of them tends to
the exclusion of that ungenerous persister's visits, be
pleased to know, that there is no misfortune I will not
submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the
man to whom I can allow no share in my heart. 
If I write in a style different from my usual, and
different from what I wished to have occasion to write,
an impartial person, who knew what I have accidentally,
within this hour past, heard from your mouth, and
my Sister's, and a third person's (particularly the reason
you give for driving on at this violent rate; to-wit,
my Cousin Morden's soon-expected arrival) would
think I have but too much reason for it. Then be 

pleased to remember, Sir, that when my whining vocatives
have subjected me to so much scorn and ridicule,
it is time, were it but to imitate examples so
excellent as you and my Sister set me, that I should
endeavour to assert my character, in order to be thought
less an alien, and nearer of kin to you both, than either
of you have of late seemed to suppose me. 
Give me leave, in order to empty my female quiver
at once, to add, that I know no other reason which
you can have for forbidding me to reply to you, after
you have written what you pleased to me, than that
you are conscious you cannot answer to reason and to
justice the treatment you give me. 
If it be otherwise, I, an unlearned, un-logical girl,
younger by near a third than yourself, will venture (so
assured am I of the justice of my cause) to put my fate
upon an issue with you: With you, Sir, who have had
the advantage of an academical education; whose
mind must have been strengthened by observation,
and learned conversation, and who, pardon my going
so low, have been accustomed to give choak-pears to
those you vouchsafe to write against. 
Any impartial person, your late Tutor, for instance,
or the pious and worthy Dr. Lewen, may be judge
between us: And if either give it against me, I will
promise to resign to my destiny: Provided, if it be
given against you, that my Father will be pleased
only to allow of my negative to the person so violently
sought to be imposed upon me. 
I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier
come into this proposal, as you seem to have a high
opinion of your talents for argumentation; and not a
low one of the cogency of the arguments contained in
your last Letter. And as I can possibly have no advantage
in a contention with you, if the justice of my
cause affords me not any (as you have no opinion it
will); it behoves you, methinks, to shew to an impartial
moderator, that I am wrong, and you not so. 

If this be accepted, there is a necessity for its being
carried on by the pen; the facts to be stated, and
agreed upon by both; and the decision to be given,
according to the force of the arguments each shall produce
in support of their side of the question: For, give
me leave to say, I know too well the manliness of your
temper, to offer at a personal debate with you. 
If it be not accepted, I shall conclude, that you
cannot defend your conduct towards me: And shall
only beg of you, that, for the future, you will treat
me with the respect due to a Sister from a Brother
who would be thought as polite as learned. 
And now, Sir, if I have seemed to shew some spirit,
not quite foreign to the relation I have the honour to
bear to You, and to my Sister; and which may be
deemed not altogether of a piece with that part of my
character which once, it seems, gained me every one's
Love; be pleased to consider to whom, and to what
it is owing; and that this part of that character was
not dispensed with, till it subjected me to that scorn,
and to those insults, which a Brother, who has been so
tenacious of an independence voluntarily given up by me,
and who has appeared so exalted upon it, ought not
to have shewn to any-body, much less to a weak and
defenceless Sister: Who is, notwithstanding, an affectionate
and respectful one, and would be glad to
shew herself to be so upon all future occasions; as she
has in every action of her past life, altho' of late she
has met with such unkind returns. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
See, my dear, the force, and volubility as I may
say, of passion; for the Letter I send you, is my first
draught, struck off without a blot or erasure. 
Friday, Three o'Clock. 
As soon as I had transcribed it, I sent it down to
my Brother by Mrs. Betty. 

The wench came up soon after, all aghast, with a
Laud, Miss! What have you done? —What have you
written? For you have set them all in a joyful uproar! 
* *
My Sister is but this moment gone from me: She
came up all in a flame; which obliged me abruptly
to lay down my pen: She ran to me— 
O Spirit! said she; tapping my neck a little too
hard. And is it come to this at last!— 
Do you beat me, Bella? 
Do you call this beating you? Only tapping your
shoulder thus, said she; tapping again more gently— 
This is what we expected it would come to—You
want to be independent—My Father has lived too
long for you!— 
I was going to speak with vehemence; but she put
her handkerchief before my mouth, very rudely— 
You have done enough with your pen, mean listener,
as you are! But, know, that neither your independent
scheme, nor any of your visiting ones, will be
granted you. Take your course, perverse one! Call
in your Rake to help you to an independence upon
your Parents, and a dependence upon him! —Do so! 
—Prepare this moment—Resolve what you will take
with you—To-morrow you go—Depend upon it tomorrow
you go! —No longer shall you stay here,
watching and creeping about to hearken to what people
say—'Tis determined, child! —You go to-morrow
—My Brother would have come up to tell you so; 
but I persuaded him to the contrary—For I know not
what had become of you, if he had—Such a Letter!
such an insolent, such a conceited challenger! —O thou
vain creature! But prepare yourself, I say—To-morrow
you go—My Brother will accept of your bold
challenge; but it must be personal; and at my Uncle
Antony's—Or perhaps at Mr. Solmes's— 
Thus she ran on, almost foaming with passion, till,
quite out of patience, I said, No more of your violence, 

Bella—Had I known in what a way you designed
to come up, you should not have found my
chamber-door open. —Talk to your Servant in this
manner. Unlike you, as I bless God I am, I am
nevertheless your Sister—And let me tell you, that I
won't go to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to
that—except I am dragged away by violence. 
What! not if your Father or your Mother command
it—Girl? said she; intending another word,
by her pause and manner before it came out. 
Let it come to that, Bella; then I shall know what
to say. But it shall be from their own mouths, if I
do—Not from yours, nor your Betty's—And say
another word to me, in this manner, and be the consequence
what it may, I will force myself into their
presence; and demand what I have done to be used
thus! 
Come along, child! Come along, meekness— 
taking my hand, and leading me towards the door— 
Demand it of them now—You'll find both your despised
Parents together! —What! does your heart
fail you?—for I resisted, being thus insolently offered
to be led, and pulled my hand from her. 
I want not to be led, said I; and since I can plead
your invitation, I will go: And was posting to the
stairs accordingly in my passion—But she got between
me and the door, and shut it— 
Let me first, Bold-one, said she, apprise them of
your visit—For your own sake let me—For my Brother
is with them. But yet opening it again, seeing
me shrink back—Go if you will! —Why don't you
go? —Why don't you go, Miss?—following me to
my closet, whither I retired, with my heart full, and
pulled the sash-door after me; and could no longer
hold in my tears. 
Nor would I answer one word to her repeated aggravations,
nor to her demands upon me to open my
door (for the key was on the inside); nor so much as 

turn my head towards her, as she looked thro' the
glass at me. And at last, which vexed her to the
heart, I drew the silk curtain, that she should not see
me, and down she went muttering all the way. 
Is not this usage enough to provoke a rashness
never before thought of? 
As it is but too probable that I may be hurried
away to my Uncle's without being able to give you
previous notice of it; I beg that as soon as you shall
hear of such a violence, you would send to the usual
place, to take back such of your Letters as may not
have reached my hands, or to fetch any of mine that
may be there. 
May you, my dear, be always happy, prays your 
Clarissa Harlowe. 
I have received your four Letters. But am in such a
ferment, that I cannot at present write to them. 