



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Mr. Lovelace, in continuation of his last Letter
(No. iii.) gives an account to his Friend (pretty
much to the same effect with the Lady's) of all that
passed between them at the Inns, in the journey,
and till their fixing at Mrs. Sorlings's. To avoid
repetition, those passages in his Narrative are only
extracted, which will serve to embellish hers; to 

open his views; or to display the humourous talent
he was noted for. 
At their alighting at the Inn at St. Albans on Monday
night, thus he writes: 
The people who came about us, as we alighted,
seemed, by their jaw-fallen faces, and goggling eyes, to
wonder at beholding a charming young Lady, majesty
in her air and aspect, so composedly dressed, yet with
features so discomposed, come off a journey, which had
made the cattle smoke, and the servants sweat. I read
their curiosity in their faces, and my beloved's uneasiness
in hers. She cast a conscious glance, as she alighted,
upon her habit, which was no habit; and repulsively,
as I may say, quitting my assisting hand, hurried into
the house. * * * 
Ovid was not a greater master of metamorphoses
than thy friend. To the mistress of the house I instantly
changed her into a Sister, brought off by surprize from a
near Relation's (where she had wintered) to prevent her
marrying a confounded Rake [I love always to go as near
the truth as I can] whom her Father and Mother, her
elder Sister, and all her loving Uncles, Aunts, and
Cousins, abhorred. This accounted for my Charmer's
expected sullens; for her displeasure when she was to
join me again, were it to hold; for her unsuitable dress
upon the road; and, at the same time, gave her a
proper and seasonable assurance of my honourable
views. 
Upon the debate between the Lady and him, and particularly
upon that part where she upbraids him with
putting a young creature upon making a sacrifice of
her Duty and Conscience, he writes— 
All these, and still more mortifying things, she said. 
I heard her in silence. But when it came to my
turn, I pleaded, I argued, I answered her, as well as
I could. —And when humility would not do, I raised 

my voice, and suffered my eye to sparkle with anger; 
hoping to take advantage of that sweet cowardice which
is so amiable in the Sex, and to which my victory over
this proud Beauty is principally owing. 
She was not intimidated, however; and was going
to rise upon me in her temper; and would have broken
in upon my defence. But when a man talks to a woman
upon such subjects, let her be ever so much in Alt,
'tis strange, if he cannot throw out a Tub to the
Whale;—that is to say, if he cannot divert her from
resenting one bold thing, by uttering two or three full
as bold; but for which more favourable interpretations
will lie. 
To that part, where she tells him of the difficulty she
made to correspond with him at first, thus he writes: 
Very true, my precious! —And innumerable have
been the difficulties thou hast made me struggle with. 
But one day thou mayest wish, that thou hadst spared this
boast; as well as those other pretty haughtinesses,
‘That thou didst not reject Solmes for my sake: That
my glory, if I valued myself upon carrying thee off,
was thy shame: That I have more merit with myself,
than with thee, or any-body else: [What a coxcomb she
makes me, Jack!] That thou wishest thyself in thy
Father's house again, whatever were to be the consequence.’ 
—If I forgive thee, Charmer, for these hints,
for these reflections, for these wishes, for these contempts,
I am not the Lovelace I have been reputed to be; and
that thy treatment of me shews that thou thinkest I am. 
In short, her whole air throughout this debate, expressed
a majestic kind of indignation, which implied a
believed superiority of talents over the person to whom
she spoke. 
Thou hast heard me often expatiate upon the pitiful
figure a man must make, whose wife has, or believes
she has, more sense than himself. A thousand reasons
could I give why I ought not to think of marrying Miss 

Clarissa Harlowe: At least till I can be sure, that she
loves me with the preference I must expect from a
wife. 
I begin to stagger in my resolutions. Ever averse as
I was to the Hymeneal shackles, how easily will old
prejudices recur! Heaven give me the heart to be honest
to my Clarissa! —There's a prayer, Jack! If I
should not be heard, what a sad thing would that be,
for the most admirable of women! —Yet, as I do not
often trouble heaven with my prayers, who knows
but this may be granted? 
But there lie before me such charming difficulties,
such scenery for intrigue, for stratagem, for enterprize— 
What a horrible thing, that my talents point all that
way! —When I know what is honourable and just; 
and would almost wish to be honest? —Almost I say; 
for such a varlet am I, that I cannot altogether wish it,
for the soul of me! —Such a triumph over the whole
Sex, if I can subdue this Lady! —My maiden vow, as
I may call it! —For did not the Sex begin with me? — 
And does this Lady spare me? —Thinkest thou, Jack,
that I should have spared my Rosebud, had I been set
at defiance thus? —Her Grandmother besought me, at
first, to spare her Rosebud; and when a girl is put, or
puts herself, into a man's power, what can he wish for
further? while I always considered opposition and resistance
as a challenge to do my worst (a) . 
Why, why, will the dear creature take such pains
to appear all ice to me? —Why will she, by her pride,
awaken mine? —Hast thou not seen, in the above, how
contemptibly she treats me? —What have I not suffered
for her, and even from her? —Ought I to bear being
told, that she will despise me, if I value myself above
that odious Solmes? 
Then she cuts me short in all my ardors. To vow
fidelity, is by a cursed turn upon me, to shew, that
there is reason, in my own opinion, for doubt of it. — 

The very same reflection upon me once before (a) . 
In my power, or out of my power, all one to this
Lady. —So, Belford, my poor vows are crammed
down my throat, before they can well rise to my lips. 
And what can a Lover say to his Mistress, if she will
neither let him lye nor swear? 
One little piece of artifice I had recourse to: When
she pushed so hard for me to leave her, I made a request
to her, upon a condition she could not refuse; and
pretended as much gratitude upon her granting it, as if
it were a favour of the last consequence. 
And what was This? but to promise what she had
before promised, ‘Never to marry any other man, while
I am living, and single, unless I should give her cause
for high disgust against me.’ This, you know, was
promising nothing, because she could be offended at
any time; and was to be the sole judge of the offence. 
But it shewed her, how reasonable and just my expectations
were; and that I was no Encroacher. 
She consented; and asked, What security I expected? 
Her Word only. 
She gave me her Word: But I besought her excuse
for sealing it: And in the same moment (since to have
waited for consent would have been asking for a denial)
saluted her. And, believe me, or not, but, as I hope
to live, it was the first time I had the courage to touch
her charming lips with mine. And This I tell thee,
Belford, that That single pressure (as modestly put too,
as if I were as much a virgin as herself, that she might
not be afraid of me another time) delighted me more
than ever I was delighted by the Ultimatum with any
other woman. —So precious do awe, reverence, and
apprehended prohibition, make a favour! 
And now, Belford, I am only afraid, that I shall be
too cunning; for she does not at present talk enough
for me. I hardly know what to make of the dear
creature yet. 

I topt the Brother's part on Monday night before
the Landlady at St. Albans; asking my Sister's pardon
for carrying her off so unprepared for a journey; prated
of the joy my Father and Mother, and all our friends,
would have on receiving her; and this with so many
circumstances, that I perceived, by a look she gave me,
that went thro' my very reins, that I had gone too far. 
I apologized for it indeed when alone; but I could not
penetrate for the soul of me, whether I made the matter
better or worse by it. 
But I am of too frank a nature: My success, and
the joy I have because of the jewel I am half in possession
of, has not only unlocked my bosom, but left
the door quite open. 
This is a confounded sly Sex. Would she but speak
out, as I do—But I must learn reserves of her. 
She must needs be unprovided of money: But has
too much pride to accept of any from me. I would
have had her to go to town [To town, if possible, must
I get her to consent to go] in order to provide herself
with the richest of Silks which That can afford. But neither
is this to be assented to. And yet, as my intelligencer
acquaints me, her implacable Relations are resolved
to distress her all they can. 
These wretches have been most gloriously raving,
ever since her flight; and still, thank Heaven, continue
to rave; and will, I hope, for a twelvemonth to come. 
Now, at last, it is my Day! 
Bitterly do they regret, that they permitted her
poultry-visits, and garden-walks, which gave her the
opportunity to effect an escape which they suppose preconcerted. 
For, as to her dining in the Ivy-bower,
they had a cunning design to answer upon her in that
permission, as Betty told Joseph her Lover (a) . 
They lost, they say, an excellent pretence for confining
her more closely on my threatening to rescue her,
if they offered to carry her against her will to old 

Antony's moated house (a) . For this, as I told thee
at the Hart, and as I once hinted to the dear creature
herself (b) , they had it in deliberation to do; apprehending,
that I might attempt to carry her off, either
with or without her consent, on some one of those
connived-at excursions. 
But here my honest Joseph, who gave me the information,
was of admirable service to me. I had
taught him to make the Harlowes believe, that I was
as communicative to my servants, as their stupid James
was to Joseph (c) : Joseph, as they supposed, by
tampering with Will (d) , got at all my secrets, and
was acquainted with all my motions: And having also
undertaken to watch all those of his young Lady (e) ,
the wise family were secure; and so was my Beloved; 
and so was I. 
I once had it in my head (and I hinted it to thee (f) 
in a former) in case such a step should be necessary,
to attempt to carry her off by surprize from the Woodhouse; 
as it is remote from the dwelling-house. This,
had I attempted, I should certainly have effected, by
the help of the Confraternity: And it would have
been an action worthy of us All. —But Joseph's Conscience,
as he called it, stood in my way; for he
thought, it must have been known to be done by his
connivance. I could, I dare say, have overcome this
scruple, as easily as I did many of his others, had I not
depended, at one time upon her meeting me at a midnight
or late hour [And, if she had, she never would
have gone back]; at other times, upon the cunning
family's doing my work for me, equally against their
knowlege or their wills. 
For well I knew, that James and Arabella were 

determined never to leave off their foolish trials and
provocations, till, by tiring her out, they had either
made her Solmes's Wife, or guilty of some such rashness
as should throw her for ever out of the favour of
both her Uncles; though they had too much malice in
their heads to intend service to me by their persecutions
of her. 