



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, May 4. 
I forego every other engagement, I suspend every
wish, I banish every other fear, to take up my pen,
to beg of you, that you will not think of being guilty
of such an act of Love as I can never thank you for; 
but must for ever regret. If I must continue to write
to you, I must. I know full well your impatience of
controul, when you have the least imagination that your
generosity or friendship is likely to be wounded by it. 
My dearest, dearest creature, would you incur a maternal,
as I have a paternal, malediction? Would not
the world think there was an infection in my fault, if
it were to be followed by Miss Howe? There are some
points so flagrantly wrong, that they will not bear to 

be argued upon. This is one of them. I need not give
reasons against such a rashness. Heaven forbid that it
should be known that you had it but once in your thought,
be your motives ever so noble and generous, to follow so
bad an example; the rather, as that you would, in such
a case, want the extenuations that might be pleaded in
my favour; and particularly that one of being surprised
into the unhappy step. 
The restraint your Mother lays you under, would
not have appeared heavy to you, but on my account. 
Would you have once thought it a hardship to be admitted
to a part of her bed? —How did I use to be delighted
with such a favour from my Mother! —How did
I love to work in her presence! —So did you in the presence
of yours once. And to read to her in winter-evenings
I know was one of your joys. —Do not give me
cause to reproach myself on the reason that may be assigned
for the change in you. 
Learn, my dear, I beseech you learn, to subdue your
own passions. Be the motives what they will, Excess
is Excess. Those passions in our Sex, which we take no
pains to subdue, may have one and the same source with
those infinitely blacker passions, which we used so often
to condemn in the violent and headstrong of the other
Sex; and which may be only heightened in them by
Custom, and their freer Education. Let us both, my dear,
ponder well this thought; look into ourselves, and fear. 
If I write, as I find I must, I insist upon your forbearing
to write. Your silence to this shall be the sign
to me, that you will not think of the rashness you
threaten me with; and that you will obey your Mother
as to your own part of the correspondence, however: 
Especially, as you can inform or advise me in every
weighty case by Mr. Hickman's pen. 
My trembling writing will shew you, my dear impetuous
creature, what a trembling heart you have
given to 
Your ever-obliged,
Or, if you take so rash a step,
Your for-ever disobliged,
Clarissa Harlowe. 

My cloaths were brought to me just now. But you
have so much discomposed me, that I have no heart
to look into the trunks. &dotup;Why, why, my dear, will
you fright me with your flaming Love? Discomposure
gives Distress to a weak heart, whether it
arise from Friendship or Enmity.&dotup; 
A servant of Mr. Lovelace carries this to Mr. Hickman
for dispatch-sake. Let that worthy man's pen
relieve my heart from this new uneasiness. 