


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Lord L. broke the silence. You are a delightful
girl, Charlotte; but your brother has had a
great deal of patience with you. 
O my Lord, said she, if we women play our cards
right, we shall be able to manage the best and wisest
of you all, as we please. It is but persevering; and
you men, if not out-argued, may be out-teazed. — 
But, Harriet—upon my word—The game seems to be
all in your own hands. 
We want but my brother to be among us, said Lady
L. Beauty would soon find its power: And such a
mind—And then they complimented me, that their
brother and I were born for each other. 
Miss Grandison told us all three her thoughts, in
relation to the alliance with Lord G. She said, she was
glad that her brother had proposed to know her mind
from me. Something, Harriet, said she, may arise in
the tête-à-tête conversation, that may let us into a
little of his own. 
But shall I trust myself with him alone, Lucy? 

Indeed I am afraid of him, of my-self, rather. My
own concerns so much in my head, I wish I don't
confound them with Miss Grandison's. A fine piece
of work shall I make of it, if I do. If I get it so
happily over, as not to be dissatisfied with myself, for
my part in it, I shall think I have had a deliverance. 
But, Lucy, if all these distinctions paid me in this
conversation, and all this confidence placed in me,
produce nothing—If—Why, what if? —In one word,
Should this if be more than if—Why then it will go
the harder, that's all, with your Harriet, than if she
had not been so much distinguished. 
At afternoon-tea, the Danby's being mentioned,
Lord L. asked Sir Charles, What was the danger from
which he relieved their uncle? And we all joining in
requesting particulars, he gave the following, which I
will endeavour to repeat, as near as possible, in his own
words. My heart interested itself in the relation. 
‘Mr. Danby, said he, was a merchant of equal
eminence and integrity: He was settled at Cambray:
He had great dealings in the manufactures of cambricks
and lace. His brother John, a very profligate
man, had demanded of him, and took it ill that he
denied him, a thousand guineas; for no better reason,
but because he had generously given that sum
to each of the wicked man's children. Surely, he
pleaded, he was as nearly related to his brother as
were those his children. No plea is too weak for
folly and self-interest to insist upon. Yet my Mr.
Danby had often given this brother large sums,
which he squandered away almost as soon as he received
them. 
‘My father used to make remittances to Mr.
Danby, for my use; for his dealings in other
branches of commerce extended to the south of
France and Italy: This brought me acquainted
with him. 
‘He took a great liking to me. I saw him first at 

Lyons; and he engaged me to visit him at Cambray,
whenever I should go to Paris or Flanders. 
‘Accompanying a friend, soon after, to Paris, I
performed my promise. 
‘He had a villa in the Cambresis, at a small distance
from the city, which he sometimes called his
cottage, at others his dormitory. It was a little lone
house: He valued it for its elegance. Thither, after
I had passed two days with him at his house in the
city, he carried me. 
‘His brother, enraged at being refused the sum he
had so unreasonably demanded, formed a plot to get
possession of his whole fortune. My Mr. Danby
was a bachelor, and, it was known, had, to that
time, an aversion to the thought of making his will. 
‘The wretch, in short, hired three ruffians to
murder him. The attempt was to be made in this
little house, that the fact might have the appearance
of being perpetrated by robbers; and the cabinets
in the bed-chamber, if there were time for it, after
the horrid fact was perpetrated, were to be broken
open, and rifled, in order to give credit to that appearance. 
The villains were each to be rewarded
with a thousand crowns, payable on the wicked
man's getting possession of his brother's fortune; 
and they had fifty crowns apiece paid them in hand. 
Their unnatural employer waited the event at Calais,
tho' he told them he should be at Dunkirk. 
‘I had one servant with me, who lay with a manservant
of Mr. Danby in a little room over the
stable, about an hundred yards from the house. 
There were only conveniences in the house for Mr.
Danby and a friend, besides two women servants in
the upper part of it. 
‘About midnight I was alarmed by a noise, as of
violence used at the window of Mr. Danby's room. 
Mine communicated with his. The fastening of the 

door was a spring-lock, the key of which was on my
side. 
‘I slipt on my cloaths in an instant, and, drawing
my sword, rushed into the next room, just as one
villain, with a large knife in his hand, had seized
the throat of Mr. Danby, who, till then, was in a
sound sleep. The skin of his neck, and one hand
lifted up to defend himself, were slightly wounded
before I ran the ruffian into the shoulder, as I did
with my sword, and in the same moment disarmed
him, and threw him, with violence from the bed,
against the door. He roared out, that he was a dead
man. 
‘A second fellow had got up to the window, and
was half in: He called out, to a third below, to
hasten up after him on a ladder, which was generally
left in an outhouse near the little garden. 
‘I hastened to this second fellow, who then fired a
pistol, but happily missed me; and who, feeling my
sword's point in his arm, threw himself, with a little
of my help, out of the window, upon the third
fellow, who was mounting the ladder, and knocked
him off: And then both made their escape by the
way they came. 
‘The fellow within had fainted, and lay weltring
in his blood. 
‘By this time, the two women-servants had let in
our men, who had been alarmed by the report of
the pistol, and by the screams of the women from
their window; for they ventured not out of their
chamber till they were called upon for entrance, by
their fellow-servant from below. 
‘The two footmen, by my direction, bound up
the ruffian's shoulder: They dragged him down
into the hall: He soon came to himself, and offered
to make an ample confession. 
‘Poor Mr. Danby had crept into my room, and in 

a corner of it had fainted away. We recovered him
with difficulty. 
‘The fellow confessed, before a magistrate, the
whole villainy, and who set him at work: The
other two, being disabled by their bruises from flying
far, were apprehended next day. The vile brother
was sent after to Dunkirk, according to the intelligence
given of him by the fellows; but he having
informed himself of what had happened, got over
from Calais to Dover. 
‘The wounded man, having lost much blood, recovered
not. They were all three ordered to be
executed; but, being interceded for, the surviving
villains were sent to the gallies. 
‘It seems they knew nothing of Mr. Danby's
having a guest with him: If they had, they owned
they would have made their attempt another night.’ 
We were about to deliver our sentiments on this
extraordinary event, when Sir Charles, turning to
Lady L. Let me ask you, said he, the servant being
withdrawn, Has Charlotte found out her own mind? 
Yes, yes, Sir; I believe she has opened all her heart
to Miss Byron. 
Then I shall know more of it in ten minutes, than
Charlotte would let me know in as many hours. 
Stand by, every-body, said the humorous Lady— 
Let me get up, and make my brother one of my best
courtesies. 
Sir Charles was just then called out to a messenger,
who brought him Letters from town. He returned to
us, his complexion heightened, and a little discomposed. 
I intended, madam, said he, to me, to have craved
the honour of your company for half an hour in my
Lord's library, on the subject we were talking of: But
these Letters require my immediate attention. The
messenger must return with my answer to two of 

them, early in the morning. You will have the goodness,
looking round him, to dispense with my attendance
on you at supper. But perhaps, madam, to me,
you will be so good, as, in one word, to say, No, or
Yes, for Charlotte. 
Miss Gr. What, Sir, to be given up without a
preface! —I beg your pardon. Less than ten words
shall not do, I assure you, tho' from my sister Harriet. 
Sir Ch. Who given up, Charlotte? yourself? If
so, I have my answer. 
Miss Gr. Or Lord G. —I have not said which. 
Would you have my poor Lord rejected by a slighting
monosyllable only? 
Lady L. Mad girl! 
Miss Gr. Why, Lady L. don't you see that Sir
Charles wants to take me by implication? But my
Lord G. is neither so soon lost, nor Charlotte so easily
won. Harriet, if you would give up yourself at a
first question, then I will excuse you if you give up
me as easily, but not else. 
Harriet. If Sir Charles thinks a conference upon
the subject unnecessary—Pray don't let us give him
the trouble of holding one. His time, you see, is very
precious. 
Can you guess, Lucy, at the humour I was in
when I said this? —If you think it was a very good
one, you are mistaken; yet I was sorry for it afterwards. 
Foolish self-betrayer! Why should I seem to
wish for a conference with him? But that was not
all—To be petulant with such a one, when his heart
was distressed; for so it proved: But he was too polite,
too great, shall I say? to take notice of my petulance. 
How little does it make me in my own
eyes! 
Had I, said he, ever so easily obtained a knowlege
of my sister's mind, I should not have known how to
depend upon it, were it not strengthened, madam, 

from your lips. The conference, therefore, which
you gave me hopes you would favour me with, would
have been absolutely necessary. I hope Miss Byron
will allow me to invite her to it to-morrow morning. 
The intended subject of it is a very serious one with
me. My sister's happiness, and that of a man not
unworthy, are concerned in it, lightly as Charlotte
has hitherto treated it. He bowed, and was going. 
Miss Gr. Nay, pray, brother—You must not leave
me in anger. 
Sir Ch. I do not, Charlotte. I had rather bear
with you, than you should with me. I see you cannot
help it. A lively heart is a great blessing. Indulge
it. Now is your time. 
Dear doctor, said Miss Grandison, when Sir Charles
was gone out, What can be the meaning of my brother's
gravity? It alarms me. 
Dr. B. If goodness, madam, would make an heart
lively, Sir Charles's would be as lively as your own; 
but you might have perceived by his air, when he entered,
that the Letters brought him affected him too
much to permit him to laugh off a light answer to a
serious question. 
Miss Gr. Dear doctor! —But I do now recollect,
that he entered with some little discomposure on his
countenance. How could I be so inattentive? 
Harriet. And I, too, I doubt, was a little captious. 
Dr. B. A very little. Pardon me, madam. 
Just then came in the excellent man. 
Dr. Bartlett, I would wish to ask you one question,
said he. 
Miss Gr. You are angry with me, brother. 
Sir Ch. No, my dear! —But I am afraid I withdrew
with too grave an air. I have been a thousand
times pleased with you, Charlotte, to one time displeased; 
and when I have been the latter, you have
always known it: I had something in my hand that
ruffled me a little. But how could patience be patience, 

if it were not tried? I wanted to say a few
words to my good Dr. Bartlett: And, to say truth,
being conscious that I had departed a little abruptly, I
could not be easy till I apologized in person for it; 
therefore came to ask the favour of the doctor's advice,
rather than request it by message. 
The doctor and he withdrew together. 
In these small instances, said my Lord, are the characters
of the heart displayed, far more than in greater. 
What excellence shines out in full lustre, on this unaffected
and seemingly little occasion! Fear of offending; 
of giving uneasiness; sollicitude to remove doubts; 
patience recommended in one short sentence, more
forcibly than some would have done it in a long discourse,
as well as by example; censuring himself,
not from a consciousness of being wrong, but of being
taken wrong. Ah! my dear sister Charlotte, we
should all edify by such an example—But I say no
more. 
Miss Gr. And have you nothing to say, Harriet? 
Harriet. Very little, since I have been much to
blame myself: Yet let me remind my Charlotte, that
her brother was displeased with her yesterday, for treating
too lightly a subject he had engaged in seriously; 
and that he has been forced to refer to her friend,
rather than to herself, to help him to the knowlege of
her mind. O Charlotte! regret you not the occasion
given for the expedient? And do you not [Yes, I see
you do] blush for giving it? Yet to see him come voluntarily
back, when he had left us in a grave humour,
for fear the babies should think him angry with them; 
O how great is he! and how little are we! 
Miss Gr. Your servant, sister Harriet! —You have
made a dainty speech, I think: But, great and good as
my brother is, we know how it comes to pass, that
your pretty imagination is always at work to aggrandize
the man, and to lower the babies! 

Harriet. I will not say another word on the subject. 
You are not generous, Charlotte. 
She took my hand: Forgive me, my dear—I touch'd
too tender a string. Then turning to Miss Jervois,
and with the other hand taking hers, Why twinkles
thus my girl? —I charge you, Emily, tell me all you
think. 
I am thinking, said she, that my guardian is not
happy. To see him bear with every-body; to have
him keep all his troubles to himself, because he would
not afflict any-body, and yet study to lighten and remove
the troubles of every-body else—Did he not
say, that he should be happy, but for the unhappiness
of other people? 
Excellent young creature! said Miss Grandison: I
love you every day better and better. For the future,
my dear, do not retire, whatever subjects we talk of. 
I see, that we may confide in your discretion. But
well as you love your guardian, say nothing to him of
what women talk to women. My Lord L. is an exception,
in this case: He is one of us. 
Harriet. O Miss Grandison! what a mix'd character
is yours! How good you can be, when you
please! and how naughty! 
Miss Gr. Well, and you like me, just now? — 
That's the beauty of it; to offend and make up, at
pleasure. Old Terence was a shrewd man: The falling
out of Lovers, says he (as Lord L. once quoted
him), is the renewal of Love. Are we not now better
friends, than if we had never differed? And do
you think that I will not, if I marry, exercise my
husband's patience now-and-then for this very purpose? 
—Let me alone, Harriet: Now a quarrel; now
a reconciliation; I warrant I shall be happier than any
of the yawning see-saws in the kingdom. Everlasting
summers would be a grievance. 
Harriet. You may be right, if you are exceeding
discreet in your perversenesses, Charlotte; and yet if 

you are, you will not lay out for a quarrel, I fansy. 
The world, or you will have better luck than your
brother seems to have had, will find you opportunities
enow, for exercising the tempers of both, without
your needing to study for occasions. 
Miss Gr. Study for them, Harriet! I sha'n't study
for them, neither: They will come of course. 
Harriet. I was about to ask a question—But 'tis
better let alone. 
Miss Gr. I will have it. What was your question? 
Don't you see what a good-natured fool I am? 
You may say any-thing to me: I won't be angry. 
Harriet. I was going to ask you, If you were ever
concerned two hours together, for any fault you ever
committed in your life? 
Miss Gr. Yes, yes, yes; and for two-and-twenty
hours: For sometimes the inconveniencies that followed
my errors, were not presently over, as in a
certain case, which I'll be hang'd if you have not
in your head, with that sly leer that shews the rogue
in your heart: But when I got rid of consequences,
no bird in spring was ever more blyth. I carolled
away every care at my harpsichord. —But Emily will
think me mad—Remember, child, that Miss Byron
is the woman by whose mind you are to form yours:
Never regard me, when she is in company. —But now
(and she whimsically arose, and opened the door, and
saying Begone, shut it, and coming to her place) I
have turned my folly out of door. 
Friday morn. seven o'clock. 
I Have written for these two days passed at every
opportunity, and, for the two nights, hardly knowing
what sleepiness was, two hours, each night, have
contented me. I wonder whether I shall be summoned
by-and-by to the proposed conference; but I
am equally sorry and apprehensive, on occasion of the
Letters which have given Sir Charles Grandison so 

much anxiety: Foreign Letters, I doubt not! —I wish
this ugly word foreign were blotted out of my vocabulary; 
out of my memory, rather. I never, till of
late, was so narrow-hearted—But that I have said before,
twenty times. 
I have written—How many sheets of paper—A
monstrous Letter—Pacquet, rather. I will begin a
new one, with what shall offer this day. Adieu, till by
and by, my Lucy. 

