



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, June 12. 
Didst ever see a Licence, Jack? 
N. N. by divine permission, Lord Bishop of London,
To our well-beloved in Christ Robert Lovelace [Your
servant, my good Lord! What have I done to merit
so much goodness, who never saw your Lordship in
my life?], of the parish of St. Martin's in the Fields,
Batchelor, and Clarissa Harlowe of the same parish,
Spinster, sendeth greeting. —WHEREAS ye are,
as is alleged, determined to enter into the holy state of
matrimony [This is only alleged, thou observest], by
and with the consent of, &c. &c. &c. and are very
desirous of obtaining your marriage to be solemnized in
the face of the church: We are willing, that such your
honest desires [Honest desires, Jack!] may more speedily
have their due effect: And therefore, that ye may be
able to procure such marriage to be freely and lawfully
solemnized in the parish-church of St. Martin in the
Fields, or St. Giles's in the Fields, in the county of
Middlesex, by the rector, vicar, or curate thereof, at
any time of the year [At any time of the year,
Jack!], without publication of banes: Provided, that
by reason of any precontract [I verily think, that I
have had three or four precontracts in my time; but
the good girls have not claimed upon them of a long
time], consanguinity, affinity, or any other lawful cause
whatsoever, there be no lawful impediment in this behalf; 
and that there be not at this time any action, suit,
plaint, quarrel, or demand, moved or depending before
any judge ecclesiastical or temporal, for or concerning
any marriage contracted by or with either of you; and
that the said marriage be openly solemnized in the church
above-mentioned, between the hours of eight and twelve
in the forenoon; and without prejudice to the minister
of the place where the said woman is a parishioner: We 

do hereby, for good causes [It cost me—Let me see,
Jack—What did it cost me?], give and grant our
licence, or faculty, as well to you the parties contracting,
as to the rector, vicar, or curate of the said church,
where the said marriage is intended to be solemnized, to
solemnize the same in manner and form above-specified,
according to the rites and ceremonies prescribed in the
Book of Common-prayer in that behalf published by authority
of parliament. Provided always, That if hereafter
any fraud shall appear to have been committed, at
the time of granting this licence, either by false suggestions,
or concealment of the truth [Now this, Belford,
is a little hard upon us: For I cannot say, that
every one of our suggestions is literally true: —So,
in good conscience, I ought not to marry under this
licence], the licence shall be void to all intents and purposes,
as if the same had not been granted. And in that
case, we do inhibit all ministers whatsoever, if any thing
of the premises shall come to their knowlege, from proceeding
to the celebration of the said marriage, without first
consulting Us, or our Vicar-general. Given, &c. 
Then follow the register's name, and a large pendent
seal, with these words round it—Seal of
the Vicar-general and Official-principal
of the diocese of London. 
A good whimsical instrument, take it all together! 
—But what, thinkest thou, are the arms to this
matrimonial harbinger? —Why, in the first place,
Two crossed swords; to shew, that marriage is a state
of offence as well as defence: Three lions; to denote,
that those who enter into the state, ought to
have a triple proportion of courage. And (couldst
thou have imagined, that these priestly fellows, in so
solemn a case, would cut their jokes upon poor souls,
who come to have their honest desires put in a way to
be gratified?) there are three crooked horns, smartly
top-knotted with ribbands; which being the Ladies
wear, seem to indicate, that they may very probably
adorn, as well as bestow, the bull's feather. 

To describe it according to heraldry-art, if I am
not mistaken—Gules, two swords, saltire-wise, Or; 
second coat, a chevron sable between three buglehorns,
Or [So it ought to be]: On a chief of the second,
three lions rampant of the first—But the devil
take them for their hieroglyphics, should I say, if I
were determined in good earnest to marry! 
And determined to marry I would be, were it not
for this consideration; That once married, and I am
married for life. 
That's the plague of it! —Could a man do as the
birds do, change every Valentine's day [A natural appointment!
for birds have not the sense, forsooth, to
fetter themselves, as we wiseacre men take great and
solemn pains to do]; there would be nothing at all
in it. And what a glorious time would the Lawyers
have, on the one hand, with their Noverint universi's,
and suits commenceable on restitution of goods and
chattels; and the Parsons, on the other, with their
indulgencies (renewable annually, as other licences)
to the honest desires of their clients? 
Then, were a stated mulct, according to rank or
fortune, to be paid on every change, towards the
exigencies of the State [But none on renewals with
the old loves, for the sake of encouraging constancy,
especially among the minores], the change would be
made sufficiently difficult, and the whole Public
would be the better for it; while those children,
which the parents could not agree about maintaining,
might be considered as the children of the Public, and
provided for like the children of the antient Spartans; 
who were (as ours would in this case be) a nation of
heroes. How, Jack, could I have improved upon
Lycurgus's institutions, had I been a lawgiver (a) ? 