


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Saturday-morning, Dec. 16. 
I will not trouble you, my dear grandmamma,
with an account of the preparations we are making
to benefit and regale our poorer neighbours, and
Sir Charles's tenants, at this hospitable season. Not
even Sir Charles Grandison himself can exceed you,
either in bounty or management, on this annual Solemnity. 
Sir Charles has consulted with Dr. Bartlett,
and every-thing will be left to the direction of
that good man. My uncle and aunt have dispatched
their directions to Selby-house, that their neighbours
and tenants may not suffer by their absence. 
The gentlemen are all rid out together, the Doctor
with them, to reconnoitre the country, as my uncle
calls it. Emily and Lucy are gone with them, on
horseback. My aunt and I declined accompanying
them; and took this opportunity, attended by Mrs.
Curzon, to go thro' the Offices. 
In the housekeeper's room, I received the maidservants,
seven in number; and, after her, called
each by her name, and spoke kindly to them all. I
told them how handsomely Mrs. Curzon spoke of
them, and assured them of my favour. I praised the
chearfulness with which Dr. Bartlett had told me
they attended him every day in his antechamber. 
They should have the opportunity given them, I said,
as often as possible. I hoped that my Sally behaved
well among them. 
They praised her. 
Sally, said I, has a serious turn. Piety is the best
security in man and woman for good behaviour. She
will seldom fail of attending the Doctor with you. 
We shall all be happy, I hope. I am acquainting myself
with the methods of the house. Nobody shall 

be put out of their good way by me. My aunt only
said, My niece proposes to form herself on the example
of the late excellent Lady Grandison. 
They blessed me; tears in their eyes. 
I made each of them a present for a pair of gloves. 
We went thro' all the Offices, the lowest not excepted. 
The very servants live in paradise. There
is room for every thing to be in order: Every-thing
is in order. The Offices so distinct, yet so conveniently
communicating—Charmingly contrived! 
—The low servants, men and women, have Laws,
which at their own request, were drawn up, by
Mrs. Curzon, for the observance of the minutest of
their respective duties; with little mulcts, that at
first only there was occasion to exact. It is a house
of harmony, to my hand. Dear madam! What do
good people leave to good people to do? Nothing! 
Every one knowing and doing his and her duty; and
having, by means of their own diligence, time for
themselves. 
I was pleased with one piece of furniture in the
housekeeper's room, which neither you, madam, nor
my aunt, have in yours. My aunt says, Selby house
shall not be long after her return without it. It is
a Servants Library, in three classes: One of books
of divinity and morality: Another for housewifry:
A third of history, true adventures, voyages, and
innocent amusement. I, II, III. are marked on the
cases, and the same on the back of each book, the
more readily to place and re-place them, as a book is
taken out for use. They are bound in buff for strength. 
A little fine is laid upon whoever puts not a book
back in its place. As new books come out, the Doctor
buys such as he thinks proper to range under these
three classes. 
I asked, If there were no books of gardening? I
was answered, that the gardener had a little house in
the garden, in which he had his own books. But her 

master, Mrs. Curzon said, was himself a Library of
gardening, ordering the greater articles by his own taste. 
Seeing a pretty glass-case in the housekeeper's apartment,
filled with physical matters, I asked, If she
dispensed any of those to the servants, or the poor? 
Here is, said she, a collection of all the useful drugs
in medicine: But does not your Ladyship know the
noble method that my master has fallen into since his
last arrival in England? What is that? He gives a
salary, madam, to a skilful apothecary; and pays him
for his drugs besides (and these are his, tho' I have a
key to it); and this gentleman dispenses physic to all
his tenants, who are not able to pay for advice; nor
are the poor who are not his tenants, refused, when
recommended by Dr. Bartlett. 
Blessings on his benevolence! said I. O my aunt! 
What a happy creature am I! God Almighty, if I
disgrace not my husband's beneficence, will love me
for his sake! —Dear creature, said my aunt—And
for your own too, I hope. 
There lives in an house, madam, continued Mrs.
Curzon, within five miles of this, almost in the middle
of the estate, and pays no rent, a very worthy young
man; brought up, under an eminent surgeon of one
of the London hospitals, who has orders likewise for
attending his tenants in the way of his business—As
also every casualty that happens within distance, and
where another surgeon is not to be met with. And
he, I understand, is paid on a cure actually performed,
very handsomely. But if the patient die, his trouble
and attendance are only considered according to the
time taken up; except a particular case requires consideration. 
And this surgeon, Mrs. Curzon, this apothecary— 
Are noted, madam, for being good, as well as skilful
men. My master's test is, that they are men of
seriousness, and good livers: Their consciences, he
says, are his security. 

How must this excellent man be beloved, how respected,
Mrs. Curzon! 
Respected and beloved, madam! —Indeed he is— 
Mr. Richard Saunders, has often observed to me, that
if my master either rides or walks in company, tho'
of great Lords, people distinguish him by their respectful
love: To the Lord, they will but seem to
lift up their hats, as I may say; or if women, just
drop the knee, and look grave, as if they paid respect
to their quality only: But to my master, they pull
off their hats to the ground, and bow their whole
bodies: They look smilingly, and with pleasure and
blessings, as I may say, in their faces: The good
women courtesy also to the ground, turn about when
he has passed them, and look after him—God bless
your sweet face; and God bless your dear heart, will
they say—And the servants who hear them are so delighted! 
—Don't your Ladyship see, how all his servants
love him as they attend him at table? How they
watch his eye in silent reverence—Indeed, madam,
we all adore him; and have prayed morning, noon,
and night for his coming hither, and settling among
us. And now is the happy time: Forgive me, madam; 
I am no flatterer; But we all say, He has
brought another angel to bless us. 
I was forced to lean upon my aunt—Tears of joy
trickled down my cheeks. O madam, what a happy
lot is mine!— 
My uncle wonders I am not proud—Proud, madam! 
—Proud of my inferiority! 
We visited Mr. Bartlett in his new office. He is
a modest, ingenious young man. I asked him to give
me at his leisure, a catalogue of the Servants Library,
for my aunt. 
O my dear, said my aunt, had your grandpapa,
had your papa, your mamma, lived to this day!— 
I will imagine, said I, that I see them looking down
from their heaven. They bid me take care to deserve 

the lot I have drawn; and tell me, that I can
only be more happy, when I am what and where
they are. 
* *
Dr. Bartlett, attended by his servant, is returned
without the gentlemen. I was afraid he was not very
well. I followed him up, and told him my apprehensions. 
He owned afterwards, that he was a little indisposed
when he came in; but said, I had made him
well. 
I told him, what had passed between Mrs. Curzon
and me. He confirmed all she said. 
He told me, that Sir Charles was careful also in
improving his estates. The minutest things, he said,
any more than the greatest, escaped not his attention. 
He has, said he, a bricklayer, a carpenter, by the year; 
a sawyer, three months constantly in every year. 
Repairs are set about the moment they become necessary. 
By this means he is not imposed upon by incroaching
or craving tenants. He will do any-thing
that tends to improve the estate; so that it is the best
conditioned estate in the county. His tenants grow
into circumstance under him. Tho' absent, he gives
such orders, as but few persons on the spot would
think of. He has a discernment that goes to the bottom
of every-thing. In a few years, improving only
what he has in both kingdoms, he will be very rich,
yet answer the generous demands of his own heart
upon his benevolence: All the people he employs,
he takes upon character of seriousness and sobriety, as
Mrs. Curzon told you; and then he makes them the
more firmly his, by the confidence he reposes in them. 
He continually, in his written directions to his masterworkmen,
cautions them to do justice to the tenants
as well as to him, and even to throw the turn of the
scale in their favour. You are, says he, my friends,
my workmen: You must not make me both judge 

and party. Only remember, that I bear not imposition. 
The man who imposes on me once, I will
forgive: But he never shall have an opportunity to
deceive me a second time: For I cannot act the part
of a suspicious man, a watchman over people of
doubtful honesty. 
The Doctor says, he is a great planter, both here
and in Ireland: And now he is come to settle here,
he will set on foot several projects, which hitherto he
had only talked of, or written about. 
Sir Charles, I am sure, said he, will be the friend
of every worthy man and woman. He will find out
the sighing heart before it is overwhelmed with calamity. 
He proposes, as soon as he is settled, to take a
personal Survey of his whole estate. He will make
himself acquainted with every tenant, and even cottager,
and enquire into his circumstances, number of
children, and prospects. When occasions call for it,
he will forgive arrears of rent; and if the poor men
have no prospect of success, he will buy his own
farms of them, as I may say, by giving them money
to quit: He will transplant one to a less, another to
a larger farm, if the tenants consent, according as
they have stock, or probability of success in the one
or the other; and will set the poor tenants in a way
of cultivating what they hold, as well by advice as
money; for while he was abroad, he studied Husbandry
and Law, in order, as he used to say, to be his
father's steward; the one to qualify him to preserve,
the other to manage, his estate. He was always prepared
for, and aforehand with, probable events. 
Dear, dear Dr. Bartlett, said I, we are on a
charming subject; tell me more of my Sir Charles's
management and intentions. Tell me all you know,
that is proper for me to know. 
Proper, madam! Every-thing he has done, does,
and intends to do, is proper for you, and for all the 

world to know. I wish all the world were to know
him, as I do; not for his sake, but for their own. 
That moment(without any-body's letting me know
the gentlemen were returned) into the Doctor's apartment
came Sir Charles. My back was to the door,
and he was in the room before I saw him. I started! 
Sir, Sir! said I, as if I thought excuses necessary. 
He saw my confusion. That, and his sudden entrance,
abashed the Doctor. Sir Charles reconciled us
both to ourselves—He put one arm round my waist,
with the other he lifted up my hand to his lips, and
in the voice of Love, I congratulate you both, said
he: Such company, my dearest Life! such company,
my dearest friend! you cannot have every hour! 
May I, as often as there is opportunity, see you together! 
I knew not that you were! The Doctor and
I, madam, stand not upon ceremony. Pardon me,
Doctor. I insist upon leaving you as I sound you— 
I caught his hand, as he was going—Dear, dear
Sir, I attend you. You shall take me with you; 
and, if you please, make my excuses to my aunt,
for leaving her so long alone, before you came in. 
Doctor, excuse us both; my Harriet has found,
for the first time, a will. It is her own, we know,
by its obligingness. 
He received my offered hand, and led me into company:
Where my aunt called me to account for
leaving her, and begged Sir Charles would chide me. 
She was with Dr. Bartlett, madam, said he: Had
she been with any other person, man or woman, and
Mrs. Selby alone, I think we would have tried to
chide her. 
What obliging, what sweet politeness, my dear
grandmamma! 
Such, madam, is the happiness of your Harriet. 
Lucy has a charming Letter to send you! —From
that Letter, you will have a still higher notion of my
happiness, of the dear man's unaffected tenderness to 

me, and of the approbation of a very genteel neighbourhood,
than I myself could give you. 
Lady G. and Lady L. have both made up for their
supposed neglects. I had written to each to charge
them with having not congratulated me on my arrival
here. Two such charming Letters! —I have
already answered them. They love as well as ever
(Thank heaven they do!) 
Your Harriet Grandison. 

