



My dear Father and Mother,
I must write on, tho' I shall come so soon; 
for now I have hardly any thing else to do. 
I have finish'd all that lay upon me, and only
wait the good Time of setting out. Mrs. Jervis
said, I must be low in Pocket, for what I
have laid out; and so would have presented
me with Two Guineas of her Five; but I could
not take them of her, because, poor Gentlewoman!
she pays old Debts for her Children
that were extravagant, and wants them herself. 
This, however, was very good in her. 
I am sorry, I shall have but little to bring
with me; but I know you won't, you are so
good!—and I will work the harder, when I
come home, if I can get a little Plain-work, or
any thing to do. But all your Neighbourhood
is so poor, that I fear I shall want Work; except,
may-be, Dame Mumford can help me to
something, from any good Family she is acquainted
with. 
Here, what a sad Thing it is! I have been
brought up wrong, as Matters stand. For, you
know, my good Lady, now in Heav'n, lov'd
Singing and Dancing; and, as she would have
it I had a Voice, she made me learn both; and
often and often has she made me sing her an
innocent Song, and a good Psalm too, and dance
before her: And I must learn to flower and draw
too, and to work fine Work with my Needle; 

why, all this too I have got pretty tolerably at
my Fingers End, as they say; and she us'd to praise
me, and was a good Judge of such Matters. 
Well now, what is all this to the Purpose,
as Things have turn'd about? 
Why, no more nor less, than that I am like
the Grashopper in the Fable, which I have read
of in my Lady's Books, as follows *  : 
“As the Ants were airing their Provisions
one Winter, a hungry Grashopper (as suppose
it was poor I) begg'd a Charity of them. 
They told him, That he should have wrought
in Summer, if he would not have wanted in
Winter. Well, says the Grashopper, but I
was not idle neither; for I sung out the
whole Season. Nay, then, said they, you'll
e'en do well to make a merry Year of it, and
dance in Winter to the Tune you sung in
Summer.” 
So I shall make a fine Figure with my Singing
and my Dancing, when I come home to
you! Nay, I shall be unfit even for a May-day
Holiday-time; for these Minuets, Rigadoons,
and French Dances, that I have been
practising, will make me but ill Company for
my Milk-maid Companions that are to be. To
be sure, I had better, as Things stand, have 

learn'd to wash and scour, and brew and bake,
and such-like. But I hope, if I can't get Work,
and can meet with a Place, to learn these soon,
if any body will have the Goodness to bear with
me, till I am able: For, notwithstanding what
my Master says, I hope I have an humble and a
teachable Mind; and next to God's Grace, that
is all my Comfort: For I shall think nothing
too mean that is honest. It may be a little
hard at first; but woe to my proud Heart, if I
find it so, on Trial! for I will make it bend to
its Condition, or break it. 
I have read of a good Bishop, that was to
be burnt for his Religion; and he try'd how he
could bear it, by putting his Fingers into the
lighted Candle: So I t'other Day try'd, when
Rachel's Back was turn'd, if I could not scour a
Pewter Plate she had begun. I see I could do't
by degrees: It only blister'd my Hand in two
Places. 
All the Matter is, if I could get Plain-work
enough, I need not spoil my Fingers. But if I
can't, I hope to make my Hands as red as a
Blood-pudden, and as hard as a Beechen Trencher,
to accommodate them to my Condition. 
—But I must break off: Here's somebody
coming. 
'Tis only our Hannah with a Message from
Mrs. Jervis. —But, hold, here is somebody
else. —Well, it is only Rachel. 
I am as much frighted as were the City
Mouse and the Country Mouse, in the same 

Book of Fables, at every thing that stirs. Oh! 
I have a Power of these Things to entertain
you with in Winter Evenings, when I come
home. If I can but get Work, with a little
Time for Reading, I hope we shall be very
happy, over our Peat Fires. 
What made me hint to you, that I should
bring but little with me, is this: 
You must know, I did intend to do, as I
have this Afternoon: And that is, I took
all my Cloaths, and all my Linen, and I divided
them into three Parcels, as I had before told
Mrs. Jervis I intended to do; and I said, It is
now Monday, Mrs. Jervis, and I am to go
away on Thursday Morning betimes; so tho' I
know you don't doubt my Honesty, I beg you
will look over my poor Matters, and let every
one have what belongs to them; for, said I,
you know I am resolv'd to take with me only
what I can properly call my own. 
Said she, (I did not know her Drift then; 
to be sure she meant well; but I did not thank
her for it, when I did know it) Let your Things
be brought down into the Green-room, and I
will do any thing you would have me do. 
With all my Heart! said I, Green-room
or any-where; but I think you might step up,
and see 'em as they lie. 
However, I fetch'd 'em down, and laid
them in three Parcels, as before; and when I
had done, I went down to call her up to look
at them. 

Now, it seems, she had prepar'd my Master
for this Scene, unknown to me; and in this
Green-room was a Closet, with a Sash-door and
a Curtain before it; for there she puts her Sweetmeats
and such things; and this she did, it seems,
to turn his Heart, as knowing what I intended; 
I suppose, that he should make me take the
Things; for if he had, I should have made
Money of them, to help us when we got together; 
for, to be sure, I could never have
appear'd in them. 
Well, as I was saying, he had got, unknown
to me, into this Closet; I suppose while
I went to call Mrs. Jervis: And she since
own'd to me, it was at his Desire, when she
told him something of what I intended, or else
she would not have done it: Tho' I have Reason,
I'm sure, to remember the last Closet-work. 
So I said, when she came up, Here, Mrs.
Jervis, is the first Parcel; I will spread it all
abroad. These are the Things my good Lady
gave me. —In the first place, said I—and so
I went on describing the Cloaths and Linen my
Lady had given me, mingling Blessings, as I
proceeded, for her Goodness to me; and when
I had turn'd over that Parcel, I said, Well, so
much for the first Parcel, Mrs. Jervis; that
was my Lady's Gifts. 
Now I come to the Presents of my dear
virtuous Master: Hay! you know, Closet for
that, Mrs. Jervis! She laugh'd, and said, I
never saw such a comical Girl in my Life! But 

go on. I will, Mrs. Jervis, said I, as soon as
I have open'd the Bundle; for I was as brisk and
as pert as could be, little thinking who heard
me. 
Now, here, Mrs. Jervis, said I, are my
ever-worthy Master's Presents; and then I particularized
all those in the second Bundle. 
After which, I turn'd to my own, and
said: 
Now, Mrs. Jervis, comes poor Pamela's
Bundle, and a little one it is, to the others. 
First, here is a Calico Night-gown, that I used
to wear o'Mornings. 'Twill be rather too
good for me when I get home; but I must have
something. Then there is a quilted Calimanco
Coat, and a Pair of Stockens I bought of the
Pedlar, and my Straw Hat with blue Strings; 
and a Remnant of Scots Cloth, which will
make two Shirts and two Shifts, the same I
have on, for my poor Father and Mother. And
here are four other Shifts, one the fellow to
that I have on; another pretty good one, and
the other two old fine ones, that will serve
me to turn and wind with at home, for they
are not worth leaving behind me; and here are
two Pair of Shoes; I have taken the Lace off,
which I will burn, and may-be will fetch me
some little Matter at a Pinch, with an old Silver
Buckle or two. 
What do you laugh for, Mrs. Jervis? said
I. —Why you are like an April Day; you
cry and laugh in a Breath. 



Well, let me see; ay, here is a Cotton
 Handkerchief I bought of the Pedlar; there
should be another somewhere. O here it is!
and here too are my new-bought knit Mittens:
And this is my new Flanel Coat, the fellow to
that I have on. And in this Parcel pinn'd together,
are several Pieces of printed Calico, Remnants
of Silks, and such-like, that, if good
Luck should happen, and I should get Work,
would serve for Robings and Facings, and suchlike
Uses. And here too are a Pair of Pockets; 
they are too fine for me; but I have no
worse. Bless me! said I, I did not think I had
so many good Things! 
Well, Mrs. Jervis, said I, you have seen
all my Store, and I will now sit down, and
tell you a Piece of my Mind. 
Be brief, then, said she, my good Girl; for
she was afraid, she said afterwards, that I should
say too much. 
Why then the Case is this: I am to enter
upon a Point of Equity and Conscience, Mrs.
Jervis; and I must beg, if you love me, you'd
let me have my own Way. Those things there
of my Lady's, I can have no Claim to, so as to
take them away; for she gave them me, supposing
I was to wear them in her Service, and
to do Credit to her bountiful Heart. But since
I am to be turn'd away, you know, I cannot
wear them at my poor Father's; for I should
bring all the little Village upon my Back: and
so I resolve not to have them. 

Then, Mrs. Jervis, said I, I have far less
Right to these of my worthy Master's: For
you see what was his Intention in giving them
to me. So they were to be the Price of my
Shame, and if I could make use of them, I
should think I should never prosper with them; 
and besides, you know, Mrs. Jervis, if I
would not do the good Gentleman's Work, why
should I take his Wages? So in Conscience, in
Honour, in every thing, I have nothing to say
to thee, thou second, wicked, Bundle! 
But, said I, come to my Arms, my dear
third Parcel, the Companion of my Poverty,
and the Witness of my Honesty; and may I
never deserve the least Rag that is contain'd in
thee, when I forfeit a Title to that Innocence
which I hope will ever be the Pride of my Life!
and then I am sure it will be my highest Comfort
at my Death, when all the Riches and
Pomp in the World will be worse than the
vilest Rags that can be worn by Beggars! And
so I hugg'd my third Bundle. 
But, said I, Mrs. Jervis, (and she wept
to hear me) one thing more I have to trouble
you with, and that's all. 
There are Four Guineas, you know, that
came out of my good Lady's Pocket, when she
dy'd, that, with some Silver, my Master gave
me: Now these same Four Guineas I sent to
my poor Father and Mother, and they have
broken them; but would make them up, if
I would: And if you think it should be so,
it shall. But pray tell me honestly your Mind: 

As to the Three Years before my Lady's Death,
do you think, as I had no Wages, I may be suppos'd
to be Quits? —By Quits, I cannot mean,
that my poor Services should be equal to my
Lady's Goodness; for that's impossible. But as
all her Learning and Education of me, as Matters
have turn'd, will be of little Service to me
now; for it had been better for me to have
been brought up to hard Labour, to be sure; 
for that I must turn to at last, if I can't get a
Place (and you know, in Places too, one is
subject to such Temptations as are dreadful to
think of): So I say, by Quits I only mean, as
I return all the good things she gave me,
whether I may not set my little Services against
my Keeping; because, as I said, my Learning
is not now in the Question; and I am sure
my dear good Lady would have thought so,
had she liv'd: But that, too, is now out of the
Question. Well then, if so, I would ask,
Whether in above this Year that I have liv'd
with my Master, as I am resolv'd to leave all
his Gifts behind me, I may not have earn'd,
besides my Keeping, these Four Guineas, and
these poor Cloaths here upon my Back, and
in my third Bundle? Now tell me your Mind
freely, without Favour or Affection. 
Alas! my dear Maiden, said she, you
make me unable to speak to you at all: To be
sure, it will be the highest Affront that can
be offer'd, for you to leave any of these things
behind you; and you must take all your Bundles 

with you, or my Master will never forgive
you. 
Well, well, Mrs. Jervis, said I, I don't
care; I have been too much used to be snubb'd
and hardly treated by my Master, of late. I
have done him no Harm; and I shall always
pray for him, and wish him happy. But I
don't deserve these Things; I know I don't. 
Then I can't wear them, if I should take them; 
so they can be of no Use to me: And I trust
I shall not want the poor Pittance, that is all
I desire to keep Life and Soul together. Bread
and Water I can live upon, Mrs. Jervis, with
Content. Water I shall get any-where; and if
I can't get me Bread, I will live like a Bird in
Winter upon Hips and Haws, and at other times
upon Pig-nuts, and Potatoes, or Turneps, or any
thing. So what Occasion have I for these Things? 
–––But all I ask is about these Four Guineas, and
if you think I need not return them, that is
all I want to know. —To be sure, my Dear,
you need not, said she; you well earn'd them
by that Waistcoat only. No, I think not so,
in that only; but in the Linen, and other
Things, do you think I have? Yes, yes, said
she, and more. And my Keeping allow'd for,
I mean, said I, and these poor Cloaths on my
Back, besides? Remember that, Mrs. Jervis. 
Yes, my dear Odd-one, no doubt you have! 
Well then, said I, I am as happy as a Princess! 
I am quite as rich as I wish to be! And,
once more, my dear third Bundle, I will hug
thee to my bosom. And I beg you'll say nothing 

of all this till I am gone, that my Master
mayn't be so angry, but that I may go in Peace; 
for my Heart, without other Matters, will be
ready to break to part with you all. 
Now, Mrs. Jervis, said I, as to one Matter
more: and that is, my Master's last Usage of
me, before Mr. Longman. —Said she, Pr'ythee,
dear Pamela, step to my Chamber, and
fetch me a Paper I left on my Table. I have
something to shew you in it. I will, said I,
and stepp'd down; but that was only a Fetch
to take the Orders of my Master, I found. It
seems, he said, he thought two or three times
to have burst out upon me; but he could not
stand it, and wish'd I might not know he was
there. But I tripp'd up again so nimbly, (for
there was no Paper) that I just saw his Back,
as if coming out of that Green-room, and going
into the next to it, the first Door that was
open. —I whipp'd in, and shut the Door, and
bolted it. O Mrs. Jervis, said I, what have
you done by me? —I see I can't confide in any
body. I am beset on all Hands! Wretched,
wretched Pamela! where shalt thou expect a
Friend, if Mrs. Jervis joins to betray me thus? 
—She made so many Protestations, (telling
me all, and that he own'd I had made him
wipe his Eyes two or three times; and said, she
hop'd it would have a good Effect; and remember'd
me, that I had said nothing but would
rather move Compassion than Resentment) that
I forgave her. But O! that I was safe from this
House! for never poor Creature sure was so 

fluster'd as I have been for so many Months together! 
–––––I am call'd down from this most
tedious Scribble. I wonder what will next
befal 
Your dutiful Daughter. 
Mrs. Jervis says, she is sure I shall have the
Chariot to carry me home to you. Tho'
this will look too great for me, yet it will
shew as if I was not turn'd away quite in
Disgrace. The travelling Chariot is come
from Lincolnshire, and I fansy I shall go
in that; for the other is quite grand. 

