


Lady Olivia, To Sir Charles Grandison. 
(Translated by Dr. Bartlett.) 


Florence, Aug. 22. Sept. 2.
I  Am to take it kindly, that you have thought fit to
write to the unhappy Olivia before you leave ltaly. 
I could not have expected even this poor favour, after
the parting it was your pleasure to call everlasting. 
Cruel man! —Can I still call you so? I did, before
I had this Letter; and was determined, that you
should have reason to repent your cruelty: But this
Letter has almost reconciled me to you; so far reconciled
me, however, as to oblige me to lay aside the
intended vengeance that was rolling towards you from
slighted Love. You have awakened me to my glory,
by your dispassionate, your tender reasonings. Your
Letter (for I have erased one officious passage in it) is in
my bosom all day. It is on my pillow at night. The
last thing, and the first thing, do I read it. The contents
make my rest balmy, my up-rising serene. But
it was not till I had read it the seventh time, and after
I had erased that obnoxious passage, that it began to
have that happy effect upon me. I was above advice,
for the first day. I could not relish your reasonings. 
Resolutions of vengeance had possessed me wholly. 

What a charm could there be in a Letter, that should
make a slighted woman lay aside her meditated vengeance? 
A woman too, that had fallen beneath herself
in the object of that despised Love. 
Allow me, Grandison, to say so. In the account
of worldly reckoning, it was so. And when I thought
I hated you, it was so in my own account. Yet could
you have returned my Love, I would have gloried in
my choice; and attributed to envy all the insolent
censures of maligners. 
But even at the seventh perusal, when my indignation
began to give way, would it have given way,
had you not, in the same Letter, hinted, that the
proud Bologna had given up all thoughts of a husband
in the man to whom my heart had been so long attached? 
—Allow me to call her by the name of her
city. I love not her, nor her family. I hate them
by their own proud names. It is an hereditary hatred,
augmented by rivalry, a rivalry that had like to have
been a successful one: And is she not proud, who,
whatever be her motive, can refuse the man, who has
rejected a nobler woman? Yet I think I ought to forgive
her; for has she not avenged me? If you are
grieved, that she has refused you, I am rejoiced. Be
the pangs she has so often given me, if possible, forgotten! 
What a miserable wretch, however, from my own
reflexions, did this intelligence make me! Intelligence
that I received before your Letter blessed my hands. 
Let me so express myself; the contents, I hope,
will be the means of blessing, by purifying, my
heart! —And why a miserable wretch? —O this man,
of sentiments the most delicate, of life and manners
the most unblameable; yet of air and behaviour so
truly gallant, had it not been for thy forwardness,
Olivia; had it not been for proposals, shame to thyself!
shame to thy sex! too plainly intimated to him; proposals
that owed their existence to inconsiderate Love; 

a Love mingled, I will now confess, with passions of
the darkest hue—Envy, malice—and those aggravated
by despair—would, on this disappointment from the
Bologna, have offered his hand to the Florentine! — 
But now do I own, that it cannot, that it ought not
to be. For what, Olivia, is there in the glitter of
thy fortune, thy greatest dependence, to attract a man,
whom worldly grandeur cannot influence? Who has
a fortune of his own so ample, that hundreds are the
better for it? —A man, whose oeconomy is regulated
by prudence? Who cannot be in such difficulties as
would give some little merit to the person who was so
happy as to extricate him from them? —A man, in
short, who takes pleasure in conferring obligations,
yet never lays himself under the necessity of receiving
returns? Prince of a man! What Prince, King,
Emperor, is so truly great as this man? And is he
not likewise surrounded by his nobles? —What a
number of people of high interior worth, make up the
circle of his acquaintance! 
And is there not, cannot there yet be hope; the
proud Bologna now (as she is) out of the question? 
—The Florentine wants not pride; but betrayed by
the violence of her temper, she has not had the caution
to confine herself within the bounds of female
(shall I say) hypocrisy? What she could not hide from
herself, she revealed to the man she loved: But never; 
however, was there any other man whom she
loved. Upon whom but one man, the haughty object
of her passion, did she ever condescend to look
down? Who but he was ever encouraged to look
up to her? —And did not his gentle, his humane, his
unreproaching heart, seem to pity rather than despise
her, till she was too far engaged? At the time
that she first cast her eyes upon him, his fortune was
not high: His father, a man of expence, was living,
and likely to live: His sisters, whom he loved as himself,
were hopeless of obtaining from their father fortunes 

equal to their rank and education. Olivia knew
all this from unerring intelligence. His friends, his
Bartlett, his Beauchamp, and others, were not in
circumstances, that set them above owing obligations
to him, slender as were his own appointments—Then
it was that thou, Olivia, valuedst thyself for being
blest with means to make the power of the man thou
lovedst, as large as his heart. Thou wouldest have
vested it all in him. Thou wouldest have conditioned
with him, that this he should do for one sister; this
for the other; this for one friend; this for another; 
and still another, to the extent of his wishes: And
with him, and the remainder, thou wouldest have been
happy. 
Surely there was some merit in Olivia's Love. 
But, alas! she was not prudent: Her temper, supposed
to be naturally haughty and violent, hurried her
into measures too impetuous. The soul of the man
she loved, too great to be attracted by riches, by
worldly glory, and capable of being happy in a mere
competence, was (how can I say it? I blush while I
write it!) disgusted by a violence that had not been
used to be restrained by the accustomed reserve. It
was all open day, no dark machinating night, in the
heart of the undissembling Olivia. She persecuted the
object of her passion with her Love, because she thought
she could lay him under obligation to it. By hoping
to prove herself more, she made herself appear less
than woman. She despised that affectation, that hypocrisy,
in her Sex, which unpenetrating eyes attribute
to modesty and shame—Shame of what! of a
natural passion? 
But you, Grandison, were too delicate, to be taken
with her sincerity. If you had penetration to distinguish
between reserve and openness of heart, you had
not greatness of mind enough to break thro' the low
restraints of custom; and to reward the latter in preference
to the former. Yet who, better than you, 

knows, that women in Love are actuated by one view,
and differ only in outward appearance? Will bars,
bolts, walls, rivers, seas, any more with-hold the supercilious,
than the less reserved? That passion which
made the Florentine compass earth and seas, in hopes
of obtaining its end, made, perhaps, the prouder Bologna
(and from pride) a more pitiable object—Yet,
who ever imputed immodesty to Olivia? Who ever
dared to harbour a thought injurious to her virtue? 
You only (custom her judge) have the power, but not,
I hope, the will, to upbraid her. You can. The creature,
who, conscious of having alarmed you by the
violence of her temper, would have lived with you on
terms of probation, and left it to your honour, on full
consideration and experience of that temper, to reward
her with the celebration, or punish her with rejection
(her whole fortune devoted to you) had subjected
herself to your challenges. But no-body else
could harbour a thought inglorious to her. 
And must she yield to the consciousness of her own
unworthiness, from a proposal made by herself, which
tyrant custom only can condemn? 
O yes, she must. There is, among your country-women,
one who seems born for you, and you for
her. If she can abate of a dignity, that a first and
only Love alone can gratify, and accept of a second-placed
Love, a widower-bachelor, as I may call you,
she, I know, must, will, be the happy woman. To
her the slighted Florentine can resign, which, with patience,
she never could to the proud Bologna; and the
sooner, because of the immortal hatred she bears to
that woman of Bologna. You, Grandison, have
been accustomed to be distinguished by women who
in degree and fortune might claim rank with princesses. 
Degree and fortune captivate you not—This
humbler fair-one is more suitable to your own degree:
And in the beauties of person and mind (at least, in
those beauties of the latter, which you must admire) 

she is superior either to your Bolognese or Florentine. 
Let my pen praise her, tho' malice to Clementina, and
despair of obtaining my own wishes, mingle with
my ink—She is mild, tho' sparkling: She is humble,
yet has dignity: She is reserved, yet is frank and open-hearted:
Nobody can impute to her either dissimulation
or licence of behaviour. We read her heart in
her countenance; and have no thought of looking
further for it: Wisdom has its seat on her lips; modesty,
on her brow: Her eyes avow the secrets of her
soul; and demonstrate, that she has no one, that she
need to be ashamed of: She can blush for others; 
for the unhappy Olivia she did more than once: But
for herself she need not blush. I loved, yet feared
her, the moment I saw her. I dared not to try myself
by her judgment. It was easy for me to see, that
she loved you; yet such were your engagements, your
supposed engagements, that I pitied her: And can we
be alarmed by, or angry at, her whom we pity? —Unworthy
Grandison! Unworthy I will call you; because
you cannot merit the Love of such a spotless
heart. You who could leave her, and, under colour
of honour, when there was no pre-engagement, and
when the proud family had rejected you, prefer to
such a fine young creature, a romantic Enthusiast— 
O may the sweet maiden, who wants not due consciousness
of interior worth, assert herself; and, by
refusing your second-placed addresses, vindicate the
dignity of beauty and innocence unequalled! 
If you, Grandison, cannot forgive Olivia for loving
you too well, for rendering herself too cheap to you; 
if you cannot repair in her own eyes, the honour of
one, who, in that case, must be sunk in yours beyond
the power of restoration; if you cannot forgive attempts
of the hand, in which the heart had no share,
but resisted; in a word, if you cannot forgive the
fervor of a Love, that, at times, combating my pride,
had nearly overturned my reason also—Then, let this 

virgin goodness be yours, and Olivia will endeavour
to forgive you—Yet—O that yet—Ah, Grandison! — 
But how can a woman bear that refusal, which, however
superior she may be in rank, in fortune, gives her
an inferiority to the man of her wishes, in the very
article in which it should be a woman's glory to retain
dignity, even were the man superior to her in
birth, and in all other outward advantages? I disdain
thee, Grandison, in this light. I will tear thy proud
image from my heart, or die. 
One request only, let me make, and permit your
pride to comply with it. Return not to me, but accept
(accept as a token of Love) the cabinets which
perhaps will be in England before you. They will
be thought by you of too great value; but they are
not too great for the grandeur of my fortune, and the
magnificence of my spirit. The medals alone, make
a collection that would do credit to the cabinet of a
sovereign Prince. These are in your taste. They are
nothing to Olivia, but for your sake. Accept of these
cabinets, as some atonement for the trouble I have
given you; for the attempts I have made upon your
liberty, and more than once (but Oh! with how feeble
a hand!) upon your life! How easy had it been to
take the latter, your soul so fearless, braving menaces
and danger, had I been resolved to take it! How many
ministers of vengeance, in my country, had I been determined
to execute it, would my fortune have procured
me! How easy would it have been for me to conceal
my guilt from all but myself, had the slow-working
bowl, or even the sharp-pointed poniard, given
thee up to my great revenge! —'Tis happy for us both,
however, that the proud Bigot rejected you! Your
death, and my distraction, had, probably, been the
consequence of her acceptance of you—Yet, how I
rave! —The moment I had seen you, my vengeance
would have been arrested, as more than once it was. 
O Grandison! How dear are you (were you now, 

I will endeavour to say) to the soul of Olivia! Dearer
than fame, than glory, and whatever the world deems
valuable. 
All that I ask of you now, that the Bologna, in
disappointing you, has disappointed herself (great revenge!)
is within your own power to grant, without
detriment to yourself, and, I hope, without regret. 
It consists of two or three articles: The first is, to resolve
within yourself, that you will not now, should
that heat of the zealot's imagination, which has seemed
to carry her above herself, subside (as I have no doubt
but it will); and should she even follow you to your
native place, as a still nobler woman ignobly did; 
that you will not now receive her offered hand! — 
O Grandison! —If you do— 
Next, that you will (thus fairly, tho' foolishly, dismissed,
and the whole family rejoicing in your dismission,
well as they pretend to love you) put it out
of your own power, since the Florentine can have no
hope, to give the Bolognese any. My soul thirsts to
see her in a Nunnery: I could myself assume the veil
in the same convent, I think I could, for the pleasure
of exulting over her for the pangs she has occasioned
me. But for her, Olivia would have been mistress of
her own wishes. 
Preach not to me, Grandison, against that spirit of
revenge, which ever did, and ever must, actuate my
heart. Slighted Love will warrant it, or nothing can! 
Have I not lost the man I loved by it? Can I regain
him, if I conquer that not ignoble vehemence of a great
mind? —No! —Forbear then the unavailing precept. 
I am not of Bologna. I am no zealot! While the
warm blood flows in my veins, I pretend not to be
above human nature. When I can divest myself of
that, then, perhaps, I may follow your advice: I
may seek to cultivate the friendship of Mrs. Beaumont:
But till then, she would not accept of mine. 
O Grandison! born to distinction! princely in 

your munificence! amiable in your person! great in
your mind, in your sentiments! you have conquered
your ambition—You may therefore unite yourself to
the politest country maid, and the loveliest, that ever
adorned your various climate: Yet, O that in the same
hour, the Bolognese might assume the veil, and the
lovely English maid refuse your offered hand! 
My third request is (as before requested) that you
will not refuse the cabinets which will be soon embarked
for you. Be not afraid of me, Grandison; I form
no pretensions upon you from this present; valuable
as you, perhaps, may think it. Your simple acceptance
is all the return I hope for. Write only these
words with your own hand—“Olivia, I accept your
present, and thank you for it.” Receive it only as
a token of my past Love, for a man whose virtues I
admire, and, by degrees, shall hope to imitate. That,
Sir, when a certain event was most my wish, was not
the least motive for that wish: But now, what will
be the destiny of the bewildered creature, who is left
at large to her own will, who can tell? A will, that
only one man in the world could have subjugated. 
His controul would have been freedom. 
I would not have you imagine, that a correspondence,
by Letter, is hoped for, as a return for the Present of
which I entreat your acceptance: But when I can
assure you, that your advice will probably be of great
service to me, in the conduct of my future life, as I
have no doubt it will, from the calm effects that the
Letter, which has now a place in my bosom, has
already produced there, I am ready to flatter myself,
that a wish so ardent, and so justifiable, will be granted
to the repeated request of 
Olivia. 



Continuation of Sir Charles Grandison's Letter,
No. XL. Begun p. 251.
Olivia, you see, my dear Dr. Bartlett, concludes
her Letter, with a desire of corresponding
with me. As she has put it, I cannot refuse her request. 
How happy should I think myself, if I could
be a means effectually to serve her in the conduct of
her future life! 
I have written to her, that I shall think an intercourse
by Letters an honour done me, if she will
allow me to treat her with the freedom and the singleness
of heart of an affectionate brother. 
As to her particular recommendation of a third person,
I tell her, that must be the subject of the future
correspondence to which she is pleased to invite me. 
Olivia may be in earnest, in her warm commendations
of a Lady, of whose excellencies nobody
can write or speak with indifference: But I
have no doubt, that she is very earnest to know my
sentiments on the subject. But what must be the mind
of the bachelor-widower, as she calls me, if already I
can enter into the subject with any-body, with Lady
Olivia especially? The most sensible, I will not say
subtle creature on earth, is certainly a woman in Love. 
What can escape her penetration? What can bound
her curiosity? 
I tell her, that I can neither decline nor accept of
her present, till I see the contents of the cabinets she
is pleased to mention. It will give me pain, I say,
to refuse any favour from Lady Olivia, by which she
intends to shew her esteem of me: But favours of so
high a price, will, and ought to, give scruples to one
who would not be thought ungenerous. 
I had always admired, I tell her, her collection of
medals: But they are a family collection, of two or
three generations: And I should not allow myself to
accept of such a treasure, unless I could have an opportunity 

given me to shew, if not my merit, my gratitude; 
and that I saw no possibility of being blessed
with, in any manner, that could make the acceptance
tolerably easy to myself. I cannot, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
receive from this munificent Lady a present
that is of such high intrinsic worth. Had she offered
me any-thing that would have had its value from the
giver, or to the receiver, for its own sake, and not
equally to any-body else; for instance, had she desired
me to accept of her picture, since the original could
not me mine; I would not have refused it, tho' it had
been incircled with jewels of price. But, circumstanced
as this unhappy Lady and I are, could I have asked
her for a favour of that nature? 
I think, I have broken thro' one delicacy, in consenting
to correspond with this Lady. She should not
have asked it. I never knew a pain of so particular a
nature as this Lady (a not ungenerous, tho' a rash
one) has given me. My very heart recoils, Dr. Bartlett,
at the thought of a denial of marriage to a woman
expecting the offer, whom delicacy has not quite forsaken. 
But a word or two more on this subject of Presents. 
When the whole family at Bologna were so earnestly
solicitous to shew their gratitude to me by some permanent
token, I had once the thought of asking for
their Clementina's picture in miniature: But as I was
never to think of her as mine, and as, probably, my
picture, if but for politeness sake, would have been
asked for in exchange, I was afraid of cherishing, by
that means, in her mind, the tender ideas of our past
friendship, and thereby of making the work of her
parents difficult. And do they not the more excusably
hope to succeed in their views, as they think their success
will be a means to secure health of mind to their
child? But if they visit me in England, I will then
request the pictures of the whole family, in one large
piece, for the principal ornament of Grandison-hall. 

By what Olivia says, of designs on my liberty, I believe
she means to include the attempt made upon me
at Florence; which I hinted at in my last, and supposed
to come from that quarter. What she would
have done with me, had the attempt succeeded, I cannot
imagine. I should not have wished to have been
the subject of so romantic an adventure—A prisoner
to a Lady in her castle! —She is certainly one of the
most enterprising women in ltaly; and her temper is
too well seconded by her power. She would not,
however, in that case, have had recourse to fatal acts
of violence. Once, you know, she had thoughts of
exciting against me the Holy Tribunal: But I was upon
such a foot, as a traveller, and as an English Protestant,
tho' avowed, not behaving indiscreetly, that I
had friends enow, even in the Sacred College, to have
rendered ineffectual any steps of that sort. And
after all, her machinations were but transitory ones,
and, the moment she saw me, given over. 
My first enquiry, after my arrival here, was after
my poor cousin Grandison. My poor cousin, indeed! 
What a spiritless figure does he make! I remember
you once said, That it was more difficult for a man to
behave well in prosperity, than in adversity: But the
man who will prove the observation to be true, must
not be one, who, by his own extravagance and vice,
has reduced himself, from an affluence to which he
was born, to penury, at least to a state of obligation
and dependence. Good God! that a man should be
so infatuated, as to put on the cast of a dye, the estate
of which he is in unquestioned possession from his ancestors! 
Yet who will say, that he who hopes to win
what belongs to another, does not deserve to lose his
own? 
I soothed my cousin in the best manner I could, consistently
with justice: Yet I told him, that his repentance
must arise from his judgment, as well as from his
sufferings; and that he would have less reason for regretting 

 the unhappy situation to which he had reduced
himself, if the latter brought him to a right sense of
his errors. I was solicitous, Dr. Bartlett, for the sake
of his own peace of mind, that he should fall into a
proper train of thinking: But I told him, that preachment
was no more my intention, than recrimination. 
I have two hands to one tongue, my cousin, said
I; and the latter I use not but to tell you, that both
the former are cordially at your service. You have
considered this matter well, no doubt, added I: Can
you propose to me any means of retrieving your
affairs? 
There is, said he, one way. It would do everything
for me: But I am afraid of mentioning it to
you. 
If it be a just way, fear not. If it be any-thing I
can do for you, out of my own single purse, without
asking any second or third person to contribute to it,
command me—He hesitated. 
If it be any-thing, my cousin, said I, that you think
I ought not, in justice, in honour, to comply with, do
not, for your own sake, mention it. Let me see that
your calamity has had a proper effect upon you. Let
not the just man be sunk in the man in adversity; 
and then open your mind freely to me. 
He could not, he said, trust the mention of the expedient
to me, till he had given it a further consideration. 
Well, Sir, be pleased to remember, that I will
never ask you to mention it; because I cannot doubt
but you will, if, on consideration, you think it a proper
expedient. 
When some friends, who came to visit me on my
arrival, were gone, my cousin resumed the former subject:
But he offered not to mention his expedient. I
hope it was not, that he had a view to my Emily. I
am very jealous for my Emily. If I thought poor
Everard had but an imagination of retrieving his affairs 

by her fortune, nothing but his present calamity should
hinder me from renouncing for ever my cousin. 
I enquired particularly into the situation he was in; 
and if there were a likelihood of doing any-thing with
the gamesters. But he could not give me room for
such an expectation. I find he has lost all his estate
to them, Dunton-farm excepted; which, having been
much out of repair, is now fitting up for a new tenant; 
and will not, for three or four years to come,
bring him in a clear fifty pounds a year. 
I have known more men than one, who could not
live upon fifteen hundred a year, bring themselves to
be contented with fifty. But Mr. Grandison is so
fallen in spirit, that he never will be able to survive
such a change of fortune, if I do not befriend him. 
Poor man! he is but the shadow of what he was. 
The first formerly in the fashion: In body and face
so erect; his steps so firm, gait so assured, air so genteel,
eye so lively—But now, in so few months, gaunt
sides; his half-worn tarnish'd-laced coat, big enough
to lap over him; hollow cheeks, puling voice, sighing
heart, creeping feet—O my Dr. Bartlett, how
much does it behove men so little able to bear distress,
to avoid falling into it by their own extravagance! 
But for a man to fall into indigence thro' avarice (for
what is a spirit of gaming, but a spirit of avarice, and
that of the worst sort?) How can such a one support
his own reflexions? 
I had supposed, that he had no reason, in this shattered
state of his affairs, to apprehend any-thing from
the prosecution set on foot by the woman who claimed
him on promise of marriage; but I was mistaken; 
she has, or pretends to have, he told me, witnesses
of the promise. Poor shameful man! What witnesses
needed she, if he knows he made it, and received the
profligate consideration? 
I am not happy, my dear friend, in my mind. I
hope to be tolerably so, if my next Letters from Bologna 

are favourable, as to the state of health of the
beloved brother and sister there. 
It would have been no disagreeable amusement to
me, at this time, to have proceeded directly to Ireland; 
the rather, as I hope a visit to my estate there is become
almost necessary, by the forwardness the works are in
which I set on foot when I was on that more than
agreeable spot. But the unhappy situation of Mr.
Grandison's affairs, and my hopes of bringing those
of Lady Mansfield to an issue, together with the impatience
I have to see my English friends, determine
me to the contrary. To-morrow will be the
last day of my stay in this city; and the day after, my
cousin and I shall set out for Calais—Very quickly,
therefore, after the receipt of this Letter, which shuts
up the account of my foreign excursions, will you,
by your paternal goodness, if in London, help to
calm the disturbed heart of 
Your Charles Grandison. 

