



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, March 11. 
I have had such taunting messages, and such
repeated avowals of ill offices, brought me from
my Brother and Sister, if I do not comply with their
wills (delivered, too, with provoking sauciness by
Betty Barnes) that I have thought it proper, before I
entered upon my inrended address to my Uncles, in
pursuance of the hint given me in my Mother's Letter,
to expostulate a little with them. But I have
done it in such a manner, as will give you (if you
please to take it as you have done some parts of my
former Letters) great advantage over me. In short,
you will have more cause than ever, to declare me
far gone in Love, if my reasons for the change of
my style in these Letters, with regard to Mr. Lovelace,
do not engage your more favourable opinion. — 
For I have thought proper to give them their own
way; and, since they will have it, that I have a preferable
regard for Mr. Lovelace, I give them cause
rather to confirm their opinion than doubt it. 
These are my reasons in brief, for the alteration of
my style. 
In the first place, they have grounded their principal
argument for my compliance with their will,
upon my acknowlegement that my heart is free; and
so, supposing I give up no preferable person, my opposition
has the look of downright obstinacy in their
eyes; and they argue, that, at worst, my aversion to
Solmes is an aversion that may be easily surmounted,
and ought to be surmounted in duty to my Father,
and for the promotion of family-views. 
Next, altho' they build upon this argument in order 

to silence me, they seem not to believe me, but treat
me as disgracefully, as if I were in love with one of
my Father's footmen: —So that my conditional willingness
to give up Mr. Lovelace has procured me no
favour. 
In the next place, I cannot but think, that my
Brother's antipathy to Mr. Lovelace is far from being
well-grounded: The man's inordinate passion for the
Sex is the crime that is always rung in my ears: And
a very great one it is: But, does my Brother recriminate
upon him thus in love to me? —No—His whole
behaviour shews me, that That is not his principal
motive, and that he thinks me rather in his way than
otherwise. 
It is then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak
a little in favour of a man, who, altho' provoked by
my Brother, did not do him all the mischief he could
have done him, and which my Brother had endeavoured
to do him. It might not be amiss therefore, I
thought, to alarm them a little with an apprehension,
that the methods they are taking with me are the
very reverse of those they should take to answer the
end they design by them. And after all, what is the
compliment I make Mr. Lovelace, if I allow it to be
thought, that I do really prefer him to such a man as
him they terrify me with? Then, my Miss Howe
[concluded I] accuses me of a tameness which subjects
me to insults from my Brother: I will keep
that dear friend in my eye; and for all these considerations,
try what a little of her spirit will do—sit it ever
so aukwardly upon me. 
In this way of thinking, I wrote to my Brother and
Sister. This is my Letter to him. 

Treated as I am treated, and, in a great measure,
if not wholly, by your instigations, Brother, you
must permit me to expostulate with you upon the occasion. 
It is not my intention to displease you in what 

I am going to write: And yet I must deal freely with
you. The occasion calls for it. 
And permit me, in the first place, to remind you,
That I am your Sister; and not your Servant; and
that, therefore, the bitter revilings and passionate language
brought me from you, upon an occasion in
which you have no reason to prescribe to me, are neither
worthy of my character to bear, nor of yours
to offer. 
Put the case, that I were to marry the man you
dislike; and that he were not to make a polite or tender
Husband, Is that a reason for you to be an unpolite
and disobliging Brother? —Why must you, Sir,
anticipate my misfortunes, were such a case to happen? 
—Let me tell you plainly, that the man who
could treat me as a Wife, worse than you of late
have treated me as a Sister, must be a barbarous man
indeed. 
Ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, If you would thus
have treated your Sister Bella, had she thought fit to
receive the addresses of the man so much hated by
you? —If not, let me caution you, my Brother, not
to take your measures by what you think will be borne,
but rather by what ought to be offered. 
How would you take it, if you had a Brother,
who, in a like case, were to act by you, as you do
by me? You cannot but remember what a Laconic
answer you gave even to my Father, who recommended
to you Miss Nelly D'Oily—You did not
like her, were your words: And that was thought
sufficient. 
You must needs think, that I cannot but know to
whom to attribute my disgraces, when I recollect my
Father's indulgence to me, in permitting me to decline
several offers; and to whom, that a common
cause is endeavoured to be made, in favour of a man
whose person and manners are more exceptionable than
those of any of the gentlemen I have been permitted
to refuse. 

I offer not to compare the two men together: Nor
is there indeed the least comparison to be made between
them. All the difference to the one's disadvantage,
if I did, is but in one point—Of the greatest
importance, indeed—But to whom of most importance? 
—To myself, surely, were I to encourage his
application: —Of the least to you. Nevertheless, if
you do not, by your strange politics, unite that man
and me as joint-sufferers in one cause, you shall find
me as much resolved to renounce him, as I am to
refuse the other. I have made an overture to this
purpose: I hope you will not give me reason to confirm
my apprehensions, that it will be owing to you
if it be not accepted. 
It is a sad thing to have it to say, without being
conscious of ever having given you cause of offence,
that I have in you a Brother, but not a Friend. 
Perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the
reasons of your late and present conduct with a foolish
Sister. But if politeness, if civility, be not due to
that character, and to my Sex, justice is. 
Let me take the liberty further to observe, that the
principal end of a young Man's education at the University,
is, to learn him to reason justly, and to subdue
the violence of his passions. I hope, Brother,
that you will not give room for any-body who knows
us both, to conclude, that the Toilette has taught
the one more of the latter doctrine, than the University
has taught the other. I am truly sorry to have
cause to say, that I have heard it often remarked,
that your uncontrouled passions are not a credit to
your liberal education. 
I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I
have taken with you: You have given me too much
reason for it, and you have taken much greater with
me, without reason;—so, if you are offended, ought to
look at the cause, and not at the effect: —Then examining
yourself, that cause will cease, and there will 

not be any-where a more accomplished gentleman
than my Brother. 
Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir (unkindly as
you have used me) and not the pertness which of late
you have been so apt to impute to me, is my motive
in this hint. Let me invoke your returning kindness,
my only Brother! And give me cause, I beseech you,
to call you my compassionating Friend. For I am,
and ever will be, 
Your affectionate Sister,
Clarissa Harlowe. 
This is my Brother's Answer. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I know, there will be no end of your impertinent
scribble, if I don't write to you. I write therefore: 
But, without entering into argument with such
a conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it is, to
forbid you to plague me with your quaint nonsense. 
I know not what Wit in a woman is good for, but to
make her over-value herself, and despise every other
person. Yours, Miss Pert, has set you above your
duty, and above being taught or prescribed to, either
by Parents, or any-body else—But go on, Miss: 
your mortification will be the greater; That's all,
child. It shall, I assure you, if I can make it so, so
long as you prefer that villainous Lovelace (who is
justly hated by all your family) to every-body. We
see by your Letter now (what we too justly suspected
before) most evidently we see, the hold he has got
of your forward heart. But the stronger the hold,
the greater must be the force (and you shall have
enough of that) to tear such a miscreant from it. In
me, notwithstanding your saucy lecturing, and your
saucy reflections before, you are sure of a Friend, as
well as of a Brother, if it be not your own fault. 

But if you will still think of such a wretch as that
Lovelace, never expect either Friend or Brother in 
Ja. Harlowe. 
I will now give you a copy of my Letter to my
Sister; with her Answer. 

In what, my dear Sister, have I offended you, that
instead of endeavouring to soften my Father's anger
against me (as I am sure I should have done for
you, had my unhappy case been yours) you should,
in so hard-hearted a manner, join to aggravate not
only his displeasure, but my Mother's against me. 
Make but my case your own, my dear Bella; and
suppose you were commanded to marry Mr. Lovelace
(to whom you are believed to have an antipathy)
would you not think it a very grievous injunction? — 
Yet cannot your dislike to Mr. Lovelace be greater
than mine is to Mr. Solmes. Nor are Love and Hatred
voluntary passions. 
My Brother may perhaps think it a proof of a
manly spirit, to shew himself an utter stranger to the
gentle passions. We have both heard him boast, that
he never loved with distinction; and, having predominating
passions, and checked in his first attempt,
perhaps he never will. It is the less wonder then,
raw from the College, so lately himself the tutored,
that he should set up for a tutor, a prescriber to our
gentler Sex, whose tastes and manners are differently
formed: For what, according to his account, are
Colleges, but classes of Tyrants, from the Upper-students
over the Lower, and from them to the Tutor? 
—That he, with such masculine passions, should
endeavour to controul and bear down an unhappy
Sister, in a case where his antipathy, and, give me
leave to say, his ambition [Once you would have
allowed the latter to be his fault] can be gratified by
so doing, may not be quite so much to be wondered 

at—But, that a Sister should give up the cause of a
Sister, and join with him to set her Father and Mother
against her, in a case that might have been her
own—Indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you. 
There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought
reclaimable, and when it was far from being deemed
a censurable view to hope to bring back to the paths
of virtue and honour, a man of his sense and understanding. 
I am far from wishing to make the experiment: 
But nevertheless will say, That if I have not
a regard for him, the disgraceful methods taken to
compel me to receive the addresses of such a man as
Mr. Solmes, are enough to induce it. 
Do you, my Sister, for one moment, lay aside all
prejudice, and compare the two men in their births,
their educations, their persons, their understandings,
their manners, their air, and their whole deportments; 
and in their fortunes too, taking in reversions; and
then judge of both: Yet, as I have frequently
offered, I will live single with all my heart, if that
will do. 
I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace. I
would, if I could, oblige all my friends. But will it
be just, will it be honest, to marry a man I cannot
endure? If I have not been used to oppose the will
of my Father, but have always delighted to oblige
and obey, judge of the strength of my antipathy, by
the painful opposition I am obliged to make, and cannot
help it. 
Pity then, my dearest Bella, my Sister, my Friend,
my Companion, my Adviser, as you used to be when
I was happy, and plead for 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 


To Miss Clary Harlowe.
Let it be pretty or not pretty in your wise opinion,
I shall speak my mind, I will assure you,
both of you and your conduct in relation to this detested
Lovelace. You are a fond foolish girl with all
your wisdom. Your Letter shews that enough in
twenty places. And as to your cant of living single,
nobody will believe you. This is one of your fetches
to avoid complying with your duty, and the will of
the most indulgent parents in the world, as yours have
been to you, I am sure—Tho' now they see themselves
finely requited for it. 
We all, indeed, once thought your temper soft and
amiable: But why was it? You never was contradicted
before. You had always your own way. But
no sooner do you meet with opposition in your wishes
to throw yourself away upon a vile Rake, but you
shew what you are. You cannot love Mr. Solmes!
that's the pretence: But, Sister, Sister, let me tell you,
that is because Lovelace has got into your fond heart: — 
A wretch hated, justly hated, by us all; and who has
dipped his hands in the blood of your Brother: Yet
him you would make our relation, would you? 
I have no patience with you, but for putting the
case of my liking such a vile wretch as him. As to
the encouragement you pretend he received formerly
from all our family, it was before we knew him to be
so vile: And the proofs that had such force upon us,
ought to have had some upon you: —And would, had
you not been a foolish forward girl; as on this occason
every body sees you are. 
O how you run out in favour of the wretch! — 
His birth, his education, his person, his understanding,
his manners, his air, his fortune—Reversions too
taken in to augment the surfeiting catalogue! What
a fond string of love-sick praises is here! And yet
you would live single—Yes, I warrant!—when so 

many imaginary perfections dance before your dazled
eye? —But no more—I only desire, that you will not,
while you seem to have such an opinion of your wit,
think every one else a fool; and that you can at
pleasure, by your whining flourishes, make us all
dance after your lead. 
Write as often as you will, this shall be the last
answer or notice you shall have upon this subject
from 
Arabella Harlowe. 
I had in readiness a Letter for each of my Uncles; 
and meeting in the garden a servant of my Uncle
Harlowe, I gave them to him to deliver according to
their respective directions. If I am to form a judgment
by the Answers I have received from my Brother
and Sister, as above, I must not, I doubt, expect
any good from those Letters. But when I have tried
every expedient, I shall have the less to blame myself
for, if any-thing unhappy should fall out. I will send
you copies of both, when I shall see what notice they
will be thought worthy of, if of any. 