


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Monday, April 3. 
The Countess of D. and the Earl her son have but
just left us. The Countess sent last night, to let my
cousin Reeves know of their intended morning visit,
and they came together. As the visit was made to my
cousin, I did not think myself obliged to be in waiting
for them below. I was therefore in my closet,
comforting myself with my own agreeable reflexions. 
They were there a quarter of an hour before I was
sent to. 
Their talk was of me. I am used to recite my
own praises, you know; and what signifies making
a parade of apologies for continuing the use? I don't
value myself so much as I once did on peoples favourable
opinions. If I had a heart in my own keeping,
I should be glad it was thought a good one; that's
all. Yet tho' it has littlenesses in it, that I knew nothing
of formerly, I hope it is not a bad one. 
My Lord D. by the whole turn of the partial conversation,
was led to expect a very extraordinary young
woman. The Lady declared, that she would have
her talk out, and hear all my two cousins were inclined
to say of me, before I was sent up to, as I was
not below when they came. 
I was therefore to be seen only as a subject of curiosity. 
My Lord had declared, it seems, that he
would not be denied an introduction to me by his mother. 
But there were no thoughts of making any
application to a girl whose heart was acknowleged 

not to be her own. My Lord's honour would not
allow of such an intention. Nor ought it. 
His impatience, however, hastened the message to
me. The Countess met me half-way, and embraced
me: My lovely girl, how do you? —My Lord, said
she, turning to the Earl, I need not say, This is Miss
Byron. 
He bowed low, and made me a very high compliment; 
but it had sense in it, tho' high, and above
my merits. Girls, writing of themselves on these
occasions, must be disclaimers, you know: But, my
dear uncle, what care I now for compliments? The
man, from whose mouth only they could be acceptable,
is not at liberty to make me any. 
The Countess engaged me in an easy general conversation; 
part of which turned upon Lord and Lady
L. Miss Grandison, and Miss Jervois, and how I had
passed my time at Colnebrooke, in this wintry season,
when there were so many diversions in town. But, said
she, you had a man with you, who is the admiration
of every man and woman, where-ever he goes. 
Is there no making an acquaintance, said my Lord,
with Sir Charles Grandison? What I hear said of
him, every time he is mentioned in company, is
enough to fire a young man with emulation. I should
be happy did I deserve to be thought of as a second or
third man to Sir Charles Grandison. 
I dare say, returned I, your Lordship's acquaintance
would be highly acceptable to him. He is easy of
access. Men of rank, if men of merit, must be of
kindred, and recognize one another the moment they
meet. But Sir Charles will soon leave England. 
The fool sighed: It was, you may believe, involuntarily. 
I felt myself blush, and was the more silly
for that. 
The Countess took my hand—One word with you,
my dear—and led me out into the next room, and
sitting down, made me sit on the same settee with her. 

O that I could call you daughter! began she at
once; and turning half round to me, put one arm
about me, with her other hand taking one of mine,
and earnestly looking in my downcast face. 
I was silent. Ah, Lucy! had Lady D. been the
mother of Sir Charles Grandison, with what pleasure
could I have listened to her! 
You said, my dear, that Sir Charles Grandison will
soon leave England: And then you sighed—Will you
be quite open-hearted? —May I ask you a question in
hope that you will? 
I was silent: Yet the word Yes, was on my lips. 
You have caused it to be told me, that your affections
are engaged. This has been a cruel blow upon
us. My Lord, nevertheless, has heard so much of
you [He is really a good young man, my dear], that
(against my advice, I own) he would have me introduce
him into your company. I see by his looks,
that he could admire you above all women. He never
was in love: I should be sorry if he were disappointed
in his first love. I hope his promised prudence will be
his guard, if there be no prospect of his succeeding
with you. —She paused—I was still silent— 
It will be a mark of your frankness of heart, my
dear, if, when you take my full meaning, you prevent
me speaking more than I need. —I would not oppress
you, my sweet love—Such a delicacy, and such
a frankness mingled, have I never seen in young woman—But
tell me, my dear, has Sir Charles Grandison
made his addresses to you? 
It was a grievous question for me to answer—But
why was it so, my Lucy, when all the hopes I ever
had, proceeded from my own presumption, confirmed
(that's true, of late!) by his sisters partiality in my favour; 
and when his unhappy Clementina has such a
preferable claim? 
What says Miss Byron? 
She says, madam, that she reveres Lady D. and 

will answer any questions that she puts to her, however
affecting—Sir Charles Grandison has not. 
Once I thought, proceeded she, that I never would
make a second motion, were the woman a princess,
who had confessed a prior love, or even liking: But
the man is Sir Charles Grandison, whom all women
must esteem; and the woman is Miss Byron, whom
all men must love. Let me ask you, my dear— 
Have you any expectation, that the first of men (I will
call him so) and the loveliest and most amiable-minded
of women, can come together? —You sighed, you
know, when you mentioned, that Sir Charles was
soon to leave England; and you own that he has not
made addresses to you—Don't be uneasy, my love! — 
We women, in these tender cases, see into each other's
hearts from small openings—Look upon me as your
mother—What say you, love? 
Your Ladyship compliments me with delicacy and
frankness—It is too hard a question, if I have any of
the first, to answer without blushes. A young woman
to be supposed to have an esteem for a man, who has
made no declarations, and whose behaviour to her is
such only as shews a politeness to which he is accustomed,
and only the same kind of tenderness as he
shews to his sisters;—and whom sometimes he calls
sister—as if—Ah, madam, how can one answer? 
You have answer'd, my dear, and with that delicacy
and frankness too, which make a principal part
of your character. If my son (and he shall not be
encouraged in his hopes, if he sees you not, mind as
well as person, with his mother's eyes) should not be
able to check himself by the apprehensions he has
had reason for, of being but a second man in the favour
of the object of his wishes [We, my dear, have
our delicacies] could you not allow him a second place
in your favour, that might, in time, as he should
merit, and as you should subdue your prepossessions,
give him a first? —Hush—my dear, for one moment— 

Your honour, your piety, are my just dependence; 
and will be his. —And now speak: It is to me, my
dear: Speak your whole heart: Let not any apprehended
difficulty—I am a woman as well as you. And
prepared to indulge— 
Your goodness, madam, and nothing else, interrupted
I, gives me difficulty. —My Lord D. seems to
me to be a man of merit, and not a disagreeable
man in his person and manners. What he said of Sir
Charles Grandison, and of his emulation being fired
by his example, gave him additional merit with me. 
He must have a good mind. I wish him acquainted
with Sir Charles, for his own sake, and for the sake
of the world, which might be benefited by his large
power, so happily directed! —But as to myself, I should
forfeit the character of frankness of heart, which your
Ladyship's goodness ascribes to me, if I did not declare,
that altho' I cannot, and, I think, ought not, to entertain
an hope with regard to Sir Charles Grandison, since
there is a Lady who deserved him by severe sufferings
before I knew him; yet is my heart so wholly attach'd,
that I cannot think it just to give the least encouragement
to any other proposal. 
You are an excellent young woman: But, my
dear, if Sir Charles Grandison is engaged—your mind
will, it must change. Few women marry their first
loves. Your heart— 
O madam! it is already a wedded heart: It is
wedded to his merits; his merits will be always the
object of my esteem: I can never think of any other,
as I ought to think of the man to whom I give my
hand. 
Like merits, my dear, as person is not the principal
motive, may produce like attachments. My Lord D.
will be, in your hands, another Sir Charles Grandison. 
How good you are, my dear Lady D.! But allow me
to repeat, as the strongest expression I can use, because 

I mean it to carry in it all the force that can be
given it, That my heart is already a wedded heart. 
You have spoken with great force: God bless you,
my dear, as I love you! The matter shall take its
course. If my Lord should happen to be a single man
some time hence (and, I can tell you, that your excellencies
will make our choice difficult); and if your
mind, from any accident, or from persuasion of friends,
should then have received alteration; you may still be
happy in each other. I will therefore only thank you for
that openness of heart, which must set free the heart
of my son—Had you had the least lurking inclination
to coquetry, and could have taken pride in conquests,
he might have been an undone man. —We will return
to the company—But spare him, my dear: You
must not talk much. He will love you, if you do,
too fervently for his own peace. Try to be a little
aukward—I am afraid for him: Indeed I am, O
that you had never seen Sir Charles Grandison! 
I could not answer one word. She took my hand; 
and led me into the company. 
Had I been silent, when my Lord directed his discourse
to me, or answer'd only No, or Yes, the
Countess would have thought me very vain; and, that
I ascribed to myself the consequence she so generously
gave me, with respect to my Lord. I therefore behaved
and answered unaffectedly; but avoided such a
promptness of speech, as would have looked like
making pretensions to knowlege and opinion, though
some of my Lord's questions were apparently design'd
to engage me into freedom of discourse. The Countess
observed me narrowly. She whisper'd to me, that
she did; and made me a very high compliment on my
behaviour. How much, Lucy, do I love and reverence
her! 
My Lord was spoken too slightly of, by Miss Grandison,
in a former conversation. He is really a fine
gentleman. Any woman who is not engaged in her 

affections, may think herself very happy with him. 
His conversation was easy and polite, and he said nothing
that was low or trifling. Indeed, Lucy, I think
Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick are as greatly inferior
to Lord D. as Lord D. is to Sir Charles Grandison. 
At parting, he requested of me, to be allowed to
repeat his visits. 
My Lord, said the Countess, before I could answer,
you must not expect a mere stiff maiden answer from
Miss Byron: She is above all vulgar forms. She and
her cousins have too much politeness, and, I will venture
to say, discernment, not to be glad of your acquaintance,
as an acquaintance—But, for the rest,
you must look to your heart. 
I shall be afraid, said he, turning to the Countess,
to ask your Ladyship for an explanation. Miss Byron,
I hope, Sir, addressing himself to Mr. Reeves, will
not refuse me her company, when I pay you my compliments. 
Then turning to me, I hope, madam, I
shall not be punished for admiring you. 
My Lord D. replied I, will be intitled to every
civility. I had said more, had he not snatched my
hand a little too eagerly, and kissed it. 
And thus much for the visit of the Countess of D.
and the Earl. 
Did I tell you in my former letter, that Emily is
with me half her time? She is a most engaging young
creature. Her manners are so pure! Her heart is so
sincere and open! —O Lucy! you would dearly love
her. I wish I may be asked to carry her down with
me. Yet she adores her guardian: But her reverence
for him will not allow of the innocent familiarity in
thinking of him, that—I don't know what I would
say. But to love with an ardor, that would be dangerous
to one's peace, one must have more tenderness
than reverence for the object: Don't you think
so, Lucy? 

Miss Grandison made me one of her flying visits,
as she calls them, soon after the Countess and my
Lord went away. 
Mr. and Mrs. Reeves told her all that had been
said before them by the Earl and Countess, as well
before I went down to them, as after. They could
not tell her what passed between that Lady and me,
when she took me aside. I had not had time to tell
them. They referred to me for that: But besides
that I was not in spirits, and cared not to say much,
I was not willing to be thought by my refusal of so
great an offer, to seem to fasten myself upon her brother. 
She pitied (Who but must?) Lady Clementina. 
She pitied her brother also: And, seeing me dejected,
she clasped her arms about me, and wet my cheek
with a sisterly tear. 
Is it not very strange, Lucy, that his father should
keep him so long abroad? These free-living men! 
What absurdities are they not guilty of? What misfortunes
to others do they not occasion? One might,
with the excellent Clementina, ask, What had Mr.
Grandison to do in Italy? Or why, if he must go
abroad, did he stay so long? 
Travelling! Young men travelling! I cannot, my
dear, but think it a very nonsensical thing! What
can they see, but the ruins of the gay, once busy
world, of which they have read? 
To see a parcel of giddy boys, under the direction
of tutors, or governors, hunting after—What? —Nothing; 
or at best but ruins of ruins; for the imagination,
aided by reflexion, must be left, after all,
to make out the greater glories which the grave-digger
Time has buried too deep for discovery. 
And when this grand tour is completed, the travell'd
youth returns: And, what is his boast? Why to be
able to tell, perhaps his better-taught friend, who has
never been out of his native country, that he has seen 

in ruins, what the other has a juster idea of, from
reading: And of which, it is more than probable, he
can give a much better account than the traveller. 
And are these, petulant Harriet (methinks, Lucy,
you demand) all the benefits, that you will suppose
Sir Charles Grandison has reaped from his travelling? 
Why, no. But then, in turn, I ask, Is every traveller
a Sir Charles Grandison? —And does not even
he confess to Dr. Bartlett, that he wished he had never
seen Italy? And may not the poor Clementina, and
all her family, for her sake, wish he never had? 
If an opportunity offers, I don't know, but I may
ask Sir Charles, Whether, in his conscience, he thinks,
that, taking in every consideration, relating to time,
expence, risques of life, health, morals, this part of
the fashionable education of youth of condition is
such an indispensable one, as some seem to suppose it? 
If Sir Charles Grandison give it not in favour of travelling,
I believe it will be concluded, that six parts
out of eight of the little masters who are sent abroad
for improvement, might as well be kept at home; if,
especially, they would be orderly, and let their fathers
and mothers know what to do with them. 
O my uncle! I am afraid of you: But spare the poor
girl: She acknowleges her petulance, her presumption. 
The occasion you know, and will pity her for
it! However, neither petulance nor presumption shall
make her declare as her sentiments what really are not
so, in her unprejudiced hours; and she hopes to have
her heart always open to conviction. 
For the present, Adieu, my Lucy. 
P. S. Dr. Bartlett tells me, that Mr. Beauchamp
is at Calais, waiting the pleasure of his father; 
and that Sir Harry has sent express for him,
as at his Lady's motion. 

