



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[In answer to Letter xlii.] 

Sunday Morning, April 9. 
Do not think, my beloved friend, altho' you have
given me in yours of yesterday a severer instance
of what, nevertheless, I must call your impartial 

Love, than ever yet I received from you, that I will
be displeased with you for it. That would be to put
myself into the inconvenient situation of Royalty: 
That is to say, Out of the way of ever being told of
my faults; of ever mending them; and In the way of
making the sincerest and warmest friendship useless
to me. 
And then how brightly, how nobly glows in your
bosom the sacred flame of friendship; since it can
make you ready to impute to the unhappy sufferer a
less degree of warmth in her own cause, than you have
for her, because she endeavours to divest herself of
Self so far as to leave others to the option which they
have a right to make! —Ought I, my dear, to blame,
ought I not rather to admire you for this ardor? 
But nevertheless, lest you should think that there
is any foundation for a surmise which (altho' it owe
its rise to your friendship) would, if there were, leave
me utterly inexcuseable; I must, in justice to myself,
declare, That I know not my own heart, if I have
any of that latent or un-owned inclination, which you
would impute to any other but me. Nor does the important
alternative sit lightly on my mind. And yet I
must excuse your Mother, were it but on this single
consideration, That I could not presume to reckon
upon her favour, as I could upon her Daughter's, so
as to make the claim of friendship upon her, to whom,
as the Mother of my dearest friend, a veneration is
owing, which can hardly be compatible with that
sweet familiarity which is one of the indispensable
requisites of the Sacred Tie by which your heart and
mine are bound in one. 
What therefore I might expect from my Anna
Howe, I ought not from her Mother; for would it
not be very strange, that a person of her experience
should be reflected upon because she gave not up her
own judgment, where the consequence of her doing
so would be to embroil herself, as she apprehends, 

with a family she has lived well with, and in behalf
of a child against her parents? —As she has moreover
a Daughter of her own: —A Daughter too, give me
leave to say, of whose vivacity and charming spirits
she is more apprehensive than she need to be, because
her truly maternal cares make her fear more from her
youth, than she hopes from her prudence; which nevertheless
she and all the world know to be beyond her
years. 
And here let me add, That whatever you may
generously, and as the result of an ardent affection for
your unhappy friend, urge on this head, in my behalf,
or harshly against any one who may refuse me protection
in the extraordinary circumstances I find myself
in; I have some pleasure, in being able to curb
undue expectations upon my indulgent friends, whatever
were to befal myself from those circumstances; 
for I should be extremely mortified, were I by my
selfish forwardness to give occasion for such a check,
as to be told, that I had encouraged an unreasonable
hope; or, according to the phrase you mention,
wished to take a Thorn out of my own foot, and to put
it into that of my friend. Nor should I be better
pleased with myself, if, having been taught by my
good Mrs. Norton, that the best of schools is That of
affliction, I should rather learn impatience than the
contrary, by the lessons I am obliged to get by heart
in it; and if I should judge of the merits of others,
as they were kind to me; and that at the expence of
their own convenience or peace of mind. For is not
This to suppose myself ever in the right; and all who
do not act as I would have them act, perpetually in
the wrong? In short, to make my sake, God's sake,
in the sense of Mr. Solmes's pitiful plea to me? 
How often, my dear, have You and I endeavoured
to detect and censure this partial spirit in others? 
But I know you do not always content yourself with
saying what you think may justly be said; but, in order 

to shew the extent of a penetration which can go
to the bottom of any subject, delight to say or to write
all that can be said or written, or even thought, on the
particular occasion; and this partly perhaps from being
desirous [Pardon me, my dear!] to be thought mistress
of a sagacity that is aforehand with events. But
who would wish to drain off or dry up a refreshing
current, because it now-and-then puts us to some
little inconvenience by its overflowings? In other
words, who would not allow for the liveliness of a
spirit which for one painful sensibility gives an hundred
pleasurable ones? And the one in consequence
of the other? 
But now I come to the two points in your Letter,
which most sensibly concern me: Thus you put
them: 
‘Whether I chuse not rather to go off [shocking
words!] with one of my own Sex; with my
Anna Howe—than with one of the other; 
with Mr. Lovelace?’ 
And if not, 
‘Whether I should not marry him as soon as
possible?’ 
You know, my dear, my reasons for rejecting your
proposal, and even for being earnest that you should
not be known to be assisting to me in an enterprize in
which a cruel necessity induced me to think of engageing; 
and for which you have not the same plea. At
this rate, well might your Mother be uneasy at our
correspondence, not knowing to what inconveniencies
it might subject her and you! —If I am hardly
excuseable to think of withdrawing from my unkind
friends, what could you have to say for yourself, were
you to abandon a Mother so indulgent? Does she
suspect that your fervent friendship may lead you to a
small indiscretion? and does this suspicion offend you? 

And would you, in resentment, shew her and the
world, that you can voluntarily rush into the highest
error that any of our Sex can be guilty of? 
And it is worthy of your generosity [I ask you,
my dear, is it?] to think of taking so undutiful a
step, because you believe your Mother would be glad
to receive you again? 
I do assure you, that were I to take this step myself,
I would run all risques rather than you should
accompany me in it. Have I, do you think, a desire
to double and treble my own fault in the eye of the
world? In the eye of that world, which, cruelly as I
am used (not knowing all) would not acquit me? 
But, my dearest kindest friend, let me tell you,
That we will neither of us take such a step. The manner
of putting your questions abundantly convinces
me, that I ought not, in your opinion, to attempt it. 
You no doubt intend that I shall so take it; and I
thank you for the equally polite and forcible conviction. 
It is some satisfaction to me (taking the matter in
this light) that I had begun to waver before I received
your last. And now I tell you, that it has absolutely
determined me not to go off; at least, not to-morrow. 
If You, my dear, think the issue of the alternative
(to use your own words) sits so lightly upon my mind; 
in short, that my inclination is faulty; the World
would treat me much less scrupulously. When therefore
you represent, that all punctilio must be at an end
the moment I am out of my Father's house; and hint,
that I must submit it to Mr. Lovelace to judge when
he can leave me with safety; that is to say, give him
the option whether he will leave me, or not; Who
can bear these reflections, who can resolve to incur
these inconveniences, that has the question still in her
own power to decide upon? 
While I thought only of an escape from This house
as an escape from Mr. Solmes; that already my reputation 

suffered by my confinement; and that it would
be still in my own option, either to marry Mr. Lovelace,
or wholly to renounce him; bold as the step
was, I thought, treated as I am treated, something
was to be said in excuse of it—If not to the world,
to myself: And to be self-acquitted, is a blessing to be
preferred to the opinion of all the world. But, after
I have censured most severely, as I have ever done,
those giddy girls, who have in the same hour, as I
may say, that they have fled from their chamber, presented
themselves at the Altar that is to witness to
their undutiful rashness; after I have stipulated with
Mr. Lovelace for time, and for an ultimate option
whether to accept or refuse him; and for his leaving
me, as soon as I am in a place of safety (which, as
you observe, he must be the judge of); and after he
has signified to me his compliance with these terms; so
that I cannot, if I would, recall them, and suddenly
marry;—You see, my dear, that I have nothing left
me, but to resolve not to go away with him. 
But, how, on this revocation of my appointment,
shall I be able to pacify him? 
How! —Why assert the privilege of my Sex! — 
Surely, on This side of the Solemnity he has no right
to be displeased. Besides, did I not reserve a power
of receding, if I saw fit? To what purpose, as I asked
in the case between your Mother and you, has anybody
an option, if the making use of it shall give the
refused a right to be disgusted? 
Far, very far, would Those, who, according to the
Old Law, have a right of absolving or confirming a
child's promise, be from ratifying mine, had it been
ever so solemn a one (a) . But This was rather an appointment, 

than a promise: And suppose it had been
the latter; and that I had not reserved to myself a
liberty of revoking it; was it to preclude better or
maturer consideration? —If so, how unfit to be given! 
—How ungenerous to be insisted upon! —And how
unfitter still, to be kept! —Is there a man living who
ought to be angry that a woman whom he hopes one
day to call his, shall refuse to keep a rash promise,
when, on the maturest deliberation, she is convinced
that it was a rash one? 
I resolve then, upon the whole, to stand This one
trial of Wednesday next—or, perhaps, I should rather
say, of Tuesday evening, if my Father hold his purpose
of endeavouring, in person, to make me read,
or hear read, and then sign, the Settlements. —That,
That must be the greatest trial of all. 
If I am compelled to sign them over-night—Then
(the Lord bless me!) must All I dread, follow, as of
course, on Wednesday. If I can prevail upon them by
my prayers [Perhaps I shall fall into fits; for the very
first appearance of my Father, after having been so 

long banished his presence, will greatly affect me—If,
I say, I can prevail upon them by my prayers] to
lay aside their views; or to suspend the day, if but
for one week; if not, but for two or three days; still
Wednesday will be a lighter day of trial. They will
surely give me time to consider; to argue with myself. 
This will not be promising. As I have made no effort
to get away, they have no reason to suspect me; so
I may have an opportunity, in the last resort, to withdraw. 
Mrs. Norton is to be with me: She, altho'
she should be chidden for it, will, in my extremity,
plead for me. My Aunt Hervey may, in such an extremity,
join with her. Perhaps my Mother may be
brought over. I will kneel to each, one by one, to
make a friend. Some of them have been afraid to
see me, lest they should be moved in my favour: 
Does not This give me a reasonable hope, that I may
move them? My Brother's counsel, heretofore given,
to turn me out of doors to my evil destiny, may again
be repeated, and may prevail: Then shall I be in no
worse case than now, as to the displeasure of my friends; 
and thus far better, that it will not be my fault that
I seek another protection: Which even then ought to
be my Cousin Morden's, rather than Mr. Lovelace's,
or any other person's. 
My heart, in short, misgives me less, when I resolve
This way, than when I think of the other: And
in so strong and involuntary a byass, the heart is, as
I may say, Conscience. And well cautions the wise
man: ‘Let the counsel of thine own heart stand; 
for there is no man more faithful to thee, than It: 
For a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him
more than seven watchmen, that sit above in a high
tower (a) .’ 
Forgive these indigested self-reasonings. I will
close here: And instantly set about a Letter of Revocation
to Mr. Lovelace; take it as he will. It 

will only be another trial of temper to him. To me
of infinite importance. And has he not promised
temper and acquiescence, on the supposition of a
change in my mind? 