



Mr. Lovelace, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
Superscribed, To Mrs. Lovelace. 

M. Hall, Sunday Night, June 25. 
My dearest Love,
I cannot find words to express how much I am mortified
at the return of my messenger without a line
from you. 
Thursday is so near, that I will send messenger after
messenger every Four hours, till I have a favourable
answer; the one to meet the other, till its eve arrives,
to know if I may venture to appear in your presence
with the hope of having my wishes answered on that
day. 
Your Love, Madam, I neither expect, nor ask for; 
nor will, till my future behaviour gives you cause to
think I deserve it. All I at present presume to wish,
is, To have it in my power to do you all the justice I
can now do you: And to your generosity will I leave
it, to reward me, as I shall merit, with your affection. 
At present, revolving my poor behaviour of Friday
night before you, I think I should sooner chuse to go
to my last Audit, unprepared for it as I am, than to
appear in your presence, unless you give me some hope,
that I shall be received as your elected husband, rather
than (however deserved) as a detested criminal. 

Let me therefore propose an expedient, in order to
spare my own confusion; and to spare you the necessity
for that Soul-harrowing recrimination, which I cannot
stand, and which must be disagreeable to yourself—To
name the Church, and I will have every-thing in readiness; 
so that our next interview will be, in a manner,
at the very Altar; and then you will have the kind
Husband to forgive for the faults of the ingrateful Lover. 
If your resentment be still too high to write more, let it
only be in your own dear hand, these words, St. Martin's
Church, Thursday—or these, St. Giles's Church
Thursday; nor will I insist upon any inscription or subscription,
or so much as the initials of your name. 
This shall be all the favour I will expect, till the dear
hand itself is given to mine, in presence of that Being
whom I invoke as a witness of the inviolable faith and
honour of 
Your adoring
Lovelace. 