



My dear Miss Darnford,
The Interest I take in every thing that concerns
you, makes me very importunate to
know how you approve the Gentleman, whom
some of his best Friends and Well-wishers have
recommended to your Favour. I hope he will
deserve your good Opinion, and then he must
excel most of the unmarried Gentlemen in England. 
Your Papa, in his humourous Manner, mentions
his large Possessions and Riches: But, indeed,
were he as rich as Crœsus, he should not
have my Consent, if he has no greater Merit; 
tho' that is what the Generality of Parents look
out for first: And indeed an easy Fortune is so
far from being to be disregarded, that, when
attended with equal Merit, I think it ought to
have a Preference given to it, supposing Affections
disingaged. For 'tis certain, that a Gentleman
or Lady may stand as good a Chance for Happiness
in Marriage with a Person of Fortune, as
with one who has not that Advantage; and notwithstanding
I had neither Riches nor Descent
to boast of, I must be of Opinion with those,
who say, that they never knew any body despise
either, that had them. But to permit Riches to
be the principal Inducement, to the Neglect of
superior Merit, that is the Fault which many a
one smarts for, whether the Choice be their own,
or imposed upon them by those who have a Title
to their Obedience. 

Here is a saucy Body, might some, who
have not Miss Darnford's kind Consideration
for her Friend, be apt to say, who being thus
meanly descended, presumes, nevertheless, to give
her Opinion, in these high Cases, unasked. But
I have one thing, my dear Miss, to say; and
that is, that I think myself so intirely divested
of Partiality to my own Case, that, as far as my
Judgment shall permit, I will never have that in
View, when I am presuming to hint my Opinion
of general Rules. For, most surely, the
Honours I have received, and the Debasement
to which my best Friend has subjected himself,
have, for their principal Excuse, that the Gentleman
was intirely independent; had no Questions
to ask, and had a Fortune sufficient to
make himself, as well as the Person he chose,
happy, tho' she brought him nothing at all; and
that he had, moreover, such a Character for
good Sense, and Knowlege of the World, that
nobody could impute to him any other Inducement,
but that of a noble Resolution to reward
a Virtue he had so frequently, and, I will say,
so wickedly, try'd, and could not subdue. 
But why do I thus run on to Miss Darnford,
whose partial Friendship attributes to me Merits
I cannot claim? I will, therefore, quit this Subject,
as a needless one to her, and proceed to
what was principally in my View, when I began
to write; and that is, to complain of your Papa,
who has, let me say it, done his Endeavour to
set at Variance a Gentleman and his Wife. 

I will not enter into the Particulars, because
the Appeal is to Cæsar, and it would look
like invading his Prerogative, to take it into
my own Hands. But I can tell Sir Simon,
that he is the only Gentleman, I hope, who,
when a young Person of my Sex asked him to
make her a Present of a Book, would put such
a mischievous Turn as he has done upon it to
her Husband! —Indeed, from the Beginning. 
I had Reason to call him a*  Tell-tale—But,
no more of that—Yet I must say, I had rather
he should have flung this Book at my Head too,
than to have made a so much worse Use of it. 
But I came off tolerably, no Thanks to Sir Simon,
however! —And but tolerably neither:
For, Mr. B. kept me in Suspense a good while,
and put me in great Flutters, before he let me
into the Matter. 
But I was very much concerned, my dear
Miss, at first, till you gave a Reason I better
liked after wards, for Sir Simon's denying your
Company to me, after I had obtain'd the Favour
of your Mamma's Consent, and you were kindly
inclin'd yourself to oblige me: And that was,
that Sir Simon had a bad Opinion of the Honour
of my dear Mr. B. For, as to that Part of his
Doubt, which reflected Dishonour upon his
dear Daughter, it was all but the Effect of his
strange free Humour, on purpose to vex you. 
That Gentleman must be the most abandon'd
of Men, who would attempt any thing 

against the Virtue of a Lady intrusted to his Protection:
And I am grieved, methinks, that the
dear Gentleman, who is the better Part of myself,
and has, to his own Debasement, acted so
honourably by me, should be thought capable
of so much Vileness. But, forgive me, Miss; it
is only Sir Simon, I dare say, who could think
so hardly of him: And I am in great Hope, for
the Honour of the present Age, (quite contrary
to the Aspersion, that every Age grows worse
and worse) that the last, if it produc'd People
capable of such Attempts, was wickeder than
this. 
Bad as Mr. B.'s Designs and Attempts
were upon me, I can, now I am set above fearing
them, and am enabled to reflect upon them
with less Terror and Apprehension, be earnest,
for his own dear sake, to think him not, even
then, the worst of Men, tho' bad enough in all
Conscience: For have we not heard of those
who have had no Remorse or Compunction at
all, and have actually executed all their vile Purposes,
when a poor Creature was in their Power? 
Yet (indeed, after sore Trials, that's true!) did
not God turn his Heart? And altho' I was still
helpless, and without any Friend in the World,
and in the Hands of a poor vile Woman, who,
to be sure, was worse than he, provoking him
to ruin me, and so wholly in his Power, that I
durst not disobey him, whether he bid me come
to him, or be gone from him, as he was pleased,
or displeased with me; yet, I say, for all this,
did he not overcome his criminal Passion, and 

entertain an honourable one, tho' to his poor
Servant Girl; and brave the World, and the
World's Censures, and marry me? 
And does not this shew, that the Seeds of Honour
were kept alive in his Heart, tho' choaked
or kept from sprouting forth, for a Time, by
the Weeds of Sensuality, Pride, and youthful
Impetuosity? And by cutting down the latter,
have not the former taken Root, have they not
shot out, and, in their turn, kept down at least,
the depressed Weeds? And who now lives more
virtuously than Mr. B.? 
Let me tell you, my dear Miss, that I have
not heard of many Instances of Gentlemen, who,
having designed vilely, have stopt short, and
acted so honourably; and who continue to act
so nobly: And I have great Confidence, that he
will, in time, be as pious, as he is now moral; 
for tho' he has a few bad Notions, which he
talks of now-and-then, as Polygamy, and such-like,
which indeed give me a little serious
Thought sometimes, because a Man is too apt
to practise what he has persuaded himself to believe
is no Crime; yet, I hope, they are owing
more to the Liveliness of his Wit, (a wild Quality,
which does not always confine itself to proper
Exercises) than to his Judgment. And if I
can but see the first Three or Four Months Residence
over in that wicked London, (which,
they say, is so seducing a Place) without adding
to my Apprehensions, how happy shall I be! 
So much, slightly, have I thought proper to
say in behalf of my dear Mr. B. For a good Wife 

cannot out hope for a sweeter and more elevated
Companionship, (if her presumptuous Heart
makes her look up ward with Hope herself) than
this transitory State can afford us. And what a
sad Case is hers, who being as exemplary as human
Frailty will permit her to be, looks forward
upon the Partner of her adverse and of her prosperous
Estate, the Husband of her Bosom, the
Father of her Children, the Head of her Family,
as a poor unhappy Soul, destin'd to a separate
and a miserable Existence for ever! —O my
dear Miss! —How can such a Thought be supportable! 
—But what high Consolation, what
Transport rather, at times, must hers be, who
shall be bless'd with the Hope of being an humble
Instrument to reclaim such a dear, dear, thrice
dear Partner! —And that, Heart in Heart, and
Hand in Hand, they shall one Day issue forth
from this incumber'd State into a blessed Eternity,
benefited by each other's Example! —I
will lay down my Pen, and enjoy the rich
Thought for a few Moments. 
Now, my dear Miss, let me, as a Subject
very pleasing to me, touch upon your kind Mention
of the worthy Mr. Peters's Sentiments in
relation to that Part of his Conduct to me, which
(oppress'd by the Terrors and Apprehensions to
which I was subjected) once indeed I censured; 
and so much the readier, as I had ever so great
an Honour for his Cloth, that I thought, to be
a Clergyman, and all that was compassionate,
good and virtuous, was the same thing. 

But when I came to know Mr. Peters, I
had a high Opinion of his Worthiness; and as
no one can be perfect in this Life, thus I thought
to myself: How hard was then my Lot, to be a
Cause of Stumbling to so worthy a Heart! To
be sure, a Gentleman, who knows so well, and
practises so well, his Duty, in every other Instance,
and preaches it so efficaciously to others, must have
been one Day sensible, that it would not have
misbecome his Function and Character, to have
afforded that Protection to oppressed Innocence,
which was requested of him; and how would it
have grieved his considerate Mind, had my Ruin
been completed, that he did not! 
But as he had once a Name-sake, as one may
say, that failed in a much greater Instance, let
not my Want of Charity exceed his Fault; but
let me look upon it as an Infirmity, to which
the most perfect are liable: I was a Stranger to
him; a Servant Girl carry'd off by her Master,
a young Gentleman of violent and lawless Passions; 
who, in this very Instance, shew'd how
much in Earnest he was set upon effecting all his
vile Purposes; and whose Heart altho' God might
touch, it was not probable any lesser Influence
could. 
Then he was not sure, that tho' he might
assist my Escape, I might not afterwards fall into
the Hands of so determin'd a Violator; and that
Difficulty would not, with such a one, inhance
his Resolution to overcome all Obstacles. 
Moreover, he might think, that the Person,
who was moving him to this worthy Measure, 

might possibly be seeking to gratify a View
of his own; and that while he was endeavouring
to save, to outward Appearance, a Virtue
in Danger, he was, in reality, only helping another
to a Wife, at the Hazard of exposing himself
to the Vindictiveness of a violent Temper,
and a rich Neighbour, who had Power as well as
Will to resent; for such was his*  Apprehension,
groundless, intirely groundless as it was,
tho' not improbable, as it might seem to him. 
Then again, the sad Examples set by too
many European Sovereigns, in whom the Royal
and ‘Priestly Offices are united (for are not Kings
the Lord's Anointed?); and the little Scruple
which many Persons, Right Reverend by their
Functions and Characters, too generally make,
to pay sordid Court and Visits (far from bearing
their Testimony against such Practices) even
to Concubines, who have Interest to promote
them†  , are no small Discouragements to a private
Clergyman, to do his Duty, and to make
himself Enemies among his powerful Neighbours,
for the Cause of Virtue. And especially
(forgive me, dear Sir Simon Darnford, if you
should see this) when an eminent Magistrate,
one of the principal Gentlemen of the County,
of an independent Fortune, who had fine young
Ladies to his Daughters, (who had nothing but
their superior Conditions, not their Sex, to exempt
them from like Attempts) a Justice of 

Peace, and of the Quorum; refused to be a*  
Justice, tho' such a Breach of the Peace was
made, and such a Violation of Morals plainly
intended. This, I say, must add to the Discouragement
of a Gentleman a little too diffident
and timorous of himself: And who having no
one to second him, had he afforded me his Protection,
must have stood alone in the Gap, and
made to himself, in an active Gentleman, an
Enemy, who had a thousand desirable Qualities to
make one wish him for a Friend. 
For all these Considerations, I think myself
obliged to pity, rather than too rigorously to
censure, the worthy Gentleman. And I must
and will always respect him: And thank him a
thousand times, my dear Miss, in my Name,
for his Goodness, in condescending to acknowlege,
by your dear Hand, his Infirmity, as such:
For this gives an excellent Proof of the natural
Worthiness of his Heart; and that it is beneath
him to seek to extenuate a Fault, when he thinks
he has committed one. 
Indeed, my dear Friend, I have so much
Honour for the Clergy of all Degrees, that I
never forget in my Prayers, one Article, That
God will make them burning and shining Lights
to the World; since so much depends on their
Ministry and Examples, as well with respect to
our publick as private Duties. Nor shall the
Faults of a Few make Impression upon me to
the Disadvantage of the Order. For I am afraid 

a very censorious Temper, in this respect, is too
generally the Indication of an uncharitable, and
perhaps a profligate Heart, levelling Characters,
in order to cover some inward Pride, or secret
Enormities, which they are ashamed to avow,
and will not be instructed to amend. 
Forgive, my dear Miss, this tedious Scribble. 
I cannot for my Life write short Letters
to those I love. And let me hope, that you
will favour me with an Account of your new
Affair, and how you proceed in it; and with
such of your Conversations, as may give me
some Notion of a polite Courtship. For, alas!
my dear Miss, your poor Friend knows nothing
of this. All her Courtship was sometimes a
hasty Snatch of the Hand, a black and blue Gripe
of the Arm, and, Whither now! —Come,
to me, when I bid you! —And Saucy-face,
and Creature, and such-like, on his Part— 
with Fear and Trembling on mine; and—I
will, I will! —Good Sir, have Mercy! At
other times, a Scream, and nobody to hear or
mind me; and with uplift Hands, bent Knees,
and tearful Eyes—For God's sake, pity your
poor Servant! 
This, my dear Miss, was the hard Treatment
that attended my Courtship. —Pray,
then, let me know, how Gentlemen court their
Equals in Degree; how they look when they
address you, with their Knees bent, sighing,
supplicating, and all that, as Sir Simon says,
with the Words Slave, Servant, Admirer, continually
at their Tongues Ends. 

But, after all, it will be found, I believe,
that, be the Language and Behaviour ever so
obsequious, it is all designed to end alike. — 
The English, the plain English, of the politest
Address, is, I am now, dear Madam, your humble
Servant: Pray be so good as to let me be
your Master. Yes, and thank you too, says the
Lady's Heart, tho' not her Lips, if she likes him. 
And so they go to Church together: And, in
Conclusion, it will be happy, if these obsequious
Courtships end no worse than my frightful
one. 
But I am convinc'd, that with a Man of
Sense, a Woman of tolerable Prudence must be
happy. 
That whenever you marry, it may be to
such a Man, who then must value you as you
deserve, and make you as happy as I now am,
notwithstanding all that's past, wishes and prays 
Your obliged Friend and Servant,
P. B. 

&line;
N. B. Altho' Miss Darnford could not
receive the above Letter so soon as to answer it
before others were sent to her by her fair Correspondent; 
yet we think it not amiss to dispense
with the Order of Time, that the Reader may
have the Letter and Answer at one View: And
shall on other Occasions take the like Liberty. 
