



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I have just now had a specimen of what this dear
creature's resentment will be, when quite recover'd: 
An affecting one! —For, entering her apartment
after Dorcas; and endeavouring to soothe and
pacify her disordered mind; in the midst of my blandishments,
she held up to Heaven, in a speechless agony,
the innocent Licence (which she has in her own
power); as the poor distressed Catalans held up their 

English treaty, on an occasion that keeps the worst
of my actions in countenance. 
She seemed about to call down vengeance upon
me; when, happily, the Leaden God, in pity to
her trembling Lovelace, waved over her half-drowned
eyes his somniferous wand, and laid asleep the fair
exclaimer, before she could go half thro' with her
intended imprecation. 
Thou wilt guess, by what I have written, that
some little art has been made use of: But it was with
a generous design (if thou'lt allow me the word on
such an occasion) in order to lessen the too quick
sense she was likely to have of what she was to suffer. 
A contrivance I never had occasion for before, and
had not thought of now, if Mrs. Sinclair had not
proposed it to me: To whom I left the management
of it: And I have done nothing but curse her ever
since, lest the quantity should have for ever damped
her charming intellects. 
Hence my concern—For I think the poor lady
ought not to have been so treated. Poor lady, did I
say? —What have I to do with thy creeping style? — 
But have not I the worst of it; since her insensibility
has made me but a thief to my own joys? 
I did not intend to tell thee of this little innocent
trick; for such I designed it to be; but that I hate
disingenuity: To thee, especially: And as I cannot
help writing in a more serious vein than usual, thou
wouldst, perhaps, had I not hinted the true cause,
have imagined, that I was sorry for the fact itself: 
And this would have given thee a good deal of trouble
in scribbling dull persuasives to repair by matrimony; 
and me, in reading thy crude nonsense. Besides,
one day or other, thou mightest, had I not confessed
it, have heard of it in an aggravated manner; 
and I know thou hast such an high opinion of this
lady's virtue, that thou wouldst be disappointed, if
thou hadst reason to think, that she was subdued by 

her own consent, or any the least yielding in her
will. And so is she beholden to me, in some measure,
that, at the expence of my honour, she may
so justly form a plea, which will intirely salve hers? 
And now is the whole secret out. 
Thou wilt say I am a horrid fellow! —As the
lady does, that I am the unchained Beelzebub, and
a plotting villain: And as this is what you both said
beforehand, and nothing worse can be said, I desire, if
thou wouldst not have me quite serious with thee, and
that I should think thou meanest more by thy tilting-hint,
than I am willing to believe thou dost, that
thou wilt forbear thy invectives: For is not the thing
done? —Can it be help'd? —And must I not now
try to make the best of it? —And the rather do I
injoin thee this, and inviolable secrecy; because I
begin to think, that my punishment will be greater
than the fault, were it to be only from my own
reflection. 