


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


The next thing the ladies mention'd was, Sir
Charles's management with the two stewards. 
I will not aim at being very particular in this part
of the family-history. 
When Sir Charles found that his father had left the
inspection of each steward's account to the other, he
enter'd into the examination of the whole himself; 
and tho' he allowed them several disputable and unproved
charges, he brought them to acknowlege a
much greater balance in his favour, than they had
made themselves debtors for. This was the use he
made of detecting them, to his sisters. —You see, 

sisters, that my father was not so profuse as some
people thought him. He had partners in his estate; 
and I have reason to think that he often paid interest
for his own money. 
On his settling with Filmer, the treaty with Miss
Obrien came out. Mr. Filmer had, by surprize,
brought that beautiful girl into Sir Charles's presence; 
and he owned to his sisters, that she was a very lovely
creature. 
But when the mother and aunt found, that he only
admired her as a man would a fine picture, they insisted
that Sir Thomas had promised to marry Miss
Obrien privately; and produced two of his letters to
her, that seemed to give ground for such an expectation. 
Sir Charles was grieved for the sake of his father's
memory, at this transaction; and much more
on finding that the unhappy man went down to his
seat in Essex, his head and heart full of this scheme,
when he was struck with his last fatal illness. 
A meeting was proposed by Filmer, between Sir
Charles, the mother, the aunt, and himself, at the
aunt's house in Pallmall. Sir Charles was very desirous
to conceal his father's frailty from the world. 
He met them: But before he enter'd into discourse,
made it his request to be allowed half an hour's conversation
with Miss Obrien by herself; at the same
time, praising, as it deserved, her beauty. 
They were in hopes, that she would be able to
make an impression on the heart of so young and so
lively a man; and complied. Under pretence of
preparing her for so unexpected a visit, her aunt gave
her her cue: But, instead of her captivating him, he
brought her to such confessions, as sufficiently let him
into the baseness of their views. 
He returned to company, the young woman in his
hand. He represented to the mother the wickedness
of the part she had come over to act, in such strong
terms, that she fell into a fit. The aunt was terrified. 

The young creature wept; and vowed that she would
be honest. 
Sir Charles told them, That if they would give
him up his father's two letters, and make a solemn
promise never to open their lips on the affair, and
would procure for her an honest husband, he would
give her 1000l. on the day of marriage; and, if she
made a good wife, would be further kind to her. 
Filmer was very desirous to clear himself of having
any hand in the blacker part of this plot. Sir Charles
did not seem solicitous to detect and expose him: But
left the whole upon his conscience. And having made
before several objections to his account, which could
not be so well obviated in England, he went over to
lreland with Filmer; and there very speedily settled
every-thing to his own satisfaction; and, dismissing
him more genteelly than he deserved, took upon himself
the management of that estate, directing several
obvious improvements to be made; which are likely to
turn to great account. 
On his return, he heard that Miss Obrien was ill
of the small-pox. He was not, for her own sake,
sorry for it. She suffer'd in her face, but still was
pretty and genteel: And she is now the honest and
happy wife of a tradesman near Golden-square; who
is very fond of her. Sir Charles gave with her the
promised sum, and another 100l. for wedding-cloaths. 
One part of her happiness and her husband's is, that
her aunt, supposing she had disgraced herself by this
match, never comes near her: And her mother is return'd
to Ireland to her husband, greatly dissatisfied
with her daughter on the same account. 
While these matters were agitating, Sir Charles
forgot not to enquire what steps had been taken with
regard to the alliance proposed between himself and
Lady Frances N. 
He paid his first visit to the father and brother of
that Lady. 

All that the sisters know of this matter, is, that the
treaty was, on this first visit, entirely broken off. 
Their brother, however, speaks of the lady, and of
the whole family, with great respect. The lady
is known to esteem him highly. Her father,
her brother, speak of him every-where with great
regard: Lord N. calls him the finest young gentleman
in England. And so, Lucy, I believe he is. 
Sir Charles Grandison, Lord N. once said, knows
better by non-compliance, how to create friendships,
than most men do by compliance. 
Lady L. and Miss Grandison, who, as I have before
intimated, have another lady whom they favour,
once said to him, that the Earl and his son Lord N.
were so constantly speaking in his praise, that they
could not but think that it would at last be a match
between him and Lady Frances. His answer was,
The lady is infinitely deserving: But it cannot be. 
I am ready to wish, he would say, what can be,
that we need not—Ah, Lucy! —I know not what I
would say: But so it will always be with silly girls,
that distinguish not between the would and the should. 
One of which, is 
Your Harriet Byron. 

