



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Aug. 1. 
I am most confoundedly chagrined and disappointed: 
For here, on Saturday, arrived a messenger
from Miss Howe, with a Letter to my Cousins (a) ; 
which I knew nothing of till yesterday; when Lady
Sarah and Lady Betty were procured to be here, to
sit in judgment upon it with the old Peer, and my
two Kinswomen. And never was Bear so miserably
baited as thy poor friend! —And for what? —Why,
for the Cruelty of Miss Harlowe: For have I committed
any new offence? And would I not have reinstated
myself in her favour upon her own terms, if I
could? And is it fair to punish me for what is my misfortune,
and not my fault? Such event-judging fools as
I have for my relations! I am ashamed of them all. 
In that of Miss Howe was inclosed one to her from
Miss Harlowe (b) , to be transmitted to my Cousins,
containing a final Rejection of me; and that in very
vehement and positive terms; yet she pretends, that
in this Rejection she is governed more by principle
than passion—[Damn'd lye, as ever was told!] And,
as a proof that she is, says, that she can forgive me,
and does, on this one condition, That I will never 

molest her more—The whole Letter so written, as
to make herself more admired, me more detested. 
What we have been told of the agitations and
workings, and sighings and sobbings, of the French
Prophets among us formerly, was nothing at all to
the Scene exhibited by these Maudlin Souls, at the
reading of these Letters; and of some affecting passages
extracted from another of my fair Implacable's
to Miss Howe—Such lamentations for the loss of so
charming a relation! Such applaudings of her virtue,
of her exaltedness of soul and sentiment! Such menaces
of dis-inherisons! I, not needing their reproaches
to be stung to the heart with my own reflections,
and with the rage of disappointment; and
as sincerely as any of them admiring her—‘What
the devil, cried I, is all this for? Is it not enough
to be despised and rejected? Can I help her implacable
spirit? —Would I not repair the evils I
have made her suffer?’ —Then was I ready to curse
them all, herself and Miss Howe for company: And
heartily I swore, that she should yet be mine. 
I now swear it over-again to thee—‘Were her
death to follow in a week after the knot is tied, by
the Lord of Heaven, it shall be tied, and she shall
die a Lovelace.’ —Tell her so, if thou wilt: But,
at the same time, tell her, that I have no view to her
Fortune; and that I will solemnly resign that, and
all pretensions to it, in whose favour she pleases, if
she resign life issueless. —I am not so low-minded a
wretch, as to be guilty of any sordid views to her
fortune. —Let her judge for herself then, whether
it be not for her honour rather to leave this world a
Lovelace than a Harlowe. 
But do not think I will entirely rest a cause so near
my heart, upon an advocate, who so much more admires
his client's adversary, than his client. I will
go to town in a few days, in order to throw myself
at her feet: And I will carry with me, or have at 

hand, a resolute, well prepared Parson; and the Ceremony
shall be performed, let what will be the consequence. 
But if she will permit me to attend her for this purpose
at either of the Churches mentioned in the
Licence (which she has by her, and, thank Heaven!
has not returned me with my Letters); then will I
not disturb her; but meet her at the Altar in either
Church, and will engage to bring my two Cousins to
attend her, and even Lady Sarah and Lady Betty; 
and my Lord M. in person shall give her to me. 
Or, if it will be still more agreeable to her, I will
undertake, that either Lady Sarah or Lady Betty, or
both, shall go to town, and attend her down; and
the Marriage shall be celebrated in their presence,
and in that of Lord M. either here or elsewhere, at
her own choice. 
Do not play me booty, Belford; but sincerely and
warmly use all the eloquence thou art master of, to
prevail upon her to chuse one of these three methods. 
One of them she must chuse—By my Soul, she must. 
Here is Charlotte tapping at my closet-door for admittance. 
What a devil wants Charlotte? —I will bear
no more reproaches! —Come in, girl! 
* *
My Cousin Charlotte, finding me writing on with
too much earnestness to have any regard for politeness
to her, and guessing at my subject, besought me to
let her see what I had written. 
I obliged her. And she was so highly pleased on
seeing me so much in earnest, that she offered, and I
accepted her offer, to write a Letter to Miss Harlowe; 
with permission to treat me in it as she thought
fit. 
I shall inclose a copy of her Letter. 
When she had written it, she brought it to me,
with apologies for the freedom taken with me in it: 
But I excused it; and she was ready to give me a 

kiss for joy of my approbation: And I gave her two
for writing it; telling her, I had hopes of success
from it; and that I thought she had luckily hit it
off. 
Every one approves of it, as well as I; and is
pleased with me for so patiently submitting to be
abused, and undertaken for. —If it do not succeed,
all the blame will be thrown upon the dear Creature's
perverseness: Her charitable or forgiving disposition,
about which she makes such a parade, will be justly
questioned; and the pity of which she is now in full
possession, will be transferred to me. 
Putting therefore my whole confidence in this Letter,
I postpone all my other alternatives, as also my
going to town, till my Empress send an Answer to
my Cousin Montague. 
But if she persist, and will not promise to take
time to consider of the matter, thou mayest communicate
to her what I had written, as above, before
my Cousin entered; and, if she be still perverse, assure
her, that I must and will see her—But this with
all honour, all humility: And, if I cannot move her
in my favour, I will then go abroad, and perhaps
never more return to England. 
I am sorry thou art, at this critical time, so busily
employed, as thou informest me thou art, in thy
Watford affairs, and in preparing to do Belton justice. 
If thou wantest my assistance in the latter, command
me. Tho' engrossed by this perverse Beauty, and
plagued as I am, I will obey thy first summons. 
I have great dependence upon thy zeal and thy
friendship: Hasten back to her, therefore, and resume
a task so interesting to me, that it is equally the
subject of my dreams, as of my waking hours. 