



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday, Aug. 31. 
The Colonel thought fit once, in praise of Lovelace's
generosity, to say, That (as a man of honour
ought) he took to himself all the blame, and acquitted
you of the consequences of the precipitate step
you had taken; since, he said, as you loved him, and
was in his power, he must have had advantages, which
he would not have had, if you had continued at your
Father's, or at any Friend's. 
Mighty generous, I said (were it as he supposed) in
such insolent reflecters, the best of them; who pretend
to clear reputations which never had been sullied,
but by falling into their dirty acquaintance! But in
this case, I averred, that there was no need of anything
but the strictest truth, to demonstrate Lovelace
to be the blackest of villains, You the brightest of
innocents. 
This he catched at; and swore, that if any-thing
uncommon or barbarous in the seduction were to come
out, as indeed one of the Letters you had written to
your friends, and which had been shewn him, very
strongly implied; that is to say, my dear, If anything
worse than perjury, breach of faith, and abuse
of a generous confidence, were to appear! —[Sorry fellows!]
he would avenge his Cousin to the utmost. 
I urged your apprehensions on this head from your
last Letter to me: But he seemed capable of taking 

what I know to be real Greatness of Soul, in an unworthy
sense: For he mentioned directly upon it, the
expectation your friends had, that you should (previous
to any Reconciliation with them) appear in a
Court of Justice against the villain—IF you could do
it with the advantage to yourself that I hinted might
be done. 
And truly, if I would have heard him, he had indelicacy
enough to have gone into the nature of the
proof of the crime upon which they wanted to have
Lovelace arraigned. Yet this is a Man improved by
Travel and Learning! —Upon my word, my dear,
I, who have been accustomed to the most delicate
conversation ever since I had the honour to know you,
despise this Sex from the gentleman down to the peasant. 
Upon the whole, I find that Mr. Morden has a
very slender notion of womens virtue, in particular
cases: For which reason I put him down, tho' your
favourite, as one who is not entitled to cast the first
stone. 
I never knew a man who deserved to be well
thought of himself for his morals, who had a slight
opinion of the virtue of our Sex in general. For if,
from the difference of Temperament and Education,
Modesty, Chastity, and Piety too, are not to be
found in our Sex preferably to the other, I should
think it a sign of a much worse nature in ours. 
He even hinted (as from your relations indeed)
that it is impossible but there must be some Will where
there is much Love. 
These sort of reflections are enough to make a
woman, who has at heart her own honour and the
honour of her Sex, to look about her, and consider
what she is doing when she enters into an intimacy
with these wretches; since it is plain, that whenever
she throws herself into the power of a man, and leaves
for him her Parents or Guardians, every-body will 

believe it to be owing more to her good luck than to
her discretion, if there be not an end of her virtue: 
And let the man be ever such a villain to her, she
must take into her own bosom a share of his guilty
baseness. 
I am writing to general cases. You, my dear, are
out of the question. Your Story, as I have heretofore
said, will afford a Warning, as well as an Example
(a) : For who is it that will not infer, That if a
person of your fortune, character, and merit, could
not escape ruin, after she had put herself into the
power of her hyæna, what can a thoughtless, fond,
giddy creature expect? 
Every man, they will say, is not a Lovelace— 
True: But then, neither is every woman a Clarissa. 
And allow for the one and for the other,
the Example must be of general use. 
I prepared Mr. Morden to expect your appointment
of Mr. Belford for an office that we both hope
he will have no occasion to act in (nor any-body else)
for many, very many years to come. He was at first
startled at it: But, upon hearing such of your reasons
as had satisfied me, he only said, That such an appointment,
were it to take place, would exceedingly
affect his other Cousins. 
He told me, He had a copy of Lovelace's Letter
to you, imploring your pardon, and offering to undergo
any penance to procure it (b) ; and also of
your Answer to it (c) . 
I find he is willing to hope, that a Marriage between
you may still take place; which, he says, will
heal up all breaches. 
I would have written much more—On the following
particulars especially; to wit, Of the wretched
man's hunting you out of your lodgings: Of your
relations strange implacableness [I am in haste, and 

cannot think of a word you would like better, just
now]: Of your last Letter to Lovelace, to divert
him from pursuing you: Of your Aunt Hervey's
penitential conversation with Mrs. Norton: Of Mr.
Wyerley's renewed address: Of your lessons to me
in Hickman's behalf, so approveable, were the man
more so than he is: But indeed I am offended with
him at this instant, and have been for these two days: 
—Of your Sister's transportation-project: —And of
twenty and twenty other things: —But am obliged
to leave off, to attend my two Cousins Spilsworth,
and my Cousin Herbert, who are come to visit us on
account of my Mother's illness—I will therefore dispatch
these by Rogers; and if my Mother gets well
soon (as I hope she will) I am resolved to see you in
town, and tell you every-thing that now is upon my
mind; and particularly, mingling my Soul with
yours, how much I am, and will ever be, my dearest,
dear friend, 
Your affectionate
Anna Howe. 
Let Rogers bring one line, I pray you. I thought
to have sent him this afternoon; but he cannot
set out till to-morrow morning early. 
I cannot express how much your staggering lines,
and your conclusion, affect me! 