


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Was forced to lay down my pen. I will begin
a new Letter. I did not think of concluding my
former where I did. 
Sir Charles saw me in grief, and forgot his own, to
applaud my humanity, as he called it, and sooth me. 

I have often, said he, referred you, in my narrative,
to Dr. Bartlett. I will beg of him to let you see anything
you shall wish to see, in the free and unreserved
correspondence we have held. You, that love to entertain
your friends with your narrations, will find
something, perhaps, in a story like this, to engage
their curiosity. On their honour and candor, I am
sure, I may depend. Are they not your friends? 
Would to heaven it were in my power to contribute
to their pleasure and yours! 
I only bowed. I could only bow. 
I told you, madam, that my Compassion was engaged; 
but that my Honour was free: I think it is so. 
But when you have seen all that Dr. Bartlett will shew
you, you will be the better able to judge of me, and
for me. I had rather be thought favourably of by
Miss Byron, than by any woman in the world. 
Who, Sir, said I, knowing only so far as I know
of the unhappy Clementina, but must wish her to
be— 
Ah Lucy! there I stopt—I had like to have been a
false girl! —And yet ought I not, from my heart, to
have been able to say what I was going to say? —I do
aver, Lucy, upon repeated experience, that Love is a
narrower of the heart. Did I not use to be thought
generous and benevolent, and to be above all selfishness? 
But am I so now? 
And now, madam, said he [and he was going to
take my hand, but with an air, as if he thought the
freedom would be too great—A tenderness so speaking
in his eyes; a respectfulness so solemn in his countenance; 
he just touched it, and withdrew his hand]
What shall I say? —I cannot tell what I should say— 
But you, I see, can pity me—You can pity the noble
Clementina—Honour forbids me! —Yet honour bids
me—Yet I cannot be unjust, ungenerous—selfish!— 
He arose from his seat—Allow me, madam,
thank you for the favour of your ear—Pardon me 

the trouble I see I have given to an heart that is capable
of a sympathy so tender— 
And, bowing low, he withdrew with precipitation,
as if he would not let me see his emotion. He left
me looking here, looking there, as if for my heart; 
and then, as giving it up for irrecoverable, I became
for a few moments motionless, and a statue. 
A violent burst of tears recovered me to sense and
motion; and just then Miss Grandison (who, having
heard her brother withdraw, forbore for a few minutes
to enter, supposing he would return) hearing me
sob, rushed in. —O my Harriet! said she, clasping her
arms about me, What is done! —Do I, or do I not,
embrace my sister, my real sister, my sister Grandison? 
Ah my Charlotte! No flattering hope is now left
me—No sister! It must not, it cannot be! The
Lady is—But lead me, lead me out of this room! — 
I don't love it! spreading one hand before my eyes,
my tears trickling between my fingers—Tears that
flowed not only for myself, but for Sir Charles Grandison
and the unhappy Clementina: For, gather you
not, from what he said, that something disastrous has
befallen the poor Lady? And then, supporting myself
with her arm, I hurried out of Lord L.'s Study, and
up stairs into my own chamber; she following me— 
Leave me, leave me here, dear creature, said I, for
six minutes: I will attend you then, in your own
dressing room. 
She kindly retired; I threw myself into a chair
indulged my tears for a few moments, and was the
fitter to receive the two sisters, who, hand-in-hand,
came into my room to comfort me. 
But I could not relate what had passed immediately
with any connexion: I told them only, that all was
over; that their brother was to be pitied, not blamed:
And that if they would allow me to recollect some
things that were most affecting, I would attend them; 

and they should have my narrative the more exact, for
the indulgence. 
They stayed no longer with me than to see me a
little composed. 
Sir Charles and Dr. Bartlett went out together in
his chariot: He enquired more than once of my
health; saying to his sister Charlotte, That he was
afraid he had affected me too much, by the melancholy
tale he had been telling me. 
He excused himself from dining with us. Poor
man! What must be his distress! —Not able to see,
to sit with us! 
I would have excused myself also, being not very fit
to appear; but was not permitted. 
I sat, however, but a very little while at table after
dinner; and how tedious did the dinner-time appear! 
The servants eyes were irksome to me; so were
Emily's (dear girl!) glistening as they did, tho' she
knew not for what, but sympathetically, as I may say; 
she supposing, that all was not as she would have it. 
She came up soon after to me—One word, my
dearest madam (the door in her hand, and her head
only within it): Tell me only that there is no misunderstanding
between my guardian and you! —Tell me
only that— 
None, my dear! —None, none at all, my Emily! 
Thank God! clasping her hands together; thank
God! —If there were, I should not have known
whose part to take! —But I won't disturb you—And
was going. 
Stay, stay, my precious young friend! Stay, my
Emily. —I arose; took her hand: My sweet girl!
say, Will you live with me? 
God for ever bless you, dearest madam! —Will I? 
It is the wish next my heart. 
Will you go down with me to Northamptonshire,
my love? 
To the world's end I will attend you, madam: I 

will be your handmaid; and I will love you better
than I love my guardian, if possible. 
Ah my dear! but how will you live without seeing
your guardian now-and-then? 
Why, he will live with us, won't he? 
No, no, my dear! —And you would choose, then,
to live with him, not with me, would you not?— 
Indeed but I won't—Indeed I will live and die with
you, if you will let me; and I warrant his kind heart
will often lead him to us. But tell me, Why these
tears, madam? Why this grief?—Why do you speak
so quick and short? And why do you seem to be in
such a hurry? 
Do I speak quick and short? Do I seem to be in a
hurry? —Thank you, my love, for your observation. 
And now leave me: I will profit by it. 
The amiable girl withdrew on tiptoe; and I sat
about composing myself. 
I was obliged to her for her observation: It was
really of use to me. But you must think, Lucy, that
I must be fluttered. —His manner of leaving me— 
Was it not particular? —To break from me so abruptly,
as I may say—And what he said with looks so
earnest! Looks that seemed to carry more meaning
than his words: And withdrawing without conducting
me out, as he had led me in—and as if—I don't
know how as if—But you will give me your opinion
of all these things. I can't say but I think my suspense
is over; and in a way not very desirable—Yet— 
But why should I puzzle myself? What must be,
must. 
At afternoon-tea, the gentlemen not being returned,
and Emily undertaking the waiter's office, I gave my
Lord and the two Ladies, tho' she was present, some
account of what had passed, but briefly; and I had
just finished, and was quitting the room, as the two
gentlemen entered the door. 
Sir Charles instantly addressed me with apologies for 

the concern he had given me. His emotion was visible
as he spoke to me. He hesitated: He trembled. 
Why did he hesitate? Why did he tremble? 
I told him, I was not ashamed to own, that I was
very much affected by the melancholy story. The
poor Lady, said I, is greatly to be pitied—But remember,
Sir, what you promised Dr. Bartlett should
do for me. 
I have been requesting the doctor to fulfil my engagements. 
And I am ready to obey, said the good man. My
agreeable task shall soon be performed. 
As I was at the door, going up stairs to my closet,
I courtesied, and pursued my intention. 
He bowed, said nothing, and looked, I thought,
as if he were disappointed, that I did not return to
company. —No, indeed! 
Yet I pity him, at my heart! How odd is it, then,
to be angry with him! —So much goodness, so much
sensibility, so much compassion (whence all his woes,
I believe), never met together, in a heart so manly. 
Tell me, tell me, my dear Lucy—Yet tell me nothing
till I am favoured with, and you have read, the
account that will be given me by Dr. Bartlett: Then,
I hope, we shall have every-thing before us. 
Saturday, March 25. 
He [Yet why that disrespectful word? —Fie upon
me, for my narrowness of heart!] Sir Charles is setting
out for town. He cannot be happy, himself: He is
therefore giving himself the pleasure of endeavouring
to make his friend happy. He can enjoy the happiness
of his friends! O the blessing of a benevolent
heart! Let the world frown as it will upon such a
one, it cannot possibly bereave it of all happiness. — 
Fortune, do thy worst! If Sir Charles Grandison cannot
be happy with his Clementina, he will make himself
a partaker of Lord G.'s happiness; and as that 

will secure, if not her own fault, the happiness of his
sister, he will not be destitute of felicity. And let
me, after his example—Ah, Lucy! that I could! — 
But in time, I hope, I shall deserve, as well as be
esteemed, to be the girl of my grandmamma and
aunt; and then, of course, be worthy to be called, my
dear Lucy, 
Your Harriet Byron. 
Saturday Noon. 
Sir Charles is gone; and I have talked over the
matter again with the Ladies and Lord L. 
What do you think? —They all will have it—and
it is a faithful account, to the very best of my recollection
—They all will have it, That Sir Charles's
great struggle, his great grief, is owing—His great
struggle (I don't know what I write, I think—But let
it go) is between his Compassion for the unhappy Clementina,
and his Love—for—Somebody else. 
But who, my dear, large as his heart is, can be
contented with half an heart? Compassion, Lucy! — 
The compassion of such an heart—It must be Love— 
And ought it not to be so to such a woman? —Tell
me—Don't you, Lucy, with all yours, pity the unhappy
Clementina? who loves, against the principles
of her religion; and, in that respect, against her inclination,
a man who cannot be hers, but by a violation
of his honour and conscience? What a fatality
in a Love so circumstanced! —To love against inclination! 
What a sound has that! But what an absurdity
is this passion called Love? Or, rather, of what absurd
things does it make its votaries guilty? Let mine
be evermore circumscribed by the laws of reason, of
duty; and then my recollections, my reflexions, will
never give me lasting disturbance! 
* *
Dr. Bartlett has desired me to let him know what
the particular passages are, of which I more immediately 

wish to be informed, for our better understanding
the unhappy Clementina's story, and has promised
to transcribe them. I have given him a list in writing. 
I have been half guilty of affectation. I have asked
for some particulars that Sir Charles referred to, which
are not so immediately interesting: The history of
Olivia, of Mrs. Beaumont; the debates Sir Charles
mentioned, between himself and Signor Jeronymo:
But, Lucy, the particulars I am most impatient for,
are these: 
His first conference with Lady Clementina on the
subject of the Count of Belvedere; which her father
and mother over-heard. 
The conference he was desired to hold with her, on
her being first seized with melancholy. 
Whether her particularly chearful behaviour, on his
departure from Bologna, is any-where accounted for. 
By what means Mrs. Beaumont prevailed on her to
acknowlege a passion so studiously concealed from the
tenderest of parents. 
Sir Charles's reception, on his return from Vienna. 
What reception his proposals of compromise, as to
religion and residence, met with, as well from the family,
as from Clementina. 
The most important of all, Lucy—The last distressful
parting: What made it necessary; what happened
at Bologna afterwards; and what the poor Clementina's
situation now is. 
If the doctor is explicit, with regard to this article,
we shall be able to account for their desiring him to
revisit them at Bologna, after so long an absence, and
for his seeming to think it will be to no purpose to oblige
them. O Lucy! what a great deal depends upon
the answer to this article, as it may happen! —But no
more suspense, I beseech you, Sir Charles Grandison! 
No more suspense, I pray you, Dr. Bartlett! My
heart sickens at the thought of farther suspense. I cannot
bear it! 

Adieu, Lucy! Lengthening my Letter would be
only dwelling longer (for I know not how to change
my subject) on weaknesses and follies that have already
given you too much pain for 
Your Harriet Byron. 

