



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

Tuesday, May 9. 
I am a very unhappy fellow. This lady is said to
to be one of the sweetest-temper'd creatures in
the world: And so I thought her. But to me, she
is one of the most perverse. I never was supposed to
be an ill-natur'd puppy neither. How can it be? 
I imagin'd for a long while, that we were born to
make each other happy: But, quite the contrary; 
we really seem to be sent to plague one another. 
I will write a Comedy, I think. I have a title ready; 
and that's half the work. The Quarrelsome Lovers. 
'Twill do. There's something new and striking in
it. Yet, more or less, all lovers quarrel. Old Terence
has taken notice of that; and observes upon it,
That lovers falling-out occasions lovers falling-in; 
and a better understanding of course. 'Tis natural
that it should be so. But with us, we fall-out so often,
without falling in once; and a second quarrel so generally
happens before a first is made up; that it is
hard to guess what event our loves will be attended
with. But Shakespeare says; 


—Came what come may,
Patience and time run thro' the roughest day.
And that shall be my comfort. No man living bears
crosses better than myself: But then they must be of
my own making: And even This is a great merit, and
a great excellence, think what thou wilt: Since most
of the troubles, which fall to the lot of mortals, are
brought upon themselves, either by their too large desires,
or too little deserts. But I shall make myself a
common man by-and-by: Which is what no one yet
ever thought me. I will now lead to the occasion of
this preamble. 
I had been out. On my return, meeting Dorcas
on the stairs—Your lady in her chamber, Dorcas? 
In he dining-room, Sir: And if ever you hope for
an opportunity to come at a letter, it must be now. 
For at her feet I saw one lie, which, by its open'd
folds, she has been reading, with a little parcel of
others she is now busied with. All pulled out of her
pocket, as I believe: So, Sir, you'll know where to
find them another time. 
I was ready to leap for joy, and instantly resolved
to bring forward an expedient which I had held in
petto; and entering into the dining-room, with an
air of transport, I boldly clasped my arms about her,
as she sat (she huddling up her papers in her handkerchief
all the time, the dropt paper unseen): O my
dearest life, a lucky expedient have Mr. Mennell and
I hit upon, just now. In order to hasten Mrs. Fretchville
to quit the house, I have agreed, if you approve
of it, to entertain her cook, her housemaid, and two
men-servants (about whom she was very solicitous),
till you are provided to your mind. And that no
accommodations may be wanted, I have consented to
take the houshold linen at an appraisement. 
I am to pay down 500 l. and the remainder as soon
as the bills can be look'd up, and the amount of them 

adjusted. Thus will you have a charming house intirely
ready to receive you, and any of my friends. 
They will soon be with you: They will not permit
you long to suspend my happy day. —And that nothing
may be wanting to gratify your utmost punctilio,
I will till then consent to stay here at Mrs. Sinclair's,
while you reside at your new house; and leave the rest
to your own generosity. 
O my beloved creature, will not this be agreeable
to you? I am sure it will—It must—And clasping
her closer to me, I gave her a more fervent kiss than
ever I had dared to give her before: But still let not
my ardor overcome my discretion; for I took care to
set my foot upon the letter, and scraped it farther from
her, as it were behind her chair. 
She was in a passion at the liberty I took. Bowing
low, I begg'd her pardon; and, stooping still lower, in
the same motion, took it up, and whipt it in my bosom. 
Pox on me, for a puppy, a fool, a blockhead, a
clumsy varlet, and a mere Jack Belford! —I thought
myself a much cleverer fellow than I am! —Why
could I not have been followed in by Dorcas; who
might have taken it up, while I addressed her lady? 
For here, the letter being unfolded, I could not
put it into my bosom, without alarming her ears, as
my sudden motion did her eyes. —Up she flew in a
moment: Traitor! Judas! her eyes flashing lightning,
and a perturbation in her eager countenance,
so charming! —What have you taken up? —And
then, what for both my ears I durst not to have done
to her, she made no scruple to seize the stolen letter,
tho' in my bosom. 
Beg-pardon apologies were all that now remained
for me, on so palpable a detection. I clasped her
hand, which had hold of the ravish'd paper, between
mine: O my beloved creature! can you think I have
not some curiosity? Is it possible you can be thus for 

ever employed; and I, loving narrative letter-writing
above every other species of writing, and admiring
your talent that way, should not (thus upon the dawn
of my happiness, as I presume to hope) burn with a
desire to be admitted into so sweet a correspondence. 
Let go my hand!—stamping with her pretty foot: 
How dare you, Sir! —At this rate, I see—Too plainly I
see—And more she could not say: But, gasping, was
ready to faint, with passion and affright; the devil a
bit of her accustomed gentleness to be seen in her
charming face, or to be heard in her musical voice. 
Having gone thus far, loth, very loth was I to lose
my prize—Once more, I got hold of the rumpled-up
letter! —Impudent man! were her words: Stamping
again: For God's sake, then it was! —I let go
my prize, lest she should faint away: But had the
pleasure first to find my hand within both hers, she
trying to open my reluctant fingers. How near was
my heart, at that moment, to my hand, throbbing
to my fingers ends, to be thus familiarly, altho'
angrily, treated by the charmer of my soul! 
When she had got it in her possession, she flew to
the door: I threw myself in her way, shut it, and,
in the humblest manner, besought her to forgive me: 
And yet do you think the Harlowe-hearted charmer
would; notwithstanding the agreeable annunciation
I came in with? —No, truly! but pushing me rudely
from the door, as if I had been nothing (yet do I
love to try, so innocently to try, her strength too!); 
she gaining that force through passion, which I had
lost through fear; and out she shot to her own apartment
[Thank my stars she could fly no further!]; and
as soon as she enter'd it, in a passion still, she double-locked
and double-bolted herself in. —This my comfort,
on reflection, that, upon a greater offence, it
cannot be worse! 
I retreated to my own apartment, with my heart
full. And, my man Will. not being near me, gave 

myself a plaguy knock on the forehead, with my
double fist. 
And now is my charmer shut up from me: Refusing
to see me; refusing her meals: Resolves not to
see me, that's more;—Never again, if she can
help it. 
In the mind she is in—I hope she has said. The
dear creatures, whenever they quarrel with their
humble servants, should always remember this saving
clause, that they may not be forsworn. 
But thinkest thou that I will not make it the subject
of one of my first plots, to inform myself of the
reason why all this commotion was necessary on so
slight an occasion, as this would have been, were not
the letters that pass between these ladies of a treasonable
nature? 
* *
Wednesday Morning. 
No admission to breakfast, any more than to supper. 
I wish this lady is not a simpleton, after all. —I have
sent up in Capt. Mennell's name. A message from
Capt. Mennell, Madam. 
It won't do! —She is of a baby age: She cannot
be—a Solomon, I was going to say, in every thing. 
Solomon, Jack, was the wisest man: —But didst
ever hear who was the wisest woman? —I want a
comparison for this lady: Cunning women and witches,
we read of without number. But I fancy wisdom
never entered into the character of a woman. It
is not a requisite of the Sex. Women, indeed, make
better sovereigns than men: But why is that? —Because
the women sovereigns are governed by men; 
the men sovereigns by women: —Charming by my
soul! For hence we guess at the rudder by which both
are governed. Yet, sorry puppy as thou art, thou
makest light of me for my attachment to this Sex; 
and even of my ardors to the most excellent one of
it!— 

But to put wisdom out of the question, and to take
running in: That is to say, To consider woman as a
woman; what shall we do, if this lady has something
extraordinary in her head? —Repeated charges has
she given for Wilson, by a particular messenger, to
send any letter directed for her, the moment it comes. 
I must keep a good look-out. She is not now
afraid of her brother's plot. I shan't be at all surprized,
if Singleton calls upon Miss Howe, as the
only person who knows, or is likely to know, where
Miss Harlowe is; pretending to have affairs of importance,
and of particular service to her, if he can
but be admitted to her speech. Of compromise, who
knows, from her brother? 
Then will Miss Howe warn her to keep close; 
then will my protection be again necessary. This
will do, I believe. Any thing from Miss Howe
must. 
Joseph Leman is a vile fellow with her, and my
implement. Joseph, honest Joseph, as I call him, may
hang himself. I have play'd him off enough, and have
very little further use for him. No need to wear one
plot to the stumps, when I can find new ones every
hour. 
Nor blame me for the use I make of my talents. 
Who, that had such, would let 'em be idle? 
Well then, I will find a Singleton; that's all I
have to do. 
Instantly find one! —Will.— 
Sir— 
This moment call me hither thy cousin Paul
Wheatly, just come from sea, whom thou wert recommending
to my service, if I were to marry and
keep a pleasure-boat. 
Presto—Will.'s gone! —Paul will be here presently! 
—Presently will he be gone to Mrs. Howe's. —If
Paul be Singleton's mate, coming from his captain, it
will do as well as if it were Singleton himself. 

Sally, a little devil, often reproaches me with the
slowness of my proceedings. But in a play, does not
the principal entertainment lie in the first four acts? Is
not all in a manner over, when you come to the fifth? 
And what a vultur of a man must he be, who sowses
upon his prey, and in the same moment trusses and
devours? 
But to own the truth, I have overplotted myself. 
To make my work secure, as I thought, I have frighted
the dear creature with my four Hottentots, and I shall
be a long time, I doubt, before I can recover my lost
ground. And then these cursed folks at Harlowe-Place
have made her out of humour with me, with
herself, and with all the world, but Miss Howe, who,
no doubt, is continually adding difficulties to my other
difficulties. And then I am very unwilling to have
recourse to measures which these dæmons below are
continually urging me to take. And the rather, as I
am sure, that, at last, she must be legally mine. One
complete trial over, and I think I will do her noble
justice. 
* *
Well, Paul's gone! —Gone already! —Has all his
lessons! —A notable fellow! —Lord W.'s necessary
man was Paul before he went to sea. A more sensible
rogue Paul than Joseph! —Not such a pretender
to piety neither, as the other. At what a price have
I bought that Joseph! —I had two to buy, in him— 
His conscience, as well as the man. —I believe I
must punish the rascal at last: But must let him marry
first: Then (tho' that may be punishment enough),
as I bribed two at once in one man, I shall punish
two at once in the man and his wife. —And how
richly does Betty deserve it for her behaviour to my
goddess? 
But now I hear the rusty hinges of my Beloved's
door give me creaking invitation. My heart creaks
and throbs with respondent trepidations: Whimsical 

enough tho'! For what relation has a lover's heart
to a rusty pair of hinges? —But they are the hinges
that open and shut the door of my Beloved's bed-chamber! 
—Relation enough in that! 
I hear not the door shut again. I shall have her
commands I hope anon. —What signifies her keeping
me thus at a distance? —She must be mine, let
me do or offer what I will. Courage whenever I assume,
all is over: For should she think of escaping
from hence, whither can she fly to avoid me? Her
parents will not receive her: Her uncles will not entertain
her: Her beloved Norton is in their direction,
and cannot: Miss Howe dare not: She has not one
friend in town but me: Is intirely a stranger to the
town. And what then is the matter with me, that I
should be thus unaccountably over-awed and tyrannized
over, by a dear creature, who wants only to
know how impossible it is that she should escape me,
in order to be as humble to me, as she is to her persecuting
relations? 
Should I even make the grand attempt, and fail,
and should she hate me for it, her hatred can be but
temporary. She has already incurred the censure of
the world. She must therefore choose to be mine,
for the sake of soldering up her reputation in the eye
of that impudent world. For, who that knows me,
and knows that she has been in my power, tho' but
for twenty-four hours, will think her spotless as to
fact, let her inclination be what it will? —And then
human nature is such a well-known rogue, that
every man and woman judges by what each knows of
themselves, that inclination is no more to be trusted,
where an opportunity is given, than I am; especially
where a woman young and blooming loves a
man well enough to go off with him; for such will
be the world's construction in the present case. 
She calls her maid Dorcas. No doubt, that I may
hear her harmonious voice, and to give me an opportunity 

to pour out my soul at her feet; to renew all
my vows; and to receive her pardon for the past offence: 
And then, with what pleasure shall I begin upon
a new score; and afterwards wipe out that; and
begin another, and another; till the last offence
passes; and there can be no other. And once, after
that, to be forgiven, will be to be forgiven for ever. 
* *
The door is again shut. Dorcas tells me, that
she denies to admit me to dine with her, as I had ordered
her to request for me next time she saw her. 
Not uncivilly, however, denies. Coming to by degrees! 
Nothing but the last offence, the honest
wench tells me, in the language of her principals below,
will do with her. The last offence is meditating. 
Yet this vile recreant heart of mine plays me
booty. —But here I conclude; tho' the tyranness
leaves me nothing to do, but read, write, and fret. 
Subscription is formal between us. Besides, I am
so totally hers, that I cannot say, how much I am
thine, or any other person's. 