


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sir Charles returned with the Ladies. He presented
to Lady Olivia and her Aunt, Lady G. Lord L.
and Lord W. I was in another apartment talking with
Dr. Bartlett. Lady Olivia asked for the doctor. He
lest me to pay his respects to her. Sir Charles being
informed, that I was in the house, told Lady Olivia,
that he hoped he should have the honour of presenting
to her one of our English beauties; desiring Lady
G. to request my company. 
Lady G. came to me—A lovely woman, I assure
you, Harriet; let me lead you to her. Sir Charles
met me at the entrance of the drawing-room: Excuse
me, madam, said he, taking my hand, with profound
respect, and allow me to introduce to a very
amiable Italian Lady one of the loveliest women in
Britain; leading me up to her; she advancing towards
me. Miss Byron, madam, addressing himself
to her, salutes you. Her beauty engages every eye; 
but that is her least perfection. 
Her face glowed. Miss Byron, said she, in French
is all loveliness. A relation Sir? in Italian. He
bowed; but answered not her question. 
Her aunt, saluting me, expressed herself in my favour. 
I would sooner forgive you here, whispered Lady
Olivia to Sir Charles, in Italian, looking at me, than
at Bologna. 

I heard her; and by my confusion shewed that I
understood her. She was in confusion too. 
Mademoiselle, said she, in French, understands
Italian. —I am ashamed, Monsieur. 
Miss Byron does, answered Sir Charles; and French
too. 
I must have the honour, said she in French, to be
better known to you, Mademoiselle. 
I answer'd her as politely as I could in the same
language. 
Lady Olivia is really a lovely woman. Her complexion
is fine. Her face oval. Every feature of it
is delicate. Her hair is black; and, I think, I never
saw brighter black eyes in my life: If possible, they
are brighter, and shine with a more piercing lustre,
than even Sir Charles Grandison's: But yet I give his
the preference; for we see in them a benignity, that
hers, tho' a woman's, has not; and a thoughtfulness,
as if something lay upon his mind, which nothing
but patience could overcome; yet mingled with an
air that shews him to be equal to any-thing, that can
be undertaken by man. While Olivia's eyes shew
more fire and impetuosity than sweetness. Had I not
been told it, I should have been sure that she has a
violent spirit: But on the whole, she is a very fine
figure of a woman. 
She talk'd of taking a house, and staying in England
a year at least; and was determined, she said,
to perfect herself in the language, and to become an
Englishwoman: But when Sir Charles, in the way of
discourse, mentioned his obligation to leave England,
as on next Saturday morning, how did she and her
aunt look upon each other! And how was the sunshine
that gilded her fine countenance, shut in! Surely,
Sir, said her aunt, you are not in earnest! 
After dinner, the two Ladies retired with Sir Charles,
at his motion. Dr. Bartlett, at Lady G.'s request,
then gave us this short sketch of her history: He said, 

She had a vast fortune: She had had indiscretions; 
but none that had affected her character as to virtue:
But her spirit could not bear controul. She had
shewn herself to be vindictive, even to a criminal degree. 
Lord bless me, my dear, the doctor has mentioned
to me in confidence, that she always carries
a poniard about her; and that once she used it. Had
the person died, she would have been called to public
account for it. The man, it seems, was of rank,
and offered some slight affront to her. She now comes
over, the doctor said, as he had reason to believe,
with a resolution to sacrifice even her religion, if it
were insisted upon, to the passion she had so long in
vain endeavoured to conquer. 
She has, he says, an utter hatred to Lady Clementina; 
and will not be able to govern her passion, he
is sure, when Sir Charles shall acquaint her, that he
is going to attend that Lady, and her family: For he
has only mentioned his obligation to go abroad; but
not said whither. 
Lord W. praised the person of the Lady, and her
majestic air. Lord L. and Lord G. wish'd to be within
hearing of the conference between her and Sir
Charles: So did Lady G.: And while they were thus
wishing, in came Sir Charles, his face all in a glow; 
Lady L. said he, be so good as to attend Lady Olivia. 
She went to her. Sir Charles staid not with us:
Yet went not to the Lady; but into his Study. Dr.
Bartlett attended him there: The doctor returned
soon after to us. His noble heart is vexed, said he:
Lady Olivia has greatly disturbed him: He chooses
to be alone. 
Lady L. afterwards told us, that she found the Lady
in violent anguish of spirit; her aunt endeavouring
to calm her: She, however, politely addressed heself
to Lady L. and, begging her aunt to withdraw for a
few moments, she owned to her, in French, her
passion for her brother: She was not, she said, ashamed 

to own it to his sister, who must know that his merit
would dignify the passion of the noblest woman. She
had endeavoured, she said, to conquer hers: She had
been willing to give way to the prior attachments that
he had pleaded for a Lady of her own country, Signora
Clementina della Porretta, whom she allowed to
have had great merit; but who, having irrecoverably
been put out of her right mind, was shut up at Naples
by a brother, who vowed eternal enmity to Sir
Charles; and from whom his life would be in the
utmost hazard, if he went over. She owned, that
her chief motive for coming to England was, to cast
her fortune at her brother's feet; and as she knew
him to be a man of honour, to comply with any
terms he should propose to her. He had offered to
the family della Porretta to allow their daughter her
religion, and her confessor, and to live with her every
other year in Italy. She herself, not inferior in birth,
in person, in mind, as she said, she presumed, and superior
in fortune, the riches of three branches of her
family, all rich, having centred in her, insisted not
now upon such conditions. Her aunt, she said, knew
not that she proposed, on conviction, a change of her
religion; but she was resolved not to conceal anything
from Lady L. She left her to judge how
much she must be affected, when he declared his
obligation to leave England; and especially when he
owned, that it was to go to Bologna, and that so
suddenly, as if, as she apprehended at first, it was to
avoic her. She had been in tears, she said, and even
would have kneeled to him, to induce him to suspend
his journey for one month, and then to have taken
her over with him, and seen her safe in her own palace,
if he would go upon so hated, and so fruitless, as
well as so hazardous an errand: But he had denied
her this poor favour. 
This refusal, she owned, had put her out of all
patience. She was unhappily passionate; but was the 

most placable of her Sex. What, madam, said she,
can affect a woman, if slight, indignity, and repulse,
from a favoured person, is not able to do it? A
woman of my condition to come over to England, to
sollicit—how can I support the thought—and to be
refused the protection of the man she prefers to all
men; and her request to see her safe back again, tho'
but as the fool she came over—You may blame me,
madam—but you must pity me, even were you to
have a heart the sister-heart of your inflexible brother's. 
In vain did Lady L. plead to her Lady Clementina's
deplorable situation; the reluctance of his own relations
to part with him; and the magnanimity of his
self-denial in an hundred instances, on the bare possibility
of being an instrument to restore her: She could
not bear to hear her speak highly of the unhappy
Lady. She charged Clementina with the pride of her
family, to which she attributed their deserved calamity
[Deserved! Cruel Lady! How could her pitiless
heart allow her lips to utter such a word!]; and
imputed meanness to the noblest of human minds, for
yielding to the entreaties of a family, some of the
principals of which, she said, had treated him with
an arrogance that a man of his spirit ought not to
bear. 
Lady Maffei came in. She seems dependent upon
her niece. She is her aunt by marriage only: And
Lady L. speaks very favourably of her from the advice
she gave, and her remonstrances to her kinswoman. 
Lady Maffei besought her to compose herself,
and return to the company. 
She could not bear, she said, to return to the company,
the slighted, the contemned object, she must
appear to be to every one in it. I am an intruder,
said she, haughtily; a beggar, with a fortune that
would purchase a Sovereignty in some countries. 
Make my excuses to your sister, to the rest of the 

company—and to that fine young Lady—whose eyes,
by their officious withdrawing from his, and by the
consciousness that glowed in her face whenever he addressed
her, betrayed, at least to a jealous eye, more
than she would wish to have seen—But tell her, that
all lovely and blooming as she is, she must have no
hope, while Clementina lives. 
I hope, Lucy, it is only to a jealous eye that my
heart is so discoverable! —I thank her for her caution. 
But I can say what she cannot; that from my heart,
cost me what it may, I do subscribe to a preference in
favour of a Lady who has acted, in the most arduous
trials, in a greater manner than I fear either Olivia or
I could have acted, in the same circumstances. We
see that her reason, but not her piety, deserted her in
the noble struggle between her Love and her Religion. 
In the most affecting absences of her reason, the Soul
of the man she loved was the object of her passion. 
However hard it is to prefer another to one's self, in
such a case as this; yet if my judgment is convinced,
my acknowlegement shall follow it. Heaven will enable
me to be reconciled to the event, because I pursue
the dictates of that judgment, against the biasses
of my more partial heart. Let that Heaven, which
only can, restore Clementina, and dispose as it pleases
of Olivia and Harriet. We cannot either of us, I
humbly hope, be so unhappy as the Lady has been
whom I rank among the first of women; and whose
whole family deserves almost equal compassion. 
Lady Olivia asked Lady L. If her brother had not
a very tender regard for me? He had, Lady L. answered; 
and told her, that he had rescued me from a
very great distress; and that mine was the most grateful
of human hearts. 
She called me sweet young creature (supposing me,
I doubt not, younger than I am); but said, that the
graces of my person and mind alarmed her not, as
they would have done, had not his attachment to Clementina 

been what now she saw, but never could have
believed it was; having supposed, that compassion
only was the tie that bound him to her. 
But compassion, Lucy, from such a heart as his,
the merit so great in the Lady, must be Love; a Love
of the nobler kind—And if it were not, it would be
unworthy of Clementina's. 
Lady Maffei called upon her dignity, her birth, to
carry her above a passion that met not with a grateful
return. She advised her to dispose herself to stay in
England some months, now she was here. And as
her friends in Italy would suppose what her view was
in coming to England, their censures would be obviated
by her continuing here for some time, while Sir
Charles was abroad, and in Italy: And that she should
divert herself with visiting the court, the public places,
and in seeing the principal curiosities of this kingdom,
as she had done those of others; in order to give credit
to an excursion that might otherwise be freely
spoken of, in her own country. 
She seemed to listen to this advice. She bespoke,
and was promised, the friendship of the two sisters; 
and included in her request, through their interests,
mine; and Lady G. was called in, by her sister, to
join in the promise. 
She desired that Sir Charles might be requested to
walk in; but would not suffer the sisters to withdraw,
as they would have done, when he returned. He could
not but be polite; but, it seems, looked still disturbed. 
I beg you to excuse, Sir, said she, my behaviour to
you: It was passionate; it was unbecoming. But, in
compliment to your own consequence, you ought to
excuse it. I have only to request one favour of you:
That you will suspend for one week, in regard to me,
your proposed journey; but for one week; and I will,
now I am in England, stay some months; perhaps till
your return. 
Excuse me, madam. 

I will not excuse you—But one week, Sir. Give me
so much importance with myself, as for one week's
suspension. You will. You must. 
Indeed I cannot. My Soul, I own to you, is in the
distresses of the family of Porretta. Why should I
repeat what I said to you before? 
I have bespoken, Sir, the civilities of your sisters, of
your family: You forbid them not? 
You expect not an answer, madam, to that question. 
My sisters will be glad, and so will their Lords,
to attend you where-ever you please, with a hope to
make England agreeable to you. 
How long do you propose to stay in Italy, Sir? 
It is not possible for me to determine. 
Are you not apprehensive of danger to your person? 
I am not. 
You ought to be. 
No danger shall deter me from doing what I think
to be right. If my motives justify me, I cannot
fear. 
Do you wish me, Sir, to stay in England till your
return? 
A question so home put, disturbed him. Was it a
prudent one in the Lady? It must either subject her
to a repulse; or him, by a polite answer, to give her
hope, that her stay in England might not be fruitless,
as to the view she had in coming. He reddened. It
is fit, answered he, that your own pleasure should determine
you. It did, pardon me, madam, in your
journey hither. 
She reddened to her very ears. Your brother, Ladies,
has the reputation of being a polite man: Bear
witness to this instance of it. I am ashamed of myself! 
If I am unpolite, madam, my sincerity will be my
excuse; at least to my own heart. 
O that inflexible heart! But, Ladies, if the inhospitable
Englishman refuse his protection in his own 

country, to a foreign woman, of no mean quality; Do
not you, his sisters, despise her. 
They, madam, and their Lords, will render you
every chearful service. Let me request you, my
sisters, to make England as agreeable as possible to
this Lady. She is of the first consideration in her
own country: She will be of such where-ever she
goes. My Lady Maffei deserves likewise your utmost
respect. Then addressing himself to them; Ladies,
said he, encourage my sisters: They will think themselves
honoured by your commands. 
The two sisters confirmed, in an obliging manner,
what their brother had said; and both Ladies acknowleged
themselves indebted to them for their offered
friendship: But Lady Olivia seemed not at all
satisfied with their brother: And it was with some
difficulty he prevailed on her to return to the company,
and drink coffee. 
I could not help reflecting, on occasion of this Lady's
conduct, that fathers and mothers are great blessings,
to daughters, in particular, even when women grown. 
It is not every woman that will shine in a state of independency. 
Great fortunes are snares. If independent
women escape the machinations of men,
which they have often a difficulty to do, they will
frequently be hurried by their own imaginations,
which are said to be livelier than those of men, tho'
their judgments are supposed less, into inconveniencies. 
Had Lady Olivia's parents or uncles lived, she
hardly would have been permitted to make the tour of
Europe: And not having so great a fortune to support
vagaries, would have shone, as she is well qualified to
do, in a dependent state, in Italy, and made some
worthy man and herself happy. 
Had she a mind great enough to induce her to pity
Clementina, I should have been apt to pity her; for I
saw her soul waas disturbed. I saw that the man she
loved was not able to return her Love: A pitiable 

case! I saw a starting tear now-and-then with difficulty
dispersed. Once she rubbed her eye, and, being
conscious of observation, said something had got
into it: So it had. The something was a tear. Yet
she looked with haughtiness, and her bosom swelled
with indignation ill concealed. 
Sir Charles repeated his recommendation of her to
Lord L. and Lord G. They offered their best services:
Lord W. invited her and all of us to Windsor. 
Different parties of pleasure were talked of: But still
the Enlivener of every party was not to be in any one
of them. She tried to look pleased; but did not always
succeed in the trial: An eye of Love and Anger
mingled was often cast upon the man whom everybody
loved. Her bosom heaved, as it seemed sometimes,
with indignation against herself: That was the
construction which I made of some of her looks. 
Lady Maffei, however, seemed pleased with the
parties of pleasure talked of: She often directed herself
to me in Italian. I answered her in it as well as
I could. I do not talk it well: But as I am not an
Italian, and little more than book-learned in it (for it
is a long time ago since I lost my grandpapa, who used
to converse with me in it, and in French) I was not
scrupulous to answer in it. To have forborn, because
I did not excel in what I had no opportunity to excel
in, would have been false modesty, nearly bordering
upon pride. Were any Lady to laugh at me for not
speaking well her native tongue, I would not return
the smile, were she to be less perfect in mine, than I
am in hers. But Lady Olivia made me a compliment
on my faulty accent, when I acknowleged it to be so. 
Signora, said she, you shew us, that a pretty mouth
can give beauty to a defect. A master teaching you,
added she, would perhaps find some fault; but a friend
conversing with you, must be in love with you for the
very imperfection. 
Sir Charles was generously pleased with the compliment,
and made her a fine one on her observation. 

He attended the two Ladies to their lodgings in his
coach. He owned to Dr. Bartlett, that Lady Olivia
was in tears all the way, lamenting her disgrace in
coming to England, just as he was quitting it; and
wishing she had stay'd at Florence. She would have
engaged him to correspond with her: He excused
himself. It was a very afflicting thing to him, he told
the doctor, to deny any request that was made to
him, especially by a Lady: But he thought he ought
in conscience and honour to forbear giving the shadow
of an expectation that might be improved into hope,
where none was intended to be given. Heaven, he
said, had, for laudable ends, implanted such a regard
in the Sexes towards each other, that both man and
woman who hoped to be innocent, could not be too
circumspect in relation to the friendships they were so
ready to contract with each other. He thought he had
gone a great way, in recommending an intimacy between
her and his sisters, considering her views, her
spirit, her perseverance, and the free avowal of her
regard for him, and her menaces on his supposed
neglect of her. And yet, as she had come over, and
he was obliged to leave England so soon after her arrival; 
he thought he could not do less: And he hoped
his sisters, from whose example she might be benefited,
would, while she behaved prudently, cultivate
her acquaintance. 
The doctor tells me, that now Lady Olivia is so
unexpectedly come hither in person, he thinks it best
to decline giving me, as he had once intended, her
history at large; but will leave so much of it as may
satisfy my curiosity, to be gathered from my own observation; 
and not only from the violence and haughtiness
of her temper, but from the freedom of her declarations. 
He is sure, he said, that his patron will be
best pleased, that a veil should be thrown over the
weaker part of her conduct; which, were it known,
would indeed be glorious to Sir Charles, but not so to 

the Lady; who, however, never was suspected, even
by her enemies, of giving any other man reason to tax
her with a thought that was not strictly virtuous:
And she had engaged his Pity and Esteem, for the sake
of her other fine qualities, tho' she could not his Love. 
Before she saw him (which, it seems, was at the opera
at Florence for the first time, when he had an opportunity
to pay her some slight civilities) she set all men
at defiance. 
To-morrow morning Sir Charles is to breakfast
with me. My cousins and I are to dine at Lord L.'s. 
The Earl and Lady Gertrude are also to be there. 
Lord W. has been prevailed upon to stay, and be there
also, as it is his nephew's last day in England. —‘Last
day in England!’ O my Lucy! What words are
those! —Lady L. has invited Lady Olivia and her aunt,
at her own motion, Sir Charles (his time being so
short) not disapproving. 
I thank my grandmamma and aunt for their kind
summons. I will soon set my day: I will, my dear,
soon set my day. 

