



The Rev. Dr. Lewen, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 

Friday, Aug. 18. 
Presuming, dearest and ever-respectable young
Lady, upon your former favour, and upon your
opinion of my judgment and sincerity, I cannot help
addressing you by a few lines, on your present unhappy
situation. 
I will not look back upon the measures into which
you have either been led or driven: But will only say
as to those, that I think you are the least to blame of
any young Lady that was ever reduced from happy to
unhappy circumstances; and I have not been wanting
to say as much, where I hoped my freedom would
have better received than I have had the mortification
to find it to be. 
What I principally write for now, is, to put you
upon doing a piece of justice to yourself, and to your
Sex, in the prosecuting for his life (I am assured his
life is in your power) the most profligate and abandoned
of men, as he must be, who could act so basely, as I
understand Mr. Lovelace has acted by you. 
I am very ill; and am now forced to write upon my
pillow; my thoughts confused; and incapable of method: 
I shall not therefore aim at method: But to
give you in general my opinion. —And that is, That
your Religion, your Duty to your Family, the Duty 

you owe to your Honour, and even Charity to your
Sex, oblige you to give Public Evidence against this
very wicked man. 
And let me add another consideration: The prevention,
by this means, of the mischiefs that may
otherwise happen between your Brother and Mr. Lovelace,
or between the latter and your Cousin Morden,
who is now, I hear, arrived, and resolves to have
justice done you. 
A consideration which ought to affect your Conscience
[Forgive me, dearest young Lady, I think I
am now in the way of my duty]; and to be of more
concern to you, than that hard pressure upon your modesty
which I know the appearance against him in an
open Court must be of to such a Lady as you; and
which, I conceive, will be your great difficulty. But
I know, Madam, that you have dignity enough to
become the blushes of the most naked truth, when necessity,
justice, and honour, exact it from you. 
Rakes and Ravishers would meet with encouragement
indeed, and most from those who had the greatest abhorrence
of their actions, if violated modesty were
never to complain of the injury it received from the
villainous attempters of it. 
In a word, the Reparation of your family dishonour
now rests in your own bosom: And which only one
of these two alternatives can repair; to wit, either to
marry the offender, or to prosecute him at Law. 
Bitter expedients for a soul so delicate as yours! 
He, and all his friends, I understand, solicit you
to the first: And it is certainly, now, all the amends
within his power to make. But I am assured, that
you have rejected their solicitations, and his, with the
indignation and contempt that his foul actions have
deserved: But yet, that you refuse not to extend to
him the Christian forgiveness he has so little reason to
expect, provided he will not disturb you further. 
But, Madam, the prosecution I advise, will not 

let your present and future exemption from fresh disturbance
from so vile a molester depend upon his
courtesy: I should think so noble and so rightly-guided
a spirit as yours, would not permit that it should, if
you could help it. 
And can indignities of any kind be properly pardoned
till we have it in our power to punish them? To pretend
to pardon, while we are labouring under the
pain or dishonour of them, will be thought by some
to be but the vaunted mercy of a pusillanimous heart,
trembling to resent them. The remedy I propose, is
a severe one; but what pain can be more severe than
the injury? or how will injuries be believed to grieve
us, that are never honourably complained of? 
I am sure, Miss Clarissa Harlowe, however injured
and oppressed, remains unshaken in her sentiments of
honour and virtue: And although she would sooner
die than deserve that her modesty should be drawn into
question; yet she will think no truth immodest that
is to be uttered in the vindicated cause of innocence
and chastity. Little, very little difference is there,
my dear young Lady, between a suppressed evidence,
and a false one. 
It is a terrible circumstance, I once more own, for
a young Lady of your delicacy, to be under the obligation
of telling so shocking a Story in public Court: 
But it is still a worse imputation, that she should pass
over so mortal an injury unresented. 
Conscience, Honour, Justice, are on your side: 
And Modesty would, by some, be thought but
an empty name, should you refuse to obey their
dictates. 
I have been consulted, I own, on this subject. I
have given it as my opinion, that you ought to prosecute
the abandoned man—But without my reasons. 
These I reserved, with a resolution to lay them before
you unknown to any-body, that the result, if
what I wish, may be your own. 

I will only add, that the misfortunes which have
befallen you, had they been the lot of a child of my
own, could not have affected me more than yours have
done. My own child I love: But I both love and
honour you: Since to love you, is to love virtue,
good sense, prudence, and every-thing that is good
and noble in woman. 
Wounded as I think all these are by the injuries you
have received, you will believe that the knowledge of
your distresses must have afflicted, beyond what I am
able to express, 
Your sincere Admirer, and humble Servant,
Arthur Lewen. 
I just now understand, that your Sister will, by
proper authority, propose this prosecution to you. 
I humbly presume, that the reason why you resolved
not upon this step from the first, was, that
you did not know, that it would have the Countenance
and Support of your Relations. 