


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Dec. 21. 
Sir Charles, God be praised! arrived here in
safety about two hours ago. He has settled every
thing between Lady Beauchamp and the now Sir Edward, 

to the satisfaction of both; for they entirely
referred themselves to him. This was the method
he took. —As their interests were not naturally the
same, he enquired of each separately, what were the
wishes of each; and finding the Lady's not unreasonable,
he referred it to Sir Edward, of his own generosity,
to compliment her with more than she asked. 
Particularly she had wished to Sir Charles, that she
might not be obliged to remove under a twelvemonth
from the house in Berkley-square: And when
Sir Charles had brought them together, and pronounced
between them, making that an article, Sir Edward,
on one knee, thus bespoke her: 
All that your Ladyship demands I most chearfully
comply with. Instead of the year you wish to
remain in Berkley-square, let me beg of you, still to
consider both houses as your own; and me your inmate
only, as in the life-time of my father. I never
will engage in marriage, but with your approbation:
Let us, madam, be as little as possible separated:
Be pleased only to distinguish, that I wish not this,
but from pure and disinterested motives. I will be
your servant as well as son. I will take all trouble
from you that you shall think trouble; but never
will offer so much as my humble advice to you in the
conduct of your own affairs, unless you ask for it. 
She wept. We will henceforth, said she, have
but one interest. You shall be dear to me, for your
father's sake. Let me, for the same dear sake, be
regarded by you: Receive me, excellent pair of friends,
proceeded she, as a third in your friendship. Should
any misunde standing arise, which, after so happy a
setting out, I hope, cannot be, let Sir Charles Grandison
determine between us. Justice and He are
one. 
Sir Charles invited down to us the Lady and his
Beauchamp. He hopes they will come. The young
Baionet, I dare say, will. Emily says, she wants to 

see how he will become his new dignity. Very well,
I dare say, said I. Why yes; such an example before
him, I don't doubt but he will. 
Lucy was present. Near 4000l. a year, and a
title, said she—I think you and I, my dear, were we
nearer of an age, would contend for him. 
Not I, Miss Selby: So that I have the Love of my
Guardian and Lady Grandison, you may be Lady
Beauchamp for me. —You will be of another mind,
perhaps, some time hence, said Miss Selby—When
I am, replied Emily, tell me of it. 
Sir Charles, when he was in town, visited his two
sisters. He gave me the pleasure of acquainting me,
that we shall be favoured with the company of Lord
and Lady L. as soon as her Ladyship's visits and visitings
are over. 
Mind, my dear Lady G. what follows: 
Lady L. said he, is all joy, that her great event
is happily over; she and my Lord rewarded with a
dear pledge of their mutual Love. But is not Lady
G. a little unaccountable, my dear? 
As how, Sir? 
She hardly seems to receive pleasure in her happy
prospects. She appears to me peevish, even childishly
so, to her Lord. I see it the more for her endeavours
to check herself before me. She submits but ungraciously
to the requisites of the circumstance, that lays
him and me, and our several united families under
obligation to her. I was unwilling to take notice of
her particular behaviour, for two reasons; first, because
she wants not understanding, and would see her
own error before she went too far; and next, because
she tacitly confessed herself to be wrong, by being evidently
desirous to hide her fault from me. But is not
our Charlotte a little unaccountable, my dear? 
What, my dear Lady G. should I have answered? 
I hope you will allow me to be just. I should have
been most sincerely glad to have spoken a good word 

for you: But to attempt to excuse or palliate an evident
fault, looks like a claim put in for allowances
for one's own. 
“Indeed, Sir, she is a very unaccountable creature! 
She is afraid of you, and of nobody but you. 
You should, as she could not conceal from you
her odd behaviour to one of the best of husbands,
and sweetest-temper'd of men, who loves her
more than he loves himself; and who is but too
solicitous to oblige so unthankful a thing; have
taken notice of it, and chidden her severely: I,
for my part, take liberties of this kind with her in
every Letter I write; but to no purpose. I wanted
you, Sir, to find her out yourself; she will get a habit
of doing wrong things; and make herself more
unhappy than she will make any-body else; since it
is possible for her to tire out her Lord. How insupportable
to her of all women, would it be, were the
tables to be turned; and were the man she treats
so ungraciously, to be brought to slight her? The
more insupportable, as she has a higher opinion
of her own understanding than she has of his!” 
Can't you form to yourself, my dear Lady G. the
attitude of astonishment, that your brother threw
himself into?— 
But, ah, my dear grandmamma, do you think I
said this to Sir Charles? —No, indeed! For the
world, I would not have said one syllable of it. But
let Lady G. for a moment, as she reads my Letter,
think I did. She loves to surprize; why should she
not be surprised in turn? Her displeasure would affect
me greatly: But if by incurring it I could do
her good, and put her in a right train of thinking, I
would incur it, and on my knees afterwards beg her
to forgive me. 
He did make the above observation. A thousand
excellent qualities has my Charlotte. I particularized
to her brother half a dozen, and those are more than 

fall to the share of most of our modern people of
quality; and he was willing to be satisfied with them
—Why? Because he loves her. But, as she now-and-then
whispers her Harriet, in her Letters, let me
whisper her, that she is under great obligation to her
brother, and still greater to her Lord, for passing over
so lightly her petulances. 
Thursday afternoon. 
Who, madam, do you think, is arrived? Arrived
just as we sat down to dinner; and will stay with us
this one night, but, he says, no more? —Sir Rowland
Meredith! Good man! and Mr. Fowler! The latter
attended his uncle reluctantly, it seems; but, thank
God, he is in pretty good health. How kindly, how
affectionately, did Sir Charles receive them both! How
has he already won the heart of honest Sir Rowland! 
* *
Let me, madam, acquaint you with something
generously particular of this worthy man. 
He desired Sir Charles to let him have me by himself
for one quarter of an hour. So fine a young
gentleman would not, he hoped, be jealous of such
a poor old man as he. 
We were in the dining room; and he rising to attend
me, I led him to my drawing-room adjoining. 
He looked round him, and was struck with the elegance
of the room and furniture; disregarding me
for a few moments—Why, ay! said he, at last; This
is noble! This is fine! Stately, by mercy! And he
bowed to me, poor man! the more respectfully, as I
thought, for what he saw. And will you, madam, bowing
again, and again, allow me to call you daughter? 
I can't part with my daughter: Nor would I, were
you a queen. 
You do me honour, Sir Rowland. Call me still
your daughter. 
Why then, you must allow me—Forgive me, madam! 

—And he saluted me. Joy, joy, tenfold joy,
attend my daughter! I don't know what to make of
the present fashions. Would Sir Charles have been
affronted, had I taken this liberty before him? The
duce is in the present age; they reserve themselves to
holes and corners, I suppose. But I am sure no creature
breathing could mean more respect than I do. 
I think only of myself as of your father. 
You are a good man, Sir Rowland. Sir Charles
Grandison was prepared to love you; he was prepared
to value Mr. Fowler. 
Prepared by your own respect for us, madam! — 
God love you, say yes. 
Yes indeed, I ever shall respect you both. Have
I not claimed a father in you? Have I not claimed
a brother in your nephew? I never forget my relations. 
Charming, charming, by mercy! And he stalked
to the other end of the room, wiping his eyes: The
very same good young Lady that you ever were! 
But, but, but, putting his hand in his pocket, and
pulling out a little box, if you are my daughter, you
shall wear these for your father's sake! —How now,
madam! Refuse me! I command you on your obedience
to accept of this—I will not be a Jack-straw
father— 
Indeed, indeed, Sir Rowland, you must excuse me:
I thought I might have trusted myself with you alone. 
Your generosity, Sir, is painful to me. 
I courtesied, and withdrew to the company in the
dining-room. The good man followed me, tears upon
his cheeks, the box in his hand: My face glowed. 
She calls me Father, Sir Charles; and refuses her
obedience. Here I have brought a toy or two, to
shew my fatherly Love to my daughter. Not a soul,
not my nephew there, knows a syllable of the matter; 
it was that made me call her aside. 

Sir Charles rose from his seat. My dearest Life is
not used, said he, to make light of a duty; taking
my hand. You will excuse her from accepting the present,
Sir Rowland; that would look as if you thought
it necessary to bribe her to do her duty. She will always
acknowlege her father: So will I mine. But
you do us honour enough in the relation. 
What, Sir Charles, not of a present from her father
to his daughter, on her nuptials, and as a small
token of his joy on the occasion; when I know not
the man living, out of my own family—There he
stopt. 
My dearest Love, there is no resisting this plea:
Your duty, your gratitude, is engaged. 
Look you there now! Look you there now! God
love you both everlastingly, Amen! —And there is the
blessing of a father! 
I took the box, courtesying low; but looked silly,
I believe. 
Forgive me, Sir Charles, said the Knight; but I
must—He took my hand, and kissed it—and looked
as if he wished to salute me—Fathers, my dear, must
be reverenced, said Sir Charles, by their children. 
I bent my knee, and, in compliance with a motion
of Sir Charles, leaned forward my cheek. He
saluted me; and again he blessed us both—My dear
nephew, said he, hastening to Mr. Fowler, if you
envy such a man as this his good fortune, by mercy
I will renounce you. 
I may envy you, Sir Charles, said Mr. Fowler,
addressing himself to him in an agreeable manner; I
don't know how it is possible to avoid it; but at the
same time I revere you for your character and accomplishments. 
You are the only man in the world
whom I could cordially congratulate, as I do you, on
your happiness. 
True, nephew, true: I, any more than you, should
never have enjoyed myself, had any of the feather-headed 

creatures I saw formerly endeavouring to
make an interest in my daughter's favour, succeeded
with her. But you, madam, have chosen a man
that every-body must prefer to himself. 
The Knight, after tea, moved to have the box
opened. When Sir Charles saw the jewels, he was a
little uneasy, because of the value of them. A costly
diamond necklace and ear-rings, a ring of price, a
repeating watch finely chased; the chain of which is
richly ornamented; one of the appendages is a picture
of Sir Rowland in enamel, adorned with brilliants; 
an admirable Likeness: This I told him was more
valuable to me than all the rest: I spoke truth; for
so rich a present has made me uneasy. He saw I was. 
He knew, he said, that I could not want any of
these things: But he could not think of any other
way to shew his Love to his daughter. It was nothing
to what he had intended to do in his Will; had I not
intimated to him, that what he left me, should be
given among his relations. I am rich, madam, I can
tell you: And what, on your nuptials, could I do less
for my daughter? 
Sir Charles said, This must not end so, Sir Rowland:
But I see you are an invincible man. Mr.
Fowler, I wish you as happily married as you deserve
to be: Your Lady will be intitled to a return of
equal value. 
Sir Rowland begged, that he might try on the ring
himself. He was allowed to do so, and was pleased
it was not much too big. He said, I should not pull
it off this night. I kept it on to humour the worthy
man. 
* *
Supper over, and a chearful glass going round
with my uncle, Mr. Deane, and the Knight, Sir Rowland
made it his odd request, that I would permit
Sir Charles to put on the necklace for me. By on
means, I said. But the Knight being very earnest, 

and my uncle seconding him (for there was particularity
enough in the motion, to engage the dear odd
man) and Sir Charles not discouraging it, my aunt
and Lucy smiling all the time, I thought I had better
comply, lest the Knight should take it into his head
to request the putting it on himself. Yet I was the
more reluctant, on poor Mr. Fowler's account; for
his smiles were but essays to smile. Sir Charles, in
his own graceful manner, put it on; bowing low to
me, in the gallantest manner, when he had done. I
courtesied to him, to Sir Rowland, and looked silly
I am sure. 
Friday noon. 
Sir Rowland and Mr. Fowler have left us. They
would not stay to dinner. They have business to
dispatch in town, that will take them up some days:
But they were so well pleased with their reception,
that they promise to see us before they set out for
Caermarthen. 
At parting, Sir Rowland drew me aside: Your
cousin Lucy, as you call her, is a fine young Lady. 
They tell me, that she has a great fortune: But I
matter not that of a straw—Would to God, my boy
knew how to submit to his destiny like a man—Hem! 
You understand me, madam—Mercy! I want to be
akin to you—You take me, madam. 
We are akin. Sir Rowland Meredith is my father. 
God bless you, madam! I love you dearly for that. 
And so we are: But you understand me: A word to
the wife: She is not engaged; is she? —I love your
uncle of all men—except the king of all men; your
Lord and master—God bless him! With what good
humour he eyes us—Sir Charles, one word with you,
if you please. 
I thought the Knight had his fingers ready to take
hold of Sir Charles's button; for his hand was extended; 
but suddenly, as from recollection, withdrawn. 

He led Sir Charles to me—And put the same
question to him, as he had done to me. 
Let me ask you, my dear Sir Rowland, Was this
in your thought before you came hither? 
No, by mercy! —It just now struck me. My
nephew knew not a syllable of the matter. But why,
you know, Sir Charles, should a man pine and die,
because he cannot have the she that he loves? —Suppose,
you know, six men love one woman, as has
been the case here, for aught I know; what a duce,
are five of them to hang, drown, or pistol themselves? 
Or are they to out-stay their time, as I have
done, till they are fit for nobody? 
Women must be treated with delicacy, Sir Rowland. 
Miss Selby is a young Lady of great merit. 
When questions are properly asked, you hardly need
to doubt of a proper answer. 
But, Sir Charles, is Miss Selby, bona fide, engaged,
or is she not? that's the question I ask: If she
be, I shall not say a word of the matter. 
My dear? said Sir Charles to me. 
I don't know that she is, answered I. But Lucy
will never think of a man, be his qualifications ever
so great, if he cannot give her proofs of loving her
above all women. 
I underst and you, madam—Well, well, and I should
be nice too, I can tell you, for my boy. But I'll
sound him. I must have him married before I die,
if possible. But no more of that for the present. 
And now God Almighty bless, preserve, and keep
you both! —I will pray for the continuance of your
happiness. 
He kissed my hand: Wrung Sir Charles's: Wiped
his eyes: Made his bow: And stept into the chariot
to his nephew, who had taken leave of us all before. 
Lucy, with an air so like some of dear Lady G's,
put up her saucy lip, when I told her of this; and
hid me not write it to you: But I thought, were 

nothing to come of it, it would divert my grandmamma,
as I am sure it will Lady G. 
God preserve the most indulgent and pious of Parents,
and my two Sisters and their Lords (including
the honoured Lord and Lady you Lady G. are with)
prays 
Her ever-dutiful, and their ever-affectionate,
Harriet Grandison. 

