

The Editor of the foregoing collection
has the more readily undertaken to publish
it, because he thinks Human Nature
has often, of late, been shewn in a
light too degrading; and he hopes from
this Series of Letters it will be seen, that characters
may be good, without being unnatural. Sir
Charles Grandison himself is sensible of imperfections,
and, as the reader will remember, accuses himself
more than once of tendencies to pride and passion,
which it required his utmost caution and vigilance to
rein-in; and many there are, who look upon his
offered compromise with the Porretta family, in allowing
the daughters of the proposed marriage to be
brought up by the mother, reserving to himself the
education of the sons only, as a blot in the character. 
Indeed, Sir Charles himself declares to the
General, that he would not have come into such
a compromise in a beginning address, not even with
a princess. 
Notwithstanding this, it has been observed by
some, that, in general, he approaches too near the
faultless character which critics censure as above
nature: Yet it ought to be observed too, that he
performs no one action which it is not in the power 

of any man in his situation to perform; and that he
checks and restrains himself in no one instance in
which it is not the duty of a prudent and good man
to restrain himself. 
It has been objected by some persons, that a man
less able by strength or skill to repel an affront, than
Sir Charles appears to have been, could not with
such honour have extricated himself out of difficulties
on refusing a challenge. And this is true, meaning
by honour the favourable opinion of the European
world, from the time of its being over-run by Gothic
barbarism, down to the present. But as that
notion of honour is evidently an absurd and mischievous
one, and yet multitudes are at a loss to get over
it, the rejection and confutation of it by a person
whom, it was visible, the consideration of his own
safety did not influence, must surely be of no small
weight. And when it is once allowed, that there
are cases and circumstances in which these polite invitations
to murder may consistently with honour be
disregarded, a little attention will easily find others; 
vulgar notions will insensibly wear out; and more
ground be gained by degrees, than could have been
attempted with hope of success, at once; till at
length all may come to stand on the firm footing of
reason and religion. 
In the mean time, they who are less qualified to
carry off right behaviour with honour in the eye of
common judges, will, however, be esteemed for it
by every serious and prudent person; and, perhaps,
inwardly by many who are mean enough to join
outwardly in blaming them. 
Indeed, when a person hath deserved harsh treatment,
his acquiescence under it, may generally be
imputed to sear alone, and so render him an object
at once of hatred and ridicule, hardly possible to be
borne: But he who supports a conduct equally offensive,
by ever so much brutal courage, tho' a less 

contemptible, is a vastly more detestable, creature:
Whilst an upright and harmless man, suppose him
ever so timorous, merits rather a kind sort of pity
than violent scorn. 
But whoever declines forbidden instances of self-vindication,
not from fear, but from principle; which
is always to be presumed, if his regard to principle
be steady and uniform in other things; such a one,
however inferior to Sir Charles Grandison in advantages
of nature and art, yet, if he shews real greatness
of mind in such things as all men may, needs
not doubt but he shall be respected by most, and
may be sufficiently easy, tho' he is despised by some. 
He will still have the satisfaction of reflecting, that
the Laws of all nations are on his side, (a)  and 

only the usurped authority of a silly modern custom
against him; that, on many occasions, worthy men
in all ages, have patiently suffered false disgrace for
adhering to their duty; that the true bravery is to
adhere to all duties under all disadvantages; and, that
refusing a duel is a duty to ourselves, our fellow-creatures,
and our Maker. And whoever acts on these
principles, the more reproach he undergoes for it,
rather than be driven, like a coward, by the scoffs
of his fellow-subjects, to rebel against the Sovereign
of the Universe, will have the more delightful
consciousness of a strong inward principle of piety
and virtue, and the more distinguished reward from
the final Judge of all, who alone disposes of that
Honour which shall never fade. 
It has been said in behalf of many modern fictitious
pieces, in which authors have given success
(and happiness, as it is called) to their heroes of vicious,
if not of profligate, characters, that they have
exhibited Human Nature as it is. Its corruption may,
indeed, be exhibited in the faulty character; but need
pictures of this be held out in books? Is not vice
crowned with success, triumphant, and rewarded,
and perhaps set off with wit and spirit, a dangerous
representation? And is it not made even more dangerous
by the hasty reformation, introduced, in contradiction
to all probability, for the sake of patching
up what is called a happy ending? 
The God of Nature intended not Human Nature
for a vile and contemptible thing: And many are the
instances, in every age, of those whom He enables,
amidst all the frailties of mortality, to do it honour. 
Still the best performances of human creatures will be
imperfect; but, such as they are, it is surely both
delightful and instructive to dwell sometimes on this
bright side of things; To shew, by a series of facts
in common life, what a degree of excellence may be 

attained and preserved amidst all the infection of fashionable
vice and folly. 
Sir Charles Grandison is therefore in the
general tenor of his principles and conduct (tho'
exerted in peculiarities of circumstances that cannot
always be accommodated to particular imitation) proposed
for an Example; and, in offering him as such,
were his character still more perfect than it is presumed
to be, the Editor is supported by an eminent
Divine of our own country. 
“There is no manner of inconvenience in having
a pattern propounded to us of so great perfection,
as is above our reach to attain to; and there may
be great advantages in it. The way to excel in
any kind, is, optima quœque exempla ad imitandum
proponere; to propose the brightest and most perfect
Examples to our imitation. No man can
write after too perfect and good a copy; and tho'
he can never reach the perfection of it, yet he is
like to learn more, than by one less perfect. He
that aims at the heavens, which yet he is sure to
come short of, is like to shoot higher than he that
aims at a mark within his reach. 
“Besides, that the excellency of the pattern, as
it leaves room for continual improvement, so it
kindles ambition, and makes men strain and contend
to the utmost to do better. And, tho' he
can never hope to equal the Example before him,
yet he will endeavour to come as near it as he
can. So that a perfect pattern is no hindrance,
but an advantage rather, to our improvement in
any kind.” 
Tillotson, Vol. II. Serm. LVII. p. 577. 
