



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
In reply to hers of Friday Aug. 11 (a). 



Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, Aug. 23. 
My dearest Friend,
I have read the Letters and Copies of Letters
you favoured me with: And I return them by a
particular hand. 
I am extremely concerned at your indifferent state
of health: But I approve of all your proceedings and
precautions in relation to the appointment of Mr. Belford
for an office, in which, I hope, neither he nor
any-body else will be wanted to act, for many, very
many years. 
I admire, and so we do all, that greatness of mind
which can make you so stedfastly despise (thro' such
inducements as no other woman could resist, and in
such desolate circumstances as you have been reduced
to) the wretch that ought to be so heartily despised
and detested. 
What must the contents of those Letters from your 

relations be, which you will not communicate to me! 
—Fie upon them! How my heart rises! —But I dare
say no more—Tho' you yourself now begin to think
they use you with great severity. 
Every-body here is so taken with Mr. Hickman
(and the more from the horror they conceive at the
character of the detestable Lovelace) that I have been
teazed to death almost to name a day. This has
given him airs; and, did I not keep him to it, he
would behave as carelesly and as insolently as if he
were sure of me. I have been forced to mortify him
no less than four times since we have been here. 
I made him lately undergo a severe penance for
some negligences that were not to be passed over: 
Not designed ones, he said: But that was a poor excuse,
as I told him: For, had they been designed, he
should never have come into my presence more: 
That they were not, shewed his want of thought and
attention; and those were inexcuseable in a man only
in his probatory state. 
He hoped he had been more than in a probatory
state, he said. 
And therefore, Sir, might be more careless! —So
you add ingratitude to negligence, and make what you
plead as accident, that itself wants an excuse, design,
which deserves none. 
I would not see him for two days, and he was so
penitent, and so humble, that I had like to have lost
myself, to make him amends: For, as you have said,
a resentment carried too high often ends in an amends
too humble. 
I long to be nearer to you: But that must not yet
be, it seems. Pray, my dear, let me hear from you
as often as you can. 
May Heaven encrease your comforts, and restore
your health, are the prayers of 
Your ever faithful and affectionate
Anna Howe. 

P. S. Excuse me that I did not write before: It
was owing to a little coasting voyage I was obliged
to give into. 