



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

London, June 27. Tuesday. 
You must excuse me, Lovelace, from engaging
in the office you would have me undertake, till 

I can be better assured you really intend honourably at
last by this much-injured Lady. 
I believe you know your friend Belford too well, to
think he would be easy with you or with any man
alive, who should seek to make him promise for him
what he never intended to perform. And let me tell
thee, that I have not much confidence in the Honour
of a man, who by imitation of hands (I will only call
it) has shewn so little regard to the Honour of his own
relations. 
Only that thou hast such jesuitical qualifyings, or I
should think thee at last touched with remorse, and
brought within view of being ashamed of thy cursed
inventions by the ill success of thy last: Which I
heartily congratulate thee upon. 
O the divine Lady! —But I will not aggravate! 
Nevertheless, when thou writest, that, in thy present
mood, thou thinkest of marrying, and yet canst so
easily change thy mood: When I know thy heart is
against the State: —That the Four words thou courtest
from the Lady are as much to thy purpose, as if she
wrote Forty; since it will shew she can forgive the
highest injury that can be offered to woman: And
when I recollect how easily thou canst find excuses to
postpone; thou must be more explicit a good deal,
as to thy real intentions, and future honour, than
thou art: For I cannot trust to a temporary remorse; 
which is brought on by Disappointment too, and not
by Principle; and the like of which thou hast so often
got over. 
If thou canst convince me time enough for the Day,
that thou meanest to do honourably by her, in her own
sense of the word; or, if not time enough, wilt fix
some other day (which thou oughtest to leave to her
option, and not bind her down for the Thursday; 
and the rather, as thy pretence for so doing is founded
on an absolute fiction); I will then most chearfully
undertake thy cause; by person, if she will admit me 

to her presence; if she will not, by pen. But, in this
case, thou must allow me to be guarantee for thy
faith. And, if so, as much as I value thee, and
respect thy skill in all the qualifications of a gentleman,
thou mayest depend upon it, that I will act up
to the character of a guarantee, with more honour
than the Princes of our day usually do—to their shame
be it spoken. 
Mean time, let me tell thee, that my heart bleeds
for the wrongs this angelic Lady has received: And
if thou dost not marry her, if she will have thee; and,
when married, make her the best and tenderest of
Husbands; I would rather be a dog, a monkey, a
bear, a viper, or a toad, than thee. 
Command me with honour, and thou shalt find
none readier to oblige thee, than 
Thy sincere Friend,
John Belford. 