



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday, June 15. 
Let me alone, you great dog, you! —Let me
alone!—have I heard a lesser boy, his coward
arms held over his head and face, say to a bigger, who
was pommeling him, for having run away with his
apple, his orange, or his ginger-bread. 
So say I to thee, on occasion of thy severity to thy
poor friend, who, as thou ownest, has furnished thee
(ungenerous as thou art!) with the weapons thou brandishest
so fearfully against him. —And to what purpose,
when the mischief is done? when, of consequence,
the affair is irretrievable? and when a Clarissa
could not move me? 
Well, but, after all, I must own, that there is something
very singular in this Lady's case: And, at times,
I cannot help regretting, that I ever attempted her; 
since not one power either of Body or Soul could be
moved in my favour; and since, to use the expression
of the philosopher, on a much graver occasion, There
is no difference to be found between the skull of king
Philip, and that of another man. 
But peoples extravagant notions of things alter not
facts, Belford: And, when all's done, Miss Clarissa
Harlowe has but run the fate of a thousand others of
her Sex—Only that they did not set such a romantic
value upon what they call their Honour; that's all. 
And yet I will allow thee this—That if a person sets
a high value upon any-thing, be it ever such a trifle in
itself, or in the eye of others, the robbing of that person
of it is not a trifle to him. Take the matter in this
light, I own I have done wrong, great wrong, to this
admirable creature. 
But have I not known twenty and twenty of the Sex,
who have seemed to carry their notions of virtue high; 

yet, when brought to the test, have abated of their severity? 
And how should we be convinced that any of
them are proof, till they are tried? 
A thousand times have I said, that I never yet met
with such a woman as this. If I had, I hardly ever
should have attempted Miss Clarissa Harlowe. Hitherto
she is all angel: And was not that the point which
at setting out I proposed to try (a) ? And was not Cohabitation
ever my darling view? And am I not now,
at last, in the high-road to it? —It is true, that I have
nothing to boast of as to her Will. The very contrary. 
But now are we come to the Test, whether she cannot
be brought to make the best of an irreparable evil. — 
If she exclaim [She has reason to exclaim, and I will
sit down with patience by the hour together to hear
her exclamations, till she is tired of them] she will
then descend to expostulation perhaps: Expostulation
will give me hope: Expostulation will shew, that she
hates me not. And if she hate me not, she will forgive: 
And if she now forgive; then will all be over; 
and she will be mine upon my own terms: And it
shall then be the whole study of my future life to
make her happy. 
So, Belford, thou seest, that I have journeyed on
to this stage [indeed, thro' infinite mazes, and as infinite
remorses] with one determined point in view,
from the first. To thy urgent supplication then, that
I will do her grateful justice by marriage, let me answer
in Matt. Prior's two lines on his hoped-for Auditorship; 
as put into the mouths of his St. John and
Harley; 

—Let that be done, which Matt. doth say.
Yea, quoth the Earl—BUT NOT TO-DAY.
Thou seest, Jack, that I make no resolutions, however,
against doing her, one time or other, the wished-for
justice, even were I to succeed in my principal view, 

Cohabitation. And of this I do assure thee, that, if I
ever marry, it must, it shall be Miss Clarissa Harlowe. — 
Nor is her honour at all impaired with me, by what she
has so far suffered: But the contrary. She must only
take care, that, if she be at last brought to forgive me,
she shew me, that her Lovelace is the only man on
earth, whom she could have forgiven on the like occasion. 
But, ah, Jack! what, in the mean time, shall I do
with this admirable creature? At present—[I am loth
to say it—But, at present] she is quite stupefied. 
I had rather, methinks, she should have retained all
her active powers, tho' I had suffered by her nails and
her teeth, than that she should be sunk into such a state
of absolute—insensibility (shall I call it?) as she has
been in ever since Tuesday morning. Yet, as she begins
a little to revive, and now-and-then to call names,
and to exclaim, I dread almost to engage with the
anguish of a spirit that owes its extraordinary agitations
to a niceness that has no example either in antient
or modern Story. For, after all, what is there
in her case, that should stupefy such a glowing, such a
blooming charmer? —Excess of grief, excess of terror,
has made a person's hair stand on end, and even (as we
have read) changed the colour of it. But that it should
so stupefy, as to make a person, at times, insensible to
those imaginary wrongs, which would raise others
from stupefaction, is very surprising! 
But I will leave this subject, lest it should make me
too grave. 
I was yesterday at Hamstead, and discharged all obligations
there, with no small applause. I told them,
that the Lady was now as happy as myself: And that
is no great untruth; for I am not altogether so, when
I allow myself to think. 
Mrs. Townsend, with her Tars, had not been then
there. I told them what I would have them say to
her, if she come. 

Well, but, after all [How many after-all's have
I?] I could be very grave, were I to give way to it. 
—The devil take me for a fool! What's the matter
with me, I wonder! —I must breathe a fresher air for
a few days. 
But what shall I do with this admirable creature the
while? —Hang me, if I know! —For, if I stir, the
venomous Spider of this habitation will want to set upon
the charming Fly, whose silken wings are already
so entangled in my enormous web, that she cannot
move hand or foot: For so much has grief stupefied
her, that she is at present as destitute of will, as she
always seemed to be of desire. I must not therefore
think of leaving her yet for two days together. 