



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, July 6. 
Few young persons have been able to give more
convincing proofs than myself, how little true
happiness lies in the enjoyment of our own wishes. 
To produce one instance only of the truth of this observation; 
What would I have given for weeks past, for
the favour of a letter from my dear Miss Howe, in
whose friendship I placed all my remaining comfort? 
Little did I think, that the next letter she would honour
me with, should be in such a stile, as should make me
look more than once at the subscription, that I might
be sure (the name not being written at length) that
it was not signed by another A. H. For surely,
thought I, this is my sister Arabella's style: Surely Miss
Howe (blame me as she pleases in other points) could
never repeat so sharply upon her friend, words written
in the bitterness of spirit, and in the disorder of
head; nor remind her, with asperity, and with
mingled strokes of wit, of an argument held in the
gaiety of an heart elated with prosperous fortunes (as 

mine then was), and very little apprehensive of the
severe turn that argument would one day take against
herself. 
But what have I, sunk in my fortunes; my character
forfeited; my honour lost [While I know it,
I care not who knows it]; destitute of friends, and
even of hope; What have I to do to shew a spirit of
repining and expostulation to a dear friend, because
she is not more kind than a sister?— 
I find, by the rising bitterness which will mingle
with the gall in my ink, that I am not yet subdued
enough to my condition: And so, begging your pardon,
that I should rather have formed my expectations
of favour from the indulgence you used to shew
me, than from what I now deserve to have shewn me,
I will endeavour to give a particular answer to your
letter; altho' it will take me up too much time to
think of sending it by your messenger to-morrow: 
He can put off his journey, he says, till Saturday. I
will endeavour to have the whole narrative ready for
you by Saturday. 
But how to defend myself in every thing that has
happened, I cannot tell: Since in some part of the
time, in which my conduct appears to have been censurable,
I was not myself; and to this hour know
not all the methods taken to deceive and ruin me. 
You tell me, that in your first letter you gave me
such an account of the vile house I was in, and such
cautions about that Tomlinson, as make you wonder
how I could think of going back. 
Alas, my dear! I was trick'd, most vilely trick'd
back, as you shall hear in its place. 
Without knowing the house was so very vile a
house from your intended information, I disliked the
people too much, ever voluntarily to have returned to
it. But had you really written such cautions about
Tomlinson, and the house, as you seem to have purposed
to do, they must, had they come in time, have 

been of infinite service to me. But not one word
of either, whatever was your intention, did you mention
to me, in that first of the three letters you so
warmly TELL ME you did send me. I will inclose
it to convince you (a) . 
But your account of your messenger's delivering to
me your second letter, and the description he gives
of me, as lying upon a couch, in a strange way, bloated
and flush-coloured, you don't know how, absolutely
puzzles and confounds me. 
Lord have mercy upon the poor Clarissa Harlowe! 
What can this mean! —Who was the messenger you
sent? Was he one of Lovelace's creatures too! — 
Could no-body come near me but that man's confederates,
either setting out so, or made so? —I know
not what to make of any one syllable of this! —Indeed
I don't! 
Let me see. You say, this was before I went
from Hamstead! —My intellects had not then been
touch'd! —Nor had I ever been surprised by wine
(strange if I had!): How then could I be found in
such a strange way, bloated, and flush-coloured; you
don't know how! —Yet what a vile, what a hateful
figure has your messenger represented me to have
made! 
But indeed, I know nothing of ANY messenger
from you. 
Believing myself secure at Hamstead, I staid longer
there than I would have done, in hopes of the letter
promised me in your short one of the 9th, brought
me by my own messenger, in which you undertake
to send for and engage Mrs. Townsend in my favour
(b) . 
I wonder'd I heard not from you: And was told
you were sick; and, at another time, that your 

mother and you had had words on my account, and
that you had refused to admit Mr. Hickman's visits
upon it: So that I supposed at one time, that you
was not able to write; at another, that your mother's
prohibition had its due force with you. But
now I have no doubt, that the wicked man must
have intercepted your letter; and I wish he found
not means to corrupt your messenger to tell you so
strange a story. 
It was on Sunday June 11. you say, that the man
gave it me. I was at church twice that day with
Mrs. Moore. Mr. Lovelace was at her house the
while, where he boarded, and wanted to have lodged; 
but I would not permit that, tho' I could not help
the other. In one of these spaces it must be that he
had time to work upon the man. You'll easily, my
dear, find that out, by inquiring the time of his arrival
at Mrs. Moore's, and other circumstances of the
strange way he pretended to see me in, on a couch,
and the rest. 
Had any-body seen me afterwards, when I was
betray'd back to the vile house, struggling under the
operation of wicked potions, and robb'd indeed of
my intellects (for this, as you shall hear, was my
dreadful case!), I might then, perhaps, have appeared
bloated, and flush-coloured, and I know not how
myself. But were you to see your poor Clarissa now
(or even to have seen her at Hamstead, before she
suffered the vilest of all outrages), you would not
think her bloated, or flush-coloured: Indeed you would
not. 
In a word, it could not be me your messenger saw; 
nor (if any-body) who it was can I divine. 
I will now, as briefly as the subject will permit,
enter into the darker part of my sad story: And yet
it must be somewhat circumstantial, that you may not
think me capable of reserve or palliation. The latter
I am not conscious that I need. I should be utterly 

inexcuseable, were I guilty of the former to you. And
yet, if you knew how my heart sinks under the
thoughts of a recollection so painful, you would pity me. 
As I shall not be able, perhaps, to conclude what I
have to write in even two or three letters, I will begin
a new one, with my story; and send the whole of
it together, altho' written at different periods, as I
am able. 
Allow me a little pause, my dear, at this place; 
and to subscribe my self 
Your ever-affectionate and obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 