



Miss Clarissa Harlowe; In Continuation. 

But this subject must not be pursued. Another
might, with more pleasure (tho' not with more
approbation) upon one of your lively excursions. It
is upon the high airs you give yourself upon the word
approve. 

How comes it about, I wonder, that a young lady
so noted for a predominating generosity, should not
be uniformly generous? —That your generosity should
fail in an instance, where policy, prudence, gratitude,
would not permit it to fail? Mr. Hickman (as you
confess) has indeed a worthy mind. If I had not long
ago known that, he would never have found an advocate
in me for the favour of my Anna Howe. Often and
often have I been concerned, when I was your happy
guest, to see him, after a conversation in which he
had well-supported his part in your absence, sink at
once into silence the moment you came into company. 
I have told you of this before: And I believe I
hinted to you once, that the superciliousness you put
on only to him, was capable of a construction, which
at the time would have very little gratify'd your pride
to have had made; since it was as much in his favour,
as in your own disfavour. 
Mr. Hickman, my dear, is a modest man. I never
see a modest man, but I am sure (if he has not wanted
opportunities) that he has a treasure in his mind,
which requires nothing but the key of encouragement
to unlock it, to make him shine: While a confident
man, who, to be confident, must think as meanly of
his company, as highly of himself, enters with magisterial
airs upon any subject; and depending upon
his assurance to bring himself off when found out,
talks of more than he is master of. 
But a modest man! —O my dear, shall not a modest
woman distinguish and wish to consort with a modest
man? —A man, before whom, and to whom, she may
open her lips secure of his good opinion of all she says,
and of his just and polite regard for her judgment? and
who must therefore inspire her with an agreeable confidence. 
What a lot have I drawn! —We are all apt to turn
teachers. —But, surely, I am better enabled to talk, 

to write, upon these subjects, than ever I was! — 
But I will banish myself, if possible, from an address
which, when I began to write, I was determin'd to
confine wholly to your own particular. 
My dearest, dearest friend, how ready are you to
tell us what others should do, and even what a mother
should have done! But indeed you once, I remember,
advanced, that, as different attainments required different
talents to master them, so, in the writing-way,
a person might not be a bad critic upon the works of
others, altho' he might himself be unable to write
with excellence. But will you permit me to account
for all this readiness of finding fault, by placing it to
human nature, which, being sensible of the defects
of human nature (that is to say, of its own defects),
loves to be correcting? But in exercising that talent,
chooses rather to turn its eye outward than inward? 
—In other words, to employ itself rather in the outdoor
search, than in the in-door examination? 
And here give me leave to add (and yet it is with
tender reluctance) that altho' you say very pretty things
of notable wives; and altho' I join with you in opinion,
that husbands may have as many inconveniencies
to encounter with, as conveniences to boast of,
from women of that character; yet Lady Hartley,
perhaps, would have had milder treatment from your
pen, had it not been dipt in gall, with a mother in
your eye. 