



Mrs. Norton, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Friday, July 28. 
My dearest young Lady,
I have the consolation to tell you, that my Son is
once again in an hopeful way, as to his health. 
He desires his duty to you. He is very low and weak. 
And so am I. But this is the first time that I have
been able, for several days past, to sit up to write, or
I would not have been so long silent. 
Your Letter to your Sister is received and answered. 
You have the Answer by this time, I suppose. I wish
it may be to your satisfaction: But am afraid it will
not: For, by Betty Barnes, I find they were in a
great ferment on receiving yours, and much divided
whether it should be answered or not. They will
not yet believe that you are so ill, as (to my infinite
concern) I find you are. What passed between
Miss Harlowe and Miss Howe, has been, as I feared
it would be, an aggravation. 
I shewed Betty two or three passages in your Letter
to me; and she seemed moved, and said, She would
report them favourably, and would procure me a visit
from Miss Harlowe, if I would promise to shew the
same to her. But I have heard no more of that. 
Methinks, I am sorry you refuse the wicked man: 
But doubt not, nevertheless, that your motives for
doing so are more commendable, than my wishes that
you would not. But as you would be resolved, as I
may say, on life, if you gave way to such a thought; 
and as I have so much interest in your recovery; I
cannot forbear shewing this regard to myself; and to
ask you, If you cannot get over your just resentments? 
—But I dare say no more on this subject. 
What a dreadful thing indeed was it for my dearest
tender young Lady to be arrested in the Streets of London! 

—How does my heart go over again for you,
what yours must have suffered at that time! —Yet
this, to such a mind as yours, must be light, compared
to what you had suffered before. 
O my dearest Miss Clary, how shall we know what
to pray for, when we pray, but that God's will may
be done, and that we may be resigned to it! —When
at Nine years old, and afterwards at Eleven, you had
a dangerous fever, how incessantly did we all grieve,
and pray, and put up our vows to the Throne of
Grace, for your recovery! For all our lives were
bound up in your life—Yet now, my dear, as it has
proved (especially if we are soon to lose you) what a
much more desirable event, both for you, and for us,
would it have been, had we then lost you! 
A sad thing to say! But as it is in pure Love to you
that I say it, and in full conviction, that we are not
always fit to be our own chusers, I hope it may be excuseable; 
and the rather, as the same reflection will
naturally lead both you and me to acquiesce under the
present dispensation; since we are assured, that nothing
happens by chance; and that the greatest good may, for
ought we know, be produced from the heaviest evils. 
I am glad you are with such honest people; and
that you have all your effects restored. How dreadfully
have you been used, that one should be glad of such a
poor piece of justice as that? 
Your talent at moving the passions is always hinted
at; and this Betty of your Sister never comes near
me, that she is not full of it. But, as you say, whom
has it moved, that you wished to move? Yet, were
it not for this unhappy notion, I am sure your Mother
would relent. Forgive me, my dear Miss Clary; 
for I must try one way to be convinced if my opinion
be not just. But I will not tell you what that is, unless
it succeeds. I will try, in pure Duty and Love
to them, as well as to you. 

May Heaven be your support, in all your trials, is
the constant prayer, my dearest young Lady, of 
Your ever affectionate Friend and Servant,
Judith Norton. 