


We were Yesterday favour'd with the Company
of almost all the neighbouring Gentry,
and their good Ladies, who, by Appointment with
one another, met to congratulate our Happiness. 
Nothing could be more obliging, more free
and affectionate, than the Ladies; nothing more
polite than the Gentlemen. All was perform'd, (for
they came to Supper,) with Decency and Order,
and much to every one's Satisfaction, which was
principally owing to good Mrs. Jervis's Care and
Skill; who is an excellent Manager. 
For my part, I was dress'd out, only to be admir'd,
as it seems; and truly, if I had not known,
that I did not make myself, as you, my dear Father,
once hinted to me; and if I had had the Vanity to
think as well of myself, as the good Company was
pleased to do, I might possibly have been proud. 
But I know, as my Lady Davers said, tho' in Anger,
yet in Truth, that I am but a poor Bit of
painted Dirt. All that I value myself upon, is, that
God has raised me to a Condition to be useful in
my Generation, to better Persons than myself. This
is my Pride: And I hope this will be all my Pride. 
For what was I of myself!––– All the Good I can
do, is but a poor third-hand Good; for my dearest
Master himself is but the Second-hand. God, the
All-gracious, the All-good, the All-bountiful, the
All-mighty, the All-merciful God, is the First:
To HIM, therefore, be all the Glory! 
As I expect the Happiness, the unspeakable Happiness,
my ever-dear and ever-honour'd Father and
Mother, of enjoying you both here, under this Roof,
so soon, (and pray let it be as soon as you can) I
will not enter into the Particulars of the last agreeable 
Evening: For I shall have a thousand things, as
well as that, to talk to you upon. I fear you will
be tir'd with my Prattle when I see you! 
I am to return these Visits singly; and there were
Eight Ladies here, of different Families. Dear Heart,
I shall find enough to do!––– I doubt my Time will
not be so well filled up, as I once promised my
dear Sir!––– But he is pleas'd, chearful, kind, affectionate! 
O what a happy Creature am I!––– May I
be always thankful to God, and grateful to him!––– 
When all these tumultuous Visitings are over, I shall
have my Mind, I hope, subside into a Family Calm,
that I may make myself a little useful to the Houshold
of my dear Master; or else I shall be an unprofitable
Servant indeed! 
Lady Davers sent this Morning her Compliments
to us both, very affectionately; and her Lord's good
Wishes and Congratulations. And she desir'd my
Writings per Bearer; and says, she will herself bring
them to me again, with Thanks, as soon as she has
read them; and she and her Lord will come and be
my Guests (that was her particularly kind Word) for
a Fortnight. 
I have now but one thing to wish for, and then,
methinks, I shall be all Ecstasy; and that is, Your
Presence, both of you, and your Blessings; which I
hope you will bestow upon me every Morning
and Night, till you are settled in the happy manner
my dear Spouse has intended. 
Methinks I want sadly your List of the honest and
worthy Poor; for the Money lies by me, and brings
me no Interest. You see I am become a mere
Usurer; and want to make Use upon Use: And
yet, when I have done all, I cannot do so much as
I ought. God forgive my Imperfections! 
I tell my dear Sir, I want another Dairy-house
Visit. To be sure, if he won't, at present, permit 

it, I shall, if it please God to spare us, tieze him like
any over-indulged Wife, if, as the dear Charmer
grows older, he won't let me have the Pleasure of
forming her tender Mind, as well as I am able, lest,
poor little Soul! she fall into such Snares as her unhappy
dear Mother fell into. I am providing a
Power of pretty Things for her, against I see her
next, that I may make her love me, if I can. 
Just now I have the blessed News, that you will
set out, for this happy House, on Tuesday Morning. 
The Chariot shall be with you without fail. God
give us a happy Meeting! O, how I long for it! 
Forgive your impatient Daughter, who sends this,
to amuse you on your Journey; and desires to be 
Ever most dutifully Yours. 
&line;
