


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


St. James's-Square, Friday Morn. April 7. 
Sir Charles Grandison set out early this morning
for Lord W.'s, in his way to Lady Mansfield's. 
I am here with this whimsical Charlotte. 
Lady L. Miss Jervois, myself, and every female of
the family, or who do business for both sisters out of
it, are busy in some way or other, preparatory to the
approaching Tuesday. 
Miss Grandison is the only idle person. I tell her,
she is affectedly so. 
The Earl has presented her, in his son's name, with
some very rich trinkets. Very valuable jewels are also
bespoke by Lord G. who takes Lady L.'s advice in
every-thing; as one well read in the fashions. New
equipages are bespoke; and gay ones they will be. 
Miss Grandison confounded me this morning by an
instance of her generosity. She was extremely urgent
with me to accept, as her third sister, of her share of 

her mother's jewels. You may believe, that I absolutely
refused such a present. I was angry with her; 
and told her, she had but one way of making up
with me; and that was, that since she would be so
completely set out from her Lord, she would unite the
two halves, by presenting hers to Lady L. who had
refused jewels from her Lord on her marriage; and
who then would make an appearance, occasionally,
as brilliant as her own. 
She was pleased with the hint; and has actually
given them (unknown to any-body but me) to her
jeweller; who is to dispose them in such figures, as
shall answer those she herself is to have, which Lady
L. has not. And by this contrivance, which will
make them in a manner useless to herself, she thinks
she shall oblige her sister, however reluctant, to accept
of them. 
Lady Gertrude is also preparing some fine presents
for her niece elect: But neither the delighted approbation
of the family she is entering into, nor the satisfaction
expressed by her own friends, give the perverse
Charlotte any visible joy, nor procure for Lord
G. the distinction which she ought to think of beginning
to pay him. But, for his part, never was man
so happy. He would, however, perhaps, fare better
from her, if he could be more moderate in the outward
expression of his joy; which she has taken it into
her head to call an insult upon her. 
She does not, however, give the scope she did before
the day was fix'd, to her playful captiousness. She
is not quite so arch as she was. Thoughtfulness, and
a seeming carelessness of what we are all about for
her, appear in her countenance. She saunters about,
and affects to be diverted by her harpsichord only. 
What a whimsical thing is Charlotte Grandison? But
still she keeps Lord G. at distance. I told her an hour
ago, that she knows not how to condescend to him
with that grace which is so natural to her in her whole
behaviour to every-body else. 

I have been talking to Dr. Bartlett, about Sir
Charles's journey to Italy. Nobody knows, he says,
what a bleeding heart is cover'd by a countenance so
benign, and chearful. Sir Charles Grandison, said
he, has a prudence beyond that of most young men; 
but he has great sensibilities. 
I take it for granted, Sir, that he will for the future
be more an Italian than Englishman. 
Impossible, madam! A prudent youth, by traveling,
reaps this advantage—From what he sees of
other countries, he learns to prefer his own. An
imprudent one the contrary. Sir Charles's country is
endeared to him by his long absence from it. Italy
in particular is called, The Garden of Europe; but
it is rather to be valued for what it was, and might be,
than what it is. I need not tell a Lady who has read
and conversed as you have done, to what that incomparable
difference is owing. Sir Charles Grandison is
greatly sensible of it. He loves his country, with the
judgment of a wise man; and wants not the partiality
of a patriot. 
But, doctor, he has offered, you know, to reside— 
There I stopt. 
True, madam—And he will not recede from his
offers, if they are claimed. But this uncertainty it
is that disturbs him. 
I pity my patron. I have often told you he is not
happy. What has indiscretion to expect, when discretion
has so much to suffer? His only consolation
is, that he has nothing to reproach himself with. Inevitable
evils he bears as a man should. He makes
no ostentation of his piety: But, madam, Sir Charles
Grandison is a Christian. 
You need not, Sir, say more to me to exalt him:
And, let me add, that I have no small pleasure in
knowing that Clementina is a Lady of strict piety; 
tho' a Roman Catholic. 
And let me assure you, madam, that Sir Charles's 

regard for Miss Byron (his more than regard for her,
why should I not say? since every-body sees it) is founded
upon her piety, and upon the amiable qualities of
her mind. Beauty, madam, is an accidental and
transient good. No man better knows how to distinguish
between admiration and love, than my patron. 
His virtue is virtue upon full proof, and against sensibilities,
that it is heroic to overcome. Lady Olivia
knows this: And here I must acknowlege myself
a debtor to you for three articles out of your ten. I
hope soon to discharge the obligation. 
Your own time, doctor: But I must say, that
whenever you give me Lady Olivia's story, I shall be
pained, if I find, that a Clementina is considered by
a beauty of an unhappier turn, as her rival in the love
of Sir Charles Grandison. 
Lady Olivia, madam, admires him for his virtue; 
but she cannot, as he has made it his study to do, divide
admiration from love. What offers has she not
refused? —But she declares, that she had rather be the
friend of Sir Charles Grandison, than the wife of the
greatest prince on earth. 
This struck me: Have not I said something like it? 
But surely with innocence of heart. But here the
doctor suggests, that Olivia has put his virtue to the
proof: Yet I hope not. 
The Friend, Dr. Bartlett! —I hope that no woman
who is not quite given up to dishonour, will
pollute the sacred word, by affixing ideas to it, that
cannot be connected with it. A Friend is one of the
highest characters that one human creature can shine
in to another. There may be Love, that tho' it has
no view but to honour, yet even in wedlock, ripens
not into friendship. How poor are all such attachments! 
How much beneath the exalted notion I have
of that noblest, that most delicate union of souls! 
You wonder at me, Dr. Bartlett. Let me repeat to
you, Sir (I have it by heart) Sir Charles Grandison's 

tender of friendship to the poor Harriet Byron, which
has given me such exalted ideas of this disinterested
passion; but you must not take notice that I have. I
repeated those words, beginning, “My heart demands
alliance with hers”—and ending with these— 
So long as it shall be consistent with her other attachments
(a) .” 
The doctor was silent for a few moments: At last,
What a delicacy is there in the mind of this excellent
man! Yet how consistent with the exactest truth! 
The friendship he offers you, madam, is indeed friendship. 
What you have repeated can want no explanation:
Yet it is expressive of his uncertain situation. 
It is— 
He stopt of a sudden. 
Pray, doctor, proceed: I love to hear you talk. 
My good young lady! —I may say too much. Sir
Charles in these nice points must be left to himself. 
It is impossible for any-body to express his thoughts as
he can express them. But let me say, that he justly,
as well as greatly, admires Miss Byron. 
My heart rose against myself. Bold Harriet, thought
I, how darest thou thus urge a good man to say more
than he has a mind to say of the secrets of a friend,
which are committed to his keeping? Content thyself
with the hopes that the worthiest man in the world
would wish to call thee his, were it not for an invincible
obstacle. And noble, thrice noble Clementina,
be thine the preference even in the heart of Harriet
Byron, because justice gives it to thee; for, Harriet,
hast thou not been taught to prefer right and justice to
every other consideration? And, wouldst thou abhor
the thought of a common theft, yet steal an heart that
is the property, and that by the dearest purchase, of
another? 

