


Lady Clementina, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


Bologna, Aug. 19. N. S.
And do you, best of men, consent to be governed
by my wishes? But are you convinced (You do not
say you are) by my reasonings? —Alas! my reasoning
powers are weakened: My head has received an incurable
wound: My memory, indeed, seems returned; 
but its return only serves to make me more sensible of
my past unhappiness; and to dread a relapse. 
But what is it I hear? Olivia is come back to Florence; 
and you are at Florence! Fly from Florence,
and from Olivia—But whither will you go, to avoid
a woman who could follow you to England? —Whither,
but to England? —We are all of us apprehensive
for the safety of your person, if you refuse to be the 

husband of that violent woman. Yet cannot I bear
the thoughts of her being yours. But that, you have
told me, she never can be—Yet, if you could be happy
with her, why should I be an enemy to her happiness? 
—But to your own magnanimity I will leave this
subject. 
Let me advise with my tutor, my friend, my brother,
on a point that is now much more my concern
than Olivia, and her hopes—Fain, very fain, would I
take the veil. My heart is in it. My friends, my
dearest friends, urge against my plea, the dying request,
as well as the wishes while living, of my grandfathers
on both sides. I am distressed; I am greatly
distressed; for well do I know what were the views
of the two good men, now with God, in wishing me
not to assume the veil. But could they foresee the calamity
that was to befal their Clementina? They could
not. I need not dwell upon the subject, and upon
the force of their pleas and mine, to a man whose
mind is capacious enough to take in the whole strength
of both at once. But you will add an obligation to
the many you have already conferred upon me, if you
can join your weight to my pleas; and make it your
request, that I may be obliged in this momentous article. 
Let me expect that you can, that you will. 
They all languish for opportunities to oblige the man,
who has laid them under obligations not to be returned. 
Need I to suggest a plea to you, the force of
which must be allowed from you, if you ever with
fervor loved Clementina? 
If I know my own heart, and I have given it a
strict examination, two things granted me would make
me as happy as I now can be in this life: The one,
that my request to be allowed to sequester myself from
the world, and to dedicate myself to God, be complied
with: The other, to be assured of your happiness in
marriage with an English, at least not an Italian,
woman. I am obliged to own, tho' I am sensible 

that I expose to you my weakness, by the acknowlegement,
that the last is but too necessary to the tranquillity
of my mind, in the situation in which the grant
of my first wish will place me. Let me know, Chevalier,
when I have set my hand to the plough, that
there is no looking back; and that the only man I ever
thought of with tenderness is another's, and, were I
not professed, never could be mine. Answer, as I
wish; and I shall be able to follow you, Sir, with my
prayers, to the country that has the honour of producing
such an ornament to human nature. 
It must not be known, you will readily suppose,
that I have sought to interest you in my plea. For
this reason, I have not shewn this Letter to any-body. 
Father Marescotti, I have hopes, as a Religious, will
declare himself in my favour, if you do. My brother,
the Bishop, surely will strengthen your hand and his,
tho' he appears as the Brother, not as the Prelate, in
support of the family reasons. 
I am not ashamed to say, I long to see you, Sir. I
can the more readily allow myself to tell you so, as I
can declare that I am unalterably determined in my
adherence to my written resolution, never to trust to
my own strength in an article in which my everlasting
welfare is concerned. O, Sir, what struggles, what
conflicts, did this resolution cost me, before I could
make it! —But once made, and upon such deliberation,
and after I had begged of God his direction, which I
imagine he has graciously given me, I have never
wished to alter it. Forgive me, Sir. You will; you
are a good man—My God only have I preferred to
you. 
Clementina della Porretta. 

