



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday afternoon, June 19. 
Pity me, Jack, for pity's sake; since, if thou
dost not, no-body else will: And yet never was
there a man of my genius, and lively temper, that
wanted it more. We are apt to attribute to the
devil every-thing that happens to us, which we would
not have happen: But here, being (as perhaps thou'lt
say) the devil, myself, my plagues arise from an angel. 
I suppose all mankind is to be plagu'd by its contrary. 
She began with me like a true woman (She in
the fault, I to be blamed) the moment I enter'd
the dining-room: —Not the least apology, not the
least excuse, for the uproar she had made, and the
trouble she had given me. 
I come, said she, into thy detested presence, because
I cannot help it. But why am I to be imprison'd
here? —Altho' to no purpose, I cannot help— 
Dearest Madam, interrupted I, give not way to so
much violence. You must know, that your detention
is intirely owing to the desire I have to make
you all the amends that is in my power to make you. 
And This, as well for your sake as my own. —Surely,
there is still one way left to repair the wrongs you have
suffer'd— 
Canst thou blot out the past week? Several weeks 

past, I should say; ever since I have been with thee? 
Canst thou call back time? —If thou canst— 
Surely, Madam, again interrupting her, If I may
be permitted to call you legally mine, I might have
but anticip— 
Wretch, that thou art! Say not another word
upon this subject. When thou vowedst, when thou
promisedst at Hamstead, I had begun to think, that I
must be thine. If I had consented, at the request of
those I thought thy relations, this would have been a
principal inducement, That I could then have brought
thee, what was most wanted, an unsullied honour in
dowry, to a wretch destitute of all honour; and
could have met the gratulations of a family, to which
thy life has been one continued disgrace, with a consciousness
of deserving their gratulations. But thinkest
thou, that I will give a harlot-niece to thy honourable
uncle, and to thy real aunts; and a cousin to thy cousins
from a brothel? For such, in my opinion, is this
detested house! —Then, lifting up her clasped hands,
‘Great and good God of Heaven, said she, give
me patience to support myself under the weight of
those afflictions, which Thou, for wise and good
ends, tho' at present impenetrable by me, hast
permitted!’ 
Then, turning towards me, who knew neither
what to say to her, nor for myself, I renounce thee
for ever, Lovelace! —Abhorred of my soul! for ever
I renounce thee! —Seek thy fortunes wheresoever
thou wilt! —Only now, that thou hast already ruin'd
me— 
Ruin'd you, Madam—The world need not—I
knew not what to say— 
Ruin'd me in my own eyes, and that is the same
to me, as if all the world knew it—Hinder me not
from going whither my mysterious destiny shall lead
me— 
Why hesitate you, Sir? What right have you to 

stop me, as you lately did; and to bring me up by
force, my hands and arms bruised with your violence? 
What right have you to detain me here? 
I am cut to the heart, Madam, with invectives so
violent. I am but too sensible of the wrong I have
done you, or I could not bear your reproaches. The
man who perpetrates a villainy, and resolves to go on
with it, shews not the compunction I shew. Yet,
if you think yourself in my power, I would caution
you, Madam, not to make me desperate. For you
shall be mine, or my life shall be the forfeit! Nor is
life worth having without you!— 
Be thine! —I be thine!—said the passionate Beauty. 
O how lovely in her violence!— 
Yes, Madam, Be mine! —I repeat, You shall be
mine! —My very crime is your glory. My love,
my admiration of you is increased by what has passed: 
And so it ought. I am willing, Madam, to court
your returning favour: But let me tell you, were
the house beset by a thousand armed men, resolved
to take you from me, they should not effect
their purpose, while I had life. 
I never, never will be yours, said she, clasping
her hands together, and lifting up her eyes! —I never
will be yours! 
We may yet see many happy years, Madam. All
your friends may be reconciled to you. The treaty
for that purpose is in greater forwardness than you
imagine. You know better than to think the worse
of yourself for suffering what you could not help. Injoin
but the terms I can make my peace with you
upon, and I will instantly comply. 
Never, never, repeated she, will I be yours!— 
Only forgive me, my dearest life, this one time! — 
A virtue so invincible! what further view can I have
against you? —Have I attempted any further outrage? 
—If you will be mine, your injuries will be injuries
done to myself. You have too well guessed at the 

unnatural arts that have been used? —But can a
greater testimony be given of your virtue? —And
now I have only to hope, that altho' I cannot make
you complete amends, yet that you will permit me
to make you all the amends that can possibly be
made. 
Hear me out, I beseech you, Madam; for she
was going to speak with an aspect unpacifiedly angry: 
The God, whom you serve, requires but repentance
and amendment. Imitate Him, my dearest love,
and bless me with the means of reforming a course
of life, that begins to be hateful to me. That was
once your favourite point. Resume it, dearest creature: 
In charity to a soul as well as body, which
once, as I flatter'd myself, was more than indifferent
to you, resume it. And let to-morrow's sun witness
to our espousals. 
I cannot judge thee, said she; but the God to
whom thou so boldly referrest, can; and assure thyself
He will. But, if compunction has really taken
hold of thee; if indeed thou art touched for thy ingrateful
baseness, and meanest any thing by pleading
the holy example thou recommendest to my imitation; 
in this thy pretended repentant moment, let
me sift thee thoroughly; and, by thy answer, I shall
judge of the sincerity of thy pretended declarations. 
Tell me then, Is there any reality in the treaty
thou hast pretended to be on foot between my Uncle
and Captain Tomlinson, and thyself? —Say, and
hesitate not, is there any truth in that story? —But,
remember, if there be not, and thou avowest that
there is, what further condemnation attends thy
averrment, if it be as solemn, as I require it to be! 
This was a cursed thrust. What could I say? — 
Surely, this merciless lady is resolved to damn me,
thought I, and yet accuses me of a design against
her soul! —But was I not obliged to proceed as I
had begun? 

In short, I solemnly averr'd, that there was! — 
How one crime, as the good folks say, brings on
another? 
I added, That the Captain had been in town, and
would have waited on her, had she not been indisposed: 
That he went down much afflicted, as well
on her account, as on that of her uncle; tho' I had
not acquainted him either with the nature of her
disorder, or the ever-to-be-regretted occasion of it; 
having told him, that it was a violent fever: That
he had twice since, by her uncle's desire, sent up
to inquire after her health: And that I had already
dispatched a man and horse with a letter, to acquaint
him (and her uncle thro' him) with her recovery; 
making it my earnest request, that he would renew
his application to her uncle for the favour of
his presence at the private celebration of our nuptials; 
and that I expected an answer, if not this night, as
to-morrow. 
Let me ask thee next, said she, Thou knowest
the opinion I have of the women thou broughtest
to me at Hamstead; and who have seduced me hither
to my ruin; Let me ask thee, If really and truly,
they were Lady Betty Lawrance and thy cousin
Montague? —What sayest thou—Hesitate not—What
sayest thou to this question? 
Astonishing, my dear, that you should suspect
them! —But, knowing your strange opinion of them,
what can I say to be believed? 
And is this the answer thou returnest me? Dost
thou thus evade my question? But let me know, for
I am trying thy sincerity now, and shall judge of
thy new professions by thy answer to this question; 
Let me know, I repeat, whether those women be really
Lady Betty Lawrance and thy cousin Montague? 
Let me, my dearest love, be enabled to-morrow
to call you lawfully mine, and we will set out the next
day, if you please, to Berkshire, to my Lord M.'s, 

where they both are at this time, and you shall convince
yourself by your own eyes, and by your own
ears; which you will believe sooner than all I can
say or swear. 
Now, Belford, I had really some apprehension
of treachery from thee; which made me so miserably
evade; for else, I could as safely have sworn
to the truth of this, as to that of the former: But
she pressing me still for a categorical answer, I ventur'd
plumb; and swore to it [Lovers oaths, Jack]
that they were really and truly Lady Betty Lawrance
and my cousin Montague. 
She lifted up her hands, and eyes—What can I
think! —What can I think!— 
You think me a devil, Madam; a very devil! or
you could not, after you have put these questions to
me, seem to doubt the truth of answers so solemnly
sworn to. 
And if I do think thee so, have I not cause? Is
there another man in the world (I hope, for the sake
of human nature, there is not) who could act by
any poor friendless creature as thou hast acted by
me, whom thou hast made friendless—And who, before
I knew thee, had for a friend every one who
knew me? 
I told you, Madam, before, that my aunt and
cousin were actually here, in order to take leave of
you, before they set out for Berkshire. But the
effects of my ingrateful crime (such, with shame and
remorse, I own it to be!) were the reason you could
not see them. Nor could I be fond, that they
should see you: Since they never would have forgiven
me, had they known what had passed—And
what reason had I to expect your silence on the
subject, had you been recover'd? 
It signifies nothing now, that the cause of their
appearance has been answer'd in my ruin, who or
what they are: But, if thou hast averr'd thus solemnly 

to two falshoods, what a wretch do I see
before me!— 
I thought she had now reason to be satisfied; and
I begg'd her to allow me to talk to her of to-morrow,
as of the happiest day of my life. We have the
Licence, Madam—And you must excuse me, that I
cannot let you go hence, till I have try'd every way
I can try, to obtain your forgiveness. 
And am I then (with a kind of frantic wildness)
to be detained a prisoner in this horrid house? —Am
I, Sir? —Take care! —Take care! holding up her
hand, menacing, how you make me desperate! —If
I fall, tho' by my own hand, inquisition will be made
for my blood: And be not out in thy plot, Lovelace,
if it should be so—Make sure work, I charge
thee: Dig a hole deep enough to cram in and conceal
this unhappy body: For, depend upon it, that some
of those, who will not stir to protect me living, will
move heaven and earth, to avenge me dead! 
A horrid dear creature! —By my soul, she made
me shudder! She had need, indeed, to talk of her
unhappiness, in falling into the hands of the only
man in the world, who could have used her, as I
have used her! She is the only woman in the world,
who could have shock'd and disturb'd me, as she has
done. —So we are upon a foot in that respect. And
I think I have the worst of it by much. Since very
little has been my joy; very much my trouble: And
her punishment, as she calls it, is over: But when
mine will, or what it may be, who can tell? 
Here, only recapitulating [think, then, how I must
be affected at the time], I was forced to leave off,
and sing a song to myself. I aimed at a lively air; 
but I croaked rather than sung: And fell into the
old dismal thirtieth of January strain. I hemm'd
up for a sprightlier note; but it would not do: And
at last I ended, like a malefactor, in a dead psalm-melody. 

High-ho!—I gape like an unfledg'd kite in its nest,
wanting to swallow a chicken, bobb'd at its mouth,
by its marauding dam!— 
What a devil ails me! —I can neither think nor
write!— 
Lie down, pen, for a moment!— 