


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


This Lady Olivia, Lucy, what can she pretend
to—But I will not puzzle myself about her. 
Yet she pretend to give disturbance to such a man! 
You will find her mentioned in Dr. Bartlett's next
Letter; or she would not have been named by me. 


Dr. Bartlett's eleventh Letter.
Mr. Grandison, on his return to his lodgings,
found there, in disguise, Lady Olivia. He
wanted not any new disturbance. But I will not mix
the stories. 
The next morning he received a Letter from Signor
Jeronymo. The following is a translation of it: 

My dearest Grandison,
How do you? —Ever-amiable friend! What
triumphs did your behaviour of last night obtain
for you! Not a soul here but admires you! 
Even Laurana declared, That, were you a Catholic,
it would be a merit to love you. Yet she reluctantly
praised you, and once said, What, but splendid sins,
are the virtues of an Heretic? 
Our two cousins, with the good-nature of youth,
lamented that you could not be ours in the way you
wish. My father wept like a child, when you were
gone; and seemed to enjoy the praises given you by 

every one. The Count said, He never saw a nobler
behaviour in man. Your free, your manly, your
polite air and address, and your calmness and intrepidity,
were applauded by every one. 
What joy did this give to your Jeronymo! I
thought I wanted neither crutches, helps, nor wheeled
chair; and several times forgot that I ailed anything. 
I begin to love Father Marescotti. He was with
the foremost in praising you. 
The General owned, that he was resolved once to
quarrel with you. But will he, do you think, Jeronymo,
said he, make me a visit at Naples? —You
may depend upon it, he will, answered I. —I will be
there to receive him, replied he. 
They admired you particularly for your address to
my sister, by the General, rather than by me: And
Lady Sforza said, It was a thousand pities that you
and Clementina could not be one. They applauded,
all of them, what they had not, any of them, the
power to imitate, that largeness of heart which makes
you think so well, and speak so tenderly, of those of
communions different from your own. So much
steadiness in your own Religion, yet so much prudence,
in a man so young, they said, was astonishing! 
No wonder that your character ran so high, in
every court you had visited. 
My mother came in soon after you had left us. 
She was equally surprised and grieved to find you
gone. She thought she was sure of your staying supper; 
and, not satisfied with the slight leave she had
taken, she had been strengthening her mind to pass
an hour in your company, in order to take a more
solemn one. 
My father asked her after her daughter. 
Poor soul! said she, she has heard that the Chevalier
was to be here, to take leave of us. 
By whom? By whom? said my father. 

I cannot tell: But the poor creature is half-raving
to be admitted among us. She has dressed herself in
one of her best suits; and I found her sitting in a kind
of form, expecting to be called down. Indeed, Lady
Sforza, the method we are in, does not do. 
So the Chevalier said, replied that Lady. Well,
let us change it, with all my heart. It is no pleasure
to treat the dear girl harshly—O sister! this is a most
extraordinary man! 
That moment in bolted Camilla—Lady Clementina
is just at the door. I could not prevail upon her— 
We all looked upon one another. 
Three soft taps at the door, and a hem, let us know
she was there. 
Let her come in, dear girl, let her come in, said the
Count: The Chevalier is not here. 
Laurana arose, and ran to the door, and led her
in by the hand. 
Dear creature, How wild she looked! —Tears ran
down my cheeks: I had not seen her for two days
before. O how earnestly did she look round her!
withdrawing her hand from her cousin, who would
have led her to a chair, and standing quite still. 
Come and sit by me, my sweet love, said her weeping
mother. —She stept towards her. 
Sit down, my dear girl. 
No: You beat me, remember. 
Who beat you, my dear? —Sure nobody would
beat my child! —Who beat you, Clementina? 
I don't know—Still looking round her, as wanting
somebody. 
Again her mother courted her to sit down. 
No, madam, you don't love me. 
Indeed, my dear, I do. 
So you say. 
Her father held out his open arms to her. Tears
ran down his cheeks. He could not speak. —Ah, my
father! said she, stepping towards him. 

He caught her in his arms—Don't, don't, Sir,
faintly struggling, with averted face—You love me
not—You refused to see your child, when she wanted
to claim your protection! —I was used cruelly. 
By whom, my dear? by whom? 
By every-body. I complained to one, and to another; 
but all were in a tone: And so I thought I
would be contented. My mamma, too! —But it is no
matter. I saw it was to be so; and I did not care. 
By my soul, said I, this is not the way with her,
Lady Sforza. The Chevalier is in the right. You
see how sensible she is of harsh treatment. 
Well, well, said the General, let us change our
measures. 
Still the dear girl looked out earnestly, as for Somebody. 
She loosed herself from the arms of her sorrowing
father. 
Let us in silence, said the Count, observe her motions. 
She went to him on tip toe, and looking in his
face over his shoulder, as he sat with his back towards
her, passed him; then to the General; then to Signor
Sebastiano; and to every one round, till she came to
me; looking at each over his shoulder in the same
manner: Then folding her fingers, her hands open,
and her arms hanging down to their full extent, she
held up her face meditating, with such a significant
woe, that I thought my heart would have burst. — 
Not a soul in the company had a dry eye. 
Lady Sforza arose, took her two hands, the fingers
still clasped, and would have spoken to her, but could
not; and hastily retired to her seat. 
Tears, at last, began to trickle down her cheeks, as
she stood fixedly looking up. She started, looked
about her, and hastening to her mother, threw her
arms about her neck, and hiding her face in her
bosom, broke out into a flood of tears, mingled with
sobs that penetrated every heart. 

The first words she said, were, Love me, my
mamma! Love your child! your poor child! your
Clementina! Then raising her head, and again laying
it in her mother's bosom—If ever you loved me, love
me now, my mamma! —I have need of your love! 
My father was forced to withdraw. He was led
out by his two sons. 
Your poor Jeronymo was unable to help himself. 
He wanted as much comfort as his father. What
were the wounds of his body, at that time, to those of
his mind? 
My two brothers returned. This dear girl, said
the Bishop, will break all our hearts. 
Her tears had seemed to relieve her. She held up her
head. My mother's bosom seemed wet with her child's
tears and her own. Still she looked round her. 
Suppose, said I, somebody were to name the man
she seems to look for? It may divert this wildness. 
Did she come down, said Laurana to Camilla,
with the expectation of seeing him? 
She did. 
Let me, said the Bishop, speak to her. He arose,
and, taking her hand, walked with her about the
room. You look pretty, my Clementina! Your ornaments 
are charmingly fansied. What made you dress
yourself so prettily? 
She looked earnestly at him, in silence. He repeated
his question—I speak, said she, all my heart; 
and then I suffer for it. Every body is against me. 
You shall not suffer for it: Every-body is for you. 
I confessed to Mrs. Beaumont; I confessed to you,
brother: But what did I get by it? —Let go my hand. 
I don't love you, I believe. 
I am sorry for it. I love you, Clementina, as I
love my own soul! 
Yet you never chide your own soul! 
He turned his face from her to us. She must not
be treated harshly, said he. He soothed her in a truly
brotherly manner. 

Tell me, added he to his soothings, Did you expect
any-body here, that you find not? 
Did I? Yes, I did. —Camilla, come hither. —Let
go my hand, brother. 
He did. She took Camilla under the arm—Don't
you know, Camilla, said she, what you heard said of
Somebody's threatening Somebody? —Don't let anybody
hear us; drawing her to one end of the room. — 
I want to take a walk with you into the garden, Camilla. 
It is dark night, madam. 
No matter. If you are afraid, I will go by myself. 
Seem to humour her in talk, Camilla, said the
Count; but don't go out of the room with her. 
Be pleased to tell me, madam, what we are to
walk in the garden for? 
Why, Camilla, I had a horrid dream last night; 
and I cannot be easy till I go into the garden. 
What, madam, was your dream? 
In the Orange-grove, I thought I stumbled over
the body of a dead man! 
And who was it, madam? 
Don't you know who was threatened? And was
not Somebody here to-night? And was not Somebody
to sup here? And is he here? 
The General then went to her. My dearest Clementina; 
my beloved sister; set your heart at rest. 
Somebody is safe: Shall be safe. 
She took first one of his hands, then the other; 
and looking in the palms of them, They are not
bloody, said she. —What have you done with him,
then? Where is he? 
Where is who?— 
You know whom I ask after; but you want something
against me. 
Then stepping quick up to me: My Jeronymo! — 
Did I see you before? and stroked my cheek. —Now
tell me, Jeronymo—Don't come near me, Camilla. 

Pray, Sir, to the General, do you sit down. She
leaned her arm upon my shoulder: I don't hurt you,
Jeronymo: Do I? 
No, my dearest Clementina. 
That's my best brother. —Cruel assassins! —But the
brave man came just in time to save you. —But do
you know what is become of him? 
He is safe, my dear. He could not stay. 
Did any-body affront him? 
No, my love. 
Are you sure nobody did? —Very sure? Father
Marescotti, said she, turning to him (who wept from
the time she entered) You don't love him: But you
are a good man, and will tell me truth. Where is he? 
Did nobody affront him? 
No, madam. 
Because, said she, he never did any-thing but good
to any one. 
Father Marescotti, said I, admires him as much as
any-body. 
Admire him! Father Marescotti admire him! — 
But he does not love him. And I never heard him
say one word against Father Marescotti in my life. — 
Well, but, Jeronymo, What made him go away,
then? Was he not to stay supper? 
He was desired to stay; but would not. 
Jeronymo, let me whisper you—Did he tell you
that I wrote him a Letter? 
I guessed you did, whispered I. 
You are a strange guesser: But you can't guess
how I sent it to him—But hush, Jeronymo—Well,
but, Jeronymo, Did he say nothing of me, when he
went away? 
He left his compliments for you with the General. 
With the General! The General won't tell me! 
Yes, he will. —Brother, pray tell my sister what
the Chevalier said to you, at parting. 
He repeated, exactly, what you had desired him to
say to her. 

Why would they not let me see him? said she. 
Am I never to see him more? 
I hope you will, replied the Bishop. 
If, resumed she, we could have done any-thing
that might have looked like a return to his goodness
to us (and to you, my Jeronymo, in particular) I
believe I should have been easy. —And so you say he
is gone? —And gone for ever! lifting up her hand
from her wrist, as it lay over my shoulder: Poor
Chevalier! —But hush, hush, pray hush, Jeronymo. 
She went from me to her aunt, and cousin Laurana. 
Love me again, madam, said she, to the former. 
You loved me once. 
I never loved you better than now, my dear. 
Did you, Laurana, see the Chevalier Grandison? 
I did. 
And did he go away safe, and unhurt? 
Indeed he did. 
A man who had preserved the life of our dear Jeronymo,
said she, to have been hurt by us, would
have been dreadful, you know. I wanted to say a
few words to him. I was astonished to find him not
here: And then my dream came into my head. It
was a sad dream, indeed! But, cousin, be good to
me: Pray do. You did not use to be cruel. You
used to say, you loved me. I am in calamity, my
dear. I know I am miserable. At times I know I
am; and then I am grieved at my heart, and think
how happy every one is, but me: But then, again, I
ail nothing, and am well. But do, love me, Laurana:
I am in calamity, my dear. I would love you,
if you were in calamity: Indeed I would. —Ah,
Laurana! What is become of all your fine promises? 
But then every-body loved me, and I was happy! — 
Yet you tell me, It is all for my good. Naughty
Laurana—To wound my heart by your crossness, and
then say, It is for my good! —Do you think I should
have served you so? 

Laurana blushed, and wept. Her aunt promised
her, that every-body would love her, and comfort
her, and not be angry with her, if she would make
her heart easy. 
I am very particular, my dear Grandison. I know
you love I should be so. From this minuteness, you
will judge of the workings of her mind. They are
resolved to take your advice (It was very seasonable),
and treat her with indulgence. The Count is earnest
to have it so. 
* *
Camilla has just left me. She says, That her
young Lady had a tolerable night. She thinks it
owing, in a great measure, to her being indulged in
asking the servants, who saw you depart, how you
looked; and being satisfied that you went away unhurt,
and un-affronted. 
Adieu, my dearest, my best friend. Let me hear
from you, as often as you can. 
* *
I Just now understand from Camilla, that the
dear girl has made an earnest request to my father,
mother, and aunt; and been refused. She came back
from them deeply afflicted, and, as Camilla fears, is
going into one of her gloomy fits again. I hope to
write again, if you depart not from Bologna before
to-morrow: But I must, for my own sake, write
shorter Letters. Yet how can I? Since, however
melancholy the subject, when I am writing to you, I
am conversing with you. My dear Grandison, once
more 
Adieu. 

O Lucy, my dear! Whence come all the tears
this melancholy story has cost me? I cannot dwell
upon the scenes! —Begone, all those wishes that
would interfere with the interest of that sweet distressed
Saint at Bologna! 

How impolitic, Lucy, was it in them, not to gratify
her impatience to see him! She would, most probably,
have been quieted in her mind, if she had been
obliged by one other interview. 
What a delicacy, my dear, what a generosity, is
there in her Love! 
Sir Charles, in Lord L.'s Study, said to me, that
his compassion was engaged, but his honour was free:
And so it seems to be: But a generosity in return for
her generosity, must bind such a mind as his. 

