



&dotup;Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday, April 30. 
&dotup;Mr. Lovelace in his last Letters having taken notice
of the most material passages contained in this Letter,
the following Extracts from it are only inserted. 
&dotup;She gives pretty near the same account that he does of
what passed between them, on her resolution to go to
church; and of his proposal of St. Paul's, and desire
of attending her. She praises his good behaviour
there; as also the discourse, and the preacher: Is
pleased with its seasonableness: Gives particulars of
the conversation between them afterwards, and commends
the good observations he makes upon the sermon. 
&dotup;I am willing, says he, to have hopes of him: But
am so unable to know how to depend upon his seriousness
for an hour together, that all my favourable
accounts of him in this respect must be taken with
allowance. 
&dotup;Being very much pressed, I could not tell how to
refuse dining with the Widow and her Nieces this
day. I am better pleased with them, than I ever
thought I should be. I cannot help blaming myself 

for my readiness to give severe censures, where reputation
is concerned. Peoples ways, humours, constitutions,
education, and opportunities allowed for, my
dear, many persons, as far as I know, may appear
blameless, whom others of different humours and educations
are too apt to blame; and who, from the
same fault, may be as ready to blame them. I will
therefore make it a rule to myself for the future, Never
to judge peremptorily on first appearances: But
yet I must observe, that these are not people I should
chuse to be intimate with, or whose ways I can like: 
Altho', for the stations they are in, they may go thro'
the world with tolerable credit. 
&dotup;Mr. Lovelace's behaviour has been such, as makes
me call this, so far as it is passed, an agreeable day. 
Yet, when easiest as to him, my situation with my
friends takes place in my thoughts, and causes me
many a tear. 
&dotup;I am the more pleased with the people of the house,
because of the persons of rank they are acquainted
with, and who visit them. 
&dotup;Sunday Evening. 
&dotup;I am still well pleased with Mr. Lovelace's behaviour. 
We have had a good deal of serious discourse
together. The man has really just and good
notions. He confesses how much he is pleased with
this day, and hopes for many such. Nevertheless, he
ingenuously warned me, that his unlucky vivacity
might return: But he doubted not, that he should be
fixed at last by my example and conversation. 
&dotup;He has given me an entertaining account of the
four gentlemen he is to meet to-morrow night: Entertaining,
I mean , for his humourous description of
their persons, manners, &c. but such a description as
is far from being to their praise: Yet he seemed rather
to design to divert my melancholy by it, than to
degrade them. I think at bottom, my dear, that he
must be a good-natured man; but that he was spoiled
young for want of check or controul. 

&dotup;I cannot but call this, my circumstances considered,
an happy day to the end of it. Indeed, my dear, I
think I could prefer him to all the men I ever
knew, were he but to be always what he has been
this day. You see how ready I am to own all you
have charged me with, when I find myself out. It is
a difficult thing, I believe, sometimes, for a young
creature that is able to deliberate with herself, to know
when she loves, or when she hates: But I am resolved,
as much as possible, to be determined both in
my hatred and love by actions, as they make the man
worthy or unworthy.&dotup; 
She dates again on Monday, and declares herself highly
displeased at Miss Partington's being introduced to
her: And still more for being obliged to promise to
be present at Mr. Lovelace's Collation. She foresees,
she says, a murder'd Evening. 