


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday Morning, April 6. 
Miss Grandison, accompanied by Miss Jervois,
has just left us. Lady L. has undertaken, she
says, to set all hands at work, to have things in tolerable
order, early as the day is, for Tuesday next. 
Miss Grandison (would you believe it?) owns, that she
wants spirits to order any-thing. What must be the
solemnity of that circumstance, when near, that shall
make Charlotte Grandison want spirits? 
She withdrew with me to my apartment. She
threw herself into a chair: 'Tis a folly to deny it, Harriet,
but I am very low, and very silly: I don't like
next Tuesday by any means. 
Is your objection only to the day, my dear? 
I do not like the man. 
Is there any man whom you like better? 
I can't say that neither. But this brother of mine
makes me think contemptibly of all other men. I
would compound for a man but half so good; tender,
kind, humane, polite, and even chearful in affliction! 
—O Harriet! where is there such another man? 
No-where. —But you don't by marriage lose, on
the contrary, you farther engage and secure, the affection
of this brother. You will have a good-natured,
worthy man for your husband; a man who
loves you, and you will have your brother besides. 
Do you think I can be happy with Lord G.? 
I am sure you may, if it be not your own fault. 
That's the thing: I may perhaps bear with the
man; but I cannot honour him. 
Then don't vow to honour him. Don't meet him
at the altar. 
Yet I must. But I believe I think too much: And 

consideration is no friend to wedlock. —Would to
heaven that the same hour that my hand and Lord
G.'s were joined, yours and my brother's were also
united! 
Ah, Miss Grandison! If you love me, try to wean
me; and not to encourage hopes of what never,
never can be. 
Dear creature! You will be greater than Clementina,
and that is greater than the greatest, if you can
conquer a passion, that over-turned her reason. 
Do not, my Charlotte, make comparisons in which
the conscience of your Harriet tells her she must be a
sufferer. There is no occasion for me to despise myself,
in order to hold myself inferior to Clementina. 
Well, you are a noble creature! —But, the approaching
Tuesday—I cannot bear to think of it. 
Dear Charlotte! 
And dear Harriet too! —But the officiousness, the
assiduities, of this trifling man are disgustful to me. 
You don't hate him?— 
Hate him—True—I don't hate him—But I have
been so much accustomed to treat him like a fool,
that I can't help thinking him one. He should not
have been so tame to such a spirit as mine. He should
have been angry when I played upon him. I have got
a knack of it, and shall never leave it off, that's certain. 
Then I hope he will be angry with you. I hope
that he will resent your ill treatment of him. 
Too late, too late to begin, Harriet. I won't take
it of him now. He has never let me see that his face
can become two sorts of features. The poor man can
look sorrowful; that I know full well; But I shall always
laugh when he attempts to look angry. 
You know better, Charlotte. You may give him
so much cause for anger, that you may make it habitual
to him, and then would be glad to see him
pleased. Men have an hundred ways that women 

have not to divert themselves abroad, when they cannot
be happy at home. This I have heard observed
by— 
By your grandmother, Harriet. Good old Lady! 
In her reign it might be so; but you will find, that
women now have as many ways to divert themselves
abroad as the men. Have you not observed this yourself
in one of your Letters to Lucy? Ah! my dear! 
We can every hour of the twenty-four be up with
our monarchs, if they are undutiful. 
But Charlotte Grandison will not, cannot— 
Why that's true, my dear—But I shall not then be
a Grandison. Yet the man will have some security
from my brother's goodness. He is not only good
himself, but he makes every one related to him, either
from fear or shame, good likewise. But I think
that when one week or fortnight is happily over, and
my spirits are got up again from the depression into
which this abominable hurry puts them, I could fall
upon some inventions that would make every-one
laugh, except the person who might take it into his
head that he may be a sufferer by them: And who
can laugh, and be angry, in the same moment? 
You should not marry, Charlotte, till this wicked
vein of humour and raillery is stopt. 
I hope it will hold me till fifty. 
Don't say so, Charlotte—Say rather that you hope
it will hold you so long only as it may be thought innocent
or inoffensive, by the man whom it will be
your duty to oblige, and so long as it will bring no
discredit to yourself. 
Your servant, Goody Gravity! —But what must be,
must. The man is bound to see it. It will be all his
own seeking. He will sin with his eyes open. I think
he has seen enough of me to take warning. All that
I am concerned about is for the next week or fortnight. 
He will be king all that time—Yet perhaps
not quite all neither. And I shall be his sovereign 

ever after, or I am mistaken. What a duce shall a
woman marry a man of talents not superior to her
own, and forget to reward herself for her condescension? 
—But, high-ho! —There's a sigh, Harriet. Were
I at home, I would either sing you a song, or play
you a tune, in order to raise my own heart. 
She besought me then with great earnestness, to
give her my company till the day arrived, and on the
day. You see, said she, that my brother has engagements
till Monday. Dear creature, support, comfort
me—Don't you see my heart beat thro' my stays? — 
If you love me, come to me to-morrow to breakfast; 
and leave me not for the whole time—Are you not
my sister, and the friend of my heart? I will give you
a month for it, upon demand. Come, let us go down. 
I will ask the consent of both your cousins. 
She did: And they, with their usual goodness to
me, chearfully complied. 
Sir Charles set out this morning to attend the triple
marriages; drest charmingly, his sister says. I have
made Miss Grandison promise to give me an account
of such particulars, as by the help of Saunders, and
Sir Charles's own relation, she can pick up. All we
single girls, I believe, are pretty attentive to such subjects
as these; as what one day may be our own concern. 

