


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday, Two o'Clock.
I Am stolen up again, to tell you how it is. I never
will be petulant again—Dear Sir, forgive me! 
How wicked in us all, but my grandmamma and Mr.
Deane, to blame a man who cannot be guilty of a
wilful fault! The fault is all my aunt's and mine— 
Was my aunt ever in fault before? 
We were all together when he entered. He addressed
himself to us, in that noble manner, which engages
every-body in his favour, at first sight. How,
said he, bowing to every one, have I suffered, in being
hindered, by an unhappy man, from doing myself
the honour of attending you sooner! 
You see, my dear, he made not apologies to me, as
if he supposed me disappointed by his absence. I was
afraid he would. I know I looked very grave. 
He then particularly addressed himself to each; to
me first; next to my grandmamma; and taking one
of her hands between both his, and bowing upon it,
I rejoice to see you, madam, said he—Your last favours
will ever be remembred by me, with gratitude. 
I see you well, I hope. Your Miss Byron will be
well, if you are; and our joy, looking round him, will
then be complete. 
She bowed her head, pleased with his compliment; 
so were my aunt, and Lucy, and Nancy. I was still a
little sullen; otherwise I should have been pleased too,
that he made my health depend on that of my grandmamma. 
Madam, said he, turning to my aunt, I am afraid
I made you wait for me at breakfast. A most impertinent
visiter! He put me out of humour. I dared
not to let you and yours (looking at me) see, how 

much I could be out of humour. I am naturally passionate:
But passion is so ugly, so deforming a thing,
that, if I can help it, I will never, by those I love, be
seen in it. 
I am sorry, Sir, said my aunt, you met with anything
to disturb you. 
My uncle's spirit had not come down: He, too,
was sullen in behalf of the punctilio of the girl whom
he honours with his jealous Love. How, how, is that,
Sir Charles? said he. 
My aunt presented Lucy and Nancy to him: But
before she could name either—Miss Selby, said he,
Miss Byron's own Lucy, I am sure. Miss Nancy
Selby! —I know your characters, Ladies, saluting each,
and I know the interest you have in Miss Byron. — 
Honour me with your approbation, and that will be
to give me hope of hers. 
He then turning to my uncle and Mr. Deane, and
taking a hand of each—My dear Mr. Deane smiles
upon me, said he—But Mr. Selby looks grave.— 
At-ten-tive only Sir Charles, to the cause of your
being put out of humour, that's all— 
The cause, Mr. Selby! —Know, then, I met with
a man at my inn, who would force himself upon me:
Do you know I am a quarrelsome man? He was so
hardy as to declare, that he had pretensions to a Lady
in this company, which he was determined to assert. 
O that Greville! said my aunt.— 
I was ready to sink. Wretched Harriet! thought
I, at the instant: Am I to be for ever the occasion
of embroiling this excellent man! 
My grandmamma, Mr. Deane, my uncle, my
cousin James, all spoke at once—Dear, dear Sir
Charles, said one, said another—How, how, was
it? 
Both safe! Both unhurt! No more of the rash
man, at this time. He is to be pitied. He loves
Miss Byron to distraction. 

This comes of nicety! whispered my uncle, to my
aunt; foolish nicety! —To let such a man as this go
to an inn! —Inhospitable, vile punctilio! Then turning
to Sir Charles—Dear Sir, forgive me! I was a
little serious, that I must own [I pulled my uncle by
the sleeve, fearing he would say too much by way of
atonement for his seriousness]: I, I, I, was a little serious,
I must own—I, I, I, was afraid something was
the matter—turned he off, what he was going to say— 
too freely, shall I say? —Hardly so! had he said
what he would; tho' habitual punctilio made me almost
involuntarily twitch my uncle by the sleeve; for
my heart would have directed my lips to utter the
kindest things; but my concern was too great to allow
them to obey it. 
I must go down, Lady G. —I am enquired after; 
'tis just dinner-time. —Let me only add, that Sir
Charles waved further talk of the affair between him
and that wretch, while I staid—Perhaps they have
got it out of him since I came up. 
* *
I shall be so proud, my dear! —A thousand fine
things he has said of your Harriet, in her little absence! 
—Lucy, Nancy, call him THE man: And
every one looks upon him as if there were not one
soul in company but he and themselves. My grandmamma's
eyes are complained of as weak, to colour
her joyful emotion: But, thank God, her eyes
are not weak. And he is so respectfully tender to her,
that had he not my heart before, he would have won
it now. 
He had again waved the relation of the insult he
met with: Mr. Greville himself, he supposed, would
give it. He had a mind to see if the gentleman, by
his report of it, was a gentleman. Thank God, said
he, I have not hurt a man who boasts of his passion
for Miss Byron; and of his neighbourhood to this family! 

* *
Our places were chosen for us at table: Sir
Charles's next me. Cannot I be too minute, do you
fay? —So easy, so free, so polite; something so happily
addressed occasionally to each person at table—O
my dear! I am abundantly kept in countenance; for
every one loves him, as well as I. You have been
pleased to take very favourable notice of our servants— 
They are good, and sensible. What reverence for
him, and joy for their young mistress's sake, shone in
their countenances, as they attended! 
My cousin James, who has never been out of England,
was very curious to be informed of the manners,
customs, diversions, of the people in different countries
—Italy, in particular—Ah the dear Clementina! 
What abatement from recollection! ‘The sighing
heart,’ I remember he says, in one of his Letters to
Dr. Bartlett, ‘will remind us of imperfection, in the
highest of our enjoyments.’ And he adds, ‘It is
fit it should be so.’ And on what occasion did he
write this? —O my Charlotte, I was the occasion! It
was in kind remembrance of me! He could not, at
that time, have so written, had he been indifferent,
even then, to your Harriet. 
I am so apprehensive of my uncle's after-remarks,
that I am half-afraid to look at Sir Charles: And he
must by-and-by return to this wicked inn—They
wonder at my frequent absences. It is to oblige you,
Lady G. and indeed myself: There is vast pleasure in
communicating one's pleasures to a friend who interests
herself, as you do, in one's dearest concerns. 
* *
You know and admire my grandmamma's chearful
compliances with the innocent diversions of youth. 
She made Lucy give us a lesson on the harpsichord,
on purpose, I saw, to draw me in. We both obeyed. 
I was once a little out in an Italian song. In what
a sweet manner did he put me in! touching the keys 

himself, for a minute or two. Every one wished him
to proceed; but he gave up to me, in so polite a manner,
that we all were satisfied with his excuses. 
My poor cousin Jemmy is on a sudden very earnest
to go abroad; as if, silly youth, travelling would make
him a Sir Charles Grandison! 
I have just asked your brother, If all is over between
Mr. Greville and him? He says, He hopes and
believes so. God send it may; or I shall hate that
Greville! 
* *
My uncle, Mr. Deane, and my cousin James,
were too much taken with Sir Charles, to think of
withdrawing, as it might have been expected they
would; and after some general conversation, that
succeeded our playing, Sir Charles drew his chair between
my grandmamma and aunt, and taking my
grandmamma's hand, May I not be allowed a quarter
of an hour's conversation with Miss Byron in your
presence, Ladies? said he, speaking low. We have
indeed only friends and relations present: But it will
be most agreeable, I believe, to the dear Lady, that
what I have to say to her, and to you, may be rather
reported to the gentlemen, than heard by them. 
By all means, Sir Charles, said my grandmamma. 
Then whispering to my aunt, No man in this company
thinks, but Sir Charles. Excuse me, my dear. 
The moment Sir Charles applied himself in this
particular manner to them, my heart, without hearing
what he said, was at my mouth. I arose, and
withdrew to the cedar-parlour, followed by Lucy and
Nancy. The gentlemen, seeming to recollect themselves,
withdrew likewise, to another apartment. My
aunt came to me—Love! —But ah! my dear, how
you tremble! —You must come with me. And then
she told me what he had said to my grandmamma and
her. 
I have no courage—None at all, said I. If apprehension, 

if timidity, be signs of Love, I have them
all. Sir Charles Grandison has not one. 
Nay, my dear, said Lucy, impute not to him want
of respect, I beseech you. —Respect, my Lucy! What a
poor word! —Had I only respect for him, we should be
nearer an equality. —Has he said any-thing of Lady
Clementina? 
Don't be silly, Harriet, said my aunt. You used to
be— 
Used to be! —Ah, madam! Sir Charles's heart, at
best, a divided heart! I never had a trial till now. 
I tell you all my foibles, Lady G. 
My aunt led me in to Sir Charles and my grandmamma. 
He met me at my entrance into the room,
and in the most engaging manner, my aunt having
taken her seat, conducted me to a chair which happened
to be vacant between her and my grandmother. He
took no notice of my emotion, and I the sooner recovered
myself, and still the sooner, as he himself
seemed to be in some little confusion. However, he
sat down, and with a manly, yet respectful air, his
voice gaining strength as he proceeded, thus delivered
himself: 
Never, Ladies, was man more particularly circumstanced
than he before you. You know my story:
You know what once were the difficulties of my
situation with a family that I must ever respect; with
a Lady of it whom I must ever revere: And you,
madam (to my grandmamma) have had the goodness
to signify to me, in a most engaging manner, that
Miss Byron has added to the innumerable instances
which she has given me of her true greatness of mind,
a kind, and even a friendly concern for a Lady who is
the Miss Byron of Italy. I ask not excuse for the
comparison. The heart of the man before you, madam
(to me) in sincerity and frankness, emulates your
own.— 
You want not excuse, Sir, said my grandmamma— 

We all reverence Lady Clementina: We admire
her. 
He bowed to each of us; as my aunt and I looked,
I believe, assentingly to what my grandmamma said. 
He proceeded: 
—Yet, in so particular a situation, altho' what I
have to say, may, I presume, be collected from what
you know of my story; and tho' my humble application
to Miss Byron for her favour, and to you, Ladies,
for your interest with her, have not been discouraged; 
something, however, may be necessary to
be said, in this audience, of the state of my own heart,
for the sake of this dear Lady's delicacy, and yours. 
And I will deliver myself with all the truth and plainness
which I think are required in treaties of this nature,
equally with those set on foot between nation and
nation. 
I am not insensible to Beauty: But the beauty of
person only, never yet had power over more than my
eye; to which it gave a pleasure like that which it receives
from the flowers of a gay parterre. Had not
my heart been out of the reach of personal attractions,
if I may so express myself; and had I been my own
master; Miss Byron, in the first hour that I saw her
(for her beauty suffered not by her distress) would have
left me no other choice: But when I had the honour
of conversing with her, I observed in her mind and
behaviour that true dignity, delicacy, and noble frankness,
which I ever thought characteristic in the Sex,
but never met with, in equal degree, but in one Lady. 
I soon found, that my admiration of her fine qualities
was likely to lead me into a gentler, yet a more irresistable
passion: For of the Lady abroad I then could
have no reasonable, at least no probable hope: Yet
were there circumstances between her and me, which
I thought, in strict justice, obliged me to attend the
issue of certain events. 
I called myself therefore to account, and was 

alarmed when I found that Miss Byron's graces had
stolen so imperceptibly on my heart, as already to
have made an impression on it too deep for my tranquillity. 
I determined therefore, in honour, in justice,
to both Ladies, to endeavour to restrain a passion so
new, yet likely to be so fervent. 
I had avocations in town, while Miss Byron was
with my sisters in the country. Almost afraid of trusting
myself in her presence, I pursued the more willingly
those avocations in person, when I could have
managed some of them, perhaps, near as well by other
hands. Compassion for the one Lady, because of her
calamity, might, at that time, I found, have been
made to give way, could those calamities have been overcome,
to Love for the other. Nor was it difficult for
me to observe, that my sisters and Lord L. who knew
nothing of my situation, would have chosen for a
sister the young Lady present, before every other woman. 
Sometimes, I will own to you, I was ready, from
that self-partiality and vanity which is too natural to
men of vivacity and strong hopes, to flatter myself,
that I might, by my sisters interest, have made myself
not unacceptable to a Lady, who seemed to be wholly
disengaged in her affections: But I would not permit
myself to dwell on such hopes: Every look of complaisance,
every smile, which used to beam over that
lovely countenance, I attributed to her natural goodness,
and frankness of heart, and to that grateful spirit
which made her over-rate a common service that I
had been so happy as to render her. Had I even been
free, I should have been careful not to deprive myself
of that animating sunshine, by a too early declaration. 
For well did I know, by other mens experience, that
Miss Byron, at the same time that her natural politeness,
and sweetness of manners, engaged every heart,
was not, however, easily to be won. 
But, notwithstanding all my efforts to prevent a 

competition which had grown so fast upon me, I still
found my uneasiness increase with my affection for Miss
Byron. I had then but one way left—It was, to
strengthen my heart, in Clementina's cause, by Miss
Byron's assistance: In short, to acquaint Miss Byron
with my situation; to engage her generosity for Clementina,
and thereby deprive myself of the encouragement
my fond heart might have hoped for, had I
indulged my wishes of obtaining her favour. My end
was answered, as to the latter. Miss Byron's generosity
was engaged for the Lady; but was it possible
that my obligations to her for that generosity should
not add to my admiration of her? 
At the time I laid before her my situation (it was in
Lord L's Study at Colnebrooke) she saw my emotion. 
I could not conceal it. My abrupt departure from
her, must convince her, that my heart was too much
engaged for that situation(a) . I desired Dr. Bartlett
to take an airing with me, in hopes, by his counsels,
to compose my disordered spirits(b) . He knew the
state of my heart: He knew, with regard to the proposals
I had formerly made to the family at Bologna,
relating to Religion and Residence (as I had also declared
to the brothers of the Lady) that no worldly
grandeur should ever have induced me to allow, in a
beginning address, the terms I was willing, as a compromise,
to allow to that Lady; for throughly had I
weighed the inconveniencies which must attend such
an alliance: The Lady zealous in her Religion; the
Confessor who was to be allowed her, equally zealous; 
the spirit of making proselytes so strong, and held
by Roman Catholics to be so meritorious; and myself
no less in earnest in my Religion; I had no doubt to
pronounce, I told the good Doctor, in confidence,
‘that I should be much more happy in marriage with
the Lady of Selby-house, were she to be induced to 

honour me with her hand, than it was possible I
could be with Lady Clementina, even were they to
comply with the conditions I had proposed; as I
doubted not but that Lady would also be, were her
health restored, with a man of her own Nation and
Religion:’ And I owned to him, besides, ‘that I
could have no hope of conquering the opposition
given me by the friends of Clementina; and that I
could not at times but think hardly of the indignities
cast upon me by some of them.’ 
The doctor, I knew, at the same time that he lamented
the evil treatment Clementina met with from
her mistaken friends, and her unhappy malady; and
admired her for her manifold excellencies; next to
adored Miss Byron: And he gave his voice accordingly. 
‘But here, doctor, is the case, said I—Clementina
is a woman with whom I had the honour of
being acquainted before I knew Miss Byron: Clementina
has infinite merits: She herself refused me
not: She consented to accept of the terms I offered:
She even besought her friends to comply with them. 
She has an opinion of my honour, and of my tenderness
for her. Till I had the happiness of knowing
Miss Byron, I was determined to await either
her recovery or release; and will Miss Byron herself,
if she knows that, forgive me (the circumstances
not changed) for the change of a resolution
of which Clementina was so worthy? The treatment
the poor Lady has met with, for my sake, as
once she wrote, tho' virgin modesty induced her to
cross out those words, has heightened her disorder. 
She still, to this moment, wishes to see me: While
there is a possibility, tho' not a probability, of my
being made the humble instrument of restoring an
excellent woman, who in herself deserves from me
every consideration of tenderness, ought I to wish to
engage the heart (were I able to succeed in my
wishes) of the equally-excellent Miss Byron? —Could 

I be happy in my own mind, were I to try, and to
succeed? And if not, must I not be as ungrateful to
her, as ungenerous to the other? —Miss Byron's happiness
cannot depend on me. She must be happy in
the happiness she will give to the man of her choice,
whoever shall be the man!’ 
We were all silent. My grandmamma and aunt
seemed determined to be so; and I could not speak. 
He proceeded: 
You know not, dear Miss Byron, I wished you not
to know, the conflicts my mind laboured with, when
I parted with you on my going abroad. My destiny
was wrapt up in doubt, and uncertainty. I was invited
over: Signor Jeronymo was deemed irrecoverable:
He wished to see me, and desired but to live to
see me. My presence was requested as a last effort to
recover his noble sister. You yourself, madam, applauded
my resolution to go: But, that I might not
be thought to wish to engage you in my favour (so circumstanced
as I was, that to have done so, would
have been to have acted unworthily to both Ladies) I
insinuated my hopelessness of ever being nearer to you
than I was. 
I was not able to take a formal leave of you. I
went over. Success attended the kind, the soothing
treatment which Clementina met with from her friends. 
Success also attended the means used for the recovery
of the noble Jeronymo. Conditions were again proposed. 
Clementina, on her restoration, shone upon
us all even with a brighter lustre than she did before
her disorder. All her friends consented to reward with
the hand of their beloved daughter, the man to whom
they attributed secondarily the good they rejoiced in. 
I own to you, Ladies, that what was before honour
and compassion, now became admiration; and I should
have been unjust to the merits of so excellent a woman,
if I could not say, Love. I concluded myself already
the husband of Clementina; yet it would have 

been strange, if the welfare and happiness of Miss Byron
were not the next wish of my heart. I rejoiced
that (despairing as I did of such an event before I went
over, because of the articles of Religion and Residence)
I had not sought to engage more than her
friendship; and I devoted myself wholly to Clementina
—I own it, Ladies—And had I thought, Angel as
she came out, upon proof, that I could not have
given her my heart, I had been equally unjust, and
ungrateful. For, dear Ladies, if you know all her
story, you must know, that occasion called her out to
act gloriously; and that gloriously she answered the
call. 
He paused. We were still silent. My grandmamma
and aunt looked at each other by turns. But
their eyes, as well as mine, at different parts of his
speech shewed their sensibility. He proceeded, gracefully
looking down, and at first with some little hesitation: 
I am sensible, it is with a very ill grace, that, refused,
as I must in justice call it, tho' on the noblest
motives, by Clementina, I come to offer myself, and
so soon after her refusal, to a Lady of Miss Byron's
delicacy. I should certainly have acted more laudably,
respecting my own character only, had I taken at least
the usual time of a Widower-Love. But great minds,
such as Miss Byron's, and yours, Ladies, are above
common forms, where decorum is not too much neglected. 
As to myself, what do I, but declare a passion,
that would have been, but for one obstacle,
which is now removed, as fervent as man ever knew? 
Dr. Bartlett has told me, madam [to me], that you
and my sisters have seen the Letters I wrote to him
from Italy: By the contents of some of those, and of
the Letters I left with you, madam [to my grandmamma],
you have seen Clementina's constant adherence
to the step she so greatly took. In this Letter,
received but last Wednesday [taking one out of 

his bosom], you will see (my last Letters to them unreceived,
as they must be) that I am urged by all her
family, for the sake of setting her an example, to address
myself to a Lady of my own country. This
impels me, as I may say, to accelerate the humble tender
of my vows to you, madam. However hasty the
step may be thought, in my situation; Would not an
inexcusable neglect, or seeming indifference, as if I
were balancing as to the person, have been attributable
to me, had I, for dull and cold form's sake, been capable
of postponing the declaration of my affection to
Miss Byron? And if, madam, you can so far get over
observances, which perhaps, on consideration, will be
found to be punctilious only, as to give your heart,
with your hand, to a man who himself has been perplexed
by what some would call (particular as it sounds)
a double Love (an embarrasment, however, not of his
own seeking, or which he could possibly avoid) you
will lay him under obligation to your goodness (to
your magnanimity, I will call it) which all the affectionate
tenderness of my life to come will never enable
me to discharge. 
He then put the Letter (a translation of it inclosed)
into my hand. I have already answered it, madam,
said he, and acquainted my friend, that I have actually
tendered myself to the acceptance of a Lady worthy of
a sisterly relation to their Clementina; and have not
been rejected. Your goodness must enable me (I
humbly hope it will) to give them still stronger assurances
of your favour: On my happiness they have
the generosity to build a part of their own. 
Not well before, I was more than once apprehensive
of fainting, as he talked, agreeable as was his
talk, and engaging as was his manner. My grandmamma
and aunt saw my complexion change at his
particular address to me, in the last part of his speech. 
Each put her kind hand on one of mine, and held it
on it, as my other hand held my handkerchief now 

to my eyes, and now as a cover to my self-felt varying
check. 
At the same moment that he ceased speaking, he
took our triply-united hands in both his; and in the
most respectful, yet graceful manner, his Letter laid in
my lap, pressed each of the three with his lips; mine
twice. I could not speak. My grandmamma and
aunt, delighted, yet tears standing in their eyes, looked
upon each other, and upon me; each as expecting
the other to speak. I have perhaps, said he, with
some emotion, taken up too much of Miss Byron's
attention on this my first personal declaration: I will
now return to the company below. To-morrow I
will do myself the honour to dine with you. We will
for this evening postpone the important subject. Miss
Byron, I presume, will be best pleased to have it so. 
I shall to-morrow be favoured with the result of your
deliberations. Mean time may I meet with an interceding
friend in every one I have had the pleasure to
see this day! I must flatter myself with the honour of
Miss Byron's whole heart, as well as with the approbation
of all her friends. I cannot be thought, at
present, to deserve it; but it shall be the endeavour of
my life so to do. 
He withdrew, with a grace which was all his own. 
The moment he was gone from us, my grandmamma
threw her arms about her Harriet, then
about my aunt; and they congratulated me, and each
other. 
We were all pained at heart, when we read the Letter. 
It is from Signor Jeronymo, urging your brother
to set the example to his sister, which they so
much want her to follow. I send you the translation. 
Pray return it. Poor Lady Clementina! Without
seeing the last Letters he wrote to them, she seems to
be tired into compliance. I will not say one half
that is upon my mind on this occasion, as you will
have the Letter before you. His last-written Letters 

will not favour her wishes. Poor Lady! Can I forbear
to pity her? And still the more is she to be pitied,
as your brother's excellencies rise upon us. 
I besought my aunt to excuse me to the company. 
Sir Charles joined his friends [His friends indeed
they all are!] with a vivacity in his air and manner,
which charmed every-body; while the silly heart of
your Harriet would not allow her to enter into company
the whole night. Indeed it wanted the inducement
of his presence; for, to every one's regret, he
declined staying supper; yet my uncle put it to him— 
What, Sir, do you choose to sup at your inn? My
uncle will have it, that Sir Charles looked an answer
of displeasure for suffering him to go to it at all. My
uncle is a good-natured man. He will sometimes
concede, when he is not convinced; and on every appearance
which makes for his opinion, we are sure to
hear of it. 
I shall have an opportunity to-morrow morning
early [This morning I might say] to send this long
Letter by a neighbour, who is obliged to ride post to
town on his own affairs. 
Had I not had this agreeable employment, rest, I
am sure, would not have come near me. Your brother,
I hope, has found it. Remember, I always
mean to include my dear Lady L. in this correspondence:
Any-body else, but discretionally. My dear
Ladies both, Adieu. 
Harriet Byron. 

