


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Friday, May 25. 
Unhappy Laurana! Sir Charles expressed
great concern for the manner of her death. How
can you, brother, said Lady G. (when we three only
were together) be concerned for so execrable a
wretch! 
Shall a human creature perish, replied he, and its
fellow-creature not be moved? Shall an immortal
Being fix its eternal state by an act dreadful and irreversible; 
by a crime that admits not of repentance; 
and shall we not be concerned? This indeed was
owing to distraction: But how ill was such a soul
as Laurana's prepared to rush into Eternity? –––Unhappy
Laurana! 
It is not thought fit, for obvious reasons, to acquaint
Clementina with the contents of the general's
Letter. 
* *
At last, my dear grandmamma, the great point
seems to be decided. Lady Clementina had for some
time been employing herself in drawing up, in two
opposite columns, the arguments for and against her
entering into the marriage-state. She shewed them
to me, and afterwards to Mrs. Beaumont; but would
not allow either of us to take a copy. She has stated
them very fairly. I could not but observe to her on
which side the strength lay. 
This morning she gave us her company at breakfast-time
for a few minutes only. She was in visible
emotions; and seemed desirous of getting the better
of them; but was unable; and therefore retired. 
She shut herself up, and about noon, sent, sealed 

up, a Letter; which I will English as well as I can; 
thus directed; 

To her ever-honoured, ever-indulgent Father and Mother, Clementina della Porretta.
How did my whole soul aspire after the veil! ––– 
Insuperable obstacles having arisen against the
union of your child with one exalted man, how averse
was I to enter into covenant with any other! 
It was your pleasure, my Lord; it was yours, madam; 
that I should not be indulged in the aspiration. 
You had the goodness to oblige me in my
averseness. 
The Chevalier Grandison has since convinced me,
by generous and condescending reasonings, that I
could not, in duty to the will of my two grandfathers,
and in justice to my elder brother and his descendants,
renew my wishes after the cloister. I
submit. 
But now, what is to be done; what can I do, to
make you, my dearest parents, and my brothers,
happy? Olivia triumphs over me. My situation is
disagreeable: I, who ought to be a comfort to my
friends, have been, I still am, a trouble to them all. 
–––The Chevalier Grandison and his excellent Lady,
have signified to me, more than once, that they expect
from me the completion of their earthly happiness:
And what is this life, but a short, a transitory
passage to a better? 
Have I not declined accepting the vows of the first
of men? The only man I ever saw with a wish to
be united to him? Declined them on motives, that
all my friends think do me honour? 
Have I ever, dear as the struggle cost me, repented
the glorious self-denial? And what precedents of self-denial
(wholly yours by laws divine and human, as
I am) have you, my ever-indulgent parents, set me? 

Is there a man I would prefer to him whom my
friends are solicitous to commend to my favour? 
Cannot I, in performing my duty to my parents,
perform all those duties of life, which performed, may
intitle me to a blessed hope? 
Shall I contend in and through life, to carry a
point, that, at the awful close of it, will appear to
me, as nothing?––– 
Let me make a proposal–––On a supposition that
you, Sir, that you, Madam (whose patient goodness
to me has been unexampled), and every one
of my friends, favour the Count of Belvedere as
much as ever—I have always acknowleged his
merits––– 
Permit me a year's consideration from the present
time, to examine the state of my head and heart; 
and at the end of that year, allow me to determine; 
and I will endeavour, my dear parents, to make
your wishes, and my duty, honour, conscience, (divested
of caprice, fancy, petulance) my sole guides
in the result, as well as in the discussion. The Chevalier
Grandison, his Lady, Father Marescotti, and
Mrs. Beaumont, shall be judges between my relations
and me, if there be occasion. 
But, as it would be unreasonable to expect, that
the Count of Belvedere should attend an issue so
uncertain; for I would rather die, than give my vows
to a man to whom I could not do justice both with
regard to head and heart; so, I make it my earnest
request to him, that he will look upon himself to be
absolutely free to make his own choice, and to pursue
his own measures, as opportunities offer. Rejoiced
at my heart should I be, to have reason to congratulate
him on his nuptials with a woman of the
soundness of whose mind he could have no doubt,
and whose heart never knew another attachment. 
I would humbly propose, as a measure highly expedient,
that the ever-obliging Chevalier Grandison 

and his truly admirable Lady will permit us, as soon
as possible, to depart from England. [O my friends!
accuse me not of levity in your hearts! I obeyed in
the rash voyage hither, an impulse that appeared to
me irresistable.] And let us leave it to his never-forfeited
honour, to bring over to us, as soon as can be
convenient, his Lady, his Sisters, and their Lords,
as they have made us hope: And that a family friendship
may be cultivated among us, as if a legal relation
had taken place. 
But allow me to declare, that if my cousin Laurana
shall be found to have entertained the least reason
to hope that she might one day be Countess of
Belvedere, that that expectation alone, whatever turn
my health may take, shall be considered as finally
determining the Count's expectations on me; for I
never will be looked upon as the rival of my cousin. 
And now, blessed Virgin-mother of the God of
my hope, do thou enable me to be an humble instrument
of restoring to the hearts of my honoured
and indulgent parents, and to those of my affectionate
brothers and other friends, the tranquillity of
which I have so unhappily and so long deprived them; 
prays, and will every hour pray, my ever-honoured
and ever-indulgent Father and Mother, 
Your dutifully devoted
Clementina. 
Friday, May 25. 

The Marquis was alone with his Lady in her
dressing-room when Camilla carried them this Letter. 
They opened it with impatience. They could not
contain their joy when they perused it. They both
declared, that it was all that should, all that ought to
be exacted from her. The Bishop, Signor Jeronymo,
and her two cousins, on the contents being
communicated to them, were in ecstasies of joy. 
All that the Count of Belvedere had wished for,
was, that Lady Clementina would give him hope, 

that if she ever married, he might be the happy man; 
and for the sake of this distant hope, he was resolved
to forego all other engagements. Sir Charles was
desired to acquaint him with the happy tidings. 
He did, with his usual prudence: But his joy is
extreme. 
The Marquis and Marchioness were impatient to
embrace and thank their beloved daughter. The
moment she saw them, she threw herself at their
feet, as they sat together on one settee, and were
rising to embrace her–––O my father! O my mother! 
Have I not been perverse in your eyes? –––It
was not I! –––You can pity me! –––It was not always
in my power to think as I now do. My mind was
disturbed. I sought for tranquillity, and could no
where find it. My brother Giacomo was too precipitating; 
yet, in his earnestness to have me marry,
shewed his disinterestedness. He gave me not time,
as you both, thro' the advice of the common friend
of us all, have done. The nearest evil was the
heaviest to me: I sought to avoid that, and might
have fallen into greater. God reward you, my father,
my mother, and all my dear friends, for the indulgence
you have shewn me! –––To follow me too
into foreign climates, at an unpropitious season of the
year–––And for what? –––Not to chide, not to punish
me; but to restore me to the arms of your parental
Love! –––And did you not vouchsafe to enter
into conditions with your child! –––How greatly disordered
in my mind must I be, if I ever forget such
instances of your graciousness! 
The tender parents pressed her to their bosoms. 
How did her two brothers and Mrs. Beaumont applaud
her!––– 
O how good, said she, are you all to me! What a
malady! A malady of the darkest hue! was mine, that
it could fill me with such apprehensions, as were able
to draw a cloud between your goodness and my gratitude; 

and make even your indulgence wear the
face of hardship to me. 
The Bishop thought it not advisable, that the Count,
who hardly knew how to trust himself with his own
joy, should be presently introduced to her. The
rejoicing Lover therefore, walked into the garden; 
giving way to his agreeable contemplations. 
Clementina, her mind filled with self-complacency
on the joyful reception her proposal had met with,
went into the garden, intending to take one of her
usual walks, Laura attending her. The Count saw
her enter, and fearing to disoblige her, if he broke
in upon her, in her retirements, profoundly bowed,
and took a different path. But she, crossing another
alley, was near him before he was aware. He started; 
but recovering, threw himself at her feet–––Life of
my hope! Adorable Lady Clementina! said he––– 
But could not at the moment speak another word. 
She relieved him from his confusion–––Rise, my
Lord, said she, I crossed to meet you, on purpose to
exchange a few words with you, as you happened
to be in the garden. 
I cannot, cannot rise, till, thus prostrate at your
feet, I have thanked you, madam, with my whole
soul––– 
No thanks are due, my Lord, interrupting him. 
God knows what may happen in the next twelve
months. Rise, my Lord. [He arose.] As a friend
of our house, I will respect you: So I have heretofore
told you: But for your own sake, for honour's,
for justice sake, I think it necessary to tell you, you
must not make an absolute dependance on me from
what I have written to my parents, tho' I repent not
of what I have written. 
I will not, madam: For one year, for many
years; I will await your pleasure. If at the end of
any limited period, after that you have named, I
cannot be so happy as to engage your favour, I will 

resign to my destiny–––Only, mean time, permit me
to hope. 
I mentioned, my Lord, that it was for your own
sake, that I wished you not to depend upon a contingency. 
Be you free to pursue your own measures. 
Who can say, what one, two, or three years may
produce? Maladies that have once seized the head,
generally, as I have heard say, keep their hold, or
often return. Have I not very lately, been guilty of
a great rashness? Believe me, Sir, if at the end of
the allowed year, I shall have reason to suspect myself,
I will suffer by myself. I ever thought you a worthy
man: God forbid that I should make a worthy man
unhappy. That would be to double my own misery. 
Generous Lady! exalted goodness! –––Permit me,
I once more beseech you but to hope. I will resign
to your pleasure whatever it shall finally be; and bless
you for your determination, tho' it should doom me
to despair. 
Remember, my Lord, you are warned. You depend
upon the regard all our house have for you. I
owe it duty next to implicit, for its unexampled indulgence
to me. Your reliance on its favour is not
a weak one: But, O Count, remember I caution you,
that your dependance on me, is not a strong one. Be
prudent: let me not be vexed. My heart sickens at
the thought of importunity. Opposition has its root in
importunity. If you are as happy as I wish, you will
be very happy. But at present I have no notion, that
I can ever contribute to make you so. 
He bent one knee, and was going to reply—Adieu,
adieu, said she–––Not another word, my Lord, if you
are wise. Are not events in the hand of Providence? 
She hurried from him. He was motionless for a
few moments: His heart, however, overflowed with
hope, love, and reverence. 
On his reporting to the Marchioness, Mrs. Beaumont,
the two Brothers, and me, what passed between 

the noble Lady and him, as above, we all
congratulated him. 
The warning Lady Clementina has given you, my
Lord, said Mrs. Beaumont, is of a piece with her
usual greatness of mind, since the event referred to,
is not, cannot be, in her own power. 
There is not, said Signor Jeronymo, there can be
but one woman greater than my sister–––It is she, who
can adopt as her dearest friend, a young creature of
her own Sex in calamity (circumstances so delicate!)
and for her sake, occasionally forget that she is the
wife of the best, and most beloved of men. 
Clementina, said the Bishop (the Count being
withdrawn) will now complete her triumph. She
has, upon religious motives, refused the man of her
inclination; the man deservedly beloved and admired
by all her friends, and by the whole world: And
now will she, from motives of duty, accept of another
worthy man; and thereby lay her parents themselves,
as well as the most disinterested of brothers,
under obligation to her. –––What a pleasure, madam,
(to the Marchioness) will it be to you, to my honoured
Lord, to my Uncle, and even to our Giacomo,
and still more to his excellent wife, to reflect
on the patience you have had with her, since
her last rash step, and the indulgence shewn her! 
Clementina now will be all our own. 
Every one praised Sir Charles, and attributed to
him the happy prospects before them. 

