


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Wednesday, July 4. 
Ah, my grandmamma! –––The poor Sir Hargrave!––– 
Sir Charles returned but this morning. He
found him sensible. He rejoiced to see him. He
instantly begged his prayers. He wrung his hands; 
wept; lamented his past free life. Fain, said he,
would I have been trusted with a few years trial of
my penitence. I have wearied heaven with my
prayers to this purpose. I deserved not perhaps that
they should be heard. My conscience cruelly told
me, that I had neglected a multitude of opportunities!
slighted a multitude of warnings! —O Sir Charles
Grandison! It is a hard, hard thing to die! In the
prime of youth too! –––Such noble possessions!––– 
And then he warned his surrounding friends, and
made comparisons between Sir Charles's happiness,
and his own misery. Sir Charles, at his request,
sat up with him all night: He endeavoured to administer
comfort to him; and called out for mercy
for him, when the poor man could only, by expressive
looks, join in the solemn invocation. Sir Hargrave
had begged he would close his eyes. He did. 
He staid to the last painful moment. Judge what 

such a heart as Sir Charles's must have felt on the
awful occasion! 
Poor Sir Hargrave Pollexfen! –––May he have met
with mercy from the All-merciful! 
He gave his will into Sir Charles's hands, soon
after he came down. He has made him his sole
executor. Have you not been told, that Sir Charles
had heretofore reconciled him to his relations and
heirs at Law? He had the pleasure of finding the
reconciliation sincere. The poor man spoke kindly
to them all. They were tenderly careful of him. 
He acknowleged their care. 
I cannot write for tears. –––The poor man, in the
last solemn act of his life, has been intendedly kind,
but really cruel, to me. –––I should have been a sincere
mourner for him (A life so mispent!) without this
act of regard for me–––He has left me, as a small
atonement, he calls it, for the terrors he once gave
me, a very large Legacy in money (Sir Charles has
not yet told me what) and his jewels and plate–––And
he has left Sir Charles a noble one besides. He died
immensely rich. Sir Charles is grieved at both Legacies:
And the more, as he cannot give them back
to the heirs; for they declare, that he bound them
under a solemn oath (and by a curse, if they broke it)
not to accept back either from Sir Charles, or me,
the large bequests he told them he had made us: And
they assured Sir Charles, that they would be religiously
bound by it. 
Many unhappy objects will be the better for these
bequests. Sir Charles tells me, that he will not interfere,
no, not so much as by his advice, in the disposal
of mine. You, madam, and my aunt Selby,
must direct me, when it comes into my hands. Sir
Charles intends, that the poor man's memory
shall receive true honour from the disposition of his
Legacy to him. He is pleased with his Harriet, for
the concern she expressed for this unhappy man. 

The most indulent of husbands finds out some
reason to praise her for every thing she says and
does. But could He be otherwise than the best of
Husbands, who was the most dutiful of Sons;
who is the most affectionate of Brothers; the
most faithful of Friends: Who is good upon
principle, in every relation of life? 
What, my dear grandmamma, is the boasted character
of most of those who are called Heroes, to
the un-ostentatious merit of a truly Good man? 
In what a variety of amiable lights does such a one
appear? In how many ways is he a blessing and a
joy to his fellow-creatures? 
And this blessing, this joy, your Harriet can call
more peculiarly her own! 
My single heart, methinks, is not big enough to
contain the gratitude which such a Lot demands. 
Let the overflowings of your pious joy, my dearest
grandmamma, join with my thankfulness in paying
part of the immense debt for 
Your undeservedly Happy
Harriet Grandison. 

