



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

We had at dinner, besides Miss Rawlins, a young
widow-niece of Mrs. Moore, who is come to
stay a month with her aunt—Bevis her name; very
forward, very lively, and a great admirer of me, I
assure you;—hanging smirkingly upon all I said; 
and prepared to approve of every word before I
spoke: And who, by the time we had half-dined (by
the help of what she had collected before), was as 

much acquainted with our story, as either of the other
two. 
As it behoved me to prepare them in my favour
against whatever might come from Miss Howe, I improved
upon the hint I had thrown out above-stairs
against that mischief-making Lady. I represented
her to be an arrogant creature, revengeful, artful,
enterprising, and one who, had she been a man,
would have sworn and curs'd, and committed rapes,
and play'd the devil, as far as I knew [and I have no
doubt of it, Jack]: but who, nevertheless, by advantage
of a female education, and pride, and insolence,
I believed was personally virtuous. 
Mrs. Bevis allowed, that there was a vast deal in
education—and in pride too, she said. While Miss
Rawlins came with a prudish God forbid, that virtue
should be owing to education only! However, I
declared, that Miss Howe was a subtle contriver of
mischief; one who had always been my enemy: her
motives I knew not: but, despising the man whom
her mother was desirous she should have, one Hickman; 
altho' I did not directly averr, that she would
rather have had me; yet they all immediately imagined,
that that was the ground of her animosity to me,
and of her envy to my beloved; and it was pity, they
said, that so fine a young Lady did not see thro' such
a pretended friend. 
And yet nobody (added I) has more reason than
she to know by experience the force of a hatred founded
in envy; as I hinted to you above, Mrs. Moore, and
to you, Miss Rawlins, in the case of her sister Arabella. 
I had compliments made to my person and talents
on this occasion; which gave me a singular opportunity
of displaying my modesty, by disclaiming the
merit of them, with a No, indeed! —I should be very
vain, Ladies, if I thought so. While thus abasing 

myself, and exalting Miss Howe, I got their opinion
both for modesty and generosity; and had all the
graces which I disclaimed, thrown in upon me, besides. 
In short, they even oppressed that modesty, which
(to speak modesty of myself) their praises created, by
disbelieving all I said against myself. 
And, truly, I must needs say, they have almost
persuaded even me myself, that Miss Howe is actually
in love with me. I have often been willing to
hope this. And who knows but she may? The Captain
and I have agreed, that it shall be so insinuated
occasionally—And what's thy opinion, Jack? She certainly
hates Hickman: And girls who are disengaged
seldom hate, tho' they may not love: And if she had
rather have another, why not that other ME? For
am I not a smart fellow, and a rake? And do not
your sprightly Ladies love your smart fellows, and
your rakes? And where is the wonder, that the man
who could engage the affections of Miss Harlowe,
should engage those of a Lady (with her (a)  Alas's)
who would be honoured in being deemed her second? 
Nor accuse thou me of SINGULAR vanity in this
presumption, Belford. Wert thou to know the secret
vanity that lurks in the hearts of those who disguise
or cloak it best, thou wouldst find great reason
to acquit, at least to allow for, me: since it is generally
the conscious over-fulness of conceit, that makes
the hypocrite most upon his guard to conceal it. — 
Yet with these fellows, proudly-humble as they are,
it will break out sometimes in spite of thier cloaks, tho'
but in self-denying, compliment-begging self-degradation. 
But now I have appealed this matter to thee, let 

me use another argument in favour of my observation,
that the Ladies generally prefer a rake to a sober
man; and of my presumption upon it, that Miss
Howe is in love with me: It is this: —Common fame
says, That Hickman is a very virtuous, a very innocent
fellow—a male-virgin, I warrant! —An odd dog I always
thought him. —Now women, Jack, like not
novices. They are pleased with a Love of the Sex
that is founded in the knowlege of it. Reason good. 
Novices expect more than they can possibly find in
the commerce with them. The man who knows
them, yet has ardors for them, to borrow a word
from Miss Howe (a) , tho' those ardors are generally
owing more to the devil within him, than to the witch
without him, is the man who makes them the highest
and most grateful compliment. He knows what to
expect, and with what to be satisfied. 
Then the merit of a woman, in some cases, must
be ignorance, whether real or pretended. The Man,
in these cases, must be an adept. Will it then be
wondered at, that a woman prefers a libertine to a
novice? —While she expects in the one the confidence
she wants; she considers the other and herself as two
parallel lines; which, tho' they run side by side, can
never meet. 
Yet in this the Sex is generally mistaken too; for
these sheepish fellows are sly. —I myself was modest
once; and this, as I have elsewhere hinted to thee
(b) , has better enabled me to judge of both. —But
to proceed with my narrative: 
Having thus prepared every-one against any letter
should come from Miss Howe, and against my beloved's
messenger returns, I thought it proper to conclude
that subject with a hint, that my spouse could
not bear to have any-thing said that reflected upon 

Miss Howe; and, with a deep sigh, added, that I
had been made very unhappy more than once by the
ill-will of Ladies, whom I had never offended. 
The widow Bevis believed, that might very easily
be. 
These hints within-doors, joined with others to
Will. both without and within (for I intend he shall
fall in love with widow Moore's maid, and have saved
one hundred pounds in my service, at least), will be
great helps, as things may happen. 