


O how this dear excellent Man indulges
me in every thing! Every Hour he makes
me happier, by his sweet Condescension, than
the former. 
He pities my Weakness of Mind, allows for
all my little Foibles, indeavours to dissipate my
Fears; his Words are so pure, his Ideas so chaste,
and his whole Behaviour so sweetly decent, that
never, surely, was so happy a Creature as your
Pamela! I never could have hoped such a Husband
could have fallen to my Lot! And much
less, that a Gentleman, who had allowed himself
in Attempts, that now I will indeavour to
forget for ever, should have behaved with so
very delicate and unexceptionable a Demeanour. 
No light, frothy Jests drop from his Lips; 
no alarming Railleries; no offensive Expressions,
nor insulting Airs, reproach or wound the Ears
of your happy, thrice happy Daughter. In short,
he says every thing that may imbolden me to
look up, with Pleasure, upon the generous
Author of my Happiness. 
At Breakfast, when I knew not how to see
him, he imbolden'd me by talking of you, my
dear Parents; a Subject, he generously knew, I
could talk of: And gave me Assurances, that he
would make you both happy. He said, he would
have me send you a Letter, to acquaint you with
my Nuptials; and, as he could make Business
that way, Thomas should carry it purposely, as 

To-morrow. Nor will I, said he, my dear
Pamela, desire to see your Writings, because I
told you I would not; for now I will, in every
thing, religiously keep my Word with my dear
Spouse (O the dear delightful Word!); and you
may send all your Papers to them from those
they have, down to this happy Moment; only
let me beg they will preserve them, and let me
have them when they have read them, as also
those I have not seen; which, however, I desire
not to see till then; but then shall take it for a
Favour, if you will grant it. 
It will be my Pleasure, as well as my Duty,
Sir, said I, to obey you in every thing. And
I will write up to the Conclusion of this Day,
that they may see how happy you have made me. 
I know you will both join with me to bless
God for his wonderful Mercies and Goodness
to you, as well as to me: For he was pleased to
ask me particularly after your Circumstances, and
said, he had taken notice, that I had hinted, in
some of my first Letters, that you ow'd Money in
the World; and he gave me Fifty Guineas, and
bid me send them to you in my Pacquet, to pay
your Debts, as far as they would go; and that
you would quit your present Business, and put
yourself, and my dear Mother, into a creditable
Appearance; and he would find a better
Place of Abode for you, than that you had, when
he return'd to Bedfordshire. O how shall I bear
all these exceeding great and generous Favours! 
—I send them, wrapt up, Five Guineas in a
Parcel, in double Papers. 

To me he gave no less than One hundred
Guineas more; and said, I would have you, my
Dear, give Mrs. Jewkes, when you go away
from hence, what you think fit, out of these, as
from yourself! —Nay, good, dear Sir, said I, let
that be what you please. Give her, then, said
he, Twenty Guineas, as a Compliment on your
Nuptials. Give Colbrand Ten Guineas: Give
the Two Coachmen Five Guineas each; to the
Two Maids at this House, Five Guineas each:
Give Abraham Five Guineas: Give Thomas Five
Guineas; and give the Gardeners, Grooms, and
Helpers, Twenty Guineas among them. And
when, added he, I return with you to the other
House, I will make you a suitable Present, to
buy you such Ornaments as are fit for my beloved
Wife to appear in. For now, my Pamela, continued
he, you are not to mind, as you once proposed,
what other Ladies will say; but to appear
as my Wife ought to do. Else it will look as if
what you thought of, as a Means to avoid the
Envy of others of your Sex, was a wilful Slight
in me, which, I hope, I never shall be guilty of; 
and I will shew the World, that I value you as I
ought, and as if I had marry'd the first Fortune
in the Kingdom: And why should it not be so,
when I know none of the first Quality that
matches you in Excellence? 
He saw I was at a Loss for Words, and said,
I see, my dearest Bride! my Spouse! my Wife
my Pamela! your grateful Confusion. And
kissing me, as I was going to speak, I will stop
your dear Mouth, said he: You shall not so 

much as thank me; for when I have done ten
times more than this, I shall but poorly express
my Love for so much Beauty of Mind, and Loveliness
of Person; which thus, said he, and clasped
me to his generous Bosom, I can proudly now
call my own! —O how, my dear Parents, can
I think of any thing, but redoubled Love, Joy,
and Gratitude! 
And thus generously did he banish from my
Mind those painful Reflections, and bashful Apprehensions,
that made me dread to see him for
the first Time this Day, when I was called to
attend him at Breakfast, and made me all Ease,
Composure and Tranquillity. 
He then, thinking I seem'd some what thoughtful,
proposed a little Turn in the Chariot till
Dinner-time: And this was another sweet Relief
to me; and he diverted me with twenty agreeable
Relations, of what Observations he had
made in his Travels; and gave me the Characters
of the Ladies and Gentlemen in his other Neighbourhood; 
telling me whose Acquaintance he
would have me most cultivate. And when I
mention'd Lady Davers with Apprehension, he
said, To be sure I love my Sister dearly, notwithstanding
her violent Spirit; and I know she
loves me; and I can allow a little for her Pride,
because I know what my own so lately was; and
because she knows not my Pamela, and her Excellencies,
as I do. But you must not, my Dear, forget
what belongs to your Character, as my Wife,
nor meanly stoop to her; tho' I know you will
chuse, by Softness, to try to move her to a proper 

Behaviour. But it shall be my Part-to see
that you do not yield too much. 
However, continued he, as I would not
publickly declare my Marriage here, I hope she
will not come near us till we are in Bedfordshire;
and then, when she knows we are marry'd, she
will keep away, if she is not willing to be reconcil'd; 
for she dares not, surely, come to quarrel
with me, when she knows it is done; for that
would have an hateful and wicked Appearance,
as if she would try to make Differences between
Man and Wife. —But we will have no more of
this Subject, nor talk of any thing, added he,
that shall give Concern to my Dearest. And so
he changed the Talk to a more pleasing Subject,
and said the kindest and most soothing things in
the World. 
When we came home, which was about
Dinner-time, he was the same obliging, kind
Gentleman: And, in short, is studious to shew,
on every Occasion, his generous Affection to
me: And, after Dinner, he told me, he had
already written to his Draper, in Town, to provide
him new Liveries: And to his late Mother's
Mercer, to send him down Patterns of the most
fashionable Silks, for my Choice. I told him,
I was unable to express my Gratitude for his
Favours and Generosity; and as he knew best
what befitted his own Rank and Condition, I
would wholly remit myself to his good Pleasure:
but, by all his repeated Bounties to me, of so
extraordinary a Nature, I could not but look forward
with Awe upon the Condition to which 

he had exalted me; and now I feared I should
hardly be able to act up to it in such a manner as
should justify the Choice he had condescended to
make: But that I hoped I should have not only
his generous Allowance for my Imperfections,
which I could only assure him should not be wilful
ones, but his kind Instructions; and that as
often as he observ'd any Part of my Conduct such
as he could not intirely approve, he would let
me know it; and I would think his Reproofs of
beginning Faults the kindest and most affectionate
things in the World; because they would
keep me from committing greater; and be
a Means to continue to me the Blessing of his
good Opinion. 
He answer'd me in the kindest manner; and
assured me, That nothing should ever lie upon
his Mind, which he would not reveal, and give
me an Opportunity either of convincing him, or
being convinced myself. 
He then asked me, When I should be willing
to go to the Bedfordshire House? I said, Whenever
he pleased. Said he, We will come down
hither again before the Winter, if you please,
in order to cultivate the Acquaintance you have
begun with Mrs. Jones, and Sir Simon's Family; 
and if it please God to spare us to one another,
in the Winter I will give you, as I promised,
for Two or Three Months, my Company in
London. And I think, added he, if my Dear
pleases, we will set out next Week, about Tuesday,
for the other House. I can have no Objection,
Sir, said I, to any thing you propose; 

but how will you avoid Miss Darnford's Solicitation
for an Evening to dance? Why, said
he, we can make Monday Evening to do for
that Purpose, if they won't excuse us. But, if
you please, said he, I will invite Mrs. Jones,
Mr. Peters and his Family, and Sir Simon and
his Family, to my little Chapel, on Sunday
Morning, and to stay Dinner with me; and
then I will declare my Marriage to them, because
my dear Life shall not leave this Country, with
the least Reason for a Possibility of any body's
doubting, that it is so. Oh! how good this was! 
But, indeed, his Conduct is all of a Piece, noble,
kind, and considerate! What an happy Creature
am I! —And then, may-be, said he, they will
excuse us till we return into this Country again,
as to the Ball. Is there any thing, added he,
that my beloved Pamela has still to wish? If
you have, freely speak. 
Hitherto, my dearest Sir, reply'd I, you
have not only prevented my Wishes, but my
Hopes, and even my Thoughts. And yet I
must own, since your kind Command of speaking
my Mind seems to shew, that you expect
from me, I should say something, that I have
only one or two things to wish more, and then
I shall be too happy. Say, said he, what they
are? Sir, proceeded I, I am, indeed, ashamed
to ask any thing, lest it should not be agreeable
to you; and lest it should look as if I was taking
Advantage of your kind Condescensions to me,
and knew not when to be satisfy'd. 

I will only tell you, Pamela, said he,
that you are not to imagine, that these things
which I have done, in hopes of obliging you,
are the sudden Impulses of a new Passion for you. 
But, if I can answer for my own Mind, they
proceed from a regular and uniform Desire of
obliging you; which, I hope, will last as long
as your Merit lasts; and that, I make no Doubt,
will be as long as I live. And I can the rather
answer for this, because I really find so much
Delight in myself in my present way of Thinking
and Acting, as infinitely overpays me; and
which, for that Reason, I am likely to continue
for both our sakes. My beloved Wife, therefore,
said he, (for, methinks I am grown fond
of a Name I once despised) may venture to speak
her Mind; and I will promise, that, so far as it
is agreeable to me, and I chearfully can, I will
comply; and you will not insist upon it, if that
should not be the Case. 
To be sure, Sir, said I, I ought not, neither
will I. And now you imbolden me to become
an humble Petitioner, and that, as I ought,
upon my Knees, for the reinstating such of your
Servants, as I have been the unhappy Occasion
of their disobliging you. He raised me up, and
said, My beloved Pamela has too often been in
this suppliant Posture to me, to permit it any
more. Rise, my Fairest, and let me know
whom, in particular, you would reinstate; and
he kindly held me in his Arms, and pressed me
to his beloved Bosom. Mrs. Jervis, Sir, said
said I, in the sirst place; for she is a good Woman; 

and the Misfortunes she has had in the
World, must make your Displeasure most heavy
to her. 
Well, said he, who next? Mr. Longman,
Sir, said I; and, I am sure, kind as they have
been to me, yet would I not ask it, if I could
not vouch for their Integrity, and if I did not
think it was my dear Master's Interest to have
such good Servants. 
Have you any thing further? said he. — 
Sir, said I, your good old Butler, who has so
long been in your Family, before the Day of
your happy Birth, I would, if I might, become
an Advocate for! 
Well, said he, I have only to say, That
had not Mr. Longman, and Mrs. Jervis, and
Jonathan too, joined in a Body, in a bold Appeal
to Lady Davers, which has given her the
insolent Handle she has taken to intermeddle in
my Affairs, I could easily have forgiven all the rest
of their Conduct; tho' they have given their
Tongues no little Licence about me: But I could
have forgiven them, because I desire every body
should admire you; and it is with Pride that I
observe not only their Opinion and Love, but
that of every body else that knows you, justify
my own. —But yet, I will forgive even this,
because my Pamela desires it; and I will send
a Letter myself, to tell Longman what he owes
to your Interposition, if the Estate he has made
in my Family, does not set him above the Acceptance
of it. And, as to Mrs. Jervis, do
you, my Dear, write a Letter to her, and give 

her your Commands, instantly, on the Receipt
of it, to go and take Possession of her former
Charge; for now, my dearest Girl, she will be
more immediately your Servant; and I know
you love her so well, that you'll go thither with
the more Pleasure to find her there. —But
don't think, added he, that all this Compliance
is to be for nothing. Ah! Sir, said I, tell me
but what I can do, poor as I am in Power, but
rich in Will; and I will not hesitate one Moment. 
Why then, said he, of your own Accord, reward
me for my chearful Compliance, with one sweet
Kiss. —I instantly said, Thus, then, dear Sir,
will I obey; and, Oh! you have the sweetest
and most generous way in the World, to make
that a Condition, which gives me double Honour,
and adds to my Obligations. And so I
clasped my Arms about his Neck, and was not
ashamed to kiss him once, and twice, and three
times, once for every forgiven Person. 
Now, my dearest Pamela, said he, what
other things have you to ask? Mr. Williams is
already taken care of; and, I hope, will be
happy. —Have you nothing to say for John
Arnold? 
Why, dear Sir, said I, you have seen the
poor Fellow's Penitence in my Letters. —Yes,
my Dear, so I have; but that is his Penitence
for his having serv'd me, against you; and, I
think, when he would have betray'd me afterwards,
he deserves nothing to be said or done
for him by either. 

But, dear Sir, said I, this is a Day of Jubilee; 
and the less he deserves, poor Fellow,
the more will be your Goodness. And let me
add one Word; That as he was divided in his
Inclinations between his Duty to you, and
good Wishes to me, and knew not how to
distinguish between the one and the other,
when he finds us so happily united by your
great Goodness to me, he will have no more
Puzzles in his Duty; for he has not fail'd in
any other Part of it; but, I hope, will serve
you faithfully for the future. 
Well, then, suppose I put Mrs. Jewkes
in a good way of Business, in some Inn, and
give her John for a Husband? And then your
Gypsey-story will be made out, that she will
have a Husband younger than herself. 
You are all Goodness, Sir, said I. I can
freely forgive poor Mrs. Jewkes, and wish her
happy. But permit me, Sir, to ask, Would
not this look like a very heavy Punishment to
poor John? —And as if you could not forgive
him, when you are so generous to every
body else? 
He smil'd and said, O my Pamela, this, for
a forgiving Spirit, is very severe upon poor
Jewkes: But I shall never, by the Grace of
God, have any more such trying Services, to
put him or the rest upon; and if you can forgive
him, I think I may; and so John shall be
at your Disposal. And now let me know,
what my Pamela has further to wish? 

O my dearest Sir, said I, not one single
Wish more has your grateful Pamela. My
Heart is overwhelm'd with your Goodness! Forgive
these Tears of Joy! added I: You have
lest me nothing to pray for, but that God will
bless you with Life, and Health, and Honour,
and continue to me the Blessing of your Esteem; 
and I shall then be the happiest Creature in the
World. 
He clasp'd me in his Arms, and said, You
cannot, my dear Life, be so happy in me, as I
am in you. O how heartily I despise all my
former Pursuits, and head-strong Appetites! 
What Joys, what true Joys! flow from
virtuous Love! Joys which the narrow Soul
of the Libertine cannot take in, nor his
Thought conceive! —And which I myself,
whilst a Libertine, had not the least Notion
of! 
But, said he, I expected, my dear Spouse,
my Pamela, had something to ask for herself:
But since all her own Good is absorbed in the
Delight her generous Heart takes in promoting
that of others, it shall be my Study to prevent
her Wishes, and to make her Care for herself
unnecessary, by my anticipating Kindness. 
In this manner, my dear Parents, is your
happy Daughter blessed in a Husband! O how
my exulting Heart leaps at the dear, dear Word! 
—And I have nothing to do, but to be humble,
and to look up with Gratitude to the all-gracious
Dispenser of these Blessings! 

So, with a Thousand Thanks, I afterwards
retired to my Closet, to write you thus far. 
And having completed what I purpose for this
Pacquet, and put up the kind, obliging
Present, I have nothing more to say, but that
I hope soon to see you both, and receive your
Blessings on this happy, thrice happy Occasion. 
And so, hoping for your Prayers, that I may
preserve an humble and upright Mind to my
gracious God, a dutiful Gratitude to my dear
Master and Husband,—that I may long rejoice
in the Continuance of these Blessings and
Favours, and that I may preserve, at the same
time, an obliging Deportment to every one
else, I conclude myself, 
Your ever dutiful, and
most happy Daughter,
Pamela B&wblank; 
O think it not my Pride, my dear Parents,
that sets me on glorying in my Change of
Name. Yours will be always dear to me,
and what I shall never be ashamed of, I
am sure! But yet—for such a Husband! 
—What shall I say, since Words are too
faint to express my Gratitude and my Joy? 
I have taken Copies of my Master's Letter to
Mr. Longman, and mine to Mrs. Jervis,
which I will send with the further Occurrences,
when I go to the other dear House, 

or give you, when I see you, as I now
hope soon to do. 
