



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Friday Morn. April 21. 
My Mother will not comply with your condition,
my dear. I hinted it to her, as from myself. 
But the Harlowes (excuse me) have got her entirely in
with them. It is a scheme of mine, she told me,
formed to draw her into your party against your parents. 
Which, for her own sake, she is very careful about. 
Don't be so much concerned about my Mother and
me, once more, I beg of you. We shall do well
enough together—Now a falling-out, now a falling-in. 
It used to be so, when you were not in the question. 
Yet do I give you my sincere thanks for every line
of your reprehensive Letters; which I intend to read as
often as I find my temper rises. 
I will freely own however, that I winced a little at
first reading them. But I see, that on every re-perusal,
I shall love and honour you still more, if possible, than
before. 
Yet, I think, I have one advantage over you; and
which I will hold thro' this Letter, and thro' all my
future Letters; that is, that I will treat you as freely
as you treat me; and yet will never think an apology
necessary to you for my freedom. 
But that you so think with respect to me, is the effect
of your gentleness of temper, with a little sketch of
implied reflection on the warmth of mine. Gentleness
in a woman you hold to be no fault: Nor do I, a little
due or provoked warmth—But what is this, but praising,
on both sides, what neither on us can help; nor perhaps
wish to help? You can no more go out of your road,
than I can go out of mine. It would be a pain to either 

to do so: —What then is it in either's approving of her
own natural byass, but making a virtue of necessity? 
But one observation I will add, that were your
character, and my character, to be truly drawn, mine
would be allowed to be the most natural. Shades and
Lights are equally necessary in a fine picture. Yours
would be surrounded with such a flood of brightness,
with such a glory, that it would indeed dazle; but
leave one heartless to imitate it. 
O may you not suffer from a base world for your
gentleness; while my temper, by its warmth, keeping
all imposition at distance, tho' less amiable in general,
affords me not reason, as I have mentioned heretofore,
to wish to make an exchange with you! 
I should indeed be inexcuseable to open my lips by
way of contradiction to my mother, had I such a fine
spirit as yours to deal with. Truth is truth, my dear! 
Why should narrowness run away with the praises due
to a noble expansion of heart? If every-body would
speak out, as I do (that is to say, give praise where only
praise is due; dispraise where due likewise) Shame, if
not Principle, would mend the world—Nay, Shame
would introduce Principle in a generation or two. Very
true, my dear. Do you apply. I dare not. —For I
fear you, almost as much as I love you. 
I will give you an instance, nevertheless, which will
anew demonstrate, that none but very generous and
noble-minded people ought to be implicitly obeyed. 
You know what I said above, that truth is truth. 
Inconveniencies will sometimes arise from having to
do with persons of modesty and scrupulousness. Mr.
Hickman, you say, is a modest man. He put your corrective
packet into my hand with a very fine bow,
and a self-satisfied air [We'll consider what you say of
this honest man by-and-by, my dear]: His Strut was not
gone off, when in came my Mother, as I was reading
it. 
When some folks find their anger has made them 

considerable, they will be always angry, or seeking occasions
for anger. 
Why, now, Mr. Hickman—Why, now, Nancy
[as I was huddling in the packet between my Gown
and my Stays at her entrance]. You have a Letter
brought you this instant. —While the modest man, with
his pausing brayings, Mad-da—Mad-dam, looked as if
he knew not whether he had best to run, and leave me
and my Mother to fight it out, or to stand his ground,
and see fair play. 
It would have been poor to tell a lye for it. She
flung away. I went out at the opposite door, to read
the contents; leaving Mr. Hickman to exercise his
white teeth upon his thumb-nails. 
When I had read your Letters, I went to find out
my Mother. I told her the generous contents, and
that you desired, that the prohibition might be adhered
to. I proposed your condition, as from myself; and
was rejected, as above. 
She supposed, ‘She was finely painted between two
young creatures, who had more wit than prudence:’ 
And instead of being prevailed upon by the generosity
of your sentiments, made use of your opinion only to
confirm her own, and renewed her prohibitions,
charging me to return no other answer, but that she
did renew them: Adding, that they should stand, till
your Relations were reconciled to you; hinting, as if
she had engaged for as much; and expected my compliance. 
I thought of your reprehensions, and was meek, tho'
not pleased. And let me tell you, my dear, that as
long as I can satisfy my own mind, that Good is intended,
and that it is hardly possible that Evil should
ensue from our correspondence—As long as I know,
that this prohibition proceeds originally from the same
spiteful minds which have been the occasion of all these
mischiefs—As long as I know, that it is not your fault
if your Relations are not reconciled to you; and that 

upon conditions which no reasonable people would refuse
—You must give me leave, with all deference to
your judgment, and to your excellent lessons (which
would reach almost every case of this kind but the present)
to insist upon your writing to me, and that minutely,
as if this prohibition had not been laid. 
It is not from Humour, from Perverseness, that I
insist upon this. I cannot express how much my heart
is in your concerns. And you must, in short, allow
me to think, that if I can do you service by writing,
I shall be better justified in continuing to write, than
my Mother is in her prohibition. 
But yet, to satisfy you all I can, I will as seldom
return answers, which the Interdict lasts, as may be
consistent with my notions of friendship, and with the
service I owe you, and can do you. 
As to your expedient of writing by Hickman [And
now, my dear, your modest man comes in: And as you
love Modesty in that Sex, I will do my endeavour, by
holding him at a proper distance, to keep him in your
favour] I know what you mean by it, my sweet friend. 
It is to make that man significant with me. As to the
correspondence, That shall go on, I do assure you,
be as scrupulous as you please—So that that will not
suffer if I do not close with your proposal as to him. 
I must tell you, that I think it will be honour
enough for him to have his name made use of so
frequently betwixt us. This, of itself, is placing a confidence
in him, that will make him walk bolt upright,
and display his white hand, and his fine diamond ring; 
and most mightily lay down his Services, and his
Pride to oblige, and his Diligence, and his Fidelity,
and his Contrivances to keep our Secret, and his Excuses,
and his Evasions to my Mother, when challenged
by her; with fifty and's beside: And will it not moreover
give him pretence and excuse oftener than ever to
pad-nag it hither to good Mrs. Howe's fair Daughter? 
But to admit him into my company tête-à-tête, and 

into my closet, as often as I would wish to write to
you; I only to dictate to his pen—my Mother all the
time supposing that I was going to be heartily in love
with him—To make him master of my sentiments,
and of my heart, as I may say, when I write to you
—Indeed, my dear, I won't. Nor, were I married
to the best HE in England, would I honour him with
the communication of my correspondencies. 
No, my dear; it is sufficient, surely, for him to
parade it in the character of our Letter-conveyer, and
to be honoured in a Cover. And never fear but, modest
as you think him, he will make enough of that. 
You are always blaming me for want of generosity
to this man, and for abuse of power. But I profess,
my dear, I cannot tell how to help it. Do, dear now,
let me spread my plumes a little, and now-and-then
make myself feared. This is my Time, you know,
since it will be no more to my credit, than to his, to
give myself those airs when I am married. He has a
joy when I am pleased with him, that he would not
know, but for the pain my displeasure gives him. 
Men, no more than women, know how to make a
moderate use of power. Is not that seen every day,
from the Prince to the Peasant? If I do not make Hickman
quake now-and-then, he will endeavour to make
me fear. All the animals in the creation are more or
less in a state of hostility with each other. The Wolf,
that runs away from a Lion, will devour a Lamb the
next moment. I remember, that I was once so enraged
at a game-chicken that was continually pecking
at another (a poor humble one, as I thought him) that
I had the offender caught, and without more ado, in a
Pet of Humanity, wrung his neck off. What followed
this execution? Why that other grew insolent, as soon
as his insulter was gone, and was continually pecking
at one or two under him. Peck and be hanged, said I
—I might as well have preserved the first; for I see it
is the nature of the beast. 

Excuse my flippancies. I wish I were with you. I
would make you smile in the midst of your gravest airs,
as I used to do. O that you had accepted of my offer
to attend you! But nothing that I offer, will you accept
—Take care! —You will make me very angry with
you: And when I am, you know I value no-body: 
For, dearly as I love you, I must be, and cannot always
help it, 
Your saucy
Anna Howe. 