


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett.
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


Grandison-Hall, Friday Night, March 31. 
I Arrived at Sir Harry Beauchamp's about twelve this
day. He and his Lady expected me, from the
letter which I wrote and shewed you before I left the
town; in which, you know, I acquainted Sir Harry
with his son's earnest desire to throw himself at his
feet, and to pay his duty to his mother, in England; 
and engaged to call myself, either this day or to-morrow,
for an answer. 
Sir Harry received me with great civility, and even
affection. Lady Beauchamp, said he, will be with
us in a moment. I am afraid you will not meet with
all the civility from her on the errand you are come
upon, that a man of Sir Charles Grandison's character
deserves to meet with from all the world. We have
been unhappy together, ever since we had your Letter. 
I long to see my son: Your friendship for him establishes
him in my heart. But—And then he cursed
the apron-string tenure, by which, he said, he held
his peace. 
You will allow me, Sir Harry, said I, to address
myself in my own way to my lady. You give me
pleasure, in letting me know, that the difficulty is not
with you. You have indeed, Sir, one of the most
prudent young men in the world for your son. His
heart is in your hand: You may form it as you
please. 
She is coming! She is coming! interrupted he. 
We are all in pieces: We were in the midst of a
feud, when you arrived. If she is not civil to you— 
In swam the lady; her complexion raised; displeasure
in her looks to me, and indignation in her air to Sir 

Harry; as if they had not had their contention out,
and she was ready to renew it. 
With as obliging an air as I could assume, I paid
my compliments to her. She received them with great
stiffness; swelling at Sir Harry: Who sidled to the
door, in a moody and sullen manner, and then slipt
out. 
You are Sir Charles Grandison, I suppose, Sir, said
she: I never saw you before: I have heard much talk
of you. —But, pray, Sir, are good men always officious
men? Cannot they perform the obligations of
friendship, without discomposing families? 
You see me now, madam, in an evil moment, if
you are displeased with me: But I am not used to the
displeasure of ladies: I do my utmost not to deserve
it; and, let me tell you, madam, that I will not suffer
you to be displeased with me. 
I took her half-reluctant hand, and led her to a chair,
and seated myself in another near her. 
I see, Sir, you have your arts. 
She took the fire-screen, that hung by the side of
the chimney, and held it before her face, now glancing
at me, now turning away her eye, as resolved to be
displeased. 
You come upon a hateful errand, Sir: I have been
unhappy ever since your officious Letter came. 
I am sorry for it, madam. While you are warm
with the remembrance of a past misunderstanding, I
will not offer to reason with you: But let me, madam,
see less discomposure in your looks. I want to
take my impressions of you from more placid features:
I am a painter, madam: I love to draw lady's pictures. 
Will you have this pass for a first sitting? 
She knew not what to do with her anger: She was
loth to part with it. 
You are impertinent, Sir Charles—Excuse me— 
You are impertinent— 
I do excuse you, Lady Beauchamp: And the rather, 

as I am sure you do not think me so. Your freedom
is a mark of your favour; and I thank you for it. 
You treat me as a child, Sir— 
I treat all angry people as children: I love to humour
them. Indeed, Lady Beauchamp, you must
not be angry with me. Can I be mistaken? Don't I
see in your aspect the woman of sense and reason? —I
never blame a lady for her humoursomeness so much,
as in my mind, I blame her mother. 
Sir! said she. I smiled. She bit her lip, to avoid
returning a smile. 
Her character, my dear friend, is not, you know,
that of an ill-temper'd woman, tho' haughty, and a
lover of power. 
I have heard much of you, Sir Charles Grandison:
But I am quite mistaken in you: I expected to see a
grave formal young man, his prim mouth set in plaits:
But you are a joker; and a free man; a very free man,
I do assure you. 
I would be thought decently free, madam; but not
impertinent. I see with pleasure a returning smile. 
O that ladies knew how much smiles become their
features! —Very few causes can justify a woman's anger
—Your sex, madam, was given to delight, not to
torment us. 
Torment you, Sir! —Pray, has Sir Harry— 
Sir Harry cannot look pleased, when his Lady is
dis-pleased: I saw that you were, madam, the moment
I beheld you. I hope I am not an unwelcome
visitor to Sir Harry for one hour (I intend to stay no
longer) that he received me with so disturbed a countenance,
and has now withdrawn himself, as if to
avoid me. 
To tell you the truth, Sir Harry and I have had a
dispute: But he always speaks of Sir Charles Grandison
with pleasure. 
Is he not offended with me, madam, for the contents
of the Letter— 

No, Sir, and I suppose you hardly think he is— 
But I am— 
Dear madam, let me beg your interest in favour of
the contents of it. 
She took fire—rose up— 
I besought her patience—Why should you wish to
keep abroad a young man, who is a credit to his family,
and who ought to be, if he is not, the joy of
his father? Let him owe to your generosity, madam,
that recall, which he sollicits: It will become your
character: He cannot be always kept abroad: Be it
your own generous work— 
What, Sir—Pray, Sir—With an angry brow— 
You must not be angry with me, madam—(I took
her hand)—You can't be angry in earnest— 
Sir Charles Grandison—You are—She withdrew her
hand; You are, repeated she—and seemed ready to
call names— 
I am the Grandison you call me; and I honour the
maternal character. You must permit me to honour
you, madam. 
I wonder, Sir— 
I will not be denied. The world reports misunderstandings
between you and Mr. Beauchamp. That
busy world that will be meddling, knows your power,
and his dependence. You must not let it charge you
with an ill use of that power: If you do, you will
have its blame, when you might have its praise: He
will have its pity. 
What, Sir, do you think your fine Letters, and
smooth words, will avail in favour of a young fellow
who has treated me with disrespect? 
You are misinformed, madam. —I am willing to
have a greater dependence upon your justice, upon
your good-nature, than upon any-thing I can urge either
by letter or speech. Don't let it be said, that
you are not to be prevailed on—A woman not to be 

prevailed on to join in an act of justice, of kindness; 
for the honour of the sex, let it not be said. 
Honour of the sex, Sir! —Fine talking! —Don't I
know, that were I to consent to his coming over, the
first thing would be to have his annuity augmented
out of my fortune? He and his father would be in a
party against me. Am I not already a sufferer thro'
him in his father's love? —You don't know, Sir, what
has passed between Sir Harry and me within this half-hour
—But don't talk to me: I won't hear of it: The
young man hates me: I hate him: And ever will. 
She made a motion to go. 
With a respectful air, I told her, she must not
leave me. My motive deserved not, I said, that both
she and Sir Harry should leave me in displeasure. 
You know but too well, resumed she, how acceptable
your officiousness (I must call it so) is to Sir
Harry. 
And does Sir Harry, madam, favour his son's suit? 
You rejoice me: Let not Mr. Beauchamp know that
he does: And do you, my dear Lady Beauchamp,
take the whole merit of it to yourself. How will he
revere you for your goodness to him! And what an
obligation, if, as you say, Sir Harry is inclined to favour
him, will you, by your generous first motion,
lay upon Sir Harry? 
Obligation upon Sir Harry! Yes, Sir Charles Grandison,
I have laid too many obligations already upon
him, for his gratitude. 
Lay this one more. You own you have had a misunderstanding
this morning: Sir Harry is withdrawn,
I suppose, with his heart full: Let me, I beseech you,
make up the misunderstanding. I have been happy in
this way—Thus we will order it—We will desire him
to walk in. I will beg your interest with him in
favour of the contents of the letter I sent. His
compliance will follow as an act of obligingness to
you. The grace of the action will be yours. I will 

be answerable for Mr. Beauchamp's gratitude. —Dear
madam, hesitate not. The young gentleman must
come over one day: Let the favour of its being an
early one, be owing entirely to you. 
You are a strange man, Sir: I don't like you at
all: You would persuade me out of my reason. 
Let us, madam, as Mr. Beauchamp and I are already
the dearest of friends, begin a family understanding
Let St. James's Square, and Berkley Square,
when you come to town, be a next-door neighbourhood. 
Give me the consideration of being the bondsman
for the duty of Mr. Beauchamp to you, as well
as to his father. 
She was silent: But looked vexed and irresolute. 
My sisters, madam, are amiable women. You will
be pleased with them. Lord L. is a man worthy of
Sir Harry's acquaintance. We shall want nothing, if
you would think so, but Mr. Beauchamp's presence
among us. 
What! I suppose you design your maiden sister for
the young fellow—But if you do, Sir, you must ask
me for—There she stopt. 
Indeed I do not. He is not at present disposed to
marry. He never will without his father's approbation,
and let me say—yours. My sister is addressed
to by Lord G. and I hope will soon be married to him. 
And do you say so, Sir Charles Grandison? —Why
then you are a more disinterested man, than I thought
you in this application to Sir Harry. I had no doubt
but the young fellow was to be brought over to marry
Miss Grandison; and that he was to be made worthy
of her at my expence. 
She enjoyed, as it seemed, by her manner of pronouncing
the words young fellow, that designed contempt,
which was a tacit confession of the consequence
he once was of to her. 
I do assure you, madam, that I know not his heart,
if he has at present any thoughts of marriage. 

She seemed pleased at this assurance. 
I repeated my wishes, that she would take to herself
the merit of allowing Mr. Beauchamp to return
to his native country: And that she would let me see
her hand in Sir Harry's, before I left them. 
And pray, Sir, as to his place of residence, were he
to come: Do you think he should live under the same
roof with me? 
You shall govern that point, madam, as you approve
or disapprove of his behaviour to you. 
His behaviour to me, Sir! —One house cannot,
shall not, hold him and me. 
I think, madam, that you should direct in this article. 
I hope, after a little while, so to order my affairs,
as constantly to reside in England. I should
think myself very happy if I could prevail upon Mr.
Beauchamp to live with me. 
But I must see him, I suppose? 
Not, madam, unless you shall think it right, for
the sake of the world's opinion, that you should. 
I can't consent— 
You can, madam! You do! —I cannot allow Lady
Beauchamp to be one of those women, who having
insisted upon a wrong point, can be convinced, yet
not know how to recede with a grace. —Be so kind to
yourself, as to let Sir Harry know, that you think it
right for Mr. Beauchamp to return; but that it must
be upon your own conditions: Then, madam, make
those conditions generous ones; and how will Sir
Harry adore you! How will Mr. Beauchamp revere
you! How shall I esteem you! 
What a strange impertinent have I before me! 
I love to be called names by a lady. If undeservedly,
she lays herself by them under obligation to me,
which she cannot be generous if she resolves not to
repay. Shall I endeavour to find out Sir Harry? Or
will you, madam? 

Was you ever, Sir Charles Grandison, denied by
any woman to whom you sued for favour? 
I think, madam, I hardly ever was: But it was
because I never sued for a favour, that it was not for
a lady's honour to grant. This is the case now; and
this makes me determine, that I will not be denied
the grant of my present request. Come, come, madam! 
How can a woman of your ladyship's good
sense (taking her hand, and leading her to the door)
seem to want to be persuaded to do a thing she knows
in her heart to be right! Let us find Sir Harry. 
Strange man! —Unhand me—He has used me unkindly— 
Overcome him then by your generosity. But, dear
Lady Beauchamp, taking both her hands, and smiling
confidently in her face [I could, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
do so to Lady Beauchamp] will you make me believe,
that a woman of your spirit (you have a charming
spirit, Lady Beauchamp] did not give Sir Harry as
much reason to complain, as he gave you? —I am sure
by his disturbed countenance— 
Now, Sir Charles Grandison, you are downright
affronting. Unhand me!— 
This misunderstanding is owing to my officious letter. 
I should have waited on you in person. I should
from the first have put it in your power, to do a graceful
and obliging thing. I ask your pardon. I am not
used to make differences between man and wife. 
I touched first one hand, then the other, of the perverse
baby with my lips—Now am I forgiven: Now
is my friend Beauchamp permitted to return to his native
country: Now are Sir Harry and his Lady reconci'ed
—Come, come, madam, it must be so—What
foolish things are the quarrels of married people! — 
They must come to an agreement again; and the
sooner the better; before hard blows are struck, that
will leave marks—Let us, dear madam, find out
Sir Harry— 

And then with an air of vivacity, that women,
whether in courtship or out of it, dislike not, I was
leading her once more to the door, and, as I intended,
to Sir Harry, where-ever he could be found. 
Hold, hold, Sir, resisting; but with features far
more placid than she had suffered to be before visible— 
If I must be compelled—You are a strange man, Sir
Charles Grandison—If I must be compelled to see Sir
Harry—But you are a strange man—And she rang the
bell. 
Lady Beauchamp, Dr. Bartlett, is one of those
who would be more ready to forgive an innocent freedom,
than to be gratified by a profound respect; 
otherwise I had not treated her with so little ceremony. 
Such women are formidable only to those
who are afraid of their anger, or who make it a serious
thing. 
But when the servant appeared, she not knowing
how to condescend, I said, Go to your master, Sir,
and tell him that your Lady requests the favour— 
Requests the favour! repeated she; but in a low
voice: Which was no bad sign. 
The servant went with a message worded with more
civility than perhaps he was used to carry to his
master from his lady. 
Now, dear Lady Beauchamp, for your own sake; 
for Sir Harry's sake; make happy; and be happy. 
Are there not, dear madam, unhappinesses enow in
life, that we must wilfully add to them? 
Sir Harry came in sight. He stalked towards us
with a parade like that of a young officer wanting to
look martial at the head of his company. 
Could I have seen him before he enter'd, my work
would have been easier. But his hostile air dispos'd
my Lady to renew hostilities. 
She turned her face aside, then her person; and
the cloudy indignation with which she enter'd at
first, again overspread her features. Ought wrath, Dr. 

Bartlett, to be so ready to attend a female will? — 
Surely, thought I, my Lady's present airs, after what
has passed between her and me, can be only owing to
the fear of making a precedent, and being thought
too easily persuaded. 
Sir Harry, said I, addressing myself to him, I have
obtained Lady Beauchamp's pardon for the officious
Letter— 
Pardon, Sir Charles Grandison! You are a good
man, and it was kindly intended— 
He was going on: Anger from his eyes flashed upon
his cheek-bones, and made them shine. My Lady's
eyes struck fire at Sir Harry, and shewed that she
was not afraid of him. 
Better intended, than done, interrupted I, since
my Lady tells me, that it was the occasion of a misunderstanding
—But, Sir, all will be right: My Lady
assures me, that you are not disinclined to comply with
the contents; and she has the goodness— 
Pray, Sir Charles, interrupted the Lady— 
To give me hopes that she— 
Pray, Sir Charles— 
Will use her interest to confirm you in your favourable
sentiments— 
Sir Harry cleared up at once—May I hope, madam
—And offer'd to take her hand. 
She withdrew it with an air. O Dr. Bartlett, I
must have been thought an unpolite husband, had she
been my wife! 
I took her hand. Excuse this freedom, Sir Harry— 
For heaven's sake, madam, whispering, Do what I
know you will do, with a grace—Shall there be a
misunderstanding, and the husband court a refused
hand? —I then forced her half-unwilling hand into his,
with an air that I intended should have both freedom
and respect in it. 
What a man have we got here, Sir Harry? This
cannot be the modest man, that you have praised to 

me—I thought a good man must of necessity be bashful,
if not sheepish: And here your visitor is the boldest
man in England. 
The righteous, Lady Beauchamp, said Sir Harry,
with an aspect but half-conceding, is bold as a lion. 
And must I be compelled thus, and by such a man,
to forgive you, Sir Harry? —Indeed you were very unkind. 
And you, Lady Beauchamp, were very cruel. 
I did not think, Sir, when I laid my fortune at
your feet— 
O Lady Beauchamp! You said cutting things! 
Very cutting things. 
And did not you, Sir Harry, say, It should be so? — 
So very peremptorily! 
Not, madam, till you, as peremptorily— 
A little recrimination, thought I, there must be, to
keep each in countenance on their past folly. 
Ah, Sir Charles! —You may rejoice that you are
not married, said Sir Harry. 
Dear Sir Harry, said I, we must bear with Ladies. 
They are meek good creatures—They— 
Meek! Sir Charles, repeated Sir Harry, with an
half-angry smile, and shrugging, as if his shoulder
had been hurt with his wife's meekness—I say, meek! 
Now, Sir Charles Grandison, said my Lady, with
an air of threatening— 
I was desirous either of turning the Lady's displeasure
into a jest, or of diverting it from the first object,
in order to make her play with it, till she had lost
it. 
Women are of gentle natures, pursued I; and, being
accustomed to be humoured, opposition sits not
easy upon them. Are they not kind to us, Sir Harry,
when they allow of our superiority, by expecting us
to bear with their pretty perversenesses? 
O Sir Charles Grandison! said my Lady; both her
hands lifted up. 

Let us be contented, proceeded I, with such their
kind acknowlegements, and in pity to them, and in
compliment to ourselves, bear with their foibles. — 
See, madam, I ever was an advocate for the Ladies. 
Sir Charles, I have no patience with you— 
What can a poor woman do, continued I, when
opposed? She can only be a little violent in words,
and when she has said as much as she chooses to say,
be perhaps a little sullen. For my part, were I so
happy as to call a woman mine, and she happened to
be in the wrong, I would endeavour to be in the
right; and trust to her good sense to recover her temper:
Arguments only beget arguments. —Those reconciliations
are the most durable, in which the Lady
makes the advances. 
What doctrine is this, Sir Charles? You are not
the man I took you for. —I believe, in my conscience,
that you are not near so good a man, as the world reports
you. 
What, madam, because I pretend to know a little of
the sex? Surely, Lady Beauchamp, a man of common
penetration may see to the bottom of a woman's heart. 
A cunning woman cannot hide it. A good woman
will not. You are not, madam, such Mysteries,
as some of us think you. Whenever you know your
own minds, we need not be long doubtful: That is
all the difficulty: And I will vindicate you, as to
that— 
As how, pray, Sir?— 
Women, madam, were designed to be dependent,
as well as gentle, creatures; and of consequence when
left to their own wills, they know not what to resolve
upon. 
I was hoping, Sir Charles, just now, that you would
slay to dinner: But if you talk at this rate, I believe I
shall be ready to wish you out of the house. 
Sir Harry looked as if he were half-willing to be
diverted at what passed between his lady and me. 

It was better for me to say what he could not but subscribe
to by his feeling, than for him to say it. Tho'
reproof seldom amends a determined spirit, such a
one as this lady's; yet a man who suffers by it cannot
but have some joy when he hears his sentiments spoken
by a bystander. This freedom of mine seemed to save
the married pair a good deal of recrimination. 
You remind me, madam, that I must be gone,
rising and looking at my watch. 
You must not leave us, Sir Charles, said Sir Harry. 
I beg excuse, Sir Harry—Yours, also, madam,
smiling—Lady Beauchamp must not twice wish me
out of the house. 
I will not excuse you, Sir, reply'd she—If you have
a desire to see the matter completed—She stopt—You
must stay to dinner, be that as it will. 
“Be that as it will,” madam! —You shall not recede. 
Recede! I have not yet complied— 
O these women! They are so used to courtship,
that they know not how to do right things without
it—And, pardon me, madam, not always with it. 
Bold man—Have I consented— 
Have you not, madam, given a Lady's consent. 
That we men expect not to be very explicit, very
gracious. —It is from such non-negative consents, that
we men make silence answer all we wish. 
I leave Sir Charles Grandison to manage this point,
said Sir Harry. In my conscience, I think the common
observation just; A stander-by sees more of the
game, than he that plays. 
It ever will be so, Sir Harry—But I will tell you,
My Lady and I have as good as agreed the matter— 
I have agreed to nothing, Sir Harry— 
Hush, madam—I am doing you credit. —Lady
Beauchamp speaks aside sometimes, Sir Harry: You
are not to hear any-thing she says, that you don't
like. 

Then I am afraid I must stop my ears for eight
hours out of twelve. 
That was aside, Lady Beauchamp—You are not to
hear that. 
To sit, like a fool, and hear myself abused—A
pretty figure I make! Sir Charles Grandison, let me
tell you, that you are the first man that ever treated
me like a fool. 
Excuse, madam, a little innocent raillery—I met
you both, with a discomposure on your countenances. 
I was the occasion of it, by the letter I sent to Sir
Harry. I will not leave you discomposed. I think
you a woman of sense; and my request is of such a
nature, that the granting of it will confirm to me,
that you are so—But you have granted it— 
I have not. 
That's charmingly said—My Lady will not undervalue
the compliment she is inclined to make you, Sir
Harry. The moment you ask for her compliance, she
will not refuse to your affection, what she makes a
difficulty to grant, to the entreaty of an almost stranger. 
Let it, let it be so! Lady Beauchamp, said Sir
Harry: And he clasped his arms about her as she
sat— 
There never was such a man as this Sir Charles
Grandison in the world! —It is a contrivance between
you, Sir Harry— 
Dear Lady Beauchamp, resumed I, depreciate not
your compliment to Sir Harry. There wanted not
contrivance, I dare to hope (if there did, it had it not)
to induce Lady Beauchamp to do a right, a kind, an
obliging thing. 
Let me, my dearest Lady Beauchamp, said Sir
Harry;—Let me request— 
At your request, Sir Harry—But not at Sir Charles's. 
This is noble, said I. I thank you, madam, for
the absent youth. Both husband and son will think
themselves favoured by you; and the more, as I am 

sure, that you will by the chearful welcome, which
you will give the young man, shew, that it is a sincere
compliment that you have made to Sir Harry. 
This man has a strange way of flattering one into
acts of—of—what shall I call them? —But, Sir Harry,
Mr. Beauchamp must not, I believe, live with us— 
Sir Harry hesitated. 
I was afraid of opening the wound. I have a request
to make to you both, said I. It is this; That
Mr. Beauchamp may be permitted to live with me; 
and attend you, madam, and his father, as a visitor,
at your own command. My sister, I believe, will be
very soon married to Lord G. 
That is to be certainly so, interrupted the Lady? 
It is, madam. 
But what shall we say, my dear, resum'd Sir Harry
—Don't fly out again—As to the provision for my
son? —Two hundred a year—What is two hundred
a year— 
Why then let it be three, answered she. 
I have an handsome and improveable estate, said I. 
I have no demands but those of reason upon me. I
would not offer a plea for his coming to England (and
I am sure he would not have come, if I had) without
his father's consent: In which, madam, he
hoped for yours. You shall not, Sir, allow him
either the two or three hundred a year. See him with
love, with indulgence (he will deserve both); and
think not of any-thing else for my Beauchamp. 
There is no bearing this, my dear, said Sir Harry; 
leaning upon his lady's shoulder, as he sat, tears in
his eyes—My son is already, as I have heard, greatly
obliged to this his true friend—Do you, do you, madam,
answer for me, and for yourself. 
She was overcome: Yet pride had its share with
generosity. You are, said she, the Grandison I have
heard of: But I will not be under obligations to you— 
not pecuniary ones, however. No, Sir Harry! Recall 

your son: I will trust to your love: Do for him what
you please: Let him be independent on this insolent
man [She said this with a smile, that made it obligeing]; 
and if we are to be visitors, friends, neighbours,
let it be on an equal foot, and let him have
nothing to reproach us with. 
I was agreeably surprised at this emanation (shall I
call it?) of goodness. She is really not a bad woman,
but a perverse one: In short, one of those whose
passions, when rightly touched, are liable to sudden
and surprising turns. 
Generous, charming Lady Beauchamp! said I: Now
are you the woman, whom I have so often heard
praised for many good qualities: Now will the portrait
be a just one! 
Sir Harry was in raptures; but had like to have
spoiled all, by making me a compliment on the force
of example. 
Be this, said I, the result—Mr. Beauchamp comes
over. He will be pleased with whatever you do: At
your feet, madam, he shall acknowlege your favour:
My home shall be his, if you permit it: On me, he
shall confer obligations; from you, he shall receive
them. If any considerations of family prudence (there
are such, and very just ones) restrain you from allowing
him, at present, what your generosity would
wish to do— 
Lady Beauchamp's colour was heightened: She interrupted
me—We are not, Sir Charles, so scanty in
our fortune— 
Well, my dear Lady Beauchamp, be all that as you
will: Not one retrospect of the past— 
Yes, Sir Charles, but there shall: His allowance
has been lessened for some years; not from considerations
of family prudence—But—Well, 'tis all at an
end, proceeded she—When the young man returns,
you, Sir Harry, for my sake, and for the sake of this
strange unaccountable creature, shall pay him the
whole arrear. 

Now, my dear Lady Beauchamp, said I, listing her
hand to my lips, permit me to give you joy. All
doubts and misgivings so triumphantly got over, so
solid a foundation laid for family harmony—What
was the moment of your nuptials to this? Sir Harry,
I congratulate you: You may, and I believe you have
been, as happy as most men; but now, you will be
still happier. 
Indeed, Sir Harry, said she, you provoked me in
the morning: I should not else— 
Sir Harry own'd himself to blame; and thus the
Lady's pride was set down softly. 
She desired Sir Harry to write, before the day concluded,
the invitation of return, to Mr. Beauchamp; 
and to do her all the credit in it that she might claim
from the last part of the conversation; but not to mention
any-thing of the first. 
She afterwards abated a little of this right spirit,
by saying, I think, Sir Harry, you need not mention
any-thing of the arrears, as I may call them—But
only the future 600l. a year. One would surprize
him a little, you know, and be twice thanked— 
Surprizes of such a nature as this, my dear Dr.
Bartlett; pecuniary surprizes! —I don't love them— 
They are double taxes upon the gratitude of a worthy
heart. Is it not enough for a generous mind to labour
under a sense of obligation? —Pride, vain-glory, must
be the motive of such narrow-minded benefactors:
A truly beneficent spirit cannot take delight in beholding
the quivering lip indicating the palpitating heart; 
in seeing the downcast countenance, the up-lifted
hands, and working muscles, of a fellow-creature,
who, but for unfortunate accidents, would perhaps
himself have had the will with the power of shewing
a more graceful benevolence! 
I was so much afraid of hearing farther abatements
of Lady Beauchamp's goodness; so willing to depart
with favourable impressions of her for her own sake; 

and at the same time so desirous to reach the Hall
that night; that I got myself excused, though with
difficulty, staying to dine; and, accepting of a dish of
chocolate, I parted with Sir Harry and my Lady, both
in equal good humour with themselves and me. 
Could you have thought, my dear friend, that I
should have succeeded so very happily, as I have done,
in this affair, and at one meeting? 
I think that the father and stepmother should have
the full merit with our Beauchamp of a turn so unexpected. 
Let him not therefore ever see this letter,
that he may take his impression of the favour done
him, from that which Sir Harry will write to him. 
My cousin Grandison, whom I hoped to find here,
left the Hall on Tuesday last, tho' he knew of my
intention to be down. I am sorry for it. Poor
Everard! He has been a great while pretty good. I
am afraid he will get among his old acquaintance; 
and then we shall not hear of him for some months
perhaps. If you see him in town, try to engage him,
till I return. I should be glad of his company to Paris,
if his going with me, will keep him out of harm's
way, as it is called. 
Saturday, April 1. 
I have had compliments sent me by many of my
neighbours, who had hoped I was come to reside
among them. They professed themselves disappointed
on my acquainting them, that I must go up early on
Monday morning. I have invited myself to their
Saturday Assembly at the Bowling-green-house. 
Our reverend friend Mr. Dobson has been so good
as to leave with me the Sermon he is to preach to-morrow
on the opening of the church: It is a very
good discourse: I have only exceptions to three or
four compliments he makes to the patron; in as many
different places of it: I doubt not but he will have the
goodness to omit them. 
I have already looked into all that has been done in 

the church; and all that is doing in the house and
gardens. When both have had the direction and inspection
of my dear Dr. Bartlett, need I say, that nothing
could have been better? 
* *
Halden is just arrived from my Lord, with a Letter,
which has enabled me to write to Lady Mansfield
his Lordship's high approbation of all our proceedings; 
and that he intends some one early day in next week
to pay to her, and Miss Mansfield, his personal compliments. 
He has left to me the article of Settlements; declaring,
that his regard for my future interest is all
that he wishes may be attended to. 
I have therefore written as from himself, that he
proposes a jointure of 1200l. a year, peny-rents, and
400 guineas a year for her private purse; and that his
Lordship desires, that Miss Mansfield will make a present
to her sister of whatever she may be intitled to
in her own right. Something was mentioned to me
at Mansfield-house of a thousand pounds left to her
by a godmother. 
Halden being very desirous to see his future Lady,
I shall, at his request, send the Letter I have written
to Lady Mansfield by him early in the morning; with
a line recommending him to the notice of that Lady
as Lord W's principal steward. 
Adieu, my dear Dr. Bartlett: I have joy in the joy
of all these good people. If Providence graciously
makes me instrumental to it, I look upon myself but
as its instrument. I hope ostentation has no share in
what draws on me more thanks and praises than I
love to hear. 
Lord W. has a right to be made happy by his next
relation, if his next relation can make him so. Is he
not my mother's brother? Would not her enlarged
soul have rejoiced on the occasion, and blessed her
son for an instance of duty to her, paid by his disinterested 

regard for her brother? Who, my dear Dr.
Bartlett, is so happy, yet who, in some cases, so unhappy,
as 
Your Charles Grandison? 

