



Mr.Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Aug. 22. 
I must write on, to divert myself: For I can
get no rest; no refreshing rest. I awaked just now
in a cursed fright. How a man may be affected by
dreams! 
‘Methought I had an interview with my Beloved. 
I found her all goodness, condescension, and forgiveness. 
She suffered herself to be overcome in
my favour by the joint intercessions of Lord M.
Lady Sarah, Lady Betty, and my two Cousins
Montague, who waited upon her in deep mourning; 
the Ladies in long trains sweeping after them; 
Lord M. in a long black mantle trailing after him. 
They told her, they came in these robes to express
their sorrow for my sins against her, and to implore
her to forgive me. 
‘I myself, I thought, was upon my knees, with
a sword in my hand, offering either to put it up in
the scabbard, or to thrust it into my heart, as she
should command the one or the other. 
‘At that moment her Cousin Morden, I thought,
all of a sudden, flashed in thro' a window, with
his drawn sword—Die, Lovelace, said he! this
instant die, and be damned, if in earnest thou repairest
not by Marriage my Cousin's wrongs! 
‘I was rising to resent this insult, I thought, when
Lord M. ran between us with his great black
mantle, and threw it over my face: And instantly,
my Charmer, with that sweet voice which has so
often played upon my ravished ears, wrapped her
arms round me, muffled as I was in my Lord's
mantle: O spare, spare my Lovelace! And spare,
O Lovelace, my beloved Cousin Morden! Let me 

not have my distresses augmented by the fall of
either or both of those who are so dear to me! 
‘At this, charmed with her sweet mediation, I
thought I would have clasped her in my arms: 
When immediately the most angelic form I had
ever beheld, all clad in transparent white, descended
in a cloud, which, opening, discovered a firmament
above it, crouded with golden Cherubs and glittering
Seraphs, all addressing her with, Welcome,
welcome, welcome! and, encircling my charmer,
ascended with her to the region of Seraphims; and
instantly, the opened cloud closing, I lost sight of
her, and of the bright form together, and found
wrapt in my arms her azure robe (all stuck thick
with stars of embossed silver) which I had caught
hold of in hopes of detaining her; but was all that
was left me of my beloved Clarissa. And then
(horrid to relate!) the floor sinking under me, as the
firmament had opened for her, I dropt into a hole
more frightful than that of Elden; and, tumbling
over and over down it, without view of a bottom,
I awaked in a panic; and was as effectually disordered
for half an hour, as if my dream had been a reality.’ 
Wilt thou forgive me troubling thee with such
visionary stuff? Thou wilt see by it, only, that, sleeping
or waking, my Clarissa is always present with me. 
But here this moment is Will. come running hither
to tell me, that his Lady actually returned to her
lodgings last night between Eleven and Twelve; 
and is now there, tho' very ill. 
I hasten to her. But, that I may not add to her
indisposition, by any rough or boisterous behaviour,
I will be as soft and gentle as the dove herself in my
addresses to her. 

That I do love her, O all ye host of heaven,
Be witness!—That she is dear to me!
Dearer than day, to one whom sight must leave;
Dearer than life, to one who fears to die!
The chair is come. I fly to my Beloved. 