


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Thursday, April 13. 
For Heaven's sake, my dearest Harriet, dine with
us to-day; for two reasons: One relates to myself; 
the other you shall hear by-and-by: To myself,
first, as is most fit—This silly creature has offended
me, and presumed to be sullen upon my resentment. 
Married but two days, and shew his airs! —Were I
in fault, my dear (which, upon my honour, I am not)
for the man to lose his patience with me, to forget his
obligations to me, in two days! —What an ungrateful
wretch is he! What a poor powerless creature
your Charlotte! 
Nobody knows of the matter, except he has complained
to my brother—If he has! —But what if he
has? —Alas! my dear, I am married; and cannot
help myself. 
We seem, however, to be drawing up our forces
on both sides. —One struggle for my dying liberty,
my dear! —The success of one pitched battle will determine
which is to be the general, which the subaltem,
for the rest of the campaign. To dare to be
sullen already! —As I hope to live, my dear, I was in
high good humour within myself; and when he was
foolish, only intended a little play with him; and he
takes it in earnest. He worships you: So I shall railly
him before you: But I charge you, as the man by
his sullenness has taken upon him to fight his own
battle, either to be on my side, or be silent. I shall
take it very ill of my Harriet, if she strengthen his
hands. 
Well, but enough of this husband—Husband! 
What a word! —Who do you think is arrived from
abroad? —You cannot guess for your life—Lady 

Olivia! —True as you are alive! accompanied, it
seems, by an aunt of hers; a widow, whose years
and character are to keep the niece in countenance in
this excursion. The pretence is, making the tour of
Europe: and England was not to be left out of the
scheme. My brother is excessively disturbed at her arrival. 
She came to town but last night. He had notice
of it but this morning. He took Emily with him
to visit her: Emily was known to her at Florence. 
She and her aunt are to be here at dinner. As she is
come, Sir Charles says, he must bring her acquainted
with his Sisters, and their Lords, in order to be at liberty
to pursue the measures he has unalterably resolved
upon: And this, Harriet, is my second reason
for urging you to dine with us. 
Now do I wish we had known her history at large,
Dr. Bartlett shall tell it us. Unwelcome as she is to
my brother, I long to see her. I hope I shall not hear
something in her story, that will make me pity her. 
Will you come? 
I wonder whether she speaks English, or not. I
don't think I can converse in Italian. 
I won't forgive you, if you refuse to come. 
Lady L. and her good man will be here. We shall
therefore, if you come, be our whole family together. 
My brother has presented this house to me, till his
return. He calls himself Lord G.'s guest and mine:
So you can have no punctilio about it. Besides, Lord
W. will set out to-morrow morning for Windsor. He
dotes upon you: And perhaps it is in your power to
make a new-married man penitent and polite. 
So you must come. 
Hang me, if I sign by any other name, while this
man is in fits, than that of 
Charlotte Grandison. 

