



Mr. Wyerley, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Wednesday, Aug. 23. 
Dearest Madam,
You will be surprised to find renewed, at this
distance of time, an address so positively tho'
so politely discouraged: But, however it be received,
I must renew it. Every-body has heard, that you have
been vilely treated by a man, who, to treat you ill,
must be the vilest of men. Every-body knows your
just resentment of his base treatment: That you are
determined never to be reconciled to him: And that
you persist in these sentiments against all the entreaties
of his noble relations, against all the prayers and repentance
of his ignoble self. And all the world that
have the honour to know you, or have heard of him,
applaud your resolution, as worthy of yourself; worthy 

thy of your virtue, and of that strict honour which
was always attributed to you by every one who spoke
of you. 
But, Madam, were all the world to have been of
a different opinion, it could never have altered mine. 
I ever loved you; I ever must love you. Yet have I
endeavoured to resign to my hard fate. When I had
so many ways, in vain, sought to move you in my
favour, I sat down, seemingly contented. I even wrote
to you, that I would sit down contented. And I endeavoured
to make all my friends and companions
think I was. But nobody knows what pangs this self-denial
cost me! In vain did the Chace, in vain did Travel,
in vain did lively Company, offer themselves, and
were embraced in their turn: With redoubled force
did my passion for you renew my unhappiness, when
I looked into myself, into my own heart; for there did
your charming image fit enthroned; and you engrossed
me all. 
I truly deplore those misfortunes, and those sufferings,
for your own sake; which, nevertheless, encourage
me to renew my bold hope. I know not particulars. 
I dare not enquire after them; because my sufferings
would be encreased with the knowlege of what
yours have been. I therefore desire not to know more
than what common report wounds my ears with; and
what is given me to know, by your absence from your
cruel family, and from the Sacred Place, where I,
among numbers of your rejected admirers, used to be
twice a week sure to behold you doing credit to that
Service of which your Example gave me the highest
notions. But whatever be those misfortunes, of whatsoever
nature those sufferings, I shall bless the occasion
for my own sake (tho' for yours curse the author
of them) if they may give me the happiness to know,
that this my renewed address may not be absolutely
rejected. —Only give me hope, that it may one day
meet with encouragement, if in the interim nothing 

happen, either in my morals or behaviour, to give
you fresh offence. Give me but hope of this—Not
absolutely to reject me is all the hope I ask for; and I
will love you, if possible, still more than I ever loved
you—And that for your sufferings; for well you deserve
to be loved, even to adoration, who can, for
Honour's and for Virtue's sake, subdue a passion which
common spirits [I speak by cruel experience] find invincible; 
and this at a time when the black offender
kneels and supplicates, as I am well assured he does
(all his friends likewise supplicating for him) to be
forgiven. 
That you cannot forgive him, not forgive him so
as to receive him again to favour, is no wonder. His
offence is against Virtue: That is a part of your essence. 
What magnanimity is this! How just to
yourself, and to your spotless character! Is it any
merit to admire more than ever a Lady who can so
exaltedly distinguish? It is not. I cannot plead it. 
What hope have I left, may it be said, when my
address was before rejected, now, that your sufferings,
so nobly borne, have, with all good judges, exalted your
character? Yet, Madam, I have to pride myself in
this, That while your friends (not looking upon you
in the just light I do) persecute and banish you; while
your Estate is with-held from you, and threatened (as
I know) to be with-held, as long as the chicaning
Law, or rather the chicaneries of its practisers, can
keep it from you: While you are destitute of protection; 
every-body standing aloof, either thro' fear
of the injurer of one family, or of the hard-hearted
of the other; I pride myself, I say, to stand forth,
and offer my Fortune, and my Life, at your devotion. 
With a selfish hope indeed: I should be too great an
hypocrite not to own this! And I know how much
you abhor insincerity. 
But, whether you encourage that hope or not, accept
my best services, I beseech you, Madam: And 

be pleased to excuse me for a piece of honest Art,
which the nature of the case (doubting the honour of
your notice otherwise) makes me chuse to conclude
with—It is this: 
If I am to be still the most unhappy of men, let
your pen by one line tell me so. If I am permitted to
indulge a hope, however distant, your silence shall be
deemed by me, the happiest indication of it that you
can give—Except that still happier—(the happiest that
can befal me) a signification that you will accept the
tender of that Life and Fortune, which it would be my
pride and my glory to sacrifice in your service, leaving
the reward to yourself. 
Be your determination as it may, I must for ever
admire and love you. Nor will I ever change my
condition, while you live, whether you change yours
or not: For, having once had the presumption to address
You, I cannot stoop to think of any other woman: 
And this I solemnly declare in the presence of
that God, whom I daily pray to bless and protect you,
be your determination what it will with regard to,
dearest Madam, 
Your most devoted and ever-affectionate
and faithful Servant,
Alexander Wyerley. 