


Miss Jervois, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


Tuesday, Oct. 31.
Honoured Sir,
You will think your ward very bold to address
you by Letter; especially as she is a very poor
inditer, and as you are in town: But her heart is in
trouble, and she must write; and must beg the favour
of you, the most indulgent guardian that ever poor
Orphan had, to answer her by pen and ink. For
whether you can forgive her or not, she will be equally
incapable of bearing your goodness, or your displeasure. 
How weakly I express myself! I find I shall write
worse to you, than to any-body else. And why? 
Because I wish to write best. But I have great awe,
and no genius. I am a poor girl in every sense, as
you shall hear by-and-by. I hope you won't be very
angry with me. If you are, I shall be worse than
poor—I shall be miserable. 
But to come before my guardian as a delinquent,
when I have ambition enough to wish to shine in his
eyes, if so it could have been! —It is a very great
mortification indeed! —If you were to acquit me, I
shall have had great punishment in that thought. 
But to open my troubled heart to you—Yet how
shall I? I thought to tell it you yesterday; but for my 

life I could not. Did you not observe me once, Sir,
hanging upon the back of your chair, unable to stand
in your sight? O how I felt my face glow! —Then it
was I thought to have spoken my mind; but you were
so kind, so good to me, I could not, might I have had
the world. You took my hand—I shall be very bold
to repeat it; but am always so proud of your kind
notice, that I can't help it: And you said, drawing
me gently to you, ‘Why keeps my Emily behind
me? What can I do for my Emily! Tell me, child; 
Is there any-thing I can do for my ward?’ Yet, tho'
the occasion was so fair, I could not tell you. But I
shall tire you, before I come to the point (to the fault,
I should say) that has emboldened me to write. 
This then is the truth of the matter: 
My poor mother, Sir, is very good now, you know. 
You have taken from her all her cares about this
world: She and her husband live together happily and
elegantly: They want for nothing; and are grown
quite religious: So that they have leisure to think of
their Souls good. They make me cry for joy, whenever
I go to them. They pray for you, and heap
blessings upon you; and cry to think they ever offended
you. 
But, Sir, I took it into my head, knowing it was
a vast way for them to go from Soho to somewhere in
Moorfields to hear the preacher they admire so much,
and coach-hire, and charities, and contributions, of one
kind or other (for their minister has no establishment)
and old debts paying off, that at present, tho' I believe
they are frugal enough, they can't be much aforehand— 
So, thought I, shall I ride in my guardian's
coach, at one time, in Lady G's at another, in Lady
L's at another, tho' so much better able to walk than
my poor mother; while she is growing into years,
and when insi mities are coming on; and my guardian's
example before me, so pening to one's heart? — 
I ventured, therefore, unknown to my mother and 

her husband, unknown to any-body, by way of surprize,
to bespeak a plain neat chariot, and agreed for
a coachman, and a pair of horses; for I had about
130 guineas by me when I bespoke it. Out of this,
thought I (which is my own money, without account)
I shall be able to spare enough for the first half-year's
expences; after which, they will be in circumstances
to keep it on: And as quarters come round, thought
I, I will stint myself, and throw in something towards
it; and then my poor mother and her husband can go
to serve God, and take sometimes an airing, or so,
where they please; and make an appearance in the
world, as the mother of the girl who is intitled to so
large a fortune. And I don't grudge Mr. O-Hara; 
for he is vastly tender of my mother now: Which
must be a great comfort to her, you know, Sir, now
she is come to be sorry for past things, and apt to be
very spiritless, when she looks back—Poor dear woman! 
But here, Sir, was the thing: Believing it became
me, as Lady L. Lady G. and Mrs. Eleanor Grandison,
intended to shew their respect to you, on a certain
happy occasion, by new cloaths, to shew mine
the same way; I went to the mercer's, and was so
tempted by two patterns, that, not knowing which to
choose, I bought of both; not thinking, at the time,
of the bespoken chariot. To be sure I ought to have
consulted Lady L. or Lady G.; but, foolish creature
as I was, I must be for surprising them too, with my
fine fancy. 
Then I laid out a good deal more than I intended,
in milanery matters: Not but I had my penyworths
for my peny: But the milaners are so very obliging; 
they shew one this pretty thing, and that fashionable
one; and are so apt to praise one's taste; and one is
so willing to believe them, and to be thought mighty
clever; that there is no resisting the vanity they raise. 
I own all my folly: I ever will, Sir, when I am guilty 

of any greater silliness than ordinary; for I have no
bad heart, I hope, tho' I am one of the flowers I
once heard you compare some of us to, who are late
before they blow into discretion. 
But now, good Sir, came on my distress: For the
bespoken chariot was ready; ready sooner, by a fortnight,
than I expected. I thought my quarter would
be nearer ended; and I had made a vast hole in my
money. I pulled up a courage; I had need of it; 
and borrowed fifty guineas of Lady G.; but, from this
foolish love of surprizes, cared not to tell her for
what. And having occasion to pay two or three bills
(I was a thoughtless creature, to be sure) which unluckily,
tho' I had asked for them before, were brought
in just then, I borrowed another sum, but yet told
not Lady G. for what; and the dear Lady, I believe,
thought me an extravagant girl: I saw she did, by her
looks. 
But, however, I caused the new chariot to be
brought privately to me. I went in it, and it carried
me to Soho; and there, on my knees, made my
present to my mother. 
But do you think, Sir, that she and Mr. O-Hara,
when I confessed that I had not consulted you upon it,
and that neither Lady L. nor Lady G. nor yet Mrs.
Eleanor Grandison, knew a syllable of the matter,
would accept of it? They would not: But yet they
both cried over me for joy, and blessed me. 
It is put up somewhere—And there it lies, till I have
obtained your pardon first, and your direction afterwards. 
And what shall I do, if you are angry at your
poor ward, who has done so inconsiderate a thing, and
run herself into debt? 
Chide me, honoured Sir, if you please. Indeed
you never yet did chide me. But yours will be chideings
of Love; of paternal Love, Sir. 
But if you are angry with me more than a day; if
you give me reason to believe you think meanly of me, 

tho', alas! I may deserve it; and that this rashness is
but a prelude to other rash or conceited steps (for that
is the fear which most terrifies me) and is therefore to
be resented with severity; then will I fly to my dear
Miss Byron, that now is! —And if she cannot soften
your displeasure, and restore me to your good opinion— 
(Mere pardon will not be enough for your truly penitent
ward) then will I say, Burst, heart! Ingrateful,
inconsiderate Emily! Thou hast offended thy Guardian! 
What is there left in this life, that is worth thy
cares! 
And now, Sir, I have laid my troubled heart open
before you. I know you will not so much blame
the thing, even should you not approve of it, as
the manner; doing it (after you had been so extremely
generous and considerate to my mother) without
consulting either you, or your sisters. O my
vanity and conceit! They, they, have misled me. 
They never shall again, whether you forgive me, or
not. 
But good, indulgent, honoured Sir, my Guardian,
my Protector, let not my punishment be the reversing
of the gracious grant which my heart has been so long
wishing to obtain, and which you had consented to,
of being allowed to live immediately in your own eye,
and in the presence of my dear Miss Byron, that now
is. This rash action should rather induce you to confirm,
than reverse it. And I promise to be very good. 
I ever loved her. I shall add filial honour, as I may
say, to my love of her. I never will do any-thing
without consulting her; and but what you, the kindest
Guardian that ever poor Orphan had, would wish me
to do. 
And now, Sir, honour me with a few lines from
your own hand; were it but to shew me that this impertinence
has not so far tired you, as (should you think
it just to banish me from your presence for some time) 

to make you discourage applications to you, by pen and
ink, from, Sir, 
Your truly sorrowful Ward,
and ever-obliged and grateful
Emily Jervois. 

