



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I will now give thee the substance of the dialogue
that passed between the two women and the lady. 
Wonder not, that a perverse wife makes a listening
husband. The event, however, as thou wilt 

find, justified the old observation, That listeners seldom
hear good of themselves. Conscious of their own
demerits (if I may guess by myself: There's ingenuity,
Jack!), and fearful of censure, they seldom
find themselves disappointed. There is something of
sense, after all, in these proverbs, in these phrases, in
this wisdom of nations. 
Mrs. Moore was to be the messenger; but Miss
Rawlins began the dialogue. 
Your Spouse, Madam—[Devil! —Only to fish
for a negative or affirmative declaration.] 
Cl. My spouse, Madam— 
Miss R. Mr. Lovelace, Madam, averrs, that you
are married to him; and begs admittance, or your
company in the dining-room, to talk upon the subject
of the letters he left with you. 
Cl. He is a poor wicked wretch. Let me beg of
you, Madam, to favour me with your company as
often as possible while he is hereabouts, and I remain
here. 
Miss R. I shall with pleasure attend you, Madam. 
But, methinks, I could wish you would see the
gentleman, and hear what he has to say, on the subject
of the letters. 
Cl. My case is a hard, a very hard one—I am quite
bewilder'd! —I know not what to do! —I have not a
friend in the world, that can or will help me! —Yet
had none but friends till I knew that man! 
Miss R. The gentleman neither looks nor talks
like a bad man. —Not a very bad man; as men go. 
As men go! —Poor Miss Rawlins, thought I! — 
And dost thou know, how men go? 
Cl. O Madam, you know him not! —He can put
on the appearance of an angel of light; but has a
black, a very black heart!— 
Poor I!— 
Miss R. I could not have thought it, truly! —But
men are very deceitful now-a-days! 

Now-a-days!—a fool! —Have not her history-books
told her, that they were always so? 
Mrs. Moore, sighing. I have found it so, I am sure,
to my cost!— 
Who knows but in her time, poor goody Moore
may have met with a Lovelace, or a Belford, or some
such vile fellow? —My little hare-um-scare-um Beauty
knows not what strange histories every woman living,
who has had the least independence of will, could
tell her, were such to be as communicative as she is. 
—But here's the thing;—I have given her cause
enough of offence; but not enough to make her hold
her tongue. 
Cl. As to the letters he has left with me, I know
not what to say to them: —But am resolved never to
have any thing to say to him. 
Miss R. If, Madam, I may be allowed to say so,
I think you carry matters very far. 
Cl. Has he been making a bad cause a good one
with you, Madam? —That he can do, with those
who know him not. Indeed I heard him talking,
tho' not what he said, and am indifferent about it. 
But what account does he give of himself? 
I was pleased to hear this. To arrest, to stop her
passion, thought I, in the height of its career, is a
charming presage. 
Then the busy Miss Rawlins fish'd on, to find out
from her either a confirmation or disavowal of my
story. Was Lord M. my uncle? —Did I court her
at first with the allowance of her friends, her brother
excepted? Had I a rencounter with that brother? 
Was she so persecuted in favour of a very disagreeable
man, one Solmes, as to induce her to throw herself
into my protection? 
None of these were denied. All the objections
she could have made, were stifled, or kept in, by the
consideration (as she mentioned) that she should stay
there but a little while; and that her story was too 

long. But Miss Rawlins would not be thus easily
answered. 
Miss R. He says, Madam, that he could not prevail
for marriage, till he had consented, under a solemn
oath, to separate beds, while your family remain'd
unreconciled. 
Cl. O the wretch! —What can be still in his
head, to endeavour to pass these stories upon
strangers! 
So no direct denial, thought I! —Admirable! — 
All will do by-and-by! 
Miss R. He has owned, that an accidental fire
had frighten'd you very much on Wednesday night— 
And that—And that—And that—an accidental fire
had frighten'd you—Very much frighten'd you—last
Wednesday night!— 
Then, after a short pause—In short, He owned,
That he had taken some innocent liberties, which
might have led to a breach of the oath you had imposed
upon him: And that This was the cause of your
displeasure. 
I would have been glad to see how my charmer
then look'd. —To be sure she was at a loss in her
own mind, to justify herself for resenting so highly
an offence so trifling. She hesitated—Did not presently
speak—When she did, she wish'd, That she,
Miss Rawlins, might never meet with any man who
would take such innocent liberties with her. 
Miss Rawlins push'd further. 
Your case, to be sure, Madam, is very particular. 
But if the hope of a reconciliation with your own
friends is made more distant by your leaving him,
give me leave to say, That 'tis pity—'tis pity—[I
suppose the maiden then primm'd, fann'd, and blush'd; 
—'tis pity] the oath cannot be dispensed with; 
especially as he owns, he has not been so strict a
liver.— 
I could have gone in, and kiss'd the girl. 

Cl. You have heard his story. Mine, as I told you
before, is too long, and too melancholy; my disorder
on seeing the wretch is too great; and my time
here is too short, for me to enter upon it. And if he
has any end to serve by his own vindication, in which
I shall not be a personal sufferer, let him make himself
appear as white as an angel; with all my heart. 
My love for her, and the excellent character I gave
her, were then pleaded. 
Cl. Specious seducer! —Only tell me, if I cannot
get away from him by some backway? 
How my heart then went pit-a-pat! 
Cl. Let me look out—[I heard the sash lifted up]
Whither does that path lead to? Is there no possibility
of getting to a coach? —Surely, he must deal with
some fiend, or how could he have found me out? — 
Cannot I steal to some neighbouring house, where I
may be concealed till I can get quite away? —You
are good people! —I have not been always among
such! —O help me, help me, ladies (with a voice of
impatience), or I am ruined! 
Then pausing, Is that the way to Hendon? [pointing,
I suppose] —Is Hendon a private place? —The
Hamstead coach, I am told, will carry passengers
thither. 
Mrs. Moore. I have an honest friend at Mill-hill
[Devil fetch her, thought I]; where, if such be your
determination, Madam, and if you think yourself in
danger, you may be safe, I believe. 
Cl. Any-whither, if I can but escape from this
man! —Whither does that path lead to, out yonder? 
—What is that town on the right-hand called? 
Mrs. M. Highgate, Madam. 
Miss R. On the side of the heath is a little village
called North-end. A kinswoman of mine lives there. 
But her house is small. I am not sure she could accommodate
such a lady. 
Devil take her too, thought I! —I imagined, that 

I had made myself a better interest in these women. 
But the whole Sex love plotting; and plot-ters, too,
Jack. 
Cl. A barn, an outhouse, a garret, will be a palace
to me, if it will but a afford me a refuge from
this man!— 
Her senses, thought I, are much livelier than mine. 
What a devil have I done, that she should be so very
implacable! —I told thee, Belford, All I did: Was
there any thing in it so very much amiss! —Such
prospects of family-reconciliation before her too! — 
To be sure she is a very sensible lady!— 
She then espied my new servant walking under the
window, and asked, If he were not one of mine?— 
Will. was on the look-out for old Grimes [So is
the fellow called whom my beloved has dispatch'd to
Miss Howe]. And being told, that the man she
saw was my servant; I see, said she, that there
is no escaping, unless you, Madam [To Miss
Rawlins, I suppose], can befriend me till I can get
farther. I have no doubt that that fellow is planted
about the house to watch my steps. But the wicked
wretch his master has no right to controul me. He
shall not hinder me from going whither I please. I
will raise the town upon him, if he molests me. Dear
ladies, is there no back-door for me to get out at
while you hold him in talk? 
Miss R. Give me leave to ask you, Madam; Is
there no room to hope for accommodation? Had
you not better see him? He certainly loves you
dearly: He is a fine gentleman: You may exasperate
him, and make matters more unhappy for yourself. 
Cl. O Mrs. Moore, O Miss Rawlins! you know
not the man! —I wish not to see his face, nor to exchange
another word with him as long as I live. 
Mrs. Moore. I don't find, Miss Rawlins, that the
gentleman has misrepresented any-thing. You see,
Madam [To my Clarissa], how respectful he is; not 

to come in till permitted. He certainly loves you
dearly. Pray, Madam, let him talk to you, as he
wishes to do, on the subject of the letters. 
Very kind of Mrs. Moore. Mrs. Moore, thought
I, is a very good woman. —I did not curse her then. 
Miss Rawlins said something; but so low, that I
could not hear what it was. Thus it was answer'd. 
Cl. I am greatly distressed! I know not what to
do! —But, Mrs. Moore, be so good as to give his
letters to him—Here they are. —Be pleased to tell
him, That I wish him and his aunt and cousin a
happy meeting. He never can want excuses to them
for what has happened, any more than pretences to
those he would delude. Tell him, That he has ruined
me in the opinion of my own friends. I am for that
reason the less solicitous how I appear to his. 
Mrs. Moore then came to me; and being afraid,
that something would pass mean time between the
other two, which I should not like, I took the letters,
and entered the room, and found them retired
into the closet; my beloved whispering with an air
of earnestness to Miss Rawlins, who was all attention. 
Her back was towards me; and Miss Rawlins, by
pulling her sleeve, giving intimation of my being
there, Can I have no retirement uninvaded, Sir, said
she, with indignation, as if she was interrupted in
some talk her heart was in? —What business have
you here, or with me? —You have your letters,
han't you? 
Lovel. I have, my dear; and let me beg of you
to consider what you are about. I every moment
expect Capt. Tomlinson here. Upon my soul, I do. 
He has promised to keep from your uncle what has
happened. —But what will he think, if he finds you
hold in this strange humour? 
Cl. I will endeavour, Sir, to have patience with
you for a moment or two, while I ask you a few 

questions before this lady and Mrs. Moore [who
just then came in], both whom you have prejudiced
in your favour by your specious stories: —Will you
say, Sir, that we are married together? Lay your
hand upon your heart, and answer me, Am I your
wedded wife? 
I am gone too far, thought I, to give up for such
a push as this—home-one as it is. 
My dearest soul! how can you put such a question? 
—Is it either for your honour or my own, that
it should be doubted? —Surely, surely, Madam, you
cannot have attended to the contents of Capt. Tomlinson's
letter. 
She complained often of want of spirits throughout
our whole contention, and of weakness of person
and mind, from the fits she had been thrown into: 
But little reason had she for this complaint, as I
thought, who was able to hold me to it, as she did. 
I own that I was excessively concern'd for her several
times. 
You and I! Vilest of men— 
My name is Lovelace, Madam— 
Therefore it is, that I call you the vilest of men. [Was
this pardonable, Jack?] You and I know the truth,
the whole truth—I want not to clear up my reputation
with these gentlewomen: —That is already lost with
every one I had most reason to value: But let me
have this new specimen of what you are capable of— 
Say, wretch (say, Lovelace, if thou hadst rather), Art
thou really and truly my wedded husband? —Say!
answer without hesitation!— 
She trembled with impatient indignation; but had a
wildness in her manner, which I took some advantage
of, in order to parry this cursed thrust—And a cursed
thrust it was; since, had I positively averr'd it, she never
would have believed any-thing I had said: And had
I owned that I was not married, I had destroyed my
own plot, as well with the women as with her; and 

could have had no pretence for pursuing her, or hindering
her from going whithersoever she pleased. 
Not that I was asham'd to averr it, had it been consistent
with policy. I would not have thee think me
such a milksop neither. 
Lovel. My dearest Love, how wildly you talk! 
What would you have me answer? Is it necessary
that I should answer? May I not re-appeal this to
your own breast, as well as to Captain Tomlinson's
treaty and letter? You know yourself how matters
stand between us. —And Captain Tomlinson— 
Cl. O wretch! Is this an answer to my question? 
Say, Are we married, or are we not? 
Lovel. What makes a marriage, we all know. If
it be the union of two hearts, [There was a turn,
Jack!] to my utmost grief, I must say we are not; 
since now I see you hate me. If it be the completion
of marriage, to my confusion and regret, I must
own we are not. But, my dear, will you be pleased
to consider what answer half a dozen people whence
you came, could give to your question? And do not
now, in the disorder of your mind, and in the height
of passion, bring into question before these gentlewomen
a point you have acknowleged before those
who know us better. 
I would have whisper'd her about the treaty with
her uncle, and the contents of the Captain's letter; 
But, retreating, and with a rejecting hand, Keep
thy distance, man, cry'd the dear insolent—To thy
own heart I appeal, since thou evadest me thus pitifully! 
—I own no marriage with thee! Bear witness,
ladies, I do not. And cease to torment me, cease to
follow me. Surely, surely, faulty as I have been, I
have not deserved to be thus persecuted! —I resume,
therefore, my former language: You have no right
to pursue me: You know you have not: Begone,
then; and leave me to make the best of my hard
lot. O my dear cruel papa! said she, in a violent 

fit of grief (falling upon her knees, and clasping her
uplifted hands together), thy heavy curse is completed
upon thy devoted daughter! I am punished, dreadfully
punished, by the very wretch in whom I had placed my
wicked confidence! 
By my soul, Belford, the little witch with her
words, but more by her manner, moved me! Wonder
not then, that her action, her grief, her tears,
set the women into the like compassionate manifestations. 
Had not I a cursed task of it? 
The two women withdrew to the further end of
the room, and whisper'd, A strange case! There
is no frenzy here—I just heard said. 
The charming creature threw her handkerchief
over her head and neck, continuing kneeling, her
back towards me, and her face hid upon a chair, and
repeatedly sobb'd with grief and passion. 
I took this opportunity to step to the women, to
keep them steady. 
You see, ladies (whispering), what an unhappy
man I am! You see what a spirit this dear creature
has! —All, all owing to her implacable relations, and
to her father's curse. —A curse upon them all; they
have turn'd the head of the most charming woman
in the world. 
Ah! Sir, Sir, replied Miss Rawlins, whatever be
the fault of her relations, all is not as it should be between
you and her. 'Tis plain she does not think
herself married: 'Tis plain she does not: And if
you have any value for the poor lady, and would not
totally deprive her of her senses, you had better
withdraw, and leave to time and cooler consideration
the event in your favour. 
She will compel me to this at last, I fear, Miss
Rawlins; I fear she will; and then we are both undone: 
For I cannot live without her; she knows it
too well: —And she has not a friend will look upon 

her: This also she knows. Our marriage, when
her uncle's friend comes, will be proved incontestably. 
But I am ashamed to think I have given
her room to believe it no marriage: That's what
she harps upon! 
Well, 'tis a strange case, a very strange one, said
Miss Rawlins; and was going to say further, when
the angry Beauty, coming towards the door, said,
Mrs. Moore, I beg a word with you. And they both
stepped into the dining-room. 
I saw her, just before, put a parcel into her pocket,
and followed them out, for fear she should slip away; 
and stepping to the stairs, that she might not go by
me, Will. cry'd I, aloud (tho' I knew he was not
hear)—Pray, child, to a maid, who answered, call
either of my servants to me. 
She then came up to me, with a wrathful countenance: 
Do you call your servant, Sir, to hinder me,
between you, from going whither I please? 
Don't, my dearest life, misinterpret every thing I
do. Can you think me so mean and so unworthy,
as to employ a servant to constrain you? —I call him
to send to the public houses, or inns in this town, to
inquire after Captain Tomlinson, who may have
alighted at some one of them, and be now, perhaps,
needlesly adjusting his dress; and I would have him
come, were he to be without cloaths, God forgive me!
for I am stabb'd to the heart by your cruelty. 
Answer was returned, that neither of my servants
was in the way. 
Not in the way, said I! —Whither can the dogs
be gone? 
O Sir! with a scornful air; Not far, I'll warrant. 
One of them was under the window just now; according
to order, I suppose, to watch my steps—But
I will do what I please, and go whither I please; and
that to your face. 

God forbid, that I should hinder you in any thing
that you may do with safety to yourself! 
Now I verily believe, that her design was, to slip
out in pursuance of the closet-whispering between her
and Miss Rawlins; perhaps to Miss Rawlins's house. 
She then stept back to Mrs. Moore, and gave her
something, which proved to be a diamond ring, and
desired her, not whisperingly, but with an air of
defiance to me, that That might be a pledge for her,
till she defray'd her demands; which she should
soon find means to do; having no more money about
her, than she might have occasion for, before she
came to an acquaintance's. 
Mrs. Moore would have declined taking it; but
she would not be deny'd; and then, wiping her eyes,
she put on her gloves—Nobody has a right to stop
me, said she! —I will go! —Who should I be afraid
of? —Her very question, charming creature! testifying
her fear. 
I beg pardon, Madam (turning to Mrs. Moore,
and courtesying), for the trouble I have given you. —I
beg pardon, Madam, to Miss Rawlins (courtesying
likewise to her)—You may both hear of me in a
happier hour, if such a one falls to my lot—And
God bless you both!—struggling with her tears till
she sobb'd—and away was tripping. 
I stepped to the door: I put it to; and setting my
back against it, took her struggling hand—My dearest
life! My angel! said I, why will you thus distress me? 
—Is this the forgiveness which you so solemnly promised?— 
Unhand me, Sir! —You have no business with me! 
You have no right over me! You know you have
not. 
But whither, whither, my dearest love, would you
go? —Think you not that I will follow you, were it
to the world's end? —Whither would you go? 
Well do you ask me, Whither I would go, who 

have been the occasion, that I have not a friend left! 
—But God, who knows my innocence, and my upright
intentions, will not wholly abandon me, when
I am out of your power—But while in it, I cannot
expect a gleam of the divine grace or favour to reach
me. 
How severe is this! —How shockingly severe! — 
Out of your presence, my angry fair one! I can
neither hope for the one nor the other. As my
cousin Montague, in the letter you have read, observes,
You are my pole-star, and my guide; and if
ever I am to be happy, either here or hereafter, it
must be in and by you. 
She would then have urged me from the door. But
respectfully opposing her, Begone, man! Begone,
Mr. Lovelace, said she. —Stop not my way. —If you
would not that I should attempt the window, give
me passage by the door; for, once more, you have
no right to detain me! 
Your resentments, my dearest life, I will own to
be well-grounded—I will acknowlege, that I have
been all in fault. On my knee (and down I dropt)
I ask your pardon. And can you refuse to ratify
your own promise? —Look forward to the happy
prospect before us. See you not my Lord M. and
Lady Sarah longing to bless you, for blessing me,
and their whole family? Can you take no pleasure in
the promised visit of Lady Betty and my cousin Montague? 
And in the protection they offer you, if you
are dissatisfied with mine? —Have you no wish to see
your uncle's friend? —Stay only till Captain Tomlinson
comes. —Receive from him the news of your
uncle's compliance with the wishes of both. 
She seem'd altogether distressed; was ready to
sink; and forced to lean against the wainscot, as I
kneeled at her feet. A stream of tears at last burst
from her less indignant eyes—Good heaven, said she,
lifting up her lovely face, and clasped hands, what is 

at last to be my destiny! —Deliver me from this dangerous
man; and direct me! —I know not what I
do; what I can do; nor what I ought to do!— 
The women, as I had owned our marriage to be
but half completed, heard nothing in this whole scene
to contradict (not flagrantly to contradict) what I had
asserted: They believed they saw in her returning
temper, and stagger'd resolution, a love for me,
which her indignation had before suppressed; and they
joined to persuade her to tarry till the Captain came,
and to hear his proposals; representing the dangers to
which she would be exposed; the fatigues she might
endure; a lady of her appearance, unguarded, unprotected. 
On the other hand, they dwelt upon my
declared contrition, and on my promises: For the
performance of which they offered to be bound. —So
much had my kneeling humility affected them. 
Women, Jack, tacitly acknowlege the inferiority
of their own sex, in the pride they take to behold a
kneeling lover at their feet. 
She turned from me, and threw herself into a
chair. 
I arose, and approached her with reverence—My
dearest creature, said I—and was proceeding—But,
with a face glowing with conscious dignity, she interrupted
me—Ungenerous, ungrateful Lovelace! — 
You know not the value of the heart you have insulted! 
Nor can you conceive how much my soul
despises your meanness. But meanness must ever be
the portion of the man, who can act vilely!— 
The women believing we were likely to be on
better terms, retired. The dear perverse opposed
their going; but they saw I was desirous of their absence. 
And when they had withdrawn, I once more
threw myself at her feet, and acknowleged my
offences; implored her forgiveness for this one time,
and promised the exactest circumspection for the future. 

It was impossible for her, she said, to keep her
memory, and forgive me. What hadst thou seen in
the conduct of Clarissa Harlowe, that should encourage
such an insult upon her, as thou didst dare to
make? How meanly must thou think of her, that
thou couldst presume to be so guilty, and expect her
to be so weak, as to forgive thee?— 
I besought her to let me go over with her Captain
Tomlinson's letter. I was sure it was impossible she
could have given it the requisite attention. 
I have given it the requisite attention, said she; 
and the other letters too. So that what I say, is upon
deliberation. And what have I to fear from my brother
and sister? —They can but complete the ruin of my
fortunes with my father and uncles. Let them, and
welcome. You, Sir, I thank you, have lowered my
fortunes: But, I bless God, that my mind is not
sunk with my fortunes. It is, on the contrary,
raised above Fortune, and above You; and for half a
word, they shall have the estate they have envied
me for, and an acquittal of all expectations from my
family, that may make them uneasy. 
I lifted up my hands and eyes in silent admiration
of her! 
My brother, Sir, may think me ruined. To the
praise of your character, by whom I have been seduced
from them, he may think it it impossible to be
with you, and be innocent. You have but too well
justified their harshest censures in every part of your
conduct. But I will, now that I have escaped from
you, and that I am out of the reach of your mysterious
devices, wrap myself up in my own innocence
(and then she passionately folded her arms about herself),
and leave to time, and to my future circumspection,
the re-establishment of my character. — 
Leave me then, Sir—Pursue me not!— 
Good God! interrupting her—And all this, for
what? —Had I not yielded to your intreaties (Forgive 

me, Madam), you could not have carried farther
your resentments— 
Wretch! —What it not crime enough to give occasion
for those intreaties? Wouldst thou make a merit
to me, that thou didst not utterly ruin her whom
thou oughtest to have protected? —Begone, man!
turning from me, her face crimson'd over with passion: 
—See me no more! —I cannot bear thee in my
sight!— 
Dearest, dearest creature!— 
If I forgive thee, Lovelace—And there she stopp'd. 
To endeavour, proceeded she, to endeavour, to terrify
a poor creature by premeditation, by low contrivance,
by cries of fire—A poor creature who had consented
to take a wretched chance with thee for life! 
For Heaven's sake—offering to take her repulsing
hand, as she was flying from me towards the closet— 
What hast thou to do, to plead the sake of Heaven
in thy favour, O darkest of human minds! 
Then turning from me, wiping her eyes, and again
turning towards me, but her sweet face half-aside,
What difficulties hast thou involved me in! —Thou
that hadst a plain path before thee, after thou hadst
betray'd me into thy power—At once my mind takes
in the whole of thy crooked behaviour; and if thou
thinkest of Clarissa Harlowe as her proud heart tells
her thou oughtest to think of her, thou wilt seek thy
fortunes elsewhere. How often hast thou provoked
me to tell thee, that my soul is above thee? 
For God's sake, Madam, for a soul's sake, which
it is in your power to save from perdition, forgive me
the past offence. I am the greatest villain on earth,
if it was a premeditated one. Yet I presume not to
excuse myself. On your mercy I throw myself. I
will not offer at any plea, but that of penitence. See
but Captain Tomlinson. See but my aunt and cousin; 
let them plead for me; let them be guaranties for my
honour. 

If Captain Tomlinson come while I stay here, I
may see him. But as for you, Sir— 
Dearest creature! let me beg of you not to aggravate
my offence to the Captain, when he comes. Let
me beg of you— 
What askest you? —Is it not, that I shall be of
party against myself? —That I shall palliate— 
Do not charge me, Madam, interrupted I, with
villainous premeditation! —Do not give such a construction
to my offence, as may weaken your uncle's
opinion—as may strengthen your brother's— 
She flung from me to the further end of the room; 
She could go no further—And just then Mrs. Moore
came up, and told her, that dinner was ready; and
that she had prevailed upon Miss Rawlins to give her
her company. 
You must excuse me, Mrs. Moore, said she. Miss
Rawlins I hope also will—But I cannot eat. I cannot
go down. As for you, Sir, I suppose you will
think it right to depart hence; at least till the gentleman
comes whom you expect. 
I respectfully withdrew into the next room, that
Mrs. Moore might acquaint her [I durst not myself],
that I was her lodger and boarder, as (whisperingly)
I desired she would: And meeting Miss Rawlins in
the passage, Dearest Miss Rawlins, said I, stand my
friend: Join with Mrs. Moore to pacify my spouse,
if she has any new flights upon my having taken
lodgings, and intending to board here. I hope she
will have more generosity than to think of hindering
a gentlewoman from letting her lodgings. 
I suppose Mrs. Moore (whom I left with my fair
one) had apprised her of this before Miss Rawlins
went in; for I heard her say, while I with-held Miss
Rawlins—‘No, indeed: He is much mistaken— 
Surely he does not think I will.’ 
They both expostulated with her, as I could gather
from bits and scraps of what they said; for they 

spoke so low, that I could not hear any distinct sentence,
but from the fair perverse, whose anger made
her louder. And to this purpose I heard her deliver
herself in answer to different parts of their talk to her: 
—‘Good Mrs. Moore, dear Miss Rawlins, press me
no further—I cannot sit down at table with him!’ 
They said something, as I suppose in my behalf— 
‘O the insinuating wretch! —What defence have I
against a man, who, go where I will, can turn
every one, even of the virtuous of my sex, in his
favour?’ 
After something else said, which I heard not distinctly,
—‘This is execrable cunning! —Were you
to know his wicked heart, he is not without hope
of engaging you two good persons to second him
in the vilest of his machinations.’ 
How came she (thought I at the instant) by all
this penetration? My devil surely does not play me
booty. If I thought he did, I would marry, and live
honest, to be even with him. 
I suppose then, they urged the plea which I hinted
to Miss Rawlins at going in, that she would not be
Mrs. Moore's hindrance; for thus she expressed herself
—‘He will no doubt pay you your own price. 
You need not question his liberality. But one
house cannot hold us. Why, if it would, did I
fly from him, to seek refuge among strangers?’ 
Then, in answer to somewhat else they pleaded— 
‘'Tis a mistake, Madam; I am not reconciled to
him. I will believe nothing he says. Has he not
given you a flagrant specimen of what a man he is,
and of what he is capable, by the disguises you saw
him in? My story is too long, and my stay here
will be but short; or I could convince you, that
my resentments against him are but too well
founded.’ 
I suppose then, that they pleaded for her leave, for
my dining with them: For she said; ‘I have nothing 

to say to that—It is your own house, Mrs. Moore— 
It is your own table—You may admit whom you
please to it—Only leave me at my liberty to choose
my company.’ 
Then in answer, as I suppose, to their offer of
sending her up a plate—‘A bit of bread, if you please,
and a glass of water: That's all I can swallow at
present. I am really very much discomposed. Saw
you not how bad I was? —Indignation only could
have supported my spirits!’— 
‘I have no objection to his dining with you, Madam;’ 
added she, in reply, I suppose, to a farther question of
the same nature—‘But I will not stay a night in the
house, where he lodges, if I can help it.’ 
I presume Miss Rawlins had told her, that she
would not stay dinner—for she said, ‘Let me not
deprive Mrs. Moore of your company, Miss Rawlins. 
You will not be displeased with his talk. He
can have no design upon you.’ 
Then I suppose they pleaded what I might say behind
her back, to make my own story good;—‘I
care not what he says, or what he thinks of me. 
Repentance and amendment are all the harm I wish
him, whatever becomes of me!’ 
By her accent, she wept when she spoke these last
words. 
They came out both of them wiping their eyes; 
and would have persuaded me to relinquish the lodgings,
and to depart till her uncle's friend came. But
I knew better. I did not care to trust the devil, well
as she and Miss Howe suppose me to be acquainted
with him, for finding her out again, if once more
she escaped me. 
What I am most afraid of, is, that she will throw
herself among her own relations; and if she does, I
am confident they will not be able to withstand her
affecting eloquence. But yet, as thou'lt see, the
Captain's letter to me is admirably calculated to obviate 

my apprehensions on this score; particularly in
that passage, where it is said, that her uncle thinks
not himself at liberty to correspond directly with her,
or to receive applications from her—But thro' Captain
Tomlinson, as is strongly imply'd (a) . 
I must own (notwithstanding the revenge I have
so solemnly vowed) that I would very fain have made
for her a merit with myself in her returning favour,
and owed as little as possible to the mediation of Captain
Tomlinson. My pride was concerned in this. 
And this was one of my reasons for not bringing
him with me. Another was; That, if I were obliged
to have recourse to his assistance, I should be
better able (by visiting her without him) to direct
him what to say or to do, as I should find out the
turn of her humour. 
I was, however, glad at my heart, that Mrs.
Moore came up so seasonably with notice, that dinner
was ready. The fair fugitive was all in Alt. She
had the game in her own hands; and by giving me
so good an excuse for withdrawing, I had time to
strengthen myself; the Captain had time to come; 
and the Lady to cool. Shakespeare advises well. 

Oppose not rage, while rage is in its force;
But give it way awhile, and let it waste.
The rising deluge is not stopt with dams;
Those it o'erbears, and drowns the hope of harvest.
But, wisely manag'd, its divided strength
Is sluic'd in channels, and securely drain'd:
And when its force is spent, and unsupply'd,
The residue with mounds may be restrain'd,
And dry-shod we may pass the naked ford.
I went down with the women to dinner. Mrs.
Moore sent her fair boarder up a plate; but she only
eat a little bit of bread, and drank a glass of water. I
doubted not but she would keep her word, when it 

was once gone out. Is not she an Harlowe? —She
seems to be inuring herself to hardships, which, at
the worst, she can never know; since, tho' she
should ultimately refuse to be obliged to me, or, to
express myself more suitably to my own heart, to
oblige me, every one who sees her must befriend her. 
But let me ask thee, Belford, Art thou not solicitous
for me, in relation to the contents of the letter
which the angry beauty has written and dispatch'd
away by man and horse; and for what may be Miss
Howe's answer to it?. Art thou not ready to inquire,
Whether it be not likely that Miss Howe, when she
knows of her saucy friend's flight, will be concern'd
about her letter, which she must know could not be
at Wilson's till after that flight; and so, probably,
would fall into my hands?— 
All these things, as thou'lt see in the sequel, are
provided for with as much contrivance as human
foresight can admit. 
I have already told thee, that Will. is upon the
look-out for old Grimes. —Old Grimes is, it seems,
a gossiping, sottish rascal; and if Will. can but light
of him, I'll answer for the consequence: For has
not Will. been my servant upwards of seven years? 