


Lady G., Miss Selby, To Lady L. 


Thursday Morning, Nov. 16.
You shall find me, my dear Sister, as minute as
you wish. Lucy is a charming girl. For the
humour's sake, as well as to forward each other, on
the joyful occasion, we shall write by turns. 
It would look as if we had determined upon a public
day, in the very face of it, were we to appear in
full dresses: The contrary, therefore, was agreed upon
yesterday. But every one, however, intends to be
dressed as elegantly as Morning-dresses can make
them. Harriet, as you shall hear, is the least shewy. 
All in Virgin white. She looks, she moves, an Angel! 
I must go to the dear girl. ‘Lucy, where are you?’ 
‘Here, madam—But how can one write, when
one's thoughts—’ 
‘Write as I bid you. Have I not given you your
cue?’ 
Lucy; taking up the pen.] Dear Lady L. I am in
a vast hurry. Lord W. Lady W. and Mr. Beauchamp,
are come in my Lord's coach. Sir Charles,
Mr. Deane, Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, have been here
this half-hour. Has Lady G. dated? No, I protest! 
We women are above such little exactnesses. Dear
Lady L! the Gentlemen and Ladies are all come. 
They say the Church-yard is crouded with more of
the living, than of the dead, and there is hardly room 

for a spade. What an image, on such a day! We
are all out of our wits between joy and hurry. My
cousin is not well; her heart misgives her! Foolish
girl! —She is with her grandmamma and my grandmamma
Selby. One gives her hartshorn, another
salts. ‘Lady G. Lady G. I must attend my dear Miss
Byron: In an hour's time that will be her name no
longer.’ 
Lady G.] Here, here, child! —Our Harriet's better,
Lady L. and ashamed of herself. Sir Charles
was sent for up, by her grandmother and aunt, to sooth
her. Charming man! Tenderness and Love are indeed
Tenderness and Love in the brave and manly
heart. Emily will not be married, on any consideration. 
There is terror, and not joy, she says, in
the attending circumstances. Good Emily, continue
to harden thy heart against Love, and thoughts of
Wedlock, for two years to come; and then change
thy mind, for Beauchamp's sake! 
‘Dear Lucy, a line or two more. Your uncle, I
hear his voice, summoning—The man's mad; mad
indeed, Lady L. —In such a hurry!’ —Lucy, They
are not yet all ready. 
‘Nor I, says the raptured saucy-face, to take up
the pen—Not a line more can I, will I, write, till
the knot is tied.’ 
Nor I, my dear Lady L. till I can give you joy
upon it. 
I fib: For this hurrying soul himself, in driving
every-body else, has forgot to be quite ready—But
we are in very good time. Lucy has brought me up
the Order of Procession, as Earl-marshal Selby has
directed it. 
Here I pin it on. 


First Coach (Mr. Selby's).
The Bride,–––
Mr. Selby.
Mrs. Shirley,––
The Bridegroom.
Second Coach (Mrs. Shirley's).
Bride-Men & Maids.
Miss Emily Jervois,
Lord Reresby.
Miss Nedham,––
Mr. Beauchamp.
Third Coach (Sir Charles's).
Bride-Men & Maids.
Miss Barclay,––
Mr. Falconbridge.
Miss Watson,––
Mr. Allestree.
Fourth Coach (Lord W's).
Mrs. Selby,–––
Lord W.
Lady W.––––
Lord L.
Fifth Coach (old Mrs. Selby's).
Old Mrs. Selby,––
Lord G.
Lady G.––––
Mr. Deane.
Sixth Coach (Mr. Reeves's).
Mrs. Reeves,––
Mr. James Selby.
Miss Lucy Selby,
Mr. Reeves.
Seventh Coach (Sir John Holles's).
Miss Nancy Selby,
Mr. Holles.
Miss Kitty Holles,
Mr. Steele.
Eighth Coach (Lord G's).
Miss Patty Holles,
Mr. Godfrey.
Miss Dolly Nedham,
Mr. Roberts.

Each coach four horses. Sir Charles's state-coach to
be reserved for the day of public appearance. 

[From Selby-house to the Church, Half a mile, in
Coaches; Foot-way not so much.] 
Emily was very earnest to be Bride-maid, tho' advised
to the contrary. 
Mr. Beauchamp was a Brideman, at his own request
also. 
I will go back to the early part of the morning. 
We were each of us serenaded, as I may say, by direction
of this joyful man uncle Selby (awakened, as
he called it, to music) by James Selby, playing at each
person's door an air or two, the words from an Epithalamium
(whose, I know not); 

The Day is come, you wish'd so long:
Love pick'd it out amidst the throng:
He destines to himself this Sun,
And takes the reins, and drives it on.

It is indeed a fine day. The sun seemed to reproach
some of us; but Harriet slept not a wink. No
wonder. 
I hastened up to salute her. She was ready dressed. 
Charming readiness, my Love, said I! —I took the
opportunity while I was able, answered she. 
Lucy, Nancy, were with her, both dressed, as she,
for the Day; that they might have nothing to do but
attend her. What joy in their faces! What sweet
carefulness in the lovely Harriet's! —And will this
Day, said she once, in a low voice, to me, give me
to the Lord of my Heart? —Let not grief come near
it; joy can be enough painful! 
Her grandmamma was soon ready. Harriet hurried
in to her grandmamma's apartment, to crave her
blessing. 
Lucy.] My cousin, her spirits over-hurried, was
ready to faint in her grandmother's arms; but, revived
by the soothings, the blessings, of her venerable
parent, soon recovered. Let nobody be frighted, said 

her grandmother: Affright not, by your hurryings,
my lovely child! A little fatigued; her spirits are hurried:
Her joy is too much for them. 
What a charming presence of mind has Mrs. Shirley! 
Lady G. bids me write any-thing to your Ladyship,
so I will but write; and forbids me apologizing
either for manner or words. 
Sir Charles was admitted. She stood up the moment
she saw him, Love and Reverence in her sweet
aspect. With a kind impatience he hastened to her,
and threw himself at her feet, taking her hand, and
pressing it with his lips—Resume your magnanimity,
my dearest Life: With the man before you, by God's
blessing, you will have more than a chance for happiness. 
Forgive me, Sir, said she, sitting down (She could
hardly stand): I can have no doubt of your goodness:
But it is a great Day! The Solemnity is an awful
one! 
It is a great, a solemn, Day to me, my dearest creature! 
But encourage my joy by your smiles. It can
suffer abatement only by giving you pain. 
Generous goodness! But— 
But what, my Love? In compliment to the best
of Parents, to the kindest of Uncles, resume your
usual presence of mind. I else, who shall glory before
a thousand witnesses in receiving the honour of your
hand, shall be ready to regret that I acquiesced so
chearfully with the wishes of those parental friends
for a public celebration. 
I have not been of late well, Sir: My mind is
weakened. But it would be ungrateful, if I did not
own to you, that my joy is as strong as my fear: It
overcame me. I hope I shall behave better. You
should not have been called to be a witness of my
weakness— 
This Day, my dearest Love, we call upon the world
to witness to our mutual vows. Let us shew that 

world, that our Hearts are one; and that the Ceremony,
sacred as it is, cannot make them more so. 
The engagement is a holy one: Let us shew the
Multitude, as well as our surrounding Friends, that
we think it a laudable one. Once more I call upon
you, my dearest Life, to justify my joy by your apparent
approbation. The world around you, loveliest
of women, has been accustomed to see your Lovers;
shew them now the Husband of your choice. 
O Sir! you have given me a motive! I will think
of it throughout the whole Sacred Transaction. She
looked around her, as if to see if every-body were
ready that moment to attend her to Church. 
Lady G.] The Ceremony is happily over; and I
am retired to oblige my Caroline. You have the
form of the Procession. When every-thing was ready,
Mr. Selby thought fit to call us down in order into the
Great Hall, according to it, marshalling his Fours; 
and great pride and pleasure did he take in his office. 
At his first summons, down came the Angel, and the
four young Ladies, and each of the four had her partner
assigned her. 
Emily seemed, between the novelty and the parade,
to be wholly engaged. 
Harriet, the moment she came down, flew to her
grandmamma, and kneeled to her, Sir Charles supporting
her as she kneeled, and as she arose. A tender
and sweet sight! 
The old Lady threw her arms about her, and twice
or thrice kissed her forehead; her voice faltring— 
God bless, bless, sustain my child! —Her aunt kissing
her cheek. Now, now, my dearest Love, whispered
she, I call upon you for fortitude. 
She visibly struggled for resolution; but seemed, in
all her motions, to be in a hurry, as if afraid she
should not hold it. She passed me with such a sweet
confusion! Charming girl! said I, taking her hand, 

as she passed, and giving way to her quick motions,
for fear restraint should disconcert her. 
When her uncle gave the word for moving, and
approached to take her hand, she in her hurry, forgetting
her cue, put it into Sir Charles's. Hold, hold,
said her uncle, sweeping his bosom with his chin, in
his arch way, that must not yet be. My brother,
kissing her hand, presented it, in a very gallant manner,
to her uncle. I yield it to you, Sir, said he, as a precious
trust; in an hour's time to be confirmed mine
by Divine, as well as Human Sanctions. 
Mr. Selby led the lovely creature to the coach, but
stopt at the door with her, for Mrs. Shirley's going in
first: The servants at distance all admiring, and blessing,
and praying, for their beloved young Lady. 
Sir Charles took the good Mrs. Shirley's hand in
one of his, and put the other arm round her waist,
to support her. What honour you do me, Sir! said
she. I think I may throw away this (meaning her
ebony crutch-stick): Do I ail any-thing? Her feet,
however, seconded not her spirits. My brother listed
her into the coach. It was so natural to him to be polite,
that he offered his hand to his beloved Harriet; 
but was checked by her uncle (in his usual pleasant
manner): Stay your time, too ready Sir, said he. 
Thank God it will not be so long before both hands
will be yours. 
We all followed, very exactly, the order that had
been, with so much proud parade, prescribed by Earlmarshal
Selby. 
The coach-way was lined with spectators. Mr.
Selby, it seems, bowed all the way, in return to the
salutes of his acquaintance. Have you never, Lady
L. called for the attention of your company in your
coach, to something that has passed in the streets, or
on the road, and at the same time thrust your head
through the windows so that nobody could see but
yourself? So it was with Mr. Selby, I doubt not. 

He wanted every one to look in at the Happy Pair; 
but took care that hardly any-body but himself should
be seen. I asked him afterwards, If it were not so? 
He knew not, he said, but it might. I told him, he
had a very jolly comely face to shew, but no head. 
He does not spare me: But true jests are not always
the most welcome. Tell a Lady of Forty, that she is
Sixty or Seventy, and she will not be so angry as if she
were guessed to be Eight or Nine-and-thirty. The
one nobody will believe; the other every-body. My
Lord G. I can tell you, fares well in Mr. Selby's company. 
‘Lucy, my dear girl, take the pen—You don't
know, you say, what I wrote last—Read it, my girl
—You have it—Take the pen; I want to be among
them.’ 
Lucy.] Lady G. must have her jest, whether in the
right place, or not. Excuse me, both Sisters. How
could she, however, in a part so interesting? She says,
I must give an account of the Procession, and she will
conduct them into the Church; I out of it. I cannot,
she says, after so many wishes, so many suspenses, so
much expectation, before it came to this, be too minute. 
Every woman's heart leaps, she says, when a
Wedding is described; and wishes to know all, how
and about it. Your Ladyship will know, that these
words are Lady G's own: But what can I say of the
Procession? 
The poor Harriet—Fie upon me—The rich Harriet,
was not sorry, I believe, that her uncle's head,
now on this side, now on the other, in a manner,
filled the Coach: But when it stopt at the Churchyard,
an inclosed one, whose walls keep off coaches
near a stone's throw from the Church-porch, then was
my lovely cousin put to it; especially as her grandmother
walked so slow. We were all out of our
Coaches before the Father and the Bride entered the 

Porch. I should tell your Ladyship, that the passage
from the entrance of the Church-yard to the Church is
railed in. Every Sunday the croud (gathered to see
the gentry go in and come out) are accustomed to be
bounded by these rails; and were the more contentedly
so now: The whole Church-yard seemed one
mass (but for that separating passage) of living matter,
distinguished only by separate heads; not a hat on the
mens; pulled off, perhaps, by general consent, for
the convenience of seeing, more than from designed
regard in that particular. But, in the main, never was
there such silent respect shewn, on the like occasion,
by mortal mob. We all of us, Lady L. have the
happiness of being beloved by high and low. 
But one pretty spectacle it is impossible to pass by. 
Four girls, tenants daughters, the eldest not above
Thirteen, appeared with neat wicker-baskets in their
hands, filled with flowers of the season. Chearful
way was made for them. As soon as the Bride, and
Father, and Sir Charles, and Mrs. Shirley, alighted,
these pretty little Flora's, all dressed in white, chaplets
of flowers for head-dresses, large nosegays in their
bosoms, white ribbands adorning their stays and their
baskets; some streaming down, others tied round the
handles in true lover's knots; attended the company,
two going before, two other here and there, and
every-where, all strewing flowers: A pretty thought
of the tenants, among themselves. Sir Charles seemed
much pleased with them: Pretty dears he called them,
to one of them. 
God bless you, and God bless you, was echoed
from many mouths. Your brother's attention was
chiefly employed on Mrs. Shirley, because of her age
and lameness. Here my good Lady G. perhaps would
stop to remark upon the worthy nature of the English
populace, when good characters attract their admiration; 
for even the populace took notice, how right a
thing it was for the finest young Gentleman their eyes 

ever beheld, to take such care of so good an old Lady. 
He deserved to live to be old himself, one said: They
would warrant, others said, that he was a sweet-temper'd
man; and others, that he had a good heart. 
In the Procession one of us picked up one praise, another
another. Tho' Lady G. Lady W. and the four
Bride-maids, as well as the Lords, might have claimed
high notice; yet not any of them received more than
commendation: We were all considered but as Satellites
to the Planets that passed before us. What, indeed,
were we more? But let me say, that Mrs. Shirley
had her share in Reverence, as the lovely Couple
had theirs in Admiration. But O how my dear cousin
was affected, when she alighted from her uncle's
coach! 
The Churchwardens themselves were so complaisant
as to stand at the Church-door, and opened it, on
the approach of the Bride, and her Nuptial Father. 
But all the pews near the Altar were, however, filled
(one or two excepted, which seemed to be left for the
company) with Ladies and well-dressed women of the
neighbourhood: And tho' they seemed to intend to
shut the doors after we had all got in, the Church
was full of people. Mr. Selby was displeased, for his
Niece's sake; who, trembling, could hardly walk up
to the Altar. Sir Charles seated his venerable charge
on a covered bench on the left-side of the Altar; and
by her, and on another covered bench on the right-side,
without the rails, we all, but the Bride-maids
and their partners, took our seats. They stood, the
Men on the Bridegroom's-side; the Maids on Harriet's
—Never— 
Lady G.] ‘Are you within the Church, Lucy? — 
You are, I protest. Let me read what you have
done. Come, pretty well, pretty well. —You were
going to praise my brother: Leave that to me. I
have an excellent knack at it.’ 

Never was man so much, and so deservedly, admired. 
He saw his Harriet wanted support and encouragement. 
The Minister stood suspended, a few
moments, as doubting whether she would not faint. 
My dearest Love, whispered Sir Charles, remember
you are doing honour to the happy, thrice happy, man
of your Choice: Shew he is your Choice, in the face
of this Congregation. Pardon me, Sir! I will endeavour
to be all you wish me. 
Sir Charles bowed to the Minister to begin the Sacred
Office. Mr. Selby, with all his bravery, trembled,
and, overcome by the Solemnity of the Preparation,
looked now pale, now red. The whole Congregation
were hushed and silent, as if nobody were
in the Church but persons immediately concerned to
be there. Emily changed colour frequently. She had
her handkerchief in her hand; and (pretty enough!)
her sister Bride-maids, little thinking that Emily had a
reason for her emotion, which none of them had,
pulled out their handkerchiefs too, and permitted a
gentle tear or two to steal down their glowing cheeks. 
I fixed my eye on Emily, sitting outward, to keep her
in order. The Doctor began—‘Dearly Beloved’— 
Ah, Harriet! thought I; thou art much quieter now,
than once thou wert at these words(a) . 
No impediments were confessed by either of the parties,
when they were referred to by the Minister, on
this head. I suppose this reference would have been
omitted by Sir Hargrave's snuffling Parson. To the
question, to my brother, ‘Wilt thou have,’ &c. he
chearfully answered, I will. Harriet did not say, I
will not. ‘Who giveth this woman,’ &c. I, I, I, said
uncle Selby; and he owns, that he had much ado to
refrain saying—‘With all my heart and soul!’ Sir
Charles seemed to have the office by heart; Harriet in
her heart: For before the Minister could take the 

Right-hand of the good girl to put it into that of my
brother, his hand knew its office; nor did her trembling
hand decline the favour. Then followed the
words of acceptance; ‘I Charles, take thee, Harriet,’ 
&c. on his part; which he audibly, and with apparent
joy and reverence in his countenance, repeated after
the Minister. But not quite so alert was Harriet, in
her turn: Her hand was rather taken, than offered. 
Her lips, however, moved after the Minister; nor
seemed to hesitate at the little piddling word obey;
which, I remember, gave a qualm to my poor heart,
on the like occasion. The Ring was presented. The
Doctor gave it to Sir Charles; who, with his usual
grace, put it on the finger of the most charming woman
in England; repeating after the Minister, audibly,
‘With this Ring I thee wed,’ &c. She brightened up; 
when the Minister, joining their Right-hands, read,
‘Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put
asunder.’ And the Minister's address to the company,
declaring the Marriage, and pronouncing them
Man and Wise, in the name of the Holy Trinity; 
and his blessing them; swelled, she owns, her grateful
heart, ready to bursting. In the Responses, I could
not but observe, that the Congregation generally
joined, as if they were interested in the celebration. 
Sir Charles, with a joy that lighted up a more
charming flush than usual on his face, his lively Soul
looking out at his fine eyes, yet with an air as modest
as respectful, did credit to our Sex before the applauding
multitude, by bending his knee to his sweet Bride,
on taking her Hand, and saluting her, on the conclusion
of the ceremony—May God, my dearest Life,
said he, audibly, be gracious to your Grandison, as he
will be good to his Harriet, now no more Byron! —She
courtesied low, and with so modest a grace, that every
soul blessed her; and pronounced her the loveliest of
women, and him the most graceful and polite of
men. 

He invited Dr. Curtis to the Wedding-dinner, and
led his Bride into the Vestry; where already were her
grandmother, her aunt, Lady W. her Lord, mine,
and Lord L. She was followed by her Virgin train; 
they by their partners. She threw herself, the moment
she beheld her grandmother, at her feet. Bless,
bless, madam, your happy, happy Child. 
God for ever bless the Darling of my heart! 
Sir Charles bent his knee to the venerable Lady,
with such a condescending dignity, if I may so express
myself; Receive and bless, also, your Son, my
Harriet's reverend parent, and mine. 
The dear Lady was affected. She slid off her seat
on her knees, and with up-lifted hands and eyes, tears
trickling on her cheeks; Thou, Almighty, bless the
dear Son of my wishes! 
He raised her, with pious tenderness, and saluted
her. Excellent Lady! —He would have said more,
but was affected—Every-body was—And having
seated the old Lady, he turned to Mrs. Selby—Words
are poor, said he; my actions, my behaviour, shall
speak the grateful sense I have of your goodness, saluting
her; of yours, madam, to Mrs. Shirley; and
of yours, my dearest Life, addressing himself to his
lovely Bride, who seemed hardly able to sustain her joy,
on so respectful a recognition of relation to persons so
dear to her. Let me once more, added he, bless the
Hand that has blessed me! 
She chearfully offered it: I give you, Sir, my Hand,
said she, courtesying, and with it a poor Heart—A
poor Heart, indeed! But it is a grateful one! It is all
your own! 
He bowed upon her Hand: He spoke not: He
seemed as if he could not speak. 
Joy, Joy, Joy, was wished the Happy Pair, from
every mouth. ‘See, my dear young Ladies,’ said the
happy and instructing Mrs. Shirley, addressing herself
to them, ‘the Reward of Duty, Virtue, and Obedience! 

How unhappy must those Parents and Relations
be, whose Daughters, unlike our Harriet,
have disgraced themselves, and their families, by a
shameful Choice—As my Harriet's is, such, looking
around her, be your Lot, my amiable Daughters!’ 
They every one besought her Hand, and kissed it; 
and some by speech, all by looks and courtesies, promised
to cherish the memory of this happy transaction,
for their benefit. 
Emily, when she approached the venerable Lady,
sobbing, said, Bless me, me also bless, my dear grandmamma
Shirley! —Let me be your own Granddaughter. 
—She embraced and blessed the dear girl— 
Ah, my Love! said she, But will you supply the place
of my Harriet to me? Will you be my Harriet? Will
you live with me, and Mrs. Selby—as Harriet did? — 
Emily started. Ah, madam! you are all goodness! 
Let me try to make myself, in some little way, agreeable
to my dear Miss Byron that was, and live a little
while in the sun-shine of my Guardian's eye; and
then how proud shall I be to be thought, in any the
least degree, like your Harriet! 
This I thought a good hint of Mrs. Shirley. Our
Harriet (my dear Caroline) shall not be made unhappy
by the chit; nor shall the dear girl neither, if I can
help it, be made so by her own foible. We will
watch over both, for the good of both, and for the
tranquillity of the best of men. 
Beauchamp's joy shone through a cloud, because
of his Father's illness; but it did shine. 
Mr. Selby and my Lord were vastly alive. Lord L.
was fervent in his joy, and congratulations; but he
was wiser than both put together. Nothing was wanting
to shew that he was excessively pleased; but I was
afraid the other two would not have considered the
Vestry as part of the Church; and would have struck
up a tune without music. 
How sincerely joyful, also, were Lord and Lady W! 

My Lord's eyes burst into tears more than once: Nephew,
and dear Nephew, at every word, whether
speaking of or to my brother; as if he thought the
Relation he stood in to him, a greater glory than his
Peerage, or ought else that he valued himself upon,
his excellent Lady excepted. 
Upon my Honour, Caroline, I think, as I have
often said, that people may be very happy, if not
most happy, who set out with a moderate stock of
Love, and supply what they want in that, with Prudence. 
I really think, that my Brother and Harriet
cannot be happier than are this now worthy Couple; 
times of life considered on both sides, and my Lord's
inferior capacity allowed for. For certainly, men of
sense are most capable of joyful sensations, and have
their balances; since it is as certain, that they are also
most susceptible of painful ones. What, then, is the
stuff, the nonsense, that romantic girls, their romancing
part of life not wholly elapsed, prate about,
and din one's cars with, of first Love, first Flame,
but first Folly? Do not most of such give indication
of gunpowder constitutions, that want but the match
to be applied, to set them into a blaze? Souls of
tinder, discretions of flimsy gauze, that conceal not
their folly—One day they will think as I do; and
perhaps before they have daughters who will convince
them of the truth of my assertion. 
But here comes Lucy. —‘My dear girl, take the
pen—I am too sentimental. The French only are
proud of sentiments at this day; the English cannot
bear them: Story, story, story, is what they hunt
after, whether sense or nonsense, probable or improbable.’ 
Lucy.] ‘Bless me, Lady G! you have written a
great deal in a little time. What am I to do?’ 
Lady G.] You brought the Happy Pair into
Church. I have told Lady L. what was done there:
You are to carry them out. 

Lucy.] ‘And so I will.’ —My dearest Love, said
her charming man to my cousin, who had a little
panic on the thoughts of going back through so great
a croud, imagine, as you walk, that you see nobody
but the happy man whom you have honoured with
your Hand: Every-body will praise and admire the
loveliest of women. Nobody, I hope, will blame
your Choice. Remember at whose request it was,
that you are put upon this difficulty: Your Grandmamma's
and Uncle's. She, one of the best of women,
was so married to one of the best of men: I
was but acquiescent in it. Shew, my dearest Life,
all your numerous admirers and well-wishers, that
you are not ashamed of your Choice. 
O Sir! how charmingly do you strengthen my
mind! I will shew the world, that my Choice is my
Glory. 
Every-body being ready, she gave her Hand to the
Beloved of her Heart. 
The Bells were set a ringing the moment the Solemnity
was concluded; and Sir Charles Grandison,
the Son of our venerable Mrs. Shirley, the Nephew
of my uncle and aunt Selby, Husband of my dear and
ever-dear Harriet, and the Esteemed of every heart,
led his graceful Bride through a lane of applauding
and decent-behaving spectators, down through the
Church—and still more thronging multitudes in the
Church-yard; the four little Flora's again strewing
flowers at their feet, as they passed. My sweet girls,
said he, to two of them, I charge you, complete the
honour you have done us, by your presence at Selby-house:
You will bring your companions with you,
my Loves. 
My uncle looked around him as he led Mrs. Shirley:
So proud! and so stately! By some undesigned
change, Mr. Beauchamp led Miss Jervois. She seemed
pleased, and happy; for he whispered to her, all the 

way, praises of her Guardian. My Guardian, twice or
thrice, occasionally, repeated she aloud, as if she
boasted of standing in some relation to him. 
The Bride and Bridegroom stopt for Mrs. Shirley, a
little while, at the Coach-side: A very grateful accident
to the spectators. He led them both in, with a
politeness that attends him in all he does. The Coach
wheeled off, to give way to the next; and we came
back in the order we went. 
‘Now, my dear Lady G. you, who never were
from the side of your dear new sister for the rest of
the day, resume the pen.’ 
Lady G.] ‘I will, my dear; but in a new Letter. 
This fourth sheet is written down to the very edge. 
Caroline will be impatient: I will send away this.’ 
Joy to my Sister! Joy to my Aunt! Joy to the
Earl! To Lady Gertrude! To our dear Dr. Bartlett! 
To every one, on an event so happy; and so long
wished for by us All! 
‘Sign, Lucy, sign.’ 
‘After your Ladyship.’ 
There, then, Charlotte G.
And, There, then, Lucy Selby. 

