



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq. 

Monday morn. 5 o' clock (June 19) 
I must write on. Nothing else can divert me. 
And I think thou canst not have been a dog to me,
I would fain have closed my eyes: But sleep flies
me. Well says Horace, as translated by Cowley. 

The halcyon Sleep will never build his nest
  In any stormy breast.
 'Tis not enough, that he does find
  Clouds and Darkness in the mind:
 Darkness but half his work will do.
'Tis not enough: He must find Quiet too.
Now indeed do I from my heart wish, that I had
never known this lady. But who would have thought
there had been such a woman in the world? Of all
the sex I have hitherto known, or heard, or read of, 

it was once subdued, and always subdued. The first
struggle was generally the last; or, at least, the subsequent
struggles were so much fainter and fainter, that
a man would rather have them, than be without
them. But how know I yet— 
* *
It is now near six—The sun has been illuminating,
for several hours, every thing about me: For that
impartial orb shines upon mother Sinclair's house, as
well as upon any other: But nothing within me can
it illuminate. 
At day-dawn I looked thro' the key-hole of my
Beloved's door. She had declared she would not put
off her cloaths any more in this house. There I beheld
her in a sweet slumber, which I hope will prove
refreshing to her disturbed senses; sitting in her elbow-chair,
her apron over her head, and that supported
by one sweet hand, the other hanging down upon her
side, in a sleepy lifelessness; half of one pretty foot
only visible. 
See the difference in our cases, thought I! She, the
charming injured, can sweetly sleep, while the varlet
injurer cannot close his eyes; and has been trying to
no purpose, the whole night, to divert his melancholy,
and to fly from himself! 
As every vice generally brings on its own punishment,
even in this life, if any thing were to tempt
me to doubt of future punishment, it would be, that
there can hardly be a greater, than that which I at
this instant experience in my own remorse. 
I hope it will go off. —If not, well will the dear
creature be avenged; for I shall be the most miserable
of men. 
Six o' clock. 
Just now Dorcas tells me, that her lady is preparing
openly, and without disguise, to be gone. 
Very probable. The humour she flew away from me 

in last night, has given me expectation of such an enterprize. 
Now, Jack, to be thus hated, and despised! — 
And if I have sinned beyond forgiveness— 
* *
But she has sent me a message by Dorcas, that she
will meet me in the dining-room; and desires [Odd
enough!] that the wench may be present at the conversation
that shall pass between us. This message
gives me hope. 
Nine o' clock. 
Confounded art, cunning, villainy! —By my
soul, she had like to have slipt thro' my fingers. She
meant nothing by her message, but to get Dorcas out
of the way, and a clear coast. Is a fancied distress
sufficient to justify this lady for dispensing with her
principles? Does she not shew me, that she can wilfully
deceive, as well as I? 
Had she been in the fore-house, and no passage to
go thro' to get at the street-door, she had certainly
been gone. But her haste betray'd her: For Sally
Martin happening to be in the fore-parlour, and hearing
a swifter motion than usual, and a rustling of
silks, as if from somebody in a hurry, looked out
and seeing who it was, stept between her and the
door, and set her back against it. 
You must not go, Madam. Indeed you must not. 
By what right? —And how dare you? —And such
like imperious airs the dear creature gave herself. — 
While Sally called out for her aunt; and half a dozen
voices joined instantly in the cry, for me to hasten
down, to hasten down, in a moment. 
I was gravely instructing Dorcas above-stairs, and
wondering what would be the subject of the conversation
which she was to be a witness to, when the
outcries reached my ears. And down I flew. —And
there was the charming creature, the sweet deceiver
panting for breath, her back against the partition, 

parcel in her hand [Women make no excursions
without their parcels] Sally, Polly (but Polly obligingly
pleading for her) the Mother, Mabell, and Peter
(the footman of the house), about her; all, however,
keeping their distance; the Mother and Sally between
her and the door—In her soft rage the dear soul, repeating,
I will go! —Nobody has a right—I will go! 
—If you kill me, women, I won't go up again! 
As soon as she saw me, she stept a pace or two towards
me; Mr. Lovelace, I will go! said she—Do
you authorize these women—What right have they,
or you either, to stop me? 
Is this, my dear, preparative to the conversation
you led me to expect in the dining-room? And do
you think I can part with you thus? —Do you think
I will? 
And am I, Sir, to be thus beset! —Surrounded
thus? —What have these women to do with me? 
I desired them to leave us, all but Dorcas, who
was down as soon as I. I then thought it right to
assume an air of resolution, having found my tameness
so greatly triumphed over. And now, my dear,
said I (urging her reluctant feet), be pleased to walk
to the fore-parlour. Here, since you will not go
up stairs—Here we may hold our parley: and Dorcas
be witness to it. —And now, Madam, seating her,
and sticking my hands in my sides, your pleasure! 
Insolent villain! said the furious lady. And, rising,
ran to the window, and threw up the sash [She knew
not, I suppose, that there were iron rails before the
windows]. And, when she found she could not get
out into the street, clasping her uplifted hands together
—having dropt her parcel—For the love of God,
good honest man! —For the love of God, mistress— 
to two passers-by—a poor, poor creature, said she,
ruin'd!— 
I clasp'd her in my arms, people beginning to gather
about the window: And then she cried out, Murder! 

Help! help! —And carried her up to the dining-room,
in spight of her little plotting heart (as I may now call
it), altho' she violently struggled, catching hold of
the banisters here and there, as she could. I would
have seated her there, but she sunk down half-motionless,
pale as ashes. And a violent burst of tears
happly reliev'd her. 
Dorcas wept over her. The wench was actually
moved for her! 
Violent hysterics succeeded. I left her to Mabell,
Dorcas, and Polly; the latter the most supportable
to her of the sisterhood. 
This attempt, so resolutely made, alarmed me not
a little. 
Mrs. Sinclair, and her nymphs, are much more
concerned; because of the reputation of their house,
as they call it, having receiv'd some insults (broken
windows threaten'd), to make them produce the
young creature who cried out. 
While the mobbish inquisitors were in the height
of their office, the women came running up to me
to know what they should do; a constable being
actually fetch'd. 
Get the constable into the parlour, said I, with
three or four of the forwardest of the mob, and produce
one of the nymphs, onion-ey'd, in a moment
with disorder'd head-dress and neck-kerchief, and let
her own herself the person: The occasion, a female
skirmish; but satisfied with the justice done her. Then
give a dram or two to each fellow, and all will be well 
Eleven o' clock. 
All done, as I advised; and all is well. 
Mrs. Sinclair wishes she never had seen the face of
so skittish a lady; and she and Sally are extremely
pressing with me, to leave the perverse beauty to their
breaking, as they call it, for four or five days. But
I cursed them into silence; only ordering double
precaution for the future. 

Polly, tho' she consoled the dear perverse-one all
she could, when with her, insists upon it to me, that
nothing but terror will procure me tolerable usage. 
Dorcas was challenged by the women upon her
tears. She own'd them real. Said, She was asham'd
of herself; but could not help it. So sincere, so
unyielding a grief, in so sweet a lady!— 
The women laugh'd at her: But I bid her make
no apologies for her tears, nor mind their laughing. 
I was glad to see them so ready. Good use might be
made of such strangers. In short, I would have her
indulge them often, and try if it were not possible to
gain her lady's confidence by her concern for her. 
She said, That her lady did take kind notice of
them to her; and was glad to see such tokens of
humanity in her. 
Well then, said I, your part, whether any thing
come of it or not, is to be tender-hearted. It can do
no harm, if no good. But take care you are not too
suddenly, or too officiously compassionate. 
So Dorcas will be a humane good sort of creature,
I believe, very quickly with her lady. And as it becomes
women to be so, and as my Beloved is willing
to think highly of her own sex; it will the more
readily pass with her. 
I thought to have had one trial (having gone so far)
for cohabitation. But what hope can there be of succeeding? 
—She is invincible! —Against all my notions,
against all my conceptions (thinking of her as a woman,
and in the very bloom of her charms), she is
absolutely invincible! —My whole view, at the present,
is to do her legal justice! if I can but once
more get her out of her altitudes! 
The consent of such a lady, must make her ever
new, ever charming. But, astonishing! Can the
want of a church ceremony make such a difference! 
She owes me her consent; for hitherto I have had
nothing to boast of. All, of my side, has been deep 

remorse, anguish of mind, and love increased rather
than abated. 
How her proud rejection stings me! —And yet I hope
still to get her to listen to my stories of the family-reconciliation,
and of her Uncle and Capt. Tomlinson. 
—And as she has given me a pretence to detain her,
against her will, she must see me, whether in temper,
or not—She cannot help it. And if Love will
not do, Terror, as the women advise, must be tried. 
A nice part, after all, has my Beloved to act. If
she forgive me easily, I resume, perhaps, my projects: 
—If she carry her rejection into violence, that violence
may make me desperate, and occasion fresh
violence—She ought, since she thinks she has found
the women out, to consider where she is. 
I am confoundedly out of conceit with myself. If
I give up my contrivances, my joy in stratagem, and
plot, and invention, I shall be but a common man: 
Such another dull heavy creature as thyself. Yet
what does even my success in my machinations bring
me, but disgrace, repentance, regret? But I am
overmatched, egregiously overmatched, by this lady. 
What to do with her, or without her, I know not. 