



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. Morn. April 19. 
I am glad, my dear friend, that you approve of my
Removal to London. 
The disagreement between your Mother and you
gives me inexpressible affliction. I hope I think you
both more unhappy than you are. But I beseech you
let me know the particulars of the debate you call a
very pretty one. I am well acquainted with your dialect. 
When I am informed of the whole, let your
Mother have been ever so severe upon me, I shall be
easier a great deal. —Faulty people should rather deplore
the occasion they have given for anger than resent
it. 
If I am to be obliged to any-body in England for
money, it shall be to you. Your Mother need not 

know of your kindness to me, you say—But she must
know it, if it be done, and if she challenge my beloved
friend upon it; for would you either falsify or
prevaricate? —I wish your Mother could be made easy
on this head. —Forgive me, my dear—But I know— 
Yet once she had a better opinion of me. —O my inconsiderate
rashness! —Excuse me once more, I pray
you. —Pride, when it is native, will shew itself sometimes
in the midst of mortifications—But my stomach
is down already. 
* *
I am unhappy that I cannot have my worthy Hannah. 
I am as sorry for the poor creature's illness as for
my own disappointment by it. Come, my dear Miss
Howe, since you press me to be beholden to you; and
would think me proud if I absolutely refused your favour; 
pray be so good as to send her two guineas in my name. 
If I have nothing for it, as you say, but Matrimony,
it yields a little comfort, that his Relations do not despise
the Fugitive, as persons of their rank and quality-pride
might be supposed to do, for having been a Fugitive. 
But O my cruel, thrice cruel Uncle! to suppose— 
But my heart checks my pen, and will not let it proceed,
on an intimation so extremely shocking as that
which he supposes! —Yet, if thus they have been persuaded,
no wonder if they are irreconcileable. 
This is all my hard-hearted Brother's doings! —His
surmisings! —God forgive him—Prays his injured
Sister! 