



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday, May 3. 
When I have already taken pains to acquaint thee
in full with my views, designs, and resolutions,
with regard to this admirable creature, it is very extraordinary,
that thou shouldst vapour as thou dost,
in her behalf, when I have made no trial, no attempt: 
And yet, givest it as thy opinion in a former letter,
that advantage may be taken of the situation she is in; 
and that she may be overcome. 
Most of thy reflections, particularly that, which
respects the difference as to the joys to be given by 

the Virtuous and the Libertine of the sex, are fitter to
come in as after-reflections, than as antecedencies. 
I own with thee, and with the poet, That sweet are
the joys that come with willingness —But is to be expected,
that a woman of education, and a lover of
forms, will yield before she is attacked? —And have I
so much as summon'd This to surrender? —I doubt
not but I shall meet with difficulty. I must therefore
make my first effort by surprize. —There may possibly
be some cruelty necessary. But there may be consent
in struggle; there may be yielding in resistance: But
the first conflict over, whether the following may not
be weaker and weaker, till willingness follow, is the
point to be try'd. —I will illustrate what I have said by
the simile of a bird new-caught. We begin with
birds, as boys, and, as men, go on to ladies; and both
perhaps, in turns, experience our sportive cruelty. 
Hast thou not observed the charming gradations,
by which the insnared volatile has been brought to
bear with its new condition? How at first, refusing
all sustenance, it beats and bruises itself against its
wires, till it makes its gay plumage fly about, and
overspread its well-secured cage. Now it gets out
its head; sticking only at its beautiful shoulders: 
Then, with difficulty, drawing back its head, it gasps
for breath, and erectedly perched, with meditating
eyes, first surveys, and then attempts, its wired canopy. 
As it gets breath, with renew'd rage, it beats
and bruises again its pretty head and sides, bites the
wires, and pecks at the fingers of its delighted tamer. 
Till at last, finding its efforts ineffectual, quite tired
and breathless, it lays itself down, and pants at the
bottom of the cage, seeming to bemoan its cruel fate
and forfeited liberty. And after a few days, its struggles
to escape still diminishing, as it finds it to no purpose
to attempt it, its new habitation becomes familiar; 
and it hops about from perch to perch, resumes its 

wonted chearfulness, and every day sings a song to
amuse itself, and reward its keeper. 
Now, let me tell thee, that I have known a bird
actually starve itself, and die with grief, at its being
caught and caged—But never did I meet with a lady
who was so silly. —Yet have I heard the dear souls most
vehemently threaten their own lives on such an occasion. 
But it is saying nothing in a woman's favour,
if we do not allow her to have more sense than a
bird. And yet we must all own, that it is more difficult
to catch a bird than a lady. 
And now, Belford, were I to go no further, how
shall I know whether this sweet bird may not be
brought to sing me a fine song, and, in time, to be as
well contented with her condition as I have brought
other birds to be; some of them very shy ones? 
But I guess at thy principal motive in this thy earnestness
in behalf of this charming creature. I know
that thou correspondest with Lord M. who is impatient,
and long has been desirous, to see me shackled. 
And thou wantest to build up a merit with that noble
podagra-man, with a view to one of his nieces. But
knowest thou not, that my consent will be wanting to
complete it? —and what a commendation will it be
of thee to such a girl as Charlotte, when I shall acquaint
her with the affront thou puttest upon the
whole sex, by asking, whether I think my reward,
when I have subdued the most charming woman in
the world, will be equal to my trouble? —Which,
thinkest thou, a woman of spirit will soonest forgive,
the undervaluing varlet who can put such a question; 
or him, who prefers the pursuit and conquest of a fine
woman to all the joys of life? —Have I not known
even a virtuous woman, as she would be thought,
vow everlasting antipathy to a man, who gave out,
that she was too old for him to attempt? 
But another word or two, as to thy objection relating
to my trouble and my reward. 

Does not the keen foxhunter endanger his neck and
his bones in pursuit of a vermin, which, when killed,
is neither fit food for men nor dogs? 
Do not the hunters of the nobler game value the
venison less than the sport? 
Why then should I be reflected upon, and the Sex
affronted, for my patience and perseverance in the
most noble of all chaces; and for not being a poacher
in love, as thy question may be made to imply? 
Learn of thy master, for the future, to treat more
respectfully a sex that yields us our principal diversions
and delights. 
Proceed anon. 