


Signor Jeronymo della Porretta, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


My Grandison,
You will be surprised—astonished—The dear
Clementina! How has she tarnished all her glory! 
A young creature of her nice honour! —Good 

God! —And must I her brother, your Jeronymo, expose
his sister? 
We gave into almost every wish of her heart. The
dear Scripturist had requested a month's time to travel
from place to place on the other side of the Apennines,
partly in imitation of the daughter of the famous
Israelitish General (a) ; and partly on pretence
of establishing her health; implying, that she considered
the meditated marriage as a sacrifice: And we
had hopes at the end of it, that she would be brought
to give her hand, not unchearsully, to the Count of
Belvedere, for whom she owned pity and gratitude. 
We had consented to several trifling delays of her
return to us before. Yet besought her to excuse us
from allowing her to visit Rome and Naples; and
she acquiesced with the reasons we gave her. She
desired leave to take into her service, as a page, an
English youth, the nephew of a gentleman of the
English factory at Leghorn, who was well recommended
by his uncle, on the enquiry Mrs. Beaumont,
at our desire, made into his character. We, supposing
her motive to be merely an innocent and grateful
regard to the country of a man whom we could
allow her to respect, consented. She accordingly took
him; and he attended her in her excursions to Pistoia,
Prato, Pratolina, Pisa, Sienna, &c.; to some of
which places she was accompanied by Mrs. Beaumont,
and the Ladies her friends. But being desirous to see
the sea-coast from Piombino to Luc a, according to
a plan she shewed; and talking of stretching to Genoa,
when at Lucca; which was to conclude her
excursions, and complete her month; she was left
by those Ladies to be attended by her own servants:
These, all but her page and Laura, she contrived (the
high-soul'd Clementina stooped to art!) to send different
ways, ordering them to meet her at Lucca; 
but, instead of going thither, took a short way to 

Leghorn; and there embarked on board an English
ship ready cleared out, and bound for the port of
London; and it had sailed three days, before it was
known what was become of her. But then the contents
of the following Letter, directed to Mrs. Beaumont,
astonished that Lady, and her friends; as you
will believe it did us, when it was transmitted to us
in a Letter written by Mrs. Beaumont, acquainting
us with the particulars of her excursions and flight; 
and the certainty, upon proper enquiries at Leghorn,
that she was gone to England. 

“Forgive me, my dearest Ladies; my dearest
Mrs. Beaumont, particularly, forgive me! I am
embarked in an enterprize, that will be enough
my punishment. Pity me, therefore, as well as
pardon me! The impending evil is always the
most terrible. My heart is extremely averse to a
married life. A fortnight of the month is expired,
at the end of which I am expected to give
my vows to a man not unworthy of them, could
I think it in my power to make him happy, and
could I be so myself in the prospects before me:
But how can that be? Persuasion, cruel persuasion! 
A kneeling father, a sighing mother; generous,
but entreating brothers; how, how can I resist
you, if I go to dear, once most dear Bologna? 
All you, my friends, at Bologna, at Urbino, every-where,
forgive me! What have I not suffered before
I came to the resolution that must be pursued,
tho' repentance, when I have attained the proposed
asylum, follow! My good Lord of B. forgive
me also. Change your attachment. You
deserve a better wife, than conscience, than honour,
than justice (words that mean the same
thing) tell me, can be made you, by the unhappy
Clementina. She dare not add Della Porretta. —Ah
my mother!”— 

This Letter was left with a person at Leghorn, 

with orders, not to send it, till the vessel had sailed
three days. We are all distracted; but most my
mother. 
For the sake of her peace of mind, we are come
to a resolution to anticipate our summer's visit to you; 
and, unpropitious as the season is for such a journey,
we shall set out next week accordingly. God give
my mother strength to bear the fatigue! Courage she
has, on this occasion, who never before could be
brought to go by sea any-where: No, not to Naples,
to visit her Giacomo, and his Lady, tho' in a more
propitious season. 
It was a long-laid scheme, we imagine; for she
had dismissed her faithful Camilla, on her urging her
to a change of condition. I am afraid the good
woman was too sedulous in obeying the orders given
her by my brother, to make use of every opportunity
to inspire her with tender sentiments, in favour
of the Count of Belvedere. Laura has for some time
been her only favourite servant. 
This youth, by name Antony Dagley, no doubt
has managed this affair for her. 
Mrs. Beaumont now recollects several circumstances,
which, could she have suspected Clementina
to be capable of such an enterprize, might have given
her suspicion. 
The vessel she is in, is called The Scanderoon:
Alexander Henderson master. 
How can the dear creature on her arrival in England
look You, your Lady, your Sisters, in the face? 
What may she suffer, in such a voyage, at such a
season! To what insults may she be exposed! So
little as she knows of the English tongue! Laura not
a syllable of it! Depending on the fidelity of a
stranger-boy! So few changes of apparel as she had
the opporounity to take with her! —Whether provided
with any considerable sums of money, we
know not! England, in her opinion, a nation of 

heretics! —Good Heaven! could Clementina della
Porretta be guilty of such a rashness? 
But what an averseness must she have to marriage! 
We have certainly been too precipitating. You cautioned
us: Yet, I dare say, could not have believed,
that our Clementina could have taken such a step. 
But, alas! we conclude, that it is owing more to
the effects of her late unhappy malady, than to any
other cause. When once the mind is disordered,
there is danger, it seems, of its shewing itself, on extraordinary
occasions, even after the cure is supposed
to be perfected, capable of extravagance. Again I
say, we have been too hasty. —Our brother Giacomo! 
—But he is the most disinterested of men. He
would not otherwise be so urgent as he is for her marriage. 
Dear, dear creature! How my heart bleeds for the
distresses she may be thrown into! —But they cannot
be equal to those which her mother feels for her. 
Clementina knows how much the lives of her father
and mother are bound up in hers. But I repeat, she
must be under the influences of her former malady,
or never, never, could she have done an act, that she
must know would wound our very souls. 
From the lights I have held out, we hope you will
be able to find her before she can have suffered more
than the inconveniencies of the voyage; before she
can have wanted money, or other conveniencies. If
you do, your sisters will give the rash one countenance
and protection till we can arrive. 
Our company will be, my Father, Mother, the
Bishop, your Jeronymo, Father Marescotti, and our
two cousins Sebastiano and Juliano. Mrs. Beaumont
has the goodness, purely from motives of charity, to
accompany my mother. Poor Camilla, almost as
inconsolable as my mother, attends her Lady. 
We must give you the trouble of hiring for us as
large a house as you can procure. The circumstances 

we are in, allow us not to think of any-thing more
than common convenience, and to be incognito. 
Our two cousins above-named may be in lodgings,
if room be wanted. 
We shall have no more than necessary attendants. 
A lesser house, or handsome lodgings will content
the Count of Belvedere. 
These cares for us, my dear Grandison, we must
throw upon you: Yet, if my Lowther be in England,
he will be so kind as to case you of part of
them. You will have concern enough in sharing
ours, for the occasion which carries us to you, so
much sooner than we intended, and in an inconvenient
season; circumstances that will sufficiently demonstrate
the distress we are in. 
The vessel we have hired, is called, The Leghorn
Frigate. The master's name is Arthur Gunning. 
If we are favoured in our voyage, the master hopes
to be in your river Thames in about three weeks from
our embarking. 
God give us, my Grandison, a meeting not un-happy! 
May we find the dear fugitive safe in your
protection, or under the wings of one of your noble
sisters! 
I hope this unhappy affair will produce no uneasiness
between your Lady and you. If it should, what
an additional evil would the dear rash one have to
answer for! 
The General is too much incensed against the unhappy
girl, to think of accompanying us, could he
obtain permission of his sovereign. 
The least reparation the dear creature can make us,
the Bishop says, is, chearfully to give her vows to the
good Count of Belvedere, who looks forward to the
issue of this affair, as the crisis of his fate. 
I hardly know what I have written; nor how to
leave off. It is to you, our dear friend, our consoler,
our brother, and, let me add, our refuge, next to 

that Almighty, who we hope will guide us in safety
to you, and give an issue not greatly derogatory to
the glory of our sister, and family. Join, my Grandison,
your prayers with ours, to this purpose. Noblest
of friends, Adieu! 
Jeronymo della Porretta. 

