



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday Morn. May 22. 
No generosity in this Lady. None at all. Wouldst
thou not have thought, that after I had permitted
her to withdraw, primed for mischief as I was,
she would meet me next morning early; and that
with a smile; making me one of her best courtesies? 
I was in the Dining-room before Six, expecting
her. She opened not her door. I went up stairs and
down; and hemm'd; and called Will; called Dorcas; 
threw the doors hard to; but still she opened
not her door. Thus till half an hour after Eight,
fooled I away my time; and then (breakfast ready) I
sent Dorcas to request her company. 
But I was astonished, when (following the wench,
as she did at the first invitation) I saw her enter dressed,
all but her gloves, and those and her fan in her
hand; in the same moment bidding Dorcas direct
Will. to get her a chair to the door. 
Cruel creature, thought I, to expose me thus to
the derision of the women below! 
Going abroad, Madam? 
I am, Sir. 
I looked cursed silly, I am sure. You will breakfast
first, I hope, Madam; in a very humble strain; 
yet with an hundred tenter-hooks in my heart. 
Had she given me more notice of her intention, I
had perhaps wrought myself up to the frame I was in
the day before, and begun my vengeance. And immediately
came into my head all the virulence that
had been transcribed for me from Miss Howe's Letters,
and in that Letter which I had transcribed myself. 

Yes, she would drink one dish; and then laid her
gloves and fan in the window just by. 
I was perfectly disconcerted. I hemm'd, and was
going to speak several times; but knew not in what
key. Who's modest now, thought I! Who's insolent
now! —How a tyrant of a woman confounds a
bashful man! —She was acting Miss Howe, I thought; 
and I the spiritless Hickman. 
At last, I will begin, thought I. 
She a dish—I a dish. 
Sip, her eyes her own, she; like an haughty and
imperious sovereign, conscious of dignity, every look
a favour. 
Sip, like her vassal, I; lips and hands trembling,
and not knowing that I sipp'd or tasted. 
I was—I was—Iffp'd—(drawing in my breath and
the liquor together, tho' I scalded my mouth with it)
I was in hopes, Madam— 
Dorcas came in just then. —Dorcas, said she, is a
chair gone for? 
Damn'd impertinence, thought I, thus to put me
out in my speech! And I was forced to wait for the
servant's answer to the insolent mistress's question. 
William is gone for one, Madam. 
This cost me a minute's silence before I could begin
again. And then it was with my hopes, and my
hopes, and my hopes, that I should have been early
admitted to— 
What weather is it, Dorcas? said she, as regardless
of me as if I had not been present. 
A little lowering, Madam—The Sun is gone in— 
It was very fine half an hour ago. 
I had no patience. Up I rose. Down went the
Tea-cup, Saucer and all—Confound the Weather,
the Sunshine, and the Wench! —Begone for a devil,
when I am speaking to your Lady, and have so little
opportunity given me. 
Up rose the saucy-face, half-frighted; and snatched
from the window her gloves and fan. 

You must not go, Madam! —Seizing her hand— 
By my Soul you must not— 
Must not, Sir! —But I must—You can curse your
maid in my absence, as well as if I were present— 
Except—Except—you intend for me, what you direct
to her. 
Dearest creature, you must not go—You must not
leave me—Such determined scorn! —Such contempts! 
—Questions asked your servant of no meaning but to
break in upon me—I cannot bear it! 
Detain me not, struggling. I will not be withheld. 
I like you not, nor your ways. You sought
to quarrel with me yesterday, for no reason in the
world that I can think of, but because I was two obligeing. 
You are an ingrateful man; and I hate you
with my whole heart, Mr. Lovelace! 
Do not make me desperate, Madam. Permit me
to say, that you shall not leave me in this humour. 
Where-ever you go, I will attend you. Had Miss
Howe been my friend, I had not been thus treated. 
It is but too plain to whom my difficulties are owing. 
I have long observed, that every Letter you receive
from her, makes an alteration in your behaviour to
me. She would have you treat me, as she treats Mr.
Hickman, I suppose: But neither does that treatment
become your admirable temper to offer, nor
me to receive. 
This startled her. She did not care to have me
think hardly of Miss Howe. 
But recollecting herself, Miss Howe, said she, is
a friend to virtue, and to good men. If she like not
you, it is because you are not one of those. 
Yes, Madam; and therefore to speak of Mr. Hickman
and Myself, as you both, I suppose, think of
each, she treats him as she would not treat a Lovelace. 
—I challenge you, Madam, to shew me but one of
the many Letters you have received from her, where
I am mentioned. 

Miss Howe is just; Miss Howe is good, replied
she. She writes, she speaks, of every-body as they
deserve. If you point me out but any one occasion,
upon which you have reason to build a merit to yourself,
as either just or good, or even generous, I will
look out for her Letter on that occasion [If such an
occasion there be, I have certainly acquainted her
with it]; and will engage it shall be in your favour. 
Devilish severe! And as indelicate as severe, to put
a modest man upon hunting backward after his own
merits. 
She would have flung from me: I will not be detained,
Mr. Lovelace. I will go out. 
Indeed you must not, Madam, in this humour. 
And I placed myself between her and the door. — 
And then, fanning, she threw herself into a chair,
her sweet face all crimsoned over with passion. 
I cast myself at her feet. —Begone, Mr. Lovelace,
said she, with a rejecting motion, her fan in her
hand; for your own sake leave me! —My soul is
above thee, man! with both her hands pushing me
from her! —Urge me not to tell thee, how sincerely
I think my soul above thee! —Thou hast in mine, a
proud, a too proud heart, to contend with! —Leave
me, and leave me for ever! —Thou hast a proud heart
to contend with! 
Her air, her manner, her voice, were bewitchingly
noble, tho' her words were so severe. 
Let me worship an angel, said I, no woman. Forgive
me, dearest creature! —Creature if you be, forgive
me! —Forgive my inadvertencies! Forgive my
inequalities! —Pity my infirmities! —Who is equal to
my Clarissa? 
I trembled between Admiration and Love; and
wrapt my arms about her knees, as she sat. She
tried to rise at the moment; but my clasping round
her thus ardently, drew her down again; and never
was woman more affrighted. But free as my clasping 

emotion might appear to her apprehensive heart,
I had not, at the instant, any thought but what reverence
inspired. And till she had actually withdrawn
[Which I permitted under promise of a speedy
return, and on her consent to dismiss the chair] all
the motions of my heart were as pure as her own. 
She kept not her word. An hour I waited before
I sent to claim her promise. She could not possibly
see me yet, was the answer. As soon as she could,
she would. 
Dorcas says, she still excessively trembled; and
ordered her to give her hartshorn and water. 
A strange apprehensive creature! Her terror is too
great for the occasion. Evils are often greater in apprehension
than in reality. Hast thou never observed,
that the terrors of a bird caught, and actually in the
hand, bear no comparison to what we might have
supposed those terrors would be, were we to have
formed a judgment of the same bird by its shyness
before it was taken? 
Dear creature! —Did she never romp? Did she
never from girlhood to now, hoyden? The innocent
kinds of freedom taken and allowed on these occasions,
would have familiarized her to greater. Sacrilege
but to touch the hem of her garment! —Excess
of delicacy! —O the consecrated Beauty! how
can she think to be a wife! 
But how do I know till I try, whether she may
not by a less alarming treatment be prevailed upon, or
whether [Day, I have done with thee!] she may not
yield to nightly surprizes? This is still the burden of
my song, I can marry her when I will. And if I do,
after prevailing (whether by surprize, or by reluctant
consent) whom but myself shall I have injured? 
* *
It is now Eleven o'clock. She will see me as soon
as she can, she tells Polly Horton, who made her a
tender visit, and to whom she is less reserved than to 

any-body else. Her emotion, she assures her, was
not owing to perverseness, to nicety, to ill-humour; 
but to weakness of heart. She has not strength of
mind sufficient, she says, to enable her to support her
condition. 
Yet what a contradiction! —Weakness of heart,
says she, with such a strength of will! —O Belford!
she is a lion-hearted Lady, in every case where her
Honour, her Punctilio rather, calls for spirit. But
I have had reason more than once in her case, to
conclude, that the passions of the gentle, slower to
be moved than those of the quick, are the most flameing,
the most irresistible, when raised. —Yet her
charming Body is not equally organized. The unequal
partners pull two ways; and the divinity within
her tears her silken frame. But had the same soul
informed a masculine body, never would there have
been a truer hero. 
Monday, Two o'clock. 
Not yet visible! —My Beloved is not well. What
Expectations had she from my ardent admiration of
her! —More rudeness than revenge apprehended. 
Yet, how my soul thirsts for Revenge upon both
these Ladies! I must have recourse to my masterstrokes. 
This cursed project of Miss Howe and her
Mrs. Townsend (if I cannot contrive to render it
abortive) will be always a sword hanging over my
head. Upon every little disobligation my Beloved
will be for taking wing; and the pains I have taken
to deprive her of every other refuge or protection
in order to make her absolutely dependent upon me,
will be all thrown away. But perhaps I shall find
out a Smuggler to counterplot Miss Howe. 
Thou remembrest the contention between the Sun
and the North-wind, in the Fable; which should first
make an honest Traveller throw off his cloak. 
Boreas began first. He puffed away most vehemently; 

and often made the poor fellow curve and
stagger; but with no other effect, than to cause him
to wrap his Surtout the closer about him. 
But when it came to Phœbus's turn, he so played
upon the Traveller with his beams, that he made him
first unbutton, and then throw it quite off: –––Nor left
he, till he obliged him to take to the friendly shade of
a spreading beech; where prostrating himself on the
thrown-off cloak, he took a comfortable nap. 
The victor-god then laughed outright, both at Boreas
and the Traveller, and pursued his radiant course,
shining upon, and warming and cherishing a thousand
new objects, as he danced along: And at night, when
he put up his fiery coursers, he diverted his Thetis
with the relation of his pranks in the passed day. 
I, in like manner, will discard all my boistrous inventions: 
And if I can oblige my sweet Traveller to
throw aside, but for one moment, the cloak of her
rigid virtue, I shall have nothing to do, but, like the
Sun, to bless new objects with my rays. But my
chosen hours of conversation and repose, after all my
peregrinations, will be devoted to my goddess. 
* *
And now, Belford, according to my new system,
I think this house of Mrs. Fretchville an embarrass
upon me. I will get rid of it; for some time at least. 
Mennell, when I am out, shall come to her, enquiring
for me. What for? thou'lt ask. What
for! –––Hast thou not heard what has befallen poor
Mrs. Fretchville? –––Then I'll tell thee. 
One of her maids, about a week ago, was taken
with the Small-pox. The rest kept their mistress ignorant
of it till Friday; and then she came to know
it by accident. The greater half of the plagues poor
mortals of condition are tormented with, proceed from
the Servants they take, partly for shew, partly for use,
and with a view to lessen their cares. 
This has so terrified the widow, that she is taken 

with all the symptoms that threaten an attack from
that dreadful enemy of fair faces. –––So must not think
of removing: Yet cannot expect, that we should be
further delayed on her account. 
She now wishes, with all her heart, that she had
known her own mind, and gone into the country at
first when I treated about the house: This evil then
had not happened! A cursed cross accident for us, too! 
–––High-ho! Nothing else, I think, in this mortal
life! People need not study to bring crosses upon
themselves by their petulancies. 
So this affair of the house will be over; at least,
for one while. But then I can fall upon an expedient
which will make amends for this disappointment. I
must move slow, in order to be sure. I have a charming
contrivance or two in my head, even supposing
my Beloved should get away, to bring her back again. 
But what is become of Lord M. I trow, that he
writes not to me, in answer to my invitation? If he
would send me such a Letter as I could shew, it might
go a great way towards a perfect reconciliation. I
have written to Charlotte about it. He shall soon
hear from me, and that in a way he won't like, if he
writes not quickly. He has sometimes threatened to
disinherit me: But if I should renounce him, it would
be but justice, and would vex him ten times more, than
any-thing he can do, will vex me. Then, the Settlements
unavoidably delayed, by his neglect! –––How
shall I bear such a life of procrastination! –––I, who, as
to my will, and impatience, and so forth, am of the
true Lady-make, and can as little bear controul and
disappointment as the best of them! 
* *
Another Letter, from Miss Howe. I suppose it
is that which she promises in her last to send her relating
to the Courtship between old Tony the Uncle,
and Annabella the Mother. I should be extremely
rejoiced to see it. No more of the Smuggler-plot in it, 

surely! This Letter, it seems, she has put in her
pocket. But I hope I shall soon find it deposited
with the rest. 
Monday Evening. 
At my repeated request she condescended to meet
me in the Dining-room to afternoon-tea, and not
before. 
She entered with bashfulness, as I thought; in a
pretty confusion, for having carried her apprehensions
too far. Sullen and slow moved she towards the Tea-table. 
—Dorcas present, busy in Tea-cup preparations. 
I took her reluctant hand, and pressed it to my lips— 
Dearest, loveliest of creatures, why this distance? 
Why this displeasure? —How can you thus torture
the faithfullest heart in the world? 
She disengaged her hand. Again I would have
snatched it. 
Be quiet, peevishly withdrawing it: And down she
sat; a gentle palpitation in the Beauty of beauties indicating
mingled sullenness and resentment; her
snowy handkerchief rising and falling, and a sweet
flush overspreading her charming cheeks. 
For God's sake, Madam! —And a third time I
would have taken her repulsing hand. 
And for the same sake, Sir; no more teazing. 
Dorcas retired; I drew my chair nearer hers, and
with the most respectful tenderness took her hand; 
and told her, that I could not forbear to express
my apprehensions (from the distance she was so desirous
to keep me at) that if any man in the world was
more indifferent to her, to use no harsher a word,
than another, it was the unhappy wretch before her. 
She looked steadily upon me for a moment, and
with her other hand, not withdrawing that I held,
pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket; and by a
twinkling motion urged forward a tear or two,
which having arisen in each sweet eye, it was plain
by that motion, she would rather have dissipated: 
But answered me only with a sigh, and an averted face. 

I urged her to speak; to look up at me; to bless
me with an eye more favourable. 
I had reason, she told me, for my complaint of her
indifference. She saw nothing in my mind that was
generous. I was not a man to be obliged or favoured. 
My strange behaviour to her since Saturday night, for
no cause at all that she knew of, convinced her of this. 
Whatever hopes she had conceived of me, were utterly
dissipated: All my ways were disgustful to her. 
This cut me to the heart. The guilty, I believe,
in every case, less patiently bear the detecting truth,
than the innocent do the degrading falshood. 
I bespoke her patience, while I took the liberty to
account for this change, on my part. —I re-acknowleged
the pride of my heart, which could not bear the
thought of that want of preference in the heart of a Lady
whom I hoped to call mine, which she had always
manifested. Marriage, I said, was a State that was not
to be entered upon with indifference on either side. 
It is insolence, interrupted she, it is presumption, Sir,
to expect tokens of value, without resolving to deserve
them. You have no whining creature before you, Mr.
Lovelace, overcome by weak motives, to love where
there is no merit. Miss Howe can tell you, Sir, that
I never loved the faults of my friend; nor ever wished
her to love me for mine. It was a rule with us, not
to spare each other. And would a man who has nothing
but faults (for pray, Sir, what are your virtues?)
expect that I should shew a value for him? Indeed
if I did, I should not deserve even his value; 
but ought to be despised by him. 
Well have you, Madam, kept up to this noble manner
of thinking. You are in no danger of being despised
for any marks of tenderness or favour shewn to
the man before you. You have been perhaps, you'll
think, laudably studious of making and taking occasions
to declare, that it was far from being owing to
your choice, that you had any thoughts of me. My 

whole soul, Madam, in all its errors, in all its wishes,
in all its views, had been laid open and naked before
you, had I been encouraged by such a share in your
confidence and esteem, as would have secured me against
your apprehended worst constructions of what I should
from time to time have revealed to you, and consulted
you upon. For never was there a franker heart; nor a
man so ready to accuse himself [This, Belford, is true]. 
But you know, Madam, how much otherwise it has
been between us. —Doubt, distance, reserve, on your
part, begat doubt, fear, awe, on mine. —How little
confidence! as if we apprehended each other to be a
Plotter rather than a Lover. How have I dreaded
every Letter that has been brought you from Wilson's! 
—And with reason; since the last, from which
I expected so much, on account of the proposals I had
made you in writing, has, if I may judge by the
effects, and by your denial of seeing me yesterday
(tho' you could go abroad, and in a chair too, to
avoid my attendance on you) set you against me
more than ever. 
I was guilty, it seems, of going to church, said the
indignant Charmer; and without the company of a
man, whose choice it would not have been to go, had I
not gone—I was guilty of desiring to have the whole
Sunday to myself, after I had obliged you, against my
will, at a Play; and after you had detained me
(equally to my dislike) to a very late hour over-night. 
—These were my faults: For these I was to be punished: 
I was to be compelled to see you, and to be
terrified when I did see you, by the most shocking
ill-humour that was ever shewn to a creature in my
circumstances, and not bound to bear it. You have
pretended to find free fault with my Father's temper,
Mr. Lovelace: But the worst that he ever shewed
after marriage, was not in the least to be compared
to what you have shewn twenty times beforehand. — 
And what are my prospects with you, at the very best? 

—My indignation rises against you, Mr. Lovelace,
while I speak to you, when I recollect the many instances,
equally ungenerous and unpolite, of your
behaviour to one whom you have brought into distress
—And I can hardly bear you in my sight. 
She turned from me, standing up; and lifting up
her folded hands, and charming eyes swimming in tears,
O my Father, said the inimitable creature, you might
have spared your heavy curse, had you known how I
have been punished, ever since my swerving feet led
me out of your garden-doors to meet this man! — 
Then, sinking into her chair, a burst of passionate
tears forced their way down her glowing cheeks. 
My dearest life, taking her still folded hands in
mine, who can bear an invocation so affecting, tho'
so passionate? 
And, as I hope to live, my nose tingled, as I once,
when a boy, remember it did (and indeed once more
very lately) just before some tears came into my eyes; 
and I durst hardly trust my face in view of hers. 
What have I done to deserve this impatient exclamation? 
–––Have I, at any time, by word, by deeds,
by looks, given you cause to doubt my honour, my
reverence, my adoration, I may call it, of your virtues? 
All is owing to misapprehension, I hope, on
both sides. Condescend to clear up but your part,
as I will mine, and all must speedily be happy. ––– 
Would to Heaven I loved that Heaven as I love you! 
And yet, if I doubted a Return in Love, let me perish
if I should know how to wish you mine! –––Give
me hope, dearest creature, give me but hope, that
I am your preferable choice! –––Give me but hope,
that you hate me not; that you do not despise me. 
O Mr. Lovelace, we have been long enough together,
to be tired of each other's humours and ways; 
ways and humours so different, that perhaps you ought
to dislike me, as much as I do you. –––I think, I think,
that I cannot make an answerable return to the value 

you profess for me. My temper is utterly ruined. 
You have given me an ill opinion of all mankind; of
yourself in particular: And withal so bad a one of
myself, that I shall never be able to look up, having
utterly and for ever lost all that self-complacency,
and conscious pride, which are so necessary to carry
a woman through this life with tolerable satisfaction
to herself. 
She paused. I was silent. By my Soul, thought I,
this sweet creature will at last undo me! 
She proceeded. —What now remains, but that you
pronounce me free of all obligation to you? And
that you hinder me not from pursuing the destiny
that shall be allotted me? 
Again she paused. I was still silent; meditating
whether to renounce all further designs upon her; 
whether I had not received sufficient evidence of a
virtue, and of a greatness of soul, that could not be
questioned or impeached. 
She went on: Propitious to me be your silence,
Mr. Lovelace! —Tell me, that I am free of all obligation
to you. You know, I never made you promises. 
—You know, that you are not under any to
me. 
—My broken fortunes I matter not— 
She was proceeding—My dearest life, said I, I
have been all this time, tho' you fill me with doubts
of your favour, busy in the nuptial preparations. I
am actually in treaty for Equipage. 
Equipage, Sir! —Trappings, Tinsel! —What is
Equipage; what is Life; what is any-thing; to a
creature sunk so low as I am in my own opinion! — 
Labouring under a Father's Curse! —Unable to look
backward without self-reproach, or forward without
terror! —These reflections strengthened by every cross
accident! —And what but cross accidents befal me! 
—All my darling schemes dashed in pieces; all my
hopes at an end; deny me not the liberty to refuge
myself in some obscure corner, where neither the 

enemies you have made me, nor the few friends you
have left me, may ever hear of the supposed Rash
one, till those happy moments are at hand, which
shall expiate for all! 
I had not a word to say for myself. Such a war
in my mind had I never known. Gratitude, and
Admiration of the excellent creature before me, combating
with villainous Habit, with resolutions so premeditatedly
made, and with views so much gloried
in! —An hundred new contrivances in my head, and
in my heart, that to be honest, as it is called, must
all be given up, by a heart delighting in intrigue and
difficulty—Miss Howe's virulences endeavoured to be
recollected—Yet recollection refusing to bring them
forward with the requisite efficacy—I had certainly
been a lost man, had not Dorcas come seasonably in,
with a Letter. —On the superscription written—Be
pleased, Sir, to open it now. 
I retired to the window—opened it. —It was from
Dorcas herself. —These the contents—‘Be pleased to
detain my Lady: A paper of importance to transcribe. 
I will cough when I have done.’ 
I put the paper in my pocket, and turned to my
Charmer, less disconcerted, as she, by that time, had
also a little recovered herself. —One favour, dearest
creature—Let me but know, whether Miss Howe
approves or disapproves of my proposals? —I know
her to be my enemy. I was intending to account to
you for the change of behaviour you accused me of
at the beginning of this conversation; but was diverted
from it by your vehemence. Indeed, my beloved
creature, you were very vehement. Do you
think, it must not be matter of high regret to me,
to find my wishes so often delayed and postponed in
favour of your predominant view to a Reconciliation
with relations who will not be reconciled to you? — 
To this was owing your declining to celebrate our
Nuptials before we came to town, tho' you were 

so atrociously treated by your Sister, and your whole
family; and tho' so ardently pressed to celebrate by
me—To this was owing the ready offence you took
at my four friends; and at the unavailing attempt I
made to see a dropt Letter; little imagining from
what two such Ladies could write to each other,
that there could be room for mortal displeasure. —To
this was owing the week's distance you held me at,
till you knew the issue of another application. —But
when they had rejected that; when you had sent my
coldly-received proposals to Miss Howe for her approbation
or advice, as indeed I advised; and had
honoured me with your company at the Play on Saturday
night (my whole behaviour unobjectible to the
last hour); must not, Madam, the sudden change in
your conduct the very next morning, astonish and distress
me? —And this persisted in with still stronger
declarations, after you had received the impatiently-expected
Letter from Miss Howe; must I not conclude,
that all was owing to her influence; and that
some other application or project was meditating, that
made it necessary to keep me again at distance till
the result were known, and which was to deprive me
of you for ever? for was not that your constantly
proposed preliminary? —Well, Madam, might I be
wrought up to a half-phrensy by this apprehension; 
and well might I charge you with hating me. — 
And now, dearest creature, let me know, I once
more ask you, what is Miss Howe's opinion of my
proposals? 
Were I disposed to debate with you, Mr. Lovelace,
I could very easily answer your fine harangue. 
But at present, I shall only say, that your ways have
been very unaccountable. You seem to me, if your
meanings were always just, to have taken great pains
to embarrass them. Whether owing in you to the
want of a clear head, or a sound heart, I cannot determine; 
but it is to the want of one of them, I verily 

think, that I am to ascribe the greatest part of your
strange conduct. 
Curse upon the heart of the little devil, said I,
who instigates you to think so hardly of the faithfullest
heart in the world! 
How dare you, Sir? —And there she stopt; having
almost overshot herself; as I designed she should. 
How dare I what, Madam? And I looked with
meaning. How dare I what? 
Vile man! —And do you—And there again she
stopt. 
Do I what, Madam? –––And why vile man? 
How dare you to curse any-body in my presence? 
O the sweet receder! But that was not to go off
so with a Lovelace. 
Why then, dearest creature, is there any-body that
instigates you? –––If there be, again I curse them, be
they whom they will. 
She was in a charming pretty passion. —And this
was the first time that I had the odds in my favour. 
Well, Madam, it is just as I thought. And now
I know how to account for a temper that I hope is
not natural to you. 
Artful wretch! And is it thus you would entrap
me? —But know, Sir, that I receive Letters from
nobody but Miss Howe. Miss Howe likes some of
your ways as little as I do; for I have set every-thing
before her. Yet she is thus far your enemy, as she
is mine—She thinks I should not refuse your offers; 
but endeavour to make the best of my lot. And
now you have the truth. Would to heaven you were
capable of dealing with equal sincerity! 
I am, Madam. And here, on my knee, I renew
my vows, and my supplication, that you will make
me yours—Yours for ever. —And let me have cause
to bless you and Miss Howe in the same breath. 
To say the truth, Belford, I had before begun to
think, that the vixen of a girl, who certainly likes
not Hickman, was in love with me. 

Rise, Sir, from your too-ready knees; and mock
me not. 
Too-ready knees, thought I! —Though this humble
posture so little affects this proud Beauty, she knows
not how much I have obtained of others of her Sex,
nor how often I have been forgiven for the last attempts,
by kneeling. 
Mock you, Madam! —And I arose, and re-urged
her for the Day. I blamed myself at the same time,
for the invitation I had given to Lord M. as it might
subject me to delay from his infirmities: But told
her, that I would write to him to excuse me, if she
had no objection; or to give him the Day she would
give me, and not wait for him, if he could not come
in time. 
My Day, Sir, said she, is Never. Be not surprised. 
A person of politeness judging between us,
would not be surprised that I say so. But indeed,
Mr. Lovelace [and wept thro' impatience] you either
know not how to treat with a mind of the least
degree of delicacy, notwithstanding your Birth and
Education, or you are an ingrateful man; and [after
a pause] a worse than ingrateful one. But I will retire. 
I will see you again to-morrow. I cannot before. 
I think I hate you—You may look—Indeed I
think I hate you. And if, upon a re-examination
of my own heart, I find I do, I would not for the
world that matters should go on farther between
us. 
&dotup;But I see, I see, she does not hate me! —How
it would mortify my vanity, if I thought there was
a woman in the world, much more this, that could
hate me! —'Tis evident, villain as she thinks me,
that I should not be an odious villain, if I could
but at last in one instance cease to be a villain! She
could not hold it, determined as she had thought
herself, I saw by her eyes, the moment I endeavoured
to dissipate her apprehensions, on my too-ready 

knees, as she calls them. The moment the
rough covering that my teazing behaviour has
thrown over her affections is quite removed, I
doubt not to find all silk and silver at bottom, all
soft, bright, and charming.&dotup; 
I was however too much vexed, disconcerted, mortified,
to hinder her from retiring—And yet she had
not gone, if Dorcas had not coughed. 
The wench came in, as soon as her Lady had retired,
and gave me the copy she had taken. And
what should it be but of the answer the truly admirable
creature had intended to give to my written proposals
in relation to Settlements? 
I have but just dipt into this affecting paper. Were
I to read it attentively, not a wink should I sleep this
night. To-morrow it shall obtain my serious consideration. 