



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday night, June 20. 
No admittance yet to my charmer! She is very
ill—in a violent fever, Dorcas thinks. Yet
will have no advice. 
Dorcas tells her how much I am concerned at it. 
But again let me ask, Does this lady do right to
make herself ill, when she is not ill? For my own part,
libertine as people think me, when I had occasion to
be sick, I took a dose of ipecacuanha, that I might
not be guilty of a falshood; and most heartily sick
was I; as she, who then pitied me, full well knew. 
But here to pretend to be very ill, only to get an opportunity
to run away, in order to avoid forgiving a
man who has offended her, how unchristian! —If
good folks allow themselves in these breaches of a
known duty, and in these presumptuous contrivances
to deceive, who, Belford, shall blame us? 
I have a strange notion, that the matronly lady will
be certainly at the grocer's shop at the hour of nine
to-morrow morning: For Dorcas heard me tell Mrs.
Sinclair, that I shall go out at eight precisely; and
then she is to try for a coach: And if the dowager's
chariot should happen to be there, how lucky will it
be for my charmer! How strangely will my dream
be made out! 
* *
I have just received a letter from Captain Tomlinson. 
Is it not wonderful! For that was part of
my dream! 
I shall always have a prodigious regard to dreams
henceforward. I know not but I may write a book
upon that subject; for my own experience will furnish
out a great part of it. Glanville of Witches, and 

Baxter's History of Spirits and Apparitions, and the
Royal Insignificant's Demonology, will be nothing at
all to Lovelace's Resveries. 
The letter is just what I dream'd it to be. I am
only concerned, that uncle John's anniversary did
not happen three or four days sooner; for should any
new misfortune befal my charmer, she may not be
able to support her spirits so long, as till Thursday in
the next week. Yet it will give me the more time
for new expedients, should my present contrivance
fail; which I cannot, however, suppose. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Monday, June 19. 
Dear Sir,
I can now return you joy, for the joy you have
given me, as well as my dear friend Mr. Harlowe,
in the news of his beloved niece's happy recovery; 
for he is determined to comply with her wishes, and
yours, and to give her to you with his own hand. 
As the ceremony has been necessarily delayed by
reason of her illness, and as Mr. Harlowe's Birthday
is on Thursday the 29th of this instant June,
when he enters into the seventy-fourth year of his
age; and as time may be wanted to complete the
dear lady's recovery; he is very desirous, that the
marriage shall be solemnized upon it; that he may
afterwards have double joy on that day, to the end
of his life. 
For this purpose, he intends to set out privately,
so as to be at Kentish-town on Wednesday se'nnight
in the evening. 
All the family used, he says, to meet to celebrate
it with him; but as they are at present in too unhappy
a situation for that, he will give out, that,
not being able to bear the day at home, he has resolved
to be absent for two or three days. 
He will set out on horseback, attended only with
one trusty servant, for the greater privacy. He will 

be at the most creditable-looking public house there,
expecting you both next morning, if he hear nothing
from me to prevent him. And he will go to town
with you after the ceremony is performed, in the
coach he supposes you will come in. 
He is very desirous, that I should be present on
the occasion. But this I have promised him, at his
request, that I will be up before the day, in order to
see the settlements executed, and every thing properly
prepared. 
He is very glad that you have the licence ready. 
He speaks very kindly of you, Mr. Lovelace; and
says, that, if any of the family stand out after he has
seen the ceremony performed, he will separate from
them, and unite himself to his dear niece and her
interests. 
I owned to you, when in town, that I took slight
notice to my dear friend of the misunderstanding between
you and his niece; and that I did this, for fear
the lady should have shewn any little discontent in his
presence, were I to have been able to prevail upon
him to go up in person, as then was doubtful. But
I hope nothing of that discontent remains now. 
My absence, when your messenger came, must
excuse me for not writing by him. 
Be pleased to make my most respectful compliments
acceptable to the admirable lady, and believe
me to be 
Your most faithful and obedient servant,
Antony Tomlinson. 
This letter I sealed, and broke open. It was
brought, thou mayst suppose, by a particular messenger; 
the seal such a one as the writer need not be
ashamed of. I took care to inquire after the Captain's
health, in my Beloved's hearing; and it is now
ready to be produced, as a pacifier, according as she
shall take on, or resent, if the two metamorphoses 

happen pursuant to my wonderful dream; as, having
great faith in dreams, I dare say they will. —I
think it will not be amiss in changing my cloaths, to
have this letter of the worthy Captain lie in my Beloved's
way. 