



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, One o'Clock. 
I have a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transports,
vows, and promises. I will send it to you
inclosed. You'll see how he engages in it for his
aunt Lawrance's protection, and for Miss Charlotte
Montague's accompanying me. ‘I have nothing to
do, but to persevere, he says, and prepare to receive
the personal congratulations of his whole family.’ 
But you'll see, how he presumes upon my being
his, as the consequence of throwing myself into that
Lady's protection. 
The chariot-and-six is to be ready at the place he
mentions. You'll see, as to the slur upon my reputation,
which I am so apprehensive about, how
boldly he argues. Generously enough, indeed, were
I to be his; and had given him reason to believe that
I would! —But that I have not done. 
How one step brings on another with this incroaching 

Sex! How soon may a young creature, who gives
a man the least encouragement, be carried beyond
her intentions, and out of her own power! —You
would imagine, by what he writes, that I have given
him reason to think, that my aversion to Mr. Solmes
is all owing to my favour for him! 
The dreadful thing is, that, comparing what he
writes from his intelligencer, of what is designed against
me [though he seems not to know the threatened day]
with what my aunt and Betty assure me of, there
can be no hope for me, but that I must be Solmes's
wife, if I stay here. 
I had better have gone to my uncle Antony's, at
this rate! I should have gained time, at least, by it. 
This is the fruit of his fine contrivances! 
‘What we are to do, and how good he is to be: 
How I am to direct all his future steps.’ All this
shews, as I said before, that he is sure of me. 
However, I have reply'd to the following effect: 
‘That although I had given him room to expect, that
I would put myself into his aunt's protection; yet,
as I have three days to come, between this and
Monday, and as I hope that my friends will still relent,
or that Mr. Solmes will give up a point they
will both find it impossible to carry; I shall not look
upon myself as absolutely bound by the appointment: 
And expect therefore, if I recede, that I shall not
be called to account for it by him. That I think
it necessary to acquaint him, that if, by putting
myself into Lady Betty Lawrance's protection, he
understands, that I mean directly to throw myself
into his power, he is very much mistaken: For that
there are many points in which I must be satisfied; 
several matters to be adjusted, even, after I have
left this house (if I do leave it), before I can think
of giving him any particular encouragement: That,
in the first place, he must expect, that I will do my
utmost to procure my father's reconciliation and 

approbation of my future steps; and that I will
govern myself intirely by his commands, in every
reasonable point, as much as if I had not left his
house: That if he imagines, that I shall not reserve
to myself this liberty, but that my withdrawing
is to give him any advantages, which he would
otherwise have had; I am determined to tarry where
I am, and abide the event, in hopes that my friends
will still accept of my reiterated promise, never
to marry him, or any-body else, without their
consent.’ 
This I will deposite as soon as I can. And as he
thinks things are near their crisis, I dare say it will
not be long before I have an answer to it. 
Friday, Four o'Clock. 
I am far from being well: Yet must I make myself
worse than I am, preparative to the suspension I
hope to obtain of the menaced evil of Wednesday
next. And if I do obtain it, I will postpone my appointment
to meet Mr. Lovelace. 
Betty has told them I am very much indisposed. 
But I have no pity from any-body. 
I believe, I am become the object of every-one's
aversion; and that they would all be glad I were dead. — 
Indeed, I believe it! —‘What ails the perverse creature,’ 
cries one? —‘Is she love-sick,’ another? 
I was in the Ivy-summer-house, and came out shivering
with cold, as if aguishly seized. Betty observed
this, and reported it. —‘O, no matter! —Let
her shiver on! —Cold cannot hurt her. Obstinacy
will defend her from That. Perverseness is a Bracer
to a love-sick girl, and more effectual than the Cold
Bath to make hardy, altho' the constitution be ever
so tender.’ 
This said by a cruel brother, and heard said by the
dearer friends of one, for whom, but a few months 

ago, every-body was apprehensive at every blast of
wind to which she exposed herself! 
Betty, it must be owned, has an admirable memory
on these occasions. Nothing of this nature is
lost by her repetition: Even the very air she repeats
with, renders it unncecessary to ask, Who said This
or That severe thing. 
Friday, Six o'Clock. 
My aunt, who again stays all night, has just left
me. She came to tell me the result of my friends
deliberations about me. It is this. 
Next Wednesday morning they are all to be assembled: 
To wit, my father, mother, my uncles,
herself, and my uncle Hervey; my brother and sister
of course; my good Mrs. Norton is likewise to be
admitted: And Dr. Lewin is to be at hand, to exhort
me, it seems, if there be occasion: But my aunt
is not certain, whether he is to be among them, or
to tarry till called in. 
When this awful court is set, the poor prisoner is
to be brought in, supported by Mrs. Norton; who is
to be first tutored to instruct me in the duty of a
child; which, it seems, I have quite forgotten. 
Nor is the success at all doubted, my aunt says: 
For it is not believed I can be so harden'd, as to
withstand so venerable a judicature, altho' I have
withstood several of them separately. And still the
less, as she hints at extraordinary condescensions from
my papa. But what condescensions, from even my
father, can induce me to make such a sacrifice as is
expected from me? 
Yet my spirits will never bear up, I doubt, at such
a tribunal: My father presiding in it. 
I believed indeed, that my trials would not be at
an end, till he had admitted me once more into his
awful presence! 
What is hoped from me, she says, is, That I 

will chearfully, on Tuesday night, if not before,
sign the articles; and so turn the succeeding day's
solemn convention of all my friends, into a day of
festivity. I am to have the license sent me up, however,
and once more the settlements, that I may see
how much in earnest they are. 
She further hinted, that my papa himself would
bring up the settlements for me to sign. 
O my dear! what a trial will This be! —How
shall I be able to refuse to my father [My father!
from whose presence I have been so long banish'd; 
he commanding and intreating, perhaps, in a breath! 
How shall I be able to refuse to my father] the
writing of my name? 
They are sure, she says, something is working on
Mr. Lovelace's part, and perhaps on mine: And my
papa would sooner follow me to the grave, than see
me his wife. 
I said, I was not well; That the very apprehensions
of these trials, were already insupportable to
me; and would increase upon me, as the time approached; 
and I was afraid I should be extremely
ill. 
They had prepared themselves for such an artifice
as That, was my aunt's unkind word; and she could
assure me, it would stand me in no stead. 
Artifice! repeated I: And this from my aunt
Hervey? 
Why my dear, said she, do you think people are
fools? —Can they not see, how dismally you endeavour
to sigh yourself down within-doors? —How you
hang down your sweet face [those were the words she
was pleased to use] upon your bosom: —How you
totter, as it were, and hold by this chair, and by
that door-post, when you know that Any-body sees
you [This, my dear Miss Howe, is an aspersion to
fasten hypocrisy and contempt upon me: My brother's
or sister's aspersion! —I am not capable of arts 

so low]. But the moment you are down with your
poultry, or advancing upon your garden-walk, and,
as you imagine, out of every-body's sight, it is seen
how nimbly you trip along; and what an alertness
ggoverns all your motions. 
I should hate myself, said I, were I capable of such
poor artifices as these. I must be a fool to use them,
as well as a mean creature; for have I not had experience
enough, that my friends are incapable of
being moved in much more affecting instances? —But
you'll see how I shall be by Tuesday. 
My dear, you will not offer any violence to your
health? —I hope, God has given you more grace,
than to do that. 
I hope he has, Madam. But there is violence
enough offer'd, and threatened, to affect my health; 
and that will be found, without my needing to have
recourse to any other, or to artifice either. 
I'll only tell you one thing, my dear: And that is; 
Ill or well, the ceremony will probably be performed
before Wednesday-night: —But This, also, I will
tell you, altho' beyond my present commission, that
Mr. Solmes will be under an engagement, (if you
should require it of him, as a favour) after the ceremony
is passed, and Lovelace's hopes thereby utterly
extinguished, to leave you at your father's, and return
to his own house every evening, until you are
brought to a full sense of your duty, and consent to
acknowlege your change of name. 
There was no opening of my lips to such a speech
as This. I was dumb. 
And these, my dear Miss Howe, are They, who,
some of them, at least, have called me a romantic
girl! —This is my chimerical brother, and wise
sister; both joining their heads together, I dare say
and yet, my aunt told me, that the last part was
what took in my mamma; who had, till that was
started, insisted, that her child should not be married 

if, thro' grief or opposition, she should be ill, or fall
into fits. 
This intended violence my aunt often excused, by
the certain information they pretended to have, of
some plots or machinations, that were ready to break
out, from Mr. Lovelace (a) : The effects of which
were thus cunningly to be frustrated. 
Friday, Nine o'Clock. 
And now, my dear, what shall I conclude upon? 
You see how determin'd—But how can I expect
your advice will come time enough to stand me in
any stead? For here, I have been down, and already
have another letter from Mr. Lovelace [The man
lives upon the spot, I think]: And I must write to
him, either that I will, or will not, stand to my first
resolution of escaping hence on Monday next. If I
let him know, that I will not (appearances so strong
against him, and for Solmes, even stronger, than
when I made the appointment), will it not be justly
deemed my own fault, if I am compelled to marry
their odious man? And if any mischief ensue from
Mr. Lovelace's rage and disappointment, will it not
lie at my door? —Yet, he offers so fair! —Yet, on
the other hand, to incur the censure of the world, as
a giddy creature! —But that, as he hints, I have already
incurred! —What can I do? Oh! that my
cousin Morden! —But what signifies wishing? 
I will here give you the substance of Mr. Lovelace's
letter. The letter itself I will send, when I
have answered it; but that I will defer doing as long
as I can, in hopes of finding reason to retract an appointment
on which so much depends. And yet it
is necessary you should have all before you, as I go 

along, that you may be the better able to advise me
in this dreadful crisis of my fate. 
‘He begs my pardon, for writing with so much assurance; 
attributing it to his unbounded transport; 
and intirely acquiesces in my will. He is full of
alternatives and proposals. He offers to attend me
directly to Lady Betty's; or, if I had rather, to
my own estate; and that my Lord M. shall protect
me there, [He knows not, my dear, my reasons
for rejecting this inconsiderate advice]. In either
case, as soon as he sees me safe, he will go up to
London, or whither I please; and not come near
me, but by my own permission; and till I am satisfy'd
in every thing I am doubtful of, as well with
regard to his reformation, as to settlements, &c. 
‘To conduct me to You, my dear, is another of
his alternatives, not doubting, he says, but your
mamma will receive me. Or, if That be not agreeable
to you, to your mamma, or to me, he will
put me into Mr. Hickman's protection; whom, no
doubt, Miss Howe can influence; and that it may
be given out, that I am gone to Bath, or Bristol,
or Abroad; where-ever I please. 
‘Again, If it be more agreeable, he proposes to
attend me privately to London, where he will procure
handsome lodgings for me, and both his cousins
Montague to receive me there, and to accompany
me till all shall be adjusted to my mind; and till
a reconciliation shall be effected; which, he assures
me, nothing shall be wanting in him to facilitate; 
greatly as he has been insulted by all my family. 
‘These several measures he proposes to my choice; 
it being unlikely, he says, that he can procure in
the time, a letter from Lady Betty, under her
own hand, inviting me in form to her house, unless
he had been himself to go to that Lady for it; 
which, at this critical conjuncture, while he is attending
my commands, is impossible. 

‘He conjures me, in the solemnest manner, if I
would not throw him into utter despair, to keep to
my appointment. 
‘However, instead of threatening my relations, or
Solmes, if I recede, he respectfully says, that he
doubts not, but that, if I do, it will be upon such
reasons, as he ought to be satisfy'd with; upon no
slighter, he hopes, than their leaving me at full liberty
to pursue my own inclinations: In which (whatever
they shall be), he will intirely acquiesce; only endeavouring
to make his future good behaviour, the sole
ground for his expectation of my favour. 
‘In short, he solemnly vows, that his whole view at
present, is, To free me from my imprisonment; and
to restore me to my own free-will, in a point so absolutely
necessary to my future happiness. He declares,
that neither the hopes he has in my future
favour, nor the honour of himself and family, will
permit him to propose any thing that shall be inconsistent
with my own most scrupulous notions: 
And, for my mind's sake, should choose to have this
end obtained by my friends declining to compel me. 
But that, nevertheless, as to the world's opinion,
it is impossible to imagine, that the behaviour of
my relations to me, has not already brought upon
my family those free censures which they deserve,
and caused the step which I am so scrupulous about
taking, to be no other than the natural and expected
consequence of their treatment of me.’ 
Indeed, I am afraid all this is true: And it is owing
to some little degree of politeness, that Mr. Lovelace
does not say all he might say on this subject: For I
have no doubt, that I am the talk, and perhaps the
by-word of half the country. If so, I am afraid, I can
now do nothing that will give me more disgrace than
I have already so causelesly received by their indiscreet
persecutions: And let me be whose I will, and do
what I will, I shall never wipe off the stain my confinement, 

and the rigorous usage I have received, have
fixed upon me; at least in my own opinion. 
I wish, if ever I am to be considered as one of the
eminent family this man is ally'd to, some of them do
not think the worse of me, for the disgrace I have received! 
—In that case, perhaps, I shall be obliged to
him, if he do not. You see how much this harsh,
this cruel, treatment from my own family has humbled
me! —But, perhaps, I was too much exalted
before. 
Mr. Lovelace concludes, ‘with repeatedly begging
an interview with me; and That, this night, if possible: 
An honour, he says, he is the more encouraged
to solicit for, as I had twice before made him
hope for it. But whether he obtain it, or not, he
beseeches me to choose one of the alternatives he offers
to my acceptance; and not to depart from my
resolution of escaping on Monday, unless the reason
ceases on which I had taken it up; and that I have
a prospect of being restored to my friends favour; 
at least to my own liberty and freedom of choice.’ 
He renews all his vows and promises on this head,
in so earnest and so solemn a manner, that (his own
interest, and his family's honour, and their favour for
me, co-operating) I can have no room to doubt of
his sincerity. 
