


Mrs. Jewkes has thought fit to give me an
Airing for three or four Hours this Afternoon,
and I am a good deal better; and should
be much more so, if I knew for what I am
reserv'd. But Health is a Blessing hardly to be
coveted in my Circumstances, since that but
exposes me to the Calamity I am in continual
Apprehensions of; whereas a weak and sickly
State might possibly move Compassion for me. 
O how I dread the coming of this angry and
incensed Master; tho' I am sure I have done
him no Harm! 
Just now we heard, that he had like to
have been drown'd in crossing a Stream, a few
Days ago, in pursuing his Game. What is the
Matter, that, with all his ill Usage of me, I
cannot hate him? To be sure, I am not like
other People! He has certainly done enough to
make me hate him; but yet when I heard his
Danger, which was very great, I could not in
my Heart forbear rejoicing for his Safety; tho'
his Death would have ended my Afflictions. 

Ungenerous Master! if you knew this, you
surely would not be so much my Persecutor! 
But for my late good Lady's sake, I must wish
him well; and O what an Angel would he be
in my Eyes yet, if he would cease his Attempts,
and reform. 
Well, I hear by Mrs. Jewkes, that John
Arnold is turn'd away, being detected in writing
to Mr. Williams; and that Mr. Longman,
and Mr. Jonathan the Butler, have incurr'd his
Displeasure, for offering to speak in my Behalf. 
Mrs. Jervis too is in Danger; for all these
Three, belike, went together to beg in my Favour; 
for now it is known where I am. 
Mrs. Jewkes has, with the News about my
Master, receiv'd a Letter; but she says the Contents
are too bad for me to know. They must
be bad indeed, if they be worse than what I
have already known. 
Just now the horrid Creature tells me, as
a Secret, that she has Reason to think he has
found a way to satisfy my Scruples: It is, by
marrying me to this dreadful Colbrand, and
buying me of him on the Wedding day, for a
Sum of Money! —Was ever the like heard? 
–––She says it will be my Duty to obey my Husband; 
and that Mr. Williams will be forced, as
a Punishment, to marry us; and that when my
Master has paid for me, and I am surrender'd
up, the Swiss is to go home again, with the
Money, to his former Wife and Children; for
she says, it is the Custom of those People to
have a Wife in every Nation. 

But this, to be sure, is horrid romancing! 
Yet, abominable as it is, it may possibly serve to
introduce some Plot now hatching! With what
strange Perplexities is my poor Mind agitated! 
Perchance, some Sham-marriage may be design'd
on purpose to ruin me: But can a Husband sell
his Wife, against her own Consent? —And
will such a Bargain stand good in Law? 
