



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. Apr. 26. 
At last my lucky Star has directed us into the desired
Port, and we are safely landed. Well says Rowe: 

The wise and active conquer difficulties
By daring to attempt them. Sloth and folly
Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and hazard,
And make th' impossibility they fear.
But in the midst of my exultation, something, I
know not what to call it, checks my joys, and glooms
over my brighter prospects. If it be not Conscience, it
is wondrously like what I thought so, many, many
years ago. 
Surely, Lovelace, methinks thou sayst, thy good
motions are not gone off already! Surely thou wilt not
now at last be a villain to this Lady! 
I can't tell what to say to it. Why would not the
dear creature accept of me, when I so sincerely offered
myself to her acceptance? Things already appear with
a very different face now I have got her here. Already
have our Mother and her Daughters been about me:
‘Charming Lady! What a complexion! What eyes! 
What majesty in her person! —O Mr. Lovelace, you
are a happy man! —You owe us such a Lady!’ —Then
they remind me of my Revenge, and of my hatred to
her whole family. 
Sally was so struck with her, at first sight, that she
broke out to me in those lines of Dryden: 

—Fairer to be seen
Than the fair Lily on the flow'ry green!
More fresh than May herself in blossoms new!—
I sent to thy Lodgings within half an hour after our
arrival, to receive thy congratulations upon it: But
thou wert at Edgware, it seems. 

My Beloved, who is charmingly amended, is retired
to her constant employment, writing. I must content
myself with the same amusement, till she shall be pleased
to admit me to her presence; for already have I given
to every one her cue. 
&dotup;And, among the rest, who dost thou think is to
be her maid-servant? —Deb. Butler. 
&dotup;Ah, Lovelace! 
&dotup;And Ah, Belford! It can't be otherwise. But
what dost think Deb's Name is to be? —Why, Dorcas,
Dorcas Wykes. And won't it be admirable, if
either thro' fear, fright, or good liking, we can get
my Beloved to accept of Dorcas Wykes for a bedfellow?&dotup; 
In so many ways will it be now in my power to
have the dear creature, that I shall not know which of
them to chuse!— 
But here comes the Widow, with Dorcas Wykes in
her hand; and I am to introduce them both to my
Fair-one. 
* *
So! —The honest girl is accepted—Of good parentage: 
But, thro' a neglected education, plaguy illiterate— She
can neither write, nor read writing. A kinswoman of
Mrs. Sinclair—Could not therefore well be refused, the
Widow in person recommending her; and the wench
only taken till her Hannah can come. What an advantage
has an imposing or forward nature over a courteous
one! —So here may something arise to lead into
correspondencies, and so forth. To be sure, a person
need not be so wary, so cautious of what she writes, or
what she leaves upon her table or toilette, when her attendant
cannot read. 
&dotup;It would be a miracle, as thou sayst, if this Lady
can save herself—And having gone so far, how can I
recede? —Then my Revenge upon the Harlowes! 
—To have run away with a Daughter of theirs, to make
her a Lovelace—To make her one of a family so superior 

to her own, what a Triumph, as I have heretofore
observed (a) , to them! —But to run away with
her, and to bring her to my lure in the other light,
what a mortification of their pride! What a gratification
of my own! 
&dotup;Then these women are continually at me. These
women, who, before my whole soul and faculties
were absorbed in the Love of this single charmer,
used always to oblige me with the flower and first
fruits of their garden! Indeed, indeed, my Goddess
should not have chosen this London Widow's—But
I dare say, if I had, she would not. People who will
be dealing in contradiction, ought to pay for it. And
to be punished by the consequences of our own choice,
what a moral lies there! —What a deal of Good may
I not be the occasion of from a little Evil!&dotup; 
Dorcas is a neat creature, both in person and dress; 
her countenance not vulgar. And I am in hopes, as I
hinted above, that her Lady will accept of her for her
bedfellow, in a strange house, for a week or so. But
I saw she had a dislike to her at her very first appearance:
Yet I thought the girl behaved very modestly— 
Over-did it a little, perhaps—Her Lady shrunk back,
and looked shy upon her. The doctrine of Sympathies
and Antipathies is a surprising doctrine. —But Dorcas
will be excessively obliging, and win her Lady's favour
soon, I doubt not. I am secure in one of the wench's
qualities however—She is not to be corrupted. A great
point that! —Since a Lady and her Maid, when heartily
of one party, will be too hard for half a score devils. 
The dear Creature was no less shy when the Widow
first accosted her, at her alighting. Yet I thought, that
honest Doleman's Letter had prepared her for her masculine
appearance. 
And now I mention that Letter, why dost thou not
wish me joy, Jack? 
Joy of what? 

Why, joy of my Nuptials. —Know then, that said,
is done with me, when I have a mind to have it so; 
and that we are actually man and wife: Only that
Consummation has not passed—Bound down to the
contrary of that, by a solemn vow, till a Reconciliation
with her family take place. The women here are
told so. They know it, before my Beloved knows it; 
and that thou wilt say, is odd. 
But how shall I do to make my Fair-one keep her
temper on the intimation? Why, is she not here? —At
Mrs. Sinclair's? —But if she will hear reason, I doubt
not to convince her, that she ought to acquiesce. 
She will insist, I suppose, upon my leaving her, and
that I shall not take up my lodgings under the same
roof. But circumstances are changed since I first made
her that promise. I have taken all the vacant apartments; 
and must carry this point also. 
I hope in a while to get her with me to the public
Entertainments. She knows nothing of the Town,
and has seen less of its diversions than ever woman of
her taste, her fortune, her endowments, did see. She
has indeed a natural politeness, which transcends all
acquirement. The most capable of any one I ever
knew, of judging what an hundred things are, by seeing
one of a like nature. Indeed she took so much
pleasure in her own chosen amusements till persecuted
out of them, that she had neither leisure nor inclination
for the Town-diversions. 
These diversions will amuse. And the duce is in it,
if a little Susceptibility will not put forth, now she receives
my address; especially if I can manage it so, as
to be allowed to live under one roof with her. What
though the sensibility be at first faint and reluctant, like
the appearance of an early Spring-flower in frosty weather,
which seems afraid of being nipt by an easterly
blast? That will be enough for me. 
I hinted to thee in a former (a) , that I had provided 

Books for the Lady's in-door amusement. Sally
and Polly are readers. My Beloved's light closet was
their library. And several pieces of devotion have been
put in, bought on purpose, at second-hand. 
I was always for forming a judgment of the reading
part of the Sex by their books. The observations I have
made on this occasion have been of great use to me, as
well in England as out of it. This sagacious Lady may
possibly be as curious in this point, as her Lovelace. 
So much for the present. Thou seest, that I have a
great deal of business before me. Yet I will write again
soon. 
Mr. Lovelace sends another Letter with this; in
which he takes notice of young Mrs. Sorlings's setting
out with them, and leaving them at Barnet: But
as its contents are nearly the same with those in the
Lady's next Letter, it is omitted. 