


A Thought came into my Head; I meant no
Harm; but it was a little bold. For seeing
my Master dressing to go to Church, and his Chariot
getting ready, I went to my Closet, and I writ, 
The Prayers of this Congregation are earnestly
desired for a Gentleman of great Worth and Honour,
who labours under a Temptation to exert
his great Power to ruin a poor, distressed,
worthless Maiden. 

And also, 
The Prayers of this Congregation are earnestly desired,
by a poor distressed Creature, for the
Preservation of her Virtue and Innocence. 
Mrs. Jewkes came up; Always writing, said she!
and would see it. And strait, all that ever I could
say, carry'd it down to my Master. –––He look'd
upon it, and said, Tell her, she shall soon see how
her Prayers are answer'd. She is very bold. But as
she has rejected all my Favours, her Reckoning for
all is not far off. I look'd after him, out of the
Window, and he was charmingly dress'd: To be
sure, he is a handsome fine Gentleman! –––What pity
his Heart is not as good as his Appearance! Why
can't I hate him? –––But don't be uneasy, if you
should see this; for it is impossible I should love
him; for his Vices all ugly him over, as I may say. 
My Master sends Word, that he shall not come
home to Dinner: I suppose he dines with this Sir Simon
Darnford. I am much concerned for poor Mr.
Williams. Mrs. Jewkes says, he is confined still, and
takes on much. All his Trouble is brought upon
him for my sake: This grieves me much. My
Master, it seems, will have his Money from him. 
This is very hard; for it is three fifty Pounds, he
gave him, as he thought, as a Salary for three Years
that he has been with him. But there was no Agreement
between them; and he absolutely depended
on my Master's Favour. To be sure, it was the
more generous of him to run these Risques for the
sake of oppressed Innocence; and I hope he will
meet with his Reward in due Time. Alas! for
me! I dare not plead for him; that would raise my
Oppressor's Jealousy more. And I have not Interest
to save myself! 
