



Miss Clarissa Harlowe; In Continuation. 

And now, my dear, a few words, as to the prohibition
laid upon you; a subject, that I have
frequently touched upon, but cursorily; because I was
afraid to trust myself with it, knowing that my judgment,
if I did, would condemn my practice. 

You command me not to attempt to dissuade you
from this correspondence; and you tell me how kindly
Mr. Hickman approves of it; and how obliging he
is to me, to permit it to be carry'd on under cover to
him: —But this does not quite satisfy me. 
I am a very bad casuist; and the pleasure I take in
writing to you, who are the only one to whom I can
disburden my mind, may make me, as I have hinted,
very partial to my own wishes: —Else, if it were not
an artful evasion beneath an open and frank heart to
wish to be comply'd with, I would be glad methinks
to be permitted still to write to you; and only have
such occasional returns by Mr. Hickman's pen, as
well as cover, as might set me right when I am wrong; 
confirm me, when right; and guide me where I
doubt. This would enable me to proceed in the difficult
path before me with more assuredness. For whatever
I suffer from the censures of others, if I can preserve
your good opinion, I shall not be altogether unhappy,
let what will befal me. 
And indeed, my dear, I know not how to forbear
writing. I have now no other employment or diversion. 
And I must write on, altho' I were not to send
it to any-body. You have often heard me own the
advantages I have found from writing down every
thing of moment that befals me; and of all I think,
and of all I do, that may be of future use to me: —For,
besides that this helps to form one to a style, and opens
and expands the ductile mind, every one will find,
that many a good thought evaporates in thinking; 
many, a good resolution goes off, driven out of memory,
perhaps, by some other, not so good. But
when I set down what I will do, or what I have done,
on this or that occasion; the resolution or action is
before me, either to be adhered to, withdrawn, or
amended; and I have entered into compact with myself,
as I may say; having given it under my own 

hand, to improve rather than go backward, as I live
longer. 
I would willingly therefore write to you, if I might; 
the rather as it would be more inspiriting to have some
end in view in what I write; some friend to please; 
besides merely seeking to gratify my passion for scribbling. 
But why, if your mamma will permit our correspondence
on communicating to her all that passes in
it, and if she will condescend to one only condition,
may it not be comply'd with? 
Would she not, do you think, my dear, be prevailed
upon to have the communication made to her in
confidence? 
If there were any prospect of a reconciliation with
my friends, I should not have so much regard for my
pride, as to be afraid of any-body's knowing how much
I have been outwitted, as you call it. I would in that
case (when I had left Mr. Lovelace) acquaint your
mamma, and all my own friends, with the whole of
my story. It would behove me so to do, for my
own reputation, and for their satisfaction. 
But if I have no such prospect, what will the communication
of my reluctance to go away with Mr.
Lovelace, and of his arts to frighten me away, avail
me? —Your mamma has hinted, that my friends
would insist upon my returning to them (as a proof
of the truth of my plea) to be disposed of, without
condition, at their pleasure. If I scrupled this, my
brother would rather triumph over me, than keep my
secret. Mr. Lovelace, whose pride already so ill
brooks my regrets for meeting him (when he thinks,
if I had not, I must have been Mr. Solmes's wife)
would perhaps treat me with indignity: —And thus,
deprived of all refuge and protection, I should become
the scoff of men of intrigue; and be thought a greater
disgrace than ever to my sex: —Since Love, and consequential 

marriage, will find more excuses, than perhaps
ought to be found, for actions premeditatedly rash. 
But if your mamma will receive the communications
in confidence, pray shew her all that I have written,
or shall write. If my past conduct deserves not
heavy blame, I shall then perhaps have the benefit of
her advice, as well as yours. And if I shall wilfully
deserve blame for the time to come, I will be contented
to be deny'd yours as well as hers for ever. 
As to cramping my spirit, as you call it (were I to
sit down to write what I know your mamma must
see), that, my dear, is already cramp'd. And do
not think so unhandsomely of your mamma, as to
fear that she would make partial constructions against
me. Neither you nor I can doubt, but that, had
she been left unprepossessedly to herself, she would
have shewn favour to me. And so, I dare say, would
my uncle Antony. —Nay my dear, I can extend my
charity still further: For I am sometimes of opinion,
that were my brother and sister absolutely certain,
that they had ruin'd me beyond recovery in the opinion
of both my uncles, so far, as that they need not
be apprehensive of my clashing with their interests; 
they would not oppose a pardon, altho' they might
not wish a reconciliation—Especially if I would make
a few sacrifices to them: —Which, I assure you, I
should be inclined to make, were I wholly free, and
independent of this man. —You know I never valued
myself upon worldly acquisitions, nor upon my grandfather's
bequests, but as they enlarged my power to
do things I loved to do. And if I were deny'd the
power, I must, as I now do, curb my inclination. 
Do not, however, think me guilty of an affectation
in what I have said of my brother and sister. Severe
enough I am sure it is, in the most favourable sense. And
an indifferent person will be of opinion, that they are
much better warranted than ever, for the sake of the 

family-honour, to seek to ruin me in the favour of all
my friends. 
But to the former topic—Try, my dear, if your
mamma will, upon the condition above-given, permit
our correspondence, on seeing all we write. But
if she will not, what a selfishness would there be in
my love to you, were I to wish you to forego your
duty for my sake? 
And now, one word, as to the freedom I have
treated you with in this tedious expostulatory address. 
I presume upon your forgiveness of it, because few
friendships are founded on such a basis as ours: — 
Which is, ‘freely to give reproof, and thankfully to
receive it, as occasions arise; that so either may have
opportunity to clear up mistakes, to acknowlege
and amend errors, as well in behaviour, as in words
and deeds; and to rectify and confirm each other
in the judgment each shall form upon persons,
things, and circumstances.’ And all this upon the
following consideration; ‘That it is much more eligible,
as well as honourable, to be corrected with
the gentleness of an undoubted friend, than by continuing
either blind or wilful, to expose ourselves
to the censures of an envious, and perhaps malignant
world.’ 
But it is as needless, I dare say, to remind you of
this, as it is to repeat my request, that you will not,
in your turn, spare the follies and the faults of 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
Subjoin'd to the above.
I said, that I would avoid writing any thing of my
own particular affairs in the above address, if I could. 
I will write one letter more, to inform you how we
stand. But, my dear, you must permit that one (which
will require your advice) and your answer to it, and the
copy of one I have written to my aunt, to be the last 

that shall pass between us, while the prohibition continues. 
I fear, I very much fear, that my unhappy situation
will draw me in to be guilty of evasion, of little
affectations, and of curvings from the plain simple
truth, which I was wont to value myself upon. But
allow me to say, and this for your sake, and in order
to lessen your mother's fears of any ill consequences
that she might apprehend from our correspondence,
that if I am at any time guilty of a failure in these
respects, I will not go on in it: But repent, and seek
to recover my lost ground, that I may not bring error
into habit. 
I have deferr'd going to town, at Mrs. Sorlings's
earnest request. But have fixed my removal to
Monday, as I shall acquaint you in my next. I have
already made a progress in that next; but, having an
unexpected opportunity, will send this by itself. 