



Dear Mother,
Well, I can't find my Letter, and so I'll
try to recollect it all, and be as brief as I
can. All went well enough, in the main, for
some time after my last Letter but one. At
last, I saw some Reason to suspect; for he
would look upon me, whenever he saw me, in
such a manner, as shew'd not well; and one
Day he came to me, as I was in the Summer-house
in the little Garden, at work with my
Needle, and Mrs. Jervis was just gone from
me; and I would have gone out; but he said,
No, don't go, Pamela; I have something to
say to you; and you always fly me, when I
come near you, as if you were afraid of me. 
I was much out of Countenance, you may
well think; but said, at last, It does not become
your poor Servant to stay in your Presence, Sir,
without your Business required it; and I hope
I shall always know my Place. 
Well, says he, my Business does require it
sometimes, and I have a Mind you should stay
to hear what I have to say to you. 
I stood still confounded, and began to
tremble, and the more when he took me by
the Hand; for now no Soul was near us. 

My Sister Davers, said he, (and seem'd, I
thought, to be as much at a Loss for Words
as I) would have had you live with her; but
she would not do for you what I am resolved
to do, if you continue faithful and obliging. 
What say'st thou, my Girl? said he,
with some Eagerness; hadst thou not rather stay
with me, than go to my Sister Davers? He
look'd so, as fill'd me with Affrightment: I
don't know how; wildly, I thought. 
I said, when I could speak, Your Honour
will forgive me; but as you have no Lady for
me to wait upon, and my good Lady has been
now dead this Twelvemonth, I had rather, if
it would not displease you, wait upon Lady
Davers, because— 
I was proceeding, and he said a little hastily
—Because you are a little Fool, and know
not what's good for yourself. I tell you, I
will make a Gentlewoman of you, if you be
obliging, and don't stand in your own Light. 
And so saying, he put his Arm about me, and
kiss'd me. 
Now, you will say, all his Wickedness
appear'd plainly. I struggled, and trembled,
and was so benumb'd with Terror, that I sunk
down, not in a Fit, and yet not myself; and I
found myself in his Arms, quite void of
Strength; and he kissed me two or three times,
with frightful Eagerness. —At last I burst from
him, and was getting out of the Summer-house; 
but he held me back, and shut the
Door. 

I would have given my Life for a Farthing. 
And he said, I'll do you no Harm, Pamela;
don't be afraid of me. I said, I won't stay. 
You won't, Hussy! said he: Do you know
whom you speak to? I lost all Fear, and all
Respect, and said, Yes, I do, Sir, too well
—Well may I forget, that I am your Servant,
when you forget what belongs to a Master. 
I sobb'd and cry'd most sadly. What a
foolish Hussy you are! said he: Have I done
you any Harm? —Yes, Sir, said I, the greatest
Harm in the World: You have taught me to
forget myself, and what belongs to me; and
have lessen'd the Distance that Fortune has
made between us, by demeaning yourself, to
be so free to a poor Servant. Yet, Sir, I will
be bold to say, I am honest, tho' poor: And if
you was a Prince, I would not be otherwise. 
He was angry, and said, Who would have
you otherwise, you foolish Slut! Cease your
Blubbering. I own I have demean'd myself; 
but it was only to try you: If you can keep
this Matter secret, you'll give me the better
Opinion of your Prudence; and here's something,
said he, putting some Gold in my Hand,
to make you Amends for the Fright I put you
in. Go, take a Walk in the Garden, and
don't go in till your Blubbering is over: And I
charge you say nothing of what has past, and
all shall be well, and I'll forgive you. 
I won't take the Money indeed, Sir, said
I; poor as I am: I won't take it. For, to say
Truth, I thought it look'd like taking Earnest; 

and so I put it upon the Bench; and as he
seemed vex'd and confus'd at what he had done,
I took the Opportunity to open the Door, and
went out of the Summer-house. 
He called to me, and said, Be secret, I
charge you, Pamela; and don't go in yet, as
I told you. 
O how poor and mean must those Actions
be, and how little must they make the best of
Gentlemen look, when they offer such things
as are unworthy of themselves, and put it into
the Power of their Inferiors to be greater than
they! 
I took a Turn or Two in the Garden, but
in Sight of the House, for fear of the worst; 
and breathed upon my Hand to dry my Eyes,
because I would not be too disobedient. My
next shall tell you more. 
Pray for me, my dear Father and Mother; 
and don't be angry, that I have not yet run away
from this House, so late my Comfort and Delight,
but now my Terror and Anguish. I am
forc'd to break off hastily, 
Your dutiful and honest Daughter. 

