


I Might as well have not gone to-bed last Night,
for what Sleep I had. Mrs. Jewkes often was
talking to me, and said several things that would
have been well enough from any body else of our
Sex; but the poor Woman has so little Purity of
Heart, that it is all Say from her, and goes no further
than my Ears. 
I fancy my Master has not slept much neither; 
for I heard him up, and walking about his Chamber,
ever since Break of Day. To be sure, poor Gentleman,
he must have some Concern, as well as I; 
for here he is going to marry a poor foolish unworthy
Girl, brought up on the Charity, as one may
say, (at least, Bounty) of his worthy Family! And this
foolish Girl must be, to all Intents and Purposes,
after Twelve o'Clock this Day, as much his Wife,
as if he were to marry a Dutchess! ––– And here he
must stand the Shocks of common Reflection; The
great 'Squire B. has done finely! he has marry'd his
poor Servant Wench! will some say. The Ridicule
and rude Jests of his Equals, and Companions too, 
he must stand: And the Disdain of his Relations,
and Indignation of Lady Davers, his lofty Sister! 
––– Dear good Gentleman! he will have enough to do,
to be sure! —O how shall I merit all these things
at his Hands! I can only do the best I can; and
pray to God to reward him, and to resolve to love
him with a pure Heart, and serve him with a sincere
Obedience. I hope the dear Gentleman will
continue to love me for this; for, alas! I have nothing
else to offer! But, as I can hardly expect so great
a Blessing, if I can be secure from his Contempt,
I shall not be unfortunate; and must bear his Indifference,
if his rich Friends should inspire him with
it, and proceed with doing my Duty with Chearfulness. 
Half an Hour past Eight o'Clock.
My good dear Master, my kind Friend, my generous
Benefactor, my worthy Protector, and,
Oh! all the good Words in one, my affectionate
Husband, that is so soon to be, (be curbed in, my
proud Heart, know thyself, and be conscious of thy
Unworthiness!–––) has just left me, with the kindest,
tenderest Expressions, and gentlest Behaviour that
ever blest a happy Maiden. He approached me
with a sort of reined-in Rapture. My Pamela! said
he, May I just ask after your Employment! Don't
let me chide my dear Girl this Day, however. The
two Parsons will be here to Breakfast with us at
Nine; and yet you are not a bit dress'd! Why this
Absence of Mind, and sweet Irresolution! 
Why, indeed, Sir, said I! I will set about a Reformation
this Instant! He saw the Common-prayer
Book lying in the Window. I hope, said he, my
lovely Maiden has been conning the Lesson she
is by-and-by to repeat. Have you not, Pamela?
and clasped his Arms about me, and kissed me. 
Indeed, Sir, said I, I have been reading over the
solemn Service?––– And what thinks my Fairest,
for so he called me, of it? —O Sir, 'tis very awful,
and makes one shudder to reflect upon it!––– No
wonder, said he, it should affect my sweet Pamela: 
I have been looking into it this Morning,
and I can't say, but I think it a solemn, but very
suitable Service. But this I tell my dear Love, continu'd
he, and again clasped me to him, There is not
a Tittle in it, that I cannot joyfully subscribe to: 
And that, my dear Pamela, should make you easy,
and join chearfully in it with me. I kissed his dear
Hand; O my generous, kind Protector, said I, how
gracious is it to confirm thus the doubting Mind
of your poor Servant! which apprehends nothing so
much as her own Unworthiness of the Honour
and Blessing that await her!––– He was pleased to
say, I know well, my dearest Creature, that, according
to the Liberties we People of Fortune generally
give ourselves, I have promised a great deal, when
I say so. But I would not have said it, if, deliberately,
I could not with all my Heart. So, banish
from your Mind all Doubts and Difficulties; let a
generous Confidence in me take place; and let me
see it does, by your Chearfulness, in this Day's solemn
Business; and then I will love you for ever! 
May God Almighty, Sir, said I, reward all your
Goodness to me! —That is all I can say. But, Oh!
how kind it is in you, to supply the want of the
Presence and Comfortings of a dear Mother; of a
loving Sister, or of the kind Companions of my
own Sex, which most Maidens have, to sooth their
Anxieties on the so near Approach of so awful a
Solemnity! —You, Sir, are All these tender Relations
in One to me! Your Condescensions and
Kindness shall, if possible, embolden me to look up
to you without that sweet Terror, that must confuse 
poor bashful Maidens, on such an Occasion,
when they are surrender'd up to a more doubtful
Happiness, and to half strange Men; whose good
Faith, and good Usage of them, must be less experienced,
and is all involv'd in the dark Bosom of
Futurity, and only to be proved by the Event. 
This, my dear Pamela, said he, is most kindly
said! —It shews me, that you enter gratefully into
my Intention. For I would, by my Conduct, supply
all these dear Relations to you; and I voluntarily
promise, from my Heart, to you, what I think
I could not with such assured Resolutions of Performance,
to the highest-born Lady in the Kingdom. 
For, let me tell my sweet Girl, that, after
having been long tost by the boisterous Winds of a
more culpable Passion, I have now conquer'd it,
and am not so much the Victim of your Love, all
charming as you are, as of your Virtue; and therefore
I may more boldly promise for myself, having
so stable a Foundation for my Affection; which,
should this outward Beauty fail, will increase with
your Virtue, and shine forth the brighter, as that is
more illustriously display'd, by the augmented Opportunities
which the Condition you are now entering
into, will afford you. —O the dear charming Man!
how nobly, and encouragingly kind was all this! 
I could not suitably express myself, and he said,
I see my Girl is at a Loss for Words! I doubt not
your kind Acceptance of my Declarations. And
when I have acted too much the Part of a Libertine
formerly, for you to look back without some
Anxiety, I ought not, being now happily convicted,
to say less. —But why loses my dear Girl her Time? I
will now only add, that I hope for many happy Years
to make good, by my Conduct, what so willingly
flows from my Lips. 
He kissed me again, and said, But, whatever you
do, Pamela, be chearful; for else, may-be, of the small
Company we shall have, some one, not knowing
how to account for your too nice Modesty, may
think there is some other Person in the World,
whose Addresses would be still more agreeable to
you. 
This he said with an Air of Sweetness and Pleasantry; 
but it alarm'd me exceedingly, and made
me resolve to appear as calm and chearful as possible. 
For this was indeed a most affecting Expression,
and enough to make me, if any thing can, behave
as I ought, and to force my idle Fears to give
way to Hopes, so much better grounded. —And I
began almost, on this Occasion, to wish Mr. Williams
were not to marry me, lest I should behave
like a Fool; and so be liable to an Imputation, which
I should be most unworthy if I deserved. 
So I set about dressing me instantly; and he sent
Mrs. Jewkes to assist me. But I am never long a
Dressing, when I set about it; and my Master has
now given me a Hint, that will, for half an Hour
more, at least, keep my Spirits in a brisk Circulation. 
Yet it concerns me a little too, lest he should
have any, the least Shadow of a Doubt, that I am
not, Mind and Person, intirely his. And so being
now ready, and not called to Breakfast, I sat down
and writ thus far. I might have mention'd, that I
dress'd myself in a rich white Sattin Night-gown,
that had been my good Lady's, and my best Head-cloths,
&c. I have got such a Knack of writing,
that, when I am by myself, I cannot sit without a
Pen in my Hand. —But I am now called to Breakfast. 
I suppose the Gentlemen are come! —Now,
Courage, Pamela; Remember thou art upon thy
good Behaviour: —Fie upon it! my Heart begins
to flutter again! —Foolish Heart! lie still! Never, 
sure, was any Maiden's perverse Heart under so little
Command as mine! —It gave itself away, at first,
without my Leave; it has been, for Weeks, pressing
me with its Wishes; and yet now, when it
should be happy itself, and make me so, it is throb,
throb, throb, like a little Fool; and filling me with
such unseasonable Misgivings, as abate the rising
Comforts of all my better Prospects! 