


Lady Clementina, To Sir Charles Grandison. 
[Mentioned in the preceding.] 


Tuesday, Febr. 13. O. S. 
By this time, it is very probable, you have heard
of the rashest step that the writer of these presents
(chequer'd and unhappy, as the last years of her
life have been) ever took. She knows it to be rash:
She condemns herself for taking it. She doubts not
but she shall be condemned by every-body for it: Nor
is she sure, that she shall have the better opinion of your
justice, if you are not one of the severest of her censurers:
For you are a good man. Your goodness, I hear,
fills every mouth in this your own country; and it is
not one of your least praises, that you did your duty
in the strictest manner, to a Father, who was wanting
in his to his whole family. It is, it seems, your
principle, that where a duty is reciprocal, the failure
in it of the one, acquits not the other for a failure in
his. How then can I appear before you? I am cover'd
with blushes at the thoughts of it—I, who am
a runaway from the kindest, the most indulgent, of
parents—God forgive me! —Yet, can I say, I repent? 

—I think, I can. —But at best, it is a conditional
repentance only, that I boast. 
I am here in your England; I cannot, cannot, tell
you where; in a low condition; my fortune scanty; 
my lodgings not very convenient; two servants only
my attendants; Laura (you remember her) one; 
weeping every hour after her friends, and our Italy:
My other you know not—My page he was called
in the days of my state, as I may, comparatively,
call them; but now my every-thing: Poor youth! 
But he is honest, he is faithful. God reward him! — 
I cannot. 
Yet in all this my depression of circumstances, if I
may so express myself, and sometimes (too often indeed)
of spirits; I think I am happy in the thought
that I am a single woman. 
Well, Sir! —And what can I say further? A thousand
things I have to say: Too many, to know which
to say first. I had better say no more. I am not, however,
sure, I shall send you this, or any other Letter. 
I have been ten days in this great, and, as it seems
to me, ugly city: A vastly populous one: People
very busy. I thought your London people were all
rich—But what is this to write to you about? 
I have been out but once, and that for an airing
in one of your parks. I can't say, I like England,
nor its people, much: But I have seen nothing of the
one, or the other. 
I live a very melancholy life: But that befits me
best. 
They tell me, that your churches are poor, plain
things. You bestow more upon yourselves than you
do upon your God: But perhaps you trust more to
the heart, than to the eye, in the plainness of your
places of devotion. But, again, what is all this stuff
to you? —Yet, I am apt to ramble too-too much! 
The truth is, I am not very well: So excuse me. 
But do you know how it comes about, that having 

the best of fathers, the best of mothers, the most affectionate
of brothers, I should yet think them persecutors? 
How it comes about, that I, who love
them, who honour them, as much as daughter ever
honoured parents, or sister ever loved brothers, should
run away from them all, into a strange land, a land
of heretics; yet once be thought a pious kind of creature? 
Do you know how this comes about? 
Once there was a man—But him I renounced— 
But I had a good reason for it. And do you think I
repent it? By my truth, Chevalier, I do not: I never
did. Yet I think of nobody half so often, nor
with half the pleasure: For, tho' a Heretic, he is a
good man. 
But hush! Dare I, in this country, say he is a
Heretic? Perhaps, we Catholics are looked upon as
Heretics here. Idolaters I know we are said to be—I
grant that I had like to have been an idolater once— 
But let that pass. I believe we Catholics think worse
of you Protestants, and you Protestants think worse
of us Catholics, than either deserve: It may be so. 
But, to me, you seem to be a strange people, for all
that. 
Of one thing, my good Chevalier, methinks I should
be glad. —Here I am told you are married: That I
knew before I left Italy: Else, let me tell you, I never
would have come hither: Yet I should have got
away rather than be married myself, I believe: But
then perhaps it would have been to a Catholic country. 
What was I going to say? —One thing I should be
glad of: It is to see your Lady; but not if she were
to see me. I came with very few cloaths, and they
were not the best I had at Florence: My best of all
are at Bologna. My father and mother loved to see
me dressed. I dressed many a time to please them
more than to please myself. For I am not a proud
creature: Do you think I am? You knew me once 

better than I knew myself: But you know little of
me now. I am a runaway: And I know you won't
forgive me. I can't help it. However, I should be
glad to see your Lady. She dresses richly, I suppose. 
Well she may! 
I am told, she is one of the loveliest women in
England: And as to her goodness—there is nobody
so good. Thank God! You know, Chevalier, I
always prayed, that the best of women might be called
by your name. 
But Olivia, it seems, praises her; and Olivia saw her
when she was a rambler to England, as, God help me! 
I am now. 
But Olivia's motive and mine were very different. 
Olivia went to England in hopes of a husband—Poor
woman! I pity her. 
But, Chevalier, cannot I see your Lady, and she
not see me? I need not be in disguise to see her. If
you were with her, handing her, suppose, to church,
(I would not scruple to croud myself into some unobserved
corner of your church on such an occasion)
you would be too proud of her to mind me: And
you would not know me, if you saw me; for I would
stoop in my shoulders, and look down; and the cloaths
I should have on would be only an English linen gown
and petticoat, unadorned by ribbands or gewgaw— 
Not half so well dress'd as your Lady's woman. 
But yet I should thank God, that you had not disgraced
the regard I had once for you: I had a great
deal of pride, you know, in that hope. Thank you,
Sir, that you have married so lovely and so deserving
a woman. She is of a good family, I hope. 
It was a great disappointment to me, when I came
first to London, to find, that you were not there. I
thought, some how or other, to catch a sight of you
and your Lady, were it but as you stept into your
coach; and I to have been in a chair, near, or even on
foot: For, when I heard what a character you bore, 

for every kind of goodness; I, a poor fugitive, was
afraid to see you. So many good lessons as you taught
me, and all to come to this! Unhappy Clementina! 
Where will your Ladyship (but I have forbidden
that stile) choose to take up your residence? said Antony
when we first landed (My servant's name is
Antony; but you shall not know his other name). We
landed among a parcel of guns, at the Tower, they
called it, in a boat. 
Laura answered for me; for he spoke in Italian; 
Somewhere near the Chevalier Grandison's, won't you,
madam? I won't tell you what was my answer; for
perhaps I am near the Thames—I don't want you to
find me out. I beseech you, Chevalier, don't give
yourself pain for me. I am a fugitive. Don't disgrace
yourself in acknowleging any acquaintance with
a creature who is poor and low; and who deserves to
be poor and low; for is she not a runaway from the
best of parents? But it is to avoid, not to get, a
husband; you'll be pleased to remember that, Sir. 
But, poor Laura—I am sorry for Laura; more sorry
than for myself—My brother Giacomo would kill
the poor creature, I believe, if ever she were to come
in his way. But she is in no fault. It was with great
reluctance she obeyed her mistress. She was several
times as impertinent as Camilla. Poor Camilla! I
used her hardly. She is a good creature. I used her
hardly against my own nature, to make her the easier
to part with me. I love her. I hope she is well. It
is not worth her while to pine after me; I was an ungrateful
creature to her. 
My Antony is a good young man, as I told you. 
I think to save half his wages, and give the other half
to raise Laura's, to keep her a little in heart. The
poor young man hoped preferment in my service; and
I can do nothing for him. It will behove me to be a
good manager. But I will sell the few jewels I have
left, rather than part with him, till he can get a better 

service. What little things do I trouble you with! 
Little things to you; but not quite so little to me now,
as I have managed it. But so as I can do justice to
this poor youth, and poor Laura, I matter not myself. 
What I have done is my choice: They had no option. 
I over-persuaded Laura, as my friends would
have done me. I feel that sting: It was not doing as I
would be done by. Very, very wicked in me! I dare
say, you would tell me so, were you to find me out. 
But, Chevalier, shall I send you, yes, or no, this
scrawl, written to divert me in a pensive mood? I
would not, if I thought it would trouble you. God
forbid that your pupil Clmentina should give you
discomposure, now especially in the early part of your
nuptials! Yet if I could so manage, as that you would
permit your secretary (I would not ask the favour of
your own pen) to send a few lines to some particular
place, where my servant could fetch them unknown
to you or any-body, only to let me know, If you have
heard from Bologna, or Naples, or Florence (I was
very ungrateful to good Mrs. Beaumont and the Ladies
her friends) and how they all do; my father, mother
(my heart at times bleeds for them) my dear Jeronymo,
my two other brothers, and good Father Marescotti,
and my sister-in-law whom I have so much
reason to love; it will be a great ease to my heart; 
provided the account be not a very melancholy one:
If it should, poor Clementina's days would be number'd
upon twice five fingers. 
I am put in a way—This shall be sent to your palace
in town. You will order your secretary to direct
his Letter, To George Trumbull, Esq; to be left
till called for, at White's Chocolate-house in St.
James's-street. I depend upon your honour, Chevalier,
that you will acquiesce with my desire to remain
incognita, till I shall consent to reveal to you the
place of my abode, or to see you elsewhere. I sign
only 
Clementina. 

