


I find I am watched and suspected still very
close: and I wish I was with you; but that
must not be, it seems, this Fortnight. I don't
like this Fortnight, and it will be a tedious and
a dangerous one to me, I doubt. 
My Master just now sent for me down to take
a Walk with him in the Garden. But I like him
not at all, nor his Ways: For he would have all
the Way his Arm about my Waist, and said abundance
of fond Things to me, enough to make
me proud, if his Design had not been apparent. 
After walking about, he led me into a little Alcove,
on the further Part of the Garden; and really
made me afraid of myself: For he began to be very
tiezing, and made me sit on his Knee, and was
so often kissing me, that I said, Sir, I don't like
to be here at all, I assure you. Indeed you
make me afraid! —And what made me the
more so, was what he once said to Mrs. Jewkes,
and did not think I heard him, and which, tho' 

always uppermost with me, I did not mention
before, because I did not know how to bring
it in, in my Writing. 
She, I suppose, had been encouraging him in
his Wickedness; for it was before the last dreadful
Trial; and I only heard what he answer'd. 
Said he, I will try once more; but I have begun
wrong. For I see Terror does but add to her
Frost; but she is a charming Girl, and may be
thaw'd by Kindness; and I should have melted her
by Love, instead of freezing her by Fear. 
Is he not a sad wicked Man for this? —To
be sure I blush while I write it. But I trust,
that that God, who has deliver'd me from the
Paw of the Lion and the Bear, that is, his and
Mrs. Jewkes's Violences, will also deliver me
from this Philistine, myself, that I may not defy
the Commands of the Living God! 
But, as I was saying, this Expression coming
into my Thoughts, I was of Opinion, I could
not be too much on my Guard, at all times; 
more especially when he took such Liberties:
For he profess'd Honour all the Time with his
Mouth, while his Actions did not correspond. 
I begg'd and pray'd he would let me go: And
had I not appear'd quite regardless of all he said,
and resolv'd not to stay, if I could help it, I know
not how far he would have proceeded: For I
was forced to fall down upon my Knees. 
At last he walk'd out with me, still bragging
of his Honour, and his Love. Yes, yes,
Sir, said I, your Honour is to destroy mine; 
and your Love is to ruin me, I see it too plainly. 

But, indeed, said I, I will not walk with you,
Sir, any more. Do you know, said he, whom
you talk to, and where you are? 
You may believe I had Reason to think him
not so decent as he should be; for I said, As to
where I am, Sir, I know it too well, and that
I have no Creature to befriend me: And, as to
whom I talk to, Sir, let me ask you, What you
would have me answer? 
Why tell me, said he, What Answer you
would make? It will only make you angry,
said I; and so I shall fare worse, if possible. 
I won't be angry, said he. Why then, Sir,
said I, you cannot be my late good Lady's Son; 
for she lov'd me, and taught me Virtue. You
cannot then be my Master; for no Master demeans
himself so to his poor Servant. 
He put his Arm round me, and his other
Hand on my Neck; which made me more
angry and bold; and he said, What then
am I? Why, said I, (struggling from him,
and in a great Passion) to be sure, you are Lucifer
himself in the Shape of my Master, or
you could not use me thus. These are too
great Liberties, said he, in Anger; and I desire,
that you will not repeat them, for your own
sake: For if you have no Decency towards me,
I'll have none towards you. 
I was running from him; and he said,
Come back, when I bid you. —So, knowing
every Place was alike dangerous to me, and I
had nobody to run to, I came back, at his Call; 
and seeing him look displeased, I held my Hands 

together, and wept, and said, Pray, Sir, forgive
me. No, said he, rather say, Pray, Lucifer,
forgive me; and now, since you take me for
the Devil, how can you expect any Good from
me? —How, rather, can you expect any thing
but the worst Treatment from me—You
have given me a Character, Pamela, and blame
me not, that I act up to it. 
Sir, said I, let me beg you to forgive me. I
am really sorry for my Boldness; but indeed
you don't use me like a Gentleman; and how
can I express my Resentment, if I mince the
Matter, while you are so indecent? 
Precise Fool! said he, What Indecencies
have I offer'd you? —I was bewitch'd I had
not gone thro' my Purpose last Sunday Night; 
and then your licentious Tongue had not given
the worst Name to little puny Freedoms, that
shew my Love and my Folly at the same time. 
But begone, said he, taking my Hand, and tossing
it from him, and learn another Conduct,
and more Wit; and I will lay aside my foolish
Regard for you, and assert myself. Begone,
said he, again, with a haughty Air. 
Indeed, Sir, said I, I cannot go, till you
pardon me, which I beg on my bended Knees. 
I am truly sorry for my Boldness. —But I see
how you go on: You creep by little and little
upon me; and now sooth me, and now threaten
me; and if I should forbear to shew my Resentment,
when you offer Incivilities to me, would
not that be to be lost by degrees? Would it not
shew, that I could bear any thing from you, if 

I did not express all the Indignation I could express,
at the first Approaches you make to what
I dread? And have you not as good as avow'd my
Ruin? –––And have you once made me hope, you
will quit your Purposes against me? How then,
Sir, can I act, but by shewing my Abhorrence of
every Step that makes towards my Undoing? And
what is left me but Words? —And can these
Words be other than such strong ones, as shall
shew the Detestation, which, from the Bottom
of my Heart, I have for every Attempt upon my
Virtue? Judge for me, Sir, and pardon me. 
Pardon you! said he, what! when you
don't repent? —When you have the Boldness
to justify yourself in your Fault? Why don't you
say, you never will again offend me? I will
endeavour, Sir, said I, always to preserve that
Decency towards you which becomes me: But
really, Sir, I must beg your Excuse for saying,
That when you forget what belongs to Decency
in your Actions, and when Words are all that are
left me, to shew my Resentment of such Actions,
I will not promise to forbear the strongest Expressions,
that my distressed Mind shall suggest
to me; nor shall your angriest Frowns deter me,
when my Honesty is in Question. 
What then, said he, do you beg Pardon
for? Where is the Promise of Amendment, for
which I should forgive you? Indeed, Sir, said
I, I own that must absolutely depend on your
Usage of me: For I will bear any thing you
can inflict upon me with Patience, even to the
laying down of my Life, to shew my Obedience 

to you in other Cases; but I cannot be patient,
I cannot be passive, when my Virtue is at Stake! 
—It would be criminal in me, if I was. 
He said he never saw such a Fool in his Life! 
And he walk'd by the Side of me some Yards,
without saying a Word, and seem'd vex'd; and
at last went in, bidding me attend him in the
Garden after Dinner. So having a little Time,
I went up, and wrote thus far. 
