



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. Afternoon. 
By your last date of Ten o'clock in your Letter
of this day, you could not long have deposited it
before Robin took it. He rode hard, and brought it
to me just as I had risen from table. 
You may justly blame me for sending my messenger
empty-handed, your situation considered; and
yet that very situation (so critical!) is partly the reason
for it: For indeed I knew not what to write, fit
to send you. 
I had been enquiring privately, how to procure you
a conveyance from Harlowe-Place, and yet not appear
in it; knowing, that to oblige in the fact, and
to disoblige in the manner, is but obliging by halves: 
My Mother being moreover very suspicious, and very
uneasy; made more so by daily visits from you Uncle
Antony; who tells her, that every-thing is now upon
the point of being determined; and hopes, that her
Daughter will not so interfere, as to discourage your
compliance with their wills. This I came at by a
way that I cannot take notice of, or both should hear
of it in a manner neither would like: And, without
that, my Mother and I have had almost hourly bickerings. 
I found more difficulty than I expected (as the time
was confined, and secrecy required, and as you so
earnestly forbid me to accompany you in your enterprize)
in procuring you a vehicle. Had you not obliged
me to keep measures with my Mother, I could have
managed it with ease. I could even have taken our
own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two
horses extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; and I
could, when we had got to London, have sent it back
and nobody the wiser as to the lodgings we might
have taken. 

I wish to the Lord, you had permitted This. Indeed
I think you are too punctilious a great deal for
your situation. Would you expect to enjoy yourself
with your usual placidness, and not be ruffled, in an
hurricane which every moment threatens to blow
your house down? 
Had your distress sprung from yourself, that would
have been another thing. But when all the world
knows where to lay the fault, this alters the case. 
How can you say I am happy, when my Mother,
to her power, is as much an abettor of their wickedness
to my dearest friend, as your Aunt, or any-body
else? —And this thro' the instigation of that odd-headed
and foolish Uncle of yours, who [sorry creature that he
is!] keeps her up to resolutions which are unworthy
of her, for example to me, if it please you. Is not
this cause enough for me to ground a resentment upon,
sufficient to justify me for accompanying you; the
friendship between us so well known? 
Indeed, my dear, the importance of the case considered,
I must repeat, That you are too nice. Don't
they already think, that your non-compliance with
their odious measures is owing a good deal to my advice? 
Have they not prohibited our correspondence
upon that very surmise? And have I, but on your
account, reason to value what they think? 
Besides, what discredit have I to fear by such a step? 
What detriment? Would Hickman, do you believe,
refuse me upon it? —If he did, should I be sorry for
that? —Who is it, that has a Soul, who would not be
affected by such an instance of female friendship? 
But I should vex and disorder my Mother! —Well,
that is something: But not more than she vexes and
disorders me, on her being made an implement by such
a sorry creature, who ambles hither every day in spite
to my dearest friend—Woe be to both, if it be for a
double end! —Chide me, if you will: I don't care. 
I say, and insist upon it, such a step would ennoble 

your friend: And if still you will permit it, I
will take the office out of Lovelace's hands; and, tomorrow
evening, or on Monday before his time of
appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or
chaise: And then, my dear, if we get off as I wish,
will we make terms (and what terms we please) with
them All. My Mother will be glad to receive her
daughter again I warrant: And Hickman will cry for
joy on my return; or he shall for sorrow. 
But you are so very earnestly angry with me for proposing
such a step, and have always so much to say
for your side of any question, that I am afraid to urge
it farther. —Only be so good (let me add) as to encourage
me to resume it, if, upon farther consideration,
and upon weighing matters well (and in this light,
Whether best to go off with me, or with Lovelace)
you can get over your punctilious regard for my reputation. 
A woman going away with a woman is
not so discreditable a think, surely! and with no view,
but to avoid the fellows! —I say, only be so good as
to consider this point; and if you can get over your
scruples on my account, do. And so I will have done
with this argument for the present; and apply myself
to some of the passages in yours. 
A time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to
read your affecting narratives without that impatient
bitterness, which now boils over in my heart, and
would flow to my pen, were I to enter into the particulars
of what you write. And indeed I am afraid
of giving you my advice at all, or of telling you what
I should do in your case (supposing you will still refuse
my offer; finding too, what you have been brought
or rather driven to, without it); lest any evil should
follow it: In which case, I should never forgive myself. 
And this consideration had added to my difficulties
in writing to you now you are upon such a crisis,
and yet refuse the only method—But I said, I
would not for the present touch any more that string. 

Yet, one word more, chide me if you please: If any
harm betide you, I shall for ever blame my Mother— 
Indeed I shall—And perhaps yourself, if you do not
accept of my offer. 
But one thing, in your present situation and prospects,
let me advise: It is this, That if you do go
off with Mr. Lovelace, you take the first opportunity
to marry. Why should you not, when every-body
will know by whose assistance, and in whose company,
you leave your Father's house, go whithersoever you 
will? —You may indeed keep him at distance, until
Settlements are drawn, and such-like matters are adjusted
to your mind: But even these are matters of
less consideration in your particular case, than they
would be in that of most others: And first, Because,
be his other faults what they will, nobody thinks him
an ungenerous man: Nest, Because the possession of
your Estate must be given up to you as soon as your
Cousin Morden comes; who, as your Trustee, will
see it done; and done upon proper terms: 3dly, Because
there is no want of fortune on his side: 4thly,
Because all his family value you, and are extremely
desirous that you should be their Relation: 5thly,
Because he makes no scruple of accepting you without
conditions. You see how he has always defied your
relations [I, for my own part, can forgive him for
that fault: Nor know I, if it be not a noble one]: 
And I dare say, he had rather call you his, without a
shilling, than be under obligation to those whom he
has full as little reason to love, as they have to love
him. You have heard, that his own Relations cannot
make his proud spirit submit to owe any favour to
them. 
For all these reasons, I think, you may the less
stand upon previous Settlements. It is therefore my
absolute opinion, that, if you do withdraw with him
(And in that case you must let him be judge, when
he can leave you with safety, you'll observe That) you
should not postpone the Ceremony. 

Give this matter you most serious consideration. 
Punctilio is out of doors the moment you are out of
your Father's house. I know how justly severe you
have been upon those inexcuseable creatures whose
giddiness, and even want to decency, have made them,
in the same hour as I may say, leap from a Parent's
window to a Husband's bed—But, considering Lovelace's
character, I repeat my opinion, that your Reputation
in the eye of the world requires that no delay
be made in this point when once you are in his power. 
I need not, I am sure, make a stronger plea to you. 
You say, in excuse for my Mother (what my fervent
Love for my Friend very ill brooks) That we
ought not to blame any one for not doing what she
has an option to do, or to let alone. This, in cases
of friendship, would admit of very strict discussion. 
If the thing requested be of greater consequence, or
even to equal, to the person sought to, and it were,
as the old phrase has it, to take a thorn out of one's
friend's foot, to put it into one's own, something might
be said. —Nay, it would be, I will venture to say, a
selfish thing in us to ask a favour of a friend which
would subject That friend to the same or equal inconvenience
as That from which we wanted to be relieved. 
The requester would, in this case, teach his friend,
by his own selfish example, with much better reason,
to deny him, and despite a friendship so merely nominal. 
But if, by a less inconvenience to ourselves, we
could relieve our friend from a greater, the refusal of
such a favour makes the refuser unworthy of the name
of Friend: Nor would I admit such a one, not even
into the Outermost Fold of my Heart. 
I am well aware that this is your opinion of friendship,
as well as mine: For I owe the distinction to
you, upon a certain occasion; and it saved me from
a very great inconvenience, as you must need remember. 
But you were always for making excuses
for other people, in cases wherein you would not have
allowed of one for yourself. 

I must own, that were these excuses for a friend's
indifference, or denial, made by any-body but you,
in a case of such vast importance to herself, and of so
comparative a small one to those for whose protection
she would be thought to wish; I, who am for ever, as
you have often remarked, endeavouring to trace effects
to their causes, should be ready to suspect, that there
was a latent, unowned inclination, which balancing,
or preponderating rather, made the issue of the alternative
(however important) sit more lightly upon the
excuser's mind than she cared to own. 
You will understand me, my dear. But if you do
not, it may be as well for me; for I am afraid I shall
have it from you, for but starting such a notion, or
giving a hint, which perhaps, as you did once in another
case, you will reprimandingly call, ‘Not being
able to forego the ostentation of sagacity, tho' at the
expence of that tenderness which is due to friendship
and charity.’ 
What signifies owning a fault, without mending it,
you'll say? —Very true, my dear. But you know I
ever was a saucy creature—Ever stood in need of great
allowances. —And I remember likewise that I ever had
them from my dear Clarissa. Nor do I doubt them
now: For you know how much I love you—If it be
possible, more than myself I love you! Believe me,
my dear: And, in consequence of that belief, you
will be able to judge, how much I am affected by
your present distressful and critical situation; which
will not suffer me to pass by without a censure even
that philosophy of temper in your own cause, which
you have not in another's, and which all that know
you ever admired you for. 
From this critical and distressful situation, it shall
be my hourly prayers, that you may be delivered without
blemish to that fair fame, which has hitherto, like
your heart, been unspotted. 
With this prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 

I hurried myself in writing This; and I hurry
Robin away with it, that in a situation so very
critical, you may have all the time possible to
consider what I have written, upon two points
so very important. I will repeat them in a very
few words: 
‘Whether you chuse not rather to go off with one
of your own Sex; with your Anna Howe— 
than with one of the other; with Mr. Lovelace?’ 
And if not, 
‘Whether you should not marry him as soon as
possible?’ 