



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq. 

Sat. Night, June 10. 
What will be the issue of all my plots and contrivances,
devil take me if I am able to divine! 
But I will not, as Lord M. would say forestall my
own market. 
At four, the appointed hour, I sent up, to desire
admittance in the Captain's name and my own. 
She would wait upon the Captain presently [Not
upon me!]; and in the parlour, if it were not engaged. 
The dining-room being mine, perhaps that was the
reason of her naming the parlour—Mighty nice
again, if so! —No good sign for me, thought I, this
stiffness. 
In the parlour, with me and the Captain, were
Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins, and Mrs. Bevis. 
The women said, they would withdraw, when
the Lady came down. 
Lovel. Not, except she chooses you should, Ladies. 
—People who are so much above-board as I am,
need not make secrets of any of their affairs. Besides,
you three Ladies are now acquainted with all our
concerns. 
Capt. I have some things to say to your Lady, that
perhaps she would not herself choose that any-body
should hear; not even you, Mr. Lovelace, as you and
her family are not upon such a good foot of understanding
as were to be wished. 
Lovel. Well, well, Captain, I must submit. Give
us a sign to withdraw; and we will withdraw. 
It was better that the exclusion of the women
should come from him, than from me. 

Capt. I will bow, and wave my hand, thus— 
when I wish to be alone with the lady. Her uncle
dotes upon her: I hope, Mr. Lovelace, you will not
make a reconciliation more difficult, for the earnestness
which my dear friend shews to bring it to bear: 
But indeed I must tell you, as I told you more than
once before, that I am afraid you have made lighter of
the occasion of this misunderstanding to me, than it
ought to have been made. 
Lovel. I hope, Captain Tomlinson, you do not
question my veracity! 
Capt. I beg your pardon, Mr. Lovelace—But those
things which we men may think lightly of, may not
be so to a lady of delicacy. —And then, if you have
bound yourself by a vow, you ought— 
Miss Rawlins bridling, her lips closed (but her
mouth stretched to a smile of approbation, the longer
for not buttoning), tacitly shewed herself pleased
with the Captain for his delicacy. 
Mrs. Moore could speak—Very true, however, was
all she said, with a motion of her head that expressed
the bow-approbatory. 
For my part, said the jolly widow, staring with
eyes as big as eggs, I know what I know—But Man
and Wife are Man and Wife; or they are not Man
and Wife. —I have no notion of standing upon such
niceties. 
But here she comes! cried one—hearing her chamber
door open—Here she comes! another—hearing
it shut after her—And down dropt the angel among
us. 
We all stood up, bowing and courtesying; and
could not help it. For she entered with such an air
as commanded all our reverence. Yet the Captain
look'd plaguy grave. 
Cl. Pray keep your seats, Ladies—Pray do not go
[For they made offers to withdraw; yet Miss Rawlins 

would have burst, had she been suffer'd to retire]. 
Before this time you have heard all my story,
I make no doubt—Pray keep your seats—At least all
Mr. Lovelace's. 
A very saucy and whimsical beginning, thought I. 
Capt. Tomlinson, your servant, addressing herself
to him with inimitable dignity. I hope you did not
take amiss my declining your visit yesterday. I was
really incapable of talking upon any subject that required
attention. 
Capt. I am glad I see you better now, Madam. 
I hope I do. 
Cl. Indeed I am not well. I would not have excused
myself from attending you some hours ago, but
in hopes I should have been better. I beg your pardon,
Sir, for the trouble I have given you; and shall
the rather expect it, as this day will, I hope, conclude
it all. 
Thus set! thus determin'd! thought I—Yet to have
slept upon it! —But, as what she said was capable of
a good, as well as a bad construction, I would not
put an unfavourable one upon it. 
Lovel. The Captain was sorry, my dear, he did
not offer his attendance the moment he arrived yesterday. 
He was afraid that you took it amiss, that he
did not. 
Cl. Perhaps I thought that my uncle's friend might
have wished to see me as soon as he came [How we
stared!] —But, Sir (to me), it might be convenient to
you to detain him. 
The devil, thought I! —So there really was resentment,
as well as head-ach, as my good friend Mrs.
Bevis observed, in her refusing to see the honest gentleman. 
Capt. You would detain me, Mr. Lovelace—I
was for paying my respects to the lady the moment I
came— 

Cl. Well, Sir [interrupting him], to wave this; 
for I would not be thought captious—If you have not
suffer'd inconveniency, in being obliged to come
again, I shall be easy. 
Capt. [half-disconcerted] A little, I can't say but
I have. I have, indeed, too many affairs upon my
hands. But the desire I have to serve you and Mr.
Lovelace, as well as to oblige my dear friend your
uncle Harlowe, make great inconveniencies but small
ones. 
Cl. You are very obliging, Sir. —Here is a great
alteration since you parted with us last. 
Capt. A great one indeed, Madam! I was very
much surprised at it, on Thursday evening, when
Mr. Lovelace conducted me to your lodgings, where
we hoped to find you. 
Cl. Have you any thing to say to me, Sir, from my
uncle himself, that requires my private ear? Don't go,
Ladies [for the women stood up, and offer'd to withdraw]: 
—If Mr. Lovelace stays, I am sure you may. 
I frown'd. I bit my lip. I looked at the women; 
and shook my head. 
Capt. I have nothing to offer, but what Mr. Lovelace
is a party to, and may hear, except one private
word or two, which may be postponed to the last. 
Cl. Pray, Ladies, keep your seats. —Things are
altered, Sir, since I saw you. You can mention nothing
that relates to me now, to which that gentleman
can be a party. 
Capt. You surprise me, Madam! I am sorry to
hear this! —Sorry for your uncle's sake! —Sorry for
your sake! —Sorry for Mr. Lovelace's sake—And yet
I am sure he must have given greater occasion than
he has mentioned to me, or— 
Lovel. Indeed, Captain, Indeed, Ladies, I have
told you great part of my story! —And what I told
you of my offence was the truth: —What I concealed 

of my story was only what I apprehended would, if
known, cause this dear creature to be thought more
censorious than charitable. 
Cl. Well, well, Sir, say what you please. Make
me as black as you please. Make yourself as white
as you can. I am not now in your power: That
will comfort me for all. 
Capt. God forbid that I should offer to plead in
behalf of a crime, that a lady of virtue and honour
cannot forgive. But surely, surely, Madam, this is
going too far. 
Cl. Do not blame me, Capt. Tomlinson. I have
a good opinion of you, as my uncle's friend. But if
you are Mr. Lovelace's friend, that is another thing; 
for my interests and Mr. Lovelace's must now be for
ever separated. 
Capt. One word with you, Madam, if you please
—offering to retire. 
Cl. You may say all that you please to say before
these gentlewomen. Mr. Lovelace may have secrets. 
I have none. You seem to think me faulty: I should
be glad, that all the world knew my heart. Let my
enemies sit in judgment upon my actions: Fairly
scanned, I fear not the result. Let them even ask
me my most secret thoughts, and, whether they
make for me, or against me, I will reveal them. 
Capt. Noble Lady! who can say as you say? 
The women held up their hands and eyes; each,
as if she had said, Not I. 
No disorder here, said Miss Rawlins! But (judging
by her own heart) A confounded deal of improbability,
I believe she thought. 
Finely said, to be sure, said the widow Bevis,
shrugging her shoulders. 
Mrs. Moore sighed. 
Jack Belford, thought I, knows all mine: And
in this I am more ingenuous than any of the three,
and a fit match for this paragon. 

Cl. How Mr. Lovelace has found me out here, I
cannot tell. But such mean devices, such artful,
such worse than Waltham disguises put on, to obtrude
himself into my company; such bold, such
shocking untruths— 
Capt. The favour of but one word, Madam, in
private— 
Cl. In order to support a right which he has not
over me! —O Sir, O Capt. Tomlinson! —I think
I have reason to say, that the man is capable of any
vileness!— 
The women looked upon one another, and upon
me, by turns, to see how I bore it. I had such
dartings in my head at the instant, that I thought I
should have gone distracted. My brain seemed on
fire. What would I have given to have had her
alone with me! —I traversed the room; my clenched
fist to my forehead. O that I had any-body here,
thought I, that, Hercules-like, when flaming in the
tortures of Deianira's poison'd shirt, I could tear in
pieces? 
Capt. Dear Lady! see you not how the poor gentleman
—Lord, how have I imposed upon your uncle,
at this rate! How happy, did I tell him, I saw
you! How happy I was sure you would be in each
other! 
Cl. Oh, Sir, you don't know how many premeditated
offences I had forgiven when I saw you last,
before I could appear to you, what I hoped then I
might for the future be! —But now you may tell my
uncle, if you please, that I cannot hope for his mediation. 
Tell him, that my guilt, in giving this
man an opportunity to spirit me away from my try'd,
my experienced, my natural friends, harshly as they
treated me, stares me every day more and more in
the face; and still the more, as my fate seems to
be drawing to a crisis, according to the malediction
of my offended father! 

And then she burst into tears, which even affected
that dog, who, brought to abet me, was himself all
Belforded over. 
The women, so used to cry without grief, as they
are to laugh without reason, by mere force of example
[confound their promptitudes!], must needs
pull out their handkerchiefs. The less wonder, however,
as I myself, between confusion, surprize, and
concern, could hardly stand it. 
What's a tender heart good for! —Who can be
happy, that has a feeling heart? —And yet thou'lt
say, that he who has it not, must be a tyger, and
no man. 
Capt. Let me beg the favour of one word with
you, Madam, in private; and that on my own account. 
The women hereupon offered to retire. She insisted,
that if they went, I should not stay. 
Capt. Sir, bowing to me, shall I beg— 
I hope, thought I, that I may trust this solemn dog,
instructed as he is. She does not doubt him. I'll
stay out no longer than to give her time to spend her
first fire. 
I then passively withdrew, with the women—But
with such a bow to my goddess, that it won for me
every heart but that I wanted most to win; for the
haughty maid bent not her knee in return. 
The conversation between the Captain and the
Lady, when we were retired, was to the following
effect: They both talked loud enough for me to hear
them. The Lady from anger, the Captain with design; 
and, thou mayst be sure, there was no listener
but myself. What I was imperfect in was supply'd
afterwards; for I had my vellom-leav'd book, to
note all down. —If she had known this, perhaps she
would have been more sparing of her invectives— 
and but perhaps neither. 

He told her, that as her brother was absolutely resolved
to see her; and as he himself, in compliance
with her uncle's expedient, had reported her marriage; 
and as that report had reached the ears of
Lord M. Lady Betty, and the rest of my relations; 
and as he had been obliged, in consequence of his
first report, to vouch it; and as her brother might
find out where she was, and apply to the women
here, for a confirmation or refutation of the marriage; 
he had thought himself obliged to countenance
the report before the women: That this had embarassed
him not a little, as he would not for the
world that she should have cause to think him capable
of prevarication, contrivance, or double-dealing: 
And that this made him desirous of a private conversation
with her. 
It was true, she said, she had given her consent
to such an expedient, believing it was her uncle's; 
and little thinking, that it would lead to so many errors. 
Yet she might have known, that one error is
frequently the parent of many. Mr. Lovelace had
made her sensible of the truth of that observation, on
more occasions than one; and it was an observation
that he the Captain had made, in one of the letters
that was shewn her yesterday (a) . 
He hoped, that she had no mistrust of him. That
she had no doubts of his honour. If, Madam, you
suspect me—If you think me capable—What a man— 
The Lord be merciful to me! —What a man must you
think me! 
I hope, Sir, there cannot be a man in the world,
who could deserve to be suspected in such as a case as
this. I do not suspect you. If it were possible there
could be one such man, I am sure, Capt. Tomlinson,
a father of children, a man in years, of sense and
experience, cannot be that man. 

He told me, that just then, he thought he felt a
sudden flash from her eye, an eye-beam, as he called
it, dart thro' his shivering reins; and he could not
help trembling. 
The dog's conscience, Jack! Nothing else! —I
have felt half a dozen such flashes, such eye-beams,
in as many different conversations with this soul-piercing
beauty. 
Her uncle, she must own, was not accustom'd to
think of such expedients: But she had reconciled
this to herself, as the case was unhappily uncommon; 
and by the regard he had for her honour. 
This set the puppy's heart at ease, and gave him
more courage. 
She asked him, If he thought Lady Betty and Miss
Montague intended her a visit? 
He had no doubt but they did. 
And does he imagine, said she, that I could be
brought to countenance to them the report you have
given out? 
[I had hoped to bring her to this, Jack, or she had not
seen their letters. But I had told the Captain, that I
believe I must give up this expectation.] 
No. He believed, that I had not such a thought. 
He was pretty sure, that I intended, when I saw
them, to tell them (as in confidence) the naked
truth. 
He then told her, that her uncle had already made
some steps towards a general reconciliation. The moment,
Madam, that he knows you are really married, he
will enter into conference with your father upon it; 
having actually expressed his desire to be reconciled
to you, to your mother. 
And what, Sir, said my mother? What said my
dear mother? [with great emotion; holding out
her sweet face, as the Captain described her, with
the most earnest attention, as if she would shorten 

the way which his words were to have to her
heart.] 
Your mother, Madam, burst into tears upon it: 
And your uncle was so penetrated by her tenderness,
that he could not proceed with the subject. But he
intends to enter upon it with her in form, as soon as
he hears that the ceremony is over. 
By the tone of her voice she wept. The dear
creature, thought I, begins to relent! —And I grudg'd
the dog his eloquence. I could hardly bear the thought,
that any man breathing should have the power, which
I had lost, of persuading this high-soul'd lady, tho'
in my own favour. And, wouldst thou think it?
this reflection gave me more uneasiness at the moment,
than I felt from her reproaches, violent as
they were; or than I had pleasure in her supposed
relenting. For there is beauty in every-thing she
says and does: Beauty in her passion: Beauty in her
tears! —Had the Captain been a young fellow, and of
rank and fortune, his throat would have been in danger; 
and I should have thought very hardly of her! 
O Capt. Tomlinson, said she, you know not what
I have suffer'd by this man's strange ways. He had,
as I was not ashamed to tell him yesterday, a plain
path before him. He at first betray'd me into his
power: But when I was in it—There she stopt. 
Then resuming—O, Sir, you know not what a
strange man he has been! —An unpolite, a rough-manner'd
man! —In disgrace of his birth, and education,
and knowlege, an unpolite man! —And so acting,
as if his worldly and personal advantages set him above
those graces which distinguish a gentleman. 
The first woman that ever said or that ever
thought so of me, that's my comfort, thought I! — 
But this (spoken to her uncle's friend behind my back)
helps to heap up thy already too-full measure, dearest! 
—It is down in my vellom-book. 

Cl. When I look back on his whole behaviour to a
poor young creature (for I am but a very young creature),
I cannot acquit him either of great folly, or
of deep design. —And, last Wednesday—[There she
stopt; and I suppose turn'd away her face. I wonder
she was not asham'd to hint at what she thought
so shameful; and that to a man, and alone with him.] 
Capt. Far be it from me, Madam, to offer to enter
too closely into so tender a subject. He owns,
that you have reason to be displeased with him. But
he so solemnly clears himself to me, of premeditated
offence— 
Cl. He cannot clear himself, Mr. Tomlinson. The
people of the house must be very vile, as well as he. 
I am convinced, that there was a wicked confederacy
—But no more upon such a subject. 
Capt. Only one word more, Madam: He tells
me, that he gave you such an instance of your power
over him, as never man gave: And that you promised
to pardon him. 
Cl. He knew, that he deserved not pardon, or he
had not extorted that promise from me. Nor had I
given it to him, but to shield myself from the vilest
outrage— 
Capt. I could wish, Madam, inexcusable as his
behaviour has been, since he has something to plead
in the reliance he made upon your promise; that, for
the sake of appearances to the world, and to avoid
the mischiefs that may follow, if you absolutely break
with him, you could prevail upon your naturally generous
mind, to lay an obligation upon him by your
forgiveness. 
She was silent. 
Capt. Your father and mother, Madam, deplore
a daughter lost to them, whom your generosity to
Mr. Lovelace may restore: Do not put it to the possible
chance, that they may have cause to deplore a 

double loss; the losing of a son, as well as a daughter,
who, by his own violence, which you may
perhaps prevent, may be for ever lost to them, and
to the whole family. 
She paused. She wept. She owned, that she felt
the force of this argument. 
I will be the making of this fellow, thought I! 
Capt. Permit me, Madam, to tell you, that I
do not think it would be difficult to prevail upon
your uncle, if you insist upon it, to come up privately
to town, and to give you with his own hand
to Mr. Lovelace—Except, indeed, your present misunderstanding
were to come to his ears. 
Cl. But why, Sir, should I be so much afraid of
my brother? My brother has injured me, not I him. 
Shall I seek protection from my brother of Mr. Lovelace? 
And who shall protect me from Mr. Lovelace? 
—Will the one offer to me, what the other has
offer'd! —Wicked, ungrateful man! to insult a
friendless, unprotected creature, made friendless by
himself—I cannot, cannot think of him in the light
I once thought of him. He has no business with me. 
Let him leave me. Let my brother find me. I am
not such a poor creature, as to be afraid to face the
brother who has injured me. 
Capt. Were you and your brother to meet only
to confer together, to expostulate, to clear up difficulties,
it were another thing. But what, Madam,
can you think will be the issue of an interview (Mr.
Solmes with him), when he finds you unmarried, and
resolved never to have Mr. Lovelace; supposing Mr.
Lovelace were not to interfere; which cannot be
supposed? 
Cl. Well, Sir, I can only say, I am a very unhappy
creature! —I must resign to the will of Providence,
and be patient under evils, which that will
not permit me to shun. But I have taken my measures. 
Mr. Lovelace can never make me happy, nor 

I him. I wait here only for a letter from Miss Howe. 
That must determine me— 
Determine you as to Mr. Lovelace, Madam? interrupted
the Captain. 
Cl. I am already determin'd as to him. 
Capt. If it be not in his favour, I have done. I
cannot use stronger arguments than I have used, and
it would be impertinent to repeat them. —If you cannot
forgive his offence, I am sure it must have been
much greater than he has owned to me. —If you are
absolutely determined, be pleased to let me know
what I shall say to your uncle? You was pleased to
tell me, that this day would put an end to what you
called my trouble: I should not have thought it any,
could I have been an humble means of reconciling
persons of worth and honour to each other. 
Here I enter'd with a solemn air. 
Lovel. Mr. Tomlinson, I have heard a great part
of what has passed between you and this unforgiving,
however otherwise excellent lady. I am cut to the
heart to find the dear creature so determined. I could
not have believed it possible, with such prospects,
that I had so little a share in her esteem. Nevertheless
I must do myself justice with regard to the
offence I was so unhappy as to give, since I find you
are ready to think it much greater than it really was. 
Cl. I hear not, Sir, your recapitulations. I am,
and ought to be, the sole judge of insults offered to
my person. I enter not into discussion with you,
nor hear you on the shocking subject. And was going. 
I put myself between her and the door—You may
hear all I have to say, Madam. My fault is not of
such a nature, but that you may. I will be a just
accuser of myself; and will not wound your ears. 
I then protested that the fire was a real fire [So it
was]. I disclaimed [less truly indeed] premeditation. 
I owned that I was hurried on by the violence
of a youthful passion, and by a sudden impulse, 

which few other persons, in the like situation, would
have been able to check: That I withdrew, at her
command and intreaty, on the promise of pardon,
without having offered the least indecency, or any
freedom, that would not have been forgiven by persons
of delicacy, surprised in an attitude so charming
—Her terror, on the alarm of fire, calling for a
soothing behaviour, and personal tenderness, she being
ready to fall into fits: My hoped-for happy day
so near, that I might be presumed to be looked upon
as a betrothed lover—And that this excuse might be
pleaded even for the women of the house, that they,
thinking us actually married, might suppose themselves
to be the less concerned to interfere on so tender
an occasion—There, Jack, was a bold insinuation
in behalf of the women! 
High indignation filled her disdainful eye, eye-beam
after eye-beam flashing at me. Every feature
of her sweet face had soul in it. Yet she spoke not. 
Perhaps, Jack, she had a thought, that this plea for
the women accounted for my contrivance to have her
pass to them as married, when I first carried her
thither. 
Capt. Indeed, Sir, I must say, that you did not
well to add to the apprehensions of a lady so much
terrified before. 
She offer'd to go by me. I set my back against
the door, and besought her to stay a few moments. 
I had not said thus much, my dearest creature, but
for your sake, as well as for my own, that Captain
Tomlinson should not think I had been viler than I
was. Nor will I say one word more on the subject,
after I have appealed to your own heart, whether it
was not necessary, that I should say so much; and to
the Captain, whether otherwise he would not have
gone away with a much worse opinion of me, if he 

had judged of my offence by the violence of your
resentment. 
Capt. Indeed I should. I own I should. And I
am very glad, Mr. Lovelace, that you are able to
defend yourself thus far. 
Cl. That cause must be well tried, where the offender
takes his seat upon the same bench with the
judge. —I submit not mine to men—Nor, give me
leave to say, to You, Captain Tomlinson, tho' I am
willing to have a good opinion of you. Had not the
man been assured, that he had influenced you in his
favour, he would not have brought you up to Hamstead. 
Capt. That I am influenced, as you call it, Madam,
is for the sake of your uncle, and for your
own sake, more (I will say to Mr. Lovelace's face)
than for his. What can I have in view, but peace
and reconciliation? I have, from the first, blamed,
and I now, again, blame, Mr. Lovelace, for adding
distress to distress, and terror to terror; the lady, as
you acknowlege, Sir [looking valiantly], ready before
to fall into fits. 
Lovel. Let me own to you, Captain Tomlinson,
that I have been a very faulty, a very foolish man; and,
if this dear creature ever honoured me with her love,
an ingrateful one. But I have had too much reason
to doubt it. And this is now a flagrant proof that
she never had the value for me which my proud heart
wished for, that, with such prospects before us; a
day so near; settlements approved and drawn; her
uncle mediating a reconciliation, which, for her
sake, not my own, I was desirous to give into; she
can, for an offence so really slight, on an occasion so
truly accidental, renounce me for ever; and, with
me, all hopes of that reconciliation in the way her
uncle had put it in, and she had acquiesced with; and 

risque all consequences, fatal ones as they may too
possibly be. —By my soul, Captain Tomlinson, the
dear creature must have hated me all the time she
was intending to honour me with her hand. And
now she must resolve to abandon me, as far as I
know, with a preference in her heart of the most odious
of men—in favour of that Solmes, who, as you
tell me, accompanies her brother: And with what
hopes, with what view, accompanies him? —How can
I bear to think of this?— 
Cl. It is fit, Sir, that you should judge of my regard
for you, by your own conscious demerits. Yet
you know, or you would not have dared to behave
to me as sometimes you did, that you had more of
it than you deserved. 
She walked from us; and then returning, Captain
Tomlinson, said she, I will own to you, that I was
not capable of resolving to give my hand, and—nothing
but my hand. —Have I not give a flagrant proof
of this to the once most indulgent of parents? which
has brought me into a distress, which this man has
heightened, when he ought, in gratitude and honour,
to have endeavoured to render it supportable. 
I had even a byas, Sir, in his favour, I scruple not
to own it. Long, too long! bore I with his unaccountable
ways, attributing his errors to unmeaning
gaiety, and to a want of knowing what true delicacy,
and true generosity, required from a heart susceptible
of grateful impressions to one involved by
his means in unhappy circumstances. It is now wickedness
in him (a wickedness which discredits all his
professions) to say, that his last cruel and ingrateful
insult was not a premeditated one. —But what need I
say more of this insult, when it was of such a nature,
that it has changed that byas in his favour, and made
me choose to forego all the inviting prospects he 

talks of, and to run all hazards, to free myself from
his power? 
O my dearest creature! how happy for us both,
had I been able to discover that byas, as you condescend
to call it, thro' such reserves as man never encountered
with!— 
He did discover it, Captain Tomlinson. He brought
me, more than once, to own it; the more needlesly
brought me to own it, as I dare say his own vanity
gave him no cause to doubt it; and as I had no other
motive in not being forward to own it, than my too
just apprehensions of his want of generosity. In a
word, Captain Tomlinson (and now, that I am determined
upon my measures, I the less scruple to say
it), I should have despised myself, had I found myself
capable of affectation or tyranny to the man I intended
to marry. I have always blamed the dearest
friend I have in the world for a fault of this nature. 
In a word— 
Lovel. And had my angel really and indeed the
favour for me she is pleased to own? —Dearest creature,
forgive me. Restore me to your good opinion. 
Surely I have not sinned beyond forgiveness. You
say, that I extorted from you the promise you made
me. But I could not have presumed to make that
promise the condition of my obedience, had I not
thought there was room to expect forgiveness. Permit,
I beseech you, the prospects to take place, that
were opening so agreeably before us. I will go to
town, and bring the licence. All difficulties to the
obtaining of it are surmounted. Captain Tomlinson
shall be witness to the deeds. He will be present at
the ceremony on the part of your uncle. Indeed he
gave me hope, that your uncle himself— 
Capt. I did, Mr. Lovelace: And I will tell you
my grounds for the hope I gave. I proposed to my 

dear friend (Your uncle, Madam), that he should
give out, that he would take a turn with me to my
little farm-house, as I call it, near Northampton,
for a week or so. —Poor gentleman! he has of late
been very little abroad! Too visibly indeed declineing! 
—Change of air, it might be given out, was good
for him. —But I see, Madam, that this is too tender
a subject— 
The dear creature wept. She knew how to apply,
as meant, the Captain's hint to the occasion of her
uncle's declining state of health. 
Capt. We might indeed, I told him, set out in
that road, but turn short to town in my chariot; and
he might see the ceremony performed with his own
eyes, and be the desired father, as well as the beloved
uncle. 
She turned from us, and wiped her eyes. 
Capt. And, really, there seem now to be but two
objections to this; as Mr. Harlowe discouraged not
the proposal—The one, the unhappy misunderstanding
between you; which I would not by any means
he should know; since then he might be apt to give
weight to Mr. James Harlowe's unjust surmizes. — 
The other, that it would necessarily occasion some
delay to the ceremony; which I cannot see, but
may be performed in a day or two—If— 
And then he reverently bowed to my goddess. — 
Charming fellow! —But often did I curse my stars,
for making me so much obliged to his adroitness. 
She was going to speak; but, not liking the turn
of her countenance (altho', as I thought, its severity
and indignation seemed a little abated), I said, and
had like to have blown myself up by it—One expedient
I have just thought of— 
Cl. None of your expedients, Mr. Lovelace! I
abhor your expedients, your inventions—I have had
too many of them. 

Lovel. See, Capt. Tomlinson! —See, Sir—O how
we expose ourselves to you! —Little did you think, I
dare say, that we have lived in such a continued misunderstanding
together! But you will make the best
of it all. We may yet be happy. O that I could
have been assured, that this dear lady loved me with
the hundredth part of the love I have for her! —Our
diffidences have been mutual. This dear creature has
too much punctilio: I am afraid, that I have too little. 
Hence our difficulties. But I have a heart,
Capt. Tomlinson, a heart, that bids me hope for her
love, because it is resolved to deserve it, as much as
man can deserve it. 
Capt. I am indeed surprised at what I have seen
and heard. I defend not Mr. Lovelace, Madam, in
the offence he has given you—As a father of daughters
myself, I cannot defend him, tho' his fault seems
to be lighter than I had apprehended—But in my conscience
I think, that you, Madam, carry your resentment
too high. 
Cl. Too high, Sir! —Too high, to the man that
might have been happy if he would! —Too high to
the man that has held my soul in suspense an hundred
times, since (by artifice and deceit) he obtained a
power over me! —Say, Lovelace, thyself say, Art
thou not the very Lovelace, that, by insulting me,
hast wrong'd thy own hopes? —The wretch that appeared
in vile disguises, personating an old lame creature,
seeking for lodgings for thy sick wife? —Telling
the gentlewomen here, stories all of thy own invention; 
and asserting to them an husband's right
over me, which thou hadst not? —And is it (turning
to the Captain) to be expected, that I should give
credit to the protestations of such a man? 
Lovel. Treat me, dearest creature, as you please,
I will bear it: And yet your scorn and your violence
have fixed daggers in my heart—But was it possible, 

without those disguises, to come at your speech? — 
And could I lose you, if study, if invention, would
put it in my power to arrest your anger, and give
me hope to engage you to confirm to me the promised
pardon? —The address I made to you before
the women, as if the marriage-ceremony had passed,
was in consequence of what your uncle had advised,
and what you had acquiesced with; and the rather
made, as your brother, and Singleton, and Solmes,
were resolved to find out whether what was reported
of your marriage were true or not, that they might
take their measures accordingly; and in hopes to
prevent that mischief, which I have been but too studious
to prevent, since this tameness has but invited
insolence from your brother and his confederates. 
Cl. O thou strange wretch, how thou talkest! — 
But, Captain Tomlinson, give me leave to say, that,
were I inclin'd to talk any farther upon this subject,
I would appeal to Miss Rawlins's judgment (Who else
have I to appeal to?); she seems to be a person of prudence
and honour; but not to any man's judgment,
whether I carry my resentment beyond fit bounds,
when I resolve— 
Capt. Forgive, Madam, the interruption—But I
think there can be no reason for this. You ought,
as you said, to be the sole judge of indignities offered
you. The gentlewomen here are strangers to you. 
You will perhaps stay but a little while among them. 
If you lay the state of your case before any of them, and
your brother come to inquire of them, your uncle's
intended mediation will be discover'd, and rendered
abortive—I shall appear in a light that I never appeared
in, in my life—for these women may not think
themselves obliged to keep the secret. 
Cl. O what difficulties has one fatal step involved
me in! —But there is no necessity for such an appeal. 
I am resolved on my measures. 

Capt. Absolutely resolved, Madam? 
Cl. I am. 
Capt. What shall I say to your uncle Harlowe,
Madam? —Poor gentleman! how will he be surprised! 
—You see, Mr. Lovelace—You see, Sir— 
turning to me, with a flourishing hand—But you may
thank yourself—and admirably stalk'd he from us. 
True, by my soul, thought I. I traversed the room,
and bit my unpersuasive lips, now upper, now under,
for vexation. 
He made a profound reverence to her—And went
to the window, where lay his hat and whip; and,
taking them up, open'd the door. Child, said he,
to somebody he saw, pray, order my servant to bring
my horse to the door— 
Lovel. You won't go, Sir—I hope you won't! — 
I am the unhappiest man in the world! —You won't
go—Yet, alas! —But you won't go, Sir! —There
may be yet hopes, that Lady Betty may have some
weight— 
Capt. Dear Mr. Lovelace; and may not my worthy
friend, an affectionate uncle, hope for some influence
upon his daughter-niece? —But I beg pardon
—A letter will always find me disposed to serve the
lady, and that as well for her sake, as for the sake
of my dear friend. 
She had thrown herself into a chair; her eyes cast
down: He was motionless, as in a profound study. 
The Captain bowed to her again: But met with
no return to his bow. Mr. Lovelace, said he (with
an air of equality and independence), I am Yours. 
Still the dear unaccountable sat as immoveable as a
statue; stirring neither hand, foot, head, nor eye— 
I never before saw any one in so profound a resverie,
in so waking a dream. 
He passed by her to go out at the door she sat
near, tho' the other door was his direct way; and 

bowed again. She moved not. I will not disturb
the lady in her meditations, Sir. —Adieu, Mr. Lovelace
—No farther, I beseech you. 
She started, sighing—Are you going, Sir? 
Capt. I am, Madam. I could have been glad to
do you service: But I see it is not in my power. 
She stood up, holding out one hand, with inimitable
dignity and sweetness—I am sorry you are going,
Sir—I can't help it—I have no friend to advise
with—Mr. Lovelace has the art (or good-fortune,
perhaps, I should call it) to make himself many. — 
Well, Sir—If you will go, I can't help it. 
Capt. I will not go, Madam, his eyes twinkling
[Again seized with a fit of humanity!]. I will not
go, if my longer stay can do you either service or
pleasure. What, Sir (turning to me), what, Mr.
Lovelace, was your expedient? —Perhaps something
may be offer'd, Madam— 
She sighed, and was silent. 
Revenge, invoked I to myself, keep thy throne in
my heart—If the usurper Love once more drive thee
from it, thou wilt never regain possession! 
Lovel. What I had thought of, what I had intended
to propose, and I sigh'd—was this, That the dear
creature, if she will not forgive me, as she promised,
would suspend the displeasure she has conceived against
me, till Lady Betty arrives. —That lady may be
the mediatrix between us. This dear creature may
put herself into her protection, and accompany her
down to her seat in Oxfordshire. It is one of her
Ladyship's purposes to prevail on her supposed new
niece to go down with her. It may pass to every
one but to Lady Betty, and to you, Capt. Tomlinson,
and to your friend Mr. Harlowe (as he desires),
that we have been some time married: And her being
with my relations, will amount to a proof to
James Harlowe, that we are; and our nuptials may 

be privately, and at this beloved creature's pleasure,
solemnized; and your report, Captain, authenticated. 
Capt. Upon my honour, Madam, clapping his
hand upon his breast, a charming expedient! This
will answer every end. 
She mused—She was greatly perplexed—At last,
God direct me, said she! I know not what to do— 
A young unfriended creature, whom have I to advise
with? —Let me retire, if I can retire. 
She withdrew with slow and trembling feet, and
went up to her chamber. 
For Heaven's sake, said the penetrated varlet, his
hands lifted up, for Heaven's sake, take compassion
upon this admirable lady! —I cannot proceed—I cannot
proceed—She deserves all things— 
Softly!—damn the fellow! —The women are coming
in. 
He sobb'd up his grief—turn'd about—hemm'd up
a more manly accent—Wipe thy cursed eyes—He did. 
The sunshine took place on one cheek, and spread
slowly to the other, and the fellow had his whole
face again. 
The women all three came in, led by that ever-curious
Miss Rawlins. I told them, that the lady
was gone up to consider of every-thing: That we
had hopes of her. And such a representation we
made of all that had passed, as brought either tacit
or declared blame upon the fair perverse, for hardness
of heart, and over-delicacy. 
The widow Bevis, in particular, put out one lip,
tossed up her head, wrinkled her forehead, and made
such motions with her now-lifted-up, now cast-down
eyes, as shew'd, that she thought there was a great
deal of perverseness and affectation in the lady. Now-and-then
she changed her censuring looks to looks of
pity of me—But (as she said) She loved not to aggravate! 
—A poor business, God help's! shrugging up 

her shoulders, to make such a rout about! and then
her eyes laugh'd heartily—Indulgence was a good
thing! Love was a good thing! —But too much was
too much! 
Miss Rawlins, however, declared, after she had
called the Widow Bevis, with a prudish simper, a
comical gentlewoman! That there must be something
in our story, which she could not fathom; and went
from us into a corner, and sat down, seemingly
vexed that she could not. 