



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
[In Answer to Letter lxxiii.] 

Thursday, July 20. 
I re'd that part of your conclusion to poor Belton,
where you enquire after him, and mention how
merrily you, and the rest, pass your time at M. Hall. 
He fetched a deep sigh: You are all very happy! 

were his words. —I am sorry they were his words; 
for, poor fellow, he is going very fast. Change of
Air, he hopes, will mend him, joined to the chearful
Company I have left him in. But nothing, I dare
say, will. 
A consuming Malady, and a consuming Mistress, to
an indulgent Keeper, are dreadful things to struggle
with both together: Violence must be used to get rid
of the latter; and yet he has not spirit left him, to
exert himself. His house is Thomasine's house; not
his. He has not been within his doors for a fortnight
past. Vagabonding about from Inn to Inn; entering
each for a bait only; and staying two or three days
without power to remove; and hardly knowing
which to go to next. His malady is within him; and
he cannot run away from it. 
Her Boys (once he thought them his) are sturdy
enough to shoulder him in his own house as they pass
by him. Siding with the Mother, they in a manner
expel him; and, in his absence, riot away on the
remnant of his broken fortunes. As to their Mother
(who was once so tender, so submissive, so studious
to oblige, that we all pronounced him happy, and
his course of life the eligible) she is now so termagant,
so insolent, that he cannot contend with her, without
doing infinite prejudice to his health. A broken-spirited
Defensive, hardly a defensive, therefore reduced
to: And this to a heart, for so many years waging
offensive war (nor valuing whom the opponent) what
a reduction! —Now comparing himself to the super-annuated
Lion in the fable, kicked in the jaws, and
laid sprawling, by the spurning heel of an ignoble
Ass! 
I have undertaken his cause. He has given me
leave, yet not without reluctance, to put him into
possession of his own house; and to place in it for
him his unhappy Sister, whom he has hitherto slighted,
because unhappy. It is hard, he told me (and wept, 

poor fellow, when he said it) that he cannot be permitted
to die quietly in his own house! —The fruits of
blessed Keeping these!— 
Tho' but lately apprised of her infidelity, it now
comes out to have been of so long continuance, that
he has no room to believe the Boys to be his: Yet
how fond did he use to be of them! 
&dotup;To what, Lovelace, shall we attribute the tenderness
which a reputed Father frequently shews to the
children of another man? —What is that, I pray
thee, which we call Nature, and Natural Affection? 
And what has man to boast of as to sagacity and
penetration, when he is as easily brought to cover
and rear, and even to love, and often to prefer, the
product of another's guilt with his Wife or Mistress,
as a hen or a goose the eggs, and even young, of
others of their kind? 
&dotup;Nay, let me ask, If Instinct, as it is called, in the
animal creation, does not enable them to distinguish
their own, much more easily than we, with our
boasted reason and sagacity, in this nice particular,
can do? 
&dotup;If some men, who have Wives but of doubtful
virtue, considered this matter duly, I believe their
inordinate ardor after gain would be a good deal
cooled, when they could not be certain (tho' their
Mates could) for whose children they were elbowing,
bustling, griping, and perhaps cheating, those with
whom they have concerns, whether friends, neighbours,
or more certain next-of-kin, by the Mother's
side however. 
&dotup;But I will not push this notion so far as it might
be carried; because, if propagated, it might be of
unsocial or unnatural consequence; since women of
virtue would perhaps be more liable to suffer by the
mistrusts and caprices of bad-hearted and foolish-headed Husbands, than those who can screen themselves
from detection by arts and hypocrisy, to which 

a woman of virtue cannot have recourse. And yet,
were this notion duly and generally considered, it
might be attended with no bad effects; as good education,
good inclinations, and established virtue,
would be the principally sought-after qualities, and
not money, when a man (not byassed by mere personal
attractions) was looking round him for a partner in
his fortunes, and for a Mother of his future children,
which are to be the heirs of his possessions, and
to enjoy the fruits of his industry. 
&dotup;But to return to poor Belton.&dotup; 
If I have occasion for your assistance, and that of
our compeers, in reinstating the poor fellow, I will
give you notice. Mean time, I have just now been
told, that Thomasine declares she will not stir: For,
it seems, she suspects that measures will be fallen upon
to make her quit. She is Mrs. Belton, she says, and
will prove her Marriage. 
If she give herself these airs in his life-time, what
would she attempt to do after his death? 
Her Boys threaten any-body, who shall presume to
insult their Mother. Their Father (as they call poor
Belton) they speak of as an unnatural one. And
their probably true Father is for ever there, hostilely
there, passing for her Cousin, as usual: Now her protecting
Cousin. 
Hardly ever, I dare say, was there a Keeper, that
did not make a Keeperess; who lavished away on her
kept-fellow, what she obtained from the extravagant
folly of him who kept her. 
I will do without you, if I can. The case will be
only, as I conceive, like that of the antient Sarmatians,
returning, after many years absence, to their homes,
their Wives then in possession of their Slaves: So that
they had to contend not only with those Wives, conscious
of their infidelity, and with their Slaves, but
with the Children of those Slaves, grown up to manhood,
resolute to defend their Mothers, and their long 

manumitted Fathers. But the noble Sarmatians,
scorning to attack their Slaves with equal weapons,
only provided themselves with the same sort of whips,
with which they used formerly to chastise them. And,
attacking them with them, the miscreants fled before
them. —In memory of which, to this day, the device
on the Coin in Novogrod in Russia, a city of the antient
Sarmatia, is a man on horseback, with a whip in
his hand. 
The poor fellow takes it ill, that you did not press
him more than you did, to be of your party at M.
Hall. It is owing to Mowbray, he is sure, that he
had so very flight an invitation, from one whose invitations
used to be so warm. 
Mowbray's speech to him, he says, he never will
forgive: “Why, Tom,” said the brutal fellow, with
a curse, “thou droopest like a pip or roup-cloaking
chicken. Thou shouldst grow perter, or submit
to a solitary quarantine, if thou wouldst not infect
the whole brood.” 
For my own part, only that this poor fellow is in
distress, as well in his affairs, as in his mind, or I
should be sick of you all. Such is the relish I have of
the conversation, and such my admiration of the deportment
and sentiments, of this divine Lady, that I
would forego a month, even of thy company, to be
admitted into hers but for one hour: And I am highly
in conceit with myself, greatly as I used to value thine,
for being able, spontaneously as I may say, to make
this preference. 
It is, after all, a devilish life we have lived. And
to consider how it all ends in a very few years—To
see to what a state of ill health this poor fellow is so
soon reduced—And then to observe how every one
of ye run away from the unhappy being, as rats from
a falling house, is fine comfort to help a man to
look back upon companions ill-chosen, and a life
mis-spent! 

&dotup;It will be your turns by-and-by, every man of ye,
if the justice of your country interpose not. 
&dotup;Thou art the only Rake we have herded with, if
thou wilt not except myself, who hast preserved
entire thy health and thy fortunes. 
&dotup;Mowbray indeed is indebted to a robust constitution,
that he has not yet suffered in his health; but
his Estate is dwindling away year by year. 
&dotup;Three-fourths of Tourville's very considerable
fortunes are already dissipated; and the remaining
fourth will probably soon go after the other three. 
&dotup;Poor Belton! we see how it is with him! —His
only felicity is, that he will hardly live to want. 
&dotup;Thou art too proud, and too prudent, ever to be
destitute; and, to do thee justice, hast a spirit to
assist such of thy friends as may be reduced; and
wilt, if thou shouldest then be living. But I think
thou must, much sooner than thou imaginest, be
called to thy account—knocked on the head perhaps
by the friends of those whom thou hast injured; 
for if thou escapest this fate from the Harlowe family,
thou wilt go on tempting danger and vengeance,
till thou meetest with vengeance; and this,
whether thou marriest, or not: For the nuptial life
will not, I doubt, till age join with it, cure thee of
that spirit for intrigue, which is continually running
away with thee, in spite of thy better sense, and
transitory resolutions. 
&dotup;Well, then, I will suppose thee laid down quietly
among thy worthier ancestors. 
&dotup;And now let me look forward to the ends of
Tourville and Mowbray [Belton will be crumbled
into dust before thee perhaps], supposing thy early
exit has saved thee from gallows intervention. 
&dotup;Reduced, probably, by riotous waste to consequential
want, behold them refuged in some obscene
hold or garret; obliged to the careless care of some
dirty old woman, whom nothing but her poverty 

prevails upon to attend to perform the last offices for
men who have made such shocking ravage among
the young ones. 
&dotup;Then how miserably will they whine thro' squeaking
organs! Their big voices turned into puling
pity-begging lamentations! Their now-offensive
paws, how helpless then! —Their now-erect necks
then denying support to their aching heads; those
globes of mischief dropping upon their quaking
shoulders. Then what wry faces will they make!
their hearts, and their heads, reproaching each
other! —Distended their parched mouths! —Sunk
their unmuscled cheeks! —Dropt their under-jaws! 
—Each grunting like the swine he had resembled in
his life! Oh! what a vile wretch have I been! — 
Oh! that I had my life to come over again! —Confessing
to the poor old woman, who cannot shrive
them! Imaginary ghosts of deflowered Virgins, and
polluted matrons, flitting before their glassy eyes! 
And old Satan, to their apprehensions, grinning behind
a looking-glass held up before them, to frighten
them with the horror visible in their own countenances!&dotup; 
For my own part, if I can get some good family
to credit me with a Sister or a Daughter, as I have
now an encreased fortune, which will enable me to
propose handsome Settlements, I will desert ye all; 
marry, and live a life of Reason, rather than a life of
Brute, for the time to come. 