



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 
In answer to his Letters lvii. lxxi. 

Thursday, Aug. 31. 
I cannot but own, that I am cut to the heart by
this Miss Harlowe's interpretation of her Letter. 
She ought never to be forgiven. She, a meek person,
and a penitent, and innocent, and pious, and I
know not what, who can deceive with a foot in the
grave!— 
'Tis evident, that she sat down to write this Letter
with a design to mislead and deceive. And if she
be capable of That, at such a crisis, she has as much
need of Heaven's forgiveness, as I have of hers: And,
with all her cant of Charity and Charity, if she be not
more sure of it, than I am of her real pardon, and if
she take the thing in the light she ought to take it in,
she will have a few darker moments yet to come than
she seems to expect. 
Lord M. himself, who is not one of those (to speak
in his own phrase) who can penetrate a millstone, sees
the deceit, and thinks it unworthy of her; tho' my
Cousins Montague vindicate her. And no wonder: 
This cursed partial Sex [I hate 'em all—by my Soul,
I hate 'em all!] will never allow any-thing against an
individual of it, where ours is concerned. And why? 
Because, if they censure deceit in another, they must
condemn their own hearts. 
She is to send me a Letter after she is in Heaven,
is she? The devil take such allegories; and the devil
take thee for calling this absurdity an innocent artifice! 
I insist upon it, that if a woman of her character,
at such a critical time, is to be justified in such a deception,
a man in full health and vigour of body and
mind, as I am, may be excused for all his stratagems 

and attempts against her. And, thank my Stars, I
can now sit me down with a quiet conscience on that
score. By my Soul, I can, Jack. Nor has anybody,
who can acquit her, a right to blame me. But
with some, indeed, every-thing she does must be
good, every-thing I do must be bad—And why? 
Because she has always taken care to coax the stupid
misjudging world, like a Woman: While I have constantly
defied and despised its censures, like a Man. 
But, notwithstanding all, you may let her know
from me, that I will not molest her, since my visits
would be so shocking to her: And I hope she will
take this into her consideration as a piece of generosity
which she could hardly expect after the deception
she has put upon me. And let her further know,
that if there be any-thing in my power, that will
contribute either to her ease or honour, I will obey
her, at the very first intimation, however disgraceful
or detrimental to myself. All this, to make her unapprehensive,
and that she may have nothing to pull
her back. 
If her cursed relations could be brought as chearfully
to perform their parts. I'd answer life for life
for her recovery. 
But who, that has so many ludicrous images raised
in his mind by thy aukward penitence, can forbear
laughing at thee? Spare, I beseech thee, dear Belford,
for the future, all thine own aspirations, if
thou wouldst not dishonour those of an Angel indeed. 
When I came to that passage, where thou sayst,
that thou considerest her (a)  as one sent from Heaven,
to draw thee after her—for the heart of me, I could
not for an hour put thee out of my head, in the attitude
of Dame Elizabeth Carteret, on her monument
in Westminster-Abbey. If thou never observedst it,
go thither on purpose; and there wilt thou see this
Dame in effigie, wit uplifted head and hand, the 

latter taken hold of by a Cupid every inch of stone,
one clumsy foot lifted up also, aiming, as the Sculptor
designed it, to ascend; but so executed, as would
rather make one imagine, that the Figure (without
shoe or stocken, as it is, tho' the rest of the body is
robed) was looking up to its Corn-cutter: The other
riveted to its native earth, bemired, like thee (immersed
thou callest it) beyond the possibility of unsticking
itself. Both Figures, thou wilt find, seem to
be in a contention, the bigger, whether it should
pull down the lesser about its ears—the lesser (a
chubby fat little varlet, of a fourth part of the other's
bigness, with wings not much larger than those of a
butterfly) whether it should raise the larger to a Heaven
it points to, hardly big enough to contain the
great toes of either. 
Thou wilt say, perhaps, that the Dame's figure in
stone may do credit, in the comparison, to thine,
both in grain and shape, wooden as thou art all over: 
But that the Lady, who, in every-thing but in the
trick she has plaid me so lately, is truly an Angel,
is but sorrily represented by the fat-flanked Cupid. 
This I allow thee. But yet there is enough in thy
aspirations, to strike my mind with a resemblance of
thee and the Lady to the Figures on the wretched
monument; for thou oughtest to remember, that,
prepared as she may be to mount to her native skies,
it is impossible for her to draw after her a heavy fellow
who has so much to repent of as thou hast. 
But now, to be serious once more, let me tell
you, Belford, that, if the Lady be really so ill as you
write she is, it will become you [No Roman style here!]
in a case so very affecting, to be a little less pointed
and sarcastic in your reflections. For, upon my
Soul, the matter begins to grate me most confoundedly. 
I am now so impatient to hear oftener of her, that
I take the hint accidentally given me by our two fellows 

meeting at Slough, and resolve to go to our
friend Doleman's at Uxbridge; whose Wife and Sister,
as well as he, have so frequently pressed me to
give them my company for a week or two. There
shall I be within two hours ride, if any-thing should
happen to induce her to see me: For it will well become
her piety, and avowed charity, should the worst
happen [The Lord of Heaven and Earth, however,
avert that worst!] to give me that pardon from her
lips, which she has not denied me by pen and ink. 
And as she wishes my Reformation, she knows not
what good effects such an interview may have upon
me. 
I shall accordingly be at Doleman's to-morrow
morning, by Eleven at furthest. My fellow will
find me there at his return from you (with a Letter,
I hope). I shall have Joel with me likewise, that I
may send the oftener, as matters fall out. Were I
to be still nearer, or in town, it would be impossible
to with-hold myself from seeing her. 
But, if the worst happen!—as, by your continual
knelling, I know not what to think of it! —[Yet,
once more, Heaven avert that worst! —How natural
is it to pray, when one cannot help one's self! — 
Then say not, in so many dreadful words, what
the event is—Only, that you advise me to take a
trip to Paris—And that will stab me to the heart. 
* *
I so well approve of your generosity to poor Belton's
Sister, that I have made Mowbray give up his
Legacy, as I do mine, towards her India Bonds. 
When I come to town, Tourville shall do the like; 
and we will buy each a Ring, to wear in memory of
the honest fellow, with our own money, that we
may perform his will, as well as our own. 
My fellow rides the rest of the night. I charge
you, Jack, if you would save his life, that you send
him not back empty-handed. 