


From the Countess Dowager of D. To Mrs. Selby. Inclosed in the preceding. 


Jan. 23. 
Give me leave, madam, to address myself to you,
tho' personally unknown, on a very particular 

occasion; and, at the same time, to beg of you to
keep secret, even from Mr. Selby, and the party to
be named, as still more immediately concerned in the
subject, till I give my consent; as no one creature of
my family, not even the Earl of D. my son, does, or
shall from me, till you approve of it. 
My Lord has just entered into his twenty-fifth year. 
There are not many better young men among the nobility. 
His minority gave an opportunity to me, and
his other trustees, to put him in possession, when he
came of age, of a very noble and clear estate; which
he has not impaired. His person is not to be found
fault with. He has learning, and is allowed to have
good sense, which every learned man has not. His
conduct, his discretion, in his travels, procured him
respect and reputation abroad. You may make enquiry
privately of all these matters. 
We are, you must believe, very sollicitous to have
him happily married. He is far from being an undutiful
son. Indeed he was always dutiful. A dutiful
son gives very promising hopes of making a good
husband. He assures me that his affections are disengaged,
and that he will pay the most particular regard
to my recommendation. 
I have cast about for a suitable wife for him. I look
father than to the person of a woman; tho' my Lord
will by no means have beauty left out in the qualifications
of a wife. I look to the family to whom a lady
owes her education and training-up. Quality, however,
I stand not upon. A man of quality, you know,
confers quality on his wife. An antient and good
gentleman's family is all I am sollicitous about in this
respect. In this light, yours, madam, on all sides,
and for many descents, is unexceptionable. I have a
desire, if all things shall be found to be mutually agreeable,
to be related to it: And your character, as the
young lady has been brought up under your eye, is a
great inducement with me. 

Your niece Byron's beauty, and merits, as well
as sweetness of temper, are talk'd of by every-body. 
Not a day passes, but we hear of her to her great advantage. 
Now, madam, will you be pleased to answer
me one question, with that explicitness which the
importance of the case, and my own intended explicitness
to you may require from woman to woman? 
Especially, as I ask it of you in confidence. 
Are then Miss Byron's affections absolutely disengaged? 
We are very nice, and must not doubt in this
matter. 
This is the only question I will ask at present. If
this can be answered as I wish, others, in a treaty of
this important nature, will come into consideration on
both sides. 
The favour of a line, as soon as it will suit your convenience,
will oblige, madam, 
Your most faithful and obedient Servant,
M. D. 

