



Miss Howe, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sat. Sept. 30. 
Sir,
I little thought I ever could have owed so much obligation
to any man, as you have laid me under. 
And yet what you have sent me has almost broken my
heart, and ruined my eyes. 
I am surprised, tho' agreeably, that you have so soon,
and so well, got over that part of the Trust you have
engaged in, which relates to the family. 
It may be presumed, from the exits you mention of
two of the infernal man's accomplices, that the thunder-bolt
will not stop short of the principal. Indeed I
have some pleasure to think it seems rolling along towards
the devoted head that has plotted all the mischief. 
But let me, however, say, that altho' I think Mr.
Morden not altogether in the wrong in his reasons for
resentment, as he is the dear creature's Kinsman and
Trustee; yet I think you very much in the right in
endeavouring to dissuade him from it, as you are her
Executor, and act in pursuance of her earnest request. 
But what a Letter is that of the infernal man! I 

cannot observe upon it. Neither can I, for very different
reasons, upon my dear creature's posthumous
Letters; particularly on that to him. Oh! Mr. Belford!
what numberless perfections died, when my
Clarissa drew her last breath! 
If decency be observed in his Letters; for I have
not yet had patience to read above two or three of
them (besides this horrid one, which I return you inclosed); 
I may some time hence be curious to look,
by their means, into the hearts of wretches, which,
tho' they must be the abhorrence of virtuous minds,
will, when laid open (as I presume they are in them)
afford a proper warning to those who read them, and
teach them to detest men of such profligate characters. 
If your reformation be sincere, you will not be offended
that I do not except you on this occasion. —And
thus have I helped you to a criterion to try yourself by. 
By this Letter of the wicked man it is apparent,
that there are still wickeder women. But see what a
guilty commerce with the devils of your Sex will bring
those to, whose morals ye have ruined! —For these
women were once innocent: It was man that made
them otherwise. The first bad man, perhaps, threw
them upon worse men: Those upon still worse; till
they commenced devils incarnate—The height of wickedness,
or of shame, is not arrived at all at once, as I have
somewhere heard observed. 
But this man, this monster rather, for him to curse
these women, and to curse the dear creature's family
(implacable as the latter were) in order to lighten a
burden he voluntarily took up, and groans under, is
meanness added to wickedness: And in vain will he one
day find his low plea of sharing with her friends, and
with those common wretches, a guilt which will be adjudged
him as all his own; tho' they too may meet with
their punishment: As it is evidently begun; in the
first, in their ineffectual reproaches of one another; 
in the second—as you have told me. 

This Letter of the abandoned wretch I have not
shewn to any-body; not even to Mr. Hickman: For,
Sir, I must tell you, I do not as yet think it the same
thing as only seeing it myself. 
Mr. Hickman, like the rest of his Sex, would grow
upon indulgence. One distinction from me would
make him pay two to himself. Insolent creepers, or
encroachers, all of you! To shew any of you a favour
to-day, you would expect it as a right to-morrow. 
I am, as you see, very open and sincere with you; 
and design in another Letter to be still more so, in
answer to your call, and Colonel Morden's call, upon
me, in a point that concerns me to explain myself upon
to my beloved creature's Executor, and to the Colonel,
as her only tender and only worthy relation. 
I cannot but highly applaud Colonel Morden for his
generosity to Miss Dolly Hervey. 
O that he had arrived time enough to save my inimitable
friend from the machinations of the vilest of
men, and from the envy and malice of the most selfish
and implacable of Brothers and Sisters! 
Anna Howe. 