


The following History is given in a
Series of Letters, written principally
in a double, yet separate, Correspondence; 
Between Two young Ladies of Virtue and
Honour, bearing an inviolable Friendship for
each other, and writing upon the most interesting
Subjects: And 
Between Two Gentlemen of free Lives; one
of them glorying in his Talents for Stratagem
and Invention, and communicating to the other,
in Confidence, all the secret Purposes of an intriguing
Head, and resolute Heart. 
But it is not amiss to premise, for the
sake of such as may apprehend Hurt to the
Morals of Youth from the more freely-written 

Letters, That the Gentlemen, tho' professed
Libertines as to the Fair Sex, and making it one
of their wicked Maxims, to keep no Faith with
any of the Individuals of it who throw themselves
into their Power, are not, however, either
Infidels or Scoffers: Nor yet such as think themselves
freed from the Observance of other moral
Obligations. 
On the contrary, it will be found, in the
Progress of the Collection, that they very often
make such Reflections upon each other, and
each upon himself, and upon his Actions, as
reasonable Beings, who disbelieve not a future
State of Rewards and Punishments (and who
one day propose to reform) must sometimes
make: —One of them actually reforming, and
antidoting the Poison which some might otherwise
apprehend would be spread by the gayer
Pen, and lighter Heart, of the other. 
And yet that other, [altho' in unbosoming
himself to a select Friend, he discover Wickedness
enough to intitle him to general Hatred]
preserves a Decency, as well in his Images, as
in his Language, which is not always to be
found in the Works of some of the most celebrated
modern Writers, whose Subjects and
Characters have less warranted the Liberties
they have taken. 
Length will be naturally expected, not only 

from what has been said, but from the following
Considerations: 
That the Letters on both Sides are written
while the Hearts of the Writers must be supposed
to be wholly engaged in their Subjects: 
The Events at the Time generally dubious: — 
So that they abound, not only with critical Situations; 
but with what may be called instantaneous
Descriptions and Reflections; which may
be brought home to the Breast of the youthful
Reader: —As also, with affecting Conversations; 
many of them written in the Dialogue or Dramatic
Way. 
To which may be added, that the Collection
contains not only the History of the excellent
Person whose Name it bears, but includes The
Lives, Characters, and Catastrophes, of several
others, either principally or incidentally concerned
in the Story. 
But yet the Editor [to whom it was referred
to publish the Whole in such a Way as he
should think would be most acceptable to the
Public] was so diffident in relation to this Article
of Length, that he thought proper to submit
the Letters to the Perusal of several judicious
Friends; whose Opinion he desired of
what might be best spared. 
One Gentleman, in particular, of whose Knowlege, 

Judgment, and Experience, as well as
Candor, the Editor has the highest Opinion,
advised him to give a Narrative Turn to the
Letters; and to publish only what concerned
the principal Heroine;—striking off the collateral
Incidents, and all that related to the Second
Characters; tho' he allowed the Parts which
would have been by this means excluded, to be
both instructive and entertaining. But being
extremely fond of the affecting Story, he was
desirous to have every-thing parted with, which
he thought retarded its Progress. 
This Advice was not relished by other Gentlemen. 
They insisted, that the Story could not
be reduced to a Dramatic Unity, nor thrown
into the Narrative Way, without divesting it of
its Warmth; and of a great Part of its Efficacy; 
as very few of the Reflections and Observations,
which they looked upon as the most useful Part
of the Collection, would, then, find a Place. 
They were of Opinion, That in all Works
of This, and of the Dramatic Kind, Story,
or Amusement, should be considered as little
more than the Vehicle to the more necessary
Instruction: That many of the Scenes
would be render'd languid, were they to be
made less busy: And that the Whole would
be thereby deprived of that Variety, which is
deemed the Soul of a Feast, whether mensal or
mental. 

They were also of Opinion, That the Parts
and Characters, which must be omitted, if this
Advice were followed, were some of the most
natural in the whole Collection: And no less instructive; 
especially to Youth. Which might be
a Consideration perhaps overlooked by a Gentleman
of the Adviser's great Knowlege and
Experience: For, as they observed, there is a
Period in human Life, in which, youthful Activity
ceasing, and Hope contenting itself to look
from its own domestic Wicket upon bounded
Prospects, the half-tired Mind aims at little
more than Amusement. —And with Reason; for
what, in the instructive Way, can appear either
new or needful to one who has happily got
over those dangerous Situations which call for
Advice and Cautions, and who has fill'd up his
Measures of Knowlege to the Top? 
Others, likewise gave their Opinions. But
no Two being of the same Mind, as to the
Parts which could be omitted, it was resolved
to present to the World, the Two First Volumes,
by way of Specimen; and to be determined
with regard to the rest by the Reception those
should meet with. 
If that be favourable, Two others may soon
follow; the whole Collection being ready for
the Press: That is to say, If it be not found necessary 

to abstract or omit some of the Letters,
in order to reduce the Bulk of the Whole. 
Thus much in general. But it may not be
amiss to add, in particular, that in the great
Variety of Subjects which this Collection contains,
it is one of the principal Views of the
Publication, 
To caution Parents against the undue Exertion
of their natural Authority over their
Children, in the great Article of Marriage: 
And Children against preferring a Man of
Pleasure to a Man of Probity, upon that
dangerous, but too commonly received
Notion, That a Reformed Rake makes the
best Husband. 
But as the Characters will not all appear in
the Two First Volumes, it has been thought
advisable, in order to give the Reader some
further Idea of Them, and of the Work, to
prefix 

A brief Account of the principal Characters
throughout the Whole.
Miss Clarissa Harlowe, a young
Lady of great Delicacy; Mistress of all
the Accomplishments, natural and acquired,
that adorn the Sex; having the strictest Notions
of filial Duty. 
Robert Lovelace, Esq; a Man of Birth and
Fortune: Haughty, vindictive, humourously
vain; equally intrepid and indefatigable in the
Pursuit of his Pleasures— Making his Addresses
to Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
James Harlowe, Esq; the Father of Miss
Clarissa, Miss Arabella, and Mr. James Harlowe: 
Despotic, absolute; and, when offended,
not easily forgiving. 
Lady Charlotte Harlowe, his Wife, Mistress
of fine Qualities; but greatly under the
Influence not only of her arbitrary Husband,
but of her Son. 
James Harlowe, jun. proud, fierce, uncontroulable,
and ambitious; jealous of the Favour
his Sister Clarissa stood in with the Principals
of the Family; and a bitter and irreconcileable
Enemy to Mr. Lovelace. 
Miss Arabella Harlowe, elder Sister of Miss
Clarissa; ill-natured, overbearing, and petulant; 
envying her Sister; and the more, as 

Mr. Lovelace was first brought to make his
Addresses to herself. 
John Harlowe, Esq; elder Brother of Mr.
James Harlowe, sen. an unmarried Gentleman; 
good-natured, and humane; but easily
carried away by more boistrous Spirits. 
Antony Harlowe, Third Brother, who had
acquired a great Fortune in the Indies; positive,
rough, opinionated. 
Mr. Roger Solmes, a Man of sordid Manners; 
disagreeable in his Person and Address: 
Immensely rich: Proposed with an high hand
for an Husband to Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
Mrs. Hervey, Half-Sister of Lady Charlotte
Harlowe; a Lady of good Sense, and Virtue: 
In her Heart against the Measures taken to
drive her Niece to Extremities; but not having
Courage to oppose herself to so strong a
Stream, sailing with it. 
Miss Dolly Hervey, her Daughter; good-natured,
gentle, sincere; and a great Admirer
of her Cousin Clarissa. 
Mrs. Norton, a Gentlewoman of Piety,
and good Understanding; the Daughter of
an unpreferred Clergyman of great Merit,
whose Amanuensis she was: —Married unhappily
(and left a Widow), engaged to nurse
Miss Clarissa Harlowe: In whose Education
likewise she had a principal Share. 
Colonel Morden, a Man of Fortune, Generosity,
and Courage, nearly related to the 

Harlowe-Family: For some time past residing
at Florence. 
Miss Howe, the most intimate Friend, Companion,
and Correspondent of Miss Clarissa Harlowe: 
Of great Vivacity, Fire, and Fervency
in her Friendships and Enmities. 
Mrs. Howe, Mother of Miss Howe; a Widow
Lady of high Spirit; a notable Manager: 
Having high Notions of the Parental Authority. 
Mr. Hickman, a Man of Family, Fortune,
Sobriety, and Virtue: Encouraged by Mrs.
Howe in his Addresses to her Daughter. 
Lord M. Uncle to Mr. Lovelace; a Nobleman
of middle Genius; and a great Proverbialist. 
Lady Sarah Sadleir, Lady Betty Lawrance,
Half-Sisters of Lord M. Widow-Ladies
of Honour and Fortune. 
Miss Charlotte and Patty Montague,
Maiden Ladies of Character; Nieces of the
same Nobleman. 
Dr. Lewin, a Divine of great Piety and Learning; 
to whom Miss Clarissa Harlowe owed
much of her Improvement. 
Dr. H. a Physician of Humanity, Generosity, and
Politeness. 

Mr. Elias Brand, a pedantic young Clergyman,
fond of Latin Scraps, and Classical Quotations. 
Richard Mowbray, Thomas Doleman,
James Tourville, Thomas Belton,
Libertine Gentlemen, Companions of Mr. Lovelace. 
John Belford, Esq; a Fifth Friend and Companion
of Mr. Lovelace; and his principal
Intimate and Confident. 
Mrs. Sinclair, the pretended Name of a private
Brothel-keeper in London. 
Capt. Tomlinson, the assumed Name of a vile
and artful Pander of the Debaucheries of Mr.
Lovelace. 
Mrs. Moore, a Widow-Gentlewoman, keeping
a Lodging-house at Hampstead. 
Miss Rawlins, a notable young Gentlewoman
in that Neighbourhood. 
Mrs. Bevis, a lively Widow of the same Place. 
Sally Martin, Polly Horton, Assistants
of, and Partners with, the infamous Mrs.
Sinclair. 
Joseph Leman, William Summers, Hannah
Burton, Betty Barnes, Dorcas Wykes, and
others, Servants to the principal Persons. 