



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wedn. Morn. Eight o'clock (6 Sept.) 
Your servant arrived here before I was stirring. 
I sent him to Smith's to enquire how the Lady
was; and ordered him to call upon me when he came
back. I was pleased to hear she had had tolerable rest. 
As soon as I had dispatched him with the Letter I had
written over-night, I went to attend her. 
I found her up, and dress'd; in a white satten nightgown. 
Ever elegant; but now more so, than I had
seen her for a week past: Her aspect serenely chearful. 
She mentioned the encreased dimness of her eyes,
and the tremor which had invaded her limbs. If this
be dying, said she, there is nothing at all shocking in
it. My body hardly sensible of pain, my mind at ease,
my intellects clear and perfect as ever. What a good
and gracious God have I! —For this is what I always
prayed for. 
I told her, It was not so serene with you. 
There is not the same reason for it, replied she. 
'Tis a choice comfort, Mr. Belford, at the winding-up
of our short story, to be able to say, I have rather
suffered injuries myself, than offered them to others. I
bless God, tho' I have been unhappy, as the world
deems it, and once I thought more so, than at present
I think I ought to have done; since my calamities
were to work out for me my everlasting happiness; 

yet have I not wilfully made any one creature so. I
have no reason to grieve for any-thing but for the sorrow
I have given my friends. 
But pray, Mr. Belford, remember me in the best
manner to my Cousin Morden; and desire him to
comfort them, and to tell them, that all would have
been the same, had they accepted of my true penitence,
as I wish and as I trust the Almighty has done. 
I was called down: It was to Harry, who was just
returned from Miss Howe's, to whom he carried the
Lady's Letter. The stupid fellow, being bid to make
haste with it, and return as soon as possible, staid not
till Miss Howe had it, she being at the distance of
five miles, altho' Mrs. Howe would have had him stay,
and sent a man and horse purposely with it to her
Daughter. 
Wednesday Morning, 10 o'clock. 
The poor Lady is just recovered from a fainting
fit, which has left her at death's door. Her late tranquillity
and freedom from pain seemed but a Lightening,
as Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith call it. 
By my faith, Lovelace, I had rather part with all
the friends I have in the world, than with this Lady. 
I never knew what a virtuous, a holy friendship, as I
may call mine to her, was before. But to be so new
to it, and to be obliged to forego it so soon, what an
affliction! Yet, thank heaven, I lose her not by my
own fault! —But 'twould be barbarous not to spare
thee now. 
She has sent for the Divine who visited her before,
to pray with her. 