



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Wedn. Apr. 11. 12. 
You claim my promise, that I will be as particular
as possible, in all that passes between me and my
goddess. Indeed, I never had a more illustrious subject
to exercise my pen upon. And, moreover, I have
leisure; for by her good will, my access would be as
difficult to her, as that of the humblest slave to an
Eastern Monarch. Nothing, then, but inclination to
write can be wanting: And since our friendship, and
your obliging attendance upon me at the White Hart,
will not excuse That, I will endeavour to keep my
word. 
I parted with thee and thy brethren, with a full
resolution, thou knowest, to rejoin ye, if she once
again disappointed me, in order to go together (attended
by our servants, for shew-sake) to the gloomy
Father; and demand audience of the tyrant upon the
freedoms taken with my character. In short, to have
tried by fair means, if fair would do, to make him
change his resolutions; and treat his charming Daughter
with less inhumanity, and me with more civility. 

I told thee my reasons for not going in search of a
Letter of countermand. I was right; for if I had, I
should have found such a one; and had I received it,
she would not have met me. Did she think, that
after I had been more than once disappointed, I would
not keep her to her promise; that I would not hold
her to it, when I had got her in so deeply? 
The moment I heard the door unbolt, I was sure
of her. That motion made my heart bound to my
throat. But when That was followed with the presence
of my Charmer, flashing upon me all at once
in a flood of brightness, sweetly dressed, tho' all unprepared
for a journey, I trod air, and hardly thought
myself a mortal. 
Thou shalt judge of her dress, as, at the moment
I first beheld her, she appeared to me, and as, upon
a nearer observation, she really was. I am a Critic,
thou knowest, in womens dresses. Many a one have
I taught to dress, and helped to undress. But there
is such a native elegance in this Lady, that she surpasses
all that I could imagine surpassing. But then
her person adorns what she wears, more than dress
can adorn her; and that's her excellence. 
Expect therefore a faint sketch of her admirable
person with her dress. 
Her wax-like flesh (for, after all, flesh and blood
I think she is) by its delicacy and firmness, answers
for the soundness of her health. Thou hast often
heard me launch out in praise of her complexion. I
never in my life beheld a skin so illustriously fair. The
Lily and the driven Snow it is nonsense to talk of: 
Her Lawn and her Laces one might indeed compare
to those: But what a whited wall would a woman appear
to be, who had a complexion which would justify
such unnatural comparisons? But this Lady is all
glowing, all charming flesh and blood; yet so clear,
that every meandring vein is to be seen in all the lovely
parts of her which custom permits to be visible. 

Thou hast heard me also describe the wavy Ringlets of
her shining hair, needing neither art nor powder; of itself
an ornament, defying all other ornaments; wantoning
in and about a neck that is beautiful beyond description. 
Her head-dress was a Brussels-lace mob, peculiarly
adapted to the charming air and turn of her features. 
A sky-blue ribband illustrated that. But altho' the
weather was somewhat sharp, she had not on either
hat or hood; for, besides that she loves to use herself
hardily (by which means, and by a temperance
truly exemplary, she is allowed to have given high
health and vigour to an originally tender constitution)
she seems to have intended to shew me, that she was
determined not to stand to her appointment. O Jack!
that such a sweet girl should be a rogue! 
Her morning-gown was a pale primrose-coloured
paduasoy: The cuffs and robings curiously embroidered
by the fingers of this ever-charming Arachne,
in a running pattern of violets and their leaves; the
light in the flowers silver; gold in the leaves. A pair
of diamond snaps in her ears. A white handkerchief
wrought by the same inimitable fingers, concealed— 
O Belford! what still more inimitable beauties did it
not conceal! —And I saw, all the way we rode, the
bounding heart (by its throbbing motions I saw it!)
dancing beneath the charming umbrage. 
Her ruffles were the same as her mob. Her apron
a flowered lawn. Her coat white satten, quilted: 
Blue satten her shoes, braided with the same colour,
without lace; for what need has the prettiest foot
in the world of ornament? Neat buckles in them: 
And on her charming arms a pair of black velvet
glove-like muffs, of her own invention; for she makes
and gives fashions as she pleases. —Her hands velvet
of themselves, thus uncovered the freer to be grasped
by those of her adorer. 
I have told thee what were my transports, when 

the undrawn bolt presented to me my long-expected
goddess. —Her emotions were more sweetly feminine,
after the first moments; for then the fire of her
starry eyes began to sink into a less dazling languor. 
She trembled: Nor knew she how to support the agitations
of a heart she had never found so ungovernable. 
She was even fainting, when I clasped her in my supporting
arms. What a precious moment That! How
near, how sweetly near, the throbbing partners! 
By her dress, I saw, as I observed before, how unprepared
she was for a journey; and not doubting her
intention once more to disappoint me, I would have
drawn her after me. Then began a contention the
most vehement that ever I had with woman. It would
pain thy friendly heart to be told the infinite trouble
I had with her. I begged, I prayed; on my knees,
yet in vain, I begged and prayed her to answer her
own appointment: And had I not happily provided for
such a struggle, knowing whom I had to deal with, I
had certainly failed in my design; and as certainly
would have accompanied her in, without thee and
thy Brethren: And who knows what might have been
the consequence? 
But my honest agent answering my signal, tho' not
quite so soon as I expected, in the manner thou knowest
I had prescribed, They are coming! They are coming! 
—Fly, fly, my beloved creature, cried I, drawing my
sword with a flourish, as if I would have slain half an
hundred of the supposed intruders; and, seizing her
trembling hands, I drew her after me so swiftly, that
my feet, winged by Love, could hardly keep pace with
her feet, agitated by fear. —And so I became her Emperor. 
I'll tell thee all, when I see thee: And thou shalt
then judge of my difficulties, and of her perverseness. 
And thou wilt rejoice with me at my conquest over
such a watchful and open-eyed Charmer. 
But seest thou not now (as I think I do) the wind-outstripping 

Fair-one flying from her Love to her Love? 
—Is there not such a game? —Nay, flying from friends
she was resolved not to abandon, to the man she was
determined not to go off with? —The Sex! The Sex,
all over! —Charming contradiction! —Hah, hah, hah,
hah!—I must here—I must here, lay down my pen,
to hold my sides; for I must have my laugh out now
the fit is upon me. 
* *
I believe—I believe—Hah, hah, hah! —I believe,
Jack, my dogs conclude me mad: For here has one
of them popt in, as if to see what ailed me; or whom
I had with me. The whorson caught the laugh, as
he went out. —Hah, hah, hah!—An im-pudent dog! — 
O Jack, knewest thou my conceit, and were but thy
laugh joined to mine, I believe it would hold me for
an hour longer. 
But, O my best-beloved Fair-one, repine not thou
at the Arts by which thou suspectest thy fruitless vigilance
has been over-watched. —Take care, that thou
provokest not new ones, that may be still more worthy
of thee. If once thy Emperor decrees thy fall, thou
shalt greatly fall. Thou shalt have cause, if that come
to pass, which may come to pass (for why wouldest
thou put off Marriage to so long a day, as till thou
hadst reason to be convinced of my Reformation, dearest?)
thou shalt have cause, never fear, to sit down
more dissatisfied with thy Stars, than with thyself. And
come the worst to the worst, glorious terms will I give
thee. Thy garison, with general Prudence at the head,
and governor Watchfulness bringing up the rear, shall
be allowed to march out with all the honours due to so
brave a resistance. And all thy Sex, and all mine, that
hear of my stratagems, and of thy conduct, shall acknowlege
the fortress as nobly won, as defended. 
‘Thou wilt not dare, methinks I hear thee say, to
attempt to reduce such a goddess as This, to a standard
unworthy of her excellencies. It is impossible, Lovelace, 

that thou shouldst intend to break thro' oaths
and protestations so solemn.’ 
That I did not intend it, is certain. That I do intend
it, I cannot (my heart, my reverence for her,
will not let me) say. But knowest thou not my aversion
to the State of Shackles? —And is she not In my
Power? 
‘And wilt thou, Lovelace, abuse that power, which’— 
Which what, Belford? —Which I obtained not by
her own consent, but against it. 
‘But which thou never hadst obtained, had she not
esteemed thee above all men.’ 
And which I had never taken so much pains to obtain,
had I not loved her above all women. So far upon
a par, Jack! And, if thou pleadest Honour, ought
not Honour to be mutual? If mutual, does it not imply
mutual trust, mutual confidence? And what have
I had of that from her to boast of? —Thou knowest
the whole progress of our warfare: For a warfare it
has truly been; and far, very far, from an amorous
warfare too. Doubts, mistrusts, upbraidings, on her
part: Humiliations the most abject, on mine. Obliged
to assume such airs of Reformation, that every varlet
of ye has been afraid I should reclaim in good earnest. 
And hast thou not thyself frequently observed to me,
how aukwardly I returned to my usual gaiety, after I
had been within a mile of her Father's garden-wall,
altho' I had not seen her? 
Does she not deserve to pay for all this? —To make
an honest fellow look like an hypocrite; what a vile
thing is that! 
Then thou knowest what a false little rogue she has
been. How little conscience she has made of disappointing
me. Hast thou not been a witness of my raveings,
on this score? —Have I not, in the height of them,
vowed Revenge upon the faithless Charmer? —And, if
I must be forsworn, whether I answer her expectations,
or follow my own inclinations; and if the option be 

in my own power; can I hesitate a moment which to
chuse? 
Then, I fansy, by her circumspection, and her continual
grief, that she expects some mischief from me. I
don't care to disappoint any-body I have a value for. 
But O the noble, the exalted creature! Who can
avoid hesitating when he thinks of an offence against
her? Who can but pity— 
Yet, on the other hand, so loth at last to venture,
tho' threatened to be forced into the nuptial fetters with
a man, whom to look upon as a rival, is to disgrace
myself! —So sullen, now she has ventured! —What
title has she to pity; and to a pity which her pride
would make her disclaim? 
But I resolve not any way. I will see how her will
works; and how my will leads me on. I will give the
combatants fair play. And yet, every time I attend her,
I find that she is less in my power; I more in hers. 
Yet, a foolish little rogue! to forbid me to think of
marriage till I am a reformed man! Till the Implacables
of her family change their natures, and become
placable! 
It is true, when she was for making those conditions,
she did not think, that, without any, she should be
cheated out of herself; for so the dear soul, as I may tell
thee in its place, phrases it. 
How it swells my pride, to have been able to outwit
such a vigilant Charmer! I am taller by half a yard in
my imagination than I was. I look down upon everybody
now. Last night I was still more extravagant. 
I took off my hat, as I walked, to see if the Lace
were not scorched, supposing it had brushed down a
star; and, before I put it on again, in mere wantonness,
and heart's-ease, I was for buffeting the moon. 
In short, my whole soul is joy. When I go to bed,
I laugh myself asleep: And I awake either laughing or
singing—Yet nothing nearly in view, neither—For
why? —I am not yet reformed enough! 

I told thee at the time, if thou rememberest, how
capable this restriction was of being turned upon the
over-scrupulous dear creature, could I once get her out
of her Father's house; and were I disposed to punish her
for her family's faults, and for the infinite trouble she
herself had given me. Little thinks she, that I have kept
an account of both: And that, when my heart is soft, and
all her own, I can but turn to my memoranda, and
harden myself at once. 
O my Charmer, look to it! Abate of thy haughty
airs! Value not thyself upon thy Sincerity, if thou art
indifferent to me! I will not bear it Now. Art thou
not in my Power? —Nor, if thou lovest me, think,
that the female affectation of denying thy Love, will
avail thee Now, with a heart so proud and so jealous
as mine? —Remember, moreover, that all thy family-sins
are upon thy head!— 
But, ah! Jack, when I see my Angel, when I am
admitted to the presence of this radiant Beauty, what
will become of all this vapouring? 
But, be my end what it may, I am obliged, by thy
penetration, Fair-one, to proceed by the Sap. Fair
and softly. A Wife at any time! Marriage will be always
in my power. 
When put to the University, the same course of initial
Studies will qualify the Yonker for the one Line
or for the other. The genius ought to point out the
future Lawyer, Divine, or Physician! —So the same
cautious conduct, with such a vigilance, will do either
for the Wife, or for the No-wife. When I reform,
I'll marry. 'Tis time enough for the one, the Lady
must say—For the other, say I! 
But how I ramble! —This it is to be in such a situation,
that I know not what to resolve upon. 
I'll tell thee my inclinings, as I proceed. The pro's
and the con's I'll tell thee: But being got too far from
the track I set out in, I will close here. I may however
write every day something, and send it as opportunity
offers. 

Regardless, nevertheless, I shall be in all I write, of
connexion, accuracy, or of any-thing but of my own
imperial will and pleasure. 