


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Wedn. Evening, Oct. 25.
Fie upon you, Lady G! What a Letter have you
written! There is no separating the good from
the bad in it. With what dangerous talents are you
entrusted! and what use do you make of them! I
have written two long Letters, continuing my narrative
of our proceedings; but I must take you to
severe task for this before me; and this and they shall
go together. 
Wicked wit! What a foe art thou to decent chearfulness! 
—In a woman's hand such a weapon! What
might we not expect from it, were it in a man's? 
How you justify the very creatures of that Sex, whom
you would be thought to despise! 
But you say, you would not allow in a man, the liberties
you yourself take with your own Sex. How
can you, my dear, be so partial to your faults, yet
own them to be such? Would you rank with the
worst of sinners? They do just so. 
I may be a fool: I may be inconsistent: I may not
know how with a grace to give effect to my own
wishes: I may be able to advise better than act—Most
pragmatical creatures think they can be counsellors in
another's case, while their own affairs, as my uncle
would say, lie at sixes and sevens. But how does this
excuse your freedoms with your whole Sex—With the
Innocents of it, more particularly? 
Let me say, my dear, that you take odious, yes,
odious, liberties; I won't recal the word: Liberties
which I cannot, tho' to shame you, repeat. Fie upon
you, Charlotte! 
And yet you sly, that neither you nor Lady L.
know how to blame me much, tho', the man considered, 

you will not totally acquit me of parade; and
in another place, that so far as we have proceeded,
we have behaved tolerably. Why, then, all this riot?
—yes, riot, Charlotte! against us, and against our
Sex? What, but for riot's sake? 
‘The humour upon you!’ —The humour is upon
you, with a witness! ‘Harg you, if you care!’ —But,
my dear, it would be more to your credit if you did
care; and if you checked the wicked humour. —Do
you think nobody but you has such talents? Fain
would I lower you, since, as it is evident, you take
pride in your licence—Forgive me, my dear—Yet I
will not say half I think of your wicked wit. Think
you, that there are not many who could be as smart,
as surprising, as you, were they to indulge a vein of
what you call humour? Do you think your brother
is not one? Would not he be too hard for you at your
own weapons? Has he not convinced you that he
could? But he, a man, can check the overflowing
freedom. 
But if I have set out wrong with your brother, I
will do my endeavour to recover my path. You
greatly oblige me with your conducting hand: But
what necessity was there for you to lead me through
briars and thorns, and to plunge me into two or three
dirty puddles, in order to put me into the right path,
when it lay before you in a direct line, without going
a bow-shoot about? 
Be pleased, however, to consider situation, on my
side, as well as on your brother's: I might be a little
excusable for my aukwardness, perhaps, were it considered,
that the notion of a double or divided Love, on
the man's part, came often into my head; indeed
could not be long out; the Lady so superlatively excellent!
his affection for her, so allowably, as well
as avowedly, strong! Was it possible to avoid little
jealousies, little petulancies, when slights were imaginable? 
The more, for the excellency of the man; 

the more for my past weakness of so many months? I
pretend not, my dearest Charlotte, to be got above
nature: I know I am a weak silly gi l: I am humbled
in the sense I have of his and Clementina's superior
merits. True Love will ever make a person think
meanly of herself, in proportion as she thinks highly
of the object. Pride will be up, sometimes; but in
the pull two ways, between that and mortification, a
torn coat will be the consequence: And must not the
tatterdemallion (What a new language will my uncle
teach me!) then look simply? 
You bid me ask my aunt—You bid me tell my
uncle—Naughty Charlotte! I will ask, I will tell,
them, nothing. Pray write me a Letter next, that
I can read to them. I skipt this passage—Read that— 
'um—'um—'um—Then skipt again—Hey-day! 
What's come to the girl, cried my uncle? Can Lady
G. write what Harriet cannot read? [There was a
rebuke for you, Charlotte!] For the love of God, let
me read it! —He bustled, laughed, shook his shoulders,
rubbed his hands, at the imagination—Some
pretty roguery, I warrant: Dearly do I love Lady G.
If you love me, Harriet, let me read; and once he
snatched one of the sheets. I boldly struggled with
him for it—For shame, Mr. Selby, said my aunt. 
My dear, said my grandmother, if your uncle is so
impetuous, you must shew him no more of your Letters. 
He then gave it up—Consider, Charlotte, what a
sine piece of work we should have had with my uncle,
had he read it through! 
But, let me see,—What are the parts of this wicked
Letter, for which I can sincerely thank you? —O my
dear, I cannot, cannot, without soiling my fingers,
pick them out—Your intelligences, however, are
among those which I hold for favours. 
Poor Emily! that is a subject which delights, yet
saddens, me—We are laudably fond of distinguishing 

merit. But your brother's is so dazling—Every woman
is one's rival. But no more of my Emily! 
Dear creature! the subject pains me! —Yet I cannot
quit it. —You ask, If, after all, I think it right that she
should live with me? —What can I say? For her sake,
perhaps, it will not: Yet how is her heart set upon it! 
For my own sake, as there is no perfect happiness to
be expected in this life, I could be content to bear a
little pain, were that dear girl to be either benefited or
pleasured by it. Indeed I love her, at my heart—And,
what is more—I love myself for so sincerely loving
her. 
In the wicked part of your Letter, what you write
of your aunt Eleanor—But I have no patience with
you, sinner as you are against light, and better knowlege!
and derider of the infirmities, not of old maids,
but of old age! —Don't you hope to live long, yourself? 
That worthy Lady wears not spectacles, Charlotte,
because she never was so happy as to be married. 
Wicked Charlotte! to owe such obligation to the generosity
of good Lord G. for taking pity of you in
time [Were you Four or Five-and-twenty when he
honoured you with his hand at St. George's church?]
and yet to treat him as you do, in more places than
one, in this very Letter! 
But I will tell you what I will do with this same
strange Letter—I will transcribe all the good things in
it. There are many which both delight and instruct; 
and some morning, before I dress for the day, I will
[Sad task, Charlotte! But it shall be by way of penance
for some of my faults and follies!] transcribe
the intolerable passages; so make two Letters of it. 
One I will keep to shew my friends here, in order to
increase, if it be possible, their admiration of my
Charlotte; the bad one I will present to you. I
know I shall transcribe it in a violent hurry—Not
much matter whether it be legible, or not—The hobbling
it will cause in the reading, will make it appear 

worse to you, than if you could read it as glibly as
you write. If half of it be illegible, enough will be
left to make you blush for the whole, and wonder
what sort of a pen it was that somebody, unknown to
you, put into your standdish. 
After all, spare me not, my ever-dear, my ever-charming
friend! spare only your self: Don't let
Charlotte run away from both G's. You will then be
always equally sure of my admiration and love. For
dearly do I love you, with all your faults; so dearly,
that when I consider your faults by themselves, I am
ready to arraign my heart, and to think there is more
of the roguery of my Charlotte in it than I will allow
of. 
One punishment to you, I intend, my dear—In all
my future Letters, I will write as if I had never seen
this your naughty one. Indeed I am in a kind of
way, faulty or not, that I cannot get out of, all at
once; but as soon as I can, I will, that I may better
justify my displeasure at some parts of your Letter, by
the observance I will pay to others. That is a sweet
sentence of my Charlotte's: ‘Change your name,
`and increase your consequence.’ Reflect, my dear— 
How naughty must you have been, that such a charming
instance of goodness could not bribe to spare you 
Your ever-affectionate and grateful
Harriet Byron! 

