



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

We had hardly dined, when my coachman, who
kept a look-out for Captain Tomlinson, as Will.
did for old Grimes, conducted hither that worthy
gentleman, attended by one servant, both on horseback. 
He alighted. I went out to meet him at the
door. 
Thou knowest his solemn appearance, and unblushing
freedom; and yet canst not imagine what a
dignity the rascal assumed, nor how respectful to him
I was. 
I led him into the parlour, and presented him to
the women, and them to him. —I thought it highly
imported me (as they might still have some diffidences
about our marriage, from my fair-one's home-push'd
questions on that head) to convince them intirely of
the truth of all I had asserted. And how could I do
this better, than by dialoguing with him before them
a little? 
Dear Captain, I thought you long; for I have had
a terrible conflict with my spouse. 
Capt. I am sorry that I am later than my intention
—My account with my banker—[There's a dog, 

Jack!] took me up longer time to adjust than I had
foreseen (all the time pulling down and stroking his
ruffles): for there was a small difference between us— 
only twenty pounds, indeed, which I had taken no
account of. The rascal has not seen twenty pounds
of his own these ten years. 
Then had we between us the characters of the
Harlowe family: I railing against them all; the Captain
taking his dear friend Mr. John Harlowe's part; 
with a Not so fast! —Not so fast, young gentleman!— 
and the like free assumptions. 
He accounted for their animosity by my defiances: 
No good family, having such a charming daughter,
would care to be defied, instead of courted: He must
speak his mind: Never was a double-tongu'd man. — 
He appealed to the Ladies, if he were not right. 
He got them of his side. 
The correction I had given the brother, he told
me, must have aggravated matters. 
How valiant this made me look to the women! — 
The Sex love us mettled fellows at their hearts. 
Be that as it would, I should never love any of
the family but my spouse; and, wanting nothing
from them, would not, but for her sake, have gone
so far as I had gone towards a reconciliation. 
This was very good of me; Mrs. Moore said. 
Very good indeed; Miss Rawlins. 
Good! —It is more than good; it is very generous; 
said the widow. 
Capt. Why, so it is, I must needs say: For I am
sensible, that Mr. Lovelace has been rudely treated
by them all—More rudely, than it could have been
imagined a man of his quality and spirit would have
put up with. But then, Sir (turning to me), I
think you are amply rewarded in such a Lady; and
that you ought to forgive the father for the daughter's
sake. 

Mrs. M. Indeed so I think. 
Miss R. So must every-one think, who has seen
the Lady. 
Widow B. A fine Lady! to be sure! But she has
a violent spirit; and some very odd humours too, by
what I have heard. The value of good husbands is
not known till they are lost! 
Her conscience then drew a sigh from her. 
Lovel. Nobody must reflect upon my angel. —An
angel she is. —Some little blemishes, indeed, as to
her over-hasty spirit, and as to her unforgiving temper. 
But this she has from the Harlowes; instigated
too by that Miss Howe. —But her innumerable excellencies
are all her own. 
Capt. Ay, talk of spirit, There's a spirit, now
you have named Miss Howe! [And so I led him to
confirm all I had said of that vixen.] Yet she was to
be pitied too, looking with meaning at me. 
As I have already hinted, I had before agreed with
him to impute secret love occasionally to Miss Howe,
as the best means to invalidate all that might come
from her in my disfavour. 
Capt. Mr. Lovelace, but that I know your modesty,
or you could give a reason— 
Lovel. looking down, and very modest—I can't
think so, Captain—But let us call another cause. 
Every woman present could look me in the face,
so bashful was I. 
Capt. Well, but, as to our present situation—Only
it mayn't be proper—looking upon me, and round
upon the women. 
Lovel. O Captain, you may say any-thing before
this company—Only, Andrew, to my new servant,
who attended us at table, do you withdraw: This
good girl (looking at the maid-servant) will help us
to all we want. 
Away went Andrew: He wanted not his cue; and 

the maid seemed highly pleased at my honour's preference
of her. 
Capt. As to our present situation, I say, Mr. Lovelace
—Why, Sir, we shall be all untwisted, let me
tell you, if my friend Mr. John Harlowe were to
know what that is: He would as much question the
truth of your being married, as the rest of the family
do. 
Here the women perked up their ears; and were
all silent attention. 
Capt. I asked you before for particulars, Mr. Lovelace:
but you declined giving them. —Indeed it may
not be proper for me to be acquainted with them. — 
But I must own, that it is past my comprehension,
that a wife can resent any-thing a husband can do
(that is not a breach of the peace), so far as to think
herself justified for eloping from him. 
Lovel. Captain Tomlinson—Sir—I do assure you,
that I shall be offended—I shall be extremely concerned
—if I hear that word mention'd again— 
Capt. Your nicety, and your love, Sir, may make
you take offence—But it is my way to call everything
by its proper name, let who will be offended— 
Thou canst not imagine, Belford, how brave, and
how independent, the rascal look'd. 
Capt. When, young Gentleman, you shall think
proper to give us particulars, we will find a word that
shall please you better, for this rash act in so admirable
a Lady—You see, Sir, that, being the representative
of my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe, I
speak as freely as I suppose he would do, if present. 
But you blush, Sir—I beg your pardon, Mr. Lovelace: 
It becomes not a modest man to pry into those
secrets, which a modest man cannot reveal. 
I did not blush, Jack; but denied not the compliment,
and looked down: the women seem'd delighted
with my modesty: but the widow Bevis was 

more inclined to laugh at me, than praise me for
it. 
Capt. Whatever be the cause of this step (I will
not again, Sir, call it elopement, since that harsh
word wounds your tenderness), I cannot but express
my surprize upon it, when I recollect the affectionate
behaviour, which I was witness to between you,
when I attended you last. Over-love, Sir, I think
you once mentioned—but Over-love (smiling), give
me leave to say, Sir, is an odd cause of quarrel. — 
Few Ladies— 
Lovel. Dear Captain! And I tried to blush. 
The women also tried; and, being more used to
it, succeeded better. —Mrs. Bevis, indeed, has a red-hot
countenance, and always blushes. 
Miss R. It signifies nothing to mince the matter:
but the Lady above as good as denies her marriage. 
You know, Sir, that she does; turning to me. 
Capt. Denies her marriage! Heavens! how then
have I imposed upon my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe! 
Lovel. Poor dear! —But let not her veracity be
called in question. She would not be guilty of a wilful
untruth for the world. 
Then I had all their praises again. 
Lovel. Dear creature!—she thinks she has reason
for her denial. You know, Mrs. Moore; you know,
Miss Rawlins; what I owned to you above, as to
my vow— 
I look'd down, and, as once before, turned round
my diamond ring. 
Mrs. Moore looked awry; and with a leer at Miss
Rawlins, as to her partner in the hinted-at reference. 
Miss Rawlins look'd down as well as I; her eyelids
half-closed, as if mumbling a Pater-noster, meditating 

her snuff-box, the distance between her nose
and chin lengthened by a close-shut mouth. 
She put me in mind of the pious Mrs. Fetherstone
at Oxford, whom I pointed out to thee once, among
other grotesque figures, at St. Mary's church, where
we went to take a view of her two sisters: Her eyes
shut, not daring to trust her heart with them open; 
and but just half-rearing the lids, to see who the
next-comer was; and falling them again, when her
curiosity was satisfied. 
The widow Bevis gazed, as if on the hunt for a
secret. 
The Captain looked archly, as if half in possession
of one. 
Mrs. Moore at last broke the bashful silence. Mrs.
Lovelace's behaviour, she said, could be no otherwise
so well accounted-for, as by the ill-offices of
that Miss Howe; and by the severity of her relations; 
which might but too probably have affected her head
a little at times: Adding, that it was very generous
in me to give way to the storm, when it was up, rather
than to exasperate at such a time. 
But let me tell you, Sirs, said the widow Bevis,
that is not what one husband in a thousand would
have done. 
I desired, that no part of this conversation might be
hinted to my spouse; and looked still more bashfully. 
Her great fault, I must own, was over-delicacy. 
The Captain leered round him; and said, He believed
he could guess from the hints I had given him
in town (of my over-love), and from what had now
passed, that we had not consummated our marriage. 
O Jack! how sheepishly then looked, or endeavoured
to look, thy friend! how primly Goody
Moore! how affectedly Miss Rawlins!—while the
honest widow Bevis gazed around her fearless; and 

tho' only simpering with her mouth, her eyes laugh'd
out-right, and seem'd to challenge a laugh from every
eye in the company. 
He observ'd, that I was a phœnix of a man, if so; 
and he could not but hope, that all matters would
be happily accommodated in a day or two; and that
then he should have the pleasure to averr to her uncle,
that he was present, as he might say, on our wedding-day. 
The women seem'd all to join in the same hope. 
Ah, Captain! ah, Ladies!—how happy should I be,
if I could bring my dear spouse to be of the same
mind! 
It would be a very happy conclusion of a very
knotty affair, said widow Bevis; and I see not why
we may not make this very night a merry one. 
The Captain superciliously smiled at me. He saw
plainly enough, he said, that we had been at childrens
play hitherto. A man of my character must
have a prodigious value for his Lady, who could give
way to such a caprice as This. But one thing he
would venture to tell me; and that was This—That,
however desirous young skittish Ladies might be to
have their way in this particular, it was a very bad
setting-out for the man; as it gave his bride a very
high proof of the power she had over him: And he
would engage, that no woman, thus humoured, ever
valued the man the more for it; but very much the
contrary—And there were reasons to be given why she
should not. 
Well, well, Captain, no more of this subject before
the Ladies. —One feels (in a bashful try-to-blush
manner, shrugging my shoulders), that one is so ridiculous
—I have been punish'd enough for my tender
folly. 
Miss Rawlins had taken her fan, and would needs 

hide her face behind it: I suppose because her blush
was not quite ready. 
Mrs. Moore hemm'd, and look'd down, and by
that, gave hers over. 
While the jolly widow, laughing out, praised the
Captain, as one of Hudibras's metaphysicians, repeating, 

He knew what's what, and that's as high
As metaphysic wit can fly.
This made Miss Rawlins blush indeed: —Fie, fie,
Mrs. Bevis! cry'd she, unwilling I suppose, to be
thought absolutely ignorant. 
Upon the whole, I began to think, that I had
not made a bad exchange of our professing mother,
for the un-professing Mrs. Moore. And indeed the
women and I, and my Beloved too, all mean the
same thing: We only differ about the manner of
coming at the proposed end. 