


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


The two sisters and Lord L. were then solicitous
to know what was the occasion, which he called
melancholy, that had engaged his attendance so many
days at Canterbury. 
It is really a melancholy occasion, reply'd he. You
must not be surprised, my Lord; nor you, my sisters,
if you see me in mourning in a few days. His sisters 

started. And so, truly, must I. But I am his third
sister, you know. He seemed in haste to explain
himself, lest he should keep us in painful suspense. 
My journeyings to Canterbury have been occasioned
by the melancholy necessity of visiting a sick friend,
who is now no more. 
You had all such an opinion, said Mr. Grandison,
that I could keep no secret, that— 
You were resolved, interrupted Miss Grandison, to
say any-thing but the truth. Indeed, cousin, you had
better have been silent at this time—Is there a necessity,
brother, for us to go into mourning? 
There is not. I had a true value for the departed. 
But custom will oblige me to mourn outwardly, as an
executor only. And I have given orders about that,
and other necessary matters. 
Did we know the deceased gentleman, brother?
said Lady L. 
No. His name was Danby. He was an eminent
merchant; an Englishman; but, from his youth,
settled in France. He had for months been in a languishing
state of health; and at last, finding his recovery
desperate, was desirous to die in his native
country. He landed at Dover about two months
ago: But his malady so greatly increased, that he was
obliged to stop at Canterbury in his way to town; and
there at last he yielded to the common destiny. The
body was to be brought to town as this night. I have
order'd it to an undertaker's. I must lock myself up
for a day or two, when I go to town. His concerns are
large; but, he told me, not intricate. He desired, that
his will might not be opened 'till after his interrment; 
and that that might be private. He has two nephews,
and a niece. I would have had him join them in the
trust with me: But he refused to do so. An attempt
once had been made upon his life, by villains set at
work by a wicked brother, father of those nephews,
and that niece, of which they were innocent: They 

are worthy young people. I had the happiness to
save his life: But had no merit in it; for my own
safety was involved in his. I am afraid he has been
too grateful. 
But, my good brother, said Miss Grandison, were
you not a little reserved on this occasion? You went
and returned, and went and returned, to Canterbury,
and never said one word to us of the call you had to go
thither. For my part, I thought there was a Lady in
the case, I do assure you. 
My reserve, as you call it, Charlotte, was rather
accidental, than designed; and yet I do now-and-then
treat your agreeable curiosity as mariners are said
to do a whale; I throw out a tub. But this was too
melancholy an occasion to be sported with. I was
affected by it. Had the gentleman lived to come to
town, you would all have been acquainted with him. 
I love to communicate pleasure, but not pain; when,
especially, no good end can be answered by the communication. 
I go to different places, and return, and
hardly think it worth troubling my sisters with every
movement. Had I thought you had any curiosity
about my little journeyings to Canterbury, you should
have had it answered. And yet I know my sister
Charlotte loves to puzzle, and find out secrets where
none are intended. 
She blush'd; and so did I. Your servant, Sir, was
all she said. 
But, Charlotte, proceeded he, you thought it was
a Lady that I visited: You know not your brother. I
never will keep a secret of that nature from you, my
good Lord, nor from you, my sisters, when I find
myself either encouraged or inclined to make a second
visit. It is for your Sex, Charlotte, to be very
chary of such secrets; and reason good, if you have
any doubt, either of the man's worthiness, or of
your own consequence with him. 
He looked very earnestly at her, but smiled. 

So, my brother! I thank you, humorously rubbing
one side of her face (tho' she needed not to do
so, to make both cheeks glow) this is another box
on the same ear. I have been uneasy, I can tell you,
Sir, at an hint you threw out before you last went to
Canterbury, as if I kept from you something that it
behoved you to know. Now, pray, Sir, will you be
pleased to explain yourself? 
And, since you put it so strongly to me, Charlotte,
let me ask you, Have you not? 
And let me ask you, Sir—Do you think I have? 
Perhaps, Charlotte, your solicitude on this subject,
now, and the alarm you took at the time, on a very
slight hint, might warrant— 
No warrants, brother! —Pray be so good as to speak
all that lies on your mind. 
Ah, Charlotte! and looked, tho' smilingly, with
meaning. 
I will not bear this Ah, Charlotte! and that meaning
look. 
And are you willing, my dear, to try this cause? 
I demand my tryal. 
Charming innocence! thought I, at the time—Now
shall I find some fault, I hope, in this almost perfect
brother. I triumphed in my mind, for my Charlotte. 
Who shall be your judge? 
Yourself, Sir. 
God grant you may be found guilty, cousin, said
Mr. Grandison, for your plaguing of me. 
Has that wretch, looking at Mr. Grandison, insinuated
any-thing? —She stopt. 
Are you afraid, my sister? 
I would not give that creature any advantage over
me. 
Sir Ch. I think I would, if there were fair room— 
You have too often all the game in your own hands. 
You should allow Mr. Grandison his chance. 

Miss Gr. Not to arise from such an observing bystander,
as my brother. 
Sir Ch. Conscious, Charlotte! 
Miss Gr. May be not— 
Sir Ch. May be, is doubtful: May be No, implies
May be Yes. 
Lady L. You have made Charlotte uneasy: Indeed,
brother, you have. The poor girl has been harping
upon this string, ever since you have been gone. 
Sir Ch. I am sorry what I said pressed so hard—Do
you, Lady L. if this delinquency comes to tryal,
offer yourself as an advocate for Charlotte? 
Lady L. I know not any act of delinquency she
has committed. 
Sir Ch. The act of delinquency is this—Shall I,
Charlotte, explain myself?— 
Miss Gr. Teazing man! How can you— 
Mr. Grandison rubbed his hands, and rejoiced. 
Miss Grandison was nettled. She gave Mr. Grandison
such a look! —I never saw such a contemptuous
one—Pray, Sir, do you withdraw, if you please. 
Mr. Gr. Not I, by the Mass! Are you afraid of
a tryal in open court? O-ho, cousin Charlotte!— 
Miss Gr. Have I not a cruel brother, Miss Byron? 
Lord L. Our sister Charlotte really suffers, Sir
Charles. 
Sir Ch. I am sorry for it. The innocent should not
suffer. We will drop the cause. 
Lady L. Worse and worse, brother. 
Sir Ch. How so, Lady L.? Is not Charlotte innocent? 
Dr. Bartlett. If an advocate be required, and you,
Sir Charles, are judge, and not a pleader in this
cause, I offer myself to Miss Grandison. 
Sir Ch. A very powerful one she will then have. 
You think her cause a just one, Doctor, by your offer. 
Will you, Charlotte, give Dr. Bartlett a brief? Or
have you given him one? 

Dr. Bart. I have no doubt of the justice of the
cause. 
Sir Ch. Nor of the justice of the accuser, I hope. 
I cannot be a judge in it. 
Lady L. Nay, then! —Poor Charlotte! 
Miss Gr. I wish, cousin Grandison, you would
withdraw. 
Mr. Gr. I wish, cousin Charlotte, you would not
wish it. 
Miss Gr. But are you serious, brother? 
Sir Ch. Let us call another cause, sister, if you
please. Pray, my Lord, what visitors have you had
since I had the honour to attend you? 
Miss Gr. Nay, brother—Don't think— 
Sir Ch. Be quiet, Charlotte. 
Lady L. Your own words, sister! —But we had a
visit from Lady Anne S. yesterday. 
I was glad to hear Lady L. say this. But nothing
came of it. 
Sir Ch. You have seen Lady Anne more than once,
my Emily: How do you like Lady Anne? 
Miss Emily. Very well, Sir. She is a very agreeable
Lady. Don't you think so, Sir? 
Sir Ch. I do—But, Charlotte (and looked tenderly
upon her) I must not have you uneasy. 
She sat vexed—her complexion raised, and playing
with a lump of sugar; and sometimes twirling round
and round a tea-cup; for the tea-things, thro' earnestness
of talking, were not taken away, tho' the
servants were withdrawn. 
Mr. Gr. Well, I will leave you together, I think. 
Poor cousin Charlotte! —[Rising, he tapped her
shoulder.] Poor cousin Charlotte! Ha, ha, ha, hah! 
Miss Gr. Impertinence! with a look, the fellow
to that she gave him before. 
Miss Emily. I will withdraw, if you please, madam; 
rising, and courtesying. 

Miss Grandison nodded her assent. And Emily
withdrew likewise. 
Dr. Bartlett offer'd to do so. Miss Grandison seem'd
not to disapprove of his motion: But Sir Charles
said, The Doctor is retained on your part, Charlotte:
He must hear the charge. Shall Miss Byron be
judge? 
I begged to be excused. The matter began to look
like earnest. 
Miss Gr. (whispering me) I wish, Harriet, I had
opened my whole heart to you. Your nasty scribbling! 
Eternally at your pen; or I had. 
Then I began to be afraid for her. Dear Miss
Grandison! re-whisper'd I, it was not for me to obtrude—Dear
Miss Grandison, my pen should never
have interfered, if— 
Miss Gr. (still whispering) One should be courted
out of some sort of secrets. One is not very forward to
begin some sort of discourses—Yet the subjects most
in our hearts, perhaps. But don't despise me. You
see what an accuser I have. And so generous a one
too, that one must half condemn one's self at setting
out. 
Harriet. (whispering) Fear nothing, my Charlotte. 
You are in a brother's hands. 
Miss Gr. Well, Sir Charles; and now, if you
please, for the charge. But you say, you cannot be
judge and accuser: Who shall be judge? 
Sir. Ch. Your own heart, Charlotte. I desire all
present to be your advocates, if their judgment be
with you: And if it be not, that they will pity you
in silence. 
He looked smilingly serious. Good Heaven!
thought I. 
Miss Gr. Pity me! —Nay, then—But, pray, Sir,
your charge. 
Sir Ch. The matter is too serious to be spoken of
in metaphor. 

Miss Gr. Good God! —Hem!—and twice more
she hemm'd—Pray, Sir, begin. Begin while I have
breath. 
Lord and Lady L. and Dr. Bartlett, and I, look'd
very grave; and Miss Grandison look'd, in general,
fretfully humble, if I may so express myself: And
every-thing being removed, but the table, she play'd
with her diamond ring; sometimes pulling it off, and
putting it on; sometimes putting the tip of her finger
in it, as it lay upon the table, and turning it round
and round, swifter or slower, and stopping thro' downcast
vexation, or earnest attention, as she found herself
more or less affected—What a sweet confusion! 
Sir Ch. You know, my dear Charlotte, that I, very
early after my arrival, enquired after the state of your
heart. You told me it was absolutely free. 
Miss Gr. Well, Sir. 
Sir Ch. Not satisfied with your own acknowlegement; 
as I knew that young Ladies [I know not
why, when proper persons make enquiries, and for
motives not ungenerous] are too apt to make secrets
of a passion that is not in itself illaudable; I asked
your elder sister, who scrupled not to own hers, whether
there was any one man, whom you preferred to
another? —She assured me, that she knew not of
any one. 
Lady L. My sister knows that I said truth. 
Miss Gr. Well, well, Lady L. nobody doubts your
veracity. 
Sir Ch. Dear Charlotte, keep your temper. 
Miss Gr. Pray, Sir, proceed—And the ring turn'd
round very fast. 
Sir Ch. On several occasions I put the same question,
and had the same assurances. My reason for
repeating my question, was owing to an early intelligence
—Of which more by-and-by. 
Miss Gr. Sir! 

Sir Ch. And that I might either provide the money
that I thought due to her as my sister, or take time to
pay it, according to the circumstances of her engagement; 
and take from her all apprehensions of controul,
in a case that might affect the happiness of her life— 
These, and brotherly Love, were the motives of my
enquiry. 
Miss Gr. Your generosity, Sir, was without
example. 
Sir Ch. Not so, I hope. My sisters had an equitable,
if not a legal right to what has been done. I
found, on looking into my affairs, that, by a moderate
calculation of the family-circumstances, no
man should think of addressing a daughter of Sir Thomas
Grandison, without supposing himself intitled,
either by his merits or fortune, to expect 10,000l.
with her—And this, even allowing to the Son the
customary preferences given to men as men; tho'
given for the sake of pride, perhaps, rather than natural
justice. For does not tyrant custom make a
daughter change her name in marriage, and give to a
son, for the sake of name only, the estate of the common
ancestor of both? 
This generous hint, affected me. It was nearly
my own case, you know. I might otherwise have
been a rich heiress, and might have had as strong
pretensions to be distinguished by the Grandisons, for
my fortune, as any Lady S. in the kingdom. But
worthless as those are, to whom, for the sake of the
name, my father's estate is passed, I never grudged it
to them till I came acquainted with these Grandisons. 
Lord L. But who, Sir Charles, but you— 
Sir Ch. Pray, my Lord, let not your generosity
mislead you to think that a favour, which is but a due. 
We shall not be judged by comparison. The Laws of
Truth and Justice are always the same. What others
would not have done in the like situation, that let 

them look to: But what is the mortal man, who
should make an unjust advantage of mortality? 
Miss Grandison pulled out her handkerchief, put
it to her eyes, and then in her lap; and putting half
on, and half off, by turns, her ring, looked now-and-then
at me, as if she wished me to pity her. 
Indeed, Lucy, I did pity her: Every one did; 
and so did her judge, I dare say, in his heart. But
justice, my Lucy, is a severe thing. Who can bear
a tryal, if the integrity and greatness of this man's
heart is to be the rule, by which their actions are to
be examined? Yet you shall hear how generous he
was. 
Sir Ch. Allow me, for Miss Byron's sake, who has
been but lately restored to our family, to be a little
more particular, than otherwise I need to be. I had
not been long in England, before Sir Walter Watkyns
desired my interest with my sister. I told him, That
she was entirely her own mistress; and that I should
not offer to lead her choice. Lord G. made his court
to her likewise; and, applying to me, received the
same answer. 
I enter'd, however, into serious talk with my sister
upon this subject. She ask'd me what I thought of
each gentleman. I told her frankly. 
Miss Gr. And pray, brother, be so good as to repeat
what you said of them. Let Miss Byron be
judge whether either of the portraits was very inviting. 
Sir Ch. I told her, Miss Byron, that Sir Walter
would, I presumed, be thought the handsomer man of
the two. He was gay, lively, genteel; and had that
courage in his air and manner, that Ladies were seldom
displeased with. I had not, however, discovered
any great depth in him. My sister, I imagined, if
she married him, would have the superiority in good
sense: But I question'd whether Sir Walter would
easily find that out; or allow it, if he did. He 

was a brisk man for an hour, and might have wit and
sense too; but indeed I hardly ever saw him out of
Ladies company; and he seemed to be of opinion,
that flash rather than fire, was what would recommend
him to them. Sometimes I have thought, I
told her, that women of sense should punish such men
with their contempt, and not reward them with their
approbation, for thus indirectly affronting their understandings:
But that I had known women of sense
approve a man of that character; and each woman
must determine for herself, what appeared most agreeable
to her. 
Miss Gr. (whispering) Well, Harriet— 
Har. (whispering) Don't interrupt him. 
Sir Ch. You remember, my dear Charlotte, that
it was in this kind of way I spoke about Sir Walter
Watkyns; and added, That he was independent; in
possession of the family-estate, which I believed was
a good one; and that he talked handsomely to me of
settlements. 
I do remember this, said Miss Grandison; and
whispering me, I am afraid, said she, he knows too
much; but the person he cannot know. —Well, Sir,
and pray be pleased to repeat what you said of
Lord G. 
Sir Ch. Lord G. I told you, was a gay-dressing
man, but of a graver cast than the other. The
fashion, rather than his inclination, seemed to govern
his outward appearance. He was a modest man, and
I feared had too much doubt of himself to appear with
that dignity in the eye of a lively woman, which
should give him a first consequence with her. 
Miss Gr. Your servant, Sir. 
Sir Ch. I believed he would make a good husband:
So perhaps might Sir Walter. But the one would bear,
the other perhaps must be borne with. Ladies, as
well as men, I presumed, had some foibles, that they
would not care to part with. As to fortune, I added, 

that Lord G. was dependent on his father's pleasure. 
He had, indeed, his father's entire approbation, I
found, in his address: And I hoped that a sister of
mine would not wish for any man's death, for the
sake of either title or fortune. You have seen Lord G.
Miss Byron? 
Harr. What, Sir Charles, was Miss Grandison's
answer? 
I did not care to give any opinion, that might either
hurt or humour my Charlotte. 
Sir Ch. Charlotte told me, in so many words, That
she did not approve of either. Each gentleman, said
I, has besought me to be his advocate: A task that I
have not undertaken. I only told them, That I would
talk to my sister upon the subject: But did not think a
brother ought to expect an influence over a sister,
where the gentlemen suspected their own. You will
remember, said I to my sister, that women cannot
choose where they will; and that the same man cannot
be every-thing—She desired me to tell her, which
of the two I would prefer? —First, said I, let me repeat
the question I have more than once put to you— 
Have you any the least shadow of a preference in your
heart, to any third person? —What was my sister's answer? 
She said, She had not. And yet, had I not had
the private intelligence I hinted at, I should have been
apt to imagine, that I had some reason to repeat the
question, from the warmth, both of manner and accent,
with which she declared, that she approved of neither. 
Women, I believe, do not, with earnestness, reject a
man who is not quite disagreeable, and to whose quality
and fortune there can be no objection, if they
are absolutely unprejudiced in another's favour. 
We women look'd upon one another. I have no
doubt, thought I, but Sir Charles came honestly by his
knowlege of us. The dear Charlotte sat uneasy. He
proceeded. 

However, I now made no question but my sister's
affections were absolutely disengaged. My dear Charlotte,
said I, I would rather be excused telling you,
which gentleman's suit I should incline to favour, lest
my opinion should not have your inclination with it; 
and your mind, by that means, should suffer any embarrasment. 
She desired to know it. 
Miss Gr. You were very generous, Sir; I owned
you were, in this point, as well as in all others. 
Sir Ch. I then declared in favour of Lord G. as the
man who would be most likely to make her happy; 
who would think himself most obliged to her for her
favour: And I took the liberty to hint, that tho' I
admired her for her vivacity, and even, when her wit
carried its keenest edge, loved to be awakened by it,
and wished it never to lose that edge; yet I imagined,
that it would hurt such a man as Sir Walter. Lord G.
it would enliven: And I hoped, if she took pleasure
in her innocent sallies, that she would think it something,
so to choose, as that she should not be under a
necessity of repressing those sprightly powers, that very
seldom were to be wished to be reined in. 
Miss Gr. True, Sir. You said, very seldom, I remember. 
Sir Ch. I never will flatter either a Prince, or a
Lady; yet should be sorry to treat either of them
rudely. She then asked me after my own inclinations. 
I took this for a desire to avoid the subject we were
upon; and would have withdrawn; but not in ill-humour. 
There was no reason for it. My sister was
not obliged to follow me in a subject that was not
agreeable to her: But I took care to let her know, that
her question was not a disagreeable one to me: But
would be more properly answered on some other occasion. 
She would have had me to stay. —For the sake
of the former subject, do you ask me to stay, Charlotte? 
No, said she. 

Well then, my dear, take time to consider of it; 
and at some other opportunity we will resume it. 
Thus tender did I intend to be, with regard to my
sister's inclinations. 
Miss Grandison wiped her eyes—And said, but
with an accent that had a little peevishness in it, You
wanted not, Sir, all this preparation. Nobody has
the shadow of belief, that you could be wrong. 
Sir Ch. If this, Charlotte, be well said; if, in that
accent, it be generously said; I have done—And from
my heart acquit you, and as cordially condemn myself,
if I have appeared in your eye to intend to raise
my own character, at the expence of yours. Believe
me, Charlotte, I had much rather, in a point of delicacy,
that the brother should be found faulty than
the sister: And let it pass, that I am so. —And only
tell me, in what way you would wish me to serve
you. 
Miss Gr. Pardon me, brother. You can add forgiveness
to the other obligations under which I labour. 
I was petulant. 
Sir Ch. I do; most cordially I do. 
Miss Gr. (wiping her eyes) But won't you proceed,
Sir? 
Sir Ch. At another opportunity, madam. 
Miss Gr. Madam! —Nay, now you are indeed
angry with me. Pray, proceed. 
Sir Ch. I am not: But you shall allow me an hour's
conversation with you in your dressing-room, when
you please. 
Miss Gr. No! —Pray, proceed. Every one here is
dear to me. Every one present must hear either my
acquittal or condemnation. Pray, Sir, proceed—Miss
Byron, pray sit still—Pray (for we were all rising to
go out) keep your seats. I believe I have been wrong. 
My brother said, you must pity me in silence, if you
found me faulty. Perhaps I shall be obliged to you
for your pity. —Pray, Sir, be pleased to acquaint me
with what you know of my faults. 

Sir Ch. My dear Charlotte, I have said enough to
point your fault to your own heart. If you know it; 
that, I hope, is sufficient. —Do not imagine, my dear,
that I want to controul you—But—He stopt. 
Miss Gr. But what, Sir? —Pray, Sir—And she
trembled with eagerness. 
Sir Ch. But it was not right to—And yet, O that
I were mistaken in this point, and my sister not
wrong! 
Miss Gr. Well, Sir, you have reason, I suppose,
to think—There she stopt— 
Sir Ch. That there is a man whom you can approve
of—notwithstanding— 
Miss Gr. All I have said to the contrary. Well,
Sir, if there be, it is a great fault to have denied it. 
Sir Ch. That is all I mean—It is no fault, for you
to prefer one man to another. It is no fault in you to
give this preference to any man, without consulting
your brother. I proposed that you should be entirely
mistress of your own conduct and actions. It would
have been ungenerous in me, to have supposed you accountable
to me, who had done no more than my
duty by you. Dear Charlotte, do not imagine me
capable of laying such a load on your free will: But
I should not have been made to pronounce to Lord G.
and even to the Earl his father (on their enquiries,
whether your affections were or were not engaged)
in such a manner as gave them hopes of succeeding. 
Miss Gr. Are you sure, Sir? 
Sir Ch. O my sister, how hard fought (now must
I say?) is this battle! —I can urge it no farther. For
your sake, I can urge it no farther. 
Miss Gr. Name your man, Sir!— 
Sir Ch. Not my man, Charlotte—Captain Anderson
is not my man. 
He arose; and, taking her motionless hand, pressed
it with his lips:—Be not too much disturbed, said he. 
I am distress'd, my sister, for your distress—I think, 

more than I am for the error: And, saying this, bowing
to her, he withdrew. 
He saw and pitied her confusion. She was quite
confounded. It was very good of him to withdraw,
to give her time to recover herself. Lady L. gave
her her salts. Miss Grandison hardly ever wanted
salts before. 
O what a poor creature am I, said she, even in my
own eyes! Don't despise me, Harriet—Dr. Bartlett,
can you excuse me for so sturdy a perseverance? —My
Lord, forgive me! —Lady L. be indulgent to a sister's
fault. But my brother will always see me in this depreciating
light! “A battle hard fought,” indeed! 
How one error, persisted in, produces another! 
When Sir Charles heard her voice, as talking,
every one soothing, and pitying her, he returned. She
would have risen, with a disposition seemingly, as if
she would have humbled herself at his feet: But he
took her folded hands in one of his, and with the
other drew a chair close to her, and sat down: With
what sweet majesty, and mingled compassion in his
countenance! Miss Grandison's consciousness made it
terrible only to her. —Forgive me, Sir! were her
words. 
Dear Charlotte, I do. We have all something to
be forgiven for. We pity others then most cordially,
when we want pity ourselves. Remember only, in
the cases of other persons, to soften the severity of
your virtue. 
He had Mrs. Oldham in his thoughts, as we all afterwards
concluded. 
We know not, said he, to what inconveniencies a
small departure from principle will lead: And now let
us look forward. But first, Had you rather shew me
into your dressing-room? 
Miss Gr. I have now no wish to conceal any-thing
from the persons present. I will only withdraw for a
few moments. 

She went out. I followed her. And then, wanting
some-body to divide her fault with, the dear Charlotte
blamed my nasty scribbling again: But for that,
said she, I should have told you all. 
And what, my dear, would that have done, returned
I? —That would not have prevented— 
No: But yet you might have given me your advice:
I should have had the benefit of that; and my confessions
would have been, then, perhaps, aforehand with
his accusations. —But, forgive me, Harriet— 
O my Charlotte, thought I to myself, could you
but rein-in your charming spirit, a little, a very little,
you would not have had two forgivenesses to ask instead
of one. 

