



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sunday Night, July 16. 
My dearest Friend,
Why would you permit a mind so much devoted
to your service, to labour under such an impatience
as you must know it would labour under, for
want of an Answer to a Letter of such consequence to
you, and therefore to me, as was mine of Thursday
night? —Rogers told me on Thursday, you were so
ill; your Letter sent by him was so melancholy! — 
Yet you must be ill indeed, if you could not write
something to such a Letter; were it but a line, to say
you would write as soon as you could. Sure you
have received it. The master of our nearest Post-office
will pawn his reputation that it went safe: I
gave him particular charge of it. 
God send me good news of your health, of your
ability to write; and then I will chide you—Indeed
I will—as I never yet did chide you. 
I suppose your excuse will be, that the subject required
consideration—Lord! my dear, so it might: 
But you have so right a mind, and the matter in question 

is so obvious, that you could not want half an hour
to determine—Then you intended, probably, to wait
Collins's call for your Letter as on to-morrow! — 
Suppose—Miss!—(indeed I am angry with you! suppose)
something were to happen, as it did on Friday,
that he should not be able to go to town to-morrow? 
—How, child, could you serve me so! —I know not
how to leave off scolding you! 
Dear, honest Collins, make haste: He will: He
will. He sets out, and travels all night: For I have
told him, that the dearest friend I have in the world
has it in her own choice to be happy, and to make me
so; and that the Letter he will bring from her, will
assure it to me. 
I have ordered him to go directly (without stopping
at the Saracen's-head Inn) to you at your lodgings. 
Matters are now in so good a way, that he safely
may. 
Your expected Letter is ready written, I hope: If
it be not, he will call for it at your hour. 
You can't be so happy as you deserve to be: But I
doubt not that you will be as happy as you can; that
is, that you will chuse to put yourself instantly into
Lady Betty's protection. If you would not have the
wretch for your own sake; have him you must, for
mine, for your family's, for your honour's sake! — 
Dear, honest Collins, make haste! make haste! and
relieve the impatient heart of my Beloved's 
Ever-faithful, ever-affectionate,
Anna Howe. 