


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Monday, Oct. 23.
Go on, go on, with your narratives, my dear. 
Hitherto Caroline and I know not how either 

much to blame you, or totally to acquit you of parade,
the man and his situation considered; and the state of
your heart for so many months past; every one of
your friends—consenting, shall I say?—more than
consenting—ardent, to be related to him. Hark ye,
Harriet, let me whisper you—My brother, whether
he come honestly, or not, by his knowlege, I dare say,
thinks not so highly of the Free-masonry part of marriage
as you do! —You start. O Charlotte! you
cry:—And, O Harriet! too—But, my dear girl, let
my brother see, that you think (and no woman in the
world does, if you don't) that the true modesty, after
hearts are united, is to think little of parade, and
much of the social happiness that awaits two worthy
minds united by Love, and conformity of sentiment— 
After all, we are silly creatures, Harriet: We are
afraid of wise men. No wonder that we seldom
choose them, when a fool offers. I wish I knew the
man, however, who dared to say this in my hearing. 
Your grandmother Shirley is more than woman:
My brother prodigiously admires her. I think you
may trust to her judgment, if you suppose him too
precipitating. Your aunt is an excellent woman! 
But I never knew a woman or man, who valued themselves
on delicacy, and found themselves consulted
upon it, but was apt to over-do the matter. Is not
this a little, a very little, Mrs. Selby's case? Let her
know, that I bid you ask this question of herself:
She must be assured that I equally love and honour
her; so won't be angry. 
Your uncle is an odd, but a very honest Dunstable
soul! Tell him, I say so; but withal, that he should
leave women to act as women, in these matters. What
a duce, what a pize, would he expect perfection from
them? He, whose arguments always run in the depreciating
strain? If he would, ask him, Where should
they have it, conversing, as they are obliged to do,
with men? Men for their fathers, for their brothers, 

for their uncles—They must be a little silly, had they
not a fund of silliness in themselves. —But I would
not have them be most out, in matters where they
should be most in. 
I think, however, so does Lady L. that so far as
you have proceeded, you are tolerable; tho' not half
so clever as he, considering situations. Upon my
word, Harriet, allowing for every-thing, neither of
Sir Charles Grandison's sisters expected that their brother
would have made so ardent, so polite, a Lover. 
He is so prudent a man, and that once had like to
have been one of your, even your objections. —Yet
so nobly sincere—so manly. O that my ape—But
come, Harriet, as men go in this age of monkeys
and Sir Foplings, Lord G. (for all you) is not to be
despised. I, as a good wife ought, will take his part,
whoever runs him down. Where much is not given,
much, and-so-forth— 
I have told Emily the good news: I could not help
it, tho' you promise to write to her. 
Poor thing! she is all ecstasy! She is not the only
one who seeks, as her greatest good, what may possibly
prove her greatest misfortune. But, for her sake,
for your sake, and my brother's, I hope, under your
directing eye, and by prudent management (the flame
so young) a little cold water will do; and that if it
will blaze, it may be directed towards Beauchamp's
house. 
Let me whisper you again, Harriet—Young girls
finding themselves vested with new powers, and a set
of new inclinations, turn their staring eyes out of
themselves; and the first man they see, they imagine,
if he be a single man, and but simpers at them, they
must receive him as a Lover: Then they return
downcast for ogle, that he may ogle on without interruption. 
They are soon brought to write answers to
Letters which confess flames the writer's heart never
felt. The girl doubts not her own gifts, her own 

consequence; she wonders that her father, mother,
and other friends, never told her of these new-found
excellencies: She is more and more beautiful in her
own eyes, as he more and more flatters her. If her
parents are a-verse, the girl is per-verse; and the
more, the less discretion there is in her passion. She
adopts the word constancy; she declaims against persecution;
she calls her idle flame, Love; which only
was a Something she knew not what to make of—and,
like a wandering bee, had it not settled on this flower,
would on the next, were it either bitter or sweet. 
And this generally, with the thoughtless, is the beginning
and progress of that formidable invader, miscalled
Love; a word very happily at hand, to help
giddy creatures to talk with, and look without confusion
of face on, a man telling them a thousand lyes,
and hoping, perhaps by illaudable means, to attain an
end not in itself illaudable, when duty and discretion
are, the one the guide, the other the gentle restraint. 
But as to Emily—I depend on her principles, as
well as on your affectionate discretion (when you will
be pleased, among ye, to permit my brother to be actually
yours) for restraining her imagination. There
never beat in Female bosom an honester heart. Poor
thing! she is but a girl! And who is the woman, or
child, that looks on my brother without love and reverence? 
For Emily's sake, you see, you must not have too
many of your honest uncle's circum-roundabouts. He
makes us laugh. I love to have him angry with his
Dame Selby. Dear Harriet! when your heart's quite
at ease, give us the courtship of the odd soul to the
light of his eyes; his oddness, and her delicacy! A
charming contrast l You did help us to a little of it
once(a) , you know. Theirs, on the woman's side,
could not be a match of Love at first: But who so
happy as they? I am convinced, Harriet, that Love 

on one side, and discretion on the other, is enough in
conscience; and, in short, much better than Love on
both: For what room can there be for discretion, in
the latter case? The man is guilty of an heterodoxy
in Love, you know, who is prudent, or but suspected
of being so! —Ah Harriet, Harriet! once more I say,
we women are foolish creatures in our Love-affairs; 
and know not what's best for ourselves. —In your
stile—‘Don't you think so, Lucy?’ —Yet I admire
Lucy She got over an improperly-placed Love; and
now, her mad fit over [We have all little or much of
it; begun, as I told you how] she is so cool, so quiet,
so sedate. Yet once I make no doubt, looking forward
to her present happy quiescence, would have thought
it a state of insipidity. Dearly do we love racketing; 
and, another whisper, some of us to be racketed—But
not you! you are an exception. Yes, to be sure! — 
But I believe you'll think me mad. 
We like my brother's little trick upon you in the
Billet he wrote, and which you signed, as if to Emily. 
You see how earnest he is, my dear. I long for his
next Letters from Italy. I think that is a lucky plea
enough for you, if you suppose parade necessary. 
We have got Everard among us again. The sorry
fellow—O Harriet! had you seen him, with his hat
upon his two thumbs, bowing, cringing, blushing,
confounded, when first he came into my royal presence
—But I, from my throne, extended the golden
sceptre to him, as I knew I should please my brother
by it. He sat down, when I bid him, twisted his
lips, curdled his chin, hemm'd, stole a look of reverence
at me, looked down when his eyes met mine; 
mine bold as innocence, his conscious as guilt; hemm'd
again, turned his hat about; then with one of his
not quite-forgotten airs of pertness, putting it under
his arm, shook his ears, tried to look up, then his eye
sunk again under my broader eye. —O my dear! — 
What a paltry creature is a man vice-bitten! and sensible
of detected folly, and obligation! 

Sir Charles has made a man of him, once more. 
His dress is as gay as ever; and, I dare say, he struts
as much in it as ever, in company that knows not
how he came by it. He reformed! —Bad habits are
of the Jerusalem artichoke-kind; once planted, there
is no getting them out of the ground. 
Our good Dr. Bartlett is also with us, at present:
He is in hopes of seeing my brother in town—‘In
town,’ Harriet!—and the great affair un-solemnized! 
—Woe be to you, if—But let's see how you
act when left to yourself. Prudent people, in other's
matters, are not always prudent in their own; especially
in their Love-affairs. A little over-nicety at
setting out, will carry them into a road they never
intended to amble in; and then they are sometimes
obliged to the less prudent to put them in the path they
set out from. Remember, my dear, I am at hand, if
you bewilder yourself. 
Dr. Bartlett tells us, that my brother has extricated
this poor creature from his entanglements with his
woman, by his interposition only by Letter: Some
money, I suppose. The Doctor desires to be silent, on
the means; but hints, however, that Everard will
soon be in circumstances not unhappy. 
* *
I have got the Doctor to explain himself. Every
day produces some new instances of womens follies. 
What would poor battered rakes and younger brothers
do, when on their last legs, were it not for good-natured
widows? —Ay, and sometimes for forward
maids? This wretch, it seems, has acquitted himself
so handsomely in the discharge of the 100l. which he
owed to his wine-merchant's relict, and the Lady was
so full of acknowlegements, and obligations, and all
that, for being paid but her due, that he has ventured
to make addresses to her (Love, as it is called); and
is well received. He behaves with more spirit before
her, I suppose, than he does before me. 

The widow had a plain, diligent, honest man, before. 
She has what is called taste, forsooth, or believes
she has. She thinks Mr. Grandison a finer
gentleman than him who left her in a condition to be
thought worthy of the address of a gayer man. She
prides herself, it seems, in the relation that her marriage
will give her to a man of Sir Charles Grandison's
character. Much worse reasons will have
weight, when a woman finds herself inclined to
change her condition. But Everard is very earnest
that my brother should know nothing of the matter
till all is over: So you (as I) have this piece of news
in confidence. Lady L. has not been told it. His
cousin, he says, who refused him his interest with
Miss Mansfield, Lady W's sister, because he thought
a further time of probation, with regard to his avowed
good resolutions, necessary, would perhaps, for the
widow's sake, if applied to, put a spoke in his wheel. 
Everard, I can hardly allow myself to call him
Grandison, avows a vehement passion for the widow. 
She is rich. —When they are set out together in tasie,
as she calls it, trade, or business, her first rise, quite
forgot, what a gay, what a frolick dance will she and
her new husband, in a little while, lead up, on the
grave of her poor, plain, despised one! 
'Tis well, 'tis well, my dear Harriet, that I have
a multitude of faults myself [Witness, to go no further
back, this Letter] or I should despise nine parts of
the world out of ten. 
I find that Sir Charles, and Beauchamp, and Dr.
Bartlett, correspond. Light is hardly more active
than my brother, nor lightning more quick, when he
has any-thing to execute that must or ought to be
done. I believe I told you early, that was a part of
his character. You must not then wonder, or be offended
[Shall I use the word offended, my dear?] that
you, in your turn, now he has found himself at liberty
to address you, should be affected by his adroitness 

and vivacity in your Femalities, as uncle Selby calls
them: Aptly enough, I think; tho' I do not love that
men should be so impudent, as either to find us out,
or abuse us. You cannot always, were you to think
him too precipitating, separate bad qualities from good
in the same person; since, perhaps, the one is the
constitutional occasion of the other. Could he, for
example, be half so useful a friend as he is, if he were
to dream over a Love-affair, as you would seem to
have him; in other words, gape over his ripened fruit
till it dropt into his yaw-yaw-yawning mouth? He'll
certainly get you, Harriet, within, or near, his proposed
time. Look about you: He'll have you, before
you know where you are. By hook, as the saying is,
will he pull you to him, struggle as you will (he has
already got hold of you) or by crook; inviting, nay,
compelling you, by his generosity, gentle shepherd-like,
to nymph as gentle. What you do, therefore,
do with such a grace as may preserve to you the appearance
of having it in your power to lay an obligation
upon him. It is the opinion of both his sisters,
that he values you more for your noble expansion of
heart, and not ignorant, but generous frankness of
manners, yet mingled with dignity; than for—even
—your Beauty, Harriet—Whether you, who are in
such full possession of every grace of person, care, as
a woman, to hear of that, or not. His gay parterre
similitude you remember, my dear. It is my firm
belief, that those are the greatest admirers of fine
flowers, who love to see them in their borders, and
seldomest pluck the fading fragrance. The other
wretches crop, put them in their bosoms, and in an
hour or two, rose, carnation, or whatever, after one
parting smell, throw them away. 
He is very busy, where-ever he is. At his inn, I
suppose, most. But he boasts not to you, or anybody,
of what he does. 
He writes now-and-then a Letter to aunt Nell, and 

she is so proud of the favour—Look you here, niece; 
Look you here! —But I sha'n't shew you all he writes. 
—On go the spectacles—for she will not for the world
part with the Letter out of her hands. —She reads one
paragraph, one sentence, then another—On and off
go the spectacles, while she conjectures, explains,
animadverts, applauds; and so goes on till she leaves
not a line unread: Then, folding it up carefully in its
cover, puts it in her Letter or Ribband-case, which
shall I call it? For having but few Letters to put in it,
the case is filled with bits and ends of ribbands, patterns,
and-so-forth, of all manner of colours, faded
and fresh; with intermingledoms of gold-beaters skin,
plaisters for a cut finger, for a chopt lip, a kibe, perhaps
for corns; which she dispenses occasionally very
bountifully, and values herself, as we see at such times
by a double chin made triple, for being not unuseful
in her generation. Chide me, if you will; the humour's
upon me; hang me, if I care: You are only
Harriet Byron, as yet. Change your name, and increase
your consequence. 
I have written a long Letter already; and to what
end? Only to expose myself, say you? True enough. 
But now, Harriet, to bribe you into passing a milder
censure, let me tell you all I can pick up from the
Doctor, relating to my brother's matters. Bribe shall
I call this, or gratitude, for your free communications? 
Matters between the Mansfields and the Keelings
are brought very forward. Hang particulars: Nobody's
affairs lie near my heart, but yours. The two
families have already begun to visit. When my brother
returns, all the gentry in the neighbourhood are
to be invited, to rejoice with the parties on the occasion. 
Be so kind, my dear, as to dismiss the good man,
as soon as your punctilio will admit. We are contented,
that, while he lays himself out so much in the 

service of others, he should do something for himself. 
You, my dear, we look upon as a high reward for his
many great and good actions. But as he is a man
who has a deep sense of favours granted, and values
not the blessing the more, when it ought to be within
his reach, because it is dear (as is the case of the sorry
fellows in general) I would have you consider of it— 
that's all. 
The Doctor tells me, also, that the wicked Bolton's
ward is dead; and that every-thing is concluded, to
Sir Charles's satisfaction, with him; and the Mansfields
(reinstated in all their rights) are once more a
happy family. 
Sir Hargrave is in a lamentable way; Dr. Bartlett
has great compassion for him. Would you have me
pity him, Harriet? —You would, you say—Well,
then, I'll try for it: As it was by his means you and
we, and my brother, came acquainted, I think I may. 
He is to be brought to town. 
Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp! He is past recovery. 
Had the physicians given him over when they first
undertook him, he might, they say, have had a chance
for it. 
I told you, that Emily's mother was turned Methodist. 
She has converted her husband. A strange
alteration! But it is natural for such sort of people to
pass from one extreme to another. Emily every now-and-then
visits them. They are ready to worship her,
for her duty and goodness. She is a lovely girl: She
every day improves in her person, as well as in her
mind. She is sometimes with me; sometimes with
Lady L.; sometimes with aunt Eleanor; sometimes
with your Mrs. Reeves—We are ready to fight for
her: But you will soon rob all of us. She is preparing
for her journey to you. Poor girl! I pity her. 
Such a conflict in her mind, between her love of you,
and tenderness for her guardian! Her Anne has confessed
to me, that she weeps one half of the night; 

yet forces herself to be lively in company—After the
example of Miss Byron, she says, when she visited
you at Selby-house. I hope, my dear, all will be
right. But to go to live with a beloved object—I
don't understand it. You, Harriet, may. I never
was in Love, God help me! 
I am afraid the dear girl does too much for her
mother. As they have so handsome an annuity, 400l.
a year, so much beyond their expectation; I think she
should not give, nor should they receive, any-thing
considerable of her, without her guardian's knowlege. 
She is laying out a great deal of money in new cloaths,
to do you and her guardian credit—on your nuptials,
poor thing! she says, with tears in her eyes—but
whether of joy, or sensibility, it is hard to decide; 
but I believe of both. 
What makes me imagine she does more than she
should, is, that a week ago she borrowed fifty guineas
of me; and but yesterday came to me—I should do a
very wrong thing, said she, blushing up to the ears,
should I ask Lady L. to lend me a sum of money till
my next quarter comes due, after I made myself your
debtor so lately: But if you could lend me thirty or
forty guineas more, you would do me a great favour. 
My dear! said I; and stared at her! 
Don't question, don't chide me, this one time. I
never will run in debt again: I hate to be in debt. 
But you have bid me tell you all my wants. 
I will not, my love, say another word. I will
fetch you fifty guineas more. 
More, my dear Lady G! that is a pretty rub: But
I will always, for the future, be within bounds: And
don't let my guardian know it—He would kill me, by
his generosity; yet perhaps, in his own heart, wonder
what I did with my money. If he thought ill of me,
or that I was extravagant, it would break my heart. 
Only, my dear, said I, remember that 400l. a 

year—Mrs. O-Hara cannot want any-thing to be done
for her now. 
Don't call her Mrs. O-Hara! She is very good:
Call her my mother. 
I kissed the sweet girl, and fetched her the other
fifty guineas. 
I thought it not amiss to give you this hint, my
dear, against she goes down to you. But do you
think it right, after all, to have her with my brother
and you? 
Lady L. keeps close—She fasts, cries, prays, is
vastly apprehensive: She makes me uneasy for her
and myself. These vile men! I believe I shall hate
them all. Did they partake—But not half so grateful
as the blackbirds: They rather look big with insolence,
than perch near, and sing a song to comfort
the poor souls they have so dreadfully mortified. 
Other birds, as I have observed (sparrows, in particular)
sit hour and hour, he's and she's, in turn; 
and I have seen the hen, when her rogue has staid too
long, rattle at him, while he circles about her with
sweeping wings, and displayed plumage, his head and
breast of various dyes, ardently shining, peep, peep,
peep; as much as to say, I beg your pardon, love— 
I was forced to go a great way off for my dinner. — 
Sirrr-rah! I have thought she has said, in an unforgiving
accent—Do your duty now—Sit close—Peep,
peep, peep—I will, I will, I will—Away has she
skimmed, and returned to relieve him—when she
thought fit. 
Don't laugh at us, Harriet, in our mortified state
[Begone, wretch—What have I done, madam? stareing! 
What have you done! —My sorry fellow came
in, wheedling, courting, just as I was pitying two
meek sisters: Was it not enough to vex one?] Don't
laugh at us, I say—If you do! —May my brother, all
in good time, avenge us on you, prays, in malice, 
Charlotte G. 

