



Joseph Leman, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

He acquaints Mr. Lovelace of the prosecution intended
to be set up against him, by his masters, for
a Rape upon Miss Betterton, whom, by a stratagem, he
had got into his hands; and who afterwards died in
child-bed; the child still living, but, as Joseph says, not
regarded by his Honour in the least. His masters, he
says, call it a very vile affair; but God forbid that he
should, without his Honour's leave. He hears, he
says, that his Honour went abroad to avoid the prosecution
which the lady's relations otherwise would
have set on foot. And that his masters will not rest
till they get the Bettertons to commence it. 
Joseph tells him, that this was one of the stories
which 'Squire Solmes was to tell his young Lady of,
would she have heard him (b) . 
He desires him to let him know, if his Honour's
life is in danger from this prosecution; and hopes, if
it be, ‘that he will not be hanged like as a common
man; but only have his head cut off, or so; and
that he will natheless think of his faithful Joseph Leman,
before his head shall be condemned, because
afterwards he understands, that all will be the
king's, or the shreeve's.’ 

He then acquaints him, that Captain Singleton, and
his young master and young mistress, are often in close
conference together; and that his young master said,
before his face, to the captain, that his blood boiled
over for revenge upon his Honour; and at the same
time praised him (Joseph) to the captain, for his fidelity
and for his good head, altho' he looked so seelie: 
And then he offers his services, in order to prevent
mischief, and to deserve his bounty, and his favour,
as to the Blue Boar Inn, which he hears so good an
account of— 
‘And then the Blue Boar is not all neither (says
Joseph), since, and please your Honour, the pretty
Sow [God forgive me for jesting in so serious a
matter] runs in my head likewise. I believe I shall
love her mayhap more than your Honour would
have me; for she begins to be kind and good-humoured,
and listens, and please your Honour,
like as if she was among beans, when I talk about the
Blue Boar, and all that. 
‘Pray your Honour forgive the jesting of a poor
plain man. We common folks have our joys,
and please your Honour, like as our betters have; 
and if we be sometimes snubbed, we can find our
underlings to snub again: And if not, we can get a
wife, mayhap, and snub her: So are masters some
how or other ourselves.’ 
He then tells him how much his conscience smites
him for what he has done; since, but for the stories
his Honour taught him, it would have been impossible
for his old masters, and his lady, to have been so
hard-hearted as they were, notwithstanding the malice
of his young master and young mistress. 
‘And here is the sad thing (proceeds he); they cannot
come to clear up matters with my dearest young
lady, because, as your Honour has ordered it, they
have these stories as if bribed out of your Honour's
servant; which must not be known, for fear your 

Honour should kill him and me too, and blacken
the bribers! —Ah, your Honour! —I doubt, your
Honour, as that I am a very vile fellow,—Lord
bless my soul! and did not intend it. 
‘But if my dearest young lady should come to
harm, and please your Honour, the Horsepond at
the Blue Boar—But Lord preserve me from all bad
mischiefs, and all bad ends, I pray the Lord! 
—For tho' your Honour is kind to me in wordly
pelf, yet what shall a man get to lose his soul, as holy
scripture says, and please your Honour? 
‘But natheless I am in hope of repentance hereafter,
being but a young man, if I do wrong thro'
ignorance; your Honour being a great man, and a
great wit; and I a poor creature, not worthy notice; 
and your Honourable to answer for all. But howsoever
I am 
Your Honour's faithful servant in all duty,
Joseph Leman.’ 
April 15 and 16. 