


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Sat. March 3. 
Lady Clementina, my dearest grandmamma,
must not, shall not, be compelled. If I admired,
if I loved her before, now that I have seen her, that
I have conversed with her, I love, I admire her, if
possible, ten times more. She is really, in her person,
a lovely woman, of middle stature; extremely
genteel: An air of dignity, even of grandeur, appears
in her aspect, and in all she says and does:
Her complexion is fine without art: Indeed she is a
lovely woman! She has the finest black eye, hair,
eyebrows of the same colour, I ever saw; yet has
sometimes a wildish cast with her eye, sometimes a
languor, that, when one knows her story, reminds
one that her head has been disturbed. Why, taking
advantage of her Sex, is such a person to be controuled,
and treated as if she were not to have a will; when
she has an understanding, perhaps, superior to that of
either of her wilful brothers? 
When we alighted at Lady L's, I begged Sir Charles
to conduct me into any apartment but that where she
was. I sat down on the first seat. Lady L. hastened
to me—My dearest sister, you seem disordered— 
Fie! —Lady Grandison, and want spirits! 

Sir Charles (not observing my emotion) had left
me; and went to attend Lady Clementina. She, it
seems, was in some disorder. My Harriet (said he
to her, as he told me afterwards) attends the commands
of her Sister-excellence. 
Call me not Excellence! Call me not her Sister! Am
I not a fugitive in her eye, in every-body's eye? —I
think, Chevalier, I cannot see her. She will look
down upon me. I think I am as much afraid to see
her, as I was at first to see you. Is there severity in
her virtue? 
She is all goodness, all sweetness, madam. Did I
not tell you, that she is the Clementina of England? 
Well, Sir, you are very good. Don't let me be
unpolite. I am but a guest in this hospitable house— 
Else I would have attended her at the first door. Is
she not Lady Grandison? Happy, happy woman! 
Tears were in her eyes. She turned away to hide
them. Then stepping forward; I am now prepared
to receive her: Pray, Sir, introduce me. 
She is not without her emotions, madam—She is
preparing herself to see you. Love, compassion, for
Lady Clementina, fills her bosom—I will present
her to you. 
Lady L. went to her. Sir Charles came to me. — 
My dearest Love, why this concern? You will see a
woman you cannot fear, but must love. She has been
in the like agitations—Favour me with your hand. 
No, Sir—That would be to insult her. 
My dearest Life! forget not your own dignity [I
started]; nor give me too much consequence with a
Lady, who, like yourself, is all Soul. I glory in my
wife: I cannot desert myself. 
I was a little awed at the time; but the moment I
got home, and was alone with him, I acknowleged
his goodness and greatness, both in one. 
He led me in. Lady L. only (at Sir Charles's request,
for both our sakes) was present. The noble 

Lady approached me. I hastened to meet her, with
trembling feet. Sir Charles, kissing a hand of each,
joined them together. Sister-excellencies, I have
often called you! Dearest of women, love each
other, as I admire you both. 
She threw her arms about my neck: Receive, O
receive, to your Love, to your Friendship, a poor desolate! 
Till within these few days, a desolate indeed!
a fugitive! a rebellious! an ingrate to the best of
parents! 
I embraced her—Mistaken parents, I have called
them, madam—I have pitied them; but most I
have pitied you—Honour me with your sisterly love. 
This best of men had before given me two Sisters. 
Let us be four. 
Be it so, my dear Lady L. said Sir Charles, bringing
her to us: And, clasping his arms about the three; 
You answer for the absent Charlotte and yourself; a
fourfold cord that never shall be broken. 
Sir Charles led us to one settee, again putting a
hand of each together, and sitting down over-against
us; Lady L. on the other hand of him. We were
both silent for a few moments, each struggling with
her tears. 
My Harriet, madam, said Sir Charles, as I have
told you, knows your whole story. You two are of
long acquaintance. Your minds are kindred minds. 
Your griefs are hers: Your pleasures she will rejoice
in as her own. —My Harriet, you now see, you now
know by person, the admirable Clementina, whose
magnanimity you so much admired, whose character,
you have so often said, is the first among women. 
We both wept: But her tears seemed tears of kindness
and esteem. I put the hand which was not in
hers, on her arm. I wanted courage; my reverence
for her would not allow me to be so free, or it had
again embraced the too conscious Lady. Believe me,
madam (excuse my broken Italian) I have ever revered 

you. I have said often, very often, that your
happiness, happy as I am, is necessary to complete
mine, as well as Sir Charles Grandison's. 
This goodness to me, a fugitive, an alien to your
country; not a lover of your religion! O Lady Grandison,
you must be as much all I have heard of you
in your mind, as I see you are in your person. Receive
my thanks for making happy the man I wished
to be the happiest of men; for well does he deserve
to be made so. We were Brother and Sister, madam,
before he knew you. Let me be his Sister still, and let
me be yours. 
Kindred minds, Sir Charles Grandison calls ours,
madam. He does me honour. May I, on further
knowlege, appear to as much advantage in your eye,
as you, from what I know of you, do in mine; and
I shall be a very happy creature! 
Then you will be happy. I was prepared to love
you. I love you already, methinks, with a passion
that wants not further knowlege of your goodness to
augment it. But can you, madam, look upon me
with a true sisterly eye? Can you pity me for the step
I have taken, so seemingly derogatory to my glory? 
Can you believe me unhappy, but not wicked, for
taking it? O madam! my reason has been disturbed
—Do you know that? —You must attribute to that,
some of my perversenesses. 
Heaven, dearest Lady Clementina, only knows
how many tears your calamity has cost me! In the
most arduous cases, I have preferred your happiness
to my own. You shall know all of me, and of my
heart. Not a secret of it, tho' yet uncommunicated
to this dearest of men, will I conceal from you. I
hope we shall be true Sisters, and true Friends, to the
end of our lives. 
My noble Harriet! said the generous man—Frankness
of heart, my dear Clementina, is her characteristic. 
She means all she says; and will perform more 

than she promises. I need not tell you, my Love,
what our Clementina is: You know her to be the
noblest of women: Give her the promised proofs of
your confidence in her; and, whatever they be, they
must draw close the knot which never will be untied. 
Already, thus encouraged, said the noble Lady, let
me apply to you, madam, to strengthen for me the
interest I presume to have in the friendship of Sir
Charles Grandison. Let me not, Sir, let me not, I
intreat you all three, be compelled to give my vows
to any man in marriage. All of you promise me; 
and I shall with more delight look before me, than for
a long, long time past, I thought would fall to my
Lot. 
You, madam, must concede a little, perhaps: Your
parents must a little relax. Their reason, if you will
not be too unconceding, shall not, if I am referred to,
be mine, unless it is reason in every other impartial
judgment. Would to Heaven they were at hand to
be consulted! 
What a wish! Then you would give me up! You
are a good man: Will a good man resist the authority
of parents, in favour of a run-away child? Dear,
dear madam, clasping her arms about me, prevail upon
your Chevalier Grandison to protect me; to plead
for me: He can deny you nothing: He will then protect
me, tho' my father, my mother, my brothers,
should all join to demand me of him. 
My dear Lady Clementina, said I, you may depend
on your own interest with Sir Charles Grandison. 
He has your happiness at heart, and will have, as much
as I with him to have mine. 
Generous, noble, good Lady Grandison! how I
admire you! May the Almighty shower upon you his
choicest blessings! If you allow me an interest in his
services, I demand it of you, Chevalier. 
Demand it, expect it, be assured of it, my dear Lady
Clementina. I want to talk with you upon your expectations, 

your wishes. As much as is practicable,
whatever they are, they shall be mine. 
Well, Sir, when then shall we talk? —To-morrow
will be too soon for my spirits. 
Do my Harriet then the honour of passing the day
on Monday with her. The dear friends we have for
our guests will choose to pass it with Lord and Lady
G.—Yourself, Lady L. my Harriet, and I, will be
all the company: You shall declare your pleasure,
and that shall be a Law to me. At present, this affecting
interview has discomposed us all; and we will
retire. 
Kindly considered! said she: You are in England
what you were in Italy—I am discomposed. I have
discomposed you, madam; to me. I was born to
give trouble to my friends. Forgive me! I once was
happy—I may hope, madam, to Lady L. your supporting
presence at your brother's on Monday? 
Lady L. bowed her assent. She understands Italian; 
but speaks it not. 
The Lady stood up, yet trembling. I will withdraw,
Ladies, Sir, if you please. My head seems as
if bound round by a tight cord (putting her hand to
her forehead). Then clasping her arms round me,
thus in a high strain spoke she—Angel of a woman,
gracious as the blessed Virgin Mother, benign, all that
is good and great, I attend you on Monday. Adieu! 
—She kissed my cheek, I clasped my arms about her. 
Revered Lady Clementina! —I could say no more. 
Tears, and tenderness of accent, interrupted my speech. 
Lady L. conducted her to her own apartment, and
left her to her Laura. 
We sat down, admiring, praising, praying for her. 
Dear, dear Sir, said I, taking Sir Charles's hand,
Lady Clementina must not be persuaded. Persuasion
is compulsion. Why comes over the Count of Belvedere? 
If she knows it, I will not answer for her
right mind. 

My Uncle and Aunt, Lucy, Emily, were very curious
after particulars, when we came home, as we
did to supper. 
Sir Charles left it to Lady L. to manage with Lady
G. who he knew expected a day of our beloved guests; 
and he himself apologized to them for the freedom
he had taken of so disposing of them. They had the
goodness to thank him for his freedom with them. 
But yet they long to see the admirable Lady, who
could renounce the man of her choice from religious
motives; yet love him still; fly to him for protection; 
yet be able to congratulate him on his marriage; and
love his wife. She is great indeed! said my aunt. — 
Lucy praised my generosity—But what is that which
is called generosity in me, who am in full possession
of all my wishes, to that of Clementina? 
Join, my dear grandmamma, in prayers for her
happiness; the rather, as in it, from true affection,
is included that of 
Your Harriet Grandison. 

