



My dear Lady,
I now resume my last Subject where I left
off, that your Ladyship may have the Whole
before you at one View. 
I went after Dinner, with my dear Benefactor,
to Lady Arthur's; and met with fresh
Calls upon me for Humility, having the too
natural Effects of the Praises and professed Admiration
of that Lady's Guests, as well as my
dear Mr. B.'s, and those of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur 

to guard myself against: And your good
Brother was pleased to entertain me in the Chariot,
going and coming, with an Account of
the Orders he had given in relation to the London
House, which is actually taken, and the
Furniture he should direct for it; so that I had
no Opportunity to tell him what I had done in
relation to Mrs. Jervis. 
But after Supper, retiring from Company to
my Closet, when his Friends were gone, he
came up to me about our usual Bed-time: He
inquired kindly after my Imployment, which
was trying to read in the French Telemachus:
For, my Lady, I am learning French, I'll assure
you! And who, do you think, is my Master? — 
Why, the best I could have in the World, your
dearest Brother, who is pleased to say, I am no
Dunce: How inexcusable should I be, if I was,
with such a Master, who teaches me on his
Knee, and rewards me with a Kiss, whenever
I do well; and says, I have already nearly master'd
the Accent and Pronunciation, which, he
tells me, is a great Difficulty got over! 
I requested him to render for me into
English two or three Places that were beyond
my Reach; and when he had done it, he ask'd
me, in French, What I had done for Mrs. Jervis? 
I said, Permit me, Sir, (for I am not Proficient
enough to answer you in my new Tongue)
in English, to say, I have made the good Woman
quite happy; and if I have your Approbation, 

I shall be as much so myself in this
Instance, as I am in all others. 
I dare answer for your Prudence, my Dear,
he was pleased to say; but this is your Favourite:
Let me know, when you have so bountiful
a Heart to Strangers, what you do for your
Favourites? 
I then said, Permit my bold Eye, Sir, to
watch yours, as I obey you; and you know you
must not look full upon me then; for if you do,
how shall I look at you again? how see, as I proceed,
whether you are displeased? for you will
not chide me in Words, so partial have you the
Goodness to be to all I do. 
He put his Arm round me, and look'd
down now-and-then, as I desired; for Oh,
Madam, he is all Condescension and Goodness,
to his unworthy, yet grateful Pamela! And I
told him all I have written to your Ladyship
about the Forty Pounds. —And now, dear
Sir, said I, half-hiding my Face on his Shoulder,
you have heard what I have done, chide or beat
your Pamela, if you please: It shall be all kind
from you, and Matter of future Direction and
Caution. 
He raised my Head, and kissed me two or
three times, saying, Thus, then I chide, I beat
my Angel! —And yet I have one Fault to find
with you; and let Mrs. Jervis, if not in Bed,
come up to us, and hear what it is; for I will
expose you, as you deserve, before her. My
Polly being in Hearing, attending to know if
I wanted her Assistance to undress, I bad her 

call Mrs. Jervis. And tho' I thought, from
his kind Looks, and kind Words, as well as
tender Behaviour, that I had not much to fear,
yet I was impatient to know what my Fault was,
for which I was to be exposed. 
The good Woman came; and as she enter'd
with all that Modesty which is so graceful in her,
he moved his Chair further from me, and, with
a set Aspect, but not unpleasant, said,—Step in,
Mrs. Jervis: Your Lady (for so, Madam, he will
always call me to Mrs. Jervis, and to the Servants)
has incurred my Censure; and I would not
tell her in what, till I had you Face to Face. 
She look'd surpris'd—now on me, now
on her dear Master; and I, not knowing what
he would say, looked a little attentive. —I am
sorry—I am very sorry for it, Sir! said she,
court'sying low. —But should be more sorry,
if I were the unhappy Occasion. 
Why, Mrs. Jervis, I can't say but it is on
your Account that I must blame her. 
This gave us both Confusion; but especially
the good Woman; for still I hoped much from
his kind Behaviour to me just before. —And
she said, Indeed, Sir, I could never deserve— 
He interrupted her, My Charge against you,
Pamela, said he, is that of Niggardliness, and no
other; for I will put you both out of your Pain:
You ought not to have found out the Method
of Repayment. 
The dear Creature, said he to Mrs. Jervis,
seldom does any thing that can be mended; but,
I think, when your good Conduct deserved an 

annual Acknowlegement from me, in Addition
to your Salary, the Lady should have shewed
herself no less pleased with your Service than
the Gentleman. —Had it been for old Acquaintance-sake,
for Sex-sake, she should not
have given me Cause to upbraid her on this
Head. —But I will tell you, that you must look
upon the Forty Pounds you have, as the Effect
of a just Distinction on many Accounts; and
your Salary from last Quarter-day shall be advanced,
as the dear Niggard intended it some
Years hence; and let me only add, that when
my Pamela first begins to shew a Coldness to
her Mrs. Jervis, I shall then suspect she is beginning
to decline in that humble Virtue which
is now peculiar to herself, and makes her the
Delight of all who converse with her. 
This was what he was pleased to say: Thus,
with the most graceful Generosity, and a Nobleness
of Mind, truly peculiar to himself, was he
pleased to act: And what, does your Ladyship
think, could Mrs. Jervis or I say to him? — 
Why, indeed, nothing at all! —We could
only look upon one another, with our Eyes
full, and our Hearts full, of a Gratitude that
would not permit either of us to speak; but
which express'd itself at last, in a Manner he was
pleased to call more elegant than Words; and
that was, with uplifted folded Hands, and Tears
of Joy. 
Oh, my dear Lady! how many Opportunities
have the beneficent Rich to make themselves,
as well as their Fellow-creatures, happy! 

All that I could think, or say, or act, was but
my Duty before; what a Sense of Obligation
then must I lie under to this most generous of
Men! 
But here let me put an End to this tedious
Subject; the principal Part of which can have
no Excuse, if it may not serve as a Proof of my
chearful Compliance with your Ladyship's Commands,
That I recite every thing that is of Concern
to me, and with the same Freedom as I
was wont to do to my dear Parents. 
I Have done it, and at the same time have
offer'd what I had to plead in Behalf of my Conduct
to the Two Housekeepers, which you expected
from me; and I shall therefore close this
my humble Defence, if I may so call it, with the
Assurance, that I am, my dearest Lady, 
Your obliged and faithful Servant,
P.B. 

