



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

In the midst of these agreeablenesses, the coach came
to the door. The pretended Lady Betty besought
me to give them my company to their cousin Leeson's 

I desired to be excused: Yet suspected nothing. She
would not be denied. How happy would a visit so condescending
make her cousin Leeson! —Her cousin Leeson
was not unworthy of my acquaintance: And would take
it for the greatest favour in the world. 
I objected my dress. But the objection was not admitted. 
She bespoke a supper of Mrs Moore to be ready at nine. 
Mr. Lovelace, vile hypocrite, and wicked deceiver, seeing,
as he said, my dislike to go, desired her Ladyship
not to insist upon it. 
Fondness for my company was pleaded. She begged
me to oblige her: Made a motion to help me to my fan
herself: And, in short, was so very urgent, that my
feet complied against my speech, and my mind: And,
being in a manner, led to the coach by her, and made
to step in first, she followed me; and her pretended
niece, and the wretch, followed her: And away it drove. 
Nothing but the height of affectionate complaisance
passed all the way: Over and over, What a joy would
this unexpected visit give her cousin Leeson! What a
pleasure must it be to such a mind as mine, to be able
to give so much joy to every-body I came near! 
The cruel, the savage seducer (as I have since recollected)
was in rapture all the way; but yet such a sort
of rapture, as he took visible pains to check. 
Hateful villain! —How I abhor him! —What mischief
must be then in his plotting heart! —What a devoted
victim must I be in all their eyes! 
Though not pleased, I was nevertheless just then
thoughtless of danger; they endeavouring thus to lift me
up above all apprehension of that, and above myself too. 
But think, my dear, what a dreadful turn all had upon
me, when, through several streets and ways I knew nothing
of, the coach, slackening its pace, came within
sight of the dreadful house of the dreadfullest woman
in the world; as she proved to me. 
Lord be good unto me! cry'd the poor fool, looking
out of the coach—Mr. Lovelace! —Madam! turning to
the pretended aunt—Madam! turning to the niece, my
eyes and hands lifted up—Lord be good unto me! 
What! What! What, my dear! 

He pulled the string—What need to have come this
way? said he. —But since we are, I will but ask a
question. —My dearest life! why this apprehension? 
The coachman stopp'd: His servant, who, with one
of hers was behind, alighted—Ask, said he, if I have
any letters? —Who knows, my dearest creature, turning
to me, but we may already have one from the Captain? — 
We will not go out of the coach! —Fear nothing—Why
so apprehensive? —Oh! these fine spirits!—cry'd the execrable
insulter. 
Dreadfully did my heart then misgive me: I was ready
to faint. —Why this terror, my life? —You shall not stir
out of the coach! —But one question, now the fellow
has drove us this way! 
Your lady will faint! cry'd the execrable Lady Betty,
turning to him. —My dearest niece! I will call
you, taking my hand, we must alight, if you are so
ill. —Let us alight—Only for a glass of water and hartshorn
—Indeed we must alight. 
No, no, no—I am well—Quite well—Won't the man
drive on? —I am well—quite well—Indeed I am. —Man,
drive on, putting my head out of the coach—Man,
drive on!—tho' my voice was too low to be heard. 
The coach stopp'd at the door. How I trembled! 
Dorcas came to the door, on its stopping. 
My dearest creature! said the vile man, gasping, as it
were for breath, you shall not alight—Any letters for me,
Dorcas? 
There are two, Sir. And here is a gentleman, Mr.
Belton, Sir, waits for your Honour; and has done so
above an hour. 
I'll just speak to him. Open the door—You sha'n't
step out, my dear—A letter, perhaps, from the Captain
already! —You sha'n't step out, my dear. 
I sighed, as if my heart would burst. 
But we must step out, nephew: Your lady will faint— 
Maid, a glass of hartshorn and water! —My dear, you
must step out. —You will faint, child—We must cut your
laces. —[I believe my complexion was all manner of colours
by turns]—Indeed, you must step out, my dear. 

He knew, he said, I should be well, the moment the
coach drove from the door. I should not alight. By
his soul, I should not. 
Lord, Lord, nephew, Lord, Lord, cousin, both women
in a breath, What ado you make about nothing! — 
You persuade your lady to be afraid of alighting! —See
you not, that she is just fainting? 
Indeed, Madam, said the vile seducer, my dearest love
must not be moved in this point against her will! —I beg
it may not be insisted upon. 
Fiddle-faddle, foolish man! —What a pother is here! — 
I guess how it is: You are ashamed to let us see, what sort
of people you carried your lady among! —But do you go
out, and speak to your friend, and take your letters. 
He stept out; but shut the coach-door after him, to
oblige me. 
The coach may go on, Madam! said I. 
The coach shall go on, my dear life, said he—But he
gave not, nor intended to give, orders that it should. 
Let the coach go on! said I—Mr. Lovelace may come
after us. 
Indeed, my dear, you are ill! —Indeed you must
alight! —Alight but for one quarter of an hour! —Alight
but to give order yourself about your things. Whom can
you be afraid of, in my company, and my niece's? — 
These people must have behaved shockingly to you! — 
Please the Lord, I'll inquire into it! —I'll see what sort
of people they are! 
Immediately came the old creature to the door. A
thousand pardons, dear Madam, stepping to the coach—side,
if we have any-way offended you! —Be pleased, Ladies
(to the other two), to alight. 
Well, my dear, whispered the Lady Betty, I now find,
that an hideous description of a person we never saw, is
an advantage to them. I thought the woman was a monster! 
But, really, she seems tolerable. 
I was afraid I should have fallen into fits: But still refused
to go out—Man!—Man!—Man! cry'd I, gaspingly,
my head out of the coach and in, by turns, half a
dozen times running, drive on! —Let us go! 
My heart misgave me beyond the power of my own 

accounting for it; for still I did not suspect these women. 
But the antipathy I had taken to the vile house,
and to find myself so near it, when I expected no such
matter, with the sight of the old creature, all together,
made me behave like a distracted person. 
The hartshorn and water was brought. The pretended
lady Betty made me drink it. Heaven knows if there
were any thing else in it! 
Besides, said she, whisperingly, I must see what sort
of creatures the nieces are. Want of delicacy cannot be
hid from me. You could not surely, my dear, have
this aversion to re-enter a house, for a few minutes, in
our company, in which you lodged and boarded several
weeks, unless these women could be so presumptuously
vile, as my nephew ought not to know. 
Out stept the pretended lady; the servant, at her
command, having opened the door. 
Dearest Madam, said the other, let me follow you
(for I was next the door.) Fear nothing: I will not stir
from your presence. 
Come, my dear, said the pretended Lady: Give me
your hand; holding out hers. Oblige me this once! 
I will bless your footsteps, said the old creature, if
once more you honour my house with your presence. 
A croud by this time was gathered about us; but I
was too much affected to mind that. 
Again the pretended Miss Montague urged me (standing
up as ready to go out if I would give her room). 
Lord, my dear, said she, who can bear this croud? — 
What will people think? 
The pretended Lady again pressed me, with both her
hands held out—Only, my dear, to give orders about
your things. 
And thus pressed, and gazed at (for then I looked
about me), the women so richly dressed, people whispering; 
in an evil moment, out stepp'd I, trembling, forced
to lean with both my hands (frighted too much for ceremony)
on the pretended Lady Betty's arm—O that I
had dropped down dead upon the guilty threshold! 
We shall stay but a few minutes, my dear!—but a few
minutes! said the same specious jilt—out of breath with 

her joy, as I have since thought, that they had thus
triumphed over the unhappy victim! 
Come, Mrs. Sinclair, I think your name is, shew us
the way—following her, and leading me. I am very
thirsty. You have frighted me, my dear, with your strange
fears. I must have tea made, if it can be done, in a
moment. We have further to go, Mrs. Sinclair, and
must return to Hamstead this night. 
It shall be ready in a moment, cry'd the wretch. We
have water boiling. 
Hasten, then—Come, my dear, to me, as she led me
through the passage to the fatal inner house—Lean upon
me—How you tremble! —how you faulter in your steps! 
—Dearest niece Lovelace (the old wretch being in hearing),
why these hurries upon your spirits? —We'll begone
in a minute. 
And thus she led the poor sacrifice into the old wretch's
too well-known parlour. 
Never was any-body so gentle, so meek, so low-voiced,
as the odious woman; drawling out, in a puling accent,
all the obliging things she could say: Awed, I then
thought, by the conscious dignity of a woman of quality; 
glittering with jewels. 
The called for tea was ready presently. 
There was no Mr. Belton, I believe: For the wretch
went not to any-body, unless it were while we were
parlying in the coach. No such person, however, appeared
at the tea-table. 
I was made to drink two dishes, with milk, complaisantly
urged by the pretended Ladies helping me each to
one. I was stupid to their hands; and, when I took the
tea, almost choaked with vapours; and could hardly
swallow. 
I thought, transiently thought, that the tea, the last
dish particularly, had an odd taste. They, on my palating
it, observed, that the milk was London milk; far
short in goodness of what they were accustomed to from
their own dairies. 
I have no doubt, that my two dishes, and perhaps my
hartshorn, were prepared for me; in which case it was
more proper for their purpose, that they should help me, 

than that I should help myself. Ill before, I found myself
still more and more disordered in my head; a heavy
torpid pain increasing fast upon me. But I imputed it to
my terror. 
Nevertheless, at the pretended Ladies motion, I went
up stairs, attended by Dorcas; who affected to weep for
joy, that once more she saw my blessed face, that was the
vile creature's word; and immediately I set about taking
out some of my cloaths, ordering what should be put up,
and what sent after me. 
While I was thus employed, up came the pretended
Lady Betty, in a hurrying way—My dear, you won't be
long before you are ready. My nephew is very busy in
writing answers to his letters: So, I'll just whip away,
and change my dress, and call upon you in an instant. 
O Madam! —I am ready! I am now ready! —You must
not leave me here: And down I sunk, affrighted, into
a chair. 
This instant, this instant, I will return—Before you
can be ready—Before you can have packed up your
things—We would not be late—The robbers we have
heard of may be out—Don't let us be late. 
And away she hurried before I could say another word. 
Her pretended niece went with her, without taking notice
to me of her going. 
I had no suspicion yet, that these women were not
indeed the Ladies they personated; and I blamed myself
for my weak fears. —It cannot be, thought I, that such
Ladies will abet treachery against a poor creature they are
so fond of. They must undoubtedly be the persons they
appear to be—What folly to doubt it! The air, the
dress, the dignity, of women of quality. —How unworthy
of them, and of my charity, concluded I, is
this ungenerous shadow of suspicion! 
So, recovering my stupified spirits, as well as they
could be recovered (for I was heavier and heavier; and
wondered to Dorcas, what ailed me; rubbing my eyes,
and taking some of her snuff, pinch after pinch, to very
little purpose), I pursued my employment: But when
that was over, all packed up that I designed to be packed
up; and I had nothing to do but to think; and found 

them tarry so long; I thought I should have gone distracted. 
I shut myself into the chamber that had been
mine; I kneeled, I prayed; yet knew not what I prayed
for: Then ran out again: It was almost dark night, I
said: Where, where, was Mr. Lovelace? 
He came to me, taking no notice at first of my consternation
and wildness (What they had given me made
me incoherent and wild): All goes well, said he, my
dear! —A line from Captain Tomlinson! 
All indeed did go well for the villainous project of the
most cruel and most villainous of men! 
I demanded his aunt! —I demanded his cousin! —The
evening, I said, was closing! —My head was very, very
bad, I remember, I said. —And it grew worse and worse. 
Terror, however, as yet kept up my spirits; and I
insisted upon his going himself to hasten them. 
He called his servant. He raved at the sex for their
delay: 'Twas well that business of consequence seldom
depended upon such parading, unpunctual triflers! 
His servant came. 
He ordered him to fly to his cousin Leeson's; and to
let his aunt and cousins know how uneasy we both were
at their delay: Adding, of his own accord, Desire them,
if they don't come instantly, to send their coach, and
we will go without them. Tell them I wonder they'll
serve me so! 
I thought this was considerately and fairly put. But
now, indifferent as my head was, I had a little time to
consider the man, and his behaviour. He terrified me
with his looks, and with his violent emotions, as he
gazed upon me. Evident joy-suppressed emotions, as I
have since recollected. His sentences short, and pronounced
as if his breath were touched. Never saw I
his abominable eyes look, as then they looked—Triumph
in them! —Fierce and wild; and more disagreeable
than the womens at the vile house appeared to me,
when I first saw them: And at times, such a leering, mischief-boding
cast! —I would have given the world to have been
an hundred miles from him. Yet his behaviour was decent
—A decency, however, that I might have seen to be
struggled for—For he snatched my hand two or three 

times, with a vehemence in his grasp that hurt me; 
speaking words of tenderness through his shut teeth, as
it seemed; and let it go, with a beggar-voic'd humble
accent, like the vile woman's just before; half-inward; 
yet his words and manner carrying the appearance of
strong and almost convulsed passion! —O my dear! What
mischiefs was he not then meditating! 
I complained once or twice of thirst. My mouth seemed
parched. At the time, I supposed, that it was my terror
(gasping often as I did for breath) that parched up the
roof of my mouth. I called for water: Some table-beer
was brought me: Beer, I suppose, was a better vehicle
(if I were not dosed enough before) for their potions. 
I told the maid, That she knew I seldom tasted malt-liquor: 
Yet, suspecting nothing of this nature, being
extremely thirsty, I drank it, as what came next: And instantly,
as it were, found myself much worse than before; 
as if inebriated, I should fancy: I know not how. 
His servant was gone twice as long as he needed: And,
just before his return, came one of the pretended Lady
Betty's, with a letter for Mr. Lovelace. 
He sent it up to me. I read it: And then it was that
I thought myself a lost creature; it being to put off
her going to Hamstead that night, on account of violent
fits which Miss Montague was pretended to be seized with: 
For then immediately came into my head his vile attempt
upon me in this house; the revenge that my flight
might too probably inspire him with on that occasion,
and because of the difficulty I made to forgive him, and
to be reconciled to him; his very looks wild, and dreadful
to me; and the women of the house such as I had more
reason than ever, even from the pretended Lady Betty's
hints, to be afraid of: All these crouding together in my
apprehensive mind, I fell into a kind of phrensy. 
I have not remembrance how I was, for the time it
lasted: But I know, that, in my first agitations, I pulled
off my head-dress, and tore my ruffles in twenty tatters; 
and ran to find him out. 
When a little recovered, I insisted upon the hint he
had given of their coach. But the messenger, he said,
had told him, that it was sent to fetch a physician, lest his
chariot should be put up, or not ready. 

I then insisted upon going directly to Lady Betty's
lodgings. 
Mrs. Leeson's was now a crouded house, he said: And
as my earnestness could be owing to nothing but groundless
apprehension [And O what vows, what protestations
of his honour did he then make!], he hoped I would not
add to their present concern. Charlotte, indeed, was
used to fits, he said, upon any great surprizes, whether
of joy or grief; and they would hold her for a week together,
if not got off in a few hours. 
You are an observer of eyes, my dear, said the villain; 
perhaps in secret insult: Saw you not in Miss Montague's
now-and-then, at Hamstead, something wildish? —I was
afraid for her then—Silence and quiet only do her good: 
Your concern for her, and her love for you, will but
augment the poor girl's disorder, if you should go. 
All impatient with grief and apprehension, I still declared
myself resolved not to stay in that house till morning. 
All I had in the world, my rings, my watch, my little
money, for a coach! or, if one were not to be got, I would
go on foot to Hamstead that night, tho' I walked it by
myself. 
A coach was hereupon sent for, or pretended to be
sent for. Any price, he said, he would give to oblige
me, late as it was; and he would attend me with all his
soul. —But no coach was to be got. 
Let me cut short the rest. I grew worse and worse in
my head; now stupid, now raving, now senseless. The
vilest of vile women was brought to frighten me. Never
was there so horrible a creature as she appeared to me at
the time. 
I remember, I pleaded for mercy—I remember that I
said I would be his—Indeed I would be his—to obtain his
mercy—But no mercy found I! —My strength, my intellects,
failed me! —And then such scenes followed—O
my dear, such dreadful scenes! —Fits upon fits (faintly
indeed, and imperfectly remembered) procuring me no
compassion—But death was with-held from me. That
would have been too great a mercy! 
* *
Thus was I tricked and deluded back by blacker hearts
of my own sex, than I thought there were in the world; 

who appeared to me to be persons of honour: And, when
in his power, thus barbarously was I treated by this villainous
man! 
I was so senseless, that I dare not averr, that the horrid
creatures of the house were personally aiding and
abetting: But some visionary remembrances I have of female
figures, flitting, as I may say, before my sight; 
the wretched woman's particularly. But as these confused
ideas might be owing to the terror I had conceived
of the worse than masculine violence she had been permitted
to assume to me, for expressing my abhorrence of
her house; and as what I suffered from his barbarity
wants not that aggravation; I will say no more on a subject
so shocking as this must ever be to my remembrance. 
I never saw the personating wretches afterwards. He
persisted to the last (dreadfully invoking heaven as a witness
to the truth of his assertion), that they were really
and truly the Ladies they pretended to be; declaring, that
they could not take leave of me, when they left the
town, because of the state of senselessness and phrensy
I was in. For their intoxicating, or rather stupefying,
potions, had almost deleterious effects upon my intellects,
as I have hinted; insomuch that, for several days
together, I was under a strange delirium; now moping,
now dozing, now weeping, now raving, now scribbling,
tearing what I scribbled, as fast as I wrote it: Most miserable when now-and-then a ray of reason brought confusedly
to my remembrance what I had suffered. 