



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

King's-Arms, Pallmall, Thursday Two o'clock. 
Several billets passed between us before I went out,
by the internuncioship of Dorcas: For which
reason mine are superscribed by her married name. — 
She would not open her door to receive them; lest I
should be near it, I suppose: So Dorcas was forced to
put them under the door (after copying them for thee); 
and thence to take the answer. Read them, if thou
wilt, at this place. 

To Mrs. Lovelace.
Indeed, my dearest life, you carry this matter too
far. What will the people below, who suppose us
one as to the ceremony, think of so great a niceness? 
Liberties so innocent; the occasion so accidental! 
—You will expose yourself as well as me. — 
Hitherto they know nothing of what has passed. And 

what, indeed, has passed, to occasion all this resentment? 
—I am sure, you will not, by a breach of your
word of honour, give me reason to conclude, that,
had I not obeyed you, I could have fared no worse. 
Most sincerely do I repent the offence given to your
delicacy—But must I, for so accidental an occurrence,
be branded by such shocking names? Vilest of men,
and most detestable of plotters, are hard words! —From
such a Lady's pen too. 
If you step up another pair of stairs, you'll be convinced,
that, however detestable to you, I am no
plotter in this affair. 
I must insist upon seeing you, in order to take your
directions upon some of the subjects that we talked of
yesterday in the evening. 
All that's more than necessary is too much. I claim
your promised pardon, and wish to plead it on my
knees. 
I beg your presence in the dining-room for one
quarter of an hour, and I will then leave you for the
day. I am, my dearest life, 
Your ever-adoring and truly penitent,
Lovelace. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
I will not see you. I cannot see you. I have no
directions to give you. Let Providence decide for
me as it pleases. 
The more I reflect upon your vileness, your ingraful,
your barbarous vileness, the more I am exasperated
against you. 
You are the last person, whose judgment I would
take upon what is or is not carried too far, in matters
of decency. 
'Tis grievous to me to write, or even to think of
you at present. Urge me no more then. Once more,
I will not see you. Not care I, now you have made
me vile to myself, what other people think of me. 


To Mrs. Lovelace.
Again, Madam, I remind you of your promise: 
And beg leave to say, I insist upon the performance
of it. 
Remember, dearest creature, that the fault of a
blameable person cannot warrant a fault in one more
perfect. Over niceness may be under-niceness! 
I cannot reproach myself with any thing that deserves
this high resentment. 
I own that the violence of my passion for you
might have carried me beyond fit bounds: —But that
your commands and adjurations had such a power
over me, at such a moment, I humbly presume to
say, deserves some consideration. 
You injoin me not to see you for a week. If I have
not your pardon before Captain Tomlinson comes to
town, what shall I say to him? 
I beg once more your presence in the dining-room. 
By my soul, Madam, I must see you. 
I want to consult you about the licence, and other
particulars of great importance. The people below
think us married; and I cannot talk to you, the door
between us, upon such subjects. 
For heaven's sake, favour me with your presence
for a few minutes: And I will leave you for the day. 
If I am to be forgiven, according to your promise,
the earliest forgiveness must be the least painful to
yourself, as well as to 
Your truly contrite and afflicted,
Lovelace. 

To Mr.Lovelace.
The more you teaze me, the worse will it be for
you. 
Time is wanted to consider whether I ever should
think of you at all. At present, it is my sincere wish,
that I may never more see your face. 

All that can afford you the least shadow of favour
from me, arises from the hoped-for reconciliation with
my real, not my Judas-protector. 
I am careless at present of consequences. I hate
myself: And who is it I have reason to value? —Not
the man who could form a plot to disgrace his own
hopes, as well as a poor friendless creature (made
friendless by himself), by outrages not to be thought
of with patience. 

To Mrs. Lovelace.
Madam,
I will go to the Commons, and proceed in every
particular, as if I had not the misfortune to be under
your displeasure. 
I must insist upon it, that however faulty my
passion, on so unexpected an incident, made me appear
to a lady of your delicacy, yet my compliance
with your intreaties at such a moment, as it gave you
an instance of your power over me, which few men
could have shewn; ought, duly consider'd, to intitle
me to the effects of that solemn promise which was
the condition of my obedience. 
I hope to find you in a kinder, and, I will say,
juster disposition on my return. Whether I get the
licence, or not, let me beg of you to make the Soon
you have been pleased to bid me hope for, to-morrow
morning. This will reconcile every thing, and make
me the happiest of men. 
The settlements are ready to sign, or will be by
night. 
For heaven's sake, Madam, do not carry your resentment
into a displeasure so disproportionate to the
offence. For that would be to expose us both to the
people below; and, what is of infinite more consequence
to us, to Captain Tomlinson. Let us be able,
I beseech you, Madam, to assure him, on his next
visit, that we are one. 

As I have no hope to be permitted to dine with
you, I shall not return till evening: And then, I presume
to say, I expect (your promise authorizes me to
use the word) to find you disposed to bless, by your
consent for to-morrow, 
Your adoring
Lovelace. 
What pleasure did I propose to take, how to enjoy
the sweet confusion I expected to find her in, while
all was so recent! —But she must, she shall see me on
my return. It were better for herself, as well as for
me, that she had not made so much ado about nothing. 
I must keep my anger alive, lest it sink into compassion. 
Love and Compassion, be the provocation ever
so great, are hard to be separated: While Anger
converts what would be Pity without it, into Resentment. 
Nothing can be lovely in a man's eye, with
which he is thoroughly displeased. 
I ordered Dorcas, on putting the last billet under
the door, and finding it taken up, to tell her, that I
hoped an answer to it before I went out. 
Her reply was verbal, Tell him that I care not whither
he goes, nor what he does. —And this, re-urged by
Dorcas, was all she had to say to me. 
I looked thro' her keyhole at my going by her
door, and saw her on her knees, at her bed's feet,
her head and bosom on the bed, her arms extended
[sweet creature!], and in an agony she seemed to be,
sobbing, as I heard at that distance, as if her heart
would break. —By my soul, Jack, I am a pity-ful
fellow. Recollection is my enemy! —Divine excellence! 
—Happy for so many days together! —Now
so unhappy! —And for what? —But she is purity itself. 
—And why, after all, should I thus torment— 
But I must not trust myself with myself, in the humour
I am in. 

* *
Waiting here for Mowbray and Mallory, by
whose aid I am to get the licence, I took papers out of
my pocket, to divert myself; and thy last popt itself
officiously the first into my hand. I gave it the honour
of a re-perusal; and this revived the subject with
me, which I had resolved not to trust myself with. 
I remember, that the dear creature, in her torn
answer to my proposals, says, That condescension is not
meanness. She better knows how to make this out,
than any mortal breathing. Condescension, indeed,
implies dignity: And dignity ever was there in her
condescension. Yet such a dignity, as gave grace to
the condescension; for there was no pride, no insult,
no apparent superiority, indicated by it. —This Miss
Howe confirms to be a part of her general character (a) . 
I can tell her, how she might behave, to make
me her own for ever. She knows she cannot fly
me. She knows she must see me sooner or later; 
the sooner the more gracious. —I would allow her to
resent (not because the liberties I took with her require
resentment, were she not a Clarissa; but as
it becomes her particular niceness to resent): But
would she shew more Love than Abhorrence of me
in her resentment; would she seem, if it were but
to seem, to believe the fire no device, and all that followed
merely accidental; and descend, upon it, to
tender expostulation and upbraiding for the advantage
I would have taken of her surprize; and would
she, at last, be satisfied (as well she may), that it was
attended with no further consequence; and place
some generous confidence in my honour [Power loves
to be trusted, Jack]; I think I would put an end to
all her trials, and pay her my vows at the altar. 
Yet, to have taken such bold steps, as with Tomlinson
and her Uncle-To have made such a progress— 
O Belford, Belford, how have I puzzled myself, as 

well as her! —This cursed aversion to wedlock how
has it intangled me! —What contradictions has it not
made me guilty of! 
How pleasing to myself, to look back upon the
happy days I gave her; though mine would doubtless
have been more unmixedly so, could I have determined
to lay aside my contrivances, and to be as sincere
all the time, as she deserved that I should be! 
If I find this humour hold but till to-morrow
morning [And it has now lasted two full hours, and
I seem, methinks, to have pleasure in encouraging
it],
I will make thee a visit, I think, or get thee to
come to me; and then will I consult thee upon it. 
But she will not trust me. She will not confide in
my honour. Doubt, in this case, is defiance. She
loves me not well enough, to forgive me generously. 
She is so greatly above me! How can I forgive her
for a merit so mortifying to my pride! She thinks, she
knows, she has told me, that she is above me. These
words are still in my ears, ‘Begone, Lovelace! —My
soul is above thee, man! —Thou hast a proud heart
to contend with! —My soul is above thee, man (a) !’ 
Miss Howe thinks her above me too. Thou, even
thou, my friend, my intimate friend and companion,
art of the same opinion. I fear her as much as I love
her. —How shall my pride bear these reflections? — 
My wife, (as I have so often said, because it so often
recurs to my thoughts) to be so much my superior! — 
Myself to be considered but as the second person in my
own family! —Canst thou teach me to bear such a reflection
as this! —To tell me of my acquisition in
her, and that she, with all her excellencies, will be
mine in full property, is a mistake—It cannot be so— 
For shall I not be hers; and not my own? —Will not
every act of her duty (as I cannot deserve it) be a
condescension, and a triumph over me? —And must
I owe it merely to her goodness, that she does not despise 

me? —To have her condescend to bear with my
follies! —To wound me with an eye of pity! —A
daughter of the Harlowes thus to excel the last, and,
as I have heretofore said, not the meanest of the Lovelaces
—Forbid it!— 
Yet forbid it not—For do I not now—do I not
every moment—see her before me all over charms,
and elegance, and purity, as in the struggles of the
past midnight? And in these struggles, heart, voice,
eyes, hands, and sentiments, so greatly, so gloriously
consistent with the character she has sustained from her
cradle to the present hour? 
But what advantages do I give thee? 
Yet have I not always done her justice? Why then
thy teazing impertinence? 
However, I forgive thee, Jack—Since (so much
generous love am I capable of!), I had rather all the
world should condemn me, than that her character
should suffer the least impeachment. 
The dear creature herself once told me, that there
was a strange mixture in my mind (a) . 
I have been called Devil, and Beelzebub, between
the two proud beauties: I must indeed be a Beelzebub,
if I had not some tolerable qualities. 
But as Miss Howe says, her suffering-time is her
shining-time (b) . Hitherto she has done nothing but
shine. 
She called me villain, Belford, within these few
hours. And what is the sum of the present argument; 
but that had I not been a villain in her sense of
the word, she had not been so much an angel? 
O Jack, Jack! This midnight attempt has made
me mad; has utterly undone me! How can the dear
creature say, I have made her vile in her own eyes,
when her behaviour under such a surprize, and her
resentment under such circumstances, have so greatly
exalted her in mine? 

Whence, however, this strange rhapsody? —Is it
owing to my being here? That I am not at Sinclair's? 
But if there be infection in that house, how has my
Beloved escaped it? 
But no more in this strain! —I will see what her
behaviour will be on my return—Yet already do I
begin to apprehend some little sinkings, some little
retrogradations; for I have just now a doubt arisen,
whether, for her own sake, I should wish her to forgive
me lightly, or with difficulty? 
* *
I am in a way to come at the wish'd-for licence. 
I have now given every-thing between my Beloved
and me a full consideration; and my puzzle is over. 
What has brought me to a speedier determination, is,
that I think I have found out what she means by the
week's distance she intends to hold me at: It is, that
she may have time to write to Miss Howe, to put in
motion that cursed scheme of hers, and to take measures
upon it, which shall enable her to abandon and
renounce me for ever. —Now, Jack, if I obtain not
admission to her presence on my return; but am refused
with haughtiness; if her week be insisted upon
(such prospects before her); I shall be confirmed in my
conjecture; and it will be plain to me, that weak at
best was that Love, which could give place to punctilio,
at a time that the all-reconciling ceremony (so she must
think) waits her command: —Then will I recollect all
her perversenesses; then will I re-peruse Miss Howe's
letters, and the transcripts from others of them; and
give way to my aversion to the life of shackles: And
then shall she be mine in my own way. 
But, after all, I am in hopes, that she will have
better considered of every-thing by the evening. 
That her threat of a week's distance was thrown out
in the heat of passion; and that she will allow, that I
have as much cause to quarrel with her for breach of
her word, as she has with me for breach of the peace. 

These lines of Rowe have got into my head; and
I shall repeat them very devoutly all the way the chairmen
shall poppet me towards her by-and-by. 

Teach me, some power, the happy art of speech,
To dress my purpose up in gracious words;
Such as may softly steal upon her soul,
And never waken the tempestuous passions.