



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday Morn. 5 o'clock (June 19.) 
I must write on. Nothing else can divert me: And
I think thou canst not have been a dog to me. 

I would fain have closed my eyes: But Sleep flies
me. Well says Horace, as translated by Cowley; 

The halcyon Sleep will never build his nest
  In any stormy breast.
 'Tis not enough, that he does find
  Clouds and Darkness in the mind:
 Darkness but half his work will do.
'Tis not enough: He must find Quiet too.
Now indeed do I from my heart wish, that I had
never known this Lady. But who would have
thought there had been such a woman in the world? 
Of all the Sex I have hitherto known, or heard, or
read of, it was once subdued, and always subdued. 
The first struggle was generally the last; or, at least,
the subsequent struggles were so much fainter and
fainter, that a man would rather have them, than
be without them. But how know I yet— 
* *
It is now near Six—The Sun for two hours past
has been illuminating every-thing about me: For
that impartial orb shines upon mother Sinclair's house,
as well as upon any other: But nothing within me
can it illuminate. 
At day-dawn I looked thro' the key-hole of my
Beloved's door. She had declared she would not put
off her cloaths any more in this house. There I beheld
her in a sweet slumber, which I hope will prove
refreshing to her disturbed senses; sitting in her elbow-chair,
her apron over her head; her head supported
by one sweet hand, the other hand hanging
down upon her side, in a sleepy lifelessness; half of
one pretty foot only visible. 
See the difference in our cases, thought I! She,
the charming injured, can sweetly sleep, while the
varlet-injurer cannot close his eyes; and has been trying
to no purpose the whole night to divert his melancholy,
and to fly from himself! 

As every vice generally brings on its own punishment,
even in this life; if any-thing were to tempt
me to doubt of future punishment, it would be, that
there can hardly be a greater than that which I at
this instant experience in my own remorse. 
I hope it will go off. —If not, well will the dear
creature be avenged; for I shall be the most miserable
of men. 
Six o'clock. 
Just now Dorcas tells me, that her Lady is preparing
openly, and without disguise, to be gone. 
Very probable. The humour she flew away from me
in last night, has given me expectation of such an
enterprize. 
Now, Jack, to be thus hated, and despised! — 
And if I have sinned beyond forgiveness— 
* *
But she has sent me a message by Dorcas, that
she will meet me in the dining-room; and desires
[Odd enough!] that the wench may be present at
the conversation that shall pass between us. This
message gives me hope. 
Nine o'clock. 
Confounded Art, Cunning, Villainy! —By my
Soul, she had like to have slipt thro' my fingers. 
She meant nothing by her message, but to get Dorcas
out of the way, and a clear coast. Is a fansied
distress sufficient to justify this Lady for dispensing
with her principles? Does she not shew me, that she
can wilfully deceive, as well as I? 
Had she been in the fore-house, and no passage to
go thro' to get at the street-door, she had certainly
been gone. But her haste betrayed her: For Sally
Martin happening to be in the fore-parlour, and
hearing a swifter motion than usual, and a rustling of
silks, as if from somebody in a hurry, looked out; 
and seeing who it was, stept between her and the
door, and set her back against it. 

You must not go, Madam. Indeed you must not. 
By what right? —And how dare you? —And such-like
imperious airs the dear creature gave herself. — 
While Sally called out for her Aunt; and half a
dozen voices joined instantly in the cry, for me to
hasten down, to hasten down, in a moment. 
I was gravely instructing Dorcas above-stairs, and
wondering what would be the subject of the conversation
to which the wench was to be a witness, when
these outcries reached my ears. And down I
flew. —And there was the charming creature, the
sweet deceiver, panting for breath, her back against
the partition, a parcel in her hand [Women make
no excursions without their parcels] Sally, Polly (but
Polly obligingly pleading for her) the Mother, Mabell,
and Peter (the footman of the house) about
her; all, however, keeping their distance; the Mother
and Sally between her and the door—In her
soft rage the dear Soul repeating, I will go! —Nobody
has a right—I will go! —If you kill me, women,
I won't go up again! 
As soon as she saw me, she stept a pace or two
towards me; Mr. Lovelace, I will go! said she— 
Do you authorize these women—What right have
they, or you either, to stop me? 
Is this, my dear, preparative to the conversation
you led me to expect in the Dining-room? And do
you think I can part with you thus? —Do you think
I will? 
And am I, Sir, to be thus beset! —Surrounded
thus? —What have these women to do with me? 
I desired them to leave us, all but Dorcas, who
was down as soon as I. I then thought it right to
assume an air of resolution, having found my tameness
so greatly triumphed over. And now, my dear, said I
(urging her reluctant feet) be pleased to walk into the
fore-parlour. Here, since you will not go up stairs; 
here, we may hold our parley; and Dorcas be witness 

to it. —And now, Madam, seating her, and sticking
my hands in my sides, your pleasure! 
Insolent Villain! said the furious Lady. And,
rising, ran to the window, and threw up the Sash
[She knew not, I suppose, that there were iron rails
before the windows]. And, when she found she
could not get out into the street, clasping her uplifted
hands together, having dropt her parcel—For
the Love of God, good honest man! —For the Love
of God, mistress—[to two passers-by] a poor, poor
creature, said she, ruined!— 
I clasped her in my arms, people beginning to gather
about the window: And then she cried out,
Murder! Help! help! —And carried her up to the
Dining-room, in spite of her little plotting heart (as
I may now call it) altho' she violently struggled,
catching hold of the banisters here and there, as she
could. I would have seated her there; but she sunk
down half-motionless, pale as ashes. And a violent
burst of tears happily relieved her. 
Dorcas wept over her. The wench was actually
moved for her! 
Violent hysterics succeeded. I left her to Mabell,
Dorcas, and Polly; the latter the most supportable
to her of the Sisterhood. 
This attempt, so resolutely made, alarmed me
not a little. 
Mrs. Sinclair, and her Nymphs, are much more
concerned; because of the reputation of their house,
as they call it, having received some insults (broken
windows threatened) to make them produce the
young creature who cried out. 
While the mobbish inquisitors were in the height
of their office, the women came running up to me,
to know what they should do; a Constable being
actually fetched. 
Get the Constable into the parlour, said I, with
three or four of the forwardest of the mob, and produce 

one of the Nymphs, onion-eyed, in a moment,
with disordered head-dress and handkerchief, and let
her own herself the person: The occasion, a female
skirmish; but satisfied with the justice done her. 
Then give a dram or two to each fellow, and all will
be well. 
Eleven o'clock. 
All done, as I advised; and all is well. 
Mrs. Sinclair wishes she never had seen the face of
so skittish a Lady; and she and Sally are extremely
pressing with me, to leave the perverse Beauty to
their breaking, as they call it, for four or five days. 
But I cursed them into silence; only ordering double
precaution for the future. 
Polly, tho' she consoled the dear perverse one all
she could, when with her, insists upon it to me, that
nothing but terror will procure me tolerable usage. 
Dorcas was challenged by the women upon her
tears. She owned them real. Said, She was ashamed
of herself; but could not help it. So sincere, so unyielding
a grief, in so sweet a Lady!— 
The women laughed at her: But I bid her make
no apologies for her tears, nor mind their laughing. 
I was glad to see them so ready. Good use might be
made of such strangers. In short, I would have her
indulge them often, and try if it were not possible to
gain her Lady's confidence by her concern for her. 
She said, That her Lady did take kind notice of
them to her; and was glad to see such tokens of humanity
in her. 
Well then, said I, your part, whether any-thing
come of it or not, is to be tender-hearted. It can
do no harm, if no good. But take care you are not
too suddenly, or too officiously compassionate. 
So Dorcas will be a humane good sort of creature,
I believe, very quickly with her Lady. And as it
becomes women to be so, and as my Beloved is willing
to think highly of her own Sex; it will the
more readily pass with her. 

I thought to have had one trial (having gone so far)
for Cohabitation. But what hope can there be of
succeeding? —She is invincible! —Against all my notions,
against all my conceptions (thinking of her as
a woman, and in the very bloom of her charms) she
is absolutely invincible. My whole view, at the present,
is to do her legal justice, if I can but once more
get her out of her altitudes. 
The Consent of such a woman must make her
ever new, ever charming. But, astonishing! Can
the want of a Church-Ceremony make such a difference! 
She owes me her consent; for hitherto I have had
nothing to boast of. All, of my side, has been deep
remorse, anguish of mind, and Love encreased rather
than abated. 
How her proud Rejection stings me! —And yet I
hope still to get her to listen to my Stories of the Family-reconciliation,
and of her Uncle and Capt. Tomlinson. 
—And as she has given me a pretence to detain
her against her will, she must see me whether in
temper or not—She cannot help it. And if Love
will not do, Terror, as the women advise, must be
tried. 
A nice part, after all, has my Beloved to act. If
she forgive me easily, I resume perhaps my projects: 
—If she carry her rejection into violence, that violence
may make me desperate, and occasion fresh
violence—She ought, since she thinks she has found
the women out, to consider where she is. 
I am confoundedly out of conceit with myself. If
I give up my contrivances, my joy in stratagem, and
plot, and invention, I shall be but a common man: 
Such another dull heavy creature as thyself. Yet
what does even my success in my machinations bring
me, but regret, disgrace, repentance? But I am
overmatched, egregiously overmatched, by this woman. 
What to do with her, or without her, I know
not. 