



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. Afternoon, Apr. 26. 
At length, my dearest Miss Howe, I am in London,
and in my new lodgings. They are neatly furnished,
and the situation, for the Town, is pleasant. 
But, I think, you must not ask me, how I like the
old gentlewoman. Yet she seems courteous and obliging. 
Her kinswomen just appeared to welcome me
at my alighting. They seem to be genteel young women. 
But more of their Aunt and of them, as I shall see more. 
Miss Sorlings has an Uncle at Barnet, whom she
found so very ill, that her uneasiness on that account
(having large expectations from him) made me comply
with her desire to stay with him. Yet I wished, as her
Uncle did not expect her, that she would see me settled
in London; and Mr. Lovelace was still more earnest
that she would, offering to send her back again in a
day or two, and urging, that her Uncle's malady threatened 

not a sudden change. But leaving the matter to
her choice, after she knew what would have been mine,
she made me not the expected compliment. Mr. Lovelace,
however, made her a handsome present at parting. 
His genteel spirit on all occasions makes me often
wish him more consistent. 
As soon as I arrived, I took possession of my apartment. 
I shall make good use of the light closet in it,
if I stay here any time. 
One of his attendants returns in the morning to The
Lawn; and I made writing to you by him, an excuse
for my retiring. 
And now give me leave to chide you, my dearest
friend, for your rush, and I hope revocable resolution,
not to make Mr. Hickman the happiest man in the
world, while my happiness is in suspense. Suppose I
were to be unhappy, what, my dear, would this resolution
of yours avail me? Marriage is the highest State
of Friendship: If happy, it lessens our cares by dividing
them, at the same time that it doubles our pleasures by
a mutual participation. Why, my dear, if you love
me, will you not rather give another friend to one who
has not two that she is sure of? —Had you married on
your Mother's last Birth-day, as she would have had
you, I should not, I dare say, have wanted a refuge,
that would have saved me many mortifications, and
much disgrace. 
* *
Here I was broken in upon by Mr. Lovelace; introducing
the widow leading in a kinswoman of hers to
attend me, if I approved of her, till my Hannah should
come, or till I had provided myself with some other servant. 
The Widow gave her many good qualities; but
said, that she had one great defect; which was, that
she could not write, nor read writing; that part of her
education having been neglected when she was young: 
But for discretion, fidelity, obligingness, she was not
to be outdone by any-body. She commended her likewise
for her skill at the needle. 

As for her defect, I can easily forgive that. She is
very likely and genteel; too genteel indeed, I think,
for a servant. But, what I like least of all in her, she
has a strange sly Eye. I never saw such an Eye—Half-confident,
I think. But indeed Mrs. Sinclair herself
(for that is the Widow's name) has an odd winking
eye; and her respectfulness seems too much studied, methinks,
for the London ease and freedom. But people
can't help their looks, you know; and after all, she is
extremely civil and obliging. And as for the young
woman (Dorcas is her name) she will not be long
with me. 
I accepted her: How could I do otherwise (if I had
had a mind to make objections, which in my present
situation I had not) her Aunt present, and the young
woman also present; and Mr. Lovelace officious in his
introducing them, to oblige me? But, upon their leaving
me, I told him (who seemed inclinable to begin a conversation
with me) that I desired that this apartment
might be considered as my Retirement: That when I
saw him, it might be in the Dining-room &dotup;(which is
up a few stairs; for this back house being once two,
the rooms do not all of them very conveniently communicate
with each other);&dotup; and that I might be as
little broken in upon as possible, when I am here. He
withdrew very respectfully to the door; but there stopt; 
and asked for my company then in the Dining-room. 
If he were about setting out for other lodgings, I would
go with him now, I told him: But if he did not just
then go, I would first finish my Letter to Miss Howe. 
I see he has no mind to leave me, if he can help it. 
My Brother's scheme may give him a pretence to try
to engage me to dispense with his promise. But if I now
do, I must acquit him of it entirely. 
My approbation of his tender behaviour in the midst
of my grief has given him a right, as he seems to think,
of addressing me with all the freedom of an approved
Lover. I see by this man, that when once a woman 

embarks with this Sex, there is no receding. One concession
is but the prelude to another with them. He
has been ever since Sunday last continually complaining
of the distance I keep him at; and thinks himself entitled
now, to call in question my value for him; 
strengthening his doubts by my former declared readiness
to give him up to a Reconciliation with my friends
—And yet has himself fallen off from that obsequious
tenderness, if I may couple the words, which drew from
me the concessions he builds upon. 
While we were talking at the door, my new servant
came up, with an invitation to us both to Tea. I said
he might accept of it, if he pleased; but I must pursue
my writing; and not chusing either Tea or Supper, I
desired him to make my excuses below, as to both; 
and inform them of my choice to be retired as much as
possible; yet to promise for me my attendance on the
Widow and her Nieces at breakfast in the morning. 
He objected particularity in the eye of strangers, as
to avoiding Supper. 
You know, said I, and you can tell them, that I
seldom eat Suppers. My spirits are low. You must
never urge me against a declared choice. Pray, Mr.
Lovelace, inform them of all my particularities. If they
are obliging, they will allow for them. I come not
hither to make new acquaintance. 
I have turned over the books I found in my closet; 
and am not a little pleased with them; and think the
better of the people of the house for their sakes. 
Stanhope's Gospels; Sharp's, Tillotson's, and South's
Sermons; Nelson's Feasts and Fasts; a Sacramental
piece of the Bishop of Man, and another of Dr. Gauden
Bishop of Exeter; and Inett's Devotions; are among
the devout books: And among those of a lighter turn,
the following not ill chosen ones; A Telemachus in
French, another in English; Steele's, Rowe's, and
Shakespear's Plays; that genteel Comedy of Mr. Cibber,
The Careless Husband, and others of the same 

Author; Dryden's Miscellanies; the Tatlers, Spectators,
and Guardians; Pope's, and Swift's, and Addison's
Works. 
In the blank leaves of the Nelson and Bishop Gauden,
is Mrs. Sinclair's name; and in those of most of the
others, either Sarah Martin, or Mary Horton, the
names of the two Nieces. 
* *
I am exceedingly out of humour with Mr. Lovelace: 
And have great reason to be so. As you will allow,
when you have read the conversation I am going to
give you an account of; for he would not let me rest
till I gave him my company in the Dining-room. 
He began with letting me know, that he had been
out to enquire after the character of the Widow; which
was the more necessary, he said, as he supposed that I
would expect his frequent absence. 
I did, I said; and that he would not think of taking
up his lodging in the same house with me. But what,
said I, is the result of your enquiry? 
Why, indeed, the Widow's character was, in the
main, what he liked well enough. But as it was Miss
Howe's opinion, as I had told him, that my Brother
had not given over his scheme; as the Widow lived by
letting lodgings; and had others to lett in the same part
of the house, which might be taken by an enemy; he
knew no better way, than for him to take them all, as
it could not be for a long time—unless I would think of
removing to others. 
So far was well enough: But as it was easy for me to
see, that he spoke the slighter of the Widow, in order
to have a pretence to lodge here himself, I asked him
his intention in that respect. And he frankly owned,
that if I chose to stay here, he could not, as matters
stood, think of leaving me for six hours together; and
he had prepared the Widow to expect, that we should
be here but for a few days;—only till we could fix ourselves
in a house suitable to our condition; and this, that 

I might be under the less embarrass, if I pleased to remove. 
Fix our-selves in a house, and we and our, Mr.
Lovelace—Pray, in what light— 
He interrupted me—Why, my dearest Life, if you
will hear me with patience—Yet I am half-afraid, that
I have been too forward, as I have not consulted you
upon it—But as my friends in town, according to what
Mr. Doleman has written, in the Letter you have seen,
conclude us to be married— 
Surely, Sir, you have not presumed— 
Hear me out, dearest Creature—You have received
with favour my addresses—You have made me hope for
the honour of your consenting hand: Yet, by declining
my most fervent tender of myself to you at Mrs. Sorlings's,
have given me apprehensions of delay: I would
not for the world be thought so ungenerous a wretch,
now you have honoured me with your confidence, as
to wish to precipitate you: Yet your Brother's schemes
are not given up. Singleton, I am afraid, is actually
in town; his vessel lies at Rotherhith—Your Brother
is absent from Harlowe-Place; indeed not with Singleton
yet, as I can hear. If you are known to be mine,
or if you are but thought to be so, there will probably
be an end of your Brother's contrivances. The Widow's
character may be as worthy as it is said to be. But the
worthier she is, the more danger, if your Brother's
agent should find us out; since she may be persuaded,
that she ought in conscience to take a parent's part,
against a child who stands in opposition to them. But
if she believes us married, her good character will stand
us in stead, and she will be of our party. —Then I have
taken care to give her a reason why two apartments are
requisite for us, at the hour of retirement. 
I perfectly raved at him. I would have flung from
him in resentment; but he would not let me: And
what could I do? Whither go, the evening advanced? 

I am astonished at you! said I.—If you are a man
of honour, what need of all this strange obliquity? You
delight in crooked ways—Let me know, since I must
stay in your company (for he held my hand) let me
know all you have said to the people below. —Indeed,
indeed, Mr. Lovelace, you are a very unaccountable
man. 
My dearest Creature, need I to have mentioned anything
of this? And could I not have taken up my lodgings
in this house, unknown to you, if I had not intended
to make you the judge of all my proceedings? 
But This is what I have told the Widow before her
kinswomen, and before your new servant—‘That indeed
we were privately married at Hertford; but that
you had preliminarily bound me under a solemn vow,
which I am most religiously resolved to keep, to be
contented with separate apartments, and even not to
lodge under the same roof, till a certain Reconciliation
shall take place, which is of high consequence to both.’ 
And further, that I might convince you of the purity of
my intentions, and that my whole view in this was to
prevent mischief, I have acquainted them, ‘that I have
solemnly promised to behave to you before every-body,
as if we were only betrothed, and not married; not
even offering to take any of those innocent freedoms
which are not refused in the most punctilious Loves.’ 
And then he solemnly vowed to me the strictest observance
of the same respectful behaviour to me. 
I said, that I was not by any means satisfied with the
tale he had told, nor with the necessity he wanted to lay
me under, of appearing what I was not: That every
step he took was a wry one, a needless wry one: And
since he thought it necessary to tell the people below
any-thing about me, I insisted, that he should unsay all
he had said, and tell them the truth. 
What he had told them, he said, was with so many
circumstances, that he could sooner die than contradict
it. And still he insisted upon the propriety of appearing 

to be married, for the reasons he had given before
—And, dearest Creature, said he, why this high displeasure
with me upon so well-intended an expedient? 
You know, that I cannot wish to shun your Brother,
or his Singleton, but upon your account. The first step
I would take, if left to myself, would be to find them
out. I have always acted in this manner, when anybody
has presumed to give out threatnings against me. 
'Tis true, I should have consulted you first, and had
your leave. But since you dislike what I have said, let
me implore you, dearest Madam, to give the only
proper sanction to it, by naming an early day. Would
to Heaven that were to be to-morrow! —For God's
sake, let it be to-morrow! But if not [Was it his business,
my dear, before I spoke (yet he seemed to be
afraid of me) to say, If not?] let me beseech you,
Madam, if my behaviour shall not be to your dislike,
that you will not to-morrow at breakfast-time, discredit
what I have told them. The moment I give you
cause to think, that I take any advantage of your concession,
that moment revoke it, and expose me, as I
shall deserve. —And once more, let me remind you,
that I have no view either to serve or save myself by
this expedient. It is only to prevent a probable mischief,
for your own mind's sake; and for the sake of
those who deserve not the least consideration from me. 
What could I say? What could I do? —I verily
think, that had he urged me again, in a proper manner,
I should have consented (little satisfied as I am with
him) to give him a meeting to-morrow morning at a
more solemn place than in the parlour below. 
But this I resolve, that he shall not have my consent
to stay a night under this roof. He has now given me
a stronger reason for this determination than I had before. 
* *
Alas! my dear, how vain a thing to say, what we
will or what we will not do, when we have put ourselves 

into the power of this Sex! —He went down to
the people below, on my desiring to be left to myself; 
and staid till their supper was just ready; and then, desiring
a moment's audience, as he called it, he besought
my leave to stay that one night, promising to set out
either for Lord M's, or for Edgware to his friend Belford's,
in the morning, after breakfast. But if I were
against it, he said, he would not stay supper; and would
attend me about eight next day—Yet he added, that
my denial would have a very particular appearance to
the people below, from what he had told them; and
the more, as he had actually agreed for all the vacant
apartments (indeed only for a month) for the reason he
had before hinted at: But I need not stay here two
days, if, upon conversing with the Widow and her
Nieces in the morning, I should have any dislike to
them. 
I thought, notwithstanding my resolution abovementioned,
that it would seem too punctilious to deny
him, under the circumstances he had mentioned: — 
Having, besides, no reason to think he would obey me; 
for he looked, as if he were determined to debate the
matter with me. And now as I see no likelihood of a
Reconciliation with my friends, and as I have actually
received his addresses; I thought I would not quarrel
with him, if I could help it, especially as he asked to
stay but for one night, and could have done so without
my knowing it; and you being of opinion, that the
proud wretch, distrusting his own merits with me, or
at least my regard for him, will probably bring me to
some concessions in his favour—For all these reasons, I
thought proper to yield this point: Yet I was so vexed
with him on the other, that it was impossible for me to
comply with that grace which a concession should be
made with, or not made at all. 
This was what I said—What you will do, you must
do, I think. You are very ready to promise; very
ready to depart from your promise. You say, however, 

that you will set out to-morrow for the country. 
You know how ill I have been. I am not well enough
now to debate with you upon your encroaching ways. 
I am utterly dissatisfied with the tale you have told below. 
Nor will I promise to appear to the people of the
house to-morrow what I am not. 
He withdrew in the most respectful manner, beseeching
me only to favour him with such a meeting in the
morning, as might not make the Widow and her Nieces
think he had given me reason to be offended with him. 
I retired to my own apartment, and Dorcas came to
me soon after to take my commands. I told her, that
I required very little attendance, and always dressed and
undressed myself. 
She seemed concerned, as if she thought I had repulsed
her; and said, It should be her whole study to
oblige me. 
I told her, that I was not difficult to be pleased: And
should let her know from time to time what assistances
I should expect from her. But for that night I had no
occasion for her further attendance. 
She is not only genteel, but is well-bred, and well-spoken. 
—She must have had what is generally thought
to be the polite part of education: But it is strange,
that Fathers and Mothers should make so light, as they
generally do, of that preferable part, in girls, which
would improve their minds, and give a grace to all the
rest. 
As soon as she was gone, I inspected the doors, the
windows, the wainscot, the dark closet as well as the
light one; and finding very good fastenings to the door,
and to all the windows, I again had recourse to my pen. 
* *
Mrs. Sinclair is just now gone from me. Dorcas,
she told me, had acquainted her, that I had dismissed
her for the night. She came to ask me how I
liked my apartment, and to wish me good rest. She
expressed her concern, that they could not have my 

company at supper. Mr. Lovelace, she said, had informed
them of my love of retirement. She assured me,
that I should not be broken in upon. She highly extolled
him, and gave me a share in the praise, as to person. 
But was sorry, she said, that she was likely to lose us
so soon as Mr. Lovelace talked of. 
I answered her with suitable civility; and she withdrew
with great tokens of respect. With greater, I
think, than should be from distance of years, as she was
the wife of a gentleman; and as the appearance of
every-thing about her, as well house as dress, carries
the marks of such good circumstances, as require not
abasement. 
If, my dear, you will write against prohibition, be
pleased to direct, To Miss Lætitia Beaumont; To be left
till called for, at Mr. Wilson's in Pall-Mall. 
Mr. Lovelace proposed this direction to me, not
knowing of your desire that our Letters should pass by a
third hand. As his motive for it was, that my Brother
might not trace out where we are, I am glad, as well
from this instance as from others, that he seems to think
he has done mischief enough already. 
Do you know how my poor Hannah does? 
Mr. Lovelace is so full of his contrivances and expedients,
that I think it may not be amiss to desire you to
look carefully to the Seals of my Letters, as I shall to
those of yours. If I find him base in this particular, I
shall think him capable of any evil; and will fly him as
my worst enemy. 