



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday, Sept. 1. 
How astonishing, in the midst of such affecting
Scenes, is thy mirth on what thou callest my
own aspirations! Never, surely, was there such
another man in this world, thy talents and thy levity
taken together! —Surely, what I shall send thee with
this will affect thee. If not, nothing can, till thy
own hour come: —And heavy will then thy reflections
be! 
I am glad, however, that thou enablest me to assure
the Lady, that thou wilt no more molest her; 
that is to say, in other words, That, after having
ruined her fortunes, and all her worldly prospects,
thou wilt be so gracious, as to let her lie down and
die in peace. 

Thy giving up to poor Belton's Sister the little Legacy,
and thy undertaking to make Mowbray and
Tourville follow thy example, are, I must say to thy
honour, of a piece with thy generosity to thy Rosebud
and her Johnny; and to a number of other good
actions, in pecuniary matters; altho' thy Rosebud's
is, I believe, the only instance where a pretty woman
was concerned, of such a disinterested bounty. 
Upon my faith, Lovelace, I love to praise thee; 
and often and often, as thou knowest, have I studied
for occasions to do it: Insomuch that when for the
life of me I could not think of any-thing done by thee
that deserved praise, I have taken pains to applaud the
not ungraceful manner in which thou hast performed
actions that merited the gallows. 
Now thou art so near, I will dispatch my servant to
thee, if occasion requires. But, I fear, I shall soon
give thee the news thou apprehendest. For I am
just now sent for by Mrs. Smith; who has ordered
the messenger to tell me, that she knew not if the
Lady will be alive when I come. 
Friday, Sept. 1. Two o'Clock, at Smith's. 
I could not close my Letter in such an uncertainty
as must have added to your impatience. For
you have, on several occasions, convinced me, that
the suspense you love to give, would be the greatest
torment to you that you could receive. A common
case with all aggressive and violent spirits, I believe. 
I will just mention then (your servant waiting here
till I have written) that the Lady has had two very
severe fits: In the last of which whilst she lay, they
sent to the Doctor and Mr. Goddard, who both advised,
that a messenger should be dispatched for me,
as her Executor; being doubtful, whether, if she
had a third, it would not carry her off. 
She was tolerably recovered by the time I came; 
and the Doctor made her promise before me, that, 

while she was so weak, she would not attempt any
more to go abroad; for, by Mrs. Lovick's description,
who attended her, the shortness of her breath,
her extreme weakness, and the fervor of her devotions
when at Church, were contraries, which, pulling
different ways (the Soul aspiring, the Body sinking)
tore her tender frame in pieces. 
So much for the present. I shall detain Will. no
longer, than just to beg, that you will send me back
this packet, and the last. Your memory is so good,
that once reading is all you ever give, or need to give,
to any-thing. And who but ourselves can make out
our characters, were you inclined to let any-body see
what passes between us? If I cannot be obliged, I
shall be tempted to with-hold what I write, till I
have time to take a copy of it (a) . 
A Letter from Miss Howe is just now brought by
a particular messenger, who says he must carry back
a few lines in return. But, as the Lady is just retired
to lie down, the man is to call again by-and-by. 