



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I have begun another letter to thee, in continuation
of my narrative: But I believe I shall send
thee this before I shall finish that. By the inclosed
thou wilt see, that neither of the correspondents deserve
mercy from me: And I am resolved to make
the ending with one, the beginning with the other. 

If thou sayest, That the provocations I have given
to one of them, will justify her freedoms; I answer,
So they will to any other person but myself. But he
that is capable of giving those provocations, and has
the power to punish those who abuse him for giving
them, will shew his resentment; and the more vindictively,
perhaps, as he has deserved the freedoms? 
If thou sayest, It is, however, wrong to do so; 
I reply, that it is nevertheless human nature: —And
would'st not have me be a man, Jack? 
Here read the letter, if thou wilt. But thou art
not my friend, if thou offerest to plead for either of
the saucy creatures, after thou hast read it. 

To Mrs. Harriot Lucas, at Mrs. Moore's at
Hamstead.
After the discoveries I had made of the villainous
machinations of the most abandoned of
men, particularized in my long letter of Wednesday
last (a) , you will believe, my dearest friend, that
my surprize upon perusing yours of Thursday evening
from Hamstead (b)  was not so great as my indignation. 
Had the villain attempted to fire a city instead
of a house, I should not have wondered at it. 
All that I am amazed at, is, that he (whose boast, as
I am told, it is, that no woman shall keep him out
of her bedchamber, when he has made a resolution
to be in it) did not discover his foot before. And it
is as strange to me, that, having got you at such a
shocking advantage, and in such an horrid house, you
could, at the time, escape dishonour, and afterwards
get from such a set of infernals. 
I gave you, in my long letter of Wednesday and
Thursday last, reasons why you ought to mistrust
that specious Tomlinson. That man, my dear, must
be a solemn villain. May lightning from Heaven
blast the wretch, who has set him, and the rest of his 

REMORSELESS GANG, at work, to endeavour to destroy
the most consummate virtue! Heaven be praised!
you have escaped from all their snares, and now are
out of danger. —So I will not trouble you at present
with the particulars that I have further collected relating
to this abominable imposture. 
For the same reason, I forbear to communicate to
you some new stories of the abhorred wretch himself,
which have come to my ears. One in particular,
of so shocking a nature! —Indeed, my dear, the man
is a devil. 
The whole story of Mrs. Fretchville, and her house,
I have no doubt to pronounce, likewise, an absolute
fiction. —Fellow!—How my soul spurns the villain! 
Your thought of going abroad, and your reasons
for so doing, most sensibly affect me. But, be comforted,
my dear; I hope you will not be under a
necessity of quitting your native country. Were I
sure, that That must be the cruel case, I would abandon
all my own better prospects, and soon be with you. 
And I would accompany you whithersoever you went,
and share fortunes with you: For it is impossible
that I should be happy, if I knew that you were
exposed not only to the perils of the sea, but to the
attempts of other vile men; your personal graces
attracting every eye, and exposing you to those hourly
dangers, which others, less distinguished by the gifts of
nature, might avoid. —All that I know, that Beauty (so
greatly coveted, and so greatly admired) is good for! 
O, my dear, were I ever to marry, and to be the
mother of a Clarissa (Clarissa must be the name,
if promisingly lovely!) how often would my heart ake
for the dear creature, as she grew up, when I reflected,
that a prudence avqund discretion unexampled
in woman, had not, in you, been a sufficient protection
to that beauty, which had drawn after it as
many admirers as beholders! —How little should I
regret the attacks of that cruel distemper, as it is 

called, which frequently makes the greatest ravages
in the finest faces! 
Sat. Afternoon. 
I have just parted with Mrs. Townsend (a) . 
I thought you had once seen her with me: But,
she says, she never had the honour to be personally
known to you. She has a manlike spirit. She knows
the world. And her two brothers being in town,
she is sure she can engage them, in so good a cause,
and (if there should be occasion) both their ships crews,
in your service. 
Give your consent, my dear; and the horrid villain
shall be repaid with broken bones, at least, for all
his vileness! 
The misfortune is, Mrs. Townsend cannot be
with you till Thursday next, or Wednesday, at soonest. 
Are you sure you can be safe where you are, till
then? I think you are too near London; and perhaps
you had better be in it. If you remove, let me know
whither, the very moment. 
How my heart is torn, to think of the necessity so
dear a creature is driven to, of hiding herself! Devilish
fellow! He must have been sportive and wanton
in his inventions—Yet that cruel, that savage
sportiveness has saved you from the sudden violence
which he has had recourse to in the violation of
others, of names and families not contemptible. For
such the villain always gloried to spread his snares. 
The vileness of this specious monster has done more,
than any other consideration could do, to bring Mr.
Hickman into credit with me. Mr. Hickman alone
knows, for me, of your flight, and the reason of it. 
Had I not given him the reason, he might have
thought still worse of the vile attempt. I communicated
it to him by shewing him your letter from Hamstead. 

When he had read it (and he trembled and
reddened, as he read), he threw himself at my feet,
and besought me to permit him to attend you, and
to give you the protection of his house. The good-natured
man had tears in his eyes, and was repeatedly
earnest on this subject; proposing to take his chariot-and-four,
or a set, and in person, in the face of all
the world, give himself the glory of protecting such
an oppressed innocent. 
I could not but be pleased with him. And I let
him know that I was. I hardly expected so much spirit
from him. But a man's passiveness to a beloved
object of our sex may not, perhaps, argue want of
courage on proper occasions. 
I thought I ought, in return, to have some consideration
for his safety, as such an open step would
draw upon him the vengeance of the most villainous
enterprizer in the world, who has always a gang of
fellows, such as himself, at his call, ready to support
one another in the vilest outrages. But yet, as Mr.
Hickman might have strengthened his hands by legal
recourses, I should not have stood upon it, had I not
known your delicacies (since such a step must have
made a great noise, and given occasion for scandal,
as if some advantage had been gained over you), and
were there not the greatest probability, that all might
be more silently, and more effectually, managed by
Mrs. Townsend's means. 
Mrs. Townsend will in person attend you—She
hopes, on Wednesday. —Her brothers, and some of
their people, will scatteringly, and as if they knew
nothing of you (so we have contrived), see you safe
not only to London, but to her house at Deptford. 
She has a kinswoman, who will take your commands
there, if she herself be obliged to leave you. 
And there you may stay, till the wretch's fury on
losing you, and his search, are over. 

He will very soon, 'tis likely, enter upon some
new villainy, which may engross him: And it may
be given out, that you are gone to lay claim to the
protection of your cousin Morden at Florence. 
Possibly, if he can be made to believe it, he will
go over in hopes to find you there. 
After a while, I can procure you a lodging in
one of the neighbouring villages; where I may have
the happiness to be your daily visiter. And if this
Hickman be not silly, and apish, and if my mother do
not do unaccountable things, I may the sooner think
of marrying, that I may, without controul, receive
and entertain the darling of my heart. 
Many, very many, happy days, do I hope we
shall yet see together: And as this is my hope, I
expect, that it will be your consolation. 
As to your estate, since you are resolved not to
litigate for it, we will be patient, either till Col.
Morden arrives, or till shame compels some people
to be just. 
Upon the whole, I cannot but think your prospects
now much happier, than they could have been,
had you been actually married to such a man as
this. I must therefore congratulate you upon your
escape, not only from a horrid libertine, but from
so vile a husband, as he must have made to any woman; 
but more especially to a person of your virtue
and delicacy. 
You hate him, heartily hate him, I hope, my dear— 
I am sure you do. It would be strange, if so much
purity of life and manners were not to abhor what
is so repugnant to itself. 
In your letter before me, you mention one written
to me for a feint (a) . I have not received any
such. Depend upon it therefore, that he must have
it. And if he has, it is a wonder, that he did not
likewise get my long one of the 7th. Heaven be 

praised that he did not; and that it came safe to your
hands! 
I send this by a young fellow, whose father is
one of our tenants, with command to deliver it to
no other hands but yours. He is to return directly,
if you give him any letter. If not, he will proceed
to London upon his own pleasures. He is a simple
fellow; but very honest. So you may say any thing
to him. If you write not by him, I desire a line or
two, as soon as possible. 
My mother knows nothing of his going to you. 
Nor yet of your abandoning the fellow! Forgive
me! —But he's not intitled to good manners. 
I shall long to hear how you and Mrs. Townsend
order matters. I wish she could have been with you
sooner. But I have lost no time in engaging her,
as you will suppose. I refer to her, what I have
further to say and advise. So shall conclude with my
prayers, that Heaven will direct, and protect, my
dearest creature, and make your future days happy! 
Anna Howe. 
And now, Jack, I will suppose, that thou hast
read this cursed letter. Allow me to make a few
observations upon some of its contents, which I will
do in my crow-quill short-hand, that they may have
the appearance of notes upon the vixen's text. 
It is strange to Miss Howe, that having got her friend at such a
shocking advantage, &c.] And it is strange to me, too. If ever I have
such another opportunity given me, the cause of both our wonder, I
believe, will cease. 
So thou seest Tomlinson is further detected. No such person as Mrs.
Fretchville. May lightning from heaven—O Lord, O Lord, O
Lord! —What a horrid vixen is this! —My gang, my remorseless
gang, too, is brought in—And thou wilt plead for these girls again; 
wilt thou? —Heaven be praised, she says, that her friend is out of
danger—Miss Howe should be sure of that: And that she herself is
safe. —But for this termagant (as I have often said), I must surely
have made a better hand of it— 
New stories of me, Jack! —What can they be? —I have not
found, that my generosity to my Rosebud ever did me due credit with this 

pair of friends. Very hard, Belford, that Credits cannot be set against
Debits, and a balance struck in a Rake's favour, as well as in that of
every common man! —But he, from whom no good is expected, is not
allowed the merit of the good he does. 
I ought to have been a little more attentive to character, than I
have been. For, notwithstanding that the measures of Right and
Wrong are said to be so manifest, let me tell thee, that character byasses
and runs away with all mankind. Let a man or woman once establish
themselves in the world's opinion, and all that either of them do will
be sanctified. Nay, in the very courts of justice, does not character
acquit or condemn as often as facts, and sometimes even in spite of
facts? —Yet, (impolitic that I have been, and am!) to be so careless of
mine! —And now, I doubt, it is irretrievable. —But to leave moralizing. 
Thou, Jack, knowest almost all my enterprizes worth remembring. 
Can this particular story, which this girl hints at, be that of Lucy
Villars? —Or can she have heard of my intrigue with the pretty Gypsey,
who met me in Norwood, and of the trap I caught her cruel husband
in (a fellow, as gloomy and tyrannical as old Harlowe), when he pursued
a wife, who would not have deserved ill of him, if he had deserved
well of her? —But he was not quite drowned. The man is
alive at this day: And Miss Howe mentions the story as a very shocking
one. Besides, both these are a twelvemonth old, or more. 
But evil fame and scandal are always new. When the offender has
forgot a vile fact, it is often told to one and to another, who, having
never heard of it before, trumpet it about, as a novelty to others. 
But well said the honest corregidor at Madrid, a saying with which
I inriched Lord M.'s collection—Good actions are remembered but
for a day: Bad ones for many years after the life of the guilty. — 
Such is the relish that the world has for scandal. In other words,
Such is the desire which every-one has to exculpate himself by blackening
his neighbour. You and I, Belford, have been very kind to the
world, in furnishing it with many opportunities to gratify its devil. 
Miss Howe will abandon her own better prospects, and share fortunes
with her, were she to go abroad.] —Charming Romancer! —I must set
about this girl, Jack. I have always had hopes of a woman whose
passions carry her into such altitudes! —Had I attacked Miss Howe
first, her passions (inflamed and guided, as I could have managed them)
would have brought her to my lure in a fortnight. 
But thinkest thou (and yet I think thou dost), that there is any
thing in these high flights among the sex? Verily, Jack, these vehement
friendships are nothing but chaff and stubble, liable to be
blown away by the very wind that raises them. Apes! mere apes of
us! they think the word friendship has a pretty sound with it; and
it is much talked of; a fashionable word: And so, truly, a single
woman, who thinks she has a Soul, and knows, that she wants something,
would be thought to have found a fellow-soul for it in her own
Sex. But I repeat, that the word is a mere word, the thing a mere
name with them; a cork-bottomed shuttlecock, which they are fond
of striking to and fro, to make one another glow in the frosty weather
of a single state; but which, when a man comes in between the pretended
inseparables, is given up, like their Music, and other maidenly
amusements; which, nevertheless, may be necessary to keep the pretty 

rogues out of more active mischief. They then, in short, having
caught the fish, lay aside the net (a) . 
Thou hast a mind, perhaps, to make an exception for these two
ladies. With all my heart. My Clarissa has, if woman has, a soul
capable of friendship. Her flame is bright and steady. But Miss
Howe's, were it not kept up by her mother's opposition, is too vehement
to endure. How often have I known opposition not only cement
Friendship, but create Love? I doubt not but poor Hickman would fare
the better with this vixen, if her mother were as heartily against
him, as she is for him. 
Thus much indeed, as to these two ladies, I will grant thee; that
the active spirit of the one, and the meek disposition of the other,
may make their friendship more durable than it would otherwise be; 
for this is certain, that in every friendship, whether male or female,
there must be a man and a woman spirit (that is to say, one of them,
a forbearing one) to make it permanent. 
But this I pronounce, as a truth, which all experience confirms; 
that friendship between women never holds to the sacrifice of capital gratifications,
or to the endangering of life, limb, or estate, as it often
does in our nobler sex. 
Well, but next comes an indictment against poor Beauty! –––What
has Beauty done, that Miss Howe should be offended at it? –––Miss
Howe, Jack, is a charming girl. She has no reason to quarrel with
Beauty! –––Didst ever see her? –––Too much fire and spirit in her eye
indeed, for a girl! –––But that's no fault with a man, that can lower
that fire and spirit at pleasure; and I know I am the man that can. 
A sweet auburn Beauty, is Miss Howe. A first Beauty among
beauties, when her sweeter friend (with such a commixture of serene
gracefulness, of natural elegance, of native sweetness, yet conscious,
tho' not arrogant, dignity, every feature glowing with intelligence) is
not in company. 
The difference between the two, when together, I have sometimes
delighted to read, in the addresses of a stranger entering into the presence
of both, when standing side by side. There never was an instance,
on such an occasion, where the stranger paid not his first devoirs to my
Clarissa. 
A respectful solemn awe sat upon every feature of the addresser's
face. His eye seemed to ask leave to approach her; and lower than
common, whether man or woman, was the bow or courtesy. And
altho' this awe was immediately diminished by her condescending sweetness,
yet went it not so intirely off, but that you might see the reverence
remain, as if the person saw more of the goddess, than the
woman in her. 
But the moment the same stranger turns to Miss Howe (tho'
proud and saucy, and erect and bridling, she) you will observe by the
turn of his countenance, and the air of his address, a kind of equality 

assumed. He appears to have discovered the woman in her, charming
as that woman is. He smiles. He seems to expect repartee and
smartness, and is never disappointed. But then visibly he prepares
himself to give as well as take. He dares, after he has been a while
in her company, to dispute a point with her—Every point yielded
up to the other, tho' no assuming or dogmatical air compels it. 
In short, with Miss Howe a bold man sees (No doubt but Sir
George Colmar did), that he and she may either very soon be familiar
together (I mean with innocence), or he may so far incur her displeasure,
as to be forbid her presence for ever. 
For my own part, when I was first introduced to this lady, which
was by my goddess, when she herself was a visiter at Mrs. Howe's; 
I had not been half an hour with her, but I even hungred and
thirsted after a romping-bout with the lively rogue; and in the second
or third visit, was more deterred by the delicacy of her friend, than
by what I apprehended from her own. This charming creature's
presence, thought I, awes us both. And I wished her absence, tho'
any other lady were present, that I might try the difference in Miss
Howe's behaviour before her friend's face, or behind her back. 
Delicate ladies make delicate ladies, as well as decent men. With
all Miss Howe's fire and spirit, it was easy to see, by her very eye,
that she watched for lessons, and feared reproof from the penetrating
eye of her milder-disposition'd friend (a) : And yet it was as easy to
observe, in the candor and sweet manners of the other, that the fear
which Miss Howe stood in of her, was more owing to her own generous
apprehension, that she fell short of her excellencies, than to Miss
Harlowe's consciousness of excellence over her. I have often, since I
came at Miss Howe's letters, revolved this just and fine praise contained
in one of them (b) . ‘Every one saw, that the preference each
gave you to herself, exalted you not into any visible triumph over her; 
for you had always something to say, on every point you carried,
that raised the yielding heart, and left every one pleased and satisfied
with herself, tho' she carried not off the palm.’ 
As I propose in my more advanced life, to endeavour to atone for
my youthful freedoms with individuals of the sex, by giving caution
and instructions to the whole, I have made a memorandum to inlarge
upon this doctrine;–––to wit, That it is full as necessary to direct daughters
in the choice of their female companions, as it is to guard them
against the designs of men. 
I say not this, however, to the disparagement of Miss Howe. She
has from pride, what her friend has from principle. [The Lord help
the sex, if they had not pride!] –––But yet I am confident, that Miss Howe
is indebted to the conversation and correspondence of Miss Harlowe for
her highest improvements. But, both these ladies out of the question,
I make no scruple to averr [And I, Jack, should know something of
the matter], that there have been more girls ruined, at least prepared 

for ruin, by their own sex (taking in servants, as well as companions),
than directly by the attempts and delusions of men. 
But it is time enough, when I am old and joyless, to enlarge upon
this topic. 
As to the comparison between the two ladies, I will expatiate more
on that subject (for I like it) when I have had them both––––Which
this letter of the vixen girl's, I hope thou wilt allow, warrants me
to try for. 
I return to the consideration of a few more of its contents, to justify
my vengeance, so nearly now in view. 
As to Mrs. Townsend; her manlike spirit; her two brothers; and
their ships crews–––I say nothing but this to the insolent threatening––– 
Let 'em come!––– 
But as to her sordid menace–––To repay the horrid villain, as she
calls me, for all my vileness, by BROKEN BONES! –––Broken bones,
Belford! –––Who can bear this porterly threatning! –––Broken bones,
Jack! –––Damn the little vulgar–––Give me a name for her–––But I
banish all furious resentment. If I get these two girls into my power,
Heaven forbid that I should be a second Phalaris, and turn his bull
upon the artist! No bones of theirs will I break! –––They shall come
off with me upon much lighter terms!––– 
But these fellows are smugglers, it seems. And am not I a smuggler
too? –––I have not the least doubt, that I shall have secured my
goods before Thursday or Wednesday either. 
But did I want a plot, what a charming new one does this letter
of Miss Howe strike me out? I am almost sorry, that I have fixed
upon one. –––For here, how easy would it be for me, to assemble a
crew of swabbers, and to create a Mrs. Townsend (whose person, thou
seest, my Beloved knows not) to come on Tuesday, at Miss Howe's
renewed urgency, in order to carry my Beloved to a warehouse of my
own providing? 
This, however, is my triumphant hope, that at the very time,
that these ragamuffins will be at Hamstead (looking for us), my dear
Miss Harlowe and I (so the fates, I imagine, have ordained) shall be
fast asleep in each other's arms in town. –––Lie still, villain, till the
time comes. –––My heart, Jack; my heart! –––It is always thumping
away on the remotest prospects of this nature. 
But, it seems, that the vileness of this specious monster (meaning me
Jack!) has brought Hickman into credit with her. So I have done
some good! –––But to whom, I cannot tell: For this poor fellow,
should I permit him to have this termagant, will be punished, as many
times we all are, by the enjoyment of his own wishes. –––Nor can she
be happy, as I take it, with him, were he to govern himself by her
will, and have none of his own; since never was there a directing
wife, who knew where to stop: Power makes such a one wanton––– 
She despises the man she can govern. Like Alexander, who wept,
that he had no more worlds to conquer, she will be looking out for
new exercises for her power, till she grow uneasy to herself, a discredit
to her husband, and a plague to all about her. 
But this honest fellow, it seems, with tears in his eyes, and with
humble prostration, besought the vixen to permit him to set out in his
chariot and four, in order to give himself the glory of protecting such 

an oppressed innocent, in the face of the whole world. –––Nay, he rodden'd,
it seems; and trembled too! as he read the fair complainant's
letter. –––How valiant is all this! –––Women love brave men; and no
wonder, that his tears, his trembling, and his prostration, gave him
high reputation with the meek Miss Howe. 
But dost think, Jack, that I, in the like case (and equally affected
with the distress) should have acted thus? –––Dost think, that I should
not first have rescued the lady, and then, if needful, have asked excuse
for it, the lady in my hand? –––Wouldest not thou have done thus, as
well as I? 
But 'tis best as it is. Honest Hickman may now sleep in a whole
skin. And yet that is more perhaps than he would have done (the
lady's deliverance unattempted), had I come at this requested permission
of his any other way, than by a letter, that it must not be known I
have intercepted. 
She thinks I may be diverted from pursuing my charmer, by some
new-started villainy. Villainy is a word that she is extremely fond of. 
But I can tell her, that it is impossible I should, till the end of this villainy
be obtained. Difficulty is a stimulus with such a spirit as mine. 
I thought Miss Howe knew me better. Were she to offer herself,
person for person, in the romancing zeal of her friendship, to save her
friend, it should not do, while the dear creature is on this side the
moon. 
She thanks Heaven, that her friend has received her letter of the
7th. We are all glad of it. She ought to thank me too. But I will
not at present claim her thanks. 
But when she rejoices, that that letter went safe, does she not, in
effect, call out for vengeance, and expect it? –––All in good time, Miss
Howe. When settest thou out for the Isle of Wight, Love? 
I will close at this time with desiring thee to make a list of the virulent
terms with which the inclosed letter abounds: And then, if
thou supposest, that I have made such another, and have added to it
all the flowers of the same blow, in the former letters of the same
saucy creature, and those in that of Miss Harlowe, left for me on her
elopement, thou wilt certainly think, that I have provocations sufficient
to justify me in all I shall do to either. 
Return the inclosed the moment thou hast perused it. 
