



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Monday Night, Aug. 28. 
I doubt you will be all impatience, that you have
not heard from me since mine of Thursday last. 
You would be still more so, if you knew that I had by
me a Letter ready-written. 
I went early yesterday morning to Epsom; and found
every-thing disposed according to the directions I had
left on Friday; and at night the solemn office was performed. 
Tourville was there; and behaved very decently,
and with greater concern than I thought he
would ever have expressed for any-body. 
Thomasine, they told me, in a kind of disguise,
was in an obscure pew, out of curiosity (for it seems
she was far from shewing any tokens of grief) to see the 

last office performed for the man whose heart she had
so largely contributed to break. 
I was obliged to stay till this afternoon, to settle several
necessary matters, and to direct inventories to
be taken, in order for appraisement; for every-thing
is to be turned into money, by his Will. I presented
his Sister with the hundred guineas the poor man left
me as his Executor, and desired her to continue in
the house, and take the direction of every-thing, till
I could hear from his Nephew at Antigua, who is
Heir at Law. He had left her but Fifty Pounds,
altho' he knew her indigence; and that it was owing
to a vile Husband, and not to herself, that she was
indigent. 
The poor man left about two hundred pounds in
money, and two hundred pounds in two East-India
bonds; and I will contrive, if I can, to make up the
poor woman's fifty pounds, and my hundred guineas,
two hundred pounds to her; and then she will have
some little matter coming in certain, which I will
oblige her to keep out of the hands of a Son, who has
completed that ruin which his Father had very near
effected. 
I gave Tourville his twenty pounds, and will send
you and Mowbray yours by the first order. 
And so much for poor Belton's affairs till I see you. 
I got to town in the Evening, and went directly to
Smith's. I found Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith in
the back-shop, and I saw they had been both in tears. 
They rejoiced to see me, however; and told me,
that the Doctor and Mr. Goddard were but just gone; 
as was also the worthy Clergyman who often comes
to pray by her; and all three were of opinion, that
she would hardly live to see the entrance of another
week. I was not so much surprised as grieved; for
I had feared as much when I left her on Saturday. 
I sent up my compliments; and she returned, that
she would take it for a favour if I would call upon her 

in the morning, by Eight o'clock. Mrs. Lovick told
me, That she had fainted away on Saturday, while
she was writing, as she had done likewise the day before; 
and having received benefit then by a little turn
in a chair, she was carried abroad again. She returned
somewhat better; and wrote till late; yet had a pretty
good night; and went to Covent-garden Church in
the morning: But came home so ill, that she was
obliged to lie down. 
When she arose, seeing how much grieved Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith were for her, she made apologies
for the trouble she gave them—You were happy,
said she, before I came hither. It was a cruel
thing in me to come among honest strangers, and to
be sick, and die with you. 
When they touched upon the irreconcileableness of
her friends, I have had ill offices done me to them,
said she, and they do not know how ill I am; nor
will they believe any-thing I should write. But yet
I cannot sometimes forbear thinking it a little hard,
that out of so many near and dear friends as I have
living, not one of them will vouchsafe to look upon
me. No old servant, no old friend, proceeded she,
to be permitted to come near me, without being
sure of incurring displeasure! And to have such a
great work to go thro' by myself, a young creature
as I am, and to have every-thing to think of as to my
temporal matters, and to order, to my very interrment! 
No dear Mother, said the sweet Sufferer, to
pray by me and bless me! —No kind Sister to sooth
and comfort me! —But come, recollected she, how
do I know but all is for the best—If I can but make
a right use of my discomforts? —Pray for me, Mrs.
Lovick—Pray for me, Mrs. Smith, that I may—I
have great need of your prayers. —This cruel man
has discomposed me. His persecutions have given me
a pain just here [putting her hand to her heart]
What a step has he made me take to avoid him! — 

Who can touch pitch, and not be defiled? He has made
a bad spirit take possession of me, I think—Broken
in upon all my duties. And will not yet, I doubt,
let me be at rest. Indeed he is very cruel—But, this
is one of my trials, I believe. By God's grace, I
shall be easier to-morrow, and especially if I have no
more of his tormentings, and if I can get a tolerable
night. And I will sit up till Eleven, that I may. 
She said, That tho' this was so heavy a day with
her, she was at other times, within these few days
past especially, blessed with bright hours; and particularly,
that she had now-and-then such joyful assurances
(which she hoped were not presumptuous ones)
that God would receive her to his mercy, that she
could hardly contain herself, and was ready to think
herself above this earth while she was in it: And what,
inferred she to Mrs. Lovick, must be the State itself,
the very aspirations after which have often cast a
beamy light thro' the thickest darkness, and when I
have been at the lowest ebb, have dispelled the black
clouds of despondency? —As I hope they soon will
this spirit of repining. 
She had a pretty good night, it seems; and this
morning went in a chair to St. Dunstan's Church. 
The chairmen told Mrs. Smith, that after prayers
(for she did not return till between Nine and Ten)
they carried her to a house in Fleet-street, whither
they never waited on her before. And where dost
think this was? —Why, to an Undertaker's! Good
Heaven! what a woman is this! She went into the
back-shop, and talked with the master of it about
half an hour, and came from him with great serenity; 
he waiting upon her to her chair with a respectful
countenance, but full of curiosity and seriousness. 
'Tis evident, that she then went to bespeak her
house that she talked of (a) . —As soon as you can, Sir,
were her words to him as she got into the chair. 

Mrs. Smith told me this with the same surprize and
grief that I heard it. 
She was very ill in the afternoon, having got cold
either at St. Dunstan's, or at Chapel, and sent for
the Clergyman to pray by her; and the women, unknown
to her, sent both for Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard: 
Who were just gone, as I told you, when I
came to pay my respects to her this evening. 
And thus have I recounted from the good women
what passed to this night since my absence. 
I long for to-morrow, that I may see her: And
yet 'tis such a melancholy longing, as I never experienced,
and know not how to describe. 
Tuesday, Aug. 29. 
I was at Smith's at half an hour after Seven. They
told me that the Lady was gone in a chair to St. Dunstan's; 
but was better than she had been in either of
the two preceding days; and that she said to Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith, as she went into the chair,
I have a good deal to answer for to you, my good
friends, for my vapourish conversation of last night. 
If, Mrs. Lovick, said she smiling, I have no new
matters to discompose me, I believe my spirits will
hold out purely. 
She returned immediately after prayers. 
Mr. Belford, said she, as she entered the backshop
where I was (and upon my approaching her) I
am very glad to see you. You have been performing
for your poor friend a kind last office. 'Tis not long
ago since you did the same for a near relation. Is it
not a little hard upon you, that these troubles should
fall so thick to your lot? But they are charitable
offices: And it is a praise to your humanity, that
poor dying people know not where to chuse so well. 
I told her I was sorry to hear she had been so ill
since I had the honour to attend her; but rejoiced to
find, that now she seemed a good deal better. 

It will be sometimes better, and sometimes worse,
replied she, with poor creatures, when they are balancing
between life and death. But no more of these
matters just now. I hope, Sir, you'll breakfast with
me. I was quite vapourish yesterday. I had a very
bad spirit upon me. Had I not, Mrs. Smith? But I
hope I shall be no more so. And to-day I am perfectly
serene. This day rises upon me as if it would
be a bright one. 
She desired me to walk up, and invited Mr. Smith
and his wife, and Mrs. Lovick also, to breakfast with
her. I was better pleased with her liveliness than with
her looks. 
The good people retiring after breakfast, the following
conversation passed between us. 
Pray, Sir, let me ask you, said she, if you think I
may promise myself that I shall be no more molested
by your friend? 
I hesitated: For how could I answer for such a
man? 
What shall I do, if he comes again? —You see how
I am. —I cannot fly from him now—If he has any
pity left for the poor creature whom he has thus reduced,
let him not come. —But have you heard from
him lately? And will he come? 
I hope not, Madam. I have not heard from him
since Thursday last, that he went out of town, rejoicing
in the hopes your Letter gave him of a Reconciliation
between your friends and you, and that he
might in good time see you at your Father's; and he
is gone down to give all his friends joy of the news,
and is in high spirits upon it. 
Alas for me! I shall then surely have him come up
to persecute me again! As soon as he discovers that
That was only a stratagem to keep him away, he will
come up; and who knows but even now he is upon
the road? I thought I was so bad, that I should have
been out of his and every-body's way before now; for 

I expected not, that this contrivance would serve me
above two or three days; and by this time he must have
found out, that I am not so happy as to have any hope
of a Reconciliation with my family; and then he will
come, if it be only in revenge for what he will think a
deceit, but is not I hope a wicked one. 
I believe I looked surprised to hear her confess that
her Letter was a stratagem only; for she said, You
wonder, Mr. Belford, I observe, that I could be
guilty of such an artifice. I doubt it is not right: It
was done in a hurry of spirits. How could I see a
man who had so mortally injured me; yet, pretending
sorrow for his crimes (and wanting to see me)
could behave with so much shocking levity, as he
did to the honest people of the house? Yet, 'tis
strange too, that neither you nor he found out my
meaning on perusal of my Letter. You have seen
what I wrote, no doubt? 
I have, Madam. And then I began to account
for it, as an innocent artifice. 
Thus far indeed, Sir, it is innocent, that I meant
him no hurt, and had a right to the effect I hoped
for from it; and he had none to invade me. But
have you, Sir, that Letter of his in which he gives
you (as I suppose he does) the Copy of mine? 
I have, Madam. And pulled it out of my Letter-case: 
But hesitating—Nay, Sir, said she, be
pleased to read my Letter to yourself—I desire not to
see his—and see if you can be longer a stranger to a
meaning so obvious. 
I re'd it to myself—Indeed, Madam, I can find
nothing but that you are going down to Harlowe-Place
to be reconciled to your Father and other
Friends: And Mr. Lovelace presumed that a Letter
from your Sister, which he saw brought when he was
at Mr. Smith's, gave you the welcome news of it. 
She then explained all to me, and that, as I may
say, in Six words—A religious meaning is couched 

under it, and that's the reason that neither you nor I
could find it out. 
‘Read but for my Father's house, Heaven, said
she, and for the interposition of my dear blessed
friend, suppose the Mediation of my Saviour (which
I humbly rely upon); and all the rest of the Letter
will be accounted for.’ I hope (repeated she)
that it is a pardonable artifice. But I am afraid it is
not strictly right. 
I re'd it so, and stood astonished for a minute at her
Invention, her Piety, her Charity, and at thine and
mine own Stupidity, to be thus taken in. 
And now, thou vile Lovelace, what hast thou to
do (the Lady all consistent with herself, and no hopes
left for thee) but to hang, drown, or shoot thyself,
for an outwitted boaster? 
My surprize being a little over, she proceeded: 
As to the Letter that came from my Sister while your
friend was here, you will soon see, Sir, that it is the
cruellest Letter she ever wrote me. 
And then she expressed a deep concern for what
might be the consequence of Col. Morden's intended
visit to you; and besought me, that if now, or at
any time hereafter, I had opportunity to prevent any
further mischief, without detriment or danger to myself,
I would do it. 
I assured her of the most particular attention to
this and to all her commands; and that in a manner
so agreeable to her, that she invoked a blessing upon
me for my goodness, as she called it, to a desolate
creature who suffered under the worst of Orphanage; 
those were her words. 
She then went back to her first subject, her uneasiness
for fear of your molesting her again; and said,
If you have any influence over him, Mr. Belford,
prevail upon him, that he will give me the assurance,
that the short remainder of my time shall be all my
own. I have need of it. Indeed I have. Why will 

he wish to interrupt me in my duty? Has he not
punished me enough for my preference of him to all
his Sex? Has he not destroyed my fame and my fortune? 
And will not his causless vengeance upon me
be complete, unless he ruin my Soul too? —Excuse
me, Sir, for this vehemence! But indeed it greatly
imports me, to know that I shall be no more disturbed
by him. And yet, with all this aversion, I
would sooner give way to his visit, tho' I were to
expire the moment I saw him, than to be the cause
of any fatal misunderstanding between you and him. 
I assured her, that I would make such a representation
of the matter to you, and of the state of her
health, that I would undertake to answer for you, that
you would not attempt to come near her. 
And for this reason, Lovelace, do I lay the whole
matter before you, and desire you will authorize me,
as soon as this and mine of Saturday last come to your
hands, to dissipate her fears. 
This gave her a little satisfaction; and then she
said, that had I not told her that I could promise for
you, she was determined, ill as she is, to remove
somewhere out of my knowlege as well as out of yours. 
And yet, to have been obliged to leave people I am
but just got acquainted with, said the poor Lady, and
to have died among perfect strangers, would have
completed my hardships. 
This conversation, I found, as well from the
length, as the nature of it, had fatigued her; and
seeing her change colour once or twice, I made that
my excuse, and took leave of her: Desiring her permission,
however, to attend her in the evening; and
as often as possible; for I could not help telling her,
that every time I saw her, I more and more considered
her as a beatified spirit; and as one sent from Heaven
to draw me after her out of the miry gulph in which
I had been so long immersed. 
And laugh at me if thou wilt; but it is true, that 

every time I approach her, I cannot but look upon her,
as one just entering into a Companionship with Saints
and Angels. This thought so wholly possessed me,
that I could not help begging, as I went away, her
prayers and her blessing; with the reverence due to
an Angel. 
In the evening, she was so low and weak, that I
took my leave of her, in less than a quarter of an
hour. I went directly home. Where, to the pleasure
and wonder of my Cousin and her Family, I now
pass many honest evenings: Which they impute to
your being out of town. 
I shall dispatch my packet to-morrow morning early
by my own servant, to make thee amends for the
suspense I must have kept thee in: Thou'lt thank me
for that, I hope; but wilt not, I am sure, for sending
thy servant back without a Letter. 
I long for the particulars of the conversation between
you and Mr. Morden: The Lady, as I have
hinted, is full of apprehensions about it. Send me
back this packet when perused; for I have not had
either time or patience to take a copy of it. —And I
beseech you enable me to make good my engagements
to the poor Lady that you will not invade her
again. 