



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday Night, 11 o'Clock. 
Faith, Jack, thou hadst half undone me with
thy nonsense, tho' I would not own it in my yesterday's
Letter: My Conscience of thy party before. 
—But I think I am my own man again. 
So near to execution my Plot; so near springing
my Mine; all agreed upon between the women and
me; or I believe thou hadst overthrown me. 
I have time for a few lines preparative to what is
to happen in an hour or two; and I love to write to
the moment. 
We have been extremely happy. How many
agreeable days have we known together! —What may
the next two hours produce! 

When I parted with my Charmer (which I did,
with infinite reluctance, half an hour ago) it was upon
her promise, that she would not sit up to write
or read. For so engaging was the conversation to
me (and indeed my behaviour throughout the whole
of it was confessedly agreeable to her) that I insisted,
if she did not directly retire to rest, that she should
add another happy hour to the former. 
To have sat up writing or reading half the night,
as she sometimes does, would have frustrated my
view, as thou wilt observe, when my little plot unravels. 
* *
What—What—What now! —Bounding villain!
wouldst thou choak me!— 
I was speaking to my heart, Jack! —It was then at
my throat. —And what is all this for? —These shy
women, how, when a man thinks himself near the
mark, do they tempest him! 
* *
Is all ready, Dorcas? Has my Beloved kept her
word with me? —Whether are these billowy heavings
owing more to Love or to Fear? I cannot tell for
the soul of me, of which I have most. If I can but
take her before her apprehension, before her eloquence,
is awake— 
Limbs, why thus convulsed? —Knees, till now so
firmly knit, why thus relaxed? Why beat ye thus
together? Will not these trembling fingers, which
twice have refused to direct the pen, fail me in the
arduous moment? 
Once again, Why and for what all these convulsions? 
This project is not to end in Matrimony,
surely! 
But the consequences must be greater than I had
thought of till this moment—My Beloved's destiny
or my own may depend upon the issue of the two
next hours! 

I will recede, I think!— 
* *
Soft, O virgin saint, and safe as soft, be thy
slumbers! 
I will now once more turn to my friend Belford's
Letter. Thou shalt have fair play, my Charmer. 
I will re-peruse what thy advocate has to say for
thee. Weak arguments will do, in the frame I am
in!— 
But, what, what's the matter! —What a double— 
But the uproar abates! —What a double coward am
I? —Or is it that I am taken in a cowardly minute?
for Heroes have their fits of fear; Cowards their
brave moments; and Virtuous Women, all but my
Clarissa, their moment critical— 
But thus coolly enjoying thy reflections in a hurricane! 
—Again the confusion is renewed!— 
What! Where! —How came it!— 
Is my Beloved safe?— 
O wake not too roughly my Beloved!— 