


Mrs. Jewkes has receiv'd a Line from my
Master. I wonder what it is; for his
Chariot is come home without him. But she
will tell me nothing; so it is in vain to ask her. 
I am so fearful of Plots and Tricks, I know
not what to do! Every thing I suspect; for now
my Disgrace is avow'd, what can I think! To
be sure the worst will be attempted! I can only
pour out my Soul in Prayer to God, for his
blessed Protection. But if I must suffer, let me
not be long a mournful Survivor! –––Only let
me not shorten my own Time sinfully!––– 
This Woman left upon the Table, in the
Chamber, this Letter of my Master's to her; 
and I bolted myself in, till I had transcrib'd it; 
you'll see how tremblingly, by the Lines. I
wish poor Mr. Williams's Release at any Rate; 
but this Letter makes my Heart ake. Yet I have
another Day's Reprieve, thank God! 


“Mrs. Jewkes,
I have been so press'd on Williams's
Affair, that I shall set out this Afternoon,
in Sir Simon's Chariot, and with Parson Peters,
who is his Intercessor, for Stamford;
and shall not be back till to-morrow Evening,
if then. As to your Ward, I am thoroughly
incensed against her. She has withstood
her Time; and now, would she sign
and seal to my Articles, it is too late. I
shall discover something, perhaps, by him; 
and will, on my Return, let her know, that
all her ensnaring Loveliness shall not save her
from the Fate that awaits her. But let her
know nothing of this, lest it put her fruitful
Mind upon Plots and Artifices. Besure trust
her not without another with you at Night,
lest she venture the Window in her foolish
Rashness: For I shall require her at your
Hands. 
“Yours, &c.” 

I had but just finished taking a Copy of this,
and laid the Letter where I had it, and unbolted
the Door, when she came up in a great Fright,
for fear I should have seen it; but I being in my
Closet, and that lying as she left it, she did
not mistrust. O, said she, I was afraid you
had seen my Master's Letter here, which I carelesly
left on the Table. I wish, said I, I had 

known that. Why sure, said she, if you had,
you would not have offered to read my Letter! 
Indeed, said I, I should, at this time, if it
had been in my way. —Do, let me see it. — 
Well, said she, I wish poor Mr. Williams well off; 
I understand my Master is gone to make up Matters
with him; which is very good. To be
sure, added she, he is a very good Gentleman,
and very forgiving! —Why said I, as if I had
known nothing of the Matter, how can he
make up Matters with him? Is not Mr. Williams
at Stamford? Yes, said she, I believe so; 
but Parson Peters pleads for him, and he is
gone with him to Stamford, and will not be
back to-night: So, we have nothing to do, but
to eat our Suppers betimes, and go to-bed. Ay,
that's pure, said I; and I shall have good Rest,
this Night, I hope. So, said she, you might
every Night, but for your own idle Fears. You
are afraid of your Friends, when none are near
you. Ay, that's true, said I; for I have not
one near me. 
So have I one more good honest Night before
me: What the next may be, I know not, and
so I'll try to take in a good deal of Sleep, while
I can be a little easy. Therefore here I say,
Good-night, my dear Parents; for I have no
more to write about this Night: And tho' his
Letter shocks me, yet I will be as brisk as I can,
that she mayn't suspect I have seen it. 
