


Lady Clementina della Porretta, To Sir
Charles Grandison. 


Bologna, Tuesday, Aug. 5. N.S.
I Was the more willing, Sir, to become your correspondent,
as I thought I could write to you
with greater freedom, than I could speak. And indeed
I will be very free, and very sincere, in all I shall
write. I will suppose, that I am writing, when I
write to you, to my Brother, and best friend. And
indeed to which of my other brothers can I write, with
equal freedom? —You, in imitation of the God of us
all, require only the heart. My heart shall be as open
to you, as if, like Him, you could look into every secret
recess of it. 
I thank you, Sir, for the kind and generous contents
of the Letter, by which you have opened this desirable
correspondence. Such a regard have you paid
in it to the weakness of my mind, and to its late unhappy
state, without mentioning that unhappy state— 
O Sir, you are the most delicate of men—What tenderness
have you always shewn me, for my attachment
to the religion of my fathers—Surely, you are
the most pious of Protestants! —Protestants can be pious; 

you and Mrs. Beaumont have convinced me that
they can. Little did I think I should ever be brought
to acknowlege so much in favour of the people of your
religion, as you and she, by your goodness, have
brought me to acknowlege. O Sir! What might you
not have brought me to, by your Love, by your kind
treatment of me, and by your irresistable address, were
I to have been yours, and residing in a Protestant nation,
every one of your friends of that religion, and
all amiable, and perhaps exemplarily good? I was afraid
of you, Chevalier. But no more of this subject. You
are invincible; and I hope I should not have been
overcome, had I been yours—But do we not pray
against running into temptation? —Again, I say, no
more of this subject at present, yet hardly know how
to forbear— 
Nothing but the due consideration of the brevity as
well as vanity of this life, in which we are but probationers,
and of the eternity of the next, could have
influenced me to act against my heart. Dear Chevalier,
how happy should I have been, could I have given
my hand as that heart would have directed, and on
such terms, as I could have thought my Soul secure? 
—How shall I quit this entangling subject? I am in
the midst of briars and thorns—Lend me, lend me,
your extricating hand; and conduct me into the smooth
and pleasant path, in which you at first found me
walking with undoubting feet. Never, never, for my
sake, let an unexperienced virgin trust herself with her
own imagination, when she begins to meditate, with
pleasure, the great qualities of an object, with whom
she has frequent opportunities of conversing. 
Again am I recurring to a subject I wish to quit. 
But since I cannot, I will give my pen its course— 
Pen, take thy course. Mind, equally perverse and disturbed,
I will give way to thee; I see there is no
withstanding thee— 
Tell me, then, my brother, my friend, my faithful, 

my disinterested friend, what I shall do, what method
take, to be indifferent to you, in another character? 
What I shall do, to be able to look upon
you, only as my brother and friend? —Can you not
tell me? Will you not? Will not your Love of Clementina
permit you to tell her? —I will help you to
words—Say, “you are the friend of her Soul.” 
If you cannot be a Catholic always, be a Catholic
when you advise her. And then, from your love of
her Soul, you will be able to say, “Persevere, Clementina!
and I will not account you ungrateful”— 
O Chevalier! I fear nothing so much as being
thought capable of ingratitude, by those I love. And
am I not, can you think, that I am not, ungrateful? 
Once you told me so. Why, if you mean me more
than a compliment, do you not tell me how to be
grateful? Are you the only man on earth, who have
it in your will, and in your power, to confer obligations,
yet can be above receiving returns? What services
did you endeavour to do to the Soul of a misguided
youth, at your first acquaintance with him!— 
Unhappy youth! And how did he at the time requite
you for them! He has let us know (generous self-accuser!)
what heroic patience you had with him; and
how bravely you disdained his ungrateful defiance. 
Well may he love you as he does. After many, many
months discontinuance of friendship, you were called
upon to snatch him from the jaws of death, by your
bravery. You were not requited, as you might have
expected, from some of our family—What regret has
the recollection cost us all! —You were obliged to quit
our Italy; yet, called upon, as I may say, by your
wounded friend; incurably wounded, as it was apprehended; 
you hastened to him: You hastened to
his sister, wounded in her head, in her heart: You
hastened to her father, mother, brothers, wounded
in their minds, by the sufferings of that son and daughter. 
And whence did you hasten to us? From your 

native country. Quitting your relations, all proud of
your Love, and proud of loving you; on the wings
of friendly zeal did you hasten to us, in a distant region. 
You encountered with, you overcame, a thousand
obstacles. The genius of healing, in the form
of a skilful operator, accompanying you; all the art of
the physicians of your country did you collect, to assist
your noble purpose. Success attended your generous
wishes. We see one another, a whole family see one
another, with that delight, which was wont to irradiate
our countenances, before disaster overclouded
them. 
And now, what return shall we make for your
goodness to us? You say, you are already rewarded
in the success with which God has blessed your generous
endeavours to serve us. Hence it is, that I call
you proud, and, at the same time, happy. Well do
I know, that it is not in the power of a wife to reward
you. For what could a wife do by such a man
more than her duty? And were it possible for Clementina
to be yours, would you that your kindness,
your love to her, should be rewarded at the price of
her everlasting happiness? —No, you answer—You
would leave to her the full and free exercise of her
religion—And can you promise, can you, the Chevalier
Grandison, undertake, if you think your wife
in an error, that you never will endeavour to cure
her of that error? You who, as the husband, ought
to be the regulator of her conscience; the strengthener
of her mind—Can you, believing your own religion
a right one, hers a wrong one, be contented that she
shall persevere in it? Or can she avoid, on the same,
and even still stricter principles, entering into debate
with you? And will not then her faith, from your superior
understanding, be endangered? —Of what force
will be my Confessor's arguments, against yours,
strengthened by your love, your kindness, your sweetness
of manners? And how will all my family grieve, 

were Clementina to become indifferent to them, to her
country, and more than indifferent to her religion? 
Say, Grandison, my tutor, my friend, my brother,
can you be indifferent on these weighty matters? — 
O no, you cannot. My brother, the Bishop, has
told me (But be not angry with my brother for telling
me) that you did declare to my elder brother and him,
that you would not, in a beginning address, have granted
to a princess the terms you were willing to grant
me; and that you offered them to me as a compromise! 
—Compassion and Love were equally perhaps
your inducements. Poor Clementina! —Yet, were
there not a greater obstacle in the way, I would have
accepted of your compassion; because you are great
and good; and there can be no insult, but true godlike
pity, in your compassion—Well, Sir, and do not
my father, my mother, the best and most indulgent
of fathers and mothers; and do not my uncle, and
brothers, and my other kindred; comply with their
Clementina, upon the same affectionate, the same
pitying motive; otherwise religion, country, the one
so different, the other so remote, would they have
consented? —They would not. Will you not then,
my dear Chevalier, think that I do but right (knowing
your motive, knowing theirs, knowing that to rely
upon my own strength is presumption, and a tempting
of the Almighty) to act as I act, to resolve as I
have resolved—O do you, my tutor, be again my tutor
—You never taught me a lesson that either of us
might be ashamed to own—Do you, as I have begged
of you in my paper, strengthen my mind. I
own to you, that I have struggled much with myself:
And now I am got—above myself, or beneath myself,
I know not whether—For my Letter is not such as I
designed it. You are too much the subject: I designed
only a few lines; and those to express the grateful
sense I have of your goodness to me, and our Jeronymo; 
indeed to every-body; and to beg of you, 

for the sake of my peace of mind, to point out some
way, by which I, and all of us, may demonstrate our
attachment to our superior duties, and our gratitude
to you— 
What have I said? What a quantity have I written! 
—Excuse my wandering head; and believe me to be,
as much the wellwisher of your glory, as of my own. 
Clementina della Porretta. 

