



From Miss Darnford to Lady Darnford. 


My honoured Mamma,
You cannot conceive how you and my dear
Papa have delighted the Heart of my good Mrs.
B. and obliged her Mr. B. by the Permission you
have given me to attend her till the important Hour
shall be over with her; for the dear Lady is exceedingly
apprehensive, and one can hardly blame her; 
for I don't believe there is such a happy Couple in
the World. 
I am glad to hear, that the Ceremony is over, so
much to both your Satisfactions: May this Matrimony
be but a Tenth Part as happy, as that I am Witness
to; and Mr. and Mrs. Murray will have that to boast
of, which few married People have, even among
those we call happy! 
For my Part, I believe I shall never care to marry
at all; for tho' I cannot be so deserving, yet I shall
not bear to think of an Husband much less excellent
than Mr. B. And by what I see in her Apprehensions,
and by what I can conceive of the Circumstance;
I don't think a young Lady can be requited with a
less worthy one, for all she suffers on an Husband's 

Account, and for the sake of his Family and
Name. 
Mrs. Andrews, a discreet worthy Soul, as ever I
knew, and who in her Aspect and Behaviour, is far
from being a Disgrace even to Mr. B.'s Lady, is
with her dear Daughter, to her no small Satisfaction,
as you may suppose; who now-and-then says, What
a foolish Creature, my dear Mother, have you for a
Daughter! –––You did not behave so weakly as I do,
when you were in the same Circumstances, I dare
say; and yet you had a dear good Husband, tho'
not a rich one, to hope to live for! ––––But, come, I
will have a good Heart, to make myself as worthy of
the Company and Chearings of Three such Friends,
as I am bless'd with, in my Mother, my Miss Darnford,
and Mrs. Jervis! 
Mr. B. ask'd my Advice Yesterday, about having
in the House a Midwife, to be at hand, at a Moment's
Warning. I told him I fear'd the Sight of
such a Person would terrify her: And so he instantly
started an Expedient, which her Mother, Mrs. Jervis,
and myself, approved of, and have put into
Practice; for, this Day, I have Mrs. Harris, a distant
Relation of mine, tho' not of yours, Sir and
Madam, come to make me a Visit from Essex, and
Mr. B. was so good as to prevail upon her, in Compliment
to me, as was pretended, to accept of her
Board in his House, while she stays in Town, which,
she says, will be about a Week. 
Now, you must know, that this Mrs. Harris being
a discreet, modest, matron-like Person, Mrs. B.
took a Liking to her at first Sight, and is already
very familiar with her; and understanding that she
is a Gentlewoman who was a Doctor of Physick's
Lady, and takes as much Delight in administring to
the Health of her own Sex, as her Husband used to do
to that of both, Mrs. B. says, It is very fortunate, 

that she has so experienc'd a Lady to consult, as she
is such a Novice in her own Case. 
Mr. B. however, to carry on the honest Imposture
better, just now, in Presence of Mrs. Harris,
and Mrs. Andrews, and me, ask'd the former, If it
was not necessary to have in the House the good
Woman? This frighted Mrs. B. who turn'd pale,
and said she could not bear the Thoughts of it. 
Mrs. Harris said, It was highly necessary, that Mrs.
B. if she would not permit the Gentlewoman to be
in the House, should see her; and that then, she
apprehended, there would be no Necessity, as she
suppos'd she did not live far off, to have her in the
House, since Mrs. B. was so uneasy upon that Account. 
This pleas'd Mrs. B. much, and Mrs. Thomas
was admitted to attend her. 
Now, you must know, that this is the Assistant
of my new Relation; and she, being appris'd of the
Matter, came; but never did I see so much Shyness
and Apprehension as Mrs. B. shew'd all the
time Mrs. Thomas was with her, holding sometimes
her Mother, sometimes Mrs. Harris, by the Hand,
and being ready to sweat with Terror. 
Mrs. Harris scrap'd Acquaintance with Mrs. Thomas,
who, pretending to recollect her, gave Mrs.
Harris great Praises; which increas'd Mrs. B.'s Confidence
in her: And she undertakes to govern the
Whole so, that the dreaded Mrs. Thomas need not
come till the very Moment; which is no small Pleasure
to the dear over-nice Lady. And she seems
every Hour to be better pleas'd with Mrs. Harris,
who, by her prudent Talk, will more and more familiarize
her to the Circumstance, unawares to herself
in a manner. But notwithstanding this Precaution,
of a Midwife in the House, Mr. B. intends to
have a Gentleman of the Profession in Readiness,
for fear of the worst. 

I tell Mr. B. he is very happy, in this Stratagem; 
but that, I suppose, he has been more us'd to Contrivances
of this sort, than he ought; and was so free
as to add, That I presum'd his Lady is hardly the
first he has cheated into a Child. And, indeed, I
think, Mrs. B.'s Merit to the rest of her Sex, is
very great, were it only in reforming such an uncommonly
agreeable and manly Rake as this; for
no doubt he has done, and would have done, a
world of Mischief among the Thoughtless and Indiscreet
in Upper Life; for his Taste, when at the
worst, always lay, it seems, above the Vulgar. 
Mrs. B. has written a Letter, and the Superscription
following will tell you to whom it is directed:
“To the ever honour'd and ever dear Mr. B. with
Prayers for his Health, Honour, and Prosperity in
this World, and everlasting Felicity in that to
come. P. B.” It is seal'd with black Wax, and
she gave it me this Moment, on her being taken
ill, to give to Mr. B. if she dies. But God, of his
Mercy, avert that! and preserve the dear Lady,
for the Honour of her Sex, and the Happiness of all
that know her, and particularly for that of your
Polly Darnford; for I cannot have a greater Loss, I
am sure, while my honour'd Papa and Mamma are
living: And may that be for many, very many, happy
Years! 
I will not close this Letter, till all is over: Happily,
as I hope! —Mrs. B. is better again, and has,
occasionally, made some fine Reflections, directing
herself to me, but design'd for the Benefit of her
Polly, on the Subject of the Inconsideration of some
of our Sex, with regard to this Circumstance; inferring,
that if such are her Apprehensions, tho' a
lawful Wife, and such the Danger attending this Case,
how must it leave a poor Creature destitute of all 

spiritual Consolation, (as well as of the Assistance
and Comfortings of the nearest Friends, and of a
kind Husband) when she has sacrific'd her Honour,
and cannot think of any thing so probable, as the
Moment approaches, but that God will punish her
in Kind, as she called it; that is to say, added she,
by the very Sufferings, which are the natural Consequences
of the Sin she has so wickedly committed! 
I knew what her Design was, and said, Ay, Polly,
let you and me, and every single young Body, bear
these Reflections in Mind, pronounced by so excellent
a Lady, in Moments so arduous as these! 
The Girl wept, and very movingly fell down by
the Door, on her Knees, praying to God to preserve
her dear Lady, and she should be happy for ever! 
—That, as Mrs. B. so often prettily writes, was her
Word! 
Mrs. B. is exceedingly pleas'd with my new Relation,
Mrs. Harris, as we call her, who behaves
with so much Prudence, that she suspects nothing,
and told Mrs. Jervis, she wish'd nobody else was
to come near her. And as she goes out (being a
Person of Eminence in her way) two or three times
a Day, and last Night staid out late, Mrs. B. said,
she hop'd she would not be out, when she should
wish her to be at home. 
I have the Pleasure, the very great Pleasure, my
dear Papa and Mamma, to acquaint you, and I
know you will rejoice with me upon it, that just
half an Hour ago, my dear Mrs. B. was brought to-bed
of a fine Boy. 
We are all out of our Wits for Joy almost. I
ran down to Mr. B. myself, who receiv'd me with
trembling Impatience. A Boy! a fine Boy! dear
Mr. B. said I: A Son and Heir indeed! 

But how does my Pamela? Is she safe? Is she like
to do well? We hope so, said I: Or I had not
come down to you, I'll assure you. He folded me
in his Arms, in a joyful Rapture: How happy you
make me, dearest Miss Darnford! If my Pamela is
safe, the Boy is welcome, welcome indeed! —But
when may I go up to thank my Jewel?— 
Mrs. Andrews is so overjoy'd, and so thankful,
that there's no getting her from her Knees. 
A Man and Horse is dispatch'd already to Lady
Davers; and another order'd to Kent, to the good
old Man. 
Mrs. Jervis, when I went up, said, she must go
down, and release the good Folks from their Knees; 
for, half an Hour before, they declar'd they would
not stir from that Posture, till they heard how it
went with their Lady; and when the happy News
was brought them of her Safety, and a young Master,
they were quite ecstatick, she says, in their Joy,
and not a dry Eye among them, shaking Hands,
and congratulating one another, Men and Maids:
Which must make it one of the most affecting
Sights that can be imagin'd. And Mr. Longman,
who had no Power to leave the House for three
Days past, (tho' Business requir'd his Presence in
Bedfordshire sought his worthy Principal; and never
was so much moving Joy seen, as this honest-hearted
Steward ran over with. 
I have not Mrs. B.'s Pen; so cannot draw these
affecting Scenes of Joy, as she could have done, had
she been in my Case. –––Let me only say, I never
saw such a Family-Joy in my Life: And who would
care for Royalty, and all its Pageantry, when Virtue
can thus interest every body in its Concerns, and,
on such an Occasion as this, give that general and
sincere Joy to all within its Circle, that could fill a 

Nation on the Birth of a first-born Prince from Sovereigns
the most beloved? 
I did a foolish thing in my Joy–––I gave Mr. B.
the Letter design'd for him, had an unhappy Event
follow'd: and he won't give it me again; but says,
he will obtain Mrs. B.'s Leave, when she is better,
to open it; and the happier Turn will augment his
Thankfulness to God, and Love to her, when he
shall, by this means, be blest with Sentiments so different
from what the other Case would have afforded. 
But I will get it from him, if I can, and give it her
back; for one knows not what it may contain; 
yet her Innocence and Purity make one less apprehensive
a good deal; for, I dare say, she has no Excuses
to make for Failings he knows nothing of. 
Mrs. B. had a very sharp Time. Never more,
my dear Papa, talk of a Husband to me. Indeed,
in the Mind I am in, I will never be marry'd. ––– 
Place all your Expectations on Nancy! Not one of
these Men, that I have yet seen, Mr. B. excepted,
(and you know what a Chance it was, that he
would be so good) is worth running these Risques
for! But his Indearments and Tenderness to his
Lady, his thankful and manly Gratitude and Politeness,
when he was admitted to pay his Respects to
her, and his Behaviour to Mrs. Andrews, and to us
all, tho' but for a Visit of ten Minutes, was alone
worthy of all her Risque! 
I would give you a Description of it, had I
Mrs. B.'s Pen, and of twenty agreeable Scenes and
Conversations besides: But, for want of that, must
conclude, with my humble Duty, as becomes, honour'd
Sir and Madam, 
Your ever grateful
Polly Darnford. 

You may guess at our Hurry; for I have been
Three Days writing this Letter, Piece by Piece. 

