


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Receive now, my dear, the doctor's thirteenth
Letter, and the last he intends to favour us with,
till he entertains us with the histories of Mrs. Beaumont,
and Lady Olivia. 

Dr. Bartlett's thirteenth Letter.
Mr. Grandison set out next morning. The General's
behaviour to him at his departure, was
much more open and free than it was at receiving
him. 
Mr. Grandison, on his return to Florence, entered
into the affairs of his late friend Mr. Jervois, with
the spirit, and yet with the temper, for which he is
noted, when he engages in any business. He put
every thing in a happy train in fewer days than it
would have cost some other persons months; for he
was present himself on every occasion, and in every
business, where his presence would accelerate it: Yet
he had embarrassments from Olivia. 
He found, before he set out for Naples, that Mrs.
Beaumont, at the earnest request of the Marchioness,
was gone to Bologna. At his return, not hearing
any-thing from Signor Jeronymo, he wrote to Mrs.
Beaumont, requesting her to inform him of the state
of things in that family, as far as she thought proper; 

and, particularly, of the health of that dear friend,
on whose silence to three Letters he had written, he
had the most melancholy apprehensions. He let that
Lady know, that he should set out in a very few
days for Paris, if he had no probability of being of
service to the family she favoured with her company. 
To this Letter Mrs. Beaumont returned the following
answer: 

SIR,
I Have the favour of yours. We are very miserable
here. The servants are forbidden to answer any
enquiries, but generally; and that not truly. 
Your friend, Signor Jeronymo, has gone through a
severe operation. He has been given over; but hopes
are now entertained, not of his absolute recovery, but
that he will be no worse than he was before the necessity
for the operation arose. Poor man! He forgot
not, however, his sister and you, when he was out of
the power of the opiates that were administred to
him. 
On my coming hither, I found Lady Clementina
in a deplorable way: Sometimes raving, sometimes
gloomy; and in bonds—Twice had she given them
apprehensions of fatal attempts: They therefore confined
her hands. 
They have been excessively wrong in their management
of her: Now soothing, now severe; observing
no method. 
She was extremely earnest to see you before you
left Bologna. On her knees repeatedly she besought
this favour, and promised to be easy if they would
comply; but they imagined that their compliance
would aggravate the symptoms. 
I very freely blamed them for not complying, at
the time when she was so desirous of seeing you. I
told them, that soothing her would probably then
have done good. 

When they knew you were actually gone from
Bologna, they told her so. Camilla shocked me with
the description of her rage and despair, on the communication. 
This was followed by fits of silence,
and the deepest melancholy. 
They had hopes, on my arrival, that my company
would have been of service to her: But for two days
together she regarded me not, nor any-thing I could
say to her. On the third of my arrival, finding her
confinement extremely uneasy to her, I prevailed, but
with great difficulty, to have her restored to the use
of her hands; and to be allowed to walk with me in
the garden. They had hinted to me their apprehensions
about a piece of water. 
Her woman being near us, if there had been occasion
for assistance, I insensibly led that way. She sat
down on a seat over-against the great cascade; but
she made no motion that gave me apprehensions. 
From this time she has been fonder of me than before. 
The day I obtained this liberty for her, she
often clasped her arms about me, and laid her face in
my bosom; and I could plainly see, it was in gratitude
for restoring to her the use of her arms: But she
cared not to speak. 
Indeed she generally affects deep silence: Yet, at
times, I see her very soul is fretted. She moves to
one place, is tired of that, shifts to another, and another,
all round the room. 
I am grieved at my heart for her: I never knew a
more excellent young creature. 
She is very attentive at her devotions, and as constant
in them as she used to be: Every good habit she
preserves; yet, at other times, rambles much. 
She is often for writing Letters to you; but when
what she writes is privately taken from her, she makes
no enquiry about it, but takes a new sheet, and begins
again. 
Sometimes she draws: But her subjects are generally, 

Angels and Saints. She often meditates in a map
of the British dominions, and now-and-then wishes
she were in England. 
Lady Juliana de Sforza is earnest to have her with
her at Urbino, or at Milan, where she has also a noble
palace; but I hope it will not be granted. That
Lady professes to love her; but she cannot be persuaded
out of her notion of harsh methods, which
will never do with Clementina. 
I shall not be able to stay long with her. The discomposure
of so excellent a young creature affects me
deeply. Could I do her either good or pleasure, I
should be willing to deny myself the society of my
dear friends at Florence: But I am persuaded, and
have hinted as much, that one interview with you
would do more to settle her mind, than all the methods
they have taken. 
I hope, Sir, to see you before you leave Italy. It
must be at Florence, not at Bologna, I believe. It is
generous of you to propose the latter. 
I have now been here a week, without hope. The
doctors they have consulted are all for severe methods,
and low diet. The first, I think, is in compliment
to some of the family: She is so loth to take nourishment,
and when she does, is so very abstemious,
that the regimen is hardly necessary. She never, or
but very seldom, used to drink any-thing but water. 
She took it into her poor head several times this
day, and perhaps it will hold, to sit in particular
places, to put on attentive looks, as if she were listening
to somebody. She sometimes smiled, and seemed
pleased; looked up, as if to somebody, and spoke
English. I have no doubt, tho' I was not present
when she assumed these airs, and talked English, but
her disordered imagination brought before her her
tutor instructing her in that tongue. 
You desired me, Sir, to be very particular. I have
been so; but at the expence of my eyes: And I shall 

not wonder if your humane heart should be affected
by my sad tale. 
God preserve you, and prosper you in whatsoever
you undertake! 
Hortensia Beaumont. 

Mrs. Beaumont staid at Bologna twelve days, and
then left the unhappy young Lady. 
At taking leave, she asked her, What commands
she had for her? —Love me, said she, and pity me; 
that is one. Another is (whispering her), you will
see the Chevalier, perhaps, tho' I must not. —Tell
him, that his poor friend Clementina is sometimes
very unhappy! —Tell him, that she shall rejoice to sit
next him in Heaven! —Tell him, that I say he cannot
go thither, good man as he is, while he shuts his
eyes to the truth. —Tell him, that I shall take it very
kindly of him, if he will not think of marrying till
he acquaints me with it; and can give me assurance,
that the Lady will love him as well as Somebody else
would have done. —O Mrs. Beaumont! should the
Chevalier Grandison marry a woman unworthy of
him, what a disgrace would that be to me! 
Mr. Grandison by this time had prepared everything
for his journey to Paris. The friend he honoured
with his love, was arrived from the Levant,
and the Archipelago. Thither, at his patron's request,
he had accompanied Mr. Beauchamp, the
amiable friend of both; and at parting, engaged to
continue by Letter what had been the subject of their
daily conversations, and transmit to him as many particulars
as he could obtain of Mr. Grandison's sentiments
and behaviour, on every occasion; Mr. Beauchamp
proposing him as a pattern to himself, that he
might be worthy of the Credential Letters he had furnished
him with to every one whom he had thought
deserving of his own acquaintance, when he was in
the parts which Mr. Beauchamp intended to visit. 

To the care of the person so much honoured by
his confidence, Mr. Grandison left his agreeable ward,
Miss Jervois; requesting the assistance of Mrs. Beaumont,
who kindly promised her inspection; and with
the goodness for which she is so eminently noted,
performed her promise in his absence. 
He then made an offer to the Bishop to visit Bologna
once more; but that not being accepted, he set
out for Paris. 
It was not long before his father's death called him
to England; and when he had been there a few weeks,
he sent for his ward and his friend. 
But, my good Miss Byron, you will say, That I
have not yet fully answered your last enquiry, relating
to the present situation of the unhappy Clementina. 
I will briefly inform you of it. 
When it was known, for certain, that Mr. Grandison
had actually left Italy, the family at Bologna
began to wish that they had permitted the interview
so much desired by the poor Lady: And when they
afterwards understood that he was sent for to England,
to take possession of his paternal estate, that farther
distance (the notion likewise of the seas between them
appearing formidable) added to their regrets. 
The poor Lady was kept in travelling motion to
quiet her mind: For still an interview with Mr Grandison
having never been granted, it was her first
wish. 
They carried her to Urbino, to Rome, to Naples; 
then back to Florence, then to Milan, to Turin. 
Whether they made her hope that it was to meet
with Mr. Grandison, I know not; but it is certain,
she herself expected to see him at the end of every
journey; and, while she was moving, was easier, and
more composed; perhaps in that hope. 
The Marchioness was sometimes of the party. 
The air and exercise were thought proper for her
health, as well as for that of her daughter. Her 

cousin Laurana was always with her in these excursions,
and sometimes Lady Sforza; and their escorte
was, generally, Signors Sebastiano and Juliano. 
But, within these four months past, these journeyings
have been discontinued. The young Lady accuses
them of deluding her with vain hopes. She is
impatient, and has made two attempts to escape from
them. 
She is, for this reason, closely confined, and
watched. 
They put her once into a nunnery, at the motion
of Lady Sforza, as for a trial only. She was not uneasy
in it: But this being done unknown to the General,
when he was apprised of it, he, for reasons I
cannot comprehend, was displeased, and had her taken
out, directly. 
Her head runs more than ever upon seeing her tutor,
her friend, her Chevalier, once more. They
have certainly been to blame, if they have let her travel
with such hopes; because they have thereby kept
up her ardor for an interview. Could she but once
more see him, she says, and let him know the cruelty
she has been treated with, she should be satisfied. 
He would pity her, she is sure, tho' nobody else will. 
The Bishop has written to beg, that Sir Charles
would pay them one more visit at Bologna. 
I will refer to my patron himself the communicating
to you, Ladies, his resolution on this subject. 
I had but a moment's sight of the Letters which so
greatly affected him. 
It is but within these few days past that this new request
has been made to him, in a direct manner. The
question was before put, If such a request should be
made, would he comply? And once Camilla wrote,
as having heard Sir Charles's presence wished for. 
Mean-time the poor Lady is hastening, they are
afraid, into a consumptive malady. The Count of
Belvedere, however, still adores her. The disorder 

in her mind being imputed chiefly to religious melancholy,
and some of her particular flights not being generally
known, he, who is a pious man himself, pities
her; and declares, that he would run all risques of her
recovery, would the family give her to him: And yet
he knows, that she would choose to be the wife of
the Chevalier Grandison rather than that of any other
man, were the article of religion to be got over; and
generously applauds her for preferring her Faith to her
Love. 
Signor Jeronymo is in a very bad way. Sir Charles
often writes to him, and with an affection worthy of
the merits of that dear friend. He was to undergo
another severe operation on the next day after the Letters
came from Bologna; the success of which was
very doubtful. 
How nobly does Sir Charles appear to support himself
under such heavy distresses! For those of his
friends were ever his. But his heart bleeds in secret
for them. A feeling heart is a blessing that no one,
who has it, would be without; and it is a moral security
of innocence; since the heart that is able to partake
of the distress of another, cannot wilfully give
it. 
I think, my good Miss Byron, that I have now, as
far as I am at present able, obeyed all your commands
that concern the unhappy Clementina, and her family. 
I will defer, if you please, those which relate to Olivia
and Mrs. Beaumont, Ladies of very different characters
from each other, having several Letters to
write. 
Permit me, my good Ladies, and my Lord, after
contributing so much to afflict your worthy hearts, to
refer you, for relief under all the distresses of life,
whether they affect ourselves or others, to those motives
that can alone give true support to a rational
mind. This mortal scene, however perplexing, is a
very short one; and the hour is hastening when all 

the intricacies of human affairs shall be cleared up; 
and all the sorrows that have had their foundation in
virtue be changed into the highest joy: When all
worthy minds shall be united in the same interests, the
same happiness. 
Allow me to be, my good Miss Byron, and you,
my Lord and Lady L. and Miss Grandison, 
Your most faithful and obedient Servant,
Ambrose Bartlett. 

Excellent Dr. Bartlett! How worthy of himself is
this advice! But think you not, my Lucy, that the
doctor has in it a particular view to your poor Harriet? 
A generous one, meaning consolation and instruction
to her? I will endeavour to profit by it. 
Let me have your prayers, my dear friends, that I
may be enabled to succeed in my humble endeavours. 
It will be no wonder to us now, that Sir Charles
was not solicitous to make known a situation so embarrassing
to himself, and so much involved in clouds
and uncertainty: But whatever may be the event of
this affair, you, Lucy, and all my friends, will hardly
ever know me by any other name than that of 
Harriet Byron. 

