



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Night, Mar. 23. 
I send you the boasted confutation-letter, just now
put into my hands—My brother and sister, my
uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes are, I understand, exulting
over the copy of it below, as an unanswerable
performance. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Once again, my inflexible sister, I write to you: 
It is to let you know, that the pretty piece of
art you found out to make me the vehicle of your
whining pathetics to your father and mother, has not
had the expected effect. 
I do assure you, that your behaviour has not been
misrepresented: Nor need it. Your mamma, who
is sollicitous to take all opportunities of putting the
favourablest constructions upon all you do, has been
forced, as you well know, to give you up, upon
full proof: No need then of the expedient of pursuing
your Needleworks in her sight. She cannot bear your
whining pranks: And it is for her sake, that you are
not permitted to come into her presence; nor will be,
but upon her own terms. 
You had like to have made a simpleton of your
aunt Hervey yesterday: She came down from you,
pleading in your favour: But when she was asked, 

What concession she had brought you to? she look'd
about her, and knew not what to answer. So your
mamma, when surprised into the beginning of your
cunning address to her and to your papa, under my
name (for I had begun to read it, little suspecting such
an ingenious subterfuge) and would then make me
read it thro', wrung her hands, Oh! her dear child,
her dear child, must not be so compelled! —But
when she was asked, Whether she would be willing to
have for her Son-in-law, the man who bids defiance
to her whole family; and who had like to have murder'd
her son? And what concessions she had gain'd
from her beloved, to occasion this tenderness? And
that for one who had apparently deceived her, in assuring
her that her heart was free? then could she
look about her, as her sister had done before: Then
was she again brought to herself, and to a resolution
to assert her authority; not to transfer it, witty presumer!
over the rebel who of late, has so ingratefully
struggled to throw it off. 
You seem, child, to have a high notion of the
matrimonial duty; and I'll warrant, like the rest of
your sex (one or two, whom I have the honour to
know, excepted) that you will go to church to promise
what you will never think of afterwards. But, sweet
child! as your worthy mamma Norton calls you,
think a little less of the matrimonial (at least, till you
come into that state) and a little more of the filial,
duty. 
How can you say, you are to bear all the misery,
when you give so large a share of it to your parents,
to your uncles, to your aunt, to myself, and to your
sister; who all, for Eighteen years of your life, loved
you so well? 
If of late I have not given you room to hope for
my favour or compassion, it is because of late you
have not deserved either. I know what you mean,
little reflecting fool, by saying, it is much in my 

power, altho' but your brother (a very slight degree
of relation with you) to give you that peace, which
you can give yourself whenever you please. 
The liberty of refusing, pretty Miss, is deny'd
you, because we are all sensible, that the liberty of
choosing, to every one's dislike, must follow. The
vile wretch you have set your heart upon, speaks
This plainly to every-body, tho' you won't. He says
you are His, and shall be His, and he will be the death
of any man who robs him of his Property. So,
Miss, we have a mind to try this point with him. 
My father supposing he has the right of a father in
his child, is absolutely determin'd not to be bully'd
out of that right. And what must that child be, who
prefers the Rake to a Father? 
This is the light in which this whole debate ought
to be taken. Blush, then, Delicacy! that cannot
bear the Poet's Amor omnibus idem! —Blush then,
Purity! Be ashamed, Virgin modesty! And if capable
of conviction, surrender your whole will to the will
of the honoured pair, to whom you owe your being: 
And beg of all your friends to forgive and forget the
part you have of late acted. 
I have written a longer letter, than ever I designed
to write to you, after the insolent treatment and prohibition
you have given me: And now I am commission'd
to tell you, that your friends are as weary
of confining you, as you are of being confin'd. And
therefore you must prepare yourself to go in a very
few days, as you have been told before, to your
uncle Antony's; who, notwithstanding your apprehensions,
will draw up his bridge when he pleases,
will see what company he pleases in his own house; 
nor will he demolish his chapel to cure you of your
foolish late-commenc'd antipathy, to a place of Divine
Worship. —The more foolish, as, if we intended to
use force, we could have the ceremony pass in your
chamber as well as any where else. 

Prejudice against Mr. Solmes evidently blinded
you, and there is a charitable necessity to open your
eyes: Since no one but you thinks the gentleman so
contemptible in his person; nor, for a plain country
gentleman, who has too much solid sense to appear like a coxcomb, justly blameable in his manners. — 
And as to his temper, it is necessary you should speak
upon fuller knowledge, than at present it is plain you
can have of him. 
Upon the whole, it will not be amiss, that you
prepare for your speedy removal, as well for the sake
of your own conveniency, as to shew your readiness,
in one point, at least, to oblige your friends; one of
whom you may, if you please to deserve it, reckon,
tho' but a Brother, 
James Harlowe 
P. S. If you are disposed to see Mr. Solmes, and to
make some excuses to him for your past conduct,
in order to be able to meet him somewhere else with
the less concern to yourself for your freedoms with
him; he shall attend you where you please. If you
have a mind to read the settlements, before they
are read to you for your signing, they shall be sent
you up—Who knows, but they will help you to
some fresh objections? —Your heart is free you
know—It must—For, did you not tell your mother it was? And will the pious Clarissa Harlowe
fib to her mamma? 
I desire no reply. The case requires none. Yet
I will ask you, Have you, Miss, no more proposals
to make? 

I was so vexed when I came to the end of this
letter (the postscript to which, perhaps, might be
written, after the rest had seen the letter) that I took
up my pen, with an intent to write to my uncle
Harlowe about resuming my own estate, in pursuance 

of your advice: But my heart failed me, when I recollected,
that I had not one friend to stand by or
support me in my claim; and that it would but the
more incense them, without answering any good end. 
O that my cousin were but come! 
Is it not a sad thing, beloved as I thought myself,
so lately, by every one, that now I have not one
person in the world to plead for me, to stand by me,
or who would afford me refuge, were I to be under
the necessity of seeking for it? —I, who had the vanity
to think I had as many friends as I saw faces, and
flatter'd myself too, that it was not altogether unmerited,
because I saw not my Maker's Image, either
in man, woman, or child, high or low, rich
or poor, whom, comparatively, I loved not as myself. 
—Would to heaven, my dear, that you were marry'd! 
Perhaps, then, you could have induc'd Mr. Hickman,
upon my application, to afford me protection,
till these storms were over-blown. But then this
might have involv'd him in difficulties and dangers; 
and that I would not have had done for the world. 
I don't know what to do, not I! —God forgive
me, but I am very impatient! —I wish—but I don't
know what to wish, without a sin! —Yet I wish it
would please God to take me to his mercy! —I can
meet with none here! —What a world is this! What
is there in it desireable? The good we hope for, so
strangely mix'd, that one knows not what to wish
for: And one half of mankind tormenting the other,
and being tormented themselves in tormenting! —For
here in this my particular case, my relations cannot
be happy, tho' they make me unhappy! —Except
my brother and sister, indeed—and they seem to take
delight in, and enjoy, the mischief they make! 
But it is time to lay down my pen, since my ink
runs nothing but gall. 
