


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


The son was inconsolable upon his mother's death. 
He loved his father, but next to adored his mother. 
His father, tho' he had given so little attention
to his education, was excessively fond of him: And,
no doubt, but he the more easily satisfied himself on
this head, as he knew his remissness was so well supplied
by his lady's care, which mingled with the cares
of the masters of the several sciences, who came home
to him, at her desire. 

A deep melancholy having seized the young gentleman
on a loss so irreparable, his father, who himself
was greatly grieved, and the more, as he could not but
reproach himself as having at least hasten'd that loss,
was alarmed for his son; and yielded to the entreaties
of General W. brother of Lord W. to permit him to
travel. The general recommended for a governor to
the young gentleman, an officer under him, who had
been wounded, and obliged to quit the military service. 
Sir Thomas allowed his son 800l. a year, from
the day of his setting out on his travels, which he augmented
afterwards to 1,000l. Sir Charles was about
seventeen when his mother died. 
The two daughters were taken by Lady W. But
she dying in about twelve months after Lady Grandison,
they returned to their father; who, by that time,
had pretty well got over his grief for the loss of his
lady, and was quite recovered of the wounds which he
received in the duel that cost her her life. 
He placed over his daughters, as governess (though
they both took exceptions at that title, supposing themselves
of age to manage for themselves) the widow of
one of his gay friends, Oldham by name, whose fortune
had not held out as Sir Thomas's had done. Men
of strong health, I have heard my grandfather say,
and of a riotous turn, should not, in mere compassion,
keep company with men of feebler constitutions, and
make them the companions of their riots. So may
one say, I believe, that extravagant men, of great and
small fortunes, are equally ill-suited; since the expences
which will but shake the one, will quite demolish
the other. 
Mrs. Oldham had fine qualities, and was an oeconomist. 
She deserved a better husband, than had fallen
to her lot; and the young ladies having had a
foundation laid by a still more excellent manager, received
no small advantage from her skill in family-affairs. 
But it was related to me with reluctance, and 

as what I must know on a further acquaintance with
their family, if they did not tell it to me, that Sir
Thomas was grateful to this lady in a way that cost
her her reputation. She was obliged, in short, in
little more than a twelvemonth, to quit the country,
and to come up to town. She had an indisposition,
which kept her from going abroad for a month or
two. 
Lady L. being then about nineteen, and Miss Grandison
about sixteen, they had spirit enough to oppose
the return of this lady to her charge. They undertook
themselves to manage every-thing at the capital
seat in Hampshire. 
Sir Thomas had another seat in Essex. Thither,
on the reluctance of the young ladies to receive again
Mrs. Oldham, he carried her; and they, as well as
every-body else, for some time, apprehended they
were actually married. She was handsome; well-descended; 
and tho' she became so unhappily sensible of
the favours and presents by which Sir Thomas made
way to her heart, she had an untainted character
when he took her as a governess to the young ladies. 
Was not Sir Thomas very, very faulty, with regard
to this poor woman? —She had already suffered
enough from a bad husband, to whom she remarkably
well performed her duty. —Poor woman! —The
example to his own daughters was an abominable
one. She was the relict of his friend: She was under
his protection: Thrown into it by her unhappy circumstances. 
—Were not these great aggravations to
his crime? —Happy for those parents who live not to
see such catastrophes as attended this child! This darling,
it seems: Not undeservedly so; and whom they
thought they had not unhappily married to Mr. Oldham
—And he, poor man! thought himself not unhappy
in Sir Thomas Grandison's acquaintance; tho'
it ended in his emulating him in his expences, with a 

much less estate; in the ruin of his fortune, which indeed
was his own fault; and in the ruin of his wife's
virtue, which was more Sir Thomas's than hers. 
—May I say so? —If I may not (since women, whose
glory is their chastity, must not yield to temptation)
had not the husband, however, something to answer
for, who, with his eyes open, lived at such a rate,
against his wife's dutiful remonstrances, and better example,
as reduced her (after his death) to the necessity
of dependence on another's favour, and such another! 
Sir Thomas was greatly displeased with his daughters,
for resisting him in the return of their governess. 
He had thought the reason of her withdrawing a secret,
because he wish'd it to be one: And yet her disgrace
was, at the time, every-where talked of, but in
his presence. 
This woman is still living. She has two children
by Sir Thomas, who are also living; and one by Mr.
Oldham. I shall be told more of her history, when
the ladies come to give me some account of their
brother's. 
Sir Thomas went on in the same gay fluttering way
that he had done all his life. The love of pleasure,
as it is called, was wrought into his habit. He was a
slave to it, and to what he called freedom. He was
deemed one of the best companions among men, and
one of the galantest men among women. His advantages
of person and mind were snares to him. Mrs.
Oldham was not the only one of her sex with whom
he was intimate: He had another mistress in town,
who had a taste for all its gaieties, and who even assumed
his name. 
He would now-and then, by way of excursion, and
to surprise the young ladies, visit Grandison-hall; but
tho' it was once the seat he most delighted in, neither
gave, nor seemed to receive, much pleasure there; 
hurrying away on a sudden, as if he had escaped from 

it; tho' never father had more reason to be pleased
with the conduct and duty of daughters: And this he
often declared, boasting of them in their absence; but
snubbing, chiding, and studying to find fault with them,
when present. 
But what equally surprised and affected them, was,
that his son had not been a year abroad, when he prohibited
them to write to, or correspond with, him; 
and, by their brother's discontinuing to write to them,
from about the same time, they supposed that he was
under the same prohibition: And so, it seems, he
was. 
They presumed, their father's reason for this unkind
prohibition was, his fear that his gaieties would
have been one of the subjects of the correspondence; 
and the rather, as those gaieties were so likely to affect
all three in their fortunes. 
The young ladies, however, for some time, continued
writing to their brother. Miss Grandison, in
mentioning this, said, in her usual sprightly manner,
that she never had any notion of obeying unreasonable
commands; commands so evidently unreasonable as
to be unnatural: And she called upon me to justify
her in her notion. The Countess also desired me to
speak my mind on this subject. 
I am apprehensive, said I, of children's partiality in
this respect: If they make themselves their own judges
in the performance or non-performance of a duty, inclination,
I am afraid, will too often be their guide,
rather than right reason. They will be too apt, perhaps,
to call those commands unnatural, which are not
so unnatural as this seems to be. 
But, Harriet, asked Miss Grandison, would not you
have written on, in the like circumstances? 
I believe not, replied I; and partly for this reason; 
because I should have had no doubt but my brother
would have the same prohibition; and I should only
have shewn my brother, as well as my father (were 

my father to know it) an instance of my refractoriness,
without obtaining the desired end; or, if my
brother had written, I should have made him a partaker
in my fault. 
Your answer regards the policy of the thing, Harriet,
said Miss Grandison: But ought an unnatural
command— 
There she stopt: Yet by her looks expected me to
speak. 
I should have thought it hard; but that it was more
meritorious to submit, than the contrary. I believe I
should have supposed, that my father might have reasons
which might not appear to me. But pray, ladies,
how did your brother— 
O, he was implicit— 
Will you forgive me, ladies? —I should have been
concerned, I think, that my brother, in a point of
duty, tho' it were one that might be disputable, should
be more nice, more delicate, than I his sister. 
Miss Emily looked as if she were pleased with me. 
Welt, you are a good girl, a very good girl, said
Miss Grandison: That, whether your doctrine be just
or not, is out of dispute. 
This prohibition gave the sisters the more sensible
concern, as they were afraid it would lay a foundation
for distance and indifference in their brother to them; 
on whom, as their mother had presaged, they were
likely, if he survived their father, to have a too great
dependence; but more particularly at that time, as
their brother had promised, at his taking leave of them,
to write a regular account of all that befel him, and
of all that was curious, and worthy notice, in the
courts and places he visited; and had actually begun
to do so; and as he had asked their advice in relation
to his governor, who proved not so proper a person for
that employment, as was expected; and to which they
had answered, without knowing, for some time, what
was the resolution he took. 

They asked their father, from time to time, after
the welfare of their brother. He would answer them
with pleasure, and sometimes with tears in his eyes,
He is all that is dutiful, brave, pious, worthy: And
would sometimes add, God reward him! I cannot. 
But when he mentioned the word dutiful, he would
look at them, as if he had in his thoughts their resisting
him in his intention of reinstating their governess; 
the only time, they could recollect, that they had
given him the shadow of displeasure. 
The ladies went on, and said, that Sir Thomas, in
all companies, gloried in his son. And once Lord
W. who himself, on his lady's death, openly indulged
himself in liberties which before he was only suspected
to take [O my Lucy! how rare a character, in this
age, is that of a virtuous man!] told some gentlemen,
who wonder'd that Sir Thomas Grandison could
permit a son so beloved to be absent from him so many
years, that the reason Sir Thomas gave was, that his
son's morals and his own were so different, that he
should not be able to bear his own consciousness, if he
consented to his return to England. The unhappy
man was so habituated to vice, that he could talk familiarly
of his gaieties to his intimates, seeming to
think them too well known for him to endeavour to
conceal them; but, however, would add sometimes,
I intend to set about altering my course of life; and
then will I send for my son. But, alas! Sir Thomas
went on from year to year, only intending: He lived
not to begin the promised alteration, nor to see his
son. 
Yet one awakener he had, that made him talk of
beginning the alteration of his way of living out of
hand, and of sending for his son; which last act was
to be the fore-runner of his reformation. 
It happen'd, that Mrs. Farnborough, the woman he
lived with when in town, was struck with the small-pox,
in the height of her gaiety and pleasure; for she 

was taken ill at the opera, on seeing a lady of her acquaintance
there, whose face bore too strongly the
marks of the distemper, and who, it seems, had made
her first visit to that place, rather than to a better. 
The malady, aided by her terror, proved mortal; 
and Sir Thomas was so much affected with the warning,
that he left town, and, in pursuance of his temporary
good resolutions, went down to his daughters; 
talked of sending for his son; and, for some few
months, lived like the man of sense and understanding
he was known to be. 

