



Mr. Brand, To John Harlowe, Esq; (Inclosed in the preceding) 

Worthy Sir, my very good Friend and Patron,
I arrived in town yesterday, after a tolerable pleasant
journey (considering the hot weather and dusty roads). 

I put up at the Bull and Gate in Holborn, and hastened to
Covent-garden. I soon found the house where the
unhappy lady lodges. And, in the back-shop, had a
good deal! of discourse (a)  with Mrs. Smith, (her landlady)
whom I found to be so highly prepossessed in her favour,
that I saw it would not answer your desires to take my informations
altogether from her, and being obliged to attend
my patron; who, to my sorrow, 

(Miserum est aliena vivere quadra)
I find wants much waiting upon, and is another sort of man than
than he was at college: For, Sir, (inter nos) honours change
manners. For the aforesaid causes I thought it would best
answer all the ends of the commission you honoured me
with, to engage, in the desired scrutiny, the wife of a particular
friend, who lives almost over against the house
where she lodges, and who is a gentlewoman of character
and sobriety, a mother of children, and one who knows
the world well. 
To her I applied myself, therefore, and gave her a short
history of the case, and desired she would very particularly
enquire into the conduct of the unhappy young lady; her
present way of life and subsistence; her visiters, her imployments,
and such-like; for these, Sir, you know, are
the things whereof you wished to be informed. 
Accordingly, Sir, I waited upon the gentlewoman aforesaid,
this day; and, to my very great trouble (because I
know it will be to yours, and likewise to all your worthy
family's) I must say, that I do find things look a little more
darkly, than I hoped they would. For, alas! Sir, the
gentlewoman's report turns not out so favourable for
Miss's reputation, as I wished, as you wished, and as every
one of her friends wished. But so it is throughout the world, that one false step generally brings on another; and
peradventure a worse, and a still worse; till the poor limed
soul, (a very fit epithet of the divine Quarles's!) is quite
entangled, and, (without infinite mercy) lost for ever. 
It seems, Sir, she is, notwithstanding, in a very ill state
of health. In this, both gentlewomen (that is to say, Mrs.
Smith her landlady, and my friend's wife) agree. Yet she
goes often out in a chair, to prayers, (as it is said). But 

my friend's wife tells me, that nothing is more common
in London, than that the frequenting of the church at
morning prayers, is made the presence and cover for private
assignations. What a sad thing is this! that what
was designed for wholsome nourishment to the poor soul,
should be turned into rank poison! But as Mr. Daniel de
Foe, an ingenious man, tho' a dissenter, observes (But
indeed it is an old proverb; only I think he was the first
that put it into verse) 

God never had a house of pray'r,
But Satan had a chapel there.
Yet, to do the lady justice, no-body comes home with
her: Nor, indeed can they, because she goes forward and
backward in a sedan or chair (as they call it). But then
there is a gentleman of no good character (an intimado of
Mr. Lovelace's) who is a constant visiter of her, and of
the people of the house, whom he regales and treats , and
has (of consequence) their high good words. 
I have hereupon taken the trouble (for I love to be exact
in any commission I undertake) to inquire particularly
about this gentleman, as he is called (albeit I hold no
man so but by his actions: For, as Juvenal says, 

—Nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus)
And this I did before I would sit down to write to you. 
His name is Belford. He has a paternal estate of upwards
of 1000 pounds by the year; and is now in mourning
for an uncle who left him very considerably besides. 
He bears a very profligate character as to women (for I enquired
particularly about That), and is Mr. Lovelace's
more especial privado, with whom he holds a regular correspondence; 
and has been often seen with Miss (tête à 
tête) at the window: In no bad way, indeed: But my
friend's wife is of opinion, that all is not as it should be. 
And, indeed, it is mighty strange to me, if Miss be so notable
a penitent (as is represented) and if she have such an
aversion to Mr. Lovelace, that she will admit his privado
into her retirements, and see no other company. 
I understand, from Mrs. Smith, that Mr. Hickman was
to see her some time ago, from Miss Howe; and I am
told, by another hand (You see, Sir, how diligent I have
been to execute the commissions you had given me) that he 

had no extraordinary opinion of this Belford, at first; tho'
they were seen together one morning by the opposite neighbour,
at breakfast with Miss: And another time this Belford
was observed to watch Mr. Hickman's coming from
her; so that, as it should seem, he was mighty zealous to ingratiate
himself with Mr. Hickman; no doubt, to engage
him to make a favourable report to Miss Howe of the intimacy
he was admitted into by her unhappy friend; who,
(as she is very ill) may mean no harm in allowing his visits
(for he, it seems, brought to her, or recommended, at
least, the doctor and apothecary that attend her): But I
think, upon the whole, it looketh not well. 
I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a better account of
the young lady's prudence. But, what shall we say? 

Uvaque conspectâ livorem ducit ab uvâ,
as Juvenal observes. 
One thing I am afraid of; which is, That Miss may
be under necessities; and that this Belford (who, as Mrs.
Smith owns, has offered her money, which she, at the time,
refused) may find an opportunity to take advantage of those
necessities: And it is well observed by the poet, that 

Ægrè formosam poteris: servare puellam:
 Nunc proce, nunc auro forma petita ruit.
And this Belford (who is a bold man, and has, as they
say, the look of one) may make good that of Horace (with
whose writings you are so well acquainted; nobody better) 

Audax omnia perpeti,
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.
Forgive me, Sir, for what I am going to write: But if
you could prevail upon the rest of your family, to join
in the scheme which you, and her virtuous sister, Miss Arabella,
and the archdeacon, and I, once talked of, (which
is, to persuade the unhappy young lady to go, in some
creditable manner, to some one of the foreign colonies)
it might save not only her own credit and reputation, but the
reputation and credit of all her family, and a great deal of vexation
moreover. For it is my humble opinion, that you will
hardly, any of you, injoy yourselves while this (once innocent)
young lady is in the way of being so frequently heard
of by you: And this would put her out of the way both of 

this Belford and of that Lovelace, and it might, peradventure,
prevent as much evil as scandal. 
You will forgive me, Sir, for this my plainness. Ovid
pleads for me, 

—Adulator nullus amicus erit,
And I have no view but that of approving myself a zealous
well-wisher to all your worthy family (whereto I owe
a great number of obligations) and very particularly, Sir, 
Your obliged and humble Servant,
Elias Brand. 
Wedn. Aug. 9. 
P. S. I shall give you further hints when I come down (which will be
in a few days;) and who my informants were; but by these you will
see, that I have been very assiduous (for the time) in the task you set
me upon. 
The length of my letter you will excuse; for I need not tell you, Sir,
what narrative, complex, and conversation letters, (such a one as
mine) require. Every one to his talent. Letter-writing is mine,
I will be bold to say; and that my correspondence was much coveted
at the University, on that account. But this I should not have taken
upon me to mention; only in defence of the length of my letter; for
nobody writes shorter, or pithier, when the subject is upon common
forms only—But in apologizing for my prolixity, I am adding to the
fault, (if it were one, which, however, I cannot think it to be, the
subject considered: But this I have said before in other words:) So,
Sir, if you will excuse my postscript, I am sure you will not find
fault with my letter. 
I think I have nothing to add until I have the honour of attending
you in person; but that I am, as above, &c. &c. &c. 
E. B. 