


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Monday, Dec. 18. 
The dearest, best of men, has left me! Just now
left me! —Did not every-body keep me in countenance,
I should be very angry with myself for wishing
that such a man should be always confined to
my company! I must keep my fondness within equitable
bounds. But, kind man! he seemed, and, if he
seemed, he was, as loth to part with me. He is gone
to London, madam: Poor Lady Beauchamp has besought
his presence, not at Sir Harry's funeral (He
was to be interred, it seems last night) but at the
opening of the will: And his Beauchamp joined in
the request. 
He hopes to be down with us on Thursday. Miss
Mansfield took the opportunity to return to her
mother, who sent word, that she knew not how to
live without her. 
Sir Charles was pleased to give me the keys of his
Study, and of Lady Olivia's Cabinets. Lucy gave
you, madam, an account of the invaluable contents. 
And now I will amuse myself there, and sit in every
chair, where I have seen him sit, and tread over his
imagined footsteps. 
Tuesday.] My books are come, and all my trinkets 

with them. We have all been busy in classing the
books. My closet will be now furnished as I wish
it: And I shall look at these, my dear companions of
Selby-house, and recollect the many, many happy
hours they gave me there. 
Was I ever, ever unhappy, my dear grandmamma? 
If I was, I have forgot the time. I acquiesce chearfully
with your wishes not to dis furnish your gallery,
by sending to me our family pictures. Let those of
my benevolent father, and my excellent mother, of
happy, happy memory, still continue there, to smile
upon you, as you are pleased to express yourself. Nobody
but you and my aunt Selby have a right to each
of those of mine, which are honoured with a place
in your respective drawing-rooms. My dear Sir
Charles, thank heaven! calls the original his. But
why would you load me with the precious gold
box, and its contents; less precious those, tho' of
inestimable value, than my dear grandpapa's picture
in the lid? —But I can tell you, madam, that Sir
Charles is an ungrateful man: He will not thank you
for it. A remembrance, madam! (I know what he
will say) “Does the best of women think my Harriet
wants any-thing to remind her of the obligations
she is under to parents so dear?” —He will be
very jealous of the honour of his Harriet. Forgive,
madam, the freedom of my expostulation, as if I were
not your girl, as well as his. 
What reasons have you sound out (but this was
always your happy, your instructive way) to be better
pleased with your absence from us, than if you
were present with us, as we all often wish you! 
* *
Here, Lady L. Lady G. sisters so dear to me,
since these Letters will pass under your eye, let me account
to you, by the follewing extract from my grandmamma's
last Letters, for the meaning of what I have
written to that indulgent parent, in the lines immediately
preceding. 


“You often, my dearest Harriet, wish me to be
with you. In the first place I am here enjoying
myself in my own way, my own servants about
me; a trouble, a bar, a constraint, upon no one; 
but those to whom I make it worth while to bear
with me. I should think I never could do enough
to strangers: No, tho' I were sure they thought
I did too much. In the next, were I to be with
you at Grandison-hall, I could not be every-where:
So that I should be deprived of half the delightful
scenes and conversations, that you, your aunt, and
Lucy, relate and describe to me by pen and ink:
Nor should I be able perhaps to bear those grateful
ones, to which I should be present. My heart,
my dear, you know is very susceptible of joy; it
has long been preparing itself for the sublimest. 
Grief touches it not so much. The Losses I sustained
of your father, your mother, and my own
dear Mr. Shirley; made all other sorrows light. 
Nothing could have been heavy, but the calamity
of my gentle Harriet, had she been afflicted with
it. Now, I take up the kind, the rapturous Letters,
from my table, where I spread them. When
the contents are too much for me, I lay them
down; and resume them, as my subsided joy will
allow. Then lay them down again, as I am affected
by some new instance of your happiness; 
bless God, bless you, your dearest of men; bless
every-body. —In every Letter I find a cordial that
makes my heart light, and for the time, insensible
of infirmity:—Can you, my Harriet, be happier
than I?” 

* *
I am called upon by my aunt and Lucy. I will
here, my dear grandmamma, conclude myself, 
Your for-ever obliged, and dutiful,
Harriet Grandison. 

