


I thought I should have found no Time
nor Heart to write again this Day. But
here are Three Gentlemen come, unexpectedly,
to dine with my Master; and so I shall not
appear. He has done all he could, civilly, to
send them away; but they will stay, tho' I believe,
he had rather they would not. And so
I have nothing to do but to write till I go to
Dinner myself with Mrs. Jewkes: For my
Master was not prepared for this Company; and
it will be a little latish To-day. So I will begin
with my happy Story where I left off. 
When I came down to Breakfast, Mr.
Peters and Mr. Williams were both there. 
And as soon as my Master heard me coming
down, he met me at the Door, and led me in
with great Tenderness. He had kindly spoken
to them, as he told me afterwards, to mention
no more of the Matter to me, than needs
must. I paid my Respects to them, I believe, a
little auk wardly, and was almost out of Breath; 
but said, I had come down a little too fast. 
When Abraham came in to wait, my Master
said, (that the Servants should not mistrust) 'Tis
well, Gentlemen, you came as you did: For
my good Girl and I were going to take an Airing 

till Dinner-time. I hope you'll stay and
dine with me. Sir, said Mr. Peters, we
will not hinder your Airing. I only came,
having a little Time upon my Hands, to see
your Chapel; but must be at home at Dinner; 
and Mr Williams will dine with me. Well
then, said my Master, we will pursue our Intention,
and ride out for an Hour or two, as
soon as I have shewn Mr. Peters my little Chapel. 
Will you, Pamela, after Breakfast, walk
with us to it? If&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;if, said I, and had like to
have stammer'd, foolish that I was! if you
please, Sir. I could look none of them in the
Face. Abraham looking at me; Why, Child,
said my Master, you have hardly recover'd your
Fright yet: How came your Foot to slip? 
'Tis well you did not hurt yourself. Said Mr.
Peters, improving the Hint, You han't sprain'd
your Ankle, Madam, I hope. No, Sir, said
I, I believe not: But 'tis a little painful to me. 
And so it was; for I meant my Foolishness! 
Abraham, said my Master, bid Robin put the
Horses to the Coach, instead of the Chariot; 
and if these Gentlemen will go, we can set
them down. No matter, Sir, said Mr. Peters:
I had as lieve walk, if Mr. Williams chuses it. 
Well then, said my Master, let it be the Chariot,
as I told him. 
I could eat nothing, tho' I attempted it; 
and my Hand shook so, I spill'd some of my
Chocolate, and so put it down again; and they
were all very good, and look'd another way. 
My Master said, when Abraham was out, I 

have a quite plain Ring here, Mr. Peters. 
And I hope the Ceremony will dignify the
Ring; and that I shall give my Girl Reason to
think it, for that Cause, the most valuable one
that can be presented her. Mr. Peters said, he
was sure I should set more by it, than the richest
Diamond in the World. 
I had bid Mrs. Jewkes not to dress herself,
lest she should give Cause of Mistrust, and she
took my Advice. 
When Breakfast was over, my Master said,
before Abraham, Well, Gentlemen, we will
step into the Chapel; and you must give me
your Advice, as to the Alterations I design. I
am in the more Haste, because the Survey you
are going to make of it, for the Alterations,
will take up a little Time; and we shall have
but a small Space between that and Dinner, for
the little Tour I design to make. &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; Pamela,
you'll give us your Opinion, won't you? Yes,
Sir, said I; I'll come after you. 
So they went out, and I sat down in the
Chair again, and fann'd myself: I am sick at
Heart, said I, I think, Mrs. Jewkes. Said she,
Shall I fetch you a little Cordial? —No, said
I, I am a a sad Fool; I want Spirits, that's all. 
She took her Smelling-bottle, and would have
given it me; but I said, Keep it in your Hand; 
may-be, I shall want it; but I hope not. 
She gave me very good Words; and begg'd
me to go; And I got up, but my Knees beat
so one against another, I was forced to sit down
again. But, at last, I held by her Arm, and 

passing by Abraham, I said, This ugly Slip,
coming down-stairs, has made me limp, tho'; 
so I must hold by you. Do you know, said I,
what Alterations there are to be in the Chapel,
that we must all give our Opinions of them? 
Nan, she told me, was let into the Secret; 
and she had order'd her to stay at the Chapeldoor,
to see that nobody came in. My dear
Master came to me, at entering the Chapel,
and took my Hand, and led me up to the Altar. 
Remember, my dear Girl, whisper'd he, and
be chearful. I am, I will, Sir, said I. But
I hardly knew what I said; and so you may
believe, when I said to Mrs. Jewkes, Don't
leave me, pray, Mrs. Jewkes; don't leave me:
As if I had all Confidence in her, and none
where it was most due. So she kept close to
me. God forgive me! but I never was so absent
in my Life, as at first. Even till Mr. Williams
had gone on in the Service so far as to the awful
Words about requiring us, as we should answer
at the dreadful Day of Judgment; and then
the solemn Words, and my Master's Whispering,
Mind this, my Dear, made me start. Said
he, still whispering, Know you any Impediment? 
I blush'd, and said, softly, None, Sir, but my
great Unworthiness. 
Then follow'd the sweet Words, Wilt thou
have this Woman to thy wedded Wife, &c. and
I began to take Heart a little, when my dearest
Master answer'd, audibly to this Question, I
will. But I could only make a Court'sy, when
they ask'd me; tho' I am sure, my Heart was 



readier than my Speech, and answer'd to every
Article of obey, serve, love, and honour. 
Mr. Peters gave me away, and I said after
Mr. Williams, as well as I could, as my dear
Master did, with a much better Grace, the
Words of Betrothment; and the Ceremony of
the Ring passing next, I receiv'd the dear Favour,
at his worthy Hands, with a most grateful
Heart; and he was pleased to say afterwards in
the Chariot, That when he had done saying,
With this Ring I thee wed, &c. I made a
Court'sy, and said, Thank you, Sir. May-be
I did; for I am sure it was a most grateful Part
of the Service; and my Heart was overwhelm'd
with his Goodness; and the tender Grace
wherewith he perform'd it. I was very glad,
that the next Part was the Prayer, and Kneeling; 
for I trembled so, I could hardly stand,
betwixt Fear and Joy. 
The Joining of our Hands afterwards, the
Declaration of our being marry'd, to the few
Witnesses present; for, reckoning Nan, whose
Curiosity would not let her stay at the Door,
they were but Mr. Peters, Mrs. Jewkes, and
she; the Blessing, the Psalm, and the subsequent
Prayers, and the concluding Exhortation,
were so many beautiful, welcome and lovely
Parts of this divine Office, that my Heart began
to be delighted with them, and my Spirits to be
a little freer. 
And thus, my dearest, dear Parents, is your
happy, happy, thrice happy Pamela, at last, 

marry'd! And to whom? —Why, to her beloved,
gracious Master! the Lord of her
Wishes! And thus the dear, once naughty
Assailer of her Innocence, by a blessed Turn of
Providence, is become the kind, the generous
Protector and Rewarder of it. God be evermore
blessed and praised! and make me not
wholly unworthy of such a transcendent Honour! 
—And bless and reward the dear, dear
good Gentleman, who has thus exalted his
unworthy Servant, and given her a Place,
which the greatest Ladies would think themselves
happy in! 
My Master saluted me most ardently, and
said, God give you, my dear Love, as much
Joy on this Occasion, as I have. And he presented
me to Mr. Peters, who saluted me; 
and said, You may excuse me, dear Madam; 
for I gave you away, and you are my Daughter. 
And Mr. Williams modestly withdrawing a
little way; Mr. Williams, said my Master, pray
accept my Thanks, and wish your Sister Joy. 
So he saluted me too; and said, Most heartily,
Madam, I do: And I will say, that to see
so much Innocence and Virtue, so eminently
rewarded, is one of the greatest Pleasures I
have ever known. This my Master took very
kindly. 
Mrs. Jewkes would have kissed my Hand
at the Chapel-door; but I put my Arms about
her Neck, for I had got a new Recruit of Spirits
just then; and kissed her, and said, Thank you,
Mrs. Jewkes, for accompanying me. I have 

behav'd sadly. No, Madam, said she, pretty
well, pretty well! 
Mr. Peters walk'd out with me; and Mr.
Williams and my Master came out after us,
talking together. 
Mr. Peters, when we came into the Parlour,
said, I once more, Madam, must wish
you Joy on this happy Occasion. I wish every
Day may add to your Comforts; and may you
very long rejoice in one another! for you are
the loveliest Couple I ever saw join'd. I told
him, I was highly obliged to his kind Opinion,
and good Wishes; and hoped my future Conduct
would not make me unworthy of them. 
My good Benefactor came in with Mr. Williams:
So, my dear Life, said he, How do
you do? A little more compos'd, I hope! — 
Well, you see this is not so dreadful an Affair
as you apprehended. 
Sir, said Mr. Peters, very kindly, 'tis a
very solemn Circumstance, and I love to see it
so reverently and awfully enter'd upon. It is a
most excellent Sign; for the most thoughtful
Beginnings make the most prudent Proceedings. 
Mrs. Jewkes, of her own Accord, came
in with a large Silver Tumbler, filled with
Sack, and a Toast, and Nutmeg, and Sugar; 
and my Master said, That's well thought of,
Mrs. Jewkes; for we have made but sorry
Breakfastings. And he would make me take
some of the Toast; as they all did, and
drank prettily heartily: And I drank a little, 

and it chear'd my Heart, I thought, for an Hour
after. 
My Master took a fine Diamond Ring from
his Finger, and presented it to Mr. Peters,
who receiv'd it very kindly. And to Mr. Williams
he said, My old Acquaintance, I have
reserved for you, against a Variety of Solicitations,
the Living I always design'd for you; and
I beg you'll prepare to take Possession of it; 
and as the doing it may be attended with some
Expence, pray accept of this towards it. And so
he gave him (as he told me afterwards it was) a
Bank Note of 50l. 
So did this generous good Gentlemen bless
us all, and me in particular; for whose sake he
was as bounteous as if he had marry'd one of
the noblest Fortunes. 
So he took his Leave of the Gentlemen,
recommending Secrecy again, for a few Days,
and they lest him; and none of the Servants
suspected any thing, as Mrs. Jewkes believes. 
And then I threw myself at his Feet, blessed
God, and blessed him for his Goodness, and he
overwhelm'd me with Kindness; calling me
his sweet Bride, and Twenty lovely Epithets,
that swell my grateful Heart beyond the Power
of Utterance. 
He afterwards led me to the Chariots and
we took a delightful Tour round the neighbouring
Villages, and he did all he could, to
dissipate those still perverse Anxieties that dwell
upon my Mind, and, do what I can, spread 

too thoughtful an Air, as he tells me, over my
Countenance. 
We came home again by half an Hour after
One; and he was pleasing himself with thinking
not to be an Hour out of my Company
this blessed Day, that (as he was so good as to
say) he might inspire me with a Familiarity
that should improve my Confidence in him; 
when he was told, that a Footman of Sir
Charles Hargrave had been here, to let him
know, that his Master, and Two other Gentlemen,
were on the Road to take a Dinner with
him, in their Way to Nottingham. 
He was heartily vex'd at this, and said to
me, He should have been glad of their Companies
at any other time; but that it was a
barbarous Intrusion now; and he wish'd they
had been told he would not be at home at
Dinner: And besides, said he, they are horrid
Drinkers, and I shan't be able to get them away
To night, perhaps; for they have nothing to
do, but to travel round the Country, and beat
up their Friends Quarters all the Way; and 'tis
an one to them, whether they stay a Night, or
a Month, at a Place. But, added he, I'll find
some way, if I can, to turn them off, after
Dinner. —Confound them, said he, in a violent
Pet, that they should come this Day, of all
the Days in the Year! 
We had hardly alighted, and got in, before
they came; Three mad Rakes, they seem'd to
be, as I look'd thro' the Window, setting up
a Hunting-note, as soon as they came to the 

Gate, that made the Court-yard echo again,
and smacking their Whips in Concert. 
So I went up to my Chamber, and saw
(what made my Heart throb) Mrs. Jewkes's
officious Pains to put the Room in order for a
Guest, that however welcome, as now my
Duty teaches me to say, is yet dreadful to me
to think of. So I took Refuge in my Closet,
and had recourse to Pen and Ink, for my
Amusement, and to divert my Anxiety of
Mind—If one's Heart is so sad, and one's
Apprehensions so great, where one so extremely
loves, and is so extremely obliged; What must
be the Case of those poor Maidens, who are
forced, for sordid Views, by their tyrannical
Parents, or Guardians, to marry the Man they
almost hate, and, perhaps, to the Loss of the
Man they most love? O that is a sad thing indeed! 
—And what have not such cruel Parents
to answer for? and what do not such
innocent Victims suffer? —But, blessed be
God, this Lot is far from being mine! 
My good Master (for I cannot yet have the
Presumption to call him by a more render
Name) came up to me, and said, Well, I just
come to ask my dear Bride, (O the charming,
charming Word!) how she does? I see you are
writing, my Dear, said he. These confounded
Rakes are half mad, I think, and will make me
so! However, continued he, I have order'd my
Chariot to be got ready, as if I was under an
Ingagement Five Miles off, and will set them
out of the House, if possible; and then ride 

round, and come back, as soon as I can get rid
of them. I find, said he, Lady Davers is full
of our Affairs. She has taken great Freedoms
with me, before Sir Charles; and they have
been at me without Mercy; and I was forced
to be very serious with them, or else they
would have come up to have seen you, since
I would not call you down. —He saluted me,
and said, I shall quarrel with them, if I cannot
get them away; for I have lost two or
three precious Hours with my Soul's Delight. 
And so he went down. 
Mrs. Jewkes ask'd me to walk down to
Dinner in the little Parlour. I went down,
and she was so complaisant as to offer to wait
upon me at Table; and would not be persuaded,
without Difficulty, to sit down with
me. But I insisted she should: For, said I, it
would be very extraordinary, if one should so
soon go into such Distance, Mrs. Jewkes. — 
Whatever my new Station may require of me,
added I, I hope I shall always conduct myself
in such a manner, that Pride and Insolence
shall bear no Part in my Character. 
You are very good, Madam, said she; but
I will always know my Duty to my Master's
Lady. —Why then, reply'd I, if I must take
State upon me so early, Mrs. Jewkes, let me
exact from you what you call your Duty; and
sit down with me when I desire you. 
This prevailed upon her; and I made shift
to get down a Bit of Apple-pye, and a little Custard; 
but that was all. 

My good Master came in again, and said,
Well, thank my Stars! these Rakes are going
now; but I must set out with them, and I chuse
my Chariot; for if I took Horse, I should have
Difficulty to part with them; for they are like
a Snow-ball, and intend to gather Company as
they go, to make a merry Tour of it for some
Days together. 
We both got up, when he came in; Fie,
Pamela, said he! why this Ceremony now? — 
Sit still, Mrs. Jewkes! —Nay, Sir, said she,
I was loth to sit down, but my Lady would have
me! —She is very right, Mrs. Jewkes, said
my Master, and tapp'd me on the Cheek; for
we are yet but half married; and so she is not
above half your Lady yet! —Don't look so
down, don't be so silent, my Dearest, said he; 
why, you hardly spoke Twenty Words to me
all the Time we were out together. Something
I will allow for your bashful Sweetness; but not
too much. —Mrs. Jewkes, have you no pleasant
Tales to tell my Pamela, to make her smile,
till I return? —Yes, Sir, said she, I could tell
Twenty pleasant Stories; but my Lady is too
nice to hear them; and yet, I hope, I should
not be shocking neither. Ah! poor Woman!
thought I; thy chastest Stories will make a
modest Person blush, if I know thee; and I
desire to hear none of them. 
My Master said, Tell her one of the shortest
you have, in my Hearing. Why, Sir, said she,
I knew a bashful young Lady, as Madam may
be, married to—Dear Mrs. Jewkes, interrupted 

I, no more of your Story, I beseech you! 
I don't like the Beginning of it. Go on, Mrs.
Jewkes, said my Master. No, pray, Sir, don't
require it, said I, pray don't! Well, said he,
then we'll have it another time, Mrs. Jewkes. 
Abraham coming in to tell him, the Gentlemen
were going, and that his Chariot was ready; 
I am glad of that, said he; and went to them,
and set out with them. 
I took a Turn in the Garden with Mrs.
Jewkes, after they were gone: And having
walked a while, I said, I should be glad of her
Company down the Elm-walk, to meet the
Chariot: For, Oh! I know not how to look
up at him, when he is with me; nor how to
bear his Absence, when I have Reason to expect
him! What a strange Contradiction is
there in this nnaccountable Passion! 
What a different Aspect every thing in and
about this House bears now, to my thinking, to
what it once had! The Garden, the Pond, the
Alcove, the Elm-walk. But, Oh! my Prison
is become my Palace; and no wonder every
thing wears another Face! 
We sat down upon the broad Style, leading
towards the Road, and Mrs. Jewkes was quite
another Person to me, to what she was the last
time I sat there! 
At last my best Beloved returned, and alighted
there; What, my Pamela! (and Mrs. Jewkes
then lest me) What (said he, and saluted me)
brings you this way? I hope, to meet me! — 
Yes, Sir, said I. That's kind, indeed, said he; 

but why that averted Bye? —that downcast
Countenance, as if you was afaid of me. You
must not think so, Sir, reply'd I. Revive my
Heart then, said he, with a more chearful Aspect; 
and let that over-anxious Solicitude which appears
in the most charming Face in the World,
be chased from it. —Have you, my dear Girl,
any Fears that I can dissipate; any Doubts that
I can obviate; any Hopes that I can incourage; 
any Request that I can gratify? —Speak, my
dear Pamela; and, if I have Power, but speak,
and, to purchase one Smile, it shall be done! 
I cannot, Sir, said I, have any Fears, any
Doubts, but that I shall never be able to deserve
all your Goodness. I have no Hopes, but that
my future Conduct may be agreeable to you, and
my determined Duty well accepted. Nor have
I any Request to make, but that you will forgive
all my Imperfections; and, among the rest, this
foolish Weakness, that makes me seem to you,
after all the generous Things that have passed,
to want this further Condescension, and these
kind Assurances. But, indeed, Sir, I am oppress'd
by your Bounty; my Spirits sink under
the Weight of it; and the Oppression is still the
greater, as I see not how, possibly, in my whole
future Life, by all I can do, to merit the least
of your Favours. 
I know your grateful Heart, said he; but
remember, my Dear, what the Lawyers tell us,
That Marriage is the highest Consideration which
the Law knows. And this, my sweet Bride, has
made you mine, and me yours; and you have the 

best Claim in the World to share my Fortune with
me. But, set that Consideration aside, what is
the Obligation you have to me? Your Mind is
pure as that of an Angel, and as much transcends
mine. Your Wit and your Judgment, to make
you no Compliment, are more than equal to
mine: You have all the Graces that Education
can give a Woman; improv'd by a Genius
which makes those Graces natural to you: You
have a Sweetness of Temper, and a noble Sincerity,
beyond all Comparison; and in the Beauty
of your Person, you excel all the Ladies I ever
saw. Where then, my Dearest, is the Obligation,
if not on my Side to you? —But to avoid
these Comparisons, let us talk of nothing henceforth
but Equality; altho', if the Riches of your
Mind, and your unblemished Virtue, be set
against my Fortune, (which is but an accidental
Good, as I may call it, and all I have to boast of)
the Condescension will be yours; and I shall not
think I can possibly deserve you, till, after your
sweet Example, my future Life shall become
nearly as blameless as yours. 
O sir, said I, what Comfort do you give me,
that instead of being in Danger of being insnared
by the high Condition to which your Goodness
has exalted me, you make me hope, that I shall be
confirm'd and approv'd by you; and that we may
have a Prospect of perpetuating each other's Happiness,
till Time shall be no more! —But, Sir,
I will not, as you once caution'd me, be too
serious. I will resolve, with these sweet Incouragements,
to be, in every thing, what you 

would have me be! And I hope I shall more
and more shew you, that I have no Will but
yours. He kissed me very tenderly, and thank'd
me for this kind Assurance as he called it. And
so we enter'd the House together. 
Eight o'Clock at Night.
Now these sweet Assurances, my dear Father
and Mother, you will say, must be
very consolatory to me, and being voluntary
on his Side, were all that could be wish'd for
on mine; and I was resolved, if possible, to subdue
my idle Fears and Apprehensions. 
Ten o'Clock at Night.
As we sat at Supper, he was generously kind
to me, as well in his Actions as Expressions. 
He took Notice, in the most delicate manner,
of my Endeavour to conquer my Foibles; and
said, I see, with Pleasure, my dear Girl strives
to comport herself in a manner suitable to my
Wishes: I see even thro' the sweet tender Struggles
of your over-nice Modesty, how much I
owe to your Intentions of obliging me. As I
have once told you, that I am the Conquest
more of your Virtue than your Beauty; so, not
one alarming Word or Look shall my beloved
Pamela hear or see, to give her Reason to
suspect the Truth of what I aver. You may the
rather believe me, continued he, as you may see
the Pain I have to behold any thing that concerns
you, even tho' your Concern be causless. And 

yet I will indulge my dear Girl's bashful Weakness
so far, as to own, that so pure a Mind may
suffer from Apprehension, on so important a
Change as this; and I can therefore be only displeased
with such Part of your Conduct, as may
make your Sufferings greater than my own; when
I am resolved, thro' every Stage of my future
Life, in all Events, to study to make them less. 
After Supper, of which, with all his sweet
Persuasions, I could hardly taste, he made me
drink Two Glasses of Champaign, and after wards
a Glass of Sack; which he kindly forced upon
me, by naming your Healths: And as the Time
of retiring drew on, he took notice, but in a
very delicate manner, how my Colour went and
came, and how foolishly I trembled. Nobody,
surely, in such delightful Circumstances, ever
behav'd so sillily! —And he said, My dearest
Girl, I fear you have had too much of my Company
for so many Hours together; and would
better recollect yourself, if you retir'd for half
an Hour to your Closet. 
I wish'd for this, but durst not say so much,
lest he should be angry; for, as the Hours grew
on, I found my Apprehensions increase, and
my silly Heart was the unquieter, every time
I could lift up my Eyes to his dear Face; so
sweetly terrible did he appear to my Apprehensions. 
I said, You are all Goodness, dear Sir; 
and I boldly kissed his Hand, and pressed it to
my Lips, with both mine. And saluting me
very fervently, he gave me his Hand, seeing me
hardly able to stand, and led me to my Chamber-door, 

and then most generously withdrew. 
I went to my Closet; and the first thing I
did, on my Knees, again thanked God for the
Blesling of the Day; and besought his Divine
Goodness to conduct my future Life in such a
manner, as should make me an happy Instrument
of his Glory. After this, being now left to my
own Recollection, I grew a little more assured
and lightsome; and the Pen and Paper being
before me, I amus'd myself with writing thus
far. 
Eleven o'Clock Thursday Night.
Mrs. Jewkes being come up with a Message,
desiring to know, whether her Master may
attend upon me in my Closet; and hinting to
me, that, however, she believed, he did not
expect to find me there, I have sent Word, that
I beg he would indulge me one Quarter of an
Hour. —So, committing myself to the Mercies
of the Almighty, who has led me thro' so
many strange Scenes of Terror and Affrightment,
to this happy, yet awful Moment, I will wish
you, my dear Parents, a good Night; and tho'
you will not see this in Time, yet I know I have
your hourly Prayers, and therefore cannot fail
of them now. So, Good-night, Good-night! 
God bless you, and God bless me. Amen, Amen,
if it be his blessed Will, subscribes 
Your ever dutiful Daughter. 
