


My Master is come home, and to be sure,
has been where he said. So once he has
told Truth; and this Matter seems to be gone off
without a Plot: No doubt he depends upon this
sham, wicked Marriage! He has brought a Gentleman
with him to Dinner; and so I have not
seen him yet. 
Two o'Clock.
I am very sorrowful, and still have greater
Reason; for just now as I was in my Closet,
opening the Parcel I had hid under the Rose-bush,
to see if it was damaged by lying so long,
Mrs. Jewkes came upon me by Surprize, and
laid her Hands upon it: for she had been looking
thro' the Key-hole, it seems. 
I know not what I shall do! For now he
will see all my private Thoughts of him, and
all my Secrets, as I may say. What a careless
Creature I am! —To be sure I deserve to be
punished. 

You know I had the good Luck, by Mr.
Williams's means, to send you all my Papers down
to Sunday Night, the 17th Day of my Imprisonment. 
But now these Papers contain all my
Matters, from that Time, to Wednesday the
27th Day of my Distress: and, which, as you
may now, perhaps, never see, I will briefly
mention the Contents to you. 
In these Papers, then, are included, “An
Account of Mrs. Jewkes's Arts, to draw me
in to approve of Mr. Williams's Proposal
for Marriage; and my refusing to do so; and
desiring you not to encourage his Suit to me. 
Mr. Williams's being wickedly robb'd, and a
Visit of hers to him; whereby she discover'd
all his Secrets. How I was inclin'd to get
off, while she was gone; but was ridiculously
prevented by my foolish Fears, &c. My
having the Key of the Back-door. Mrs.
Jewkes's writing to my Master all the Secrets
she had discover'd of Mr. Williams; and her
Behaviour to me and him upon it. Continuance
of my Correspondence with Mr. Williams
by the Tiles; begun in the Parcel you
had. My Reproaches to him for his revealing
himself to Mrs. Jewkes; and his Letter to
me in Answer, threatening to expose my Master,
if he deceiv'd him; mentioning in it
John Arnold's Correspondence with him; 
and a Letter which John sent, and was intercepted,
as it seems. Of the Correspondence
being carried on by a Friend of his at
Gainsborough: Of the Horse he was to provide 

for me, and one for himself. Of what
Mr. Williams had own'd to Mrs. Jewkes;
and of my discouraging his Proposals. Then
it contain'd a pressing Letter of mine to him,
urging my Escape before my Master came; 
with his half-angry Answer to me. Your
good Letter to me, my dear Father, sent to
me by Mr. Williams's Conveyance; in which
you would have me encourage Mr. Williams;
but leave it to me; and in which, fortunately
enough, you take Notice of my being uninclin'd
to marry. —My earnest Desire to be
with you. The Substance of my Answer to
Mr. Williams, expressing more Patience, &c. 
A dreadful Letter of my Master to Mrs.
Jewkes; which, by Mistake, was directed
to me; and one to me, directed, by like
Mistake, to her; and very free Reflections of
mine upon both. The Concern I expressed
for Mr. Williams's being taken in, deceiv'd,
and ruin'd. An Account of Mrs.
Jewkes's glorying in her wicked Fidelity. A
sad Description I gave of Monsieur Colbrand,
a Person he sent down to assist Mrs. Jewkes
in watching me. How Mr. Williams was
arrested and thrown into Gaol, and the Concern
I express'd upon it; and my free Reflections
on my Master for it. A projected
Contrivance of mine, to get away out of the
Window, and by the Back-door; and throwing
my Petticoat and Handkerchief into the
Pond to amuse them, while I got off: An
Attempt that had like to have ended very 

dreadfully for me! My further Concern for
Mr. Williams's Ruin, on my Account: And,
lastly, my over-hearing Mrs. Jewkes brag
of her Contrivance to rob Mr. Williams, in
order to get at my Papers; which, however,
he preserv'd, and sent safe to you.” 
These, down to the Execution of my unfortunate
Plot to escape, are, to the best of my
Remembrance, the Contents of the Papers, which
this merciless Woman seiz'd: For, how badly I
came off, and what follow'd, I still have safe, as I
hope, sew'd in my Under-coat, about my Hips. 
In vain were all my Prayers and Tears to
her, to get her not to shew them to my Master. 
For she said, It had now come about, why I affected
to be so much alone; and why I was always
writing. And she thought herself happy, she
said, she had found these; for often and often
had she search'd every Place she could think of,
for Writings, to no Purpose, before. And she
hop'd, she said, there was nothing in them but
what any body might see; for, said she, you
know, you are all Innocence! —Insolent
Creature, said I; I am sure you are all Guilt! 
—And so you must do your worst; for now
I can't help myself; and I see there is no Mercy
to be expected from you. 
Just now, my Master being coming up,
she went to him upon the Stairs, and gave him
my Papers. There, Sir, said she; you always
said Mrs. Pamela was a great Writer; but I
never could get any thing of hers before. He 

took them, and, without coming to me, went
down to the Parlour again. And what with
the Gypsey Affair, and what with this, I could
not think of going down to Dinner; and she
told him that too; and so I suppose I shall have
him up-stairs, as soon as his Company is gone. 
