



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B 


My dear Pamela,
I had intended to have been with you before
this; but my Lord has been a little indisposed
with the Gout, and Jackey, too, has had an Intermittent
Fever; but they are pretty well recovered, 

and it shall not be long before I see you,
now I understand you are returned from your
Kentish Expedition. 
We have been exceedingly diverted with
your Papers. You have given us, by their
Means, many a delightful Hour, that otherwise
would have hung heavy upon us; and we are
all charm'd with you. Lady Betty, as well as
her noble Mamma, has always been of our Party,
whenever we have read your Accounts. She is
a dear generous Lady, and has shed many a Tear
over them, as indeed we all have; and my Lord
has not been unmov'd, nor Jackey neither, at
some of your Distresses and Reflections. Indeed,
Pamela, you are a charming Creature, and an
Ornament to our Sex. We wanted to have had
you among us an hundred times, as we read,
that we might have lov'd, and kiss'd, and thank'd
you. 
But, after all, my Brother, generous and
noble as he was, when your Trials were over,
was a strange wicked young Fellow; and happy
it was for you both, that he was so cleverly
caught in the Trap he had laid for your Virtue. 
I can assure you, my Lord longs to see you,
and will accompany me; for, he says, he has but
a faint Idea of your Person. I tell him, and tell
them all, that you are the finest Girl, and the most
improv'd in Person and Mind, I ever beheld; 
and I am not afraid, altho' they should imagine
all they can in your Favour, from my Account
of you, that they will be disappointed when
they see you, and converse with you. But one 

thing more you must do for us, and then we
will love you still more; and that is, You must
send us the rest of your Papers, down to your
Marriage at least; and further, if you have written
further: For we all long to see the rest, as
you relate it, tho' we know in general what
has passed. 
You leave off*  with an Account of an angry
Letter I wrote to my Brother, to persuade him
to give you your Liberty, and a Sum of Money; 
not doubting but his Designs would end in your
Ruin, and, I own it, not wishing he would
marry you; for little did I know of your Merit
and Excellence, nor could I, but for your Letters
so lately sent me, have had any Notion of
either. —I don't question but, if you have
recited my passionate Behaviour to you, when
I was at the Hall, I shall make a ridiculous Figure
enough; but I will forgive all that, for the
sake of the Pleasure you have given me, and
will still further give me, if you comply with
my Request. 
Lady Betty says, It is the best Story she has
heard, and the most instructive; and she longs
to have the Conclusion of it in your own Words. 
She says now-and-then, What a hopeful Brother
you have, Lady Davers! —O these
intriguing Gentlemen! —What Rogueries do
they not commit! I should have had a fine Husband
of him, had I receiv'd your Proposal! The
dear Pamela would have run in his Head, and
had I been the first Lady in the Kingdom, I 

should have stood but a poor Chance in his
Esteem; for, you see, his Designs upon her
began*  early. 
She says, You had a good Heart to go back
again to him, when the violent Wretch had
driven you from him on such a slight Occasion:
But yet, she thinks, the Reasons you give†  in
your Relation, and your Love for him, (which
then you began to discover was your Case) as
well as the Event, shew'd you did right. 
But we'll tell you all our Judgments, when
we have read the rest of your Accounts. So
pray send them, as soon as you can, to (I won't
write myself Sister till then) 
Your affectionate, &c.
B. Davers. 

