



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Night, March 24. 
I have a most provoking letter from my sister. —I
might have supposed, she would resent the contempt
she brought upon herself in my chamber. Her
conduct, surely, can only be accounted for by the
rage of a supposed rivalry. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I am to tell you, That your mamma has begg'd
you off for the morrow: —But that you have
effectually done your business with her, as well as with
every-body else. 
In your proposals, and letter to your brother, you
have shew'd yourself so silly, and so wise; so young,
and so old; so gentle, and so obstinate; so meek,
and so violent; that never was there so mix'd a
character. 
We all know of whom you have borrowed this
new spirit. And yet the seeds of it must be in your
heart, or it could not all at once shew itself so rampant. 
It would be doing Mr. Solmes a spight, to
wish him such a shy, un-thy girl; another of your
contradictory qualities—I leave you to make out what
I mean by it. 
Here, Miss, your mamma will not let you remain: 
She cannot have any peace of mind while such a rebel
of a child is so near her: Your aunt Hervey will not
take a charge all the family put together cannot manage: 
Your uncle Harlowe will not see you at his
house till you are marry'd: So, thanks to your own
stubbornness, you have nobody that will receive you
but your uncle Antony: Thither you must go in a
very few days, and when there, your brother will
settle with you, in my presence, all that relates to 

your modest challenge: —For it is accepted, I will
assure you. Dr. Lewin will possibly be there, since
you make choice of him; Another gentleman likewise,
were it but to convince you, that he is another
sort of man than you have taken him to be: Your
two uncles will possibly be there too, to see that the
poor, weak, and defenceless sister has fair play. So, you
see, Miss, what company your smart challenge will
draw together. 
Prepare for the day. You'll soon be called upon. 
Adieu, mamma Norton's sweet child! 
Arab. Harlowe. 

I transcrib'd this letter, and sent it to my mamma,
with these lines. 

A very few words, my ever-honour'd Mamma!
If my sister wrote the inclosed by my father's direction,
or yours, I must submit to the usage,
with this only observation, That it is short of the personal
treatment I have received from her. If it be
of her own head: —Why then, Madam—But I
knew, that when I was banish'd from your presence— 
Yet, till I know, if she has or has not authority for
this usage, I will only write further, that I am 
Your very unhappy Child,
Cl. Harlowe. 

This answer I receiv'd in an open slip of paper,
but it was wet in one place. I kiss'd the place; for
I am sure it was blister'd, as I may say, with a mother's
tear! —The dear Lady must (I hope she must)
have wrote it reluctantly. 

To apply for protection, where authority is defy'd,
is bold! —Your sister, who would not in your
circumstances have been guilty of your perverseness,
may, allowably, be angry at you for it. —However, 

we have told her to moderate her zeal for our insulted
authority. See, if you can deserve another behaviour,
than That which cannot be so grievous to you, as the
cause of it is, to 
Your more unhappy Mother. 
How often must I forbid you any address to me! 

Give me, my dearest friend, your opinion, what
I can, what I ought to do. Not what you would do
(push'd as I am push'd) in resentment or passion—for
in That spirit you tell me, you should have been with
somebody before now. —And steps made in passion,
hardly ever fail of leading to repentance: But acquaint
me with what you think cool judgment, and
after-reflection, whatever be the event, will justify. 
I doubt not your sympathizing love: But yet you
cannot possibly feel indignity and persecution so very
sensibly as the immediate sufferer feels them: Are fitter
therefore to advise me, than I am myself. 
I will here rest my cause. Have I, or have I not,
suffer'd or borne enough? And if they will still persevere; 
if that strange persister against an antipathy so
strongly avow'd, will still persist, say, What can I
do? —What course pursue? —Shall I fly to London,
and endeavour to hide myself from Lovelace, as well
as from all my own relations, till my cousin Morden
arrives? Or shall I embark for Leghorn in my way
to my cousin? Yet, my Sex, my Youth, consider'd,
how full of danger is that! —And may not my cousin
be set out for England, while I am getting thither? — 
What can I do? —Tell me, tell me, my dearest Miss
Howe; for I dare not trust myself!— 
Eleven o'Clock at Night. 
I have been forced to try to compose my angry
passions at my Harpsichord; having first shut close
my doors and windows, that I might not be heard 

below. As I was closing the shutters of the windows,
the distant whooting of the Bird of Minerva, as from
the often-visited Woodhouse, gave the subject in that
charming Ode to Wisdom, which does honour to
our Sex, as it was written by one of it. I made an
essay, a week ago, to set the three last stanza's of it,
as not unsuitable to my unhappy situation; and after
I had re-perused the Ode, those three were my lesson: 
And, I am sure, in the solemn address they contain
to the All-wise, and All-powerful Deity, my heart
went with my fingers. 
I inclose the Ode, and my Effort with it. The
subject is solemn: My circumstances are affecting; 
and I flatter myself, that I have not been quite unhappy
in the performance. If it obtain your approbation,
I shall be out of doubt: And, should be still
more assured, could I hear it try'd by your voice,
and by your finger. 

ODE to WISDOM, By a Lady.


I.
The solitary Bird of Night
Thro' the thick Shades now wings his Flight,
 And quits his Time-shook Tow'r;
Where, shelter'd from the Blaze of Day,
In Philosophic Gloom he lay,
 Beneath his Ivy Bow'r.

II.
With Joy I hear the solemn Sound,
Which midnight Echoes waft around,
 And sighing Gales repeat.
Fav'rite of Pallas! I attend,
And, faithful to thy Summons, bend
 At Wisdom's awful Seat.


III.
She loves the cool, the silent Eve,
Where no false Shews of Life deceive,
 Beneath the Lunar Ray.
Here Folly drops each vain Disguise,
Nor sport her gaily-colour'd Dyes,
 As in the Beam of Day.

IV.
O Pallas! Queen of ev'ry Art,
That glads the Sense, and mends the Heart,
 Blest Source of purer Joys!
In ev'ry Form of Beauty bright,
That captivates the mental Sight
 With Pleasure and Surprize;

V.
To thy unspotted Shrine I bow:
Attend thy modest Suppliant's Vow,
 That breathes no wild Desires;
But taught by thy unerring Rules,
To shun the fruitless Wish of Fools,
 To nobler Views aspires.

VI.
Not Fortune's Gem, Ambition's Plume,
Nor Cytherea's fading Bloom,
 Be Objects of my Pray'r:
Let Av'rice, Vanity, and Pride,
Those envy'd glitt'ring Toys divide,
 The dull Rewards of Care.

VII.
To me thy better Gifts impart,
Each moral Beauty of the Heart,
 By studious Thought refin'd;
For Wealth, the Smiles of glad Content,
For Pow'r, its amplest, best Extent,
 An Empire o'er my Mind.

VIII.
When Fortune drops her gay Parade,
When Pleasure's transient Roses fade,

 And wither in the Tomb,
Unchang'd is thy immortal Prize;
Thy ever-verdant Laurels rise
 In undecaying Bloom.

IX.
By Thee protected, I defy
The Coxcomb's Sneer, the stupid Lye
 Of Ignorance and Spite:
Alike contemn the leaden Fool,
And all the pointed Ridicule
 Of undiscerning Wit.

X.
From Envy, Hurry, Noise, and Strife,
The dull Impertinence of Life,
 In thy Retreat I rest:
Pursue thee to the peaceful Groves,
Where Plato's sacred Spirit roves,
 In all thy Beauties drest.

XI.
He bad Ilyssus' tuneful Stream
Convey thy Philosophic Theme
 Of Perfect, Fair, and Good:
Attentive Athens caught the Sound,
And all her list'ning Sons around
 In awful Silence stood:

XII.
Reclaim'd her wild, licentious Youth,
Confess'd the potent Voice of Truth,
 And felt its just Controul.
The Passions ceas'd their loud Alarms,
And Virtue's soft persuasive Charms
 O'er all their Senses stole.

XIII.
Thy Breath inspires the Poet's Song,
The Patriot's free, unbiass'd Tongue,
 The Hero's gen'rous Strife;
Thine are Retirement's silent Joys,
And all the sweet engaging Ties
 Of still, domestic Life.


XIV

No more to fabled Names confin'd,
To the Supreme all-perfect Mind,
 My Thoughts direct their Flight.
Wisdom's thy Gift & all her force
From thee deriv'd Eternal Source
 Of Intellectual Light.


XV
O send her sure, her steady Ray,
To regulate my doubtful Way,
 Thro' Life's perplexing Road:
The Mists of Error to controul,
And thro' its Gloom direct my Soul
 To Happiness and Good.

XVI
Beneath Her clear discerning Eye
The visionary Shadows fly
 Of Folly's painted Show.
She sees thro' ev'ry fair Disguise,
That All but Virtue's solid Joys,
 Are Vanity and Woe.
