


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Colnebrooke, Monday, Mar. 27. 
Dr. Bartlett, seeing our impatience, asked leave to
take the assistance of his nephew in transcribing
from Sir Charles's Letters the passages that will enable
him to perform the task he has so kindly undertaken. 
By this means, he has already presented us with the
following transcripts. We have eagerly perused them. 
When you have done so, be pleased to hasten them up,
that my cousin Reeves's may have the same opportunity. 
They are so good as to give chearfully the preference
to the venerable circle, as my cousin, who
dined with us yesterday, bid me tell you. O my Lucy!
what a glorious young man is Sir Charles Grandison! 
But he had the happiness of a Dr. Bartlett, as he is
fond of owning, to improve upon a foundation that
was so nobly laid, by the best and wisest of mothers. 

Dr. Bartlett's first Letter.
My task, my good Miss Byron, will be easy, by
the assistance you have allowed me: For what
is it, but to transcribe parts of Sir Charles's Letters,
adding a few lines here and there, by way of connexion? 
And I am delighted with it, as it will make
known the heart of my beloved patron in all the lights
which the most interesting circumstances can throw
upon it, to so many worthy persons as are permitted
a share in this confidence. 
The first of your commands runs thus— 

I should imagine, say you, that the debates Sir
Charles mentions, between himself and Signor
Jeronymo, and his companions, at their first
acquaintance, must be not only curious, but edifying. 
They are, my good Miss Byron: But as I presume
that you Ladies are more intent upon being obeyed
in the other articles [See, Lucy, I had better not have
dissembled!] I will only at present transcibe for you,
with some short connexions, two Letters; by which
you will see how generously Mr. Grandison sought to
recover his friend to the paths of virtue and honour,
when he had formed schemes, in conjunction with,
and by the instigation of, other gay young men of
rank, to draw him in to be a partaker in their guilt,
and an abettor of their enterprizes. 
You will judge from these Letters, madam (without
shocking you by the recital) what were the common-place
pleas of those libertines, despisers of marriage,
of the laws of society, and of Women; but as
they were subservient to their pleasures. 

To the Barone della Porretta.
Will my Jeronymo allow his friend, his Grandison,
the liberty he is going to take with him? 
If the friendship he professes for him be such a one,
as a great mind can, on reflexion, glory in, he will. 
And what is this liberty, but such as constitutes the
essence of true friendship? Allow me, on this occasion,
to say, that your Grandison has seen more of the
world than most men, who have lived no longer in it,
have had an opportunity to see. I was sent abroad
for improvement, under the care of a man who proved
to be the most intriguing and profligate of those to
whom a youth was ever entrusted. I saw in him, the
inconvenience, the odiousness, of libertinism; and,
by the assistance of an excellent monitor, with whom 

I happily became acquainted, and (would it not be
false shame, and cowardice, if I did not say) by the Divine
assistance, I escaped snares that were laid to corrupt
my morals: Hence my dearest friend will the
more readily allow me to impart to him some of the
lessons that were of so much use to myself. 
I am the rather encouraged to take this liberty, as I
have often flattered myself, that I have seen my Jeronymo
affected by the arguments urged in the course
of the conversations that have been held in our select
meetings at Padua, and at Rome; in which the cause
of virtue and true honour has been discussed and
pleaded. 
I have now no hopes of influencing any one of the
noble youths, whom, at your request, I have of late
so often met: But of you I still have hopes, because
you continue to declare, that you prefer my friendship
to theirs. You think that I was disgusted at the ridicule
with which they generally treated the arguments
they could not answer: But, as far as I innocently
could, I followed them in their levity. I returned
raillery for ridicule, and not always, as you know,
unsuccessfully; but still they renewed the charge, and
we had the same arguments one day to refute, that the
preceding were given up. They could not convince
me, nor I them. 
I quit therefore (yet not without regret) the society
I cannot meet with pleasure: But let not my Jeronymo
renounce me. In his opinion I had the honour
to stand high, before I was prevailed upon to be introduced
to them; we cultivated, with mutual pleasure,
each other's acquaintance, independent of this association. 
Let us be to each other, what we were for the
first month of our intimacy. You have noble qualities; 
but are diffident, and too often suffer yourself to
be influenced by men of talents inferior to your own. 
The ridicule they have aimed at, has weakened,
perhaps, the force of the arguments that I wished to 

have a more than temporary effect on your heart. 
Permit me to remind you on paper, of some of them,
and urge to you others: The end I have in view is
your good, in hopes to confirm, by the efficacy they
may have on you, my own principles: Nor think me
too serious. The occasion, the call that true friendship
makes upon you, is weighty. 
You have shewed me Letters from your noble father,
from your mother, from the pious prelate your
brother, and others from your uncle, and still, if possible,
more admirable ones, from your sister—All
filled with concern for your present and future welfare! 
How dearly is my Jeronymo beloved by his
whole family! and by such a family! And how tenderly
does he love them all—What ought to be the
result? Jeronymo cannot be ungrateful. He knows
so well what belongs to the character of a dutiful son,
an affectionate brother, that I will not attempt to enforce
their arguments upon him. 
By the endeavours of my friend to find excuses for
some of the liberties in which he allows himself, I
infer, that if he thought them criminal, he has too
much honour to be guilty of them. He cannot say,
with the mad Medea, 

—Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor.—

No! His judgment must be misled, before he can
allow himself in a deviation. But let him beware; 
for has not every faulty inclination something to plead
in its own behalf? —Excuses, my dear friend, are
more than tacit confessions: And the health of the
mind, as of the body, is impaired by almost imperceptible
degrees. 
My Jeronymo has pleaded, and justly may he
boast of, a disposition to benevolence, charity, generosity
—What pity, that he cannot be still more perfect!
—that he resolves not against meditated injuries
to others of his fellow-creatures! But remember, my 

Lord, that true goodness is an uniform thing, and
will alike influence every part of a man's conduct; 
and that true generosity will not be confined to obligations,
either written or verbal. 
Besides, who, tho' in the least guilty instance, and
where some false virtue may offer colours to palliate
an excess, can promise himself to stop, when once he
has thrown the reins on the neck of lawless appetite? 
And may I not add, that my Jeronymo is not in his
own power? He suffers himself to be a led man! — 
O that he would choose his company anew, and be
a leader! Every virtue, then, that warms his heart,
would have a sister-virtue to encourage the noble
flame, instead of a vice to damp it. 
Justly do you boast of the nobility of your descent; 
of the excellence of every branch of your family. 
Bear with my question, my Lord; Are you determined
to sit down satisfied with the honour of your ancestors? 
Your progenitors, and every one of your
family, have given you reason to applaud their worthiness:
Will you not give them cause to boast of
yours? 
In answer to the earnest entreaties of all your
friends, that you will marry, you have said, that, were
women angels, you would with joy enter into the
state—But what ought the men to be, who form
upon women such expectations? 
Can you, my dear Lord, despise matrimony, yet
hold it to be a sacrament? Can you, defying the
maxims of your family, and wishing to have the
Sister I have heard you mention with such high delight
and admiration, strengthen your family-interest
in the female line, determine against adding to its
strength in the male? 
You have suffered yourself to speak with contempt
of the generality of the Italian women, for their illiterateness:
Let not their misfortune be imputed to
them, my noble friend, as their fault. They have the 

same natural genius's that used to distinguish the men
and women of your happy climate. Let not the want
of cultivation induce you, a learned man, to hold
them cheap. The cause of virtue, and of the sex,
can hardly be separated. 
But, O my friend, my Jeronymo, have I not too
much reason to fear, that guilty attachments have been
the cause of your slighting a legal one? —That you
are studying for pretences to justify the way of life
into which you have fallen? 
Let us consider the objects of your pursuit—Alas!
there have been more than one! Are they women seduced
from the path of virtue by himself? —Who otherwise
perhaps would have married, and made useful
members of society? —Consider, my friend, what a
capital crime is a seduction of this kind! —Can you
glory in the virtue of a sister of your own, and allow
yourself in attempts upon the daughter, the sister, of
another? And, let me ask, How can that crime be
thought pardonable in a man, which renders a woman
infamous? 
A good heart, a delicate mind, cannot associate
with a corrupt one. What tie can bind a woman,
who has parted with her honour? What, in such a
guilty attachment, must be a man's alternative, but
either to be the tyrant of a wretch who has given
him reason to despise her, or the dupe of one who
despises him? 
It is the important lesson of life (allow me to be
serious on a subject so serious) in this union of soul
and body, to restrain the unruly appetites of the latter,
and to improve the faculties of the former—Can
this end be attained by licentious indulgences, and
profligate associations? 
Men, in the pride of their hearts, are apt to suppose,
that nature has designed them to be superior to
women. The highest proof that can be given, of
such superiority, is, in the protection afforded by the 

stronger to the weaker. What can that man say for
himself, or for his proud pretension, who employs all
his arts to seduce, betray, and ruin the creature whom
he should guide and protect—Sedulous to save her,
perhaps, from every foe, but the devil and himself! 
It is unworthy of a man of spirit to be sollicitous
to keep himself within the boundaries of human laws,
on no other motive than to avoid the temporal inconveniencies
attending the breach of them. The laws
were not made so much for the direction of good
men, as to circumscribe the bad. Would a man of
honour wish to be considered as one of the latter,
rather than as one of those who would have distinguished
the fit from the unfit, had they not been discriminated
by human sanctions? Men are to approve
themselves at an higher tribunal than at that of men. 
Shall not public spirit, virtue, and a sense of duty,
have as much influence on a manly heart, as a new
face? How contemptibly low is that commerce in
which mind has no share! 
Virtuous love, my dear Jeronymo, looks beyond
this temporary scene; while guilty attachments usually
find a much earlier period than that of human
life. Inconstancy, on one side or the other, seldom
fails to put a disgraceful end to them. But were they
to endure for life, what can the reflexions upon them do
towards softening the agonies of the inevitable hour? 
Remember, my Jeronymo, that you are a Man,
a rational and immortal agent; and act up to the dignity
of your nature. Can sensual pleasure be the
great end of an immortal spirit in this life? 
That pleasure cannot be lasting, and it must be followed
by remorse, which is obtained either by doing
injustice to, or degrading, a fellow-creature. And
does not a woman, when she forfeits her honour, degrade
herself, not only in the sight of the world, but
in the secret thoughts of even a profligate lover, destroying
her own consequence with him? 

Build not, my noble friend, upon penances and
absolutions: I enter not into those subjects on which
we differ as Catholics and Protestants: But if we
would be thought men of true greatness of mind, let
us endeavour so to act, as not, in essential articles,
and with our eyes open, either to want absolution, or
incur penances. Surely, my Lord, it is nobler not
to offend, than to be obliged to atone. 
Are there not, let me ask, innocent delights enow to
fill with joy every vacant hour? Believe me, Jeronymo,
there are. Let you and me seek for such, and
make them the cement of our friendship. 
Religion out of the question, consider, what morals
and good policy will oblige you to do, as a man
born to act a part in public life. What, were the examples
set by you and your acquaintance, to be generally
followed, would become of public order and decorum? 
What of national honours? How will a regular
succession in families be kept up? You, my
Lord, boast of your descent, both by father's and mother's
side; Why will you deprive your children of a
distinction in which you glory? 
Good children, what a blessing to their parents! 
But what consort can the parent have in children
born into the world heirs of disgrace, and who, owing
their very being to profligate principles, have no family
honour to support, no fair example to imitate,
but must be warned by their father, when bitter experience
has convinced him of him errors, to avoid the
paths in which he has trod? 
How delightful the domestic connexion! To bring
to the paternal and fraternal dwellings, a sister, a
daughter, that shall be received there with tender
love; to strengthen your own interest in the world by
alliance with some noble and worthy family, who
shall rejoice to trust to the Barone della Porretta the
darling of their hopes—This would, to a generous
heart, like yours, be the source of infinite delights. 

But could you now think of introducing to the friends
you revere, the unhappy objects of a vagrant affection? 
Must not my Jeronymo even estrange himself from
his home, to conceal from his father, from his mother,
from his sister, persons shut out by all the laws
of honour from their society? The persons, so shut
out, must hate the family to whose interests theirs are
so contrary. What sincere union then, what sameness
of affection, between Jeronymo and the objects
of his passion? 
But the present hour dances delightfully away, and
my friend will not look beyond it. His gay companions
applaud and compliment him on his triumphs. 
In general, perhaps, he allows, ‘that the welfare and
order of society ought to be maintained by submission
to Divine and human laws; but his single exception
for himself can be of no importance.’ Of
what, then, is general practice made up? If every one
excepts himself, and offends in the instance that best
suits his inclination, what a scene of horror will this
world become! Affluence and a gay disposition tempt
to licentious pleasures; penury and a gloomy one to
robbery, revenge, and murder. Not one enormity
will be without its plea, if once the boundaries of
duty are thrown down. But, even in this universal
depravity, would not his crime be much worse, who
robbed me of my child from riot and licentiousness,
and under a guise of love and trust, than his who despoiled
me of my substance, and had necessity to plead
in extenuation of his guilt? 
I cannot doubt, my dear friend, but you will take,
at least, kindly, these expostulations, tho' some of them
are upon subjects on which our conversations have been
hitherto ineffectual. I submit them to your consideration. 
I can have no interest in making them, nor motive,
but what proceeds from that true friendship with
which I desire to be thought 
Most affectionately Yours. 


You have heard, my good Miss Byron, that the
friendship between Mr. Grandison and Signor Jeronymo
was twice broken off: Once it was, by the unkindly
-taken freedom of the expostulatory Letter. Jeronymo,
at that time of his life, ill brooked opposition
in any pursuit his heart was engaged in. When
pushed, he was vehement; and Mr. Grandison
could not be over-solicitous to keep up a friendship
with a young man who was under the dominion of his
dissolute companions; and who would not allow of remonstrances,
in cases that concerned his morals. 
Jeronymo, having afterwards been drawn into great
inconveniencies by his libertine friends, broke with
them; and Mr. Grandison and he meeting by accident
at Padua, their friendship, at the pressing instances
of Jeronymo, was again renewed. 
Jeronymo thought himself reformed; Mr. Grandison
hoped he was: But, soon after, a temptation fell
in his way, which he could not resist. It was from a
Lady who was more noted for her birth, beauty, and
fortune, than for her virtue. She had spread her
snares for Mr. Grandison before Jeronymo became acquainted
with her; and revenge for her slighted advances
taking possession of her heart, she hoped an
opportunity would be afforded her of wreaking it upon
him. 
The occasion was given by the following Letter,
which Mr. Grandison thought himself obliged, in honour,
to write to his friend, on his attachment; the
one being then at Padua, the other at Cremona: 

I Am extremely concerned, my dear Jeronymo, at
your new engagement with a Lady, who, tho' of
family and fortune, has shewn but little regard to her
character. How frail are the resolutions of men! 
How much in the power of women! But I will not
recriminate—Yet I cannot but regret, that I must lose
your company in our projected visits to the German 

courts: This, however, more for your sake than my
own; since to the principal of them I am no stranger. 
You have excused yourself to me; I wish you had a
better motive: But I write rather to warn, than to
upbraid you. This Lady is mistress of all the arts of
woman. She may glory in her conquest; you ought
not to be proud of yours. You will not, when you
know her better. I have had a singular opportunity
of being acquainted with her character. I never
judged of characters, of womens especially, by report. 
Had the Barone della Porretta been the first for whom
this Lady spread her blandishments, a man so amiable
as he is, might the more assuredly have depended on
the love she professes for him. She has two admirers,
men of violence, who, unknown to each other, have
equal reason to look upon her as their own. You
propose not to marry her. I am silent on this subject. 
Would to heaven you were married to a woman of
virtue! Why will you not oblige all your friends? 
Thus liable as you are—But neither do I expostulate. 
Well do I know the vehemence with which you are
wont to pursue a new adventure. Yet I had hoped— 
But again I restrain myself. Only let me add, that
the man who shall boast of his success with this Lady,
may have more to apprehend from the competition in
which he will find himself engaged, than he can be
aware of. Be prudent, my Jeronymo, in this pursuit,
for your own sake. The heart that dictates this
advice is wholly yours: But, alas! it boasts no further
interest in that of its Jeronymo. With infinite regret
I subscribe to the latter part of the sentence the once
better-regarded name of 
Grandison. 

And what was the consequence? The unhappy
youth, by the instigation of the revengeful woman,
defied his friend, in her behalf. Mr. Grandison, with
a noble disdain, appealed to Jeronymo's cooler deliberation; 

and told him, that he never would meet, as
a foe, the man he had ever been desirous to consider
as his friend. You know, my Lord, said he, that I
am under a disadvantage in having once been obliged
to assert myself, in a country where I have no natural
connexions; and where you, Jeronymo, have many. 
If we meet again, I do assure you, it must be by accident; 
and if that happens, we shall then find it
time enough to discuss the occasion of our present
misunderstanding. 
Their next meeting was indeed by accident. It
was in the Cremonese; when Mr. Grandison saved
his life. 
* *
And now, madam, let me give you, in obedience
to your second command, 
The particulars of the conference which Sir Charles
was put upon holding with Clementina, in favour
of the Count of Belvedere; and which her
father and mother, unknown to either of them,
over-heard. 
You must suppose them seated; a Milton's Paradise
Lost before them: And that, at this time, Mr. Grandison
did not presume that the young Lady had any
particular regard for him. 
Clementina. You have taught the prelate, and you
have taught the soldier, to be in love with your Milton,
Sir: But I shall never admire him, I doubt. Don't
you reckon the language hard and crabbed? 
Grandison. I did not propose him to you, madam:
Your brother chose him. We should not have made
the proficiency we have, had I not begun with you by
easier authors. But you have heard me often call him
a sublime poet, and your ambition (it is a laudable
one) leads you to make him your own too soon. Has
not your tutor taken the liberty to chide you for your
impatience; for your desire of being every-thing at
once? 

Clem. You have; and I own my fault. —But to
have done, for the present, with Milton; What shall
I do to acquit myself of the addresses of this Count
of Belvedere? 
Gr. Why would you acquit yourself of the Count's
addresses? 
Clem. He is not the man I can like: I have told
my papa as much, and he is angry with me. 
Gr. I think, madam, your papa may be a little
displeased with you; tho' he loves you too tenderly to
be angry with you. You reject the Count, without
assigning a reason. 
Clem. Is it not reason enough, that I don't like him? 
Gr. Give me leave to say, that the Count is an
handsome man. He is young; gallant; sensible; of
a family antient and noble; a grace to it. He is
learned, good-natured: He adores you— 
Clem. And so let him, if he will: I never can like
him. 
Gr. Dear Lady! You must not be capricious. 
You will give the most indulgent parents in the world
apprehension that you have cast your thoughts on some
other object. Young Ladies, except in a case of prepossession,
do not often reject a person who has so
many great and good qualities as shine in this gentleman; 
and where equality of degree, and a father's
and mother's high approbation, add to his merit. 
Clem. I suppose you have been spoken to, to talk
with me on this subject—It is a subject I don't like. 
Gr. You began it, Madam. 
Clem. I did so; because it is uppermost with me. 
I am grieved at my heart, that I cannot see the Count
with my father's eyes: My father deserves from me
every instance of duty, and love, and veneration; 
but I cannot think of the Count of Belvedere for an
husband. 
Gr. One reason, madam? One objection? 
Clem. He is a man that is not to my mind: A 

fawning, cringing man, I think. —And a spirit that
can fawn and cringe, and kneel, will be a tyrant in
power. 
Gr. Dear madam, To whom is he this obsequious
man, but to you? —Is there a man in the world that
behaves with a more proper dignity to every one else? 
Nay, to you, the Lover shines out in him, but the
Man is not forgot. Is the tenderness of well-placed
Love, the veneration paid to a deservedly beloved object,
any derogation to the manly character? Far from
it; and shall you think the less of your Lover, for being
the most ardent, and, I have no knowlege in man,
if he is not the most sincere, of men? 
Clem. An excellent advocate! —I am sure you
have been spoken to—Have you not? Tell me truly? 
Perhaps by the Count of Belvedere? 
Gr. I should not think, and, of consequence, not
speak, so highly as I do, of the Count, if he were capable
of asking any man, your father and brothers excepted,
to plead his cause with you. 
Clem. I can't bear to be chidden, Chevalier. Now
you are going to be angry with me too. But has not
my mamma spoken to you? Tell me? 
Gr. Dear Lady, consider, if she had, what you owe
to a mamma, who deserving, for her tenderness to her
child, the utmost observance and duty, would condescend
to put her authority into a mediation. And
yet, let me declare, that no person breathing should
make me say what I do not think, whether in favour
or disfavour of any man. 
Clem. That is no answer. I owe implicit, yes, I
will say implicit, duty to my mamma, for her indulgence
to me: But what you have said is no direct
answer. 
Gr. For the honour of that indulgence, madam,
I own to you, that your mamma, and my Lord too,
have wished that their Clementina could or would
give one substantial reason why she cannot like the 

Count of Belvedere; that they might prepare themselves
to acquiesce with it, and the Count be induced
to submit to his evil destiny. 
Clem. And they have wished this to you, Sir? And
you have taken upon you to answer their wishes—I
protest, you are a man of prodigious consequence,
with us all; and by your readiness to take up the
cause of a man you have so lately known, you seem
to know it, too well. 
Gr. I am sorry I have incurred your displeasure,
madam. 
Clem. You have. I never was more angry with
you, than I now am. 
Gr. I hope you never was angry with me before. 
I never gave you reason. And if I have now, I beg
your pardon. 
I arose to go. 
Clem. Very humble, Sir! —And are for going before
you have it. Now call me capricious, again! 
Gr. I did not know that you could be so easily
displeased, madam. 
She wept. 
Clem. I am a very weak creature: I believe I am
wrong: But I never knew what it was to give
offence to any-body till within these few months. I
love my father, I love my mother, beyond my own
life; and to think that now, when I wish most for
the continuance of their goodness to me, I am in
danger of forfeiting it! —I can't bear it! —Do you forgive
me, however. I believe I have been too petulant
to you. Your behaviour is noble, frank, disinterested. 
It has been a happiness that we have known you. 
You are every-body's friend. But yet I think it is a
little officious in you to plead so very warmly for a
man of whom you know so little; and when I told
you, more than once, I could not like him. 
Gr. Honoured as I am, by your whole family,
with the appellation of a fourth son, a fourth brother; 

dear madam, was I to blame to act up to the character? 
I know my own heart; and if I have consequence
given me, I will act so, as to deserve it; at
least, my own heart shall give it to me. 
Clem. Well, Sir, you may be right: I am sure
you mean to be right. But as it would be a diminution
of the Count's dignity, to apply to you for a supposed
interest in you, which he cannot have, it would
be much more so, to have you interfere where a father,
mother, and other brothers [You see, Sir, I allow
your claim of fourth brotherhood] are supposed to
have less weight: So no more of the Count of Belvedere,
I beseech you, from your mouth. 
Gr. One word more, only—Don't let the goodness
of your father and mother be construed to the
disadvantage of the parental character in them. They
have not been positive: They have given their wishes,
rather than their commands. Their tenderness for
you, in a point so very tender, has made them unable
to tell their own wishes to you, for fear they should
not meet with yours; yet would be, perhaps, glad to
hear one solid objection to their proposal—And why? 
That they might admit of it—Impute, therefore, to
my officiousness, what you please; and yet I would
not wish to disoblige or offend you; but let their indulgence,
they never will use their authority, have its
full merit with you. 
Clem. Your servant, Sir. I never yet had a slight
notion of their indulgence; and I hope I never shall. 
If you will go, go: But Sir, next time I am favoured
with your lectures, it shall be upon Languages,
if you please; and not upon Lovers. 
I withdrew, profoundly bowing. But surely,
thought I, the lovely Clementina is capricious. 
Thus far my patron. 
Let me add, That the Marchioness having acquainted
Mr. Grandison, that her Lord and she had heard
every word that had passed, expressed her displeasure 

at her daughter's petulance; and, thanking him in her
Lord's name, as well as for herself, for the generous
part he had taken, told him, that Clementina should
ask his pardon. 
He begged that, for the sake of their own weight
with her on the same subject, she might not know
that they had heard what had passed. 
I believe that's best, Chevalier, answered the Marchioness; 
and I am apt to think, that the poor girl will
be more ready than perhaps one would wish, to make
up with you, were she to find you offended with her in
earnest; as you have reason to be, as a disinterested man. 
You see, Chevalier, I know to whom I am speaking; 
but both my Lord, and self, hope to see her of
another mind; and that she will soon be Countess of
Belvedere. My Lord's heart is in this alliance; so is
that of my son Giacomo. 
I come now, madam, to your third command; 
which is, To give you, 
The conference which Sir Charles was put upon
holding with the unhappy Clementina, on her
being seized with melancholy. 
[Mr. Grandison still not presuming on any particular
favour from Clementina.] 
The young Lady was walking in one alley of the
garden; Mr. Grandison, and the Marquis and Marchioness,
in another. She was attended by her woman,
who walked behind her; and with whom she
was displeased for endeavouring to divert her; but
who, however, seemed to be talking on, tho' without
being answered. 
The dear creature! said the Marquis, tears in his
eyes,—See her there, now walking slow, now with
quicker steps, as if she would shake off her Camilla. 
She hates the poor woman for her love to her: But
who is it that she sees with pleasure? Did I think that
I should ever behold the pride of my heart, with the 

pain that I now feel for her? Yet she is lovely in my
eye, in all she does, in all she says—But, O my dear
Grandison, we cannot now make her speak, more
than Yes, or No. We cannot engage her in a conversation,
no not on the subject of her newly-acquired
language. See if you can, on any subject. 
Ay, Chevalier, said the Marchioness, do you try
to engage her. We have told her, that we will not
talk of marriage to her at all, till she is herself inclined
to receive proposals. Her weeping eyes thank us for
our indulgence: She prays for us with lifted-up hands:
She courtesies her thanks, if she stands before us:
She bows, in acknowleged gratitude for our goodness
to her, if she sits; but she cares not to speak. She is
not easy while we are talking to her. See! she is
stepping into the Greek temple; her poor woman,
unanswered, talking to her. She has not seen us. By
that winding walk we can, unseen, place ourselves in
the myrtle-grove, and hear what passes. 
The Marchioness, as we walked, hinted, that in their
last visit to the General at Naples, there was a Count
Marulli, a young nobleman of merit, but a soldier
of fortune, who would have clandestinely obtained
the attention of their Clementina. They knew nothing
of it till last night, she said; when herself and
Camilla, puzzling to what to attribute the sudden melancholy
turn of her daughter, and Camilla mentioning
what was unlikely, as well as likely; told her, that
the Count would have bribed her to deliver a Letter
to the young Lady; but that she repulsed him with
indignation: He besought her then to take no notice
of his offer, to the General, on whom all his fortunes
depended. She did not, for that reason, to any-body; 
but, a few days since, she heard her young Lady (talking
of the gentlemen she had seen at Naples) mention
the young Count favourably—Now it is impossible
there can be any-thing in it, said the Marchioness:
But do you, however, Chevalier, lead to the subject of 

Love, but at distance; nor name Marulli, because
she will think you have been talking with Camilla. 
The dear girl has pride: She would not endure you,
if she thought you imagined her to be in Love, especially
with a man of inferior degree, or dependent
fortunes. But on your prudence we wholly rely; 
mention it, or not, as matters fall in. 
There can be no room for this surmise, my dear,
said the Marquis; and yet Marulli was lately in Bologna:
But Clementina's spirit will not permit her to
encourage a clandestine address. 
By this time we had got to the myrtle-grove, behind
the temple, and over-heard them talk, as follows: 
Camilla. And why, why must I leave you, madam? 
—From infancy you know how I have loved
you. You used to love to hold converse with your
Camilla. How have I offended you? I will not enter
this temple till you give me leave; but indeed, indeed,
I must not, I cannot leave you. 
Clem. Officious Love! —Can there be a greater
torment than an officious prating Love! —If you
loved me, you would wish to oblige me. 
Cam. I will oblige you, my dear young Lady, in
every-thing I can— 
Clem. Then leave me, Camilla. I am best when I
am alone: I am chearfullest when I am alone. You
haunt me, Camilla; like a ghost you haunt me, Camilla. 
Indeed you are but the ghost of my once obliging
Camilla. 
Cam. My dearest young Lady, let me beseech
you— 
Clem. Ay, now you come with your besecches
again: But if you love me, Camilla, leave me. Am
I not to be trusted with myself? Were I a vile young
creature, that was suspected to be running away with
some base-born man, you could not be more watchful
of my steps. 

Camilla would have entered into farther talk with
her; but she absolutely forbad her. 
Talk till dooms-day, I will not say one word more
to you, Camilla. I will be silent. I will stop my ears. 
They were both silent. Camilla seemed to weep. 
Now, my dear Chevalier, whispered the Marquis,
put yourself in her sight; engage her into talk about
England, or any thing: You will have an hour good
before dinner. I hope she will be chearful at table:
She must be present; our guests will enquire after her. 
Reports have gone out, as if her head is hurt. 
I am afraid, my Lord, that this is an unseasonable
moment. She seems to be out of humour; and, pardon
me if I say, that Camilla, good woman as she is,
and well-meaning, had better give way to her young
Lady's humour, at such times. 
Then, said the Marchioness, will her malady get
head; then will it become habit. But my Lord and
I will remain where we are, for a few minutes, and
do you try to engage her in conversation. I would
have her be chearful before the Patriarch, however; 
he will expect to see her. She is as much his delight,
as she is ours. 
I took a little turn; and entering the walk, which
led to the temple, appeared in her sight; but bowed,
on seeing her sitting in it. Her woman stood silent,
with her handkerchief at her eyes, at the entrance. 
I quickened my steps, as if I would not break into
her retirement, and passed by; but, by means of the
winding walk, could hear what she said. 
She arose; and stepping forward, looking after me,
He is gone, said she. Learn, Camilla, of the Chevalier
Grandison— 
Shall I call him back, madam? 
No. Yes. No. Let him go. I will walk. You
may now leave me, Camilla: There is somebody in
the garden who will watch me: Or you may stay, 

Camilla; I don't care which: Only don't talk to me
when I wish you to be silent. 
She went into an alley that crossed the alley in
which I was, but took the walk that led from me. 
When we came to the centre of both, and were
very near each other, I bowed; she courtesied; but
not seeming to encourage my nearer approach, I made
a motion, as if I would take another walk. She stopt. 
Learn of the Chevalier Grandison, Camilla, repeated
she. 
May I presume, madam? Do I not invade— 
Camilla is a little officious to-day: Camilla has
teazed me. Are the poets of your country as severe
upon womens tongues, as the poets of ours? 
Poets, madam, of all countries, boast the same inspiration:
Poets write, as other men speak, to their
feeling. 
So, Sir! —You make a pretty compliment to us
poor women. 
Poets have finer imaginations, madam, than other
men; they therefore feel quicker: But as they are not
often intitled to boast of judgment (for imagination
and judgment seldom go together) they may, perhaps,
give the cause, and then break out into satire upon the
effects. 
Don't I see before me, in the Orange-grove, my
father and mother? I do. I have not kneeled to them
to-day. Don't go, Chevalier. 
She hastened towards them. They stopt. She
bent her knee to each, and received their tender
blessings. They led her towards me. You seemed
engaged in talk with the Chevalier, my dear, said the
Marquis. Your mamma and I were walking in. We
leave you. —They did. 
The best of parents! said she. O that I were a
more worthy child! —Have you not seen them, Sir,
before to-day? 

I have, madam. They think you the worthiest of
daughters; but they lament your thoughtful turn. 
They are very good. I am grieved to give them
trouble. Have they expressed their concern to you,
Sir? —I will not be so petulant as I was once before,
provided you keep clear of the same subject. You
are the confident of us all; and your noble and disinterested
behaviour deservedly endears you to everybody. 
They have been, this very morning, lamenting the
melancholy turn you seem to have taken. With tears
they have been lamenting it. 
Camilla, you may draw near: You will hear your
own cause supported. The rather draw near, and hear
all the Chevalier seems to be going to say; because it
may save you and me too a great deal of trouble. 
Madam, I have done, said I. 
But you must not have done. If you are commissioned,
Sir, by my father and mother, I am, I
ought to be, prepared to hear all you have to say. 
Camilla came up. 
My dearest young Lady, said I, What can I say? 
My wishes for your happiness may make me appear
importunate: But what hope have I of obtaining
your confidence, when your mother fails? 
What, Sir, is aimed at? What is sought to be obtained? 
I am not very well: I used to be a very
sprightly creature: I used to talk, to sing, to dance,
to play; to visit, to receive visits: And I don't like
to do any of these things now. I love to be alone:
I am contented with my own company. Other company
is, at times, irksome to me; and I can't help it. 
But whence this sudden turn, madam, in a Lady
so young, so blooming? Your father, mother, brothers,
cannot a count for it; and this disturbs them. 
I see it does, and am sorry for it. 
No other favourite diversion takes place in your 

mind. You are a young Lady of exemplary piety:
You cannot pay a greater observance than you always
paid, to the duties of religion. 
You, Sir, an Englishman, an heretic, give me
leave to call you; for are you not so? —Do you talk
of piety, of religion? 
We will not enter into this subject, madam: What
I meant— 
Yes, Sir, I know what you meant—And I will
own, that I am, at times, a very melancholy strange
creature. I know not whence the alteration; but so
it is; and I am a greater trouble to myself than I can
be to any-body else. 
But, madam, there must be some cause—And for
you to answer the best and most indulgent of mothers
with sighs and tears only; yet no obstinacy, no sullenness,
no petulance, appearing: All the same sweetness,
gentleness, observance, that she ever rejoiced to
find in her Clementina, still shining out in her mind. 
She cannot urge her silent daughter; her tenderness
will not permit her to urge her: And how can you,
my Sister (Allow of my claim, madam) How can you
still silently withdraw from such a mother? How can
you, at other times, suffer her to withdraw, her heart
full, her eyes running over, unable to stay, yet hardly
knowing how to go, because of the ineffectual report
she must make to your sorrowing father; yet the
cause of this very great alteration (which they dread
is growing into habit, at a time of life when you were
to crown all their hopes) a Secret fast locked up in your
own heart? 
She wept, and turned from me, and leaned upon
the arm of her Camilla; and then quitting her arm,
and joining me, How you paint my obstinacy, and my
mamma's goodness! I only wish—With all my soul,
I wish—that I was added to the dust of my ancestors. 
I who was their comfort, I see, now, must be their
torment. 

Fie, fie, my sister! 
Blame me not: I am by no means satisfied with
myself. What a miserable being must she be, who is
at variance with herself? 
I do not hope, madam, that you should place so
much confidence in your fourth brother as to open
your mind to him: All I beg is, that you will relieve
the anxious, the apprehensive heart of the best of
mothers; and, by so doing, enable her to relieve the
equally-anxious heart of the best of fathers. 
She paused, stood still, turned away her face, and
wept; as if half overcome. 
Let your faithful Camilla, madam, be commissioned
to acquaint your mamma— 
But hold, Sir! (seeming to recollect herself) not so
fast—Open my mind—What! whether I have anything
to reveal, or not? —Insinuating man! You had
almost persuaded me to think I had a Secret that lay
heavy at my heart: And when I began to look for it,
to oblige you, I could not find it. Pray, Sir—She
stopt. 
And pray, madam (taking her hand) Do not think
of receding thus— 
You are too free, Sir. Yet she withdrew not her
hand. 
For a brother, madam? Too free for a brother? 
And I quitted it. 
Well, and what farther would my brother? 
Only to implore, to beseech you, to reveal to your
mamma, to your excellent, your indulgent— 
Stop, Sir, I beseech you—What! Whether I have
any-thing to reveal, or not? —Pray, Sir, tell me,
invent for me, a Secret that is fit for me to own; and
then, perhaps, if it will save the trouble of enquiries,
I may make, at least, my four brothers easy. 
I am pleased, however, madam, with your agreeable
raillery. Continue but in this temper, and the
Secret is revealed: Enquiry will be at an end. 

Camilla, here, is continually teazing me with her
persuasions to be in Love, as she calls it: That is the
silly thing, in our sex, which gives importance to
yours. A young creature cannot be grave, cannot
indulge a contemplative humour, but she must be in
Love. I should hate myself, were I to put it in the
power of any man breathing to give me uneasiness. 
I hope, Sir, I hope, that you, my brother, have not so
poor, so low, so mean a thought of me. 
It is neither poor, nor low; it is not mean, to be in
Love, madam. 
What! not with an improper object? 
Madam! 
What have I said? You want to—But what I have
now said, was to introduce what I am going to tell
you; that I saw your insinuation, and what it tended
to, when you read to me those lines of your Shakespeare; 
which in your heart, I suppose, you had the
goodness, or what shall I call it? to apply to me. Let
me see if I can repeat them to you in their original
English. 
With the accent of her country, she very prettily
repeated those lines: 

 —She never told her love;
But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
Feed on her damask cheek: She pin'd in thought;
And, with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat, like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief.—

Now, Chevalier, if you had any design in your
pointing to these very pretty lines, I will only say, you
are mistaken; and so are all those who affront and
afflict me, with attributing my malady to so great a
weakness. 
I meant not at the time, madam— 
Nor now, I hope, Sir— 
Any such application of the lines. How could I? 

Your refusal of many Lovers; your declining the
proposals of a man of the Count of Belvedere's consequence
and merit; tho' approved of by every one of
your friends; are convictions— 
See, Camilla! interrupting me with quickness, the
Chevalier is convinced! —Pray let me have no more
of your affronting questions and conjectures on this
subject. I tell you, Camilla, I would not be in Love
for the world, and all its glory. 
But, madam, if you will be pleased to assign one
cause, to your mamma, for the melancholy turn your
lively temper has taken, you will free yourself from
a suspicion that gives you pain, as well as displeasure. 
Perhaps you are grieved, that you cannot comply with
your father's views—Perhaps— 
Assign one cause, again interrupted she—Assign one
cause! —Why, Sir—I am not well—I am not pleased
with myself—as I told you. 
If it were any-thing that lay upon your mind, your
conscience, madam, your confessor— 
Would not make me easy. He is a good, but
(turning aside, and speaking low) a severe man. Camilla
hears not what I say [Camilla dropt behind]. He
is more afraid of me, in some cases, than he need to
be. And why? Because you have almost persuaded
me to think charitably of people of different persuasions,
by your noble charity for all mankind: Which
I think, heretic as you are, forgive me, Sir, carries
an appearance of true Christian goodness in it: Tho'
Protestants, it seems, will persecute one another; 
but you would not be one of those, except you are
one man in Italy, another in England. 
Your mother, madam, will ask, If you have honoured
me with any part of your confidence? Her
communicative goodness makes her think every-body
should be as unreserved as herself. Your father is so
good as to allow you to explain yourself to me, when
he wishes that I could prevail upon you to open your 

mind to me in the character of a fourth brother. My
Lord the Bishop— 
Yes, yes, Sir, interrupted she, all our family worships
you almost. I have myself a very great regard
for you, as the fourth brother who has been the deliverer
and preserver of my third. But, Sir, who can
prevail upon you, in any thing you are determined
upon? —Had I any thing upon my heart, I would not
tell it to one, who, brought up in error, shuts his eyes
against conviction, in an article in which his everlasting
good is concerned. Let me call you a Catholic,
Sir, and I will not keep a thought of my heart from
you. You shall indeed be my brother; and I shall
free one of the holiest of men from his apprehensions
on my conversing with so determined an heretic as he
thinks you. Then shall you, as my brother, command
those Secrets, if any I have, from that heart in which
you think them locked up. 
Why then, madam, will you not declare them to
your mamma, to your confessor, to my Lord Bishop? 
Did I not say, If any I have? 
And is your reverend confessor uneasy at the favour
of the family to me? —How causeless! —Have I ever,
madam, talked with you on the subject of religion? 
Well but, Sir, are you so obstinately determined in
your errors, that there is no hope of convincing you? 
I really look upon you, as my papa and mamma first
bid me do, as my fourth brother: I should be glad
that all my brothers were of one religion. Will you
allow Father Marescotti and Father Geraldino to enter
into a conference with you on this subject? And if
they answer all your objections, will you act according
to your convictions? 
I will not, by any means, madam, enter upon this
subject. 
I have long intended, Sir, to propose this matter to
you. 
You have often intimated as much, madam, tho' 

not so directly as now; but the religion of my country
is the religion of my choice. I have a great deal
to say for it. It will not be heard with patience by
such strict professors as either of those you have
named. Were I to be questioned on this subject before
the Pope, and the whole Sacred College, I would
not prevaricate: But good manners will make me
shew respect to the religion of the country I happen to
be in, were it the Mahometan, or even the Pagan; 
and to venerate the good men of it: But I never will
enter into debate upon the subject as a traveller, a
sojourner; that is a rule with me. 
Well, Sir, you are an obstinate man, that's all I
will say. I pity you; with all my soul I pity you:
You have great and good qualities. As I have sat at
table with you, and heard you converse on subject; 
that every one has in silence admired you for, I have
often thought to myself, Surely this man was not designed
for perdition! —But begone, Chevalier; leave
me. You are an obstinate man. Yours is the worst
of obstinacy; for you will not give yourself a chance
for conviction. 
We have so far departed from the subject we began
upon, that it is proper to obey you, madam. I only
beg that my Sister— 
Not so far departed from it, perhaps, as you
imagine, interrupted she; and turned a blushing cheek
from me—But what do you beg of your Sister? 
That she will rejoice the most indulgent of parents,
and the most affectionate of brothers, with a chearful
aspect at table, especially before the Patriarch. Do
not, madam, in silence— 
You find, Sir, I have been talkative enough with
you. —Shall we go thro' your Shakespeare's Hamlet tonight? 
—Farewel, Chevalier. I will try to be chearful
at table: But let not your eye, if I am not, reproach
me. —She took another walk. 
I was loth, my dear Dr. Bartlett, to impute to myself 

the consequence with this amiable Lady, that
might but naturally be inferred from the turn which
the conversation took; but I thought it no more than
justice to the whole family, to hasten my departure:
And when I hinted to Clementina, that I should soon
take leave of them, I was rejoiced to find her unconcerned. 
This, my good Miss Byron, is what I find in my
patron's Letters relating to this conference. He takes
notice, that the young Lady behaved herself at table
as she was wished to do. 
Mr. Grandison was prevailed upon, by the intreaties
of the whole family, to suspend his departure for a
few days. 
The young Lady's melancholy, to the inexpressible
affliction of her friends, increased; yet she behaved
with so much greatness of mind, that neither her
mother nor her Camilla could persuade themselves
that Love was the cause. They sometimes imagined,
that the earnestness with which they solicited the interest
of the Count of Belvedere with her, had hurried
and affected her delicate spirits; and therefore
they were resolved to say little more on that subject
till they should see her disposed to lend a more favourable
ear to it: And the Count retired to his own
palace in Parma, expecting and hoping for such a
turn in his favour: For he declared, That it was impossible
for him to think of any other woman for a wife. 
But Signor Jeronymo doubted not, all this time,
of the cause; and, without letting any-body into his
opinion, not even Mr. Grandison, for fear a disappointment
would affect him, resolved to make use of
every opportunity that should offer, in favour of the
man he loved, from a principle of gratitude, that
reigned with exemplary force in the breast of every
one of this noble family; a principle which took the
firmer root in their hearts, as the prudence, generosity, 

magnanimity, and other great and equally-amiable
qualities of Mr. Grandison, appeared every day more
and more conspicuous to them all. 
I will soon, madam, present you with farther extracts
from the Letters in my possession, in pursuance
of the articles you have given me in writing. I am
not a little proud of my task. 

Continuation of Miss Byron's Letter.
Begun p. 199.
Can you not, Lucy, gather from the setting-out
of this story, and the short account of it given
by Sir Charles in the Library-conference, that I shall
soon pay my duty to you all in Northamptonshire? I
shall, indeed. 
Is it not strange, my dear, that a father and mother,
and brothers, so jealous as Italians, in general,
are said to be, of their women; and so proud as this
Bologna family is represented to be of their rank; 
should all agree to give so fine a man, as this is, in
mind, person, and address, such free access to their
daughter, a young Lady of Eighteen? 
Teach her English! —Very discreet in the father
and mother, surely! And to commission him to talk
with the poor girl in favour of a man whom they
wished her to marry! —Indeed you will say, perhaps,
that by the honourable expedient they fell upon, unknown
to either tutor or pupil, of listening to all that
was to pass in the conference, they found a method to
prove his integrity; and that, finding it proof, they
were justified to prudence in their future confidence. 
With all my heart, Lucy: If you will excuse these
parents, you may. But I say, that any body, tho'
not of Italy, might have thought such a tutor as this
was dangerous to a young Lady; and the more, for
being a man of honour and family. In every case,
the teacher is the obliger. He is called master, you
know: And where there is a master, a servant is implied. 

Who is it that seeks not out for a married
man, among the common tribe of tutors, whether
professing music, dancing, languages, science of any
kind? But a tutor such a one as this— 
Well, but I will leave them to pay the price of their
indiscretion. 
* *
I Am this moment come from the doctor. I insinuated
to him, as artfully as I could, some of the
above observations. He reminded me, that the Marchioness
herself had her education at Paris; and says,
that the manners of the Italians are very much altered
of late years; and that the French freedom begins to
take place among the people of condition, in a very
visible manner, of the Italian reserve. The women
of the family of Porretta, particularly, he says, because
of their learning, freedom, and conversableness,
have been called, by their enemies, Frenchwomen. 
But you will see, that honour, and the laws of hospitality,
were Mr. Grandison's guard: And I believe
a young flame may be easily kept under. But it is a
grateful thing, Lucy, to all women, to have a man in
Love, whether with ourselves, or not; and the more
grateful, perhaps, the less prudent. Yet, ought it to
be so? Sir Charles Grandison is used to do only what
he ought. Dr. Bartlett once said, that the life of a
good man was a continual warfare with his passions. 
You will see, in the second conference between
Mr. Grandison and the Lady, upon the melancholy
way she was in, how artfully, yet, I must own, honourably,
he reminds her of the brotherly character
which he passes under to her! How officiously he
sisters her! 
Ah, Lucy! your Harriet is his sister too, you know! 
He has been used to this dialect, and to check the
passions of us forward girls; and yet I have gone on
confessing mine to the whole venerable circle, and
have almost gloried in it to them. Have not also his 

sisters detected me? While the noble Clementina, as
in that admirable passage cited by her, 

 —Never told her love,
But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
Feed on her damask cheek.—
How do I admire her for her silence! But yet, had
she been circumstanced as your Harriet was, would
Clementina have been so very reserved? 
Shall I run a parallel between our two cases? 

Clementina's relations
were all solicitous for
her marrying the Count
of Belvedere, a man of
unexceptionable character,
of family, of
fortune; and who is
said to be a galant and
an handsome man, and
who adores her, and is
of her own faith and
country.
Harriet's relations were
all solicitous, from the
first, for an alliance
with their child's deliverer.
They never had
encouraged any man's
address; nor had she:
And all his nearest and
dearest friends were partial
to her, and soon
grew ardent in her favour.
What difficulties had Clementina
to contend
with! It was great in
her to endeavour to
conquer a Love, that
she could not, either in
duty, or with her judgment
and conscience,
acknowlege.
Harriet, not knowing of
any engagement he had,
could have no difficulties
to contend with; 
except inferiority of fortune
were one. She had
therefore no reason to
endeavour to conquer
a passion not ignobly
founded; and of which
duty, judgment, and
conscience, approved.
No wonder, then, that so
excellent a young Lady
suffered Concealment,
Suspense therefore, only,
and not concealment
(since every one called

like a worm in the bud,
to feed on her damask
cheek.
upon Harriet to acknowlege
her Love)
could feed on her cheek.

And is not suspense enough to make it pale, tho' it
has not yet given it a green and yellow cast? O what
tortures has suspense given me! But certainty is now
taking place. 
What a right method, Lucy, did Clementina, so
much in earnest in her own persuasion, take, in this
second conference, could she have succeeded, in her
solicitude for his change of religion! —Could that
have been effected, I dare say she would have been
less reserved, as to the cause of her melancholy; 
especially as her friends were all as indulgent to her as
mine are to me. 
But my pity for the noble Clementina begins to
take great hold of my heart. I long to have the
whole before me. 
Adieu, Lucy: If I write more, it will be all a recapitulation
of the doctor's Letter. I can think of
nothing else. 

