


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Saturday, Oct. 14.
Mr. Fenwick has just now been telling us, from
the account given him by that Greville, vile
man, how the affair was between him and Sir Charles
Grandison. Take it briefly, as follows: 
About Eight yesterday morning, that audacious
wretch went to the George at Northampton; and,
after making his enquiries, demanded an audience of
Sir Charles Grandison. Sir Charles was near dressed,
and had ordered his chariot to be ready, with intent
to visit us early. 
He admitted of Mr. Greville's visit. Mr. Greville
confesses, that his own behaviour was peremptory (his 

word for insolent, I suppose). I hear, Sir, said he,
that you are come down into this county in order to
carry off from us the richest jewel in it—I need not
say whom. My name is Greville: I have long made
my addresses to her, and have bound myself under a
vow, that, were a Prince to be my competitor, I
would dispute his title to her. 
You seem to be a princely man, Sir, said Sir Charles,
offended with his air and words, no doubt. You need
not, Mr. Greville, have told me your name: I have
heard of you. What your pretensions are, I know
not; your vow is nothing to me: I am master of my
own actions; and shall not account to you, or any
man living, for them. 
I presume, Sir, you came down with the intention
I have hinted at? I beg only your answer as to that. 
I beg it as a favour, gentleman to gentleman? 
The manner of your address to me, Sir, is not such
as will intitle you to an answer for your own sake. I
will tell you, however, that I am come down to pay
my devoirs to Miss Byron. I hope for acceptance; 
and know not that I am to make allowance for the
claim of any man on earth. 
Sir Charles Grandison, I know your character: I
know your bravery. It is from that knowlege that I
consider you as a fit man for me to talk to. I am
not a Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, Sir. 
I make no account of who or what you are, Mr.
Greville. Your visit is not, at this time, a welcome
one: I am going to breakfast with Miss Byron. I
shall be here in the evening, and at leisure, then, to
attend to any-thing you shall think yourself authorized
to say to me, on this or any other subject. 
We may be overheard, Sir—Shall I beg you to
walk with me into the garden below? You are going
to breakfast, you say, with Miss Byron. Dear Sir
Charles Grandison, oblige me with an audience, of
five minutes only, in the back-yard, or garden. 

In the evening, Mr. Greville, command me anywhere:
But I will not be broken in upon now. 
I will not leave you at liberty, Sir Charles, to make
your visit where you are going, till I am gratified with
one five minutes conference with you below. 
Excuse me then, Mr. Greville, that I give orders,
as if you were not here. Sir Charles rang. Up came
one of his servants—Is the chariot ready? —Almost
ready, was the answer. —Make haste. Saunders may
see his friends in this neighbourhood: He may stay
with them till Monday. Frederick and you attend
me. 
He took out a Letter, and read in it, as he walked
about the room, with great composure, not regarding
Mr. Greville, who stood swelling, as he owned, at
one of the windows, till the servant withdrew; and
then he addressed himself to Sir Charles in language
of reproach on this contemptuous treatment. —Mr.
Greville, said Sir Charles, you may be thankful, perhaps,
that you are in my own apartment: This intrusion
is a very ungentlemanly one. 
Sir Charles was angry, and expressed impatience to
be gone. Mr. Greville owned, that he knew not
how to contain himself, to see his rival, with so many
advantages in his person and air, dressed avowedly to
attend the woman he had so long—Shall I say been
troublesome to? For I am sure he never had the shadow
of countenance from me. 
I repeat my demand, Sir Charles, of a conference
of five minutes below. 
You have no right to make any demand upon me,
Mr. Greville: If you think you have, the evening
will be time enough. But, even then, you must behave
more like a gentleman, than you have done hitherto,
to intitle yourself to be considered as on a foot
with me. 
Not on a foot with you, Sir! —And he put his hand
upon his sword. A gentleman is on a foot with a
Prince, Sir, in a point of honour— 

Go, then, and find out your Prince, Mr. Greville:
I am no Prince. And you have as much reason to
address yourself to the man you never saw, as to me. 
His servant just then shewing himself, and withdrawing; 
Mr. Greville, added he, I leave you in possession
of this apartment. Your servant, Sir. In the
evening I shall be at your command. 
One word with you, Sir Charles—One word— 
What would Mr. Greville? turning back. 
Have you made proposals? Are your proposals accepted? 
I repeat, that you ought to have behaved differently,
Mr. Greville, to be intitled to an answer to
these questions. 
Answer me, however, Sir: I beg it as a favour. 
Sir Charles took out his watch. —After Nine: I
shall make them wait. But thus I answer you: I
have made proposals; and, as I told you before, I
hope I shall be accepted. 
Were you any other man in the world, Sir, the
man before you might question your success with a
woman whose difficulties are augmented by the obsequiousness
of her admirers. But such a man as you,
would not have come down on a fool's errand. I love
Miss Byron to distraction. I could not shew my face
in the county, and suffer any man out of it to carry
away such a prize. 
Out of the county, Mr. Greville! What narrowness
is this! But I pity you for your Love of Miss
Byron: And— 
You pity me, Sir! interrupted he. —I bear not such
haughty tokens of superiority. Either give up your
pretensions to Miss Byron, or make me sensible of it,
in the way of a gentleman. 
Mr. Greville, your servant: And he went down. 
The wretch followed him; and when they came to
the yard, and Sir Charles was stepping into the chariot,
he took his hand, several persons present—We 

are observed, Sir Charles, whispered he. Withdraw
with me, for a few moments. By the great God of
Heaven, you must not refuse me. I cannot bear that
you should go thus triumphantly on the business you
are going upon. 
Sir Charles suffered himself to be led by the wretch:
And when they were come to a private spot, Mr. Greville
drew, and demanded Sir Charles to do the like,
putting himself in a posture of defence. 
Sir Charles put his hand on his sword, but drew it
not. Mr. Greville, said he, know your own safety; 
and was turning from him, when the wretch swore
he would admit of no alternative, but his giving up
his pretensions to Miss Byron. 
His rage, as Mr. Fenwick describes it from himself,
making him dangerous, Sir Charles drew. —I only
defend myself, said he—Greville, you keep no guard— 
He put by his pass with his sword; and, without
making a push, closed in with him, twisted his sword
out of his hand; and, pointing his own to his breast,
You see my power, Sir—Take your life, and your
sword. —But if you are either wife, or would be
thought a man of honour, tempt not again your
fate. 
And am I again master of my sword, and unhurt? 
'Tis generous—The evening, you say? 
Still I say, I will be yours in the evening, either at
your own house, or at my inn; but not as a Duellist,
Sir: You know my principles. 
How can this be? and he swore. —How was it
done? Expose me not at Selby-house. How the devil
could this be? —I expect you in the evening here. 
And he went off a back-way. Sir Charles, instead
of going directly into his chariot, went up to his
apartment; wrote his Billet to my aunt to excuse
himself, finding it full late to get hither in time, and
being somewhat discomposed in his temper, as he
owned to us: And then he took an airing in his chariot,
till he came hither to dine. 

But how should we have been alarmed, had we
known that Sir Charles declined supping here, in order
to meet the violent man again at his inn! And how
did we again blame ourselves for taking amiss his not
supping with us! 
Mr. Fenwick says, that Mr. Greville got him to accompany
him to the George. 
Sir Charles apologized, with great civility, to Mr.
Greville, for making him wait for him. Mr. Greville,
had he been disposed for mischief, had no use of
his right-arm. It was sprained by the twisting of his
sword from it, and in a sling. 
Sir Charles behaved to them both with great politeness; 
and Mr. Greville owned, that he had acted
nobly by him, in returning his sword, even before his
passion was calmed, and in not using his own. But it
was some time, it seems, before he was brought into
this temper. And what a good deal contributed to it,
was, Sir Charles's acquainting him, that he had not
given particulars at Selby-house, or to any-body, of
the fray between them; but referred it to himself to
give them, as he should think proper. This forbearance
he highly applauded, and was even thankful for
it. Fenwick shall, in confidence, said he, report this
matter to your honour, and my own mortification, as
the truth requires, at Selby-house. Let me not be
hated by Miss Byron, on this account. My passion
gave me disadvantage. I will try to honour you, Sir
Charles: But I must hate you, if you succeed. One
condition, however, I make: That you reconcile me
to the Selby's, and Miss Byron; and if you are likely
to be successful, let me have the credit of reporting,
that it is by my consent. 
They parted with civility; but not, it seems, till
a late hour. Sir Charles, as Mr. Beauchamp and Dr.
Bartlett have told us, was always happy in making,
by his equanimity, generosity, and forgiveingness, fast 

friends of inveterate enemies. Thank God, the issue
was not unhappy! 
Mr. Fenwick says, that the rencounter is very little
guessed at, or talked of [Thank God for that, too!]; 
and to those few, who have enquired of Mr. Greville
or Mr. Fenwick about it, it has been denied; and
now Greville, as Mr. Fenwick had done before, declares
he will give out, that he yields up all his hopes
of Miss Byron; but says, that Sir Charles Grandison,
of whose address every-body already talks, is the only
man in England to whom he could resign his pretensions. 
He insists upon Sir Charles's dining with him tomorrow; 
Mr. Fenwick's also. Sir Charles is so desirous
that the neighbourhood should conclude, that he
and these gentlemen are on a foot of good understanding,
that he made the less scruple, for every-one's
sake, to accept of his invitation. 
I am very, very thankful, my dearest Lady G. that
the constant blusterings of this violent man, for so many
months past, are so happily overblown. 
Mr. Fenwick, as I guessed he would, made proposals
to my aunt and me for my Lucy. Lucy has a
fine fortune: But if she had not, he shall not have
her! Indeed he is not worthy of Lucy's mind. He
must be related to me, he said: But I answered, No
man must call Lucy Selby his, who can have any other
motive for his wishes but her merit. 
We hourly expect your brother. The new danger
he has been in, on my account, endears him still more
to us all. How, how will you forbear, said my uncle,
throwing yourself in his arms at once, when he demands
the result of our deliberations? If I follow
Mr. Deane's advice, I am to give him my hand at the
first word: If Lucy's and Nancy's, he is not to ask
me twice: If my grandmamma's and aunt's [They
are always good] I am to act as occasion requires, and 

as my own confided-in prudence will suggest at the
time; but to be sure not to be guilty of affectation. 
But still, my dear Ladies, something sticks with me
(and ought it not?) in relation to the noble Clementina! 

