



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday Night, Aug. 31. 
When I concluded my last, I hoped, that my
next attendance upon this surprising Lady
would furnish me with some particulars as agreeable
as now could be hoped for from the declining way
she is in, by reason of the welcome Letter she had
received from her Cousin Morden. But it proved
quite otherwise to me, tho' not to herself; for I think
I never was more shocked in my life than on the occasion
I shall mention presently. 
When I attended her about Seven in the evening,
she told me, that she found herself in a very petulant
way, after I had left her. Strange, said she, that
the pleasure I received from my Cousin's Letter should
have such an effect upon me! But I could not help
giving way to a comparative humour, as I may call
it, and to think it very hard, that my nearer relations
did not take the methods, which my Cousin Morden
kindly took, by enquiring into my merit or demerit,
and giving my cause a fair audit before they proceeded
to condemnation. 
She had hardly said this, when she started, and a
blush overspread her sweet face, on hearing, as I
also did, a sort of lumbering noise upon the stairs, as
if a large trunk were bringing up between two people: 
And, looking upon me with an eye of concern,
Blunderers! said she, they have brought in something
two hours before the time. —Don't be surprised, Sir
—It is all to save you trouble. 
Before I could speak, in came Mrs. Smith: O Madam,
said she, What have you done? —Mrs. Lovick,
entering, made the same exclamation. Lord have
mercy upon me, Madam, cried I, what have you
done! —For, she stepping at the instant to the door, 

the women told me, it was a Coffin. —O Lovelace!
that thou hadst been there at the moment! —Thou,
the causer of all these shocking Scenes! Surely thou
couldst not have been less affected than I, who have
no guilt, as to her, to answer for. 
With an intrepidity of a piece with the preparation,
having directed them to carry it into her bedchamber,
she returned to us: They were not to
have brought it in till after dark, said she—Pray,
excuse me, Mr. Belford: And don't you, Mrs. Lovick,
be concerned: Nor you, Mrs. Smith. —Why
should you? There is nothing more in it, than the
unusualness of the thing. Why may we not be as
reasonably shocked at going to the Church where are
the monuments of our ancestors, with whose dust we
even hope our dust shall be one day mingled, as to be
moved at such a sight as this? 
We all remaining silent, the women having their
aprons at their eyes, Why this concern for nothing
at all? said she: If I am to be blamed for any-thing,
it is for shewing too much solicitude, as it may be
thought, for this earthly part. I love to do everything
for myself that I can do. I ever did. Every
other material point is so far done, and taken care of,
that I have had leisure for things of lesser moment. 
Minutenesses may be observed, where greater articles
are not neglected for them. I might have had this to
order, perhaps, when less fit to order it. I have no
Mother, no Sister, no Mrs. Norton, no Miss Howe,
near me. Some of you must have seen this in a few
days, if not now; perhaps have had the friendly
trouble of directing it. And what is the difference
of a few days to you, when I am gratified, rather
than discomposed by it? I shall not die the sooner for
such a preparation. Should not every-body that has
any-thing to bequeath make their Will? And who,
that makes a Will, should be afraid of a Coffin? — 
My dear friends [to the women] I have considered 

these things; do not, with such an object before you
as you have had in me for weeks, give me reason to
think you have not. 
How reasonable was all this! —It shewed, indeed,
that she herself had well considered it. But yet we
could not help being shocked at the thoughts of the
Coffin thus brought in; the lovely person before our
eyes, who is in all likelihood so soon to fill it. 
We were all silent still, the women in grief, I in
a manner stunned. She would not ask me, she said; 
but would be glad, since it had thus earlier than she
had intended been brought in, that her two good
friends would walk in and look upon it. They would
be less shocked, when it was made more familiar to
their eye: Don't you lead back, said she, a starting
Steed to the object he is apt to start at, in order to
familiarize him to it, and cure his starting? The same
reason will hold in this case. Come, my good
friends, I will lead you in. 
I took my leave; telling her she had done wrong,
very wrong; and ought not, by any means, to have
such an object before her. 
The women followed her in. —'Tis a strange Sex! 
Nothing is too shocking for them to look upon, or
see acted, that has but Novelty and Curiosity in it. 
Down I posted; got a chair; and was carried
home, extremely shocked and discomposed: Yet,
weighing the Lady's arguments, I know not why I
was so affected—except, as she said, at the Unusualness
of the thing. 
While I waited for a chair, Mrs. Smith came
down, and told me, that there were devices and inscriptions
upon the Lid. Lord bless me! Is a Coffin
a proper subject to display fancy upon? —But these
great minds cannot avoid doing extraordinary things! 