


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Grosvenor-Square, Wedn. Sept. 27.
Fly, Script, of one line; on the wings of the
wind, fly, to acquaint my Harriet, that I love
her above all women—and all men too; my brother
excepted. Tell her, that I now love her with an increased
love; because I love her for his sake, as well as
her own. 
Forgive, my dear, all the carelesnesses, as you always
did the flippancies, of my pen. The happy prospect
that all our wishes would be succeeded to us, had
given a levity, a wantonness, to it. Wicked pen! — 
But I have burnt the whole parcel from which I took 

it! —Yet I should correct myself; for I don't know
whether I did not intend to teaze a little: I don't
know whether my compassion for Emily did not make
me more silly. If that were so (for really I suffered
my pen to take its course at the time; therefore burnt
it) I know you will the more readily forgive me. 
Littleness, Harriet! You are all that is great and
good in woman. The littleness of others adds to your
greatness. Have not my foibles always proved this? — 
No, my dear! you are as great, as—Clementina herself:
And I love you better, if possible, than I love
myself. 
A few lines more on other subjects; for I can't
write a short Letter to my Harriet.— 
The Countess of D. has made my brother a visit. I
happened to be at his house. They were alone together
near an hour. At going away, he attending
her to her chair, she took my hand; All, all my hopes
are over, said she; but I will love Miss Byron, for all
that. Nor shall you, Sir Charles, in the day of your
power, deny me my correspondent: Nor must you,
madam, and Lady L. a friendship with Sir Charles
Grandison's two sisters. 
Lady W. and my sister and I correspond. I want
you to know her, that you may love her as well as we
do. Love-matches, my dear, are foolish things. I
know not how you will find it some time hence: No
general rule, however, without exceptions, you know. 
Violent Love on one side, is enough in conscience, if
the other be not a fool, or ungrateful: The Lover
and Lovce make generally the happiest couple. Mild,
sedate convenience, is better than a stark staring-mad
passion. The wall-climbers, the hedge and ditchleapers,
the river-forders, the window-droppers, always
find reason to think so. Who ever hears of
darts, flames, Cupids, Venus's, Adonis's, and suchlike
nonsense, in matrimony? —Passion is transitory; 
but discretion, which never boils over, gives durable 

happiness. See Lord and Lady W. Lord G. and his
good woman, for instances. 
O my mad head! And why, think you, did I mention
my corresponding with Lady W.? —Only to tell
you, and I had like to have forgot it, that she felicitates
me in her last, on the likelihood of a happy acquisition
to our family, from what my brother communicated
of his intention to make his addresses to
Somebody—I warrant you guess to whom. 
Lady Anne S. —Poor Lady Anne S.! —I dare not tell
my brother how much she loves him: I am sure it
would make him uneasy. 
Beauchamp desires his compliments to you. He is
in great affliction. Poor Sir Harry is thought irrecoverable. 
Different physicians have gone their rounds
with him: But the new ones only ask what the old
ones did, that they may guess at something else to make
trial of. When a patient has money, it is hard, I believe,
for a physician to be honest, and to say, till the
last extremity, That the Parson and Sexton may take
him. 
Adieu, my love! —Adieu, all my grandmammas,
aunts, cousins, and kin's kin of Northamptonshire— 
Adieu! 
Charlotte G. 

