


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Grandison-hall, Monday, April 16. 
And must I, my dear grandmamma, be more
particular in relation to ourselves, our guests, our
amusements, diversions, conversations—Why then
does not Lucy write as usual, every tender, every
engaging, every lively occurrence that happens at
Selby-house, and Shirely-manor? Is she so much taken
up with her agreeable Peer, that she must leave the
obliging task wholly to Nancy and Emily? I don't
care. They shall be my best girls; and I will put
down my Lucy as a woman of mere quality before
she has the title. Yet let me tell her, that could honest
Mr. Fowler have courted for himself, have suffered 

his heart to rise to his lips, I should have wished
by her means, to have been related to him and Sir
Rowland. But that matter, it seems, is as good as
over; and I will proceed to do my duty, whether
she does hers or not. 
I have told you, madam, how much our guests are
pleased with us and the place. How much we are
charmed with them, I need not tell you. Every praise
you have heard of them, is confirmed and heightened,
on a more intimate knowledge of them. 
Lord and Lady L. are with us. Lord and Lady G.
will come as soon as they can. Lady L. has her
sweet infant with her. And I hope Lady G. will not
come without my god-child. 
Sir Edward Beauchamp is at present our guest. The
good doctor, you know, is at home here; and how
beloved, how revered, by every one! 
Sir Charles! The Soul of us all! –––O madam!
never surely, was one spot blessed with so many persons
of one mind, as are now rejoicing together at
Grandison-hall. 
And pray, my dear grandmamma, let me ask; 
Would it not be affectation rather than modesty, were
I to leave myself un-named in this noble circle? I
will not. Every body, for Sir Charles's sake, looks on
me, with the kindest partiality, and my heart tells
me that being his as much as my own, it deserves that
partiality. 
Except at certain devotional hours of retirement,
we know not, but that we are all of one faith. Nothing
of religious subjects is ever mentioned among us,
but in those points in which all good Christians are
agreed. You, madam, who have a true catholic charity
for the worthy of all persuasions, would be delighted
to see the affectionate behaviour of the two
fathers (I will call them) to each other. When they
are not in the general company, they are always together,
walking, riding out; or in the apartment of 

each other, reading, conversing. The dear Clementina
cannot but see, that charitable and great minds,
however differing in some even essential articles of religion,
might mingle hearts and love each other; and
from Sir Charles's catholicism, that she might have
been happy with him, and kept her own faith. –––But,
no! it would in her notion, now I recollect, have
been a dangerous trial. She could not trust her own
heart—Great and noble Lady! how much is she to
be revered! 
The gentlemen ride out almost every day. –––Our
conversations! It would be endless to give you an account
of the conversations that yet, I flatter myself,
would delight you all. The least interesting ones of
those we hold, would have made a great figure in
my former Letters. Such the company, you may suppose
we know not what trifling subjects are. 
Every one avoids mentioning the name of the poor
Count of Belvedere in the presence of Lady Clementina; 
yet we all pity him. We have reason to do so,
from the account Signor Jeronymo receives of his distress
of mind, while he endeavours to overcome his
hopeless passion. 
Allow me, madam, to conclude this Letter here. 
We are to have a little concert this evening, and our
company is beginning to assemble in the music room. 
–––I must go and attend the marchioness and Lady
Clementina; who herself will be a performer. She
is an admirable one. I can only stay to add, that I
am 
Your ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison 

