


I Have had very little of my dear Friend's Company
this Day; for he only staid Breakfast with me,
and rid out to see a sick Gentleman about eighteen
Miles off, who begg'd (by a Man and Horse on purpose)
to speak with him, believing he should not
recover, and upon Part of whose Estate my Master
has a Mortgage. He said, My Dearest, I shall be 
very uneasy, if I am oblig'd to tarry all Night from
you; but, lest you should be alarm'd, if I don't
come home by Ten, don't expect me: For poor
Mr. Carlton and I have pretty large Concerns together,
and if he should be very ill, and would be comforted
by my Presence, (as I know he loves me, and
his Family will be more in my Power if he dies, than
I wish for) Charity will not let me refuse. 
It is now Ten o'Clock at Night, and I fear he will
not return. I fear for the sake of his poor sick
Friend, who I doubt is worse. Tho' I know not
the Gentleman, I am sorry for his own sake, for
his Family's sake, and for my dear Master's sake, who
by his kind Expressions I find loves him: And methinks
I should be sorry any Grief should touch his
generous Heart; tho' yet, there is no living in
this World, without too many Occasions for Concern,
even in the most prosperous State. And it is
fit it should be so; or else, poor Wretches as we
are! we should look no further, but be like sensual
Travellers on a Journey homeward, who, meeting
with good Entertainment at some Inn on the Way,
put up their Rest there, and never think of pursuing
their Journey to their proper Home. —This, I remember,
was often a Reflection of my good Lady's,
to whom I owe it. 
Eleven o'Clock.
Mrs. Jewkes has been with me, and ask'd if
I will have her for a Bedfellow in want of a
better? I said, I thank'd her; but I would see how
it was to lie by myself one Night. 
I might have mention'd, that I made Mrs. Jewkes
dine and sup with me, and she was much pleas'd
with it, and my Behaviour to her. And I could see
by her Manner, that she was a little struck inwardly 
at some of her former Conduct to me. But, poor
Wretch, it is, I much fear, because I am what I am; 
for she has otherwise very little Remorse, I doubt.––– 
Her Talk and Actions are intirely different from what they us'd to be, quite circumspect and decent; and
I should have thought her virtuous, and even pious,
had I never known her in another Light. 
By this, we may see, my dear Father and Mother,
of what Force Example is; and what is in the Power
of the Heads of Families to do: And this shews, that
evil Examples, in Superiors, are doubly pernicious,
and doubly culpable, because such Persons are bad
themselves, and not only do no Good, but much
Harm, to others; and the Condemnation of such
must, to be sure, be so much the greater! —And
how much the greater still must my Condemnation
be, who have had such a religious Education under
you, and been so well nurtur'd by my good Lady, if
I should forget, with all these Mercies heap'd upon
me, what belongs to the Station God has preferr'd
me to! —Oh how I long to be doing some Good! 
For all that is past yet, is my dear, dear Master's; 
God bless him! and return him safe to my Wishes; 
for methinks already 'tis a Week since I saw him! If
my Love would not be troublesome and impertinent,
I should be nothing else; for I have a true
grateful Spirit, and I had Need to have such a one; 
for I am poor in every thing but Will. 