







This period of tranquillity was short. Poverty hovered
at their threshold, and in a state precarious as their's, could
not be long excluded. The lady was more accustomed to
anticipate good than evil, but she was not unconscious that
the winter, which was hastening, would bring with it numerous
inconveniences. Wants during that season are multiplied,
while the means of supplying them either fail or are
diminished. Fuel is alone, a cause of expense equal to all
other articles of subsistence. Her dwelling was old, crazy,
and full of avenues to air. It was evident that neither fire
nor clothing would, in an habitation like that, attemper the
chilling blasts. Her scanty gains were equal to their needs,
during summer, but would probably fall short during the prevalence
of cold.
These reflections could not fail sometimes to intrude.
She indulged them as long as they served merely to suggest
expedients and provisions for the future, but labored to call
away her attention when they merely produced anxiety.
This she more easily effected, as some months of summer
were still to come, and her knowledge of the vicissitudes to
which human life is subject, taught her to rely upon the
occurrence of some fortunate, though unforeseen event.
Accident suggested an expedient of this kind. Passing
through an alley, in the upper part of the town, her eye was
caught by a label on the door of a small house, signifying
that it was to be let. It was smaller than that she at present
occupied, but it had an aspect of much greater comfort and
neatness. Its situation, near the centre of the city, in a
quiet, cleanly, and well paved alley, was far preferable to
that of her present habitation, in the suburbs, scarcely accessible
in winter, for pools and gulleys, and in a neighborhood
abounding with indigence and profligacy. She likewise
considered that the rent of this might be less, and that
the proprietor of this might have more forbearance and
benignity than she had hitherto met with.
Unconversant as she was with the world, imbued with the
timidity of her sex and her youth, many enterprises were
arduous to her, which would, to age and experience, have




been easy. Her reluctances, however, when required by
necessity, were overcome, and all the measures which her
situation prescribed, executed with address and despatch.
One, marking her deportment, would have perceived nothing
but dignity and courage. He would have regarded these
as the fruits of habitual independence and exertion, whereas
they were merely the results of clear perceptions and inflexible
resolves.
The proprietor of this mansion was immediately sought
out, and a bargain, favorable as she could reasonably desire,
concluded. Possession was to be taken in a week. For
this end carters and draymen were to be engaged, household
implements to be prepared for removal, and negligence and
knavery prevented by scrupulous attention. The duties of
superintendence and execution devolved upon her. Her
father's blindness rendered him powerless. His personal
case required no small portion of care. Household and
professional functions were not to be omitted. She stood
alone in the world. There was none whose services or
counsel she could claim. Tortured by multiplicity of cares,
shrinking from exposure to rude eyes, and from contention
with refractory and insolent spirits, and overpowered with
fatigue and disgust, she was yet compelled to retain a cheerful
tone in her father's presence, and to struggle with his
regrets and his peevishness.
O my friend! Methinks I now see thee, encountering the
sneers and obstinacy of the meanest of mankind, subjecting
that frame of thine, so exquisitely delicate, and therefore so
feeble, to the vilest drudgery. I see thee, leading thy unhappy
father to his new dwelling, and stifling the sighs produced
by his fruitless repinings and unseasonable scruples—
Why was I not partaker of thy cares and labors? Why
was I severed from thee by the ocean, and kept in ignorance
of thy state? I was not without motives to anxiety, for I
was friendless as thou, but how unlike to thine was my condition!
I reposed upon down and tissue, never moved but
with obsequious attendance and pompous equipage, painting
and music were consolations ever at hand, and my cabinet
was stored with poetry and science. These, indeed, were
insufficient to exclude care, and with regard to the past, I
have no wish but that I had shared with my friend her





toilsome and humiliating lot. However an erroneous world
might judge, thy life was full of dignity, and thy moments of
happiness not few, since happiness is only attendant on the
performance of our duty.
A toilsome and sultry week was terminated by a sabbath
of repose. Her new dwelling possessed indisputable advantages
over her old. Not the least of these benefits
consisted in the vicinity of people, peaceable and honest,
though poor. She was no longer shocked by the clamors
of debauchery, and exposed, by her situation, to the danger
of being mistaken by the profligate of either sex, for one of
their own class. It was reasonable to consider this change
of abode, as fortunate, and yet, circumstances quickly occurred
which suggested a very different conclusion.
She had no intercourse, which necessity did not prescribe,
with the rest of the world. She screened herself as much
as possible from intercourse with prying and loquacious
neighbors. Her father's inclination in this respect coincided
with her own, though their love of seclusion was prompted
by different motives. Visitants were hated by the father,
because his dignity was hurt by communication with the
vulgar. The daughter set too much value upon time willingly
to waste it upon trifles and triflers. She had no pride
to subdue, and therefore never escaped from well meant
importunity at the expense of politeness and good humor.
In her moments of leisure, she betook herself to the poet
and the moralist for relief.
She could not at all times, suppress the consciousness of
the evils which surrounded and threatened her. She could
not but rightly estimate the absorbing and brutifying nature
of that toil to which she was condemned. Literature had
hitherto been regarded as her solace. She knew that meditation
and converse as well as books and the pen, are instruments
of knowledge, but her musing thoughts were too often
fixed upon her own condition. Her father's soaring moods
and luminous intervals grew less frequent. Conversation
was too rarely abstracted from personal considerations, and
strayed less often than before into the wilds of fancy or the
mazes of analysis.






These circumstances led her to reflect whether subsistence
might not be obtained by occupations purely intellectual.
Instruction was needed by the young of both sexes.
Females frequently performed the office of teachers. Was
there no branch of her present knowledge which she might
claim wages for imparting to others? Was there no art
within her reach to acquire, convertible into means of gain?
Women are generally limited to what is sensual and ornamental.
Music and painting, and the Italian and French
languages, are bounds which they seldom pass. In these
pursuits it is not possible, nor is it expected, that they should
arrive at the skill of adepts. The education of Constantia
had been regulated by the peculiar views of her father, who
sought to make her, not alluring and voluptuous, but eloquent
and wise. He therefore limited her studies to Latin and
English. Instead of familiarizing her with the amorous
effusions of Petrarcha and Racine, he made her thoroughly
conversant with Tacitus and Milton. Instead of making her
a practical musician or pencilist, he conducted her to the
school of Newton and Hartley, unveiled to her the mathematical
properties of light and sound, taught her as a metaphysician
and anatomist, the structure and power of the
senses, and discussed with her the principles and progress
of human society.
These accomplishments tended to render her superior to
the rest of women, but in no degree qualified her for the
post of a female instructer. She saw and lamented her
deficiencies, and gradually formed the resolution of supplying
them. Her knowledge of the Latin tongue and of
grammatical principles, rendered easy the acquisition of
Italian and French, these being merely scions from the
Roman stock.
Having had occasion, previous to her change of dwelling,
to purchase paper at a bookseller's, the man had offered her
at a very low price, a second-hand copy of Veneroni's grammar.
The offer had been declined, her views at that time
being otherwise directed. Now, however, this incident was
remembered, and a resolution instantly formed to purchase
the book. As soon as the light declined, and her daily task
at the needle had drawn to a close, she set out to execute
this purpose. Arriving at the house of the bookseller, she




perceived that the doors and windows were closed. Night
having not yet arrived, the conjecture easily occurred, that
some one had died in the house. She had always dealt with
this man for books and paper, and had always been treated
with civility. Her heart readily admitted some sympathy
with his distress, and to remove her doubts, she turned to a
person who stood at the entrance of the next house, and who
held a cloth steeped in vinegar to his nostrils. In reply to
her question, the stranger said in a tone of the deepest consternation—
Mr. Watson do you mean? He is dead; he
died last night of the yellow fever.
The name of this disease was not absolutely new to her
ears. She had been apprised of its rapid and destructive
progress in one quarter of the city, but, hitherto, it had existed,
with regard to her, chiefly in the form of rumor. She
had not realized the nature or probable extent of the evil.
She lived at no great distance from the seat of the malady,
but her neighborhood had been hitherto exempt. So wholly
unused was she to contemplate pestilence, except at a
distance, that its actual existence in the bosom of this city
was incredible.
Contagious diseases, she well knew, periodically visited
and laid waste the Greek and Egyptian cities. It constituted
no small part of that mass of evil, political and physical, by
which that portion of the world has been so long afflicted.
That a pest equally malignant had assailed the metropolis of
her own country, a town famous for the salubrity of its airs
and the perfection of its police, had something in it so wild
and uncouth, that she could not reconcile herself to the possibility
of such an event.
The death of Watson, however, filled her mind with awful
reflections. The purpose of her walk was forgotten
amidst more momentous considerations. She bent her steps
pensively homeward. She had now leisure to remark the
symptoms of terror with which all ranks appeared to have
been seized. The streets were as much frequented as ever,
but there were few passengers whose countenances did not
betray alarm, and who did not employ the imaginary antidote
to infection, vinegar.
Having reached home, she quickly discovered in her father,
an unusual solemnity and thoughtfulness. He had no




power to conceal his emotions from his daughter, when her
efforts to discover them were earnestly exerted. She learned
that, during her absence he had been visited by his next
neighbor, a thrifty, sober and well meaning, but ignorant and
meddling person, by name Whiston. This person, being
equally inquisitive into other men's affairs, and communicative
of his own, was always an unwelcome visitant. On this occasion,
he had come to disburthen on Mr. Dudley his fears of
disease and death. His tale of the origin and progress of
the epidemic, of the number and suddenness of recent deaths,
was delivered with endless prolixity. With this account he
mingled prognostics of the future, counselled Mr. Dudley to
fly from the scene of danger, and stated his own schemes
and resolutions. After having thoroughly affrighted and
wearied his companion, he took his leave.
Constantia endeavored to remove the impression which
had been thus needlessly made. She urged her doubts as
to the truth of Whiston's representations, and endeavored,
in various ways, to extenuate the danger.
Nay, my child, said her father, thou needest not reason
on the subject. I am not afraid. At least, on my own account,
I fear nothing. What is life to me that I should dread
to lose it? If on any account I should tremble, it is on
thine, my angelic girl. Thou dost not deserve thus early
to perish; and yet if my love for thee were rational, perhaps
I ought to wish it. An evil destiny will pursue thee to
the close of thy life, be it never so long.
I know that ignorance and folly breed the phantoms by
which themselves are perplexed and terrified, and that Whiston
is a fool; but here the truth is too plain to be disguised.
This malady is pestilential. Havoc and despair will accompany
its progress, and its progress will be rapid. The
tragedies of Marseilles and Messina will be reacted on this
stage.
For a time, we in this quarter will be exempt, but it will
surely reach us at last, and then, whither shall we fly? For
the rich, the whole world is a safe asylum, but for us, indigent
and wretched, what fate is reserved but to stay and
perish? If the disease spare us, we must perish by neglect
and famine. Alarm will be far and wide diffused.
Fear will hinder those who supply the market, from entering




the city. The price of food will become exorbitant. Our
present source of subsistence, ignominious and scanty as it
is, will be cut off. Traffic and labor of every kind will be
at an end. We shall die, but not until we have witnessed
and endured horrors that surpass thy powers of conception.
I know full well the enormity of this evil. I have been
at Messina, and talked with many who witnessed the state
of that city in 1743. I will not freeze thy blood with the
recital. Anticipation has a tendency to lessen or prevent
some evils, but pestilence is not of that number. Strange
untowardness of destiny! That thou and I should be cast
upon a scene like this!
Mr. Dudley joined with uncommon powers of discernment,
a species of perverseness not easily accounted for.
He acted as if the inevitable evils of her lot was not sufficient
for the trial of his daughter's patience. Instead of
comforter and counsellor, he fostered impatience in himself,
and endeavored, with the utmost diligence, to undermine
her fortitude and disconcert her schemes. The task was
assigned to her, not only of subduing her own fears, but of
maintaining the contest with his disastrous eloquence. In
most cases she had not failed of success. Hitherto their
causes of anxiety, her own observation had, in some degree,
enabled her to estimate at their just value. The rueful pictures
which his imagination was wont to portray, affected
her for a moment; but deliberate scrutiny commonly enabled
her to detect and demonstrate their fallacy. Now, however,
the theme was new. Panic and foreboding found their way
to her heart in defiance of her struggles. She had no experience
by which to counteract this impulse. All that remained
was to beguile her own and her father's cares by
counterfeiting cheerfulness and introducing new topics.
This panic, stifled for a time, renewed its sway when she
retired to her chamber. Never did futurity wear, to her
fancy, so dark a hue. Never did her condition appear to
her in a light so dreary and forlorn. To fly from the danger
was impossible. How should accommodation at a distance
be procured? The means of subsistence were indissolubly
connected with her present residence, but the
progress of this disease would cut off these means, and




leave her to be beset not only with pestilence but famine.
What provision could she make against an evil like this?
