

“Having ascertained my purpose, it was requisite to
search out the means by which I might effect it. These
were not clearly or readily suggested. The more I contemplated
my project, the more numerous and arduous its
difficulties appeared. I had no associates in my undertaking.
A due regard to my safety and the unextinguished
sense of honor deterred me from seeking auxiliaries and
co-agents. The esteem of mankind was the spring of all




 my activity, the parent of all my virtue and all my vice. To
preserve this, it was necessary that my guilty projects should
have neither witness nor partaker.
“I quickly discovered that to execute this scheme demanded
time, application and money, none of which my
present situation would permit me to devote to it. At first,
it appeared that an attainable degree of skill and circumspection
would enable me to arrive, by means of counterfeit
bills, to the pinnacle of affluence and honor. My error
was detected by a closer scrutiny, and I, finally, saw nothing
in this path but enormous perils and insurmountable impediments.

“Yet what alternative was offered me. To maintain myself
by the labor of my hands, to perform any toilsome or
prescribed task, was incompatible with my nature. My
habits debarred me from country occupations. My pride
regarded as vile and ignominious drudgery any employment
which the town could afford. Meanwhile, my wants were
as urgent as ever, and my funds were exhausted.
“There are few, perhaps, whose external situation resembled
mine, who would have found in it any thing but incitements
to industry and invention. A thousand methods
of subsistence, honest but laborious, were at my command,
but to these I entertained an irreconcilable aversion.
Ease and the respect attendant upon opulence I was
willing to purchase at the price of ever-wakeful suspicion
and eternal remorse; but, even at this price, the purchase
was impossible.
“The desperateness of my condition became hourly more
apparent. The further I extended my view, the darker
grew the clouds which hung over futurity. Anguish and
infamy appeared to be the inseparable conditions of my existence.
There was one mode of evading the evils that impended.
To free myself from self-upbraiding and to shun
the persecutions of my fortune was possible only by shaking
off life itself.
“One evening, as I traversed the bank of the creek, these
dismal meditations were uncommonly intense. They at
length terminated in a resolution to throw myself into the
stream. The first impulse was to rush instantly to my
death, but the remembrance of papers, lying at my lodgings,




 which might unfold more than I desired to the curiosity of
survivors, induced me to postpone this catastrophe till the
next morning.
“My purpose being formed, I found my heart lightened of
its usual weight. By you it will be thought strange, but it
is nevertheless true, that I derived from this new prospect,
not only tranquillity but cheerfulness. I hastened home.
As soon as I entered, my landlord informed me that a person
had been searching for me in my absence. This was
an unexampled incident and foreboded me no good. I was
strongly persuaded that my visitant had been led hither not
by friendly, but hostile purposes. This persuasion was confirmed
by the description of the stranger's guise and demeanor
given by my landlord. My fears instantly recognised
the image of Watson, the man by whom I had been
so eminently benefited, and whose kindness I had compensated
by the ruin of his sister and the confusion of his
family.
“An interview with this man was less to be endured than
to look upon the face of an avenging deity. I was determined
to avoid this interview, and for this end, to execute
my fatal purpose within the hour. My papers were collected
with a tremulous hand, and consigned to the flames. I
then bade my landlord inform all visitants that I should not
return till the next day, and once more hastened towards
the river.
“My way led past the inn where one of the stages from
Baltimore was accustomed to stop. I was not unaware that
Watson had possibly been brought in the coach which had
recently arrived, and which now stood before the door of
the inn. The danger of my being descried or encountered
by him as I passed did not fail to occur. This was to be
eluded by deviating from the main street.
“Scarcely had I turned a corner for this purpose when I
was accosted by a young man whom I knew to be an inhabitant
of the town, but with whom I had hitherto had no
intercourse but what consisted in a transient salutation. He
apologized for the liberty of addressing me, and, at the same
time, inquired if I understood the French language.
“Being answered in the affirmative, he proceeded to tell
me, that in the stage, just arrived, had come a passenger, a




 youth who appeared to be French, who was wholly unacquainted
with our language, and who had been seized with
a violent disease.
“My informant had felt compassion for the forlorn condition
of the stranger, and had just been seeking me at my
lodgings, in hope that my knowledge of French would enable
me to converse with the sick man, and obtain from him
a knowledge of his situation and views.
“The apprehensions I had precipitately formed, were thus
removed and I readily consented to perform this service.
The youth was, indeed, in a deplorable condition. Besides
the pains of his disease, he was overpowered by dejection.
The innkeeper was extremely anxious for the removal of
his guest. He was by no means willing to sustain the trouble
and expense of a sick or a dying man, for which it was,
scarcely probable that he should ever be reimbursed. The
traveller had no baggage, and his dress betokened the pressure
of many wants.
“My compassion for this stranger was powerfully awakened.
I was in possession of a suitable apartment, for
which I had no power to pay the rent that was accruing, but
my inability in this respect was unknown, and I might enjoy
my lodgings unmolested for some weeks. The fate of
this youth would be speedily decided, and I should be left at
liberty to execute my first intentions before my embarrassments
should be visibly increased.
“After a moment's pause, I conducted the stranger to my
home, placed him in my own bed, and became his nurse.
His malady was such as is known in the tropical islands, by
the name of the yellow or malignant fever, and the physician
who was called, speedily pronounced his case desperate.

“It was my duty to warn him of the death that was hastening,
and to promise the fulfilment of any of his wishes, not
inconsistent with my present situation. He received my intelligence
with fortitude, and appeared anxious to communicate
some information respecting his own state. His
pangs and his weakness scarcely allowed him to be intelligible.
From his feeble efforts and broken narrative I collected
thus much concerning his family and fortune.
“His father's name was Vincentio Lodi. From a




 merchant at Leghorn, he had changed himself into a planter in
the island of Guadaloupe. His son, had been sent, at an
early age, for the benefits of education to Europe. The
young Vincentio was, at length, informed by his father, that,
being weary of his present mode of existence, he had determined
to sell his property, and transport himself to the United
States. The son was directed to hasten home, that he
might embark, with his father, on this voyage.
“The summons was cheerfully obeyed. The youth on his
arrival at the island found preparation making for the funeral
of his father. It appeared that the elder Lodi had flattered
one of his slaves with the prospect of his freedom, but
had, nevertheless, included this slave in the sale that he had
made of his estate. Actuated by revenge, the slave assassinated
Lodi in the open street and resigned himself, without
a struggle, to the punishment which the law had provided
for such a deed.
“The property had been recently transferred, and the
price was now presented to young Vincentio by the purchaser.
He was, by no means, inclined to adopt his father's
project, and was impatient, to return with his inheritance, to
France. Before this could be done, the conduct of his father
had rendered a voyage to the continent indispensable.
“Lodi had a daughter, whom, a few weeks previous to his
death, he had entrusted to an American captain, for whom
he had contracted a friendship. The vessel was bound to
Philadelphia, but the conduct she was to pursue, and the
abode she was to select, on her arrival, were known only to
the father, whose untimely death involved the son in considerable
uncertainty with regard to his sister's fate. His
anxiety on this account induced him to seize the first conveyance
that offered. In a short time he landed at Baltimore.

“As soon as he recovered from the fatigues of his voyage,
he prepared to go to Philadelphia. Thither his baggage
was immediately sent under the protection of a passenger
and countryman. His money consisted in Portuguese gold,
which, in pursuance of advice, he had changed into bank
notes. He besought me, in pathetic terms, to search out
his sister, whose youth, and poverty, and ignorance of the
language and manners of the country might expose her to





 innumerable hardships. At the same time, he put a pocket
book and small volume into my hand, indicating, by his
countenance and gestures, his desire that I would deliver
them to his sister.
“His obsequies being decently performed, I had leisure to
reflect upon the change in my condition which this incident
had produced. In the pocket-book were found bills to the
amount of twenty thousand dollars. The volume proved to
be a manuscript, written by the elder Lodi in Italian, and
contained memoirs of the Ducal house of Visconti, from
whom the writer believed himself to have lineally descended.
“Thus had I arrived, by an avenue so much beyond my
foresight, at the possession of wealth. The evil which impelled
me to the brink of suicide, and which was the source,
though not of all, yet of the larger portion of my anguish,
was now removed. What claims to honor or to ease were
consequent on riches, were, by an extraordinary fortune,
now conferred upon me.
“Such, for a time, were my new born but transitory raptures.
I forgot that this money was not mine. That it had
been received under every sanction of fidelity, for another's
use. To retain it was equivalent to robbery. The sister
of the deceased was the rightful claimant; it was my duty to
search her out, and perform my tacit, but sacred obligations,
by putting the whole into her possession.
“This conclusion was too adverse to my wishes, not to be
strenuously combated. I asked, what it was that gave man
the power of ascertaining the successor to his property?
During his life, he might transfer the actual possession, but
if vacant at his death, he, into whose hands accident should
cast it, was the genuine proprietor. It is true, that the law
had sometimes otherwise decreed, but in law, there was no
validity, further than it was able by investigation and punishment,
to enforce its decrees; but would the law extort
this money from me?
“It was rather by gesture than by words that the will of
Lodi was imparted. It was the topic of remote inferences
and vague conjecture rather than of explicit and unerring
declarations. Besides, if the lady were found, would not
prudence dictate the reservation of her fortune to be




 administered by me, for her benefit? Of this her age and education
had disqualified herself. It was sufficient for the
maintenance of both. She would regard me as her benefactor
and protector. By supplying all her wants and
watching over her safety without apprizing her of the means,
by which I shall be enabled to do this, I shall lay irresistible
claims to her love and her gratitude.
“Such were the sophistries by which reason was seduced
and my integrity annihilated. I hastened away from my
present abode. I easily traced the baggage of the deceased
to an inn, and gained possession of it. It contained nothing
but clothes and books. I then instituted the most diligent
search after the young lady. For a time, my exertions were
fruitless.
“Meanwhile, the possessor of this house thought proper to
embark with his family for Europe. The sum which he
demanded for his furniture, though enormous, was precipitately
paid by me. His servants were continued in their
former stations, and in the day, at which he relinquished
the mansion, I entered on possession.
“There was no difficulty in persuading the world that Welbeck
was a personage of opulence and rank. My birth and
previous adventures it was proper to conceal. The facility
with which mankind are misled in their estimate of characters,
their proneness to multiply inferences and conjectures,
will not be readily conceived by one destitute of my experience.
My sudden appearance on the stage, my stately
reserve, my splendid habitation and my circumspect deportment
were sufficient to entitle me to homage. The artifices
that were used to unveil the truth, and the guesses that
were current respecting me, were adapted to gratify my
ruling passion.
“I did not remit my diligence to discover the retreat of
Mademoiselle Lodi, I found her, at length, in the family of
a kinsman of the Captain under whose care she had come
to America. Her situation was irksome and perilous. She
had already experienced the evils of being protectorless and
indigent, and my seasonable interference snatched her from
impending and less supportable ills.
“I could safely unfold all that I knew of her brother's history,
except the legacy which he had left. I ascribed the




 diligence with which I had sought her to his death-bed
injunctions, and prevailed upon her to accept from me the
treatment which she would have received from her brother,
if he had continued to live, and if his power to benefit had
been equal to my own.
“Though less can be said in praise of the understanding,
than of the sensibilities of this woman, she is one, whom no
one could refrain from loving, though placed in situations far less favorable to the generation of that sentiment, than
mine. In habits of domestic and incessant intercourse, in
the perpetual contemplation of features animated by boundless
gratitude and ineffable sympathies, it could not be expected
that either she or I should escape enchantment.
“The poison was too sweet not to be swallowed with avidity
by me. Too late I remembered that I was already
enslaved by inextricable obligations. It was easy to have
hidden this impediment from the eyes of my companion, but
here my integrity refused to yield. I can, indeed, lay claim
to little merit on account of this forbearance. If there had
been no alternative between deceit and the frustration of my
hopes, I should doubtless have dissembled the truth with
as little scruple on this, as on a different occasion, but I
could not be blind to the weakness of her with whom I had
to contend.
