







To explore the house in this manner was so contrary to
ordinary rules, that the design was probably wholly unsuspected
by the women whom I had just left. My silence,
at parting, might have been ascribed by them to the intimidating
influence of invectives and threats. Hence I proceeded
in my search without interruption.
Presently I reached a front chamber in the third story.
The door was ajar. I entered it on tiptoe. Sitting on a
low chair by the fire, I beheld a female figure, dressed in
a negligent, but not indecent manner. Her face in the
posture in which she sat was only half seen. Its hues were
sickly and pale, and in mournful unison with a feeble and
emaciated form. Her eyes were fixed upon a babe, that
lay stretched upon a pillow at her feet. The child, like its
mother, for such she was readily imagined to be, was meagre
and cadaverous. Either it was dead, or could not be
very distant from death.
The features of Clemenza were easily recognised, though
no contrast could be greater, in habit and shape, and complexion,
than that which her present bore to her former
appearance. All her roses had faded, and her brilliancies
vanished. Still, however, there was somewhat fitted to
awaken the tenderest emotions. There were tokens of inconsolable
distress.
Her attention was wholly absorbed by the child. She
lifted not her eyes, till I came close to her, and stood before
her. When she discovered me, a faint start was perceived.
She looked at me for a moment, then putting one spread
hand before her eyes, she stretched out the other towards
the door, and waving it in silence, as if to admonish me to
depart.
This motion, however emphatical, I could not obey. I
wished to obtain her attention, but knew not in what words
to claim it. I was silent. In a moment she removed her
hand from her eyes, and looked at me with new eagerness.
Her features bespoke emotions, which, perhaps, flowed from




my likeness to her brother, joined with the memory of my
connexion with Welbeck.
My situation was full of embarrassment. I was by no
means certain that my language would be understood. I
knew not in what light the policy and dissimulation of Welbeck
might have taught her to regard me. What proposal,
conducive to her comfort and her safety, could I make to
her?
Once more she covered her eyes, and exclaimed in a
feeble voice, go away! begone!
As if satisfied with this effort, she resumed her attention
to her child. She stooped and lifted it in her arms, gazing,
meanwhile, on its almost lifeless features with intense anxiety.
She crushed it to her bosom, and again looking at
me, repeated, go away! go away! begone!
There was somewhat in the lines of her face, in her tones
and gestures, that pierced to my heart. Added to this, was
my knowledge of her condition; her friendlessness; her
poverty; the pangs of unrequited love; and her expiring
infant. I felt my utterance choked, and my tears struggling
for passage. I turned to the window, and endeavored
to regain my tranquillity.
What was it, said I, that brought me hither? The perfidy
of Welbeck must surely have long since been discovered.
What can I tell her of the Villars which she does not
already know, or of which the knowledge will be useful?
If their treatment has been just, why should I detract from
their merit? If it has been otherwise, their own conduct
will have disclosed their genuine character. Though voluptuous
themselves, it does not follow that they have labored
to debase this creature. Though wanton, they may not be
inhuman.
I can propose no change in her condition for the better.
Should she be willing to leave this house, whither is it in my
power to conduct her? O that I were rich enough to provide
food for the hungry, shelter for the houseless, and
raiment for the naked.
I was roused from these fruitless reflections by the lady,
whom some sudden thought induced to place the child in
its bed, and rising to come towards me. The utter dejection
which her features lately betrayed, was now changed




for an air of anxious curiosity. Where, said she, in her
broken English, where is Signior Welbeck?
Alas! returned I, I know not. That question might, I
thought, with more propriety be put to you than me.
I know where he be; I fear where he be.
So saying, the deepest sighs burst from her heart. She
turned from me, and going to the child, took it again into
her lap. Its pale and sunken cheek was quickly wet with
the mother's tears, which, as she silently hung over it, dropped
fast from her eyes.
This demeanor could not but awaken curiosity, while it
gave a new turn to my thoughts. I began to suspect that
in the tokens which I saw, there was not only distress for
her child, but concern for the fate of Welbeck. Know you,
said I, where Mr. Welbeck is? Is he alive? Is he near?
Is he in calamity?
I do not know if he be alive. He be sick. He be in
prison. They will not let me go to him. And—here her
attention and mine was attracted by the infant, whose frame,
till now motionless, began to be tremulous. Its features
sunk into a more ghastly expression. Its breathings were
difficult, and every effort to respire produced a convulsion
harder than the last.
The mother easily interpreted these tokens. The same
mortal struggle seemed to take place in her features as in
those of her child. At length her agony found way in a
piercing shriek. The struggle in the infant was past. Hope
looked in vain for a new motion in its heart or its eyelids.
The lips were closed, and its breath was gone, forever!
The grief which overwhelmed the unhappy parent, was
of that outrageous and desperate kind which is wholly incompatible
with thinking. A few incoherent motions and
screams, that rent the soul, were followed by a deep swoon.
She sunk upon the floor, pale and lifeless as her babe.
I need not describe the pangs which such a scene was
adapted to produce in me. These were rendered more
acute by the helpless and ambiguous situation in which I
was placed. I was eager to bestow consolation and succor,
but was destitute of all means. I was plunged into uncertainties
and doubts. I gazed alternately at the infant and
its mother. I sighed. I wept. I even sobbed. I




stooped down and took the lifeless hand of the sufferer. I
bathed it with my tears, and exclaimed, ill-fated woman!
unhappy mother! what shall I do for thy relief? How
shall I blunt the edge of this calamity, and rescue thee from
new evils?
At this moment the door of the apartment was opened,
and the youngest of the women whom I had seen below,
entered. Her looks betrayed the deepest consternation and
anxiety. Her eyes in a moment were fixed by the decayed
form and the sad features of Clemenza. She shuddered
at this spectacle, but was silent. She stood in the midst of
the floor, fluctuating and bewildered. I dropped the hand
that I was holding, and approached her.
You have come, said I, in good season. I know you not,
but will believe you to be good. You have a heart, it may
be, not free from corruption, but it is still capable of pity for
the miseries of others. You have a hand that refuses not
its aid to the unhappy. See; there is an infant dead.
There is a mother whom grief has, for a time, deprived of
life. She has been oppressed and betrayed; been robbed of
property and reputation—but not of innocence. She is
worthy of relief. Have you arms to receive her? Have
you sympathy, protection, and a home to bestow upon a
forlorn, betrayed, and unhappy stranger? I know not what
this house is; I suspect it to be no better than a brothel. I
know not what treatment this woman has received. If,
when her situation and wants are ascertained, will you supply
her wants? Will you rescue her from evils that may
attend her continuance here?
She was disconcerted and bewildered by this address.
At length she said—All that has happened, all that I have
heard and seen is so unexpected, so strange, that I am
amazed and distracted. Your behavior I cannot comprehend,
nor your motive for making this address to me. I
cannot aaswer you, except in one respect. If this woman
has suffered injury, I have had no part in it. I knew not of
her existence, nor her situation till this moment; and whatever
protection or assistance she may justly claim, I am both
able and willing to bestow. I do not live here, but in the
city. I am only an occasional visitant in this house.






What then, I exclaimed, with sparkling eyes and a rapturous
accent, you are not profligate; are a stranger to the
manners of this house, and a detester of these manners?
Be not a deceiver, I entreat you. I depend only on your
looks and professions, and these may be dissembled.
These questions, which indeed argued a childish simplicity,
excited her surprise. She looked at me, uncertain
whether I was in earnest or in jest. At length she said,
your language is so singular, that I am at a loss how to answer
it. I shall take no pains to find out its meaning, but
leave you to form conjectures at leisure. Who is this woman,
and how can I serve her? After a pause, she continued—
I cannot afford her any immediate assistance, and
shall not stay a moment longer in this house. There, (putting
a card in my hand) is my name and place of abode.
If you shall have any proposals to make, respecting this woman,
I shall be ready to receive them in my own house.
So saying, she withdrew.
I looked wistfully after her, but could not but assent to
her assertion, that her presence here would be more injurious
to her than beneficial to Clemenza. She had scarcely
gone, when the elder woman entered. There was rage,
sullenness, and disappointment in her aspect. These, however,
were suspended by the situation in which she discovered
the mother and child. It was plain that all the sentiments
of woman were not extinguished in her heart. She
summoned the servants and seemed preparing to take such
measures as the occasion prescribed. I now saw the folly
of supposing that these measures would be neglected, and
that my presence could not essentially contribute to the
benefit of the sufferer. Still, however, I lingered in the
room, till the infant was covered with a cloth, and the still
senseless parent was conveyed into an adjoining chamber.
The woman then, as if she had not seen me before, fixed
scowling eyes upon me, and exclaimed, thief! villain! why
do you stay here?
I mean to go, said I, but not till I express my gratitude
and pleasure, at the sight of your attention to this sufferer.
You deem me insolent and perverse, but I am not such;
and hope that the day will come when I shall convince you
of my good intentions.






Begone! interrupted she, in a more angry tone. Begone
this moment, or I will treat you as a thief. She now drew
forth her hand from under her gown, and shewed a pistol.
You shall see, she continued, that I will not be insulted
with impunity. If you do not vanish, I will shoot you as
a robber.
This woman was far from wanting a force and intrepidity
worthy of a different sex. Her gestures and tones were
full of energy. They denoted a haughty and indignant
spirit. It was plain that she conceived herself deeply
injured by my conduct; and was it absolutely certain that
her anger was without reason? I had loaded her house with
atrocious imputations, and these imputations might be false.
I had conceived them upon such evidence as chance had
provided, but this evidence, intricate and dubious as human
actions and motives are, might be void of truth.
Perhaps, said I, in a sedate tone, I have injured you; I
have mistaken your character. You shall not find me less
ready to repair, than to perpetrate, this injury. My error
was without malice, and—
I had not time to finish the sentence, when this rash and
enraged woman thrust the pistol close to my head and fired
it. I was wholly unaware that her fury would lead her to
this excess. It was a sort of mechanical impulse that made
me raise my hand, and attempt to turn aside the weapon.
I did this deliberately and tranquilly, and without conceiving
that any thing more was intended by her movement than
to intimidate me. To this precaution, however, I was indebted
for life. The bullet was diverted from my forehead
to my left ear, and made a slight wound upon the furface,
from which the blood gushed in a stream.
The loudness of this explosion, and the shock which the
ball produced in my brain, sunk me into a momentary stupor.
I reeled backward, and should have fallen, had not I
supported myself against the wall. The sight of my blood
instantly restored her reason. Her rage disappeared, and
was succeeded by terror and remorse. She clasped her
hands, and exclaimed—Oh! what! what have I done? My
frantic passion has destroyed me.
I needed no long time to show me the full extent of the
injury which I had suffered and the conduct which it became




me to adopt. For a moment I was bewildered and alarmed,
but presently perceived that this was an incident more
productive of good than of evil. It would teach me caution
in contending with the passions of another, and shewed me
that there is a limit which the impetuosities of anger will
sometimes overstep. Instead of reviling my companion, I
addressed myself to her thus:
Be not frighted. You have done me no injury, and I
hope will derive instruction from this event. Your rashness
had like to have sacrificed the life of one who is your friend,
and to have exposed yourself to infamy and death, or, at
least, to the pangs of eternal remorse. Learn, from hence,
to curb your passions, and especially to keep at a distance
from every murderous weapon, on occasions when rage is
likely to take place of reason.
I repeat that my motives in entering this house were connected
with your happiness as well as that of Clemenza
Lodi. If I have erred, in supposing you the member of a
vile and pernicious trade, that error was worthy of being
rectified, but violence and invective tend only to confirm it.
I am incapable of any purpose that is not beneficent; but,
in the means that I use and in the evidence on which I proceed,
I am liable to a thousand mistakes. Point out to me
the road by which I can do you good, and I will cheerfully
pursue it.
Finding that her fears had been groundless, as to the consequences
of her rashness, she renewed, though with less
vehemence than before, her imprecations on my intermeddling
and audacious folly. I listened till the storm was
nearly exhausted, and then, declaring my intention to revisit
the house, if the interest of Clemenza should require it, I
resumed my way to the city.
