







This narrative threw new light on the character of Welbeck.
If accident had given him possession of this treasure,
it was easy to predict on what schemes of luxury and
selfishness it would have been expended. The same dependence
on the world's erroneous estimation, the same devotion
to imposture, and thoughtlessness of futurity, would
have constituted the picture of his future life, as had distinguished
the past.
This money was another's. To retain it for his own use
was criminal. Of this crime he appeared to be as insensible
as ever. His own gratification was the supreme law of his
actions. To be subjected to the necessity of honest labor,
was the heaviest of all evils, and one from which he was
willing to escape by the commission of suicide.
The volume which he sought was mine. It was my duty
to restore it to the rightful owner, or, if the legal claimant
could not be found, to employ it in the promotion of virtue
and happiness. To give it to Welbeck was to consecrate
it to the purpose of selfishness and misery. My right,
legally considered, was as valid as his.
But if I intended not to resign it to him, was it proper to
disclose the truth, and explain by whom the volume was
purloined from the shelf? The first impulse was to hide this
truth; but my understanding had been taught, by recent
occurrences, to question the justice, and deny the usefulness
of secrecy in any case. My principles were true; my
motives were pure; why should I scruple to avow my
principles, and vindicate my actions?
Welbeck had ceased to be dreaded or revered. That
awe which was once created by his superiority of age, refinement
of manners and dignity of garb, had vanished. I
was a boy in years, an indigent and uneducated rustic, but I
was able to discern the illusions of power and riches, and
abjured every claim to esteem that was not founded on integrity.
There was no tribunal before which I should falter
in asserting the truth, and no species of martyrdom which
I would not cheerfully embrace in its cause.






After some pause, I said; cannot you conjecture in what
way this volume has disappeared?
No; he answered with a sigh. Why, of all his volumes,
this only should have vanished, was an inexplicable enigma.
Perhaps, said I, it is less important to know how it was
removed, than by whom it is now possessed.
Unquestionably; and yet, unless that knowledge enables
me to regain the possession it will be useless.
Useless then it will be, for the present possessor will never
return it to you.
Indeed, replied he, in a tone of dejection, your conjecture
is most probable. Such a prize is of too much value to be
given up.
What I have said, flows not from conjecture, but from
knowledge. I know that it will never be restored to you.
At these words, Welbeck looked at me with anxiety and
doubt.—You know that it will not! Have you any knowledge
of the book! Can you tell me what has become of
it?
Yes, after our separation on the river, I returned to this
house. I found this volume and secured it, you rightly suspected
its contents. The money was there.
Welbeck started as if he had trodden on a mine of gold.
His first emotion was rapturous, but was immediately chastised
by some degree of doubt. What has become of it?
Have you got it? Is it entire? Have you it with you?
It is unimpaired. I have got it, and shall hold it as a sacred
trust for the rightful proprietor.
The tone with which this declaration was accompanied,
shook the new born confidence of Welbeck. The rightful
proprietor! true, but I am he. To me only it belongs, and
to me, you are, doubtless, willing to restore it.
Mr. Welbeck! It is not my desire to give you perplexity
or anguish; to sport with your passions. On the supposition
of your death, I deemed it no infraction of justice to
take this manuscript. Accident unfolded its contents. I
could not hesitate to choose my path. The natural and
legal successor of Vincentio Lodi is his sister. To her,
therefore, this property belongs, and to her only will I
give it.
Presumptuous boy! And this is your sage decision. I




 tell you that I am the owner, and to me you shall render it.
Who is this girl! childish and ignorant! Unable to consult
and to act for herself on the most trivial occasion. Am I
not, by the appointment of her dying brother, her protector
and guardian? Her age produces a legal incapacity of
property. Do you imagine that so obvious an expedient, as
that of procuring my legal appointment as her guardian, was
overlooked by me? If it were neglected, still my title to
provide her subsistence and enjoyment is unquestionable.
Did I not rescue her from poverty, and prostitution, and
infamy? Have I not supplied all her wants with incessant
solicitude? Whatever her condition required has been
plenteously supplied. This dwelling and its furniture, was
hers, as far as a rigid jurisprudence would permit. To prescribe
her expenses and govern her family, was the province
of her guardian.
You have heard the tale of my anguish and despair.
Whence did they flow but from the frustration of schemes,
projected for her benefit, as they were executed with her
money and by means which the authority of her guardian
fully justified. Why have I encountered this contagious atmosphere,
and explored my way, like a thief, to this recess,
but with a view to rescue her from poverty and restore to
her, her own?
Your scruples are ridiculous and criminal. I treat them
with less severity, because your youth is raw and your conceptions
crude. But if, after this proof of the justice of my
claim, you hesitate to restore the money, I shall treat you as
a robber, who has plundered my cabinet and refused to refund
his spoil.
These reasonings were powerful and new. I was acquainted
with the rights of guardianship. Welbeck had, in
some respects, acted as the friend of this lady. To vest
himself with this office, was the conduct which her youth
and helplessness prescribed to her friend. His title to this
money, as her guardian, could not be denied.
But how was this statement compatible with former representations?
No mention had then been made of guardianship.
By thus acting, he would have thwarted all his
schemes for winning the esteem of mankind, and fostering




 the belief which the world entertained of his opulence and
independence.
I was thrown, by these thoughts, into considerable perplexity.
If his statement were true, his claim to this money
was established, but I questioned its truth. To intimate my
doubts of his veracity, would be to provoke abhorrence and
outrage.
His last insinuation was peculiarly momentous. Suppose
him the fraudulent possessor of this money, shall I be justified
in taking it away by violence under pretence of restoring
it to the genuine proprietor, who, for aught I know, may
be dead, or with whom, at least, I may never procure a
meeting? But will not my behavior on this occasion, be
deemed illicit? I entered Welbeck's habitation at midnight,
proceeded to his closet, possessed myself of portable property,
and retired unobserved. Is not guilt imputable to an
action like this?
Welbeck waited with impatience for a conclusion to my
pause. My perplexity and indecision did not abate, and my
silence continued. At length, he repeated his demands, with
new vehemence. I was compelled to answer. I told him,
in few words, that his reasonings had not convinced me of
the equity of his claim, and that my determination was unaltered.

He had not expected this inflexibility from one in my
situation. The folly of opposition, when my feebleness and
loneliness were contrasted with his activity and resources,
appeared to him monstrous and glaring, but his contempt
was converted into rage and fear when he reflected that this
folly might finally defeat his hopes. He had probably determined
to obtain the money, let the purchase cost what it
would, but was willing to exhaust pacific expedients before
he should resort to force. He might likewise question
whether the money was within his reach. I had told him
that I had it, but whether it was now about me, was somewhat
dubious; yet, though he used no direct inquiries, he
chose to proceed on the supposition of its being at hand.
His angry tones were now changed into those of remonstrance
and persuasion.
Your present behavior, Mervyn, does not justify the expectation
I had formed of you. You have been guilty of a





 base theft. To this you have added the deeper crime of
ingratitude, but your infatuation and folly are, at least, as
glaring as your guilt. Do you think I can credit your assertions
that you keep this money for another, when I recollect
that six weeks have passed since you carried it off?
Why have you not sought the owner and restored it to her?
If your intentions had been honest, would you have suffered
so long a time to elapse without doing this? It is plain, that
you designed to keep it for your own use.
But whether this were your purpose or not, you have no
longer power to restore it or retain it. You say that you
came hither to die. If so, what is to be the fate of the money?
In your present situation you cannot gain access to
the lady. Some other must inherit this wealth. Next to
Signora Lodi, whose right can be put in competition with
mine? But if you will not give it to me, on my own account,
let it be given in trust for her. Let me be the bearer
of it to her own hands. I have already shewn you that my
claim to it, as her guardian, is legal and incontrovertible, but
this claim, I wave. I will merely be the executor of your
will. I will bind myself to comply with your directions by
any oath, however solemn and tremendous, which you shall
prescribe.
As long as my own heart acquitted me, these imputations
of dishonesty affected me but little. They excited no anger,
because they originated in ignorance, and were rendered
plausible to Welbeck, by such facts as were known
to him. It was needless to confute the charge by elaborate
and circumstantial details.
It was true that my recovery was, in the highest degree,
improbable, and that my death would put an end to my
power over this money; but had I not determined to secure
its useful application, in case of my death? This project
was obstructed by the presence of Welbeck, but I hoped
that his love of life would induce him to fly. He might
wrest this volume from me by violence, or he might wait till
my death should give him peaceable possession. But these,
though probable events, were not certain, and would, by
no means, justify the voluntary surrender. His strength, if




 employed for this end, could not be resisted; but then it
would be a sacrifice, not to choice, but necessity.
Promises were easily given, but were surely not to be
confided in. Welbeck's own tale, in which it could not be
imagined that he had aggravated his defects, attested the
frailty of his virtue. To put into his hands a sum like this,
in expectation of his delivering it to another, when my
death would cover the transaction with impenetrable secrecy,
would be, indeed, a proof of that infatuation which he
thought proper to impute to me.
These thoughts influenced my resolutions, but they were
revolved in silence. To state them verbally was useless.
They would not justify my conduct in his eyes. They
would only exasperate dispute, and impel him to those
acts of violence which I was desirous of preventing. The
sooner this controversy should end, and I in any measure
be freed from the obstruction of his company, the better.
Mr. Welbeck, said I, my regard to your safety compels
me to wish that this interview should terminate. At a different
time, I should not be unwilling to discuss this matter.
Now it will be fruitless. My conscience points out to me
too clearly the path I should pursue for me to mistake it.
As long as I have power over this money I shall keep it for
the use of the unfortunate lady, whom I have seen in this
house. I shall exert myself to find her, but if that be impossible,
I shall appropriate it in a way, in which you shall
have no participation.
I will not repeat the contest that succeeded between my
forbearance and his passions. I listened to the dictates of
his rage and his avarice in silence. Astonishment, at my
inflexibility, was blended with his anger. By turns he commented
on the guilt and on the folly of my resolutions.
Sometimes his emotions would mount into fury, and he
would approach me in a menacing attitude, and lift his hand
as if he would exterminate me at a blow. My languid eyes,
my cheeks glowing, and my temples throbbing with fever,
and my total passiveness, attracted his attention and arrested
his stroke. Compassion would take place of rage,
and the belief be revived that remonstrances and arguments
would answer his purpose.
