







Genius and knowledge command respect; but superior
genius and profound knowledge, combined with exalted
moral purity, cannot fail to excite unmingled admiration.
The reputation of an author in whom these qualities are
united, may be circumscribed during life; but its rise and
extension after death, prove that his claim to distinction
are well founded. It is no less the duty than the pleasure
of friendship, to fortify and sustain these claims. The impartiality
of criticism cannot but confirm the anticipations of
affection.
Charles Brockden Brown was the highly gifted descendant
of ancestors originally English, who came over to
this country with the wise and benevolent Penn, and landed
from the same ship on the banks of the Delaware. Their
principles, moral, religious, and political, coincided with
those of their pious and illustrious leader.
He derived the additional name of Brockden, from his
uncle Charles Brockden, so respectfully mentioned by




 Franklin in his life, who, to avoid the vengeance of conspirators,
whose secret conversations he had accidently overheard, fled
to America, and settled in Pennsylvania, where his industry
and abilities finally raised him to an important office, which
he filled with distinguished reputation.
His parents were pious and respectable members of the
Society of Friends, and may be presumed to have instilled
into their beloved offspring, all that simplicity of manners
and benevolence of sentiment, which so honorably characterize
the religious society to which they belonged.
He was born in the city of Philadelphia, on the 17th day
of January, 1771. He had three brothers older than himself,
to whom, as well as to every other member of his family,
he was from his earliest years an object of deep interest, and
fond affection.
Of those incidents and circumstances, which, in childhood,
either control the development or indicate the character
of the moral and intellectual powers of men distinguished
for their talents, and which are not only interesting in
themselves, but valuable as contributions to the great cause
of education, it is always desirable to hear. But when he
whose life they would illustrate, modestly leaves them unnoticed,
the biographer can only have recourse to conjecture,
or to the recollections of friends. From the facts which
they furnish he may deduce and infer, but he cannot establish
with certainty. His narrative of these may therefore be
brief, without subjecting him to censure.
Of the first ten years of Mr. Brown's life the memorials
are few, but sufficient. His constitution was unusually delicate
and frail, and his frame slender. Life opened upon
him with a wan and sickly aspect, and disclosed but doubtful
prospects of a healthy manhood. The weakness of his
body was, however, his only weakness. His mind was not
enervated. There all was activity and strength.






Debility of body does not necessarily lead to vigor of mind.
The reverse of this may perhaps be maintained. But he
whom nature had rendered incapable of much corporeal exertion,
would almost necessarily be thrown upon his intellectual
resources for enjoyment.
This was the case with the lamented subject of this Memoir.
From his earliest years he was devoted to books and
reflection. Maps, books and prints were to him, even in
childhood, objects irresistibly attractive. The study and examination
of these were the constant and invariable occupations
of his juvenile years. His knowledge of geography
and architecture in his tenth year, was a subject of pride
and exultation to his friends, and of surprise to strangers.
He entered the classical school of Robert Proud, the well
known author of the History of Pennsylvania, in his eleventh
year, and left it before he had completed his sixteenth. His
rapid advancement and incessant diligence, while under the
direction of this gentleman, received, as they merited, his
warmest commendations. His studies were, however, by
no means confined to the ancient classics; his application
was unremitting to the best English models.
Five years of ardent and intellectual exercise in classical
studies! What a mass of intellectual treasures may not be
collected during such a period! What rich materials for future
use may it not afford! Fortunate is the youth of whom
it may be said, that for five years, he perservered with ardor
and enthusiasm, in the pursuit of knowledge and the cultivation
of his powers. His soul becomes imbued with the love
of letters and of science, and he is already on the high road
to distinction and honor. He can hardly become the slave
of low and grovelling vices.
Mr. Brown's application during this period, was indeed so
intense, as seriously to endanger his health; and therefore,
by the advice of his preceptor, he occasionally relaxed from




 the severities of study, and made excursions into the country.
These journeys he performed on foot; and on account of the
pleasure and advantage which he derived from them, he ever
after continued the practice.
Accustomed as he had been to the confined atmosphere,
the dusky streets, and unwholesome exhalations of a city,
the extended prospects, the varied hues, the delicious fragrance,
and the balmy and elastic air of the country, were
unspeakably grateful and refreshing. Solitary wandering
leads to thoughtful musing, and this to romantic enthusiasm.
It would not be difficult to predict the effects which such a
practice would have upon an imagination ever active, enriched
and embellished with elegant literature and various
knowledge. Habits of reverie and abstraction would be
insensibly contracted. Present objects would gradually fade
from the view, and the imagination revel, free and unfettered,
amidst its own creations.
He had been diligent in composition before he was sixteen.
But after he left school he became indefatigable. He wrote
a variety of essays, both in prose and verse, most of which
imply considerable powers and uncommon acquisitions, in a
youth of his age. About this time, too, he invented a system
of short-hand, and successfully studied French, aided only
by books.
But it became necessary that his efforts should be concentrated
upon a single science. A profession must be adopted.
The fictions of the imagination, and the enthusiasm of sentiment,
must give place to the sober realities of business.
With the approbation of his family, he made choice of the
Law, and became a student in the office of Alexander Wilcox,
Esq. a distinguished member of the Philadelphia Bar.
His habits of labor and application, no less than his keen
discrimination and sound judgment, were admirably fitted
for his new pursuit, and he entered upon it with his usual




 ardor and diligence. He became a member of a law society,
over whose deliberations he presided with credit and ability.
The recorded decisions, which his duty as president required
him to make, evince unusual research, and solidity of judgment.
But polite literature and liberal studies could not be
relinquished. Law he studied from a principle of duty or
necessity; but Literature had his secret soul. Though the
dry abstractions and bewildering subtleties of law, had something
in them which particularly suited his laborious habits
and speculative ingenuity, his literary propensities were irresistible.
He became, at the same time, a member of the
Belles Lettres Club, whose principal object was improvement
in literature. In this, also, he became a leader. The various
addresses which he delivered before this society, are
creditable to his talents, and indicative of vigor and originality
of thought.
During the whole of his noviciate, his pen was in diligent
exercise. He wrote various essays, some of them of considerable
merit; and maintained a long and elaborate correspondence
with several of his friends. Not satisfied with
these labors, he kept a minute and copious journal, not
merely of the incidents and occurrences of the day, but of
his thoughts, feelings, and reflections. He did this for the
double purpose of improvement in thinking and in writing.
Of excellence in style, he was always ambitious, and for it
he most assiduously labored.
Of the progress that he made or was qualified to make, in
the science of law, the decisions before alluded to, afford
abundant and convincing evidence. His qualifications and
attainments were unquestionably great for so young a man;—
and of moral purity and elevation of sentiment he was a rare
and signal example. His early associates were selected solely
with a view to moral and intellectual improvement; for to
sensual enjoyments and vicious pleasures, he was an utter




 stranger. Vice in every shape was loathsome and disgusting
to him.
He was now of that age when youth swells into manhood,
when the dispositions, habits, and propensities of early life,
become fixed and permanent, or, swayed by novel and unforeseen
circumstances, assume new directions, or become
supplanted by others still more powerful. The period came
when the study was to be succeeded by the practice of the
law. To this he was decidedly averse. His resolution was
fixed, and the law was abandoned. Neither argument nor
persuasion could vanquish his resolution. This was not the
result of whim or caprice. His passion for letters, the weakness
of his physical constitution, and his reluctance to
engage in the noise and bustle of professional business, were
doubtless causes abundantly adequate to the production of
this effect. The last of these originated in that habit of
romantic and visionary speculation, in which he so much
delighted to indulge, and of which he gave a striking instance
in the essays which he published, under the title of
the “Rhapsodist.”
In reference to this event he says, himself,—“As for me,
I had long ago discovered that nature had not qualified me
for an actor on this stage. The nature of my education
only added to these disqualifications.” The disappointment
of his friends was great, indeed, at this abandonment of the
only path to fame and fortune which seemed to be open to
him. They reasoned, they remonstrated; but their labor
was vain. His reluctance was invincible. Not even his own
sense of duty could overcome it. His friends saw this, and
were silent. To one so strongly attached to his family and
friends, of whom he was the pride and the boast, this trial
must have been peculiarly severe. The effect was soon
perceived. His spirits sunk almost to hopelessness, and his
health became visibly impaired.







The portion of his life, from the close of his legal studies
till the time of his becoming professedly an author, in the
year 1798, comprises a period of about six years. Of this
part of his history, the incidents are few and may be briefly
told. His literary and scientific tastes were now his only
resource, and they were indulged without restraint.
To dissipate the gloom and dejection into which his mind
had sunk, he left Philadelphia, and after traversing various
parts of the country, he remained for a while in the city of
New York. There the joys and consolations of friendship
awaited him, for his friend, Dr. Elihu H. Smith, was a resident
of that city. By him Mr. Brown was received with all
the cordiality which the most disinterested friendship could
inspire. Their intercourse had commenced in Philadelphia,
while respectively engaged in professional studies. This
visit was not only productive of pleasure, but of friendship,
to Mr. B. Through the kindness of his beloved friend,
Smith, the circle of his friends was considerably enlarged,
and hope was revived in his breast. He left New York
gratified and strengthened.
The impressions he received during this visit, induced a
speedy repetition of it. The second was longer than the
first, and from this time the greater part of the period before
mentioned, was spent by him in New York. His situation
there was happily adapted to gratify his best feelings, and
promote his favorite pursuits. Of his new friends and associates,
many were distinguished, and all respectable, for
literature or science. With most of these gentlemen he
was on terms of the strictest intimacy and most liberal intercourse.
Many of them were members of a literary society,
about that time formed in New York, under the modest title
of the “Friendly Club.” Of this society Mr. B. became a




 member, and frequently mentions, in his journal, the pleasure
and advantages he derived from it.
By his friend Smith, he was introduced to the friendship
of Mr. Johnson and Mr. Dunlap, the latter of whom has
since celebrated the talents and virtues of his friend in an
extended biography. Between these gentlemen, Dr. Smith
and himself, an intimacy of the most endearing and confidential
nature subsisted for several years, and was terminated
only by death. He was an inmate in the family of
Mr. Dunlap during the greater part of this time; but he
afterwards resided with his friends Johnson and Smith.
Mr. Brown was of that temperament that required objects
for the exercise of the domestic affections. Mere literary
or social intercourse was not sufficient for him. In the
family establishments just mentioned, he found ample exercise
for the sensibilities of his affectionate heart.
Thus circumstanced, his intellectual powers were strongly
excited and his moral propensities confirmed and strengthened.
That he made large additions to his knowledge may
fairly be inferred from his known habits of labor and application.
His reading was various and extensive, but not
always profitable. He had at this period of his life a strong
tendency to scepticism, which, in his riper years, he rejected.
This was natural, and the explanation is easy. Imperfection
is written upon every thing human. It requires little
sagacity to perceive defects in existing institutions, or to
suggest difficulties and to frame objections to any system of
morals or religion. To a young, acute, and original inquirer
these are soon apparent. To him, if zealous and
sincere in his search after truth, nothing is more vehemently
desired than certainty. He strains after perfection, and
finding the system which accident, design, or necessity, first
presents to his examination, not to yield the satisfaction he




 seeks, he rejects it for another. This is liable to objections
as well as the former,—less potent, perhaps, but still objections.
Another, and another succeeds; but doubts and
difficulties are still unresolved, and the inquirer, wearied at
last with the fruitless search, sinks into the indifference of
scepticism, from which a more enlarged experience, and
deeper inquiries, alone can raise him.
During this period of his life, the moral and political worlds
were in a state of the most violent excitation. The deep
foundations of society were shaken. The spirit of fearless
inquiry was abroad upon the earth. Theories the most extravagant
were daily promulgated, and the madness of speculation
knew no bounds.
Towards the close of these times of such fearful excitement,
he commenced his career as an author, and his first
publication was Alcuin, a Dialogue on the Rights of Women.
This was written during the autumn and winter of the year
1797. It is an eloquent and ingenious speculation, of which,
though we may praise the elegance of the language, the
originality of the style, and the subtlety of the argument,
we cannot but condemn the unsoundness of the doctrine.
Though published, it was scarcely known to the public, and
the author consequently acquired from it neither reputation
nor profit.
About the same period he wrote a small novel, in the form
of a series of letters, which he never published, and which,
though not destitute of merit, it would be unnecessary to
notice here, did not the composition of it seem to have been
the circumstance which led to his subsequent efforts in the
same walk. On this work he remarks in his journal,—“I
commenced something in the form of a romance. I had at
first no definite conceptions of my design. As my pen proceeded
forward, my invention was tasked, and the materials
that it afforded were arranged and digested.”—“Every new




 attempt will be better than the last, and, considered in the
light of a prelude or first link, it may merit that praise to
which it may possess no claim, considered as a last, best
creation.”
It was indeed a prelude to a series, which he now in rapid
succession produced, of the most original, powerful, and
masterly, though faulty, and in some respects, imperfect and
objectionable, works of fiction, of which American literature
could then, or perhaps can now, boast; and which will advantageously
sustain a comparison with European works of
the same species of composition, in most of the qualities
essential to such productions.
Mr. Brown wrote six works of this description, upon
which his fame has hitherto chiefly rested,—Weiland, Ormond,
Arthur Mervyn, Edgar Huntly, Clara Howard, and
Jane Talbot. The first five were published in the interval
that elapsed from the spring of 1798 till the summer of
1801, a period of little more than three years, and in which
he completed his thirtieth year. The last was published
somewhat later.
Upon the character of these fictions, little more can be
said upon this occasion. They have now in their favor the
voice of British criticism, tardy as it has ever been to proclaim
the merits of American genius; and that excellence
must indeed be positive on this side of the Atlantic, which
can win or extort applause from the judges on the other.
They are indeed remarkable productions. Once read, the
impression they make is never forgotten. They are original
in every sense,—in the conception, the style, the execution;
in the characters, sentiments, manners, incidents—altogether
original. Full of energy and pathos, they abound with passages
of genuine eloquence and irresistible force. Few
works excite such breathless anxiety and awful apprehension.
The tone of seriousness and solemnity that pervades them,





 repels the ordinary reader of novels. One fond of mere
love-tales must not look into them for enjoyment. They are
calculated only for those who indulge in the deep and powerful
emotions; for those who think and feel strongly; who
delight patiently to trace every action to its appropriate motive;
and to mark the ebbs and flows of passion, and follow
them out to their farthest consequences. To such readers
they will always be welcome, notwithstanding the admission,
that the characters and incidents are too frequently in extremes,
and lie barely within the range of probability. Few
writers of fictitious narrative can be pronounced equal to
Mr. Brown, in the analysis of the thoughts and emotions of
the soul; in exquisite skill in the arrangement and development
of incidents; and in accuracy, extent, and variety of
knowledge.
During this period, he not only wrote a variety of essays
and fugitive pieces, in prose and verse, some of which were
published in the journals of the day, but he at the same
time conducted, with great credit and ability, a periodical
work in the city of New York, under the title of the
“Monthly Magazine, and American Review.” This work,
begun in April, 1799, and closed in the autumn of the year
1800, was almost entirely the production of his own pen,
though he received some valuable contributions from his
literary and scientific friends, particularly in the critical
department. It abounds with curious and learned essays,
ingenious speculations, interesting tales, and valuable information;
and affords some of the best specimens of liberal,
candid, and manly criticism, that the American press has
hitherto produced.
In closing this short summary of his first literary labors,
it is but justice to his memory to claim for him the honor
of having been among the first, perhaps of having been the




 first, of those American writers who set an example of literary
independence, by drawing upon their own resources;
thus stimulating the national mind to exertion in the fields of
literature and science. He was, it is believed, the first
native American author who devoted himself to literary pursuits
as a regular occupation, and who depended upon them
for a permanent support.
Mr. Brown continued to reside in the city of New York
and its neighborhood, from the spring of 1798 till the
autumn of the year 1800, at the conclusion of which he
removed to his native city, Philadelphia.
Riper years, and more extensive communion with his
fellow-men, during his residence in New York, corrected
without weakening his moral enthusiasm and romantic sensibilities.
The realities of experience were gradually and
imperceptibly substituted for the visions of a glowing and
luxurious imagination, and his moral progress was eminently
beneficial and salutary. Friendship in him was so powerful
and elevated a sentiment, that not even the dangers of pestilence
could deter him from the performance of those duties
which it seemed to him to prescribe.
Though he made occasional excursions, in the warm seasons,
sometimes for health, and sometimes for pleasure and
relaxation, yet his favorite studies and pursuits were zealously
continued, and he added largely to the ample stock of
literature and science which he had previously acquired. His
correspondence was prosecuted with his wonted activity, and
his journals were, as usual, detailed and copious. His pen,
indeed, was incessantly employed, and for the three years
succeeding his return to his paternal abode, he not only
wrote a variety of lighter essays, in prose and verse, but
planned and made considerable collections for future works
of more durable utility and elevated aim than any he had




 yet produced, and from which, when completed, he might
expect both profit and reputation.
The year 1803 was an important era in his life, as from
this is to be dated the commencement of his career as a
political writer, and we can only regret that he did not write
more on subjects of such vast practical importance, upon
which he has shown himself so admirably qualified to write
well. Three of the speculations which he published at different
periods, upon political subjects, are especially worthy
of notice and consideration, that on the Cession of Louisiana
to France, that on the Treaty with England, rejected by Mr.
Jefferson, and that on Commercial Restrictions.
The candid and impartial reader will bestow upon these
productions no mean praise. They are evidently the work of
a clear, sagacious, original and comprehensive thinker, the
soundness and accuracy of whose views and opinions are
strongly implied in the manliness, candor and perspicuity
with which those of the adverse parties are stated and examined.
To the praise of variety and depth of knowledge,
vigor of argument, and comprehensiveness of view, they are
eminently entitled. They display a boldness and independence
of thought, a freedom from prejudice and party bias,
and an impartiality of decision, very unusual in writings of
this description among us. The characteristic originality of
the author is seen in almost every page. On subjects so
complicated and various as those discussed in these productions,
different opinions may be entertained and different
conclusions drawn by men of the greatest knowledge and
brightest intellect, without subjecting them to the imputation
of ignorance or unfairness. Of the ability displayed in these
essays, a careful perusal will afford decisive evidence. For
the disinterestedness and purity of the author's motives,
those who knew him best, can best answer; no American
could be actuated by a more noble and elevated patriotism,




 or could perceive more clearly, and paint more vividly the
glorious destinies of his country.
A second edition of the Cession of Louisiana, was called
for and speedily issued in February, 1803. The public attention
was ingeniously and forcibly directed to the importance
of the acquisition, and to the necessity that it should,
at all hazards, be secured to these States. We may therefore
justly claim for the author, the honor of having, in some
small degree, contributed to the subsequent annexation of
that important and extensive country, to the American
Union.
There was nothing for which he had a deeper abhorrence
than for party intemperance and strife. He freely and fairly
allowed to others the freedom which he exercised himself,
and he could prove an adversary to be in the wrong, without
the imputation of selfish or dishonorable motives. He therefore,
in his pamphlet on the British Treaty of 1806, fearlessly
but decorously declared his opinions of public men and
their measures. He aimed sedulously and solely to establish
truth. If he failed, his judgment, not his intentions, must
be called in question.
He was decidedly opposed to embargoes and restrictions.
He therefore in his pamphlet on Commercial Restrictions,
endeavored, and we think successfully, to demonstrate their
injustice and inutility. The course pursued since by some
of the principal maritime States of Europe, seems to confirm
the justness of his conclusions, and the enlightened
views of political economy since prevalent, to lead to the same
result. A considerable portion of his countrymen maintain
the same doctrines which he so forcibly and ably supported,
and a still larger one, perhaps, rejects them. Many may
deride the impartiality which weighed the merits of France,
and England in the same scales. Some, surely will applaud
it. Time will add to the number of the latter, and every




 American bosom must swell with exultation at the grand
picture of “the progress to greatness,” so eloquently sketched
by the author, as that which his country is destined to
realize in no distant futurity.
But political speculations did not detain him long. Literature
had long been his passion, and was now to be his support.
He made an advantageous engagement with an eminent
bookseller of Philadelphia, who undertook the publication at
his own risk; and the first number of a new periodical work
was issued on the first of October 1803, under the title of
“The Literary Magazine and American Register.” The
following passage from the excellent address which accompanied
the first number of this work, exhibits at once, Mr.
B's modesty, his candor and his sensibility to fame:—
“I am far, however, from wishing that my readers should
judge of my exertions by my former ones. I have written
much, but take much blame to myself for something, which I
have written, and take no praise for any thing. I should enjoy
a larger share of my own respect at the present moment, if
nothing had ever flowed from my pen the production of which
could be traced to me. A variety of causes induce me to form
such a wish, but I am principally influenced by the consideration,
that time can scarcely fail of enlarging and refining the
powers of a man, while the world is sure to judge of his capacities
and principles at fifty, from what he has written at
fifteen.” The following illustrates an important change in
his opinions. “In an age like this, when the foundations of
religion and morality have been so boldly attacked, it seems
necessary, in announcing a work of this nature, to be particularly
explicit as to the path which the editor means to
pursue. He therefore avows himself to be, without equivocation
or reserve, the ardent friend and the willing champion
of the Christian Religion. Christian piety he reveres as the
highest excellence of human beings, and the amplest reward




 he can seek for his labor, is the consciousness of having, in
some degree, however inconsiderable, contributed to recommend
the practice of religious duties.”
This work was continued with unremitting care and assiduity
for five years. And though his reputation for knowledge
and learning were extended by it, he could derive from
it little fame as an author. It is larger and contains a
greater variety of information, than the one which he had
previously conducted, and its general characteristics are seriousness
and solidity. It has little gaiety, that essential ingredient
in a monthly publication designed for miscellaneous
reading. Of wit and humor it cannot boast, for to neither
of these had the editor any pretensions. There are so many
articles on subjects of science dispersed through this work,
that it might with propriety be denominated a scientific as
well as a literary journal. The editor, as in his former
enterprise, was compelled to draw copiously from his own
store, and he not unfrequently wrote the whole of the original
matter of a number, himself. When the variety of articles
embraced in a number of this Miscellany is considered, we
cannot but acknowledge the versatility of his powers, and
the abundance of his resources, who could so readily and
promptly produce essays on topics so diversified. This work
is an honorable evidence of the taste, knowledge, talents
and attainments of its indefatigable editor.
Single, enjoying the pleasures of friendship and social intercourse,
full of literary occupation, with brightening prospects
and a rising reputation, honorably supported by the
labors of his pen, and free from all cares but those incident
to the life of a literary man, he seemed to have reached a
situation, in all respects gratifying and satisfactory to the
votary of letters. He was not insensible to the advantages
of this condition, and a year passed away in abundant occupation
and eager anticipations of future felicity from that




 state, into which, at the close of this year, he was for the
first time to enter.
In November, 1804, he was married to Miss Elizabeth
Linn, of New York. This lady was the daughter of the
Rev. Dr. Linn, of that city, a clergyman of the presbyterian
church, of great respectability and superior eloquence.
After his marriage he became a permanent resident in his
native city. Of his domestic condition and prospects he
must be his own historian. He says, in a letter to a friend,—
“As to myself, my friend, you judge rightly when you
think me situated happily. My present way of life is in every
respect to my mind. There is nothing to disturb my felicity
but the sense of the uncertainty and instability that clings to
every thing human.”—“My business, if I may so call it, is
altogether pleasurable; and such as it is, it occupies not one
fourth of my time.”—“I have nothing to wish but that my
present situation may last.”—This was written in 1805. In
the summer of the following year he writes thus of his home
to another friend,—“You will find it the abode of content,
and may enjoy the spectacle, not very common, of a happy
family.”
Thus happily situated, notwithstanding the delicacy of his
health, his literary labors were prosecuted with his accustomed
zeal and perseverance; and in the year succeeding his
marriage, he commemorated the virtues and abilities of his
departed friend, Dr. J. B. Linn, the brother of his wife, in
one of the most elegant and interesting biographical sketches,
with which we are acquainted. It is, indeed, in our apprehension,
a model of its kind. The facts, though few, are
judiciously arranged, and the character is gradually and distinctly
developed with singular correctness and felicity. His
taste and skill in this department of composition, as well as
in others, were frequently exercised in the columns of the




 Port Folio, to which, from its commencement, he was a large
contributor.
Unwearied in his efforts to promote knowledge, he commenced
in the year 1806, a new annual publication devoted
to history, politics, and science, under the title of the “American
Register.” This work, the only one of the kind yet
attempted, we believe, in this country, was successfully and
vigorously continued by him until the close of the year 1809.
When it is considered that the Magazine and Register
were both conducted by him at the same time for a considerable
period after the commencement of the latter, an opinion
favorable to his zeal and application will readily be admitted.
But he deserves other and higher praise.
In the “American Register” the powers of this admirable
writer are displayed in a new and more imposing manner.
This work exhibits him to his countrymen as an historian.
Though his own modesty named that merely annals,
which impartial criticism will scarcely hesitate to call history;
we cannot but declare the conviction, that his narrative
of European and American affairs from the year 1806 to the
year 1809, is not surpassed, if equalled, by any contemporary
sketch of the same period, that has hitherto been presented
to the public. It proves the author to have possessed the
essential qualities of an able historian,—sound comprehensive
judgment, keen discriminating sagacity, independence
and vigor of mind, rigid impartiality, command of language,
and ample knowledge. Its tendencies are in the highest
degree favorable to the cause of national virtue and enlightened
freedom.*







Of the other portions of this work, though valuable, and the
result of great labor, it is unnecessary to speak. This, and
the pamphlet before mentioned on “Commercial Restrictions,”
were the last of his publications.
Thus, from 1804 till the summer of 1809, was he almost
incessantly employed. He had in this interval nearly completed
an extensive system of General Geography,* and
made considerable progress in a work on Rome, during the
Age of the Antonines, similar to Anacharsis' Travels in
Greece, when disease invaded his frame so seriously that he
was compelled to desist from his labors, and go in search of
that health, which it was now almost hopeless to find.
In the summer of 1809, he left home for this purpose, and
passed a short time with some friends in New Jersey and
New York. He says, in a letter written upon this occasion,
“When have I known that lightness and vivacity of mind,
which the divine flow of health, even in calamity, produces
in some men?”—“Never,—scarcely ever. Not longer than
half an hour at a time, since I have called myself man.”
It is hardly necessary to say that he returned without benefit,
to the home he had left, with great reluctance.
He was naturally inclined to consumption, and his application
only confirmed the predisposition. His friends were
alarmed, and urged the necessity of a sea voyage for the benefit
of his health; but home was too dear to him to be left
for so long a time as this would require. The disease now




 began to assume a more threatening aspect, and his friends
again became importunate for him to try a voyage to Europe.
He at last consented; and the spring of 1810 was fixed
upon as the period of his departure for England.
The disease however did not abate. On the 10th of November
1809, he was attacked with a violent pain in his
side, for which he was bled. He was now confined to his
chamber, and his situation became evidently more alarming.
Day after day passed away, but there was no symptom of
amendment. The malady was making fearful progress, and
the hearts of his friends sunk within them at the bare conception
of the catastrophe that was rapidly approaching.
His sufferings were acute and severe, but his patience and
fortitude were superior to calamity. He was aware of his
danger from the beginning, and perfectly conscious of the
fate that awaited him. In his long confinement he was
scarcely ever free from pain; but the same gentleness and
simplicity of manners, the same sweetness of conversation,
which distinguished him in health, shone conspicuously in
sickness. He was the same gentle, forbearing, humble being
he had ever been.
One who was bound to him by the strongest ties, and who
will ever revere his memory, thus describes his deportment
at this trying season: “He always felt for others more than
for himself, and the evidences of sorrow in those around
him, which could not at all times be suppressed, appeared to
affect him more than his own sufferings. Whenever he
spoke of the probability of a fatal termination to his disease,
it was in an indirect and covert manner, as, `you must do
so and so, when I am absent,'—or `when I am asleep.' He
surrendered not up one faculty of his soul but with his last
breath. He saw death in every step of his approach, and
received him as a messenger that brought with him no terrors.




 He frequently expressed his resignation; but his resignation
was not produced by apathy or pain, for while he bowed
with submission to the divine will, he felt, with the keenest
sensibility, his separation from those who made this world but
too dear to him. Towards the last, he spoke of death without
disguise, and appeared to wish to prepare his friends for
the event which he felt to be approaching. A few days previous
to his change, while sitting up in bed, he fixed his eyes
on the sky, and desired not to be spoken to, until he should
first speak. In this position and with a serene countenance,
he continued some minutes, and then said to his wife, `when
I desired you not to speak to me, I had the most transporting
and sublime feelings I ever experienced. I wanted to
enjoy them, and to know how long they would last.' He
concluded with requesting her to remember the circumstance.”

His sufferings were protracted till February, 1810. On
the morning of the 19th of that month, his anxious family
saw with emotions not to be expressed, that a fatal change
had taken place. He thought himself dying; and at his request,
his family and friends were assembled round his bed.
He addressed them successively with the utmost tenderness
and affection. He lingered, however, for three days longer,
conversing as usual with perfect composure and self-possession.
On the 22d, the final summons came, and with clear
and unclouded faculties, he yielded up his soul to Him who
gave it.
Thus died, at the early age of thirty-nine, a martyr to
letters, Charles Brockden Brown, who to eminence in
knowledge and strength of genius, added a moral purity
and elevation of sentiment, above all praise; whose character
exhibited the rare union of intellectual superiority and
unfeigned modesty; and whose whole life was radiant with




 virtue and goodness. He was one of the most disinterested
of men; and to the base and malignant passions, he was an
utter stranger. Distinguished for genius himself, he was the
enthusiastic admirer of it in others. He knew not how to
envy. Intellectual exercise of every kind was perfectly
familiar to him, and he could with equal ease, and without
premeditation, enter into solid and elaborate argument, or
sport in all the luxuriance of fiction. Mild, retiring, and
amiable, his manners had a simplicity and unobtrusiveness,
and his conversation a sweetness, that cannot soon be forgotten
by his friends. With great colloquial powers, and
inexhaustible stores of knowledge, he would frequently
listen and modestly receive from others what he was much
better qualified to give. No one enjoyed with a keener
relish the delights of social intercourse; but it was in the
converse of the domestic circle that his gratification was
complete. He enjoyed the singular felicity of numbering
among his best friends, his relations by marriage as well as
by birth, by whom his memory is cherished with the warmest
affection and reverence. The literature of America
owes him much, and our countrymen will do justice to the
merits of one equally entitled to the admiration of the mind,
and the homage of the heart.

Philadelphia, March 3d, 1827.
Note.—Mr. Brown left four children. The youngest son, Eugene
Linn Brown, died of consumption on the first of April, 1824, in the
seventeenth year of his age. Of this boy, much could be told. In love
of knowledge, in capacity for acquiring it, and in every endearing virtue
of the heart, he resembled his father. He is now mingling with kindred
spirits.

