

Now I was once more on public ground. By so many
anxious efforts had I disengaged myself from the perilous
precincts of private property. As many stratagems as are
usually made to enter a house, had been employed by me
to get out of it. I was urged to the use of them by my
fears; yet so far from carrying off spoil, I had escaped with
the loss of an essential part of my dress.
I had now leisure to reflect. I seated myself on the
ground and reviewed the scenes through which I had just
passed. I began to think that my industry had been misemployed.
Suppose I had met the person on his first entrance
into his chamber? Was the truth so utterly wild as
not to have found credit? Since the door was locked, and
there was no other avenue; what other statement but the




 true one would account for my being found there? This
deportment had been worthy of an honest purpose. My
betrayer probably expected that this would be the issue
of his jest. My rustic simplicity, he might think, would
suggest no more ambiguous or elaborate expedient. He
might likewise have predetermined to interfere if my safety
had been really endangered.
On the morrow the two doors of the chamber and the
window below would be found unclosed. They will suspect
a design to pillage, but their searches will terminate in
nothing but in the discovery of a pair of clumsy and dusty
shoes in the closet. Now that I was safe I could not help
smiling at the picture which my fancy drew of their anxiety
and wonder. These thoughts, however, gave place to
more momentous considerations.
I could not imagine to myself a more perfect example of
indigence than I now exhibited. There was no being in
the city on whose kindness I had any claim. Money I had
none, and what I then wore comprised my whole stock of
moveables. I had just lost my shoes, and this loss rendered
my stockings of no use. My dignity remonstrated against
a barefoot pilgrimage, but to this, necessity now reconciled
me. I threw my stockings between the bars of a stable
window, belonging, as I thought, to the mansion I had just
left. These, together with my shoes, I left to pay the cost
of my entertainment.
I saw that the city was no place for me. The end that I
had had in view, of procuring some mechanical employment,
could only be obtained by the use of means, but what
means to pursue I knew not. This night's perils and deceptions
gave me a distaste to a city life, and my ancient
occupations rose to my view enhanced by a thousand imaginary
charms. I resolved forthwith to strike into the country.
The day began now to dawn. It was Sunday, and I was
desirous of eluding observation. I was somewhat recruited
by rest, though the languors of sleeplessness oppressed me.
I meant to throw myself on the first lap of verdure I should
meet, and indulge in sleep that I so much wanted. I knew
not the direction of the streets; but followed that which I
first entered from the court, trusting that, by adhering
steadily to one course, I should sometime reach the fields.




 This street, as I afterwards found, tended to Schuylkill,
and soon extricated me from houses. I could not cross this
river without payment of toll. It was requisite to cross it
in order to reach that part of the country whither I was
desirous of going, but how should I effect my passage? I
knew of no ford, and the smallest expense exceeded my
capacity. Ten thousand guineas and a farthing were
equally remote from nothing, and nothing was the portion
allotted to me.
While my mind was thus occupied, I turned up one of
the streets which tend northward. It was, for some length,
uninhabited and unpaved. Presently I reached a pavement,
and a painted fence, along which a row of poplars was
planted. It bounded a garden into which a knothole permitted
me to pry. The inclosure was a charming green,
which I saw appended to a house of the loftiest and most
stately order. It seemed like a recent erection, had all the
gloss of novelty, and exhibited, to my unpractised eyes,
the magnificence of palaces. My father's dwelling did not
equal the height of one story, and might be easily comprised
in one fourth of those buildings which here were designed
to accommodate the menials. My heart dictated the comparison
between my own condition and that of the proprietors
of this domain. How wide and how impassable was
the gulf by which we were separated! This fair inheritance
had fallen to one who, perhaps, would only abuse it
to the purposes of luxury, while I, with intentions worthy
of the friend of mankind, was doomed to wield the flail and
the mattock.
I had been entirely unaccustomed to this strain of reflection.
My books had taught me the dignity and safety of
the middle path, and my darling writer abounded with encomiums
on rural life. At a distance from luxury and
pomp I viewed them, perhaps, in a just light. A nearer
scrutiny confirmed my early prepossessions, but at the distance
at which I now stood, the lofty edifices, the splendid
furniture, and the copious accommodations of the rich, excited
my admiration and my envy.
I relinquished my station and proceeded, in a heartless
mood, along the fence. I now came to the mansion itself.
The principal door was entered by a staircase of marble. I




 had never seen the stone of Carrara, and wildly supposed
this to have been dug from Italian quarries. The beauty of
the poplars, the coolness exhaled from the dew-besprent
bricks, the commodiousness of the seat which these steps
afforded, and the uncertainty into which I was plunged respecting
my future conduct, all combined to make me
pause. I sat down on the lower step and began to meditate.

By some transition it occurred to me that the supply of
my most urgent wants might be found in some inhabitant of
this house. I needed at present a few cents; and what
were a few cents to the tenant of a mansion like this. I
had an invincible aversion to the calling of a beggar, but I
regarded with still more antipathy the vocation of a thief;
to this alternative, however, I was now reduced. I must
either steal or beg; unless, indeed, assistance could be procured
under the notion of a loan. Would a stranger refuse
to lend the pittance that I wanted? Surely not, when the
urgency of my wants were explained.
I recollected other obstacles. To summon the master of
the house from his bed, perhaps, for the sake of such an
application, would be preposterous. I should be in more
danger of provoking his anger than exciting his benevolence.
This request might, surely, with more propriety be preferred
to a passenger. I should, probably, meet several
before I should arrive at Schuylkill.
A servant just then appeared at the door, with bucket and
brush. This obliged me, much sooner than I intended, to
decamp. With some reluctance I rose and proceeded.—
This house occupied the corner of the street, and I now
turned this corner towards the country. A person, at some
distance before me, was approaching in an opposite direction.

“Why,” said I, “may I not make my demand of the
first man I meet? This person exhibits tokens of ability to
lend. There is nothing chilling or austere in his demeanor.”
The resolution to address this passenger was almost
formed; but the nearer he advanced, my resolves grew
less firm. He noticed me not till he came within a few
paces. He seemed busy in reflection, and had not my
figure caught his eye; or had he merely bestowed a passing




 glance upon me, I should not have been sufficiently courageous
to have detained him. The event however was
widely different.
He looked at me and started. For an instant, as it were,
and till he had time to dart at me a second glance, he
checked his pace. This behavior decided mine, and he
stopped on perceiving tokens of a desire to address him. I
spoke, but my accents and air sufficiently denoted my embarrassments.

“I am going to solicit a favor, which my situation makes
of the highest importance to me, and which I hope it will be
easy for you, sir, to grant. It is not an alms but a loan that
I seek; a loan that I will repay the moment I am able to do
it. I am going to the country, but have not wherewith to
pay my passage over Schuylkill, or to buy a morsel of
bread. May I venture to request of you, sir, the loan of
sixpence? As I told you, it is my intention to repay it.”
I delivered this address, not without some faltering, but
with great earnestness. I laid particular stress upon my intention
to refund the money. He listened with a most inquisitive
air. His eye perused me from head to foot.
After some pause, he said, in a very emphatic manner,
“Why into the country? Have you family? Kindred?
Friends?”
“No,” answered I, “I have neither. I go in search of
the means of subsistence. I have passed my life upon a
farm, and propose to die in the same condition.”
“Whence have you come?”
“I came yesterday from the country, with a view to earn
my bread in some way, but have changed my plan and propose
now to return.”
“Why have you changed it? In what way are you capable
of earning your bread?”
“I hardly know,” said I. “I can, as yet, manage no tool,
that can be managed in the city, but the pen. My habits
have, in some small degree, qualified me for a writer. I
would willingly accept employment of that kind.”
He fixed his eyes upon the earth, and was silent for some
minutes. At length, recovering himself, he said, “Follow
me to my house. Perhaps something may be done for you.
If not I will lend you sixpence.”






It may be supposed that I eagerly complied with the invitation.
My companion said no more, his air bespeaking
him to be absorbed by his own thoughts, till he reached his
house, which proved to be that at the door of which I had
been seated. We entered a parlor together.
Unless you can assume my ignorance and my simplicity,
you will be unable to conceive the impressions that were
made by the size and ornaments of this apartment. I shall
omit these impressions, which, indeed, no description could
adequately convey, and dwell on incidents of greater moment.
He asked me to give him a specimen of my penmanship.
I told you that I had bestowed very great attention
upon this art. Implements were brought and I sat
down to the task. By some inexplicable connexion a line
in Shakspeare, occurred to me, and I wrote
“My poverty, but not my will consents.”
 The sentiment conveyed in this line powerfully affected him,
but in a way which I could not then comprehend. I collected
from subsequent events that the inference was not
unfavorable to my understanding or my morals. He questioned
me as to my history. I related my origin and my
inducements to desert my father's house. With respect to
last night's adventures I was silent. I saw no useful purpose
that could be answered by disclosure, and I half suspected
that my companion would refuse credit to my tale.
There were frequent intervals of abstraction and reflection
between his questions. My examination lasted not
much less than an hour. At length he said, “I want an
amanuensis or copyist. On what terms will you live with
me?”
I answered that I knew not how to estimate the value of
my services. I knew not whether these services were
agreeable or healthful. My life had hitherto been active.
My constitution was predisposed to diseases of the lungs and
the change might be hurtful. I was willing, however, to try
and to content myself for a month or a year, with so much
as would furnish me with food, clothing, and lodging.
“'Tis well,” said he, “You remain with me as long and
no longer than both of us please. You shall lodge and eat
in this house. I will supply you with clothing, and your




 task will be to write what I dictate. Your person, I see,
has not shared much of your attention. It is in my power
to equip you instantly in the manner which becomes a resident
in this house. Come with me.”
He led the way into the court behind and thence into a
neat building, which contained large wooden vessels and a
pump; “There,” said he, “you may wash yourself, and
when that is done, I will conduct you to your chamber and
your wardrobe.”
This was speedily performed, and he accordingly led the
way to the chamber. It was an apartment in the third story,
finished and furnished in the same costly and superb style
with the rest of the house. He opened closets and drawers
which overflowed with clothes and linen of all and of
the best kinds. “These are yours,” said he, “as long as
you stay with me. Dress yourself as likes you best. Here
is every thing your nakedness requires. When dressed
you may descend to breakfast.” With these words he
left me.
The clothes were all in the French style, as I afterwards,
by comparing my garb with that of others, discovered.
They were fitted to my shape with the nicest precision. I
bedecked myself with all my care. I remembered the
style of dress used by my beloved Clavering. My locks
were of shining auburn, flowing and smooth like his. Having
wrung the wet from them, and combed, I tied them
carelessly in a black riband. Thus equipped I surveyed
myself in a mirror.
You may imagine, if you can, the sensations which this
instantaneous transformation produced. Appearances are
wonderfully influenced by dress. Check shirt, buttoned at
the neck, an awkward fustian coat, check trowsers and bare
feet were now supplanted by linen and muslin, nankeen coat
striped with green, a white silk waistcoat elegantly needlewrought,
cassimer pantaloons, stockings of variegated silk,
and shoes that in their softness, pliancy, and polished surface
vied with sattin. I could scarcely forbear looking back to
see whether the image in the glass, so well proportioned, so
gallant, and so graceful, did not belong to another. I could
scarcely recognise any lineaments of my own. I walked to
the window. “Twenty minutes ago,” said I, “I was




 traversing that path a barefoot beggar; now I am thus.”
Again I surveyed myself. “Surely some insanity has fastened
on my understanding. My senses are the sport of
dramas. Some magic that disdains the cumbrousness of
nature's progress, has wrought this change.” I was roused
from these doubts by a summons to breakfast, obsequiously
delivered by a black servant.
I found Welbeck, (for I shall henceforth call him by his
true name,) at the breakfast table. A superb equipage of
silver and china was before him. He was startled at my
entrance. The change in my dress seemed for a moment
to have deceived him. His eye was frequently fixed upon
me with unusual steadfastness. At these times there was
inquietude and wonder in his features.
I had now an opportunity of examining my host. There
was nicety but no ornament in his dress. His form was of
the middle height, spare, but vigorous and graceful. His
face was cast, I thought, in a foreign mould. His forehead
receded beyond the usual degree in visages which I had
seen. His eyes large and prominent, but imparting no marks
of benignity and habitual joy. The rest of his face forcibly
suggested the idea of a convex edge. His whole figure
impressed me with emotions of veneration and awe. A
gravity that almost amounted to sadness invariably attended
him when we were alone together.
He whispered the servant that waited, who immediately
retired. He then said, turning to me, “A lady will enter
presently, whom you are to treat with the respect due to my
daughter. You must not notice any emotion she may betray
at the sight of you, nor expect her to converse with
you; for she does not understand your language.” He had
scarcely spoken when she entered. I was seized with
certain misgivings and flutterings which a clownish education
may account for. I so far conquered my timidity, however,
as to snatch a look at her. I was not born to execute her
portrait. Perhaps the turban that wreathed her head, the
brilliant texture and inimitable folds of her drapery, and
nymphlike port, more than the essential attributes of her
person, gave splendor to the celestial vision. Perhaps it
was her snowy hues and the cast, rather than the position





 of her features, that were so prolific of enchantment; or
perhaps the wonder originated only in my own ignorance.
She did not immediately notice me. When she did she
almost shrieked with surprise. She held up her hands, and
gazing upon me, uttered various exclamations which I could
not understand. I could only remark that her accents were
thrillingly musical. Her perturbations refused to be stilled.
It was with difficulty that she withdrew her regards from me.
Much conversation passed between her and Welbeck, but I
could comprehend no part of it. I was at liberty to animadvert
on the visible part of their intercourse. I diverted some
part of my attention from my own embarrassments, and fixed
it on their looks.
In this art, as in most others, I was an unpractised simpleton.
In the countenance of Welbeck, there was somewhat
else than sympathy with the astonishment and distress of the
lady; but I could not interpret these additional tokens.
When her attention was engrossed by Welbeck, her eyes
were frequently vagrant or downcast; her cheeks contracted
a deeper hue; and her breathing was almost prolonged
into a sigh. These were marks on which I made no comments
at the time. My own situation was calculated to
breed confusion in my thoughts and awkwardness in my
gestures. Breakfast being finished, the lady, apparently at
the request of Welbeck, sat down to a piano forte.
Here again I must be silent. I was not wholly destitute
of musical practice and musical taste. I had that degree of
knowledge which enabled me to estimate the transcendent
skill of this performer. As if the pathos of her touch were
insufficient, I found after some time that the lawless jarrings
of the keys were chastened by her own more liquid notes.
She played without a book, and though her base might be
preconcerted, it was plain that her right-hand notes were
momentary and spontaneous inspirations. Meanwhile Welbeck
stood, leaning his arms on the back of a chair near her,
with his eyes fixed on her face. His features were fraught
with a meaning which I was eager to interpret, but unable.
I have read of transitions effected by magic; I have read
of palaces and deserts which were subject to the dominion of
spells; poets may sport with their power, but I am certain




 that no transition was ever conceived more marvellous and
more beyond the reach of foresight, than that which I had
just experienced. Heaths vexed by a midnight storm may
be changed into a hall of choral nymphs and regal banqueting;
forest glades may give sudden place to colonnades and
carnivals, but he whose senses are deluded finds himself still
on his natal earth. These miracles are contemptible when
compared with that which placed me under this roof and
gave me to partake in this audience. I know that my emotions
are in danger of being regarded as ludicrous by those
who cannot figure to themselves the consequences of a limited
and rustic education.
