

I rose at the dawn, and without asking or bestowing a
blessing, sallied forth into the high road to the city, which
passed near the house. I left nothing behind, the loss of
which I regretted. I had purchased most of my own books
with the product of my own separate industry, and their
number being, of course, small, I had, by incessant application,
gotten the whole of them by rote. They had ceased,
therefore, to be of any further use. I left them, without
reluctance, to the fate for which I knew them to be reserved,
that of affording food and habitation to mice.
I trod this unwonted path with all the fearlessness of
youth. In spite of the motives to despondency and apprehension,
incident to my state, my heels were light and my
heart joyous. “Now,” said I, “I am mounted into man.
I must build a name and a fortune for myself. Strange if
this intellect and these hands will not supply me with an
honest livelihood. I will try the city in the first place; but
if that should fail, resources are still left to me. I will resume
any post in the cornfield and threshing-floor, to which I
shall always have access, and where I shall always be happy.”
I had proceeded some miles on my journey, when I began
to feel the inroads of hunger. I might have stopped at any
farm-house, and have breakfasted for nothing. It was prudent
to husband, with the utmost care, my slender stock; but
I felt reluctance to beg as long as I had the means of buying,




 and I imagined, that coarse bread and a little milk would
cost little even at a tavern, when any farmer was willing to
bestow them for nothing. My resolution was farther influenced
by the appearance of a sign-post. What excuse could
I make for begging a breakfast with an inn at hand and silver
in my pocket?
I stopped, accordingly, and breakfasted. The landlord
was remarkably attentive and obliging, but his bread was
stale, his milk sour, and his cheese the greenest imaginable.
I disdained to animadvert on these defects, naturally supposing
that his house could furnish no better.
Having finished my meal, I put, without speaking, one of
my pieces into his hand. This deportment I conceived to
be highly becoming, and to indicate a liberal and manly
spirit. I always regarded with contempt a scrupulous maker
of bargains. He received the money with a complaisant
obeisance. “Right,” said he. “Just the money, Sir.
You are on foot, Sir. A pleasant way of travelling, Sir. I
wish you a good day, Sir.”—So saying he walked away.
This proceeding was wholly unexpected. I conceived
myself entitled to at least three-fourths of it in change. The
first impulse was to call him back, and contest the equity of
his demand, but a moment's reflection shewed me the absurdity
of such conduct. I resumed my journey with spirits
somewhat depressed. I have heard of voyagers and wanderers
in deserts, who were willing to give a casket of gems
for a cup of cold water. I had not supposed my own condition
to be, in any respect, similar; yet I had just given one
third of my estate for a breakfast.
I stopped at noon at another inn. I counted on purchasing
a dinner for the same price, since I meant to content
myself with the same fare. A large company was just sitting
down to a smoking banquet. The landlord invited me
to join them. I took my place at the table, but was furnished
with bread and milk. Being prepared to depart, I
took him aside. “What is to pay?” said I.—“Did you
drink any thing, Sir?”—“Certainly. I drank the milk
which was furnished.”—“But any liquors, Sir?”—“No.”
He deliberated a moment and then assuming an air of
disinterestedness, “'Tis our custom to charge dinner and





 club, but as you drank nothing, we'll let the club go. A
mere dinner is half a dollar, Sir.”
He had no leisure to attend to my fluctuations. After
debating with myself on what was to be done, I concluded
that compliance was best, and leaving the money at the bar,
resumed my way.
I had not performed more than half my journey, yet my
purse was entirely exhausted. This was a specimen of the
cost incurred by living at an inn. If I entered the city, a
tavern must, at least for some time, be my abode, but I had
not a farthing remaining to defray my charges. My father
had formerly entertained a boarder for a dollar per week,
and, in a case of need, I was willing to subsist upon coarser
fare, and lie on a harder bed than those with which our
guest had been supplied. These facts had been the foundation
of my negligence on this occasion.
What was now to be done? To return to my paternal
mansion was impossible. To relinquish my design of entering
the city and to seek a temporary asylum, if not permanent
employment, at some one of the plantations within
view, was the most obvious expedient. These deliberations
did not slacken my pace. I was almost unmindful of my
way, when I found I had passed Schuylkill at the upper
bridge. I was now within the precincts of the city and night
was hastening. It behoved me to come to a speedy decision.

Suddenly I recollected that I had not paid the customary
toll at the bridge; neither had I money wherewith to pay it.
A demand of payment would have suddenly arrested my
progress; and so slight an incident would have precluded
that wonderful destiny to which I was reserved. The obstacle
that would have hindered my advance, now prevented
my return. Scrupulous honesty did not require me to turn
back and awaken the vigilance of the toll gatherer. I had
nothing to pay, and by returning I should only double my
debt. “Let it stand,” said I, “where it does. All that
honor enjoins is to pay when I am able.”
I adhered to the cross ways, till I reached Market-street.
Night had fallen, and a triple row of lamps presented a
spectacle enchanting and new. My personal cares were,




 for a time, lost in the tumultuous sensations with which I
was now engrossed. I had never visited the city at this
hour. When my last visit was paid I was a mere child.
The novelty which environed every object was, therefore,
nearly absolute. I proceeded with more cautious steps, but
was still absorbed in attention to passing objects. I reached
the market house, and, entering it, indulged myself in new
delight and new wonder.
I need not remark that our ideas of magnificence and
splendor are merely comparative; yet you may be prompted
to smile when I tell you that, in walking through this avenue,
I, for a moment, conceived myself transported to the hall
“pendent with many a row of starry lamps and blazing crescents
fed by naptha and asphaltos.” That this transition
from my homely and quiet retreat, had been effected in so
few hours, wore the aspect of miracle or magic.
I proceeded from one of these buildings to another, till
I reached their termination in Front street. Here my progress
was checked, and I sought repose to my weary
limbs by seating myself on a stall. No wonder some fatigue
was felt by me, accustomed as I was to strenuous exertions,
since, exclusive of the minutes spent at breakfast
and dinner, I had travelled fifteen hours and forty five miles.
I began now to reflect, with some earnestness, on my
condition. I was a stranger, friendless, and moneyless. I
was unable to purchase food and shelter, and was wholly
unused to the business of begging. Hunger was the only
serious inconvenience to which I was immediately exposed.
I had no objection to spend the night in the spot where I
then sat. I had no fear that my visions would be troubled by
the officers of police. It was no crime to be without a home;
but how should I supply my present cravings and the cravings
of tomorrow?
At length it occurred to me that one of our country neighbors
was probably at this time in the city. He kept a store
as well as cultivated a farm. He was a plain and well
meaning man, and should I be so fortunate as to meet him,
his superior knowledge of the city might be of essential
benefit to me in my present forlorn circumstances. His
generosity might likewise induce him to lend me so much
as would purchase one meal. I had formed the resolution




 to leave the city next day and was astonished at the folly
that had led me into it; but, meanwhile, my physical wants
must be supplied.
Where should I look for this man? In the course of conversation
I recollected him to have referred to the place of
his temporary abode. It was an inn, but the sign or the
name of the keeper, for sometime withstood all my efforts
to recall them.
At length I lighted on the last. It was Lesher's tavern.
I immediately set out in search of it. After many inquiries
I at last arrived at the door. I was preparing to enter the
house when I perceived that my bundle was gone. I had
left it on the stall where I had been sitting. People were
perpetually passing to and fro. It was scarcely possible not
to have been noticed. No one that observed it would fail
to make it his prey. Yet it was of too much value to me,
to allow me to be governed by a bare probability. I resolved
to lose not a moment in returning.
With some difficulty I retraced my steps, but the bundle
had disappeared. The clothes were, in themselves, of
small value, but they constituted the whole of my wardrobe;
and I now reflected that they were capable of being transmuted,
by the pawn or sale of them, into food. There
were other wretches as indigent as I was, and I consoled
myself by thinking that my shirts and stockings might furnish
a seasonable covering to their nakedness; but there
was a relic concealed within this bundle, the loss of which
could scarcely be endured by me. It was the portrait of
a young man who died three years ago at my father's house,
drawn by his own hand.
He was discovered one morning in the orchard with many
marks of insanity upon him. His air and dress bespoke
some elevation of rank and fortune. My mother's compassion
was excited, and, as his singularities were harmless,
an asylum was afforded him, though he was unable to pay
for it. He was constantly declaiming, in an incoherent
manner, about some mistress who had proved faithless.
His speeches seemed, however, like the rantings of an
actor, to be rehearsed by rote or for the sake of exercise.
He was totally careless of his person and health, and by
repeated negligences of this kind, at last contracted a fever




 of which he speedily died. The name which he assumed
was Clavering.
He gave no distinct account of his family, but stated in
loose terms, that they were residents in England, high born
and wealthy. That they had denied him the woman whom
he loved and banished him to America, under penalty of
death if he should dare to return, and that they had refused
him all means of subsistence in a foreign land. He predicted,
in his wild and declamatory way, his own death. He was
very skilful at the pencil, and drew this portrait a short time
before his dissolution, presented it to me, and charged me to
preserve it in remembrance of him. My mother loved the
youth because he was amiable and unfortunate, and chiefly
because she fancied a very powerful resemblance between
his countenance and mine. I was too young to build affection
on any rational foundation. I loved him, for whatever
reason, with an ardor unusual at my age, and which this
portrait had contributed to prolong and to cherish.
In thus finally leaving my home, I was careful not to leave
this picture behind. I wrapt it in paper in which a few
elegiac stanzas were inscribed in my own hand, and with
my utmost elegance of penmanship. I then placed it in a
leathern case, which, for greater security, was deposited in
the centre of my bundle. It will occur to you, perhaps, that
it would be safer in some fold or pocket of the clothes which
I wore. I was of a different opinion and was now to endure
the penalty of my error.
It was in vain to heap execrations on my negligence, or to
consume the little strength left to me in regrets. I returned
once more to the tavern and made inquiries for Mr. Capper,
the person whom I have just mentioned as my father's neighbor.
I was informed that Capper was now in town; that
he had lodged, on the last night, at this house; that he had
expected to do the same to night, but a gentleman had called
ten minutes ago, whose invitation to lodge with him to night
had been accepted. They had just gone out together.
Who, I asked, was the gentleman? The landlord had no
knowledge of him; he knew neither his place of abode nor
his name. Was Mr. Capper expected to return hither in
the morning? No, he had heard the stranger propose to





 Mr. Capper to go with him into the country tomorrow, and
Mr. Capper, he believed, had assented.
This disappointment was peculiarly severe. I had lost,
by my own negligence, the only opportunity that would
offer of meeting my friend. Had even the recollection of
my loss been postponed for three minutes, I should have
entered the house, and a meeting would have been secured.
I could discover to other expedient to obviate the present
evil. My heart began now, for the first time, to droop. I
looked back, with nameless emotions, on the days of my
infancy. I called up the image of my mother. I reflected
on the infatuation of my surviving parent, and the usurpation
of the detestable Betty with horror. I viewed myself as the
most calamitous and desolate of human beings.
At this time I was sitting in the common room. There
were others in the same apartment, lounging, or whistling,
or singing. I noticed them not, but leaning my head upon
my hand, I delivered myself up to painful and intense meditation.
From this I was roused by some one placing himself
on the bench near me and addressing me thus; “Pray Sir,
if you will excuse me, who was the person whom you were
looking for just now? Perhaps I can give you the information
you want. If I can, you will be very welcome to it.”
I fixed my eyes with some eagerness on the person that
spoke. He was a young man, expensively and fashionably
dressed, whose mien was considerably prepossessing, and
whose countenance bespoke some portion of discernment.
I described to him the man whom I sought. “I am in search
of the same man myself,” said he, “but I expect to meet
him here. He may lodge elsewhere, but he promised to
meet me here at half after nine. I have no doubt he will
fulfil his promise, so that you will meet the gentleman.”
I was highly gratified by this information, and thanked
my informant with some degree of warmth. My gratitude
he did not notice, but continued; “In order to beguile expectation,
I have ordered supper; will you do me the favor
to partake with me, unless indeed you have supped already?”
I was obliged, somewhat awkwardly, to decline his invitation,
conscious as I was that the means of payment were not
in my power. He continued however to urge my




 compliance, till at length it was, though reluctantly, yielded. My
chief motive was the certainty of seeing Capper.
My new acquaintance was exceedingly conversible, but
his conversation was chiefly characterized by frankness and
good humor. My reserves gradually diminished, and I
ventured to inform him, in general terms, of my former condition
and present views. He listened to my details with
seeming attention, and commented on them with some
judiciousness. His statements, however, tended to discourage
me from remaining in the city.
Meanwhile the hour passed and Capper did not appear.
I noticed this circumstance to him with no little solicitude.
He said that possibly he might have forgotten or neglected
his engagement. His affair was not of the highest importance,
and might be readily postponed to a future opportunity.
He perceived that my vivacity was greatly damped
by this intelligence. He importuned me to disclose the
cause. He made himself very merry with my distress,
when it was at length discovered. As to the expense of
supper, I had partaken of it at his invitation, he therefore
should of course be charged with it. As to lodging, he had
a chamber and a bed which he would insist upon my sharing
with him.
My faculties were thus kept upon the stretch of wonder.
Every new act of kindness in this man surpassed the fondest
expectation that I had formed. I saw no reason why I
should be treated with benevolence. I should have acted in
the same manner if placed in the same circumstances; yet
it appeared incongruous and inexplicable. I know whence
my ideas of human nature were derived. They certainly
were not the offspring of my own feelings. These would
have taught me that interest and duty were blended in every
act of generosity.
I did not come into the world without my scruples and
suspicions. I was more apt to impute kindnesses to sinister
and hidden than to obvious and laudable motives. I paused
to reflect upon the possible designs of this person. What
end could be served by this behavior? I was no subject of
violence or fraud. I had neither trinket nor coin to stimulate
the treachery of others. What was offered was merely
lodging for the night. Was this an act of such transcendent




 disinterestedness as to be incredible? My garb was meaner
than that of my companion, but my intellectual accomplishments
were at least upon a level with his. Why should he
be supposed to be insensible to my claims upon his kindness.
I was a youth destitute of experience, money, and friends;
but I was not devoid of all mental and personal endowments.
That my merit should be discovered, even on such slender
intercourse, had surely nothing in it that shocked belief.
While I was thus deliberating, my new friend was earnest
in his solicitations for my company. He remarked my hesitation,
but ascribed it to a wrong cause. “Come,” said
he, “I can guess your objections and can obviate them.
You are afraid of being ushered into company; and people
who have passed their lives like you have a wonderful antipathy
to strange faces; but this is bed time with our family,
so that we can defer your introduction to them till tomorrow.
We may go to our chamber without being seen by any but
servants.”
I had not been aware of this circumstance. My reluctance
flowed from a different cause, but now that the inconveniences
of ceremony were mentioned, they appeared to
me of considerable weight. I was well pleased that they
should thus be avoided, and consented to go along with him.
We passed several streets and turned several corners. At
last we turned into a kind of court which seemed to be
chiefly occupied by stables. “We will go,” said he, “by
the back way into the house. We shall thus save ourselves
the necessity of entering the parlor, where some of the
family may still be.”
My companion was as talkative as ever, but said nothing
from which I could gather any knowledge of the number,
character and condition of his family.
