







The evils of pestilence by which this
city has lately been afflicted will probably form an æra in its
history. The schemes of reformation and improvement to
which they will give birth, or, if no efforts of human wisdom
can avail to avert the periodical visitations of this calamity,
the change in manners and population which they will
produce, will be, in the highest degree, memorable. They
have already supplied new and copious materials for reflection
to the physician and the political economist. They have
not been less fertile of instruction to the moral observer,
to whom they have furnished new displays of the influence
of human passions and motives.
Amidst the medical and political discussions which are
now afloat in the community relative to this topic, the author
of these remarks has ventured to methodise his own
reflections, and to weave into an humble narrative, such incidents
as appeared to him most instructive and remarkable
among those which came within the sphere of his own observation.
It is every one's duty to profit by all opportunities
of inculcating on mankind the lessons of justice and
humanity. The influences of hope and fear, the trials of




 fortitude and constancy, which took place in this city, in the
autumn of 1793, have, perhaps, never been exceeded in any
age. It is but just to snatch some of these from oblivion,
and to deliver to posterity a brief but faithful sketch of the
condition of this metropolis during that calamitous period.
Men only require to be made acquainted with distress for
their compassion and their charity to be awakened. He
that depicts, in lively colors, the evils of disease and poverty,
performs an eminent service to the sufferers, by calling
forth benevolence in those who are able to afford relief,
and he who portrays examples of disinterestedness and intrepidity,
confers on virtue the notoriety and homage that
are due to it, and rouses in the spectators, the spirit of salutary
emulation.
In the following tale a particular series of adventures is
brought to a close; but these are necessarily connected with
the events which happened subsequent to the period here
described. These events are not less memorable than those
which form the subject of the present volume, and may
hereafter be published, either separately or in addition to
this.

C. B. B.

