



The Author sets out as Captain of a Ship. His
Men conspire against him, confine him a long
Time to his Cabbin, set him on Shore in an unknown
Land. He travels up into the Country. 
The Yahoos, a strange Sort of Animal, described. 
The Author meets two Houyhnhnms. 

I Continued at home with my Wife
and Children about five Months in
a very happy Condition, if I could
have learned the Lesson of knowing
when I was well. I left my poor
Wife big with Child, and accepted an advantageous
Offer made me to be Captain of the Adventure, 

a stout Merchant-man of 350 Tuns: For I
understood Navigation well, and being grown weary
of a Surgeon's Employment at Sea, which however
I could exercise upon Occasion, I took a skilful
young Man of that Calling, one Robert Purefoy,
into my Ship. We set sail from Portsmouth upon
the 7th Day of September, 1710; on the 14th we
met with Captain Pocock of Bristol, at Tenariff,
who was going to the Bay of Campeachy, to cut
Logwood. On the 16th he was parted from us by
a Storm: I heard since my Return, that his Ship
foundered, and none escaped, but one Cabbin-Boy. 
He was an honest Man, and a good Sailor, but a
little too positive in his own Opinions, which was
the Cause of his Destruction, as it hath been of
several others. For if he had followed my Advice,
he might at this Time have been safe at home
with his Family as well as my self. 
I had several Men died in my Ship of Calentures,
so that I was forced to get Recruits out of Barbadoes,
and the Leeward Islands, where I touched by the
Direction of the Merchants who employed me; 
which I had soon too much Cause to repent; for
I found afterwards that most of them had been Buccaneers. 
I had fifty Hands on Board; and my Orders
were, that I should trade with the Indians in the
South-Sea, and make what Discoveries I could. 
These Rogues whom I had picked up, debauched
my other Men, and they all formed a Conspiracy
to seize the Ship and secure me; which they did
one Morning, rushing into my Cabbin, and binding
me Hand and Foot, threatening to throw me overboard,
if I offered to stir. I told them, I was their
Prisoner, and would submit. This they made me 

swear to do, and then unbound me, only fastening
one of my Legs with a Chain near my Bed; and
placed a Centry at my Door with his Piece charged,
who was commanded to shoot me dead if I attempted
my Liberty. They sent me down Victuals and
Drink, and took the Government of the Ship to
themselves. Their Design was to turn Pirates, and
plunder the Spaniards, which they could not do,
till they got more Men. But first they resolved to
sell the Goods in the Ship, and then go to Madagascar
for Recruits, several among them having
died since my Confinement. They sailed many
Weeks, and traded with the Indians; but I knew
not what Course they took, being kept close Prisoner
in my Cabbin, and expecting nothing less
than to be murdered, as they often threatened me. 
Upon the 9th Day of May, 1711, one James
Welch came down to my Cabbin; and said he had
Orders from the Captain to set me ashore. I expostulated
with him, but in vain; neither would
he so much as tell me who their new Captain was. 
They forced me into the Long-boat, letting me
put on my best Suit of Cloaths, which were as
good as new, and a small Bundle of Linnen, but
no Arms except my Hanger; and they were so
civil as not to search my Pockets, into which I
conveyed what Money I had, with some other
little Necessaries. They rowed about a League; 
and then set me down on a Strand. I desired them
to tell me what Country it was: They all swore,
they knew no more than my self, but said, that the
Captain (as they called him) was resolved, after they
had sold the Lading, to get rid of me in the first
Place where they discovered Land. They pushed 

off immediately, advising me to make haste, for fear
of being overtaken by the Tide; and bade me farewell. 
In this desolate Condition I advanced forward,
and soon got upon firm Ground, where I sat down
on a Bank to rest my self, and consider what I had
best to do. When I was a little refreshed, I went
up into the Country, resolving to deliver my self
to the first Savages I should meet; and purchase my
Life from them by some Bracelets, Glass Rings, and
other Toys, which Sailors usually provide themselves
with in those Voyages, and whereof I had
some about me: The Land was divided by long
Rows of Trees, not regularly planted, but naturally
growing; there was great Plenty of Grass, and several
Fields of Oats. I walked very circumspectly
for fear of being surprised, or suddenly shot with an
Arrow from behind, or on either Side. I fell into
a beaten Road, where I saw many Tracks of human
Feet, and some of Cows, but most of Horses. At
last I beheld several Animals in a Field, and one
or two of the same Kind sitting in Trees. Their
Shape was very singular, and deformed, which a little
discomposed, me, so that I lay down behind a
Thicket to observe them better. Some of them
coming forward near the Place where I lay, gave me
an Opportunity of distinctly marking their Form. 
Their Heads and Breasts were covered with a thick
Hair, some frizzled and others lank; they had Beards
like Goats, and a long Ridge of Hair down their
Backs, and the fore Parts of their Legs and Feet; 
but the rest of their Bodies were bare, so that I
might see their Skins, which were of a brown Buff
Colour. They had no Tails, nor any Hair at all on 

their Buttocks, except about the Anus; which, I
presume Nature had placed there to defend them as
they sat on the Ground; for this Posture they used,
as well as lying down, and often stood on their hind
Feet. They climbed high Trees, as nimbly as a
Squirrel, for they had strong extended Claws before
and behind, terminating on sharp Points, hooked. 
They would often spring, and bound, and leap with
prodigious Agility. The Females were not so large
as the Males; they had long lank Hair on their
Heads, and only a Sort of Down on the rest of
their Bodies, except about the Anus, and Pudenda. 
Their Dugs hung between their fore Feet, and often
reached almost to the Ground as they walked. The
Hair of both Sexes was of several Colours, brown,
red, black and yellow. Upon the whole, I never
beheld in all my Travels so disagreeable an Animal,
or one against which I naturally conceived so strong
an Antipathy. So that thinking I had seen enough,
full of Contempt and Aversion, I got up and pursued
the beaten Road, hoping it might direct
me to the Cabbin of some Indian. I had not
gone far when I met one of these Creatures full in
my Way, and coming up directly to me. The ugly
Monster, when he saw me, distorted several Ways
every Feature of his Visage, and stared as at an Object
he had never seen before; then approaching
nearer, lifted up his fore Paw, whether out of Curiosity
or Mischief, I could not tell: But I drew
my Hanger, and gave him a good Blow with the
flat Side of it; for I durst not strike him with the
Edge, fearing the Inhabitants might be provoked
against me, if they should come to know, that I 

had killed or maimed any of their Cattle. When
the Beast felt the Smart, he drew back, and roared
so loud, that a Herd of at least forty came flocking
about me from the next Field, howling and making
odious Faces; but I ran to the Body of a Tree, and
leaning my Back against it, kept them off, by waving
my Hanger. Several of this cursed Brood getting
hold of the Branches behind, leaped up into the Tree,
from whence they began to discharge their Excrements
on my Head: However, I escaped pretty well,
by sticking close to the Stem of the Tree, but was almost
stifled with the Filth, which fell about me on
every Side. 
In the Midst of this Distress, I observed them
all to run away on a sudden as fast as they could; at
which I ventured to leave the Tree, and pursue the
Road, wondering what it was that could put them
into this Fright. But looking on my Left-Hand, I
saw a Horse walking softly in the Field; which
my Persecutors having sooner discovered, was the
Cause of their Flight. The Horse started a little
when he came near me, but soon recovering himself,
looked full in my Face with manifest Tokens
of Wonder: He viewed my Hands and Feet,
walking round me several times. I would have pursued
my Journey, but he placed himself directly in
the Way, yet looking with a very mild Aspect, never
offering the least Violence. We stood gazing
at each other for some time; at last I took the Boldness,
to reach my Hand towards his Neck, with a
Design to stroak it; using the common Style and
Whistle of Jockies when they are going to handle
a strange Horse. But, this Animal seeming to receive
my Civilities with Disdain, shook his Head, 

and bent his Brows, softly raising up his Left Fore-Foot
to remove my Hand. Then he neighed three
or four times, but in so different a Cadence, that I
almost began to think he was speaking to himself
in some Language of his own. 
While He and I were thus employed, another
Horse came up; who applying himself to the first
in a very formal Manner, they gently struck each
others Right Hoof before, neighing several times
by Turns, and varying the Sound, which seemed
to be almost articulate. They went some Paces off,
as if it were to confer together, walking Side by
Side, backward and forward, like Persons deliberating
upon some Affair of Weight; but often turning
their Eyes towards me, as it were to watch that
I might not escape. I was amazed to see such
Actions and Behaviour in Brute Beasts; and concluded
with myself, that if the Inhabitants of this
Country were endued with a proportionable Degree
of Reason, they must needs be the wisest People
upon Earth. This Thought gave me so much
Comfort, that I resolved to go forward untill I could
discover some House or Village, or meet with any
of the Natives; leaving the two Horses to discourse
together as they pleased. But the first, who was a
Dapple-Grey, observing me to steal off, neighed
after me in so expressive a Tone, that I fancied myself
to understand what he meant; whereupon I
turned back, and came near him, to expect his farther
Commands; but concealing my Fear as much
as I could; for I began to be in some Pain, how
this Adventure might terminate; and the Reader
will easily believe I did not much like my present
Situation. 

The two Horses came up close to me, looking
with great Earnestness upon my Face and Hands. 
The grey Steed rubbed my Hat all round with his
Right Fore-hoof, and discomposed it so much,
that I was forced to adjust it better, by taking it
off, and settling it again; whereat both he and his
Companion (who was a brown Bay) appeared to
be much surprized; the latter felt the Lappet of my
Coat, and finding it to hang loose about me, they
both looked with new Signs of Wonder. He
stroked my Right Hand, seeming to admire the
Softness, and Colour; but he squeezed it so hard
between his Hoof and his Pastern, that I was forced
to roar; after which they both touched me with
all possible Tenderness. They were under great
Perplexity about my Shoes and Stockings, which
they felt very often, neighing to each other, and
using various Gestures, not unlike those of a Philosopher,
when he would attempt to solve some new
and difficult Phænomenon. 
Upon the whole, the Behaviour of these Animals
was so orderly and rational, so acute and judicious,
that I at last concluded, they must needs be
Magicians, who had thus metamorphosed themselves
upon some Design; and seeing a Stranger in
the Way, were resolved to divert themselves with
him; or perhaps were really amazed at the Sight of
a Man so very different in Habit, Feature and Complexion
from those who might probably live in so
remote a Climate. Upon the Strength of this Reasoning,
I ventured to address them in the following
Manner: Gentlemen, if you be Conjurers, as I have
good Cause to believe, you can understand any
Language; therefore I make bold to let your Worships 

know, that I am a poor distressed Englishman,
driven by his Misfortunes upon your Coast; and I
entreat one of you, to let me ride upon his Back,
as if he were a real Horse, to some House or Village,
where I can be relieved. In return of which
Favour, I will make you a Present of this Knife and
Bracelet, (taking them out of my Pocket.) The
two Creatures stood silent while I spoke, seeming
to listen with great Attention; and when I had
ended, they neighed frequently towards each other,
as if they were engaged in serious Conversation. 
I plainly observed, that their Language expressed
the Passions very well, and the Words might with
little Pains be resolved into an Alphabet more easily
than the Chinese. 
I could frequently distinguish the Word Yahoo,
which was repeated by each of them several times; 
and although it were impossible for me to conjecture
what it meant, yet while the two Horses were busy
in Conversation, I endeavoured to practice this
Word upon my Tongue; and as soon as they were
silent, I boldly pronounced Yahoo in a loud Voice,
imitating, at the same time, as near as I could, the
Neighing of a Horse; at which they were both
visibly surprized, and the Grey repeated the same
Word twice, as if he meant to teach me the right
Accent, wherein I spoke after him as well as I could,
and found myself perceivably to improve every
time, although very far from any Degree of Perfection. 
Then the Bay tried me with a second
Word, much harder to be pronounced; but reducing
it to the English Orthography, may be spelt
thus, Houyhnhnm. I did not succeed in this so
well as the former, but after two or three farther 

Trials, I had better Fortune; and they both appeared
amazed at my Capacity. 
After some farther Discourse, which I then
conjectured might relate to me, the two Friends
took their Leaves, with the same Compliment of
striking each other's Hoof; and the Grey made me
Signs that I should walk before him; wherein I
thought it prudent to comply, till I could find a
better Director. When I offered to slacken my
Pace, he would cry Hhuun, Hhuun; I guessed his
Meaning, and gave him to understand, as well as I
could, that I was weary, and not able to walk
faster; upon which, he would stand a while to let
me rest. 
