



The Author's great Love of his Native Country. His Master's Observations upon the Constitution and Administration of England, as described by the Author, with parallel Cases and Comparisons. His Master's Observations upon human Nature. 

The Reader may be disposed to wonder
how I could prevail on my self
to give so free a Representation of my
own Species, among a Race of Mortals
who were already too apt to conceive
the vilest Opinion of Human
Kind, from that entire Congruity betwixt me and
their Yahoos. But I must freely confess, that the
many Virtues of those excellent Quadrupeds placed
in opposite View to human Corruptions, had so far
opened mine Eyes, and enlarged my Understanding,
that I began to view the Actions and Passions of
Man in a very different Light; and to think the
Honour of my own Kind not worth managing; 
which, besides, it was impossible for me to do before
a Person of so acute a Judgment as my Master,
who daily convinced me of a thousand Faults in my
self, whereof I had not the least Perception before,
and which with us would never be numbered even 

among human Infirmities. I had likewise learned
from his Example an utter Detestation of all Falsehood
or Disguise; and Truth appeared so amiable
to me, that I determined upon sacrificing every
thing to it. 
Let me deal so candidly with the Reader, as to
confess, that there was yet a much stronger Motive
for the Freedom I took in my Representation of
Things. I had not been a Year in this Country,
before I contracted such a Love and Veneration for
the Inhabitants, that I entered on a firm Resolution
never to return to human Kind, but to pass the rest
of my Life among these admirable Houyhnhnms in
the Contemplation and Practice of every Virtue; 
where I could have no Example or Incitement to
Vice. But it was decreed by Fortune, my perpetual
Enemy, that so great a Felicity should not fall to
my Share. However, it is now some Comfort to
reflect, that in what I said of my Countrymen, I
extenuated their Faults as much as I durst before so
strict an Examiner; and upon every Article, gave as
favourable a Turn as the Matter would bear. For,
indeed, who is there alive that will not be swayed
by his Byass and Partiality to the Place of his Birth? 
I have related the Substance of several Conversations
I had with my Master, during the greatest
Part of the Time I had the Honour to be in his
Service; but have indeed for Brevity sake omitted
much more than is here set down. 
When I had answered all his Questions, and
his Curiosity seemed to be fully satisfied; he sent
for me one Morning early, and commanding me to
sit down at some Distance, (an Honour which he
had never before conferred upon me) He said, he 

had been very seriously considering my whole Story,
as far as it related both to my self and my Country:
That, he looked upon us as a Sort of Animals to
whose Share, by what Accident he could not conjecture,
some small Pittance of Reason had fallen,
whereof we made no other Use than by its Assistance
to aggravate our natural Corruptions,
and to acquire new ones which Nature had not
given us. That, we disarmed our selves of the few
Abilities she had bestowed; had been very successful
in multiplying our original Wants, and seemed
to spend our whole Lives in vain Endeavours
to supply them by our own Inventions. That,
as to my self, it was manifest I had neither the
Strength or Agility of a common Yahoo; that I
walked infirmly on my hinder Feet; had found
out a Contrivance to make my Claws of no Use or
Defence, and to remove the Hair from my Chin,
which was intended as a Shelter from the Sun and
the Weather. Lastly, That I could neither run
with Speed, nor climb Trees like my Brethren (as
he called them) the Yahoos in this Country. 
That, our Institutions of Government and Law
were plainly owing to our gross Defects in Reason,
and by consequence, in Virtue; because Reason
alone is sufficient to govern a Rational Creature; 
which was therefore a Character we had no
Pretence to challenge, even from the Account I
had given of my own People; although he manifestly
perceived, that in order to favour them, I
had concealed many Particulars, and often said the
Thing which was not. 
He was the more confirmed in this Opinion,
because he observed, that as I agreed in every Feature 

of my Body with other Yahoos, except where
it was to my real Disadvantage in point of Strength,
Speed and Activity, the Shortness of my Claws,
and some other Particulars where Nature had no
Part; so, from the Representation I had given him
of our Lives, our Manners, and our Actions, he
found as near a Resemblance in the Disposition of
our Minds. He said, the Yahoos were known to
hate one another more than they did any different
Species of Animals; and the Reason usually assigned,
was, the Odiousness of their own Shapes, which all
could see in the rest, but not in themselves. He
had therefore begun to think it not unwise in us to
cover our Bodies, and by that Invention, conceal
many of our Deformities from each other, which
would else be hardly supportable. But, he now
found he had been mistaken; and that the Dissentions
of those Brutes in his Country were owing to
the same Cause with ours, as I had described them. 
For, if (said he) you throw among five Yahoos
as much Food as would be sufficient for fifty, they
will, instead of eating peaceably, fall together by
the Ears, each single one impatient to have all to
it self; and therefore a Servant was usually employed
to stand by while they were feeding abroad,
and those kept at home were tied at a Distance
from each other. That, if a Cow died of Age or
Accident, before a Houynhnhnm could secure it for
his own Yahoos, those in the Neighbourhood would
come in Herds to seize it, and then would ensue
such a Battle as I had described, with terrible
Wounds made by their Claws on both Sides, although
they seldom were able to kill one another,
for want of such convenient Instruments of Death 

as we had invented. At other Times the like Battles
have been fought between the Yahoos of several
Neighbourhoods without any visible Cause: Those
of one District watching all Opportunities to surprise
the next before they are prepared. But if they
find their Project hath miscarried, they return home,
and for want of Enemies, engage in what I call a
Civil War among themselves. 
That, in some Fields of his Country, there are
certain shining Stones of several Colours, whereof
the Yahoos are violently fond; and when Part of
these Stones are fixed in the Earth, as it sometimes
happeneth, they will dig with their Claws for whole
Days to get them out, and carry them away, and
hide them by Heaps in their Kennels; but still
looking round with great Caution, for fear their
Comrades should find out their Treasure. My Master
said, he could never discover the Reason of
this unnatural Appetite, or how these Stones could
be of any Use to a Yahoo; but now he believed it
might proceed from the same Principle of Avarice,
which I had ascribed to Mankind. That he had
once, by way of Experiment, privately removed a
Heap of these Stones from the Place where one of
his Yahoos had buried it: Whereupon, the sordid
Animal missing his Treasure, by his loud lamenting
brought the whole Herd to the Place, there miserably
howled, then fell to biting and tearing the rest; 
began to pine away, would neither eat nor sleep,
nor work, till he ordered a Servant privately to convey
the Stones into the same Hole, and hide them
as before; which when his Yahoo had found, he presently
recovered his Spirits and good Humour; but 

took Care to remove them to a better hiding Place; 
and hath ever since been a very serviceable Brute. 
My Master farther assured me, which I also
observed my self; That in the Fields where these
shining Stones abound, the fiercest and most frequent
Battles are fought, occasioned by perpetual
Inroads of the neighbouring Yahoos. 
He said, it was common when two Yahoos discovered
such a Stone in a Field, and were contending
which of them should be the Proprietor, a third
would take the Advantage, and carry it away from
them both; which my Master would needs contend
to have some Resemblance with our Suits at
Law; wherein I thought it for our Credit not to
undeceive him; since the Decision he mentioned
was much more equitable than many Decrees among
us: Because the Plaintiff and Defendant there lost
nothing beside the Stone they contended for; whereas
our Courts of Equity, would never have dismissed
the Cause while either of them had any thing
left. 
My Master continuing his Discourse, said, There
was nothing that rendered the Yahoos more odious,
than their undistinguished Appetite to devour every
thing that came in their Way, whether Herbs,
Roots, Berries, corrupted Flesh of Animals, or all
mingled together: And it was peculiar in their
Temper, that they were fonder of what they could
get by Rapine or Stealth at a greater Distance, than
much better Food provided for them at home. 
If their Prey held out, they would eat till they
were ready to burst, after which Nature had pointed
out to them a certain Root that gave them a general
Evacuation. 

There was also another Kind of Root very juicy,
but something rare and difficult to be found, which
the Yahoos fought for with much Eagerness, and
would suck it with great Delight: It produced the
same Effects that Wine hath upon us. It would
make them sometimes hug, and sometimes tear one
another; they would howl and grin, and chatter,
and roul, and tumble, and then fall asleep in the
Mud. 
I did indeed observe, that the Yahoos were the
only Animals in this Country subject to any Diseases; 
which however, were much fewer than
Horses have among us, and contracted not by any
ill Treatment they meet with, but by the Nastiness
and Greediness of that sordid Brute. Neither has
their Language any more than a general Appellation
for those Maladies; which is borrowed from the
Name of the Beast, and called Hnea Yahoo, or the
Yahoo's-Evil; and the Cure prescribed is a Mixture
of their own Dung and Urine, forcibly put down
the Yahoo's Throat. This I have since often
known to have been taken with Success: And do
here freely recommend it to my Countrymen, for
the publick Good, as an admirable Specifick against
all Diseases produced by Repletion. 
As to Learning, Government, Arts, Manufactures,
and the like; my Master confessed he could
find little or no Resemblance between the Yahoos
of that Country and those in ours. For, he only
meant to observe what Parity there was in our
Natures. He had heard indeed some curious
Houyhnhnms observe, that in most Herds there was
a Sort of ruling Yahoo, (as among us there is generally
some leading or principal Stag in a Park) who 

was always more deformed in Body, and mischievous
in Disposition, than any of the rest. That, this
Leader had usually a Favourite as like himself as he
could get, whose Employment was to lick his Master's
Feet and Posteriors, and drive the Female Yahoos
to his Kennel; for which he was now and
then rewarded with a Piece of Ass's Flesh. This
Favourite is hated by the whole Herd; and therefore
to protect himself, keeps always near the Person
of his Leader. He usually continues in Office
till a worse can be found; but the very Moment he
is discarded, his Successor, at the Head of all the
Yahoos in that District, Young and Old, Male and
Female, come in a Body, and discharge their Excrements
upon him from Head to Foot. But how
far this might be applicable to our Courts and Favourites,
and Ministers of State, my Master said I
could best determine. 
I durst make no Return to this malicious Insinuation,
which debased human Understanding below
the Sagacity of a common Hound, who hath
Judgment enough to distinguish and follow the Cry
of the ablest Dog in the Pack, without being ever
mistaken. 
My Master told me, there were some Qualities
remarkable in the Yahoos, which he had not observed
me to mention, or at least very slightly, in
the Accounts I had given him of human Kind. He
said, those Animals, like other Brutes, had their
Females in common; but in this they differed, that
the She Yahoo would admit the Male, while she
was pregnant; and that the Hees would quarrel and
fight with the Females as fiercely as with each
other. Both which Practices were such Degrees of 

infamous Brutality, that no other sensitive Creature
ever arrived at. 
Another Thing he wondered at in the Yahoos,
was their strange Disposition to Nastiness and Dirt; 
whereas there appears to be a natural Love of Cleanliness
in all other Animals. As to the two former
Accusations, I was glad to let them pass without
any Reply, because I had not a Word to offer upon
them in Defence of my Species, which otherwise
I certainly had done from my own Inclinations. 
But I could have easily vindicated human Kind from
the Imputation of Singularity upon the last Article,
if there had been any Swine in that Country, (as
unluckily for me there were not) which although it
may be a sweeter Quadruped than a Yahoo, cannot
I humbly conceive in Justice pretend to more Cleanliness; 
and so his Honour himself must have
owned, if he had seen their filthy Way of feeding,
and their Custom of wallowing and sleeping in the
Mud. 
My Master likewise mentioned another Quality,
which his Servants had discovered in several Yahoos,
and to him was wholly unaccountable. He said, a
Fancy would sometimes take a Yahoo, to retire into
a Corner, to lie down and howl, and groan, and
spurn away all that came near him, although he
were young and fat, and wanted neither Food nor
Water; nor did the Servants imagine what could
possibly ail him. And the only Remedy they found
was to set him to hard Work, after which he would
infallibly come to himself. To this I was silent out
of Partiality to my own Kind; yet here I could
plainly discover the true Seeds of Spleen, which
only seizeth on the Lazy, the Luxurious, and the 

Rich; who, if they were forced to undergo the
same Regimen, I would undertake for the Cure. 
His Honour had farther observed, that a Female
Yahoo would often stand behind a Bank or a Bush,
to gaze on the young Males passing by, and then
appear, and hide, using many antick Gestures and
Grimaces; at which time it was observed, that she
had a most offensive Smell; and when any of the
Males advanced, would slowly retire, looking often
back, and with a counterfeit Shew of Fear, run off
into some convenient Place where she knew the
Male would follow her. 
At other times, if a Female Stranger came among
them, three or four of her own Sex would get
about her, and stare and chatter, and grin, and
smell her all over; and then turn off with Gestures
that seemed to express Contempt and Disdain. 
Perhaps my Master might refine a little in these
Speculations, which he had drawn from what he
observed himself, or had been told him by others:
However, I could not reflect without some Amazement,
and much Sorrow, that the Rudiments of
Lewdness, Coquetry, Censure, and Scandal, should
have Place by Instinct in Womankind. 
I expected every Moment, that my Master
would accuse the Yahoos of those unnatural Appetites
in both Sexes, so common among us. But
Nature it seems hath not been so expert a School-mistress; 
and these politer Pleasures are entirely the
Productions of Art and Reason, on our Side of the
Globe. 
