



A further Account of Glubbdubdrib. Antient and
Modern History corrected. 

Having a Desire to see those Antients,
who were most renowned for Wit and
Learning, I set apart one Day on purpose. 
I proposed that Homer and Aristotle
might appear at the Head of all
their Commentators; but these were so numerous,
that some Hundreds were forced to attend in the
Court and outward Rooms of the Palace. I knew
and could distinguish those two Heroes at first
Sight, not only from the Croud, but from each
other. Homer was the taller and comelier Person
of the two, walked very erect for one of his Age,
and his Eyes were the most quick and piercing I
ever beheld. Aristotle stooped much, and made
use of a Staff. His Visage was meager, his Hair
lank and thin, and his Voice hollow. I soon discovered,
that both of them were perfect Strangers 

to the rest of the Company, and had never seen or
heard of them before. And I had a Whisper from
a Ghost, who shall be nameless, that these Commentators
always kept in the most distant Quarters
from their Principals in the lower World, through
a Consciousness of Shame and Guilt, because they
had so horribly misrepresented the Meaning of those
Authors to Posterity. I introduced Didymus and
Eustathius to Homer, and prevailed on him to treat
them better than perhaps they deserved; for he soon
found they wanted a Genius to enter into the Spirit
of a Poet. But Aristotle was out of all Patience
with the Account I gave him of Scotus and Ramus,
as I presented them to him; and he asked them
whether the rest of the Tribe were as great Dunces
as themselves. 
I then desired the Governor to call up Descartes
and Gassendi, with whom I prevailed to explain
their Systems to Aristotle. This great Philosopher
freely acknowledged his own Mistakes in Natural
Philosophy, because he proceeded in many things
upon Conjecture, as all Men must do; and he
found, that Gassendi, who had made the Doctrine
of Epicurus as palatable as he could, and the Vortices
of Descartes, were equally exploded. He predicted
the same Fate to Attraction, whereof the present
Learned are such zealous Asserters. He said,
that new Systems of Nature were but new Fashions,
which would vary in every Age; and even those
who pretend to demonstrate them from Mathematical
Principles, would flourish but a short Period
of Time, and be out of Vogue when that was determined. 

I spent five Days in conversing with many
others of the antient Learned. I saw most of the
first Roman Emperors. I prevailed on the Governor
to call up Eliogabalus's Cooks to dress us a Dinner; 
but they could not shew us much of their
Skill, for want of Materials. A Helot of Agesilaus
made us a Dish of Spartan Broth, but I was not
able to get down a second Spoonful. 
The two Gentlemen who conducted me to the
Island were pressed by their private Affairs to return
in three Days, which I employed in seeing
some of the modern Dead, who had made the
greatest Figure for two or three Hundred Years past
in our own and other Countries of Europe; and
having been always a great Admirer of old illustrious
Families, I desired the Governor would call up
a Dozen or two of Kings with their Ancestors in
order, for eight or nine Generations. But my Disappointment
was grievous and unexpected. For,
instead of a long Train with Royal Diadems, I saw
in one Family two Fidlers, three spruce Courtiers,
and an Italian Prelate. In another, a Barber, an
Abbot, and two Cardinals. I have too great a Veneration
for crowned Heads to dwell any longer on
so nice a Subject: But as to Counts, Marquesses,
Dukes, Earls, and the like, I was not so scrupulous. 
And I confess it was not without some Pleasure
that I found my self able to trace the particular
Features, by which certain Families are distinguished
up to their Originals. I could plainly discover
from whence one Family derives a long Chin; 
why a second hath abounded with Knaves for two
Generations, and Fools for two more; why a third
happened to be crack-brained, and a fourth to be 

Sharpers. Whence it came, what Polydore Virgil
says of a certain great House, Nec Vir fortis, nec
Fœmina Casta. How Cruelty, Falshood, and
Cowardice grew to be Characteristicks by which
certain Families are distinguished as much as by their
Coat of Arms. Who first brought the Pox into a
noble House, which hath lineally descended in
scrophulous Tumours to their Posterity. Neither
could I wonder at all this, when I saw such an Interruption
of Lineages by Pages, Lacqueys, Valets,
Coachmen, Gamesters, Fidlers, Players, Captains,
and Pick-pockets. 
I was chiefly disgusted with modern History. 
For having strictly examined all the Persons of
greatest Name in the Courts of Princes for an Hundred
Years past, I found how the World had been
misled by prostitute Writers, to ascribe the greatest
Exploits in War to Cowards, the wisest Counsel to
Fools, Sincerity to Flatterers, Roman Virtue to Betrayers
of their Country, Piety to Atheists, Chastity
to Sodomites, Truth to Informers. How many innocent
and excellent Persons had been condemned
to Death or Banishment, by the practising of great
Ministers upon the Corruption of Judges, and the
Malice of Factions. How many Villains had been
exalted to the highest Places of Trust, Power,
Dignity, and Profit: How great a Share in the
Motions and Events of Courts, Councils, and Senates
might be challenged by Bawds, Whores,
Pimps, Parasites, and Buffoons: How low an Opinion
I had of human Wisdom and Integrity, when
I was truly informed of the Springs and Motives of
great Enterprizes and Revolutions in the World, 

and of the contemptible Accidents to which they
owed their Success. 
Here I discovered the Roguery and Ignorance
of those who pretend to write Anecdotes, or secret
History; who send so many Kings to their Graves
with a Cup of Poison; will repeat the Discourse
between a Prince and chief Minister, where no
Witness was by; unlock the Thoughts and Cabinets
of Embassadors and Secretaries of State; and
have the perpetual Misfortune to be mistaken. Here
I discovered the true Causes of many great Events
that have surprized the World: How a Whore can
govern the Back-stairs, the Back-stairs a Council,
and the Council a Senate. A General confessed in
my Presence, that he got a Victory purely by the
Force of Cowardice and ill Conduct: And an Admiral,
that for want of proper Intelligence, he beat
the Enemy to whom he intended to betray the Fleet. 
Three Kings protested to me, that in their whole
Reigns they did never once prefer any Person of
Merit, unless by Mistake or Treachery of some
Minister in whom they confided: Neither would
they do it if they were to live again; and they
shewed with great Strength of Reason, that the
Royal Throne could not be supported without Corruption; 
because, that positive, confident, restive
Temper, which Virtue infused into Man, was a
perpetual Clog to publick Business. 
I had the Curiosity to enquire in a particular
Manner, by what Method great Numbers had procured
to themselves high Titles of Honour, and
prodigious Estates; and I confined my Enquiry to a
very modern Period: However, without grating
upon present Times, because I would be sure to give 

no Offence even to Foreigners. (for I hope the
Reader need not be told that I do not in the least
intend my own Country in what I say upon this
Occasion) A great Number of Persons concerned
were called up, and upon a very slight Examination,
discovered such a Scene of Infamy, that I cannot
reflect upon it without some Seriousness. Perjury,
Oppression, Subornation, Fraud, Pandarism, and
the like Infirmities were amongst the most excusable
Arts they had to mention; and for these I gave,
as it was reasonable, due Allowance. But when
some confessed, they owed their Greatness and
Wealth to Sodomy or Incest; others to the prostituting
of their own Wives and Daughters; others
to the betraying their Country or their Prince; some
to poisoning, more to the perverting of Justice in
order to destroy the Innocent: I hope I may be
pardoned if these Discoveries inclined me a little to
abate of that profound Veneration which I am naturally
apt to pay to Persons of high Rank, who
ought to be treated with the utmost Respect due to
their sublime Dignity, by us their Inferiors. 
I had often read of some great Services done to
Princes and States, and desired to see the Persons by
whom those Services were performed. Upon Enquiry
I was told, that their Names were to be found
on no Record, except a few of them whom History
hath represented as the vilest Rogues and Traitors. 
As to the rest, I had never once heard of
them. They all appeared with dejected Looks, and
in the meanest Habit; most of them telling me
they died in Poverty and Disgrace, and the rest on
a Scaffold or a Gibbet. 

Among others there was one Person whose Case
appeared a little singular. He had a Youth about
Eighteen Years old standing by his Side. He told
me, he had for many Years been Commander of a
Ship; and in the Sea Fight at Actium, had the
good Fortune to break through the Enemy's great
Line of Battle, sink three of their Capital Ships,
and take a fourth, which was the sole Cause of
Antony's Flight, and of the Victory that ensued:
That the Youth standing by him, his only Son,
was killed in the Action. He added, that upon
the Confidence of some Merit, the War being at
an End, he went to Rome, and solicited at the
Court of Augustus to be preferred to a greater Ship,
whose Commander had been killed; but without
any regard to his Pretensions, it was given to a Boy
who had never seen the Sea, the Son of a Libertina,
who waited on one of the Emperor's Mistresses. 
Returning back to his own Vessel, he
was charged with Neglect of Duty, and the Ship
given to a favourite Page of Publicola the Vice-Admiral 
whereupon he retired to a poor Farm, at
a great Distance from Rome, and there ended his
Life. I was so curious to know the Truth of this
Story, that I desired Agrippa might be called, who
was Admiral in that Fight. He appeared, and confirmed
the whole Account, but with much more
Advantage to the Captain, whose Modesty had
extenuated or concealed a great Part of his Merit. 
I was surprized to find Corruption grown so
high and so quick in that Empire, by the Force of
Luxury so lately introduced; which made me less
wonder at many parallel Cases in other Countries,
where Vices of all Kinds have reigned so much 

longer, and where the whole Praise as well as Pillage
hath been engrossed by the chief Commander,
who perhaps had the least Title to either. 
As every Person called up made exactly the same
Appearance he had done in the World, it gave me
melancholy Reflections to observe how much the
Race of human Kind was degenerate among us,
within these Hundred Years past. How the Pox
under all its Consequences and Denominations had
altered every Lineament of an English Countenance; 
shortened the Size of Bodies, unbraced the Nerves,
relaxed the Sinews and Muscles, introduced a sallow
Complexion, and rendered the Flesh loose and
rancid. 
I descended so low as to desire that some English
Yeomen of the old Stamp, might be summoned
to appear; once so famous for the Simplicity of
their Manners, Dyet and Dress; for Justice in
their Dealings; for their true Spirit of Liberty; for
their Valour and Love of their Country. Neither
could I be wholly unmoved after comparing the
Living with the Dead, when I considered how all
these pure native Virtues were prostituted for a
Piece of Money by their Grand-children; who in
selling their Votes, and managing at Elections have
acquired every Vice and Corruption that can possibly
be learned in a Court. 
