



The Author's Veracity. His Design in publishing this Work. His Censure of those Travellers who swerve from the Truth. The Author clears himself from any sinister Ends in writing. An Objection answered. The Method of planting Colonies. His Native Country commended. The Right of the Crown to those Countries described by the Author, is justified. The Difficulty of conquering them. The Author takes his last Leave
of the Reader; proposeth his Manner of Living for the future; gives good Advice, and concludeth. 

Thus, gentle Reader, I have given
thee a faithful History of my Travels
for Sixteen Years, and above Seven
Months; wherein I have not been so
studious of Ornament as of Truth. 
I could perhaps like others have astonished thee
with strange improbable Tales; but I rather chose 

to relate plain Matter of Fact in the simplest Manner
and Style; because my principal Design was to
inform, and not to amuse thee. 
It is easy for us who travel into remote Countries,
which are seldom visited by Englishmen or
other Europeans, to form Descriptions of wonderful
Animals both at Sea and Land. Whereas, a
Traveller's chief Aim should be to make Men
wiser and better, and to improve their Minds by
the bad, as well as good Example of what they deliver
concerning foreign Places. 
I could heartily wish a Law were enacted, that
every Traveller, before he were permitted to publish
his Voyages, should be obliged to make Oath before
the Lord High Chancellor, that all he intended
to print was absolutely true to the best of his Knowledge; 
for then the World would no longer be
deceived as it usually is, while some Writers, to
make their Works pass the better upon the Publick,
impose the grossest Falsities on the unwary
Reader. I have perused several Books of Travels
with great Delight in my younger Days; but, having
since gone over most Parts of the Globe, and
been able to contradict many fabulous Accounts
from my own Observation; it hath given me a great
Disgust against this Part of Reading, and some Indignation
to see the Credulity of Mankind so impudently
abused. Therefore, since my Acquaintance
were pleased to think my poor Endeavours might
not be unacceptable to my Country; I imposed on
myself as a Maxim, never to be swerved from, that
I would strictly adhere to Truth; neither indeed
can I be ever under the least Temptation to vary
from it, while I retain in my Mind the Lectures 

and Example of my noble Master, and the other
illustrious Houyhnhnms, of whom I had so long
the Honour to be an humble Hearer. 

—Nec si miserum Fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam, mendacemque improba finget.

I know very well, how little Reputation is to be
got by Writings which require neither Genius nor
Learning, nor indeed any other Talent, except a
good Memory, or an exact Journal. I know likewise,
that Writers of Travels, like Dictionary-Makers, 
are sunk into Oblivion by the Weight and
Bulk of those who come last, and therefore lie uppermost. 
And it is highly probable, that such
Travellers who shall hereafter visit the Countries
described in this Work of mine, may by detecting
my Errors, (if there be any) and adding many new
Discoveries of their own, jostle me out of Vogue,
and stand in my Place; making the World forget
that ever I was an Author. This indeed would
be too great a Mortification if I wrote for Fame:
But, as my sole Intention was the Publick Good,
I cannot be altogether disappointed. For, who
can read the Virtues I have mentioned in the
glorious Houyhnhnms, without being ashamed of
his own Vices, when he considers himself as the
reasoning, governing Animal of his Country? I
shall say nothing of those remote Nations where
Yahoos preside; amongst which the least corrupted
are the Brobdingnagians, whose wise Maxims in
Morality and Government, it would be our Happiness
to observe. But I forbear descanting further, 

and rather leave the judicious Reader to his own
Remarks and Applications. 
I am not a little pleased that this Work of mine
can possibly meet with no Censurers: For what
Objections can be made against a Writer who relates
only plain Facts that happened in such distant
Countries, where we have not the least Interest
with respect either to Trade or Negotiations? I
have carefully avoided every Fault with which
common Writers of Travels are often too justly
charged. Besides, I meddle not the least with any
Party, but write without Passion, Prejudice, or Ill-will
against any Man or Number of Men whatsoever. 
I write for the noblest End, to inform and
instruct Mankind, over whom I may, without
Breach of Modesty, pretend to some Superiority,
from the Advantages I received by conversing so
long among the most accomplished Houyhnhnms. 
I write without any View towards Profit or Praise. 
I never suffer a Word to pass that may look like
Reflection, or possibly give the least Offence even
to those who are most ready to take it. So that, I
hope, I may with Justice pronounce myself an Author
perfectly blamleess; against whom the Tribes
of Answerers, Considerers, Observers, Reflecters,
Detecters, Remarkers, will never be able to find
Matter for exercising their Talents. 
I confess, it was whispered to me, that I was
bound in Duty as a Subject of England, to have
given in a Memorial to a Secretary of State, at my
first coming over; because, whatever Lands are
discovered by a Subject, belong to the Crown. 
But I doubt, whether our Conquests in the Countries
I treat of, would be as easy as those of Ferdinando 

Cortez over the naked Americans. The Lilliputians
I think, are hardly worth the Charge of a
Fleet and Army to reduce them; and I question
whether it might be prudent or safe to attempt the
Brobdingnagians: Or, whether an English Army
would be much at their Ease with the Flying
Island over their Heads. The Houyhnhnms, indeed,
appear not to be so well prepared for War, a
Science to which they are perfect Strangers, and
especially against missive Weapons. However,
supposing myself to be a Minister of State, I could
never give my Advice for invading them. Their
Prudence, Unanimity, Unacquaintedness with Fear,
and their Love of their Country would amply supply
all Defects in the military Art. Imagine twenty
Thousand of them breaking into the Midst of
an European Army, confounding the Ranks, overturning
the Carriages, battering the Warriors Faces
into Mummy, by terrible Yerks from their hinder
Hoofs: For they would well deserve the Character
given to Augustus; Recalcitrat undique tutus. 
But instead of Proposals for conquering that magnanimous
Nation, I rather wish they were in a Capacity
or Disposition to send a sufficient Number of
their Inhabitants for civilizing Europe; by teaching
us the first Principles of Honour, Justice, Truth
Temperance, publick Spirit, Fortitude, Chastity,
Friendship, Benevolence, and Fidelity. The Names
of all which Virtues are still retained among us in
most Languages, and are to be met with in modern
as well as ancient Authors; which I am able to assert
from my own small Reading. 
But, I had another Reason which made me less
forward to enlarge his Majesty's Dominions by my 

Discoveries: To say the Truth, I had conceived a
few Scruples with relation to the distributive Justice
of Princes upon those Occasions. For Instance,
A Crew of Pyrates are driven by a Storm they
know not whither; at length a Boy discovers Land
from the Top-mast; they go on Shore to rob and
plunder; they see an harmless People, are entertained
with Kindness, they give the Country a new
Name, they take formal Possession of it for the
King, they set up a rotten Plank or a Stone for a
Memorial, they murder two or three Dozen of the
Natives, bring away a Couple more by Force for a
Sample, return home, and get their Pardon. Here
commences a new Dominion acquired with a Title
by Divine Right. Ships are sent with the first
Opportunity; the Natives driven out or destroyed,
their Princes tortured to discover their Gold; a free
Licence given to all Acts of Inhumanity and Lust; 
the Earth reeking with the Blood of its Inhabitants:
And this execrable Crew of Butchers employed in
so pious an Expedition, is a modern Colony sent to
convert and civilize an idolatrous and barbarous
People. 
But this Description, I confess, doth by no
means affect the British Nation, who may be an
Example to the whole World for their Wisdom,
Care, and Justice in planting Colonies; the liberal
Endowments for the Advancement of Religion and
Learning; their Choice of devout and able Pastors
to propagate Christianity; their Caution in stocking
their Provinces with People of sober Lives and
Conversations from this the Mother Kingdom; 
their strict Regard to the Distribution of Justice,
in supplying the Civil Administration through all 

their Colonies with Officers of the greatest Abilities,
utter Strangers to Corruption: And to crown all,
by sending the most vigilant and virtuous Governors,
who have no other Views than the Happiness
of the People over whom they preside, and the
Honour of the King their Master. 
But, as those Countries which I have described
do not appear to have a Desire of being conquered,
and enslaved, murdered or driven out by Colonies; 
nor abound either in Gold, Silver, Sugar or Tobacco; 
I did humbly conceive they were by no
Means proper Objects of our Zeal, our Valour, or
our Interest. However, if those whom it may concern,
think fit to be of another Opinion, I am ready
to depose, when I shall be lawfully called, That no
European did ever visit these Countries before me. 
I mean, if the Inhabitants ought to be believed. 
But, as to the Formality of taking Possession in my
Sovereign's Name, it never came once into my
Thoughts; and if it had, yet as my Affairs then
stood, I should perhaps in point of Prudence and
Self-Preservation, have put it off to a better Opportunity. 
Having thus answered the only Objection that
can be raised against me as a Traveller; I here take
a final Leave of my Courteous Readers, and return
to enjoy my own Speculations in my little Garden
at Redriff; to apply those excellent Lessons of Virtue
which I learned among the Houyhnhnms; to
instruct the Yahoos of my own Family as fas as I
shall find them docible Animals; to behold my Figure
often in a Glass, and thus if possible habituate
my self by Time to tolerate the Sight of a human
Creature: To lament the Brutality of Houyhnhnms 

in my own Country, but always treat their Person
with Respect, for the Sake of my noble Master,
his Family, his Friends, and the whole Houyhnhnm
Race, whom these of ours have the Honour to resemble
in all their Lineaments, however their Intellectuals
came to degenerate. 
I began last Week to permit my Wife to sit
at Dinner with me, at the farthest End of a long
Table; and to answer (but with the utmost Brevity)
the few Questions I asked her. Yet the Smell of a
Yahoo continuing very offensive, I always keep my
Nose well stopt with Rue, Lavender, or Tobacco-Leaves. 
And although it be hard for a Man late in
Life to remove old Habits; I am not altogether out
of Hopes in some Time to suffer a Neighbour Yahoo
in my Company, without the Apprehensions I
am yet under of his Teeth or his Claws. 
My Reconcilement to the Yahoo kind in general
might not be so difficult, if they would be content
with those Vices and Follies only which Nature
hath entitled them to. I am not in the least provoked
at the Sight of a Lawyer, a Pick-pocket, a Colonel,
a Fool, a Lord, a Gamster, a Politician, a Whoremunger,
a Physician, an Evidence, a Suborner, an Attorney,
a Traytor, or the like: This is all according
to the due Course of Things: But, when
I behold a Lump of Deformity: and Diseases both
in Body and Mind, smitten with Pride, it immediately
breaks all the Measures of my Patience; 
neither shall I be ever able to comprehend how such
an Animal and such a Vice could tally together. 
The wise and virtuous Houyhnhnms, who abound
in all Excellencies that can adorn a rational Creature,
have no Name for this Vice in their Language, 

which hath no Terms to express any thing that is
evil, except those whereby they describe the detestable
Qualities of their Yahoos; among which they
were not able to distinguish this of Pride, for want
of thoroughly understanding Human Nature, as it
sheweth it self in other Countries, where that Animal
presides. But I, who had more Experience,
could plainly observe some Rudiments of it among
the wild Yahoos. 
But the Houyhnhnms, who live under the Government
of Reason, are, no more proud of the
good Qualities they possess, than I should be for
not wanting a Leg or an Arm, which no Man in
his Wits would boast of, although he must be miserable
without them. I dwell the longer upon this
Subject from the Desire I have to make the Society
of an English Yahoo by any Means not insupportable; 
and therefore I here intreat those who have
any Tincture of this absurd Vice, that they will not
presume to appear in my Sight. 
