



The Author's Return to Maldonada. Sails to the
Kingdom of Luggnagg. The Author confined. 
He is sent for to Court. The Manner of his
Admittance. The King's great Lenity to his
Subjects. 

The Day of our Departure being
come, I took leave of his Highness
the Governor of Glubbdubdribb,
and returned with my two Companions
to Maldonada, where after a
Fortnight's waiting, a Ship was ready
to sail for Luggnagg. The two Gentlemen and
some others were so generous and kind as to furnish
me with Provisions, and see me on Board. I was
a Month in this Voyage. We had one violent
Storm, and were under a Necessity of steering
Westward to get into the Trade-Wind, which
holds for above sixty Leagues. On the 21st of
April, 1708, we sailed in the River of Clumegnig,
which is a Sea-port Town, at the South-East Point
of Luggnagg. We cast Anchor within a League
of the Town, and made a Signal for a Pilot. Two
of them came on Board in less than half an Hour,
by whom we were guided between certain Shoals
and Rocks, which are very dangerous in the Passage, 

to a large Basin, where a Fleet may ride in Safety
within a Cable's Length of the Town-Wall. 
Some of our Sailors, whether out of Treachery
or Inadvertence, had informed the Pilots that I was
a Stranger and a great Traveller, whereof these gave
Notice to a Custom-House Officer, by whom I
was examined very strictly upon my landing. This
Officer spoke to me in the Language of Balnibarbi,
which by the Force of much Commerce is generally
understood in that Town, especially by Seamen,
and those employed in the Customs. I gave
him a short Account of some Particulars, and made
my Story as plausible and consistent as I could; but
I thought it necessary to disguise my Country, and
call my self a Hollander; because my Intentions
were for Japan, and I knew the Dutch were the
only Europeans permitted to enter into that Kingdom. 
I therefore told the Officer, that having
been shipwrecked on the Coast of Balnibarbi, and
cast on a Rock, I was received up into Laputa, or
the flying Island (of which he had often heard) and
was now endeavouring to get to Japan, from
whence I might find a Convenience of returning
to my own Country. The Officer said, I must be
confined till he could receive Orders from Court,
for which he would write immediately, and hoped
to receive an Answer in a Fortnight. I was carried
to a convenient Lodging, with a Centry placed at
the Door; however I had the Liberty of a large
Garden, and was treated with Humanity enough,
being maintained all the Time at the King's Charge. 
I was invited by several Persons, chiefly out of Curiosity,
because it was reported I came from Countries
very remote, of which they had never heard. 

I hired a young Man who came in the same
Ship to be an Interpreter; he was a Native of
Luggnagg, but had lived some Years at Maldonada.
and was a perfect Master of both Languages. By
his Assistance I was able to hold a Conversation
with those that came to visit me; but this consisted
only of their Questions and my Answers. 
The Dispatch came from Court about the Time
we expected. It contained a Warrant for conducting
me and my Retinue to Traldragdubb or Trildrogdrib,
(for it is pronounced both Ways as near
as I can remember) by a Party of Ten Horse. All
my Retinue was that poor Lad for an Interpreter,
whom I persuaded into my Service. At my humble
Request we had each of us a Mule to ride on. 
A Messenger was dispatched half a Day's Journey
before us, to give the King Notice of my Approach,
and to desire that his Majesty would please to appoint
a Day and Hour, when it would be his gracious
Pleasure that I might have the Honour to lick
the Dust before his Footstool. This is the Court
Style, and I found it to be more than Matter of
Form: For upon my Admittance two Days after
my Arrrival, I was commanded to crawl upon my
Belly, and lick the Floor as I advanced; but on account
of my being a Stranger, Care was taken to have
it so clean that the Dust was not offensive. However,
this was a peculiar Grace, not allowed to any
but Persons of the highest Rank, when they desire
an Admittance: Nay, sometimes the Floor is
strewed with Dust on purpose, when the Person
to be admitted happens to have powerful Enemies
at Court: And I have seen a great Lord with his
Mouth so crammed, that when he had crept to the 

Proper Distance from the Throne, he was not able
to speak a Word. Neither is there any Remedy,
because it is capital for those who receive an Audience
to spit or wipe their Mouths in his Majesty's
Presence. There is indeed another Custom, which
I cannot altogether approve of. When the King
hath a Mind to put any of his Nobles to Death in
a gentle indulgent Manner; he commands to have
the Floor strowed with a certain brown Powder, of
a deadly Composition, which being licked up infallibly
kills him in twenty-four Hours. But in Justice
to this Prince's great Clemency, and the Care he
hath of his Subjects Lives, (wherein it were much
to be wished that the Monarchs of Europe would
imitate him) it must be mentioned for his Honour,
that strict Orders are given to have the infected
Parts of the Floor well washed after every such
Execution; which if his Domesticks neglect, they
are in Danger of incurring his Royal Displeasure. 
I my self heard him give Directions, that one of
his Pages should be whipt, whose Turn it was to
give Notice about washing the Floor after an Execution,
but maliciously had omitted it; by which
Neglect a young Lord of great Hopes coming to
an Audience, was unfortunately poisoned, although
the King at that Time had no Design against his
Life. But this good Prince was so gracious, as to
forgive the Page his Whipping, upon Promise that
he would do so no more, without special Orders. 
To return from this Digression; when I had
crept within four Yards of the Throne, I raised my
self gently upon my Knees, and then striking my
Forehead seven Times against the Ground, I pronounced
the following Words, as they had been 

taught me the Night before, Ickpling Gloffthrobb
Squutserumm blhiop Mlashnalt Zwin tnodbalkguffh
Slhiophad Gurdlubh Asht. This is the Compliment
established by the Laws of the Land for all
Persons admitted to the King's Presence. It may
be rendered into English thus: May your cœlestial
Majesty out-live the Sun, eleven Moons and an half. 
To this the King returned some Answer, which although
I could not understand, yet I replied as I
had been directed; Fluft drin Yalerick Dwuldum
prastrad mirplush, which properly signifies, My
Tongue is in the Mouth of my Friend; and by this
Expression was meant that I desired leave to bring
my Interpreter; whereupon the young Man already
mentioned was accordingly introduced; by whose
Intervention I answered as many Questions as his
Majesty could put in above an Hour. I spoke in
the Balnibarbian Tongue, and my Interpreter delivered
my Meaning in that of Luggnagg. 
The King was much delighted with my Company,
and ordered his Bliffmarklub or High Chamberlain
to appoint a Lodging in the Court for me and
my Interpreter, with a daily Allowance for my Table,
and a large Purse of Gold for my common Expences. 
I stayed three Months in this Country out of
perfect Obedience to his Majesty, who was pleased
highly to favour me, and made me very honourable
Offers. But I thought it more consistent with
Prudence and Justice to pass the Remainder of my
Days with my Wife and Family. 
