



Of the Inhabitants of Lilliput; their Learning,
Laws, and Customs. The Manner of Educating
their Children. The Author's Way of living in
that Country. His Vindication of a great
Lady. 

Although I intend to leave the Description
of this Empire to a particular
Treatise, yet in the mean time I
am content to gratify the curious Reader
with some general Ideas. As the
common Size of the Natives is somewhat under six
Inches, so there is an exact Proportion in all
other Animals, as well as Plants and Trees: For Instance,
the tallest Horses and Oxen are between
four and five Inches in Height, the Sheep an Inch
and a half, more or less; their Geese about the
Bigness of a Sparrow; and so the several Gradations
downwards, till you come to the smallest,
which, to my Sight, were almost invisible; but 

Nature hath adapted the Eyes of the Lilliputians
to all Objects proper for their View: They see with
great Exactness, but at no great Distance. And to
show the Sharpness of their Sight towards Objects
that are near, I have been much pleased with observing
a Cook pulling a Lark, which was not so
large as a common Fly; and a young Girl threading
an invisible Needle with invisible Silk. Their talest
Trees are about seven Foot high; I mean some
of those in the great Royal Park, the Tops whereof
I could but just reach with my Fist clinched. 
The other Vegetables are in the same Proportion:
But this I leave to the Reader's Imagination. 
I shall say but little at present of their Learning,
which for many Ages hath flourished in all its
Branches among them: But their Manner of Writing
is very peculiar; being neither from the Left to
the Right, like the Europeans; nor from the Right
to the Left, like the Arabians; nor from up to
down, like the Chinese; nor from down to up,
like the Cascagians; but aslant from one Corner of
the Paper to the other, like Ladies in England. 
They bury their Dead with their Heads directly
downwards; because they hold an Opinion, that
in eleven Thousand Moons they are all to rise again; 
in which Period, the Earth (which they conceive
to be flat) will turn upside down, and by this
Means they shall, at their Resurrection, be found
ready standing on their Feet. The Learned among
them confess the Absurdity of this Doctrine; but
the Practice still continues, in Compliance to the
Vulgar. 
There are some Laws and Customs in this Empire
very peculiar; and if they were not so directly 

contrary to those of my own dear Country, I should
be tempted to say a little in their Justification. It
is only to be wished, that they were as well executed. 
The first I shall mention, relateth to Informers. 
All Crimes against the State, are punished here
with the utmost Severity; but if the Person accused
make his Innocence plainly to appear upon his
Tryal, the Accuser is immediately put to an ignominious
Death; and out of his Goods or Lands, the
innocent Person is quadruply recompensed for the
Loss of his Time, for the Danger he underwent,
for the Hardship of his Imprisonment, and for all
the Charges he hath been at in making his Defence. 
Or, if that Fund be deficient, it is largely
supplyed by the Crown. The Emperor doth also
confer on him some publick Mark of his Favour; 
and Proclamation is made of his Innocence through
the whole City. 
They look upon Fraud as a greater Crime than
Theft, and therefore seldom fail to punish it with
Death: For they alledge, that Care and Vigilance,
with a very common Understanding, may preserve
a Man's Goods from Thieves; but Honesty hath no
Fence against superior Cunning: And since it is necessary
that there should be a perpetual Intercourse
of buying and selling, and dealing upon Credit; 
where Fraud is permitted or connived at, or hath
no Law to punish it, the honest Dealer is always
undone, and the Knave gets the Advantage. I remember
when I was once interceeding with the
King for a Criminal who had wronged his Master
of a great Sum of Money, which he had received
by Order, and ran away with; and happening to
tell his Majesty, by way of Extenuation, that it was 

only a Breach of Trust; the Emperor thought it
monstrous in me to offer, as a Defence, the greatest
Aggravation of the Crime: And truly, I had
little to say in Return, farther than the common
Answer, that different Nations had different Customs; 
for, I confess, I was heartily ashamed. 
Although we usually call Reward and Punishment,
the two Hinges upon which all Government
turns; yet I could never observe this Maxim to be
put in Practice by any Nation except that of Lilliput. 
Whoever can there bring sufficient Proof
that he hath strictly observed the Laws of his Country
for Seventy-three Moons, hath a Claim to certain
Privileges, according to his Quality and Condition
of Life, with a proportionable Sum of Money
out of a Fund appropriated for that Use: He likewise
acquires the Title of Snilpall, or Legal, which
is added to his Name, but doth not descend to his
Posterity. And these People thought it a prodigious
Defect of Policy among us, when I told them
that our Laws were enforced only by Penalties, without
any Mention of Reward. It is upon this account
that the Image of Justice, in their Courts of
Judicature, is formed with six Eyes, two before, as
many behind, and on each Side one, to signify Circumspection; 
with a Bag of Gold open in her right
Hand, and a Sword sheathed in her left, to shew
she is more disposed to reward than to punish. 
In chusing Persons for all Employments, they
have more Regard to good Morals than to great
Abilities: For, since Government is necessary to
Mankind, they believe that the common Size of
human Understandings, is fitted to some Station or 

other; and that Providence never intended to make
the Management of publick Affairs a Mystery, to
be comprehended only by a few Persons of sublime
Genius, of which there seldom are three born in
an Age: But, they suppose Truth, Justice. Temperance,
and the like, to be in every Man's Power; 
the Practice of which Virtues, assisted by Experience
and a good Intention, would qualify any
Man for the Service of his Country, except where
a Course of Study is required. But they thought
the Want of Moral Virtues was so far from being
supplied by superior Endowments of the Mind,
that Employments could never be put into such dangerous
Hands as those of Persons so qualified; and
at least, that the Mistakes committed by Ignorance
in a virtuous Disposition, would never be of such
fatal Consequence to the Publick Weal, as the
Practices of a Man, whose Inclinations led him to
be corrupt, and had great Abilities to manage, to
multiply, and defend his Corruptions. 
In like Manner, the Disbelief of a Divine Providence
renders a Man uncapable of holding any
publick Station: For, since Kings avow themselves
to be the Deputies of Providence, the Lilliputians
think nothing can be more absurd than for a Prince
to employ such Men as disown the Authority under
which he acteth. 
In relating these and the following Laws, I
would only be understood to mean the original Institutions,
and not the most scandalous Corruptions
into which these People are fallen by the degenerate
Nature of Man. For as to that infamous Practice
of acquiring great Employments by dancing on the
Ropes, or Badges of Favour and Distinction by 

leaping over Sticks, and creeping under them; the
Reader is to observe, that they were first introduced
by the Grand-father of the Emperor now reigning; 
and grew to the present Height, by the gradual Increase
of Party and Faction. 
Ingratitude is among them a capital Crime,
as we read it to have been in some other Countries:
For they reason thus; that whoever makes ill Returns
to his Benefactor, must needs be a common
Enemy to the rest of Mankind, from whom they
have received no Obligation; and therefore such
a Man is not fit to live. 
Their Notions relating to the Duties of Parents
and Children differ extremely from ours. 
For, since the Conjunction of Male and Female is
founded upon the great Law of Nature, in order
to propagate and continue the Species; the Lilliputians
will needs have it, that Men and Women
are joined together like other Animals, by the Motives
of Concupiscence; and that their Tenderness
towards their Young, proceedeth from the like
natural Principle: For which Reason they will
never allow, that a Child is under any Obligation
to his Father for begetting him, or to his Mother
for bringing him into the World; which, considering
the Miseries of human Life, was neither
a Benefit in itself, nor intended so by his Parents,
whose Thoughts in their Love-encounters were
otherwise employed. Upon these, and the like
Reasonings, their Opinion is, that Parents are the
last of all others to be trusted with the Education
of their own Children: And therefore they
have in every Town publick Nurseries, where all
Parents, except Cottagers and Labourers, are obliged 

to send their Infants of both Sexes to be reared
and educated when they come to the Age of
twenty Moons; at which Time they are supposed
to have some Rudiments of Docility. These
Schools are of several Kinds, suited to different Qualities,
and to both Sexes. They have certain Professors
well skilled in preparing Children for such
a Condition of Life as befits the Rank of their
Parents, and their own Capacities as well as Inclinations. 
I shall first say something of the Male
Nurseries, and then of the Female. 
The Nurseries for Males of Noble or Eminent
Birth, are provided with grave and learned Professors,
and their several Deputies. The Clothes and
Food of the Children are plain and simple. They
are bred up in the Principles of Honour, Justice,
Courage, Modesty, Clemency, Religion, and Love
of their Country: They are always employed in
some Business, except in the Times of eating and
sleeping, which are very short, and two Hours for
Diversions, consisting of bodily Exercises. They
are dressed by Men until four Years of Age, and
then are obliged to dress themselves, although their
Quality be ever so great; and the Women Attendants,
who are aged proportionably to ours at
fifty, perform only the most menial Offices. They
are never suffered to converse with Servants, but
go together in small or greater Numbers to take
their Diversions, and always in the Presence of a
Professor, or one of his Deputies; whereby they
avoid those early bad Impressions of Folly and Vice
to which our Children are subject. Their Parents
are suffered to see them only twice a Year; the Visit
is not to last above an Hour; they are allowed 

to kiss the Child at Meeting and Parting; but a
Professor, who always standeth by on those Occasions,
will not suffer them to whisper, or use any
fondling Expressions, or bring any Presents of Toys,
Sweet-meats, and the like. 
The Pension from each Family for the Education
and Entertainment of a Child, upon Failure
of due Payment, is levyed by the Emperor's Officers. 
The Nurseries for Children of ordinary Gentlemen,
Merchants, Traders, and Handicrafts, are
managed proportionably after the same Manner; 
only those designed for Trades, are put out Apprentices
at seven Years old; whereas those of Persons
of Quality continue in their Exercises until
Fifteen, which answers to One and Twenty with
us: But the Confinement is gradually lessened for
the last three Years. 
In the Female Nurseries, the young Girls of
Quality are educated much like the Males, only
they are dressed by orderly Servants of their own
Sex, but always in the Presence of a Professor or
Deputy, until they come to dress themselves,
which is at five Years old. And if it be found that
these Nurses ever presume to entertain the Girls
with frightful or foolish Stories, or the common
Follies practised by Chamber-Maids among us; they
are publickly whipped thrice about the City, imprisoned
for a Year, and banished for Life to the
most desolate Parts of the Country. Thus the
young Ladies there are as much ashamed of being
Cowards and Fools, as the Men; and despise all
personal Ornaments beyond Decency and Cleanliness; 
neither did I perceive any Difference in their 

Education, made by their Difference of Sex, only
that the Exercises of the Females were not altogether
so robust; and that some Rules were given
them relating to domestick Life, and a smaller Compass
of Learning was enjoyned them: For, their
Maxim is, that among People of Quality, a Wife
should be always a reasonable and agreeable Companion,
because she cannot always be young. When
the Girls are twelve Years old, which among
them is the marriageable Age, their Parents or
Guardians take them home, with great Expressions
of Gratitude to the Professors, and seldom without
Tears of the young Lady and her Companions. 
In the Nurseries of Females of the meaner Sort,
the Children are instructed in all Kinds of Works
proper for their Sex, and their several Degrees:
Those intended for Apprentices are dismissed at seven
Years old, the rest are kept to eleven. 
The meaner Families who have Children at
these Nurseries, are obliged, besides their annual
Pension, which is as low as possible, to return to
the Steward of the Nursery a small Monthly
Share of their Gettings, to be a Portion for the
Child; and therefore all Parents are limited in their
Expences by the Law. For the Lilliputians think
nothing can be more unjust, than that People, in
Subservience to their own Appetites, should bring
Children into the World, and leave the Burthen
of supporting them on the Publick. As to Persons
of Quality, they give Security to appropriate a certain
Sum for each Child, suitable to their Condition; 
and these Funds are always managed with good
Husbandry, and the most exact Justice. 

The Cottagers and Labourers keep their Children
at home, their Business being only to till and
cultivate the Earth; and therefore their Education
is of little Consequence to the Publick; but the Old
and Diseased among them are supported by Hospitals:
For begging is a Trade unknown in this
Empire. 
And here it may perhaps divert the curious Reader,
to give some Account of my Domestick,
and my Manner of living in this Country, during
a Residence of nine Months and thirteen Days. 
Having a Head mechanically turned, and being
likewise forced by Necessity, I had made for myself
a Table and Chair convenient enough, out of the
largest Trees in the Royal Park. Two hundred
Sempstresses were employed to make me Shirts,
and Linnen for my Bed and Table, all of the
strongest and coarsest kind they could get; which,
however, they were forced to quilt together in
several Folds; for the thickest was some Degrees
finer than Lawn. Their Linnen is usually three
Inches wide, and three Foot make a Piece. The
Sempstresses took my Measure as I lay on the
Ground, one standing at my Neck, and another
at my Mid-Leg, with a strong Cord extended, that
each held by the End, while the third measured
the Length of the Cord with a Rule of an
Inch long. Then they measured my right
Thumb, and desired no more; for by a mathematical
Computation, that twice round the
Thumb is once round the Wrist, and so on to
the Neck and the Waist; and by the Help of
my old Shirt, which I displayed on the Ground
before them for a Pattern, they fitted me exactly. 

Three hundred Taylors were employed in the
same Manner to make me Clothes; but they had
another Contrivance for taking my Measure. I
kneeled down, and they raised a Ladder from the
Ground to my Neck; upon this Ladder one of
them mounted, and let fall a Plum-Line from my
Collar to the Floor, which just answered the
Length of my Coat; but my Waist and Arms I
measured myself. When my Cloaths were finished,
which was done in my House, (for the largest
of theirs would not have been able to hold them)
they looked like the Patch-work made by the Ladies
in England, only that mine were all of a Colour. 
I had three hundred Cooks to dress my Victuals,
in little convenient Huts built about my
House, where they and their Families lived, and
prepared me two Dishes a-piece. I took up twenty
Waiters in my Hand, and placed them on the
Table; an hundred more attended below on the
Ground, some with Dishes of Meat, and some
with Barrels of Wine, and other Liquors, flung
on their Shoulders; all which the Waiters above
drew up as I wanted, in a very ingenious Manner,
by certain Cords, as we draw the Bucket up a Well
in Europe. A Dish of their Meat was a good
Mouthful, and a Barrel of their Liquor a reasonable
Draught. Their Mutton yields to ours, but
their Beef is excellent I have had a Sirloin so
large, that I have been forced to make three Bits
of it; but this is rare. My Servants were astonished
to see me eat it Bones and all, as in our
Country we do the Leg of a Lark. Their Geese-and
Turkeys I usually eat at a Mouthful, and I 

must confess they far exceed ours. Of their smaller
Fowl I could take up twenty or thirty at the
End of my Knife. 
One Day his Imperial Majesty being informed
of my Way of living, desired that himself, and
his Royal Consort; with the young Princes of the
Blood of both Sexes, might have the Happiness
(as he was pleased to call it) of dining with me. 
They came accordingly, and I placed them upon
Chairs of State on my Table, just over-against me,
with their Guards about them. Flimnap the Lord
High Treasurer attended there likewise, with his
white Staff; and I observed he often looked on
me with a sour Countenance, which I would not
seem to regard, but eat more than usual, in Honour
to my dear Country, as well as to fill the
Court with Admiration. I have some private Reasons
to believe, that this Visit from his Majesty
gave Flimnap an Opportunity of doing me ill Offices
to his Master. That Minister had always
been my secret Enemy, although he outwardly caressed
me more than was usual to the Moroseness
of his Nature. He represented to the Emperor
the low Condition of his Treasury; that he was
forced to take up Money at great Discount; that
Exchequer Bills would not circulate under nine
per Cent. below Par; that I had cost his Majesty
above a Million and a half of Sprugs, (their greatest
Gold Coin, about the Bigness of a Spangle;)
and upon the whole, that it would be adviseable
in the Emperor to take the first fair Occasion of dismissing
me. 
I am here obliged to vindicate the Reputation
of an excellent Lady, who was an innocent Sufferer 

upon my Account. The Treasurer took a Fancy
to be jealous of his Wife, from the Malice of
some evil Tongues, who informed him that her
Grace had taken a violent Affection for my Person; 
and the Court-Scandal ran for some Time
that she once came privately to my Lodging. This
I solemnly declare to be a most infamous Falshood,
without any Grounds, farther than that her Grace
was pleased to treat me with all innocent Marks
of Freedom and Friendship. I own she came often
to my House, but always publickly, nor ever
without three more in the Coach, who were usually
her Sister, and young Daughter, and some particular
Acquaintance; but this was common to many
other Ladies of the Court. And I still appeal
to my Servants round, whether they at any Time
saw a Coach at my Door without knowing what
Persons were in it. On those Occasions, when a
Servant had given me Notice, my Custom was to
go immediately to the Door; and after paying
my Respects, to take up the Coach and two Horses
very carefully in my Hands, (for if there were
six Horses, the Postillion always unharnessed four)
and place them on a Table, where I had fixed a
moveable Rim guite round, of five Inches high,
to prevent Accidents. And I have often had four
Coaches and Horses at once on my Table full of
Company, while I sat in my Chair leaning my
Face towards them; and when I was engaged with
one Sett, the Coachmen would gently drive the
others round my Table. I have passed many an
Afternoon very agreeably in these Conversations:
But I defy the Treasurer, or his two Informers. 
(I will name them, and let them make their best 

of it) Clustril and Drunlo, to prove that any Person
ever came to me incognito, except the Secretary
Reldresal, who was sent by express Command of
his Imperial Majesty, as I have before related. I
should not have dwelt so long upon this Particular,
if it had not been a Point wherein the Reputation
of a great Lady is so nearly concerned; to
say nothing of my own; although I had the Honour
to be a Nardac, which the Treasurer himself
is not; for all the World knows he is only a
Clumglum, a Title inferior by one Degree, as that
of a Marquess is to a Duke in England; yet I allow
he preceded me in right of his Post. These false
Informations, which I afterwards came to the Knowledge
of, by an Accident not proper to mention,
made the Treasurer shew his Lady for some
Time an ill Countenance, and me a worse: For
although he were at last undeceived and reconciled
to her, yet I lost all Credit with him; and found
my Interest decline very fast with the Emperor
himself, who was indeed too much governed by
that Favourtie. 
