



The Author permitted to see the grand Academy of
Lagado. The Academy largely described. The
Arts wherein the Professors employ themselves. 

This Academy is not an entire
single Building, but a Continuation
of several Houses on both Sides of
a Street; which growing waste, was
purchased and applyed to that
Use. 
I was received very kindly by the Warden, and
went for many Days to the Academy. Every
Room hath in it one or more Projectors; and I believe
I could not be in fewer than five Hundred
Rooms. 
The first Man I saw was of a meagre Aspect,
with sooty Hands and Face, his Hair and Beard
long, ragged and singed in several Places. His
Clothes, Shirt, and Skin were all of the same Colour. 
He had been Eight Years upon a Project for
extracting Sun-Beams out of Cucumbers, which 

were to be put into Vials hermetically sealed, and
let out to warm the Air in raw inclement Summers. 
He told me, he did not doubt in Eight Years more,
that he should be able to supply the Governors Gardens
with Sun-shine at a reasonable Rate; but he
complained that his Stock was low, and intreated
me to give him something as an Encouragement to
Ingenuity, especially since this had been a very dear
Season for Cucumbers. I made him a small Present,
for my Lord had furnished me with Money on purpose,
because he knew their Practice of begging
from all who go to see them. 
I went into another Chamber, but was ready
to hasten back, being almost overcome with a horrible
Stink. My Conductor pressed me forward,
conjuring me in a Whisper to give no Offence,
which would be highly resented; and therefore I
durst not so much as stop my Nose. The Projector
of this Cell was the most ancient Student of the
Academy. His Face and Beard were of a pale Yellow; 
his Hands and Clothes dawbed over with
Filth. When I was presented to him, he gave me
a very close Embrace, (a Compliment I could well
have excused.) His Employment from his first
coming into the Academy, was an Operation to reduce
human Excrement to its original Food, by
separating the several Parts, removing the Tincture
which it receives from the Gall, making the Odour
exhale, and scumming off the Saliva. He had a
weekly Allowance from the Society, of a Vessel
filled with human Ordure, about the Bigness of a
Bristol Barrel. 

I saw another at work to calcine Ice into Gunpowder; 
who likewise shewed me a Treatise he
had written concerning the Malleability of Fire,
which he intended to publish. 
There was a most ingenious Architect who
had contrived a new Method for building Houses,
by beginning at the Roof, and working downwards
to the Foundation; which he justified to me by the
like Practice of those two prudent Insects the Bee
and the Spider. 
There was a Man born blind, who had several
Apprentices in his own Condition: Their Employment
was to mix Colours for Painters, which their
Master taught them to distinguish by feeling and
smelling. It was indeed my Misfortune to find
them at that Time not very perfect in their Lessons; 
and the Professor himself happened to be generally
mistaken: This Artist is much encouraged and
esteemed by the whole Fraternity. 
In another Apartment I was highly pleased with
a Projector, who had found a Device of plowing
the Ground with Hogs, to save the Charges of
Plows, Cattle, and Labour. The Method is this:
In an Acre of Ground you bury at six Inches Distance,
and eight deep, a Quantity of Acorns, Dates,
Chesnuts, and other Masts or Vegetables whereof
these Animals are fondest; then you drive six Hundred
or more of them into the Field, where in a
few Days they will root up the whole Ground in
search of their Food, and make it fit for sowing,
at the same time manuring it with their Dung. It
is true, upon Experiment they found the Charge
and Trouble very great, and they had little or no 

Crop. However, it is not doubted that this Invention
may be capable of great Improvement. 
I went into another Room, where the Walls
and Ceiling were all hung round with Cobwebs,
except a narrow Passage for the Artist to go in and
out. At my Entrance he called aloud to me not to
disturb his Webs. He lamented the fatal Mistake
the World had been so long in of using Silk-Worms,
while we had such plenty of domestick
Insects, who infinitely excelled the former, because
they understood how to weave as well as spin. 
And he proposed farther, that by employing Spiders,
the Charge of dying Silks would be wholly saved; 
whereof I was fully convinced when he shewed me
a vast Number of Flies most beautifully coloured,
wherewith he fed his Spiders; assuring us, that the
Webs would take a Tincture from them; and as he
had them of all Hues, he hoped to fit every Body's
Fancy, as soon as he could find proper Food for the
Flies, of certain Gums, Oyls, and other glutinous
Matter, to give a Strength and Consistence to the
Threads. 
There was an Astronomer who had undertaken
to place a Sun-Dial upon the great Weather-Cock
on the Town-House, by adjusting the annual and
diurnal Motions of the Earth and Sun, so as to answer
and coincide with all accidental Turnings of
the Wind. 
I was complaining of a small Fit of the Cholick; 
upon which my Conductor led me into a
Room, where a great Physician resided, who was
famous for curing that Disease by contrary Operations
from the same Instrument. He had a large 

Pair of Bellows, with a long slender Muzzle of
Ivory. This he conveyed eight Inches up the
Anus, and drawing in the Wind, he affirmed he
could make the Guts as lank as a dried Bladder. 
But when the Disease was more stubborn and violent,
he let in the Muzzle while the Bellows was
full of Wind, which he discharged into the Body
of the Patient; then withdrew the Instrument to
replenish it, clapping his Thumb strongly against
the Orifice of the Fundament; and this being repeated
three or four Times, the adventitious Wind
would rush out, bringing the noxious along with
it (like Water put into a Pump) and the Patient recovers. 
I saw him try both Experiments upon a
Dog, but could not discern any Effect from the
former. After the latter, the Animal was ready to
burst, and made so violent a Discharge, as was very
offensive to me and my Companions. The
Dog died on the Spot, and we left the Doctor endeavouring
to recover him by the same Operation. 
I visited many other Apartments, but shall not
trouble my Reader with all the Curiosities I observed,
being studious of Brevity. 
I had hitherto seen only one Side of the Academy,
the other being appropriated to the Advancers
of speculative Learning; of whom I shall say
something when I have mentioned one illustrious
Person more, who is called among them the universal
Artist. He told us, he had been Thirty
Years employing his Thoughts for the Improvement
of human Life. He had two large Rooms full of
wonderful Curiosities, and Fifty Men at work. 
Some were condensing Air into a dry tangible Substance, 

by extracting the Nitre, and letting the
aqueous or fluid Particles percolate: Others softening
Marble for Pillows and Pin-cushions; others
petrifying the Hoofs of a living Horse to preserve
them from foundring. The Artist himself was at
that Time busy upon two great Designs: The first,
to sow Land with Chaff, wherein he affirmed the
true seminal Virtue to be contained, as he demonstrated
by several Experiments which I was not
skilful enough to comprehend. The other was,
by a certain Composition of Gums, Minerals, and
Vegetables outwardly applied, to prevent the
Growth of Wool upon two young Lambs; and he
hoped in a reasonable Time to propagate the Breed
of naked Sheep all over the Kingdom. 
We crossed a Walk to the other Part of the
Academy, where, as I have already said, the Projectors
in speculative Learning resided. 
The first Professor I saw was in a very large
Room, with Forty Pupils about him. After Salutation,
observing me to look earnestly upon a
Frame, which took up the greatest Part of both the
Length and Breadth of the Room; he said, perhaps
I might wonder to see him employed in a Project
for improving speculative Knowledge by practical
and mechanical Operations. But the World would
soon be sensible of its Usefulness; and he flattered
himself, that a more noble exalted Thought never
sprang in any other Man's Head. Every one knew
how laborious the usual Method is of attaining to
Arts and Sciences; whereas by his Contrivance, the
most ignorant Person at a reasonable Charge, and
with a little bodily Labour, may write Books in 

Philosophy, Poetry, Politicks, Law, Mathematicks
and Theology, without the least Assistance from
Genius or Study. He then led me to the Frame,
about the Sides whereof all his Pupils stood in
Ranks. It was Twenty Foot square, placed in the
Middle of the Room. The Superficies was composed
of several Bits of Wood, about the Bigness of
a Dye, but some larger than others. They were
all linked together by slender Wires. These Bits
of Wood were covered on every Square with Paper
pasted on them; and on these Papers were written
all the Words of their Language in their several
Moods, Tenses, and Declensions, but without any
Order. The Professor then desired me to observe,
for he was going to set his Engine at work. The
Pupils at his Command took each of them hold of
an Iron Handle, whereof there were Forty fixed
round the Edges of the Frame; and giving them a
sudden Turn, the whole Disposition of the Words
was entirely changed. He then commanded Six
and Thirty of the Lads to read the several Lines
softly as they appeared upon the Frame; and where
they found three or four Words together that might
make Part of a Sentence, they dictated to the four
remaining Boys who were Scribes. This Work
was repeated three or four Times, and at every
Turn the Engine was so contrived, that the Words
shifted into new Places, as the square Bits of Wood
moved upside down. 

Six Hours a-Day the young Students were employed
in this Labour; and the Professor shewed
me several Volumes in large Folio already collected,
of broken Sentences, which he intended to piece 

together; and out of those rich Materials to give
the World a compleat Body of all Arts and Sciences; 
which however might be still improved, and much
expedited, if the Publick would raise a Fund for
making and employing five Hundred such Frames
in Lagado, and oblige the Managers to contribute
in common their several Collections. 
He assured me, that this Invention had employed
all his Thoughts from his Youth; that he had emptyed
the whole Vocabulary into his Frame, and
made the strictest Computation of the general Proportion
there is in Books between the Numbers of
Particles, Nouns, and Verbs, and other Parts of
Speech. 
I made my humblest Acknowledgments to this
illustrious Person for his great Communicativeness; 
and promised if ever I had the good Fortune to return
to my native Country, that I would do him
Justice, as the sole Inventer of this wonderful Machine; 
the Form and Contrivance of which I desired
Leave to delineate upon Paper as in the Figure
here annexed. I told him, although it were the
Custom of our Learned in Europe to steal Inventions
from each other, who had thereby at least
this Advantage, that it became a Controversy which
was the right Owner; yet I would take such Caution,
that he should have the Honour entire without
a Rival. 
We next went to the School of Languages, where
three Professors sat in Consultation upon improving
that of their own Country. 

The first Project was to shorten Discourse by
cutting Polysyllables into one, and leaving out Verbs
and Participles; because in Reality all things imaginable
are but Nouns. 
The other, was a Scheme for entirely abolishing
all Words whatsoever: And this was urged as a
great Advantage in Point of Health as well as Brevity. 
For, it is plain, that every Word we speak
is in some Degree a Diminution of our Lungs by
Corrosion; and consequently contributes to the
shortning of our Lives. An Expedient was therefore
offered, that since Words are only Names for
Things, it would be more convenient for all Men
to carry about them, such Things as were necessary
to express the particular Business they are to discourse
on. And this Invention would certainly
have taken Place, to the great Ease as well as Health
of the Subject, if the Women in Conjunction with
the Vulgar and Illiterate had not threatned to raise
a Rebellion, unless they might be allowed the Liberty
to speak with their Tongues, after the Manner
of their Forefathers: Such constant irreconcileable
Enemies to Science are the common People. 
However, many of the most Learned and Wise
adhere to the new Scheme of expressing themselves
by Things; which hath only this Inconvenience
attending it; that if a Man's Business be very great,
and of various Kinds, he must be obliged in Proportion
to carry a greater Bundle of Things upon
his Back, unless he can afford one or two strong
Servants to attend him. I have often beheld two
of those Sages almost sinking under the Weight of
their Packs, like Pedlars among us; who when they 

met in the Streets would lay down their Loads,
open their Sacks, and hold Conversation for an
Hour together; then put up their Implements, help
each other to resume their Burthens, and take their
Leave. 
But, for short Conversations a Man may carry
Implements in his Pockets' and under his Arms,
enough to supply him, and in his House he cannot
be at a Loss; therefore the Room where Company
meet who practice this Art, is full of all Things
ready at Hand, requisite to furnish Matter for this
Kind of artificial Converse. 
Another great Advantage proposed by this Invention,
was, that it would serve as an universal
Language to be understood in all civilized Nations,
whose Goods and Utensils are generally of the same
Kind, or nearly resembling, so that their Uses
might easily be comprehended. And thus, Embassadors
would be qualified to treat with foreign
Princes or Ministers of State, to whose Tongues
they were utter Strangers. 
I was at the Mathematical School, where the
Master taught his Pupils after a Method scarce
imaginable to us in Europe. The Proposition and
Demonstration were fairly written on a thin Wafer,
with Ink composed of a Cephalick Tincture. This
the Student was to swallow upon a fasting Stomach,
and for three Days following eat nothing but Bread
and Water. As the Wafer digested, the Tincture
mounted to his Brain, bearing the Proposition
along with it. But the Success hath not hitherto
been answerable, partly by some Error in the Zuantum
or Composition, and partly by the Perverseness 

of Lads; to whom this Bolus is so nauseous, that
they generally steal aside, and discharge it upwards
before it can operate; neither have they been yet
persuaded to use so long an Abstinence as the Prescription
requires. 
