



The Humours and Dispositions of the Laputians described. An Account of their Learning. Of the King and his Court. The Auther's Reception there. The Inhabitants subject to Fears and Disquietudes. An Account of the Women. 

At my alighting I was surrounded by a
Crowd of People, but those who stood
nearest seemed to be of better Quality. 
They beheld me with all the Marks
and Circumstances of Wonder; neither
indeed was I much in their Debt; having never
till then seen a Race of Mortals so singular in
their Shapes, Habits, and Countenances. Their
Heads were all reclined either to the Right, or the
Left; one of their Eyes turned inward, and the
other directly up to the Zenith. Their outward
Garments were adorned with the Figures of Suns,
Moons, and Stars, interwoven with those of Fiddles,
Flutes, Harps, Trumpets, Guittars, Harpsicords,
and many more Instruments of Musick, unknown 

to us in Europe. I observed here and there
many in the Habit of Servants, with a blown Bladder
fastned like a Flail to the End of a short Stick,
which they carried in their Hands. In each Bladder
was a small Quantity of dried Pease, or little
Pebbles, (as I was afterwards informed.) With
these Bladders they now and then flapped the
Mouths and Ears of those who stood near them, of
which Practice I could not then conceive the Meaning. 
It seems, the Minds of these People are so
taken up with intense Speculations, that they neither
can speak, or attend to the Discourses of
others, without being rouzed by some external Taction
upon the Organs of Speech and Hearing; for
which Reason, those Persons who are able to afford
it, always keep a Flapper, (the Original is Climenole)
in their Family, as one of their Domesticks; nor
ever walk abroad or make Visits without him. And
the Business of this Officer is, when two or
more Persons are in Company, gently to strike with
his Bladder the Mouth of him who is to speak, and
and the Right Ear of him or them to whom the
Speaker addresseth himself. This Flapper is likewise
employed diligently to attend his Master in his
Walks, and upon Occasion to give him a soft Flap
on his Eyes; because he is always so wrapped up in
Cogitation, that he is in manifest Danger of falling
down every Precipice, and bouncing his Head against
every Post; and in the Streets, of jostling others,
or being jostled himself into the Kennel. 
It was necessary to give the Reader this Information,
without which he would be at the same Loss
with me, to understand the Proceedings of these
People, as they conducted me up the Stairs, to the 

Top of the Island, and from thence to the Royal
Palace. While we were ascending, they forgot several
Times what they were about, and left me to
my self, till their Memories were again rouzed by
their Flappers; for they appeared altogether unmoved
by the Sight of my foreign Habit and Countenance,
and by the Shouts of the Vulgar, whose
Thoughts and Minds were more disengaged. 
At last we entered the Palace, and proceeded
into the Chamber of Presence; where I saw the
King seated on his Throne, attended on each Side
by Persons of prime Quality. Before the Throne,
was a large Table filled with Globes and Spheres,
and Mathematical Instruments of all Kinds. His
Majesty took not the least Notice of us, although
our Entrance were not without sufficient Noise, by
the Concourse of all Persons belonging to the Court. 
But, he was then deep in a Problem, and we attended
at least an Hour, before he could solve it. 
There stood by him on each Side, a young Page,
with Flaps in their Hands; and when they saw he
was at Leisure, one of them gently struck his Mouth,
and the other his Right Ear; at which he started
like one awaked on the sudden, and looking towards
me, and the Company I was in, recollected the Occasion
of our coming, whereof he had been informed
before. He spoke some Words; whereupon
immediately a young Man with a Flap came
up to my Side, and flapt me gently on the Right
Ear; but I made Signs as well as I could, that I had
no Occasion for such an Instrument; which as I
after wards found, gave his Majesty and the whole
Court a very mean Opinion of my Understanding. 

The King, as far as I could conjecture, asked me
several Questions, and I addressed my self to him in
all the Languages I had. When it was found, that
I could neither understand nor be understood, I
was conducted by his Order to an Apartment in his
Palace, (this Prince being distinguished above all his
Predecessors for his Hospitality to Strangers,) where
two Servants were appointed to attend me. My
Dinner was brought, and four Persons of Quality,
whom I remembered to have seen very near the
King's Person, did me the Honour to dine with
me. We had two Courses, of three Dishes each. 
In the first Course, there was a Shoulder of Mutton,
cut into an Æquilateral Triangle; a Piece of
Beef into a Rhomboides; and a Pudding into a Cycloid. 
The second Course was two Ducks, trussed
up into the Form of Fiddles; Sausages and Puddings
resembling Flutes and Haut-boys, and a Breast of
Veal in the Shape of a Harp. The Servants cut
our Bread into Cones, Cylinders, Parallelograms,
and several other Mathematical Figures. 
While we were at Dinner, I made bold to ask
the Names of several Things in their Language; 
and those noble Persons, by the Assistance of their
Flappers, delighted to give me Answers, hoping to
raise my Admiration of their great Abilities, if I
could be brought to converse with them. I was
soon able to call for Bread, and Drink, or whatever
else I wanted. 
After Dinner my Company withdrew, and a
Person was sent to me by the King's Order, attended
by a Flapper. He brought with him Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and three or four Books; giving me to understand
by Signs, that he was sent to teach me the 

Language. We sat together four Hours, in which
Time I wrote down a great Number of Words in
Columns, with the Translations over against them. 
I likewise made a Shift to learn several short Sentences. 
For my Tutor would order one of my
Servants to fetch something, to turn about, to make
a Bow, to sit, or stand, or walk, and the like. 
Then I took down the Sentence in Writing. He
shewed me also in one of his Books, the Figures of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Zodiack, the Tropics,
and Polar Circles, together with the Denominations
of many Figures of Planes and Solids. 
He gave me the Names and Descriptions of all the
Musical Instruments, and the general Terms of Art
in playing on each of them. After he had left me,
I placed all my Words with their Interpretations in
alphabetical Order. And thus in a few Days, by
the Help of a very faithful Memory, I got some Insight
into their Language. 
The Word, which I interpret the Flying or
Floating I stand, is in the Original Laputa; whereof
I could never learn the true Etymology. Lap
in the old obsolete Language signifieth High, and
Untub a Governor; from which they say by Corruption
was derived Laputa from Lapuntuh. But I do
not approve of this Derivation, which seems to
be a little strained. I ventured to offer to the
Learned among them a Conjecture of my own, that
Laputa was quasi Lap outed; Lap signifying properly
the dancing of the Sun Beams in the Sea; and
outed a Wing, which however I shall not obtrude,
but submit to the judicious Reader. 

Those to whom the King had entrusted me,
observing how ill I was clad, ordered a Taylor to
come next Morning, and take my Measure for a
Suit of Cloths. This Operator did his Office after
a different Manner from those of his Trade in Europe. 
He first took my Altitude by a Quadrant,
and then with Rule and Compasses, described the
Dimensions and Out-Lines of my whole Body; all
which he entred upon Paper, and in six Days
brought my Cloths very ill made, and quite out of
Shape, by happening to mistake a Figure in the
Calculation. But my Comfort was, that I observed
such Accidents very frequent, and little regarded. 
During my Confinement for want of Cloaths,
and by an Indisposition that held me some Days
longer, I much enlarged my Dictionary; and when
I went next to Court, was able to understand many
Things the King spoke, and to return him some
Kind of Answers. His Majesty had given Orders,
that the Island should move North-East and by
East, to the vertical Point over Lagado, the Metropolis
of the whole Kingdom, below upon the
firm Earth. It was about Ninety Leagues distant,
and our Voyage lasted four Days and an Half. I
was not in the least sensible of the progressive Motion
made in the Air by the Island. On the second
Morning, about Eleven o'Clock, the King himself
in Person, attended by his Nobility, Courtiers, and
Officers, having prepared all their Musical Instruments,
played on them for three Hours without Intermission; 
so that I was quite stunned with the
Noise; neither could I possibly guess the Meaning,
till my Tutor informed me. He said, that the People
of their Island had their Ears adapted to hear 

the Musick of the Spheres, which always played at
certain Periods; and the Court was now prepared to
bear their Part in whatever Instrument they most
excelled. 
In our Journey towards Lagado the Capital City,
his Majesty ordered that the Island should stop over
certain Towns and Villages, from whence he might
receive the Petitions of his Subjects. And to this
Purpose, several Packthreads were let down with
small Weights at the Bottom. On these Packthreads
the People strung their Petitions, which
mounted up directly like the Scraps of Paper fastned
by School-boys at the End of the String that holds
their Kite. Sometimes we received Wine and
Victuals from below, which were drawn up by
Pullies. 
The Knowledge I had in Mathematicks gave me
great Assistance in acquiring their Phraseology,
which depended much upon that Science and Musick; 
and in the latter I was not unskilled. Their
Ideas are perpetually conversant in Lines and Figures. 
If they would, for Example, praise the
Beauty of a Woman, or any other Animal, they
describe it by Rhombs, Circles, Parallelograms, Ellipses,
and other Geometrical Terms; or else by
Words of Art drawn from Musick, needless here
to repeat. I observed in the King's Kitchen all
Sorts of Mathematical and Musical Instruments, after
the Figures of which they cut up the Joynts
that were served to his Majesty's Table. 
Their Houses are very ill built, the Walls bevil,
without one right Angle in any Apartment; 
and this Defect ariseth from the Contempt they bear 

for practical Geometry; which they despise as vulgar
and mechanick, those Instructions they give
being too refined for the Intellectuals of their
Workmen; which occasions perpetual Mistakes. 
And although they are dextrous enough upon a
Piece of Paper in the Management of the Rule,
the Pencil, and the Divider, yet in the common
Actions and Behaviour of Life, I have not seen a
more clumsy, awkward, and unhandy People, nor
so slow and perplexed in their Conceptions upon all
other Subjects, except those of Mathematicks and
Musick. They are very bad Reasoners, and vehemently
given to Opposition, unless when they happen
to be of the right Opinion, which is seldom
their Case. Imagination, Fancy, and Invention,
they are wholly Strangers to, nor have any Words
in their Language by which those Ideas can be expressed; 
the whole Compass of their Thoughts and
Mind, being shut up within the two forementioned
Sciences. 
Most of them, and especially those who deal in
the Astronomical Part, have great Faith in judicial
Astrology, although they are ashamed to own it
publickly. But, what I chiefly admired, and
thought altogether unaccountable, was the strong
Disposition I observed in them towards News and
Politicks; perpetually enquiring into publick Affairs,
giving their Judgments in Matters of State; and
passionately disputing every Inch of a Party Opinion. 
I have indeed observed the same Disposition among
most of the Mathematicians I have known in Europe;
although I could never discover the least Analogy
between the two Sciences; unless those People
suppose, that because the smallest Circle hath 

as many Degrees as the largest, therefore the Regulation
and Management of the World require no
more Abilities than the handling and turning of a
Globe. But, I rather take this Quality to spring
from a very common Infirmity of human Nature,
inclining us to be more curious and conceited in
Matters where we have least Concern, and for
which we are least adapted either by Study or Nature. 
These People are under continual Disquietudes,
never enjoying a Minute's Peace of Mind; and their
Disturbances proceed from Causes which very little
affect the rest of Mortals. Their Apprehensions
arise from several Changes they dread in the Celestial
Bodies. For Instance; that the Earth by the
continual Approaches of the Sun towards it, must
in Course of Time be absorbed or swallowed up. 
That the Face of the Sun will by Degrees be encrusted
with its own Effluvia, and give no more
Light to the World. That, the Earth very narrowly
escaped a Brush from the Tail of the last Comet,
which would have infallibly reduced it to Ashes; 
and that the next, which they have calculated for
One and Thirty Years hence, will probably destroy
us. For, if in its Perihelion it should approach
within a certain Degree of the Sun, (as by their
Calculations they have Reason to dread) it will
conceive a Degree of Heat ten Thousand Times
more intense than that of red hot glowing Iron; 
and in its Absence from the Sun, carry a blazing
Tail Ten Hundred Thousand and Fourteen Miles
long; through which if the Earth should pass at
the Distance of one Hundred Thousand Miles from
the Nucleus, or main Body of the Comet, it must 

in its Passage be set on Fire, and reduced to Ashes. 
That the Sun daily spending its Rays without any
Nutriment to supply them, will at last be wholly
consumed and annihilated; which must be attended
with the Destruction of this Earth, and of all the
Planets that receive their Light from it. 
They are so perpetually alarmed with the Apprehensions
of these and the like impending Dangers,
that they can neither sleep quietly in their
Beds, nor have any Relish for the common Pleasures
or Amusements of Life. When they meet an Acquaintance
in the Morning, the first Question is
about the Sun's Health; how he looked at his Setting
and Rising, and what Hopes they have to avoid
the Stroak of the approaching Comet. This Conversation
they are apt to run into with the same
Temper that Boys discover, in delighting to hear
terrible Stories of Sprites and Hobgoblins, which
they greedily listen to, and dare not go to Bed for
fear. 
The Women of the Island have Abundance of
Vivacity; they contemn their Husbands, and are
exceedingly fond of Strangers, whereof there is always
a considerable Number from the Continent
below, attending at Court, either upon Affairs of
the several Towns and Corporations, or their own
particular Occasions; but are much despised, because
they want the same Endowments. Among these
the Ladies chuse their Gallants: But the Vexation
is, that they act with too much Ease and Security; 
for the Husband is always so wrapped in Speculation,
that the Mistross and Lover may proceed to the
greatest Familiarities before his Face, if he be but
provided with Paper and Implements, and without
his Flapper at his Side. 

The Wives and Daughters lament their Confinement
to the Island, although I think it the most delicious
Spot of Ground in the World; and although
they live here in the greatest Plenty and Magnificence,
and are allowed to do whatever they please:
They long to see the World, and take the Diversions
of the Metropolis, which they are not allowed
to do without a particular Licence from the King; 
and this is not easy to be obtained, because the People
of Quality have found by frequent Experience,
how hard it is to persuade their Women to return
from below. I was told, that a great Court Lady,
who had several Children, is married to the prime
Minister, the richest Subject in the Kingdom, a
very graceful Person, extremely fond of her, and
lives in the finest Palace of the Island; went down
to Lagado, on the Pretence of Health, there hid
her self for several Months, till the King sent a
Warrant to search for her; and she was found in
an obscure Eating-House all in Rags, having pawned
her Cloths to maintain an old deformed Footman,
who beat her every Day, and in whose Company
she was taken much against her Will. And
although her Husband received her with all possible
Kindness, and without the least Reproach; she
soon after contrived to steal down again with all
her Jewels, to the same Gallant, and hath not been
heard of since. 
This may perhaps pass with the Reader rather
for an European or English Story, than for one of a
Country so remote. But he may please to consider,
that the Caprices of Womankind are not limited by
any Climate or Nation; and that they are much
more uniform than can be easily imagined. 

In about a Month's Time I had made a tolerable
Proficiency in their Language, and was able to answer
most of the King's Questions, when I had the
Honour to attend him. His Majesty discovered
not the least Curiosity to enquire into the Laws,
Government, History, Religion, or Manners of
the Countries where I had been; but confined his
Questions to the State of Mathematicks, and received
the Account I gave him, with great Contempt
and Indifference, though often rouzed by his Flapper
on each Side. 
