



Several Adventures that happened to the Author. 
The Execution of a Criminal. The Author shews
his Skill in Navigation. 

I should have lived happy enough
in that Country, if my Littleness
had not exposed me to several
ridiculous and troublesome Accidents; 
some of which I shall venture
to relate. Glumdalclitch often
carried me into the Gardens of the Court in my
smaller Box, and would sometimes take me out of
it and hold me in her Hand, or set me down to
walk. I remember, before the Dwarf left the Queen,
he followed us one Day into those Gardens; and my
Nurse having set me down, he and I being close
together, near some Dwarf Apple-trees, I must needs
shew my Wit by a silly Allusion between him and
the Trees, which happens to hold in their Language
as it doth in ours. Whereupon, the malicious
Rogue watching his Opportunity, when I was walking
under one of them, shook it directly over my
Head, by which a dozen Apples, each of them near
as large as a Bristol Barrel, came tumbling about my 

Ears; one of them hit me on the Back as I chanced
to stoop, and knocked me down flat on my
Face, but I received no other Hurt; and the Dwarf
was pardoned at my Desire, because I had given the
Provocation. 
Another Day, Glumdalclitch left me on a
smooth Grass-plot to divert my self while she
walked at some Distance with her Governess. In
the mean time, there suddenly fell such a violent
Shower of Hail, that I was immediately by the
Force of it struck to the Ground: And when I was
down, the Hail-stones gave me such cruel Bangs
all over the Body, as if I had been pelted with Tennis-Balls; 
however I made a Shift to creep on all
four, and shelter my self by lying flat on my Face
on the Lee-side of a Border of Lemmon Thyme; 
but so bruised from Head to Foot, that I could not
go abroad in ten Days. Neither is this at all to be
wondered at; because Nature in that Country observing
the same Proportion through all her Operations,
a Hail-stone is near Eighteen Hundred Times
as large as one in Europe; which I can assert upon
Experience, having been so curious to weigh and
measure them. 
But, a more dangerous Accident happened to
me in the same Garden, when my little Nurse, believing
she had put me in a secure Place, which I
often entreated her to do, that I might enjoy my
own Thoughts; and having left my Box at home to
avoid the Trouble of carrying it, went to another
Part of the Gardens with her Governess and some
Ladies of her Acquaintance. While she was absent
and out of hearing, a small white Spaniel belonging 

to one of the chief Gardiners, having got
by Accident into the Garden, happened to range
near the Place where I lay. The Dog following
the Scent, came directly up, and taking me in his
Mouth, ran strait to his Master, wagging his Tail,
and set me gently on the Ground. By good Fortune
he had been so well taught, that I was carried
between his Teeth without the least Hurt, or even
tearing my Cloaths. But, the poor Gardiner, who
knew me well, and had a great Kindness for me,
was in a terrible Fright. He gently took me up in
both his Hands, and asked me how I did; but I
was so amazed and out of Breath, that I could not
speak a Word. In a few Minutes I came to my
self, and he carried me safe to my little Nurse, who
by this time had returned to the Place where she left
me, and was in cruel Agonies when I did not appear,
nor answer when she called; she severely reprimanded
the Gardiner on Account of his Dog. 
But, the Thing was hushed up, and never known
at Court; for the Girl was afraid of the Queen's Anger; 
and truly as to my self, I thought it would not
be for my Reputation that such a Story should go
about. 
This Accident absolutely determined Glumdalclitch
never to trust me abroad for the future out of
her Sight. I had been long afraid of this Resolution; 
and therefore concealed from her some little
unlucky Adventures that happened in those Times
when I was left by my self. Once a Kite hovering
over the Garden, made a Stoop at me, and if I had
not resolutely drawn my Hanger, and run under a
thick Espalier, he would have certainly carried me
away in his Talons. Another time, walking to the 

Top of a fresh Mole-hill, I fell to my Neck in the
Hole through which that Animal had cast up the
Earth; and coined some Lye not worth remembring,
to excuse my self for spoiling my Cloaths. I likewise
broke my right Shin against the Shell of a
Snail, which I happened to stumble over, as I was
walking alone, and thinking on poor England. 
I cannot tell whether I were more pleased or
mortified to observe in those solitary Walks, that
the smaller Birds did not appear to be at all afraid of
me; but would hop about within a Yard Distance,
looking for Worms, and other Food, with as much
Indifference and Security as if no Creature at all
were near them. I remember, a Thrush had the
Confidence to snatch out of my Hand with his
Bill, a Piece of Cake that Glumdalclitch had just
given me for my Breakfast. When I attempted to
catch any of these Birds, they would boldly turn
against me, endeavouring to pick my Fingers, which
I durst not venture within their Reach; and then
they would hop back unconcerned to hunt for
Worms or Snails, as they did before. But, one
Day I took a thick Cudgel, and threw it with all my
Strength so luckily at a Linnet, that I knocked him
down, and seizing him by the Neck with both my
Hands, ran with him in Triumph to my Nurse. 
However, the Bird who had only been stunned,
recovering himself, gave me so many Boxes with
his Wings on both Sides of my Head and Body, although
I held him at Arms Length, and was out of
the Reach of his Claws, that I was twenty Times
thinking to let him go. But I was soon relieved by
one of our Servants, who wrung off the Bird's
Neck; and I had him next Day for Dinner by the 

Queen's Command. This Linnet, as near as I can
remember, seemed to be somewhat larger than an
English Swan. 
The Maids of Honour often invited Glumdalclitch
to their Apartments, and desired she would
bring me along with her, on Purpose to have the
Pleasure of seeing and touching me. They would
often strip me naked from Top to Toe, and lay me
at full Length in their Bosoms; wherewith I was
much disgusted; because, to say the Truth, a very
offensive Smell came from their Skins; which I do
not mention or intend to the Disadvantage of those
excellent Ladies, for whom I have all Manner of
Respect: But, I conceive, that my Sense was more
acute in Proportion to my Littleness; and that those
illustrious Persons were no more disagreeable to
their Lovers, or to each other, than People of the
same Quality are with us in England. And, after
all, I found their natural Smell was much more supportable
than when they used Perfumes, under
which I immediately swooned away. I cannot forget,
that an intimate Friend of mine in Lilliput
took the Freedom in a warm Day, when I had
used a good deal of Exercise, to complain of a
strong Smell about me; although I am as little faulty
that way as most of my Sex: But I suppose, his
Faculty of Smelling was as nice with regard to me,
as mine was to that of this People. Upon this
Point, I cannot forbear doing Justice to the Queen
my Mistress, and Glumdalclitch my Nurse; whose
Persons were as sweet as those of any Lady in
England. 
That which gave me most Uneasiness among
these Maids of Honour, when my Nurse carried 

me to visit them, was to see them use me without
any Manner of Ceremony, like a Creature who had
no Sort of Consequence. For, they would strip
themselves to the Skin, and put on their Smocks in
my Presence, while I was placed on their Toylet directly
before their naked Bodies; which, I am
sure, to me was very far from being a tempting
Sight, or from giving me any other Motions than
those of Horror and Disgust. Their Skins appeared
so coarse and uneven, so variously coloured when I
saw them near, with a Mole here and there as
broad as a Trencher, and Hairs hanging from it
thicker than Pack-threads; to say nothing further
concerning the rest of their Persons. Neither did
they at all scruple while I was by, to discharge what
they had drunk, to the Quantity of at least two
Hogsheads, in a Vessel that held above three Tuns. 
The handsomest among these Maids of Honour, a
pleasant frolicksome Girl of sixteen, would sometimes
set me astride upon one of her Nipples; with
many other Tricks, wherein the Reader will excuse
me for not being over particular. But, I was so
much displeased, that I entreated Glumdalclitch to
contrive some Excuse for not seeing that young Lady
any more. 
One Day, a young Gentleman who was Nephew
to my Nurse's Governess, came and pressed
them both to see an Execution. It was of a Man
who had murdered one of that Gentleman's intimate
Acquaintance. Glumdalclitch was prevailed
on to be of the Company, very much against her
Inclination, for she was naturally tender hearted:
And, as for my self, although I abhorred such Kind 

of Spectacles; yet my Curiosity tempted me to see
something that I thought must be extraordinary. 
The Malefactor was fixed in a Chair upon a Scaffold
erected for the Purpose; and his Head cut off
at one Blow with a Sword of about forty Foot long. 
The Veins and Arteries spouted up such a prodigious
Quantity of Blood, and so high in the Air, that
the great Jet d'Eau at Versailles was not equal for
the Time it lasted; and the Head when it fell on the
Scaffold Floor, gave such a Bounce, as made me
start, although I were at least an English Mile
distant. 
The Queen, who often used to hear me talk of
my Sea-Voyages, and took all Occasions to divert
me when I was melancholy, asked me whether I
understood how to handle a Sail or an Oar; and
whether a little Exercise of Rowing might not be
convenient for my Health. I answered, that I understood
both very well. For although my proper
Employment had been to be Surgeon or Doctor to
the Ship; yet often upon a Pinch, I was forced to
work like a common Mariner. But, I could not see
how this could be done in their Country, where
the smallest Wherry was equal to a first Rate Man
of War among us; and such a Boat as I could manage,
would never live in any of their Rivers: Her
Majesty said, if I would contrive a Boat, her own
Joyner should make it, and she would provide a
Place for me to sail in. The Fellow was an ingenious
Workman, and by my Instructions in ten
Days finished a Pleasure-Boat with all its Tackling
able conveniently to hold eight Europeans. When
it was finished, the Queen was so delighted, that
she ran with it in her Lap to the King, who ordered 

it to be put in a Cistern full of Water, with me
in it, by way of Tryal; where I could not manage
my two Sculls or little Oars for want of Room. 
But, the Queen had before contrived another Project. 
She ordered the Joyner to make a wooden
Trough of three Hundred Foot long, fifty broad,
and eight deep; which being well pitched to prevent
leaking, was placed on the Floor along the
Wall, in an outer Room of the Palace. It had a
Cock near the Bottom, to let out the Water when
it began to grow stale; and two Servants could easily
fill it in half an Hour. Here I often used to
row for my Diversion, as well as that of the Queen
and her Ladies, who thought themselves agreeably
entertained with my Skill and Agility. Sometimes
I would put up my Sail, and then my Business was
only to steer, while the Ladies gave me a Gale
with their Fans; and when they were weary, some
of the Pages would blow my Sail forward with their
Breath, while I shewed my Art by steering Starboard
or Larboard as I pleased. When I had done,
Glumdalclitch always carried back my Boat into her
Closet, and hung it on a Nail to dry. 
In this Exercise I once met an Accident which
had like to have cost me my Life. For, one of the
Pages having put my Boat into the Trough; the
Governess who attended Glumdalclitch, very officiously
lifted me up to place me in the Boat; but I
happened to slip through her Fingers, and should
have infallibly fallen down forty Foot upon the
Floor, if by the luckiest Chance in the World, I
had not been stop'd by a Corking-pin that stuck in
the good Gentlewoman's Stomacher; the Head of
the Pin passed between my Shirt and the Waistband 

of my Breeches; and thus I was held by the
Middle in the Air, till Glumdalclitch ran to my
Relief. 
Another time, one of the Servants, whose
Office it was to fill my Trough every third Day
with fresh Water; was so careless to let a huge Frog
(not perceiving it) slip out of his Pail. The Frog
lay concealed till I was put into my Boat, but then
seeing a resting Place, climbed up, and made it lean
so much on one Side, that I was forced to balance
it with all my Weight on the other, to prevent
overturning. When the Frog was got in, it hopped
at once half the Length of the Boat, and then
over my Head, backwards and forwards, dawbing
my Face and Cloaths with its odious Slime. The
Largeness of its Features made it appear the most
deformed Animal that can be conceived. However,
I desired Glumdalclitch to let me deal with it alone,
I banged it a good while with one of my Sculls,
and at last forced it to leap out of the Boat. 
But, the greatest Danger I ever underwent in
that Kingdom, was from a Monkey, who belonged
to one of the Clerks of the Kitchen. Glumdalclitch
had locked me up in her Closet, while she
went somewhere upon Business, or a Visit. The
Weather being very warm, the Closet Window
was left open, as well as the Windows and the
Door of my bigger Box, in which I usually lived,
because of its Largeness and Conveniency. As I
sat quietly meditating at my Table, I heard something
bounce in at the Closet Window, and skip
about from one Side to the other; whereat, although
I were much alarmed, yet I ventured to 

look out, but not stirring from my Seat; and then
I saw this frolicksome Animal, frisking and leaping
up and down, till at last he came to my Box'
which he seemed to view with great Pleasure and
Curiosity, peeping in at the Door and every Window. 
I retreated to the farther Corner of my
Room, or Box; but the Monkey looking in at every
Side, put me into such a Fright, that I wanted
Presence of Mind to conceal my self under the
Bed, as I might easily have done. After some time
spent in peeping, grinning, and chattering, he at
last espyed me; and reaching one of his Paws in at
the Door, as a Cat does when she plays with a
Mouse, although I often shifted Place to avoid him; 
he at length seized the Lappet of my Coat (which
being made of that Country Silk, was very thick
and strong) and dragged me out. He took me up
in his right Fore-foot, and held me as a Nurse doth
a Child she is going to suckle; just as I have seen
the same Sort of Creature do with a Kitten in Europe:
And when I offered to struggle, he squeezed
me so hard, that I thought it more prudent to submit. 
I have good Reason to believe that he took
me for a young one of his own Species, by his often
stroaking my Face very gently with his other
Paw. In these Diversions he was interrupted by a
Noise at the Closet Door, as if some Body were
opening it; whereupon he suddenly leaped up to the
Window at which he had come in, and thence
upon the Leads and Gutters, walking upon three
Legs, and holding me in the fourth, till he clambered
up to a Roof that was next to ours. I heard
Glumdalclitch give a Shriek at the Moment he was 

carrying me out. The poor Girl was almost distracted:
That Quarter of the Palace was all in an
Uproar; the Servants ran for Ladders; the Monkey
was seen by Hundreds in the Court, sitting upon
the Ridge of a Building, holding me like a Baby
in one of his Fore-Paws, and feeding me with the
other, by cramming into my Mouth some Victuals
he had squeezed out of the Bag on one Side of his
Chaps, and patting me when I would not eat; 
whereat many of the Rabble below could not forbear
laughing; neither do I think they justly ought
to be blamed; for without Question, the Sight was
ridiculous enough to every Body but my self. 
Some of the People threw up Stones, hoping to
drive the Monkey down; but this was strictly forbidden,
or else very probably my Brains had been
dashed out. 
The Ladders were now applied, and mounted by
several Men; which the Monkey observing, and
finding himself almost encompassed; not being able
to make Speed enough with his three Legs, let me
drop on a Ridge-Tyle, and made his Escape. Here
I sat for some time five Hundred Yards from the
Ground, expecting every Moment to be blown
down by the Wind, or to fall by my own Giddiness,
and come tumbling over and over from the
Ridge to the Eves. But an honest Lad, one of
my Nurse's Footmen, climbed up, and putting me
into his Breeches Pocket, brought me down safe. 
I was almost choaked with the filthy Stuff the
Monkey had crammed down my Throat; but, my
dear little Nurse picked it out of my Mouth with a
small Needle; and then I fell a vomiting, which 

gave me great Relief. Yet I was so weak and bruised
in the Sides with the Squeezes given me by this
odious Animal, that I was forced to keep my Bed
a Fortnight. The King, Queen, and all the Court,
sent every Day to enquire after my Health; and
her Majesty made me several Visits during my
Sickness. The Monkey was killed, and an Order
made that no such Animal should be kept about the
Palace. 
When I attended the King after my Recovery,
to return him Thanks for his Favours, he
was pleased to railly me a good deal upon this
Adventure. He asked me what my Thoughts
and Speculations were while I lay in the Monkey's
Paw; how I liked the Victuals he gave
me, his Manner of Feeding; and whether the
fresh Air on the Roof had sharpened my Stomach. 
He desired to know what I would have done upon
such an Occasion in my own Country. I
told his Majesty, that in Europe we had no Monkies,
except such as were brought for Curiosities
from other Places, and so small, that I could
deal with a Dozen of them together, if they presumed
to attack me. And as for that monstrous
Animal with whom I was so lately engaged, (it
was indeed as large as an Elephant) if my Fears
had suffered me to think so far as to make Use of
my Hanger (looking fiercely, and clapping my
Hand upon the Hilt as I spoke) when he poked
his Paw into my Chamber, perhaps I should have
given him such a Wound, as would have made
him glad to withdraw it with more Haste than
he put it in. This I delivered in a firm Tone, 

like a Person who was jealous lest his Courage
should be called in Question. However, my
Speech produced nothing else besides a loud
Laughter; which all the Respect due to his Majesty
from those about him, could not make them
contain. This made me reflect, how vain an Attempt
it is for a Man to endeavour doing himself
Honour among those who are out of all Degree
of Equality or Comparison with him. And yet I
have seen the Moral of my own Behaviour very
frequent in England since my Return; where a
little contemptible Varlet, without the least Title
to Birth, Person, Wit, or common Sense, shall
presume to look with Importance, and put himself
upon a Foot with the greatest Persons of the
Kingdom. 
I was every Day furnishing the Court with
some ridiculous Story; and Glumdalclitch, although
she loved me to Excess, yet was arch enough to
inform the Queen, whenever I committed any
Folly that she thought would be diverting to her
Majesty. The Girl who had been out of Order,
was carried by her Governess to take the Air about
an Hour's Distance, or thirty Miles from
Town. They alighted out of the Coach near a
small Foot-path in a Field; and Glumdalclitch
setting down my travelling Box, I went out of it
to walk. There was a Cow-dung in the Path,
and I must needs try my Activity by attempting
to leap over it. I took a Run, but unfortunately
jumped short, and found my self just in the Middle
up to my Knees. I waded through with some 

Difficulty, and one of the Footmen wiped me as
clean as he could with his Handkerchief; for I
was filthily bemired, and my Nurse confined me
to my Box until we returned home; where the
Queen was soon informed of what had passed, and
the Footmen spread it about the Court; so that
all the Mirth, for some Days, was at my Expence. 
