



The Author sent for to Court. The Queen buys
him of his Master the Farmer, and presents him
to the King. He disputes with his Majesty's
great Scholars. An Apartment at Court provided
for the Author. He is in high Favour with the
Queen. He stands up for the Honour of his
own Country. His Quarrels with the Queen's
Dwarf. 

The frequent Labours I underwent
every Day, made in a few Weeks a
very considerable Change in my
Health: The more my Master got
by me, the more unsatiable he grew. 
I had quite lost my Stomach, and was almost reduced
to a Skeleton. The Farmer observed it; 
and concluding I soon must die, resolved to make
as good a Hand of me as he could. While he was
thus reasoning and resolving with himself; a Slardral,
or Gentleman Usher, came from Court, commanding
my Master to bring me immediately thither 

for the Diversion of the Queen and her Ladies. 
Some of the latter had already been to see me; and
reported strange Things of my Beauty, Behaviour,
and good Sense. Her Majesty and those who attended
her, were beyond Measure delighted with
my Demeanor. I fell on my Knees, and begged
the Honour of kissing her Imperial Foot; but this
Gracious Princess held out her little Finger towards
me (after I was set on a Table) which I embraced
in both my Arms, and put the Tip of it, with the
utmost Respect, to my Lip. She made me some
general Questions about my Country and my Travels,
which I answered as distinctly and in as few
Words as I could. She asked, whether I would
be content to live at Court. I bowed down to the
Board of the Table, and humbly answered, that I
was my Master's Slave; but if I were at my own
Disposal, I should be proud to devote my Life to
her Majesty's Service. She then asked my Master
whether he were willing to sell me at a good Price. 
He, who apprehended I could not live a Month,
was ready enough to part with me; and demanded
a Thousand Pieces of Gold; which were ordered
him on the Spot, each Piece being about the Bigness
of eight Hundred Moydores: But, allowing
for the Proportion of all Things between that
Country and Europe, and the high Price of Gold
among them; was hardly so great a Sum as a Thousand
Guineas would be in England. I then said to
the Queen; since I was now her Majesty's most
humble Creature and Vassal, I must beg the Favour,
that Glumdalclitch, who had always tended me with
so much Care and Kindness, and understood to do 

it so well, might be admitted into her Service, and
continue to be my Nurse and Instructor. Her Majesty
agreed to my Petition; and easily got the Farmer's
Consent, who was glad enough to have his
Daughter preferred at Court: And the poor Girl
herself was not able to hide her Joy. My late
Master withdrew, bidding me farewell, and saying
he had left me in a good Service; to which I replyed
not a Word, only making him a slight
Bow. 
The Queen observed my Coldness; and when
the Farmer was gone out of the Apartment, asked
me the Reason. I made bold to tell her Majesty,
that I owed no other Obligation to my late Master,
than his not dashing out the Brains of a poor harmless
Creature found by Chance in his Field; which
Obligation was amply recompenced by the Gain he
had made in shewing me through half the Kingdom,
and the Price he had now sold me for. That
the Life I had since led, was laborious enough to
kill an Animal of ten Times my Strength. That
my Health was much impaired by the continual
Drudgery of entertaining the Rabble every Hour
of the Day; and that if my Master had not
thought my Life in Danger, her Majesty would not
have got so cheap a Bargain. But as I was out of
all fear of being ill treated under the Protection of
so great and good an Empress, the Ornament of
Nature, the Darling of the World, the Delight of
her Subjects, the Phœnix of the Creation; so, I
hoped my late Master's Apprehensions would appear
to be groundless; for I already found my Spirits
to revive by the Influence of her most August
Presence. 

This was the Sum of my Speech, delivered
with great Improprieties and Hesitation; the latter
Part was altogether framed in the Style peculiar to
that People, whereof I learned some Phrases from
Glumdalclitch, while she was carrying me to Court. 
The Queen giving great Allowance for my Defectiveness
in speaking, was however surprised at
so much Wit and good Sense in so diminutive an
Animal. She took me in her own Hand, and carried
me to the King, who was then retired to his
Cabinet. His Majesty, a Prince of much Gravity,
and austere Countenance, not well observing my
Shape at first View, asked the Queen after a cold
Manner, how long it was since she grew fond of a
Splacknuck; for such it seems he took me to be, as
I lay upon my Breast in her Majesty's right Hand. 
But this Princess, who hath an infinite deal of Wit
and Humour, set me gently on my Feet upon the
Scrutore; and commanded me to give His Majesty
an Account of my self, which I did in a very few
Words; and Glumdalclitch, who attended at the
Cabinet Door, and could not endure I should be
out of her Sight, being admitted; confirmed all
that had passed from my Arrival at her Father's
House. 
The King, although he be as learned a Person
as any in his Dominions; had been educated in the
Study of Philosophy, and particularly Mathematicks; 
yet when he observed my Shape exactly, and
saw me walk erect, before I began to speak, conceived
I might be a piece of Clock-work, (which
is in that Country arrived to a very great Perfection)
contrived by some ingenious Artist. But, when
he heard my Voice, and found what I delivered to 

be regular and rational, he could not conceal his
Astonishment. He was by no means satisfied with
the Relation I gave him of the Manner I came into
his Kingdom; but thought it a Story concerted
between Glumdalclitch and her Father, who had
taught me a Sett of Words to make me sell at a
higher Price. Upon this Imagination he put several
other Questions to me, and still received rational
Answers, no otherwise defective than by a Foreign
Accent, and an imperfect Knowledge in the Language; 
with some rustick Phrases which I had
learned at the Farmer's House, and did not suit the
polite Style of a Court. 
His Majesty sent for three great Scholars who
were then in their weekly waiting (according to
the Custom in that Country.) These Gentlemen,
after they had a while examined my Shape with
much Nicety, were of different Opinions concerning
me. They all agreed that I could not be produced
according to the regular Laws of Nature; 
because I was not framed with a Capacity of preserving
my Life, either by Swiftness, or climbing
of Trees, or digging Holes in the Earth. They
observed by my Teeth, which they viewed with
great Exactness, that I was a carnivorous Animal; 
yet most Quadrupeds being an Overmatch for me; 
and Field-Mice, with some others, too nimble, they
could not imagine how I should be able to support
my self, unless I fed upon Snails and other Insects; 
which they offered by many learned Arguments to
evince that I could not possibly do. One of them
seemed to think that I might be an Embrio, or abortive
Birth. But this Opinion was rejected by
the other two, who observed my Limbs to be perfect 

and finished; and that I had lived several Years,
as it was manifested from my Beard; the Stumps
whereof they plainly discovered through a Magnifying-Glass. 
They would not allow me to be a
Dwarf, because my Littleness was beyond all Degrees
of Comparison; for the Queen's favourite
Dwarf, the smallest ever known in that Kingdom,
was near thirty Foot high. After much Debate,
they concluded unanimously that I was only Relplum
Scalcath, which is interpreted literally Lusus
Nature; a Determination exactly agreeable to the
Modern Philosophy of Europe: whose Professors,
disdaining the old Evasion of occult Causes, whereby
the Followers of Aristotle endeavour in vain to
disguise their Ignorance; have invented this wonderful
Solution of all Difficulties, to the unspeakable
Advancement of human Knowledge. 
After this decisive Conclusion, I entreated to
be heard a Word or two. I applied my self to the
King, and assured His Majesty, that I came from a
Country which abounded with several Millions of
both Sexes, and of my own Stature; where the
Animals, Trees, and Houses were all in Proportion; 
and where by Consequence I might be as able to
defend my self, and to find Sustenance, as any of
his Majesty's Subjects could do here; which I took
for a full Answer to those Gentlemens Arguments. 
To this they only replied with a Smile of Contempt; 
saying, that the Farmer had instructed me very
well in my Lesson. The King, who had a much
better Understanding, dismissing his learned Men,
sent for the Farmer, who by good Fortune was not
yet gone out of Town: Having therefore first examined
him privately, and then confronted him with 

me and the young Girl; his Majesty began to think
that what we told him might possibly be true. He
desired the Queen to order, that a particular Care
should be taken of me; and was of Opinion, that
Glumdalclitch should still continue in her Office of
tending me, because he observed we had a great
Affection for each other. A convenient Apartment
was provided for her at Court; she had a sort of
Governess appointed to take care of her Education,
a Maid to dress her, and two other Servants for
menial Offices; but, the Care of me was wholly
appropriated to her self. The Queen commanded
her own Cabinet-maker to contrive a Box that might
serve me for a Bed-chamber, after the Model that
Glumdalclitch and I should agree upon. This Man
was a most ingenious Artist; and according to my
Directions, in three Weeks finished for me a
wooden Chamber of sixteen Foot square, and twelve
High; with Sash Windows, a Door, and two
Closets, like a London Bed-chamber. The Board
that made the Cieling was to be lifted up and down
by two Hinges, to put in a Bed ready furnished by
her Majesty's Upholsterer; which Glumdalclitch
took out every Day to air, made it with her own
Hands, and letting it down at Night, locked up the
Roof over me. A Nice Workman, who was famous
for little Curiosities, undertook to make me
two Chairs, with Backs and Frames, of a Substance
not unlike Ivory; and two Tables, with a Cabinet
to put my Things in. The Room was quilted on
all Sides, as well as the Floor and the Cieling, to
prevent any Accident from the Carelessness of those
who carried me; and to break the Force of a Jolt
when I went in a Coach. I desired a Lock for my 

Door to prevent Rats and Mice from coming in:
The Smith after several Attempts made the smallest
that was ever seen among them; for I have known
a larger at the Gate of a Gentleman's House in
England. I made a shift to keep the Key in a
Pocket of my own, fearing Glumdalclitch might
lose it. The Queen likewise ordered the thinnest
Silks that could be gotten, to make me Cloaths; not
much thicker than an English Blanket, very cumbersome
till I was accustomed to them. They were
after the Fashion of the Kingdom, partly resembling
the Persian, and partly the Chinese; and are a very
grave decent Habit. 
The Queen became so fond of my Company,
that she could not dine without me. I had a Table
placed upon the same at which her Majesty eat,
just at her left Elbow; and a Chair to sit on. Glumdalclitch
stood upon a Stool on the Floor, near my
Table, to assist and take Care of me. I had an
entire set of Silver Dishes and Plates, and other
Necessaries, which in Proportion to those of the
Queen, were not much bigger than what I have
seen in a London Toy-shop, for the Furniture
of a Baby-house: These my little Nurse
kept in her Pocket, in a Silver Box, and gave me at
Meals as I wanted them; always cleaning them her
self. No Person dined with the Queen but the two
Princesses Royal; the elder sixteen Years old, and
the younger at that time thirteen and a Month. Her
Majesty used to put a Bit of Meat upon one of my
Dishes, out of which I carved for my self; and
her Diversion was to see me eat in Miniature. For
the Queen (who had indeed but a weak Stomach)
took up at one Mouthful, as much as a dozen English 

Farmers could eat at a Meal, which to me was
for some time a very nauseous Sight. She would
craunch the Wing of a Lark, Bones and all, between
her Teeth, although it were nine Times as
large as that of a full grown Turkey; and put a
Bit of Bread in her Mouth, as big as two twelve-penny
Loves. She drank out of a golden Cup, above
a Hoshead at a Draught. Her Knives were
twice as long as a Scythe set strait upon the Handle. 
The Spoons, Forks, and other Instruments were all
in the same Proportion. I remember when Glumdalclitch
carried me out of Curiosity to see some of
the Tables at Court, where ten or a dozen of these
enormous Knives and Forks were lifted up together; 
I thought I had never till then beheld so terrible a
Sight. 
It is the Custom, that every Wednesday, (which
as I have before observed, was their Sabbath) the
King and Queen, with the Royal Issue of both
Sexes, dine together in the Apartment of his Majesty; 
to whom I was now become a Favourite; 
and at these Times my little Chair and Table were
placed at his left Hand before one of the Salt-sellers. 
This Prince took a Pleasure in conversing with
me; enquiring into the Manners, Religion, Laws,
Government, and Learning of Europe, wherein I
gave him the best Account I was able. His Apprehension
was so clear, and his Judgment so exact,
that he made very wise Reflexions and Observations
upon all I said. But, I confess, that after I had
been a little too copious in talking of my own beloved
Country; of our Trade, and Wars by Sea
and Land, of our Schisms in Religion, and Parties
in the State; the Prejudices of his Education prevailed 

so far, that he could not forbear taking my
up in his right Hand, and stroaking me gently with
the other; after an hearty Fit of laughing, asked
me whether I were a Whig or a Tory. Then turning
to his first Minister, who waited behind him
with a white Staff, near as tall as the Main-most of
the Royal Sovereign; he observed, how contemptible
a Thing was human Grandeur, which could be
mimicked by such diminutive Insects as I: And yet,
said he, I dare engage, those Creatures have their
Titles and Distinctions of Honour; they contrive
little Nests and Burrows, that they call Houses and
Cities; they make a Figure in Dress and Equipage; 
they love, they fight, they dispute, they cheat, they
betray. And thus he continued on, while my Colour
came and went several Times, with Indignation
to hear our noble Country, the Mistress of
Arts and Arms, the Scourge of France, the Arbitress
of Europe, the Seat of Virtue, Piety, Honour
and Truth, the Pride and Envy of the World, so
contemptuously treated. 
But, as I was not in a Condition to resent Injuries,
so, upon mature Thoughts, I began to doubt
whether I were injured or no. For, after having
been accustomed several Months to the Sight and
Converse of this People, and observed every Object
upon which I cast mine Eyes, to be of proportionable
Magnitude; the Horror I had first conceived
from their Bulk and Aspect was so far worn off, that
if I had then beheld a Company of English Lords
and Ladies in their Finery and Birth-day Cloaths,
acting their several Parts in the most courtly Manner
of Strutting, and Bowing and Prating; to say the
Truth, I should have been strongly tempted to 

laugh as much at them as this King and his Grandees
did at me. Neither indeed could I forbear
smiling at my self, when the Queen used to place
me upon her Hand towards a Looking-Glass, by
which both our Persons appeared before me in full
View together; and there could nothing be more
ridiculous than the Comparison: So that I really
began to imagine my self dwindled many Degrees
below my usual Size. 
Nothing angred and mortified me so much as
the Queen's Dwarf, who being of the lowest Stature
that was ever in that Country, (for I verily
think he was not full Thirty Foot high) became so
insolent at seeing a Creature so much beneath him,
that he would always affect to swagger and look
big as he passed by me in the Queen's Antichamber,
while I was standing on some Table talking
with the Lords or Ladies of the Court; and he seldom
failed of a smart Word or two upon my Littleness; 
against which I could only revenge my self
by calling him Brother, challenging him to wrestle; 
and such Repartees as are usual in the Mouths of
Court Pages. One Day at Dinner, this malicious
little Cubb was so nettled with something I had
said to him, that raising himself upon the Frame
of her Majesty's Chair, he took me up by the Middle,
as I was sitting down, not thinking any Harm,
and let me drop into a large Silver Bowl of Cream; 
and then ran away as fast as he could. I fell over
Head and Ears, and if I had not been a good Swimmer,
it might have gone very hard with me; for
Glumdalclitch in that Instant happened to be at the
other End of the Room; and the Queen was in such
a Fright, that she wanted Presence of Mind to assist 

me. But my little Nurse ran to my Relief; and
took me out, after I had swallowed above a Quart
of Cream. I was put to Bed; however I received
no other Damage than the Loss of a Suit of Cloaths,
which was utterly spoiled. The Dwarf was soundly
whipped, and as a further Punishment, forced to
drink up the Bowl of Cream, into which he had
thrown me; neither was he ever restored to Favour:
For, soon after the Queen bestowed him to
a Lady of high Quality; so that I saw him no more,
to my very great Satisfaction; for I could not tell
to what Extremity such a malicious Urchin might
have carried his Resentment. 
He had before served me a scurvy Trick, which
set the Queen a laughing, although at the same
time she were heartily vexed, and would have immediately
cashiered him, if I had not been so generous
as to intercede. Her Majesty had taken a
Marrow-bone upon her Plate; and after knocking
out the Marrow, placed the Bone again in the Dish
erect as it stood before; the Dwarf watching his
Opportunity, while Glumdalclitch was gone to the
Side-board, mounted the Stool that she stood on to
take care of me at Meals; took me up in both
Hands, and squeezing my Legs together, wedged
them into the Marrow-bone above my Waist; 
where I stuck for some time, and made a very ridiculous
Figure. I believe it was near a Minute
before any one knew what was become of me; 
for I thought it below me to cry out. But, as
Princes seldom get their Meat hot, my Legs were
not scalded, only my Stockings and Breeches in a
sad Condition. The Dwarf at my Entreaty had no
other Punishment than a sound whipping. 

I was frequently raillied by the Queen upon Account
of my Fearfulness; and she used to ask me
whether the People of my Country were as great
Cowards as my self. The Occasion was this. 
The Kingdom is much pestered with Flies in Summer; 
and these odious Insects, each of them as big
as a Dunstable Lark, hardly gave me any Rest while
I sat at Dinner, with their continual Humming and
Buzzing about mine Ears. They would sometimes
alight upon my Victuals, and leave their loathsome
Excrement or Spawn behind, which to me was very
visible, although not to the Natives of that
Country, whose large Opticks were not so acute as
mine in viewing smaller Objects. Sometimes they
would fix upon my Nose or Forehead, where they
stung me to the Quick, smelling very offensively; 
and I could easily trace that viscous Matter, which
our Naturalists tell us enables those Creatures to
walk with their Feet upwards upon a Ceiling. I
had much ado to defend my self against these detestable
Animals, and could not forbear starting
when they came on my Face. It was the common
Practice of the Dwarf to catch a Number of these
Insects in his Hand, as School-boys do among us,
and let them out suddenly under my Nose, on Purpose
to frighten me, and divert the Queen. My
Remedy was to cut them in Pieces with my Knife
as they flew in the Air; wherein my Dexterity was
much admired. 
I remember one Morning when Glumdalclitch
had set me in my Box upon a Window, as she
usually did in fair Days to give me Air, (for I durst
not venture to let the Box be hung on a Nail out
of the Window, as we do with Cages in England) 

after I had lifted up one of my Sashes, and sat
down at my Table to eat a Piece of Sweet-Cake for
my Breakfast; above twenty Wasps, allured by the
Smell, came flying into the Room, humming
louder than the Drones of as many Bagpipes. 
Some of them seized my Cake, and carried it piecemeal
away; others flew about my Head and Face,
confounding me with the Noise, and putting me in
the utmost Terror of their Stings. However I had
the Courage to rise and draw my Hanger, and attack
them in the Air. I dispatched four of them, but
the rest got away, and I presently shut my Window. 
These Insects were as large as Partridges; I
took out their Stings, found them an Inch and a
half long, and as sharp as Needles. I carefully
preserved them all, and having since shewn them
with some other curiosities in several Parts of Europe;
upon my Return to England I gave three of
them to Gresham College, and kept the fourth for
my self. 
