


Observations on the foregoing Dialogue,
together with a base Design
on our Hero, which must be detested
by every Lover of Greatness. 
Thus did this Dialogue (which tho'
we have termed it matrimonial, had
indeed very little Savour of the Sweets of
Matrimony in it) produce at last a Resolution
more wise than strictly pious, and which,
if they could have rigidly adhered to it,
might have prevented some unpleasant Moments
as well to our Hero as to his Serene
Consort; but their Hatred was so very
great and unaccountable, that they never
could bear to see the least Composure in one
another's Countenance, without attempting
to ruffle it. This set them on so many Contrivances
to plague and vex one another, that
as their Proximity afforded them such frequent
Opportunities of executing their malicious 

Purposes, that they seldom past one
easy or quiet Day together. 
And this, Reader, and no other is the
Cause of those many Inquietudes, which
thou must have observed to disturb the Repose
of some married Couples, who mistake
implacable Hatred for Indifference; for
why should Corvinus, who lives in a Round
of Intrigue, and seldom doth, and never
willingly would, dally with his Wife, endeavour
to prevent her from the Satisfaction
of an Intrigue in her Turn? Why doth
Camilla refuse a more agreeable Invitation
abroad, only to expose her Husband at his
own Table at home? In short, to mention
no more Instances, whence can all the
Quarrels, and Jealousies, and Jars, proceed,
in People who have no Love for each
other, unless from that noble Passion above-mentioned,
that Desire, according to my
Lady Betty Modish, of curing each other
of a Smile? 
We thought proper to give our Reader
a short Taste of the domestic State of our
Hero, the rather to shew him that GREAT 

Men are subject to the same Frailties and
Inconveniences in ordinary Life, with little
Men, and that Heroes are really of the same
Species with other human Creatures, notwithstanding
all the Pains they themselves,
or their Flatterers take to assert the contrary; 
and that they differ chiefly in the
Immensity of their Greatness, or as the
Vulgar erroneously call it, Villainy. Now
therefore, that we may not dwell too long
on low Scenes, in a History of this sublime
Kind, we shall return to Actions of a
higher Note, and more suitable to our Purpose. 
When the Boy Hymen had with his
lighted Torch driven the Boy Cupid out of
Doors; that is to say, in common Phrase,
when the Violence of Mr. Wild's Passion
(or rather Appetite) for the chaste Lætitia,
began to abate, he returned to visit his
Friend Heartfree, who was now in the Liberties
of the Fleet, and had appeared to
the Commission of Bankruptcy against him,
where he met with a less cold Reception
than he himself had apprehended. Heartfree
had long entertained Suspicions of 

Wild, but these Suspicions had from time to
time been confounded with Circumstances,
and principally smothered with that amazing
Confidence, which was indeed the most
striking Virtue in our Hero. He was unwilling
to condemn him, without certain
Evidence, and laid hold on every probable
Semblance to acquit him; but the Proposal
made at his last Visit had so totally
blackned his Character in this poor Man's
Opinion, that it entirely fixed the wavering
Scale, and he no longer doubted but that
our Hero was one of the greatest Villains
in the World. 
Circumstances of great Improbability
often escape Men who devour a Story with
greedy Ears; the Reader therefore cannot
wonder that Heartfree, whose Passions were
so variously concerned, first for the Fidelity,
and secondly for the Safety of his
Wife; and lastly, who was so distracted
with Doubt concerning the Conduct of his
Friend, should at his first Relation pass unobserved
the Incident of his being committed
to the Boat by the Captain of the
Privateer, which he had not at the time 

of his telling it in the least accounted for; 
but now when Heartfree came to reflect on
the whole, and with a high Prepossession
against Wild, the Absurdity of this Fact
glared in his Eyes, and struck him in the
most sensible Manner. At length a Thought
of great Horror suggested itself to his Imagination,
and this was, Whether the whole
was not a Fiction, and Wild, who was, as
he had learn'd from his own Mouth, equal
to any Undertaking how black soever, had
not spirited away, robbed and murthered
his Wife. 
Intolerable as this Apprehension was,
he not only turned it round and examined
it carefully in his own Mind, but acquainted
young Friendly with it at their next
Interview. Friendly, who detested Wild
(from that Envy, probably, with which
these great Characters naturally inspire
low Fellows) encouraged these Suspicions
so much, that Heartfree resolved
to attach our Hero and carry him before
a Magistrate. 

This Resolution had been sometime taken,
and Friendly with a Warrant and a
Constable had with the utmost Diligence,
searched several Days for our Hero; but
whether it was that in Compliance with
modern Custom, he had retired to spend
the Honey-Moon with his Bride, the only
Moon indeed in which it is fashionable or
customary for the married Parties to have
any Affection for each other; or perhaps
his Habitation might for particular
Reasons be usually kept a Secret: 
Like those of some few great Men,
whom unfortunately the Law hath left out
of that reasonable as well as honourable
Provision, which it hath made for the Security
of most great Men's Persons. 
But Wild resolved to perform Works of
Supererogation in the Way of Honour, and,
tho' no Hero is obliged to answer the
Challenge of my Lord Chief Justice, or indeed,
of any other Magistrate; but may
with unblemished Reputation slide away
from it; yet such was the Bravery, such 

the Greatness, the Magnanimity of Wild,
that he appeared in Person to it. 
Indeed Envy may say one Thing, which
may lessen the Glory of this Action, namely,
that the said Mr. Wild, knew nothing
of the said Warrant or Challenge; and as
thou may'st be assured, Reader, that the
malicious Fury will omit nothing which
can any ways fully so great a Character,
so she hath endeavoured to account for this
second Visit of our Hero to his Friend
Heartfree, from a very different Motive
than that of asserting his own Innocence. 