


Matters preliminary to the Marriage
between Mr. Jonathan Wild
and the chaste Lætitia. 
But to proceed with our History: 
Fireblood having received this Letter,
and promised on his Honour, as we have
before hinted, to discharge his Embassy
faithfully, went to visit the fair Lætitia. 
Having opened the Letter, and read it, she
put on an Air of Disdain, and told Mr. Fireblood, 

she could not conceive what Mr.
Wild meant by troubling her with his Impertinence; 
she begged him to carry the
Letter back again, saying, had she known
from whom it came, she would have been
d&wblank;d before she had opened it. Moreover,
she said she was not angry with him,
nay, she was sorry so pretty a young Man
should be employed in such an Errand. 
She accompanied these Words with so tender
an Accent, and so wanton a Leer, that
Fireblood, who was no backward Youth,
began to take her by the Hand, and proceeded
so warmly, that, to imitate his Actions
with the Rapidity of our Narration, he
in a few Minutes ravished this fair Creature,
or at least would have ravished her, if
she had not, by a timely Compliance, prevented him. 
FIREBLOOD, after he had ravished
as much as he could, returned to Wild,
and acquainted him as far as any wise Man
would, with what had past; concluding
with many Praises of the young Lady's
Beauty, with whom, he said, if his Honour
would have permitted him, he should himself 

have fallen in Love; but, d&wblank;n him,
if he would not sooner be torn in Pieces by
wild Horses, than even think of injuring his
Friend. And if he could be of any Service,
he might command him to go to
Lætitia when, and as often as he pleased. 
Thus constituted were the Love-Affairs
of our Hero, when his Father brought him
Mr. Snap's Proposal. The Reader must
know very little of Love, or indeed of any
thing else, if he requires any Information
concerning the Reception which this Proposal
met with. Not guilty never sounded
sweeter in the Ears of Culprit, nor a
Reprieve to the Prisoner condemned, than
did every Word of the old Gentleman in
the Ears of our Hero. He gave his Father
full Power to treat in his Name, and desired
nothing more than Expedition. 
The old People now met, and Snap,
who had Information from his Daughter,
of the violent Passion of her Lover, endeavoured
to improve it to the best Advantage,
and would have not only declined giving 

her any Fortune himself, but attempted to
cheat her of what she owed to the Liberality
of her Relations, particularly of a Pint
Silver Caudle Cup, the Gift of her Grandmother. 
However, the young Lady herself
afterwards took Care to prevent him. 
As to the old Mr. Wild, he did not sufficiently
attend to all the Designs of Snap,
as his Faculties were busily employed in
Designs of his own, to over-reach (or, as
others express it, to cheat) the said Mr. Snap,
by pretending to give his Son a whole
Number for a Chair, when in Reality he
was intitled to a third only. 
While Matters were thus settling between
the old Folks, the young Lady agreed
to admit Mr. Wild's Visits. And,
by Degrees, began to entertain him with
all the Shew of Affection, which the great
natural Reserve of her Temper, and the
greater artificial Reserve of her Education
would permit. At length every thing being
agreed between their Parents, Settlements
made, and the Lady's Fortune (to
wit, Seventeen Pounds and nine Shillings in
Money and Goods) paid down, the Day 

for their Nuptials was fixed, and they were
celebrated accordingly. 
Most Histories as well as Comedies
end at this Period; the Historian and the
Poet both concluding they have done enough
for their Hero when they have
married him; or intimating rather, that
the rest of his Life must be a dull Calm of
Happiness, very delightful indeed to pass
through, but somewhat insipid to relate: 
And Matrimony in general must, I believe,
without any Dispute, be allowed to be this
State of tranquil Felicity, so little concerned
with Variety, that, like Salisbury
Plain, it affords only one Prospect, a very
pleasant one it must be confest, but the
same. 
Now there was all Probability imaginable,
that this Contract would have
proved of such happy Note, both from the
great Accomplishments of the young Lady,
and the truly ardent Passion of Mr. Wild; 
but whether it was that Nature and Fortune
had great Designs for him to execute,
and would not suffer his vast Abilities to be 

lost and sunk in the Arms of a Wife, or
whether neither Nature nor Fortune had
any Hand in the Matter, is a Point I will
not determine. Certain it is that this Match
did not produce that serene State we have
mentioned above, but resembled the most
turbulent and ruffled, rather than calm
Sea. 
I cannot here omit a Conjecture ingenious
enough of a Friend of mine, who
had a long Intimacy in the Wild Family. 
He hath often told me he fancied one Reason
of the Dissatisfactions which afterwards
fell out between Wild and his Lady, arose
from the Number of Gallants, to whom she
had before Marriage granted Favours; for
says he, and indeed very probable it is too,
the Lady might expect from her Husband,
what she had before received from several,
and being angry not to find one Man as
good as ten, she had, from that Indignation,
taken those Steps which we cannot
perfectly justify. 
From this Person I received the following
Dialogue, which, he assured me, he
had overheard, and taken down verbatim. 

It passed on the Day Fortnight after they
were married. 