


In which David alone, and not his Camilla,
is the Sufferer. 
But whatever were the Pains of Mind
or Labour of Body that Camilla underwent,
they were too much for her Strength,
and she survived her Child but two Months. 
During which Time, David and his Daughter
Camilla (now his only remaining Child)
felt for her Sufferings what she had before
experienced for her Children. Although
in all her Weakness, and all her Pains, she
lightened their Burdens as much as possible
by stifling her Complaints, by catching
every Moment to appear chearful; and in
thus concealing what she really felt, she
practised the only kind of Deceit her Mind
would ever suffer her to be guilty of. In
short, Camilla's Death was an uniform Conclusion
to her Life. She was all Resignation
and Submission to the Will of her God. 

She dropped not one Word of Pity for herself,
and endeavoured to soften her Husband's
Sorrow, by shewing as little Reluctance
as possible at knowing she was going to
be separated even from him. She denied
herself the Pleasure of uttering many little
tender Expressions that often arose in her
Mind, for fear they should impress too deeply
in his Heart, and add Stings to her
Loss. For her Consideration for her Husband's
Peace could not cease whilst yet she
preserved any remaining Breath. 
David led his Daughter weeping from the
Bed-side—he could not weep—he sat as
one stupified. —But as soon as he heard that
his Camilla was out of the Reach of Pain or
Sorrow, he thanked God, and felt a Peace
and Calm that his Mind had been long a
Stranger to. The Dread of her Distress, the
Sight or Hearing of her Pains were now at
an End, and for the present his own Loss
did not even occur to his Mind; he in a
manner forgot himself, all his Thoughts
were fixed on his beloved Wife; and as he
knew her Innocence, he was filled with the
highest Hopes of her Happiness. He endeavoured
to lead the Mind of his Daughter
Camilla, young as she was, to distinguish
between her own Loss, and the insufferable 

Pain of seeing her Mother's Anguish. Nor
was it difficult to her to perceive the Truth
of what her Father told her, namely, that
whoever can stand their Friends painful Passage
through this World, may easily stand
their being delivered from it. For how
much more insupportable to a tender Mind
are their Friends Miseries than their Loss! 
But lest this Friendship should appear too
disinterested to be practicable, I pretend nor
wish not to conceal from my Reader, nor
did David endeavour to conceal from himself,
that it was the superior Torments of his
own Mind in seeing Camilla's Sufferings,
that rendered him more calm at hearing of
her Death. The Time she had lain in her
Sickness had raised such Images in his
Breast, that it was impossible any Change
could be for the worse. For Time after
Time did he quit her Room, when, like
Job, he could almost have contended with
the Almighty. And one might say with
no great Impropriety, that a temporary
Madness had seized his Mind. But, like his
royal Example in the Scripture, though he
fasted and prayed whilst his Petition could
be granted, yet as soon as it was rejected,
he humbly acquiesced, satisfied in the Wisdom
as well as the Goodness of the great 

Disposer of Events. Nay he even began, in
his own Fancy, to imagine himself possessed
of great Riches, in Comparison of what
he had been from the Time he dreaded his
Camilla's Distress. Mr. Orgueil now, would
he have given his whole Estate, had it not
in his Power to make him amends for sending
him home with empty Advice to do
Impossibilities, and with the Stings of Unkindness
in his Heart, when his House was
a House of Distress and Sorrow.  But as
Mr. Orgueil had not, with his whole Fortune,
the Power of giving him equal Pleasure,
so neither had he the Power of tormenting
him, as when he cruelly refused to
relieve his beloved Camilla. She was out of
the Reach of feeling the Effects of Hardness
of Heart, and consequently David could
never again feel the same Strokes. His own
Pains, indeed, might force from him a
Groan; but it must be the Sufferings of another
that could quite dissolve and overcome
all his Resolutions. 
But David's Weight of Grief, though at
first borne up by the pleasing Reflection,
that his Camilla had escaped all earthly
Troubles, grew almost too heavy for his
Strength to support; and his Thoughts still
fixed on his Camilla, took another Turn, 

The last Twelvemonth of Distress could not
obliterate the many Years of the highest human
Happiness he had enjoyed with his
Wife. There was a Rent in his Heart,
which he vainly endeavoured to heal: there
was no Place, no Minute in the twenty-four
Hours, that did not bring to his Remembrance
his faithful, his tender Companion. 
And in Proportion as the Image of her Sufferings
decreased, the Sense of his own Loss
was strengthened. The Velocity of his
Thoughts in one Minute could trace back
Years. The chearful Looks, the soft Compliances
of his Camilla were continually
present to his Imagination, with the sharp
and poignant Reflection, that he should behold
them no more. He attempted not, by
flying from Place to Place, to hide from his
own Mind the Death of Camilla. He knew,
unless he could fly from himself, the Picture
could not be rooted from his Heart. Human
Philosophy had little Chance of bringing
him Comfort. It was vain to tell him,
that he could not help himself, and therefore
he must not feel; and that other Men had
lost their Wives, and therefore he must
look on his Loss as nothing. This, and
much more of this kind, was all answered
in one Word, “I loved Camilla, and she is
no more.” Had David been an Infidel, 

not all the Books composed by the wisest
Philosophers, would have taken one Arrow
from a Heart so sensible as his of every tender
Connection. He would have raved to
Madness, or wept himself to Death: but
when the Christian Hope came over his
Mind, that his Camilla was really happy,
—that the Loss was all his own—and that
a short Time longer struggling through Life
would put an End to all his Sorrows also,
and render him happy, his Grief would subside,
and patient Resignation take its Place. 
Nay, his Consideration for his Daughter
made him even wish for Life, till he could
place her in some Situation where her Youth
and Innocence might meet a kind of Protection. 