


The Birth, Parentage, and Education
of Mr. Jonathan Wild the Great. 
It is observable that Nature seldom produces
any one who is afterwards to act
a notable Part on the Stage of Life, but
she gives some Warning of her Intention; 
and as the dramatic Poet generally prepares
the Entry of every considerable Character,
with a solemn Narrative, or at least
a great Flourish of Drums and Trumpets; 
so doth this our Alma Mater by some
shrewd Hints, pre-admonish us of her Intention. 
Thus Astyages, who was the
Grandfather of Cyrus, dreamed that his
Daughter was brought to Bed of a Vine
whose Branches over-spread all Asia; and
Hecuba, while big with Paris, dreamed
that she was delivered of a Firebrand that
set all Troy in Flames; so did the Mother
of our Great Man, while she was with
child of him, dream that she was enjoyed
in the Night by the Gods Mercury, and
Priapus. This Dream puzzled all the 

learned Astrologers of her Time, seeming
to imply in it a Contradiction; Mercury
being the God of Ingenuity, and Priapus
the Terror of those who practised it. What
made this Dream the more wonderful, and
perhaps the true Cause of its being remembred,
was a very extraordinary Circumstance,
sufficiently denoting something preter-natural
in it; for tho' she had never heard even the
Name of either of these Gods, she repeated
these very Words in the Morning, with
only a small Mistake of the Quantity of
the latter, which she chose to call Pri&ashort;pus  instead of Pri&abar;pus;  and her Husband swore
that tho' he might possibly have named
Mercury to her, for he had heard of such
an Heathen God, he never in his Life could
have any wise put her in Mind of that
other Deity, with whom he had no Acquaintance. 
Another remarkable Incident was, that
during her whole Pregnancy, she constantly
longed for every thing she saw; nor
could be satisfied with her Wish unless she
injoyed it clandestinely; and as Nature by
true and accurate Observers is remarked to give 

us no Appetites without furnishing us with
the Means of gratifying them; so had she
at this Time a most marvellous glutinous
Quality attending her Fingers, to which as
to Birdlime, every thing closely adhered
that she handled. 
To omit other Stories, some of which
may be perhaps the Growth of Superstition,
we proceed to the Birth of our Hero, who
made his first Appearance on this Great
Theatre, the very Day when the Plague
first broke out in 1665. Some say his Mother
was delivered of him in an House of
an orbicular or round Form in Covent-Garden; 
but of this we are not certain. 
He was some Years afterwards baptized by
the famous Mr. Titus Oates. 
Nothing very remarkable past in his
Years of Infancy, save, that as the Letters
Th are the most difficult of Pronunciation,
and the last which a Child attains to
the Utterance of, so they were the first
that came with any Readiness from young
Master Wild. Nor must we omit the early
Indications which he gave of the Sweetness 

of his Temper; for tho' he was by no
Means to be terrified into Compliance,
yet might he by a Sugar-plumb be brought
to your Purpose: Indeed, to say the Truth,
he was to be bribed to any thing, which
made many say, he was certainly born to
be a Great Man. 
He was scarce settled at School before
he gave Marks of his lofty and aspiring
Temper; and was regarded by all his
School-Fellows with that Deference which
Men generally pay to those superior Genius's
who will exact it of them. If an Orchard
was to be robb'd, Wild was consulted,
and tho' he was himself seldom
concerned in the Execution of the Design,
yet was he always Concerter of it, and
Treasurer of the Booty; some little Part of
which he would now and then, with wonderful
Generosity, bestow on those who
took it; he was generally very secret on
these Occasions: But if any offered to
plunder of his own Head, without acquainting
Master Wild and making a Deposite of
the Booty, he was sure to have an Information
against him lodged with the School-Master, 

and to be severely punished for his
Pains. 
He discovered so little Attention to
School-Learning, that his Master, who was
a very wise and worthy Man, soon gave
over all Care and Trouble on this Account,
and acquainting his Parents that their Son
proceeded extremely well in his Studies, he
permitted his Pupil to follow his own Inclinations; 
perceiving they led him to nobler
Pursuits than the Sciences, which are
generally acknowledged to be a very unprofitable
Study, and greatly to hinder the
Advancement of Men in the World: But
tho' Master Wild was not esteemed the readiest
at making his Exercise, he was universally
allowed to be the most dextrous at
stealing it of all his School-Fellows: Being
never detected in such furtive Compositions,
nor indeed in any other Exercitations of his
great Talents, which all inclined the same
Way, but once, when he had laid violent
Hands on a Book called Gradus ad Parnassum
i. e. A Step towards Parnassus; 
on which Account his Master, who was a
Man of most wonderful Wit and Sagacity, is 

said to have told him, he wished it might
not prove in the Event, Gradus ad Patibulum,
i. e. A Step towards the Gallows. 
But tho' he would not give himself the
Pains requisite to acquire a competent sufficiency
in the learned Languages, yet did
he readily listen with Attention to others,
especially when they translated the Classical
Authors to him; nor was he in the
least backward at all such Times, to express
his Approbation. He was wonderfully
pleased with that Passage in the Eleventh
Iliad, where Achilles is said to have bound
two Sons of Priam upon a Mountain, and
afterwards released them for a Sum of Money. 
This was, he said, alone sufficient
to refute those who affected a Contempt
for the Wisdom of the Ancients, and an
undeniable Testimony of the great Antiquity
of *  Priggism. He was ravished
with the Account which Nestor gives in
the same Book, of the rich Booty which
he bore off (i. e. stole) from the Eleans. 
He was desirous of having this often repeated
to him, and at the End of every Repetition, 

he constantly fetched a deep Sigh,
and said, It was a glorious Booty. 
When the Story of Cacus was read to
him out of the Eighth Æneid, he generously
pitied the unhappy Fate of that
Great Man, to whom he thought Hercules
much too severe: One of his School-Fellows
commending the Dexterity of
drawing the Oxen backward by their Tails
into his Den, he smiled, and with some
Disdain said, He could have taught him a
better Way. 
He was a passionate Admirer of Heroes,
particularly Alexander the Great, between
whom and the late King of Sweden he
would frequently draw Parallels. He was
much delighted with the Accounts of the
Czar's Retreat from the latter, who carried
off the Inhabitants of great Cities to people
his own Country. This, he said, was
not once thought of by Alexander; but, added,
perhaps he did not want them. 
Happy had it been for him, if he had
confined himself to this Sphere; but his 

chief, if not only Blemish, was that he
would sometimes, from an Humility in his
Nature, too pernicious to true Greatness,
condescend to an Intimacy with inferior
Things and Persons. Thus the Spanish
Rogue was his favourite Book, and the
Cheats of Scapin his favourite Play. 
The young Gentleman being now at the
Age of seventeen, his Father, from a foolish
Prejudice to our Universities, and out
of a false, as well as excessive Regard to
his Morals, brought his Son to Town,
where he resided with him till he was of
an Age to travel. Whilst he was here, all
imaginable Care was taken of his Instruction,
his Father endeavouring his utmost
to inculcate Principles of Honour and Gentility
into his Son. 