


In which is seen the anxious Concern of David
for his Brother's Child. 
David and Camilla very sensibly felt
the Loss of their much valued Friends. 
Their Minds, capable of the highest Enjoyment
that innocent and spritely Conversation
can give, must necessarily have some
Reluctance at parting with Valentine and
Cynthia; and the old Gentleman's truly paternal
Heart was filled with anxious Cares
for his Children's Welfare. It was, indeed,
impossible for any the least Link of this Society
to be loosed without being strongly
perceived by all the rest. 
As the modest Mind of Camilla ever fled
for Protection and Refuge to David's Understanding,
so under his kind Directions
she walked securely free from Fear or Guilt; 
and as David's Understanding never suffered
him to go astray from the Path that led
to his real Happiness, he chearfully turned
the brightest Side of every Accident to his 

View. He knew not Despondency; and,
as his own Pleasure was heightened by
communicating Delight to others, he contrived
every Method in his Power, of raising
in his own Mind, and in those of all his
Family, the most agreeable Images. He
often said, that Mankind in general, notwithstanding
all their pretended Search after
Happiness, seemed to him to be so totally
ignorant of any rational Method to pursue
it, that they acted as absurdly as a Refiner
would do, who should carefully preserve
all the Dross he extracts from Gold, and
cast the Gold, as worthless Dross, into the
Sea. Now, therefore, if by any the smallest
Mark of Dejection in Camilla's Conntenance
her indulgent Husband thought she felt this
Separation from her Brother and Friend too
sharply, he kindly led her Mind to consider,
that she was most probably grieving at
the very Means of their Friends Prosperity; 
till, by that pleasing Prospect, the Image of
her own Loss slid from her Thoughts, and
dissolved in her Husband's Kindness. 
Yet David and his gentle Wife enjoyed
but a small Respite before they were attacked
by an unforeseen Stroke; which they
could not avoid lamenting, although they
endeavoured, as much as possible, to resign 

their Minds, and to submit to their Creator
without repining. 
One Morning old Mrs. Dunster, the Mother
of Betty Dunster, before mentioned,
came to see Camilla. The good Woman
was the Picture which Hamlet describes:
her Arms were folded a-cross; she hum'd
and ha'd—hinted, that she could—and,
if she would—and threw out many dark
Hints about People and Folks; such as,
“That People, when they took other Folks
Children, should take Care of them, and
not pretend to do them a Kindness, and
make them Slaves to their own Children. 
To be sure, nothing was too good for
their own. —If they were never so cross,
they were sure not to lack. —It is a true
Saying, that Money do make the Mare
to go. —But other Folks Children be
made of Flesh and Blood too, thoff they
ben't so rich; and may catch Cold, and
be ill, and die too, as well as Quality
Folks. —For we be all God Almighty's
Creatures, and he gives his Blessing to
all alike. —I warrant, poor Children
must not catch cold, thoff they do lie in
a wet Room—to be sure, they must be
well, whether they be well or no— 
they must have no Privilege of being ill 

as the rich have.” All this the poor old
Woman run on, intending very well, though
her Expressions were something odd; for
by the Privilege of being sick, she meant,
of being taken care of, when sick; and the
Reason of her broken Sentences, was, that
she did not dare to speak out, because her
Intelligence must come from her Daughter,
who lived with Mrs. Orgueil. 
Camilla, who was naturally endued with
a great deal of Sagacity, and who always
employed that Sagacity in watching over
the Welfare of whatever belonged to Cynthia,
easily perceived, by the old Woman's
broken Sentences, that there was no Safety
for little Cynthia, but her being relieved
from the Power of Mrs. Orgueil; and (according
to her Custom) was hastening to
open her Heart to her Husband, when she
received the following Letter. 

“Dear Madam,
“WE had a pleasant Journey to the
Bath; and should have had a much
pleasanter, if it had not been for Cynthia's
Daughter, whose Humours, indeed, are
intolerably troublesome. I wonder she 

should have been bred up, to give herself
such Airs, as she can have no Prospect
of any Fortune; but these Wits
—Well, I'll put it into my Litany,
that my Child mayn't be a Wit. The
little Hussey sets up for such Delicacy!
she pretends she has got a Cold, and fancies
she lay in a wet Room the first Night
of our Arrival; but I know it is all Humour,
because she was contradicted. Nothing
would serve her, truly, but to lye
with my Miss Cassy, though she knows
the poor Child hates to lye with any one,
but her own Maid, whom she is very
fond of; for it is a gentle, loving, little
thing; and I will not suffer her to be
vexed, and spoil her Eyes with Crying,
to please any humoursome Brat in England. 
I wish the delicate Puss Cynthia
mayn't be glad to have any Place to lie
in, before she dies. I love to confer Favours; 
but the Ingratitude of this World
is enough to make one forswear the
Thoughts of laying an Obligation on any
Person. —I know, Camilla, you have
too much Good Sense, to be offended at
my free Manner of speaking; for I intend
to be a Friend to the Girl, and break her
of her perverse obstinate Humours. I
am glad, for her sake, she fell into my 

Hands, and will have the Example of
my sweet-tempered Puppet continually
before her Eyes.” 
“I am, Madam, &c.
H. Orgueil. 
“Mr. Orgueil desires
his Compliments.” 
The Matter of Fact, which, at present,
must appear confused, between the Account
in Mrs. Orgueil's Letter, and the dark
Hints thrown out by Mrs. Dunster, was
thus. 
When Mrs. Orgueil set out, with her own
Family and little Cynthia, to the Bath, Mrs.
Orgueil, for fear of crowding her Henrietta,
would not suffer Cynthia to have any other
Place in her Coach, than a Box placed at
the Bottom for that Purpose, which, being
corded, and Cynthia very weak, made her so
uneasy that she modestly mentioned it: poor
Infant, she had never lived in any other Family
but David's, and ignorantly thought
that Redress (epecially if easily come at)
was the natural Consequence of every reasonable
Complaint! but being told, that it
was impossible she could be hurt; and being
ordered, with an insolent Tone of Voice, 

not to be humoursome; she practised the
Lesson of Patience, her Mother had taught
her, from the time she was capable of profiting
by any Instructions; and, whatever
Pain she might suffer, complained no
more. 
When they arrived at the Lodgings taken
for them at the Bath, the House was so
full, that they could not covneniently be
accommodated, but by little Cynthia's lying
with Henrietta, who, on this Occasion,
fell into such a Passion of Rage and Tears,
for fear her Maid (whom she took all Opportunities
of scratching and fighting with)
should be separated from her, as frightened
her Mother out of her Wits, and made her
fall on little Cynthia in all the Terms of Reproach
she could invent, or think of; although
not so much as one Word fell from
the innocent Child's Lips, to give her any
the least Provocation. 
At last the Mistress of the House said,
there was one little spare Bed, up in the
Garret, in which the Child might lie, after
this one Night; but, as it had been washed
that very Morning, she was afraid Miss
would take cold. On this Mrs. Orgueil
mustered her whole Stock of Insolence into 

her Countenance, repeated the Word Miss
half a dozen Times; and then desired Miss
to go to-bed, without any Whims or Airs. 
The Child, fatigued with her tiresome Journey,
with a pale and wan Countenance,
obeyed, wondering what was the matter; 
for, hitherto, she had been too happy to fear
feeling the Effects of Anger, without, even
in Thought, giving the least Offence. 
When Mrs. Orgueil was, for the present,
rid of this most dreadful Enemy, she began
to fondle her Henrietta, for being so loving. 
Poor little thing! She loved her Maid. 
She was the most gentle loving Child! Indeed,
all her Acquaintance said, she took
after her Mamma, in every thing. Miss,
indeed! She should be sick of the Word as
long as she lived; she supposed Miss wou'd
be just such another Wit as her Mother. 
Then she began to sigh and lament over little
Henny; no body pitied her, though she
looked so pale, and was so tender in her
Constitution; she had lost her Appetite too,
lately, and would certainly, poor little dear
Creature, go into a Consumption. 
It may appear something odd, but at this
very time, when Henrietta, in the Eyes of
her Mother, was this weakly, sickly Child, 

every impartial Person plainly saw that she
was a fresh-coloured healthy looking Girl,
and had no Distemper, but a little Weakness
in her Eyes (those Eyes Mrs. Orgueil
was so afraid should be spoiled) arising from
her continual crying, because she could not
discover her own Inclinations. 
At the Time Mrs. Orgueil wrote the foregoing
Letter to Camilla, little Cynthia was
afflicted with a fixed Pain in her Head, occasioned
by a violent Cold given her in that
wet Room she lay in the first Night of her
Arrival at the Bath. It might reasonably have
been hoped that the seeing the poor Child's
Pain would have mollified Mrs. Orgueil; 
but so far from it, that it seemed rather to irritate
her Passions, to find that a Consequence
should attend her Commands, which she
had declared could not attend them: nor
could she suffer little Cynthia to have a Moment's
Peace; for Henrietta now took a Fancy
to play and make all manner of Noises
in her Room; and if Good Nature prompted
any of the Family, in Compassion, to
try to prevent this which was Play to her,
but Death to Cynthia, Henrietta had nothing
to do, but to fall a blubbering in Mrs. Orgueil's
Sight, who always immediately gave
Orders that Cynthia should not dare to pretend 

to be disturbed by only a little innocent
Play; and should know her Station
enough to humour the poor Child. And
yet so strange was Mrs. Orgueil in her Humour,
that one Evening (although that very
Day she had sent Cynthia one of the above
practicable Orders) having a Pain her own
Head, and Henrietta making a Noise with
drawing about the Chair, as she used to do
in little Cynthia's Room (and not making
the proper Distinction, who she was at
Liberty to disturb, would not desist) this
fond Mother, in a violent Rage, beat her
with an uncommon Severity. 
This Behaviour of Mrs. Orgueil can no
otherwise be accounted for, than that on
the one hand she opposed Cynthia's Daughter
to something she could call her own; 
and, on the other, Henrietta-Cassandra was
forced to yield the Pre-eminence to a yet
dearer Friend, namely, herself. 
In short, Mrs. Orgueil, from their first
Acquaintance, had suffered an inveterate
Hatred to Cynthia to take Possession of her
Mind, arising from a Suspicion, fatal to her
Peace, that, notwithstanding her great Superiority
in Equipage, Dress, and Riches,
some few of her Acquaintance were foolish 

or mad enough eo prefer Cynthia's Company
to hers. Now this same uneasy Suspicion
(which, without any great Harshness, may
be said to be nearly related to Envy) again
haunted her on Account of little Cynthia
and her own Henrietta-Cassandra; every
kind Word that was said to the former, she
imagined was a Robbery from the latter; 
and it would certainly be very unreasonable
to demand any other Account of her Cruelty. 
David and Camilla, on the Receipt of Mrs.
Orgueil's Letter, immediately resolved to
have the Child Home; but some Difficulty
arose concerning the Method. They feared
she was too weak to bear any manner of travelling
which their Purse could reach; but
David, who was always ready to expose
himself to Difficulties for the sake of his
Friends, and driven on by the Thought of
Valentine and his Wife's Grief, in case they
should lose their Child, immediately set out
on foot for the Bath, that he might preserve
the little Cash in his Possession, in order to
convey little Cynthia home, as he should
find it necessary. 
David, when he saw little Cynthia, was
shocked at the Alteration of her Countenance. 

Her pale and languid Looks sufficiently
expressed her Condition. And now
all Consequences vanished from his Mind,
and no Thoughts remained, but that of
saving his Friend's Child. 
Mrs. Orgueil would not assist him with
any Vehicle or Horses, for she was angry
at losing the Object of her Power: but had
she thought her in any Danger, she would
have been the first to have sent her away; 
for, although she could wilfully and unprovokedly
cause the Misery of her Fellow-creatures,
yet the Thought of Death, especially
in her House, would have filled
her with the utmost Horror. 
David immediately hired a Chariot, and,
in his Arms, conveyed little Cynthia to his
Camilla, who employed her most diligent
Care to make the Burthen of her Distemper
as light as possible; but all Care came too
late, for the Child was too far gone. Her
Fever daily encreased, and she did not outlive
her Change of Situation, from the
dreadful Tyranny of Mrs. Orgueil to the
tender Care of Camilla, above a Week. 
David's little Family much lamented
their Cousin, for she was a pratling spritely 

Child, and innocent of one Thought of
Offence towards any Mortal. 
Camilla reflected with the most poignant
Affliction, that she had suffered her dear
Brother's Child to go to Mrs. Orgueil; and,
in the first Attack of her Grief, her Mind
was so weakened, that she accused herself
of being her Destroyer. But David, altho'
the Picture of what Valentine and Cynthia
must feel, on hearing such News, was deeply
imprinted in his Imagination, and made
a strong Effort to subdue his Mind; yet did
he preserve Steadiness enough to conquer
his own Passions, to comfort his Camilla,
and again to restore his little Family to
Harmony and Peace. 