


The Arrival of a Person little expected; 
with other Matters. 
The Day was now come when poor
Heartfree was to suffer an ignominious
Death. Friendly had, in the strongest
Manner, confirmed his Assurance of
fulfilling his Promise, of becoming a Father
to one of his Children, and a Husband to
the other. This gave him inexpressible
Comfort, and he had, the Evening before,
taken his last Leave of the little Wretches,
with a Tenderness which drew a Tear
from one of the Keepers, joined to a Magnanimity
which would have pleased a Stoic. 
When he was informed that the Coach,
which Friendly had provided for him, was
ready, and that the rest of the Prisoners
were gone, he embraced that faithful Friend
with great Passion, and begged that he
would leave him here; but the other desired
Leave to accompany him to his
End; which at last he was forced to
comply with. And now he was proceeding 

towards the Coach, when he found his
Difficulties were not yet over; for now a
Friend arrived, of whom he was to take a
harder and more tender Leave than he had
yet gone through. This Friend, Reader,
was no other than Mrs. Heartfree herself,
who ran to him with a Look all wild,
staring, and frantic, and, having reached
his Arms, fainted away in them without
uttering a single Syllable. Heartfree was,
with great Difficulty, able to preserve his
own Senses in such a Surprize at such a
a Season. And indeed our good-natured
Reader will be rather inclined to wish this
miserable Couple had, by dying in each other's
Arms, put a final Period to their
Woes, than have survived to taste those
bitter Moments which were to be their Portion,
and which the unhappy Wife, soon
recovering from the short Intermission of
Being, now began to suffer. When she
became first Mistress of her Voice, she burst
forth into the following Accents: “O my
Husband! —Is this the Condition in
which I find you after our cruel Separation! 
Who hath done this? Cruel
Heaven! What is the Occasion? I know 

thou canst deserve no Ill. Tell me,
some Body who can speak, while I have
my Senses left to understand,—What
is the Matter?” At which Words several
laughed, and one answered: “The Matter!
Why no great Matter. —The Gentleman
is not the first, nor won't be the
last: The worst of the Matter is, that if
we are to stay all the Morning here, I
shall lose my Dinner.” Heartfree,
pausing a Moment, and recollecting himself,
cyr'd out: “I will bear all with Patience.” 
And then, addressing himself
to the commanding Officer, begged he
might only have a few Minutes by himself
with his Wife, whom he had not seen before,
since his Misfortunes. The GREAT
Man answered: “He had Compassion on
him, and would do more than he could
answer; but he supposed he was too
much a Gentleman not to know that
something was due for such Civility.” 
On this hint, Friendly, who was himself
half dead, pulled five Guineas out of his
Pocket; which the GREAT Man took, and
said, he would be so generous to give him
ten Minutes; on which one observed, that 

many a Gentleman had bought ten Minutes
with a Woman dearer, and many other
facetious Remarks were made, unnecessary
to be here related. Heartfree was
now suffered to retire into a Room with
his Wife, the Commander informing him
at his Entrance, that he must be expeditious,
for that the rest of the good Company
would be at the Tree before him, and
he supposed he was a Gentleman of too
much Breeding to make them wait. 
This tender wretched Couple were now
retired for these few Minutes, which the
Commander without carefully measured
with his Watch; and Heartfree was mustering
all his Resolution to part with what
his Soul so ardently doated on, and to conjure
her to support his Loss for the sake
of her poor infants, and to comfort her
with the Promise of Friendly on their Account; 
but all his Design was frustrated. 
Mrs. Heartfree could not support the Shock,
but again fainted away, and so entirely lost
every Symptom of Life, that Heartfree
called vehemently for Assistance. Friendly
rushed first into the Room, and was soon 

followed by many others, and, what was
remarkable, one who had unmoved beheld
the tender Scene between these parting Lovers,
was touched to the quick by the pale
Looks of the Woman, and ran up and
down for Water, Drops, &c. with the utmost
Hurry and Confusion. The ten Minutes
were expired, which the Commander now
hinted; and seeing nothing offered for
the Renewal of the Term (for indeed
Friendly had unhappily emptied his Pockets)
he began to grow very importunate, and
at last told Heartfree, He should be ashamed
not to act more like a Man. Heartfree
begged his Pardon, and said, he would
make him wait no longer. Then, with the
deepest Sigh, cry'd: “O my Angel!” and
embracing his Wife with the utmost Eagerness,
kissed her pale Lips with more Fervency
than ever Bridegroom did the blushing
Cheeks of his Bride; he then cry'd: “The
Great God bless thee, and, if it be his
Pleasure, restore thee to Life; if not, I
beseech him we may presently meet again
in a better World than this.” He
was breaking from her, when, perceiving
her Sense returning, he could not forbear 

renewing his Embrace, and again pressing
her Lips, which now recovered Life and
Warmth so fast, that he begged one ten
Minutes more to tell her what her Swooning
had prevented her hearing. The worthy
Commander, being perhaps a little
touched at this tender Scene, took Friendly
aside, and asked him what he would give,
if he would suffer his Friend to remain half
an Hour? Friendly answered, any thing; 
that he had no more Money in his Pocket,
but he would certainly pay him that Afternoon. 
Well then, I'll be moderate, said
he,—Twenty Guineas. —Friendly
answered, It is a Bargain. The Commander
having exacted a firm Promise, cry'd,
—Then I don't care if they stay a whole
Hour together; for what signifies hiding
good News? —The Gentleman is reprieved
—; of which he had just before
received Notice in a Whisper. It would be
very impertinent to offer at a Description
of the Joy this occasioned to the two
Friends, or to Mrs. Heartfree, who was
now again recovered. A Surgeon, who
was happily present, was employed to bleed
them all. After which, the Commander, 

who had his Promise of the Money again
confirmed to him, wished Heartfree Joy,
and, shaking him very friendly by the
Hands, cleared the Room of all the Company,
and left the three Friends together. 