

Is little more than a continuance of the
former. 
Miss Betsy had no sooner disengaged
herself from the incumbrance of a
formal dress, and put on one more light
and easy, al fresco, as the Spaniards phrase
it, than she began to give her brother's
letter a more serious and attentive perusal,
than she had the opportunity of doing before. 
She was charmed and elated with the
description mr. Francis had told her, she
had inspired in the breast of his friend; 
she called to her mind the idea of those
persons who were present at the entertainments
he mentioned, and easily recollected
which was most likely to be the lover, 
though she remembered not the name:
she very well now remembered there was
one that seemed both times to regard her
with glances, which had somewhat peculiar
in them, and which then she had interpreted
as the certain indications of feeling
something in his heart of the nature
her brother had described; but not seeing
him afterwards, nor hearing any mention
made of him, at least that she took notice
of, the imagination went out of her
head. 
This account of him, however, brought
to her memory every thing she had observed
concerning him, and was very well
convinced she had seen nothing, either in
his person or deportment, that was not
perfectly agreeable; yet notwithstanding
all this, and the high encomiums given of
him by a brother, who she knew would
not deceive her, she was a little vexed
to find herself pressed by one so dear, and
so nearly related to her, to think of him
as a man she ever intended to marry:
she thought she could be pleased to have
such a lover, but could not bring herself
to be content that he ever should be a
husband. She had too much good sense
not to know it suited not with the condition
of a wife to indulge herself in the
gaieties she at present did, which though 
innocent, and, as she thought, becoming
enough in the present state she now was,
might not be altogether pleasing to one,
who, if he so thought proper, had the
power of restraining them. In fine, she
looked upon a serious behaviour as unsuitable
to one of her years, and therefore
resolved not to enter into a condition,
which demanded some share of it, at least
for a long time; that is, when she should
be grown weary of the admiration, flatteries,
and addresses of the men, and no
longer found any pleasure in seeing herself
preferred before all the women of her
acquaintance. 
Though it is certain, that few young
handsome ladies are without some share
of the vanity here described, yet it is to
be hoped, there are not many who are possessed
of it in that immoderate degree
miss Betsy was. It is, however, for the
sake of those who are so, that these pages
are wrote, to the end they may use their
utmost endeavours to correct that error,
as they will find it so fatal to the happiness
of one, who had scarce any other
blameable propensity in her whole composition. 
This young lady was full of meditations
on her new conquest, and the manner in 
which she should receive the victim, who
was so shortly to prostrate himself at the
shrine of her beauty, when she heard some
body run hastily up stairs, and go into
lady Mellasin's dressing-room, which being,
as has been already taken notice of,
on a very remarkable occasion, she stepped
out of the chamber to see who was there,
and found mrs. Prinks very busy at a cabinet,
where her lady's Jewels were always
kept: “So, mrs. Prinks,” said she,
“is my lady come home?” “No, miss,” 
replied the other, “her ladyship is certainly
the most compassionate best woman
in the world; her cousin is very
bad indeed, and she has sent me for a
bottle of reviving drops, which I am
going back to carry.” With these
words she shussled something into her pocket,
and having locked the cabinet again,
went out of the room, saying, “Your
servant, miss Betsy, I cannot stay, for
life's at stake.” 
This put miss Betsy in the greatest consternation
imaginable; she knew lady Mellasin
could have no drops in that Cabinet,
unless they were contained in a phial of
no larger circumference than a thimble,
the drawers of it being very shallow, and
made only to hold rings, croceats, necklaces,
and such other flat trinkets: she 
thought there was something very odd,
and extraordinary in the whole affair. A
strange woman coming in so abrupt a manner,
—her refusing to give the letter to any
one but lady Mellasin herself,—her ladyship's
confusion at the receipt of it,—her
disguising herself, and going out with
Prinks in that violent hurry,—the latter
being sent home,—her taking something
out of the casket, and her going back
again; all these incidents, I say, when put
together, denoted something of a mystery
not easily penetrated into. 
Miss Betsy, however, was not of a disposition
to think too much, or too deeply,
on those things, which the most nearly
concerned herself, much less on such as
related entirely to other people; and miss
Flora coming home soon after, and relating
what conversation had passed in the
visits she had been making, and the dresses
the several ladies had on, and such other
trifling matters, diverted the other from
those serious reflections, which might
otherwise, perhaps, have lasted somewhat
longer. 
When miss Flora was undressed, they
went down together into the parlour, where
they found mr. Goodman extremely uneasy,
that lady Mellasin was not come 
home: he had been told in what manner
she went out, and it now being grown
dark, he was frighted least any ill accident
should befall her, as she had no manservant,
nor any one with her but her woman,
whom, he said, he could not look
on as a sufficient guard for a lady of quality,
against those insults, which night, and the
libertinism of the age, frequently produced. 
This tender husband asked the young
ladies a thousand questions, concerning
the possibility of guessing to whom, and
to what part of the town, she was gone,
in order that he might go himself, or send
a servant, to conduct her safely home; but
neither of them were able to inform him
any thing farther, than what has been already
related; that she had been sent for
to a sick relation, who, as it appeared to
them, had been very pressing to engage her
ladyship to that charitable office. 
Mr. Goodman then began to endeavour
to recollect the names and places of abode,
of all those he had ever heard her say were
of her kindred, for she had never suffered
any of them to come to the house, under
pretence that some of them had not behaved
well, and that others being fallen
to decay, and poor, might expect favours
from her, and that she would suffer nobody 
belonging to her to be burthensome
to him. 
He was, notwithstanding, about to send
his men in search of his beloved lady,
though he knew not where to direct them to
go, when she and mrs. Prinks came home:
he received her with all the transports a
man of his years could be capable of,
but gently chid her for the little care she
had taken of herself, and looking on her,
as mrs. Prinks was pulling off her hood,
“Bless me, my dear,” said he, “what
was your fancy for going out in such
a dress?” “My cousin,” replied she,
“is in very wretched circumstances, lives
in a little mean lodging, and, besides,
owes money; if I had gone any thing
like myself, the people of the house
might have expected great things from
me. I am very compassionate, indeed,
to every one under misfortunes, but
will never squander mr. Goodman's
money for their relies.” 
“I know thou art all goodness,” said
the old gentleman, kissing her with the
utmost tenderness; “but something,” 
continued he, “methinks, might be spared.” 
“Leave it to me, mr. Goodman,” 
answered she, “I know best,—they have
not deserved it from me:” She then 
told a long story, how kind she had been
to this cousin, and some others of her kindred
in her first husband's time, and gave
some instances of the ill use they had made
of her bounties. All she said had so much
the appearance of truth, that even miss
Betsy, who was far from having an high
opinion of her sincerity, believed it, and
thought no farther of what had passed; 
she had indeed, in a short time, sufficient
business of her own to take up all her mind. 
Mr. Goodman, the very next day,
brought home a very agreeable young
gentleman to dine with him, who, though
he paid an extraordinary respect to lady
Mellasin, and treated her daughter with
the utmost complaisance, yet in the compliments
he made to miss Betsy, there was
something which seemed to tell her she
had inspired him with a passion more tender
than bare respect, and more sincere
than common complaisance. 
She had very penetrating eyes this way,
and never made a conquest without knowing
she did so; she was not, therefore,
wanting in all those little artifices she had
but too much made her study, in order
to fix the impression she had given this
stranger as indeliable as possible: this she
had a very good opportunity for doing; 
he stayed the whole afternoon, drank tea
with the ladies, and left them not, 'till a
crowd of company coming in, he thought
good manners obliged him to retire. 
Miss Betsy was filled with the most impatient
curiosity to know the name and
character of this person, whom she had already
set down in her mind as a new adorer:
she asked miss Flora when they were going
to bed, as if it were a matter of indifference
to her, and meerly for the sake
of chat, who that gentleman was who had
dined with them, and made so long a visit; 
but that young lady had never seen
him before, and was as ignorant of every
thing concerning him, as herself. 
Miss Betsy, however, lost no part of
her repose that night, on this account, as
she doubted not but she should very soon
be informed by himself of all she wished
to know: she was but just out of bed the
next morning, when a maid-servant came
into the chamber, and delivered a letter
to her, which she told her was brought by
a porter, who waited for an answer. 
Miss Betsy's heart fluttered at the mention
of a letter, flattering herself it came
from the person, who at present engrossed
her thoughts; but on taking it from the 
maid, found a woman's hand on the superscription,
and one perfectly known to
her, though that instant she could not reflect
to whom it belonged: she was a good
deal surprised, when on breaking the seal
she found it came from miss Forward,
with whom, as well as the rest of the
boarding-school ladies, she had ceased all
correspondence for many months. The
contents were these: 

To miss Bbtsy Thoughtless.
“Dear miss Betsy,
Though since I had the pleasure
of seeing or hearing from you, so
many accidents, and odd turns of fortune,
have happened to me, as might
very well engross my whole attention; 
yet I cannot be so far forgetful of our
former friendship, as to be in the same
town with you, without letting you
know, and desiring to see you. Were
there a possibility of my waiting on you,
I certainly should have made you the
first visit; but alas! at present there is
not. —Oh! miss Betsy, I have strange
things to tell you;—things fit only to
be trusted to a person whose generosity
and good-nature I have experienced. 
If therefore you are so good to come, I
must intreat you will bring no companion 
with you, and also that you will
allow me that favour the first leisure
hour; because I am in some hopes of
returning to L&wblank;e in a short time. 
Please to enquire for the house of one
mrs. Nightshade, in Chick-lane, near
Smithfield, where you will find her,
who, in spite of time, absence, and a
thousand perplexing circumstances, is 
“With the most tender regard,
My dear miss Betsy,
Your very sincere,
Though unfortunate, friend,
A. Forward. 
“P. S. Be so good to let me know, by a
line, whether I may flatter myself
with the hopes of seeing you, and
at what time.” 

Though miss Betsy, through the hurry
of her own affairs, had neglected writing
to this young lady for a considerable time; 
yet she was extremely pleased at hearing
from her: she could not imagine, however,
what strange turns of fortune they
were she mentioned in her letter, and
which she supposed had brought her to 
London. Equally impatient to satisfy her
curiosity in this point, as to see a person
with whom she had contracted her first
friendship, she took pen and paper and
immediately wrote this answer: 

To miss Forward.
“Dear miss Forward,
The satisfaction of hearing you were
so near me would be compleat,
were it not allayed by the hints you
give, that some accidents, not altogether
pleasing, had occasioned it. I long
to hear what has happened to you,
since last we saw each other, and will
not fail to wait on you this afternoon. 
I know nothing of the part of the town
you are in, but suppose a hackney-coach
will be able to find its way. I
will detain your messenger no longer,
than to tell you that I am, 
“With the most perfect amity,
Dear miss Forward,
Your very affectionate friend,
And humble servant,
E. Thoughtless.” 

Miss Flora had not been present when
the maid delivered the letter to miss Betsy; 
but coming into the chamber just as she
had finished, and was sealing up the answer
to it:“So,” said she, “have I
catched you? Pray what new lover
have you been writing to this morning?” 
It was in vain that miss Betsy
told her, she never yet had seen the man
she thought worthy of a letter from her,
on the score of love: the other persisted in
her asseverations; and miss Betsy to silence
her railery was obliged to shew her some
part of the letter she had received from
miss Forward. 
It being near breakfast-time they went
down together into the parlour, and as
they were drinking their Coffee, “Well,
pretty lady,” said mr. Goodman to miss
Betsy, with a smile, “how did you like
the gentleman that dined here yesterday.” 
This question so much surprised
her, that she could not help blushing. 
“Like him, Sir,” replied she, “I did
not take any notice of him. —I remember
a stranger was here, and staid
a good while, and that is all; for I
neither observed any thing he said, or
did, or thought on him since.” “The
agreeable confusion,” cried mr. Goodman, 
gaily, “you are in at my mentioning
him, makes me believe you remarked
him more than you are willing to acknowlege,
and I am very glad of it. — 
You do him but justice I assure you,
for he is very much in love with you.” 
“Lord, sir,” said miss Betsy, blushing
still more, “I cannot imagine what makes
you talk so; I don't suppose the man
thinks of me any more than I do of him.
That may be,” rejoined he, laughing
outright. Lady Mellasin then took up
the word, and told her husband, he was
very merry that morning. “Aye,” said
he, “the hurry of spirits I have put poor
miss Betsy in, has made me so; but I
can assure you the thing is very serious; 
but,” continued he, “you shall know
the whole of it.” 
He then proceeded to inform them,
that the person, he had been speaking of,
was the son of one who had formerly been
a merchant; but who having acquired a
large fortune by his industry, had for several
years past left off business, and lived
mostly in the country; that the young
gentleman had seen miss Betsy at St. Paul's
rehearsal, when they were all there to hear
the music; that the next day after, he
had come to him at a coffee-house, which 
it was known he frequented, and after
asking many questions concerning miss
Betsy, and hearing she was not engaged,
declared he was very much charmed with
her, and entreated his permission, as being
her guardian, to make his addresses
to her. Mr. Goodman remembered the
affront he had received from alderman
Saving on a like occasion, and was determined
not to lay himself open to the same
from mr. Staple, (for so he was called,)
and plainly told the young lover, that he
would encourage nothing of that sort,
without the approbation of his father; 
that after this he had a meeting with the old
gentleman, who being fully satisfied by him
of miss Betsy's family, fortune, and character,
had no objections to make against
his son's inclinations. “Having this
sanction,” continued mr. Goodman,
and believing it may be a very proper
match for both of you, I brought
him home with me to dinner yesterday,
and should be glad to know how
far you think you can approve of the
offer before I give him my consent to
make it.” 
“I have already told you, sir,” replied
miss Betsy, “that I took but little notice
of the gentleman;—or, if I had,
should never have asked myself the 
question, whether I could like him or
not; for as to marriage, I do assure
you, sir, it is a thing that has never
yet entered into my head.” “Nay, as
to that,” returned he, “it is time
enough, indeed. —A good husband,
however, can never come unseasonably.
—I shall tell him, he may visit you,
and leave you to answer the addresses
according to the dictates of your heart.” 
Miss Betsy neither opposed, nor gave
consent to what her guardian said, on this
score; but her not refusing seemed to him
a sufficient grant: so there passed nothing
more, except some little pleasantries usual
on such subjects. 