

Will make the reader little the wiser. 
The greatest part of the time, that
mr. Trueworth and mr. Staple stayed
with miss Betsy, was taken up with talking
of captain Hysom;—his passion,— 
his behaviour, and the manner in which
he received his dismission, afforded indeed
an ample field for conversation: —lady
Mellasin, and miss Flora, relating the answers
he had given them, on their pressing
him to come back, mr. Trueworth said,
that it must be owned, that he had shewn
a strength of resolution, which few men
in love could boast of. 
“Love, sir, according to my notions
of that passion,” replied mr. Staple,
“is not to be felt by every heart;— 
many deceive themselves in this point,
and take for it what is in reality no
more than a bare liking of a beautiful
object: —the captain seems to me to
have a soul, as well as form, cast
in too rough a mould, to be capable
of those refined and delicate ideas, 
which alone constitute and are worthy
to be called love.” 
“Yet,” said lady Mellasin, “I have
heard mr. Goodman give him an excellent
character, and above all that he
is one of the best-natured men breathing.” 
—“That may be indeed, madam,” 
resumed mr. Staple, “and some
allowances ought to be made for the
manner in which he has been bred; 
though,” added he, “I have known
many commanders, not only of Indiamen,
but of other trading vessels, who
have all their life time used the seas,
yet have known how to behave with
politeness enough when on shore.” 
Mr. Trueworth agreed with mr. Staple,
that though the amorous declaration of a
person of the captain's age, and fashion of
bringing up, to one of miss Betsy's, exposed
him to the deserved ridicule of as many as
knew it; yet ought not his particular
foible to be any reflection on his occupation,
which merited to be held in the
greatest veneration, as the strength and
opulence of the nation was owing to its
commerce in foreign parts. 
This was highly obliging to mr. Staple,
whose father had been a merchant, and 
mr. Trueworth being the first who took
his leave, perceiving the other stayed supper,
he said abundance of handsome things
in his praise, and seemed to have conceived
so high an esteem of him, that
miss. Betsy was diverted in her mind to
think how he would change his way of
speaking, when once the secret of his rivalship
should come out, as she knew it
could not fail to do in a short time. 
But as easy as mr. Staple was at present,
on this occasion, mr. Trueworth was no
less anxious and perplexed: —he was
convinced that the other visited miss Betsy
on no other score than that of love, and
it appeared to him equally certain, by the
freedom with which he saw him treated in
the family, that he was likewise greatly
encouraged, if not by miss Betsy herself,
at least by her guardian. 
His thoughts were now wholly taken
up with the means, by which he might
gain the advantage over a rival, whom he
looked upon as a formidable one, not only
for his personal accomplishments, but also
for his having the good fortune to address
her before himself. —All he could do
was to prevent, as much as possible, all
opportunities of his entertaining miss Betsy
in private, till the arrival of Mr. Francis 
Thoughtless, from whose friendship, and
the influence he had over his sister, he
hoped much. 
He waited on her the next day very
early:—mr. Goodman happening to dine
that day later than ordinary, on account
of some friends he had with him, and the
cloth not being drawn, miss Betsy went
and received him in another room. — 
Having this favourable opportunity, he
immediately began to prepare for putting
into execution one of those stratagems he
had contrived for separating her from mr.
Staple. After some few tender speeches,
he fell into a discourse concerning the
weather; said, he was sorry to perceive
the days so much shortened,—that summer
would soon be gone; and added, that
as that beautiful season could last but a
small time, the most should be made of
it. —“I came,” said he, “to intreat
the favour of you, and miss Flora, to
permit me to accompany you in an airing
through Brumpton, Kensington,
Chelsea, and the other little villages on
this side of London.” 
Miss Betsy replied, that she would go
with all her heart, and believed she could
answer the same for miss Flora, there being
only two grave Dons, and their wives 
within, whom she would be glad to be
disengaged from;—“but if not,” said
she, “I can send for a young lady in the
neighbourhood, who will be glad to
give us her company.” 
She sent first, however, to miss Flora,
who immediately came in, and the proposal
being made, accepted it with pleasure,
and added, that she would ask her
mamma for orders for the coach to be got
ready. —“It needs not, madam,” said
mr. Trueworth, “my servant is here,
and he shall get one from Blunt's;”— 
but miss Flora insisted on their going in
mr. Goodman's, saying, she was certain
neither he nor her mamma would go out
that day, as the company they had were
come to stay; on which mr. Trueworth
complied. 
When she had left the room, “Ah!
madam,” said he to miss Betsy, “could
I flatter myself with believing I owed
this condescension to any other motive
than your complaisance, to a person
who has some share in your brother's
friendship, I should be blest indeed;— 
but, ah! I see I have a rival,—a rival
dangerous to my hopes, not only on
the account of his merits, but also as
he had the honour of declaring his passion 
before me:—the fortunate mr.
Staple,” added he, kissing her hand,
“may perhaps have already made some
impression on that heart I would sacrifice
my all to gain, and I am come too
late.” 
“Rather too soon,” replied she, smiling; 
—“both of you equally too soon,
admitting his sentiments for me be as
you imagine; for I assure you, sir,
my heart has hitherto been entirely my
own, and is not very likely to incline
to the reception of any guest of the nature
you mean, for yet a long—long
time. —Whoever thinks to gain me
must not be in a hurry, like captain
Hysom.” 
Mr. Trueworth was about to make
some passionate reply, when miss Flora returned,
and told them the coach would
be ready immediately, for she herself had
spoke to the coachman, and bid him put
the horses to with all the haste he could; 
on which the lover expressed his sense of
the obligation he had to her for taking
this trouble, in the politest terms. 
A person of much less discernment than
this gentleman might easily perceive, that
the way to be agreeable to miss Betsy was 
not to be too serious;—he therefore assumed
all the vivacity he was master of,
both before they went, and during the
whole course of the little tour they made,
in which it is not to be doubted but he regaled
them with every thing the places
they passed through could furnish. 
The ladies were so well pleased both
with their entertainment, and the company
of the person who entertained them,
that they seemed not in haste to go home,
and he had the double satisfaction of enjoying
the presence of his mistress, and of
giving at least one day's disappointment
to his rival: —he was confirmed in the
truth of this conjecture, when, on returning
to mr. Goodman's, which was not
till some hours after close of day, the footman
who opened the door told miss Betsy,
that mr. Staple had been to wait upon
her. 
After this it may be supposed he had a
night of much more tranquility, than the
preceding one had afforded him:—the
next morning, as early as he thought decency
permitted, he made a visit to miss
Betsy, under the pretence of coming to
enquire if her health had not suffered by
being abroad in the night air, and how
she had rested: —she received him with 
a great deal of sprightliness, and replied,
she found herself so well after it, as to be
ready for such another jaunt, whenever
he had a fancy for it. “I take you at
your word, madam,” cried he, transported
to hear she anticipated what he
came on purpose to intreat,—“I am
ready this moment if you please,” continued
he, “and we will either take a
barge, and go up the river, or a coach
to Hampstead, or any of those places,
just to diversify the scene;—you have
only to say which you chuse.” 
She then told him, there was a necessity
of deferring their ramble 'till the afternoon,
because miss Flora was abroad, and
would not return till dinner-time. —“As
to what route we shall take, and every
thing belonging to it,” said she, “I
leave it entirely to you;—I know nobody
has a more elegant taste, or a better
judgment.” —“I have taken care,” 
replied he, “to give the world an high
opinion of me in both, by making my
addresses to the amiable miss Betsy;— 
but, madam,” pursued he, “since we
are alone, will you give me leave to
tell you how I have employed my hours
this morning.” —“Why,—in dressing,
—breakfasting,—and, perhaps,
a little reading,” answered she. —“A 
small time, madam, suffices for the two
former articles with me,” resumed he,
but I have indeed been reading;— 
happening to dip into the works of a
poet, who wrote near a century ago,
I found some words so adapted to the
situation of my heart, and so agreeable
to the sense of the answer I was about
to make yesterday to what you said,
concerning the perseverance of a lover,
that I could not forbear putting some
notes to them, which I beg you will
give me your opinion of.” 
In speaking these words, he took a piece
of paper out of his pocket, and sung the
following stanzas. 


I.
The Patriarch, to gain a wife
 “Chaste, beautiful, and young,
“Serv'd fourteen years, a painful life,
 “And never thought it long.


II.
“Oh! were you to reward such cares,
 “And life so long would stay,
“Not fourteen, but four hundred years,
 “Would seem but as one day.


Mr. Trueworth had a fine voice, and
great skill in music, having perfected himself
in that science from the best masters,
when he was in Italy. Miss Betsy was so
charmed both with the words and the
notes, that she made him sing them several
times over, and afterwards set them
down in her music-book, to the end that
she might get them by heart, and join
her voice in concert with her spinet. 
Mr. Trueworth would not make his
morning visit too long, believing it might
be her time to dress against dinner, as she
was now in such a deshabille as ladies usually
put on, on their first rising;—so
after having received a second promise
from her of giving him her company
that day abroad, took his leave, highly
satisfied with the progress he imagined he
had made in her good graces. 
The wind happening to grow a little
boisterous, though the weather otherwise
was fair and clear, made mr. Trueworth
think a land journey would be more
agreeable to the ladies, than to venture
themselves upon the water; he therefore
procured a handsome livery coach, and
attended by his two servants, went to mr.
Goodman's: —the ladies were already in 
expectation of him, and did not make him
wait a moment. 
Nothing extraordinary happening at this
entertainment, nor at those others, which,
for several succeeding days without intermission
mr. Trueworth prevailed on his
mistress to accept, it would be superfluous
to trouble the reader with the particulars
of them. 
Mr. Staple all this time was very uneasy; 
—he had not seen miss Betsy for
a whole week, and though he knew not
as yet, that he was deprived of that satisfaction,
by her being engrossed by a rival,
yet he now began to be sensible she had
less regard for him, than he had flattered
himself he had inspired her with; and this
of itself was a sufficient mortification to a
young gentleman, who was not only
passionately in love, but also could not,
without being guilty of great injustice to
his own merits, but think himself not altogether
unworthy of succeeding. —This
however was no more than a slight sample
of the inquietudes which the blind god
sometimes inflicts on hearts devoted to
him, as will hereafter appear in the progress
of this history. 