


Seems to demand, for more reasons than
one, a greater share of attention than
ordinary, in the perusal of it. 

The fair wife of mr. Munden,—miss
Betsy now no more,—had promised
nothing at the altar, that she was not resolved
religiously to perform;—she began
seriously to consider on the duties of
her place;—she was ignorant of no part
of them, and soon became fully convinced,
that on a strict observance of them depended
her honour,—her reputation,— 
her peace of mind, and, in fine, all that
was dear to a woman of virtue and understanding. 
To give the more weight to these reflections,
she also called to her mind the
long perseverance of mr. Munden;—his 

constant assiduities to please her,—his
patient submitting to all the little caprices
of her humour; and establishing in herself
an assured belief of the ardour and sincerity
of his affection for her, her gratitude,
her good nature, and good sense, much
more than compensated for the want of
inclination;—and without any of those
languishments,—those violent emotions,
which bear the name of love, rendered
her capable of giving more real and more
valuable proofs of that passion, than are
sometimes to be found amongst those, who
profess themselves, and are looked upon
by the world as the most fond wives. 
In spite of her endeavours, the thoughts
of mr. Trueworth would, however, sometimes
come into her mind, but she repelled
them with all her might; and as
the merits of that gentleman would, in
reality, admit of no comparison with any
thing that mr. Munden had to boast of,
she laboured to overbalance the perfections
of the one, by that tender and passionate
affection with which she flattered herself
she now was, and always would be regarded
by the other. 
Thus happily disposed to make the
bonds she had entered into easy to herself,
and perfectly agreeable to the person 

with whom she was engaged, he had indeed
a treasure in her beyond what he
could ever have imagined, or her friends,
from her former behaviour, had any reason
to have expected; and had he been
truly sensible of the value of the jewel he
possessed, he would have certainly been
compleatly blessed;—but happiness is not
in the power of every one to enjoy, tho'
heaven and fortune denies nothing to their
wishes;—but of this hereafter. 
At present, all was joy and transport
on the side of the bridegroom;—all complaisance
and sweetness on that of the
bride:—their whole deportment to each
other was such, as gave the most promising
expectations of a lasting harmony
between them, and gladened the hearts of
as many as saw it, and interested themselves
in the felicity of either of them. 
They continued but a few days in the
retirement, which had been made choice
of for the consummation of their nuptials:
—mr. Munden was naturally gay,— 
loved company, and all the modish diversions
of the times:—and his wife, who,
as the whole course of this history has
shewn, had been always fond of them to
an excess, and whose humour, in this
point, was very little altered by the change 

of her condition, readily embraced the
first proposal he made of returning to
town, believing she should now have courage
enough to appear in public, without
testifying any of that shamefacedness on
account of her marriage, which she knew
would subject her to the ridicule of those
of her acquaintance, who had a greater
share of assurance. 
For a time this new married pair seemed
to have no other thing in view than pleasure:
—mr. Munden had a numerous acquaintance,
—his wife not a few;—giving
and receiving entertainments, as yet
engrossed their whole attention;—each
smiling hour brought with it some fresh
matter for satisfaction, and all was chearful,
gay, and jocund. 
But this was a golden dream, which
could not be expected to be of any long
continuance:—the gaudy scene vanished
at once, and soon a darkening gloom
overspread the late enchanting prospect. 
—Mr. Munden's fortune could not support
these constant expences;—he was
obliged to retrench somewhere, and not
being of a humour to deny himself any
of those amusements he was accustomed to
abroad, he became excessively parsimonious
at home insomuch that the scanty allowance 

she received from him for housekeeping
would scarce furnish out a table
fit for a gentleman of an estate far inferior
to that he was in possession of, to sit
down to himself, much less to ask any
friend, who should casually come in to
visit him, to partake of. 
Nothing can be more galling to a woman
of any spirit, than to see herself at
the head of a family without sufficient
means to support her character, as such,
in a handsome manner:—the fair subject
of this history had too much generosity,
and indeed too much pride, in her
composition, to endure that there should
be any want in so necessary an article of
life, and as often as she found occasion,
would have recourse for a supply to her
own little purse. 
But this was a way of going on, which
could not last long:—she complained of
it to mr. Munden;—but though the remonstrances
she made him were couched
in the most gentle terms that could be, he
could not forbear testifying a good deal of
displeasure on hearing them;—he told
her, that he feared she was a bad œconomist,
and that as she was a wife, she
ought to understand, that it was one of
the main duties of her place to be frugal 

of her husband's money; and be content
with such things as were suitable to his
circumstances. 
The surly look with which these words
were accompanied, as well as the words
themselves, made her easily perceive, that
all the mighty passion he had pretended
to have had for her, while in his days of
courtship, was too weak to enable him
to bear the least contradiction from her,
now he was become a husband. 
She restrained, however, that resentment,
which so unexpected a discovery of
his temper had inspired her with, from
breaking into any violent expressions, and
only mildly answered, that she should always
be far from desiring any thing, which
would be of real prejudice to his circumstances; 
but added, that she was too well
acquainted with his fortune, not to be
well assured, it would admit of keeping a
table much more agreeable to the rank he
held in life, and the figure he made in
other things. 
‘I am the best judge of that,’ replied
he, a little disdainfully; ‘and also, that
it is owing to your own want of management,
that my table is so ill supplied:
—I would wish you therefore to contrive 

better for the future, as you may
depend upon it, that, unless my affairs
take a better turn, I shall not be perswaded
to make any addition to my
domestic expences.’ 
‘I could wish then, sir,’ cried she,
with a little more warmth, ‘that henceforth
you would be your own purveyor; 
for I confess myself utterly unable to
maintain a family, like our's, on the
nigard stipend you have allotted for
that purpose.’ 
‘No really, madam,’ answered he, very
churlishly, ‘I did not marry, in order to
make myself acquainted with how the
markets go, and become learned in the
prices of beef and mutton;—I always
looked on that as the province of a
wife,—it is enough for me to discharge
all reasonable demands on that score; 
—and since you provoke me to it, I
must tell you, madam,’ continued he,
‘that what my table wants of being compleat,
is robbed from it by the idle superfluities
you women are so fond of,
and with which, I think, I ought to
have no manner of concern.’ 
As she was not able to comprehend the
meaning of these words, she was extremely 

astonished at them, and in a pretty hasty
manner demanded a detail of those superfluities
he accused her of:—on which,
throwing himself back in his chair, and
looking on her with the most careless and
indifferent air he could assume, he replied
in these terms. 
‘I know not,’ said he, ‘what fool it
was that first introduced the article of
pin-money into marriage-writings,— 
nothing certainly is more idle, since a
woman ought to have nothing apart
from her husband; but as it is grown
into a custom, and I have condescended
to comply with it, you should, I think,
of your own accord, and without giving
me the trouble of reminding you of it,
convert some part of it, at least, to
such uses as might ease me of a burden
I have indeed no kind of reason to be
loaded with;—as for example,’ continued
he, ‘coffee,—tea,—chocolate,
—with all the appendages belonging to
them, have no business to be enrolled
in the list of house-keeping expences,
and consequently not to be taken out
of what I allow you for that purpose.’ 
Here he gave over speaking, but the
consternation his wife was in preventing
her from making any immediate answer, 

he resumed his discourse: —‘Since we
are upon this topic, my dear,’ said he,
‘it will be best to tell you at once what
I expect from you,—it is but one
thing more,—which is this;—you
have a man entirely to yourself,—I am
willing he should eat with the family; 
but as to his livery and wages I think it
highly reasonable you should be at the
charge of.’ 
The innate rage, which, during the
whole time he had been talking, swell'd
her breast to almost bursting, would now
no longer be confined: —‘Good heavens!’ 
cried she, ‘to what have I reduced myself? 
—Is this to be a wife? —Is this
the state of wedlock? —Call it rather
an Egyptian bondage;—the cruel taskmasters
of the Israelites could exact no
more. —Ungrateful man!’ pursued she,
bursting into tears, ‘is this the love,— 
the tenderness you vowed?’ 
Overwhelmed with passion, she was capable
of uttering no more, but continued
walking about the room in a disordered
motion, and all the tokens of the most
outrageous grief and anger:—he sate
silent for some time; but at last looking
somewhat more kindly on her than he
had done, ‘Prithee, my dear,’ said he, 

‘don't let me see you give way to emotions
so unbecoming of yourself, and
so unjust to me;—you shall have no
occasion to complain of my want of
love and tenderness;—you know what
my expectations are, and when once I
have gained my point, you may be sure,
for my own sake, I shall do every thing
suitable to it;—I would only have you
behave with a little prudence for the
present.’ 
In concluding these words, he rose and
took hold of her hand, but approached
her with an air so cold and indifferent, as
was far from attoning, with a woman of
her penetration, for the unkindness of his
late proposal. —‘No, mr. Munden,’ cried
she, haughtily, turning from him, ‘do
not imagine I am so weak as to expect,
after what you have said, any thing but
ill usage.’ 
‘I have said nothing that I have cause
to repent of,’ answered he, ‘and hope,
that when this heat is over, you will do
me the justice to think so too. —I leave
you to consider of it, and bring yourself
into a better humour against my return.’ 
—He added no more, but took
his hat and sword, and went out of the
room. 

She attempted not to call him back,
but retired to her chamber, in order to
give loose to passions more turbulent than
she had ever known before. 
