

Is yet more interesting than the former. 
Any one may judge what a heart, possessed
of so sincere and honourable a
flame, as that of mr. Trueworth's, must
feel, to see the beloved object so intimate
with a common prostitute; it shall suffice
therefore to say, that his anxieties
were such as prevented him from being
able to recover himself enough to speak
to miss Betsy on that subject, as he would
do; he forbore mentioning it at all, and
said very little to her on any other, while
they were in the coach, and having seen
her safe into mr. Goodman's house, took
his leave, and went home, where he passed 
a night of more vexation than he ever
had before experienced. 
Fain would he have found some excuse
for miss Betsy's conduct in this point,— 
fain would he have believed her innocent
as she was lovely, but could not tell how
to conceive there was a possibility for
true virtue to take delight in the company
of vice; but were there even such a
thing in nature, the shew of incouraging
an infamous action, he knew not how to
brook in a woman he intended to make
his wife. 
He now acknowledged the justice of
his aunt's remonstrances; and by what
the levity of miss Betsy made him at present
endure, foresaw what his honour and
his peace of mind must hereafter continually
endure, if he should once become a
husband:—never were thoughts so divided,
—so fluctuating as his;—his good
understanding, and jealousy of honour,
convinced him, there could be no lasting
happiness with a person of miss Betsy's
temper; but then the passion he had for
her, flattered him with the hopes, that as
all the faults she was guilty of, sprung
rather from want of consideration than
design, she might be reasoned out of
them, when once he had gained so far 
upon her affections, as to find he might
take the liberty of painting them to her
in their proper colours. 
He often asked himself the question,
whether he could be able to break with
her or not; and finding by the pangs,
which the every idea of an utter separation
inflicted on him, that he could not,
had no other measures to take than to
submit with patience,—to appear satisfyed
with every thing that pleased her, and
to contrive all the methods he could,
without her perceiving he did so, of stealing,
by gentle degrees, into her mind, a
disrelish of such things as were unbecoming
in her. 
He had but just rose from a bed,
which that night had afforded him but
little repose, when he was told sir Bazil
Lovit, to whom he had given his directions
the day before, was come to wait
upon him. —Mr. Trueworth was very
glad of it, being impatient to undeceive
him in the opinion he found he had entertained
of miss Betsy. —They had not
been three minutes together before the
other gave him an opportunity, by some
facetious interrogatories concerning the
transactions of the past night, and among
the rest, after looking round the room, 
asked him, how he had disposed of his
pretty Betsy? To all which mr. Trueworth
replied, with a very serious air,
“Sir Bazil, though I must own there
are many appearances to justify your
mistake, yet, I hope, my word and
honour will out-balance them. —I do
assure you, sir, that lady, whom you
think and speak so lightly of, is a woman
of fortune, family, and reputation.” 
—“I am sorry then,” said sir
Bazil, very much surprised, “I treated
her in the manner I did. —My Nancy,
indeed,” continued he, meaning miss
Forward, “told me she was virtuous,
but I did not regard what she said on
that score; —I know it is a trick
among them to set off one another, to
draw in us men:—but prithee, dear
Charles, are you in earnest?” —Mr.
Trueworth then, after having made a second
asseveration that he was sincere in
what he said, proceeded to give him some
account of miss Betsy's family, circumstances,
and manner of life; adding,
that nothing could be more surprising to
him, than to have met her in that place; 
“but,” said he, “she must certainly be
unacquainted with the character of the
woman she came to visit.” 
“Such a thing might possibly happen,” 
replied sir Bazil, “and I think you would
do well to give her a hint of it.” — 
“Doubtless,” cried the other, “I am
doubly bound so to do, first by my
own honour, and next by the friendship
I have for some of her kindred.” 
—No farther discourse passed between
them on this score, and the remaining
time they were together being taken up
on matters altogether foreign to the business
of this history, there is no occasion
for making any mention of it. 
Sir Bazil stayed so long, that when he
had taken his leave, it was too late for
mr. Trueworth to make a morning visit
to miss Betsy, as he intended to have
done, so was obliged to defer it till the
afternoon, though since his first acquaintance
with her, he never had felt more
impatience to see her. 
As he had much in his head to say
to her, on the subject of the preceding
day, he went as soon as he thought dinner
was entirely over at mr. Goodman's,
in order to have an opportunity
of talking with her, before any other
company came in:—she was then in her
chamber dressing, but he waited not long 
before she came down, and appeared
more lovely and dazzling in his eyes
than ever. —This happened to be the
first day of her putting on a very rich,
and extremely well-fancied gown, and
either because it was more becoming than
any of those he had seen her in before,
or because of the pleasure ladies of her
age and humour generally feel on such
occasions, a more than usual brightness
shone in her eyes, and was diffused through
all her air; and after having made her
some compliments on the elegance of her
taste in dress, “I suppose, madam,” said
he, “thus set forth, and equipped for
conquest, you do not mean to stay at
home this evening.” —“No, indeed,” 
replied she, “I am told there is a new
tragedy to be acted to-night at Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
and I would not for
the world miss the first night of a new
play.” 
On this mr. Trueworth asked if he
might have leave to wait upon her there? 
—“With all my heart,” answered she,
“none of the gentlemen of my acquaintance
know any thing of my going,
so could not offer to gallant me, and
there is only one lady goes with me.” 
—“Miss Mabel, I guess,” cried mr.
Trueworth.” —No,” answered miss Betsy, 
“she is engaged to the other house tonight,
so I sent to desire the favour of
that lady, you saw me with last night,
to give me her company.” 
“You will have more if you have
her's, I doubt not,” said he; “but
sure, madam, you cannot think of being
seen with a woman of her fame,
in a place so public as the playhouse.” 
—Miss Betsy was astonished to hear him
speak in this manner, and demanded of
him, in somewhat of a haughty tone,
what it was he meaned? “First, madam,” 
resumed mr. Trueworth, “give
me leave to ask you, how long since,
and by what accident, your intimacy
with this woman commenced?” — 
“Though your interrogatories,” replied
she, “are made in such a fashion, as
might well excuse me from answering
them, yet for once I may give you
the satisfaction you desire:—miss Forward
and I were-together at the boarding-school,
—we mutually took a liking
to each other, I believe from a parity
of humours and inclinations, and
since her coming to London have renewed
that friendship we began in our
more tender years.” 
“Friendships begun in childhood,
madam,” answered he, with a very
grave air, “ought to be continued or
broke off, according as the parties persevere
in innocence, or degenerate into
vice and infamy. —This caution ought
to be more peculiarly observed in persons
of your sex, as reputation in you
once lost, is never to be retrieved. — 
Remember, madam, what your favourite
author mr. Rowe says on this occasion: 

“In vain with tears the loss she may deplore,
“In vain look back to what she was before,
“She sets, like stars that fall, to rise no more.

Miss Betsy was so piqued at these remonstrances,
that she had scarce patience
to contain herself, 'till he had given over
speaking. “Goodlack,” cried she, “how
sentenious you are grown!—but, I
hope, you have not the insolence to
imagine I am guilty of any thing that
might justly call my reputation in
question?” —“No, madam,” replied
he, “far be it from me to suspect you
of any thoughts, but such as might become 
the purity of angels;—but the
more bright you are, the more should
we lament to see the native lustre of
your mind clouded, and blemished by
the faults of others. —Permit me,
madam, to tell you, that to continue
an intimacy with a woman of miss Forward's
character, must infallibly draw
you into inconveniencies, which you
want but to foresee to tremble at.” 
“If you have the affection for me you
pretend,” said she, haughtily, “and
could foresee the aversion I have to a
censorious temper, it is yourself would
have cause to tremble. —I love miss
Forward, and neither know, nor will
believe, any ill of her. —Whenever I
am convinced, that she is unworthy of
my friendship, it must be by her own
actions, not by the report of others. — 
Therefore, mr. Trueworth, if you desire
to continue on good terms with
me, you must forbear to interfere with
what company I keep, nor pretend to
prescribe rules for my conduct, at
least till you have more right to do
so.” 
“I shall never, madam, presume to
prescribe,” replied he; “but shall always
think it my duty to advise you, 
in a matter, which so nearly concerns,
not only yourself, but all who have any
relation to you, either by blood or affection.” 
—Though these words, as
well as all he had said on this occasion,
were uttered in the most respectful accents,
yet miss Betsy was not able to imagine
the least contradiction, suited with the
character of a lover, was offended beyond
all measure;—she frowned,—rose hastily
from her chair,—walked about the room
in a disordered motion,—told him the
nature of the acquaintance between them
did not authorise the liberties he took,— 
that she would not bear it, and desired,
that he would either leave her, or change
the conversation to somewhat more agreeable. 
Mr. Trueworth, who as yet had said
little, in comparison with what he intended
to say on this subject, was so much
shocked at the impossibility he found of
engaging her attention, that for some
time he was incapable of speaking one
word. —During this pause, a servant
presented a letter to miss Betsy. —“O!” 
cried she, as soon as she looked on the
superscription, “It is from my dear miss
Forward; —I hope nothing has happened
to prevent her going with me
to the play.” —She made this exclamation 

merely to vex mr. Trueworth,
and for that purpose, also, read the billet
loud enough for him to hear what it contained,
which was as follows: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
“My dear miss Betsy,
Since I received your message, I
got a person to secure places for us
in the box, so we need not go till six
o'clock; but I am quite alone, and if
you are disengaged should be glad you
would come directly to her, who is
ever, 
“With the most perfect amity,
My dear miss Betsy,
Your very much obliged,
And humble servant,
A. Forward.” 

“Bid the messenger,” said miss Betsy
to the servant, “tell the lady that I will
wait upon her this moment,—and
then call me a chair. —I must comply
with the summons I have just received,” 
said she, turning to mr. Trueworth, “so
you must excuse my leaving you, for
I will not strain your complaisance to 
accompany me where I am going; 
but shall be glad to see you when you
are in a better humour.” 
“I am ready, madam, to attend you
any where,” said mr. Trueworth, even
to miss Forward's,—and will pass the
whole evening with you, if you please,
in her apartment;—but, I beseech
you, do not think of going to the play
with a woman of her class:—do not
expose yourself in a place where so
many eyes will be upon you:—reflect,
for heaven's sake, what your modesty
will suffer, in seeing yourself gazed
and pointed at, by those to whom she
sells her favours;—and reflect yet farther,
what they will judge of you.” 
—“You grow scurrilous, sir,” cried
she, ready to burst with passion, “I will
hear no more.” —Then running to
the door, asked if the chair was come,
and being told it was, “Farewell, sir,” 
said she, as she was going into it, “when
I want a spy to inspect, or a governor
to direct my actions, the choice, perhaps,
may fall on you.” 
Mr. Trueworth, who, at this treatment,
was not quite master of himself, retorted,
with some warmth, and loud enough to
be heard by her, as the chairmen were 
carrying her to the steps of the house,
“The choice, madam, perhaps, may not
be yours to make.” —With these
words he went hastily away, half resolving
in his mind never to see her more. 