
Contains a great deal of business in a very narrow compass. 
Life affords but few amusements which are more agreeable than travelling, when in a party of select friends who have all of them their hearts at ease, and think of nothing but to divert themselves:—the company, which now set out from lady Wingman's, were in a situation as near to perfect happiness as can 
be tasted on this side eternity;—Jenny was the only person in a state of expectation, yet was she no less alert and gay than those who had already obtain'd the ultimate of their desires. 
When they had got free from the tumultuous din,—the smoak,—the stench, and rugged stones of London,—‘I begin already, said this amiable lady with a smile, to taste the pleasures of this journey; but you little suspect how much I have been tempted not to take it; and when I make you the confidants of an adventure that happen'd to me last night, you will confess I am a woman of great resolution in keeping the promise I gave of accompanying you.’ 
On this they all cried to her not to keep them in supence;—‘I will not, resumed she,—and hope you will not think me too vain a boaster, when I tell you at once that I have made a new conquest,—have gain'd a heart all flaming and adoration,—a lover who for my sake has done such things as I believe no man besides himself ever did or would do.’ 
‘Nobody doubts the power of your charms, my dear, said lady Speck; but pray who is this lover?—for he must be one of whom you are either very fond, or think not worth concealing.’ —I dare answer by her looks, subjoin'd lord Huntley, that he is the latter;—but pray, madam, let us have his name.’ 
‘I will not put your lordship, nor any of the company, to the trouble of guessing, reply'd Jenny; for should you all go to work upon that task, it would certainly last till we came to Paris, and even then be as far from being accomplish'd as now:—know then, that the hero of my true romance,—the man who dies for me, is call'd—Belpine.’ 
‘Belpine!—Belpine!—impossible, repeated they all several times over;—He could not sure have the impudence, cried lady Huntley; but, dear creature, let us have the whole story,—it must, however, be very entertaining.’ 
Jenny then related to them Belpine's visit, his discourse, and the manner of his behaviour towards her; and this she did with so much wit and spirit as could not but be extremely pleasing to the company; 
—they laugh'd heartily at some passages in the recital; and their mirth would have been yet more complete, had it not been somewhat check'd by their astonishment at his unparallel'd impudence and deceit. 
‘For my part, said lord Huntley, tho' I cannot but own that there was somewhat very extraordinary in the declaration he made to miss Jessamy, yet it is certain that love was the only excuse he could alledge for what he had done; and I am apt also to think it might be the real motive too, when I remember what mr. Dryden says upon this subject: 
That love, all sense of right and wrong confounds,
Strong love and proud ambition have no bounds.
Mr. Lovegrove reply'd, that he had the honour to agree with his lordship's sentiments in this point;—‘But, cried lady Speck, would any man besides himself, after the most plain detection of his villainy, have had the folly and the arrogance to appear before a woman whom he was conscious had so much reason both to detest and scorn him?’ 
‘Perhaps, madam, answer'd he, mr. Belpine had been just reading Shakespear's Richard the Third, and flatter'd himself with being able to say like that prince, after courting lady Ann, 
Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
Was ever woman in this humour won?
‘But, continued he, tho' I can very easily believe that love might be one inducement, yet I can scarce think it was the only one;—I have been told that mr. Belpine's circumstances are not in the most prosperous condition;—he might hope to mend them by miss Jessamy's fortune;—and it therefore appears to me extremely probable, that the lady's money had, at least, as great an influence over him as her eyes.’ 
From this they fell into a conversation concerning the practice of fortune-hunting, and the stratagems to which men of desperate circumstances and enterprising heads have sometimes recourse, in order to gain their point;—this was a copious subject, and afforded a great variety of diverting stories, no way to the advantage either of the deceiver or deceived;—these, with some animadversions 
of the company upon them, lasted till they arriv'd at Sittingbourn, where, a servant having been sent before, as indeed the same care was afterwards taken at every stage, they found an elegant entertainment ready prepar'd against their coming. 
The next day they dined at Canterbury, reach'd Dover the same evening, and the ensuing morning embark'd for Calais, to which port a prosperous gale safely conducted them in a few hours. 
But there is no necessity to oblige my readers to accompany them through the whole course of their journey to Paris, as no material incident happen'd in it:—on the very dawning of that day which was to conclude their progress, lord Huntley sent a servant to Paris in order to apprize sir Robert Manley of their approach; and, as he doubted not but he had provided a place for their reception, to take directions from him where they should alight, and then to return with his answer to a little town within two leagues of the city, where they intended to bait and would stay for him;—this was easily perform'd, as the fellow had an excellent horse under him, and set out several hours before the company. 
Sir Robert was at dinner with Jemmy and some other gentlemen, when a waiter of the house inform'd him that there was a man on horseback at the door who intreated to speak with him, and said he came from lord Huntley, on which he arose up immediately and went down. 
Jemmy started at the name of lord Huntley, but not being able to assure himself that his ears had not deceiv'd him, ran to the window which commanded the court-yard, where he indeed saw sir Robert talking with a man who he knew by his livery belong'd to that nobleman, and seem'd as if but just come off a journey;—this put a sudden thought into his head, which, pleasing as it was, he durst not too much encourage, for fear of a disappointment. 
‘What, cried he to sir Robert on his returning into the room, is lord Huntley in Paris?’ —‘No, reply'd the other, but very near it,—he will be here by night.’ —‘I hear he is married, return'd Jemmy strangely agitated; I suppose he brings his lady with him.’ 
—‘I shall soon see that, said sir Robert with a smile;—for I 
must go to meet him, and shall be glad if you will accompany me.’ 
‘I am always ready to attend you any where, sir Robert, answer'd he; but there is but little of a compliment in my doing so at this time; because I cannot help flattering myself with meeting some company to whom I am better known than either to lord Huntley or his lady.’ —Sir Robert could not keep himself from laughing at these words, but made no reply, and only said he must send out to hire a chariot immediately; on which a gentleman, who was present, told him he had one at the door that should be perfectly at his service, and as he seemed in haste, and the horses were ready put to, desired he would make use of it. 
Sir Robert, for the reasons urged by the gentleman, readily accepted his offer, and after taking leave of the company, and giving some private orders to a servant, went with Jemmy into the chariot, which, though it carried them with all imaginable celerity, seemed yet too slow to the impatience of one of them. 
On their arrival they were presently ushered into the room, where our travellers 
had but just got in before them:—Jemmy flew to Jenny, as if no other person had been present, and throwing himself upon her bosom, cried in the utmost extacy,—‘My dear, dear Jenny, this is an unhoped-for blessing.’ —My dear Jemmy, return'd she, I did not expect to see you till I came to Paris;—but I am fairly caught in my own snare, I thought to have surprised you, and am surprised myself.’ 
On this he fell a second time upon her neck, and who knows how long, forgetful of every thing but love and joy, he might have continued in that tender situation, if sir Robert Manley, having by this time paid his compliments to lord Huntley, mr. Lovegrove, and their ladies, had not advanced to do the same to Jenny, saying,—‘Dear Jessamy, you must not think as yet of engrossing this lady wholly to yourself.’ These words reminding Jemmy of what was due from him to the rest of the company, which debt he discharged with an air of freedom and politeness too natural to him for his late transports to render less so. 
They staid no longer here than was necessary to take some refreshment; and on their arrival at Paris were conducted 
by sir Robert to the hotel he had hired for them, which they found so handsome and commodious, that they told him he was certainly the best quarter-master in Europe. 
After having led them through several apartments, he brought them into a spacious room, where a table (being already set out) was immediately covered, by directions he had before-hand given, with the most exquisite viands of the season. —This was a piece of gallantry which, as well as they knew sir Robert, they had little expected, or even thought on. 
Some hours were past in a continual round of wit and pleasantry, intermixed with more serious demonstrations of love, gratitude, and friendship; but the gentlemen remembering how long a journey the ladies had come, thought it would be neither kind nor complaisant to keep them from their beds too late; thought it may easily be supposed, that Jemmy took a very reluctant leave of his dear Jenny, and that she also would have willingly spared some time from her repose to have been entertained by a lover, so much and so deservedly beloved. 
