

Verifies the old proverb, that one affliction
treads upon the heels of another. 
As miss Betsy was prevented from discovering
to any one, the impudent attempt
Gayland had made on her virtue,
by the shame of having emboldened him
to it, by too unreserved a behaviour, so
also the shame of the disappointment, and
rebuff he had received from her, kept him
from saying any thing of what had passed
between them; and this resolution, on
both sides, rendered it very difficult for
either of them to carry to the other, so
as not to give some suspicion. Betsy could
not always avoid seeing him, when he
came to lady Mellasin's, for he would not
all at once desist his visit, for two reasons:
first, because it might give occasion for
an enquiry into the cause; and secondly,
because miss Betsy would plume herself
on the occasion, as having, by her scorn,
triumphed over his audacity, and drove
him from the field of battle. He therefore
resolved to continue his visits for
some time, and to pique her, as he imagined,
directed all the fine things his common-place-book 
was well stored with, to
miss Flora, leaving the other wholly neglected. 
But here he was little less deceived,
than he had been before in the sentiments
of that young lady: the hatred his late
behaviour had given her, and the utter detestation
it had excited in her towards him,
had, for a time, extinguished that vanity,
so almost inseparable from youth, especially
when accompanied with beauty; and
she rather rejoiced, than the contrary, to
see him affect to be so much taken up
with miss Flora, that he could scarce say
the least complaisant thing to her, as it
freed her from the necessity of returning it,
in some measure. Her good sense had
now scope to operate;—she saw, as in a
mirror, her own late follies in those of
miss Flora, who swelled with all the pride
of flattered vanity, on this new imaginary
conquest over the heart of the accomplished
Gayland, as he was generally esteemed,
and perceived the errors of such a way of
thinking and acting, in so clear a light,
as had it continued, would, doubtless,
have spared her those anxieties her relapse
from it afterwards occasioned. 
In these serious reflections let us leave
her, for a time, to see in what situation 
mr. Saving was, after being denied access
to his mistress. As it was impossible
for a heart to be more truly sincere and
affectionate, he was far from being able to
make any efforts for the banishing miss
Betsy's image thence: on the contrary, he
thought of nothing but how to continue
a correspondence with her, and endeavour,
by all the means in his power, to engage
her to a private interview. As his flame
was pure and respectful, he was some days
debating within himself how to proceed,
so as not to let her think he had desisted
from his pretensions, or to continue them
in a manner at which she should not be
offended. Love, when real, seldom fails
of inspiring the breast that harbours it
with an equal share of timidity:—he
trembled whenever he thought of solliciting
a meeting, yet, without it, how could
he hope to retain any place in her memory,
much less make any progress in
gaining her affection! at length, however,
he assumed courage enough to write to her,
and, by a bribe to one of the servants,
got his letter delivered to her, fearing if
he sent it by the post, or any public way
to the house, it would be intercepted, by
the caution he found mr. Goodman had
resolved to observe in this point. 
Miss Betsy, knowing his hand by the
superscription, was a little surprized, as; 
perhaps, having never thought of him
since they parted, but opened it without
the least emotion, either of pain or pleasure:
—she knew him too well to be under
any apprehensions of being treated by
him as she had been by Gayland, and was
too little sensible of his merits to feel the
least impatience for examining the dictates
of his affection; yet, indifferent as she
was, she could not forbear being touched
on reading these lines: 

“Most adored of your sex,
I doubt not but you are acquainted
with mr. Goodman's behaviour to me; 
but oh! I fear, you are too insensible
of the agonies, in which my soul labours,
through his cruel caution. — 
Dreadful is the loss of sight, yet what
is sight to me, when it presents not
you! —Though I saw you regardless of
my ardent passion, yet still I saw you,
and while I did so, could not be wholly
wretched. —What have I not indured
since deprived of that only joy, for
which I wish to live! —Had it not
been improper for me to have been
seen near mr. Goodman's house, after
having been forbad entrance to it, I 
should have dwelt for ever in your
street, in hope of sometimes getting a
glimpse of you from one or other of
the windows; this I thought would
be taken notice of, and might offend
you: —But darkness freed me from
these apprehensions, and gave me the
consolation of breathing in the same
air with you. —Soon as I thought all
watchful eyes were closed, I flew to the
place, which, where-ever my body is,
contains my heart, and all its faculties. 
I pleased myself with looking on
the roof that covers you, and invoked
every star to present me to you in your
sleep, in a form more agreeable than I
can hope I ever appeared in to your
waking fancy. Thus have I passed each
night, and when the morning dawned,
unwillingly retired to take that rest,
which nature more especially demands,
when heavy melancholly oppresses the
heart. I slept,—but how?—distracting
images swam in my tormented
brain, and waked me with horrors inconceivable. 
Equally lost to business,
as to all social commerce, I fly mankind,
and like some discontented ghost
seek out the most solitary walks, and
lonely shades, to pour forth my complaints. 
O miss Betsy! I cannot live,
if longer denied the sight of you! 
—In pity to my sufferings, permit me
yet once more to speak to you, even
tho' it be to take a last farewell. I
have made a little kind of interest with
the woman at the habit-shop, in Coventgarden,
where I know you sometimes
go: —I dread to intreat you would
call there to-morrow, yet if you are so
divinely good, be assured I shall entertain
no presuming hopes on the condescension
you shall be pleased to make
me; but acknowledge it as the meer
effect of that compassion, which is inherent
to a generous mind. Alas! I
must be much more worthy than I can
yet pretend to be, before I dare flatter
myself with owing any thing to a more
soft emotion, than those I have mentioned. 
Accuse me not, therefore, of
too much boldness in this petition, but
grant to my despair what you would
deny to the love of 
“Your most faithful,
And everlasting slave,
H. Saving. 
“P.S. The favour of one line to let me
know whether I may expect the blessing
I implore, will add to the
bounty of it. The same hand that 
brings you this, will also deliver your
commands to yours as above.” 

Miss Betsy read this letter several times,
and the oftner she did so, the more she
saw into the soul of him that sent it. 
How wide the difference between this,
and that she had received from Gayland! 
'Tis true, they both desired a meeting,
each made the same request, but the manner
in which the former was asked, and the
end proposed by the grant of it, she easily
perceived were as distant as heaven and
hell. She called to mind the great
respect he had always treated her with;— 
she was convinced both of his honour and
sincerity, and thought something was due
from her on that account. In fine, after
deliberating a little within herself, she resolved
to grant his request, and accordingly
wrote to him in these terms; 

“Sir,
Tho' it is my fixed determination
to encourage the addresses of no
man whatever, without the approbation
of my guardians, yet I think myself
too much obliged to the affection you
have expressed for me, to refuse you a
favour of so trifling a nature, as that
you have taken the pains to ask. I
will be at the place you mention to-morrow, 
some time in the forenoon; but
desire you will expect nothing from it,
but a last farewell, as you have promised
to be contented with. Till then,
adieu.” 

After finishing this little billet, she called
the maid, whom Saving had made his
confidante, into her chamber, and asked
her, when she expected he would come for
an answer? To which the other replied,
that he had appointed her to meet him at
the corner of the street very early in the
morning, before any of the windows were
open. “Well then,” said miss Betsy
smiling, and putting the letter into her
hands, “give him this. I do it for your
sake, Nanny; for, I suppose, you will
have a double fee on the delivery.” 
“The gentleman is too much in love,” 
answered she, “not to be grateful.” 
Miss Betsy past the remainder of that
day, and the ensuing night, with that tranquility
which is inseparable from a mind
unincumbered with passion; but the next
morning remembering her promise, while
lady Mellasin and miss Flora were engaged
with the beaux and belles at their
levee, she slipt out, and taking a chair at
the end of the street, went to the milliner's
according to appointment. She doubted 
not but the impatience of her lover would
have brought him there long before her,
and was very much amazed to find herself
the first comer. She knew not, however,
but some extraordinary accident, unforeseen
by him, might have happened to
detain him longer than he expected, and
from the whole course of his past behaviour,
could find no shadow of reason to
suspect him of a wilful remissness. She
sat down in the shop, and amused herself
with talking to the woman on the new
modes of dress, and such like ordinary
matters; but made not the least mention
of the motive which had brought her there
that morning: and the other, not knowing
whether it would be proper to take
any notice, was also silent on that occasion; 
but miss Betsy observed, she often turned
her head towards the window, and ran to
the door, looking up and down the street,
as if she expected somebody, who was
not yet come. 
Miss Betsy could not forbear being
shocked at a disappointment, which was
the last thing in the world she could have
apprehended. She had, notwithstanding,
the patience to wait from a little past eleven
'till near two o'clock, expecting, during
every moment of that time, that he would
either come, or send some excuse for not 
doing so; but finding he did neither, and
that it was near the hour in which mr.
Goodman usually dined, she took her leave
of the woman, and went home full of agitations. 
The maid, who was in the secret, happening
to open the door, and miss Betsy
looking round, and perceiving there was
nobody in hearing, said to her, “Nanny,
are you sure you delivered my letter
safe into mr. Saving's hands?” “Sure!
miss,” cried the wench, “yes, as sure
as I am alive, and he gave me a good
queen Anne's guinea for my trouble:— 
I have not had time since to put it up,” 
continued she, taking it out of her bosom,
here it is.” “Well, then, what did he
say on receiving it?” said miss Betsy. 
I never saw a man so transported,” replied
she, “he put it to his mouth, and
kissed it with such an eagerness, I
thought he would have devoured it.” 
Miss Betsy asked no further questions,
but went up to her chamber to pull off
her hood, not being able to know how she
ought to judge of this adventure. 
She was soon called down to dinner,
but her mind was too much perplexed to
suffer her to eat much. 
She was extremely uneasy the whole day,
for an explanation of what at present seemed
so mysterious, and this gave her little
less pain, than, perhaps, she would have felt
had she been possessed with an equal share
of love; but in the evening her natural
vivacity got the better, and not doubting
but the next morning she should receive
a letter with a full eclaircisement of this
affair, she enjoyed the same sweet repose,
as if nothing had happened to ruffle her
temper. 
The morning came, but brought no
billet from that once obsequious lover:— 
the next, and three or four succeeding ones
were barren of the fruit she so much expected. 
What judgment could she form
of an event so odd? —She could not
bring herself to think Saving had taken
pains to procure a rendezvous with her,
on purpose to disappoint and affront her; 
and was not able to conceive any probable
means, by which he should be prevented
from writing to her. Death only she
thought could be an excuse for him, and
had that happened she should have heard
of it. Sometimes she fancied that the
maid had been treacherous; but when she
considered, she could get nothing by being
so, and that it was, on the contrary, 
rather her interest to be sincere, she rejected
that supposition. The various conjectures,
which by turns came into her head, rendered
her however excessively disturbed, and
in a situation which deserved some share of
pity, had not her pride kept her from revealing
either her discontent, or the motives
of it, to any one person in the
world. 