

In these days people travel with so
much safety, ease, and celerity, that
heroines have little chance of adventures
on the road; and a journey is now so
common a thing, that, as Rosamond observed,
the most brilliant imagination
has no hope of having wonders to relate—To
Rosamond's mortification, Caroline
and her brother reached London without
any event having occurred better worth
recording than the loss of an umbrella.
They drove into town when it was nearly
dark, just before the lamps were lighted; 
Caroline, therefore, had little satisfaction
from the first view of the metropolis—She
found Lady Jane Granville in a small
lodging in Clarges Street—The room
dark—a smell of smoke—the tea equipage
prepared—Lady Jane lying on a

shabby-looking sofa—drops and a smelling
bottle on a little table beside her.
She raised herself as Caroline entered,
looked half pleased, half ashamed to see
her, and stretching out her hand, said,
in a complaining voice:
“Ah! my dear Caroline, are you
really come? ... This is too good! ...
Sadly changed you find—and every thing
about me—Sit down, my dear—Keppel
... do let us have tea as soon as you
can”—
“As soon as ever Eustace comes in,
my lady,” answered Keppel, peevishly— “In
the mean time, for Heaven's
sake, allow us a little more light ... I
cannot live without light—Come nearer
to me, my dear Caroline, and tell me,
How did you leave all our friends at the
Hills?”
Whilst Caroline was answering her
Ladyship, more candles were brought,
and Lady Jane moved them on the table,
till she threw the light full on Caroline's
face.

“Handsomer than ever!—And altogether,
so formed.—One would not think,
Alfred, she had been buried all this time
in the country—Ah! perverse child,
why would not you come when I could
have been of some use to you. ... When,
at least, I could have received you as I
ought—This is not a fit place, you
see, nor am I now in circumstances, or
in a style of life.—Heigho!”—
“Dr. Percy is not come yet,” resumed
she. “This is his usual hour—and
I wrote a note to tell him that he would
meet his sister Caroline to night.”
In all her Ladyship said, in every look
and motion, there was the same nervous
hurry and inquietude.—Dr. Percy arrived,
and for a moment Lady Jane forgot herself
in sympathy with the affectionate
pleasure the brother and sister showed at
meeting. Soon, however, she would
have relapsed into melancholy comparisons,
but that Dr. Percy checked the
course of her thoughts, and with the
happy art, by which a physician of conversational

powers can amuse a nervous
patient, he, without the aid of poppy or
mandragora, medicined her to rest—though
not to sleep—
When Erasmus was alone with his
sister, he observed, that no permanent
amendment could be expected in Lady
Jane's health, till her mind should be at
ease about her law-suit. While this was
undecided, her imagination vacillated
between the horror of neglected poverty,
and the hopes of recovering her former
splendor and consideration—The lawsuit
was not to be decided for some
weeks, and Caroline saw, that all that
could be done in the meantime was as
much as possible to sooth and amuse
her patient; however tiresome and difficult
the task, she went through it with
the utmost cheerfulness and sweetness of
temper—Day after day she passed alone
with Lady Jane, hearing her complaints,
bodily and mental, and listening to the
eternally repeated history of her lawsuit.—But
Caroline's patience was ensured

by a sense of gratitude, which, in
her, was not a sentimental phrase, but a
strong principle of action, a motive for
long endurance, still more difficult than
active exertion.
One half hour in the day, however,
she was sure of being happy—the half
hour when her brother Erasmus paid his
visit—Of Alfred she saw little, for he
was so much engaged with business, that
had accumulated during his absence from
town, that a few minutes now and then
were all he could possibly spare from his
professional duties.—Mr. Temple called
upon Caroline—she was surprised to see
him, for she thought he had been on his
way to the continent; but he told her,
that difficulties had occurred, chiefly
through the manœuvres of Cunningham
Falconer, and that he did not know
when there would be an end of these—that
Lord Oldborough was glad of the
delay at present, because he wanted
Mr. Temple's assistance, as the other
secretary had been taken ill, and his

Lordship had not yet fixed upon a confidential
person to supply his place— 
Of course, in these circumstances, Mr.
Temple was so much occupied, that Caroline
saw very little of him; and she
experienced what thousands have experienced,
that, however people may wish
to meet in great towns, it is frequently
impracticable, from small difficulties as
to time, distance, and connexions.—Of
Mr. Gresham Caroline had hoped
that she should see a great deal—her
brother, Erasmus, had long since introduced
him to Lady Jane Granville, and
notwithstanding his being a merchant,
her Ladyship liked him. He was as
much disposed as ever to be friendly to
the whole Percy family; and the moment
he heard of Caroline's being in
town, he hastened to see her, and showed
all his former affectionate regard in
his countenance and manner. But his
time and his thoughts were now engrossed
by an affair very near his heart, which
he was impatient to bring to a termination.

As soon as this should be accomplished
he was to set out for Amsterdam,
where the concerns of his late partner,
old Mr. Panton, as his correspondents
wrote, imperiously demanded his presence.
This affair, which was so near Mr.
Gresham's heart, related to his dear
Constance.—Alfred had alluded to it in
one of his letters, and Erasmus had begun
to write the particulars to Rosamond,
but he had not at the time leisure
to finish the letter, and afterwards
burnt it, being uncertain how the romance,
as Alfred called it, might end.
He, therefore, thought it prudent to
say nothing about it. The whole story
was now told to Caroline, and, briefly,
was this—
After Old Panton's rage against Dr.
Percy, in consequence of the suspicion
that his daughter was in love with him,
after the strange wig scene, and the
high words that followed, had driven
Erasmus from the house; Constance

went to her father, and intent upon
doing justice to Erasmus, at whatever
hazard to herself, protested, that he
had not been the cause of her refusal of
Lord Roadster. To convince her father
of this, she confessed that she had another
attachment&wblank;No threats, no persuasion
could, however, draw from her
the name of the person to whom she was
attached; she knew that to name him
would be only to ruin his fortune—that
her father never would consent to her
marrying him; nor, had the object of
her preference ever given her reason to
think, that he felt any thing more for her
than regard and respect—Old Panton, the
last man in the world to understand any
delicacies, thought her whole confession
“nonsense”—the agitation and hesitation
with which it was made, and her eagerness
to clear Dr. Percy's credit, to prevent
his practice from being injured,
and to reinstate him in her father's favor,
conspired to convince the old man,
that his “own first original opinion was

right.” Of this, indeed, he seldom
needed any additional circumstances to
complete the conviction on any occasion—During
the remainder of his life he
continued obstinate in his error— “If
she likes any body else, why can't the
girl name him?—Nonsense—that cursed
Dr. Percy is the man, and he never
shall be the man.”—In this belief Old
Panton died, and, what is of much more
consequence, in this belief he made his
will. On purpose to exclude Dr. Percy,
and in the hope of accomplishing his
favorite purpose of ennobling his descendants,
he, in due legal form, inserted
a clause in his will, stating, that he bequeathed
his whole fortune (save his
wife's dower), to his beloved daughter,
upon condition, that within the twelve
calendar months next ensuing, after his
decease, she, the said Constance, should
marry a man not below the rank of the
son of a baron. But, in case she, the
said Constance, should not marry within
the said twelve calendar months, or

should marry any man below the rank
of a baron, then, and after the expiration
of said twelve calendar months, the said
fortune to go to his beloved wife,—except
an annuity of two hundred pounds
a year, to be paid thereout to his daughter
Constance.”—Mr. Gresham was appointed
sole executor to this will.— 
As soon as it was decently possible, after
Old Panton's decease, Lord Roadster renewed
his suit to Constance, and was
civilly, but very steadily refused. Many
other suitors, coming within the description
of persons favored by the will, presented
themselves, but without success.
Some making their applications to Constance
herself, some endeavoring to win
her favor through the intercession of her
guardian, Mr. Gresham—all in vain.—Month
after month had passed away,
and Mr. Gresham began to be much in
dread, and Mrs. Panton, the mother-in-law,
somewhat in hopes, that the twelve
calendar months would elapse without
the young lady's having fulfilled the

terms prescribed by the will. Mr. Gresham,
one morning, took his fair ward
apart, and began to talk to her seriously
upon the subject.—He told her, that he
thought it impossible she should act from
mere perversity or caprice, especially as
from her childhood upwards he had never
seen in her any symptoms of an obstinate
or capricious disposition; therefore
he was well convinced, that she had
some good reason for refusing so many
offers seemingly unexceptionable; he
was grieved to find, that he had not sufficiently
won or deserved her confidence,
to be trusted with the secret of
her heart. Constance, who revered and
loved him with the most grateful tenderness,
knelt before him, and, clasping his
hand in hers, while tears rolled over her
blushing cheeks, endeavored to speak,
but could not for some moments.—At
last, she assured him, that delicacy, and
the uncertainty in which she was, whether
she was beloved by the object of
her affections, were the only causes,

which had hitherto prevented her from
speaking on this subject, even to him,
who now stood in the place of her father,
and who had ever treated her with
more than a father's kindness.”
Mr. Gresham named Erasmus Percy?
“No.”
“Mr. Henry?”
“Yes—how was it possible that
Mr. Gresham had never thought of
him?”—
Mr. Gresham had thought of him,
had suspected, that Mr. Henry's love for
Constance had been the cause of his
quitting England—had admired the
young man's honorable silence and resolution—had
recalled him from Amsterdam,
and he was now in London.
But young Henry, who knew nothing
of Mr. Gresham's favorable disposition
towards him, who had only commercial
correspondence with Mr. Gresham, and
knew little of his character, considered
him merely as the executor of Mr. Panton

and, with this idea, obeyed his summons
home to settle accounts.—When
they met, he was much surprised by Mr.
Gresham's speaking, not of accounts,
but of Constance.—When Mr. Gresham
told him the terms of Mr. Panton's will,
far from appearing disappointed or dejected,
Mr. Henry's face flushed with
hope and joy.—He instantly confessed
to her guardian, that he loved Constance
passionately; and that now, when it
could not be supposed he had mercenary
views, now when no duty, no honor
forbad him, he would try his fate.—He
spoke with a spirit given by strong
passion, long repressed, and with a decision
of character, which his modesty,
and reserve of manner had, till now, prevented
from appearing.
“Did he consider,” Mr. Gresham
asked, “what he expected Miss Panton
to sacrifice for him?”
“Yes, fortune—not duty—duty he
could never have asked her to sacrifice—he
could not have esteemed her, if she

had sacrificed duty.—As to the rest,”—added
he proudly, “Miss Panton is now
to decide between love and fortune.”
“This from the modest Mr. Henry!
from whom, till this moment, I never
heard a syllable that savored of presumption!” 
said Mr. Gresham.—
Mr. Henry was silent—and stood not
with an air of presumption, but of proud
determination.—Regardless of the surprise
and attention with which Mr. Gresham
considered him during this silence,
he thought for a few moments, and
asked,
“May I, Sir, now, or when may I
see Miss Panton?”
“And would you,” said Mr. Gresham,
“if it were in your power, Sir,
reduce the woman you love from opulence
to poverty, to distress?”
“I have four hundred a year, Miss
Panton has two, six hundred a year is
not poverty, Sir.—Distress—the woman
I marry shall never know whilst I have
life and health.—No, Sir, this is not romance.

—Of my perseverance in whatever
I undertake, even when least congenial
to my habits, you have had proofs.—Mr.
Gresham, if Miss Panton approves
me, and if love can make her happy, I
fear not to assert to you, her guardian,
that I will make her happy.&wblank;If she
love me not, or,”—added he, his whole
countenance changing from the expression
of ardent love, to that of cold disdain,
“or, if love be not in her mind
superior to fortune, then I have little to
regret.—Wealth and honors wait her
command.—But,” resumed he, “the
trial I will make—the hazard I will run.—If
I am mistaken—if I am presumptuous—the
humiliation be mine—the
agony all my own, my heart will bear it—or—break&wblank;”
“Heroics!”—said Mr. Gresham.— “Now
let me ask ...”
“Let me ask, Sir ... pardon me,” interrupted
Mr. Henry ... “Let me beg
to see Miss Panton.”
“Stay, listen to me, young man ...”

“Young gentleman, Sir, if you
please.”—
“Young gentleman, Sir, if you
please,” repeated Mr. Gresham, mildly; 
“I can make allowance for all this—you
were bred a soldier, jealous of honor.—But
listen to me; there is one thing I
must tell you, before you see Miss Panton,
though I apprehend it may somewhat
mortify you, as it will interfere with
your boast of disinterestedness, and your
vow of poverty.—Miss Panton I have
from her cradle been in the habit of
considering partly as my own—my own
child ... and, as such, I have left her
in my will ten thousand pounds.—As she
will want this money before my death,
if she marries you, I must convert my
legacy into a marriage portion, and you
shall not, Sir, have love without fortune,
whatever your heroics may think of it.—Now,
go to your mistress, and keep
my secret.”—
Young Henry was evidently more
touched by the generosity than by the

bounty of Mr. Gresham; tears came into
his eyes, and with a gentleness and humility
the most feeling, he said, “How
shall I thank you, Sir, for bearing with
me as you did?”
“Oh!” said Mr. Gresham, “Old as
I am, I know what it is to be in love, and
can conceive too what it is to fear that
a guardian might be cross, and that the
executor and the partner of Mr. Panton
might act like Mr. Panton himself—Say
no more, I understand it all, you see—Go
to your mistress.”
Even in the haughtiness and spirit this
young man had shown, Mr. Gresham
saw the sincerity, strength, and disinterestedness
of his affection for Constance,
and in Mr. Gresham's estimation these
were no trifling merits—We pass over
... shall we be forgiven—the love-scenes
between Mr. Henry and Constance.—In
these cases it is well when
there is some sober friend to look to the
common sense of the thing, and in the
midst of the exaltation to do the necessary

business of life—Mr. Gresham laid
Mr. Panton's will before counsel
learned in the law, took opinions from
two different counsel, from Alfred Percy,
whose friendship for the parties concerned
was likely to quicken his attention,
and from another barrister of long-standing,
who, being totally unconnected with
the parties, might probably give a perfectly
unbiassed and dispassionate advice.
Both agreed, that there was no
avoiding the clause in the will; that Miss
Panton, if she married a man below the
rank of a Baron's son, must give up her
fortune to her mother-in-law at the end
of twelve calendar months, from the time
of her father's decease; but both barristers
gave it as their opinion, that the income
during those twelve months belonged to
Constance—This was a considerable sum,
which, by Mr. Gresham's advice, was to be
vested with the rest of Mr. Henry's capital
in the firm of the house of Panton and Co.—In
consequence of Mr. Gresham's earnest
recommendation, and of his own excellent

conduct and ability, Mr. Henry
was from this time joined in the firm, and
as one of the partners had a secure income
proportioned to his part of the capital,
beside a share in the very advantageous
speculations, in which the house was engaged.
Mr. Gresham undertook to supply
Mr. Henry's place at Amsterdam,
whither he was under the necessity of going.—His
house he would leave to Constance
during his absence.—She had best
begin by taking possession of it, and establish
herself there, he observed, that
she might not have the inconvenience and
mortification of being turned out of her
own at the end of the year.— “And if,” 
said he, “I should be able, when I return,
to make Mr. Henry's residence with me
agreeable to him, I shall hope he will not,
while I live, take my Constance quite
away from me.—I look to her as my
chief happiness in life.”
“If Rosamond had heard the sigh,
which closed this speech,” thought Caroline,
“and if she had seen the simplicity

and delicacy of Mr. Gresham's generosity
on this occasion, she would have
reproached herself for refusing him, and
would almost have reasoned herself into
the belief, that she had done very wrong
not to marry him—But this belief would
only, ... could only, have lasted till she
should see Mr. Temple again—So that,
upon the whole, it was best for poor
Mr. Gresham, that she knew nothing of
the matter.”—
All things being arranged thus in the
kindest and most convenient manner by
this excellent Mr. Gresham, and the day
being fixed for the marriage of Constance
and Mr. Henry—Caroline was asked to
be bride's-maid, and the honor of Lady
Jane Granville's company was requested
&wblank;It is inconceivable how much importance
Lady Jane attached to the idea
of her accepting or refusing this request,
and the quantity she talked about it was
wonderful!—notwithstanding the habitual
theme, of her “being of no consequence
now, to any one, of her being utterly

forgotten, and out of the world,”—yet
she had still a secret, very secret belief,
that all she did would be known and
commented upon; and she worked herself
up to think also, that the honor to
be conferred, or the offence that would
be taken in consequence of her decision
would be immortal.—Every five minutes
for two hours after the first reading of
Mr. Gresham's note, she took it up, laid
it down, and argued the matter pro and
con to Caroline.—
A long and loud knock at the door—came
to Caroline's relief—It was repeated
with imperious impatience&wblank;“Who is
it, my dear—look out of the window, but
don't let yourself be seen.”
Caroline did not know any of the
fashionable equipages, which to Lady
Jane appeared a great want of common
sense, or rather a great defect in her
education—Upon this occasion however,
she thought she recollected the livery to
be Mrs. Falconer's.
“Oh, no, my dear, quite impossible—

the Falconers have not been near me
this age—I will tell you whose livery it
is. ... There is a resemblance, but it is
astonishing to me a girl of your sense
cannot learn the difference. ... It is
old Lady Brangle's livery.”—
“It might very possibly be so,” Caroline
allowed.
The servant however, brought in cards,
and a note from Mrs. Falconer—The
note was to announce to Lady Jane
Granville the approaching marriage of
Miss Falconer with Sir Robert Percy—The
day was named, and the honor of
Lady Jane Granville's company was requested
at the wedding—Lady Jane knew,
that this communication was made, not
in the least in the kindness, but in the
pride of Mrs. Falconer's heart; and precisely
in the same spirit, in which it was
written, Lady Jane thought it incumbent
upon her, to receive and answer it.—Her
Ladyship, was really warm and
honest in her friendships, and very
grateful to her branch of the Percy

family, for the kindness they had shown
her in adversity.
“I think it extremely ill judged, and
ill-bred of Mrs. Falconer, to invite me
to this wedding—Does she think I have
no feeling—My own near relations, and
best friends, deprived of their birth-right,
by this Sir Robert Percy ... does she
conceive it possible, that I could go to
such a wedding?—No—nor did she wish
or expect it,—she only wrote from vanity,
and I shall answer her with pride, which,
at least, is somewhat superior to that
mean passion; and I shall go, I am now
determined, to Mr. Gresham's—I do nothing
by halves.”—
Her Ladyship immediately wrote answers
to both the invitations.—Nothing
for months had done her so much good,
as the exertion, interest, and imaginary
self-importance these two notes created—At
Mr. Gresham's on the day of the
wedding her Ladyship appeared with
great dignity, and was satisfied that she
had conferred honor and serious obligation.

Could she have seen into the minds
of all the company, she would have been
astonished to find how little she occupied
their thoughts&wblank;It would be difficult
to determine, whether it is more for
the happiness or misery of man and
womankind, that politeness should cherish,
or truth destroy these little delusions
of self-love.
Presently there appeared in the newspapers
a splendid account of the marriage
at St. George's church—Hanover
square, of Sir Robert Percy of Percy-Hall,
with Arabella the eldest daughter
of J. Falconer, Esquire,—present at the
ceremony was a long list of fashionable
friends—(who as Lady Jane Granville
observed, “would not have cared if the
bride had been hanged the next minute.”)
The happy pair, after partaking of an
elegant collation, set out in a barouche
and four for Percy-Hall, the seat of Sir
Robert Percy.
“So!” cried Lady Jane, throwing
down the paper, “Mrs. Falconer has

accomplished that match at last, and
has got one of her daughters well off her
hands—the ugly one too—Upon my word
she is amazingly clever—But, after all,
the man has a horrid temper, and a very
bad character&wblank;Now it is over, my
dear Caroline, I must tell you, that long
ago, before I was so well aware of what
sort of man he was, I had formed the
plan of marrying him to you, and so
uniting the two branches, and bringing
the estate into your family—But, we
have often reason to rejoice, that our
best concerted schemes don't succeed—I
give Mrs. Falconer joy—For worlds
I would not have such a man married to
any relation or friend of mine—Oh,
if I recover my fortune, Caroline, I have
hopes!”
Her Ladyship was interrupted by the
arrival of Mr. Gresham, who came to
take leave, as he was just setting out for
Holland.—He was a man who said less,
and did more for his friends, as Caroline
observed, “than almost any person she

knew.” On seeing his gallery of paintings,
she had noticed some beautiful
miniatures; he now brought all those
which she had admired, and begged to
leave them with her during his absence,
that she might at her leisure copy any of
them she liked. He knew she painted
in miniature, for he had long ago, when
at the Hills, seen her copy of M. de
Tourville's picture of Euphrosyne.—
“If,” said Mr. Gresham, observing
that Caroline scrupled to take charge of
so many precious pictures— “If you are
too proud to receive from me the slightest
kindness without a return, I am willing
to put myself under an obligation to
you.—While I am away, at your leisure,
make me a copy of that Euphrosyne—I
shall love it for your sake, and as reminding
me of the time when I first saw
it—the happiest time perhaps of my life” 
added he, in a low voice.—
“Oh, Rosamond,” thought Caroline,
“if you had heard that!—and if you

knew how generously kind he has been
to your brothers!”
At parting from Alfred and Erasmus,
he said to them,
“My good young friends, why don't
either of you marry ... to be sure you
are young enough, but think of it in
time, and don't put off ... put off ...
till you grow into old bachelors—I know
young men generally in these days say,
they find it too expensive to marry—Some
truth in that, but more selfishness.—Here's
young Mr. Henry has set you a
good example—your practice in your
professions, I suppose, puts you as much
at ease in the world by this time, as
he is. Malthus you know ... whom
I saw you studying the other day, objects
only to people marrying before they
can maintain a family—Alfred, when I
was at the Hills, I heard of a certain
Miss Leicester. ... If you shall think
of marrying before I come back again,
you'll want a house, and I've lent mine

already—But money you know can place
one in any part of the Town, you might
like better—I have a sum lying idle at
my bankers, which I have just had transferred
to the account of Alfred and Erasmus
Percy—Whichever of you marry
before I come back, must do me the
favor, to purchase a good house. ... I
must have it at the polite end of the
town, or I shall be worse than an old
bachelor—Let me find it well furnished
and aired—Nothing airs a house so well,
as a warm friend—Then you know, if I
should not fancy your purchase, I leave
it on your hand, and you pay me the
purchase money year by year, at your
leisure—if you can trust, that I will not
throw you into jail for it.”—
The warmth of Alfred's thanks in particular
showed Mr. Gresham, that he
had not been mistaken about Miss Leicester.
“I wish I had thought, or rather I
wish I had spoken of this sooner,” added
Mr. Gresham, “perhaps I might have

had the pleasure of seeing you married
before my leaving England, but—no—it
is best as it is—I might have hurried
things—and in these matters every body
likes to go their own pace, and their own
way.—So fare ye well—God bless you
both, and give you good wives, I can ask
nothing better for you from Heaven.”—
No man could be more disposed than
Alfred felt himself at this instant, to agree
with Mr. Gresham, and to marry immediately—Visions
of beauty and happiness
floated before his imagination, but a solicitor
knocking at the door of his chambers
recalled him to the sense of the sad
necessity of finishing some law papers,
instead of going into the country, to
see his fair mistress&wblank;His professional
duty absolutely required his remaining in
Town the whole of this term—Lady Jane
Granville's business in particular depended
upon him—He gave his mind to
it—She little knew how difficult it was
to him at this time, to fix his attention; 
or how much temper it required in

these circumstances, to bear with her
impatience.&wblank;The week before her
cause was expected to come to trial, her
Ladyship's law-fever was at it's height—Alfred
avoided her presence, and did her
business.—
The day arrived—her cause came on—Alfred's
exertions proved successful—and
hot from the courts he brought the
first joyful news—A decree in her
favor!
Lady Jane started up, clasped her
hands,—embraced Alfred,—embraced
Caroline—returned thanks to Heaven—again
and again, in broken sentences,
tried to express her gratitude to Alfred—A
flood of tears came to her relief. “Oh
Alfred, what pleasure your generous heart
must feel!”
Yes—all the labor, all the vexations of
his first professional life were paid—overpaid—at
this instant—Many years
of toil, mortifications, and disappointments
innumerable, must a barrister endure; 
but there are delicious moments,

when the sense of success, of benevolence,
of sympathy, all unite; when a life
of labor is paid by a word, or even by a
look.
It was difficult to tell whether Lady
Jane, who had regained her fortune, or
Alfred, by whom it had been recovered,
was the most joyful.—Caroline, who
sympathized with the pleasure felt by
both, was, perhaps, as happy as either.
From this day, from this hour, Lady
Jane's health rapidly recovered, and, as
Erasmus observed, her lawyer had at last
proved her best physician.—Happy for
brothers, that play thus into each other's
hands.—Happier for those, who play thus
into each other's hearts.
Caroline, when she saw Lady Jane
restored to her strength, and in excellent
spirits, preparing to take possession of a
handsome house in Cavendish Square,
thought she might now be spared to return
to her own family.—But Lady Jane
would not part with her; she insisted
upon keeping her the remainder of the

winter, promising to carry her back to
the Hills in a few weeks.—It was plain,
that refusing this request would renew the
ire of Lady Jane, and render irreconcilable
the quarrel between her Ladyship
and the Percy family. Caroline felt extremely
unwilling to offend one whom she
had obliged, and one who really showed
such anxiety for her happiness.
“I know, my dear Lady Jane,” said
she, smiling, “that if I stay with you,
you will form a hundred kind schemes
for my establishment; but forgive me
when I tell you, that it is in the certainty
that they will none of them be accomplished,
that I consent to accept your
Ladyship's invitation.”
“Perverse! provoking, and incomprehensible,—but
since you consent to stay,
my dear, I will not quarrel with your
motives.—I will let them rest as philosophically
unintelligible as you please. Be
satisfied, I will never more accuse you of
perversity in refusing me formerly, nor
will I convict you of inconsistency for

obliging me now.—The being convicted
of inconsistency I know is what you people,
who pique yourselves upon being
rational, are so afraid of.—Now we every
day people, who make no pretensions to
be reasonable, have no character for consistency
to support, you cannot conceive
what delightful liberty we enjoy.—In
lieu of whole tomes of casuistry, the
simple phrase, ‘I've changed my mind,’ 
does our business.—Now do let me hear,
if you could prevail upon yourself to say
that.”—
“I've changed my mind,” said Caroline
playfully.
“That's candid—now I love as well
as admire you.”—
“To be entirely candid then,” said
Caroline, “I must, my dear Lady Jane,
if you will give me leave, tell you more.”
“As much as you please,” said Lady
Jane, “for I am naturally curious, particularly
when young ladies blush.”—
Caroline thought, that however, Lady
Jane and she might differ on some points,

her Ladyship's anxiety to promote her
happiness in the way she thought most
advantageous deserved not only her gratitude,
but her confidence.—Besides, it
would be the most effectual way, she
hoped, of preventing Lady Jane from
forming any schemes for her establishment,
to confess at once, that her affections
were engaged. She really believed
it was not likely, that she should meet
with any person, whose character and
merits were equal to those of Count Altenberg,
and any one inferior to him she
was determined never to marry.—She
added a few words as delicately as she
could upon the dread she felt of being
persecuted in society as a young lady
wishing for an establishment.
Lady Jane heard all she said upon this
subject with much attention,—but when
she had finished, her Ladyship said to
herself.
“Nonsense!—Every young lady thinks
one lover perfect till she has seen another.—Before
Caroline has passed a month

in fashionable society, provided she has
a fashionable admirer, we shall hear no
more of this Count Altenberg.”—
“Well, my dear,” said she, holding
out her hand to Caroline,— “I will give
you my word, I will, to the best of my
ability, comply with all your conditions.—You
shall not be advertised as a young
lady in search of a husband,—but just as
if you were a married woman, you will
give me leave to introduce my acquaintance
to you, and if they should find out,
or if in time you should find out, that
you are not married, you know, I shall
not be to blame.”