

Upon his arrival at Annaly, Ormond
found that Dr. Cambray and all his family
were there.
“Yes, all your friends,” said Lady
Annaly, as Ormond looked round with
pleasure, “all your friends, Mr. Ormond,
you must allow me an old right to be of
that number—and here is my son, who
is as well inclined as I hope you feel, to
pass over the intermediate formality of
new acquaintanceship, and to become intimate
with you as soon as possible.”
Sir Herbert Annaly confirmed, by the
polite cordiality of his manner, all that his
mother promised, adding that their mutual
friend Dr. Cambray had made him already

so fully acquainted with Mr. Ormond,
that though he had never had
the pleasure of seeing him before, he
could not consider him as a stranger.
Florence Annaly was beautiful, but
not one of those beauties who strike at
first sight. Hers was a face, which
neither challenged nor sued for admiration.
There was no expression thrown
into the eyes or the eyebrows, no habitual
smile on the lips—the features were
all in natural repose, the face never expressed
any thing but what the mind really
felt.—But if any just observation
was made in Miss Annaly's company,
any stroke of genius, that countenance
instantly kindled into light and life; and
if any noble sentiment were expressed,
if any generous action were related, then
the soul within illumined the countenance
with a ray divine.—When once
Ormond had seen this, his eye returned
in hopes of seeing it again—he had an
indescribable interest and pleasure in

studying a countenance, which seemed
so true an index to a noble and cultivated
mind, to a heart of delicate, but not
morbid sensibility.—His manners and
understanding had been formed and improved,
beyond what could have been
expected from the few opportunities of
improvement he had till lately enjoyed.— 
He was timid, however, in conversation
with those of whose information and
abilities he had a high opinion, so that
at first he did not do himself justice; 
but in his timidity there was no awkwardness; 
it was joined with such firmness
of principle, and such a resolute,
manly character, that he was peculiarly
engaging to women.
During his first visit at Annaly, he
pleased much, and was so much pleased
with every individual of the family, with
their manners, their conversation, their
affection for each other, and altogether
with their mode of living, that he declared
to Dr. Cambray he never had

been so happy in his whole existence.
It was a remarkable fact, however
that he spoke much more of Lady Annaly
and Sir Herbert, than of Miss
Annaly.
He had never before felt so very unwilling
to leave any place, or so exceedingly
anxious to be invited to repeat his visit.
—He did receive the wished for invitation; 
and it was given in such a manner
as left him no doubt, that he might indulge
his own ardent desire to return,
and to cultivate the friendship of this family.
His ardour for foreign travel, his
desire to see more of the world, greatly
abated, and before he reached Castle
Hermitage, and by the time he saw his
guardian, he had almost forgotten, that
Sir Ulick had traced for him a course of
travels through the British islands and
the most polished parts of the Continent.
He now told Sir Ulick, that it was so
far advanced in the season, that he

thought it better to spend the winter in
Ireland.
“In Dublin instead of London?” said
Sir Ulick, smiling, “very patriotic, and
very kind to me, for I am sure I am
your first object—and depend upon it
few people—ladies always excepted— 
will ever like your company better than
I do.”
Then Sir Ulick went over rapidly
every subject, and every person which
could lead his ward further to explain
his feelings; but now, as usual, he wasted
his address, for the ingenuous young
man directly opened his whole heart to
him.
“I am impatient to tell you, Sir,” 
said he, “how very kindly I was received
by Lady Annaly.”
“She is very kind,” said Sir Ulick— 
“I suppose, in general, you have found
yourself pretty well received, wherever
you have gone—not to flatter you too
much on your mental or personal qualifications,

and no disparagement to Dr.
Cambray's letters of introduction or my
own, five or six thousand a year is, I
have generally observed, a tolerably good
passport into society, a sufficient passe- 
partout.”
“Passe-partout!—not partout—not
quite sufficient at Annaly, you cannot
mean, Sir—” 
“Oh! I cannot mean any thing, but
that Annaly is altogether the eighth wonder
of the world,” said Sir Ulick, “and
all the men and women in it, absolutely
angels—perfect angels.”
“No, Sir, if you please, not perfect
—for I have heard—though I own I
never saw it, that perfection is always
stupid—now certainly that the Annalys
are not.”
“Well, well, they shall be as imperfect
as you like—any thing to please
you—” 
“But, Sir, you used to be so fond of
the Annalys, I remember.”

“True, and did I tell you that I have
changed my opinion?”
“Your manner, though not your
words, tells me so.”
“You mistake—the fact is—for I always
treat you, Harry, with perfect candour— 
I was hurt and vexed by their refusal
of my son.—But, after all,” added
he with a deep sigh, “it was Marcus's
own fault—he has been very dissipated.— 
Miss Annaly was right, and her mother
quite right I own.—Lady Annaly is one
of the most respectable women in Ireland— 
and Miss Annaly is a charming
girl—I never saw any girl I should have
liked so much for my daughter-in-law.— 
But Marcus and I don't always agree
in our tastes—I don't think the refusal
there was half as great a mortification
and disappointment to him, as it was to
me.”
“You delight me, dear Sir,” cried
Ormond, “for then I may feel secure,
that if ever in future—I don't mean in

the least that I have any present thought— 
it would be absurd—it would be ridiculous— 
it would be quite improper— 
you know I was only there ten days.— 
But I mean if, in future, I should
ever have any thoughts—any serious
thoughts—” 
“Well, well,” said Sir Ulick, laughing
at Ormond's hesitation and embarrassment— 
“I can suppose that you will
have thoughts of some kind or other,
and serious thoughts in due course, but,
as you justly observe, it would be quite
ridiculous at present.”
“I beg your pardon, Sir,” interrupted
Harry, “but it would even at
present be an inexpressible satisfaction to
me to know, that if in future such a
thing should occur, I should be secure
in the first place of your approbation.”
“As to that, my dear boy,” said Sir
Ulick, “you know in a few days you
will be at years of discretion—my control
ceases.”

“Yes, Sir,—but not my anxiety for
your approbation, and my deference for
your opinion.”
“Then,” said Sir Ulick, “and without
circumlocution or nonsense, I tell
you at once, Harry Ormond, Florence
Annaly is the woman in the world I
should like best to see your wife.”
“Thank you, Sir, for this explicit
answer—I am sure towards me nothing
can have been more candid and kind,
than your whole conduct has ever been.”
“That's true, Harry!” exclaimed
Sir Ulick—“tell me about this duel— 
you have fought a duel in defence of my
conduct and my character, I understand,
since I saw you.—But, my dear fellow,
though I am excessively obliged to you,
I am exceedingly angry with you— 
how could you possibly be so hotheaded
and silly as to take up any man for relishing
the Ulysseana—bless ye, I relish
it myself—I only laugh at such things— 
believe me, 'tis the best way.”

“I am sure of it, Sir, if one can; 
and, indeed, I have had pretty good
proof, that one should despise reports
and scandal of all kinds—easier for
oneself sometimes, than for one's friends.”
“Yes, my dear Ormond, by the
time you have been half as long living
in the great and the political world, as
I have been, you will be quite casehardened,
and will hear your friends
abused, without feeling it in the least.— 
Believe me—I once was troubled with
a great deal of susceptibility like yours— 
but after all, 'tis no bad thing for
you to have fought a duel—a feather in
your cap with the ladies, and a warning
to all impertinent fellows to let you alone— 
but you were wounded, the newspaper
said—I asked you where, three times in
my letters, you never condescended to
answer me—answer me now, I insist
upon it.”
“In my arm, Sir—a slight scratch—” 
“Slight scratch or not, I must hear

all about it—come tell me exactly how
the thing began and ended—tell me all
the rascals said of me—you won't? Then
I'll tell you, they said, ‘I am the greatest
jobber in Ireland—that I do not mind
how I throw away the public money— 
in short that I am a sad political profligate.’ 
—Well! well! I am sure after
all, they did me the justice to acknowledge,
that in private life no man's honour
is more to be depended on.”
“They did do you that justice, Sir,” 
said Ormond, “but pray ask me no further
questions—for frankly it is disagreeable
to me—and I will tell you no
more.”
“That's frank,” said Sir Ulick, “and
I as frankly assure you, I am perfectly
satisfied.”
“Then to return to the Annalys,” 
said Ormond, “I never saw Sir Herbert
till now—I like him—I like his principles— 
his love of his country—his attachment
to his family.”

“He's a very fine fellow—no better
fellow than Herbert Annaly—But as for
his attachment to his family, who thanks
him for that? Who could help it,
with such a family?—And his love for
his country—every body loves his
country.”
“More or less, I suppose,” said Ormond.
“But, upon my word, I entirely agree
with you about Sir Herbert—though I
know he is prejudiced against me to the
last degree.”
“If he is, I don't know it, Sir—I
never found it out.”
“He will let it out by and by—I
only hope he will not prejudice you
against me.”
“That is not very easily done, Sir.”
“As you have given some proof, my
dear boy, and I thank you for it. But
the Annalys would go more cautiously
to work—I only put you on your guard— 
Marcus and Sir Herbert never could

hit it off together—And I am afraid the
breach between us and the Annalys
must be widened—for Marcus must
stand against Sir Herbert at the next
election, if he lives—Pray how is he?”
“Not strong, Sir—he has a hectic
colour—as I was very sorry to see.”
“Aye, poor fellow—he broke some
blood vessel, I think Marcus told me,
when they were in England.”
“Yes, Sir, so Lady Annaly told me— 
it was in over exerting himself in extinguishing
a fire.”
“A very fine spirited fellow he is, no
doubt,” said Sir Ulick, “but, after all,
that was rather a foolish thing, in his
state of health.—By the by, as your
guardian, it is my duty to explain the
circumstances of this family to you—in
case you should ever hereafter have any
serious thoughts as you say, you should
know what comforted Marcus in his
disappointment there. There is, then,
some confounded flaw in that old father's

will, through which the great Herbert
estate slips to an heir at law, who has
started up within this twelvemonth— 
Miss Annaly, who was to have been a
nonpareil of an heiress, in case of the
brother's death, will have but a moderate
fortune; and the poor dowager will be
but scantily provided for, after all the
magnificence which she has been used
to, unless he lives to make up something
handsome for them. I don't know the
particulars, but I know that a vast deal
depends on his living till he has levied
certain fines, which he ought to have
levied, instead of amusing himself putting
out other people's fires. But I am
excessively anxious about it, and now
on your account as well as theirs, for it
would make a great difference to you, if
you seriously have any thoughts of Miss
Annaly.”
Ormond declared this could make no
difference to him, since his own fortune
would be sufficient for all the wishes

of such a woman as he supposed her
to be.
The next day Marcus O'Shane arrived
from England. This was the first time
that Ormond and he had met since the
affair of Moriarty, and the banishment
from Castle Hermitage. The meeting
was awkward enough, notwithstanding
Sir Ulick's attempts to make it otherwise— 
Marcus laboured under the double
consciousness of having deserted Harry
in past adversity, and of being jealous of
his present prosperity. Ormond at first
went forward to meet him more than
half way with great cordiality, but the
cold politeness of Marcus chilled him; 
and the heartless congratulations, and
frequent allusions in the course of the
first hour to Ormond's new fortune and
consequence, offended our young hero's
pride. He grew more reserved, the
more complimentary Marcus became,
especially as in all his compliments there
was a mixture of persiflage, which Marcus

trusted erroneously that Ormond's
untutored, unpractised ear would not
perceive.
Harry sat silent, proudly indignant.
He valued himself on being something,
and somebody, independently of his
fortune—he had worked hard to become
so—he had the consciousness of tried
integrity, resolution, and virtue about
him; and was it to be implied that he
was only somebody, in consequence of
his having chanced to become heir to so
many thousand pounds a year? Neither
as flattery nor persiflage could he bear
this—much less could he endure to have
Marcus suppose, that he could at once
flatter and sneer at him. Sir Ulick,
whose address was equal to most occasions,
was not able to manage so as to
make these young men like one another.
Marcus had an old jealousy of Harry's
favour with his father, of his father's
affection for Harry; and at the present
moment he was conscious, that his father

was, with just cause, much displeased
with him. Of this Harry knew nothing,
but Marcus suspected that his father had
told Ormond every thing, and this increased
the awkwardness and ill humour
that Marcus felt; and notwithstanding
all his knowledge of the world,
and conventional politeness, he shewed
his vexation in no well bred manner.— 
He was now in particular bad humour,
in consequence of a scrape, as
he called it, which he had got into,
during his last winter in London, respecting
an intrigue, commenced with a
married lady of rank. Marcus, by some
intemperate expressions, had brought on
the discovery, of which, when it was too
late, he repented. A public trial was likely
to be the consequence—the damages
would doubtless be laid at the least at
ten thousand pounds. Marcus, however,
counting, as sons sometimes do, in calculating
their father's fortune, all the
credit, and knowing nothing of the

debtor side of the account, conceived
his father's wealth to be inexhaustible.
Lady O'Shane's large fortune had
cleared off all debts, and had set Sir
Ulick up in a bank, which was in high
credit;—then he had shares in a canal
and in a silver mine—he held two lucrative
sinecure places—had bought estates
in three counties—the son did not know,
that for the borrowed purchase-money
of two of the estates, Sir Ulick was
now paying high and accumulating interest; 
so that the prospect of being
called upon for ten thousand pounds
was most alarming. In this exigency
Sir Ulick, who had long foreseen how
the affair was likely to terminate, had
his eye upon his ward's ready money.
It was for this he had been at such peculiar
pains to ingratiate himself with
Ormond. His fondness for Ormond,
nevertheless, made him hesitate—he was
unwilling to injure him, or to hazard his
property—very unwilling to prey upon

his generosity—still more so after the
late handsome manner, in which his
ward had hazarded his life in defence
of his guardian's honour.
Sir Ulick who saw, the first evening
that Marcus and Ormond met, that Marcus
was not going the way to assist
these views, pointed out to him how
much it was for his interest to conciliate
Ormond, and to establish himself in
his good opinion—but Marcus, though
he saw and acknowledged this, could
not submit his pride and temper to the
necessary restraint. For a few hours he
would display his hereditary talents, and
all the acquired graces of polished society; 
but the next hour his ill humour
would break out, in a way which Ormond's
generous spirit could not bear,
to his inferiors, to his father's tenants
and dependants. Before he went to
England, even from his boyish days,
Marcus's manners had been habitually
haughty and tyrannical to the lower

class of people. Ormond and he had
always differed, and often quarrelled on
this subject. Ormond hoped to find
Marcus's manners altered in this respect
by his residence in a more polished
country. But the external polish he
had acquired had not reached the mind— 
high bred society had taught him only
to be polite to his equals: he was now
still more disposed to be insolent to
his inferiors, especially to his Irish inferiors.
He affected now to consider himself
as more than half an Englishman— 
and returning from London in all the
distress and disgrace to which he had
reduced himself by criminal indulgence
in the vices of fashionable, and what he
called refined society, he vented his ill
humour on his countrymen, on the poor
Irish peasants—the natives, as he termed
them, in derision.—He spoke to them always
as if they were slaves, he considered
them as barbarians and savages.
Marcus had, early in life, almost before

he knew the real distinctions, or more
than the names of the different parties in
Ireland, been a strong party man. He
called himself a government man—but
he was one of those partizans, whom
every wise and good administration in
Ireland has discountenanced and disclaimed.
He was, in short, one of those; 
who have made their politics an excuse
to their conscience for the indulgence of
a violent temper.
Ormond was indignant at the inveterate
prejudice, that Marcus shewed
against a poor man, whom he had injured,
but who had never injured him.
The moment Marcus saw Moriarty Carroll
again, and heard his name mentioned,
he exclaimed and reiterated,
“That's a bad fellow—I know him of
old—all those Carrolls are rascals and
rebels.”
Marcus looked with a sort of disdainful
spleen at the house, which Ormond
had fitted up for Moriarty.

“So, you stick to this fellow still!— 
What a dupe, Ormond, this Moriarty
has made of you!” said Marcus, “but
that's not my affair,—I only wonder
how you wheedled my father out of the
ground for the garden here.”
“There was no wheedling in the
case,” said Ormond, “your father gave
it freely, or I should not have accepted
it.”
“You were very good to accept it,
no doubt,” said Marcus, in an ironical
tone, “I know I have asked my father
for a garden to a cottage before now,
and have been refused.”
Sir Ulick came up just as this was
said, and, alarmed at the tone of voice,
used all his address to bring his son back
to good temper—and he might have
succeeded, but that Peggy Sheridan that
was, chanced to appear at that instant.
“Who is that?” cried Marcus,
“Peggy Sheridan, as I live! is not it?”
“No, please your honour,—but Peggy

Sheridan that was—Peggy Carroll that
is,” said Peggy, curtsying, with a slight
blush, and an arch smile.
“So, you have married that Moriarty
at last.”
“I have, please your honour—he is a
very honest boy—and I'm very happy— 
if your honour's pleased.”
“Who persuaded your father to this,
pray, contrary to my advice?”
“Nobody at all, plase your honour,” 
said Peggy, looking frightened.
“Why do you say that, Peggy,” said
Ormond, “when you know it was I persuaded
your father to give his consent to
your marriage with Moriarty.”
“You! Mr. Ormond! Oh, I comprehend
it all, now,” said Marcus, with his
slight sneering look and tone, “No
doubt you had good reasons.”
Poor Peggy blushed deepest crimson.
“I understand it all now,” said Marcus,
“I understand you now, Harry!”
Ormond's anger rose, and with a look
of high disdain, he replied—

“You understand me, now! no, nor
ever will, nor ever can. Our minds are
unintelligible to each other.”
Then turning from him, Ormond
walked away with indignant speed.
“Peggy, don't I see something like a
cow yonder, getting her bread at my
expense?” said Sir Ulick, directing
Peggy's eye to a gap in the hedge by
the road-side. “Whose cow is that at
the top of the ditch, half through my
hedge?”
“I can't say, please your honour,” 
said Peggy, “if it wouldn't be Paddy
M'Grath's—Betty M'Greggor!” cried
she, calling to a bare footed girl— 
“Whose cow is yonder?”
“Oh, marcy! but if it isn't our own
red rogue—and when I tied her legs
three times myself, the day;” said the
girl, running to drive away the cow.
“Oh, she strays and trespasses strangely,
the red cow, for want of the little
spot your honour promised her,” said
Peggy.

“Well, run and save my hedge from
her now, my pretty Peggy, and I will
find the little spot for her to-morrow,” 
said Sir Ulick.
Away ran Peggy after the cow— 
while lowering Marcus cursed them all
three. Pretty Peg he swore ought to be
banished the estate—the cow ought to
be hamstrung, instead of having a spot
promised her—“but this is the way,
Sir, you ruin the country and the
people,” said he to his father.
“Be that as it may, I do not ruin
myself as you do, Marcus,” replied the
cool Sir Ulick. “Never mind the cow
—nonsense! I am not thinking of a
cow.”
“Nor I either, Sir.”
“Then follow Harry Ormond directly,
and make him understand that
he misunderstood you,” said Sir Ulick.
“Excuse me, Sir, I cannot bend to
him,” said Marcus.
“And you expect that he will lend

you ten thousand pounds at your utmost
need?”
“The money, with your estate, can
be easily raised elsewhere, Sir,” said
Marcus.
“I tell you, it cannot, Sir,” said the
father.
“I cannot bend to Ormond, Sir—to
any body but him—any thing but that— 
my pride cannot stoop to that.”
“Your pride!—‘pride that licks the
dust,’”thought Sir Ulick. It was in
vain for the politic father to remonstrate
with the headstrong son. The whole
train which Sir Ulick had laid with so
much skill was, he feared, at the moment
when his own delicate hand was
just preparing to give the effective touch,
blown up by the rude impatience of his
son. Sir Ulick, however, never lost
time or opportunity in vain regret for
the past. Even in the moment of disappointment
he looked to the future. He
saw the danger of keeping two young

men together, who had such incompatible
tempers and characters. He was,
therefore, glad when he met Ormond
again, to hear him propose his returning
to Annaly, and he instantly acceded to
the proposal.
“Castle Hermitage, I know, my dear
boy, cannot be as pleasant to you just
now, as I could wish to make it—we
have nobody here now—and Marcus—is
not all I could wish him,” said Sir
Ulick, with a sigh. “He had always a
jealousy of my affection for you, Harry— 
it cannot be helped—we do not chuse
our own children—but we must abide
by them—you must perceive that things
are not going on quite rightly between
my son and me.”
“I am sorry for it, Sir—especially as
I am convinced I can do no good, and
therefore wish not to interfere.”
“I believe you are right—though I
part from you with regret.”
“I shall be within your reach, Sir,

you know—whenever you wish for me,
if ever I can be of the least use to you,
summon me, and I am at your orders.”
“Thank you! but stay one moment,” 
said Sir Ulick, with a sudden look of
recollection, “You will be of age in a
few days, Harry—we ought to settle
accounts, should not we?”
“Whenever you please, Sir—no hurry
on my part—but you have advanced me
a great deal of money lately, I ought to
settle that.”
“Oh, as to that—a mere trifle—If you
are in no hurry, I am in none—for I
shall have business enough on my hands
during these few days, before Lady Norton
fills the house again with company— 
I am certainly a little hurried now.”
“Then, Sir, do not think of my business— 
I cannot be better off, you know,
than I am—I assure you I am sensible
of that—Never mind the accounts, only
send for me whenever I can be of any
use or pleasure to you—I need not make

speeches—I trust, my dear guardian,— 
my father, when I was left fatherless,—I
trust you believe I have some gratitude
in me.”
“I do,” cried Sir Ulick, much moved,
“and, by Heaven, it is impossible to—I
mean—in short, it is impossible not to
love you, Harry Ormond.”