



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I thought it was now high time to turn my whole
mind to my beloved; who had had full leisure to
weigh the contents of the letters I had left with her. 
I therefore requested Mrs. Moore to step in, and
desire to know, whether she would be pleased to admit
me to attend her in her apartment, on occasion of the
letters I had left with her; or whether she would favour
me with her company in the dining-room? 
Mrs. Moore desired Miss Rawlins to accompany
her in to the lady. They tapp'd at her door, and
were both admitted. 
I cannot but stop here for one minute, to remark,
tho' against myself, upon that security which innocence
gives, that nevertheless had better have in it a
greater mixture of the Serpent with the Dove. For
here, heedless of all I could say behind her back, because
she was satisfied with her own worthiness, she
permitted me to go on with my own story, without
interruption, to persons as great strangers to her as
to me; and who, as strangers to both, might be supposed
to lean to the side most injured: And that, as
I managed it, was to mine. A dear silly soul!
thought I, at the time, to depend upon the goodness
of her own heart, when the heart cannot be seen
into but by its actions; and she, to appearance, a
runaway, an eloper, from a tender, a most indulgent
husband! —To neglect to cultivate the opinion of individuals,
when the whole world is governed by appearance! 
Yet, what can be expected of an angel under
twenty? —She has a world of knowlege; knowlege
speculative, as I may say; but no experience! How
should she? —Knowlege by theory only is a vague uncertain 

light: A Will o' the Wisp, which as often
misleads the doubting mind, as puts it right. 
There are many things in the world, could a
moralizer say, that would afford inexpressible pleasure
to a reflecting mind, were it not for the mixture
they come to us with. To be graver still; I have
seen parents (perhaps my own did so) who delighted
in those very qualities in their children, while young,
the natural consequences of which (too much indulged
and encouraged) made them, as they grew
up, the plague of their hearts. —To bring this home
to my present purpose, I must tell thee, that I adore
this charming creature for her vigilant prudence; but
yet, I would not, methinks, wish her, by virtue of
that prudence, which is, however, necessary to carry
her above the devices of all the rest of the world, to
be too wise for mine. 
My revenge, my sworn revenge, is nevertheless
(adore her as I will) uppermost in my heart! —Miss
Howe says, that my Love is an Herodian Love (a) : 
By my soul, that girl's a witch! —I am half sorry to
say, that I find a pleasure in playing the tyrant over
what I love. Call it an ungenerous pleasure, if thou
wilt: Softer hearts than mine know it. The women
to a woman know it, and shew it too, whenever
they are trusted with power. And why should it be
thought strange, that I, who love them so dearly,
and study them so much, should catch the infection
of them? 