



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Saturday, March 25. 
What can I advise you to do, my noble creature? 
Your merit is your crime. You can no more
change your nature, than your persecutors can theirs. 
Your distress is owing to the vast disparity between
you and them. What would you have of them? 
Do they not act in character? —And to whom? To
an Alien. You are not one of them. They have
two dependencies in their hope to move you to compliance
—Upon their impenetrableness one [I'd give it
a more proper name, if I dared]; the other, on the
regard you have always had for your character [Have
they not heretofore owned as much?] and upon your
apprehensions from that of Lovelace, which would
discredit you, should you take any step by his means
to extricate yourself. Then they know, that resentment
and unpersuadableness are not natural to you; 
and that the anger they have wrought you up to, will
subside, as all extraordinaries soon do; and that once
married, you will make the best of it. 
But surely your Father's Son and eldest Daughter
have a view (by communicating to so narrow a soul
all they know of your just aversion to him) to entail
unhappiness for life upon you, were you to have the
man who is already more nearly related to them, than
ever he can be to you, altho' the shocking compulsion
should take place. 

As to that wretch's perseverance, those only, who
know not the man, will wonder at it. He has not
the least delicacy. His principal view in marriage is
not to the mind. How shall those beauties be valued,
which cannot be comprehended? Were you to be
his, and shew a visible want of tenderness to him, it
is my opinion, he would not be much concerned at
it. I have heard you well observe, from your Mrs.
Norton, That a person who has any over-ruling passion,
will compound by giving up twenty secondary
or under-satisfactions, tho' more laudable ones, in order
to have that gratified. 
I'll give you the substance of a conversation [No
fear you can be made to like him worse than you do
already] that passed between Sir Harry Downeton and
this Solmes, but three days ago, as Sir Harry told it
but yesterday to my Mother and me. It will confirm
to you that what your Sister's insolent Betty reported
he should say, of governing by Fear, was not of her
own head. 
Sir Harry told him, he wondered he should wish
to obtain you so much against your Inclination as
every-body knew it would be, if he did. 
He matter'd not That, he said: Coy Maids made
the fondest Wives [A sorry fellow!]: It would not
at all grieve him to see a pretty woman make wry
faces, if she gave him cause to vex her. And your
Estate, by the convenience of its situation, would
richly pay him for all he could bear with your shyness. 
He should be sure, he said, after a while, of your
Complaisance, if not of your Love: And in That
should be happier than nine parts in ten of his married
acquaintance. 
What a wretch is this! 
For the rest, your known virtue would be as great
a security to him, as he could wish for. 
She will look upon you, said Sir Harry, if she be
forced to marry you, as Elizabeth of France did upon 

Philip II. of Spain, when he received her on his frontiers
as her Husband, who was to have been but her
Father-in-law: That is, with Fear and Terror, rather
than with Complaisance and Love: And you will
perhaps be as surly to her, as That old Monarch was
to his young Bride. 
Fear and Terror, the wretch, the horrid wretch!
said, looked pretty in a Bride as well as in a Wife: 
And, laughing [Yes, my dear, the hideous fellow
laughed immoderately, as Sir Harry told us, when
he said it] It should be his care to perpetuate the occasion
for that Fear, if he could not think he had the
Love. And, truly, he was of opinion, that if Love
and Fear must be separated in Matrimony, the man
who made himself feared, fared best— 
If my eyes would carry with them the execution
which the eyes of the Basilisk are said to do, I would
make it my first business to see this creature. 
My Mother, however, says, it would be a prodigious
merit in you, if you could get over your aversion
to him. Where, asks she [as you have been asked
before] is the praise-worthiness of obedience, if it be
only paid in instances where we give up nothing? 
What a fatality, that you have no better an option
—Either a Scylla or a Charybdis! 
Were it not You, I should know how (barbarously
used as you are used) to advise you in a moment. 
But such a noble character to suffer from a (supposed)
rashness and indiscretion of such a nature, would, as
I have heretofore observed, be a wound to the Sex. 
While I was in hope, that the asserting of your
own independence would have helped you, I was
pleased, that you had one resource, as I thought: 
But now, that you have so well proved, that such a
step would not avail you, I am entirely at a loss what
to say. 
I will lay down my pen and think. 

* *
I have considered, and considered again; but, I
protest, I know no more what to say now, than before. 
Only this: That I am young, like yourself; 
and have a much weaker judgment, and stronger passions,
than you have. 
I have heretofore said, that you have offered as
much as you ought, in offering to live single. If you
were never to marry, the Estate they are so loth
should go out of their name, would, in time, I suppose,
revert to your Brother: And he or his would
have it, perhaps, much more certainly this way, than
by the precarious reversions which Solmes makes them
hope for. Have you put this into their odd heads, my
dear? —The tyrant word Authority, as they use
it, can be the only objection against this offer. 
One thing you must consider, that, if you leave
your Parents, your Duty and Love will not suffer
you to justify yourself by an appeal against them; and
so you'll have the world against you. And should
Lovelace continue his wild life, and behave ungratefully
to you, will not his baseness seem to justify their
cruel treatment of you, as well as their dislike of him? 
May Heaven direct you for the best! —I can only
say, that, for my own part, I would do any-thing,
go any-whither, rather than be compelled to marry
the man I hate; and (were he such a man as Solmes)
must always hate—Nor could I have borne what you
have borne, if from Father and Uncles, not from
Brother and Sister. 
My Mother will have it, that after they have tried
their utmost efforts to bring you into their measures,
and find them ineffectual, they will recede. But I
cannot say I am of her mind. She does not own,
she has any other authority for this, but her own conjecture. 
I should otherwise have hoped, that your
Uncle Antony and she had been in one secret, and
that favourable to you: Woe be to one of them at 

least [To your Uncle to be sure I mean] if they
should be in any other! 
You must, if possible, avoid being carried to that
Uncle's. The Man, the Parson, your Brother and
Sister present!—they'll certainly there marry you to
the wretch. Nor will your newly-raised spirit support
you in your resistance on such an occasion. 
Your meekness will return; and you will have nothing
for it but tears [Tears despised by them all] and ineffectual
appeals and lamentations: —And these Tears,
when the ceremony is profaned, you must suddenly
dry up; and endeavour to dispose yourself to such an
humble frame of mind, as may induce your new-made
Lord to forgive all your past declarations of
aversion. 
In short, my dear, you must then blandish him
over with a confession, that all your past behaviour
was maidenly reserve only: And it will be your part
to convince him of the truth of his impudent sarcasm,
That the coyest maids make the fondest wives. Thus
will you enter the State with a high sense of obligation
to his forgiving goodness: And if you will not
be kept to it by that Fear, by which he proposes to
govern, I am much mistaken. 
Yet, after all, I must leave the point undetermined,
and only to be determined, as you find they recede
from their avowed purpose, or resolve to remove you
to your Uncle Antony's. But I must repeat my wishes,
that something may fall out, that neither of these men
may call you his! —And may you live single, my
dearest friend, till some man shall offer, that may be
as worthy of you, as man can be! 
But yet, methinks, I would not, that you, who are
so admirably qualified to adorn the Married State,
should be always single. You know I am incapable
of flattery; and that I always speak and write the
sincere dictates of my heart. Nor can you, from
what you must know of your own merit (taken only 

in a comparative light with others) doubt my sincerity. 
For why should a person who delights to find out and
admire every-thing that is praise-worthy in another,
be supposed ignorant of like perfections in herself,
when she could not so much admire them in another,
if she had them not herself? And why may
not I give her those praises, which she would give to
any other, who had but half of her excellencies? 
—Especially when she is incapable of pride and vain-glory; 
and neither despises others for the want of her
fine qualities, nor over-values herself upon them? — 
Over-values, did I say! —How can that be? 
Forgive me, my beloved friend. My admiration
of you (encreased, as it is, by every Letter you write)
will not always be held down in silence; altho', in
order to avoid offending you, I generally endeavour
to keep it from flowing to my pen, when I write to
you, or to my lips, whenever I have the happiness to
be in your company. 
I will add nothing (tho' I could an hundred things
on occasion of your latest communications) but that
I am 
You ever-affectionate and faithful,
Anna Howe. 
I hope I have pleased you with my dispatch. I wish
I had been able to please you with my requested
advice. 
You have given new beauties to the charming Ode
which you have transmitted to me. What pity
that the wretches you have to deal with, put
you out of your admirable course; in the pursuit
of which, like the Sun, you was wont to chear
and illuminate all you shone upon! 