



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Feb. 26. in the Morning. 
My Aunt, who staid here last night, made me a
visit this morning as soon as it was light. She
tells me, that I was left alone with my Father yesterday
on purpose that he might talk with me on my expected
obedience; but that he owned he was put beside
his purpose by reflecting on something my Brother
had told him in my disfavour, and by his impatience
but to suppose, that such a gentle spirit as mine had
hitherto seemed to be, should presume to dispute his
will in a point where the advantage of the whole
family was to be so greatly promoted by my compliance. 
I find, by a few words which dropt unawares from
my Aunt, that they have all an absolute dependence
upon what they suppose to be a meekness in my temper. 
But in this they may be mistaken; for I verily
think, upon a strict examination of myself, that I 

have almost as much in me of my Father's as of my
Mother's Family. 
My Uncle Harlowe it seems is against driving me
upon extremities: But my Brother has engaged, that
the regard I have for my reputation, and my principles,
will bring me round to my duty; that's the expression. 
Perhaps I shall have reason to wish I had
not known this. 
My Aunt advises me to submit for the present to
the interdicts they have laid me under; and indeed
to encourage Mr. Solmes's address. I have absolutely
refused the latter, let what will (as I have told
her) be the consequence. The visiting prohibition I
will conform to. But as to that of not corresponding
with you, nothing but the menace that our Letters
shall be intercepted can engage my observation of it. 
She believes that this order is from my Father, and
that my Mother has not been consulted upon it. She
says, that it is given, as she has reason to think, purely
in consideration to me, lest I should mortally offend
him; and this from the incitements of other people
(meaning you and Miss Lloyd, I make no doubt)
rather than by my own will. For still, as she tells
me, he speaks kind and praiseful things of me. 
Here is clemency! Here is indulgence! —And so
it is, To prevent a headstrong child, as a good Prince
would wish to deter disaffected subjects, from running
into rebellion, and so forfeiting every-thing! But this
is all owing to the Young-man's wisdom of my Brother; 
a Plotter without a head, and a Brother without
a heart! 
How happy might I have been with any other Brother
in the world but James Harlowe; and with any
other Sister but his Sister! Wonder not, my dear,
that I, who used to chide you for these sort of liberties
with my relations, now am more undutiful than you
ever was unkind. I cannot bear the thought of being
deprived of the principal pleasure of my life; for such 

is your conversation by Person and by Letter. And
who, besides, can bear to be made the dupe of such
low cunning, operating with such high and arrogant
passions? 
But can you, my dear Miss Howe, condescend to
carry on a private correspondence with me? —If you
can, there is one way I have thought of, by which it
may be done. 
You must remember the Green Lane, as we call it,
that runs by the side of the Wood-house and Poultry-yard
where I keep my Bantams, Pheasants, and Peahens,
which generally engage my notice twice a day; 
the more my favourites because they were my Grandfather's,
and recommended to my care by him; and
therefore brought hither from my Dairy-house since
his death. 
The Lane is lower than the floor of the Wood-house; 
and in the side of the Wood-house the boards
are rotted away down to the floor for half an ell together
in several places. Hannah can step into the Lane,
and make a mark with chalk where a Letter or Parcel
may be pushed in, under some sticks; which may
be so managed as to be an unsuspected cover for the
written deposits from either. 
* *
I have been just now to look at the place, and
find it will answer. So your faithful Robert may,
without coming near the house, and as only passing
thro' the Green Lane which leads to two or three
farm-houses [out of livery, if you please] very easily
take from thence my Letters, and deposit yours. 
This place is the more convenient, because it is
seldom resorted to but by myself or Hannah, on the
above-mentioned account; for it is the general store-house
for firing; the wood for constant use being
nearer the house. 
One corner of this being separated off for the roosting-place
of my little poultry, either she or I shall
never want a pretence to go thither. 

Try, my dear, the success of a Letter this way; 
and give me your opinion and advice what to do in
this disgraceful situation, as I cannot but call it; and
what you think of my prospects; and what you would
do in my case. 
But before-hand I will tell you, that your advice
must not run in favour of this Solmes: And yet it is
very likely they will endeavour to engage your Mother,
in order to induce you, who have such an influence
over me, to favour him. 
Yet, on second thoughts, if you incline to that side
of the question, I would have you write your whole
mind. Determined as I think I am, and cannot help
it, I would at least give a patient hearing to what may
be said on the other side. For my regards are not so
much engaged [Upon my word they are not; I
know not myself if they be] to another person as
some of my friends suppose; and as you, giving way
to your lively vein upon his last visits, affected to
suppose. What preferable favour I may have for him
to any other person, is owing more to the usage he
has received, and for my sake borne, than to any
personal consideration. 
I write a few lines of grateful acknowlegement to
your good Mother for her favours to me in the late
happy period. I fear I shall never know such another. 
I hope she will forgive me, that I did not write
sooner. 
The bearer, if suspected and examined, is to produce
that as the only one he carries. 
How do needless watchfulness and undue restraint
produce artifice and contrivance! I should abhor these
clandestine correspondencies, were they not forced
upon me. They have so mean, so low an appearance
to myself, that I think I ought not to expect that you
should take part in them. 
But why (as I have also expostulated with my Aunt)
must I be pushed into a State, which I have no wish 

to enter into, altho' I reverence it? —Why should not
my Brother, so many years older, and so earnest to
see me engaged, be first engaged? —And why should
not my Sister be first provided for? 
But here I conclude these unavailing expostulations,
with the assurance, that I am, and ever will be, 
Your affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 