



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, April 6. 
I thank you, my dearest friend, for the pains you
have taken in accounting so affectionately for my
papers not being taken away yesterday; and for the
kind protection you would have procured for me, if
you could. 
This kind protection was what I wished for: But
my wishes, raised at first by your Love, were rather
governed by my despair of other refuge [having before
cast about, and not being able to determine, what
I ought to do, and what I could do, in a situation so
unhappy] than by a reasonable hope: For why indeed
should any-body embroil themselves for others, when
they can avoid it? 
All my consolation is, as I have frequently said,
that I have not, by my own inadvertence or folly,
brought myself into this sad situation. If I had, I
should not have dared to look up to any-body with
the expectation of protection or assistance, nor to you
for excuse of the trouble I give you. But nevertheless
we should not be angry at a person's not doing 

that for ourselves, or for our friend, which she thinks
she ought not to do; and which she has it in her
option either to do, or to let it alone. Much less
have you a right to be displeased with so prudent a
Mother, for not engaging herself so warmly in my
favour, as you wished she would. If my own Aunt
can give me up, and that against her judgment, as I
may presume to say; and if my Father and Mother,
and Uncles, who once loved me so well, can join
so strenuously against me; can I expect, or ought
you, the protection of your Mother, in opposition to
them? 
Indeed, my dearest Love [Permit me to be very
serious] I am afraid I am singled out (either for my
own faults, or for the faults of my family, or perhaps
for the faults of both) to be a very unhappy creature!
—signally unhappy! For see you not how irresistibly
the waves of affliction come tumbling down
upon me? 
We have been till within these few weeks, every
one of us, too happy. No crosses, no vexations,
but what we gave ourselves from the pamper'dness, as
I may call it, of our own wills. Surrounded by our
heaps and stores, hoarded up as fast as acquired, we
have seemed to think ourselves out of the reach of
the bolts of adverse fate. I was the pride of all my
friends, proud myself of their pride, and glorying in
my standing. Who knows what the justice of Heaven
may inflict, in order to convince us, that we are
not out of the reach of misfortune; and to reduce us
to a better reliance, than that we have hitherto presumptuously
made? 
I should have been very little the better for the
Conversation-visits which the good Dr. Lewen used
to honour me with, and for the principles wrought
(as I may say) into my earliest mind by my pious
Mrs. Norton, founded on her reverend Father's experience,
as well as on her own, if I could not thus 

retrospect and argue, in such a strange situation as we
are in. Strange, I may well call it; for don't you
see, my dear, that we seem all to be impelled, as it
were, by a perverse fate, which none of us are able
to resist? —And yet all arising (with a strong appearance
of self-punishment) from ourselves? Do not my
Parents see the hopeful children, from whom they
expected a perpetuity of worldly happiness to their
branching family, now grown up to answer the till
now distant hope, setting their angry faces against
each other, pulling up by the roots, as I may say,
that hope which was ready to be carried into a probable
certainty? 
Your partial Love will be ready to acquit me of
capital and intentional faults: —But oh, my dear!
my calamities have humbled me enough to make me
turn my gaudy eye inward; to make me look into
myself. —And what have I discovered there? —Why,
my dear friend, more secret pride and vanity than
I could have thought had lain in my unexamined
heart. 
If I am to be singled out to be the punisher of myself
and family, who so lately was the pride of it,
pray for me, my dear, that I may not be left wholly
to myself; and that I may be enabled to support my
character, so as to be justly acquitted of wilful and
premeditated faults. The will of Providence be resigned
to in the rest: As that leads, let me patiently,
and unrepiningly, follow! —I shall not live always! — 
May but my closing scene be happy! 
But I will not oppress you, my dearest friend, with
further reflections of this sort. I will take them all
into myself. Surely I have a mind that has room for
them. My afflictions are too sharp to last long. The
crisis is at hand. Happier times you bid me hope
for. I will hope. 
* *
But yet, I cannot but be impatient at times, to 

find myself thus driven, and my character so depreciated
and sunk, that were all the future to be happy,
I should be ashamed to shew my face in public, or
to look up. And all by the instigation of a selfish
Brother, and envious Sister.— 
But let me stop: Let me reflect! —Are not these
suggestions the suggestions of the secret pride I have
been censuring? Then, already so impatient! But
this moment so resigned, so much better disposed for
reflection! Yet 'tis hard, 'tis very hard, to subdue
an embittered spirit! —In the instant of its trial too! 
—O my cruel Brother! —But now it rises again. —I
will lay down a pen I am so little able to govern. 
—And I will try to subdue an impatience, which
(if my afflictions are sent me for corrective ends)
may otherwise lead me into still more punishable
errors.— 
* *
I will return to a subject, which I cannot fly
from for ten minutes together—called upon especially
as I am, by your three alternatives stated in the conclusion
of your last. 
As to the first; to wit, Your advice for me to escape
to London—Let me tell you, that that other hint or
proposal which accompanies it, perfectly frightens
me—Surely, my dear (happy as you are, and indulgently
treated as your Mother treats you) you cannot
mean what you propose! What a wretch must I be,
if, for one moment only, I could lend an ear to such
a proposal as This! —I, to be the occasion of making
such a Mother's (perhaps shortened) life unhappy to
the last hour of it! —Ennoble you, my dear creature! 
How must such an enterprize (the rashness public,
the motives, were they excuseable, private) debase
you! —But I will not dwell upon the subject—For
your own sake I will not. 
As to your second alternative, To put myself into
the protection of Lord M. and of the Ladies of that 

family, I own to you (as I believe I have owned before)
that altho' to do This would be the same thing
in the eye of the world as putting myself into Mr.
Lovelace's protection, yet I think I would do it rather
than be Mr. Solmes's Wife, if there were evidently
no other way to avoid being so. 
Mr. Lovelace, you have seen, proposes to contrive
a way to put me into possession of my own house; and he
tells me, that he will soon fill it with the Ladies of his
Family, as my visitors;—upon my invitation, however,
to them. —A very inconsiderate proposal I think
it to be, and upon which I cannot explain myself to
him. What an exertion of independency does it
chalk out for me! How, were I to attend to him
(and not to the natural consequences to which the
following of his advice would lead me) might I be
drawn by gentle words into the perpetration of the
most violent acts! —For how could I gain possession,
but either by legal litigation, which, were I inclined
to have recourse to it (as I never can be) must take
up time; or by forcibly turning out the persons whom
my Father has placed there, to look after the gardens,
the house, and the furniture—persons entirely attached
to himself, and who, as I know, have been lately
instructed by my Brother? 
Your third alternative, To meet and marry Mr.
Lovelace directly; a man with whose morals I am far
from being satisfied—A step, that could not be taken
with the least hope of ever obtaining pardon from or
reconciliation with any of my friends; and against
which a thousand objections rise in my mind—That
is not to be thought of. 
What appears to me upon the fullest deliberation,
the most eligible, if I must be thus driven, is the
escaping to London. But I would forfeit all my hopes
of happiness in this life, rather than you should go
away with me, as you rashly, tho' with the kindest
intention, propose. If I could get safely thither, and 

be private, methinks I might remain absolutely independent
of Mr. Lovelace, and at liberty either to
make proposals to my friends, or, should they renounce
me (and I had no other or better way) to make terms
with him; supposing my Cousin Morden, on his arrival,
were to join with my other Relations. But they
would then perhaps indulge me in my choice of a single
life, on giving him up: The renewing to them
this offer, when at my own liberty, will at least convince
them, that I was in earnest when I made it
first: And, upon my word, I would stand to it, dear
as you seem to think, when you are disposed to railly
me, it would cost me, to stand to it. 
If, my dear, you can procure a vehicle for us both,
you can perhaps procure one for me singly: But can
it be done without embroiling yourself with your
Mother, or her with our family? —Be it coach, chariot,
chaise, waggon, or horse, I matter not, provided
You appear not to have a hand in my withdrawing. 
Only, in case it be one of the two latter,
I believe I must desire you to get me an ordinary gown
and coat, or habit, of some servant; having no concert
with any of our own: The more ordinary the
better. They may be thrust into the wood-house; 
where I can put them on; and then slide down from
the bank, that separates the Wood-yard from the
Green Lane. 
But, alas! my dear, this, even this alternative, is
not without difficulties, which, to a spirit so little
enterprizing as mine, seem in a manner insuperable,
These are my reflections upon it. 
I am afraid, in the first place, that I shall not have
time for the requisite preparations for an escape. 
Should I be either detected in those preparations,
or pursued and overtaken in my flight, and so brought
back, then would they think themselves doubly warranted
to compel me to have their Solmes: And, conscious 

of an intended fault, perhaps I should be the
less able to contend with them. 
But were I even to get safely to London, I know
nobody there but by name; and those the tradesmen
to our family; who no doubt would be the first
written to and engaged to find me out. And should
Mr. Lovelace discover where I was, and he and my
Brother meet, what mischiefs might ensue between
them, whether I were willing or not to return to
Harlowe-Place! 
But supposing I could remain there concealed, to
what might not my Youth, my Sex, and unacquaintedness
with the ways of that great, wicked town,
expose me! —I should hardly dare to go to church for
fear of being discovered. People would wonder how
I lived. Who knows but I might pass for a kept
mistress; and that, altho' nobody came to me, yet,
that every time I went out, it might be imagined to
be in pursuance of some assignation? 
You, my dear, who alone would know where to
direct to me, would be watched in all your steps, and
in all your messages; and your Mother, at present
not highly pleased with our correspondence, would
then have reason to be more displeased; and might not
differences follow between her and you, that would
make me very unhappy, were I to know them? And
this the more likely, as you take it so unaccountably
(and, give me leave to say, so ungenerously) into
your head, to revenge yourself upon the innocent
Mr. Hickman, for all the displeasure your Mother
gives you? 
Were Lovelace to find out my place of abode,
that would be the same thing in the eye of the world
as if I had actually gone off with him: For would he,
do you think, be prevailed upon to forbear visiting
me? And then his unhappy character (a foolish man!)
would be no credit to any young creature desirous of
concealment. Indeed the world, let me escape whither, 

and to whomsoever I could, would conclude him
to be the contriver of it. 
These are the difficulties which arise to me on revolving
this scheme; which, nevertheless, might appear
surmountable to a more enterprizing spirit in my
circumstances. If you, my dear, think them surmountable
in any one of the cases put [and to be sure
I can take no course, but what must have some difficulty
in it] be pleased to let me know your free and
full thoughts upon it. 
Had you, my dear friend, been married, then
should I have had no doubt but that you and Mr.
Hickman would have afforded an asylum to a poor
creature more than half lost in her own apprehension
for want of one kind protecting friend! 
You say, I should have written to my Cousin Morden
the moment I was treated disgracefully: But could
I have believed that my friends would not have softened
by degrees when they saw my antipathy to their
Solmes? 
I had thoughts indeed several times of writing to
my Cousin: But by the time an Answer could have
come, I imagined all would have been over, as if it
had never been: So from day to day, from week to
week, I hoped on: And, after all, I might as reasonably
fear (as I have heretofore said) that my Cousin
would be brought to side against me, as that some of
those I have named would. 
And then to appeal to a Cousin [I must have written
with warmth, to engage him] against a Father; 
This was not a desirable thing to set about. Then
I had not, you know, one soul on my side; my Mother
herself against me. To be sure my Cousin would
have suspended his judgment till he could have arrived. 
He might not have been in haste to come, hoping the
malady would cure itself: But had he written, his
Letters probably would have run in the qualifying
style; to persuade me to submit, or them only to relax. 

Had his Letters been more on my side than on theirs,
they would not have regarded them: Nor perhaps
himself, had he come and been an advocate for me: 
For you see how strangely determined they are; how
they have over-awed or got in every-body; so that
no one dare open their lips in my behalf. And you
have heard that my Brother pushes his measures with
the more violence, that all may be over with me before
my Cousin's expected arrival. 
But you tell me, That, in order to gain time, I
must palliate; that I must seem to compromise with
my friends: But how palliate? how seem to compromise? 
You would not have me endeavour to make
them believe, that I will consent to what I never intend
to consent to! You would not have me to gain
time, with a view to deceive! 
To do evil, that good may come of it, is forbidden: 
And shall I do evil, yet know not whether good may
come of it or not? 
Forbid it, Heaven! that Clarissa Harlowe should
have it in her thought to serve, or even to save herself
at the expence of her sincerity, and by a studied
deceit! 
And is there, after all, no way, to escape one great
evil, but by plunging myself into another? —What
an ill-fated creature am I? —Pray for me, my dearest
Nancy! —My mind is at present so much disturbed,
that I hardly can pray for myself. 