



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday, July 30. 
You have given me great pleasure, my dearest
friend, by your approbation of my reasonings,
and of my resolution founded upon them, never to
have Mr. Lovelace. This approbation is so right a
thing, give me leave to say, from the nature of the
case, and from the strict honour and true dignity of
mind, which I always admired in my Anna Howe,
that I could hardly tell to what, but to my evil destiny,
which of late would not let me please any-body,
to attribute the advice you gave me to the contrary. 
But let not the ill state of my health, and what
that may naturally tend to, sadden you. I have told
you, that I will not run away from life, nor avoid
the means that may continue it, if God see fit: And
if he do not, who shall repine at his will? 
If it shall be found, that I have not acted unworthy
of your Love, and of my own Character, in my
greater trials, that will be a happiness to both on reflection. 
The shock which you so earnestly advise me to try
to get above, was a shock, the greatest that I could
receive. But, my dear, as it was not occasioned by
my fault, I hope I am already got above it. I hope
I am. 
I am more grieved (at times however) for others,
than for myself. And so I ought. For as to myself, I
cannot but reflect, that I have had an escape, rather
than a loss, in missing Mr. Lovelace for a husband— 
Even had he not committed the vilest of all outrages. 
Let any one, who knows my Story, collect his
character from his behaviour to me, before that outrage; 
and then judge, whether it was in the least probable
that such a man should make me happy. But 

to collect his character from his principles with regard
to the Sex in general, and from his enterprizes upon
many of them, and to consider the Cruelty of his Nature,
and the Sportiveness of his Invention, together
with the high opinion he has of himself, it will not be
doubted that a Wife of his must have been miserable; 
and more miserable if she loved him, than she could
have been were she to be indifferent to him. 
A twelvemonth might very probably have put a period
to my life; situated as I was with my friends; 
persecuted and harassed as I had been by my Brother
and Sister; and my very heart torn in pieces by the
wilful, and (as it is now apparent) premeditated suspenses
of the man, whose gratitude I wished to engage,
and whose protection I was the more entitled
to expect, as he had robbed me of every other, and
reduced me to an absolute dependence upon himself. 
Indeed I once thought that it was all his view to bring
me to this (as he hated my family); and uncomfortable
enough for me, if it had been all. 
Can it be thought, my dear, that my heart was
not more than half broken (happy as I was before I
knew Mr. Lovelace) by such a grievous change in
my circumstances? —Indeed it was. Nor perhaps
was the wicked violence wanting to have cut short,
tho' possibly not so very short, a life that he has
sported with. 
Had I been his but a month, he must have possessed
the Estate on which my relations had set their hearts; 
the more to their regret, as they hated him as much as
he hated them. 
Have I not reason, these things considered, to
think myself happier without Mr. Lovelace than I
could have been with him? —My will too unviolated; 
and very little, nay, not any-thing as to him, to reproach
myself with? 
But with my Relations it is otherwise. They indeed
deserve to be pitied. They are, and no doubt will
long be, unhappy. 

To judge of their resentments, and of their conduct,
we must put ourselves in their situation: — 
And while they think me more in fault than themselves
(whether my favourers are of their opinion, or
not) and have a right to judge for themselves, they
ought to have great allowances made for them; my
Parents especially. They stand at least self-acquitted
(that cannot I); and the rather, as they can recollect,
to their pain, their past Indulgencies to me, and their
unquestionable Love. 
Your partiality for the friend you so much value,
will not easily let you come into this way of thinking. 
But only, my dear, be pleased to consider the
matter in the following light. 
‘Here was my Mother, one of the most prudent
persons of her Sex, married into a family, not
perhaps so happily tempered as herself; but every
one of which she had the address, for a great while,
absolutely to govern as she pleased by her directing
wisdom, at the same time that they knew not
but her prescriptions were the dictates of their own
hearts; such a sweet Art had she of conquering by
seeming to yield. Think, my dear, what must
be the pride and the pleasure of such a Mother,
that in my Brother she could give a Son to the family
she distinguished with her Love, not unworthy
of their wishes; a Daughter, in my Sister, of
whom she had no reason to be ashamed; and in
me, a second Daughter, whom every-body complimented
(such was their partial favour to me) as
being the still more immediate likeness of herself? 
How, self-pleased, could she smile round upon a
family she had so blessed! What compliments were
paid her upon the example she had given us, which
was followed with such hopeful effects! With what
a noble confidence could she look upon her dear
Mr. Harlowe, as a person made happy by her; 
and be delighted to think, that nothing but purity
streamed from a fountain so pure! 

‘Now, my dear, reverse, as I daily do, this
charming prospect. See my dear Mother, sorrowing
in her Closet; endeavouring to suppress her
sorrow at her Table, and in those retirements
where sorrow was before a stranger: Hanging down
her pensive head: Smiles no more beaming over her
benign aspect: Her virtue made to suffer for faults
she could not be guilty of: Her patience continually
tried (because she has more of it than any
other) with repetitions of faults she is as much
wounded by, as those can be from whom she so
often hears of them: Taking to herself, as the
fountain-head, a taint which only had infected one
of the under-currents: Afraid to open her lips
(were she willing) in my favour, lest it should be
thought she has any byas in her own mind to failings
that never could have been suspected in her: 
Robbed of that pleasing merit, which the Mother
of well-nurtured and hopeful children may glory
in: Every one who visits her, or is visited by her,
by dumb shew, and looks that mean more than
words can express, condoling where they used to
congratulate: The affected silence wounding: 
The compassionating look reminding: The half-suppressed
sigh in them, calling up deeper sighs from
her; and their averted eyes, while they endeavour
to restrain the rising tear, provoking tears from her,
that will not be restrained. 
‘When I consider these things, and, added to
these, the pangs that tear in pieces the stronger
heart of my Father, because it cannot relieve
itself by those tears which carry the torturing grief
to the eyes of softer spirits: The overboiling tumults
of my impatient and uncontroulable Brother,
piqued to the heart of his honour, in the
fall of a Sister, in whom he once gloried: The
pride of an Elder Sister, who had given unwilling
way to the honours paid over her head to 

one born after her: And, lastly, the dishonour I
have brought upon Two Uncles, who each contended
which should most favour their then happy
Niece: —When, I say, I reflect upon my fault in
these strong, yet just lights, what room can there
be to censure any-body but my unhappy self? And
how much reason have I to say, If I justify myself,
mine own heart shall condemn me: If I say, I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse?’ 
Here permit me to lay down my pen for a few moments. 
* *
You are very obliging to me, intentionally, I
know, when you tell me, It is in my power to hasten
the day of Mr. Hickman's happiness. But yet, give
me leave to say, that I admire this kind assurance less
than any other paragraph of your Letter. 
In the first place you know it is not in my power
to say when I can dismiss my physician; and you
should not put the Celebration of a Marriage intended
by yourself, and so desirable to your Mother, upon so
precarious an issue. Nor will I accept of a compliment,
which must mean a slight to her. 
If any-thing could give me a relish for life, after
what I have suffered, it would be the hopes of the
continuance of the more than Sisterly Love, which
has, for years, uninterruptedly bound us together as
one mind. —And why, my dear, should you defer
giving (by a tie still stronger) another friend to one,
who has so few? 
I am glad you have sent my Letter to Miss Montague. 
I hope I shall hear no more of this unhappy
man. 
I had begun the particulars of my Tragical Story: 
But it is so painful a task, and I have so many more
important things to do, and, as I apprehend, so little
time to do them in, that, could I avoid it, I would
go no farther in it. 

Then, to this hour, I know not by what means
several of his machinations to ruin me were brought
about; so that some material parts of my sad Story
must be defective, if I were to sit down to write it. 
But I have been thinking of a way that will answer
the end wished for by your Mother and You full as
well; perhaps better. 
Mr. Lovelace, it seems, has communicated to his
friend Mr. Belford all that has passed between himself
and me, as he went on. Mr. Belford has not been
able to deny it. So that (as we may observe by the
way) a poor young creature, whose indiscretion has
given a Libertine power over her, has a reason she
little thinks of, to regret her folly; since these
wretches, who have no more honour in one point
than in another, scruple not to make her weakness a
part of their triumph to their Brother-Libertines. 
I have nothing to apprehend of this sort, if I have
the justice done me in his Letters, which Mr. Belford
assures me I have: And therefore the particulars of
my Story, and the base Arts of this vile man, will, I
think, be best collected from those very Letters of his
(if Mr. Belford can be prevailed upon to communicate
them); to which I dare appeal with the same truth
and fervor as he did, who says,—O that one would
hear me! and that mine adversary had written a book! 
—Surely, I would take it upon my shoulders, and bind
it to me as a crown! For I covered not my transgressions
as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom. 
There is one way, which may be fallen upon to
induce Mr. Belford to communicate these Letters; 
since he seems to have (and declares he always had)
a sincere abhorrence of his friend's baseness to me: 
But that, you'll say, when you hear it, is a strange
one. Nevertheless, I am very earnest upon it at
present. 
It is no other than this: 
I think to make Mr. Belford the Executor of my 

Last Will [Don't be surprised]: And with this view
I permit his visits with the less scruple: And every
time I see him, from his concern for me, am more
and more inclined to do so. If I hold in the same
mind, and if he accept the Trust, and will communicate
the materials in his power, those, joined with
what you can furnish, will answer the whole end. 
I know you will start at my notion of such an
Executor: But pray, my dear, consider, in my present
circumstances, what I can do better, as I am
empowered to make a Will, and have considerable
matters in my own disposal. 
Your Mother, I am sure, would not consent that
You should take this office upon you. It might subject
Mr. Hickman to the insults of that violent man. 
Mrs. Norton cannot, for several reasons respecting
herself. My Brother looks upon what I ought to
have, as his right: My Uncle Harlowe is already one
of my Trustees (as my Cousin Morden is the other)
for the Estate my Grandfather left me: But you see
I could not get from my own family the few guineas
I left behind me at Harlowe-Place; and my Uncle
Antony once threatened to have my Grandfather's
Will controverted. My Father! —To be sure, my
dear, I could not expect that my Father would do all
I wish should be done: And a Will to be executed
by a Father for a Daughter (parts of it, perhaps, absolutely
against his own judgment) carries somewhat
daring and prescriptive in the very word. 
If indeed my Cousin Morden were to come in time,
and would undertake this Trust—But even him it
might subject to hazards; and the more, as he is a
man of great spirit; and as the other man (of as great)
looks upon me (unprotected as I have long been) as
his property. 
Now Mr. Belford, as I have already mentioned,
knows every-thing that has passed. He is a man of
spirit, and, it seems, as fearless as the other, with 

more humane qualities. You don't know, my dear,
what instances of sincere humanity this Mr. Belford
has shewn, not only on occasion of the cruel Arrest,
but on several occasions since. And Mrs. Lovick
has taken pains to enquire after his general character; 
and hears a very good one of him, for justice and
generosity in all his concerns of Meum and Tuum, as
they are called: He has a knowlege of Law-matters; 
and has two Executorships upon him at this time, in
the discharge of which his honour is unquestioned. 
All these reasons have already in a manner determined
me to ask this favour of him; altho' it will
have an odd sound with it to make an intimate friend
of Mr. Lovelace my Executor. 
This is certain: My Brother will be more acquiescent
a great deal in such a case with the Articles
of my Will, as he will see that it will be to no purpose
to controvert some of them, which else, I dare
say, he would controvert, or persuade my other
friends to do so. And who would involve an Executor
in a Law-suit, if they could help it? —Which
would be the case, if any-body were left, whom my
Brother could hope to awe or controul; since my
Father has possession of all, and is absolutely governed
by him. [Angry spirits, my dear, as I have often
seen, will be overcome by more angry ones, as well
as sometimes be disarmed by the meek.] —Nor would
I wish, you may believe, to have effects torn out of
my Father's hands: While Mr. Belford, who is a
man of fortune (and a good oeconomist in his own affairs)
would have no interest but to do justice. 
Then he exceedingly presses for some occasion to
shew his readiness to serve me: And he would be able
to manage his violent friend, over whom he has more
influence than any other person. 
But, after all, I know not, if it were not more
eligible by far, that my Story, and my Self too, should
be forgotten as soon as possible. And of this I shall 

have the less doubt, if the character of my Parents
[You will forgive me, my dear] cannot be guarded
against the unqualified bitterness, which, from your
affectionate zeal for me, has sometimes mingled with
your ink. —A point that ought, and (I insist upon it)
must be well considered of, if any-thing be done
which your Mother and you are desirous to have done. 
The generality of the world is too apt to oppose a
duty—And general duties, my dear, ought not to
be weakened by the justification of a single person,
however unhappily circumstanced. 
My Father has been so good as to take off the
heavy Malediction he laid me under. I must be now
solicitous for a Last Blessing; and that is all I shall
presume to petition for. My Sister's Letter, communicating
this grace, is a severe one: But as she
writes to me as from every-body, how could I expect
it to be otherwise? 
If you set out to-morrow, this Letter cannot
reach you till you get to your Aunt Harman's. I
shall therefore direct it thither, as Mr. Hickman instructed
me. 
I hope you will have met with no inconveniences
in your little journey and voyage; and that you
will have found in good health all whom you wish to
see well. 
If your relations in the little Island join their solicitations
with your Mother's commands, to have
your nuptials celebrated before you leave them, let
me beg of you, my dear, to oblige them. How
grateful will the notification that you have done so,
be to 
Your ever-faithful and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe! 