



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. 


My dear Pamela,
You very much oblige me by your chearful
Compliance with my Request. I leave it
intirely to you to write in what Manner you
please, and as you shall be in the Humour to
write, when you take up your Pen; for then I
shall have you write with less Restraint: For,
you must know, that what we admire in you,
are Truth and Nature, and not studied or elaborate
Epistles. We can hear at Church, or
we can read in our Closets, fifty good Things
that we expect not from you; but we cannot
receive from any body else the Pleasure of Sentiments
flowing with that artless Ease, which
so much affects us when we read your Letters. 
Then, my sweet Girl, your Gratitude, your Prudence,
your Integrity of Heart, your Humility,
shine so much in all your Letters and Thoughts,
that no Wonder my Brother loves you as he
does! 
But I shall make you proud, I doubt; and
so by Praise ruin those Graces which we admire,
and, but for that, cannot praise you too
much. In my Conscience, if thou canst hold as
thou hast begun, I believe thou wilt have him
all to thyself, and that was, once, more than I
thought any Woman on this Side the Seventieth 

Year of his Age would ever be able to
say. The Letters to and from your Parents we
are charm'd with, and the communicating of
them to me, I take to be as great an Instance of
your Confidence in me, as it is of your Judgment
and Prudence; for you cannot but think,
that we his Relations are a little watchful over
your Conduct, and have our Eyes upon you, to
observe what Use you are likely to make of the
Power you have over your Man, with respect
to your own Relations. 
Hither to all is unexampled Prudence; 
and you take the right Method to reconcile even
the proudest of us to your Marriage, and make
us not only love you, but respect your Parents,
because their Honesty will, I perceive, be their
distinguishing Character, and they will not forget
themselves, nor their former Condition. 
I can tell you, you are exactly right; for if
you were to be an Incroacher, as the good old
Man calls it, my Brother would be one of the
first to see it; and he would gradually think
less and less of you, till possibly he might come
to despise you, and to repent of his Choice: For
the least Shadow of an Imposition, or low Cunning,
or mean Selsishness, he cannot bear. 
In short, you're a charming Girl; and Lady
Betty says so too; and, moreover, adds, That
if he makes you not the best and faithfullest of
Husbands, he cannot deserve you, for all his
Fortune and Birth. —And, in my Heart, I
begin to think so too. 

But won't you oblige me with the Sequel
of your Letter to your Father? for you promise,
my dear charming Scribbler, in that you sent
to me, to write again to his Letter; and I long
to see how you answer the latter Part of it,
about your Relations desiring already to come
and live with him. I know what I expect from
you. But, let it be what it will, send it to me
exactly as you wrote it; and I shall see whether
I have Reason to praise or to reprove you. For
surely, Pamela, you must leave one Room to
blame you for something. Indeed I can hardly
bear the Thought, that you should so much excel
as you do, and have more Prudence by Nature,
as it were, than the best of us get in
a Course of the genteelest Education, and with
fifty Advantages, at least in Conversation, that
you could not have, by reason of my Mother's
retired Life while you were with her, and your
close Attendance on her Person. 
But I'll tell you what has been a great Improvement
to you: It is your own Writings. 
This Itch of Scribbling has been a charming
Help to you. For here, having a natural Fund
of good Sense, and a Prudence above your
Years, you have, with the Observations these
have enabled you to make, been Flint and
Steel too, as I may say, to yourself: So that
you have struck Fire when you pleas'd, wanting
nothing but a few dry'd Leaves, like the
First Pair in old Du Bartas, to serve as Tinder
to catch your animating Sparks. So that
reading constantly, and thus using yourself to 

write, and enjoying besides the Benefit of a
good Memory, every thing you heard or read
became your own; and not only so, but was
improved by passing thro' more salubrious Ducts
and Vehicles; like some fine Fruit grafted upon
a common Free-stock, whose more exuberant
Juices serve to bring to quicker and greater
Perfection the downy Peach, or the smooth
Nectarine with its crimson Blush. 
Really, Pamela, I believe, I, too, shall
improve by writing to you. —Why, you dear
Saucy-face, at this Rate, you'll make every one
that converses with you, better, and wiser, and
wittier too, as far as I know, than they ever
before thought there was Room for them to
be. 
As to my own Part, I begin to like what I
have written myself, I think; and your Correspondence
will possibly revive the poetical Ideas
that used to fire my Mind, before I enter'd into
the drowsy married Life; for my good Lord
Davers's Turn happens not to be to Books; 
and so, by degrees, my Imagination was in a
manner quench'd; and I, as a dutiful Wife
should, endeavour'd to form my Taste by that
of the Man I chose. 
But after all, Pamela, you are not to be a
little proud (I can tell you that) of my Correspondence; 
and I could not have thought it e'er
would have come to this: But you'll have the
Penetration to observe, that I am the more free
and unreserved, to encourage you to write without 

Restraint: For already you have made us a
Family of Writers and Readers; so that Lord
Davers himself is become inamour'd of your
Letters, and desires of all things he may hear
read every one that passes between us. Nay,
Jackey, for that matter, who was the most
thoughtless, whistling, sauntering Fellow you
ever knew, and whose Delight in a Book ran
no higher than a Song or a Catch, now comes in
with an inquiring Face, and vows he'll set Pen
to Paper, and turn Letter-writer himself; and
intends (if my Brother won't take it amiss, he
says) to begin to you, provided he could be sure
of an Answer. 
I have twenty Things still to say; for you
have unlocked all our Bosoms: And yet I intended
not to write above Ten or a Dozen
Lines when I began; only to tell you, that I
would have you take your own Way, in your
Subjects, and in your Style. —And if you will
but give me Hope, that you are in the Way I
so much wish to have you in, I will then call
myself your affectionate Sister; but, till then,
it shall only barely be, 
Your Correspondent,
B. Davers. 
You'll proceed with the Account of your
Kentish Affair, I doubt not. 

