



Adversity. Affliction. Calamity. Misfortune.
Great allowance ought to be made for the
warmth of a spirit embitter'd by undeserved disgraces,
vol. i. p. 214. 
People in Misfortune are apt to construe even
unavoidable accidents into slights or neglects, ii.
145. 
Adversity is the state of trial of every good quality, ii. 149. 
People in Adversity should endeavour to preserve laudable
customs, that so, if sunshine return, they may not be losers by
their trials, ibid. iii. 44. 
When Calamities befal us, we ought to look into ourselves,
and fear, ii. 238. 246. 
Misfortunes are often sent to reduce us to a better reliance than
that we have been accustomed to fix upon, ii. 245. v. 338, 339. 
No one is out of the reach of Misfortune. No one therefore
should glory in his prosperity, ii. 245. 

Be a person's Provocations ever so great, her Calamities ever so
heavy, she should always remember, that she is God's creature, and
not her own, ii. 261. 
Persons in Calamity, when they wish for death, should be sure
that they wish for it from proper motives. Worldly Disappointments
will not, of themselves, warrant such wishes, iii. 266. 
Adversity will call forth graces in a noble mind, which could
not have been brought to light in prosperous fortune, iv. 64. See
also iii. 80. 
People in Affliction or Distress cannot be hated by generous
minds, iv. 278. 
People who thro' Calamity are careless of their health, will not
perhaps be able to escape death when they would wish to do so,
vi. 342. 370. 
In the school of Affliction we are taught to know ourselves, to
compassionate and bear with one another, and to look up to a
better state, vi. 386. vii. III. 
The unhappy never want enemies, vii. 74. 
The person who makes a proper use of Calamity, may be said
to be in the direct road to glory, vii. III. viii. 31. 
Persons who labour under real Evils, will not puzzle themselves
with conjectural ones, vii. 112. 
Calamity is the test of integrity, vii. 201, 202. 
Distress makes the humbled heart diffident, vii. 212. 
Calamity calls out the fortitude that distinguishes a spirit truly
noble, vii. 318. See also iv. 64. vi. 119. 
Certainty in a deep Distress is more eligible than suspense,
vii. 423. 
[See Consolation. 
Advice and Cautions to Women.
Every one's eyes are upon the conduct, the visits, the visitors,
of a young Lady made early independent, i. 125. 
Encroaching and designing men make an artillery of a woman's
hopes and fears, and play it upon her at their pleasure, i. 126. 
Artful men frequently endeavour to entangle thoughtless women
by bold supposals and offers, and, if not checked, to reckon
upon silence as concession, i. 149. 
Women should be cautious how they give up their own Sex in
conversation with the other, in articles that relate to delicacy,
i. 183. 276, 277. 
Women, however prudent and reserved, should be careful that
they do not give the man they intend to encourage, reason to think
that they balance on other competitions, i. 202. 208. iii. 173. 
Men who want to get a woman into their power, seldom
scruple the means, i. 250. 
A woman who lends an ear to a Seducer, may, by gentle words,
be insensibly drawn in to the perpetration of the most violent acts,
ii. 248. 

When women once enter themselves as Lovers, there is hardly
any receding, ii. 293. iii. 289, 290. 
The man can have no good design, who affects to a meek-spirited
woman an anger which is evidently manageable, iii. 13. 
A daughter ought to look upon a man, who would tempt her
to go off with him clandestinely, as the vilest and most selfish of
seducers, iii. 18. 
The woman who will correspond with a known Libertine, indirectly
defies him to do his worst, iii. 56. v. 318. 
A woman who is above flattery, and despises all praise, but
that which flows from the approbation of her own heart, is,
morally speaking, out of the reach of seduction, iii. 73. 
Women ought to be careful not to give cause to the man they
love to think lightly of them, for favours, granted even to himself,
which may be supposed to spring from natural weakness,
iii. 81. 
Women ought not to think gentleness of heart despicable in a
man, iii. 130. vii. 333. 
That man's natural disposition is to be suspected, whose politeness
is not regular, nor constant, nor wrought into habit; but
appears only in fits, starts, and sallies, iii. 152. 
An acknowleged Love sanctifies every little freedom, and little
freedoms beget great ones, iii. 168. iv. 209. 304. 
To give a woman an high opinion of her own sagacity, is the
measure that a designing man often takes to bring her to his will,
iii. 168. 
I love, when I dig a pit, says Lovelace, to have my prey tumble
in with secure feet and open eyes; for then a man can look down
upon her with an O-ho, charmer! how came you there? ibid. 
A woman in courtship, for her own sake, should so behave to
the man she intends to marry, as to shew the world, that she
thinks him worthy of respect, iii. 173. 
Libertines consider all those of the Sex, over whom they obtain
a power, as fair prize, iii. 242. iv. 355. 
There seldom can be peculiarity in the Love of a rakish heart,
iii. 245. 
If a woman be not angry at indecent pictures or verses shewn
her by a Libertine, but smiles at them, she may blame herself, if
she suffer from his after-attempts, iii. 282. 
Even innocent freedoms are not to be allowed to a Libertine, ib. 
To be punished by the consequences of our own choice, what a
moral, insultingly says Lovelace, lies there! iii. 285. v. 259. 
A judgment may be generally formed of the reading part of the
Sex by their books, Lovel. iii. 287. 
The man who complains of the distance a Lady keeps him at,
wants to come too near, iii. 289. 
One concession to a man is but a prelude to another, iii. 290. 

The confidence which a woman places in a man for his respectful
behaviour to her, ought to be withdrawn the moment that she
sees in him an abatement of that reverence or respect, which begat
her confidence, iii. 290. 
A man who means honourably will not be fond of treading in
crooked paths, iii. 293. 
How vain a thing is it for a woman, who has put herself into
the power of a man, to say what she will or will not do! iii. 294, 295. 
How can a woman, who (treating herself unpolitely) gives a
man an opportunity to run away with her, expect him to treat
her politely, iii. 306. See also iii. 24. 240. 
The man who makes a flagrant, tho' unsuccessful attempt, and
is forgiven, or expostulated with, meets with encouragement to
renew it at an opportunity which he may think more favourable,
iii. 322. iv. 55. 331. See also iii. 164. 
Women of penetration, falling accidentally into company with a
Libertine and his associates, will make them reflecting-glasses to
one another for her own service, iii. 343. 
One devious step at first setting out frequently leads a person
into a wilderness of doubt and error, iv. 37. 
The man who is backward in urging a Lady to give him her
hand at the Altar, ought not to press her to favour him with it at
public entertainments, iv. 40. 
Libertines, in order the better to carry on their designs upon
the unwary of the Female Sex, particularly against those who are
prudish, frequently make pretences to Platonic Love, iv. 142. 
If a woman suffers her Lover to see she is loth to disoblige him,
let her beware of an encroacher, iv. 146. 
The Libertine, who by his specious behaviour has laid asleep a
woman's suspicion and caution, is in the way to complete all his
views, iv. 175. 
If a woman will keep company with a man who has reason to
think himself suspected by her, I am sure, says Lovelace, it is a very
hopeful sign, ibid. 
Women are apt to allow too much to a kneeling Lover, iv. 215. 
Nine parts in ten of women who fall, says Lovelace, owe their
disgrace to their own vanity or levity, or want of circumspection
and proper reserve, iv. 237. 
Libertines, equally tyrannical and suspicious, expect that a wife
should have no will, no eyes, no love, no hate, but at their direction,
iv. 248. 
Travelling together gives opportunities of familiarity between
the Sexes, says Lovelace, iv. 253. Women therefore should be choice
of the company they travel with. 
Women should be early taught to think highly of their Sex; for
pride, as Lovelace says, is an excellent substitute for virtue, iv. 313. 

A woman of the brightest talents, who throws herself into the
power of a Libertine, brings into question those talents, as well
as her discretion, not only with himself, but with his leud companions,
to whom, in secret triumph, he will be proud to shew
his prize, iv. 344. vii. 46. 
A modest woman fallen into gross company should avow her
correctives by her eye, and not affect ignorance of meanings too
obvious to be concealed, iv. 347. 
A woman who has put herself into the power of a designing
man, must be satisfied with very poor excuses and pretences, for
delay of marriage, iv. 349. 
Want of power is the only bound that a libertine puts to his
views upon any of the Sex, ibid. 
A fallen woman is the more inexcuseable, as, from the cradle,
the Sex is warned against the delusions of men, iv. 361. 
Men presume greatly on the liberties taken, and laughed off, in
Romping, v. 1. See also iv. 191. 
A Lady conscious of dignity of person should mingle with it a
sweetness of manners, to make herself beloved, as well as respected,
by all who approach her, v. 41. 
A man who insults the modesty of a woman, as good as tells
her, that he has seen something in her conduct, that warranted
his presumption, v. 128. 
A man who has offered the last indignity to a woman, yet expects
forgiveness from her, must think her as weak as he is wicked,
v. 129. 203. vi. 224. 
The woman who behaves with disrespect, either to her accepted
Lover, or to her Husband, gives every vain man hope of standing
well with her, v. 136, 137. vi. 315. 
Clarissa apprehends that Lovelace might have ground to doubt
her conduct, from having been able to prevail upon her to correspond
with him against paternal prohibition, and the light of
her own judgment, v. 196. vi. 126, 127. 
The nicest circumstances cannot be too nice to be attended to
by women who are obliged either to converse or correspond with
free livers, v. 268. 
A woman who, when attempted, descends to expostulation, lets
the offender know, that she intends to forgive him, v. 296. 
A man, whatever are his professions, always thinks the worse
of a woman, who forgives him for making an attempt on her
virtue, v. 297. 
A man, who offers indecencies to a woman, depends for secrecy
and forgiveness upon his own confidence, and her bashfulness,
v. 320. 
The woman who takes any indirect steps in favour of a libertine,
if she escape present ill-treatment from him, intitles herself,
when his Wife, to his future jealousy and censure, v. 344. 

She who puts herself out of a natural protection, is not to expect
miracles in her favour, vi. 21. 
The woman who hopes to reclaim a Libertine, may have reason
to compare herself to one, who, attempting to save a drowning
wretch, is drawn in after him, and perishes with him, vi. 125.
376. 
Men take great advantages of even women of character, who
can bear their free talk and boasts of Libertinism without resentment,
vi. 198, 199. 
Chastity, like piety, is an uniform grace. If in look, if in
speech, a girl give way to undue levity, depend upon it, says
Lovelace, the devil has already got one of his cloven feet in her
heart, vi. 229, 230. 
That woman must be indeed unhappy, whose conduct has laid
her under obligations to a man's silence, vi. 336. 
A bold man's effrontery in company of women must be owing
to his low opinion of them, and his high one of himself, vi. 362. 
A good woman who vows duty to a wicked man, knowing him
to be such, puts to hazard her eternal happiness, vi. 375. 
How dreadfully sunk is the woman who supplicates for marriage
to a man who has robbed her of her honour; and who can
be thankful to him for doing her such poor justice! ibid. 
How must such a one appear before his friends and her own, divested
of that noble confidence which arises from a mind unconscious
of deserving reproach! ibid. 
How does she subject herself to the violator's upbraidings, and
to his insults of generosity and pity, exerted in her favour! ibid. 
It must cut to the heart a thoughtful mother, whose Husband
continues in his profligate courses, to look round upon her Children,
with the reflection that she has given them a Father destin'd
without a miracle to perdition, vi. 376. 
It would be as unpardonable in a Lady, says Lovelace (in the true
Libertine spirit) to break her word with me, as it would be
strange, if I kept mine to her. In Love-cases I mean; for as to
the rest, I am an honest moral man, vii. 244. 
If a woman is conscious of having shewn weakness to a man
who has insulted her modesty, she may then come to a composition
with him, and forgive him, vii. 302. 
I never knew a man, says Miss Howe, who deserved to be
thought well of for his morals, who had a slight opinion of our
Sex in general, vii. 328. 
If a woman consents to go off with a man, and he prove ever
so great a villain to her, she must take into her own bosom [the
whole reproach, and] a share of his guilty baseness, vii. 328, 329. 
Offences against women, and those of the most heinous nature,
constitute and denominate the Man of Gallantry, vii. 358. 

The pen, next to the needle, of all employments, whether for
improvement or amusement, is the most proper and best adapted
to the genius of women, viii. 201, 202. 
The woman who neglects the useful and the elegant, which distinguishes
her own Sex, for the sake of obtaining the learning
which is supposed peculiar to men, incurs more contempt by what
she foregoes, than she gains credit by what she acquires, viii. 203. 
The practical knowlege of the domestic duties is the principal
glory of a woman, viii. 204. 
The woman who aims at more than a knowlege of the beauties
and graces of her mother tongue, too often endangers her family
usefulness, ibid. 
Young Ladies should endeavour to make up for their defects in
one part of their education, by their excellence in another, viii.
208. 
[See the articles Courtship. Duty. Husband and Wife. Libertine.
Marriage. Parents and Children. Reflections on
Women. Vows. 
Air and Manner. Address.
Air and Manner are often more expressive than words, i. 7. 
That Address in a man for which he is often most valued
by a woman, is generally owing to his assurance, i. 239. 
A concession should be made with a grace, or not at all,
iii. 295. 
What a mere personal advantage is a plausible. Address without
morals! iv. 32. 
A specious address frequently abates even a justly-conceiv'd displeasure,
vi. 410. 
There is a Manner in speaking that may be liable to exception,
when the words without that Manner will bear none, vii. 267. 
Anger. Displeasure.
Anger and disgust alter the property, at least the appearance, of
things, ii. 98. 
People hardly ever do any-thing in Anger, of which they do
not repent, ii. 125. 
A person of hard features should not allow himself to be very
angry, ii. 166. 
We should not be angry at a person's not doing that for us,
which he has a right either to do, or to let alone, ii. 244, 245–298.
iv. 316, 317. 
Faulty people should rather be sorry for the occasion they have
given for Anger, than resent it, iii. 176. 
Nothing can be lovely in a man's eye with which he is displeased,
v. 12. 

An angry or offended man will not allow to the person with
whom he is displeased, the merit which is his due, v. 25. 
Angry people should never write while their passion holds, v.
200. 
Anger unpolishes the most polite, v. 261. 
The Displeasure of friends is to be borne even by an innocent
person, when it unquestionably proceeds from love, vi. 187. 
An innocent person may be thankful for that Displeasure in her
friend, which gives her an opportunity of justifying herself. ibid. 
But then it is ungenerous in a displeased friend not to acknowlege,
and ask excuse for, the mistake which caused the Displeasure,
the moment he or she is convinced, ibid. 
People of little understanding are most apt to be angry when
their sense is called into question, viii. 152. 
[See Passion. 
Apprehensions. Fear.
The tender mind, drawn in to pursue an irregular adventure,
will be ready to start at every unexpected appearance, i. 238. 
The most apprehensive beginnings often make the happiest conclusions,
ii. 182. 
The certainty even of what we fear, is often more tolerable
than the suspense, ii. 243. 
The very event of which we are most apprehensive, is sometimes
that which we ought to wish for, ii. 320. 
Threateners, where they have an opportunity to put in force
their threats, are seldom to be feared, iii. 11. 
It is better, in a critical and uncertain situation, to apprehend
without cause, than to subject one's self to surprize, for want of
forethought, iii. 115. 
Evils are often greater in Apprehension, than in reality, iv. 203. 
An earnest disavowal of Fear often proceeds from Fear, v. 126. 
Few men fear those whom they do not value, v. 198. 
Beauty. Figure.
Comeliness, not having so much to lose as Beauty has, will hold
when Beauty will evaporate or fly off, i. 7. 
Personal advantages are oftener snares than benefits, i. 194.
iii. 88. 
Tho' Beauty is generally the creature of fancy, yet are there
some who will be Beauties in every eye, i. 203. 
A good Figure, or Person, in man or woman, gives credit at
first sight to the choice of either, i. 277. 
Men, more especially, ought to value themselves rather for
their intellectual, than personal qualifications, i. 278. 
The pretty fool, in all she says, in all she does, will please, we
know not why, ibid. 
Who would grudge the pretty fool her day? ibid. 

When her butterfly flutters are over, she will feel, in the general
contempt she will meet with, the just effects of having neglected
to cultivate her better faculties, i. 278. 
While the discreet matron, who from youth has maintained her
character, will find solid veneration take place of airy admiration,
and more than supply the want of the latter, ibid. 
A lovely woman, whether angry or pleased, will appear lovely,
iii. 328. 
That cruel distemper, which often makes the greatest ravages
in the finest faces, is not always to be thought an evil, v. 248. 
Goodness and generosity give grace and lustre to Beauty,
vi. 350. 
Blushes. Blushing.
A distinction is to be made between the confusion which guilt
will be attended with, and the noble consciousness that overspreads
the face of a fine spirit, on its being thought capable of
an imputed evil, iii. 301. 
Silence and Blushes are now no graces, says Lovelace, with our
fine Ladies, iii. 304. 
Harden'd by frequent public appearances, our modern fine Ladies
would be as much ashamed as men to be found guilty of
blushing, Lovel. ibid. 
The woman who at a gross hint puts her fan before her face,
seems to be conscious that her Blush is not quite ready, Lovel. iv.
145. 
[See Modesty. 
Censure. Character.
The world, ill-natur'd as it is said to be, is generally more
just in giving Characters (speaking by what it feels) than is
usually imagined, i. 119. 
Those who complain most of the Censoriousness of the world,
perhaps ought to look inward for the occasion oftener than they
do, ibid. 
A wrong step taken by a woman who aims to excel, subjects
her to more severe censures from the world, whose envy she has
excited, than that world would cast on a less perfect character,
i. 125. 
Characters very good, or extremely bad, are seldom justly
given, i. 172. 
We should be particularly careful to keep clear of the faults we
censure, ii. 59. 
Hasty Censures subject themselves to the charge of variableness
in judgment, ii. 160. 
We should always make allowances for the Characters, whether
bad or good, that are given us by interested persons, ii. 213. 
Many of those who have escaped censure, have not merited applause,
ibid. 

Where reputation is concerned, we should not be in haste to
censure, iii. 330. 
We should never judge peremptorily on first appearances, ibid. 
Good people, [or rather those who affect to be thought good] says
Lovelace, are generally so uncharitable, that I should not chuse to
be good, were the consequence to be, that I must think hardly of
every-body else, iv. 6, 7. vi. 169. 
Every man and woman, says Lovelace, is apt to judge of others
by what they know of themselves, iv. 55. 
A man who proves base to the confidence a woman places in
him, justifies the harshest censures of such of his enemies, as
would have persuaded her to reject him, v. 129. 
Character runs away with, and byasses all mankind, v. 253. 
In the very Courts of Justice, character acquits and condemns
as often as fact, and sometimes in spite of fact, Lovel. ibid. 
It is not always just to censure according to events, vi. 179. 
Difficult situations make seeming occasions for censure unavoidable,
vii. 231. 
Censoriousness and narrowness generally prevail with those who
affect to be thought more pious than their neighbours, vii. 294. 
Very few Ladies would be condemned, or even accused, in the
circles of Ladies, were they present, viii. 199. 
Human depravity, it is feared, will oftener justify those who
judge harshly, than those who judge favourably; yet will not
good people part with their charity, viii. 200. 
Nevertheless it is right to make that charity consist with caution
and prudence, ibid. 
Charity. Beneficence. Benevolence.
Benevolent spirits are sufficiently happy in the noble consciousness
that attends their Benevolence, i. 3. 293. 
'Tis a generous pleasure in a Landlord, to love to see all his
tenants look fat, sleek, and contented, i. 76. 
That spirit ought not to have the credit of being called bountiful,
that reserves not to itself the power of being just, iii. 192.
iv. 89. 
In cases where great good is wished to be done, it is grievous
to have the will without having the power, iv. 76. 
True Generosity is Greatness of soul: it incites us to do more
by a fellow-creature than can be strictly required of us, iv. 94. 
Innocent and benevolent spirits are sure to be considered as
aliens, and to be made to suffer, by the genuine sons and daughters
of earth, vi. 190. 
A beneficent person, diverted from her course by calamity, will
resume it the moment she can, and go on doing good to all about
her, as before, vi. 352. vii. 22. 
The power of conferring benefits is a godlike power, vii. 204. 

A truly generous and beneficent person will, in a sudden distress,
find out the unhappy before the sighing heart is overwhelmed
by it, viii. 87. See also iv. 94. 
A prudent person will suit her Charities to the person's usual
way of life, viii. 106. See also iv. 247. 
Persons bless'd with a will, should be doubly careful to preserve
to themselves the power, of doing good, viii. 110. 
The honest, industrious, labouring poor, whom sickness, lameness,
or unforeseen accidents, have reduced, ought to be the principal
objects of our Charity, viii. 110, 111. 
Small helps will set forward the sober and industrious poor: 
An ocean of wealth will not be sufficient for the idle and profligate,
viii. 111. 
It is not Charity to relieve the dissolute, if what is given to
them deprive the worthy poor of such assistance as would set the
wheels of their industry going, ibid. 
That Charity which provides for the morals, as well as for the
bodily wants of the poor, gives a double benefit to the public,
as it adds to the number of the hopeful, what it takes from
that of the profligate, viii. 213. 
Can there be in the eyes of that God, who requires nothing so
much from us as acts of beneficence to one another, a Charity
more worthy than that of providing for the souls as well as the
bodies, of our fellow-creatures? ibid. 
[See Generosity. 
Church. Clergy.
The Church is a good place to begin a reconciliation in, if
people mean any thing by their prayers, says Lovelace, i. 205. 
Who that has views either worldly or cruel, can go to Church,
and expect a blessing? ii. 301. 
It is a juster satire upon human nature, than upon the Cloth,
if we suppose, that those who have the best opportunities of being
good, are less perfect than others, v. 81. 
Professional as well as national reflections are to be avoided,
ibid. 
The Church ought to be the only market-place for women, and
domestic excellence their capital recommendation, v. 274. 
A good Clergyman must love and venerate the Gospel he
teaches, and prefer it to all other learning, vii. 52. 
The young Clergyman, who throws about to a Christian audience
scraps of Latin and Greek from the Pagan Classics, shews
something wrong either in his heart or head, or in both, vii.
52, 53. 
A general contempt of the Clergy, even Lovelace confesses, is a
certain sign of a man of free principles, vii. 282. 
[See Conscience. Death. Religion. 

Comedies. Tragedies. Music. Dancing.
Libertines (afraid to trust themselves with serious and solemn
reflections) run to Comedies, in order to laugh away compunction,
and to find examples of men as immoral as themselves,
iv. 143. 
Very few of our Comic Performances give good examples, ibid. 
Mr. Lovelace, Mrs. Sinclair, Sally Martin, Polly Horton, Miss
Partington, love not Tragedies. They have hearts too feeling. 
There is enough in the world, say they, to make the heart sad,
without carrying grief into our diversions, and making the distresses
of others our own, iv. 143. 
Libertines love not any Tragedies, but those in which they
themselves act the parts of tyrants and executioners, ibid. 
The woes of others, well represented, will unlock and open
a tender heart, Lovel. iv. 146. 
The female heart expands, and forgets it forms, when its attention
is carried out of itself at an agreeable or affecting Entertainment,
Lovel. iv. 147. 
[Women, therefore, should be cautious of the company they go
with to public Entertainments.] 
Music, and other maidenly amusements, are too generally
given up by women, when married, v. 254. 
Music, says Lovelace, is an amusement that may be necessary to
keep a young woman out of more active mischief, ibid. 
Wine is an opiate in degree: How many women, says Lovelace,
have been taken at advantage by wine and intoxicating viands!
v. 314. 
Dancing is a diversion that women love; but they ought to be
wary of their company, v. 317. 
Women to women, when warm'd by Dancing, Music, &c.
are great darers and provokers, v. 318. 
Persons who sing and play tolerably, yet plead inability, wish
not always to be believed, viii. 208. 
Condescension.
Condescension that proceeds from force, or even from policy,
may be often discovered to be forced, by observing the eyes
and lips, ii. 174. 
Condescension is not meanness, iv. 218. On the contrary, the
very word implies dignity, v. 13. 
There is a glory in yielding, of which a violent spirit can hardly
judge, iv. 218. 
By Gentleness and Condescension, a requester leaves favourable
impressions upon an angry person, which, on cooler reflection, may
bring the benefit denied at the time, iv. 316. 
That Condescension which has neither pride nor insult in it, 

gives a grace to the person, as well as to the action which demonstrates it, v. 13. 
Conscience. Consciousness.
Persons of Conscience will be afraid to begin the world unjustly,
i. 81. 
A woman who by surprize, or otherwise, is brought to swerve,
loses all that noble self-confidence, which otherwise would have
given her a visible superiority over her tempter, iii. 125. See also
ii. 255. 
How uneasy are our reflections upon every doubtful occurrence,
when we know we have been prevail'd upon to do a
wrong thing! iii. 132. 
It is a satisfaction to a worthy mind, to have borne its testimony
against the vile actions of a bad one, iii. 240. 
Self-complacency is necessary to carry a woman thro' this life,
with tolerable satisfaction to herself, iv. 211. 
The look of every person will be construed as a reproach, by
one who is conscious of having capitally erred, vi. 377. See
also iii. 338. 
As to the world and its censures, says Clarissa, however desirous
I always was of a fair fame, I never thought it right to give
more than a second place to the world's opinion, vi. 419. See
also i. 273. ii. 298. v. 9. 
A pure intention, void of all undutiful resentments, is what must
be my consolation, says Clarissa, whatever others may think of
the measures I have taken, when they come to be known,
vii. 114. 
Consolation.
Those who have not deserved ill-usage, have reason to be the
easier under it, ii. 153. 
Who would not with patience sustain even a great evil, could
she persuade herself, that it might most probably be dispensed in
order to prevent a still greater? iii. 271. 
How much lighter, on reflection, will the same evils sit on the
heart of one who has not brought them upon herself, than upon
one who has! ibid. See also ii. 180. 244. 
There is one common point in which all shall meet, err widely
as they may, iv. 37. 
Patience and perseverance overcome the greatest difficulties,
iv. 48. 
If a person in calamity can consider herself as called upon to
give an example of patience and resignation, she will find her
mind greatly invigorated, iv. 64. 
All nature, and every-thing in it, has its bright and gloomy
side. We should not always by thinking of the worst, iv. 147.
vii. 297. 

My mind, says Clarissa to Lovelace and Tomlinson, is prepared for
adversity. That I have not deserved the evils I have met with,
is my Consolation, v. 200. vi. 116. 186. 191. 194. 
There must be a world after this to do justice to injured innocence,
and to punish barbarous perfidy, v. 293. 
We often look back with pleasure on the heaviest griefs, when
the cause of them is removed, v. 304. 
No one ought to think the worse of herself for having suffered
what she could not avoid, v. 340. 
Temporary evils may be borne with, because they are but temporary,
vi. 33. 
None are made to suffer beyond what they can bear, and therefore
ought to bear, vi. 116. 
We know not the methods of Providence, nor what wise ends
it may have to serve, in its seemingly severe dispensations, ibid. 
A patient and innocent sufferer will look to a world beyond
this for its reward, vi. 178. 
Many happy days may persons greatly unhappy live to see, if
they will not heighten unavoidable accidents into guilty despondency,
vi. 191. 
We should, in an heavy evil, comfort ourselves, as we would
in the like circumstances comfort others, vi. 192. 
This world is designed but for a transitory state of probation. 
A good person, considering herself as travelling thro' it to a better,
will put up with all the hardships of the journey, in hopes of
an ample reward at the end of it, vi. 260. 
Had I, says Clarissa (drawing near her end) escaped the evils I
labour under, I might have been taken in the midst of some gay
promising hope; when my heart had beat high with desire of life; 
and when the vanity of this earth had taken hold of me, vi. 377. 
What happiness, on reflection does that person enjoy, who
has not acted unworthy of herself in the time of trial and temptation!
vii. 41, 42. 
All the troubles of this world, as well as its joys, are but of
short duration, vii. 111. 
Things the most grievous to human nature at the time, often
in the event prove the happiest for us, vii. 123. See also vii. 30. 
We remember those we have long lost, with more pleasure than
pain, vii. 181. 
Solemn impressions, that seem to weaken the mind, may, by
proper reflection, be made to strengthen it, vii. 202. 
Where there is a reliance made on Providence, it seldom fails
to raise up a new friend for every old one that falls off, vii. 204. 
There is often a necessity for a considerate person's being unhappy,
in order to be happy, vii. 212. 
Good motions wrought into habits will yield pleasure at a time
when nothing else can, vii. 240. 

Persons enured to afflictions, and who have lived in constant
hope of a better life, and have no flagrant vices to reproach
themselves with, are the fittest comforters of friends in distress,
viii. 82. 
When a man has not great good to comfort himself with, it
is right, says Lovelace, to make the best of the little that may
offer, viii. 143. 
There never was any discomfort happen'd to mortal man, but
some little ray of Consolation would dart in, if the wretch was
not so much a wretch, as to draw, instead of undraw, the curtain,
to keep it out, ibid.. 
[See Adversity. Conscience. Death. Grief. Human Life.
Religion. 
Controul. Authority.
No extraordinary qualifications are to be expected from a man
who never, as a child, was subject to Controul, i. 67. 
Young Ladies on whom parental Controul is known to sit heavily,
give a man of intrigue room to think, that they want to be
parents themselves, Lovel. iii. 58. 
A generous mind will then only be jealous of Controul, when
it imagines its laudable friendships, or its generosity, are likely to
be wounded by it, iii. 344. 
A man, by seeming afraid of Controul, often subjects himself
to it, vi. 84. 
People awed and controuled, tho' but by their own consciousness
of inferiority, will find fault right or wrong with those of
whose rectitude of mind and manners their own culpable hearts
give them to be afraid, viii. 197. 
[See Duty. Parents and Children. 
Covetousness. Avarice.
A covetous man acts as if he thought the world made for himself
only, i. 80. 
Covetous people may bear with every one's ill word, since
they are so solicitous to keep what they prefer to every one's good
word, i. 91. 
The difference between obtaining a same for generosity, and
incurring the censure of being a miser, will not, prudently managed,
cost fifty pounds a year, i. 119. 
A miser's heir may, at a small expence, obtain the reputation
of generosity, ibid. 
When was an ambitious or covetous mind satisfied with acquisition?
i. 127. 
A prodigal man generally does more injustice than a covetous
one, i. 217. 

What man or woman, who is covetous of wealth or of power,
desires either for the sake of making a right use of it? v. 201. 
Time is the only thing of which we can be allowably covetous,
since we live but once in this world, and when gone, are gone
from it for ever, viii. 221. 
[See Self. 
Courtship.
Reverence to a woman in Courtship is the less to be dispensed with,
as, generally, there is but little of it shewn afterwards, i. 8. 
A very ready consent often subjects a woman to contempt,
i. 11. 
If a man cannot make a woman in Courtship own herself pleased
with him, it is as much, and oftentimes more, to his purpose, to
make her angry with him, Lovel. i. 19. 
That disgust must be sincere, which is conceived on a first visit,
and confirmed in every after one, i. 102. 
A woman who shews a very great dislike to the Lover, whom
afterward she is induced to marry, had need to have a double share
of prudence to behave unexceptionably to her husband, i. 207.
270, 271. ii. 65. 
He who perseveres in his addresses to a woman whose aversion
or dislike to him he has no reason to doubt, wants the spirit that
distinguishes a man, i. 216. 
Very few people in Courtship see each other as they are, ii. 73. 
Our Courtship-days are our best days: Favour destroys Courtship,
distance encreases it, Miss Howe, ii. 130. 
A woman in Courtship has reason to resent those passions in
her Lover, which are predominant to that he pretends to have
for her, ii. 141. 
One of the greatest indignities that can be cast on a woman in
Courtship, is, for a man to be so profligate as to engage himself in
lewd pursuits, at the time he pretends his whole heart to be
hers, ii. 161. 
A woman accustomed to be treated with obsequiousness, will
expect obsequiousness to the end of the Courtship chapter, says
Miss Howe, iii. 171. 
The man who expresses high respect to a woman, is entitled,
if not to acceptance, to civility, iv. 171. See also i. 257. 
A wise man will not discourage that discretion in a mistress,
which will be his glory and security in a wife, iv. 219. 
The woman who in Courtship treats haughtily or ill the man
she intends to have, gives room for the world to think, either,
That she has a mean opinion of him, and an high one of herself,
vii. 231.––– 
Or, That she has not generosity enough to use moderately the
power which his great affection gives her, vii. 231, 232. 
Such a woman gives reason to free lovers to suppose (and to 

presume upon it) that the man to whom she intends to give her
hand has no share in her heart, vii. 232. 
And if she shew that regard to him after marriage, of which she
shewed none before, it will be construed as a compliment to the
Husband, made at the expence of the Wife's, and even of the Sex's
delicacy, ibid. 
Such a one will teach the world, by her example, to despise the
man, whom, when her Husband, she would wish it to respect, ibid. 
To condescend with dignity, to command with kindness, and
sweetness of manners, are points to be aimed at by a wise woman
in Courtship, vii. 233. 
She should let her Lover see, that she has generosity to approve
of and reward a well-meant service: 
That she has a mind that lifts her above the little captious follies
which some attribute to the Sex: 
That she resents not (if ever she has reason to be displeased)
thro' pride, or with petulance: 
That by insisting on little points, she aims not to come at or
to secure great ones, perhaps not proper to be carried: 
Nor leaves room to suppose that she thinks she has so much
cause to doubt her own merit, as to make it needful to put her
Lover upon disagreeable or arrogant trials: 
But lets reason be the principal guide of her actions: 
And then she will hardly ever fail of that respect which will
make her judgment after marriage consulted, sometimes with a
preference to a man's own; at other times as a delightful confirmation
of his, vii. 233, 234. 
When judgment is at a loss to determine the choice of a Lady
who has several Lovers, fancy may the more allowably predominate,
vii. 240. 
Women cannot put the question to a Lover, Whether he mean
honourably, or not, in his address, without affronting their own
virtue and personal graces, vii. 263. 
[They should therefore never admit of the address of a Libertine. 
The woman who in Courtship uses ill the man she intends to
have, reflects not on the obligations her pride is laying her under
to him for his patience with her, vii. 339. 
[See Advice to Women. Husband and Wife. Libertine.
Love. Marriage. Parents and Children. Reflections on
Women. Vows. 
Credulity.
Women are sometimes drawn in to believe against probability,
by the unwillingness they have to doubt their own merit,
ii. 142. 
Superstitious notions propagated in infancy, are hardly ever
totally eradicated, not even in minds grown strong enough to
despise the like credulous folly in others, ii. 283. 

Credulity is the God of Love's prime minister, and they are
never asunder, iii. 119. 
Credulity permits us not, till we suffer by it, to see the defects
of those of whom we think highly, iv. 30. 
We are all very ready to believe what we like, iv. 314. 
[See Courtship. Love. Lover. 
Cruelty. Hard-heartedness.
That Cruelty which children are permitted to shew to birds,
and other animals, will most probably exert itself on their
fellow-creatures, when at years of maturity, iv. 14. 
Let the parents of such a child expect a Lovelace, iv. 342. vi.
212. 
When we reflect upon the cruelties daily practised upon such
of the animal creation as are given us for food, or which we ensnare
for our diversion, we shall be obliged to own, says even Lovelace,
that there is more of the savage in human nature, than we
are aware of, iv. 16, 17, 18. 
Infinite beauties are there to be found in a weeping eye, Lovel.
iv. 23. 
Hard-heartedness is an essential in the character of a Libertine,
iv. 109. 317. 
No heart bursts, says the savage Lovelace, be the occasion for
sorrow what it will, which has the kindly relief of tears, v. 67. 
[See Libertine. Tears. 
Death. Dying.
Melancholy objects and subjects will at times impress the most
profligate spirits. [They should not therefore be run away from.]
iv. 350. 
What is Death, but a cessation from mortal life? vi. 377. 
It is but the finishing of an appointed course, ibid. 
The refreshing Inn, after a fatiguing journey, ibid. 
The end of a life of cares and troubles, ibid. 
Those men who give themselves airs of bravery on reflecting
upon the last scenes of others, may be expected, if sensible at the
time, to behave the most pitifully in their own, vii. 159. 
What a dreadful thing is Death, to a person who has not one
comfortable reflection to revolve! vii. 162. 
What would I give, says the departing Belton, to have but one
year of life before me, and to have the same sense of things I now
have! ibid. 
[See also the dying Belton's pleas to his Physician, and treatment
of him, and of his own Sister, because they could give
him no hope, vii. 187–––190. 
The seeds of Death are sown in us when we begin to live, and
grow up, till, like rampant weeds, they choak the tender flower
of life, vii. 189. 

In beholding the Death of a friend, we are affected as well by
what must one day be our own case, as by his agonies, vii. 191. 
To be cut off by the sword of injured friendship is the most
dreadful of all Deaths, next to Suicide, vii. 193. 
Resignation in Death, and reliance on the Divine mercies, give
great comfort to the friends of the dying, vii. 194. viii. 66, 67. 
A good conscience only can support a person in a sensible and
gradual Death, vii. 314. 360. 
It is a choice comfort at the winding up of our short story, says
Clarissa, to be able to say, “I have rather suffered injuries, than
offered them,” vii. 401. 
Nothing that is of consequence should be left to be done in the
last incapacitating hours of life, vii. 414. 420. 
[See Clarissa's noble behaviour in the agonies of Death, viii. 3––8. 
All sentiments of worldly grandeur vanish at that unavoidable
moment which decides the destiny of men, viii. 15. 
What, in the last solemn moments, must be the reflection of
those (if capable of reflection) whose study and pride it has been
to seduce the innocent, and to ruin the weak, the unguarded, and
the friendless; perhaps, too, by themselves made friendless? ibid. 
[See the shocking and outrageous behaviour of Sinclair at her Death,
viii. 49, & seq. 
See also the violent Death of Lovelace, viii. 246, & seq. 
What are twenty or thirty years to look back upon? viii. 31. 
In a long life, what friends may we not have to mourn for? ib. 
What temptations may we not have to encounter with? ibid. 
In the loss of a dear friend, it is an high satisfaction to be able
to reflect, that we have no acts of unkindness to reproach ourselves
with, viii. 38. 
Time only can combat with advantage very heavy deprivations,
viii. 84. 
Nature will be given way to, till sorrow has in a manner exhausted
itself; then reason and religion will come in seasonably,
with their powerful aids, to raise the drooping heart, ibid. 
[See Consolation. Grief. Religion. 
Delicacy. Decency. Decorum.
Much disagreeable evil will arise to a woman of the least Delicacy,
from an Husband who is given to wine, i. 269. 
What young woman of Delicacy would be thought to have inclinations
so violent, that she could not conquer them? or a will
so stubborn, that she would not, at the entreaty and advice of
her friends, attempt the conquest? ii. 75. 
Punctilio is out of doors the moment a Daughter clandestinely
quits her Father's house, ii. 288. 
How inexcuseable are those giddy creatures, who in the same
hour leap from a parent's window to an Husband's bed! ibid. 

Numberless are the reasons that might be given why a woman
of the least Delicacy should never think of going off with a man,
iii. 18. 
A woman who goes off with a man has no room either to practise
Delicacy herself, or to expect it from the man, iii. 32. 37. 42. 
A consent, in some nice Love-cases, were better taken for granted,
than asked for, iii. 46. 
Few, very few men are there, who have Delicacy enough to
enter into those parts of the female character which are its glory
and distinction, ibid. 
Over-niceness may be under-niceness, v. 9. 
Men need not give indelicate hints to women on subjects that
relate to themselves, Lovel. v. 112. 
A man who is gross in a woman's company, adds he, ought to
be knock'd down with a club, ibid. 
Delicate women make delicate women, and also decent men, v.
256. 
There are points so delicate, that it is a degree of dishonour
to have a vindication of one's self from them thought necessary,
vi. 137. 
The free things that among us Rakes, says Belford, pass for wit
and spirit, must be shocking stuff to the ears of persons of Delicacy,
vi. 295, 296. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Duty. Libertine. Love.
Marriage. Men and Women, &c. 
Despondency. Despair.
If we despond, there can be no hope of cure, iii. 263. vi. 396. 
To despond is to add sin to sin, iv. 197. 
When a profligate man, on being overtaken by a dangerous
sickness, or inevitable calamity, desponds, what consolation can
be given him either from his past life, or his future prospects? vi.
389. 
This is the cause of my despair, says Belton, that God's justice
cannot let his mercy operate for my comfort, vii. 163. 
[See Consolation. 
Deviation.
To condemn a Deviation, and to follow it by as great a one,
what is it but to propagate a general corruption? ii. 165. 
The Deviation of a person of eminence is more inexcuseable
than that of a common person, iii. 193. 
In unhappy situations it will be difficult, even for worthy persons,
to avoid sometimes departing from the simple truth, iii. 206. 
[How necessary is it then for such persons to be careful that they
do not, by their own inconsideration, involve themselves in
difficulties! 

Worthy persons, if inadvertently drawn into a Deviation, will
endeavour instantly to recover their lost ground, that they may
not bring error into habit, iii. 206. 
A criminal Deviation in one friend is likely to cast a shade upon
the other, iii. 256. 
To the pure every little Deviation, says Lovelace, seems offensive,
iv. 4. 
One devious step at first setting out, frequently leads a person
into a wilderness of doubt and error, iv. 37. 75. 
When we are betrayed into a capital Deviation, lesser Deviations
will hardly be avoidable, v. 55. 
She who is too ready to excuse a wilful Deviation in another,
renders her own virtue suspectable, Jam. Harl. vii. 343, 344. 
[See Guilt. Human Nature. 
Dignity. Quality.
Upon true Quality and hereditary Distinction, if sense be not
wanting, honours and affluence sit easy, i. 270. 
If we assume a Dignity, and disgrace not by arrogance our assumption,
every-body will treat us with respect and deference, ii. 11. 
Hereditary Dignity conveys more disgrace than honour to descendents
who have not merit to adorn it, ii. 223. 
Gentleman is a title of distinction, which a Prince may not
deserve, iii. 130. 
The first Dignity ought to be accompanied with the first merit,
iv. 19. 
Grandeur, says Lovelace, always makes a man's face shine in a
woman's eye, v. 336. 
People who are fenced in either by their Years or Quality,
should not, says Lovelace, take freedoms that a man of spirit ought
to resent from others, vi. 214. 
True Dignity admits not of pride or arrogance, vi. 301. 
Some men have a native Dignity in their manner, which will
procure them more regard by a look, than others can obtain by
the most imperious commands, vii. 183. 
The man who is good by choice, as well as by education, has
that Quality in himself [that true Dignity], which ennobles human
nature, and without which the most dignified by birth or rank
are ignoble, vii. 240. 
Women who will not assume some little Dignity, and exact
respect from men, will render themselves cheap, and perhaps
have their modesty and diffidence repaid with scorn and insult,
Miss Howe, viii. 177. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Delicacy. Libertine, &c. 

Double Entendre.
It is an odious thing in a man to look sly and leering at a
woman, whose modesty is invaded by another by indecent
hints or Double Entendre, iii. 301. 
What a grossness is there in the mind of that man, who thinks
to reach a Lady's heart by wounding her ears! iii. 320. 
Well-bred men, who think themselves in virtuous company,
will not allow in themselves such liberties of speech, as tho' not
free enough for open censure, are capable of conveying impure
images to the heart, iii. 332. 
Men who go out of their way to hint free things, must either
be guilty of absurdity, meaning nothing; or, meaning something,
of rudeness, ibid. 
Obscenity is so shameful even to the guilty, that they cannot
hint at it, but under a double meaning, iv. 346. 
Even Lovelace declares, that he never did, nor ever will, talk
to a Lady in a way that modesty will not permit her to answer
him in, viii. 145. 
[See Delicacy. 
Dress. Fashions. Elegance.
The genius of a man who is fond of his person, or Dress,
seldom strikes deep into intellectual subjects, i. 278. 
A man vain of his person, endeavouring to adorn it, frequently
renders himself ridiculous, ibid. 
Women owe to themselves, and to their Sex, to be always
neat, and never to be surprised, by accidental visitors, in such a
dishabille as would pain them to be seen in, ii. 149. 
All that hoops are good for, says Miss Howe, is, to clean dirty
shoes, and to keep fellows at distance, ii. 168. 
The mind is often indicated by outward Dress, iii. 332. 
Homely persons, the more they endeavour to adorn themselves,
the more they expose the defects they want to hide, iv. 27. 
If women, says Lovelace, would make themselves appear as
elegant to an Husband, as they were desirous to appear to him
while a Lover, the Rake, which all women love, would last
longer in the Husband than it generally does, iv. 126. 
A woman who would preserve a Lover's respect to her person,
will be careful of her appearance before him when in dishabille,
iv. 145. 
Full Dress creates dignity, augments consciousness, and keeps
at distance an encroacher, ibid. 
An elegant woman, in her earliest hour, will, for her own
pleasure, be as nice as others in full dress, ibid. 
Elegant Dress contributes greatly to keep passion alive, v. 273. 
Dress gives great advantage to women who have naturally a
genteel air, and have been well educated, v. 277. 

Persons who thro' misfortunes chuse not to dress, should not,
however, give up neatness vi. 193, 194. 
A Fop takes great pains to hang out a sign, by his Dress, of
what he has in his shop, vi. 362, 363. 
A clumsy Beau seems to owe himself a double spite, making
his ungracefulness appear the more ungraceful by his tawdriness
in Dress, Lovel. vi. 363. 
Singularity of Dress shews something wrong in the mind, ibid. 
Plain Dress, for an ordinary man or woman, implies at least
modesty, and procures kind quarter even from the censorious,
vi. 363. viii. 191. 
The Fashion or Dress that becomes one person, frequently
misbecomes another, vii. 95. 
Nature and Ease should be the guides in Dress or Fashion, ibid. 
[See Advice to Women. Delicacy. Dignity. 
Duelling.
A man of honour cannot go to law for verbal abuses given by
people entitled to wear swords, i. 165. 
Duelling is so fashionable a part of brutal bravery, that a good
man is often at a loss so to behave, as to avoid incurring either
mortal guilt, or general contempt, ii. 60. 
Those who throw contempt upon a good man, for chusing
rather to pass by a verbal injury than imbrue his hands in blood,
know not the measure of true magnanimity, ibid. 
'Tis much more noble to forgive, and much more manly to
despise, than to resent, an injury, ibid. 
A man of spirit should too much disdain the man, who is
capable of doing him wilfully a mean wrong, to put his life upon
equal value with his own! ibid. 
What an absurdity is it in a man, to put it in the power of
one, who has done him a small injury, to do him (as it may
happen) and those who love him, an irreparable one! ibid. 
What a flagrant partiality is it in those men, who can themselves
be guilty of crimes which they justly hold unpardonable in their
nearest female relations! vii. 336.––– 
Yet cannot commit them without doing such injuries to other
families, as they think themselves obliged to resent unto death,
when offered to their own! ibid. 
An innocent man ought not to run an equal risk with a guilty
one, viii. 26. 157. 
He who will arrogate to himself the province of the Almighty,
who has declared, that vengeance is His, ought to tremble at what
may be the consequence, viii. 26. 157. 
May it not, in case of the offended person's giving the challenge,
be suitable to the Divine justice to punish the presumptuous innocent
by the hand of the self-defending guilty, reserving him for a future
day of vengeance? viii. 26. 158, 159. 

Life is a short stage when longest: If Heaven will afford a
wicked man time for repentance, who shall dare to deny it him?
viii. 26. 158. 
The conscience of the offender, when it shall please God to
strike it, shall be sharper than an avenger's sword, viii. 26. 
Duelling is not only an usurpation of the Divine prerogative,
but it is an insult upon magistracy and good government, viii. 157. 
'Tis an impious act; 'tis an attempt to take away a life that
ought not to depend upon a private sword, ibid. 
An act, the consequence of which is to hurry a soul (all its
sins upon its head) into perdition, endangering also that of the
poor triumpher; since neither intend to give to the other that
opportunity for repentance which each presumes to hope for himself,
viii. 157, 158. 
Where shall the evil of Duelling stop? Who shall avenge on
the avenger? viii. 158. 
Who would not wish, that the aggressor should be still the guilty
aggressor? ibid. 
Often has the more guilty been the vanquisher of the less guilty,
ibid. 
[See Guilt. Libertine. 
Duty. Obedience.
A good child will not seek to exculpate herself at the expence of
the most revered characters, i. 27. 
If we suffer by an act of Duty, or even of generosity, we have
this comfort on reflection, that the fault is in others, not in ourselves,
i. 125. 
Altho' our parents or friends should not do every-thing for us
that we may wish or expect, it becomes us nevertheless to be
thankful to them for the benefits they have actually conferred on
us, i. 131. 
A good child, upon ill terms with her parents, tho' hopeless
of success, should leave no means unattempted to reconcile herself
to them, were it but to acquit herself to herself, i. 163. 
A sufferer may not be able to forbear complaining of the ill
treatment she meets with from her parents; but it may go
against her to have even the person to whom she complains take
the same liberties with them, i. 180. 
The want of reward is no warrant for us to dispense with our
Duty, ibid. 
The merit of Obedience consists in giving up an inclination,
i. 210. 
In reciprocal Duties, the failure on one side justifies not a failure
on the other, i. 240. 243. ii. 57, 58. vii. 243. 
Prudence and Duty will enable a person to overcome the greatest
difficulties, i. 265. 
Where is the praise-worthiness of Obedience, if it be only paid
in instances where we give up nothing? ii. 63. 

If a passion can be conquered, it is a sacrifice a good child owes
to indulgent parents; especially if they would be unhappy if she
made not such a sacrifice, ii. 95. See also i. 265. 
No independency of fortune can free a child from her filial
Duty, ii. 234. 
Nor ought any change of circumstances to alter her notions of
Duty, iii. 147. 
A Duty exacted with too much rigour, is often attended with
fatal consequences, iii. 192. 
The duty of a child to her parents may be said to be anterior
to her very birth, iii. 197. 
What is the precise stature or age at which a good child may
conclude herself absolved from her filial Duty? iii. 198. 
A good person cannot look with indifference on any part of a
vow'd Duty, iii. 254. 
A worthy person will make it her prayer, as well as her endeavour,
that whatever trials she may be called upon to undergo,
she may not behave unworthily in them, and may come out
amended by them, iii. 256. 
A daughter who chearfully gives up an inclination to the
judgment of her parents, may be said to have laid them under
obligation to her, iv. 34. 
Can a fugitive Daughter enjoy herself, while her parents are in
tears? iv. 249. 
Other peoples not performing their Duty, is no excuse for the
neglect of ours, says even Lovelace, vi. 203. 
The world is too apt to set itself in opposition to a general
Duty, vii. 49. 
General Duties ought not to be weakened by our endeavouring
to justify a single person, if faulty, however unhappily circumstanced,
ibid. 
There is no merit in performing a Duty, vii. 98. 
A dutiful Daughter gives an earnest of making a dutiful and
obliging Wife, vii. 178. 
Duty upon principle will oblige to an uniformity of Duty in
every relation of life, ibid. 
Rigour makes it difficult for sliding virtue to recover itself,
vii. 343. 
[See Parents and Children. 
Education.
Encouragement and approbation bring to light talents that
otherwise would never have appeared, ii. 113. 
There is a docible season, a learning-time, in youth, which,
suffered to elapse, and no foundation laid, seldom returns, vi. 149. 
Some genius's, like some fruits, ripen not till late, ibid. 
Industry and perseverance in study will do prodigious things, ibid. 
What an uphill labour must it be to a learner, who has those 

first rudiments to master at twenty years of age, which others
are taught at ten! iv. 149. 
Parents ought to cultivate the minds of their Daughters, and
inspire them with early notions of reserve and distance to men,
Lovel. iv. 313. 
It is not enough that a youth be put upon doing acts of beneficence; 
he must be taught to do them from proper motives,
iv. 318. 
A pious end, and a crown of glory, are generally the natural
fruits of a virtuous Education, viii. 22. 
The person who aims at acquiring too many things, will
hardly excel in any, viii. 209. 
Improvement must attend upon those who are more ready to
hear than to speak, viii. 215. 
[See Advice to Women. Duty. Parents and Children. 
Example.
Persons distinguished by their rank, or their virtues, are answerable
to the public for their conduct in material points, i. 4. 
Persons of prudence, and distinguish'd talents, seem to be
sprinkled thro' the world, to do credit by their example to religion
and virtue, i. 266. 
No one should plead the errors of another, in justification of
his own, ii. 82. 336. 
Persons who are fond of being thought of as examples, should
look into themselves, watch, and fear, iv. 196. 
Dearly do I love, says Lovelace (speaking of Miss Rawlins) to engage
with the Precept-givers and Example-setters, v. 317. 
The Example at church of persons conspicuous for virtue, rank,
and sense, gives an high credit to religion, vii. 237. 
[See Religion. Virtue. 
Expectation.
There is more joy in Expectation and preparation, than in
fruition, be the pursuit what it will, i. 234. 
Mankind cheat themselves by their raised Expectations of
pleasure in prospect, ii. 78. 
Very seldom is it that high Expectations are so much as tolerably
answered, iv. 30. 
The joys of Expectation are the highest of all our joys, v. 272. 
Eyes.
A weeping Eye indicates a gentle heart, iv. 146. 
Sparkling Eyes, says Lovelace, when the poetical tribe have
said what they will of them, are an infallible sign of a rogue, or
room for a rogue, in the heart, iv. 174. 
The Eye is the casement at which the heart generally looks out,
Lovel. vi. 344. 

Many a woman, who will not shew herself at the door, has
tipt the sly, the intelligible wink from the window, Lovel. vi. 344. 
[See Tears. 
Faults. Folly. Failings. Error.
A man who gives the world cause to have an ill opinion of him,
ought to take the consequence of his own Faults, i. 21. 
Who ever was in Fault, Self being judge? i. 70. 
What a hero or heroine must that person be, who can conquer
a constitutional fault! i. 174. ii. 5. See also i. 120. 
It is not enough for a person convicted of a Fault, to own it,
if he amend it not, i. 193. 
An enemy wishes not a man to be without the Faults he upbraids
him with, i. 275. 
A woman who gives better advice than she takes, doubles the
weight of her own Faults, ii. 84. 
Faults which arise from generous attachments, are not easily
detected, iii. 195. 
No man has a right to be displeased at freedoms taken with him
for Faults which he is not ashamed to confess, iv. 26. 
It ought to be our care, that whatever Errors we fall into, they
should be the Faults of our judgment, and not of our will, iv. 97. 
Great Faults, and great Virtues, are often found in the same
persons, iv. 330. 
Repetition of Faults revives the remembrance of Faults forgiven,
iv. 357. 
When we are drawn into an Error, we should take care to make
as few people as possible suffer by the consequence of it, v. 52. 
One Crime is generally the parent of another, v. 341. 
It is kind to endeavour to extenuate the Fault of one who is
more ready to reproach than to excuse herself, vi. 128. 
Wicked men will often abuse people for the consequence of their
own Faults, vi. 271. 
Worthy minds should not be more ready to fly from the rebuke
than from the Fault, vi. 420. 
We may be mortified by a calamity brought upon ourselves; 
but this rather for the calamity's than the Fault's sake, vii. 107. 
People are apt to make allowances for such Faults in others, as
they will not amend in themselves, viii. 41, 42. 
Persons who will not be at the pains of correcting constitutional
Faults or Failings, frequently seek to gloss them over by some
nominal virtues, viii. 177. 
[See Guilt. 
Favour.
Favours are ask'd by some with an air that calls for rejection,
i. 56. 
To exalt the person we favour above his merit, is but to depreciate
him, ii. 81. See also i. 215. 

A worthy mind will not ask a Favour, till it has considered
whether it is fit to be granted, ii. 192. 
In our expectations of Favours, we should divest ourselves of
self, so far as to leave to others the option they have a right to make,
ii. 294, 295. vi. 422. 
Awe, reverence, and apprehended prohibition, make a Favour
precious, Lovel. iii. 53. 
To request a Favour is one thing; to challenge it as our due is
another, iv. 316. 
A petitioner has no right to be angry at a repulse, if he has not
a right to demand what he sues for as a debt, iv. 316, 317. 
The grace with which a Favour is conferred, may be as acceptable
as the Favour itself, viii. 198. 
Flattery. Compliments.
If we have power to oblige, our Flatterers will tell us any-thing
sooner than what they know we dislike to hear, i. 31. 
Complimental flourishes are the poison of female minds, i. 220. 
Hyperbolic Compliments are elevated absurdities, ii. 176. 
A man who flatters a woman hopes either to find her a fool, or
to make her one, ibid. 
It is not always wrong to take the man at his word, who, pretending
to depreciate himself, lays out for a compliment, iii. 68.
iv. 3. 
Undue compliments ought to be locked upon as affronts to the
understanding of the person to whom they are addressed, iii. 334. 
Women, by encouraging Flatterers, teach men to be hypocrites; 
yet, at other times, stigmatize them for deceivers, Lovel. iv. 4. 
Great men do evil, and leave it to their Flatterers to find a
reason for it afterwards, vii. 5. 
Officious persons are always at hand to flatter, or sooth, the
passions of the affluent, vii. 298. 
Many persons endeavouring to avoid the imputation of Flattery,
or Hypocrisy, run into rusticity, or ill-manners, viii. 177. 
[See Advice to Women. 
Fond. Fondness.
The woman must expect to bear slights from the husband, of
whom she was too visibly fond as a lover, i. 31. 
Fondness spoils more wives than it makes grateful, Solmes, i.
280. 
The fond mother ever makes an harden'd child, i. 287. 
Coy maids make fond wives, says Mr. Solmes, ii. 65. 
The Fondness of a wife to an husband, whom in courtship she
despised for mental imperfections, must be imputed either to dissimulation,
or to very indelicate motives, ii. 71, 72. 
We are apt to be fond of any-body that will side with us when
we are oppressed or provoked, ii. 200. 

Fondness and Toying between a married pair before company,
Lovelace himself condemns, not only as indiscreet, but as indecent
and scandalous, iv. 328. 
Single Ladies who shew too visible a Fondness for a man, discharge
him from all complaisance, v. 38. 
Single Ladies should never be witnesses to those freedoms between
fond husbands and wives (tho' ever so much the wife's
friends) which they would not have offered to themselves, Lovel.
vi. 229. 
Forgiveness. Pardon.
Many a young offender against modesty and decency, has been
confirmed a libertine by a too easy forgiveness, iv. 110. 
See also i. 221. 
An easy Forgiveness, where a person ought to be forgiven, will
encrease the obligation with a mind not ungenerous, v. 10. 
A negative Forgiveness is an ungracious one, v. 27. 
The person who would exact a promise of Pardon, tacitly acknowleges
that he deserves it not, v. 180. 
May those be forgiven, prays Clarissa in the height of her calamities,
who hinder my Father from forgiving me! and this shall be
the harshest thing, relating to them, that falls from my pen, vi.
129, 130. 
An accidental and unpremeditated error carries with it the
strongest plea for Forgiveness, vi. 130. 
Tell Mr. Lovelace, nobly says Clarissa, that I am endeavouring to
bring my mind to such a frame, as to be able to pity him; and
that I shall not think myself qualified for the state I am aspiring to,
if, after a few struggles more, I cannot forgive him too, vi. 349.
vii. 378. 
Nothing can be more wounding than a generous Forgiveness,
vi. 382. 
The easy Pardon perverse children meet with, when they have
done the most rash and undutiful thing they can do, occasions many
to follow their example, vii. 33. 
To be forgiven by injured Innocents is necessary, Lovelace thinks,
to the divine Pardon, vii. 86. 
Men are less unforgiving than women, Lovel. vii. 116. 
Friendship.
True Friendship admits not of reserve, i. 55. 
Friendship should never give a byas against judgment, ibid. 
How shall we expect to avoid the censure of our enemies, if
our Friends will not hold a looking-glass before us to let us see our
imperfections in it? i. 65. 
Friend should judge Friend, as an indifferent person would be
supposed to judge of him, i. 65. 181. 

It is natural for the person who has the misfortune of losing old
Friends, to be desirous of making new ones, i. 165. 
Such a difference in temper and constitution in two young Ladies as
excludes all imaginary rivalship, may be the cement of a firm Friendship
between them, i. 174. 
The part of a true Friend is to sooth, or conciliate, rather than to
stimulate, or provoke, the anguish of a complaining spirit ill at ease
with her nearest relations, i. 181, 182. 
A Brother may not be a Friend, but a Friend will always be a Brother,
ii. 15. 
An ingenuous and worthy mind will say with Clarissa, “Spare me
not because I am your Friend; but, rather, for that very reason spare
me not,” ii. 146. 
No true Friend can ask to be relieved from a distress, which would
involve a Friend in as deep a one, ii. 288. 
But if, with a small inconvenience to ourselves, we could relieve our
Friend from a great one, I would not, says Miss Howe, admit the refuser
into the outermost fold of my heart, ii. 288. See also ii. 239. 
To be displeased with a Friend for telling us our faults, is putting
ourselves into the inconvenient situation of royalty, and out of the way
of amendment, ii. 294. 
Veneration is hardly compatible with that sweet familiarity which
is necessary to unite two persons in the bands of Friendship, ibid. 
The person who has been misled is obliged, as well in prudence, as in
generosity and justice (that her own error may not spread) to caution a
truly-beloved Friend not to fall into the like, iii. 196. 
Freely to give reproof, and thankfully to receive it, is an indispensable
condition of true Friendship, iii. 196. 205. 
An apology made for an honest and friendly freedom, is a sort of civil
affront, iii. 207. 
It is kind [tho' it may be difficult] to conceal from a dear Friend
those griefs which cannot be relieved, iv. 39. 
Misfortunes give a call to discharge the noblest offices of Friendship,
ibid. 
Great minds carry their Friendship beyond accidents, and ties of blood,
iv. 65. 
Fervent Friendships seldom subsist between two sister-beauties, both
toasts, iv. 183. 
There is a consentaneousness in some minds, which will unite them
stronger to each other in a few hours, than can be done in years with
some others whom yet we see not with disgust, iv. 294. 
An active spirit in one Friend, and a passive one in the other, is
likely to make their Friendship durable, v. 255. 
A great error ought less to be excused in one we value, than in one
to whom we are indifferent, vi. 144. 
True Friendship will make a person careful to shun every appearance
that may tend to debase it by selfish or sordid views, vi. 267. 
No Friendship, but what is virtuous, can be worthy of that sacred
name, vi. 298. 301. 
There are Friendships that are only bottle-deep, vi. 345. vii. 160,
161. 

Friendships with gay people, who became intimate because they were
gay, the reason for their first intimacy ceasing, will fade, vi. 345. 
The Friendship of gay people, and of free livers, ought more properly
to be called Companionship, ibid. 
Ladies, conspicuously worthy, give significance to those whom they
honour with their intimacy, vi. 371. 
The ties of pure Friendship are more binding and tender than those of
nature, vi. 372. 
It is disgraceful to be thought to be the intimate Friend of a profligate
and incorrigible man, vi. 399. 
There is an exalted pleasure in intellectual Friendship, that cannot
be tasted in the gross fumes of sensuality, vi. 405. 
Warmth becomes Friendship when our Friend is struggling with undeserved
calamity, vi. 407. 
I have no notion, says Miss Howe, of coolness in Friendship, be it
disguised, or distinguished, by the name of Prudence, or what it
will, ibid. 
It is not every one who has a soul capable of Friendship, vi. 410. 
One day profligate men will be convinced, that what they call
Friendship is chaff and stubble; and that nothing is worthy of that sacred
name that has not virtue for its base, vii. 162. 
The good opinion we have entertain'd of a person we have once
thought worthy of it, is not to be lightly given up, vii. 211. 
Friendship, generally speaking, is too fervent a flame for female
minds to manage, Col. Morden, viii. 167. 
—A light that, but in few of their hands, burns steady, and
often hurries the Sex into flight and absurdity; and, like other extremes,
is hardly ever durable, Col. Morden, ibid. 
Marriage, which is the highest state of Friendship, generally absorbs
the most vehement Friendship of female to female, ibid. 
What female mind is capable of two fervent Friendships at the same
time? ibid. 
The following are the requisites, according to Col. Morden, of fervent
and durable female Friendship; to wit, That both should [like Clarissa
and Miss Howe] have enlarged hearts, a good education, and
minds thirsting after virtuous knowlege.— 
That they should be nearly of equal fortunes, in order to be above
that dependence on each other, which frequently destroys the familiarity
that is the cement of Friendship.— 
That each should excel in different ways, that there might not be
room for either to envy the other.— 
That each should see something in the other to fear, as well as to
love.— 
That it should be an indispensable condition of their Friendship, each
to tell the other of her failings, and to be thankful for the freedom
taken.— 
That the one should be, by nature, gentle; the other made so by
her love and admiration of her Friend, ibid. 

Gaming.
Gaming is equally a waster of time and talents, i. 69. 
Except for trifles, what prudent person would submit to Chance
what they are already sure of? viii. 212. 
It is making my friends a very ill compliment, says Clarissa, to suppose
they wish to be possessed of what belongs to me; and I should be
very unworthy, if I desir'd to make myself a title to what is theirs,
ibid. 
High Gaming is an immorality, a sordid vice, the child of avarice,
and a direct breach of that commandment whch forbids us to covet what
is our neighbour's, ibid. 
Generosity. Generous Minds.
Reserves are painful to open and free spirits, i. 9. 
Generous Minds are rather to be invited than intimidated, i.
48. 80. 
A generous-spirited woman, to be happy, should take care not to
marry a sordid man, i. 77. 
A generous mind will love the person who corrects her in love, the
better for the correction, i. 182. 
The tenderest and most generous minds, when harshly treated, frequently
become the most inflexible, ii. 79. 
Generosity engages the noble-minded as strongly as Love, ii. 160. 
Undue displeasure, when appearing to a generous Mind undue, will
procure to the supposed offender high amends, ii. 162. 
Noble-minded persons, in the exertion of their munificence, silently
reproach the rest of the world, ii. 170. 
Tho' a generous person may wish she had not been laid under obligations
for a benefit unrequestedly conferr'd on herself, or her dependents,
yet she cannot but love the obliger the more for the exertion of a spirit
so like her own, ibid. 
A generous person highly praised will endeavour to deserve the good
opinion of the applauder, that she may not at once disgrace his judgment
and her own heart, ii. 178, 179. 
A truly generous and candid Mind will often make excuses for other
people in cases where it would not have allow'd of one for itself, ii. 288. 
See also ii. 170. 
A generous Mind cannot abuse a generous confidence, iii. 41. 
A truly generous Spirit will, in requisite cases, give advice against itself,
iii. 196. 
A frank, or open-minded person, at once, where he likes, mingles
Minds, and is forward to dissipate diffidences, iii. 300. 
A generous Spirit cannot enjoy its happiness without communication,
iii. 316. 
The person who has the advantage in an argument, and is incapable
of insult or triumph upon it, will disappoint envy, and subdue ill-will,
iv. 62. 
True Generosity is more than Politeness, it is more than good Faith,
it is more than Honour, it is more than Justice, since all these are
but duties, iv. 94. 
The Man who would be thought generous, must first be just, iv. 98 

A generous Mind will not take pleasure in vexing even those by
whom it has been distress'd, v. 198. 
Leave should not be waited for to do a right, a just, a generous
thing, if it be in one's power to do it, v. 259, 260. 
It may be very generous in one person to offer what it would be ungenerous
in another to accept, vi. 305. 
A person of a Mind not ungenerous, will rather be sorry for having
given an offence, than displeased at being amicably told of it, vi. 331. 
Generous Minds are always of kin, ibid. 
A generous Mind must be uneasy when it is laid under obligations
which are beyond its power to return, vi. 372. 
Love and Gratitude will not be narrow'd down to mere family-considerations,
viii. 100. 
It is generous to take the part of an absent person, if not flagrantly
culpable, viii. 199. 
Generosity is the happy medium between parsimony, and profuseness,
viii. 206. 
A generous Mind will not scruple to give advantage to a person of
merit, tho' not always to her own advantage, viii. 208. 
[See Friendship. Goodness. 
Goodness. Grace.
A good person will not wilfully incur the censure even of an adversary,
i. 65. 
A good man need not be afraid that his conduct should be pry'd into,
i. 70. 
Goodness is greatness, i. 246. 
A good person, far from being guilty of a falshood, will not have
recourse to equivocation, i. 267. 
People, says Lovelace, who act like Angels, ought to have Angels
to deal with, ii. 177. 
How great a satisfaction is it to a good Mind to be able to reflect,
that it has rather suffered, than offered, wrong! iii. 25. 
A good man will not make the slumbers of a worthy woman uneasy,
iii. 268. 
A worthy person will be always ready to draw favourable conclusions
on the actions and words of others, v. 194. 
A good person will wish to make every one happy, even to her very
servants, v. 214. 
Goodness and generosity of sentiments give grace and lustre to beauty,
vi. 350. 
A good woman will have other views in living, than the common
ones of eating, sleeping, dressing, visiting, &c. vi. 398. 
Goodness must be uniform, vii. 352. 
The word Grace is the Rake's Shibboleth. There are no hopes of
one who can make a jest of it, or of him who uses it, viii. 62. 
A good-natured and polite person will not expose even pretenders to
science in their absence to the ridicule of lively spirits, viii. 210. 
[See Friendship. Virtue. 

Gratitude. Ingratitude.
It is Ingratitude and Tyranny in a woman to use a man the worse
for his respect to her, i. 257. 
A thankful spirit is the same as a joyful one, iv. 285. 
We must be greatly sensible of the Ingratitude of those we love,
vi. 376. 
To take advantage of an innocent creature's good opinion, to her own
detriment, or ruin, is the most ungrateful wickedness that be committed
by man, vii. 292. 
Particular instances of Ingratitude in another to us, should not be
permitted to narrow and contract our charity into general doubt or
jealousy, viii. 199. 
Grief. Sorrow. Grievances.
When grievances are to be enumerated, slight matters are often
thrown in to make weight, that otherwise would not have
been complained of, i. 219. 
That silence wants not either merit or amiableness, which is owing
to the person's being afraid of discovering by his voice, the depth of his
concern, ii. 172. 
What a poor passive machine is the body, when the mind is disordered!
ii. 188. 
Sorrow makes an ugly face odious, Lovel. v. 19. vii. 5, 6. 
Those who mourn for a lost friend, will find their Grief very much
abated, when they are themselves attacked by a dangerous, or painful
illness, Lovel. iv. 323. 
Grief, says Lovelace, is a slow worker, and gives time to pop in a
little joy between its sullen fits, iv. 375. 
It is the humble, silent Grief that only deserves pity, v. 20. 
How anxiously do we pray for the life of a dear child in its illness,
which when grown to maturity we have reason to wish had not
been granted to our prayers! vii. 30. 
Those, who fly from home to avoid an heavy scene, labour under
more distress in the intermediate suspense, than they could have were
they to be present at it, vii. 364. 
Seasonable and necessary employments should be found out, to amuse
and to divert persons suffering under violent Grief, or loss of dearest
friends, viii. 20. 
It is natural for us, in every deep and sincere Grief, to interest
in it all we know, viii. 69. 
Grief [for the loss of friends] may be mellowed by time into remembrances
more sweet than painful, viii. 102. 
[See Adversity. Consolation. 
Guilt. Vice. Wickedness. Evil Habits. Evil Courses.
Habits are not easily changed, i. 245. viii. 134. 
Vice is a coward, and will hide its head when steadily opposed
by an advocate for virtue, ii. 19. 

What must be the force of evil Habits in a man, who thinks
right, yet disgraces his knowlege by acting wrong! iii. 157. 
The guilty eye will sink under an examining one that is innocent,
iii. 300. 
The Guilty less bear the detecting truth, than the innocent do the
degrading falshood, iv. 208. 
Bad men take more pains to be wicked, than it would cost them
to be good, iv. 303. v. 344. 
The sun shines alike upon the bad and the good; but the guilty
mind it cannot illuminate, v. 330. 
Every vice generally brings on its own punishment, v. 331. 
The injured will often sweetly sleep, when the injurer cannot close
his eyes, ibid. 
There can hardly be a greater punishment hereafter, says Lovelace,
reflecting on his last outrage on Clarissa, than that which I at this instant
experience in my own remorse, ibid. 
What a dejection must ever fall to the lot of Guilt, says Lovelace
on Clarissa's behaviour in the Penknife Scene, were it given to Innocence
always thus nobly to exert itself! vi. 62. 
Many people are deterred from Evil rather by the fear of detection,
than by principle, vi. 197. 
To plunder a wreck, and to rob at a fire, are the most barbarous of
all villainies, vi. 396. 
Sins presumptuously committed against knowlege, and against warning,
are the most unpardonable of all others, vii. 33. 
Those who cannot stand the shock of public shame, ought to be
doubly careful that they incur not private Guilt that may bring
them to it, vii. 212. 
Guilt, when detected, is, literally speaking, its own punisher even in
this world, since it makes the haughtiest spirits look like miscreants,
vii. 274. 
Evil Courses can no longer yield pleasure than while thought and reflection
can be kept off, viii. 123. 
[See Innocence. Ingratitude. Libertine. Remorse. Repentance. 
Happiness. Content.
It is happy for a person to leave the world possessed of every one's
love, i. 5. 
Happiness and Riches are two things, and very seldom meet together,
i. 127. 
Were we perfect, which no one can be, we could not be happy in
this life (even in the usual acceptation of the word) unless those with
whom we have to deal, and more especially those who have any
controul over us, were governed by the principles by which we ourselves
are directed, i. 127, 128. 
To know we are happy, and not to leave it to after-reflection to
look back upon the preferable Past with an heavy and self accusing
heart, is the highest of human felicities, ii. 167. 
What an happiness must that man know, who moves regularly to
some laudable end, and has nothing to reproach himself with in his
progress to it! v. 224. 

The heiress to Content is the richest heiress that can be sought
after, v. 221. 
[See Friendship. Generosity. Goodness. 
Health.
Sound Health will make the soul and body pleased with each
other, i. 274. 
Poverty is the mother of Health, ii. 110. 
Temperance will give Health and Vigour to an originally tender constitution,
iii. 28. 
Health disposes us to be pleased with ourselves; and then we are in
a way to be pleased with every one else, vi. 359. 
In Health every hope rises upon us; every hour presents itself to us
on dancing feet, ibid. 
What Mr. Addison says of Liberty, may, with still greater propriety,
be said of Health; for what is Liberty itself with ut Health? 
It makes the gloomy face of Nature gay;
Gives beauty to the Sun, and pleasure to the Day. ibid.
Men of very strong bodily Health seldom know how to pity the
sick or infirm, vii. 171. 
[See Physic. Vapours. 
Heart. Humanity.
He that wants an heart, wants every-thing, i. 274. 
A wrong head may be convinced; but who can give an Heart
where it is wanting? ibid. 
The person who wants a feeling Heart, wants the highest joy in
this life, i. 296. Yet is saved many griefs by that defect, ibid. 
Where the Heart in all important cases involuntarily, as may be said,
misgives, its misgivings ought generally to be attended to, as if the impulses
of Conscience, ii. 300. 
It is more to a man's praise to shew a kind Heart, than a cunning
head, ii. 310. 
Persons of Humanity will not be ashamed, on proper occasions, to
shew by their eyes that they have feeling Hearts, iv. 319. 
Women should make it a rule to judge of the Heart of a man,
as he is or is not affected by the woes of others, whether real or represented,
ibid. 
He who can place his pride in a barbarous insensibility, is ignorant
of the principal glory of the Human Nature, ibid. 
Who can be happy, says Lovelace, and have a feeling Heart? yet
he, who has it not, must be a Tyger, and no Man, v. 176. 
Even those people who have bad Hearts, will have a veneration
for those who have good ones, vi. 194. See also v. 48. 
What the unpenetrating world call Humanity, is often no more
than a weak mind pitying itself, Lovel. vi. 217. 
A capacity of being moved by the distresses of our fellow-creatures is
far from being disgraceful to a manly Heart, vi. 275. 
Sweet is the pain which generous natures feel for the distresses of
others, vii. 205. 
A kind Heart is a greater blessing to its possessor, than it can be to
any other person who may receive benefit from it. vii. 221. 
[See Friendship. Generosity. Goodness. 

Honesty.
What a praise is it to Honesty, that every man pretends to it,
even at the instant that he knows he means to be a knave!
i. 237. 
Honesty is the chief pride of the low. In the high, the love of
power, of grandeur, of pleasure, mislead, and induce a paramount
pride, which too often swallows up the more laudable one, ii. 150. 
What is there in this dull word, or thing, call'd Honesty, asks Lovelace,
that even I cannot help thinking the temporary emanation of
it, in such a man as Tomlinson, amiable? v. 205, 206. 
It is so much every one's duty to be honest, that no one has
merit in being so; every honest man therefore may call himself honest
without the imputation of vanity, viii. 193. 
[See Goodness. 
Human Life.
The plainest path in our journey thro' life, is, as acknowleges
Lovelace, the safest and the best, iv. 48. 
In all human affairs, the convenient and inconvenient, the good
and the bad, are so mingled, that there is no having the one without
the other, iv. 236. 
As Human Life is chequer-work, a person of prudence will set so
much good against so much bad, in order to strike a balance, iv. 316. 
When can creatures, who hold by so uncertain a tenure as that
of Mortality, be said to be out of danger? vi. 386.— 
This is one of those common forms of speech, that prove the
frailty and the presumption of poor mortals at the same time, ibid. 
What are ten, twenty, or thirty years to look back to, in the
longest of which periods forward, we shall all perhaps be mingled with
the dust from whence we sprung? vii. 174. 
What is even the longest Life that in high health we wish for?
what, as we go along, but a Life of apprehensions, sometimes for our
friends, and oftener for ourselves? vii. 334. 
And at last, when arrived at the old age we covet, one heavy loss
or deprivation having succeeded another, we see ourselves stripped, as
may be said, of every one we lov'd; and exposed as uncompanionable
poor creatures to the slights of jostling youth, who want to
push us off the stage in hopes to possess what we have, vii. 334,
335. 
And, superadded to all, our own infirmities every day encreasing; 
of themselves enough to make the Life we wish for, the greatest disease
of all, vii. 335. 
To wish for an exemption from all infelicities, were to wish for
that which can never happen in this world, and what perhaps ought
not to be wish'd for, if by a wish we could obtain it, since we are not
to live always, vii. 339. 
[See Consolation. 
Human Nature.
Nature gives us relations that choice would not have made
such, i. 201. 
What a world is this! one half of the people in it tormenting 

the other half, yet being themselves tormented in tormenting!
ii. 38. vi. 208. 
What a contemptible rogue, whether in poor or rich, is Human
Nature! Lovel. iii. 169. v. 164. See also iv. 55. 
How apt is Human Nature to justify a byas which it would give
a person pain to contend with! iii. 207, 208. iv. 97. 
It is but shaping the bribe to the taste, and every one has his price,
Lovel. v. 164. 
The clown, as well as his betters, practises what he censures, and
censures what he practises, v. 244. 
In every human breast some one passion generally breaks thro' principle,
and controuls us all, Lovel. vi. 5. 
In some things we all err, vi. 338. 
Those who err on the unfavourable side of a judgment, are like
to be in the right five times in six: So vile a thing is Human Nature,
says Lovelace, vii. 9. 
[See Detraction. 
Humility.
Humility must be the ornament of high condition, i. 193. 
Persons of Humility and Affability, by their sweetness of manners,
insensibly draw people into their sentiments, iv. 62. 
All human excellence is but comparative. There may be persons
who excel us, as much as we fansy we excel the meanest, viii. 198. 
The grace that makes every grace amiable is Humility, ibid. 
[See Duty. Goodness. 
Husband and Wife.
What an Husband must that man make, who is fond of prerogative,
and yet stands in need of the instruction which a man
should be qualified to give! i. 212. 
The heart, not the figure of a man, is what should determine a
woman in the choice of an Husband, i. 268. 
Sobriety in a man is a great point to be secured, since so many mischiefs
happen thro' excess, i. 269. 
As obedience is made a part of the matrimonial vow, a woman
should not teach a man, by a failure in that, to dispense with perhaps
more material parts of his, i. 271. 
The principal views of a good Wife, in adorning her person, should
be to preserve her Husband's affection, and to do credit to his choice,
i. 284. 
A married woman should be even fearful of attracting the eyes of
any man but those of her Husband, ibid. 
A gloomy spirit in an Husband will swallow up a chearful one in
his Wife, ii. 16. 
Greatness of soul is required in a woman of sense and generosity, to
make her in her heart forbear to despise a low-minded Husband, ii. 67.
iv. 217. 
Husbands are often jealous of their authority and consequence with
women who have wit, ii. 92. 
A Wife is the keeper of her Husband's honour, iii. 81. 

A Wife's faults in the world's eye, bring more disgrace upon the
Husband than even upon herself, iii. 81. iv. 101. 
The Wife, by infidelity, may do more injury to the Husband than
the Husband can to the Wife, iii. 84. 
Handsome Husbands often make a Wife's heart ake, iii. 172, 173. 
Handsome Husbands think the women they marry under obligation
to them, iii. 173. 
An Husband and Wife may be too much of one temper to agree,
iii. 189. 
Two persons of tempers not comparatively bad, may be very unhappy,
if they will be both out of humour at one time, ibid. 
It is a most affecting thing to be separated by death from a good
Husband, and left in destitute circumstances, and that not by his
fault, iii. 300. 
An wise man will rather endeavour to inspire a consciousness of
dignity in the heart of his Wife, than to depress and humble her
in her own eyes, iv. 81. 89. 117. 
Prudence, virtue, and delicacy of mind in a Wife do a man more honour
in the eyes of the world, than the same qualities in himself, iv. 101. 
A good woman will be as delicate of her Husband's honour as of her
own, iv. 219. 
A good Wife will think it her duty to lay up out of her own separate
provision, if not a too scanty one, for the family good, and for accidents,
ibid. 
A tyrant Husband, says Lovelace, makes a dutiful Wife, iv. 248, 249. 
The virtue of a woman who has a bad Husband is always in
danger, iv. 266–268. 
A proud and bad spirit cannot bear a superiority of talents in a Wife,
tho' she and all her excellencies are his in full property, v. 14. 
A bountiful-temper'd Wife should take care that by doing more than
justice to others, she does not less than justice by her Husband, v. 51. 
To bear much with some Wives, is to be under a necessity to bear
more, v. 152. 
Husbands and Wives who live together in good understanding, give to
strangers an almost unerring proof of the goodness of their hearts,
vi. 194. Et è contra. 
Happy is the marriage where neither Man nor Wife has any wilful
or premeditated evil [or low cunning] to reproach each other with! ibid. 
What good principles, says Lovelace, must that Wife have, who
[in temptation] preserves her faith to a man who has no share in
her affections! vi. 315. 
It is impossible that a man of a cruel nature, of a sportive invention,
and who has an high opinion of himself, and a low one of
the Female Sex, should make a tender and good Husband, vii. 42. 
A prudent Wife will conquer by yielding, vii. 43. 
Women should consider, that a man who is made uneasy at home,
can divert himself abroad; which a woman cannot so easily do,
without scandal, viii. 168. 
The managing Wife, if prudent, may lay a seeming obligation on a
meek or good-natured Husband, by the performance of no more than
her duty, viii. 170. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Marriage. 

Hypocrisy.
The man who has actually prevail'd with a woman to throw
herself into his power, has no occasion for Hypocrisy, iii. 128. 
See also iii. 56. 
What an Hyæna is the woman who will put her handkerchief to
her eye oftener than she wets it! iii. 300. 
A text of scripture is often, Lovelace says, a cloak for an Hypocrite,
iv. 290. 
[See Human Nature. 
Ill-will. Envy. Hatred. Malice. Spite.
Whom we fear more than love, we are not far from hating, i. 20. 
Ill-will, if it cannot find occasions of disgust, will make
them, i. 21. 
Merit and excellence are the fuel that keeps envy alive, i. 55. 74. 
Envy and Ill-will often extend their malignancy to the whole families
of the hated person, i. 75. 
Ill-will has eyes ever open to the faulty side; as good-will, or love,
is blind even to real imperfections, i. 124. 
Hotred is an enemy even to the common forms of civility, i. 195. 
Projects form'd in Malice, and founded in Selfishness, ought to
be disappointed, i. 202. 
Hatred misrepresents all things, i. 251. 
Spiteful people will sometimes shew gaiety and favour to one they
value not, merely to vex another, with whom they are displeased,
ii. 172. 
Absence heightens Malice, ii. 329. 
Hatred and Anger are but temporary passions in worthy minds, iv. 278. 
Where the ear is open to accusation, accusers will not be wanting,
vii. 74. 
Imagination.
The Female Sex have great advantages over the other in all
the powers that relate to the Imagination, ii. 111. 
Persecution and Discouragement depress ingenuous minds, and blunt
the edge of lively imaginations, ii. 113. 
Whatever we strongly imagine is at the time more than imaginary,
altho' it may not appear so to others, ii. 182. 
Warm Imaginations are not without a mixture of Enthusiasm,
iv. 64. 
Fancy or Imagination, be the subject either joyous or grievous,
is able to outgo fact, vii. 364. 
People of strong imaginations are generally distinguished from people
of judgment by their peculiar flights and whimfies, viii. 115. 
Inclination.
Persons may be drawn in against inclination, till custom will
make an Inclination, i. 62. 
Some people need no greater punishment than to be permitted to
pursue their own Inclinations, i. 156. 

Whatever our hearts are in, says Lovelace, our heads will follow,
iii. 63. 
It is the art of the Devil, and of Libertines, to suit temptations to
Inclinations, iii. 80. vi. 24. 
[See Libertine. Love. 
Indiscretion. Inconsiderateness. Presumption.
The Indiscretions of a reputedly prudent person are a wound
to Virtue, ii. 63. 
A great and wilful Indiscretion not only debases a person in her own
eyes, but weakens her authority and influence over others, iii. 47. 
It is one of the cruellest circumstances that attend the faults of
the Inconsiderate, that she makes all who love her unhappy, and
gives joy only to the enemies of her family, iii. 130. 
Presumption join'd to Inexperience is often the ruin even of well-meaning
persons, iv. 36. 
A worthy mind drawn into an Indiscretion, will have as much
concern for the pain given by it to those she loves, as for the disgraces
brought upon herself, v. 52. 
[See Advice to Women. 
Infidel. Scoffer.
There can be no hope of a man of profligate life, whose vices
have taken root in Infidelity, iv. 319. 
Those who know least are the greatest Scoffers, says Belford,
vi. 395. 
Scoffers generally censure without knowlege, laugh without reason,
and are noisy and loud on things of which they know the least, Belf.
ibid. 
[See Guilt. Religion. 
Innocence.
An innocent man may despise obloquy, i. 275. 
An innocent person doubted, will not fear his tryal, iii. 86. 
Innocence (according to its company) had better have a greater mixture
of the serpent with the dove, than it generally has, Lovel. v. 114. 
Happy is the person who can say with Clarissa, “I should be glad
that all the world knew my heart. Let my enemies sit in judgment
upon my actions; fairly scamn'd, I fear not the result,” 
v. 174, 175. 
“Let them even ask me my most secret thoughts; and whether the
revealing of them make for me or against me, I will reveal them,” 
v. 175. 
An innocent person, being apt to judge of others hearts by his own,
is the easiest to be imposed upon, vii. 68. 
[See Goodness. Virtue. 
Insolence.
The man who can fawn and creep to those by whom he hopes
to be a gainer, will be insolent and over-bearing to those on whom
he can have no such view, i. 171. ii. 182. 
In-door Insolents, who frighten women, children, and servants,
are generally cravens among men, ii. 15. 

Insolent controul more effectually subdues a female spirit than kindness
and concession, ii. 16. 
Some people act by others, as if they thought patience and forbearance
necessary on one side to be upon good terms together; but always
take care rather to owe, than to lay the obligation, ii. 125. 
People who find their anger has made them considerable, will seldom
be pleased, iii. 208, 209. 
Concessions made to ungenerous spirits, serve only to confirm them
in their insolence, iii. 209. 
Insolence is the parent of meanness, v. 211. 
[See Guilt. Libertine. 
Judgment.
An error against Judgment is infinitely worse than an error in
Judgment, i. 273. 
In order to form a Judgment of the tempers of men with whom
we incline to have a close connexion, we should attend to their behaviour
upon slight disappointments or provocations; and then we shall
be able perhaps to decide what is to be ascribed to art in them, and
what to nature, ii. 122. 
She who acts up to the best of her Judgment at the time she is called
upon to act, has the less to blame herself for, tho' the event should
prove unfavourable, iii. 34. See also i. 125. 
The eye and the heart, when too closely allied, are generally at
enmity with the Judgment, iii. 188. iv. 57, 58. 
To judge of the reasonableness of the conduct and resentment of
others, we ought to put ourselves exactly in their situations, vii. 43. 
Justice. Injustice. Right. Wrong.
In an unjust donation, the giver and receiver [the latter knowing it
to be so] are both culpable, i. 81. 127. 318. 
There is a Right and Wrong in every-thing, let people put what
gloss they will upon their actions, ii. 165. 
A woman may then doubt the Justice of her cause, when those
who loved her, and are not principals in the point in debate, condemn
her, iii. 197. 
A man reflects upon himself, and upon the company he has kept,
if he treats common instances of Justice, Gratitude, and Benevolence,
as extraordinary, iv. 94, 95. 
Libertine as I am thought to be, says Lovelace, I never will attempt
to bring down the measure of Right and Wrong to the standard of my
own actions, vi. 338. 
Those who take advantage of the necessities of their fellow-creatures,
in order to buy any-thing cheaper than the real worth, are no better
than robbers for the difference, vi. 395, 396. 
There never was a woman so criminal, who had not some to
justify and side with her, vii. 347. 
In all the Recommendations, the good and convenience of both parties
should be consulted, viii. 85, 86, in the Note. 99. 
If reflections are justly thrown upon us, we ought, instead of resenting,
to profit by them, viii. 120. 

If unjust, we ought to despise them, and the reflector too, since it
would be inexcuseable to strengthen by anger an enemy, whose malice
might be disarmed by contempt, viii. 120. 
Justice, no less than Mercy, is an Attribute of the Almighty, viii. 125. 
Keepers. Keeping.
A man may keep a woman, but not his estate, iv. 131. 
Rakes who despise matrimony, often become the dupes of
low-bred women, who govern them more absolutely than a wife would
attempt to do, ibid. 
Keepers who are in possession of estates by legal descent, will not
wish that their Fathers had despised Matrimony as they do, iv. 132. 
Ought not Keepers to have the same regard for posterity as their Fathers
had? ibid. 
How can any-thing be expected but riot and waste, from creatures
who know the uncertain tenure by which they hold, and who have
an interest quite different from that of their Keepers? ibid. 
Many considerations with-hold a wife from infidelity to a man's bed,
that cannot weigh with a mistress, iv. 132, 133. 
Men who keep women, as little know how to part with them as
if they were married to them, iii. 134. 
Men will bear many things from a kept mistress, which they would
not bear from a wife, ibid. 
Kept women, who are generally low-born, low-educated creatures,
can make no other returns for the partnership in a man's fortunes into
which they are lifted, but the libidinous ones which a man cannot boast
of but to the disgrace of both, iv. 135. 
A Keeper, as he advances into years, will find his appetite to Libertinism
go off; and that the regular family-life will be more and
more palatable to him, ibid. 
Many considerations, respecting himself and his illegitimate children,
should weigh with a man who keeps a mistress, and despises wedlock,
iv. 135, 136. 
The man who is capable of fondness to his offspring, and has a feeling
heart, will marry, iv. 136. 
The natural fruits of treading in crooked paths are dangers, disgrace,
and a too-late repentance, iv. 136. 
Keepers are often the cullies of their own Libertinism, sliding into
the married state will their well-worn doxies, which they might have
enter'd into with their ladies or superiors, ibid. 
[See the remarkable story of Tony Jenyns, a noted Keeper, iv. 136. 
And of Mr. Belton and his Thomasine, iv. 138. 
Old men, imagining themselves under obligation to their young paramours,
seldom keep any-thing from their knowlege, v. 36. 
A consuming malady, and a consuming mistress [as in Belton's case]
are dreadful things to struggle with in the last stage of life, vi. 321. vii. 90. 
Hardly ever was there a Keeper, that made not a Keeperess, vi. 323. 
In the last stage of a Keeper's life, the Mistress's more favoured
gallant has been sometimes his Physician; the dying man's Will
has been ready made for him; and Widow's weeds have been provided
the moment he is departed, in order to establish a marriage, vii. 90. 
[See Libertine. 

Law. Lawyer.
The Law asserts not itself until it is offended, i. 113. 
Old Practisers in the Law value themselves too much, for
dispatch, upon their skill as draughtsmen, iv. 234. 
The Lawyers who, for the sake of a paltry fee, undertake to make
black white, and white black, endeavour to establish iniquity by
quirks, and to rob the innocent, v. 80. –––And are as base, Lovelace
says, as his and old Sinclair's vile implement Dorcas, vi. 9. 
The Law is a word that carries in it natural terror to a guilty
mind, vi. 63. 
No wonder it should, says Lovelace, since those who will damn themselves
to procure ease and plenty in the world, must tremble at everything
that seems to threaten their methods of obtaining that ease
and plenty, vi. 63. 91. 
It is but glossing over one part of a story, and omitting another,
says Lovelace, that will make a bad cause a good one, vii. 276. 
Learning.
A letter'd education too generally sets the children of the poor
above those servile offices, by which the business of the world is
carried on, iv. 148. 
Take the world thro', there are twenty happy people among the unletter'd,
to one among those who have had a school-education, ibid. 
Yet who would not wish to lift to some little distinction, and genteel
usefulness, the person he desires to reward! ibid. 
The little words in the Republic of Letters, like the little folks in
a nation, are the most useful and significant, iv. 275. 
A man of the deepest Learning may hear something from even
a mean preacher that he knew not before, or at least that he had
not considered in the same light, iv. 322. 
The early Learning of women, which chiefly consists in what
they pick up from inflaming Novels, and improbable Romances, contributes
greatly to enervate and weaken their minds, vii. 261. 
Libertine. Rake.
The man wants but an opportunity to put in practice the crimes
he is not ashamed to have imputed to him, i. 69. 
A Libertine Lover, if preferred to a virtuous one, is more likely to
justify the dislike of his opposers, than the choice of his favourer, i. 266. 
Rakes are more suspicious than honest men, iii. 79. 
Libertines, by the frailty of those women they have triumphed over,
judge of the whole Sex, iii. 80. 
“Once subdued, and always subdued,” is an article in the Rake's
Creed, iii. 87. iv. 176. 
A Libertine who is a man of sense and knowlege must have taken
great pains to suppress many good motions and reflections as they arose in
his mind, or levity must be surprisingly predominant in it, iii. 157. 
The chief pleasure of a Libertine must arise from the pain, the 

suspense, the anguish of mind which he gives to the heart of a woman
he pretends to love, iii. 281. 
A Libertine believes that no woman can be chaste or virtuous from
principle, iv. 33. 
Every woman who favours a Libertine, confirms him in his bad
opinion of the Sex, ibid. 
If a woman loves a Libertine, how will she bear the thought of
sharing her interest in him with half the town, and those perhaps the
dregs of it? ibid. 
Prayers, tears, and the most abject submission, are fuel to be pride of
a Libertine, ibid. 
Fortunes squander'd, estates mortgaged or sold, and posterity robb'd,
are too often the result of a marriage with a Libertine, iv. 34. 
A Libertine, familiarized to the distresses he occasions, is seldom
betrayed into a tenderness foreign to his nature, iv. 109. 
A Libertine will be more ashamed of shewing compassion by a weeping
eye, than of the most atrocious crimes, iv. 110. 
Libertines [as well as women love them] have not the ardors, Miss
Howe says, that honest men have, iv. 112. 
Libertines are generally more severe exactors of implicit obedience,
and rigorous virtue, than other men, v. 266. 
No man, who can think but of half the plagues that pursue an
intriguing spirit, would ever quit the fore-right path, vi. 244. 
A man who when old would enjoy in peace his own reflections,
Lovelace confesses, should never be a Rake, vi. 313. 
The friendships and intimacies of Libertines are only calculated for
strong life and health, vi. 389. 
What an ungrateful, what an unmanly, what a meaner than reptile
pride is his, whose delight is in the ruin of a person who confides in
his honour, and whom he ought to protect! viii. 15, 16. 
Men of gallantry and intrigue are the instruments of Satan, to
draw poor souls into those subtile snares which at last will entangle
their own feet, viii. 125. 
Libertines are infinitely worse animals than beasts of prey; since
these destroy thro' hunger and necessity only; those from wantonness
and sport, viii. 210. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Cruelty. Men and Women.
Parents and Children. Vows. Wit. 
Little Spirits. Meanness. Narrowness.
Some Persons have Meanness in their very pride; and their Narrowness
goes hand in hand with it, i. 88. 
Like little Souls will find one another out, as well as like great
ones, ibid. 
Little Spirits will always accommodate themselves to the tempers of
those they want to work upon, ii. 11. 
Grudging and narrow Spirits know not how to confer a benefit with
that grace, which gives the principal merit to a beneficent action,
ii. 12. 
One Meanness is not to be justified by another, ii. 164. 
To be afraid of little Spirits is to encourage insults, iii. 218. 

Meanness must ever be the portion of the man who is detected
in acting vilely, v. 128. 
Tame Spirits will ever be imposed upon, v. 152. 
There is a malignancy in Little Minds, which makes them wish to
bring down the worthy to their own level, vii. 233. 
Nothing subjects the human mind to so much Meanness, as the consciousness
of having done wilful wrong to our fellow-creatures, vii. 338. 
People of narrow Spirits will praise generous ones, because they find it
to their purpose, that all the world, but themselves, should be open-minded,
viii. 170. 
Narrow-minded persons, judging by their own hearts, impute pride
and ostentation to worthy persons, as their motives to good actions,
viii. 197. 
[See Covetousness. Partiality. Self. 
Love.
The Love which has not taken root deep enough to shoot out
into declaration, will not be brought forward by the blighting
winds of anger or resentment, i. 10. 
Love takes deepest root in the steadiest minds, i. 62. 
Gratitude is not always to be construed into Love, i. 64. 
That Lion Love is not to be turned into a Lap-dog, i. 66. 
Prodigies, tho' they obtain our admiration, never attract our Love,
i. 170. 
Love, to look back upon, must appear to be a very foolish thing,
when it has brought a person, born to affluence, into indigence, and
laid a generous mind under obligation and dependence, i. 182. 
What is commonly called Love, is a narrow, circumscribed, selfish
passion; and, where the object of it is unworthy, a passion too
ignoble for a pure mind to encourage, i. 183. 
Pride and vanity are often the source of Love, i. 198. 
A person truly in Love will be wholly engross'd by one object,
i. 199. 204. 
Love will acquit where Reason condemns, i. 250. 
A prudent person will watch over the first approaches of Love, i. 253. 
'Tis a degree of impurity in a woman to love a sensual man, i. 272. 
Great encouragement must be given to Love to make it unconquerable,
i. 276. 
Unrequited [or slighted] Love frequently turns to deepest hate,
i. 290. 
Love delights to tame the lion-hearted, ii. 9. 
What a worse than Moloch-deity is Love, if it expects an offering
to be made to its shrine of reason, duty, and discretion! ii. 70. 
Love is a passion that often begins in folly, or thoughtlessness, and
is carried on with perverseness, ii. 76. 
Love is as busy as a Monkey, and as mischievous as a School-boy,
says Miss Howe, ii. 77. 
Violent Love is a fervor, like all other fervors, that lasts but a
little while, ibid. 
Love is generally founded on mere notional excellences, ibid. 
Time and discretion will enable a woman to get over a first
passion, ii. 95. 




Love that deserves the name, obliges the Lover to seek the satisfaction
of the beloved object, more than his own, ii. 119. iii. 222. 
True Love is ever accompanied with fear and reverence, ii. 182. 
A quarrel, says Miss Howe, has sometimes its conveniences in
Love, ii. 243. And more or less, adds Lovelace, all Lovers quarrel,
iv. 48. 
Love is a fleeting thing, little better than a name, where morality
or virtue does not distinguish the object of it, ii. 255. 
Silent awe, the humble, doubting eye, and even the hesitating voice,
are the natural indications of true and respectful Love. iii. 24. 
True Love is fearful of offending, iii. 71. 
Weakness, Lovelace says, is the true name for Love, iii. 82. 
All the world is ready to excuse a fault owing to Love, because all
the world is apt to be misled by it, ibid. 
Love was ever a traitor to its harbourer, Lovel. iii. 88. 
Love is not naturally a doubter, iii. 119. 
That avow'd Love which is follow'd by marriage, however head-strong
and indiscreet, will have more excuses made for it than generally
it ought to find, iii. 204. 
It is all over with reasoning Ladies, Lovelace says, when once Love
gets into their heads, iii. 316. 
Platonic Love is Platonic Nonsense, iv. 142. 
A first passion thoroughly subdued often makes the man a rover, the
woman a tyranness, iv. 179. 
If Love is allowed to be an excuse for the most unreasonable follies,
what is meant by the doctrine of subduing our passions? iv. 280. 
What must be that Love which has not some degree of purity for its
object? ibid. 
A worthy woman who consents to marry, need not be urged explicitly
to declare her Love, iv. 326, 327. 
The proof of true Love is respect, not freedom, iv. 327. 
Love is an encroacher: Love never goes backward. Nothing but
the highest act of Love can satisfy an indulged Love, iv. 331. 
Love and Compassion are hard to be separated, v. 12. 
Love is seldom the friend of Virtue, Lovel. v. 18. 
Love humanizes the fiercest spirits, v. 38. 
Love is a fire that, if play'd with, will burn the fingers, v. 39. 
Love hardly ever was under the dominion of prudence, or of any reasoning
power, Lovel. v. 263. 
What once a woman hopes in Love-matters, she always hopes while
there is room for hope, Lovel. vi. 361. 
Respectful Love is an inspirer of actions worthy of itself, vii. 9. 
As the graces of the mind are improveable in every added year of life,
which will impair the transitory ones of person, upon what a firm basis
does that man build his Love, who admires a woman for the former
more than for the latter! viii. 33. 
Love will draw an Elephant thro' a key-hole, viii. 149. 
Love not always admits of an air of even due dignity to the object
of it, viii. 168. 
A first Love overcome, makes a person indifferent to a second,
viii. 179. 

Love at first Sight.
We wish, in compliment to our own sagacity, to be confirmed
in our first-sighted impressions, i. 277. 
But few first-sighted impressions ought to be encouraged, i. 315. 
Shall it be said of any young Lady, that the powers of fancy are too
hard for her duty and prudence? iv. 34. 
All women, from the Countess to the Cook-maid, are put into high
good humour with themselves, when a man is taken with them at first
sight, Lovel. v. 165. 
And be she ever so plain, she will find twenty good reasons to defend
the judgment of such a man, ibid. 
Lover.
When a Lover is easy, he is sure, i. 61. 
The Lover gains a great point when he can bring a young
Lady to correspond with him privately, and against prohibition, ibid. 
Lovers disposed to write upon a plaintive subject, will often make
their Ladies cruel, when they only ought to be so, and are not, Lovel.
i. 198. 
The tempers of Lovers, whether gentle or ungentle, are to be found
out by the manner of their address in courtship, i. 200. 
The man who shews tenderness for the calamities of others, gives a
moral assurance that he will make a good husband, i. 268. 
A woman can have but small hopes of a Lover, over whom his own
worthy relations can have no influence, i. 272. 
The small still voice of supplication denotes and becomes the modest
Lover, ii. 68. 
A Lady can hardly ever esteem as an husband, the man whom as a
Lover she despises, ii. 133. 
How pleasantly can a false Lover pass his time, while the gentle bosom
of a Lady heaves with pity for his supposed sufferings for her!
ii. 155. 
A blustering braving Lover cannot deserve encouragement, ii. 182. 
A Lover has not a right to be displeased with a Lady on her side of
the solemnity, ii. 298. 
It is better for a Lady, that her Lover should go away displeased with
her, than that he should leave her dissatisfied with herself, ii. 304. 
A generous Lover must seek to oblige the object of his Love in every
thing essential to her honour, and peace of mind, iii. 10. 
When people set out wrong together, it is very difficult to avoid recrimination,
iii. 147. 
The more ardent the man is while a Lover, the more indifferent,
very probably, will he be when an husband, iii. 172. 
Lovers chuse to be alone, and are ashamed to have even a child present,
to witness to their foolish actions, and more foolish expressions, iv.
348. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Duty. Love. Marriage.
Parents and Children. 

Magnanimity. Fortitude. Hope. Steadiness.
Steadiness of mind, when it sinks not into obstinacy, is an high virtue,
which when tried and known, sets a person above the attempts
of the meanly machinating, i. 126, 127. 
To hope for better days is half to deserve them; for could we have
ground for such an hope, if we did not resolve to merit what it bids us
aspire to? ii. 149. 
Some men behave as if they thought bluster was Magnanimity,
ii. 196. 
A man sometimes, by braving a danger, escapes it, iii. 11. 
To exert spirit only where it is laudably call'd for, is the true Magnanimity,
iii. 91. 
Hope is the cordial that keeps life from stagnating, iii. 266. 
How glorious it is for a woman reduced to the greatest distress by an
ungrateful Lover to say, as Clarissa does, “You, Sir, I thank you,
have lower'd my fortunes; but, I bless God, my mind is not sunk
with my fortunes: It is, on the contrary, raised above Fortune,
and above you!” v. 129. 
He who loves Bravery in a man, ought to admire Fortitude in a
woman, vi. 43. 
Little do those know the force of innate principles, who imagine,
that penury, or a prison, can bring a right-turn'd mind to be guilty of
a baseness, in order to avoid short-liv'd evils, vi. 352. 
Great sentiments uttered with dignity by a good person, give, as it
were, a visibility to the soul, ibid. 
The sinner in his last hours will be generally found to be the real
coward, the saint in his the true hero, vi. 390. 
The woman who can, for virtue, and for honour's sake, subdue a
passion which it is in her power to gratify, merits every-thing next to
adoration, vii. 238. 
[See Friendship. Goodness. 
Marriage.
Exalted qualities may be sunk in a low and unequal Marriage, i. 87. 
A single Lady, who can be brought but to balance on the
change of her state, may be easily determined by the glare and splendor
of the nuptial preparations, and the pride of becoming the mistress of
a family, i. 135. 
It is neither just nor honest to marry where there can be no Love, i. 190. 
Women should be allowed to judge of the person with whom they
can or cannot live happily, i. 207. 
It is dreadful, as well as dishonest, to marry a man in hopes of his
death, ibid. 
Marriage, with the best prospects, is a very solemn engagement: 
Enough to make a young creature's heart ake, when she thinks seriously
of it, Cl. ibid. 
Marry first, and Love will come after, is a shocking assertion; since
a thousand things may happen to make the state but barely tolerable,
when it is entered into with mutual affection, i. 208. 
How unhappy must be that Marriage, in which the husband can
have no confidence in the Love of his wife! ibid. 
The woman who has a competency of her own, makes but an ill 

compliment to herself, when she changes her condition for superfluities,
if she has not superior or stronger motives, i. 213. 
Honeymoon lasts now-a-days but a fortnight, Ant. Harlowe, i. 222. 
A prudent man will not wish to marry a woman who has not an
heart to give, i. 227. 
How much easier and pleasanter is it for a woman to obey the man
of her choice, than one she would not have had, could she have
avoided it, i. 270, 271. 
No matter whom that woman marries, who has a slight notion of
the matrimonial duty, ii. 32. 
That woman, who accompanies to the Altar a man to whom she is
averse, will find it difficult, afterwards, if she prefers her own peace
of mind, to avoid the necessity of playing the hypocrite with him,
ii. 65. 
Those who marry from motives of convenience and duty, are generally
more happy than those who marry for Love, ii. 76. 
Persons of discretion, says Miss Howe, are apt to consider too much
to marry, ii. 141. 
Invectives against Marriage are a reflection upon the laws and good
order of society, and upon a man's own ancestors; and are more inexcuseable
in men of family, than in others, ii. 178. 
A choice made by what is called Love, is seldom durably happy; because
Love generally exalts the object above its merits, and makes the
Lover blind to faults, which, on a nearer intimacy, are so obvious, that
both parties often wonder how they could be so grossly cheated, ii. 255. 
It is absolutely necessary, to complete happiness in the married State,
says Lovelace, that one should be a fool: But then that fool should
know the other's superiority, otherwise the obstinate one would disappoint
the wise one, iii. 121. 
A man of spirit would not marry a Princess, if he thought she but
balanced a moment in her choice of him, or of an Emperor, Lovel.
iii. 173. 
The man who knows it to be in his power to marry, yet delays, or
resignedly leaves it to the woman to name the day, is to be both suspected
and despised, iii. 240. 311. 313. 
Marriage is the highest state of friendship: If happy, it lessens our
cares, by dividing them, at the same time that it doubles our pleasures
by mutual participation, iii. 288. 
Stings of conscience, from a wrong behaviour in a first Marriage,
may possibly make the faulty person tolerable in a second, iv. 106. 
It is the most cruel of fates for a woman to be forced to marry a
man whom she in her heart despises, iv. 112. 
The queernesses which old Antony Harlowe says he has seen in families,
where the man and wife lived upon the best terms, made him loth
to marry, iv. 157. 
Marriage is a state that ought not to be entered into with indifference
on either side, iv. 208. 
Large settlements in Marriage make a woman independent, and a
rebel of course, Lovel. iv. 247. 
In unequal Marriages, those frequently incur censure, who, more
happily yoked, might be intitled to praise, v. 214. 

It is happy for giddy men, as well as for giddy women, in common
cases, that ceremony and parade are necessary to Wedlock, v. 351. 
Let a man do what he will by a single woman, the world is encouragingly
apt to think Marriage a sufficient amends, vi. 52 (a) . 
What is that injury, on this principle infers Lovelace, which a
Church-rite will at any time repair? ibid (a) . 
Marriage, says Lovelace, is a true dramatic recompence for the worst
that can be done to a woman, vi. 227 (a) . 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Husband and Wife. Love.
Lover. 
Masters. Mistresses. Servants.
Judgments of persons tempers are to be made by their domestic behaviour,
and by their treatment of their Servants, i. 64. 215. 
Servants should take care, if there are any young Ladies where they
live, how they make parties, or assist in clandestine correspondencies,
i. 161. 
Policy, as well as generosity, will induce Masters and Mistresses to
repose a confidence in their Servants, ii. 150. 
People in low stations have often minds not sordid, ibid. 
Take number for number, there are more honest low people, than
high, ibid. 
Many Servants will scorn to deceive a confidence, ibid. 
That Servant cannot have sound principles, who can allow herself to
say that her Mistress shall not suspect her for nothing, ibid. 
A Master's communicativeness to his Servants is a means for an enemy
to come at his secrets, ii. 309. 
The Servants of people of quality generally talk of their Master's
pedigree and descent, with as much pride as if they were related to him,
iii. 157. vi. 22. 
Servants seldom keep their Master's secrets from one another, be
those secrets of ever so much importance to their Master, iii. 157. 
Servants are generally worse to have concerns with than their Principals,
iii. 180. 
The greatest plagues people of condition meet with, proceed from
the Servants they take with a view to lessen their cares, iv. 205. 
Servants will be apt to take liberties with those Masters who employ
them in a way that their duty will not warrant, v. 147. 
Servants united in one cause are intimate the moment they see one
another, v. 165, 166. 
They know immediately the kin, and the kin's kin, of each other,
tho' dispersed over the three kingdoms, as well as the genealogies and
kin's kin of those whom they serve, v. 166. 
[See Lovelace's opinion of Servants, vii. 182–––185. 

Mild and humane-temper'd Masters are seldom duly observed by their
Servants, vii. 172, 173. 
Servants often make excuses for faults with such looks, as shew they
believe not what they themselves say, vii. 173. 
It becomes not gentlemen to treat with insolence people who by their
stations are humbled beneath their feet, ibid. 
A Master owes protection to the meanest of his houshold, ibid. 
He that rewards well, and punishes seasonably and properly, will be
well served, vii. 183. 
The art of governing the under-bred lies more in looks than in
words, ibid. 
The Master who pays not his Servants duly, or intrusts them with
secrets, lays himself at their mercy, ibid. 
Wit in a Servant, except to his companions, is sauciness, Lovel.
vii. 184. 
If a Servant ventures to expostulate upon a supposed unreasonable
command, he should wait for a proper season, and do it with humility
and respect, vii. 184, 185. 
[See Generosity. Goodness. 
Meekness.
Tempers that will bear much, will have much to bear, i. 30. 50.
52. 126. ii. 175. 329. iii. 130. 
The gentlest spirits, when provoked, are usually the most determined,
i. 86. See also i. 50. 
The man of temper is mostly the truly brave man, ii. 60. 
Meekness of disposition, and servility of heart, are very distinct qualities,
i. 212. ii. 196. 
Meekness and Patience are characteristic virtues in a woman, iii. 172.
iv. 220. 
Presence of mind on arduous occasions is very consistent with Meekness,
v. 194. 
Meekness of temper shewn by a person defending her unjustly-questioned
character, demonstrates a greatness of mind, superior, in that
instance, to that of the censurer, vi. 182. 
Meek men abroad are not always meek men at home, vi. 414. 
And if they were, says Miss Howe, I should not, I verily think,
like them the better for their Meekness, ibid. 
Affability, Gentleness, Meekness, are the characteristics of a real
fine Lady, viii. 178. 
[See Goodness. Violent Spirits. 
Men and Women.
All that dangling fellows are good for, says Miss Howe, is to give
Women an air of vanity and assuredness in public places, ii. 4. 
Heroes have their fits of fear, Cowards their brave moments, and
virtuous Women their moments critical, Lovel. iv. 364. 
It is not fit, Lovelace says, that at any age, or in any station of
life, a Woman should be independent, v. 61. 
Girls who are quite disengaged, seldom hate, tho' they may not love,
v. 137. 
A Woman generally despises the Man she governs, v. 259. 
A Man of honour will not exculpate himself by loading a Woman,
vi. 336. 

Men are known by their companions, vi. 362. 
So sensible, and so silly at the same time! what a various, what a
foolish creature is Man! vii. 367. 
Those Women who take delight in writing generally excel the Men
in all the graces of the familiar style, viii. 202. 
A Woman of eighteen, Miss Howe takes upon her to say (look the
world thro'), is more prudent and conversable than a Man at twenty-five,
viii. 216. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Duty. Friendship. Love.
Marriage. 
Merit. Demerit.
There cannot be a greater sign of want of Merit, than when a
man seeks to pull down another's character, in order to build up
his own, ii. 214. 
Persons of Merit have a right to all the benefits conferred upon them,
iii. 157. 
There may be a Worthiness and Merit so superior, as will put envy
itself to silence, iv. 62. 
It is presumption to expect tokens of value, without resolving to deserve
them, iv. 208. 
We should endeavour to like and dislike according to the real Merit
or Demerit of the object, iv. 280. 
Great Merit is coy. Coyness has not always its foundation in pride,
vii. 372. 
[See Goodness. Praise. 
Minutiæ.
Great consequences, like great folks, sometimes owe their greatness
to small causes, and little incidents, iii. 43. 
In all matters that admit of doubt or jealousy, the smallest circumstances
are of more importance than the strongest asseverations, iii.
185. 
Great engines are frequently moved by small springs, iv. 341. 
The minutest circumstances are often of great service in matters of
the last importance, vi. 14. 
The Minutiæ are of consequence to be attended to in all critical undertakings,
vi. 83. 
Minutenesses may be observed, where greater articles are not neglected
for them, vii. 309. 
Modesty. Audacity.
A modest person challenged will be diffident, tho' innocent, i. 63. 
The Bold and Forward, not being sensible of defects, assume,
while the Modesty of the really worthy man permits him not to explain
himself, i. 87. 
Why should a person who delights to find out what is praise-worthy
in another, be supposed ignorant of his own worth? ii. 66. 
A modest woman will not despise those who have not every fine quality
that may be conspicuous in herself, ibid. 
A modest Lady, who throws herself into the power of a Rake, is
very unequal to the adventure iii. 167, iv. 109. 

A modest man has generally a treasure in his mind, that requires
only the key of encouragement to unlock it, to make him shine, iii.
200, 201. 
Shall not a modest woman wish to consort with a modest man, before
whom, and to whom, she may open her lips, secure of his good opinion
of all she says, and which therefore must inspire her with an
agreeable confidence? iii. 201. 
A truly modest woman may make even an audacious man keep his
distance, iv. 236, 237. 
Rakish hearts can no more taste the beauty and delicacy of modest
obligingness, than of modest love, vi. 390. 
Modest or diffident men wear not soon off those little precisenesses,
which the assured, if ever they had them, presently get over, vi. 402. 
Well may women, says Miss Howe, who are fond of Libertines, be
the sport and ridicule of such–––Would not very little reflection teach
us, that a man of merit must be a man of Modesty? vi. 415. 
The characteristic of Virgin Modesty, adorned by conscious dignity,
is, freedom and reserve happily blended, vii. 205. 
A modest man should no more be made little in his own eyes, than
in the eyes of others. If he be, he will have a diffidence which will
give aukwardness to every-thing he says or does, vii. 230. 
[See Advice to Women. Blushes. Delicacy. 
Obligation. Oblige. Obliging Temper.
To oblige in the fact, and disoblige in the manner, is obliging by
halves, ii. 284. 
An obliging temper is evermore disobliging itself, ii. 322. 
He that can oblige, can disoblige. It is happy for some people, that
they have it not in their power to offend, Miss Howe, iii. 40. 
Persons in a state of Obligation must not complain, iii. 47. 
How precious, to a beneficent mind, is the power of obliging! ibid. 
It is good to be easy of persuasion, in matters where one can oblige
without endangering virtue and worthy habits, viii. 221. 
[See Friendship. Generosity. 
Obstinacy. Perverseness. Frowardness. Pertness.
Perverseness will both miscall and misinterpret, i. 217, 218. 
It is better to be thought perverse, than insincere, i. 318. 
Frowardness often makes a girl object to proposals that come first from
a parent or guardian, and for no other reason, ii. 167. 
Pert women-grown daughters think their parents old, yet pay them
not the reverence due to their years, iv. 159. 
To argue with a man who is convinced he is doing a wrong thing, is
but to make him ingenious to find out excuses for himself, and to
harden his heart, v. 203. 
Men give not easily up what they have set their hearts upon, be it
ever so unreasonable to be carried, vi. 312. 
Obstinacy and implacableness are bad signs in a person declining in
health, vi. 374. 
A pert daughter gives fair warning to a lover, of proving an unmanageable
wife, viii. 169. 
[See Duty. Parents and Children. 

General Observations and Reflections.
Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried on by undermining
courtiers against one another, when private families
cannot be free from them? i. 83. 
Every one can be good, who has no provocation to the contrary,
i. 176. 
Prudence is too often called covetousness; covetousness, prudence; 
profligacy, gallantry, &c. i. 217, 218. 
Policy may make a man give up one half of his character to save the
other half, when the discussion might tend to detect him of being generally
wicked, i. 273. 
Over-doers frequently give the offence they mean to avoid, ii. 8. 
All extraordinaries will soon subside, ii. 61. 
If our hearts do not harden and contract, as we experience ill-treatment
from the world, we shall be upon very unequal terms with it,
ii. 121. 
It is very difficult for a person who would avoid one extreme,
to keep clear of another, ii. 163. 
What we most delight in, is often made the instrument of our
punishment, ii. 246. 
He who will be bribed by one person to undertake a baseness, will be
overbribed by another to retort it, iii. 105. 
To borrow of relations, is to subject one's self to an inquisition into
one's life and actions, Lovel. iii. 122. 
Traders are dealers in pins, and will be more obliged by a peny-customer,
than by a pound-present, because it is in their way; yet will
refuse neither, Lovel. iii. 160. v. 164. 
What likelihood is there or corrupting a man who has no ambition?
iii. 162. 
The person who will obstinately vindicate a faulty step in another,
seems to indicate, that, in the like circumstances, she would have
been guilty of the same fault, iii. 197. 
All the animal creation is more or less in a state of hostility, iii. 211. 
We are apt to regret what happens to our dislike, yet know not
whether we should have been more happy in the enjoyment of our own
wishes, iii. 271. 
There is hardly any-thing that a man will scruple, who will break
the seal of a letter not designed for him to see, iii. 299. 
It is easier to persist in a denial given, than to give it at first, iii.
339. 
Be the motives to excess what they will, excess is excess, iii. 345. 
Most of the troubles that fall to the lot of common mortals, arise
either from their large desires, or from their little deserts, iv. 63. 
Never was there a cause so bad, but that either from pity to the
offender, or ill-will to the injured, it found some advocates, iv. 134. 
In the progress to any event we may have in view, our minds may
be too much engaged to see things in the same light, in which they
will appear to us when all obstacles are removed, and we have nothing
to do but to chuse, iv. 151. 
All our pursuits from childhood to manhood, are only trifles of different
sorts and sizes, proportioned to our years and views, iv. 263. 

The lower class of people are ever aiming at the stupid wonderful,
iv. 286. 
It is very easy for a person to part with a secondary appetite, when,
by so doing, he can promote or gratify a first, iv. 318. 
All human good and evil is comparative, iv. 361. 
Ceremony is not civility. Civility is not ceremony, v. 63. 
The mixtures which agreeable things generally come to us with,
are great abatements of the pleasures they bring with them, v. 115. 
The greatest acquisition, even that of an imperial crown, is nothing,
when a man has been some time used to it, v. 161. 
Appeals give pride and superiority to the person appealed to, and tend
to lessen the appellants even in their own eyes, v. 208. 
Opposition frequently cements friendship, and creates or confirms
love, v. 254. 
A great difference will be generally found in the manners of the
same man, as visitor and inmate, v. 272. 
Every-body, and every-thing, has a black and a white side, of which
both well-willers and ill-willers may make advantage, vi. 159, 160.
212. See also v. 98. vii. 276. 
Evils that are small in the beginning, and only confined to a single
person, frequently spread, and involve whose families, vi. 192. 
Words of respect may be so pronounced, as to mean indignation and
insult, vi. 209. 
Those who can least bear a jest upon themselves, will be more
diverted with one passed on others, vii. 141. 
A bad cause gives a man great disadvantages, vii. 274. 
Uncommon minds can hardly avoid doing things out of the common
way, vii. 310. 
We must not expect that our roses will grow without thorns; 
but then they are useful and instructive thorns, which, by pricking the
fingers of the too hasty plucker, teach future caution, vii. 339. 
Difficulty gives poignancy to our enjoyments. Those which are
easily obtained, generally lose their relish with us, vii. 339, 340. 
The absent generally bear the load, when the blame is apparently
due somewhere, vii. 347. 
Actual distraction (take it out of its lucid intervals) must be an
happier state, than the state of suspense and anxiety, which brings it on,
vii. 363. 
Resolutions depending upon future contingencies, are best left to
future determinations, viii. 160. 
The greatest punishment that can be inflicted on us, would often be
the grant of our own wishes, viii. 182. 
Free-will enables us to do every-thing well; while restraint and imposition
make a light burden heavy, viii. 217. 
Oeconomy. Frugality. Housewifry.
By Frugality we are enabled to be both just and generous, iv. 158. 
Without Oeconomy no estate is large enough; with it, the least
is not too small, iv. 309. 
The man who runs away from his accounts will in time be glad that
he could run away from himself, vi. 345. 
Frugality is a necessary virtue, niggardliness an odious vice, viii, 206. 

It is incredible what may be done by early-rising, and by long days
well fill'd up, viii. 217. 
Persons who rise early, and make good use of their hours, may be
said to have lived more years at sixteen, than some others at twenty-six,
ibid. 
Those who keep not a strict account, seldom keep any, viii. 221. 
Palliation. Evasion. Excuse.
A good person will not palliate with a view to deceive, ii. 252. 
Artful Evasions are unworthy of a frank and open heart, iii. 202. 
It is no wonder, that he who can sit down premeditatedly to do a bad
action, will content himself with a bad excuse, vi. 388, 389. 
No Palliation ought to be made for wilful and premeditated vileness,
viii. 200. 
Parents. Children.
Severity in some cases is clemency, i. 51. 
Needless watchfulness, and undue restraint, often produce artifice
and contrivance, i. 53. 
Parents, by violently fighting against a Lover, frequently fight for
him, i. 61. 173. 200. ii. 224. 
Daughters, says James Harlowe, are chickens brought up for a
stranger's table, i. 73. 
Most unhappy is the situation of that worthy Child, who is obliged,
in her own defence, to expose a Parent's failings, i. 83. 180. 
It is impolitic in Parents to join two people in one interest, whom
they wish for ever to keep asunder, i. 85, 86. 
Tho' the parental authority should be deemed sacred, yet Parents
should have reason in what they do, i. 87. 
Where the heart of a Child is sought to be engaged, the eye ought
not to be disgusted, i. 101. 
A worthy Daughter would rather wish to appear amiable in the
eyes of her own Friends and Relations, than in those of all the world
besides, i. 165. 
Disgraceful treatment will often bring about the very end which it
is intended to frustrate, i. 190. 276. viii. 179. 
In family contentions, when every expedient to bring about a reconciliation
is tried, whatever be the event, the person so trying has the
less to blame herself for, i. 192, iii. 45. 
How great must be the comfort of that young Lady in an unhappy
marriage, who can reflect, that she followed the advice of her
Friends, and owes not her unhappiness to her own headstrong will!
i. 265. ii. 256. 
The difference between the hard usage a Child receives from a severe
Parent, and the obsequious regard paid to her by a flattering Lover, is
enough to make her run all risks with the latter, in order to get out
of the hands of the former, i. 272. 274. 
Parents sometimes make not those allowances for Youth, which,
when young, they wished to be made for themselves, ii. 78. 
Parents must not always expect, that advice should have the same
force upon their Children, as experience has upon themselves, ii. 79. 

In giving advice, and remonstrating, Parents and Guardians should
proceed by patient reasoning and gentleness, that they may not harden
where they wish to convince, ii. 79. 
Unkind circumstances on the Parent's part, and heedless ones on the
Child's, in a debate where both mean well, will make small differences
great ones, ibid. 
A Parent, by forcing a Child to marry the man she hates, may occasion
an utter dissipation of the Child's morals, and of consequence,
her everlasting perdition, ii. 95. 
Aversion in a Child should be distinguished from wilfulness, ii. 183. 
To endeavour to force a free mind, is to dishonour it, ii. 227. 
Strings that are overstrained must either be relaxed, or break,
ii. 243. 
The time may come for a Child to consider, as the highest benefit
to herself, those measures of a Parent which at present she may think
grievous, ii. 258. 
The more obstinate a Child is in her opposition to a Parent's will,
the more will a Parent be apt to think his authority concerned to
carry his point, ii. 267. 
If Parents, by appeals or otherwise, needlesly expose a Child, she
will be apt to think, that, do what she will, she cannot incur more
disgrace than she already labours under, ii. 277. 
Harsh and cruel treatment humbles a Child, and makes her seem
cheap in her own eyes, ibid. 
[Is she not then in the way to become the easy prey of a man whom
otherwise she would have despised? 
It is better for a good Child to be able to say, her Parents were
unkind to her, than that she was undutiful to them, iii. 25. See also
i. 125. 
The exertion of a seasonable lenity may save a penitent Child
from utter destruction, iii. 49. 116. iv. 355. vi. 128. vii. 343. 
The Father and Mother who would secure to themselves the undivided
love of their Children, should avoid such durable contentions with
each other, as would distress their Children which side to take, when
they would be glad to reverence both, iii. 189. 
A good Parent must have greater pain in the necessary restraint of an
headstrong Daughter, than she can give to such a Daughter, iii. 198. 
At every age on this side matrimony it will be found, that a Parent's
wings are the most effectual safeguards of Daughters, from the
villainous birds of prey that hover round them, iii. 198, 199. 
A Parent, for a failure in her own duty, is not answerable to her
Child, iii. 199. 
Reverence is too apt to be forgot by Children, when Parents forget
what belongs to their own characters, iv. 161. 
Parents and Children, when separated, and seeing each other but
seldom, like other lovers, shew their best sides to each other, iv. 172. 
The bad qualities in which fond Parents too often indulge their Children
when infants, not seldom, at riper years, prove the plague of their
hearts, v. 115. 
It is as necessary to direct Daughters in the choice of their female
companions, and to watch against the intrigues of women-servants,
as it is to guard them against the designs of men, Lovel. v. 257, 258. 

Parents the most indulgent in their own natures, often, from the
errors of a Child, incur the censure of hardheartedness, vi. 128. 
Doubly faulty is that Child, therefore, who, by a rash action,
not only disgraces herself, but depreciates the most revered characters,
ibid. 
What confusion of mind must attend the reflections of a child,
who, from the most promising outsetting, has brought ruin on herself,
and distress on her Friends! ibid. 
The voice of nature must at last be heard in favour of a Child truly
penitent, vi. 130. vii. 301. 
When a Daughter is strongly set upon a point, it is better for a
Mother (if the point be of no high consequence) to make herself of
her party, than violently to oppose her, vi. 192. 
Parents should take care that they do not weaken their authority,
by a needless exertion of it, vi. 318. 
What an enormity is there in that crime of a Child, which can
turn the hearts of Parents before indulgent against her! vi. 20. 
The resentment which Children, and even the World, may ascribe
to cruelty in an offended Parent, may be owing to excess of love, and
disappointed hopes, vi. 348. 
It is to be hoped, says Miss Howe, that unforgiving Parents were
always good, dutiful, and passive Children to their Parents, vi. 407. 
Parents who would cure a Child's impatience of spirit, should not
betray a want of temper in themselves, ibid. 
Children, depending on the weakness of their Parents tempers, too
often harden their own hearts, vii. 33. 
While Parents think a Child in fault, as they have a right to judge
for themselves, they ought to have great allowances made for them; 
especially if, till their displeasure took place, they had always been kind
and indulgent, vii. 43. 
Good Children make their Parents happy in each other, as well as
in them; bad Children unhappy in both, vii. 43, 44. 
When the nearest Friends give up an unhappy Child, every one
is ready to propagate slander against her, vii. 107. 
A good Child will be careful of making a party against even
harsh and severe Parents, vii. 212. 
It requires an high degree of understanding and discretion in a
Daughter, when grown up, to let it be seen that she mingles reverence
with her love to a Parent, who has talents visibly inferior to her own,
viii. 169. 
Parents, in order to preserve their Childrens veneration for them,
should take great care not to let them see any-thing in their conduct,
behaviour, or principles, which they themselves would not approve
of in others, ibid. 
Such Parents as have a visible narrowness of heart must needs
weaken their own authority with Children of spirit, viii. 170. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Controul. Duty. Marriage.
Love. Lover. 
Partiality. Impartiality.
Men frequently give advice to others, when consulted, with an
indirect view to something similar in their own case, i. 62. 

Good-will, or Love, is often blind to real imperfections, i. 124. 
We are apt to praise our benefactors, because they are our benefactors; 
as if every-body did right or wrong, as they obliged
or disobliged us, i. 153. 
We should endeavour to judge of ourselves, and of every-thing
that affects us, as we may reasonably imagine others will judge
of us, and of our actions, i. 181. 
Were each person to tell his own story, and to be believed,
there would not be a guilty person in the world, i. 252. 
No one should plead the errors of another, in justification of
his own, ii. 82. 
Human nature, sensible of its own defects, loves to be correcting; 
but chuses rather to turn its eye outward than inward,
iii. 201. 
We often look into ourselves with a resolution not fairly to try,
but to acquit ourselves, iii. 261. 
It is difficult for a woman to subscribe to a preference against
herself in love-cases, tho' ever so visible, iii. 308. 
Poor arguments will do, when brought in favour of what we
like, iv. 127. 
An artful man, bringing a case home to the passions or interest
of his judges, will be likely to succeed where he ought not,
v. 96. 
That cause must be well tried, where the offender takes his
seat upon the same bench with the judge, v. 184. 
Whatever qualities we wish to find in one we love, we are ready
to find, v. 307. 
Partiality to Self is a dangerous misleader, vi. 130. 
An impartial spirit, having run into a punishable error, will
not forgive itself, tho' its friends should forgive it, vi. 177. 
Those least bear disappointment, who love most to give it,
vi. 280. vii. 315. 
Many men are apt to take their measures of right and wrong
from what they themselves are, and cannot help being, vii. 8. 
So aukwardness may be a perfection with the aukward, ibid. 
It is difficult to go out of ourselves to give a judgment against
ourselves; and yet oftentimes, to pass a just judgment, we ought,
vii. 103. 
Suffering persons are apt to be partial to their own cause and
merits, vii. 298. 
It is far from being difficult for a worthy heart to reject the man
(however once favoured) whose actions it despises, vii. 338. 
[See Prepossession. 
Passions.
The command of her Passions was Clarissa's glory, and is one
of the greatest glories of the human mind, i. 272. 276. 

The manners and Passions of men and women are to be seen in
miniature during their childhood, ii. 9, 10. 
If the irascible passions cannot be overcome, how shall those be
subdued, to which bad habit, joined to greater temptation, gives
stronger force? ii. 122. 
It is easy to make a passionate spirit answer all our views upon
it, ii. 216. 
Turbulence and obsequiousness, used in turn, keep a woman's
passions alive, and at last tire her into non-resistance, Miss Howe,
iii. 268. 
People in a Passion, tho' within a few yards of each other,
hollow like travellers got out of their way, and wanting to get
into it again, iii. 269, 270. 
How universally engaging it is, says Lovelace, to put a woman
of sense in a Passion, let the reception given to the ranting scenes
in Plays testify, iii. 328. 
Those Passions in women, which they take no pains to subdue,
may have one and the same source [and tendency] with those
which hurry on the headstrong and violent of the other Sex to
the commission of the most atrocious crimes, iii. 345. iv. 190. 
Passion gives bodily strength; Fear takes it away, iv. 51. 
Passion distorts the features, and makes even an handsome
person ugly, iv. 194. 
The Passions of the gentle, tho' slower to be moved than those
of the quick, are generally the most flaming when raised, iv. 204. 
It is both impudent and imprudent, says Lovelace, for a wife
to be in a Passion, iv. 220. 
Passion and ill-will are dreadful misrepresenters, iv. 307. 
Violence of Passion is too often admitted as a plea [at least as
an extenuation] for violence and indecency of action, both by the
female sex, and by the world, iv. 326. vi. 51, 52. 
To be able to arrest a woman's Passion in the height of its
career [on an offence given to her modesty] is, says Lovelace, a charming
presage, v. 117. 
A woman of a violent Spirit is often in more danger from an
artful man, than one of a steadier disposition, v. 253, 254. 
Passionate women have high pulses, says Lovelace; and a clever
fellow will make what sport he pleases with them, vi. 311. 
Who can account for the workings and ways of a passionate
and disappointed woman? Lovel. vi. 339. 
Passion has different ways of working in different bosoms, as
humours or complexion induce, vi. 344. 
The Passions of the Female Sex, if naturally drawn, will distinguish
themselves from the masculine Passions, by a softness
that will shine thro' rage and despair, vii. 124. 
[See Anger. Violent Spirits. 

Patience. Impatience.
Persons unaccustomed to controul, are impatient of controul,
i. 5. 
If afflictions are sent for corrective ends, Impatience may lead
into more punishable errors, ii. 247. 
An impatient spirit subjects itself to deserved humiliation,
iii. 142. 
When a point is clear and self-evident, it is difficult to find
Patience, on being obliged to enter into an argument in proof of
it, iii. 344, 345. See also i. 86. 
Patience and perseverance are able to overcome the greatest
difficulties, iv. 48. 
No man ought to be impatient at imputations he is not ashamed
to deserve, v. 197. 
An innocent man will not be outrageous upon reports made to
his disadvantage; a guilty man ought not, ibid. 
The injured has a right to upbraid; the injurer ought to be
patient, vi. 24. 
Persons who by their rashness have made a breach in their
duty, should not enlarge it by their Impatience, vi. 128. 
Impatience is generally the child of self-partiality, vi. 130. 
The person who is employed as a mediator, should not be
himself over-ready to take offence, vi. 337. 341. 
People new to misfortune are often too easily moved to Impatience,
vii. 107. 
It is not just for two friends, more than for man and wife, to
be out of Patience at one time, vii. 117. 
In a deep distress, a man of an impatient spirit is apt to think
that every face, and even the face of nature, should wear the
marks of that woe which affects him, vii. 364. 
Pedants. Colleges.
Youths raw from the Colleges are not fit prescribers to the
gentler Sex, i. 189. 
Colleges are too often classes of tyrants, ibid. 
Young men of shallow parts, just come from College, are apt
to despise those who cannot tell how an antient author expressed
himself in Greek or Latin on a subject, upon which, however,
they may know how, as well as the author, to express themselves
in English, vii. 96. 
[See Brand's Letters in the History, Vol. vii. p. 285–291. and
380–398. 
Physic. Physicians.
Punish and prescribe are synonymous terms in Physic, iv. 228. 
Why, asks Lovelace, when Physicians can do no good, will
they not study to gratify rather than nauseate the palates of their
patients? ibid. 

It is ill jesting with edged tools, and worse with physical ones,
Lovel. iv. 274. 
Those who treat contemptuously the professors of the art of
healing, generally treat higher institutions as lightly, Clarissa,
iv. 279. 
Sharp or acute mental organs frequently whet out the bodily
ones, vi. 76. 
A generous physician, where he is hopeless of doing good, will
put on the Friend, and lay aside the Doctor, vi. 305. 
When physical men, says Belford, are at a loss what to prescribe
to their patients, they enquire what it is they best like, or are
most diverted with, and forbid them that, vi. 397. 
Physicians, to do credit to their skill, will sometimes make a
slight disease important, Lovel. vii. 121. 
We ought to begin early to study what our constitutions will
bear, vii. 189. 
Physicians, when they find a case desperate, should generally
decline the fee, vii. 190. 
Friendship and Physician are not absolutely incompatible, vii. 258. 
A skilful operator will endeavour to be intelligible, and, if honest,
to make every one a judge of his practice, viii. 57. 
Generally, says Belford, when the Physician enters, the air is
shut out, viii. 61. 
Quantity in diet is more to be regarded than quality, viii. 213. 
A full meal is a great enemy both to study and industry, ibid. 
A worthy Physician will pay a regular and constant attendance
upon his patient, watching with his own eyes every change, and
every new symptom, of his malady, viii. 227. 
He will vary his applications as indications vary, ibid. 
He will not fetter himself to rules laid down by the fathers of
the art, who lived many hundred years ago, when diseases, and
the causes of them, as also the modes of living, and climates, and
accidents, were different from what they are now, ibid. 
He should not be greedy of fees; but proportion his expectation
of reward to the good in his conscience he thinks he does, ibid. 
[See Health. Vapours. 
Pity. Mercy.
Pity is a good preparative to Love, i. 12. 
We should shew Mercy or Lenity to unhappy persons, whose
calamities, in a like situation, might have been our own, i. 190. 
Disgraces brought on persons by themselves ought not to be pitied,
i. 222. 
In our attendances on a dying person, we pity him for what
he suffers; and we pity ourselves for what we must one day in
like manner suffer; and so are doubly affected, ii. 131. 
The Pity which a rash child often meets with, when she has 

brought upon herself an irreparable evil, should generally be
transferred to her parents and friends, iv. 78, 79. 
Pity from one often begets Pity from another, whether the occasion
for it be either strong or weak, iv. 141. 
God wants not any-thing of us for Himself. He enjoins us
works of mercy to one another, as the means to obtain His
mercy, vi. 98. 
The brave and the wise know both how to pity and excuse,
viii. 39. 
[See Generosity. Goodness. Magnanimity. 
Politeness. Travelling.
Politeness constrained, and not free, is to be suspected, i. 64. 
A person may not be polite, and yet not characteristically
unpolite, ii. 163. 
A manly sincerity, and openness of heart, are very consistent
with true Politeness, iii. 67. 
Politeness is, on the man's part, necessary to gain a footing in
a woman's heart: But Miss Howe questions, whether a little intermingled
insolence is not necessary to keep that footing, iii. 170. 
A man's morality is often the price paid for travelling accomplishments,
iv. 32. 
A polite man, respecting a Lady, will not treat contemptuously
any of her relations, iv. 337. 
Men of parts and fortune frequently behave as if they thought
they need not be gentlemen, v. 180. 
Men in years too often think their age a dispensation from Politeness,
vi. 84. 
Nothing can be polite, that is not just or good, vi. 294. 
[See Dress. 
Political Precepts.
A man who thinks highly of himself, and lowly of his audience,
is best qualified to speak in public, iv. 241. 
An administration is entitled to every vote a man can with a
good conscience give it, ibid. 
Drags should not needlesly be put to the wheels of government,
iv. 242. 
Neither can an opposition, neither can a ministry, be always
wrong, ibid. 
A plumb man must therefore mean more or worse than he will
own, ibid. 
The least trifles, says Lovelace, will set princes and children at
joggerheads, iv. 315. 
Poverty. Poor.
The Almighty is very gracious to his creatures, in that he
makes not much necessary to the support of life; since three 

parts in four of them, if it were, would not know how to obtain
that much, ii. 110. 
Poverty is the mother of health, ibid. 
The pleasures of the Mighty are obtain'd by the tears of the
Poor, ibid. 
The man who is used to Poverty, and can enjoy it, not aiming
to live better to-morrow than he does to-day, and did yesterday,
is above temptation, unless it comes cloathed to him in the guise
of truth and trust, Lovel. iii. 162. 
Were it not for the Poor, and the Middling, Lovelace says, the
world would deserve to be destroyed, iii. 321. 
Common or bred beggars should be left to the public provision, iv.
219. 
In the general scale of beings, the lowest is as useful, and as
much a link in the great chain, as the highest, viii. 198. 
Power. Independence.
Every one, more or less, loves Power, i. 124. 
Yet those, who most wish for it, are seldom the fittest to be
trusted with it, i. 124. vii. 358. 
An honest man will not wish to have it in his Power to do hurt,
iv. 357. 
Power is too apt to make men both wanton and wicked, iv.
357. v. 259. 
If our Power to do good is circumscribed, we shall have the
less to answer for, v. 51. 
People who have money, or Power, never want assistants, be
their views ever so wicked, vi. 15. 
Who that has it in his Power to gratify a predominant passion,
be it what it will, denies himself the gratification of it? Lovel. vii. 5. 
Both Sexes too much love to have each other in their Power,
vii. 358. 
Even women of sense, says Colonel Morden, on Miss Howe's behaviour
to Mr. Hickman, are not to be trusted with too much Power,
viii. 168. 
[See Controul. Prosperity. 
Praise. Dispraise. Applause. Blame.
Praise being the reward for good deeds, and Dispraise the punishment
for bad, they ought not to be confounded in the
application, ii. 13. 
An ingenuous mind will hasten to entitle itself to the graces for
which it is commended, if already it has them not, ii. 67. See
also i. 5. and vi. 131. 
How soothing a thing is Praise from the mouths of those we
love! ii. 67. 
Would every one give Praise and Dispraise only where due,
shame, if not principle, would mend the world, iii. 208. 

It is a degree of affectation to decline joining in the due Praise
of our own children, because they are our own, iv. 72. 
Those who are accustomed to Praise, will not be proud of it, ib. 
A person too fond of Praise is apt to be misled by it, iv. 196,
197. 
Those are generally most proud of Praise, who least deserve it,
iv. 246. 
Praise reproaches, when applied to the undeserving, iv. 278. 
Praise will beget an emulation in a generous mind to deserve,
or to continue to deserve it, vi. 131. 
Those who praise with warmth the laudable actions of another,
where they themselves are not benefited, may be supposed to have
a spirit like that which they applaud, viii. 170. See also ii. 66. 
Persons who find themselves heard with applause, ought to
take care that they do not, by engrossing the conversation, lose
the benefit of other peoples sentiments; and that they suffer not
themselves to be praised into loquaciousness, viii. 215. 
[See Censure. Generosity. Goodness. Merit. Virtue. 
Prejudice. Prepossession. Antipathy.
Early-begun Antipathies are not easily eradicated, i. 20. 
Those we dislike can do nothing to please us, i. 92. ii. 202. 
An extraordinary Antipathy in a young Lady to a particular
person, is generally owing to an extraordinary prepossession in
favour of another, i. 112. 
An eye favourable to a Lover, will not see his faults thro' a
magnifying glass, ii. 142. 
Prepossession in a Lover's favour will make a Lady impute to
ill-will and prejudice all that can be said against him, ibid. 
Old prejudices [tho' once seemingly removed] easily recur, iii. 52. 
To those we love not, says Lovelace, speaking of Mr. Hickman,
we can hardly allow the merit they should be granted, vi. 328. 
Prejudices in disfavour generally fix deeper than Prejudices in
favour, vii. 233. 
Whenever we approve, we can find an hundred reasons to
justify our approbation; and whenever we dislike, we can find a
thousand to justify our dislike, viii. 181. 
[See Love. Lover. 
Pride.
Pride, in people of birth and fortune, is not only mean, but
needless, i. 193. 
Distinction and quality may be prided in, by those to whom it
is a new thing, ibid. 
The contempt a proud great person brings on himself, is a
counterbalance for his greatness, ibid. 
It is sometimes easier to lay a proud man under obligation, than
to get him to acknowlege it, ii. 13. 

Pride ever must, and ever will, provoke contempt, ii. 13. 
There may be such an haughtiness in submission, as may entirely
invalidate the submission, ii. 162. 
A Person who distinguishes not, may think it the mark of a
great spirit to humour his Pride, even at the expence of his politeness,
ii. 163. 
It is to be feared there are more good and laudable actions owing
to Pride, than to Virtue, ii. 291. 
Pride and meanness are as nearly allied to each other, as the
poets tell us wit and madness are, ii. 314. 
Nothing more effectually brings down a proud spirit, than a
sense of lying under pecuniary obligations, iii. 121, 122. 
Pride, when it is native, will shew itself sometimes in the
midst of mortifications, iii. 177. 
Pride frequently eats up a man's prudence, iv. 27. 
Pride is an infallible sign of weakness, or something wrong,
either in the heart or head, or in both, iv. 28. 
It is possible for a person to be proud, in supposing she has no
Pride, iv. 196. 
We ought not to value ourselves on talents we give not to ourselves,
iv. 218. viii. 197. 
How contemptible is that Pride which stands upon diminutive
observances, and gives up the most important duties! iv. 219. 
Some women have from Pride, what others [more laudably]
have from principle. The Lord help the Sex, says Lovelace, if
they had not Pride! v. 257. 
Pride or Arrogance invites mortification, vi. 301. 
Haughty spirits, when they are convinced that they have carried
their resentments too high, frequently want but a good excuse
to condescend, vii. 301. 
Pride in man or woman is an extreme, that hardly fails, sooner
or later, to bring forth its mortifying contrary, vii. 399. 
Persons of accidental or shadowy merit may be proud; but inborn
worth must be always as much above conceit as arrogance,
viii. 197. 
There is but one pride pardonable; that of being above doing
a base or dishonourable action, viii. 198. See also i. 193. 
[See Humility. Insolence. Little Spirits. 
Procuress. Profligate Woman.
People at vile houses, by producing sometimes to their wicked
clients, wretches of pretended quality, cause people of degree
to be thought more profligate than they are, iv. 45, 46. 
Even a Lovelace refused to continue a commerce with profligate
women, tho' they were first ruin'd by himself, iv. 266. vi. 45. 
Men in bad company can think and say things that they cannot
say or think in better, Lovel. v. 267. 

Persons may be led into crimes by the infection of bad company,
which once they would have abhorred, vi. 24. 
A profligate woman is more terrible to her own Sex, than even
a bad man, vi. 37. 
If a married man, says Lovelace, gives himself up to the company
of wicked women, they will never let him rest, till he either
suspect or hate his wife, vi. 46. viii. 34. 
What can with-hold a jealous and already ruin'd woman?
vi. 47. 
Little knows the public what villainies are committed in the
houses of abandoned women, upon innocent creatures drawn into
their snares, vi. 248. 269. 
O Lovelace, says Belford, describing the profligate creatures at Sinclair's
in their morning dishabille, what company do we Rakes keep!
and for such company, what society renounce, or endeavour to
make like these! viii. 61. 
What woman, nice in her person, and of purity in her mind
and manners, did she know what miry wallowers the generality
of men of our class are themselves, and trough and sty with, but
would detest the thoughts of associating with such filthy sensualists,
whose favourite taste carries them to mingle with the dregs of stews,
brothels, and common-sewers! Belf. ibid. 
An high phrensy must be the only happiness that woman, in
her last hours, can know, who has acted the diabolical part of a
Procuress, viii. 63. 
[See Advice to Women. Guilt. Libertine. Lover, &c. 
Prosperity. Success. Riches.
Prosperity is the parent of impatience, i. 32. 
Those who want the fewest earthly blessings, most regret
that they want any, ibid. 
Riches are valuable, in that they put it in our power to confer
favours on the deserving, ii. 12. 
Success in unjustifiable devices often sets bad people above keeping
decent measures, ii. 203. 
In great Prosperity, as well as in great Calamity, we ought
to look into ourselves, and fear, ii. 245. 
Success has blown up, and undone many a man, iii. 118. 
Who is there that Wealth does not mislead? iii. 321. 
Prosperity sets up merit as a mark for envy to shoot its shafts
at, iv. 64. 
The greatly Prosperous bear controul and disappointments with
difficulty, iv. 218. 
Great acquirements are great snares, ibid. 
Those are generally most proud of Riches or Grandeur,
who were not born to either, iv. 246. 

Success in projects is every-thing. Those schemes will appear
foolish, even to the contriver of them, which are frustrated, and
render'd abortive, vi. 66. 
Prosperity and independence are much to be coveted, as they
give force to the counsels of a friendly heart, vi. 138. 
People may be too rich to be either considerate or contented,
vii. 326. 
A life of Prosperity is dangerous, in that it affords not the
trials which are necessary to wean a person from a world that such
will find too alluring, viii. 23. 
Providence.
What have we to do, but to chuse what is right, to be steady
in the pursuit of it, and leave the issue to Providence?
i. 128. 
It is more just to arraign ourselves, or our friends, than Providence,
iv. 60. 
The ways of Providence are unsearchable, viii. 29. 
Various are the means made use of by Providence to bring sinners
to a sense of their duty, ibid. 
Some are drawn by love, others are driven by terrors, to
that divine refuge, ibid. 
[See Insolence. Pride. 
Prudence. Wisdom. Discretion.
The trials of the Prudent are generally proportioned to their
Prudence, i. 3. 
Prudent persons will not put themselves in the power of a
servant's tongue, i. 88. 
Prudence will oblige a woman to forbear complaining, or
making an appeal, against her husband, i. 207. 
Deeds, not words, will be the only evidence to a prudent
person of a good intention, ii. 70. 170. 
A prudent woman, who is address'd by a man of suspected
virtue, tho' hopeful of the best, will always, in doubtful points,
be fearful of the worst, iii. 115. 
We are often fatally convinced of the vanity of mere human
Prudence, iv. 60. 
A prudent and good Person, who has been a little misled, will
do all in her power to recover, as soon as possible, her lost
path, iv. 61. 
To avoid the supposed disgrace of retractation, a prudent person
will be backward to give her opinion in company of persons
noted for their superior talents, iv. 62. 
A wise woman, despising the imputation of prudery on one
hand, and coquetry on the other, will form her conduct according
to what her own heart tells her of the fit and unfit, and 

look upon the opinion of the world as matter only of secondary consideration,
iv. 97. 
Prudent persons will not need to be convinced, by their own misfortunes,
of the truth of what common experience daily demonstrates,
vii. 74. 
Difficult situations are the tests of Prudence and Virtue, vii. 110. 
It is an happy art to know when one has said enough, viii. 215, 216. 
Prudent persons will always leave their hearers wishing them to
say more, rather than give them cause to shew, by their inattention and
uneasiness, that they have said too much, viii. 216. 
[See Advice to Women. Goodness. Generosity. Merit. Virtue. 
Purity.
Ladies who simper or smile, when they should resent the culpable
freedom of speech in a bold man, render questionable the
Purity of their hearts, iii. 332. 
Purity of manners is the distinguishing characteristic of women,
ibid. 
Words are the body and dress of thought, ibid. 
A pure mind ought not to wish a connexion with one impure, iv. 31. 
[See Goodness. Religion. Virtue. 
Rapes.
The Violation of a woman is a crime that a man can never
atone for; especially when it is the occasion of destroying good
habits, and corrupting the whole heart, v. 352. 
The smallest concession made by a woman, resenting an Outrage
actually made upon her honour, is as much to the purpose of the Violator
as the greatest, vi. 77. 
The woman who, from Modesty, declines prosecuting a brutal Ravisher,
and has his life in her hands, is answerable for all the mischiefs
he may do in future, vi. 183. 
Will it not be surmised, that such a woman is apprehensive that
some weakness will appear against herself, if she brought the man to
a tryal for his life? vi. 183, 184. 
[See Mrs. Howe's further arguments on this head, Vol. vi. p. 183, 184. 
And also Dr. Lewen's, Vol. vii. p. 208–211. And Clarissa's
Answers, Vol. vi. p. 188. and Vol. vii. p. 212–215. 
Indignities cannot be properly pardoned till we have it in our
power to punish them, vii. 210. 
Injuries that are not resented, or honourably complained of, will not
be believed properly to affect us, ibid. 
No truth is immodest, that is to be utter'd in the vindicated cause
of innocence and chastity, ibid. 
Little, very little difference is there between a suppressed evidence
and a false one, ibid. 
[See Libertine. 

Reflections on Women.
Designed principally to incite Caution, and inspire Prudence, &c. by
letting them know what Libertines and free Speakers say and think
of the Sex. 
For women to do and to love what they should not, is, according
to old Antony Harlowe, meat, drink, and vesture to them,
i. 219. 
The usefulness and expensiveness of modern women multiply Bachelors,
i. 220. 
There is a tragedy-pride in the hearts of young women, that will
make them risque every-thing to excite pity, James Harlowe, i. 263. 
Young creatures are often fond of a lover-like distress, Ja. Harl. ibid. 
Women-cowards love men of spirit, and delight in subjects of false
heroism, Miss Howe, ii. 9. 
Women, according to Miss Howe [some only she must mean] are
mere babies in matrimony; perverse fools, when too much indulged and
humour'd; creeping slaves, when treated with harshness, ii. 16. 
Women love to trade in surprizes, ii. 20. 
The man who can be sure of his wife's complaisance, tho' he has
not her love, will be more happy than nine parts in ten of his married
acquaintance, says Solmes, ii. 62. 
If love and fear must be separated in matrimony, the man who
makes himself feared, fares best, Solmes, ii. 63. See also i. 280. 
Women always prefer blustering men: They only wish to direct the
bluster, and make it roar when and at whom they please, Miss Howe,
ii. 129. 
Women, where they favour, will make the slightest, and even but
a fansy'd merit, excuse the most glaring vice, ii. 142. 
Women who have the rougher manners of men, may be said to
have the souls of men, and the bodies of women, ii. 201, 202. 
Women love to engage in knight-errantry themselves, as well as to
encourage it in men, ii. 242. 
A Rake, says Lovelace, has no reason to be an hypocrite, when he
has found his views better answered by his being known to be a Rake,
iii. 56. 320. 
How greedily do the Sex swallow praise! Lovel. iii. 61. 
Lovelace calls upon the Female Sex to account for the preference
given by many modest women, as they are accounted, to a Rake, when
the most impudent of Rakes, says be, love modesty in a woman, iii. 106. 
It concerns every woman, instructively says Lovelace, to prove by
her actions, that this preference is not owing to a likeness in nature, ib. 
There is, Lovelace says, such a perverseness in the Sex, that when
they ask your advice, they do it only to know your opinion, that they
may oppose it, iii. 120. 167. 
Women, says Lovelace, love to be called cruel, even when they are
kindest, iii. 168. 
The best of the Sex, says Lovelace, wish to have the credit of
reforming a Rake; and so draw themselves in with a very little of
our help, iii. 320. 

Rakes and Libertines are the men, Miss Howe says, that women do
not naturally dislike, iv. 113. 
Opposition and contradiction give vigour to female spirits of a warm
and romantic turn, iv. 183. 
Women love Rakes, says Lovelace, because Rakes know how to
direct their uncertain wills, and to manage them, iv. 249. 
Nothing on earth is so perverse as a woman, when she is set upon carrying
a point, and has a meek man, or one who loves his peace, to deal
with, Lovel. iv. 335. 
Had I found that a character for virtue had been generally necessary
to recommend me to the Sex, I would, says Lovelace, have had a
greater regard to my morals than I have had, iv. 361. 
When you would have a woman report a piece of intelligence,
says Lovelace, you must enjoin her to keep it as a secret, v. 80. 
Women love to have their Sex, and their favours, appear of importance
to men, Lovel. v. 109. 
Most of the fair Romancers have, in their early womanhood, chosen
Love-names, says Lovelace, v. 110. 
Many a sweet dear, adds he, has answered me a Letter, for the sake
of owning a name which her godmother never gave her, ibid. 
An innocent woman, Lovelace says, who has been little in the
world, knows not what strange stories every woman living, who has had
the least independence of will, could tell her, v. 117. 
The whole Sex love plotting, and plotters too, says Lovelace, v. 120. 
Women like not novices, Lovel. v. 137. 
They are pleased with a love of the Sex that is founded in the knowlege
of it—Reason good—[He proceeds to give the reasons in the
same style, very little to the credit of the Sex] v. 137, 138. 
Women are the greatest triflers in the creation, rudely says Lovelace,
yet fansy themselves the most important beings in it! v. 168. 
These tender doves, says Lovelace, speaking of young Ladies, know
not, till put to it, what they can bear, especially when engag'd in love-affairs,
v. 170. 
The Sex love busy scenes, Lovel. ibid. 
A woman will create a storm, rather than be without one, Lovel.
ibid. 
Most unhappy is the Woman, who is obliged to live in tumults,
which she neither raised, nor can controul, ibid. 
Women are used to cry without grief, and to laugh without reason,
Lovel. v. 176. 
Any woman, says Lovelace, could I make good; because I could
make her fear me, as well as love me, v. 220, 221. 
All women are born to intrigue, and practise it more or less,
Lovel. v. 244. 
In love-affairs women are naturally expert, and much more quick-witted,
than men, Lovel. ibid. 
Friendship in women, when a man comes in between the pair of
friends, is given up, like their music, and other maidenly amusements,
Lovel. v. 254. 
The mother who would wish her daughter to have one man,
would sometimes better succeed, if she proposed another, Lovel. v.
254, 255. 

It is a common fault of the Sex, according to Lovelace, to aim at
being young too long, v. 279. 
Secrets of love, and secrets of intrigue, Lovelace says, are the strongest
cements of womens friendships, v. 318. 
All women, says Lovelace, are cowards at heart: They are only
violent where they may, vi. 83. 
Women, says Lovelace, love those best (whether men, women, or
children) who give them most pain, vi. 281. 
Girls who are never out of temper but with reason, when that is
given them, hardly ever pardon, or afford another opportunity of offending,
Lovel. vi. 311. 
Vestals, says Lovelace, have been often warmed by their own fires,
vi. 337. 
Revenge and obstinacy will make the best of women do very unaccountable
things, Lovel. vi. 339. 
Women, rather than not put out both the eyes of a man they are
mortally offended with, will put out one of their own, Lovel. ibid. 
Vile men owe much of their vileness even to women of character,
who hardly ever scruple to accompany and converse with them,
tho' they have been guilty of ever so much baseness to others, vi.
414, 415. 
Women being generally modest and bashful themselves, are too
apt to consider that quality in the men, which is their own principal
grace, as a defect; and finely do they judge, when they
think of supplying that defect by chusing a man that cannot be
ashamed! vi. 415. 
Ladies, Lovelace hints, often give denials, only to be persuaded to
comply, in order to reconcile themselves to themselves, vii. 10. 
No woman is homely in her own opinion, vii. 140. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Love. Libertine. Marriage.
Men and Women. 
Reformation. Conviction. Conversion.
A man can hardly be expected to reform, who resolves not to
quit the evil company he has been accustomed to delight in,
i. 234. 
Pretences to instantaneous Convictions are to be suspected, i. 245. 
Conviction is half way to amendment, i. 270. 
To reform by an enemy's malevolence, is the noblest revenge in
the world, i. 275. 
Very few convictions arise from vehement debatings, ii. 75. 
The first step to Reformation is to subdue sudden gusts of passion,
and to be patient under disappointment, ii. 120. 
The most abandon'd of Libertines generally mean one day to reform,
iii. 111, 112. [Should they not therefore, even as Libertines,
resolve against atrocious guilt, were it but to make their future compunction
less pungent? 
Reformation cannot be a sudden work, iii. 112. 124. 
There is more hope of the Reformation of a man of sense, than of
a fool, iii. 126. See also i. 272. 
[But this is a delusive hope, and has been the cause of great mischief; 

for who thinks not the man she loves a man of sense? 
The observations that follow are more the truth, and deserve
to be well considered. 
A man who errs with his eyes open, and against conviction, is
the worse for what he knows, iii. 151. 
The man of parts and abilities, who engages in a baseness, knowing
it to be so, is less likely to be reclaimed, than one who errs from
want of knowlege, or due conviction, vi. 125. 
Women think, that the reclaiming of a man from bad habits, as
Lovelace-himself observes, is a much easier task than in the nature of
things it can be, vi. 211. 
[For Mr. Belford's scheme of Reformation, see Vol. viii. p. 138–141. 
Little hope can there be of reclaiming a man, who is vile from
premeditation, vi. 376. 
To what a bad choice is many a worthy woman betray'd, by that
false and inconsiderate notion, raised and propagated no doubt by the
author of all delusion, That a reformed Rake makes the best Husband! 
Belf. viii. 61. 
Little do innocents think what a total revolution of manners, what
a change of fixed habits, nay, what a conquest of a bad nature, and
what a portion of divine grace, is required to make a profligate man
a good husband, a worthy father, and a true friend, from Principle,
viii. 62. 
It is an high degree of presumption for a woman to suppose her own
virtue so secure, as that she may marry a profligate in hopes to reclaim
him, viii. 125. 
The sincerity of that man's Reformation is hardly to be doubted,
who can patiently bear being reminded of his past follies, and when
he can occasionally express an abhorrence of them, viii. 175. 
[See Goodness. Religion. Repentance. 
Religion. Piety. Devotion. Sabbath.
A good man will not easily be put out of countenance [by scoffers],
when the cause of Virtue and Religion is to be vindicated,
ii. 18. 
There are men who think themselves too wise to be religious,
ii. 196. 
There is something beautifully solemn in Devotion, says even Lovelace,
iii. 324. 
The Sabbath, says he, is a most excellent institution to keep the
heart right, ibid. 
It is a fine sight, adds he, to see multitudes of well-appearing
people all joining in one reverent act! an exercise how worthy of a
rational being! ibid. 
If, as religion teaches us, we shall be judged, in a great measure,
by our benevolent or evil actions to one another, what must be the
condemnation of those who have wilfully perpetrated acts of the
most atrocious violence upon their innocent fellow-creatures? v. 306. 
Libertines are generally for making a Religion to their practices; a
wickedness which nevertheless Lovelace disclaims, vi. 223. 

Religion will teach us to bear inevitable evils with patience,
vi. 309. 
Altho' I wish not for life, says Clarissa, yet would I not, like
a poor coward, desert my post, when I can maintain it, and when it is
my duty to maintain it, vi. 377, 378. 
I will do every thing I can, continues she, to preserve my life, till
God, in mercy to me, shall be pleased to call for it, vi. 378. 
Religious considerations, timely enforced, will prevent the heart
from being seized with violent and fatal grief, vi. 379. 
Disappointments may bring on an indifference to this life; but a
truly pious resignation to death requires a better and deeper root,
vi. 385. 
Enthusiasts often depreciate the Scriptures they mean to extol, by
abused and indiscriminate applications, vii. 7. 
Even a Lovelace disclaims, as ill-manners, jesting upon Religion,
or religious men, vii. 10. 
A person of innate piety cannot think of shortening her own life
(whatever her calamities may be) even by neglect, much less by violence,
vii. 14. 
Our best prayer in affliction, in doubtful or critical situations, is,
That God's will may be done, and that we may be resigned to it,
vii. 30. 
Religion is the only refuge of an heart labouring under heavy and
unmerited calamities, vii. 93. 
Religion enjoins us not only to forgive injuries, but to return good
for evil; and Clarissa blesses God for enabling her to obey its dictates,
vii. 98. 
Persons of Piety cannot permit resentment, passion, or anger, to
appear, or have place, in the last disposition of their secular affairs,
vii. 335. 
God will have no rivals in the hearts which he sanctifies, vii. 371. 
Persons of Education and Piety will distinguish themselves as such,
even in their anger, viii. 19. 
It is a great mistake to imagine, that Piety is not intirely consistent
with good-nature and good-manners, viii. 188. 
Religion, if it has taken proper hold of the heart, is, says Lovelace,
the most chearful countenance-maker in the world, ibid. 
Sourness and moroseness indicate but a noviceship in Piety or Goodness,
Lovel. ibid. 
[See Goodness. Virtue. 
Remorse.
The troubles of the injured are generally at an end, when the
injury is committed; but when the punishment of the injurer
will be over, who can tell! Lovel. v. 343, 344. 
How often, says Lovelace, do we end in occasions for the deepest
Remorse, what we began in wantonness! v. 351. 
The Remorse that is brought on merely by disappointment cannot be
lasting, vi. 77. 
Nothing, says Lovelace, but the excruciating pangs which the condemned
soul feels at its entrance into the eternity of the torments we 

are taught to fear, can exceed what I now feel, and have felt for this
week past, vii. 375. 
What a dreadful thing is after-reflection upon a perverse and unnatural
conduct! viii. 68. 
Heavy must be the reflections of those, who, on the loss of a
worthy friend, have acts of unmerited unkindness to that friend to
reproach themselves with, viii. 89. 
Repentance. Contrition.
What is it that men propose, who put off Repentance and Amendment,
but to live to sense, as long as sense can relish, and
to reform when they can sin no longer? iii. 246. 
That Contrition for a guilt, under which the guilty, till detected,
was easy, is generally to be ascribed to the detection, and not to a due
sense of the heinousness of the guilt, vi. 58. 
Repentance, I have a notion, says Lovelace, should be set about
while a man is in good health and spirits, vi. 315. 
What is a man fit for [not a new work, surely!] when he is
not himself, nor master of his faculties? Lovel. ibid. 
Hence, as I apprehend, it is, that a death-bed repentance is supposed
to be such a precarious and ineffectual thing, Lovel. ibid. 
As to myself, proceeds he, I hope I have a great deal of time before
me, since I intend one day to be a reformed man, vi. 316. 
Lovelace lived not to repent!
I have very serious reflections now-and-then; yet am I afraid of
what I was once told, that a man cannot repent when he will–––Not
to hold it, I suppose is meant–––I have repented by fits and starts a
thousand times, Lovel. ibid. 
Laugh at me, if thou wilt, says Belford, but never, never more will
I take the liberties I have done; but whenever I am tempted, think
of Belton's dying agonies, and what my own may be, vii. 192. 
The most hopeful time for Repentance is when the health is sound,
when the intellects are untouched, and while it is in a person's power
to make some reparation to the injured or misled, vii. 194. See also
iii. 114. 
Reparation should always follow Repentance, vii. 263. 
That Repentance, which precedes the suffering that follows a wrong
step, must generally be well-grounded and happy, viii. 28. 
Repentance, to such as have lived only carelesly, and in the omission
of their regular duties, is not so easy a task, nor so much in
their power, as some imagine, viii. 124. See also v. 351. 
No false colouring, no glosses, does a truly penitent man aim at,
viii. 148. 
See Remorse. Religion. 
Reprehension. Reproof. Correction.
The Reproof that favours more of the cautioning friend, than
of the satirizing observer, always calls for gratitude, i. 258. 
Reproofs, to be efficacious, should be mild, gentle, and unreproaching,
iii. 89. 

How much more eligible is it to be corrected by a real friend,
than, by continuing either blind or wilful, to expose one's self to
the censure of an envious and perhaps malignant world! iii. 206. 
The correction that is unseasonably given, is more likely to harden,
or make an hypocrite, than to reclaim, iii. 240, 241. 
A bad man reprehends a bad man with a very ill grace, iv. 359.
vi. 38. 
Persons reprehending others should take care that, altho' they may
not be guilty of the faults they condemn, they are not guilty of others
as great, iv. 361. 
The benevolence of our purpose should be very apparently seen in all
our Reprehensions, viii. 207. 
See Censure. 
Reputation.
The man who is careless of his Reputation, must be so either
from an abandon'd nature, or from a consciousness that he deserves
not the world's good opinion, i. 69. 
It is just that a man should bear to be evil-spoken of who sets no
value upon his Reputation, i. 249. 
The man who has been always chary of his Reputation, has an excellent
Security to give to a woman for his good behaviour to her,
iv. 34. 
[See Men and Women. 
Resentment.
Persons who have carried their resentments too high, are not easily
brought to retract or forgive, i. 27. 
If an injury be not wilfully done, or avow'd to be so, there can be
no room for lasting Resentment, ii. 60. 
The man who would resent as the highest indignity the imputation
of a wilful falshood, ought surely to be above the guilt of one, ii. 80. 
The presence even of a disliked person takes off the edge of Resentments,
which absence frequently whets and makes keen, ii. 107. 
Women who, when treated with indecency, have nothing to reproach
themselves with, may properly resent, vi. 219. 
Resentment and revenge ought ever to be separated, vi. 288. 
That Resentment which is express'd with calmness, and without
passion, is most likely to last, vi. 349. 
Passion refuses the aid of expression sometimes, where the Resentment
prima facie declares expression to be needless, viii. 161. 
[See Anger. Passion. Revenge. 
Respect. Reverence.
Persons who deserve Respect will meet with it, without needing to
require it, i. 193. 
Persons who would exact Respect by an haughty behaviour, give a
proof that they mistrust their own merit; and seem to confess that
they know their actions will not attract it, ibid. 
Familiarity destroys Reverence; but not with the prudent, the grateful,
and the generous, ii. 163. 

Persons in years expect the Reverence due to their years; yet many
of them (having not merit) are ashamed of the years which can only
intitle them to Reverence, ii. 176. 
A studied Respectfulness or complaisance, is always to be suspected,
iii. 289. 297. vi. 84. See also iii. 24. 
Even a wicked man will revere a woman that will withstand
his lewd attempts, v. 200. 
It shall ever be a rule with me, says Miss Howe, that he that does
not regard a woman with some degree of Reverence, will look upon
her, and sometimes treat her, with contempt, vi. 416. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Love. Men and Women. 
Revenge.
Revenge grafted upon disappointed Love, is generally the most violent
of all our passions, i. 88. 
The highest Revenge a low female spirit can take, is to prevent her
rival's having the man she loves, and procuring her to be obliged to
marry the man she hates, i. 88, 89. 
Even the ties of relationship, in such a case, lose all their force,
i. 89. 
Revenge will not wipe off guilt, i. 275. 
What Revenge can be more effectual and more noble, than a generous
and well distinguished forgiveness? viii. 116. 
[See Resentment. 
Satire.
True Satire must be founded in good-nature, and directed by
a right heart, ii. 146. 
When Satire is personal, and aims to expose rather than to amend
the subject of it; how, tho' it were to be just, could it be useful?
ii. 146. vi. 135. 
Friendly Satire may be compared to a fine lancet, which gently
breathes a vein for health-sake; the malevolent Satire to a broad sword,
which lets into the gashes it makes, the air of public ridicule, ii. 246. 
[See Anger. Passion. Resentment. 
Secrets. Curiosity.
Nothing flies faster than a whisper'd scandal, v. 35. 
Listeners are generally conscious of demerit, v. 116. 
It becomes not a modest man to pry into those secrets which a modest
man cannot reveal, v. 142. 
People who mean well, need not affect Secrets, v. 171. 
Few people who are fond of prying into the Secrets of others, are
fit to be trusted, v. 200. 
Over-curious people will whisper a Secret about, till it become public,
in the pride of shewing either their consequence or sagacity, ibid. 
Health and spirits (but not discretion or decency) allow busy people
to look out of themselves into the affairs of others, vi. 202. 
Secrets to the prejudice of the innocent ought not to be kept, vi.
298. 301. 

There may be occasions, where a breach of confidence is more excuseable
than to keep the Secret, Lovel. viii. 150. See also vi. 298. 301. 
I believe I should have kill'd thee at the time if I could, says Lovelace
to Belford, hadst thou betray'd me to my Fair-one: But I
am sure now that I would have thank'd thee for preventing my baseness
to her, and thought thee more a father and a friend than my
real father and best friend, viii. 150. 
[See Observations General. 
Self. Self-interest. Selfishness.
What is the narrow Selfishness that reigns in us, but relationship
remember'd against relationship forgot? i. 46. 
Self-Interest and Ambition too often cut asunder the bonds of relationly
love, i. 84. 
It is in the power of the slightest accident to blow up and destroy the
long-reaching views of the Selfish, ibid. 
A man's own interest or convenience is a poor plea, if there be
no better, on which to found expectations of favour from another,
i. 215. 
The address which is persisted in against the undoubted inclination
of the beloved object, is too selfish to be encouraged, i. 227. 
What a low selfish creature must that child be, who is to be
rein'd-in only by the hope of what a parent can, or will, do for
her! ii. 71. 
The selfish heart never wants an excuse for not doing the good
it has no inclination to do, ii. 239. 
It is very low and selfish to form our judgments of the general
merits of others, as they are kind or reserved to ourselves, ii. 295. 
There must be great Selfishness and meanness in the love of a man,
who can wish a young creature to sacrifice her duty and conscience to
oblige him, iii. 10–205. 
The man who has no other plea for a woman's favour but that of
his loving her, builds only on a compliment made to her Self-love by
his own Selfishness, iii. 239. 
To serve one's self, and punish a villain at the same time, is serving
both public and private, Lovel. iv. 44. 
Self-love will most probably give those who advise with us on their
most intimate concerns, an interest in our hearts whether they deserve
it or not, iv. 140. 
Self is a grand misleader, iv. 197. 
That man, or even that body of men, who prefer their private interest
to the public, are sorry members of society, v. 272. 
Self is an odious devil, that reconciles to some people the most cruel
and dishonest actions, vi. 395. 
[See Covetousness. Partiality. 
Sensuality.
The less of soul there is in man or woman, the more sensual
are they, iv. 348. 
Love gratified is love satisfied, and love satisfied is indifference begun,
Belf. ibid. 

This deified passion in its greatest altitude is not fitted to stand the
day, iv. 348. 
Shall such a sneaking passion as sensual love be permitted to debase
the noblest! ibid. 
[See Love. Lovers. 
Sickness. Infirmities.
Great allowances ought to be made for the petulance of persons
labouring under ill-health, i. 180. 
When peoples minds are weakened by a sense of their own infirmities,
they will be moved on the slightest occasions, vi. 217. 
A sick person, tho' hopeless of recovery, should try every means
that is properly prescribed to her for the satisfaction of her friends, both
present and absent, vi. 303. 305. 
Sickness palls every appetite, and makes us loath what we once
lov'd, vi. 359. 
When sickness comes, free livers look round them, and upon one
another, like frighted birds at the sight of a kite just ready to souse
upon them, vi. 389. 
Sickness enervates the mind as well as the body, vii. 179. 
A long tedious sickness, says Lovelace, will make a bugbear of any-thing
to a languishing heart, vii. 181. 
An active mind, tho' clouded by bodily illness, cannot be idle,
vii. 235. 
Travelling is undoubtedly the best physic for all those disorders which
owe their rise to grief or disappointment, vii. 359. 
See Adversity. Health. Physic. Repentance. Vapours. 
Suspicion. Doubt. Jealousy.
A person who labours hard to clear herself of a fault she is not
charged with, renders herself suspectable, i. 123, 124. 
Persons who have been dipt in love themselves, are the readiest to
suspect others, i. 257. iii. 87. 
Suspicion, Watchfulness, Scolding, Miss Howe says, will not prevent
a daughter's writing, or doing any-thing she has a mind to do,
iii. 41. 
When we doubt of a person's sincerity, we should observe whether
his aspect and his words agree, iii. III. 
Where Doubts of any person are removed, a mind not ungenerous
will endeavour to make the suspected person double amends, iii. 306. 
Jealousy in woman is not to be concealed from woman, if both
are present, and in love with the same man, iii. 309. 
Constitutional Jealousy preys not on the health, iv. 48. 
Jealousy in a woman accounts for a thousand seemingly unaccountable
actions, Lovel. v. 98. 
[See Apprehension. Love. Parents and Children. 

Tears.
Beauty in Tears, is beauty heighten'd, Lovel. iv. 19. 
Anatomists, says the hard-hearted Lovelace, will allow that
women have more watry heads than men, vi. 31. 
Nothing dries sooner than Tears, Lovel. vi. 265. 
The man is to be honour'd who can weep for the distresses of others; 
and can such an one be insensible to his own? vii. 159, 160. 
Tears ease the overcharged heart, which, but for that kindly and natural
relief, would burst, vii. 160. 
Tears are the prerogative of a man, ibid. 
It cannot be a weakness to be touch'd at great and concerning events,
in which our humanity is concern'd, ibid. 
[See Beauty. Cruelty. Eyes. Heart. 
Theory.
Knowlege by Theory, is a vague uncertain light, which as often
misleads the doubting mind as puts it right, v. 115. 
The knowlege that is obtained by Theory without experience, generally
fails the person who trusts to it, v. 317. 
Theory and practice must be the same with a truly worthy person,
vii. 22. 
Thoughtfulness. Sensibility.
A thoughtful mind is not a blessing to be coveted, unless it has such
an happy vivacity join'd with it as may enable a person to enjoy
the present, without being over-anxious about the future, ii. 181. 
A thoughtful woman, who has given her lover an undue power
over her, will be apt to behold him with fear, and look upon herself
with contempt, iii. 25. 
The difference which such a one will find in the looks and behaviour
of her lover, will very soon convince her of her error, ibid. 
The finer Sensibilities make not happy, iii. 254. 
Some people are as sensible of a scratch from a pin, as others are from
a push of a sword, vii. 180. 
[See Heart. 
Tyranny.
It is an high act of Tyranny, to insist upon obedience to an unreasonable
command, iii. 193. 
Tyranny in all shapes is odious; but Fathers and Mothers who are
Tyrants can have no bowels, iv. 71. 
The woman who beforehand behaves to a man with Tyranny, will
make a poor figure in a man's eyes afterwards, Mrs. Howe, iv. 171. 
Call Tyranny an ungenerous pleasure, if thou wilt, says Lovelace: 
Softer hearts than mine have known it. Women to a woman
know it, and shew it too, whenever they are trusted with power,
v. 115. 
[See Husband and Wife. Parents and Children. Reflections
on Women. 

Vanity. Conceit. Affectation.
A vain man will be apt to construe to his advantage any particularity
shewn him by a Lady, mean by it what she will, i. 17. 19. 
The person who is vain of exterior advantages, gives cause to doubt
his interior, i. 193. 256. 
The outside of a vain man generally runs away with him, i. 278. 
Some persons are not able to forego the ostentation of sagacity, tho'
they sacrifice to it the tenderness due to friendship and charity, ii. 289. 
Men who have a Conceit of their own volubility, love to find ears
to exert their talents upon, iii. 66. 
Men of parts may, perhaps, think they have a privilege to be vain; 
yet they have the least occasion of any to be so, since the world is ready
to find them out and extol them, iii. 117. 
The man who is disposed immoderately to exalt himself, must despise
every-body else in proportion, iii. 185. 
The man who in conversation takes, knowingly, the wrong side of
an argument, shews Vanity in the high compliment he pays to his own
abilities, ibid. 
Men vain of their learning and acquirements, parading with one
another before the other Sex, may probably have women present, who,
tho' sitting in smiling silence, may rather despise than admire them,
iii. 336. 
The man who wants to be thought wiser, or better, or abler, than
he is, does but provoke a scrutiny into his pretensions, which seldom
ends to his advantage, iv. 28. 
He that exalts himself insults his neighbours, who are then provoked
to question even the merit, which otherwise might have been
allow'd to be his due, ibid. 
A too great consciousness of superiority often brings on contempt,
iv. 60. 
Old bachelors, when they like a woman, frequently think they have
nothing to do but to persuade themselves to marry, iv. 83. 
Affectation will make a woman seem not to understand indecent freedoms
of speech in men; but modesty, if the freedoms are gross, will
make her resent them, iv. 224. 
It is generally the conscious overfulness of Vanity or Conceit that
makes the vain man most upon his guard to conceal his Vanity, Lovel.
v. 137. 
Opinionative women are in danger, when they meet with a man
who will magnify their wisdom in order to take advantage of their folly,
Lovel. v. 317. 
Self-sufficiency makes a weak person the fittest of all others for the
artful and designing to work upon, vi. 193. 
An open-mouth'd Affectation to shew white teeth, Lovelace considers
as an invitation to amorous familiarity, vi. 201. 
The darkest and most contemptible ignorance, is that of not knowing
one's self; and that all we have, and all we excel in, is the gift of
God, viii. 197. 
[See Heart. Human Nature. Men and Women. 

Vapours.
Vapourish people are perpetual subjects for physicians to work
upon, Lovel. iv. 228. 
Low-spirited people are the physical tribe's milch cows, Lovel. ibid. 
Vapourish people draw out tearful bills of indictment against themselves,
Lovel. ibid. 
If persons of low spirits have not real unhappiness, they can make
it even from the overflowings of their good fortune, v. 147. vii. 339. 
The mind will at any time run away with the body, vi. 396. 
The mind that busies itself to make the worst of every disagreeable
occurrence, will never want woe, vii. 297. 
The distempers we make to ourselves, and which it is in our power
to lessen, ought to be our punishment if we do not lessen them, vii.
339. 
[See Health. Physic. 
Veracity. Truth.
Those persons have profited little by a long course of heavy
afflictions, who will purchase their relief from them at the expence
of their Veracity, iv. 300. 
It is presumed, that no man ever ruined a woman but at the expence
of his Veracity, iv. 358. 
A departure from truth was hardly ever known to be a single departure,
v. 100. 
Were I to live a thousand years, says Clarissa, I would always suspect
the Veracity of a swearer, vi. 284. 
How glorious is it for a child to be able to say with Clarissa, that she
never, to the best of her knowlege, told her mother a wilful untruth!
vii. 77. 
I never lyed to man, says Lovelace, and hardly ever said Truth to
Woman: The first is what all free livers cannot say; the second, what
every Rake can, viii. 135. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Love. Lover. Vows. 
Violent Spirits.
Vehement and obstinate Spirits, by tiring out opposition, will
make themselves of importance, i. 31. 
People who allow nothing, will be granted nothing, i. 59. 
Those who aim to carry too many points, will not be able to carry
any, ibid. 
We are too apt to make allowances for such tempers as early indulgence
has made uncontroulable, ii. 140. 
If a boisterous Spirit, when it is under obligation, is to be allowed
for, what, were the tables to be turn'd, would it not expect? ibid. 
Too great allowances made for an impetuous Spirit, are neither happy
for the person, nor for those who have to deal with him, ibid. 
Providence often makes hostile Spirits their own punishers, ii. 238. 
While a gentle Spirit will suffer from a base world, a violent one
keeps imposition at distance, iii. 208. 
Imposing Spirits and forward Spirits have a great advantage over courteous
ones, iii. 284. 

Violent Spirits provoked, will quarrel with the first they meet, iii.
342. iv. 51. 
Violent Spirits want some great sickness or heavy misfortune to befall
them, to bring them to a knowledge of themselves, vii. 357. 
The man who is violent in his resentments, when he thinks himself
right, would oftener be so, but for that violence, viii. 26. 
He is guilty of great injustice, who is more apt to give contradiction
than able to bear it, viii. 27. 
Impetuosity of temper generally brings on abasement, ibid. 
[See Anger. Insolence. Passion. Pride. Prosperity. Resentment.
Revenge. 
Virtue. Virtuous. Principle.
What a mind must that be, which, tho' not virtuous
itself, admires not virtue in another! i. 197. 
No woman can be lovely that is not virtuous, ii. 157. 
If persons pretending to Principle bear not their testimony against unprincipled
actions, what check can they have? ii. 163. 
In a general corruption a stand must be made by somebody, or Virtue
will be lost: And shall it not be I, will a worthy mind ask, who
shall make this stand? ii. 165. 
Provocations and temptations are the test of Virtue, iii. 85. 
Honours next to divine are due to a woman whose Virtue is superior
to trial or temptation, iii. 89. 
Lively women seldom know the worth of a virtuous man, iii. 130. 
Sound Principles, and a good heart, are the only bases on which the
hopes of an happy future, with respect to both worlds, can be built,
iv. 106. 
The Virtue of a woman tried, and approved, procures for her not
only general respect, but an higher degree of love when proved, even
from the tempter, vi. 67. 
A virtuous woman will conquer her affection for a man who is capable
of insulting her modesty, vi. 97. 
What virtuous woman can submit to make that man her choice,
whose actions were and ought to be her abhorrence? vi. 375. 
[See Generosity. Goodness. Innocence. Merit. Magnanimity.
Modesty. Prudence. Purity. 
Vivacity.
Persons of active spirits, and a pleasurable turn, seldom take pains to
improve themselves, i. 67. 
Lively talents are oftener snares than advantages, i. 194. 
That is an happy Vivacity which enables a person to enjoy the present,
without being anxious about the future, ii. 181. 
Persons of Vivacity do not always content themselves with saying
what they think may be said; but, to shew their penetration or sagacity,
will indulge themselves in saying all that can be said on a subject,
ii. 295, 296. 
It is difficult for persons of lively dispositions so to behave, as to avoid
censure, vi. 159. 

It is impossible to share the delights which very lively spirits give,
without partaking of the inconveniencies that will attend their volatility,
vi. 384. 
Vows. Curses. Oaths. Promises. Protestations.
A promise ought not to preclude better consideration, ii. 299. 
What must be that man who would be angry at a woman,
whom he hopes one day to call his wife, for dispensing with a rash Promise
when she is convinced it was rash? ibid 
The Vows of a maiden may be dispensed with by her Father when
he hears them, Num. xxx. 3, 4, 5. ibid. 
In like manner the Vows of a wife may be dispensed with by her
Husband, ibid. 
Could the Curser punish as he speaks, he would be a fiend, iii. 21. 
The Almighty gives not his assent to rash and inhuman Curses,
iii. 260. 
To pray for those that curse us, is to perform a duty, and thereby
to turn a Curse into a blessing, iii. 261. 
The man that is very ready to promise, is seldom equally ready to
perform, iii. 295. 
It is a shame for grown persons to have frequent need to make promises
of amendment, iv. 90. 
The most immaculate Virtue is not safe with a man who has no regard
to his own honour, and makes a jest of the most solemn Vows
and Protestations, iv. 117. 
One continued string of Oaths, Vows and Protestations, varied only
by time and place, fill the mouth of a libertine, vi. 35. 
Men, who gain their dishonourable ends by perjuries, no less profane
and defy heaven, than deceive and injure their fellow-creatures,
vi. 177. 
The man who binds his Promises by Oaths, indirectly confesses that
his word is not to be taken, vi. 284. See also ii. 70. 
It is likely, that he who makes free with his God, will scruple any-thing
that may serve his turn with his fellow-creatures? vi. 284. 
The assertions of a libertine, who is not allow'd to swear to what
he avers, will lose their principal force, Lovel. vii. 6. 
Those men who are most ready to resent the Lye given them by a
man, least scruple generally to break the most solemn Oath to a woman,
vii. 268. 270. 
[See Advice to Women. Courtship. Libertine. Love. Lover.
Veracity. 
Widow.
It is ill trusting to the discretion of a Widow, whose fortune is in
her own hands, iv. 157. 
That Widow is far engaged, who will quarrel with her child for
treating with freedom the man who courts herself, iv. 167. 
A Widow's refusal of a lover is seldom so explicit as to exclude
hope, iv. 170. 
The Widow who wants nothing but superfluities, is easily attracted
by those gewgaws that are rare to be met with, ibid. 

Widows should be particularly careful, with whom they trust themselves
at public entertainments and parties of pleasure, v. 316, 317. 
To be a Widow in the first twelve months is, Lovelace says, one of
the greatest felicities that can befal a fine woman, vii. 117. 
[See Reflections on Women. 
Wills. Testators. Executors, &c.
No one, that can avoid it, should involve an Executor in a Lawsuit,
vii. 48. 
It ought to be a Testator's study, to make his Executors work as
light as possible, vii. 205. viii. 109. 
Survivors cannot more charitably bestow their time, than in a faithful
performance of Executorship, viii. 94. 
This last act ought not to be the last in composition or making, but
should be the result of cool deliberation; and is more frequently than
justly said, of a sound mind and memory; which too seldom are to
be met with but in sound health, viii. 96. 194. 
When a Testator gives his reasons in his last Testament for what he
wills, all cavils about words are obviated; the obliged are assured, and
those enjoy the benefit for whom the benefit was intended, viii.
96. 172. 
I have for some time past, says Clarissa, employ'd myself in putting
down heads of my last Testament, which, as reasons offer'd, I have
alter'd and added to; so that I never was absolutely destitute of a Will,
had I been taken off ever so suddenly, viii. 96. 
The first reading of a Will, where a person dies worth any-thing
considerable, generally affords a true test of the relations love to the deceased,
viii. 115. 
Of all last Wills, those of monarchs are generally least regarded,
viii. 117. 
What but a fear of death (a fear, unworthy of a creature who
knows that he must one day as surely die as he was born) can hinder
any one from making his last Will while he is in health? viii. 172. 
Persons, in making their last Wills, should consider the pleasure as
well as the ease of their Executors, and not put a generous man upon
doing what would give him pain, viii. 193. 
Wit. Talents. Conversation.
There is no glory in being proud of Talents, for the abuse of
which a man is answerable, and in the right use of which he
can have no merit, Lovel. i. 199. 
Men who make a jest of sacred or divine institutions, would often
forbear, if they did not think their licentiousness Wit, ii. 196. 
Wit with gay men is one thing, with modest women another, iv.
344. 
That cannot be Wit, that puts a modest woman out of countenance,
iv. 345. 
There is not so much Wit in wickedness, as Rakes are apt to imagine,
iv. 346. 
The Wit of Libertines consists mostly in saying bold and shocking 

things, with such courage as shall make the modest blush, the impudent
laugh, and the ignorant stare, iv. 346. See also i. 269. 
Men who affect to be thought witty, are apt to treat the most serious
subjects with levity, vi. 342. 
Free-livers are apt to mistake wickedness for Wit, vi. 357. 
All the little nibblers in Wit, whose writings will not stand the test
of criticism, make it a common cause to run down critics, vii. 12 
Many things in conversation occasion a roar of applause, when the
heart is open, and men are resolved to be merry, which will neither
bear repeating nor thinking on afterwards, Belf. viii. 186. 
Common things in the mouth of a man we admire, and whose Wit
has pass'd upon us for sterling, become, in a gay hour, uncommon, ibid. 
[See Imagination. 
Writers.
The inflaming descriptions of Poets and Romance-writers often
put a youthful mind upon the scent for an object to exert its
fancy upon. 
In other words–––Often create beauty, and place it where nobody else
can find it, i. 197, 198. 
Romance-writers never forget to give their Heroine a Cleanthe, a
Violetta, a Clelia, or some such pretty-named confidante, an old nurse
at least, to help them out at a dead lift, ii. 168. 
Unnatural fimilies, drawn by poetical lovers to illustrate beauty, rather
depreciate than exalt it, iii. 27. 
A person may not be a bad critic, tho' not himself a very excellent
Writer, iii. 201. 
Our poets, Mr. Belford says, hardly know how to create a distress
without horror, murder, and suicide, and think they must shock
your souls to bring tears from your eyes, vii. 124. 
Female words, tho' of uncertain derivation, have generally very significant
meanings, vii. 408, 409. 
Early familiar Letter-writing is one of the greatest openers and improvers
of the mind that man or woman can be employed in, viii. 167. 
It is to be lamented that many eminent Writers, who are capable of
exalting virtue, and of putting vice out of countenance, throw away
their time upon subjects merely speculative, disinteresting, and unedifying,
viii. 214. 
The ingenious authors of pieces of a light or indecent turn, which
have a tendency to corrupt the morals of youth, to convey polluted
images, or to wound religion, are dishonest to their own talents, and
ungrateful to the God who gave them those talents, ibid. 
Youth.
Little inducement has an headstrong Youth to correct a temper
which gives him consequence at home, i. 78. 
Young persons should be careful in giving advice to a young friend, in
cases where passion and prudence are concerned, ii. 83. 
Young persons, whose minds are not engaged by acts of kindness and
condescension, will be put upon contrivances, ii. 150. 

Youth is the time of life for imagination or fancy to work in: A
Writer therefore, who wou'd wish to please a judicious eye, will lay by
his works written at that time, till experience shall direct the fire to
glow rather than blaze out, ii. 152. 
Youth not qualified to judge for itself, is often above advice, ii. 167. 
Young folks are sometimes very cunning in finding out contrivances
to cheat themselves, ii. 322. iii. 258. 
It is a most improving exercise, as well with regard to style as to morals,
to accustom ourselves early to write down every-thing of moment
that befals us, iii. 203. 
There is not so much bravery in youthful choler as young men imagine,
iv. 290. 
In company where there are strangers, it is right for young gentlemen,
who would wish to be thought well of, to hear every one speak
before they allow themselves to talk, vii. 13. 
[See Duty. Education. Learning. Wit. Writers. 
