



I am now come to MONDAY, the 5th
Day of my Bondage and Misery. 

I was in hope to have an Opportunity to
see John, and have a little private Talk with
him, before he went away; but it could not
be. The poor Man's excessive Sorrow made
Mrs. Jewkes take it into her Head, to think he
lov'd me; and so she brought up a Message to
me from him this Morning, that he was going. 
I desir'd he might come up to my Closet, as I
call'd it; and she came with him. The honest
Man, as I thought him, was as full of Concern
as before, at taking Leave. And I gave him two
Letters, the one for Mrs. Jervis, inclos'd in
another for my Master: But Mrs. Jewkes
would see me seal them up, lest I should inclose
any thing else. I was surpris'd, at the
Man's going away, to see him drop a Bit of
Paper, just at the Head of the Stairs, which I
took up without being observ'd by Mrs. Jewkes: 

But I was a thousand times more surpris'd, when
I return'd to my Closet, and opening it, read as
follows: 

“Good Mrs. Pamela,
I am griev'd to tell you how much you
have been deceiv'd and betray'd, and that
by such a vile Dog as I. Little did I think it
would come to this. But I must say, if ever
there was a Rogue in the World, it is me. I
have all along shew'd your Letters to my Master:
He employ'd me for that Purpose; and
he saw every one, before I carry'd them to
your Father and Mother; and then seal'd
them up, and sent me with them. I had
some Business that way, but not half so often
as I pretended: And as soon as I heard how
it was, I was ready to hang myself. You
may well think I could not stand in your
Presence. O vile, vile Wretch, to bring
you to this! If you are ruin'd, I am the Rogue
that caus'd it. All the Justice I can do you,
is to tell you, you are in vile Hands; and I
am afraid will be undone, in spite of all your
sweet Innocence; and I believe, I shall never
live, after I know it. If you can forgive me,
you are exceeding good; but I shall never
forgive myself, that's certain. Howsomever,
it will do you no Good to make this known; 
and may-hap I may live to do you Service. 
If I can, I will. I am sure I ought. —Master
kept your last two or three Letters, and 

did not send them at all. I am the most
abandon'd Wretch of Wretches, 
“J. Arnold. 
“You see your Undoing has been long
hatching. Pray take care of your
sweet Self. Mrs. Jewkes is a Devil: 
But in my Master's other House you
have not one false Heart, but myself. 
Out upon me for a Villain!” 

My dear Father and Mother, when you
come to this Place, I make no Doubt your
Hair will stand on End, as mine does! —O
the Deceitfulness of the Heart of Man! —This
John, that I took to be the honestest of Men; 
that you took for the same; that was always
praising you to me, and me to you, and for
nothing so much as for our honest Hearts; this
very Fellow was all the while a vile Hypocrite,
and a perfidious Wretch, and helping to carry
on my Ruin. 
But he says so much of himself, that I
will only sit down with this sad Reflection,
That Power and Riches never want Tools to
promote their vilest Ends, and that there is
nothing so hard to be known as the Heart of
Man. —I can but pity the poor Wretch, since
he seems to have great Remorse, and I believe
it best to keep his Wickedness secret. I will, if
it lies in my way, encourage his Penitence; for
I may possibly make some Discoveries by it. 

One thing I should mention in this Place; 
he brought down, in a Portmanteau, all the
Cloaths and Things my Lady and Master had
given me, and moreover, two Velvet Hoods,
and a Velvet Scarf, that used to be worn by
my Lady; but I have no Comfort in them, or
any thing else. 
Mrs. Jewkes had the Portmanteau brought
into my Closet, and she shew'd me what was
in it; but then lock'd it up, and said, she would
let me have what I would out of it, when I
ask'd; but if I had the Key, it might make me
want to go abroad, may-be; and so the confident
Woman put it in her Pocket. 
I gave myself over to sad Reflections upon
this strange and surprising Discovery of John's,
and wept much for him, and for myself too; 
for now I see, as he says, my Ruin has been so
long hatching, that I can make no Doubt what
my Master's honourable Professions will end in. 
What a heap of hard Names does the poor Fellow
call himself! But what must they deserve,
then, who set him to work? O what has this
wicked Master to answer for, to be so corrupt
himself, and to corrupt others, who would
have been innocent! And all to carry on a poor
Plot, I am sure, for a Gentleman, to ruin a
poor Creature, who never did him Harm, nor
wish'd him any; and who can still pray for his
Happiness, and his Repentance. 
I cannot but wonder what these Gentlemen,
as they are called, can think of themselves
for these vile Doings? John had some Inducement; 

for he hoped to please his Master, who
rewarded him, and was bountiful to him; and
the same may be said, bad as she is, for this same
odious Mrs. Jewkes. But what Inducement has
my Master for taking so much Pains to do the
Devil's Work for him? —If he loves me, as 'tis
falsly called, must he therefore lay Traps for me,
to ruin me, and to make me as bad as himself? 
I cannot imagine what Good the Undoing of
such a poor Creature as I can procure him! — 
To be sure, I am a very worthless Body. People
indeed say I am handsome; but if I was so,
should not a Gentleman prefer an honest Servant
to a guilty Harlot? —And must he be
more earnest to seduce me, because I dread of
all Things to be seduced, and would rather lose
my Life than my Honesty? 
Well, these are strange Things to me! I
cannot account for them, for my Share; but
sure nobody will say, that these fine Gentlemen
have any Tempter but their own wicked Wills! 
—This naughty Master could run away from
me, when he apprehended his Servants might
discover his vile Attempts upon me in that sad
Closet Affair; but is it not strange, that he
should not be afraid of the All-seeing Eye, from
which even that base, plotting Heart of his, in
its most secret Motions, could not be hid? — 
But what avail me these sorrowful Reflections? 
He is and will be wicked, and designs me a
Victim to his lawless Attempts, if the God in
whom I trust, and to whom I hourly pray, prevent
it not. 
