



Lord M. To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 23. 
It is a long Lane that has no turning—Do not despise
me for my proverbs—You know I was always
fond of them; and if you had been so too, it
would have been the better for you, let me tell you. 
I dare swear, the fine Lady you are so likely to be
soon happy with, will be far from despising them; 
for I am told, that she writes well, and that all her
Letters are full of Sentences. God convert you!
for nobody but He and this Lady can. 
I have no manner of doubt now but that you will
marry, as your Father, and all your ancestors, did
before you: Else you would have had no title to be
my heir; nor can your descendents have any title to
be yours, unless they are legitimate; that's worth
your remembrance, Sir! —No man is always a fool,
every man sometimes. —But your follies, I hope, are
now at an end. 
I know, you have vowed revenge against this fine
Lady's family: But no more of that, now. You
must look upon them all as your relations; and forgive, 

and forget. And when they see you make a
good husband and a good father [Which God send,
for all our sakes!] they will wonder at their non-sensical
antipathy, and beg your pardon: But while
they think you a vile fellow, and a Rake, how can
they either love you, or excuse their daughter? 
And methinks I could wish to give a word of comfort
to the Lady, who, doubtless, must be under
great fears, how she shall be able to hold-in such a
wild creature, as you have hitherto been. I would
hint to her, that, by strong arguments, and gentle
words, she may do any-thing with you; for though
you are too apt to be hot, gentle words will cool
you, and bring you into the temper that is necessary
for your cure. 
Would to God, my poor Lady, your Aunt, who
is dead and gone, had been a proper patient for the
same remedy! God rest her soul! No reflections upon
her memory! Worth is best known by want! I
know hers now; and if I had went first, she would
by this time have known mine. 
There is great wisdom in that saying, God send me
a friend, that may tell me of my faults: If not, an
enemy; and he will. Not that I am your enemy; 
and that you well know. The more noble any one is,
the more humble: So bear with me, if you would be
thought noble. —Am I not your Uncle? And do I
not design to be better to you than your Father
could be? Nay, I will be your Father too, when
the happy Day comes; since you desire it: And pray
make my compliments to my dear Niece; and tell
her, I wonder much that she has so long deferred
your happiness. 
Pray let her know as that I will present HER (not
you) either my Lancashire seat, or The Lawn in Hertfordshire; 
and settle upon her a thousand pounds a
year peny-rents; to shew her, that we are not a family
to take base advantages: And you may have 

writings drawn, and settle as you will. —Honest
Pritchard has the Rent-roll of both these Estates; 
and as he has been a good old servant, I recommend
him to your Lady's favour. I have already
consulted him: He will tell you what is best for you,
and most pleasing to me. 
I am still very bad with my gout; but will come
in a litter, as soon as the Day is fixed: It would be
the joy of my heart to join your hands. And, let
me tell you, if you do not make the best of husbands
to so good a young Lady, and one who has
had so much courage for your sake, I will renounce
you; and settle all I can upon her and hers by you,
and leave you out of the question. 
If any-thing be wanting for your further security,
I am ready to give it; though you know, that
my word has always been looked upon as my bond. 
And when the Harlowes know all this, let us see
whether they are able to blush, and take shame to
themselves. 
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty want only to know
the Day, to make all the country round them blaze,
and all their tenants mad. And, if any one of
mine be sober upon the occasion, Pritchard shall
eject him. And, on the birth of the first child, if
a Son, I will do something more for you, and repeat
all our rejoicings. 
I ought indeed to have written sooner. But I
knew, that if you thought me long, and were in
haste as to your nuptials, you would write and tell
me so. But my gout was very troublesome: And I
am but a slow writer, you know, at best: For Composing
is a thing, that tho' formerly I was very ready
at it (as my Lord Lexington used to say); yet having
left it off a great while, I am not so now. And
I chose, on this occasion, to write all out of my
own head and memory; and to give you my best
advice; for I may never have such an opportunity 

again. You have had [God mend you!] a strange
way of turning your back upon all I have said: This
once, I hope, you will be more attentive to the advice
I give you for your own good. 
I had still another end; nay, two other ends. 
The one was, That now you are upon the borders
of wedlock, as I may say, and all your wild oats will
be sown, I would give you some instructions as to
your public as well as private behaviour in life; which,
intending you so much good as I do, you ought to
hear; and perhaps would never have listened to, on
any less extraordinary occasion. 
The second is, That your dear Lady-elect (who is
it seems herself so fine and so sententious a writer)
will see by this, that it is not our faults, nor for want
of the best advice, that you was not a better man than
you have hitherto been. 
And now, in few words, for the conduct I would
wish you to follow in public, as well as in private, if
you would think me worthy of advising. —It shall be
short; so be not uneasy. 
As to the private life: Love your Lady as she deserves. 
Let your actions praise you. Be a good husband; 
and so give the lye to all your enemies; and
make them ashamed of their scandals: And let us
have pride in saying, that Miss Harlowe has not done
either herself or family any discredit by coming among
us. Do this; and I, and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty,
will love you for ever. 
As to your public conduct—This as follows is what
I could wish: But I reckon your Lady's wisdom will
put us both right—No disparagement, Sir; since,
with all your Wit, you have not hitherto shewn
much Wisdom, you know. 
Get into Parliament as soon as you can: For you
have talons to make a great figure there. Who so
proper to assist in making new holding Laws, as those
whom no Law in being could hold? 

Then, for so long as you will give attendance in
St. Stephen's chapel—Its being called a chapel, I
hope, will not disgust you: I am sure I have known
many a Riot there: —A Speaker has a hard time of
it! But we Peers have more decorum—But what
was I going to say? —I must go back. 
For so long as you will give your attendance in
Parliament, for so long will you be out of mischief; 
out of private mischief, at least: And may St.
Stephen's fate be yours, if you wilfully do public
mischief! 
When a new Election comes, you will have two
or three Boroughs, you know, to chuse out of: — 
But if you stay till then, I had rather you were for
the Shire. 
You will have interest enough, I am sure; and
being so handsome a man, the women will make their
husbands vote for you. 
I shall long to read your Speeches. I expect you
will speak, if occasion offer, the very first day. You
want no courage; and think highly enough of yourself,
and lowly enough of every-body else, to speak
on all occasions. 
As to the methods of the House, you have spirit
enough, I fear, to be too much above them: Take
care of that. —I don't so much fear your want of
good-manners. To men, you want no decency, if
they don't provoke you: As to that, I wish you
would only learn to be as patient of contradiction
from others, as you would have other people be to
you. 
Altho' I would not have you to be a Courtier; 
neither would I have you to be a Malecontent. I
remember (for I have it down) what my old friend
Archibald Hutcheson said; and it was a very good
Saying—(to Mr. Secretary Craggs, I think, it was)— 
‘I look upon an Administration, as entitled to every
Vote I can with good conscience give it; for a 

House of Commons should not needlesly put Drags
upon the Wheels of Government: And, when I
have not given it my Vote, it was with regret: 
And, for my Country's sake, I wished with all my
heart, the measure had been such as I could have
approved.’ 
And another Saying he had, which was this; 
‘Neither can an Opposition, neither can a Ministry,
be always wrong. To be a plumb man therefore
with either, is an infallible mark, that that man
must mean more and worse than he will own he
does mean.’ 
Are these Sayings bad, Sir? Are they to be despised? 
—Well then, why should I be despised for
remembering them, and quoting them, as I love
to do? Let me tell you, if you loved my company
more than you do, you would not be the worse
for it. I may say so without any vanity; since it
is other mens wisdom, and not my own, that I am so
fond of. 
But to add a word or two more, on this occasion; 
and I may never have such another; for you must
read this thro'—Love honest men, and herd with them,
in the house and out of the house; by whatever names
they be dignified or distinguished: Keep good men
company, and you shall be of the number. But did I,
or did I not, write this before? —Writing, at so
many different times, and such a quantity, one may
forget. 
You may come in for the title when I am dead and
gone—God help me! —So I would have you keep an
equilibrium. If once you get the name of being a
fine speaker, you may have any-thing: And, to be
sure, you have naturally a great deal of Elocution; 
a tongue that would delude an angel, as the women
say—To their sorrow, some of them, poor creatures! 
—A leading man in the house of Commons is
a very important character; because that House has 

the giving of money: And Money makes the more to
go; ay, and Queens and Kings too, sometimes, to
go in a manner very different from what they might
otherwise chuse to go, let me tell you. 
However, methinks, I would not have you take a
Place neither—It will double your value, and your
interest, if it be believed, that you will not: For, as
you will then stand in no man's way, you will have
no envy; but pure sterling respect; and both sides
will court you. 
For your part, you will not want a Place, as some
others do, to piece up their broken fortunes. If
you can now live reputably upon Two thousand
pounds a year, it will be hard if you cannot hereafter
live upon Seven or Eight—Less you will not have, if
you oblige me; as now by marrying so fine a Lady,
very much you will—And all this, over and above
Lady Betty's and Lady Sarah's favours! —What, in
the name of wonder, could possibly possess the
proud Harlowe! —That Son, that Son of theirs! 
—But, for his dear Sister's sake, I will say no more
of him. 
I never was offered a Place myself: And the only
one I would have taken, had I been offered it, was
Master of the Buckhounds; for I loved hunting when
I was young; and it carries a good sound with it for
us who live in the country. Often have I thought
of that excellent old adage; He that eats the King's
goose, shall be choaked with his feathers. I wish to
the Lord, this was thoroughly considered by Place-hunters! 
It would be better for them, and for their
poor families. 
I could say a great deal more, and all equally to
the purpose. But really I am tired; and so I doubt
are you. And besides, I would reserve something
for conversation. 
My Nieces Montague, and Lady Sarah and Lady
Betty, join in compliments to my Niece that is to be. 

If she would chuse to have the knot tied among us,
pray tell her that we shall see it securely done: And
we will make all the country ring and blaze for a
week together. But so I believe I said before. 
If any-thing further may be needful toward promoting
your reciprocal felicity, let me know it; and
how you order about the Day; and all that. The
inclosed Bill is very much at your service. 'Tis payable
at sight, as whatever else you may have occasion
for, shall be. 
So God bless you both; and make things as convenient
to my gout as you can; tho' be it whenever
it will, I will hobble to you; for I long to see you; 
and still more to see my Niece; and am (in expectation
of that happy opportunity) 
Your most affectionate Uncle, M. 