


What remains to be mentioned for the satisfaction
of such of the readers as may be
presumed to have interested themselves in
the fortunes of those other principals in the Story, who
survived Mr. Lovelace, will be found summarily related
as follows: 
The news of Mr. Lovelace's unhappy End was
received with as much grief by his own relations, as it
was with exultation by the Harlowe-family, and by
Miss Howe. His own family were most to be pitied,
because, being sincere admirers of the inimitable Lady,
they were greatly grieved for the injustice done her; 
and now had the additional mortification of losing the
only Male of it, by a violent death. 
That his fate was deserved, was still a heightening
of their calamity, as they had, for that very reason,
and his unpreparedness for it, but too much ground for
apprehension with regard to his future happiness. 
While the other family, from their unforgiving spirit,
and even the noble young Lady above-mentioned,
from her lively resentments, found his death some little,
some temporary, alleviation of the heavy loss they had
sustained, principally thro' his means. 
Temporary alleviation, we repeat, as to the Harlowe-family; 
for THEY were far from being happy or easy
in their reflections upon their own conduct. —&dotup;And
still the less, as the inconsolable Mother rested not, 

till she had procured, by means of Colonel Morden,
large extracts from some of the Letters that compose
this History, which convinced them all, that the very
correspondence which Clarissa, while with them,
renewed with Mr. Lovelace, was renewed for their
sakes, more than for her own: That she had given
him no encouragement contrary to her duty, and to
that prudence for which she was so early noted: That
had they trusted to a discretion which they owned she
had never brought into question, she would have extricated
them and herself (as she once proposed (a)  to
her Mother) from all difficulties as to Lovelace: That
she, if any woman ever could, would have given a
glorious instance of a passion conquered, or at least
kept under, by Reason, and by Piety; the man being
too immoral to be implicitly beloved. 
&dotup;The unhappy Parents and Uncles, from the perusal
of these Extracts, too evidently for their peace,
saw, That it was entirely owing to the avarice, the
ambition, the envy, of her implacable Brother and
Sister, and to the senseless confederacy entered into by
the whole family, to compel her to give her hand to
a man she must despise, or she had not been a Clarissa,
and to their consequent persecutions of her,
that she ever thought of quitting her Father's house: 
And that even when she first entertained such a
thought, it was with intent, if possible, to procure
for herself a private asylum with Mrs. Howe, or at
some other place of safety (but not with Mr. Lovelace,
nor with any of the Ladies of his family, tho'
invited by the latter) from whence she might propose
terms which ought to have been complied with, and
which were entirely consistent with her duty—That
tho' she found herself disappointed of the hoped for
refuge and protection, she intended not, by meeting
Mr. Lovelace, to put herself into his power; all that
she aimed at by taking that step, being to endeavour 

to pacify so fierce a spirit, lest he should (as he indeed
was determined to do) pay a visit to her friends
which might have been attended with fatal consequences; 
but was spirited away by him in such a
manner, as made her an object of pity, rather than
of blame. 
&dotup;These Extracts further convinced them all, that
it was to her unaffected regret, that she found, that
Marriage was not in her power afterwards for a long
time; and at last, but on one occasion, when their
unnatural cruelty to her (on a new application she
had made to her Aunt Hervey, to procure mercy
and pardon) rendered her incapable of receiving his
proferr'd hand; and so obliged her to suspend the
day; intending only to suspend it, till recovered. 
&dotup;They saw with equal abhorrence of Lovelace, and
of their own cruelty, and with the highest admiration
of her, That the majesty of her virtue had awed
the most daring spirit in the world, so that he durst
not attempt to carry his base designs into execution,
till, by wicked potions, he had made her senses the
previous sacrifice. 
&dotup;But how did they in a manner adore her memory! 
How did they recriminate upon each other! when
they found, that she had not only preserved herself
from repeated outrage, by the most glorious and intrepid
behaviour, in defiance, and to the utter confusion,
of all his Libertine notions; but had the fortitude,
constantly, and with a noble disdain, to reject
Him. —Whom? —Why, the Man she once could
have loved, kneeling for pardon, and begging to be
permitted to make her the best reparation then in
his power to make her; that is to say, by Marriage. 
His fortunes high and unbroken. She his prisoner at
the time in a vile house: Rejected by all her friends; 
upon repeated application to them, for mercy and
forgiveness, rejected—Mercy and forgiveness, and
a last blessing, afterwards imploring; and that as 

much to lighten their future remorses, as for the
comfort of her own pious heart—Yet, tho' savagely
refused, on a supposition that she was not so near her
End, as was represented, departed, forgiving and
blessing them all. 
&dotup;Then they recollected, that her posthumous Letters,
instead of reproaches, were filled with comfortings: 
That she had in her Last Will, in their own
way, laid obligations upon them all; obligations
which they neither deserved nor expected; as if she
thought to repair the injustice which self-partiality
made some of them conclude done to them by her
Grandfather in his Will. 
&dotup;These intelligences and recollections were perpetual
subjects of recrimination to them: Heightened their
anguish for the loss of a child who was the glory of
their family; and not seldom made them shun each
other (at the times they were accustomed to meet together)
that they might avoid the mutual reproaches
of Eyes that spoke, when Tongues were silent— 
Their stings also sharpened by time; what an unhappy
family was This! Well might Colonel Morden,
in the words of Juvenal, challenge all other
miserable families to produce such a growing distress
as that of the Harlowes (a few months before so
happy!) were able to produce. 

&dotup;Humani generis mores tibi nôsse volenti
&dotup;Sufficit una domus: paucos consume dies, &
&dotup;Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, aude.
&dotup;Mrs. Harlowe lived about two years and an
half, after the lamented death of her Clarissa. 
&dotup;Mr. Harlowe had the additional affliction to
survive his Lady about half a year; her death, by
new-pointing his former anguish and remorse, hastening
his own.&dotup; 
Both, in their last hours, however, comforted themselves,
that they should be restored to their BLESSED 

daughter, as they always (from the time that they were
acquainted with the above particulars of her story, and
with her happy exit) called her. 
They both lived, however, to see their son James,
and their daughter Arabella, married: But not to take
joy in either of their nuptials. 
Mr.James Harlowe married a woman of family,
an orphan; and is obliged, at a very great expence,
to support her claim to Estates, which were his
principal inducement to make his addresses to her; but
which, to this day, he has not recovered; nor is likely
to recover; having very powerful adversaries to contend
with, and a title to assert, which admits of litigation; 
and he not blessed with so much patience as is
necessary to persons embarrassed in Law. 
What is further observable with regard to him, is,
that the match was entirely of his own head, against
the advice of his Father, Mother, and Uncles, who
warned him of marrying in this Lady a Law-suit for
life. His ungenerous behaviour to his Wife, for what
she cannot help, and for what is as much her misfortune
as his, has occasioned such estrangements between
them (she being a woman of spirit) as, were the Lawsuits
determined, and even more favourably than probably
they will be, must make him unhappy to the End
of his Life. He attributes all his misfortunes, when
he opens himself to the few friends he has, to his vile
and cruel treatment of his angelic Sister. He confesses
these misfortunes to be just, without having temper to
acquiesce in the acknowleged justice. One month in
every year he puts on mourning, and that month commences
with him on the 7th of September, during
which he shuts himself up from all company. Finally,
he is looked upon, and often calls himself, 
The most miserable of Beings. 
Arabella's Fortune became a temptation to a
man of Quality to make his addresses to her: His Title
an inducement with her to approve of him. Brothers 

and Sisters, when they are not Friends, are generally
the sharpest Enemies to each other. He thought too
much was done for her in the Settlements. She thought
not enough. And for some years past, they have so
heartily hated each other, that if either know a joy, it
is in being told of some new misfortune or displeasure
that happens to the other. Indeed, before they came
to an open rupture, they were continually loading each
other, by way of exonerating themselves (to the additional
disquiet of the whole family) with the principal
guilt of their implacable behaviour and sordid cruelty to
their admirable Sister. —May the reports that are spread
of this Lady's further unhappiness from her Lord's free
life; a fault she justly thought so odious in Mr. Lovelace
(though that would not have been an insuperable
objection with her to his addresses); and of his public
slights and contempt of her, and even sometimes of his
personal abuses, which are said to be owing to her impatient
spirit, and violent passions; be utterly groundless. 
—For, what a heart must that be, which would
wish she might be as great a torment to herself, as she
had aimed to be to her Sister? Especially as she regrets
to this hour, and declares, that she shall to the last of
her life, her cruel treatment of that Sister; and (as well
as her Brother) is but too ready to attribute to that her
own unhappiness. 
Mr. Antony and Mr. John Harlowe are still
[at the writing of this] living: But often declare,
That, with their beloved Niece, they lost all the joy
of their lives: And lament, without reserve, in all
companies, the unnatural part they were induced to
take against her. 
Mr. Solmes is also still living, if a man of his cast
may be said to live; for his general behaviour and sordid
manners are such as justify the aversion the excellent
Lady had to him. He has moreover found his addresses
rejected by several women of far inferior fortunes
(great as his own are) to those of the Lady to whom he
was encouraged to aspire. 

Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville having
lost the man in whose conversation they so much delighted; 
shock'd and awakened by the several unhappy
catastrophes before their eyes; and having always rather
ductile than dictating hearts; took their friend Belford's
advice: Converted the remainder of their fortunes into
Annuities for Life; and retired, the one into Yorkshire,
the other into Nottinghamshire, of which counties
they are natives: Their friend Belford managing
their concerns for them, and corresponding with them,
and having more and more hopes every time he sees
them (which is once or twice a year, when they come
to town) that they will become more and more worthy
of their Names and Families. 
&dotup;As those Sisters in iniquity, Sally Martin
and Polly Horton, had abilities and education
superior to what creatures of their cast generally can
boast of; and as their Histories are no-where given in
the preceding Papers, in which they are frequently
mentioned; it cannot fail of gratifying the reader's
curiosity, as well as answering the good ends designed
by the publication of this Work, to give a brief account
of their Parentage, and manner of Training-up,
preparative to the vile courses they fell into, and
of what became of them, after the dreadful exit of
the infamous Sinclair. 
&dotup;Sally Martin was the daughter of a substantial
Mercer at the Court-end of the town; to whom
her Mother, a Grocer's Daughter in the city, brought
a handsome fortune; and both having a gay turn,
and being fond of the fashions which it was their business
to promote; and which the wives and daughters
of the uppermost tradesmen (especially in that
quarter of the town) generally affect to follow; it
was no wonder that they brought up their daughter
accordingly: Nor that she, who was a very sprightly
and ready-witted girl, and reckoned very pretty and
very genteel, should every year improve upon such
examples. 

&dotup;She early found herself mistress of herself. All she
did was right: All she said was admired. Early,
very early, did she dismiss blushes from her cheek. 
She could not blush, because she could not doubt: 
And silence, whatever were the subject, was as much
a stranger to her, as diffidence. 
&dotup;She never was left out of any party of pleasure,
after she had passed her Ninth year; and, in honour
of her prattling vein, was considered as a principal
person in the frequent Treats and Entertainments
which her parents, fond of luxurious living, gave
with a view to encrease their acquaintance for the
sake of their business. Not duly reflecting, that the
part they suffered her to take in what made for their
interest, would probably be a means to quicken the
appetites and ruin the morals of that Daughter, for
whose sake, as an only child, they were solicitous to
obtain wealth. 
&dotup;The Child so much a Woman, what must the
Woman be? 
&dotup;At Fifteen or Sixteen, she affected, both in dress
and manners, to ape such of the quality, as were
most Apish. The richest silks in her Father's shop
were not too rich for her. At all public diversions,
she was the leader, instead of the led, of all her female
kindred and acquaintance; tho' they were a
third older than herself. She would bustle herself
into a place, and make room for her more bashful
companions, through the frowns of the first possessors,
at a crouded theatre; leaving every one near her
amazed at her self-consequence, wondering she had
no servant to keep place for her; whisperingly enquiring
who she was; and then sitting down admiring
her fortitude. 
&dotup;She officiously made herself of consequence to the
most noted Players; who, as one of their patronesses,
applied to her for her interest, on their Benefit-nights. 

She knew the Christian, as well as Sur-Name of
every pretty fellow who frequented public places; 
and affected to speak of them by their former. 
&dotup;Those who had not obeyed the call her eyes always
made upon all of them for notice at her entrance,
or before she took her seat, were spoken of
with haughtiness, as, Jack's, or Tom's; while her
favourites with an affectedly-endearing familiarity,
and a prettiness of accent, were Jackeys and Tommys; 
and if they stood very high in her graces, Dear
Devils, and Agreeable Toads. 
&dotup;She sat in judgment, and an inexorable judge she
was, upon the actions and conduct of every man and
woman of quality and fashion, as they became the
subjects of conversation. She was deeply learned in
the scandalous Chronicle: She made every character,
every praise, and every censure, serve to exalt herself. 
She should scorn to do so or so! —Or, That was ever
her way; and just what she did, or liked to do; and
judging herself by the vileness of the most vile of her
Sex, she wiped her mouth, and sat down satisfied
with her own virtue. 
&dotup;She had her Chair to attend her where-ever she
went, and found people among her Betters, as her
pride stooped to call some of the most insignificant
people in the world, to encourage her visits. 
&dotup;She was practised in all the arts of the Card-table: 
A true Spartan girl; and had even courage, occasionally,
to wrangle off a detection. Late hours (turning
night into day, and day into night) were the almost
unavoidable consequence of her frequent play. 
Her parents pleased themselves that their Sally had a
charming constitution: And as long as she suffered
not in her health, they were regardless of her morals. 
&dotup;The Needle she hated: And made the constant
subjects of her ridicule the fine works that used to
employ, and keep out of idleness, luxury, and extravagance,
and at home (were they to have been of 

no other service) the women of the last age, when
there were no Vaux-halls, Ranelaghs, Marybones,
and such like places of diversion, to dress out for, and
gad after. 
&dotup;And as to Family-management, her parents had
not required any knowlege of that sort from her; 
and she considered it as a qualification only necessary
for hirelings, and the low-born, and as utterly unworthy
of the attention of a modern fine Lady. 
&dotup;Altho' her Father had great business, yet, living
in so high and expensive a way, he pretended not to
give her a fortune answerable to it. Neither he nor
his Wife, having set out with any notion of frugality,
could think of retrenching. Nor did their
Daughter desire that they should retrench. They
thought glare or ostentation reputable. They called
it living genteelly. And as they lifted their heads
above their neighbours, they supposed their credit
concerned to go forward rather than backward in
outward appearances. They flattered themselves,
and they flattered their girl, and she was entirely of
their opinion, that she had charms and wit enough
to attract some man of rank; of Fortune at least: 
And yet this Daughter of a Mercer-Father and Grocer-Mother
could not bear the thoughts of a creeping
Cit; encouraging herself with the few instances
(comparatively few) which she had always in her
head as common ones, of girls much inferior to herself
in station, talents, education, and even fortune,
who had succeeded—as she doubted not to succeed. 
Handsome Settlements, and a Chariot, that tempting
gewgaw to the vanity of the middling class of females,
were the least that she proposed to herself. But all
this while, neither her parents nor herself considered,
that she had appetites indulged to struggle with, and
a turn of education given her, as well as a warm
constitution, unguarded by sound principles, and unbenefited 

by example, which made her much better
qualified for a Mistress than a Wife. 
&dotup;Her Twentieth year, to her own equal wonder
and regret, passed over her head, and she had not had
one offer that her pride would permit her to accept
of. A girl from Fifteen to Eighteen, her beauty
then beginning to blossom, will, as a new thing,
attract the eyes of men: But if she make her face
cheap at public places, she will find, that new faces
will draw more attention than fine faces constantly
seen. Policy therefore, if nothing else were considered,
would induce a young beauty, if she could
tame her vanity, just to shew herself, and to be
talked of, and then withdrawing, as if from discretion
(and discreet it will be to do so) expect to be
sought after, rather than to be thought to seek for; 
only reviving now-and-then the memory of herself,
at the public places in turn, if she find herself likely
to be forgotten; and then she will be new again. 
But this observation ought young Ladies always to
have in their heads, that they can hardly ever expect
to gratify their vanity, and at the same time
gain the admiration of men worthy of making partners
for life. They may, in short, have many admirers
at public places, but not one Lover. 
&dotup;Sally Martin knew nothing of this doctrine. Her
beauty was in its bloom, and yet she found herself
neglected. ‘Sally Martin, the Mercer's Daughter: 
She never fails being here;’ was the answer, and
the accompanying observation, made to every Questioner,
Who is that Lady? 
&dotup;At last, her destiny approached. It was at a Masquerade,
that she first saw the gay, the handsome
Lovelace, who was just returned from his travels. 
She was immediately struck with his figure, and with
the brilliant things that she heard fall from his lips as
he happened to sit near her. He, who was not then
looking out for a Wife, was taken with Sally's smartness, 

and with an air that at the same time shewed
her to be equally genteel and self-significant; and
signs of approbation mutually passing, he found no
difficulty in acquainting himself where to visit her
next day. And yet it was some mortification to a person
of her self-consequence, and gay appearance, to
submit to be known by so fine a young gentleman as
no more than a Mercer's daughter. So natural is it
for a girl brought up as Sally was, to be occasionally
ashamed of those whose folly had set her above
herself. 
&dotup;But whatever it might be to Sally, it was no disappointment
to Mr. Lovelace, to find his Mistress of
no higher degree; because he hoped to reduce her
soon, to the lowest condition that an unhappy woman
can fall into. 
&dotup;But when Miss Martin had informed herself, that
her lover was the Nephew and presumptive Heir of
Lord M. she thought him the very man for whom
she had been so long and so impatiently looking out; 
and for whom it was worth her while to spread her
toils. And here it may not be amiss to observe, that
it is very probable, that Mr. Lovelace had Sally Martin
in his thoughts, and perhaps two or three more
whose hopes of marriage from him had led them to
their ruin, when he drew the following whimsical
picture, in a Letter to his friend Belford, not inserted
in the preceding Collection. 
&dotup;‘Methinks, says he, I see a young couple in courtship,
having each a design upon the other: The girl
plays off: She is very happy, as she is: She cannot
be happier: She will not change her single state: 
The man, I will suppose, is one who does not confess,
that he desires not that she should: She holds
ready a net under her apron; he another under his
coat; each intending to throw it over the other's
neck; she over his, when her pride is gratified, and
she thinks she can be sure of him; he over hers, 

when the watched-for yielding moment has carried
consent too far—And suppose he happens to be the
more dextrous of the two, and whips his net over
her, before she can cast hers over him; how, I
would fain know, can she be justly entitled to cry
out upon cruelty, barbarity, deception, sacrifices,
and all the rest of the exclamatory nonsense, with
which the pretty fools, in such a case, are wont to
din the ears of their conquerors? Is it not just,
thinkest thou, when she makes her appeals to gods
and men, that both gods and men should laugh at
her, and hitting her in the teeth with her own felonious
intentions, bid her sit down patiently under
her deserved disappointment?’ 
&dotup;In short, Sally's parents, as well as herself, encouraged
Mr. Lovelace's visits. They thought they
might trust to a discretion in her which she herself
was too wise to doubt. Pride they knew she had. 
And that, in these cases, is often called discretion— 
Lord help the Sex, says Lovelace, if they had not
Pride! —Nor did they suspect danger from that specious
air of sincerity, and gentleness of manners,
which he could assume or lay aside whenever he
pleased. 
&dotup;The second Masquerade, which was no more than
their third meeting abroad, completed her ruin, from
so practised, tho' so young a deceiver; and that before
she well knew she was in danger: For, having
prevailed on her to go off with him about Twelve
o'clock to his Aunt Forbes's, a lady of honour and
fortune, to whom he had given reason to expect her
future Niece [the only hint of Marriage he ever gave
her], he carried her to the house of the wicked woman,
who bears the name of Sinclair in these Papers: 
And there, by promises, which she understood
in the favourable sense (for where a woman loves, she
seldom doubts enough for her own safety) obtained
an easy conquest over a virtue that was little more
than nominal. 

&dotup;He found it not difficult to induce her to proceed
in the guilty commerce, till the effects of it became
too apparent to be hid. Her Parents then (in the
first fury of their disappointment, and vexation for
being deprived of all hopes of such a Son-in-law)
turned her out of doors. 
&dotup;Her disgrace thus published, she became hardened; 
and, protected by her seducer, whose favourite Mistress
she then was, she was so incensed against her
Parents for an indignity so little suiting with her
pride, and the head they had always given her, that
she refused to return to them, when, repenting of
their passionate treatment of her, they would have
been reconciled to her: And, becoming the favourite
Daughter of her Mother Sinclair, at the persuasions
of that abandoned woman, she practised to bring
on an abortion, which she effected, tho' she was so
far gone, that it had like to have cost her her life. 
&dotup;Thus, unchastity her first crime, murder her next,
her conscience became seared; and, young as she was,
and fond of her deceiver, soon grew indelicate enough,
having so thorough-placed a Schoolmistress, to do
all she could to promote the pleasures of the man
who had ruined her; scrupling not, with a spirit
truly diabolical, to endeavour to draw in others to
follow her example. And it is hardly to be believed
what mischiefs of this sort she was the means of effecting; 
woman confiding in, and daring woman; 
and she a creature of specious appearance, and great
art. 
&dotup;A still viler wickedness, if possible, remains to be
said of Sally Martin. 
&dotup;Her Father dying, her Mother, in hopes to reclaim
her, as she called it, proposed to her to quit the
house of the infamous Sinclair, and to retire with her
into the country, where her disgrace, and her then
wicked way of life, would not be known; and there
so to live, as to save appearances; the only virtue she 

had ever taught her; besides that of endeavouring
rather to delude than to be deluded. 
&dotup;To this Sally consented; but with no other intention,
as she often owned (and gloried in it) than
to cheat her Mother of the greatest part of her substance,
in revenge for consenting to her being turned
out of doors long before, and by way of reprisal for
having persuaded her Father, as she would have it,
to cut her off, in his last Will, from any share in
his fortune. 
&dotup;This unnatural wickedness, in half a year's time,
she brought about; and then the Serpent retired to
her obscene den with her spoils, laughing at what she
had done; even after it had broken her Mother's
heart, as it did in a few months time: A severe,
but just punishment for the unprincipled education
she had given her. 
&dotup;It ought to be added, that this was an iniquity, of
which neither Mr. Lovelace, nor any of his friends,
could bear to hear her boast; and always check'd her
for it whenever she did; condemning it with one
voice: And it is certain, that this and other instances
of her complicated wickedness, turned early Lovelace's
heart against her; and, had she not been subservient
to him in his other pursuits, he would not
have endured her: For, speaking of her, he would
say, Let not any one reproach us, Jack: There is no
wickedness like the wickedness of a woman (a) . 
&dotup;A bad education was the preparative, it must be
confessed: And for this Sally Martin had reason to
thank her Parents: As they had reason to thank
themselves, for what followed: But, had she not
met with a Lovelace, she had avoided a Sinclair; and
might have gone on at the common rate of wives so
educated; and been the Mother of children turned
out to take their chance in the world, as she was; so
many lumps of soft wax, fit to take any impression 

that the first accident gave them; neither happy, nor
making happy; every-thing but useful; and well off,
if not extremely miserable. 
&dotup;Polly Horton was the daughter of a gentlewoman
well descended; whose Husband, a man of
family, and of honour, was a Captain in the Guards. 
&dotup;He died when Polly was about Nine years of age,
leaving her to the care of her Mother, a lively
young Lady of about Twenty-six; with a genteel
provision for both. 
&dotup;Her Mother was extremely fond of her Polly; but
had it not in herself to manifest the true, the genuine
fondness of a Parent, by a strict and guarded education; 
dressing out, and visiting, and being visited by
the gay of her own Sex, and casting out her eye
abroad, as one very ready to try her fortune again
in the married state. 
&dotup;This induced those airs, and a love to those diversions,
which make a young widow, of so lively a
turn, the unfittest Tutress in the world, even to her
own daughter. 
&dotup;Mrs. Horton herself having had an early turn to
Music, and that sort of Reading, which is but an
earlier debauchery for young minds, preparative to
the grosser at riper years, to wit, Romances and Novels,
Songs and Plays, and those without distinction,
moral or immoral, she indulged her daughter in the
same taste; and at those hours, when they could not
take part in the more active and lively amusements
and Kill-times, as some call them, used to employ
Miss to read to her; happy enough in her own imagination,
that, while she was diverting her own ears,
and sometimes, as the piece was, corrupting her own
heart, and her child's too, she was teaching Miss to
read, and improve her mind; for it was the boast of
every tea-table half-hour, That Miss Horton, in propriety,
accent, and emphasis, surpassed all the young
Ladies of her age: And, at other times, complimenting 

the pleased Mother—Bless me, Madam, with
what a surprising grace Miss Horton reads! —She
enters into the very spirit of her subject—This she could
have from nobody but you! An intended praise; but,
as the subjects were, would have been a severe satire
in the mouth of an enemy! —While the fond, the
inconsiderate Mother, with a delighted air, would
cry, Why, I cannot but say, Miss Horton does credit
to her Tutress! And then a Come-hither, my best
Love! And, with a kiss of approbation, What a
pleasure to your dear Papa, had he lived to see your
improvements, my Charmer! —Concluding with a
sigh of satisfaction; her eyes turning round upon the
circle, to take in all the silent applauses of theirs! 
But little thought the fond, the foolish Mother, what
the plant would be, which was springing up from
these seeds! Little imagined she, that her own ruin,
as well as her child's, was to be the consequence of
this fine education; and that, in the same ill-fated
hour, the honour both of Mother and Daughter was
to become a sacrifice to the intriguing Invader. 
&dotup;This the laughing girl, when abandoned to her
evil destiny, and in company with her Sister Sally,
and others, each recounting their settings-out, their
progress, and their fall, frequently related to be her
education and manner of training-up. 
&dotup;This, and to see a succession of Humble Servants
buzzing about a Mother, who took too much pride
in addresses of that kind, what a beginning, what
an example, to a constitution of tinder, so prepared
to receive the spark struck from the steely forehead,
and flinty heart, of such a Libertine, as at last it was
their fortune to be encountered by! 
&dotup;In short, as Miss grew up under the influences
of such a Directress, and of books so light
and frothy, with the inflaming additions of Music,
Concerts, Opera's, Plays, Assemblies, Balls, and
the rest of the rabble of amusements of the modern 

life, it is no wonder, that, like early fruit, she
was soon ripened to the hand of the insidious gatherer. 
&dotup;At Fifteen, she own'd, she was ready to fansy
herself the Heroine of every Novel, and of every
Comedy she read, so well did she enter into the spirit
of her subject: She glowed to become the object of
some Hero's flame; and perfectly longed to begin an
intrigue, and even to be run away with by some enterprising
Lover: Yet had neither Confinement nor
Check to apprehend from her indiscreet Mother: 
Which she thought absolutely necessary to constitute
a Parthenissa! 
&dotup;Nevertheless, with all these fine modern qualities,
did she complete her Nineteenth year, before she met
with any address of consequence: One half of her admirers
being afraid, because of her gay turn, and but
middling fortune, to make serious applications for
her favour; while others were kept at distance, by
the superior airs she assumed; and a third sort, not
sufficiently penetrating the foibles either of Mother
or Daughter, were kept off by the supposed watchful
care of the former. 
&dotup;But when the man of intrepidity and intrigue was
found, never was Heroine so soon subdued, never
Goddess so early stript of her celestials! For, at the
Opera, a diversion at which neither she nor her Mother
ever missed to be present, she beheld the specious
Lovelace; beheld him invested with all the airs of
heroic insult, resenting a slight affront offered to his
Sally Martin, by Two gentlemen who had known
her in her more hopeful state, one of whom Mr.
Lovelace obliged to sneak away with a broken head,
given with the pommel of his sword, the other with
a bloody nose; neither of them well supporting that
readiness of offence, which, it seems, was a part
of their known characters to be guilty of. 
&dotup;The gallantry of this action drawing every bystander
on the side of the Hero, O the brave man! 

cried Polly Horton aloud, to her Mother, in a kind
of rapture, How needful the protection of the Brave to
the Fair! with a softness in her voice, which she
had taught herself, to suit her fansied high condition
of life. 
&dotup;A speech so much in his favour, could not but take
the notice of a man who was but too sensible of the
advantages which his fine person, and noble air,
gave him over the gentler hearts, who was always
watching every female eye, and who had his ear continually
turned to every affected voice; for that was
one of his indications of a proper subject to be attempted
—Affectation of every sort, he used to say, is
a certain sign of a wrong-turned head; of a faulty
judgment: And upon such a basis I seldom build in vain. 
&dotup;He instantly resolved to be acquainted with a
young creature, who seemed so strongly prejudiced
in his favour. Never man had a readier invention
for all sorts of mischief. He gave his Sally her Cue. 
He called her Sister in their hearing. And Sally
whisperingly gave the young Lady, and her Mother,
in her own way, the particulars of the affront she
had received; making herself an Angel of Light, to
cast the brighter ray upon the character of her heroic
Brother. She particularly praised his known and
approved courage; and mingled with her praises of
him, such circumstances relating to his birth, his
fortune and endowments, as left him nothing to do
but to fall in love with the enamoured Polly. 
&dotup;Mr. Lovelace presently saw what turn to give to
his professions: So brave a man! yet of manners so
gentle! hit the young Lady's taste: Nor could she
suspect the heart, that such an aspect cover'd. This
was the man! the very man! she whispered to her
Mother: And, when the Opera was over, his servant
procuring a coach, he undertook, with his specious
Sister, to set them down at their own lodgings,
tho' situated a quite different way from his: And 

there were they prevailed upon to alight, and partake
of a slight repast. 
&dotup;Sally pressed them to return the favour to her at her
Aunt Forbes's, and hoped it would be before her Brother
went to his own seat. 
&dotup;They promised her, and named their evening. 
&dotup;A splendid entertainment was provided. The guests
came, having in the interim found all that was said of
his name, and family, and fortune, to be true. Persons
of so little strictness in their own morals, took it
not into their heads to be very inquisitive after his. 
&dotup;Music and dancing had their share in the entertainment: 
These opened their hearts, already half-opened
by Love: The Aunt Forbes, and the Lover's Sister,
kept them open by their own example: The Hero
sung, vowed, promised: Their gratitude was moved,
their delights were augmented, their hopes increased; 
their confidence was engaged; all their appetites up in
arms; the rich wines co-operating; beat quite off
their guard, and not Thought enough remaining so
much as for suspicion; Miss, detach'd from her Mother
by Sally, soon fell a sacrifice to the successful Intriguer. 
&dotup;The widow herself, half intoxicated, and raised as
she was with artful mixtures, and inflamed by Love
unexpectedly tendered by one of the libertines his constant
companions (to whom an Opportunity was contrived
to be given to be alone with her, and that
closely followed by Importunity) fell into her Daughter's
error. The consequences of which, in length of time,
becoming apparent, grief, shame, remorse, seized
her heart (her own indiscretion not allowing her to
arraign her Daughter's); and she survived not her delivery; 
leaving Polly with child likewise: Who, when
delivered, being too fond of the gay Deluder to renounce
his company, even when she found herself deluded,
fell into a course of extravagance and dissoluteness; 
ran through her fortune in a very little time; 

and, as an high preferment, at last, with Sally, was
admitted a quarter-partner with the detestable Sinclair. 
&dotup;All that is necessary to add to the History of these
unhappy women, will be comprised in a very little
compass.&dotup; 
After the death of the profligate Sinclair, they kept
on the infamous trade with too much success; till an
accident happened in the house—A gentleman of family
killed in it in a fray, contending with another for a
new-vamp'd face. Sally was accused of holding the gentleman's
arm, while his more favoured adversary ran
him through the heart, and then made off. And she,
being tried for her life, narrowly escaped. 
This accident obliged them to break up house-keeping; 
and not having been frugal enough of their ill-gotten
gains (lavishing upon one, what they got by another)
they were compelled, for subsistence-sake, to
enter themselves as under-managers at such another house
as their own had been. In which service, soon after,
Sally died of a fever and surfeit got by a debauch: And
the other, about a month after, by a violent cold, occasioned
thro' carelessness in a Salivation. 

Happier Scenes open for the remaining characters; 
for it might be descending too low to mention the untimely
Ends of Dorcas, and of William, Mr. Lovelace's
wicked servant; and the pining and consumptive ones
of Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman, unmarried both,
and in less than a year after the happy death of their
excellent young Lady. 
The good Mrs. Norton passed the small remainder
of her life, as happily as she wished, in her beloved
foster-daughter's dairy-house, as it used to be called: 
As she wished, we repeat;—for she had too strong aspirations
after Another life, to be greatly attached to
This. 

She laid out the greatest part of her time in doing
good by her advice, and by the prudent management of
the Fund committed to her direction. Having lived an
exemplary life from her youth upwards; and seen her
Son happily settled in the world; she departed with ease
and calmness, without pang or agony, like a tired traveller,
falling into a sweet slumber: Her last words expressing
her hope of being restored to the Child of her
Bosom; and to her own excellent Father and Mother,
to whose care and pains she owed that good Education
to which she was indebted for all her other blessings. 
The Poors Fund, which was committed to her care,
she resigned, a week before her death, into the hands of
Mrs. Hickman, according to the direction of the Will,
and all the accounts and disbursements with it; which
she had kept with such an exactness, that that Lady declares,
that she will follow her method, and only wishes
to discharge the trust as well. 
Miss Howe was not to be persuaded to quit her
mourning for her dear friend, until Six months were fully
expired: And then she made Mr. Hickman one of
the happiest men in the world. A woman of her fine
sense and understanding, married to a man of virtue and
good-nature (who had no past capital errors to reflect
upon, and to abate his joys, and whose behaviour to
Mrs. Hickman is as affectionate, as it was respectful to
Miss Howe) could not do otherwise. They are already
blessed with two fine children; a Daughter, to whom,
by joint consent, they have given the name of her beloved
Friend; and a Son, who bears that of his Father. 
She has allotted to Mr. Hickman, who takes delight
in doing good (and that as much for its own sake, as to
oblige her) his part of the management of the Poors
Fund; to be accountable for it, as she pleasantly says, to
her. She has appropriated every Thursday morning for
her part of that management; and takes so much delight
in the task, that she declares it to be one of the
most agreeable of her amusements. And the more 

agreeable, as she teaches every one whom she benefits,
to bless the Memory of her departed Friend; to whom she
attributes the merit of all her own charities, as well as
the honour of those which she dispenses in pursuance of
her Will. 
She has declared, That this Fund shall never fail
while she lives. She has even engaged her Mother to
contribute annually to it. And Mr. Hickman has appropriated
twenty pounds a year to the same. In consideration
of which she allows him to recommend four
objects yearly to partake of it. —Allows, is her style; 
for she assumes the whole prerogative of dispensing this
charity; the only prerogative she does or has occasion to
assume. In every other case, there is but one will between
them; and that is generally his or hers, as either
speaks first, upon any subject, be it what it will. Mrs.
Hickman, she sometimes as pleasantly as generously
tells him, must not quite forget that she was once Miss
Howe, because if he had not loved her as such, and
with all her foibles, she had never been Mrs. Hickman. 
Nevertheless she seriously, on all occasions, and
that to others, as well as to himself, confesses, that she
owes him unreturnable obligations for his patience with
her in HER Day, and for his generous Behaviour to
her in HIS. 
And still the more highly does she esteem and love
him, as she reflects upon his past kindness to her beloved
Friend; and on that dear Friend's good opinion of him. 
Nor is it less grateful to her, that the worthy man joins
most sincerely with her in all those respectful and affectionate
recollections, which make the memory of the
Departed precious to Survivors. 
Mr. Belford was not so destitute of humanity and
affection, as to be unconcerned at the unhappy fate of
his most intimate friend. But when he reflects upon
the untimely Ends of several of his companions, but just
mentioned in the preceding history (a) —On the shocking 

despondency and death of his poor friend Belton—On
the signal justice which overtook the wicked Tomlinson
—On the dreadful exit of the infamous Sinclair—On
the deep remorses of his more valued friend—And, on
the other hand, on the Example set him by the most
excellent of her Sex—and on her blessed preparation,
and happy departure—And when he considers, as he
often does with awe and terror, that his wicked habits
were so rooted in his depraved heart, that all these Warnings,
and this lovely Example, seemed to be but necessary
to enable him to subdue them, and to reform; and that
such awakening Calls are hardly ever afforded to men of
his cast, or (if they are) but seldom attended with such
happy effects in the Prime of Youth, and in the full
Vigour of Constitution: —When he reflects upon all
these things, he adores the Mercy, which thro' these
Calls has snatched him as a brand out of the fire: And
thinks himself obliged to make it his endeavour to find
out, and to reform, any of those who may have been
endangered by his means; as well as to repair, to the
utmost of his power, any damage or mischiefs which he
may have occasioned to others. 
With regard to the Trust with which he was honoured
by the inimitable Lady, he had the pleasure of acquitting
himself of it in a very few months, to every-body's satisfaction; 
even to that of the unhappy family; who
sent him their thanks on the occasion. Nor was he, at
delivering up his accounts, contented with resigning the
Legacy bequeathed to him, to the Uses of the Will. So
that the Poors Fund, as it is called, is become a very
considerable Sum; and will be a lasting bank for relief
of objects who best deserve relief. 
There was but one Earthly Blessing which remained
for Mr. Belford to wish for, in order, morally speaking,
to secure to him all his other blessings; and that was,
the greatest of all worldly ones, a virtuous and prudent
Wife. So free a liver as he had been, he did not think
that he could be worthy of such a one, till, upon an 

impartial examination of himself, he found the pleasure
he had in his new resolutions so great, and his abhorrence
of his former courses so sincere, that he was the
less apprehensive of a deviation. 
Upon this presumption, having also kept in his mind
some encouraging hints from Mr. Lovelace; and haveing
been so happy as to have it in his power to oblige
Lord M. and that whole noble family, by some services
grateful to them (the request for which from his
unhappy friend was brought over, among other papers,
with the dead body, by De la Tour); he besought that
Nobleman's Leave to make his addresses to Miss Charlotte
Montague, the eldest of his Lordship's two
Nieces: And making at the same time such proposals of
Settlements as were not objected to, his Lordship was
pleased to use his powerful interest in his favour. And
his worthy Niece having no engagement, she had the
goodness to honour Mr. Belford with her hand; and
thereby made him as completely happy as a man can be,
who has enormities to reflect upon, which are out of
his power to atone for, by reason of the death of some of
the injured parties, and the irreclaimableness of others. 
‘Happy is the man who, in time of health and
strength, sees and reforms the error of his ways! — 
But how much more happy is he, who has no capital
and wilful errors to repent of! —How unmixed and
sincere must the joys of such a one come to him!’ 
Lord M. added bountifully in his life-time, as did
also the two Ladies his Sisters, to the fortune of their
worthy Niece. And as Mr. Belford has been blessed
with a Son by her, his Lordship at his death [which
happened just three years after the untimely one of his
unhappy Nephew] was pleased to devise to that Son,
and to his descendents for ever (and in case of his death
unmarried, to any other children of his Niece) his Hertfordshire
Estate (designed for Mr. Lovelace) which he
made up to the value of a moiety of his real Estates; 
bequeathing also a moiety of his personal to the same Lady. 

Miss Patty Montague, a fine young Lady [to
whom her Noble Uncle, at his death, devised the other
moiety of his real and personal Estates, including his
Seat in Berkshire] lives at present with her excellent
Sister Mrs. Belford; to whom she removed upon Lord
M's death: But, in all probability, will soon be the
Lady of a worthy Baronet, of antient family, fine qualities,
and ample fortunes, just returned from his Travels,
with a character superior to the very good one he
set out with: A case that very seldom happens, altho'
the End of Travel is Improvement. 
Colonel Morden, who, with so many virtues and
accomplishments, cannot be unhappy, in several Letters
to the Executor, with whom he corresponds from Florence
[having, since his unhappy affair with Mr. Lovelace,
changed his purpose of coming so soon to reside in
England as he had intended] declares, That altho' he
thought himself obliged either to accept of what he took
to be a challenge, as such; or tamely to acknowlege,
that he gave up all resentment of his Cousin's wrongs; 
and in a manner to beg pardon for having spoken freely
of Mr. Lovelace behind his back; and altho' at the time
he owns he was not sorry to be called upon, as he was,
to take either the one course or the other; yet now,
coolly reflecting upon his beloved Cousin's reasonings
against Duelling; and upon the price it had too probably
cost the unhappy man; he wishes he had more fully
considered those words in his Cousin's posthumous Letter
—“If God will allow him Time for Repentance,
why should you deny it him?” (a) . 
To conclude—The worthy Widow Lovick continues
to live with Mr. Belford; and by her prudent behaviour,
piety, and usefulness, has endeared herself to her Lady,
and to the whole Family. 