



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Night, March 9. 
I have no patience with any of the people you are
with. I know not what to advise you to do. How
do you know, that you are not punishable for being
the cause, tho' to your own loss, that the Will of your
Grandfather is not complied with? —Wills are sacred
things, child. You see, that they, even they, think
so, who imagine they suffer by a Will, thro' the distinction
paid you in it. 
I allow of all your noble reasonings for what you
did at the time: But since such a charming, such a
generous instance of filial duty is to go thus unrewarded,
why should you not resume? 
Your Grandfather knew the family-sailing. He
knew what a noble spirit you had to do good. He
himself perhaps [Excuse me, my dear] had done too
little in his life-time; and therefore he put it in your
power to make up for the defects of the whole family. 
Were it to me, I would resume it. Indeed I would. 
You will say, You cannot do it, while you are with
them. I don't know that. Do you think they can
use you worse than they do? And it it not your right? 
And do they not make use of your own generosity to
oppress you? Your Uncle Harlowe is one Trustee; 
your Cousin Morden is the other: Insist upon your
right to your Uncle; and write to your Cousin Morden
about it. This, I dare say, will make them alter
their behaviour to you. 
You insolent Brother—what has he to do to controul
you? —Were it me [I wish it were for one
month, and no more] I'd shew him the difference. I
would be in my own mansion, pursuing my charming
schemes, and making all around me happy. I would
set up my own chariot. I would visit them when 

they deserved it. But when my Brother and Sister
gave themselves airs, I would let them know, that I
was their Sister, and not their Servant: And, if that
did not do, I would shut my gates against them; and
bid them go, and be company for each other. 
It must be confessed, however, that this Brother
and Sister of yours, judging as such narrow spirits will
ever judge, have some reason for treating you as they
do. It must have long been a mortification to them
(set disappointed Love on her side, and Avarice on
his, out of the question) to be so much eclipsed by a
younger Sister. Such a Sun in a family, where there
are none but saint twinklers, how could they bear it! 
Why, my dear, they must look upon you as a prodigy
among them: And prodigies you know, tho' they
obtain our Admiration, never attract our Love. The
distance between you and them is immense. Their
eyes ake to look up at you. What shades does your
full day of merit cast upon them! Can you wonder
then, that they should embrace the first opportunity
that offered, to endeavour to bring you down to their
level? 
Depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of
it, and more still, as you bear it. 
As to this odious Solmes, I wonder not at your
aversion to him. It is needless to say any-thing to you,
who have so sincere an antipathy to him, to strengthen
your dislike: Yet, who can resist her own talents? One
of mine, as I have heretofore said, is to give an ugly
likeness. Shall I indulge it? —I will. And the rather,
as, in doing so, you will have my opinion in justification
of your Aversion to him, and in approbation
of a steadiness that I ever admired and must for ever
approve of in your temper. 
‘I was twice in this wretch's company. At one of
the times your Lovelace was there. I need not
mention to you, who have such a pretty curiosity
(tho' at present, only a curiosity, you know) the unspeakable
difference. 

‘Lovelace entertained the company in his lively
gay way, and made every-body laugh at one of his
Stories. It was before this creature was thought of
for you. Solmes laughed too. It was, however,
his laugh: For his first three years, at least, I imagine,
must have been one continual fit of crying; 
and his muscles have never yet been able to recover
a risible tone. His very smile [You never saw him
smile, I believe; never at least gave him cause to
smile] is so little natural to his features, that it appears
in him as hideous as the grin of a man in
malice. 
‘I took great notice of him, as I do of all the noble
Lords of the creation, in their peculiarities; and
was disgusted, nay, shocked at him, even then. I
was glad, I remember, on that particular occasion, to
see his strange features recovering their natural
gloominess; tho' they did this but slowly, as if the
muscles which contributed to his distortions, had
turned upon rusty springs. 
‘What a dreadful thing must even the Love of such
a Husband be! For my part, were I his Wife! (But
what have I done to myself, to make but such a
supposition?) I should never have comfort but in his
absence, or when I was quarreling with him. A
splenetic woman, who must have somebody to find
fault with, might indeed be brought to endure such
a wretch: The sight of him would always furnish
out the occasion, and all her servants, for That reason,
and for That only, would have cause to bless
their master. But how grievous and apprehensive
a thing must it be for his wife, had she the least degree
of delicacy, to catch herself in having done
something to oblige him? 
‘So much for his person: As to the other half of
him, he is said to be an insinuating, creeping mortal
to any-body he hopes to be a gainer by: An insolent,
over-bearing one, where he has no such views: 

And is not this the genuine spirit of meanness? He
is reported to be spiteful and malicious, even to the
whole family of any single person who has once disobliged
him; and to his own relations most of all. I
am told, that they are none of them such wretches
as himself. This may be one reason why he is for
disinheriting them. 
‘My Kitty, from one of his domestics, tells me,
that his tenants hate him: And that he never had a
servant who spoke well of him. Vilely suspicious of
their wronging him (probably from the badness of
his own heart) he is always changing. 
‘His pockets, they say, are continually crammed
with keys: So that when he would treat a guest (A
friend he has not out of your family) he is half as
long puzzling which is which, as his niggardly treat
might be concluded in. And if it be wine, he always
fetches it himself. Nor has he much trouble in doing
so; for he has very few visitors—only those, whom
business or necessity brings: For a gentleman who
can help it, would rather be benighted, than put up
at his house.’ 
Yet this is the man they have found out (for considerations
as sordid as those he is governed by) for a
Husband, that is to say, for a Lord and Master, for
Miss Clarissa Harlowe! 
But perhaps, he may not be quite so miserable as
he is represented. Characters extremely good, or extremely
bad, are seldom justly given. Favour for a
person will exalt the one, as disfavour will sink the
other. But your Uncle Antony has told my Mother,
who objected to his covetousness, that it was intended
to tie him up, as he called it, to your own terms; which
would be with a hempen, rather than a matrimonial
cord, I dare say. But, is not this a plain indication,
that even his own recommenders think him a mean
creature; and that he must be articled with—perhaps
for necessaries? But enough, and too much, of such 

a wretch as this! —You must not have him, my dear
—That I am clear in—tho' not so clear, how you
will be able to avoid it, except you assert the independence
to which your Estate gives you a title. 
* *
Here my Mother broke in upon me. She wanted
to see what I had written. I was silly enough to read
Solmes's character to her. 
She owned, that the man was not the most desirable
of men; and that he had not the happiest appearance: 
But what, said she, is person in a man? And I was
chidden for setting you against complying with your
Father's will. Then followed a lecture upon the preference
to be given in favour of a man who took care
to discharge all his obligations to the world, and to
keep all together, in opposition to a spendthrift or profligate: 
A fruitful subject you know, whether any
particular person be meant by it, or not. 
Why will these wise Parents, by saying too much
against the persons they dislike, put one upon defending
them? Lovelace is not a spendthrift; owes not obligations
to the world; though, I doubt not, profligate
enough. Then, putting one upon doing such but
common justice, we must needs be prepossessed, truly! 
—And so perhaps we are put upon Curiosities first, that
is to say, how such a one or his friends may think of
one: —And then, but too probably, comes in a distinguishing
preference, or something that looks exceedingly
like it. 
My Mother charged me at last, to write that side
over again—But excuse me, my good Mamma! I
would not have the character lost upon any consideration; 
since my vein ran freely into it: And I never
wrote to please myself, but I pleased you. A very
good reason why—We have but one mind between
us—Only, that sometimes you are a little too grave,
methinks; I, no doubt, a little too flippant in your
opinion. 

This difference in our tempers, however, is probably
the reason that we love one another so well, that
in the words of Norris, no third Love can come in
betwixt. Since each, in the other's eye, having something
amiss, and each loving the other well enough to
bear being told of it (and the rather perhaps as neither
wishes to mend it); this takes off a good deal from
that rivalry which might encourage a little (if not a
great deal) of that latent Spleen, which in time might
rise into Envy, and That into Ill-will. So, my dear,
if This be the case, let each keep her fault, and much
good may do her with it, say I: For there is Constitution
in both to plead for it: And what an Hero or
Heroine must he or she be, who can conquer a Constitutional
fault? Let it be Avarice, as in some I dare
not name: Let it be Gravity, as in my best friend: Or
let it be Flippancy, as in—I need not say whom. 
It is proper to acquaint you, that I was obliged to
comply with my Mother's Curiosity [My Mother has
her share, her full share, of Curiosity, my dear] and
to let her see here-and there some passages in your
Letters— 
I am broken in upon—But I will tell you by-and-by
what passed between my Mother and me on this
occasion—And the rather, as she had her Girl, her
favourite Hickman, and your Lovelace, all at
once in her eye, in her part of the conversation. 
* *
Thus it was.
I cannot but think, Nancy, said she, after all, that
there is a little hardship in Miss Harlowe's case: 
And yet (as her Mother says) it is a grating thing to
have a child, who was always noted for her duty in
smaller points, to stand in opposition to her parents
will, in the greater; yea, in the greatest of all. And
now, to middle the matter between both, it is pity,
that the man they favour has not that sort of merit
which a person of a mind so delicate as that of Miss 

Harlowe might reasonably expect in a Husband. — 
But then, this man is surely preferable to a Libertine: 
To a Libertine too, who has had a duel with her own
Brother: Fathers and Mothers must think so, were
it not for that circumstance—And it is strange if they
do not know best.’ 
And so they must, thought I, from their experience,
if no little dirty views give them also that prepossession
in one man's favour, which they are so apt to censure
their Daughters for having in another's—And if, as I
may add in your case, they have no creeping, old,
musty Uncle Antony's to strengthen their prepossessions,
as he does my Mother's—Poor, creeping, positive
soul, what has such an old Bachelor as he to do,
to prate about the Duties of Children to Parents; unless
he had a notion that Parents owe some to their
Children? But your Mother, by her indolent meekness,
let me call it, has spoiled all the three Brothers. 
‘But you see, child, proceeded my Mother, what a
different behaviour Mine is to You. I recommend
to you one of the soberest, yet politest, men in
England.—’ 
I think little of my Mother's politest, my dear. She
judges of honest Hickman for her Daughter, as she
would have done, I suppose, twenty years ago, for
herself. 
‘Of a good family, continued my Mother; a fine,
clear, and improving Estate [A prime consideration
with my Mother, as well as with some other folks,
whom you know]: And I beg and I pray you to encourage
him: At least, not to use him the worse,
for his being so obsequious to you.’ 
Yes, indeed! To use him kindly, that he may treat
me familiarly—But distance to the men-wretches is
best—I say. 
‘Yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I
would have you. What would you say, were I to 

treat you as Miss Harlowe's Father and Mother
treat her?’ 
‘What would I say, Madam! —That's easily answered. 
I would say nothing. Can you think such
usage, and to such a young Lady, is to be borne?’ 
‘Come, come, Nancy, be not so hasty: You have
heard but one side; and that there is more to be said
is plain, by your reading to me but parts of her
Letters. They are her Parents. They must know
best. Miss Harlowe, as fine a child as she is, must
have done something, must have said something
(You know how they loved her) to make them treat
her thus.’ 
‘But if she should be blameless, Madam, how does
your own supposition condemn them?’ 
Then came up Solmes's great Estate; his good management
of it—‘A little too NEAR indeed,’ was the
word! —[O how money-lovers, thought I, will palliate! 
Yet my Mother is a princess in spirit to this Solmes!] 
‘What strange effects, added she, have Prepossession
and Love upon young Ladies!’ 
I don't know how it is, my dear; but people take
high delight in finding out folks in Love. Curiosity
begets Curiosity: I believe that's the thing. 
She proceeded to praise Mr. Lovelace's person, and
his qualifications natural and acquired: But then she
would judge as Mothers will judge, and as Daughters
are very loth to judge: —But could say nothing in answer
to your offer of living single; and breaking with
him—if—if—[three or four If's she made of one good
one, If] that could be depended on. 
But still obedience without reserve, reason what I will,
is the burden of my Mother's song: And This, for
my sake, as well as for yours. 
I must needs say, that I think duty to Parents is a
very meritorious excellence: But I bless God I have
not your trials. We can all be good when we have
no temptation nor provocation to the contrary: —But 

few young persons (who can help themselves too as
you can) would bear what you bear. 
I will not mention all that is upon my mind, in relation
to the behaviour of your Father and Uncles, and
the rest of them, because I would not offend you: But
I have now a higher opinion of my own sagacity,
than ever I had, in that I could never cordially love
any one of your family but yourself. I am not born
to like them. But it is my duty to be sincere to my
friend: And this will excuse her Anna Howe to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe. 
I ought indeed to have excepted your Mother; a
Lady to be reverenced; and now to be pitied. What
must have been her treatment, to be thus subjugated,
as I may call it? Little did the good old Viscount think,
when he married his darling, his only daughter to so
well-appearing a gentleman, and to her own liking too,
that she would have been so much kept down. Another
would call your Father a Tyrant, if I must not: 
All the world that know him, do call him so; and if
you love your Mother, you should not be very angry
at the world for taking that liberty. 
Yet, after all, I cannot help thinking, that she is
the less to be pitied, as she may be said (be the Gout,
or what will, the occasion of his moroseness) to have
long behaved unworthy of her birth and fine qualities,
in yielding so much as she yields to encroaching spirits
[You may confine the reflection to your Brother, if it
will pain you to extend it]; and This for the sake of
preserving a temporary peace to herself; which was
the less worth endeavouring to preserve, as it always
produced a strength in the will of others, and was followed
by a weakness in her own, which subjected her
to an arbitrariness that of course grew, and became
established, upon her patience. —And now to give up
the most deserving of her children (against her judgment)
a sacrifice to the ambition and selfishness of the
least deserving! —But I fly from this subject—having, 

I fear, said too much to be forgiven—and yet much
less than is in my heart to say upon the over-meek
subject. 
Mr. Hickman is expected from London this evening. 
I have desired him to enquire after Lovelace's
life and conversation in town. If he has not enquired,
I shall be very angry with him. Don't expect a very
good account of either. He is certainly an intriguing
wretch, and full of inventions. 
Upon my word, I most heartily despise that Sex! I
wish they would let our Fathers and Mothers alone; 
teazing them to teaze us with their golden promises,
and protestations, and settlements, and the rest of their
ostentatious nonsense. How charmingly might you
and I live together, and despise them all! —But to be
cajoled, wire-drawn, and ensnared, like silly birds, into
a state of bondage, or vile subordination: To be
courted as Princesses for a few weeks, in order to be
treated as Slaves for the rest of our lives—Indeed, my
dear, as you say of Solmes, I cannot endure them! — 
But for your relations [friends no more will I call them,
unworthy as they are even of the other name!] to take
such a wretch's price as That; and to the cutting off
all reversions from his own family! —How must a
mind but commonly just resist such a measure! 
Mr. Hickman shall sound Lord M. upon the subject
you recommend. But beforehand, I can tell you
what he and what his Sisters will say, when they are
sounded. Who would not be proud of such a relation
as Miss Clarissa Harlowe? —Mrs. Fortescue told me,
that they are all your very great admirers. 
If I have not been clear enough in my advice about
what you shall do, let me say, that I can give it in
one word: It is only by re-urging you to Resume. 
If you do, all the rest will follow. 
We are told here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as
your Aunt Hervey, has given her opinion on the implicit
side of the question. If she can think, that the 

part she has had in your education, and your own
admirable talents and acquirements, are to be thrown
away upon such a worthless creature as Solmes, I
could heartily quarrel with her. You may think I
say this to lessen your regard for the good woman. 
And perhaps not wholly without cause, if you do. 
For, to own the truth, methinks, I don't love her
so well as I should do, did you love her so apparently
less, that I could be out of doubt, that you love me
better. 
Your Mother tells you, ‘That you will have
great trials: That you are under your Father's discipline.’ 
—The word is enough for me to despise
them who give occasion for its use. —‘That it is out
of her power to help you!’ And again: ‘That
if you have any favour to hope for, it must be by
the mediation of your Uncles.’ I suppose you will
write to the Oddities, since you are forbid to see them— 
But can it be, that such a Lady, such a Sister, such
a Wife, such a Mother, has no influence in her own
family? Who indeed, as you say, if this be so, would
marry, that can live single? My choler is again
beginning to rise. Resume, my dear: —And that
is all I will give myself time to say further, lest I
offend you when I cannot serve you—Only this, that
I am 
Your truly affectionate Friend and Servant,
Anna Howe. 