



Mrs. Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
(Superscribed, as directed in the preceding.) 

Friday, June 30. 
Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
You will wonder to receive a Letter from me. I
am sorry for the great distress you seem to be in. 
Such a hopeful young Lady as you were! —But see
what comes of disobedience to parents! 
For my part; altho' I pity you, yet I much more
pity your poor Father and Mother. Such education
as they gave you! such improvements as you made!
and such delight as they took in you! —And all come
to this!— 
But pray, Miss, don't make my Nancy guilty of
your fault; which is that of disobedience. I have
charged
her over and over not to correspond with one
who has made such a giddy step. It is not to her reputation,
I am sure. You know that I so charged
her; yet you go on corresponding together, to my
very great vexation; for she has been very perverse
upon it, more than once. Evil communication, Miss— 
You know the rest. 
Here, people cannot be unhappy by themselves, but
they must involve their friends and acquaintance, whose
discretion has kept them clear of their terrors, into near
as much unhappiness as if they had run into the like of
their own heads! Thus my poor daughter is always
in tears and grief. And she has postponed her own
felicity truly, because you are unhappy! 
If people, who seek their own ruin, could be the
only sufferers by their headstrong doings, it were something: 
But, O Miss, Miss! what have you to answer for,
who have made as many grieved hearts, as have known
you! The whole Sex is indeed wounded by you: For,
who but Miss Clarissa Harlowe was proposed by every
Father and Mother for a pattern for their Daughters? 
I write a long Letter, where I proposed to say but a 

few words; and those to forbid you writing to my
Nancy: And this as well because of the false step you
have made, as because it will grieve her poor heart, and
do you no good. If you love her, therefore, write not
to her. Your sad Letter came into my hands, Nancy
being abroad; and I shall not shew it her: For there
would be no comfort for her, if she saw it, nor for me,
whose delight she is—As you once was to your parents— 
But you seem to be sensible enough of your errors
now. —So are all giddy girls, when it is too late: And
what a crest-fallen figure then do the consequences of
their self-willed obstinacy and headstrongness compel
them to make! 
I may say too much: Only as I think it proper to
bear that testimony against your rashness which it behoves
every careful parent to bear: And none more
than 
Your compassionating well-wisher,
Annabella Howe. 
I send this by a special messenger, who has business
only so far as Barnet, because you shall have no
need to write again; knowing how you love
writing: And knowing likewise, that misfortune
makes people plaintive. 