



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday, April 27. 
I am sorry you return'd my Norris. But you
must be allow'd to do as you please. So must I, in
return. We must neither of us, perhaps, expect absolutely
of the other what is the rightest to be done: 
And yet few folks, so young, better know, what that
rightest is. I cannot separate myself from you, my
dear; altho' I give a double instance of my vanity in
this particular compliment to myself. 
I am most heartily rejoiced, that your prospects are
so much mended; and that, as I hoped, good has been
produced out of evil. What must the man have been,
what must have been his views, had he not taken such
a turn, upon a letter so vile, and treatment so unnatural,
himself principally the occasion of it? 
You know best your motives for suspending: But I
wish you had taken him at offers so earnest. Why 

should you not have permitted him to send for Lord
M.'s chaplain? If punctilio only was in the way,
and want of a licence, and of proper preparations,
and such-like, my service to you, my dear: And
there is ceremony tantamount to your ceremony. 
Don't, don't, my dear friend, again be so very
melancholy a decliner, as to prefer a shroud, when
the matter you wish for is in your power; and when,
as you have said justly heretofore, persons cannot die
when they will. 
But it is a strange perverseness in human nature,
that we covet at a distance, what when near we
slight. 
You have now but one point to pursue: That is
marriage. Let that be compassed. Leave the rest to
Providence; and follow as that leads. You'll have
a handsome man, a genteel man; he would be a wise
man, if he were not vain of his endowments, and
wild and intriguing: But while the eyes of many of
our sex, taken by so specious a form, and so brilliant
a spirit, encourage that vanity, you must be contented
to stay till grey hairs and prudence enter upon the
stage together. You would not have every thing in
the same man. 
I believe Mr. Hickman treads no crooked paths; 
but he hobbles most ungracefully in a strait one. Yet
Hickman, tho' he pleases not my eye, nor diverts my
ear, will not, as I believe, disgust the one, nor shock
the other. Your man, as I have lately said, will always
keep up attention; you will always be alive
with him, tho' perhaps more from fears than hopes: 
While Hickman will neither say anything to keep one
awake, nor yet, by shocking adventures, make one's
slumbers uneasy. 
I believe I now know which of the two men so prudent
a person as you would, at first, have chosen; 
nor doubt I, that you can guess which I would have
made choice of, if I might. But proud as we are, 

the proudest of us all can only refuse, and many of us
accept the but half-worthy, for fear a still worse
should offer. 
If the men had chosen for spirits like their own, altho'
Mr. Lovelace, at the long run, might have been
too many for me, I don't doubt but I should have
given heart-ake for heart-ake, for one half-year at
least; while you, with my dull-swift, would have
glided on as serenely, as calmly, as accountably, as
the succeeding seasons; and varying no otherwise
than as they, to bring on new beauties and conveniencies
to all about you. 
* *
I was going on in this stile—But my mamma
broke in upon me, with a prohibitory aspect. “She
gave me leave but for one letter only.” —She has
seen your odious uncle; and they have been in close
conference again. 
She has vexed me; I must lay this by till I hear
from you again; not knowing where to send it. 
Direct me to a Third place, as I desired in my former. 
I told my mother (on her challenging me), that I
was writing indeed, and to you: But it was only to
amuse myself; for I protested, that I knew not where
to send to you. 
I hope that your next may inform me of your nuptials,
altho' the next to that were to acquaint me, that
he was the ungratefullest monster on earth; as he must
be, if not the kindest husband in it. 
My mamma has vexed me. But so, on revising,
I wrote before. —But she has unhing'd me, as you call
it—Pretended to catechise Hickman, I assure you,
for contributing to our supposed correspondence. Catechise
him severely too, upon my word! —I believe I
have a sneaking kindness for the sneaking fellow; for 

I can't endure that any-body should treat him like a
fool but myself. 
I believe, between you and me, the good Lady forgot
herself. I heard her loud. —She possibly imagin'd,
that my papa was come to life again! —Yet the man's
meekness might have sooner convinced her, I should
have thought; for my papa, it seems, would talk as
loud as she: —I suppose, tho' within a few yards of
each other, as if both were out of their way, and were
hollowing at half a mile's distance, to get in again. 
I know you'll blame me for this sauciness. —But I
told you I was vexed: And if I had not a spirit, my
parentage on both sides might be doubted. 
You must not chide me too severely, however, because
I have learn'd of you not to defend myself in an
error: —And I own I am wrong: —And that's
enough. You won't be so generous in this case, as
you are in every other, if you don't think it is. 
Adieu, my dear! —I must, I will love you; and
love you for ever! So subscribes your 
Anna Howe. 