



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday, May 3. 
When I have already taken pains to acquaint
thee in full with my views, designs, and resolutions,
with regard to this admirable woman, it
is very extraordinary, that thou shouldst vapour as
thou dost in her behalf, when I have made no trial,
no attempt: And yet, givest it as thy opinion in a
former Letter, that advantage may be taken of the
situation she is in; and that she may be overcome. 
Most of thy reflections, particularly that which
respects the difference as to the joys to be given by
the Virtuous and the Libertine of the Sex, are fitter
to come in as after-reflections, than as antecedencies. 
I own with thee, and with the poet, That sweet are
the joys that come with willingness—But is it to be
expected, that a woman of education, and a lover of
forms, will yield before she is attacked? And have I
so much as summoned This to surrender? I doubt
not but I shall meet with difficulty. I must therefore
make my first effort by surprize. There may possibly
be some cruelty necessary: But there may be consent 

in struggle; there may be yielding in resistance. But
the first conflict over, whether the following may not
be weaker and weaker, till willingness ensue, is the
point to be tried. I will illustrate what I have said
by the Simile of a Bird new-caught. We begin, when
Boys, with Birds; and, when grown up, go on to
Women; and both, perhaps, in turn, experience
our sportive cruelty. 
Hast thou not observed the charming gradations
by which the ensnared Volatile has been brought to
bear with its new condition? How, at first, refusing
all sustenance, it beats and bruises itself against its
wires, till it makes its gay plumage fly about, and
overspread its well-secured cage. Now it gets out
its head; sticking only at its beautiful shoulders: 
Then, with difficulty, drawing back its head, it gasps
for breath, and, erectedly perched, with meditating
eyes, first surveys, and then attempts, its wired canopy. 
As it gets breath, with renewed rage, it beats
and bruises again its pretty head and sides, bites the
wires, and pecks at the fingers of its delighted tamer. 
Till at last, finding its efforts ineffectual, quite tired
and breathless, it lays itself down, and pants at the
bottom of the cage, seeming to bemoan its cruel fate,
and forfeited liberty. And after a few days its struggles
to escape still diminishing as it finds it to no purpose
to attempt it, its new habitation becomes familiar; 
and it hops about from perch to perch, resumes
its wonted chearfulness, and every day sings a song to
amuse itself, and reward its keeper. 
Now, let me tell thee, that I have known a Bird
actually starve itself, and die with grief, at its being
caught and caged. But never did I meet with a Woman,
who was so silly. —Yet have I heard the dear
souls most vehemently threaten their own lives on
such an occasion. But it is saying nothing in a Woman's
favour, if we do not allow her to have more
sense than a Bird. And yet we must all own, that
it is more difficult to catch a Bird than a Lady. 

&dotup;To pursue the comparison—If the disappointment
of the captivated Lady be very great, she
will threaten, indeed, as I said: She will even refuse
her sustenance for some time, especially if you
entreat her much, and she thinks she gives you concern
by her refusal. But then the Stomach of the
dear sullen one will soon return. 'Tis pretty to
see how she comes to by degrees: Pressed by appetite,
she will first steal, perhaps, a weeping morsel
by herself; then be brought to piddle and sigh,
and sigh and piddle, before you; now-and-then,
if her viands be unsavoury, swallowing with them
a relishing tear or two: Then she comes to eat and
drink, to oblige you: Then resolves to live for
your sake: Her exclamations will, in the next
place, be turned into blandishments; her vehement
upbraidings into gentle murmurings—How dare
you, Traitor!—into How could you, dearest? She
will draw you to her, instead of pushing you from
her: No longer, with unsheathed claws, will she
resist you; but, like a pretty, playful, wanton Kitten,
with gentle paws, and concealed talons, tap
your cheek, and with intermingled smiles, and tears,
and caresses, implore your consideration for her,
and your constancy: All the favour she then has to
ask of you! —And this is the time, were it given
to man to confine himself to one object, to be happier
every day than other. 
&dotup;Now, Belford, were I to go no further than I
have gone with my beloved Miss Harlowe, how
shall I know the difference between her and another
bird? To let her fly now, what a pretty jest would
that be! —How do I know, except I try, whether
she may not be brought to sing me a fine song, and
to be as well contented as I have brought other
birds to be, and very shy ones too? 
&dotup;But now let us reflect a little upon the confounded
partiality of us human creatures. I can give two 

or three familiar, and, if they were not familiar,
they would be shocking, instances of the cruelty
both of men and women, with respect to other
creatures, perhaps as worthy as (at least more innocent
than) themselves. By my Soul, Jack, there
is more of the Savage in human nature than we are
commonly aware of. Nor is it, after all, so much
amiss, that we sometimes avenge the more innocent
animals upon our own species. 
&dotup;To particulars: 
&dotup;How usual a thing is it for women as well as men,
without the least remorse, to ensnare, to cage, and
torment, and even with burning knitting-needles
to put out the eyes of the poor feather'd songster
[Thou seest I have not yet done with birds]; which
however, in proportion to its bulk, has more life
than themselves (for a bird is all soul); and of consequence
has as much feeling as the human creature! 
When at the same time, if an honest fellow,
by the gentlest persuasion, and the softest arts, has
the good luck to prevail upon a mew'd-up Lady to
countenance her own escape, and she consents to
break cage, and be set a flying into the all-chearing
air of liberty, Mercy on us! what an Outcry is generally
raised against him! 
&dotup;Just like what you and I once saw raised in a
paltry village near Chelmsford, after a poor hungry
fox, who, watching his opportunity, had seized by
the neck, and shouldered, a sleek-feathered goose: 
At what time we beheld the whole vicinage of boys
and girls, old men, and old women, all the furrows
and wrinkles of the latter filled up with malice for
the time; the old men armed with prongs, pitchforks,
clubs, and catsticks; the old women with
mops, brooms, fire-shovels, tongs, and pokers; 
and the younger fry with dirt, stones, and brickbats,
gathering as they ran like a snowball, in pursuit
of the wind-outstripping prowler; all the mongrel 

curs of the circumjacencies yelp, yelp, yelp, at
their heels, completing the horrid chorus. 
&dotup;Remembrest thou not this scene? Surely thou
must. My imagination, inflamed by a tender sympathy
for the danger of the adventurous marauder,
represents it to my eye, as if it were but yesterday. 
And dost thou not recollect how generously glad
we were, as if our own case, that honest Reynard,
by the help of a lucky stile, over which both old
and young tumbled upon one another, and a winding
course, escaped their brutal fury, and flying
catsticks; and how, in fancy, we followed him to
his undiscovered retreat; and imagined we beheld
the intrepid thief enjoying his dear-earned purchase
with a delight proportioned to his past danger? 
&dotup;I once made a charming little savage severely
repent the delight she took in seeing her tabby favourite
make cruel sport with a pretty sleek bead-eyed
mouse, before she devoured it. Egad, my
Love, said I to myself, as I sat meditating the
scene, I am determined to lie in wait for a fit opportunity
to try how thou wilt like to be tost over
my head, and be caught again: How thou wilt like
to be patted from me, and pulled to me. Yet will
I rather give life than take it away, as this barbarous
quadrupede has at last done by her prey. And
after all was over between my girl and me, I reminded
her of the incident to which my resolution
was owing. 
&dotup;Nor had I at another time any mercy upon the
daughter of an old Epicure, who had taught the
girl, without the least remorse, to roast Lobsters
alive; to cause a poor Pig to be whipt to death; to
scrape Carp the contrary way of the scales, making
them leap in the stew-pan, and dressing them in
their own blood for sawce. And this for luxury-sake,
and to provoke an appetite; which I had
without stimulation, in my way, and that I can tell
thee a very ravenous one. 

&dotup;Many more instances of the like nature could I
give, were I to leave nothing to thyself, to shew
that the best take the same liberties, and perhaps
worse, with some sort of creatures, that we take
with others; all creatures still! and creatures too,
as I have observed above, replete with strong life,
and sensible feeling! —If therefore people pretend
to mercy, let mercy go thro' all their actions. I
have read somewhere, That a merciful man is merciful
to his beast.’&dotup; 
So much at present for those parts of thy Letter
in which thou urgest to me motives of compassion for
the Lady. 
But I guess at thy principal motive in this thy earnestness
in behalf of this charming creature. I know
that thou correspondest with Lord M. who is impatient,
and has long been desirous, to see me shackled. 
And thou wantest to make a merit with the Uncle,
with a view to one of his Nieces. But knowest thou
not, that my consent will be wanting to complete thy
wishes? —And what a commendation will it be of
thee to such a girl as Charlotte, when I shall acquaint
her with the affront thou puttest upon the
whole Sex, by asking, Whether I think my reward,
when I have subdued the most charming woman in the
world, will be equal to my trouble? —Which, thinkest
thou, a woman of spirit will soonest forgive; the undervaluing
varlet who can put such a question; or him,
who prefers the pursuit and conquest of a fine woman
to all the joys of life? Have I not known even a virtuous
woman, as she would be thought, vow everlasting
antipathy to a man who gave out, that she
was too old for him to attempt? And did not Essex's
personal reflection on Queen Elizabeth, that she was
old and crooked, contribute more to his ruin, than his
treason? 
But another word or two, as to thy objection relating
to my Trouble and Reward. 

Does not the keen foxhunter endanger his neck
and his bones in pursuit of a vermin, which, when
killed, is neither fit food for men nor dogs? 
Do not the hunters of the noble game value the
venison less than the sport? 
Why then should I be reflected upon, and the Sex
affronted, for my patience and perseverance in the
most noble of all chaces; and for not being a poacher
in Love, as thy question may be made to imply? 
Learn of thy master, for the future, to treat more
respectfully a Sex that yields us our principal diversions
and delights. 
Proceed anon. 