



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

This is Wednesday; the day that I was to have
lost my Charmer for ever to the hideous Solmes! 
With what high satisfaction and heart's-ease can I now
sit down, and triumph over my Men in Straw at Harlowe-Place! 
Yet 'tis perhaps best for them, that she
got off as she did. Who knows what consequences
might have followed upon my attending her in; or
(if she had not met me) upon my projected visit, followed
by my Myrmidons? 

But had I even gone in with her un-accompanied,
I think I had but little reason for apprehension: For
well thou knowest, that the tame Spirits which value
themselves upon Reputation, and are held within the
skirts of the Law by political considerations only, may
be compared to an infectious Spider; which will run
into his hole the moment one of his threads is touched
by a finger that can crush him, leaving all his toils defenceless,
and to be brushed down at the will of the
potent invader. While a silly Fly, that has neither
courage nor strength to resist, no sooner gives notice,
by its buz and its struggles, of its being intangled, but
out steps the self-circumscribed tyrant, winds round and
round the poor insect, till he covers it with his bowel-spun
toils; and when so fully secured, that it can neither
move leg nor wing, suspends it, as if for a spectacle
to be exulted over: Then stalking to the door of his
cell, turns about, glotes over it at a distance; and,
sometimes advancing, sometimes retiring, preys at leisure
upon its vitals. 
But now I think of it, will not this comparison do
as well for the entangled girls, as for the tame spirits? 
—Better o' my conscience! —'Tis but comparing the
Spider to us brave fellows; and it quadrates. 
Whatever our hearts are in, our heads will follow. 
Begin with Spiders, with Flies, with what we will,
Girl is the centre of gravity, and we all naturally tend
to it. 
Nevertheless, to recur; I cannot but observe, that
these tame spirits stand a poor chance in a fairly offensive
war with such of us mad fellows as are above all
Law, and scorn to sculk behind the hypocritical screen
of Reputation. 
Thou knowest, that I never scrupled to throw myself
among numbers of adversaries; the more the safer: 
One or two, no fear, will take the part of a single adventurer,
if not intentionally, in fact; holding him in,
while others hold in the principal antagonist, to the 

augmentation of their mutual prowess, till both are
prevailed upon to compromise, or one to absent. So that
upon the whole, the Law-breakers have the advantage
of the Law-keepers, all the world over; at least for
a time, and till they have run to the end of their race. 
Add to this, in the question between me and the Harlowes,
that the whole family of them must know that
they have injured me—must therefore be afraid of me. 
—Did they not, at their own Church, cluster together
like bees, when they saw me enter it? Nor knew they
which should venture out first, when the Service was
over. 
James, indeed, was not there. If he had, he would
perhaps have endeavoured to look valiant. But there
is a sort of valour in the face, which shews fear in the
heart: Just such a face would James Harlowe's have
been, had I made them a visit. 
When I have had such a face and such a heart as I
have described to deal with, I have been all calm and
serene, and left it to the friends of the blusterer (as I
have done to the Harlowes) to do my work for me. 
I am about mustering up in my memory, all that I
have ever done, that has been thought praise-worthy,
or but barely tolerable. I am afraid thou canst not
help me to many remembrances of this sort; because
I never was so bad as since I have known thee. 
Have I not had it in my heart to do some good that
thou canst remind me of? Study for me, Jack. I
have recollected several instances, which I think will
tell in—But see if thou canst not help me to some which
I may have forgot. 
This I may venture to say, That the principal blot
in my escutcheon is owing to these Girls, these confounded
Girls. But for Them, I could go to church
with a good conscience: But when I do, There they
are. Every-where does Satan spread his Snares for me! 
But, now I think of it, what if our governors should
appoint Churches for the Women only, and others for the 

Men? —Full as proper, I think, for the promoting of
true piety in both [Much better than the Synagogue-lattices]
as separate Boarding-schools for their education. 
There are already male and female Dedications of
Churches. 
St. Swithin's, St. Stephen's, St. Thomas's, St. George's,
and so forth, might be appropriated to the men; and
the Santa Katharina's, Santa Anna's, Santa Maria's,
Santa Margaretta's, for the women. 
Yet, were it so, and life to be the forfeiture of being
found at the female Churches, I believe that I, like a
second Clodius, should change my dress, to come at my
Portia or Pompeia, tho' one the Daughter of a Cato,
the other the Wife of a Cæsar. 
But how I excurse! —Yet thou usedst to say, thou
likedst my excursions. If thou dost, thou'lt have enow
of them: For I never had a subject I so much adored; 
and with which I shall probably be compelled to have so
much patience, before I strike the blow; if the blow
I do strike. 
But let me call myself back to my recordation-subject
—Thou needest not remind me of my Rosebud. I
have her in my head; and moreover have contrived to
give my Fair-one an hint of that affair, by the agency
of honest Joseph Leman (a) ; altho' I have not reaped
the hoped-for credit of her acknowlegement. 
That's the devil; and it was always my hard fate— 
Every-thing I do that is good, is but as I ought! — 
Every-thing of a contrary nature is brought into the
most glaring light against me! —Is this fair? Ought
not a balance to be struck? and the Credit carried to
my account? —Yet I must own too, that I half-grudge
Johnny this blooming maiden; for, in truth, I think
a fine woman too rich a jewel to hang about a poor
man's neck. 
Surely, Jack, if I am guilty of a fault in my universal
adorations of the Sex, the women in general
ought to love me the better for it. 

And so they do, I thank them heartily; except here
and there a covetous little rogue comes cross me, who,
under the pretence of loving virtue for its own sake,
wants to have me all to herself. 
I have rambled enough. 
Adieu, for the present. 