


Altho' it will be seen, and confess'd, (notwithstanding
the Sheets, which compose these Two
additional Volumes, might have been easily formed
into Three) how difficult it was to reduce Materials
so ample within the Compass which the Editor
had assigned them; yet, being unwilling to deserve
a Suspicion, that the Extent of this Work was to be
measur'd but by the Patience of its Readers, He
thinks proper to conclude in this Place: Subjoining,
in order to elucidate the Whole, a brief Note of the
following Facts. 
That Mr. B. continued (after the Affair that
took Date at the Masquerade, and so happily concluded)
to be one of the best and most exemplary of
Men, an Honour to his Country, both in his publick
and private Capacity, having, at the Instances
of some of his Friends, in very elevated Stations,
accepted of an honourable Imployment abroad in the
Service of the State; which he discharged in such a
manner, as might be expected from his Qualifications,
and Knowlege of the World: And on his
Return, after an Absence of Three Years, resisting
all the Temptations of Ambition, devoted himself
to his privater Duties, and join'd with his excellent
Lady in every pious Wish of her Heart: Adorning
the married Life with all the Warmth of an elegant
Tenderness: Beloved by his Tenants, respected by
his Neighbours, rever'd by his Children, and almost
ador'd by the Poor, in every County where his
Estates gave him Interest, as well for his own bountiful
Temper, as for the Charities which he permitted 

to be dispensed, with so liberal a Hand, by
the Representative of his Heart, his dear Lady. 
That she made him the Father of Seven fine Children,
Five Sons, and Two Daughters, all adorn'd
and accomplish'd by Nature, to be the Joy and
Delight of such Parents; being educated, in every
respect, by the Rules of their inimitable Mother, in
that Book which she mentions to have written for
the Revisal and Correction of her Consort; the Contents
of which may be gather'd from her Remarks
upon Mr. Locke's Treatise of Education, in her
Letters to Mr. B. and in those to Lady G. 
That Miss Goodwin, at the Age of Eighteen,
was marry'd to a young Gentleman of fine Parts,
and great Sobriety and Virtue: And that both she
and her Spouse, in every material Part of their Conduct,
and in their Behaviour to one another, emulated
the great and good Examples set them by
Mr. and Mrs. B. 
That Lord Davers dying Two Years before this
Marriage, his Lady went to reside at the Hall in
Lincolnshire, the Place of her Birth, that she might
enjoy the Company and Conversation of her excellent
Sister; who, for Conveniency of the Chapel,
and Advantage of Room and Situation, had prevail'd
upon Mr. B. to make that the chief Place of his
Residence; and there the noble Lady lived long
(in the strictest Friendship with the happy Pair) a
resolv'd and an honourable Relict of her affectionate
Lord. 
That the worthy Mr. Andrews, and the
happy good Woman his Wife, lived together in
the calm, conscious Sweetness, set forth in their
Letters, for the Space of Twelve Years, at the
Kentish Farm; where the good old Gentlewoman
then died first, full of Comfort and Years, her dutiful 

Daughter performing the last pious Offices to so
beloved and so loving a Parent: Her Husband surviving
her about a Year only. 
That Lady G. Miss Darnford that was, after
a happy Marriage of several Years, died in Childbed
of her Fourth Child; to the inexpressible Concern of
her affectionate Consort, and of her dear Friend
Mrs. B. 
That Mr. Longman liv'd to a great Age in the
worthy Family, much esteemed by every one,
having trained up a diligent Youth, whom he had
recommended, to ease him in his Business, and who,
answering Expectation, succeeded him in it. 
That, at last, dying rich, out of his great Love
and Gratitude to the honourable Family, in whose
Service he had acquir'd most of his Fortune, and
in Disgust to his nearest Relations, who had perversely
disoblig'd him, he bequeath'd to Three of
them One hundred Pounds apiece, and left all the
rest to his honoured Principal Mr. B.: Who, as soon
as he came to know it, being at that Time abroad,
directed his Lady to call together the Relations of
the old Gentleman; and, after touching them to the
Heart with a just and effectual Reproof, when she
found them fill'd with due Sense of their Demerit,
which had been the Cause of their suffering, then to
divide the Whole, which had been left him, among
them, according to their Proximity of Blood: An
Action worthy of so generous and ennobled a Spirit; 
and which procured him the Prayers and Blessings,
not only of the Benefited, but of all who
heard of it. For it is easy to imagine, how chearfully
and how gracefully his benevolent Lady discharged
a Command so well suited to her natural
Generosity. 
