



&dotup;Mr. Brand, To Mr. John Walton. 

&dotup;Sat. Night, Sept. 2. 
&dotup;Dear Mr. Walton,
&dotup;I am obliged to you for the very handsomely penned
(and elegantly written) Letter which you have sent
me on purpose to do justice to the character of the
younger Miss Harlowe: And yet I must tell you,
that I had reason, before that came, to think (and to
know indeed) that we were all wrong: And so I
had employed the greatest part of this week, in
drawing up an apologetical Letter to my worthy Patron
Mr. John Harlowe, in order to set all matters
right between me and them, and (as far as I could)
between them and Miss. So it required little more
than connexion and transcribing, when I received
yours; and it will be with Mr. Harlowe aforesaid,
to-morrow morning; and this, and the copy of that,
will be with you on Monday morning. 

&dotup;You cannot imagine how sorry I am, that you,
and Mrs. Walton, and Mrs. Barker, and I myself,
should have taken matters up so lightly (judging,
alas-a-day! by appearance and conjecture) where
character and reputation are concerned. Horace
says truly, 

&dotup;Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum.
&dotup;That is, Words once spoken cannot be recalled: But
(Mr. Walton) they may be contradicted by other
Words; and we may confess ourselves guilty of a
mistake; and express our concern for being mistaken; 
and resolve to make our mistake a warning to us for
the future: And this is all that can be done; and
what every worthy mind will do; and what nobody
can be readier to do, than we four undesigning offenders
(as I see by your Letter, on your part; and
as you will see by the inclosed copy, on mine); which,
if it be received as I think it ought (and as I believe it
will) must give me a speedy opportunity to see you,
when I visit the Lady; to whom (as you will see in
it) I expect to be sent up with the olive-branch. 
&dotup;The matter in which we all erred, must be owned
to be very nice; and Mr. (Belford's character considered)
appearances ran very strong against the Lady: 
But all that this serveth to shew, is, That in doubtful
matters the wisest people may be mistaken; for so saith
the Poet, 

&dotup;Fallitur in dubiis hominum solertia rebus.
&dotup;If you have an opportunity, you may (as if from
yourself, and unknown to me) shew the inclosed to
Mr. Belford, who (you tell me) resenteth the matter
very heinously; but not to let him see, or hear
read, those words that relate to him, in the paragraph
at the bottom of the second page, beginning
[But yet I do insist upon it] to the End of that paragraph; 
for one would not make one's self enemies, 

you know: And I have reason to think, that this
Mr. Belford is as passionate and fierce a man as Mr.
Lovelace. What pity it is the Lady could find no
worthier a Protector! You may paste those lines
over with blue or black paper, before he seeth it; 
and if he insisteth upon taking a copy of my Letter
(for he, or any-body, that seeth it, or heareth it
read, will, no doubt, be glad to have by them the
copy of a Letter so full of the sentiments of the noblest
writers of antiquity, and so well adapted, as I will
be bold to say they are, to the point in hand; I say,
if he insisteth upon taking a copy) let him give you
the strongest assurances not to suffer it to be printed,
on any account; and I make the same request to you,
that you will not: For if any-thing be to be made
of a man's works, who, but the author, should have
the advantage? And if the Spectators, the Tatlers,
the Examiners, the Guardians, and other of our
polite papers, make such a strutting with a single
verse, or so, by way of motto, in the front of each
day's paper; and if other authors pride themselves in
finding out and embellishing the title-pages of their
books with a verse or adage from the classical writers; 
what a figure would such a Letter as the inclosed
make, so full fraught with admirable precepts, and
à-propos quotations, from the best authority? 
&dotup;I have been told, that a certain noble Lord, who
once sat himself down to write a pamphlet in behalf
of a great minister, after taking infinite pains to no
purpose to find a Latin motto, gave commission to a
friend of his to offer to any one, who could help him
to a suitable one, but of one or two lines, a hamper
of claret. Accordingly, his Lordship had a motto
found him from Juvenal; which he unhappily mistaking
(not knowing Juvenal was a poet) printed as
a prose sentence in his title-page. 
&dotup;If then one or two lines were of so much worth
(A hamper of claret! No less!) of what inestimable 

value would such a Letter as mine be deemed? —And
who knoweth but that this noble P&wblank;r (who is now
(a)  living) if he should happen to see this Letter
shining with such a glorious string of jewels, might
give the writer a scarf, in order to have him always
at hand, or be a means (some way or other) to bring
him into notice? And I will be bold to say (bad as
the world is) a man of sound learning wanteth nothing
but an initiation, to make his fortune. 
&dotup;I hope (my good friend) that the Lady will not
die: I shall be much grieved, if she doth; and the
more, because of mine unhappy misrepresentation: 
So will you, for the same cause: So will her parents
and friends. They are very rich and very worthy
Gentlefolks. 
&dotup;But let me tell you, by-the-by, that they had carried
the matter against her so far, that I believe in
my heart they were glad to justify themselves by my
report; and would have been less pleased, had I
made a more favourable one: And yet in their hearts
they dote upon her. But now they are all (as I hear)
inclined to be friends with her, and forgive her; 
her Brother, as well as the rest. 
&dotup;But their Cousin, Col. Morden, a very fine Gentleman,
hath had such high words with them, and
they with him, that they know not how to stoop,
lest it should look like being frighted into an Accommodation. 
Hence it is, that I have taken the greater
liberty to press the Reconciliation; and I hope in
such good season, that they will all be pleased with it: 
For can they have a better handle to save their pride
all round, than by my Mediation? And let me tell
you (inter nos, betwixt ourselves) very proud they all
are. 
&dotup;By this honest means (for by dishonest ones I would
not be Archbishop of Canterbury) I hope to please
every-body; to be forgiven, in the first place, by 

the Lady (whom, being a lover of learning and learned
men, I shall have great opportunities of obliging— 
For, when she departed from her Father's house, I
had but just the honour of her notice, and she seemed
highly pleased with my conversation); and, next, to
be thanked and respected by her parents, and all her
family; as I am (I bless God for it) by my dear
friend Mr. John Harlowe: Who indeed is a man
that professeth a great esteem for men of erudition; and
who (with singular delight, I know) will run over
with me the Authorities I have quoted, and wonder
at my memory, and the happy knack I have of recommending
mine own sense of things in the words
of the greatest sages of antiquity. 
&dotup;Excuse me, my good friend, for this seeming vanity. 
The great Cicero (you must have heard, I
suppose) had a much greater spice of it, and wrote
a long Letter begging and praying to be flattered: But
if I say less of myself, than other people (who know
me) say of me, I think I keep a medium between
vanity and false modesty; the latter of which oftentimes
gives itself the lye, when it is declaring off the
compliments, that every-body gives it as its due: An
hypocrisy, as well as folly, that (I hope) I shall for
ever scorn to be guilty of. 
&dotup;I have another reason (as I may tell to you, my
old schoolfellow) to make me wish for this fine Lady's
recovery and health; and that is (by some distant intimations)
I have heard from Mr. John Harlowe,
that it is very likely (because of the Slur she hath received)
that she will chuse to live privately and penitently
—and will probably (when she cometh into
her Estate) keep a Chaplain to direct her in her
devotions and penitence—If she doth, who can stand
a better chance than myself? —And as I find (by your
account, as well as by every-body's) that she is innocent
as to intention, and is resolved never to think
of Mr. Lovelace more, Who knoweth what (in time) 

may happen? —And yet it must be after Mr. Lovelace's
death (which may possibly sooner happen than
he thinketh of, by means of his detestable courses): For
after all, a man who is of public utility, ought not
(for the finest woman in the world) to lay his throat
at the mercy of a man who boggleth at nothing. 
&dotup;I beseech you, let not this hint go farther than
to yourself, your Spouse, and Mrs. Barker. I know
I may trust my life in your hands and theirs. There
have been (let me tell ye) unlikelier things come to
pass, and that with rich widows (some of quality
truly!) whose choice, in their first marriages hath
(perhaps) been guided by motives of convenience, or
mere corporalities, as I may say; but who by their
second have had for their view the corporal and spiritual
mingled; which is the most eligible (no doubt)
to substances composed of both, as men and women
are. 
&dotup;Nor think (Sir) that should such a thing come to
pass, either would be disgraced; since the Lady, in
me, would marry a Gentleman, and a Scholar: And
as to mine own honour, as the Slur would bring her
high fortunes down to an equivalence with my mean
ones (if fortune only, and not merit, be considered)
so hath not the life of this Lady been so tainted (either
by length of time, or naughtiness of practice) as to
put her on a foot with the cast Abigails; that too-too
often (God knoweth) are thought good enough for
a young Clergyman, who, perhaps, is drawn in by a
poor benefice; and (if the wicked one be not quite
worn out) groweth poorer and poorer upon it, by
an encrease of family he knoweth not whether is most
his, or his noble (ignoble I should say) patron's. 
&dotup;But, all this apart, and in confidence. 
&dotup;I know you made at school but a small progress in
languages. So I have restrained myself from many
illustrations from the classics, that I could have filled
this Letter with (as I have done the inclosed one): 

And, being at a distance, I cannot explain them to
you, as I do to my friend Mr. John Harlowe; who
(after all) is obliged to me for pointing out to him
many beauties of the authors I quote, which otherwise
would lie concealed from him, as they must
from every common observer. —But this (too) inter
nos —For he would not take it well to have it known
—Jays (you know, old Schoolfellow, Jays, you
know) will strut in peacocks feathers. 
&dotup;But whither am I running? I never know where
to end, when I get upon learned topics. And albeit I
cannot compliment you with the name of a learned
man; yet are you a sensible man; and (as such) must
have pleasure in learned men, and in their writings. 
&dotup;In this confidence (Mr. Walton) with my kind
respects to the good Ladies (your Spouse and Sister)
and in hopes, for the young Lady's sake, soon to
follow this long, long epistle, in person, I conclude
myself 
&dotup;Your loving and faithful friend,
&dotup;Elias Brand. 
&dotup;You will perhaps, Mr. Walton, wonder at the
meaning of the lines drawn under many of the
words and sentences (Underscoring we call
it); and were my Letters to be printed, those
would be put in a different character. Now,
you must know, Sir, that we learned men do
this to point out to the readers who are not so
learned, where the jet of our arguments lieth,
and the emphasis they are to lay upon those
words; whereby they will take in readily our
sense and cogency. Some pragmatical people
have said, that an author who doth a great deal
of this, either calleth his readers fools, or tacitly
condemneth his own style, as supposing his
meaning would be dark without it, or that all
his force lay in words. But all of those with 

whom I have conversed in the learned way,
think as I think. And to give a very pretty,
tho' familiar illustration, I have considered a
page distinguished by different characters, as a
verdant field overspread with butter-flowers and
daisies, and other summer-flowers. These the
poets liken to enamelling—Have you not read in
the poets of enamelled meads, and so forth?&dotup; 