


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Friday, March 31. 
You now, my dear friends, have before
you this affecting story, as far as Dr. Bartlett
can give it. My cousins express a
good deal of concern for your Harriet:
So does Miss Grandison: So do my Lord
and Lady L.: And the more, as I seem to carry off
the matter with assumed bravery. This their kind
concern for me looks, however, as if they thought
me an hypocrite; and I suppose, therefore, that I act
my part very aukwardly. 
But, my dear, as this case is one of those few in
which a woman can shew a bravery of spirit, I think
an endeavour after it is laudable; and the rather, as
in my conduct I aim at giving a tacit example to
Miss Jervois. 

The doctor has whisper'd to me, that Lady Olivia
is actually on her way to England; and that the intelligence
Sir Charles received of her intention, was
one of the things that disturbed him, as the news of
his beloved Signor Jeronymo's dangerous condition was
another. 
Lady Anne S. it seems, has not yet given up her
hopes of Sir Charles. The two sisters, who once
favoured her above all the women they knew, have
not been able to bring themselves to acquaint a Lady
of her rank, merit, and fortune, that there can be no
hopes; and they are still more loth to say, that their
brother thinks himself under some obligation to a foreign
lady. Yet you know that this was always what
we were afraid of: But, who, now, will say afraid,
that knows the merit of Clementina? 
I wish, methinks, that this man were proud, vain,
arrogant, and a boaster. How easily then might one
throw off one's shackles! 
Lord G. is very diligent in his court to Miss Grandison. 
His father and aunt are to visit her this afternoon. 
She behaves whimsically to my Lord: Yet I
cannot think that she greatly dislikes him. 
The Earl of D. and the Countess Dowager are both
in town. The Countess made a visit to my cousin
Reeves last Tuesday: She spoke of me very kindly:
She says that my Lord has heard so much of me, that
he is very desirous of seeing me: But she was pleased
to say, that since my heart was not disengaged, she
should be afraid of the consequences of his visit to
himself. 
My grandmamma, tho' she was so kindly fond of
me, would not suffer me to live with her; because
she thought, that her contemplative temper might influence
mine, and make me grave, at a time of life,
when she is always saying, that chearfulness is most
becoming: She would therefore turn over her girl to
the best of aunts. But now I fansy, she will allow 

me to be more than two days in a week her attendant. 
My uncle Selby will be glad to spare me. I shall not be
able to bear a jest: And then, what shall I be good for? 
I have made a fine hand of coming to town, he
says: And so I have: But if my heart is not quite
so easy as it was, it is I hope a better, at least, not a
worse heart than I brought up with me. Could I only
have admired this man, my excursion would not have
been unhappy. But this gratitude, this entangling,
with all its painful consequence—But let me say,
with my grandmamma, the man is Sir Charles Grandison! 
The very man by whose virtues a Clementina
was attracted. Upon my word, my dear, unhappy
as she is, I rank her with the first of women. 
I have not had a great deal of Sir Charles Grandison's
company; but yet more, I am afraid, than I
shall ever have again. Very true—Q heart! the most
wayward of hearts, sigh if thou wilt! 
You have seen how little he was with us, when we
were absolutely in his reach, and when he, as we
thought, was in ours. But such a man cannot, ought
not to be engrossed by one family. Bless me, Lucy,
when he comes into public life (for has not his country
a superior claim to him beyond every private one?)
what moment can he have at liberty? Let me enumerate
some of his present engagements that we know of. 
The Danby family must have some farther portion
of his time. 
The executorship in the disposal of the 3000l. in
charity, in France as well as in England, will take up
a good deal more. 
My Lord W. may be said to be under his tutelage,
as to the future happiness of his life. 
Miss Jervois's affairs, and the care he has for her person,
engage much of his attention. 
He is his own steward. 
He is making alterations at Grandison-hall; and
has a large genteel neighbourhood there, who long to 

have him reside among them; and he himself is fond
of that seat. 
His estate in Ireland is in a prosperous way, from
the works he set on foot there, when he was on the
spot; and he talks, as Dr. Bartlett has hinted to us, of
making another visit to it. 
His sister's match with Lord G. is one of his cares. 
He has services to perform for his friend Beauchamp,
with his father and mother-in-law, for the facilitating
his coming over. 
The apprehended visit of Olivia gives him disturbance: 
And the Bologna family in its various branches, and
more especially Signor Jeronymo's dangerous state of
health, and Signora Clementina's disorder'd mind— 
O Lucy! —What leisure has this man to be in love? — 
Yet how can I say so, when he is in love already? 
And with Clementina—And don't you think, that
when he goes to France on the executorship account,
he will make a visit to Bologna? —Ah, my dear, to
be sure he will! 
After he has left England therefore, which I suppose
he will quickly do, and when I am in Northamptonshire,
what opportunities will your Harriet have to
see him, except she can obtain, as a favour, the power
of obliging his Emily, in her request to be with her? 
Then, Lucy, he may, on his return to England,
once a year or so, on his visiting his ward, see, and
thank for her care and love of his Emily, his halfestranged
Harriet! —Perhaps Lady Clementina Grandison
will be with him! God restore her! Surely I
shall be capable, if she be Lady Grandison, of rejoicing
in her recovery!— 
Fie upon it! —Why this involuntary tear? You
will see it by the large blot it has made, if I did not
mention it. 
Excellent man! Dr. Bartlett has just been telling 

me of a morning visit he received, before he went
out of town, from the two sons of Mrs. Oldham. 
One of them is about seven years old; the other
about five; very fine children. He embraced them,
the doctor says, with as much tenderness, as if they
were children of his own mother. He enquired into
their inclinations, behaviour, diversions; and engaged
equally their love and reverence. 
He told them, that, if they were good, he would
love them; and said, he had a dear friend, whom he
reverenced as his father, a man with white curling
locks, he told the children, that they might know him
at first sight, who would now-and-then, as he happened
to be in town, make enquiries after their good
behaviour, and reward them, as they gave him cause. 
Accordingly he had desired Dr. Bartlett to give them
occasionally his countenance; as also to let their mother
know, that he should be glad of a visit from her,
and her three children, on his return to town. 
The doctor had been to see her when he came to
me. He found all three with her. The two younger,
impressed by the venerable description Sir Charles had
given of him, voluntarily, the younger by the elder's
example, fell down on their knees before him, and
begged his blessing. 
Mr. Oldham is about eighteen years of age; a wellinclined,
well-educated youth. He was full of acknowlegements
of the favour done him in this invitation. 
The grateful mother could not contain herself. 
Blessings without number, she invoked on her benefactor-for
his goodness in taking such kind notice of
her two sons, as he had done; and said, he had been,
ever since his gracious behaviour to her in Essex, the
first and last in her prayers to heaven. But the invitation
to herself, she declared, was too great an honour
for her to accept of: She should not be able to 

stand in his presence. Alas! Sir, said she, can the
severest, truest penitence recall the guilty past? 
The doctor said, That Sir Charles Grandison ever
made it a rule with him, to raise the dejected and
humbled spirit. Your birth and education, madam,
intitle you to a place in the first company: And where
there are two lights in which the behaviour of any
person may be set, tho' there has been unhappiness,
he always remembers the most favourable, and forgets
the other. I would advise you, madam (as he has invited
you) by all means to come. He speaks with
pleasure of your humility and good sense. 
The doctor told me, that Sir Charles had made enquiries
after the marriage of Major O-Hara with
Mrs. Jervois, and had satisfied himself that they were
actually man and wife. Methinks I am glad for Miss
Jervois's sake, that her mother has changed her name. 
They lived not happily together since their last enterprize:
For the man, who had long been a sufferer from
poverty, was in fear of losing one half at least of his
wife's annuity, by what passed on that occasion; and
accused her of putting him upon the misbehaviour he
was guilty of; which had brought upon him, he said,
the resentments of a man admired by all the world. 
The attorney, who visited Sir Charles from these
people, at their request, waited on him again, in their
names, with hopes that they should not suffer in their
annuity, and expressing their concern for having offended
him. 
Mrs. O-Hara also requested it as a favour to see her
daughter. 
Sir Charles commissioned the attorney, who is a
man of repute, to tell them, that if Mrs. O-Hara
would come to St. James's Square next Wednesday
about five o'clock, Miss Jervois should be introduced
to her; and she should be welcome to bring with her
her husband, and Captain Salmonet, that they might
be convinced he bore no ill-will to either of them. 

Adieu, till by-and-by. Miss Grandison is come, in
one of her usual hurries, to oblige me to be present at
the visit to be made her this afternoon, by the Earl of
G. and Lady Gertrude, his sister, a maiden lady advanced
in years, who is exceedingly fond of her nephew,
and intends to make him heir of her large fortune. 
Friday Night. 
The Earl is an agreeable man: Lady Gertrude is
a very agreeable woman. They saw Miss Grandison
with the young Lord's eyes; and were better pleased
with her, as I told her afterwards, than I should have
been, or than they would, had they known her as well
as I do. She doubted not, she answer'd me, but I
should find fault with her; and yet she was as good
as for her life she could be. 
Such an archness in every motion! Such a turn of
the eye to me on my Lord G's assiduities! Such a fear
in him of her correcting glance! Such an half-timid,
half-free parade when he had done any-thing that he
intended to be obliging, and now-and-then an aiming
at raillery, as if he was not very much afraid of her,
and dared to speak his mind even to her! On her
part, on those occasions, such an air, as if she had a
learner before her; and was ready to rap his knuckles,
had nobody been present to mediate for him; that
tho' I could not but love her for her very archness,
yet in my mind, I could, for their sakes, but more for
her own, have severely chidden her. 
She is a charming woman; and every-thing she
says and does becomes her. But I am so much afraid
of what may be the case, when the lover is changed
into the husband, that I wish to myself now-and-then,
when I see her so lively, that she would remember
that there was once such a man as Captain Anderson. 
But she makes it a rule, she says, to remember nothing
that will vex her. 
Is not my memory (said she once) given me for my 

benefit, and shall I make it my torment? No, Harriet,
I will leave that to be done by you wise ones,
and see what you will get by it. 
Why this, Charlotte, replied I, the wise ones may
have a chance to get by it—They will very probably, by
remembring past mistakes, avoid many inconveniencies
into which forgetfulness will run you lively ones. 
Well, well, returned she, we are not all of us
born to equal honour. Some of us are to be set up for
warnings, some for examples: And the first are generally
of greater use to the world than the other. 
Now, Charlotte, said I, do you destroy the force of
your own argument. Can the person who is singled
out for the warning, be near so happy, as she that is
set up for the example? 
You are right as far as I know, Harriet: But I obey
the present impulse, and try to find an excuse afterwards
for what that puts me upon: And all the difference
is this, as to the reward, I have a joy: You a
comfort: But comfort is a poor word; and I can't
bear it. 
So Biddy in the Tender Husband would have said,
Charlotte. But poor as the word is with you and her,
give me comfort rather than joy, if they must be separated. 
But I see not but that a woman of my Charlotte's
happy turn may have both. 
She tapped my cheek—Take that, Harriet, for
making a Biddy of me. I believe, if you have not joy,
you have comfort, in your severity. 
My heart as well as my cheek glowed at the praises
the Earl and the Lady both joined in (with a fervor
that was creditable to their own hearts) of Sir Charles
Grandison, while they told us what this man, and
that woman of quality or consideration said of him. 
Who would not be good? What is life without reputation? 
Do we not wish to be remembred with
honour after death? And what a share of it has this
excellent man in his life! —May nothing for the honour-sake 

of human nature, to which he is so great an
ornament, ever happen to tarnish it! 
They made me an hundred fine compliments. I
could not but be pleased at standing well in their opinion:
But, believe me, my dear, I did not enjoy their
praises of me, as I did those they gave him. Indeed
I had the presumption, from the approbation given to
what they said of him by my own heart, to imagine
myself a sharer in them, tho' not in his merits. Oh,
Lucy! ought there not to have been a relation between
us, since what I have said, from what I found in myself
on hearing him praised, is a demonstration of a
regard for him superior to the love of self? 
Adieu, my Lucy. I know I have all your prayers. 
Adieu, my Dear! 

