



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

King's-Arms, Pallmall, Thursday Two o' clock. 
Several billets passed between us before I went out,
by the Internuncioship of Dorcas: For which reason
mine are superscribed by her married name. —She
would not open her door to receive them; lest I should
be near it, I suppose: So Dorcas was forced to put
them under the door (after copying them for thee); 
and thence to take the answers. Read them, if thou
wilt, at this place. 

To Mrs. Lovelace.
Indeed, my dearest Life, you carry this matter too
far. What will the people below, who suppose us
one as to the Ceremony, think of so great a Niceness? 
Liberties so innocent! the Occasion so accidental! 
—You will expose yourself as well as me. — 
Hitherto they know nothing of what has passed. And
what indeed has passed, to occasion all this resentment? 
—I am sure, you will not, by a breach of your
word of honour, give me reason to conclude, that,
had I not obeyed yon, I could have fared no worse. 
Most sincerely do I repent the offence given to your
delicacy—But must I, for so accidental an occurrence,
be branded by such shocking names? —Vilest of men,
and most detestable of plotters, are hard words! —From
the Pen of such a Lady too. 

If you step up another pair of stairs, you will be
convinced, that, however detestable I may be to you,
I am no plotter in this affair. 
I must insist upon seeing you, in order to take your
directions upon some of the subjects we talked of
yesterday in the evening. 
All that is more than necessary is too much. I claim
your promised pardon, and wish to plead it on my
knees. 
I beg your presence in the Dining-room for one
quarter of an hour, and I will then leave you for the
day. I am, 
My dearest Life,
Your ever-adoring and truly penitent,
Lovelace. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
I will not see you. I cannot see you. I have no
directions to give you. Let Providence decide for
me as it pleases. 
The more I reflect upon your vileness, your ingrateful,
your barbarous vileness, the more I am exasperated
against you. 
You are the last person, whose judgment I will take
upon what is or is not carried too far in matters of
decency. 
'Tis grievous to me to write, or even to think of
you at present. Urge me no more then. Once more,
I will not see you. Nor care I, now you have made
me vile to myself, what other people think of me. 

To Mrs. Lovelace.
Again, Madam, I remind you of your promise: 
And beg leave to say, I insist upon the performance
of it. 
Remember, dearest creature, that the fault of a
blameable person cannot warrant a fault in one more
perfect. Over-niceness may be Under-niceness! 

I cannot reproach myself with any-thing that deserves
this high resentment. 
I own that the violence of my passion for you might
have carried me beyond fit bounds—But that your
commands and adjurations had power over me at
such a moment, I humbly presume to say, deserves
some consideration. 
You enjoin me not to see you for a week. If I
have not your pardon before Captain Tomlinson comes
to town, what shall I say to him? 
I beg once more your presence in the Dining-room. 
By my Soul, Madam, I must see you. 
I want to consult you about the Licence, and other
particulars of great importance. The people below
think us married; and I cannot talk to you upon such
subjects with the door between us. 
For Heaven's sake, favour me with your presence
for a few minutes: And I will leave you for the day. 
If I am to be forgiven, according to your promise,
the earlier forgiveness will be most obliging, and will
save great pain to yourself, as well as to 
Your truly contrite and afflicted
Lovelace. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
The more you teaze me, the worse will it be for
you. 
Time is wanted to consider whether I ever should
think of you at all. 
At present, it is my sincere wish, that I may never
more see your face. 
All that can afford you the least shadow of favour
from me, arises from the hoped-for Reconciliation
with my real friends, not my Judas protector. 
I am careless at present of consequences. I hate
myself: And how is it I have reason to value? — 
Not the man who could form a plot to disgrace his
own hopes, as well as a poor friendless creature (made 

friendless by himself) by insults not to be thought of
with patience. 

To Mrs. Lovelace.
Madam,
I will go to the Commons, and proceed in every
particular as if I had not the misfortune to be
under your displeasure. 
I must insist upon it, that however faulty my passion
on so unexpected an incident, made me appear to
a Lady of your delicacy, yet my compliance with your
entreaties at such a moment [As it gave you an instance
of your power over me, which few men could
have shewn] ought, duly considered, to entitle me to
the effects of that solemn promise which was the condition
of my obedience. 
I hope to find you in a kinder, and, I will say,
juster disposition on my return. Whether I get the
Licence, or not, let me beg of you to make the Soon
you have been pleased to bid me hope for, to-morrow
morning. This will reconcile every-thing, and make
me the happiest of men. 
The Settlements are ready to sign, or will be by
night. 
For Heaven's sake, Madam, do not carry your resentment
into a displeasure so disproportionate to the
offence. For that would be, to expose us both to the
people below; and, what is of infinitely more consequence
to us, to Captain Tomlinson. Let us be able,
I beseech you, Madam, to assure him, on his next
visit, that we are one. 
As I have no hope to be permitted to dine with
you, I shall not return till evening: And then, I presume
to say, I expect [Your promise authorizes me to
use the word] to find you disposed to bless, by your
consent for to-morrow, 
Your adoring
Lovelace. 

What pleasure did I propose to take, how to
enjoy the sweet confusion in which I expected to find
her, while all was so recent! —But she must, she shall
see me on my return. It were better for herself, as
well as for me, that she had not made so much ado
about nothing. I must keep my Anger alive, lest it
sink into Compassion. Love and Compassion, be the
provocation ever so great, are hard to be separated: 
While Anger converts what would be Pity without it,
into Resentment. Nothing can be lovely in a man's
eye, with which he is thoroughly displeased. 
I ordered Dorcas, on putting the last billet under
the door, and finding it taken up, to tell her, that I
hoped an answer to it before I went out. 
Her reply was verbal, Tell him that I care not
whither he goes, nor what he does. —And this, re-urged
by Dorcas, was all she had to say to me. 
I looked thro' the key-hole at my going by her
door, and saw her on her knees, at her bed's feet,
her head and bosom on the bed, her arms extended
[Sweet creature, how I adore her!]; and in an agony
she seemed to be, sobbing, as I heard at that distance,
as if her heart would break. —By my Soul, Jack, I
am a pity-ful fellow. Recollection is my enemy! — 
Divine Excellence! —Happy with her for so many
days together! Now so unhappy! —And for what? — 
But she is Purity itself. —And why, after all, should
I thus torment—But I must not trust myself with myself,
in the humour I am in. 
* *
Waiting here for Mowbray and Mallory, by
whose aid I am to get the Licence, I took papers out
of my pocket, to divert myself; and thy last popt
officiously the first into my hand. I gave it the honour
of a re perusal; and this revived the subject with
me, with which I had resolved not to trust myself. 
I remember, that the dear creature, in her torn
answer to my proposals, says, That Condescension is 

not Meanness. She better knows how to make this
out, than any mortal breathing. Condescension indeed
implies dignity: And dignity ever was there in
her condescension. Yet such a dignity, as gave grace
to the condescension; for there was no pride, no
insult, no apparent superiority, indicated by it. —This,
Miss Howe confirms to be a part of her general character
(a) . 
I can tell her, how she might behave, to make me
her own for ever. She knows she cannot fly me. 
She knows she must see me sooner or later; the sooner
the more gracious. —I would allow her to resent [Not
because the liberties I took with her require resentment,
were she not a Clarissa; but as it becomes
her particular niceness to resent]: But would she
shew more Love than Abhorrence of me in her resentment; 
would she seem, if it were but to seem, to believe
the fire no device, and all that followed merely
accidental; and descend, upon it, to tender expostulation,
and upbraiding for the advantage I would have
taken of her surprize; and would she, at last, be
satisfied (as well she may) that it was attended with
no further consequence; and place some generous
confidence in my honour [Power loves to be trusted,
Jack]; I think I would put an end to all her trials,
and pay her my vows at the Altar. 
Yet, to have taken such bold steps, as with Tomlinson
and her Uncle—To have made such a progress
—O Belford, Belford, how have I puzzled myself,
as well as her! —This cursed aversion to Wedlock
how has it entangled me! —What contradictions has
it made me guilty of! 
How pleasing to myself, to look back upon the
happy days I gave her; though mine would doubtless
have been more unmixedly so, could I have determined
to lay aside my contrivances, and to be as sincere
all the time, as she deserved that I should be! 

If I find this humour hold but till to-morrow
morning [And it has now lasted two full hours, and
I seem, methinks, to have pleasure in encouraging it]
I will make thee a visit, I think, or get thee to come
to me; and then will I—consult thee upon it. 
But she will not trust me. She will not confide in
my honour. Doubt, in this case, is Defiance. She
loves me not well enough to forgive me generously. 
She is so greatly above me! How can I forgive her for
a merit so mortifying to my pride! She thinks, she
knows, she has told me, that she is above me. These
words are still in my ears, ‘Begone, Lovelace! — 
My Soul is above thee, man! —Thou hast a proud
heart to contend with! —My Soul is above thee,
man (a) !’ Miss Howe thinks her above me too. 
Thou, even thou, my friend, my intimate friend and
companion, art of the same opinion. Then I fear
her as much as I love her. —How shall my pride bear
these reflections? My Wife (as I have so often said,
because it so often recurs to my thoughts) to be so
much my Superior! —Myself to be considered but as
the second person in my own family! —Canst thou
teach me to bear such a reflection as this! —To tell
me of my acquisition in her, and that she, with all
her excellencies, will be mine in full property, is a
mistake—It cannot be so—For shall I not be hers; 
and not my own? —Will not every act of her duty (as
I cannot deserve it) be a condescension, and a triumph
over me? —And must I owe it merely to her
goodness, that she does not despise me? —To have her
condescend to bear with my follics! —To wound me
with an Eye of Pity! —A Daughter of the Harlowes
thus to excel the last, and as I have heretofore said,
not the meanest of the Lovelaces (b) —Forbid it!— 
Yet forbid it not—For do I not now—do I not
every moment—see her before me all over charms,
and elegance and purity, as in the struggles of the past 

midnight? And in these struggles, heart, voice, eyes,
hands, and sentiments, so greatly, so gloriously consistent
with the character she has sustained from her
cradle to the present hour? 
But what advantages do I give thee? 
Yet have I not always done her justice? Why then
thy teazing impertinence? 
However, I forgive thee, Jack—Since (so much
generous Love am I capable of!) I had rather all the
world should condemn me, than that her character
should suffer the least impeachment. 
The dear creature herself once told me, that there
was a strange mixture in my mind (a) . 
I have been called Devil, and Beelzebub, between
the two proud Beauties: I must indeed be a Beelzebub,
if I had not some tolerable qualities. 
But as Miss Howe says, the suffering-time of this
excellent creature is her shining-time (b) . Hitherto
she has done nothing but shine. 
She called me villain, Belford, within these few
hours. And what is the sum of the present argument; 
but that had I not been a villain in her sense
of the word, she had not been so much an angel? 
O Jack, Jack! This midnight attempt has made
me mad; has utterly undone me! How can the dear
creature say, I have made her vile in her own eyes,
when her behaviour under such a surprize, and her
resentment under such circumstances, have so greatly
exalted her in mine? 
Whence, however, this strange rhapsody? —Is it
owing to my being here? That I am not at Sinclair's? 
But if there be infection in that house, how has my
Beloved escaped it? 
But no more in this strain! —I will see what her
behaviour will be on my return. —Yet already do I
begin to apprehend some little sinkings, some little
retrogradations: For I have just now a doubt arisen, 

whether, for her own sake, I should wish her to forgive
me lightly, or with difficulty? 
* *
I am in a way to come at the wished-for Licence. 
I have now given every-thing between my Beloved
and me a full consideration; and my puzzle is over. 
What has brought me to a speedier determination, is,
that I think I have found out what she means by the
week's distance at which she intends to hold me. It
is, that she may have time to write to Miss Howe, to
put in motion that cursed Scheme of hers, and to
take measures upon it which shall enable her to abandon
and renounce me for ever. Now, Jack, if I
obtain not admission to her presence on my return; but
am refused with haughtiness; if her week be insisted
upon (such prospects before her); I shall be confirmed
in my conjecture; and it will be plain to me, that
weak at best was that Love, which could give place
to punctilio, at a time when the all-reconciling Ceremony,
as she must think, waits her command: — 
Then will I recollect all her perversenesses; then
will I re-peruse Miss Howe's Letters, and the transcripts
from others of them; give way to my aversion
to the Life of Shackles: And then shall she be mine
in my own way. 
But, after all, I am in hopes, that she will have
better considered of every-thing by the evening; that
her threat of a week's distance was thrown out in the
heat of passion; and that she will allow, that I have
as much cause to quarrel with her for breach of her
word, as she has with me for breach of the peace. 
These lines of Rowe have got into my head; and I
shall repeat them very devoutly all the way the chairmen
shall poppet me towards her by-and-by. 

Teach me, some pow'r, the happy art of speech,
To dress my purpose up in gracious words;
Such as may softly steal upon her soul,
And never waken the tempestuous passions.