



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Morning, May 17. 
Mr. Lovelace would fain have engag'd me last
night. But as I was not prepar'd to enter upon
the subject of his proposals, intending to consider them
maturely, and was not highly pleased with his conclusion
(and then there is hardly any getting from him
in tolerable time over-night), I desired to be excused
seeing him till morning. 
About seven o'clock we met in the dining-room. 
I find, he was full of expectation that I should meet
him with a very favourable, who knows, but with a
thankful aspect? —And I immediately found by his
sullen countenance, that he was under no small disappointment
that I did not. 
My dearest love, are you well? —Why look you
so solemn upon me? —Will your indifference never 

be over? —If I have proposed terms in any respect
short of your expectation— 
I told him, that he had very considerately mention'd
my shewing his proposals to Miss Howe, and
consulting any of her friends upon them by her means; 
and I should have an opportunity to send them to her,
by Collins, by-and-by; and so insisted to suspend any
talk upon that subject till I had her opinion upon
them. 
Good God! —If there were but the least loop-hole; 
the least room for delay! —But he was writing a letter
to his uncle, to give him an account of his situation
with me, and could not finish it so satisfactorily,
either to my Lord, or to himself, as if I would condescend
to say, whether the terms he had proposed were
acceptable, or not. 
Thus far, I told him, I could say, That my principal
point was peace and reconciliation with my family. 
As to other matters, the genteelness of his own
spirit would put him upon doing more for me than I
should ask, or expect. Wherefore, if all he had to
write about was to know what Lord M. would do on
my account, he might spare himself the trouble; for
that my utmost wishes as to myself, were much more
easily gratify'd than he perhaps imagin'd. 
He asked me then, If I would so far permit him to
touch upon the happy day, as to request his uncle's
presence on the occasion, and to be my father? 
Father had a sweet and venerable sound with it, I
said. I should be glad to have a father who would
own me! 
Was not this plain speaking, think you, my dear? 
Yet it rather, I must own, appears so to me on reflection,
than was designed freely at the time. For I
then, with a sigh from the bottom of my heart,
thought of my own father; bitterly regretting, that
I am an outcast from him and from my mother. 
Mr. Lovelace, I thought, seemed a little affected; at 

the manner of my speaking, as well as at the sad reflection,
I suppose. 
I am but a very young creature, Mr. Lovelace,
said I, and wiped my averted eye, altho' you have
kindly, and in love to me, introduced so much sorrow
to me already: So you must not wonder, that the
word father strikes so sensibly upon the heart of a
child, ever dutiful till she knew you, and whose tender
years still require the paternal wing. 
He turned towards the window: [Rejoice with me,
my dear, since I seem devoted to him, that the man
is not absolutely impenetrable!] —His emotion was
visible; yet he endeavoured to suppress it—Approaching
me again; again he was obliged to turn
from me; Angelic something, he said: But then, obtaining
a heart more suitable to his wish, he once more
approached me. —For his own part, he said, as Lord
M. was so subject to the gout, he was afraid, that the
compliment he had just proposed to make him, might,
if made, occasion a longer suspension, than he could
bear to think of: And if it did, it would vex him to
the heart, that he had made it. 
I could not say a single word to this, you know, my
dear. But you will guess at my thoughts of what he
said—So much passionate love, lip-deep! So prudent
and so dutifully patient at heart to a relation he had
till now, so undutifully despised! —Why, why, am
I thrown upon such a man! thought I.— 
He hesitated, as if contending with himself, and
after taking a turn or two about the room,—He was
at a great loss what to determine upon, he said, because
he had not the honour of knowing when he was
to be made the happiest of men: —Would to God it
might that very instant be resolved upon! 
He stopp'd a moment or two, staring in my down-cast
face [Did I not, O my beloved friend, think
you, want a father or a mother just then?] But
he could not, so soon as he wished, procure my consent 

to a day; in that case, he thought the compliment
might as well be made to Lord M. as not;— 
Since the settlements might be drawn and ingrossed
in the intervenient time, which would pacify his impatience,
as no time would be lost. 
You will suppose how I was affected by this speech,
by repeating the substance of what he said upon it; 
as follows. 
—But by his soul, he knew not, so much was I
upon the reserve, and so much latent meaning did my
eye import, whether, when he most hoped to please
me, he was not farthest from doing so. Would I
vouchsafe to say, Whether I approved of his compliment
to Lord M. or not? 
Miss Howe, thought I, at that moment, says, I
must not run away from This man! 
To be sure, Mr. Lovelace, if this matter is ever to
be, it must be agreeable to me to have the full approbation
of one side, since I cannot have that of the
other. 
If this matter be ever to be! Good God! what
words were those at this time of day! And full approbation
of one side! Why that word approbation? 
When the greatest pride of all his family was, That
of having the honour of so dear a creature for their
relation? Would to Heaven, my dearest life, added
he, that, without complimenting Any-body, to-morrow
might be the happiest day of my life! —What say
you, my angel? With a trembling impatience, that
seemed not affected,—What say you for to-morrow? 
It was likely, my dear, I could say much to it, or
name another day, had I been disposed to the latter,
with such an hinted delay from him. 
Next day, Madam, if not to-morrow! —Or the
day after that! —And taking my two hands, stared
me into a half-confusion. 
No, no! You cannot think all of a sudden, there 

should be reason for such a hurry. It will be most
agreeable, to be sure, for my Lord to be present. 
I am all obedience and resignation, returned the
wretch, with a self-pluming air, as if he had acquiesced
to a proposal made by me, and had complimented
me with a great piece of self-denial. 
Modesty, I think, required it of me, that it should
pass so: Did it not? —I think it did. Would to Heaven
—But what signifies wishing? 
But when he would have rewarded himself, as he
had heretofore called it, for this self-supposed concession,
with a kiss, I repulsed him with a just and very
sincere disdain. 
He seemed both vex'd and surpriz'd, as one who
had made proposals that he had expected every thing
from. He plainly said, that he thought our situation
would intitle him to such an innocent freedom: 
And he was both amaz'd and griev'd to be thus scornfully
repulsed. 
No reply could be made by me. I abruptly broke
from him. I recollect, as I passed by one of the pier-glasses,
that I saw in it his clenched hand offered in
wrath to his forehead: The words, indifference, by
his soul, next to hatred, I heard him speak: And
something of ice he mentioned: I heard not what. 
Whether he intends to write to my Lord, or to Miss
Montague, I cannot tell. But as all delicacy ought
to be over with me now, perhaps I am to blame to expect
it from a man who may not know what it is. If
he does not, and yet thinks himself very delicate, and
intends not to be otherwise, I am rather to be pitied,
than he to be censured. And after all, since I must
take him as I find him, I must: That is to say, as a
man so vain, and so accustom'd to be admired, that,
not being conscious of internal defect, he has taken
no pains to polish more than his outside: And as his
proposals are higher than my expectations; and as in
his own opinion, he has a great deal to bear from me. I 

will (no new offence preventing) sit down to answer
them: —And, if possible, in terms as unobjectible to
him, as his are to me. 
But after all, see you not, my dear, more and
more, the mismatch that there is in our minds? 
However, I am willing to compound for my fault,
by giving up (if that may be all my punishment) the
expectation of what is deemed happiness in this life,
with such a husband as I fear he will make. In short,
I will content myself to be a suffering person thro'
the state to the end of my life. A long one it cannot
be!— 
This may qualify him (as it may prove) from stings
of conscience from misbehaviour to a first wife, to be
a more tolerable one to a second, tho' not perhaps better
deserving: While my story, to all who shall know
it, will afford these instructions: That the eye is a
traitor, and ought ever to be mistrusted: That form
is deceitful: In other words; That a fine person is
seldom pair'd by a fine mind: And that sound principles,
and a good heart, are the only bases on which
the hopes of a happy future, either with respect to the
here or to the hereafter, can be built. 
And so much at present for Mr. Lovelace's proposals: 
Of which I desire your opinion. 
I am, my dearest friend, 
Your ever obliged
Cl. Harlowe. 
Four letters are written by Mr. Lovelace from the
date of his last, giving the state of affairs between him
and the lady, pretty much the same as in hers in the
same period, allowing for the humour in his; and for
his resentments expressed with vehemence on her resolution
to leave him, if her friends could be prevailed
upon. —A few extracts from them will be only given. 
‘What, says he, might have become of me, and
my projects, had not her father, and the rest of the 

implacables, stood my friends?’ After violent threatnings
and vows of revenge, he says—‘'Tis plain she
would have given me up for ever; nor should I have
been able to prevent her abandoning of me, unless I
had torn up the tree by the roots to come at the
fruit; which I hope still to bring down by a gentle
shake or two, if I can but have patience to stay the
ripening season.’ 
Thus triumphing in his unpolite cruelty, he says,— 
‘After her haughty treatment of me, I am resolved
she shall speak out. There are a thousand beauties
to be discovered in the face, in the accent, in the
bush-beating hesitations of a woman that is earnest
about a subject which she wants to introduce, yet
knows not how. Silly rogues, calling themselves
generous ones, would value themselves for sparing
a lady's confusion: But they are silly rogues indeed; 
and rob themselves of prodigious pleasure by their
forwardness; and at the same time deprive her of
displaying a world of charms, which only can be
manifested on these occasions. Hard-heartedness,
as it is called, is an essential of the libertine's character. 
Familiarized to the distresses he occasions
he is seldom betray'd by tenderness into a complaisant
weakness unworthy of himself. How have I
enjoyed a charming creature's confusion, as I have
sat over-against her; her eyes lost in admiration of
my shoebuckles, or meditating some uncouth figure
in the carpet!’ 
Mentioning the settlements, he says,—‘I am in
earnest as to the terms. If I marry her (and I have
no doubt but that I shall, after my pride, my ambition,
my revenge, if thou wilt, is gratify'd), I
will do her noble justice. The more I do for such a
prudent, such an excellent oeconomist, the more
shall I do for myself. —But, by my soul, Belford, her
haughtiness shall be brought down to own both love 

and obligation to me. —Nor will this sketch of
settlements bring us forwarder than I would have
it. Modesty of sex will stand my friend at any
time. At the very altar, our hands join'd, I'd engage
to make this proud beauty leave the parson
and me, and all my friends present, tho' there
were twenty of them, to look like fools upon one
another, while she took wing, and flew out of the
church-door, or window, if that were open, and
the door shut; and this only by a very word.’ 
He mentions his rash expression, that she should
be his, altho' damnation were to be the purchase; 
and owns that, at that instant, he was upon the
point of making a violent attempt; but that he
was check'd in the very moment, and but just in
time, by the awe he was struck with on again casting
his eye upon her terrified but lovely face, and seeing,
as he thought, her spotless heart in every line
of it. 
‘O virtue, virtue! says he, what is there in thee,
that can thus affect the heart of such a man as me,
against my will! —Whence these involuntary tremors,
and fear of giving mortal offence? —What
art thou, that acting in the breast of a feeble woman,
canst strike so much awe into a spirit so intrepid! 
Which never before, no, not in my first attempt,
young as I then was, and frighted at my
own boldness (till I found myself forgiven), had
such an effect upon me!’ 
He paints, in lively colours, that part of the scene
between him and the Lady, where she says, ‘The
word father has a sweet and venerable sound with
it.’ 
‘I was exceedingly affected, says he, upon the occasion. 
But was ashamed to be surprised by her
into such a fit of unmanly weakness: —So ashamed,
that I was resolved to subdue it at the instant, and
guard against the like for the future. Yet, at that 

moment, I more than half regretted, that I could
not permit her to enjoy a triumph which she so well
deserved to glory in: —Her youth, her beauty, her
artless innocence, and her manner, equally beyond
comparison or description. But her indifference,
Belford! —That she could resolve to sacrifice me to
the malice of my enemies; and carry on the design
in so clandestine a manner—Yet love her, as I do,
to frenzy! —Revere her, as I do, to adoration! — 
These were the recollections with which I fortify'd
my recreant heart against her. —Yet, after all, if
she persevere, she must conquer! —Coward, as she
has made me, that never was a coward before!’ 
* *
He concludes his fourth letter in a vehement rage
upon her repulsing him, when he offer'd to salute her; 
having supposed, as he owns, that she would have been
all condescension on his proposals to her. 
‘This, says he, I will for ever remember against
her, in order to steel my own heart, that I may cut
thro' a rock of ice to hers; and repay her for the
disdain, the scorn, which glow'd in her countenance,
and was apparent in her air, at her abrupt
departure from me, after such obliging behaviour
on my side, and after I had so earnestly pressed her
for an early day. —The women below say, She
hates me, she despises me! —And 'tis true: She
does; she must. —And why cannot I take their advice? 
—I will not long, my fair one, be despised by
thee, and laughed at by them!’ 
‘Let me acquaint thee, Jack, adds he, by way of
postscript, That this effort of hers to leave me,
if she could have been received; her sending
for a coach on Sunday; no doubt, resolving
not to return, if she had gone out without me
(for did she not declare, that she had thought
to retire to some of the villages about town
where she could be safe and private?); have altogether 

so much alarm'd me, that I have been
adding to the written instructions for my servant,
and the people below, how to act, in
case she should elope in my absence: Particularly
letting my fellow know what he shall
report to strangers, in case she shall throw
herself upon any such, with a resolution to
abandon me. These instructions I shall further
add to, as circumstances offer:’ 