



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday Morning, Eight o' clock. 
Her chamber-door has not yet been
opened. I must not expect she will
breakfast with me. Nor dine with
me, I doubt. A little silly Soul, what
troubles does she make to herself by her
over-niceness! —All I have done to her, would have
been looked upon as a frolick only, a romping-bout,
and laughed off by Nine parts in Ten of the Sex
accordingly. The more she makes of it, the more
painful to herself, as well as to me. 
Why now, Jack, were it not better, upon her own
notions, that she seemed not so sensible as she will make
herself to be, if she is very angry? 
But perhaps I am more afraid than I need. I believe
I am. From her over-niceness arises my fear,
more than from any extraordinary reason for resentment. 

Next time, she may count herself very happy,
if she come off no worse. 
The dear creature was so frightened, and so fatigued,
last night, no wonder she lies it out this morning. 
I hope she has had more rest than I have had. Soft
and balmy, I hope, have been her slumbers, that she
may meet me in tolerable temper. All sweetly blushing
and confounded—I know how she will look! —But
why should she, the sufferer, be ashamed, when I,
the trespasser, am not? 
But custom is a prodigious thing. The women are
told how much their blushes heighten their graces: 
They practise for them therefore: Blushes come as
readily when they call for them, as their Tears: Aye,
that's it! While we men, taking blushes for a sign of
guilt or sheepishness, are equally studious to suppress
them. 
* *
By my troth, Jack, I am half as much ashamed to
see the women below, as my Fair-one can be to see
me. I have not yet opened my door, that I may not
be obtruded upon by them. 
After all, what devils may one make of the Sex! 
To what a height of—What shall I call it?—must
those of it be arrived, who once loved a man with so
much distinction, as both Polly and Sally loved me; 
and yet can have got so much above the pangs of jealousy,
so much above the mortifying reflections that
arise from dividing and sharing with new objects the
affections of him they prefer to all others, as to wish
for, and promote a Competitorship in his Love, and
make their supreme delight consist in reducing others
to their level! —For thou canst not imagine, how
even Sally Martin rejoiced last night in the thought
that the Lady's hour was approaching. 
Past Ten o' clock. 
I never longed in my life for any-thing with so 

much impatience, as to see my Charmer. She has
been stirring, it seems, these two hours. 
Dorcas just now tapped at her door, to take her
morning commands. 
She had none for her, was the answer. 
She desired to know, If she would not breakfast? 
A sullen and low-voiced negative received Dorcas. 
I will go myself. 
* *
Three different times tapped I at the door; but
had no answer. 
Permit me, dearest creature, to enquire after your
health. As you have not been seen to-day, I am impatient
to know how you do. 
Not a word of answer; but a deep sigh, even to
sobbing. 
Let me beg of you, Madam, to accompany me up
another pair of stairs—You'll rejoice to see what a
happy escape we have all had. 
A happy escape indeed, Jack! —For the fire had
scorched the window-board, sindged the hangings,
and burnt through the slit-deal lining of the window-jambs. 
No answer, Madam! —Am I not worthy of one
word? —Is it thus you keep your promise with me? — 
Shall I not have the favour of your company for two
minutes [Only for two minutes] in the Dining-room? 
Hem!—And a deep sigh!—were all the answer. 
Answer me but how you do! Answer me but that
you are well! Is this the forgiveness that was the condition
of my obedience? 
Then, in a faintish, but angry voice, Begone from
my door! Wretch! inhuman, barbarous, and all
that is base and treacherous!—begone from my door! 
Nor teaze thus a poor creature, entitled to protection,
not outrage. 
I see, Madam, how you keep your word with me! — 

If a sudden impulse, the effects of an unthought-of
accident, cannot be forgiven— 
O the dreadful weight of a Father's curse, thus in
the very Letter of it— 
And then her voice dying away in murmurs inarticulate,
I looked through the key-hole, and saw her on
her knees, her face, tho' not towards me, lifted up,
as well as hands, and these folded, deprecating, I suppose,
that gloomy tyrant's curse. 
I could not help being moved. 
My dearest Life! admit me to your presence but
for two minutes, and confirm your promised pardon; 
and may lightning blast me on the spot, if I offer
any-thing but my penitence, at a shrine so sacred! — 
I will afterwards leave you for the whole day; and
till to-morrow morning; and then attend you with
Writings, all ready to sign, a Licence obtained, or,
if it cannot, a Minister without one. This once believe
me! When you see the reality of the danger
that gave occasion for this your unhappy resentment,
you will think less hardly of me. And let me beseech
you to perform a promise on which I made a reliance
not altogether ungenerous. 
I cannot see you! Would to Heaven I never had! If
I write, that's all I can do. 
Let your writing then, my dearest Life, confirm
your promise: And I will withdraw in expectation of
of it. 
Past Eleven o' clock. 
She rung her bell for Dorcas; and, with her door
in her hand, only half-opened, gave her a billet for
me. 
How did the dear creature look, Dorcas? 
She was dressed. She turned her face quite from
me; and sighed, as if her heart would break. 
Sweet creature! —I kissed the wet wafer, and drew
it from the paper with my breath. 
These are the contents. —No inscriptive Sir! No
Mr. Lovelace! 


I cannot see you: Nor will I, if I can help it. 
Words cannot express the anguish of my soul on
your baseness and ingratitude. 
If the circumstances of things are such, that I can
have no way for Reconciliation with those who would
have been my natural protectors from such outrages,
but through you [The only inducement I can have to
stay a moment longer in your knowlege] pen and ink
must be, at present, the only means of communication
between us. 
Vilest of men! and most detestable of plotters! how
have I deserved from you the shocking indignities— 
But no more—Only for your own sake, wish not, at
least for a week to come, to see 
The undeservedly injured and insulted
Clarissa Harlowe. 
So thou seest, nothing could have stood me in
stead, but this plot of Tomlinson and her Uncle! To
what a pretty pass, nevertheless, have I brought myself! 
—Had Cæsar been such a fool, he had never
passed the Rubicon. But after he had passed it, had
he retreated re infectâ, intimidated by a Senatorial
Edict, what a pretty figure would he have made in
history! —I might have known, that to attempt a
robbery, and put a person in bodily fear, is as punishable
as if the robbery had been actually committed. 
But not to see her for a week! —Dear pretty soul!
how she anticipates me in every-thing! The Counsellor
will have finished the Writings to-day or tomorrow,
at furthest: The Licence with the Parson,
or the Parson without the Licence, must be also procured
within the next four-and-twenty hours; Pritchard
is as good as ready with his Indentures Tripartite: 
Tomlinson is at hand, with a favourable answer from
her Uncle—Yet not to see her for a week! —Dear
sweet soul! —Her good angel is gone a journey: Is
truanting at least. But nevertheless, in thy week's 

time, or in much less, my Charmer, I doubt not to
complete my triumph! 
But what vexes me of all things, is, that such an
excellent creature should break her word: —Fie, fie,
upon her! —But nobody is absolutely perfect! 'Tis
human to err, but not to persevere—I hope my Charmer
cannot be inhuman! 