

The following unlucky omission in Letter III. of this Volume,
written by Miss Lucy Selby to Lady G. is
thought proper to be supplied here; the rather, as it
will be found in its right place in the next Edition. 
P. 10. That young Lady thus writes: “He [Sir
Charles] hopes for a visit from the Italian family,
so deservedly dear to him, by which he is to regulate
many of his future motions: [Then follows
the omission.] 
I cannot say I wish for this visit. I love, I admire,
I pity them; and would, had I wings, take a flight
into Italy, with all my heart, to see them incognita. 
Clementina must be a charming creature—but, for
Harriet's sake, I have been used to think of her with
terror. 
For your Brother's sake also, Lady G. I rejoice,
and so, you know, do Dr. Bartlett and Mrs. Shirley,
that she can now be only a Visiter. How could Sir
Charles, so thorough an Englishman, have been happy
with an Italian wife? His heart indeed, is, generously
open and benevolent to people of all countries: He is,
as I have often heard you say, in the noblest sense, a
Citizen of the World: But, see we not, that his
long residence abroad, has only the more endeared to
him the Religion, the Government, the Manners of
England? You know, that on a double Principle of
Religion and Policy, he encourages the Trades-people,
the Manufactures, the Servants, of his own Country. 
Do I not remember a charmingly lively debate between
you and him, on the subject of those Elegancies in
Dress and Appearance which you said (and I thought
you naughty for saying it) were only to be acquired
by employing the better taste of Foreigners? 
He concluded it seriously. I recollect nearly his
Words: “The Error, Lady G. is growing too general, 

is authorized by too many persons of figure,
not to make one afraid of fatal consequences, from
what in its beginning seemed a trifle. Shall any one
pretend to true Patriotism, and not attempt to stem
this torrent of Fashion, which impoverishes our
own honest Countrymen, whilst it carries Wealth
and Power to those whose National Religion and
Interest are directly opposite to ours!” 
Good Heaven, thought I, at the time, how was
this noble-minded man entangled by delicacies of situation,
by friendship, by compassion, that he should
ever have been likely to be engaged in a family of Roman
Catholics, and lived half of his days out of his
beloved Country! And the other half to have set, as
to the world's eye, such an Example in it! 
I know, Lady G. he would have made it his study
to prevent any mischief to his neighbours from the
active zeal of his Lady's Confessor, had a certain
compromise taken effect. I remember the hint he
gave to Father Marescotti: But would even that
good man have thought himself bound to observe
Faith with Heretics in such a case? 
Whither am I rambled! I was going to tell you,
that if this Italian Family comes over, his new-taken
house, &c. 
