



From the same. 


And so, Pamela, you are very solicitous to
know, If the Gentlemen have seen every
Part of your Papers? I can't say but they have. 
Nor, except in regard to the Reputation of
your saucy Man, do I see, why the Parts you 

hint at might not be read by those to whom
the rest might be shewn. 
I can tell you, Lady Betty, who is a very
nice and delicate Lady, had no Objections to
any Part, tho' read before Men: Only now-and-then
crying out—O the vile Man! —See, Lord Davers, what Wretches you Men
are! —And, commiserating you, Ah! the
poor Pamela! —And expressing her Impatience
to hear on, how you escaped at this
time, and at that, and rejoicing in your Escape. 
And now-and-then,—O Lady Davers!
what a vile Brother you have! —I hate him
perfectly. —The poor Girl cannot be made
Amends for all this, tho' he has marry'd her. 
Who, that knows these things of him, would
wish him to be hers, with all his Advantages
of Person, Mind, and Fortune? —And suchlike
Expressions in your Praise, and condemning
him and his wicked Attempts. 
But I can tell you this, that except one had
heard every Tittle of your Danger; how near
you were to Ruin, and how little he stood
upon taking any Measures to effect his vile Purposes,
even daring to attempt you in the Presence
of a good Woman, which was a Wickedness
that every wicked Man could not be guilty
of;—I say, except one had known these
things, one should not have been able to judge
of the Merit of your Resistance, and how
shocking those Attempts were to your Virtue,
insomuch that Life itself was indanger'd by
them Nor, let me tell you, could I, in particular, 

have so well justify'd him for marrying
you, (I mean with respect to his own proud
and haughty Temper of Mind) if there had
been Room to think he could have had you
upon easier Terms. 
It was necessary, Child, on Twenty Accounts,
that we, your and his Well-wishers
and Relations, should know, that he had try'd
every Stratagem, and made use of every Contrivance,
to subdue you to his Purpose, before
he marry'd you: And how would it have answer'd
to his intrepid Character, and Pride of
Heart, had we not been particularly let into
the Nature of those Attempts, which you so
nobly resisted, as to convince us all, that you
have deserved the good Fortune you have met
with, as well as all the kind and respectful
Treatment he can possibly shew you? 
Nor ought you to be concerned who sees
any the most tender Parts of your Story, except,
as I said, for his sake; for it must be a
very unvirtuous Mind, that can form any other
Ideas from what you relate, than those of Terror
and Pity for you. Your Expressions are too
delicate to give the nicest Ear Offence, except
at him. —You paint no Scenes but such as
make his Wickedness odious; and that Gentleman,
much more Lady, must have a very
corrupt Heart, who could, from such Circumstances
of Distress, make any Reflections but
what should be to your Honour, and in Abhorrence
of such Actions. Indeed, Child, I am
so convinc'd of this, that by this Rule I would 

judge of any Man's Heart in the World, better
than by a Thousand Declarations and Protestations. 
I do assure you, rakish as Jackey is, and
freely as I doubt not that Lord Davers has
formerly lived, (for he has been a Man of
Pleasure) they gave me, by their Behaviour on
these tenderer Occasions, Reason to think they
had more Virtue than not to be apprehensive
for your Safety; and my Lord several times
exclaim'd, that he could not have thought his
Brother such a Libertine, neither. 
Besides, Child, were not these things
written in Confidence to your Mother? And,
bad as his Actions were to you, if you had
not recited all you could recite, would there
not have been Room for any one who should
have seen what you wrote, to imagine they
had been still worse? —And how could the
Terror be supposed to have had such Effects
upon you, as to indanger your Life, without
imagining you had undergone the worst that
a vile Man could offer, unless you had told us
what that was which he did offer, and so put a
Bound, as it it were, to one's apprehensive
Imaginations of what you suffer'd, which otherwise
must have been injurious to your Purity,
tho' you could not help it? 
Moreover, Pamela, it was but doing
Justice to the Libertine himself, to tell your
Mother the whole Truth, that she might know
he was not so very abandon'd, but that he
could stop short of the Execution of his wicked
Purposes, which, he apprehended, if pursued, 

would destroy the Life, that, of all Lives, he
would chuse to preserve; and you ow'd also
thus much to your Parents Peace of Mind, that
after all their distracting Fears for you, they
might see they had Reason to rejoice in an
uncontaminated Daughter. And one cannot
but reflect, now all is over, and he has made
you his Wife, that it must be a Satisfaction to
the wicked Man, as well as to yourself, that he
was not more guilty than he was, and that he
took no more Liberties than he did. 
For my own part, I must say, that I could
not have accounted for your Fits, by any Descriptions
short of those you give; and had you
been less particular in the Circumstances, I
should have judg'd he had been still worse, and
your Person, tho' not your Mind, less pure,
than his Pride would expect from the Woman
he should marry: For this is the Case of all
Rakes, that, tho' they indulge in all manner of
Libertinism themselves, there is no Class of
Men who exact greater Delicacy than they,
from the Persons they marry; tho' they care
not how bad they make the Wives, the Sisters,
and Daughters of others. 
I have run into Length again; so will only
add, (and send all my Three Letters together)
that we all blame you, in some degree, for
bearing the wicked Jewkes in your Sight, after
the most impudent Assistance she gave to his
lewd Attempt; much less, we think, ought
you to have left her in her Place, and rewarded
her: For her Vileness could hardly be equall'd 

by the worst Actions of the most abandon'd
Procuress. 
I know the Difficulties you lay under, in
his arbitrary Will, and in his Intercession for
her: But Lady Betty rightly observes, that he
knew what a vile Woman she was, when he
put you into her Power, and no doubt imploy'd
her, because he was sure she would answer all
his Purposes; and that therefore she should have
had very little Opinion of the Sincerity of his
Reformation, while he was so solicitous in
keeping her there, and in having her put upon a
foot, in the Present on your Nuptials, with
honest Jervis. 
She would, she says, had she been in your
Case, have had one Struggle for her Dismission,
let it have been taken as it would; and he that
was so well pleased with your Virtue, must have
thought this a natural Consequence of it, if he
was in earnest to reclaim. 
I know not whether you shew him all I
write, or not: But I have written this last Part
in the Cover, as well for want of Room, as
that you may keep it from him, if you please:
Tho', if you think it will serve any good End,
I am not against shewing to him all I write. 
For I must ever speak my Mind, tho' I were
to smart for it; and that nobody can, or has
the Heart to make me do, but my bold Brother. 
So, Pamela, for this time, 
Adieu. 

