



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sunday, July 9. 
May heaven signalize its vengeance, in the face
of all the world, upon the most abandoned and
profligate of men! And in its own time, I doubt
not but it will. —And we must look to a WORLD
BEYOND THIS for the Reward of your Sufferings! 
Another shocking detection, my dear!—How have
you been deluded! —Very watchful I have thought
you; very sagacious: —But, alas! not watchful, not
sagacious enough, for the horrid villain you have had
to deal with!— 
The Letter you sent me inclosed as mine, of the
7th of June, is a villainous forgery (a) . The Hand,
indeed, is astonishingly like mine; and the Cover, I
see, is actually my Cover: But yet the Letter is not
so exactly imitated, but that (had you had any suspicions
about his vileness at the time) you, who so well
know my hand, might have detected it. 

In short, this vile forged Letter, tho' a long one,
contains but a few extracts from mine. Mine was a
very long one. He has omitted every-thing, I see,
in it, that could have shewn you what a detestable
house the house is; and given you suspicions of the
vile Tomlinson. —You will see this, and how he has
turned Miss Lardner's information, and my advices
to you [execrable villain!] to his own horrid ends,
by the rough draught of the genuine Letter, which I
shall inclose (a) . 
Apprehensive for both our safeties from the villainy
of such a daring and profligate contriver, I must call
upon you, my dear, to resolve upon taking Legal vengeance
of the infernal wretch. And this not only
for our own sakes, but for the sakes of innocents who
otherwise may yet be deluded and outraged by him. 
She then gives the particulars of the report made by
the young fellow whom she sent to Hamstead with
her Letter; and who supposed he had delivered it
into her own hand (a) ; and then proceeds: 
I am astonished, that the vile wretch, who could
know nothing of the time my messenger (whose honesty
I can vouch for) would come, could have a
creature ready to personate you! Strange, that the
man should happen to arrive just as you were gone to
Church (as I find was the fact, on comparing what
he says with your hint that you were at Church twice
that day) when he might have got to Mrs. Moore's
two hours before! —But had you told me, my dear,
that the villain had found you out, and was about
you! —You should have done that—Yet I blame you
upon a judgment founded on the Event only! 
I never had any faith in the Stories that go current
among country Girls, of Spectres, Familiars, and
Demons; yet I see not any other way to account for 

this wretch's successful villainy, and for his means of
working-up his specious delusions, but by supposing
(if he be not the Devil himself) that he has a Familiar
constantly at his elbow. Sometimes it seems to
me, that this Familiar assumes the shape of that solemn
villain Tomlinson: Sometimes that of the execrable
Sinclair, as he calls her: Sometimes it is permitted
to take that of Lady Betty Lawrance—But,
when it would assume the angelic shape and mien of
my beloved friend, see what a bloated figure it made! 
'Tis my opinion, my dear, that you will be no
longer safe where you are, than while the V. is in
the country. Words are poor!—or how could I execrate
him! I have hardly any doubt, that he has
sold himself for a time. O may the time be short! 
—Or may his infernal prompter no more keep covenant
with him, than he does with others! 
I inclose not only the rough draught of my long
Letter mentioned above; but the heads of that which
the young fellow thought he delivered into your own
hands at Hamstead. And when you have perused
them, I will leave you to judge, how much reason I
had to be surprised, that you wrote me not an Answer
to either of those Letters; one of which you
owned you had received (tho' it proved to be his forged
one); the other delivered into your own hands, as I
was assured; and both of them of so much concern
to your honour; and still how much more surprised
I must be, when I received a Letter from Mrs.
Townsend, dated June 15. from Hamstead, importing,
“That Mr. Lovelace, who had been with you
several days, had, on the Monday before, brought
Lady Betty and his Cousin, richly dressed, and in
a coach and four, to visit you: Who, with your
own consent, had carried you to town with them
—to your former lodgings; where you still were: 
That the Hamstead women believed you to be
married; and reflected upon me as a fomenter of 

differences between Man and Wife: That he
himself was at Hamstead the day before; viz. Wednesday
the 14th; and boasted of his happiness with
you; inviting Mrs. Moore, Mrs. Bevis, and Miss
Rawlins, to go to town, to visit his spouse; which
they promised to do: That he declared, that you
were entirely reconciled to your former lodgings: 
—And that, finally, the women at Hamstead told
Mrs. Townsend, that he had very handsomely
discharged theirs.” 
I own to you, my dear, that I was so much surprised
and disgusted at these appearances against a
conduct till then unexceptionable, that I was resolved
to make myself as easy as I could, and wait till you
should think fit to write to me. But I could rein-in
my impatience but for a few days; and on the 20th
of June I wrote a sharp Letter to you; which I find
you did not receive, 
What a fatality, my dear, has appeared in your
case, from the very beginning till this hour! Had my
Mother permitted— 
But can I blame her; when you have a Father and
Mother living, who have so much to answer for? — 
So much!—as no Father and Mother, considering
the Child they have driven, persecuted, exposed, renounced
—ever had to answer for! 
But again I must execrate the abandoned villain— 
Yet, as I said before, all words are poor, and beneath
the occasion. 
But see we not, in the horrid perjuries and treachery
of this man, what Rakes and Libertines will
do, when they get a young creature into their
power? It is probable, that he might have the intolerable
presumption to hope an easier conquest: But,
when your unexampled vigilance and exalted virtue
made Potions, and Rapes, and the utmost Violences,
necessary to the attainment of his detestable end, we
see that he never boggled at them. I have no doubt, 

that the same or equal wickedness would be oftener
committed by men of his villainous cast, if the folly
and credulity of the poor inconsiderates who throw
themselves into their hands, did not give them an
easier triumph. 
With what comfort must those parents reflect upon
these things, who have happily disposed of their
Daughters in marriage to a virtuous man! And how
happy the young women who find themselves safe in
a worthy protection! —If such a person, as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe could not escape, who can be secure? 
—Since, tho' every Rake is not a Lovelace, neither
is every Woman a Clarissa: And his attempts
were but proportioned to your resistance and vigilance. 
My Mother has commanded me to let you know
her thoughts upon the whole of your sad Story. I
will do it in another Letter; and send it to you with
this, by a special messenger. 
But, for the future, if you approve of it, I will send
my Letters by the usual hand (Collins's) to be left at
the Saracen's Head on Snow-hill: Whither you may
send yours (as we both used to do, to Wilson's) except
such as we shall think fit to transmit by the Post: 
Which I am afraid, after my next, must be directed
to Mr. Hickman, as before: Since my Mother is for
fixing a condition to our correspondence, which, I
doubt, you will not comply with, tho' I wish you
would. This condition I shall acquaint you with
by-and-by. 
Mean time, begging excuse for all the harsh things
in my last, of which your sweet meekness and superior
greatness of soul have now made me most heartily
ashamed, I beseech you, my dearest creature, to believe
me to be, 
Your truly sympathizing
and unalterable Friend,
Anna Howe. 