



From Miss Darnford, to her Father and Mother. 


My ever-honoured Papa and Mamma,
I Arriv'd safely in London on Thursday, after a tolerable
Journey, considering Deb. and I made Six
in the Coach, (Two having been taken up on the
Way, after you left me) and none of the Six highly
agreeable. Mr. B. and his Lady, who looks very
stately upon us, (from the Circumstance of Person,
rather than of Mind, however) were so good as to
meet me at St. Albans, in their Coach and Six. They
have a fine House here, richly furnish'd in every
Part, and allotted me the best Apartments in it. 
We are happy beyond Expression: Mr. B. is a
charming Husband; so easy, so pleas'd with, and so
tender of his Lady; and she so much All that we
saw her in the Country, as to Humility and Affability,
and improv'd in every thing else, which we
hardly thought possible she could be–––that I never
knew so happy a Matrimony. –––All that Prerogative
Sauciness, which we apprehended would so eminently
display itself in his Behaviour to his Lady,
had she been ever so distinguish'd by Birth and Fortune,
is vanish'd, and no Traces of it left. I did
not think it was in the Power of an Angel, if our
Sex could have produc'd one, to have made so tender
and so fond an Husband of Mr. B. as he makes. 
And should I have the Sense to follow Mrs. B.'s
Example, if ever I marry, I should not despair of
making myself happy, let it be to whom it would,
provided he was not a Brute, nor sordid in his Temper,
which two Characters are too obvious to be
conceal'd, if Persons take due Care, and make proper 

Inquiries, and if they are not led by blind Passion. 
May Mr. Murray, and Miss Nancy, make
just such an happy Pair! 
You commanded me, my honour'd Mamma, to
write to you an Account of every thing that pleas'd
me—I said I would: But what a Task should I then
have! —I did not think I had undertaken to write
Volumes! —You must therefore allow me to be more
brief than I had intended. 
In the first place, It would take up five or six
long Letters to do Justice to the Oeconomy observed
in this happy Family. You know, (and we have
often admir'd and applauded her for it) that Mrs. B.
has not chang'd one of the Servants of the Family,
and only added her Polly to the Number. This is
an unexampled thing, especially as they were all her
Fellow-servants, as we may say: But since they have
the Sense to admire so good an Example, and are
proud to follow it, each to his and her Power, I
think it one of her peculiar Felicities to have continued
them, and to chuse to reform such as were
exceptionable, rather than dismiss them. 
Their Mouths, Deb. tells me, are continually full
of their Lady's Praises, and Prayers, and Blessings,
utter'd with such Delight and Fervour for the happy
Pair, that it makes her Eyes, she says, ready to run
over to hear them. 
Moreover, I think it an extraordinary Piece of
Policy, whether design'd or not, to keep them (as
they were honest and worthy Folks); for had she
turn'd them all off, what had she done but made as
many Enemies as Persons; and as many more, as
those Persons had Friends and Acquaintance? And
we all know, how much the Reputation of Families
lies at the Mercy of Servants, and 'tis easy to guess
to what Cause each would have imputed their Dismission. 
And so she has escaped, as she ought to 

escape, the Character of Pride; and has made every
one, instead of reproaching her with her Descent,
find those Graces in her, which turn that very Disadvantage
to her Glory. 
She is exceeding affable to every one of them; 
always speaks to them with a Smile; but yet has
such a Dignity in her Manner, that it secures her
their Respect and Reverence; and they are ready
to fly at a Look, and seem proud to have any Commands
of hers to execute: Insomuch that the
Words, My Lady commands so or so, from one Servant
to another, are sure to meet with an indisputable
Obedience, be the Duty requir'd what it will. 
If any one of them is the least out of Order, her
Care and Tenderness for them ingage the Duty, and
the Veneration, and Gratitude, of all the rest, who
see in that Instance, how kindly they will be treated,
should they ail any thing themselves. And in all
this, I must needs say, she is very happy in Mrs.
Jervis, who is an excellent Second to her admirable
Lady; and is treated by her with as much Respect
and Affection, as if she was her Mother. 
You may remember, Madam, that in the Account
she gave us of her benevolent Round, as Lady Davers
calls it, she says, That as she was going to London,
she should leave Directions with Mrs. Jervis about
some of her Clients, as I find she calls her Poor, to
avoid a Word, that her Delicacy accounts harsh
with regard to them, and ostentatious with respect
to herself. I ask'd her, how (since, contrary to her
then Design, Mrs. Jervis was permitted to be in
Town with her) she had provided to answer her Intention
as to those her Clients, whom she had referr'd
to the Care of that good Woman? 
She said, That Mr. Barlow her Apothecary was a
very worthy Man, and she had given him a plenary
Power in that Particular, and likewise desir'd him to 

recommend any new and worthy Case to her, that no
distressful Circumstance among the deserving and
destitute sick Poor, might be unreliev'd by reason of
her Absence. 
And here in London she has applied herself to Dr.
&wblank;(her Parish-minister, a fine Preacher, and sound
Divine, who promises at all Opportunities to pay his
Respects to Mr. B.) to recommend to her any poor
Housekeepers, who will be glad to accept of some
private Benefactions, and yet, having liv'd creditably,
till reduced by Misfortunes, are asham'd to apply
for publick Relief: And she has several of these
already on her benevolent List, to some of whom
she sends Coals now on the Entrance of the wintry
Season, to some a Piece of Irish or Scotish Linen,
or so many Yards of Norwich Stuff, for Gowns and
Coats for Girls, or Yorkshire Cloth for the Boys; 
and to some, (of whose Prudence she is most assur'd
in laying it out in the way they best can judge of)
Money. And she has moreover mortify'd, as the
Scots call it, 150l. as a Fund for Loans, without
Interest, of 5, 10, or 15, but not exceeding 20l.
to answer some present Exigence in some worthy
Families, who find the best Security they can to
repay it in a given Time; and this Fund she purposes,
as she grows richer, she says, to increase; and
prides herself every now-and-then, upon her Frugality,
to have sav'd so much Money already; and
estimates pleasantly her Worth by this Sum, saying
sometimes, Who would ever have thought I should
have been worth 150l. already? I shall be a rich
Body in time. But in all these things she injoins
Secrecy, which the Doctor has promis'd. 
She told the Doctor, what Mr. Adams's Office
was in her Family; and hop'd, she said, he would
give her his Sanction to it; assuring him, That she
thought it her Duty to ask it, as she was one of his 

Flock, and he, on that account, her principal Shepherd,
which made a spiritual Relation between
them, the Requisites of which, on her Part, were
not to be dispensed with. You may be sure, the
good Gentleman very chearfully and applaudingly
gave her his Consent; and when she told him, how
well Mr. Adams was provided for, and that she
should apply to him to supply her with a Town-Chaplain,
when she was depriv'd of him, he wish'd,
that the other Duties of his Function (for he has a
large Parish) would permit him to be the happy
Person himself; saying, That till she was supply'd to
her Mind, either he or his Curate would take care,
that so laudable a Method should be kept up. 
You will do me the Justice, Madam, to believe,
that I very chearfully join in my dear Friend's Sunday
Duties, and am not a little edify'd with the good
Example, and with the Seriousness, Harmony, and
Good-will, that this lovely Method contributes to
keep up in the Family. 
I must own, I never saw such a Family of Love
in my Life: For here, under the Eye of the best
and most respected of Mistresses, they twice every
Sunday see one another all together, as in the Country,
in a Body, superior as well as inferior Servants; 
and Deb. tells me, after Mrs. B. and I are withdrawn,
there are such friendly Salutations among
them, that she never heard the like–––Your Servant,
good Maister Longman; Your Servant, Master Colbrand,
cries one and another: How do you, John? 
I'm glad to see you, Abrabam!––– All blessedly met
once more! cries Jonathan the venerable Butler,
with his silver Hairs, as Mrs. B. always distinguishes
him: Good Madam Jervis, cries another, you look
purely this blessed Day, thank God! ––– And they
return to their several Vocations, so light, so easy,
so pleas'd, so even-temper'd in their Minds, as their 

chearful Countenances, as well as Expressions, testify,
that it is an Heaven of an House: And being wound
up thus constantly once a Week, like a good Eightday
Clock, no Piece of Machinery, that ever was
made, is so regular and uniform, as this Family is. 
What an Example does this dear Lady set to all
who see her, to all who know her, and to all who
hear of her, and have the Grace to imitate her! ––– 
What a publick Blessing would such a Mind as hers
be, could it be vested with the Robes of Royalty,
and adorn the Sovereign Dignity! –––But what are
the Princes of the Earth, look at them, in every
Nation, and what have they been for Ages past,
compar'd to this Lady? who acts from the Impulses
of her own Heart, unaided by any human Example. 
And how can one avoid thinking of Inspiration in
this Case; or that she was dropp'd down, when the
creating MIND was forming Angels, (forgive the
Enthusiasm, which the Contemplation of her innumerable
Excellencies raises) to be received into
bodily Organs, and to live among Men and Women,
in order to shew what the first of the Species was
designed to be? 
This reminds me of what my honoured Papa
said once at our own House to Mr. B*  That there
was but one such Angel descended from Heaven in
a thousand Years, and he had got her. 
And yet, here is the Admiration: That one sees all
these Duties performed in such an easy and pleasant
manner, as any body may perform them; for they
interfere not with any Parts of the Family Management; 
take up no Time from the most necessiry
Imployments; but rather aid and inspirit every one
in the Discharge of all their domestick Services; 
and, moreover, keep their Minds in a State of Preparation 

for the more solemn Duties of the Day; 
and all without the least Intermixture of Affectation,
Enthusiasm, or Ostentation. O my dear Papa and
Mamma! permit me but to tarry here till I am perfect
in all these good Lessons, and how happy shall
I be! 
I am mindful, my dear Mamma, of yours and
our good Neighbours Requests to Mrs. B. to oblige
you with the Conversations she mentioned, the one
with the young Ladies related to Mrs. Towers and
Mrs. Arthur; the other with Mr. B. on her Father
and Mother; a Subject, which always, however
humble, raises her admired Pen, and of Consequence
our Expectations; and I will prevail upon her to let
me transcribe them for your Entertainment. She
writes down every thing that passes, which she thinks
may one Day be of Use to Miss Goodwin, and to her
own Children, if she shall live to have any, and to see
them grown up. What a charming Mamma, as well
as Wife and Mistress, will this dear Lady make! 
As to the Town, and the Diversions of it, I shall
not trouble you with any Accounts of them, because
you know the one, and from the Time we passed
here last Winter, as well as your former thorough
Knowledge of both, you will want no Information
about the other; for, generally speaking, all who
reside constantly in London, allow, that there is little
other Difference in the Diversions of one Winter
and another, than such as are in Cloaths; a few
Variations of the Fashions only, which are mostly
owing to the ingenious Contrivances of Persons
who are to get their Bread by diversifying them. 
Mrs. B. has undertaken to give Lady Davers an
Account of Matters as they pass, and her Sentiments
on what she sees. There must be something new in
her Observations, because she is a Stranger to these
Diversions, and unbiassed intirely by Favour or Prejudice; 

and so will not play the partial Critick, but give
to a Beauty its due Praise, and to a Fault its due Censure,
according to that Truth and Nature which are
the unerring Guides of her Actions, as well as Sentiments. 
These I will procure for you, as she gives
me Leave to transcribe what she writes; and you'll
be so good as to return them when perus'd, because I
will lend them, as I used to do her Letters, to her
good Parents; and so I shall give her a Pleasure at the
same time, in the accommodating them with the
Knowlege of all that passes, which she makes it a
Point of Duty to do, because they take Delight in
her Writings. 
My Papa's Observation, that a Woman never
takes a Journey that she don't forget something, is
justify'd by me; for with all my Care, I have forgot
my Diamond Buckle, which Miss Nancy will find
in the inner Till of my Bureau, wrapt up in Cotton; 
and I beg it may be sent me, by the first Opportunity. 
With my humble Duty to you both,
my dear indulgent Papa and Mamma, Thanks for
the Favour I now rejoice in, and affectionate Respects
to Miss Nancy, (I wish she would love me
as well as I love her) and Service to Mr. Murray,
and all our good Neighbours, conclude me, 
Your dutiful and highly favour'd Daughter,
M. Darnford. 

Mr. B. and Mrs. B. desire their Compliments of
Congratulation to Mr. and Mrs. Peters, on the
happy Marriage of their worthy Niece, which
they knew nothing of till I told them of it: 
Also to your honoured Selves they desire their
kind Respects and Thanks for the Loan of your
worthless Daughter. 

I experience every Hour some new Token of
their Politeness and Affection; and I make no
Scruple to think I am with just such a Brother,
and such a Sister, as any happy Creature may
rejoice in, and be proud of.–––Mr. B. I cannot
but repeat, is a charming Husband, and a
most polite Gentleman. His Lady is always
accusing herself to me of Aukwardness and Insufficiency; 
but not a Soul who sees her, can
find it out: She is all genteel Ease; and the
Admiration of every one who beholds her. ––– 
Only I tell her, with such Happiness in Possession,
she is a little of the gravest sometimes. 
&line;
[The Letter which contains the Account of the
Conversation, requested by Miss Darnford, p. 5. of
this Volume, and promised by Mrs. B. p. 17 and mentioned
by Miss in the preceding Letter, will be found
the last Letter but one of this Volume. For Miss
Darnford, having mislaid the first Copy of it, requested
another, two or three Years after this, when married
herself, for the sake of two young Ladies in her
Neighbourhood, whose inconsiderate Rashness had
given great Affliction to their honourable Parents. 
And Mrs. B. with a View to their particular Case,
having made divers Additions and Improvements to
it, it will come in more properly, as we conceive, in
the Course of these Letters, at or near the Time
when those Improvements were made to it.] 
