



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

My heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of
seeing my Mother, and with the shame and the
grief of having given her so much uneasiness. But it
needed not: She was not permitted to come. But
my Aunt was so good as to return; yet not without
my Sister: And, taking my hand, made me sit down
by her. 
She came, she must own, officiously, she said, this
once more; tho' against the opinion of my Father: But
knowing and dreading the consequence of my opposition,
she could not but come. 
She then set forth to me my friends expectations
from me; Mr. Solmes's riches (three times as rich he
came out to be, as any-body had thought him); the
settlements proposed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; 
their aversion to him; all in a very strong light; but
not in a stronger, than my Mother had before placed
them in. My Mother, surely, could not have given
the particulars of what had passed between herself and
me: If she had, my Aunt would not have repeated
many of the same sentiments, as you will find she did,
that had been still more strongly urged, without effect
by her venerable Sister. 

She said it would break the heart of my Father to
have it imagined, that he had not a power over his
child; and that, as he thought, for my own good: 
A child too, whom they always had doated upon! — 
Dearest, dearest Miss, concluded she, clasping her
fingers, with the most condescending earnestness, let
me beg of you, for my sake, for your own sake, for a
hundred sakes, to get over this averseness, to give
up your prejudices, and make every-one happy and
easy once more. —I would kneel to you, my dearest
Niece—Nay, I will kneel to you!— 
And down she dropt, and I with her, kneeling
to her, and beseeching her not to kneel; clasping my
arms about her, and bathing her worthy bosom with
my tears. 
O rise! rise! my beloved Aunt, said I: You cut
me to the heart with this condescending goodness. 
Say then, my dearest Niece, say then, that you will
oblige all your friends! —If you love us, I beseech you
do— 
How can I promise what I can sooner chuse to die
than to perform!— 
Say then, my dear, you will consider of it. Say you
will but reason with yourself. Give us but hopes. 
Don't let me entreat, and thus entreat, in vain. For
still she kneeled, and I by her. 
What a hard case is mine! —Could I but doubt, I
know I could conquer. —That which is an inducement
to my friends, is none at all to me—How often, my
dearest Aunt, must I repeat the same thing? —Let
me but be single—Cannot I live single? Let me be
sent, as I have proposed, to Scotland, to Florence; 
any whither: Let me be sent a slave to the Indies; 
any-whither—Any of these, I will consent to. But I
cannot, cannot think of giving my vows to a man I
cannot endure! 
Well then, rising (Bella silently, with uplifted hands, 

reproaching my supposed perverseness) I see nothing
can prevail with you to oblige us. 
What can I do, my dearest Aunt Hervey? What
can I do? Were I capable of giving a hope I meant
not to enlarge, then could I say, I would consider of
your kind advice. But I would rather be thought perverse
than insincere. Is there, however, no medium? 
Can nothing be thought of? Will nothing do, but to
have a man who is the more disgustful to me, because
he is unjust in the very articles he offers? 
Whom now, Clary, said my Sister, do you reflect
upon? Consider That. 
Make not invidious applications of what I say,
Bella. It may not be looked upon in the same light
by every one. The giver and the accepter are principally
answerable, in an unjust donation. While I
think of it in this light, I should be inexcusable to
be the latter. But why do I enter upon a supposition
of this nature? —My heart, as I have often, often said,
recoils at the thoughts of the man, in every light. — 
Whose Father, but mine, agrees upon articles, where
there is no prospect of a liking? Where the direct
contrary is avowed, all along avowed, without the
least variation, or shadow of a change of sentiment? — 
But it is not my Father's doing originally. O my
cruel, cruel Brother, to cause a measure to be forc'd
upon me, which he would not behave tolerably under,
were the like to be offered to him! 
The girl is got into her altitudes, Aunt Hervey,
said my Sister. You see, Madam, she spares nobody. 
Be pleased to let her know what she has to trust to. 
Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam, pronounce
her doom. 
My Aunt retired to the window, weeping, with my
Sister in her hand: I cannot, Indeed I cannot, Miss
Harlowe, said she, softly (but yet I heard every word
she said): There is great hardship in her case. She 

is a noble child, after all. What pity things are gone
so far! —But Mr. Solmes ought to be told to desist. 
O Madam, said my Sister, in a kind of loud whisper,
are you caught too by the little Siren? —My
Mother did well not to come up! —I question whether
my Father himself, after his first indignation,
would not be turned round by her. Nobody but my
Brother can do any-thing with her, I am sure. 
Don't think of your Brother's coming up, said my
Aunt, still in a low voice—He is too furious. I see
no obstinacy, no perverseness, in her manner! If your
Brother comes, I will not be answerable for the consequences: 
For I thought twice or thrice she would
have gone into fits. 
O Madam, she has a strong heart! —And you see
there is no prevailing with her, tho' you were upon
your knees to her. 
My Sister left my Aunt musing at the window,
with her back towards us; and took that opportunity
to insult me still more barbarously: For, stepping
to my closet, she took up the patterns which
my Mother had sent me up, and bringing them to
me, she spread them upon the chair by me; and, offering
one, and then another, upon her sleeve and
shoulder, thus she ran on, with great seeming tranquillity,
but whisperingly, that my Aunt might not
hear her. This, Clary, is a pretty pattern enough: 
But This is quite charming! I would advise you to
make your appearance in it. And This, were I you,
should be my wedding night-gown—And This my
second dressed suit! Won't you give orders, Love,
to have your Grandmother's jewels new-set? —Or
will you think to shew away in the new ones Mr.
Solmes intends to present to you? He talks of laying
out two or three thousand pounds in presents, child! 
Dear heart! —How gorgeously will you be arrayed! — 
What! silent, my dear! Mamma Norton's sweet dear! 
What! silent still? —But, Clary, won't you have a 

Velvet Suit? It would cut a great figure in a country
church, you know: And the weather may bear it
for a month yet to come. Crimson Velvet, suppose! 
Such a fine complexion as yours, how would it be set
off by it! What an agreeable blush would it give you! 
—High-ho! (mocking me; for I sighed to be thus
fooled with) And do you sigh, Love? —Well then,
as it will be a solemn wedding, what think you of
black Velvet, child? —Silent still, Clary! —Black
Velvet, so fair as you are, with those charming eyes,
gleaming thro' a wintry cloud, like an April Sun! — 
Does not Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes! — 
How lovely will you appear to every one! —What!
silent still, Love! —But about your Laces, Clary!— 
She would have gone on still further, had not my
Aunt advanced towards us, wiping her eyes—What!
whispering, Ladies! You seem so easy and so pleased,
Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I
hope I shall carry down good news. 
I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns,
here. —Unask'd indeed; but she seems, by her silence,
to approve of my judgment. 
O Bella! said I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken
you at your word! —You had before now been exercising
your judgment on your own account: And I
had been happy, as well as you! Was it my fault, I
pray you, that it was not so?— 
O how she raved! 
To be so ready to give, Bella, and so loth to take,
is not very fair in you. 
The poor Bella descended to call names. 
Why, Sister, said I, you are as angry, as if there
were more in the hint, than possibly might be designed. 
My wish is sincere, for both our sakes!— 
for the whole family's sake! —And what (good now)
is there in it? —Do not, do not, dear Bella, give me
cause to suspect, that I have found a reason for your
behaviour to me; and which till now was wholly
unaccountable from Sister to Sister— 

Fie, fie, Miss Clary! said my Aunt. 
My Sister was more and more outrageous. 
O how much fitter, said I, to be a jest, than a
jester! —But now, Bella, turn the glass to you, and
see how poorly fits the robe upon your own shoulders,
which you have been so unmercifully fixing upon
mine! 
Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeated my Aunt. 
And fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe,
you would say, were you to have heard her
barbarous insults! 
Let us go, Madam, said my Sister, with great violence; 
let us leave the creature to swell till she bursts
with her own poison. —The last time I will ever come
near her, in the mind I am in! 
It is so easy a thing, returned I, were I to be mean
enough to follow an example that is so censureable in
the setter of it, to vanquish such a teazing spirit as
yours with its own blunt weapons, that I am amazed
you will provoke me! —Yet, Bella, since you will
go (for she had hurried to the door) forgive me. I
forgive you. And you have a double reason to do so,
both from eldership, and from the offence so studiously
given to one in affliction. —But may you be
happy, tho' I never shall! —May you never have half
the trials I have had! Be this your comfort, that you
cannot have a Sister to treat you, as you have treated
me! —And so God bless you! 
O thou art a—And down she flung without saying
what. 
Permit me, Madam, said I to my Aunt, sinking
down, and clasping her knees with my arms, to detain
you one moment—Not to say any-thing about my
poor Sister—She is her own punisher—Only to thank
you for all your condescending goodness to me. I
only beg of you, not to impute to obstinacy the immoveableness
I have shewn to so tender a friend; and
to forgive me every-thing I have said or done amiss 

in your presence; for it has not proceeded from inward
rancour to the poor Bella. But I will be bold
to say, that neither She, nor my Brother, nor even
my Father himself, knows what a heart they have set
a bleeding. 
I saw, to my comfort, what effect my Sister's absence
wrought for me. —Rise, my noble-minded Niece!
—charming creature! —[Those were her kind words]
kneel not to me! —Keep to yourself what I now say
to you. —I admire you more than I can express—And
if you can forbear claiming your Estate, and can resolve
to avoid Lovelace, you will continue to be the
greatest miracle I ever knew at your years. —But I
must hasten down after your Sister. —These are my
last words to you: ‘Conform to your Father's will,
if you possibly can. How meritorious will it be in
you to do so! Pray to God to enable you to conform. You don't know what may be done.’ 
Only, my dear Aunt, one word, one word more
(for she was going)—Speak all you can for my dear
Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: Should
ill-health overtake her, she may not know how to
live without my Mamma's favour. I shall have no
means to help her; for I will want necessaries before
I will assert my right: And I do assure you, she has
said so many things to me in behalf of my submitting
to my Father's will, that her arguments have not a
little contributed to make me resolve to avoid the extremities,
which nevertheless I pray to God they do not
at last force me upon. And yet they deprive me of
her advice, and think unjustly of one of the most
excellent of women. 
I am glad to hear you say This: And take This,
and This, and This, my charming Niece (for so she
called me almost at every word; kissing me earnestly,
and clasping her arms about my neck): And
God protect you, and direct you! But you must submit: 
Indeed you must. Some one day in a month
from This, is all the choice that is left you. 

And this, I suppose, was the doom my Sister called
for; yet not worse than what had been pronounced
upon me before. 
She repeated these last sentences louder than the
former. And remember, Miss, added she, it is your
‘duty to comply’—And down she went, leaving me
with my heart full, and my eyes running over. 
The very repetition of this fills me with almost equal
concern, to that which I felt at the time. 
I must lay down my pen. Mistinesses which give
to my deluged eye the appearance of all the colours in
the rainbow, will not permit me to write on. 
Wednesday, Five o' clock. 
I will now add a few lines—My Aunt, as she
went down from me, was met at the foot of the stairs
by my Sister, who seemed to think she had staid a
good while after her: And hearing her last words
prescribing to me implicit duty, praised her for it, and
exclaimed against my obstinacy. Did you ever hear
of such perverseness, Madam? said she: Could you
have thought, that your Clarissa, and every-body's
Clarissa, was such a girl? —And who, as you said, is
to submit, her Father or she? 
My Aunt said something in answer to her, compassionating
me, as I thought, by her accent: But I
heard not the words. 
Such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable! 
—But my Brother and Sister are continually
misrepresenting all I say and do; and I am deprived
of the opportunity of defending myself! —My Sister
says (a) , that had they thought me such a championess,
they would not have engaged with me: And
now, not knowing how to reconcile my supposed
obstinacy with my general character, and natural
temper, they seem to hope to tire me out, and resolve
to vary their measures accordingly. My Brother, you 

see (a) , is determined to carry this point, or to abandon
Harlowe place, and never to see it more. —So
they are to be lose a Son, or to conquer a Daughter—the
perversest and most ungrateful that ever Parents had! — 
This is the light he places things in: And has undertaken,
it seems, to subdue me, if his advice be followed. 
It will be further tried; of that I am convinced; 
and what will be their next measure, who
can divine? 
I shall dispatch, with this, my Answer to yours of
Sunday last, begun on Monday (b) ; but which is not
yet quite finished. It is too long to copy: I have
not time for it. In it I have been very free with you,
my dear, in more places than one. I cannot say, that
I am pleased with all I have written—Yet will not
now alter it. —My mind is not at ease enough for the
subject. —Don't be angry with me. Yet, if you can
excuse one or two passages, it will be, because they
were written by 
Your Clarissa Harlowe. 