


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Tuesday Evening, Feb. 28. 
Mr. Reeves, my dear, is just returned from a visit
he made to St. James's Square. I transcribe a 

paper giving an account of what passed between Mr.
Bagenhall and Sir Charles, in relation to the shocking
affair which has filled me with so much apprehension; 
and which Sir Charles, at my cousin's request, allow'd
him to put in his pocket. 
Mr. Bagenhall came to Sir Charles yesterday evening
with a message from Sir Hargrave, demanding
a meeting with him, the next morning, at a particular
hour, at Kensington Gravel-pits. Sir Charles took
Mr. Bagenhall with him into his study, and asking
him to sit down, Mr. Bagenhall said, That he was
once concerned in an affair of this nature, which had
been very much misrepresented afterwards; and that
he had been advised to take a step which Sir Charles
might think extraordinary; which was, that he had
brought with him a young gentleman, whom he hoped,
for Sir Hargrave's satisfaction, as well as to do justice
to what should pass between them, Sir Charles would
permit to take minutes of their conversation: And that
he was in the hall. 
Let not a gentleman be left in the hall, said Sir
Charles; and, ringing, directed him to be shewn into
the study to them. Yet, Mr. Bagenhall, said he, I
see no occasion for this. Our conversation on the subject
you come to talk of, can be but short. 
Were it to hold but two minutes, Sir Charles. 
What you please, Mr. Bagenhall. 
The young gentleman entered; and pen and ink
were set before him. He wrote in short hand: And
read it to the gentlemen; and Sir Charles, as it was to
be transcribed for Sir Hargrave, desiring a copy of it,
it was sent him the same night. 


Sir Ch. You have told me, Mr. Bagenhall, Sir
Hargrave's demand. Have you seen, Sir, the answer
I returned to his letter? 
Mr. Bagenhall. I have, Sir. 

Sir Ch. And do you think, there needs any other,
or farther? 
Mr. B. It is not, Sir Charles, such an answer as
a gentleman can sit down with. 
Sir Ch. Do you give that as your own opinion, Mr.
Bagenhall? Or, as Sir Hargiave's? 
Mr. B. As Sir Hargrave's, Sir. And I believe it
would be the opinion of every man of honour. 
Sir Ch. Man of honour! Mr. Bagenhall. A man
of honour would not have given the occasion which
has brought you and me, Sir, into a personal knowlege
of each other. I asked the question, supposing
there could be but one principal in this debate. 
Mr. B. I beg pardon: I meant not that there
should be two. 
Sir Ch. Pray, Sir, let me ask you, Do you know
the particulars of Sir Hargrave's attempt, and of his
violence to the lady? 
Mr. B. Sir Hargrave, I believe, has given me a
very exact account of every thing. He meant not
dishonour to the lady. 
Sir Ch. He must have a very high opinion of himself,
if he thought the best he could do for her, would
be to do her honour. —Sir, pray put that down. — 
Repeating what he said to the writer, that he might
not mistake. 
Sir Ch. But do you, Mr. Bagenhall, think Sir Hargrave
was justifiable, was a man of honour, in what
he did? 
Mr. B. I mean not, as I told you, Sir Charles, to
make myself a principal in this affair. I pretend not
to justify what Sir Hargrave did to the lady. 
Sir Ch. I hope then you will allow me to refer to
my answer to Sir Hargrave's letter. I shall send him
no other. I beg your pardon, Mr. Bagenhall, I mean
not a disrespect to you. 
Mr. B. No other, Sir Charles? 
Sir Ch. Since he is to see what this gentleman writes, 

pray put down, Sir, that I say, The answer I have
written, is such a one as he ought to be satisfied with:
Such a one as becomes a man of honour to send, if
he thought fit to send any: And such a one as a man,
who has acted as Sir Hargrave acted by a woman of
virtue and honour, ought to be thankful for. —Have
you written that, Sir? 
Writer. I have, Sir. 
Sir Ch. Write further, if you please; That I say,
Sir Hargrave may be very glad, if he hear no more of
this affair from the lady's natural friends: That, however,
I shall rid him of all apprehension of that nature; 
for that I still consider the lady as under my
protection, with regard to any consequences that may
naturally follow what happen'd on Hounslow-heath:
That I say, I shall neglect no proper call to protect
her farther; but that his call upon me to meet him,
must be such a one as my own heart can justify; and
that it is not my way to obey the insolent summons of
any man breathing. —And yet, what is this, Mr. Bagenhall,
but repeating what I wrote? 
Mr. B. You are warm, Sir Charles. 
Sir Ch. Indeed I am not: I am only earnest. As
Sir Hargrave is to be shewn what passes, I say more
than otherwise I should choose to say. 
Mr. B. Will you name your own time and place,
Sir Charles? 
Sir Ch. To do what? 
Mr. B. To meet Sir Hargrave? 
Sir Ch. To do him good—To do good to my bitterest
enemy, I would meet him. Let him know,
that I wrote a very long letter, because I would discharge
my mind of all that I thought necessary to say
on the occasion. 
Mr. B. And you have no other answer to return? 
Sir Ch. Only this—Let Sir Hargrave engage himself
in a like unworthy enterprize; and let the lady, as
this did, claim my protection; and I will endeavour 

to give it to her, altho' Sir Hargrave were surrounded
by as many men armed, as he has in his service; that
is to say, if a legal redress were not at hand: If it were,
I hold it not to be a point of bravery to insult magistracy,
and to take upon myself to be my own judge; and,
as it might happen, another man's executioner. 
Mr. B. This is nobly said, Sir Charles: But still
Sir Hargrave had not injured you, he says. And as I
had heard you were a man of an excellent character,
and know Sir Hargrave to be man of courage, I
took it into my head, for the prevention of mischief,
to make a proposal in writing to the lady, whom Sir
Hargrave loves as his own soul; and if she had come
into it— 
Sir Ch. A strange proposal, Mr. Bagenhall. Could
you expect any-thing from it? 
Mr. B. Why not, Sir Charles? She is disengaged,
it seems. I presume, Sir, you do not intend to make
court to her yourself? 
Sir Ch. We are insensibly got into a parley, upon
a subject that will not bear it, Mr. Bagenhall. Tell
Sir Hargrave—or, write it down from my lips, Sir,
(speaking to the writer) That I wish him to take time
to enquire aster my character, and after my motives in
refusing to meet him on the terms he expects me to see
him. Tell him, That I have, before now, shewn an
insolent man, that I may be provoked: But that, when
I have been so, I have had the happiness to chastise
such a one without murdering him, and without giving
any advantage over my own life, to his single
arm. 
Mr. B. This is great talking, Sir Charles. 
Sir Ch. It is, Mr. Bagenhall. And I should be
sorry to have been put upon it, were I not in hope,
that it may lead Sir Hargrave to such enquiries as may
be for his service, as much as for mine. 
Mr. B. I wish, that two such spirits were better acquainted
with each other, or that Sir Hargrave had not 

suffered so much as he has done, both in person and
mind. 
Sir Ch. What does all this tend to, Mr. Bagenhall? 
I look upon you as a gentleman; and the more, for
having said, You were sollicitous to prevent further
mischief, or I should not have said so much to so little
purpose. And once more, I must refer to my Letter. 
Mr. B. I own I admire you for your spirit, Sir.
But it is amazing to me, that a man of such spirit
can refuse to a gentleman the satisfaction which is demanded
of him. 
Sir Ch. It is owing to my having some spirit, that
I can, fearless of consequences, refuse what you call
satisfaction to Sir Hargrave, and yet be fearless of insult
upon my refusal. I consider myself, as a mortal
man: I can die but once: Once I must die: And if
the cause be such as will justify me to my own heart,
I, for my own sake, care not, whether my life be demanded
of me to-morrow, or forty years hence: But,
Sir (speaking to the writer) Let not this that I have now
said, be transcribed from your notes: It may to Sir
Hargrave sound ostentatiously. I want not, that anything
should be read or shewn to him, that would appear
like giving consequence to myself, except for Sir
Hargrave's own sake. 
Mr. B. I beg, that it may not be spared. If you
are capable of acting as you speak; by what I have
heard of you in the affair on Hounslow-Heath; and
by what I have heard from you in this conversation; 
and see of you; I think you a wonder of a man; 
and should be glad it were in my power to reconcile
you to each other. 
Sir Ch. I could not hold friendship, Mr. Bagenhall,
with a man that has been capable of acting as Sir Hargrave
has acted, by an innocent and helpless young
lady. But I will name the terms on which I can take
by the hand, where-ever I meet him, a man to whom
I can have no malice: These are they, That he lay at 

the door of mad and violent passion the illegal attempt
he made on the best of women: That he express
his sorrow for it; and, on his knees, if he pleases,
(it is no disgrace for the bravest man to kneel to an
injured lady) beg her pardon; and confess her clemency
to be greater than he deserves, if she give it. 
Mr. B. Good God! —Shall that be transcribed,
Sir Charles? 
Sir Ch. By all means: And if Sir Hargrave is a
man that has in his heart the least spark of true magnanimity,
he will gladly embrace the opportunity of
acting accordingly: And put down, Sir, That sorrow,
that contrition, is all the atonement that can be made
for a perpetrated evil. 
A faithful Narrative.
Henry Cotes.
February 27. 


Does not your heart glow, my Lucy, now you
have read (as I suppose you have) this paper? And do
not the countenances of every one of my revered
friends round you [Pray look!] shine with admiration
of this excellent man? And yet you all loved him
before: And so you all think I did. Well, I can't
help your thoughts! —But I hope I shall not be undone
by a good man! 
You will imagine, that my heart was a little agitated,
when I came to read Mr. Bagenhall's question,
Whether Sir Charles intended to make court to me
himself? I am sorry to tell you, Lucy, that I was a
little more affected than I wished to be. Indeed, I
shall keep a look-out, as you call it, upon myself. To
say truth, I laid down the paper at that place, and
was afraid to read the answer made to it. When I
took it up, and read what followed, I might have
spared, I saw, my foolish little tremors. See how frank
I continue to be: But if you come not to this paragraph 

before you are aware, you need not read it to
my uncle. 
Mr. Bagenhall went away so much pleased with Sir
Charles (as he owned) that Mr. Reeves encourages
me to hope, some way may be found to prevent further
mischief. Yet the condition, which Sir Charles
has proposed for my forgiving the wretch—Upon my
word, my dear, I desire not to see Sir Hargrave either
upon his knees, or upon his feet: I am sure I could
not see him without very violent emotions. His barbarity,
his malice, his cruelty, have impressed me
strongly: Nor can I be glad to see the wretch with
his disfigured mouth and lip. His lip, it seems, has
been sewed up, and he wears a great black-silk patch
upon the place. 
I can't find that Sir Charles has heard from the exasperated
man, since Mr. Bagenhall left him yesterday. 
I hope nothing will happen to over-cloud to-morrow. 
I propose to myself as happy a day, as, in the
present situation of things, can be given to 
Your Harriet Byron. 

