


Miss Lucy Selby, To Lady G. 


Saturday, Nov. 25. 
You enjoined me, my dear Lady G. at
parting on Monday last, to write to
you; and to be very particular in what
I wrote. I will, because I love and
fear you. Otherwise I would not
write at all; first, because I had not
the good fortune to please you, in mine to Lady L.; 
and next, because I shall so soon have the honour to
attend you in town. Well then, I begin. 
On Tuesday we women were employed in preparations
for the tenants jubilee, next day. Sir Charles,
attended by my brother, paid a morning visit to
Mr. Greville, whom he found moody, reserved, and 

indisposed. My brother James says, that he never
saw such a manly, yet tender treatment, from one
man to another, as Sir Charles gave him; and that
he absolutely subdued him, and left him acknowleging
the favour of his visit, and begging a repetition
of it, as often as he could, while he staid in these parts; 
and that, he said, as well for his credit, as for his comfort. 
But when, Sir Charles, said he, do you carry
from us the Syren? I will call her names. I hate
her. The sooner the better. Curse me, if I shall
be able to creep out of the house, while she is visible
on Northamptonshire ground—Tho' I was a friend
to the match—Do you mind that, young man (to
my brother James): O Love! Love! added he, of
what contradictions art thou the cause! Tho' I hate
her, I almost long to see her. You'll allow me to
visit you both, I hope when I have got over these
plaguy megrims? 
The same day Sir Charles making a friendly visit,
as going by Sir John Holles's seat, to that family,
sound Miss Orme there, expecting her brother to
call for her in his post chaise. 
Great civilities passed between Sir Charles and Miss
Orme. She was doubtful whether her brother had,
at that time, best see Sir Charles, as he was weak in
health and spirits: But just as Sir Charles was at the
gate, going to his chariot, attended by Sir John and
the young Ladies, poor Mr. Orme came. 
The Liveries would not allow Mr. Orme to doubt
who it was. He turned pale. Sir Charles addressed
himself to him with his usual polite freedom. Knowing,
Sir, said he, that Mr. Orme was expected by
one of the best of Sisters, I presume to salute you,
as the Mr. Orme to whom I have been desirous, ever
since I have been in Northamptonshire, to pay my
compliments. 
Sir Charles Grandison, Sir— 
At your service, Mr. Orme; taking his hand. 

The happiest man in the world, replied Mr. Orme,
with some emotion. The best, the loveliest woman
on earth calls you hers. 
I am, I think myself, the happiest of men. But
it will add to my joy, to have it wished me by so
good a man as Mr. Orme. 
Ah, Sir! —Could I wish joy to any man on this
occasion, it would be to you, because of your character; 
and in the reflexion, that the most excellent
of women must be happier with you, than any other
man could have made her. But Self, Self, Sir! He
is indeed a hero, who, with such a fervent attachment
as mine, can divest himself of Self. I loved her,
Sir, from her early infancy, and never knew another
Love. 
The man, Mr. Orme, who loved Miss Byron,
gave distinction to himself. Permit me to present
her to you, and you to her, as dear friends; and
allow me a third place in your friendship. You
have a sister who justly claims a second. I dare engage
for the dear creature, from what I know of her
value for Mr. Orme, that she will allow of this
friendship, on the foot of his own merits, were my
recommendation out of the question. 
O Sir Charles! you are, you ought to be, the man. 
And will you allow me on these terms to visit you,
and visit her? —But, alas! I fear, I fear, I cannot
soon— 
At your own time, my dear Mr. Orme. —At Mr.
Selby's; at her house in London; in Hampshire; 
where-ever she is, and whether I am present or absent,
Mr. Orme will be received as her brother and
my brother, as her friend and my friend. 
Good God! Good God! —He gushed into tears. 
He ran into the house to hide his emotion; but in
vain; for when he went in, he wept like a child! 
—Forgive me, forgive me, Sir John! (who just then
came in from taking leave of his noble guest) but 

there is no bearing this man's magnanimity! —He
is all I have heard of him. Happy, happy Miss Byron! 
—No man but this could deserve her. But where
is he? rising: I will ask his pardon for my abrupt
departure from him. 
He is gone, answered Sir John. I saw him in his
chariot! Good Mr. Orme! he called you, and sighed
for you. Poor Mr. Orme declared, that he would
wait upon Sir Charles, and tell him, how acceptable
to his heart, and what balm to his mind, would be
the tender he had the goodness to make him. Sister,
said he, you were at the gate, as well as the young
Ladies; did he not hint, did he not say, that Miss Byron
spoke of me with tenderness? 
Miss Kitty Holles supplied to us afterwards my brother's
account of what passed in this accidental interview. 
These dear girls know not how to keep from
Selby house. They are good girls; how then can
they help admiring Sir Charles Grandison? 
I begin to fansy I am in a way to please you,
Lady G. Of which, at taking up my pen, I had
little hopes, and therefore intended not to take much
pains about it. But the subject must warm the
coldest genius. Is it not of your brother, and my
cousin? 
In the afternoon, a Letter was brought from Sir
Rowland Meredith. My cousin intends to shew it
to you in town. Such a mixture in it, of joy and
sadness; of condolement and congratulation; I believe
was never seen in one sheet of paper. It is
dated from Windsor. The good man was there in
his way to town; resolving to pay a visit to the
wonderful man, as he calls him, of whom he had
heard so great a character; and who was probably to
be the husband of his daughter Byron; and there he
heard (from Lord W's domestics, I suppose) that Sir
Charles was in Northamptonshire, and that the marriage
was actually solemnized. He therefore intended 

to set out directly for Bath, where Mr. Fowler was,
or at the Hot-well at Bristol, pursuing measures for
his health; with a view to console his poor boy. 
This is a good old man. Methinks I am half
ready to wish, that some of my cousin's admirers
would dry up their tears, and come among us: Yet
we are nice and dainty girls, some of us, let me tell
you. —'Tis foolish, however, to suggest leavings, and
such sort of stuff; the Lady such as but one man
could deserve; his merit allowed universally. 
Sir Charles acquainted his Lady with all that had
passed between him and Mr. Orme. She received
his account with joy and thankfulness. 
You are enter'd, Sir, said she, into a numerous
family. I have called Sir Rowland Meredith my Father; 
Mr. Fowler my Brother. Be pleased to read
this Letter. 
I remember the relation, my dear, returned Sir
Charles, and acknowlege it. Mr. Fowler is another
Mr. Orme. Sir Rowland is a very worthy man. 
He read it—What an excellent heart has Sir Rowland! 
My dearest Love! cultivate their friendship,
as I will Mr. Orme's. My pity for these worthy objects,
joining with yours, and the frankness of our
mutual behaviour to them, will strengthen their
hearts. We owe it to them, my dearest Life, as
much as it is in our power, to soften their disappointment. 
—Could they have a greater? 
O my Lady G.! Who can think of a man after
this—Except one might hope, from the personal
knowlege of his charming behaviour, that the men
who addressed us, might be improved by such an
example? 
The Tenants Jubilee, as they called it, was on
Wednesday. I was a much more orderly day than
we expected. Sir Charles was all condescension and
chearful goodness: My cousin all graciousness, was
the word for her. Mrs. Shirley was of the company. 

How was she reverenced! She ever was! Once when
the bride was withdrawn, and Sir Charles was engaged
in talk with Mr. Deane, she whispered two or
three of her tenants to tell the rest, that it was great
joy to her, to be assured, that after her departure,
the tenants of her dear Mr. Shirley would be treated
with as much kindness (perhaps, with more) as he,
and as she, after his example, had ever treated them. 
Yet one caution, I give, said she: My dear son will
see with his own eyes: He will dispense with his own
hands. He will not be imposed upon. 
Thursday and Friday the Bride saw company. 
There was as little both days of the impertinence
that attends form, as I believe, was ever known on
the like occasion; but more of sincere admiration. 
We had a vast number of people. Some of them
persons of fashion, with whom we had but slender
acquaintance; but who wished to see the happy pair. 
We shall be this day at Shirley-manor in a family
way: In that, my dear Lady G. (after all the busile
and parade that we can make) lies the true, because
the untumultuous joy. 
To-morrow we shall serve God in our usual way. 
Adieu, my dear Lady G. —This is the sort of stuff
you must be satisfied with from a poor untalented
girl; as is 
Your ever-devoted,
Lucy Selby. 
No end of duty, love, compliments, &c. I begin
again to doubt I shan't please you:—So am
(allowably) tired. 

