



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday, April 21. 
Thou, Lovelace, hast been long the Entertainer; 
I the Entertained. Nor have I been solicitous to
animadvert, as thou wentest along, upon thy inventions,
and their tendency. For I believed, that with
all thy airs, the unequalled perfections and fine qualities
of this Lady would always be her protection and
security. But now, that I find, thou hast so far succeeded,
as to induce her to come to town, and to chuse
her lodgings in a house, the people of which will too
probably damp and suppress any honourable motions
which may arise in thy mind in her favour, I cannot
help writing: And that professedly in her behalf. 
My inducements to this are not owing to virtue: 
But if they were, what hope could I have of affecting
thee, by pleas arising from it? 
Nor would such a man as thou art be deterred, were
I to remind thee of the vengeance which thou mayest
one day expect, if thou insultest a woman of her character,
family, and fortune. 
Neither are gratitude and honour motives to be
mentioned in a woman's favour, to men, such as we
are, who consider all those of the Sex as fair prize, over
whom we can obtain a power. For our honour, and
honour in the general acceptation of the word, are two
things. 
What then is my motive? —What, but the true
friendship that I bear thee, Lovelace; which makes
me plead Thy own sake, and Thy family's sake, in the
justice thou owest to this incomparable creature; who, 

however, so well deserves to have her sake to be mentioned
as the principal consideration? 
Last time I was at M. Hall, thy noble Uncle so
earnestly pressed me to use my interest to persuade thee
to enter the pale, and gave me so many family-reasons
for it, that I could not help engaging myself heartily
on his side of the question; and the rather, as I knew,
that thy own intentions with regard to this fine woman,
were then worthy of her. And of this I assured his
Lordship; who was half-afraid of thee, because of the
ill usage thou receivedst from her family. But now,
that the case is altered, let me press the matter home to
thee from other considerations. 
By what I have heard of this Lady's perfections from
every mouth, as well as from thine, and from every
Letter thou hast written, where wilt thou find such
another woman? And why shouldst thou tempt her
virtue? —Why shouldst thou wish to try where there
is no reason to doubt? 
Were I in thy case, and designed to marry, and if I
preferred a woman, as I know thou dost This, to all
the women in the world, I should dread to make further
trial, knowing what we know of the Sex, for
fear of succeeding; and especially if I doubted not, that
if there were a woman in the world virtuous at heart,
it is she. 
And let me tell thee, Lovelace, that in this Lady's
situation, the trial is not a fair trial. Considering the
depth of thy plots and contrivances: Considering the
opportunities which I see thou must have with her, in
spite of her own heart; all her Relations follies acting
in concert, though unknown to themselves, with thy
wicked scheming head: Considering how destitute of
protection she is: Considering the house she is to be in,
where she will be surrounded with thy implements; 
specious, well-bred, and genteel creatures, not easily to
be detected when they are disposed to preserve appearances,
especially by a young, unexperienced Lady 

wholly unacquainted with the town: Considering all
these things, I say, what glory, what cause of triumph,
wilt thou have, if she should be overcome? —Thou,
too, a man born for intrigue, full of invention,
intrepid, remorseless, able patiently to watch for thy
opportunity; not hurried, as most men, by gusts of
violent passion, which often nip a project in the bud,
and make the snail that was just putting out its horns to
meet the inviter, withdraw into its shell—A man who
has no regard to his word or oath to the Sex; the Lady
scrupulously strict to her word, incapable of art or design; 
apt therefore to believe well of others—It would
be a miracle if she stood such an attempter, such attempts,
and such snares, as I see will be laid for her. 
And after all, I see not when men are so frail without
importunity, that so much should be expected from
women, daughters of the same fathers and mothers, and
made up of the same brittle compounds (Education all the
difference) nor where the triumph is in subduing them. 
May there not be other Lovelaces, thou askest, who,
attracted by her beauty, may endeavour to prevail with
her (a) ? 
No; there cannot, I answer, be such another man,
person, mind, fortune, and thy character, as above
given, taken in. If thou imaginedst there could, such
is thy pride, that thou wouldst think the worse of thyself. 
But let me touch upon thy predominant passion,
Revenge; for Love is but second to that, as I have
often told thee, tho' it has set thee into raving at me: 
What poor pretences for Revenge are the difficulties
thou hadst in getting her off; allowing that she had run
a risque of being Solmes's wife, had she staid? If these
are other than pretences, why thankest thou not those
who, by their persecutions of her, answered thy hopes,
and threw her into thy power? —Besides, are not the
pretences thou makest for further trial, most ingratefully, 

as well as contradictorily, founded upon the supposition
of error in her, occasioned by her favour to
thee? 
And let me, for the utter confusion of thy poor pleas
of this nature, ask thee—Would she, in thy opinion,
had she willingly gone off with thee, have been entitled
to better quarter? —For a mistress indeed she might: 
But wouldst thou for a wife have had cause to like her
half so well, as now? 
&dotup;Has she not demonstrated, that even the highest
provocations were not sufficient to warp her from her
duty to her parents, tho' a native, and, as I may say,
an originally involuntary duty, because native? And
is not this a charming earnest that she will sacredly
observe a still higher duty into which she proposes to
enter, when she does enter, by plighted vows, and
entirely as a volunteer?&dotup; 
That she loves thee, wicked as thou art, and cruel
as a panther, there is no reason to doubt. Yet, what
a command has she over herself, that such a penetrating
self-flatterer as thyself, is sometimes ready to doubt it! 
Tho' persecuted on the one hand, as she was, by her
own family, and attracted on the other, by the splendor
of thine; every one of whom courts her to rank
herself among them? 
Thou wilt perhaps think, that I have departed from
my proposition, and pleaded the Lady's sake more than
thine in the above—But no such thing. All that I have
written, is more in thy behalf than in hers; since she
may make thee happy; but it is next to impossible, I
should think, if she preserve her delicacy, that thou
canst make her so. What is the Love of a Rakish
Heart? There cannot be peculiarity in it. But I need
not give my further reasons. Thou wilt have ingenuousness
enough, I dare say, were there occasion for it, to
subscribe to my opinion. 
I plead not for the State from any great liking to it
myself. Nor have I, at present, thoughts of entering 

into it. But as thou art the last of thy name; as thy
family is of note and figure in thy country; and as
thou thyself thinkest that thou shalt one day marry; is
it possible, let me ask thee, that thou canst have such
another opportunity as thou now hast, if thou lettest
this slip? A woman, in her family and fortune not
unworthy of thine own (though thou art so apt, from
pride of Ancestry, and pride of Heart, to speak slightly
of the families thou dislikest); so celebrated for beauty; 
and so noted at the same time for prudence, for Soul (I
will say, instead of sense) and for virtue? 
If thou art not so narrow-minded an elf, as to prefer
thine own single satisfaction to posterity, thou, who
shouldst wish to beget children for duration, wilt not
postpone till the Rake's usual time; that is to say, till
diseases or years, or both, lay hold of thee; since in
that case thou wouldst entitle thyself to the curses of thy
legitimate progeny for giving them a Being altogether
miserable: A Being, which they will be obliged to
hold upon a worse tenure than that Tenant-courtesy,
which thou callest the worst (a) ; to wit, upon the
Doctor's courtesy; thy descendents also propagating (if
they shall live, and be able to propagate) a wretched
Race, that shall entail the curse, or the reason for it,
upon remote generations. 
Wicked as the sober world accounts you and me,
we have not yet, it is to be hoped, got over all compunction. 
Altho' we find Religion against us, we have
not yet presumed to make a Religion to suit our practices. 
We despise those who do. And we know better
than to be even doubters. In short, we believe a future
State of Rewards and Punishments. But as we have
so much youth and health in hand, we hope to have time
for repentance. That is to say, in plain English [Nor
think thou me too grave, Lovelace: Thou art grave
sometimes, tho' not often] we hope to live to Sense, as
long as Sense can relish, and purpose to reform when
we can sin no longer. 

And shall this admirable woman suffer for her generous
endeavours to set on foot thy Reformation; and
for insisting upon proofs of the sincerity of thy professions
before she will be thine? 
Upon the whole matter, let me wish thee to consider
well what thou art about, before thou goest a step
farther in the path which thou hast chalked out for thyself
to tread, and art just going to enter upon. Hitherto
all is so far right, that if the Lady mistrusts thy honour,
she has no proofs. Be honest to her, then, in her sense
of the word. None of thy companions, thou knowest,
will offer to laugh at what thou dost. And if they should
(on thy entering into a State which has been so much
ridiculed by thee, and by all of us) thou hast one advantage
—It is this; That thou canst not be ashamed. 
Deferring to the post-day to close my Letter, I find
one left at my cousin Osgood's, with direction to be
forwarded to the Lady. It was brought within these
two hours by a particular hand, and has a Harlowe-seal
upon it. As it may therefore-be of importance, I
dispatch it with my own, by my servant, post-haste (a) . 
I suppose you will soon be in town. Without the
Lady, I hope. Farewel. 
Be Honest, and be Happy.
J. Belford. 
Sat. Apr. 22. 