



Lord M. To John Belford, Esq; 
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 

M. Hall, Monday, May 15. 
Sir,
If any man in the world has power over my Nephew,
it is you. I therefore write this, to beg
you to interfere in the affair depending between him
and the most accomplished of women, as every one
says; and what every one says, must be true. 
I don't know that he has any bad designs upon her; 
but I know his temper too well, not to be apprehensive
upon such long delays: And the Ladies here have
been for some time in fear for her: Lady Sarah in
particular, who (as you must know) is a wise woman,
says, that these delays, in the present case,
must be from him, rather than from the Lady. 
He had always indeed a strong antipathy to Marriage,
and may think of playing his dog's tricks by
her, as he has by so many others. If there's any 

danger of this, 'tis best to prevent it in time: For,
when a thing is done, advice comes too late. 
He has always had the folly and impertinence to
make a jest of me for using proverbs: But as they
are the wisdom of whole nations and ages collected
into a small compass, I am not to be shamed out of
sentences, that often contain more wisdom in them,
than the tedious harangues of most of our parsons
and moralists. Let him laugh at them, if he pleases: 
You and I know better things, Mr. Belford. —Tho'
you have kept company with a wolf, you have not learnt
to howl of him. 
But nevertheless, you must not let him know that
I have written to you on this subject. I am ashamed
to say it; but he has ever treated me as if I were a
man of very common understanding; and would,
perhaps, think never the better of the best advice in
the world, for coming from me. Those, Mr. Belford,
who most love, are least set by. —But who would
expect Velvet to be made out of a Sow's ear? 
I am sure he has no reason however to slight me
as he does. He may and will be the better for me,
if he outlives me; tho' he once told me to my face,
That I might do as I would with my Estate; for
that he, for his part, loved his liberty as much as
he despised money. &dotup;And at another time, twitting
me with my phrases, That the man was above controul,
who wanted not either to borrow or flatter.&dotup; 
He thought, I suppose, that I could not cover him
with my wings, without pecking at him with my bill; 
tho' I never used to be pecking at him, without very
great occasion: And, God knows, he might have
my very heart, if he would but endeavour to oblige
me, by studying his own good; for that is all I desire
of him. Indeed, it was his poor Mother that
first spoiled him; and I have been but too indulgent
to him since. A fine grateful disposition, you'll say,
to return evil for good! But that was always his way. 

&dotup;It is a good saying, and which was verified by him
with a witness—Children when little, make their
parents fools; when great, mad. Had his parents
lived to see what I have seen of him, they would
have been mad indeed.&dotup; 
This match, however, as the Lady has such an
extraordinary share of wisdom and goodness, might
set all to rights; and if you can forward it, I would
enable him to make whatever Settlements he could
wish; and should not be unwilling to put him in
possession of another pretty Estate besides. I am no
covetous man, he knows. And indeed, what is a
covetous man to be likened to so fitly, as to a dog in
a wheel which roasts meat for others? And what do I
live for (as I have often said) but to see him and my
two Nieces well married and settled? May Heaven
settle him down to a better mind, and turn his heart to
more of goodness and consideration! 
If the delays are on his side, I tremble for the Lady; 
and, if on hers (as he tells my Niece Charlotte)
I could wish she were apprised that Delays are dangerous. 
Excellent as she is, she ought not to depend
on her merits with such a changeable fellow, and
such a professed marriage-hater, as he has been. &dotup;Desert
and Reward, I can assure her, seldom keep company
together.&dotup; 
But let him remember, that Vengeance, though it
comes with leaden feet, strikes with iron hands. If he
behaves ill in this case, he may find it so. What a
pity it is, that a man of his talents and learning
should be so vile a Rake! Alas! alas! Une poignée
de bonne vie vaut mieux que plein muy de clergé; a
handful of good life is better than a whole bushel of
learning. 
You may throw in, too, as a friend, that, should
he provoke me, it may not be too late for me to
marry. My old Friend Wycherly did so, when he
was older than I am, on purpose to plague his Nephew: 

And, in spite of this gout, I might have a
child or two still. I have not been without some
thoughts that way, when he has angered me more
than ordinary: But these thoughts have gone off
again hitherto, upon my considering, that the children
of very young and very old men (tho' I am not
so very old neither) last not long; and that old men,
when they marry young women, are said to make much
of death: Yet who knows but that matrimony might
be good against the gouty humours I am troubled
with? 
&dotup;No man is every-thing—You, Mr. Belford, are
a learned man. I am a Peer. And do you (as
you best know how) inculcate upon him the force
of these wise sayings which follow, as well as those
which went before; but yet so discreetly, as that
he may not know, that you borrow your darts from
my quiver. These be they—Happy is the man who
knows his follies in his youth. He that lives well,
lives long. Again, He that lives ill one year, will
sorrow for it seven. And again, as the Spaniards
have it—Who lives well, sees afar off! Far off indeed; 
for he sees into Eternity, as a man may say. 
Then that other fine saying, He who perishes in
needless dangers, is the Devil's Martyr. Another
Proverb I picked up at Madrid, when I accompanied
Lord Lexington in his Embassy to Spain,
which might teach our Nephew more Mercy and
Compassion than is in his Nature I doubt to shew; 
which is this, That he who pities another, remembers
himself. And this that is going to follow, I am
sure he has proved the truth of a hundred times,
That he who does what he will, seldom does what he
ought. Nor is that unworthy of his notice, Young
mens frolicks, old men feel. My devilish gout,
God help me—But I will not say what I was going
to say. 
&dotup;I remember, that you yourself, complimenting 

me for my taste in pithy and wise sentences, said a
thing that gave me a high opinion of you; and
it was this: Men of talents, said you, are sooner
to be convinced by short sentences than by long preachments,
because the short sentences drive themselves
into the heart, and stay there, while long discourses,
tho' ever so good, tire the attention; and one good
thing drives out another, and so on, till all is forgotten.&dotup; 
May your good counsels, Mr. Belford, founded
upon these hints which I have given, pierce his heart,
and incite him to do what will be so happy for himself,
and so necessary for the honour of that admirable
Lady whom I long to see his wife; and, if I
may, I will not think of one for myself. 
Should he abuse the confidence she has placed in
him, I myself shall pray, that vengeance may fall
upon his head—Raro—I quite forget all my Latin; 
but I think it is, Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit
pede pœna claudo: Where vice goes before, vengeance
(sooner or later) will follow. But why do I translate
these things for you? 
I shall make no apologies for this trouble. I know
how well you love him and me; and there is nothing
in which you could serve us both more importantly,
than in forwarding this match to the utmost
of your power. When it is done, how shall I rejoice
to see you at M. Hall! Mean time, I shall long
to hear that you are likely to be successful with him; 
and am, 
Dear Sir,
Your most faithful Friend and Servant,
M. 
Mr. Lovelace having not returned an answer to
Mr. Belford's expostulatory Letter, so soon as
Mr. Belford expected, he wrote to him, expressing
his apprehension, that he had disobliged 

him by his honest freedom. Among other things,
he says— 
I pass my time here at Watford, attending my
dying Uncle, very heavily. I cannot therefore, by
any means, dispense with thy correspondence. And
why shouldst thou punish me, for having more
Conscience and more Remorse than thyself? Thou,
who never thoughtest either Conscience or Remorse
an honour to thee. And I have, besides, a melancholy
Story to tell thee, in relation to Belton and
his Thomasine; and which may afford a Lesson to
all the Keeping Class. 
I have a Letter from each of our three companions
in the time. They have all the wickedness
that thou hast, but not the wit. Some new rogueries
do two of them boast of, which, I think, if
completed, deserve the gallows. 
I am far from hating intrigue upon principle. But
to have aukward fellows plot, and commit their
plots to paper, destitute of the seasonings, of the
acumen, which is thy talent, how extremely shocking
must their Letters be! —But do thou, Lovelace,
whether thou art, or art not, determined upon thy
measures with regard to the fine Lady in thy power,
enliven my heavy heart by thy communications; 
and thou wilt oblige 
Thy melancholy Friend,
J. Belford. 