


From Mr. Reeves, To George Selby, Esq;
In Continuation. 


Miss Grandison went to my cousin, to see how
she bore rising, supposing her near dress'd. 
She soon returned to me. The most charming
woman, I think, said she, I ever saw! But she trembles
so, that I have persuaded her to lie down. I answered
for you, that you would stay dinner. 
I must beg excuse, madam. I have an excellent
wise. She loves Miss Byron as her life: She will be
impatient to know— 
Well, well, well, say no more, Mr. Reeves: My
brother has redeemed one prisoner, and his sister has
taken another: And glad you may be, that it is no
worse. 
I bowed, and look'd silly, I believe. 
You may look, and beg and pray, Mr. Reeves. 
When you know me better, you'll find me a very
whimsical creature: But you must stay to see Sir
Charles. Would you go home to your wise with half
your errand? She won't thank you for that, I can tell
you, let her be as good a woman as the best. But,
to comfort you, we give not into every modern fashion. 
We dine earlier, than most people of our condition. 
My brother, tho' in the main, above singularity, will,
nevertheless, in things he thinks right, be govern'd by
his own rules, which are the laws of reason and convenience. 
You are on horseback; and, were I you,
such good news as I should have to carry, considering 

what might have happened, would give me wings,
and make me fly thro' the air with it. 
I was about to speak: Come, come, I will have no
denial, interrupted she, I shall have a double pleasure,
if you are present when Sir Charles comes, on hearing
his account of what happened. You are a good man,
and have a reasonable quantity of wonder and gratitude,
to heighten a common case into the marvelous. So
sit down, and be quiet. 
I was equally delighted and surprised at her humourous
raillery, but could not answer a single word. 
If it be midnight before you will suffer me to depart,
thought I, I will not make another objection. 
While this amiable lady was thus entertaining me,
we heard the trampling of horses—My brother! said
she, I hope! —He comes! pardon the fondness of a
sister, who speaks from sensible effects—A father and
a brother in one! 
Sir Charles entered the room. He addressed himself
to me in a most polite manner. Mr. Reeves! said
he, as I understand from below—Then turning to his
sister, Excuse me, Charlotte. I heard this worthy
gentleman was with you: And I was impatient to
know how my fair guest— 
Miss Byron is in a good way, I hope, interrupted
she, but very weak and low-spirited. She arose and
dress'd; but I have prevailed on her to lie down
again. 
Then turning to me, with a noble air, he both
welcomed and congratulated me. 
Sir Charles Grandison is indeed a fine figure. He
is in the bloom of youth. I don't know that I have
ever seen an handsomer or genteeler man. Well
might his sister say, that if he married, he would break
half a score hearts. O this vile Pollexfen! thought I,
at the moment; Could he draw upon, has he hurt,
such a man as this? 
After pouring out my acknowlegements, in the name 

of several families, as well as in my own, I could not
but enquire into the nature of the hurt he had received. 
A very trifle! —My coat only was hurt, Mr. Reeves. 
The skin of my left shoulder raked a little, putting
his hand upon it. 
Thank God, said I: Thank God, said Miss Grandison
—But so near! —O the villain! what might
it have been!— 
Sir Hargrave, pent up in a chariot, had great disadvantage. 
My reflections on the event of yesterday,
yield me the more pleasure, as I have, on enquiry,
understood that he will do well again, if he will be
ruled. I would not, on any account, have had his
instant death to answer for. But no more of this just
now. Give me the particulars of the young lady's
state of health. I left her in a very bad way. —You
had advice? 
Miss Grandison gave her brother an account of all
that had been done; and of every-thing that had passed
since he went away; as also of the character and excellencies
of the lady whom he had rescued. 
I confirmed what she said in my coufin's favour; 
and he very gratefully thank'd his sister for her care,
as a man would do for one the nearest and dearest to
him. 
We then besought him to give an account of the
glorious action, which had restored to all that knew
her, the darling of our hearts. 
I will relate all he said, in the first person, as nearly
in his own words as possible, and will try to hit the
coolness with which he told the agreeable story. 
‘You know, sister, said he, the call I had to town. 
It was happy, that I yielded to your importunity to
attend you hither. 
‘About two miles on this side Hounslow, I saw
a chariot-and-six driving at a great rate. I also had
ordered Jerry to drive pretty fast. 
‘The coachman seemed inclined to dispute the 

way with mine. This occasioned a few moments
stop to both. I ordered my coachman to break the
way. I don't love to stand upon trifles. My horses
were fresh: I had not come far. 
‘The curtain of the chariot we met, was pulled
down. I saw not who was in it. But on turning
out of the way, I knew by the arms it was Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen's. 
‘There was in it a gentleman, who immediately
pulled up the canvas. 
‘I saw, however, before he drew it up, another
person, wrapt up in a man's scarlet cloak. 
‘For God's sake! help, help! cried out the person:
For God's sake help! I ordered my coachman
to stop. 
‘Drive on, said the gentleman; cursing his coachman:
Drive on when I bid you. 
‘Help! again cried she, but with a voice as if her
mouth was half stopt. 
‘I called to my servants on horseback to stop the
postilion of the other chariot. And I bid Sir Hargrave's
coachman proceed at his peril. 
‘Sir Hargrave called out on the contrary side of the
chariot (his canvas being still up on that next me)
with vehement execrations to drive on. 
‘I alighted, and went round to the other side of the
chariot. 
‘Again the lady endeavoured to cry out. I saw
Sir Hargrave struggle to pull over her mouth an
handkerchief, which was tied round her head. He
swore outrageously. 
‘The moment she beheld me, she spread out both
her hands—For God's sake— 
‘Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, said I, by the arms. —You
are engaged, I doubt, in a very bad affair. 
‘I am Sir Hargrave Pollexfen; and am carrying
a fugitive wife—Your own wife, Sir Hargrave!— 
‘Yes, by G&wblank;, said he; and she was going to 

elope from me at a damn'd Masquerade—See! drawing
aside the cloak, detected in the very dress! 
‘O no, no, no! said the lady— 
‘Proceed, coachman, said he, and cursed and
swore— 
‘Let me ask the lady a question, Sir Hargrave. 
‘You are impertinent, Sir. Who the devil are
you? 
‘Are you, madam, Lady Pollexfen? said I. 
‘O no! no! no!—was all she could say— 
‘Two of my servants came about me; a third
held the head of the horse on which the postilion sat. 
Three of Sir Hargrave's approached on their horses; 
but seemed as if afraid to come too near, and parley'd
together. 
‘Have an eye to those fellows, said I. Some base
work is on foot. You'll presently be aided by passengers. 
Sirrah, said I to the coachman (for he lash'd
the horses on) proceed at your peril. 
‘Sir Hargrave then, with violent curses and threatenings,
ordered him to drive over every one that opposed
him. 
‘Coachman, proceed at your peril, said I. Madam,
will you— 
‘O Sir, Sir, Sir, relieve, help me for God's sake! 
I am in a villain's hands! Trick'd, vilely trick'd, into
a villain's hands. Help, help, for God's sake! 
‘Do you, said I, to Frederick, cut the traces, if
you cannot otherwise stop this chariot. Bid Jerry
cut the reins; and then seize as many of those fellows
as you can. Leave Sir Hargrave to me. 
‘The lady continued screaming and crying out for
help. 
‘Sir Hargrave drew his sword, which he had held
between his knees in the scabbard; and then called
upon his servants to fire at all that opposed his progress. 
‘My servants, Sir Hargrave, have fire-arms as well 

as yours. They will not dispute my orders. Don't
provoke me to give the word. 
‘Then addressing the lady, Will you, madam,
put yourself into my protection? 
‘O yes, yes, yes, with my whole heart—Dear good
Sir, protect me! 
‘I opened the chariot-door. Sir Hargrave made a
pass at me. Take that, and be damn'd to you, for
your insolence, scoundrel! said he. 
‘I was aware of his thrust, and put it by; but his
sword a little raked my shoulder. 
‘My sword was in my hand; but undrawn. 
‘The chariot-door remaining open (I was not so
ceremonious, as to let down the foot-step to take
the gentleman out) I seized him by the collar before
he could recover himself from the pass he had made
at me; and with a jerk, and a kind of twist, laid
him under the hind-wheel of his chariot. 
‘I wrench'd his sword from him, and snapp'd it,
and flung the two pieces over my head. 
‘His coachman cried out for his master. Mine
threatened his if he stirred. The postilion was a
boy. My servant had made him dismount, before
he joined the other two, whom I had ordered aloud
to endeavour to seize (but my view was only to terrify)
wretches, who knowing the badness of their
cause, were before terrified. 
‘Sir Hargrave's mouth and face were very bloody. 
I believe I might hurt him with the pommel of my
sword. 
‘One of his legs, in his sprawling, had got between
the spokes of his chariot-wheel. I thought that was
a fortunate circumstance for preventing further mischief; 
and charged his coachman not to stir with
the chariot for his master's sake. 
‘He cried out, cursed, and swore. I believe he
was bruised with the fall. The jerk was violent. 
So little able to support an offence, Sir Hargrave, 

upon his own principles, should not have been so
ready to give it. 
‘I had not drawn my sword: I hope I never shall
be provoked to do it in a private quarrel. I should not,
however, have scrupled to draw it, on such an occasion
as this, had there been an absolute necessity
for it. 
‘The lady, greatly terrified, had, however, disengaged
herself from the man's cloak. I had not
leisure to consider her dress; but I was struck with
her figure, and more with her terror. 
‘I offered my hand. I thought not now of the
foot-step, any more than I did before. She not of
any-thing, as it seemed, but her deliverance. 
‘Have you not read, Mr. Reeves (Pliny, I think,
gives the relation) of a frighted bird, that, pursued
by an hawk, flew for protection into the bosom of a
man passing by? 
‘In like manner your lovely cousin, the moment I
returned to the chariot-door, instead of accepting of
my offered hand, threw herself into my arms. —O
save me! save me! She was ready to faint. She
could not, I believe, have stood. 
‘I carried the lovely creature round Sir Hargrave's
horses, and seated her in my chariot—Be assured,
madam, said I, that you are in honourable hands. 
I will convey you to my sister, who is a young lady
of honour and virtue. 
‘She look'd out at one window, then at the other,
in visible terror, as if fearing still Sir Hargrave. Fear
nothing, said I: I will attend you in a moment. I
shut the chariot-door. 
‘I then went backward a few paces (keeping, however,
the lady in my eye) to see what had become
of my servants. 
‘It seems, that at their first coming up pretty near
with Sir Hargrave's horsemen, they presented their
pistols. 

‘What shall we do, Wilkins, or Wilson, or some
such name, said one of Sir Hargrave's men to another,
all three of them on their defence? Fly for
it, answered the fellow. We may swing for this. 
I see our master down. There may be murder. 
‘Their consciences put them to flight. 
‘My servants pursued them a little way; but were
returning to support their master, just as I had put
the lady into my chariot. 
‘I saw Sir Hargrave at a distance, on his legs, supported
by his coachman. He limped, leaned his
whole weight upon his servant; and seemed to be in
agonies. 
‘I bid one of my servants tell him who I was. 
‘He cursed me, and threatened vengeance. He
cursed my servant; and still more outrageously his
own scoundrels, as he called them. 
‘I then stept back to my chariot. 
‘Miss Byron had, thro' terror, sunk down at the
bottom of it; where she lay panting, and could only
say, on my approach, Save me! Save me! 
‘I re-assured her. I lifted her on the seat; and
brought her to my sister. And what followed, I suppose,
Charlotte, bowing to her, you have told Mr.
Reeves.’ 
We were both about to break out in grateful applauses; 
but Sir Charles, as if designing to hinder us,
proceeded. 
‘You see, Mr. Reeves, what an easy conquest this
was. You see what a small degree of merit falls to
my share. The violator's conscience was against
him. The consciences of his fellows were on my
side. My own servants are honest worthy men. 
They love their master. In a good cause I would set
any three of them against six, who were engag'd
in a bad one. Vice is the greatest coward in the
world, when it knows it will be resolutely oppos'd. 

And what have good men, engaged in a right cause,
to fear?’ 
What an admirable man is Sir Charles Grandison! — 
Thus thinking! Thus acting! 
I explained to Sir Charles who this Wilson was,
whom the others consulted and were directed by; and
what an implement in this black transaction. 
To what other man's protection in the world, Mr.
Selby, could our kinswoman have been obliged, and so
little mischief followed? 
Sir Hargrave, it seems, returned back to town. 
What a recreant figure, my dear Mr. Selby, must he
make, even to himself! —A villain! 
Sir Charles says, that the turnpike-men at Smallbury
Green told his servants, on their attending him
to town after the happy rescue, a formidable story of
a robbery committed a little beyond Hounslow by half
a dozen villains on horseback, upon a gentleman in a
chariot and six; which had passed thro' that turnpike
but half an hour before he was attacked; and that the
gentleman, about an hour and half before Sir Charles
went thro', returned to town, wounded, for advice; 
and they heard him groan as he passed through the
turnpike. 
I should add one circumstance, said Sir Charles:
Do you know, Charlotte, that you have a rake for
your brother? —A man on horseback, it seems, came
to the turnpike-gate, whilst the turnpike-men were
telling my servants this story. Nothing in the world,
said he, but two young rakes in their chariots-and-six,
one robbing the other of a lady. I, and two other
passengers, added the man, stood aloof to see the issue
of the affair. We expected mischief: And some there
was. One of the by-standers was the better for the
fray; for he took up a rich silver-hilted sword, broken
in two pieces, and rode off with it. 
Sir Hargrave, said Sir Charles, smiling, might well
give out that he was robbed; to lose such a prize as
Miss Byron, and his sword besides. 

I asked Sir Charles if it were not advisable to take
measures with the villain? 
He thought it best, he said, to take as little notice
of the affair as possible, unless the aggressor stirr'd in
it. Masquerades, added he, are not creditable places
for young ladies to be known to be insulted at them. 
They are diversions that fall not in with the genius of
the English commonalty. Scandal will have something
to say from that circumstance, however causeless. 
But Miss Byron's story, told by herself, will enable
you to resolve upon your future measures. 
So, Sir Charles seems not to be a friend to Masquerades. 
I think, were I to live an hundred years, I never
would go to another. Had it not been for Lady
Betty—She has, indeed, too gay a turn for a woman
of forty, and a mother of children. Miss Byron, I
dare say, will be afraid of giving the lead to her for
the future. But, excepting my wife and self, nobody
in town has suffered more than Lady Betty on this
occasion. Indeed she is, I must say, an obliging well-meaning
woman: And she also declares (so much has
she been affected with Miss Byron's danger, of which
she takes herself to be the innocent cause) that she will
never again go to a Masquerade. 
I long to have Miss Byron's account of this horrid
affair. —God grant, that it may not be such a one, as
will lay us under a necessity—But as our cousin has a
great notion of female delicacy—I know not what I
would say—We must have patience a little while
longer. 
Miss Grandison's eyes shone with pleasure all the
time her brother was giving his relation. 
I can only say, my brother, said she, when he had
done, that you have rescued an angel of a woman; 
and you have made me as happy by it, as yourself. 
I have a generous sister, Mr. Reeves, said Sir Charles. 
Till I knew my brother, Mr. Reeves, as I now 

know him, I was an inconsiderate, unreflecting girl. 
Good and evil which immediately affected not myself,
were almost alike indifferent to me. But he has
awakened in me a capacity to enjoy the true pleasure
that arises from a benevolent action. 
Depreciate not, my Charlotte, your own worth. 
Absence, Mr. Reeves, endears. I have been long
abroad. Not much above a year returned: But when
you know us better, you will find I have a partial
sister. 
Mr. Reeves will not then think me so. But I will
go and see how my fair patient does. 
She went accordingly to my cousin. 
O Sir Charles, said I, what an admirable woman
is Miss Grandison! 
My sister Charlotte, Mr. Reeves, is indeed, an excellent
woman. I think myself happy in her. But
I tell her sometimes, that I have still a more excellent
sister. And it is no small instance of Charlotte's
greatness of mind, that she herself will allow me to
say so. 
Just then came in the ladies: The two charming
creatures entered together, Miss Grandison supporting
my trembling cousin: But she had first acquainted her,
that she would find Sir Charles in her dressing-room. 
She look'd indeed lovely, tho' wan, at her first entrance:
But a fine glow overspread her cheeks, at the
sight of her deliverer. 
Sir Charles approached her, with an air of calmness
and serenity, for fear of giving her emotion. She cast
her eyes upon him, with a look of the most respectful
gratitude. 
I will not oppress my fair guest with many words:
But permit me to congratulate you, as I hope I may,
on your recovered spirits—Allow me, madam— 
And he took her almost motionless hand, and conducted
her to an easy chair that had been set for her. 
She sat down, and would have said something; but 

only bowed to Sir Charles, to Miss Grandison, and
me; and reclined her head against the cheek of the
chair. 
Miss Grandison held her salts to her. 
She took them into her own hands, and smelling to
them, raised her head a little: Forgive me, madam! 
Pardon me, Sir! —O my cousin, to me—How can
I—So oppressed with obligations! —Such goodness! — 
No words! —My gratitude! —My full heart!— 
And then she again reclined her head, as giving up
hopelesly the effort she made to express her gratitude. 
You must not, madam, said Sir Charles, sitting
down by her, over-rate a common benefit. —Dear
Miss Byron (Permit me to address myself to you, as
of long acquaintance) by what Mr. Reeves has told
my sister, and both have told me, I must think yesterday
one of the happiest days of my life. I am sorry
that our acquaintance has begun so much at your cost:
But you must let us turn this evil appearance into real
good. I have two sisters: The world produces not
more worthy women. Let me henceforth boast that
I have three: And shall I not then have reason to rejoice
in the event that has made so lovely an addition to
my family? 
Then taking her passive hand with the tenderness of
a truly affectionate brother, consoling a sister in calamity,
and taking his sister's, and joining both; Shall
I not, madam, present my Charlotte to a sister? And
will you not permit me to claim as a brother under
that relation? —Our Miss Byron's christian name, Mr.
Reeves? 
Harriet, Sir. 
My sister Harriet, receive and acknowlege your
Charlotte. My Charlotte— 
Miss Grandison arose and saluted my cousin; who
look'd at Sir Charles with reverence, as well as gratitude; 
at Miss Grandison with delight; and at me
with eyes lifted up. And, after a little struggle for 

speech; How shall I bear this goodness! said she— 
This indeed is bringing good out of evil! —Did I not
say, my cousin, that I was fallen into the company of
angels? 
I was afraid she would have fainted. 
We must endeavour, my cousin Reeves, kindly said
Sir Charles to me (allow the relation to go through) to
lessen the sense our Miss Byron has of her past danger,
in order to bring down to reasonable limits, the notion
she has of her obligation for a common relief. 
Miss Grandison ordered a few drops on sugar—You
must be orderly, my sister Harriet, said she. Am I
not your elder sister? My elder sister makes me do
what she pleases. 
Oh! Madam! said my cousin— 
Call me not Madam; call me your Charlotte. My
brother has given me and himself a sister; will you
not own me? 
How can an heart bowed down by obligation, and
goodness never to be returned, rise to that lovely familiarity,
by which the obligers so generously distinguish
themselves? My lips and my heart, I will be so
bold as to say, ever went together: But how—And
yet so sweetly invited, My—My—My Charlotte (withdrawing
her hand from Sir Charles, and clasping both
her arms round Miss Grandison's neck, the two worthiest
bosoms of the sex joining as one) take your
Harriet, person and mind—O that I may be found
worthy, on proof, of all this goodness! 
* *
Lady Betty has just left us. I read to her what I
have written since my visit to Colnebrooke. She shall
not, she says, recover her eyes for a week to come. 
The women, Mr. Selby, are ever looking forward
on certain occasions. Lady Betty and my wife extended
their wishes so far, as that they might be able
to call Miss Grandison and our Miss Byron sisters; 
but by a claim that should exclude Sir Charles as a
brother to one of them. 

Should Sir Charles—But no more on this subject— 
Yet one word more: When the ladies had mention'd
it, I could not help thinking that this graceful and
truly fine gentleman seems to be the only man, whom
our cousin has yet seen, that would meet with no
great difficulty from her on such an application. 
But Sir Charles has a great estate, and still greater
expectations from my Lord W. His sister says, he
would break half a score hearts, were he to marry— 
So for that matter would our Miss Byron. But once
more—Not another word however on this subject. 
I stayed to dine with this amiable brother and sister. 
My cousin exerted herself, to go down, and sat at table
for one half-hour: But changing countenance,
once or twice, as she sat, Miss Grandison would attend
her up, and make her lie down. I took leave
of her, at her quitting the table. 
On Monday I hope to see her once more among us. 
If our dear Miss Byron cannot write, you will perhaps
have one letter more, my dear Mr. Selby, from 
Your ever-affectionate
Archibald Reeves. 
My servant is this moment returned with your letter. 
Indeed, my dear Mr. Selby, there are two
or three passages in it, that would have cut me
to the heart (a) had not the dear creature been
so happily restored to our hopes. 

