


I might as well have not gone to-bed last
Night, for what Sleep I had. Mrs. Jewkes
often was talking to me, and said several
Things that would have been well enough from
any body else of our Sex; but the poor Woman
has so little Purity of Heart, that it is all Say
from her, and goes no further than the Ear. 
I fansy my Master has not slept much
neither; for I heard him up, and walking
about his Chamber, ever since Break of Day. 
To be sure, good Gentleman! he must have
some Concern, as well as I; for here he is
going to marry a poor foolish unworthy Girl,
brought up on the Charity, as one may say,
(at least, Bounty) of his worthy Family! And
this foolish Girl must be, to all Intents and
Purposes, after Twelve o'Clock this Day, as
much his Wife, as if he were to marry a Duchess! 
—And here he must stand the Shocks
of common Reflection: The great Mr. B. has
done finely! he has marry'd his poor Servant
Wench! will some say. The Ridicule and
rude Jests of his Equals, and Companions too,
he must stand: And the Disdain of his Relations,
and Indignation of Lady Davers, his 

lofty Sister! —Dear good Gentleman! he wi
have enough to do, to be sure! —O how
shall I merit all these Things at his Hands! I
can only do the best I can; and pray to God
to reward him, and to resolve to love him with
a pure Heart, and serve him with a sincere Obedience. 
I hope the dear Gentleman will
continue to love me for this; for, alas! I have
nothing else to offer! But, as I can hardly
expect so great a Blessing, if I can be secure
from his Contempt, I shall not be unfortunate; 
and must bear his Indifference, if his rich
Friends would inspire him with it, and proceed
with doing my Duty with Chearfulness. 
Half an Hour past Eight o'Clock.
My good dear Master, my kind Friend, my
generous Benefactor, my worthy Protector,
and Oh! all the good Words in one,
my affectionate Husband, that is soon to be,
(be curbed in, my proud Heart, know thyself,
and be conscious of thy Unworthiness!—)
has just left me, with the kindest, tenderest
Expressions, and gentlest Behaviour that ever
bless'd a happy Maiden. He approached me
with a sort of rein'd in Rapture. My Pamela!
said he, May I just ask after your Imployment! 
Don't let me chide my dear Girl, this
Day, however. The Two Parsons will be here
to breakfast with us at Nine; and yet you are
not a bit dress'd! Why this Absence of Mind,
and sweet Irresolution? 

Why, indeed, Sir, said I, I will set about a
Reformation this Instant! He saw the Commonprayer-book
lying in the Window: I hope,
said he, my lovely Maiden has been conning
the Lesson she is by-and-by to repeat. Have
you not, Pamela? And clasped his Arms about
me, and kiss'd me. Indeed, Sir, said I, I have
been reading over the solemn Service! —And
what thinks my Fairest (for so he call'd me)
of it? —O Sir, said I, 'tis very awful, and
makes one shudder to reflect upon it! —No
wonder, said he, it should affect my sweet
Pamela: I have been looking into it this
Morning, and I cannot but say, I think it a
solemn, but very suitable Service. But this I
tell my dear Love, continued he, and again
clasped me to him, There is not a Tittle in it,
that I cannot joyfully subscribe to: And that,
my dear Pamela, should make you easy, and
join chearfully in it with me. I kissed his dear
Hand; O my generous, kind Protector, said
I, how gracious is it to confirm thus the doubting
Mind of your poor Servant! which apprehends
nothing so much as her own Unworthiness
of the Honour and Blessing that await her! 
—He was pleased to say, I know well, my dearest
Creature, that, according to the Liberties we People
of Fortune generally give ourselves, I have
promised a great deal, when I say so. But I would
not have said it, if, deliberately, I could not
with all my Heart. So, banish from your Mind
all Doubt and Uneasiness; let a generous Confidence
in me take place; and let me see it does, 

by your Chearfuiness, in this Day's solemn Business; 
and then I will love you for ever. 
May God Almighty, Sir, said I, reward all
your Goodness to me! —That is all I can say. 
But, Oh! how kind it is in you to supply the
Want of the Presence and Comsortings of a
dear Mother, of a loving Sister, or of the kind
Companions of my own Sex, which most
Maidens have, to sooth their Anxieties, on the
so near Approach of so awful a Solemnity! — 
You, Sir, are all these tender Relations in one
to me: Your Condescensions and Kindness
shall, if possible, imbolden me to look up to
you without that sweet Terror, that must confound
poor bashful Maidens, on such an Occasion,
when they are surrender'd up to a more
doubtful Happiness, and to half-strange Men; 
whose good Faith, and good Usage of them,
must be less experienced, and is all involved in
the dark Bosom of Futurity, and only to be
proved by the Event. 
This, my dear Pamela, said he, is most
kindly said! It shews me, that you enter
gratefully into my Intention. For I would, by
my Conduct, supply all these dear Relations to
you; and I voluntarily promise, from my
Heart, to you, what I think I could not with
such assured Resolutions of Performance, to
the highest-born Lady in the Kingdom. For,
let me tell my sweet Girl, that, after having
been long toss'd by the boisterous Winds of
a more culpable Passion, I have now conquer'd
it, and am not so much the Victim of your 

Beauty, all charning as you are, as of your
Virtue; and therefore may more boldly promise
for myself, having so stable a Foundation for
my Affection; which, should this Beauty sail, will
increase with your Virtue, and shine forth the
brighter, as that is more illustriously display'd,
by the augmented Opportunitles, which the Condition
you are now entering into, will afford
you. –––O the dear charming Man! how nobly,
how incouragingly kind was all this! 
I could not suitably express myself, and
he said, I see my Girl is at a Loss for Words; I
doubt not your kind Acceptance of my Declarations. 
And when I have acted too much the Part
of a Libertine formerly, for you to look back
without some Anxiety, I ought not, being now
happlly convicted, to say less&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; But why loses my
dear Girl her Time? I will now only add, that I
hope for many Years to make good, by my Conduct,
what so willingly flows from my Lips. 
He kissed me again, and said, But, whatever
you do, Pamela, be chearful; for else, maybe,
of the small Company we shall have, some
one, not knowing how to account for your
too nice Modesty, will think there is some other
Person in the World, whose Addresses would
be still more agreeable to you. 
This he said with an Ait of Sweetness and
Pleasantry; but it alarmed me exceedingly, and
made me resolve to appear as calm and chearful
as possible. For this was indeed a most affecting
Expression, and enough to make me, if any
thing can, behave as I ought, and to force my 

idle Fears to give way to Hopes so much
better grounded. —And I began almost, on
this Occasion, to wish Mr. Williams were not
to marry me, lest I should behave like a Fool; 
and so be liable to an Imputation, which I
should be most unworthy, if I deserv'd. 
So I set about dressing myself instantly; and
he sent Mrs. Jewkes to assist me. But I am never
long a dressing, when I set about it; and my
Master has now given me a Hint, that will,
for half an Hour more, at least, keep my Spirits
in a brisk Circulation. Yet it concerns me a
little too, lest he should have any the least
Shadow of a Doubt, that I am not, Mind and
Person, intirely his. 
And so being now ready, and not call'd to
Breakfast, I sat down and wrote thus far. 
I might have mention'd, that I dress'd myself
in a rich white Satten Night-gown, that had
been my good Lady's, and my best Head-cloaths,
&c. I have got such a Knack of Writing,
that, when I am by myself, I cannot sit without
a Pen in my Hand. —But I am now call'd to
Breakfast. I suppose the Gentlemen are come! 
—Now, Courage, Pamela; Remember thou
art upon thy good Behaviour. —Fie upon it!
my Heart begins to flutter again! —Foolish
Heart! lie still! Never, sure, was any Maiden's
perverse Heart under so little Command as
mine! —It gave itself away, at first, without
my Leave; it has been, for Weeks, pressing
me with its Wishes; and yet now, when it
should be happy itself, and make me so, it is 

throb, throb, throb, like a little Fool; and
filling me with such unseasonable Misgivings,
as abate the rising Comforts of all my better
Prospects. 
