



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Morning, Eight o'Clock. 
I am more and more displeased with Mr. Lovelace,
on reflection, for his boldness in hoping to make
me, tho' but passively, as I may say, testify to his great
untruth. And I shall like him still less for it, if his
view in it does not come out to be the hope of accelerating
my resolution in his favour, by the difficulty
it will lay me under as to my behaviour to
him. He has sent me his compliments by Dorcas,
with a request that I will permit him to attend me
in the dining-room; perhaps, that he may guess
from thence, whether I will meet him in good-humour,
or not: But I have answered, that as I shall
see him at breakfast-time, I desire to be excused. 
Ten o'Clock. 
I try'd to adjust my countenance before I went,
down, to an easier air than I had a heart, and was
received with the highest tokens of respect by the widow,
and her two nieces: Agreeable young women
enough in their persons; but they seemed to put on
an air of reserve; while Mr. Lovelace was easy and
free to all, as if he were of long acquaintance with
them: gracefully enough, I cannot but say; an advantage
which travelled gentlemen have over other people. 
The widow, in the conversation we had after
breakfast, gave us an account of the military merit
of the colonel her husband; and, upon this occasion,
put her handkerchief to her eye twice or thrice. I
hope, for the sake of her sincerity, she wetted it, because
she would be thought to have done so; but I
saw not that she did. She wish'd that I might
never know the loss of a husband so dear to me, as
her dear colonel was to her: And again she put her
handkerchief to her eyes. 

It must, no doubt, be a most affecting thing to be separated
from a good husband, and to be left in difficult
circumstances besides, and that not by his fault,
and exposed to the insults of the base and ingrateful; 
as she represented her case to be at his death. This
moved me a good deal in her favour. 
You know, my dear, that I have an open and free
heart, and, naturally, have as open and free a countenance; 
at least my complimenters have told me so. 
At once, where I like, I mingle minds without reserve,
encouraging reciprocal freedoms, and am forward
to dissipate diffidences. But with these two
young gentlewomen, I never can be intimate—I don't
know why. 
Only, that circumstances, and what passed in conversation,
encouraged not the notion, or I should
have been apt to think, that the young gentlewomen
and Mr. Lovelace were of longer acquaintance than
yesterday. For he, by stealth, as it were, cast
glances sometimes at them, which they returned; 
and, on my ocular notice, their eyes fell, as I may
say, under my eye, as if they could not stand its
examination. 
The widow directed all her talk to me, as to Mrs.
Lovelace; and I, with a very ill grace, bore it. And
once she expressed, more forwardly than I thank'd her
for, her wonder, that any vow, any consideration,
however weighty, could have force enough with so
charming a couple, as she called him and me, to
make us keep separate beds. 
Their eyes, upon this hint, had the advantage of
mine. Yet was I not conscious of guilt. How know
I then, upon recollection, that my censures upon
theirs are not too rash? There are, no doubt,
many truly modest persons (putting myself out of
the question), who, by blushes at an injurious
charge, have been suspected by those who cannot distinguish
between the confusion which guilt will be attended 

with, and the noble consciousness that overspreads
the face of a fine spirit, to be thought but capable
of an imputed evil. 
The great Roman, as we read, who took his surname
from one part in three (the fourth not then discovered)
of the world he had triumphed over, being
charged with a mean crime to his soldiery, chose rather
to suffer exile (the punishment due to it, had he
been found guilty), than to have it said, that Scipio
was questioned in public, on so scandalous a charge. 
And think you, my dear, that Scipio did not blush
with indignation, when the charge was first communicated
to him? 
Mr. Lovelace, when the widow expressed her forward
wonder, looked sly and leering, as if to observe
how I took it; and said, they might observe that his
regard for my will and pleasure, calling me his dear
creature, had greater force upon him, than the oath
by which he had bound himself. 
Rebuking both him and the widow, I said, It was
strange to me to hear an oath or vow so lightly treated,
as to have it thought but of second consideration,
whatever were the first. 
The observation was just, Miss Martin said; for
that nothing could excuse the breaking of a solemn
vow, be the occasion of making it what it would. 
I asked after the nearest church; for I have been
too long a stranger to the sacred worship. They
named St. James's, St. Anne's, and another in Bloomsbury; 
and the two nieces said, they oftenest went to
St. James's church, because of the good company,
as well as for the excellent preaching. 
Mr. Lovelace said, the Royal Chapel was the place
he oftenest went to, when in town: Poor man! little
did I expect to hear he went to any place of devotion. 
I asked, If the presence of the visible king of, comparatively,
but a small territory, did not take off,
too generally, the requisite attention to the service of 

the invisible King and Maker of a thousand worlds? 
He believed this might be so with such as came for
curiosity, when the Royal Family were present. But,
otherwise, he had seen as many contrite faces at the
Royal Chapel, as any-where else: And why not? 
Since the people about Courts have as deep scores to
wipe off, as any people whatsoever. 
He spoke this with so much levity, that I could not
help saying, That nobody questioned but he knew
how to choose his company. 
Your servant, my dear, bowing, were his words; 
and turning to them, You will observe, upon numberless
occasions, ladies, as we are further acquainted,
that my beloved never spares me upon these topics. 
But I admire her as much in her reproofs, as I am
fond of her approbation. 
Miss Horton said, There was a time for every-thing. 
She could not but say, that she thought innocent mirth
was mighty becoming in young people. 
Very true, joined in Miss Martin. And Shakespeare
says well, That youth is the spring of life, The
bloom of gawdy years; with a theatrical air she spoke
it: And for her part, she could not but admire in my
spouse, that charming vivacity which so well suited
his time of life. 
Mr. Lovelace bowed. The man is fond of praise. 
More fond of it, I doubt, than of deserving it. Yet
this sort of praise he does deserve. He has, you know,
an easy free manner, and no bad voice: And this
praise so expanded his gay heart, that he sung the following
lines, from Congreve, as he told us: 

Youth does a thousand pleasures bring,
 Which from decrepit age will fly;
Sweets that wanton in the bosom of the spring,
 In winter's cold embraces die.
And this for a compliment, as he said, to the two
nieces. Nor was it thrown away upon them. They 

encored it; and his compliance fix'd them in my
memory. 
We had some talk about meals; and the widow
very civilly offer'd to conform to any rules I would
set her. I told her, how easily I was pleased, and
how much I chose to dine by myself, and that from a
plate sent me from any single dish. But I will not
trouble you with such particulars. 
They thought me very singular; and with reason: 
But as I liked them not so very well as to forego my
own choice in compliment to them, I was the less
concerned for what they thought. And still the less,
as Mr. Lovelace had put me very much out of humour
with him. 
They, however, caution'd me against melancholy. 
I said, I should be a very unhappy creature, if I could
not bear my own company. 
Mr. Lovelace said, That he must let the ladies into
my story; and then they would know how to allow
for my ways. But, my dear, as you love me, said the
confident wretch, give as little way to melancholy as
possible. Nothing but the sweetness of your temper,
and your high notions of a duty that can never be deserved
where you place it, can make you so uneasy as
you are. —Be not angry, my dear love, for saying so
(seeing me frown, I suppose): And snatched my hand,
and kissed it. 
I left him with them; and retired to my closet and
my pen. 
Just as I have wrote thus far, I am interrupted
by a message from him, that he is setting out on a
journey, and desires to take my commands. —So here I
will leave off, to give him a meeting in the dining room. 
* *
I was not displeased to see him in his riding dress. 
He seemed desirous to know how I liked the gentlewomen
below. I told him, that altho' I did not
think them very exceptionable, yet as I wanted not, 

in my present situation, new acquaintance, I should
not be fond of cultivating thirst; and he must second
me, particularly in my desire of breakfasting and
supping (when I did sup) by myself. 
If I would have it so, to be sure it should be so. 
The people of the house were not of consequence
enough to be apologiz'd to, in any point where my
pleasure was concerned. And if I should dislike them
still more on further knowlege of them, he hoped I
would think of some other lodgings. 
He expressed a good deal of regret at leaving me,
declaring, that it was absolutely in obedience to my
commands: But that he could not have consented to
go, while my brother's schemes were on foot, if I
had not done him the credit of my countenance in
the report he had made that we were marry'd; which,
he said, had bound all the family to his interest, so
that he could leave me with the greater security and
satisfaction. 
He hoped, he said, that on his return, I would
name his happy day; and the rather as I might be
convinced, by my brother's projects, that no reconciliation
was to be expected. 
I told him, that perhaps I might write one letter
to my uncle Harlowe. He once loved me. I should
be easier when I had made one direct application. I
might possibly propose such terms, in relation to my
grandfather's estate, as might procure me their attention; 
and I hoped he would be long enough absent
to give me time to write to him, and receive an answer
from him. 
That, he must beg my pardon, he could not promise. 
He would inform himself of Singleton's and
my brother's motions; and if on his return, he found
no reason for apprehensions, he would go directly to
Berks, and endeavour to bring up with him his cousin
Charlotte, who, he hoped, would induce me to give
him an earlier day, than at present I seemed to think
of. 

I told him, that I would take that young lady's
company for a great favour. 
I was the more pleased with this motion, as it came
from himself. 
He earnestly pressed me to accept of a bank note: 
But I declined it. And then he offer'd me his servant
William for my attendant in his absence; who, he
said, might be dispatched to him, if any thing extra-ordinary
fell out. I consented to that. 
He took his leave of me, in the most respectful
manner, only kissing my hand. He left the note unobserv'd
by me upon the table. You may be sure I
shall give it him back at his return. 
I am now in a much better humour with him than
I was. Where doubts of any person are removed, a
mind, not ungenerous, is willing, by way of amends
for having conceived those doubts, to construe everything
that happens capable of a good construction, in
that person's favour. Particularly, I cannot but be
pleased to observe, that altho' he speaks of the ladies
of his family with the freedom of relationship, yet it
is always with tenderness. And from a man's kindness
to his relations of the sex, a woman has some
reasons to expect his good behaviour to herself, when
married, if she be willing to deserve it from him. And
thus, my dear, am I brought to such a pass, as to fit
myself down satisfy'd with this man, where I find
room to infer, that he is not naturally a savage. 
May you, my dear friend, be always happy in your
reflections, prays 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
Mr. Lovelace in his next letter triumphs on his
having carried his two great points of making the lady
yield to pass for his wife to the people of the house,
and to his taking up his lodging in it, tho' but for
one night. He is now sure, he says, that he shall 

soon prevail, if not by persuasion, by surprize. Yet
he pretends to have some little remorse, and censures
himself as acting the part of the grand tempter. But
having succeeded thus far, he cannot, he says, forbear
trying, according to the resolution he had before
made, whether he cannot go farther. 
He gives the particulars of their debates on the
above-mentioned subjects, to the same effect as in the
lady's last letters. 
It will by this time be seen, that his whole merit
with regard to this lady, lies in doing justice to her
excellencies both of mind and person, by acknowlegement,
tho' to his own condemnation. Thus he
begins his succeeding letter. 
‘And now, Belford, will I give thee an account
of our first breakfast conversation.’ 
‘All sweetly serene and easy was the lovely brow
and charming aspect of my goddess, on her descending
to us; commanding reverence from every eye; 
a courtesy from every knee; and silence, awful
silence, from every quivering lip. While she,
arm'd with conscious worthiness and superiority,
looked and behaved, as an empress would among
her vassals; yet with a freedom from pride and
haughtiness, as if born to dignity, and to a behaviour
habitually gracious.’ 
He takes notice of the jealousy, pride and vanity of
Sally Martin and Polly Horton, on his respectful behaviour
to her. Creatures who, brought up to
high for their fortunes, and to a taste of pleasure, and
the public diversions, had fallen an easy prey to his
seducing arts; and for some time past, been associate
with Mrs. Sinclair: And who, as he observes, had not
yet got over that distinction in their love, which make
a woman prefer one man to another. 
‘How difficult is it, says he, to make a woman
subscribe to a preference against herself, tho' even
so visible; especially where love is concerned 

This violent, this partial little devil, Sally, has the
insolence to compare herself with an angel—yet
owns her to be an angel. I charge you, Mr. Lovelace,
said she, shew none of your extravagant acts
of kindness before me, to this sullen, this gloomy
beauty! —I cannot bear it. —Then her first sacrifices
were remember'd—What a rout do these women
make about nothing at all! Were it not for
what the learned bishop, in his letter from Italy,
calls the delicacy of intrigue, what is there, Belford,
in all they can do for us?—’ 
‘How do these creatures endeavour to stimulate
me! A fallen woman, Jack, is a worse devil than
even a profligate man. The former is above all remorse: 
That am not I—Nor ever shall they prevail
upon me, tho' aided by all the powers of darkness,
to treat this admirable creature with indignity
—So far, I mean, as indignity can be separated from
the trials, which will prove her to be either woman
or angel.’ 
‘Yet with them, I am a craven: I might have had
her before now, if I would: If I would treat her as
flesh and blood, I should find her such: They
thought that I knew, if any man living did, that to
make a goddess of a woman, she would assume the
goddess; to give her power, she would act up to it
to the giver, if to nobody else—And D&wblank;r's wife is
thrown into my dish, who, thou knowest, kept her
over-ceremonious husband at haughty distance, and
whined in private to her insulting footman. —O how
I cursed the blaspheming wretches! —They will
make me, as I tell them, hate their house; and never
rest, till I remove her. —And by my soul, Jack, I
begin to repent already, that I have brought her
hither—And yet, without knowing their hearts, she
resolves against having any more conversation with
them then she can avoid. This I am not sorry for; 

since jealousy in woman is not to be concealed from
woman. And Sally has no command of herself.’ 