



Dear Father,
Since my last, my Master gave me more
fine Things. He call'd me up to my late
Lady's Closet, and pulling out her Drawers, 

he gave me Two Suits of fine Flanders lac'd
Headcloaths, Three Pair of fine Silk Shoes, Two
hardly the worse, and just fit for me, (for my
Lady had a very little Foot) and the other with
wrought Silver Buckles in them; and several
Ribbands and Topknots of all Colours; Four
Pair of fine white Cotton Stockens, and Three
Pair of fine Silk ones; and two Pair of rich
Stays. I was quite astonished, and unable to
speak for a while; but yet I was inwardly
ashamed to take the Stockens; for Mrs. Jervis
was not there: If she had, it would have been
nothing. I believe I receiv'd them very aukwardly; 
for he smil'd at my Aukwardness,
and said, Don't blush, Pamela: Dost think
I don't know pretty Maids wear Shoes and
Stockens? 
I was so confounded at these Words, you
might have beat me down with a Feather. 
For, you must think, there was no Answer to
be made to this: So, like a Fool, I was ready
to cry; and went away curt'sying and blushing,
I am sure, up to the Ears; for, tho' there was
no Harm in what he said, yet I did not know
how to take it. But I went and told all to Mrs.
Jervis, who said, God put it into his Heart to
be good to me, and I must double my Diligence. 
It looked to her, she said, as if he
would fit me in Dress for a Waiting-maid's
Place on Lady Davers's own Person. 
But still your kind fatherly Cautions came
into my Head, and made all these Gifts nothing
near to me what they would have been. But 

yet, I hope, there is no Reason; for what
Good could it do him to harm such a simple
Maiden as me? Besides, to be sure, no Lady
would look upon him, if he should so disgrace
himself. So I will make myself easy; and indeed,
I should never have been otherwise, if
you had not put it into my Head; for my
Good, I know very well. But, may-be, without
these Uneasinesses to mingle with these
Benefits, I might be too much puff'd up: So I
will conclude, All that happens is for our
Good; and God bless you, my dear Father and
Mother; and I know you constantly pray for
a Blessing upon me; who am, and shall always
be, 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

