


They distress the housekeepers of Bath, by another
mischievous contrivance. Peregrine humbles a
noted hector, and meets with a strange character
at the house of a certain lady. 
This adventure was attended with another
small tour, that involved almost all the inhabitants
of Bath in a very ludicrous scene of distress. 
Our hero, among his other remarks, had
observed, that in this place there was no such
utensil as a jack, and that all the spits were turned
by dogs, which never failed to appear, at the
hour of employment, with surprising exactness
and regularity: so that every family depended
with great confidence upon their known punctuality,
without taking the trouble to secure them
before-hand. 
Our companions therefore, by means of their
understrappers, who employed several chairmen
for the purpose, apprehended all these useful animals,
on Saturday at night, and confined them
in an out-house, with a view of perplexing the
people with regard to their Sunday's dinner. Nor
were they disappointed in their expectations; the
surloins being spitted at the usual time, the cook-maid
appeared at every door almost at the same
instant; and after having earnestly cast their eyes
around, they began to run about the street, and
whistle with great vehemence, ejaculating curses
between whiles against the innocent curs, that
were disabled from obeying the dictates of their
duty. Frivolous as this circumstance may seem
to be, it was here considered as a family-concern 

of some consequence; for the maids having communicated
the affair to their respective mistresses,
every house in a twinkling sent forth its master
in a night-cap, slippers, and morning-gown, in
order to find some remedy for this dreadful calamity; 
and a second concert of whistling was
performed in vain. They even assembled in
committees in the street, to deliberate on this
unheard-of defection of the dogs; and having
cudgelled their brains to no purpose, returned to
their several homes, in manifest terror of losing
a favourite meal. 
Over and above this their distraction, which
our young gentlemen in person enjoyed, they afterwards
understood, that the affliction in many
houses was increased, by the miscarriage of the
shifts to which they were reduced on this occasion. 
One master of a family, through the perverseness
of his servants, was obliged to undertake
the office of turnspit in propria persona,
to the destruction of his appetite, and the danger
of his health; another being driven to the necessity
of cutting the roast into steaks, fell sick
of mortification, and had well nigh lost his wits; 
and a third having contrived to suspend the surloin
before the fire, in order to be twirled about
by the hand of an attendant, the pack-thread
gave way towards the end of the operation, and
the meat falling down, discharged the contents
of the dripping-pan upon his leg, which was
scalded in a miserable manner: and what added
to their vexation, about one o'clock, when the
disappointment was most severely felt, and the
misfortune irretrievable, Peregrine ordered the
prisoners to be discharged, and every kitchen was
visited by one of these quadrupeds, as if they had 

come on purpose to insult the distress they had
occasioned. These, and a variety of other stratagems,
practised upon the objects of ridicule,
hatred and contempt, confirmed and augmented
the reputation of our adventurers, who had, by
this time, rendered themselves terrible to all sorts
of delinquents of both sexes, from the brazen-fronted
gamester and female libertine, to the
stale maiden that deals in scandal and strong waters,
and the puny flutterer, who seems to have
resigned all pretensions to manhood. Among
those who never failed to reside at Bath, during
the season, was a certain person, who, from the
most abject misery, had by his industry and art
at play, amassed about fifteen thousand pounds; 
and though his character was notorious, insinuated
himself so far into the favour of what is called
the best company, that very few private parties
of pleasure took place, in which he was not
principally concerned. He was of a gigantic stature,
a most intrepid countenance; and his disposition,
naturally over-bearing, had in the course
of his adventures and success, acquired a most
intolerable degree of insolence and vanity. By
the ferocity of his features, and audacity of his
behaviour, he had obtained a reputation for the
most undaunted courage, which had been confirmed
by divers adventures, in which he had
humbled the most assuming heroes of his own
fraternity; so that he now reigned chief Hector
of the place, with unquestioned authority. 
With this son of fortune was Peregrine one
evening engaged at play, and so successful, that
he could not help informing his friend of his good
luck. Godfrey hearing the description of the
loser, immediately recognized the person, whom 

he had known at Tunbridge; and assuring Pickle,
that he was a sharper of the first water, cautioned
him against any future connexion with
such a dangerous companion, who (he affirmed)
had suffered him to win a small sum, that he
might be encouraged to lose a much greater, upon
some other occasion. 
Our young gentleman treasured up this advice; 
and though he did not scruple to give the
gamester an opportunity of retrieving his loss,
when he next day demanded his revenge, he
absolutely refused to proceed, after he had refunded
his winning. The other, who considered
him as a hot-headed unthinking youth, endeavoured
to inflame his pride to a continuance
of the game, by treating his skill with scorn and
contempt; and, among other sarcastic expressions,
advising him to go to school again, before
he pretended to engage with masters of the art. 
Our hero, incensed at his arrogance, replied with
great warmth, that he knew himself sufficiently
qualified for playing with men of honour, who
deal upon the square, and hoped he should always
deem it infamous, either to learn or practise the
tricks of a professed gamester. “Blood and
thunder! meaning me, Sir? (cried this artist,
raising his voice, and curling his visage into a
most intimidating frown.) Zounds! I'll cut the
throat of any scoundrel who has the presumption
to suppose, that I don't play as honourably as
e'er a nobleman in the kingdom: and I insist upon
an explanation from you, Sir; or, by hell
and brimstone! I shall expect other sort of satisfaction.” 
Peregrine (whose blood by this time
boiled within him) answered without hesitation; 
“Far from thinking your demand unreasonable, 

I will immediately explain myself without reserve,
and tell you, that, upon unquestionable
authority, I believe you to be an impudent rascal
and common cheat.” 
The Hector was so amazed and confounded at
the freedom of this declaration, which he thought
no man on earth would venture to make in his
presence, that for some minutes he could not recollect
himself; but, at length, whispered a challenge
in the ear of our hero, which was accordingly
accepted. When they arrived next morning
upon the field, the gamester, arming his
countenance with all its terrors, advanced with a
sword of a monstrous length, and putting himself
in a posture, called aloud in a most terrific
voice, “Draw, damn ye, draw; I will this
instant send you to your fathers.” The youth
was not slow in complying with his desire; his
weapon was unsheathed in a moment, and he
began the attack with such unexpected spirit and
address, that his adversary, having made shift
with great difficulty to parry the first pass, retreated
a few paces, and demanded a parley, in
which he endeavoured to persuade the young
man, that to lay a man of his character under
the necessity of chastising his insolence, was the
most rash and inconsiderate step that he could
possibly have taken; but, that he had compassion
upon his youth, and was willing to spare him, if
he would surrender his sword, and promise to ask
pardon in public for the offence he had given. 
Pickle was so much exasperated at this unparallelled
effrontery, that, without deigning to make the
least reply, he flung his own hat in the proposer's
face, and renewed the charge with such undaunted
agility, that the gamester, finding himself 

in manifest hazard of his life, betook himself
to his heels, and fled homewards with incredible
speed, being closely pursued by Peregrine,
who having sheathed his sword, pelted
him with stones as he ran, and compelled him to
go, that same day, into banishment from Bath,
where he had domineered so long. 
By this atchievement, which was the subject of
astonishment to all the company, who had looked
upon the fugitive as a person of heroic courage,
our adventurer's reputation was rendered formidable
in all its circumstances; although he thereby
disobliged a good many people of fashion, who
had contracted an intimacy of friendship with the
exile, and who resented his disgrace, as if it had
been the misfortune of a worthy man. These
generous patrons, however, bore a very small
proportion to those who were pleased with the
event of the duel; because, in the course of their
residence at Bath, they had either been insulted
or defrauded by the challenger. Nor was this
instance of our hero's courage unacceptable to
the ladies, few of whom could now resist the
united force of such accomplishments. Indeed,
neither he nor his friend Godfrey would have
found much difficulty in picking up an agreeable
companion for life; but Gauntlet's heart was preengaged
to Sophy; and Pickle, exclusive of his
attachment to Emily, which was stronger than he
himself imagined, possessed such a share of ambition,
as could not be satisfied with the conquest
of any female he beheld at Bath. 
His visits were, therefore, promiscuous, without
any other view than that of amusement; and
though his pride was flattered by the advances of
the fair whom he had captivated, he never harboured 

one thought of proceeding beyond the limits
of common gallantry, and carefully avoided
all particular explanations. But, what above all
other enjoyments yielded him the most agreeable
entertainment, was the secret history of characters,
which he learn'd from a very extraordinary
person, with whom he became acquainted
in this manner. 
Being at the house of a certain lady, on a visiting-day,
he was struck with the appearance of
an old man, who no sooner entered the room
than the mistress of the house very kindly desired
one of the wits present to roast the old put. 
This petit maitre, proud of the employment,
went up to the senior, who had something extremely
peculiar and significant in his countenance,
and saluting him with divers fashionable
congés, accosted him in these words: “Your
servant, you old rascal. I hope to have the honour
of seeing you hang'd. I vow to Gad! you
look extremely shocking, with these gummy
eyes, lanthorn jaws, and toothless chaps. What!
you squint at the ladies, you old rotten medlar? 
Yes, yes, we understand your ogling; but you
must content yourself with a cook-maid, sink
me! I see you want to sit. These wither'd
shanks of yours tremble under their burthen:
but you must have a little patience, old Hirco; 
indeed you must. I intend to mortify you a
little longer, curse me!” 
The company was so tickled with this address,
which was delivered with much grimace and
gesticulation, that they burst out into a loud fit
of laughter, which they fathered upon a monkey
that was chained in the room; and when
the peal was over, the wit renewed his attack, 

in these words: “I suppose you are fool enough
to think this mirth was occasioned by Pug: ay,
there he is; you had best survey him; he is of
your own family, switch me: but the laugh was
at your expence; and you ought to thank heaven
for making you so ridiculous.” While he
uttered these ingenious ejaculations, the old
gentleman bowed alternately to him and the
monkey, that seemed to grin and chatter in imitation
of the beau, and with an arch solemnity
of visage, pronounced, “Gentlemen, as I have
not the honour to understand your compliments,
they will be much better bestowed on each other.” 
So saying, he seated himself, and had the satisfaction
to see the laugh returned upon the aggressor,
who remained confounded and abashed,
and in a few minutes left the room, muttering,
as he retired, “the old fellow grows scurrilous,
stap my breath.” 
While Peregrine wondered in silence at this
extraordinary scene, the lady of the house perceiving
his surprize, gave him to understand,
that the ancient visitant was utterly bereft of the
sense of hearing; that his name was Cadwallader
Crabtree; his disposition altogether misanthropical; 
and that he was admitted into company on
account of the entertainment he afforded by his
sarcastic observations, and the pleasant mistakes
to which he was subject from his infirmity. Nor
did our hero wait a long time for an illustration
of this odd character. Every sentence he spoke
was replete with gall; nor did his satire consist
in general reflections, but in a series of remarks,
which had been made through the medium of a
most whimsical peculiarity of opinion. 

Among those who were present at this assembly
was a young officer, who having by dint of interest
obtained a seat in the lower house, thought
it incumbent upon him to talk of affairs of state; 
and accordingly regaled the company with an account
of a secret expedition which the French
were busied in preparing; assuring them, that he
had it from the mouth of the minister, to whom
it had been transmitted by one of his agents
abroad. In descanting upon the particulars of
the armament, he observed, that they had twenty
ships of the line, ready manned and victualled at
Brest, which were destined for Toulon, where
they would be joined by as many more; and
from thence proceed to the execution of their
scheme, which he imparted as a secret not fit to
be divulged. 
This piece of intelligence being communicated
to all the company, except Mr. Crabtree, who
suffered by his loss of hearing, that cynic was
soon after accosted by a lady, who, by means of
an artificial alphabet, formed by a certain conjunction
and disposition of the fingers, asked if
he had heard any extraordinary news of late? 
Cadwallader, with his usual complaisance, replied,
that he supposed she took him for a courier
or spy, by teizing him eternally with that question. 
He then expatiated upon the foolish curiosity
of mankind, which, he said, must either
proceed from idleness or want of ideas; and repeated
almost verbatim the officer's information,
as a vague ridiculous report, invented by some
ignorant coxcomb, who wanted to give himself
airs of importance, and believed only by those
who were utterly unacquainted with the politics
and strength of the French nation. 

In confirmation of what he had advanced, he
endeavoured to demonstrate how impossible it
must be for that people to fit out even the third
part of such a navy, so soon after the losses they
had sustained during the war; and confirmed his
proof by asserting, that, to his certain knowledge,
the harbours of Brest and Toulon could
not at that time produce a squadron of eight ships
of the line. 
The member, who was an utter stranger to
this misanthrope, hearing his own asseverations
treated with such contempt, glowed with confusion
and resentment, and raising his voice, began
to defend his own veracity with great eagerness
and trepidation, mingling with his arguments
many blustering invectives against the insolence
and ill manners of his supposed contradictor, who
sat with the most mortifying composure of countenance,
till the officer's patience was quite exhausted; 
and then, to the manifest increase of
his vexation, he was informed, that his antagonist
was so deaf, that, in all probability, the last
trumpet would make no impression upon him,
without a previous renovation of his organs. 