


Which may serve to shew, that true patriotism
is of no party. 
The knight had not enjoyed his
repose above two hours, when
he was disturbed by such a variety of
noises, as might have discomposed a
brain of the firmest texture. The
rumbling of carriages, and the rattling
of horses feet on the pavement, was 

intermingled with loud shouts, and
the noise of fiddle, french-horn, and
bagpipe. A loud peal was heard
ringing in the church-tower, at some
distance, while the inn resounded with
clamour, confusion, and uproar. 
Sir Launcelot being thus alarmed,
started from his bed, and running to
the window, beheld a cavalcade of
persons well mounted, and distinguished
by blue cockades. They
were generally attired like jockies,
with gold-laced hats and buckskin
breeches, and one of them bore a
standard of blue silk, inscribed in
white letters, Liberty and the
Landed Interest. He who rode
at their head was a jolly figure, of a
florid complexion and round belly,
seemingly turned of fifty, and, in all
appearance, of a choleric disposition. 
As they approached the market-place
they waved their hats, huzza'd, and
cried aloud, No Foreign Connections,— 
Old-England for ever. 
This acclamation, however, was not
so loud or universal, but that our adventurer 

could distinctly hear a counter-cry
from the populace, of No
Slavery,—No Popish Pretender. 
An insinuation so ill relished by the
cavaliers, that they began to ply their
horsewhips among the multitude, and
were, in their turn, saluted with a
discharge or volley of stones, dirt, and
dead cats; in consequence of which
some teeth were demolished, and many
surtouts defiled. 
Our adventurer's attention was soon
called off from this scene, to contemplate
another procession of people on
foot, adorned with bunches of orange
ribbons, attended by a regular band of
musick, playing God save great George
our king, and headed by a thin, swarthy
personage, of a sallow aspect and
large goggling eyes, arched over with
two thick semicircles of hair, or rather
bristles, jet black, and frowzy. 
His apparel was very gorgeous, though
his address was aukward; he was accompanied
by the mayor, recorder,
and heads of the corporation, in their
formalities. His ensigns were known 

by the inscription, Liberty of Conscience
and the Protestant Succession; 
and the people saluted him as he passed
with repeated cheers, that seemed to
prognosticate success. He had particularly
ingratiated himself with the
good women, who lined the street,
and sent forth many ejaculatory petitions
in his favour. 
Sir Launcelot immediately comprehended
the meaning of this solemnity:
he perceived it was the prelude
to the election of a member to represent
the county in parliament, and he
was seized with an eager desire to
know the names and characters of the
competitors. In order to gratify this
desire, he made repeated application
to the bell-rope that depended from
the cieling of his apartment; but this
produced nothing, except the repetition
of the words “Coming, Sir,” 
which ecchoed from three or four different
corners of the house. The
waiters were so distracted by a variety
of calls, that they stood motionless,
in the state of the schoolman's ass between 

two bundles of hay, incapable
of determining where they should first
offer their attendance. 
Our knight's patience was almost
exhausted, when Crabshaw entered
the room, in a very strange equipage:
one half of his face appeared close
shaved, and the other covered with
lather, while the blood trickled in
two rivulets from his nose, upon a
barber's cloth that was tucked under
his chin; he looked grim with indignation,
and under his left arm carried
his cutlass, unsheathed. Where
he had acquired so much of the profession
of knight-errantry we shall not
pretend to determine; but, certain it
is, he fell on his knees before Sir
Launcelot, crying, with an accent of
rage and distraction, “In the name of
St. George for England, I beg a boon,
Sir knight, and thy compliance I demand,
before the peacock and the
ladies.” 
Sir Launcelot, astonished at this
address, replied in a lofty strain, “Valiant
squire, thy boon is granted, provided 

it doth not contravene the laws
of the land, and the constitutions of
chivalry.” “Then I crave leave (answered
Crabshaw) to challenge and
defy to mortal combat, that caitif
barber who hath left me in this piteous
condition; and I vow by the peacock,
that I will not shave my beard, until
I have shaved his head from his shoulders:
so may I thrive in the occupation
of an arrant squire.” 
Before his master had time to enquire
into particulars, they were joined
by a decent man in boots, who
was likewise a traveller, and had seen
the rise and progress of Timothy's
disaster. He gave the knight to understand,
that Crabshaw had sent for
a barber, and already undergone one
half of the operation, when the operator
received the long expected message
from both the gentlemen, who
stood candidates at the election. The
double summons was no sooner intimated
to him, than he threw down
his bason and retired with precipitation,
leaving the squire in the suds. 

Timothy, incensed at this desertion,
followed him with equal celerity into
the street, where he collared the shaver,
and insisted upon being entirely
trimmed, on pain of the bastinado. 
The other finding himself thus arrested,
and having no time to spare for
altercation, lifted up his fist, and discharged
it upon the snout of Crabshaw
with such force, that the unfortunate
aggressor was fain to bite
the ground, while the victor hastened
away, in hope of touching the double
wages of corruption. 
The knight being informed of these
circumstances, told Timothy with a
smile, that he should have liberty to
defy the barber, but in the mean
time, he ordered him to saddle Bronzomarte,
and prepare for immediate
service. While the squire was thus
employed, his master engaged in
conversation with the stranger, who
happened to be a London dealer travelling
for orders, and was well acquainted
with the particulars which
our adventurer wanted to know. It 

was from this communicative tradesman
he learned, that the competitors
were Sir Valentine Quickset and Mr.
Isaac Vanderpelft; the first a mere
fox-hunter, who depended for success
in this election upon his interest among
the high-flying gentry; the other
a stock-jobber and contractor, of
foreign extract, not without a mixture
of Hebrew blood, immensely rich,
who was countenanced by his grace
of ——, and supposed to have distributed
large sums in securing a majority
of votes among the yeomanry
of the county, possessed of small freeholds,
and copyholders, a great number
of which last resided in this burrough. 
He said these were generally
dissenters and weavers; and that the
mayor, who was himself a manufacturer,
had received a very considerable
order for exportation, in consequence
of which, it was believed, he
would support Mr. Vanderpelft with
all his influence and credit. 
Sir Launcelot, rouzed at this intelligence,
called for his armour, 

which being buckled on in a hurry,
he mounted his steed, attended by
Crabshaw on Gilbert, and rode immediately
into the midst of the multitude
by which the hustings were
surrounded, just as Sir Valentine
Quicket began to harangue the people
from an occasional theatre, formed
of a plank supported by the upper
board of the publick stocks, and an
inferior rib of a wooden cage pitched
also for the accommodation of petty
delinquents. 
Though the singular appearance of
Sir Launcelot at first attracted the eyes
of all the spectators, yet they did not
fail to yield attention to the speech of
his brother knight, Sir Valentine,
which ran in the following strain: 
“Gentlemen vreehoulders of this
here county, I shan't pretend to meake
a vine vlourishing speech,—I'm a plain
spoken man, as you all know. I
hope I shall always speak my maind
without vear or vavour, as the zaying
is. 'Tis the way of the Quicksets— 
we are no upstarts, nor vorreigners, 

nor have we any Jewish blood in our
veins;—we have lived in this here
neighbourhood time out of maind, as
you all know; and posses an estate
of vive thousand clear, which we
spend at whoam, among you, in old
English hospitality—All my vorevathers
have been parliament-men, and
I can prove that ne'er a one o'um
gave a zingle vote for the court since
the revolution. Vor my own peart,
I value not the ministry three skips of
a louse, as the zaying is,—I ne'er
knew but one minister that was an
honest man; and vor all the rest I care
not if they were hanged as high as
Haman, with a pox to'un—I am,
thank God, a vree-born, true-hearted
Englishman, and a loyal, thof unworthy,
son of the church—vor all
they have done vor H&wblank;r, I'd vain
know what they have done vor the
church, with a vengeance—vor my
own peart, I hate all vorreigners, and
vorreign measures, whereby this poor
nation is broken-backed with a dismal
load of debt, and taxes rise so high 

that the poor cannot get bread. Gentlemen
vreehoulders of this county,
I value no minister a vig's end, d'ye
see; if you will vavour me with your
votes and interest, whereby I may
be returned, I'll engage one half of
my estate that I never cry yea to vour
shillings in the pound; but will cross
the ministry in every thing, as in duty
bound, and as becomes an honest
vreeholder in the ould interest—but,
if you sell your votes and your country
for hire, you will be detested in
this here world, and damned in the
next to all eternity: so I leave every
man to his own conscience.” 
This eloquent oration was received
by his own friends with loud peals of
applause; which, however, did not discourage
his competitor, who, confident
of his own strength, ascended the
rostrum, or, in other words, an old
cask, set upright for the purpose. 
Having bowed all round to the audience,
with a smile of gentle condescension,
he told them, how ambitious
he was of the honour to represent 

this county in parliament; 
and how happy he found himself in
the encouragement of his friends, who
had so unanimously agreed to support
his pretensions. He said, over and
above the qualification he possessed among
them, he had fourscore thousand
pounds in his pocket, which he
had acquired by commerce, the support
of the nation, under the present
happy establishment, in defence of
which he was ready to spend the last
farthing. He owned himself a faithful
subject to his majesty king George,
sincerely attached to the protestant
succession, in detestation and defiance
of a popish, an abjured, and outlawed
pretender; and declared that
he would exhaust his substance and
his blood, if necessary, in maintaining
the principles of the glorious revolution. 
“This (cried he) is the
solid basis and foundation upon which
I stand.” 
These last words had scarce proceeded
from his mouth, when the
head of the barrel or puncheon on 

which he stood, being frail and infirm,
gave way; so that down he
went with a crash, and in a twinkling
disappeared from the eyes of the astonished
beholders. The fox-hunters
perceiving his disaster, exclaimed, in
the phrase and accent of the chace,
“Stole away! stole away!” and, with
hideous vociferation, joined in the sylvan
chorus which the hunters hollow
when the hounds are at fault. 
The disaster of Mr. Vanderpelft
was soon repaired by the assiduity of
his friends, who disengaged him from
the barrel in a trice, hoisted him on
the shoulders of four strong weavers,
and resenting the unmannerly exultation
of their antagonists, began to
form themselves in order of battle. 
An obstinate fray would have undoubtedly
ensued, had not their mutual
indignation given way to their
curiosity, at the motion of our knight,
who had advanced into the middle
between the two fronts, and waving
his hand, as a signal for them to give
attention, addressed himself to them 

with graceful demeanor, in these
worlds: “Countrymen, friends, and
fellow-citizens, you are this day assembled
to determine a point of the utmost
consequence to yourselves and
your posterity; a point that ought to
be determined by far other weapons
than brutal force and factious clamour. 
You, the freemen of England, are
the basis of that excellent constitution,
which hath long flourished the object
of envy and admiration. To you belongs
the inestimable privilege of
choosing a delegate properly qualified
to represent you in the high court of
parliament. This is your birth-right,
inherited from your ancestors, obtained
by their courage, and sealed with
their blood. It is not only your birth-right,
which you should maintain in
defiance of all danger, but also a sacred
trust, to be executed with the
most scrupulous care and fidelity. 
The person whom you trust ought
not only to be endued with the most
inflexible integrity, but should likewise
possess a fund of knowledge that 

may enable him to act as a part of
the legislature. He must be well acquainted
with the history, the constitution,
and the laws of his country:
he must understand the forms of
business, the extent of the royal prerogative,
the privilege of parliament,
the detail of government, the nature
and regulation of the finances, the
different branches of commerce, the
politicks that prevail, and the connections
that subsist among the different
powers of Europe: for, on all
these subjects, the deliberations of a
house of commons occasionally turn:
but these great purposes will never be
answered by electing an illiterate savage,
scarce qualified, in point of understanding,
to act as a country justice
of the peace, a man who has scarce
ever travelled beyond the excursion of
a fox-chace, whose conversation never
rambles farther than his stable, his
kennel, and his barn-yard; who rejects
decorum as degeneracy, mistakes
rusticity for independence, ascertains
his courage by leaping over gates and 

ditches, and founds his triumph on feats
of drinking; who holds his estate by a
factious tenure, professes himself the
blind slave of a party, without knowing
the principles that gave it birth,
or the motives by which it is actuated,
and thinks that all patriotism consists
in railing indiscriminately at ministers,
and obstinately opposing every measure
of the administration. Such a
man, with no evil intentions of his
own, might be used as a dangerous
tool in the hands of desperate faction,
by scattering the seeds of disaffection,
embarrassing the wheels of government,
and reducing the whole kingdom
to anarchy.” 
Here the knight was interrupted
by the shouts and acclamations of
the Vanderpelfites, who cried aloud,
“Hear him! hear him! long life
to the iron-cased orator.” This clamour
subsiding, he prosecuted his harangue
to the following effect: 
“Such a man as I have described
may be dangerous from ignorance,
but is neither so mischievous nor so 

detestable as the wretch who knowingly
betrays his trust, and sues to be
the hireling and prostitute of a weak
and worthless minister; a sordid
knave, without honour or principle,
who belongs to no family whose example
can reproach him with degeneracy; 
who has no country to command
his respect, no friends to engage
his affection, no religion to regulate
his morals, no conscience to
restrain his iniquity, and who worships
no God but mammon. An insinuating
miscreant, who undertakes for the
dirtiest work of the vilest administration; 
who practises national usury,
receiving by wholesale the rewards
venality, and distributing the wages
of corruption by retail.” 
In this place our adventurer's speech
was drowned in the acclamations of
of the fox-hunters, who now triumphed
in their turn, and hoicksed the
speaker, exclaiming, “Well opened
Jowler—to 'un, to 'un, to 'un again,
Sweetlips! hey, Merry, Whitefoot!” 

After a short interruption, he thus resumed
his discourse: 
“When such a caitif presents himself
to you, like the devil, with a
temptation in his hand, avoid him
as if he were in fact the devil—it is not
the offering of disinterested love; for
what should induce him, who has no
affections, to love you, to whose persons
he is an utter stranger? alas! it
is not a benevolence, but a bribe. He
wants to buy you at one market, that
he may sell you at another. Without
doubt his intention is to make an
advantage of his purchase; and this
aim he cannot accomplish, but by sacrificing,
in some sort, your interest,
your independency, to the wicked designs
of a minister, as he can expect
no gratification for the faithful discharge
of his duty. But, even if he
should not find an opportunity of selling
you to advantage, the crime, the
shame, the infamy, will still be the
same in you, who, baser than the
most abandoned prostitutes, have sold
yourselves and your posterity for hire 

—for a paultry price, to be refunded
with interest by some minister, who
will indemnify himself cut of your
own pockets: for, after all, you are
bought and sold with your own money
—the miserable pittance you may
now receive, is no more than a pitcher
full of water thrown in to moisten the
sucker of that pump which will drain
you to the bottom. Let me therefore
advise and exhort you, my countrymen,
to avoid the opposite extremes
of the ignorant clown and the designing
courtier, and choose a man of honesty,
intelligence, and moderation,
who will—” 
The doctrine of moderation was a
very unpopular subject in such an assembly; 
and, accordingly, they rejected
it as one man. They began
to think the stranger wanted to set up
for himself, a supposition that could
not fail to incense both sides equally,
as they were both zealously engaged
in their respective causes. The Whigs
and the Tories joined against this intruder,
who being neither, was treated 

like a monster, or chimæra in politics. 
They hissed, they hooted, and they
hollowed; they annoyed him with
missiles of dirt, sticks, and stones; 
they cursed, they threatened, and reviled,
till at length his patience was
exhausted. 
“Ungrateful and abandoned miscreants! (he cried) I spoke to you as
men and christians, as free-born Britons
and fellow-citizens: but I perceive
you are a pack of venal, infamous
scoundrels, and I will treat you
accordingly.” So saying, he brandished
his lance, and riding into the thickest
of the concourse, laid about him
with such dexterity and effect, that
the multitude was immediately dispersed,
and he retired without further
molestation. 
The same good fortune did not attend
squire Crabshaw in his retreat. 
The ludicrous singularity of his features,
and the half-mown crop of hair
that bristled from one side of his countenance,
invited some wags to make
merry at his expence: one of them 

clapped a furze-bush under the tail of
Gilbert, who, feeling himself thus
stimulated a posteriori, kicked and
plunged and capered in such a manner,
that Timothy could hardly keep
the saddle. In this commotion he
lost his cap and his periwig, while
the rabble pelted him in such a manner,
that, before he could join his master,
he looked like a pillar, or rather
a pillory, of mud. 