


Description of a modern Magistrate. 
Before the knight would take any
resolution for extricating himself
from his present embarrassment, he
desired to be better acquainted with the
character and circumstances of the
justice by whom he had been confined,
and likewise to understand the meaning
of his own detention. To be informed
in this last particular, he renewed
his dialogue with the turnkey,
who told him, through the grate, that
Ferret no sooner perceived him in the
jail, without his offensive arms, which
he had left below, than he desired to
be carried before the justice, where
he had given information against the
knight, as a violator of the public
peace, who strolled about the country
with unlawful arms, rendering
the highways unsafe, encroaching upon
the freedom of elections, putting
his majesty's liege subjects in fear of
their lives, and, in all probability, 

harbouring more dangerous designs
under an affected cloak of lunacy. 
Ferret, upon this information, had
been released, and entertained as an
evidence for the king; and Crabshaw
was put in the stocks, as an idle
stroller. 
Sir Launcelot, being satisfied in
these particulars, addressed himself to
his fellow-prisoners, and begged they
would communicate what they knew
respecting the worthy magistrate, who
had been so premature in the execution
of his office. This request was
no sooner signified than a crew of
naked wretches crowded around him; 
and, like a congregation of rooks,
opened their throats all at once, in
accusation of justice Gobble. The
knight was moved at this scene, which
he could not help comparing, in his
own mind, to what would appear
upon a much more awful occasion,
when the cries of the widow and the
orphan, the injured and oppressed,
would be uttered at the tribunal of an
unerring Judge against the villainous 

and insolent authors of their calamity. 
When he had, with some difficulty,
quieted their clamours, and confined
his interrogation to one person
of a tolerably decent appearance, he
learned that justice Gobble, whose
father was a taylor, had for some
time served as a journeyman hosier in
London, where he had picked up
some law-terms, by conversing with
hackney-writers and attorneys clerks
of the lowest order; that, upon the
death of his master, he had insinuated
himself into the good graces of
the widow, who took him for her
husband, so that he became a person
of some consideration, and saved money
apace; that his pride, increasing
with his substance, was reinforced by
the vanity of his wife, who persuaded
him to retire from business, that they
might live genteelly in the country; 
that his father dying, and leaving a
couple of houses in this town, Mr.
Gobble had come down with his lady
to take possession, and liked the 

place so well as to make a more considerable
purchase in the neighbourhood; 
that a certain peer being indebted
to him in the large way of his
business, and either unwilling or unable
to pay the money, had compounded
the debt, by inserting his
name in the commission; since which
period his own insolence, and his
wife's ostentation, had exceeded all
bounds: that, in the exertion of his
authority, he had committed a thousand
acts of cruelty and injustice
against the poorer sort of people, who
were unable to call him to a proper
account: that his wife domineered
with a more ridiculous, though less
pernicious usurpation, among the females
of the place: that, in a word,
she was the subject of continual mirth,
and he the object of universal detestation. 
Our adventurer, though extremely
well disposed to believe what
was said to the prejudice of Gobble,
would not give intire credit to this
description, without first inquiring
into the particulars of his conduct. 

He therefore asked the speaker,
what was the cause of his particular
complaint. “For my own
part, Sir, (said he) I lived in repute,
and kept a shop in this here town,
well furnished with a great variety of
articles. All the people in the place
were my customers; but what I and
many others chiefly depended upon,
was the extraordinary sale at two annual
customary fairs, to which all
the country people in the neighbourhood
resorted to lay out their money. 
I had employed all my stock, and
even engaged my credit to procure a
large assortment of goods for the
Lammas-market: but having given
my vote, in the election of a vestry-clerk,
contrary to the interest of justice
Gobble, he resolved to work my
ruin. He suppressed the annual fairs,
by which a great many people, especially
publicans, earned the best part
of their subsistence. The country
people resorted to another town. I
was overstocked with a load of perishable
commodities; and found myself 

deprived of the best part of my
home customers by the ill-nature and
revenge of the justice, who employed
all his influence among the common
people, making use of threats
and promises, to make them desert
my shop, and give their custom to
another person, whom he settled in
the same business under my nose. 
Being thus disabled from making
punctual payments, my commodities
spoiling, and my wife breaking
her heart, I grew negligent and careless,
took to drinking, and my affairs
went to wreck. Being one day
in liquor, and provoked by the fleers
and taunts of the man who had set
up against me, I struck him at his
own door; upon which I was carried
before the justice, who treated me
with such insolence, that I became
desperate, and not only abused him
in the execution of his office, but also
made an attempt to lay violent
hands upon his person. You know,
Sir, when a man is both drunk and
desperate, he cannot be supposed to 

have any command of himself. I
was sent hither to jail. My creditors
immediately seized my effects; and,
as they were not sufficient to discharge
my debts, a statute of bankruptcy
was taken out against me: so that
here I must lie, until they think proper
to sign my certificate, or the parliament
shall please to pass an act for
the relief of insolvent debtors.” 
The next person who presented
himself in the croud of accusers was
a meagre figure, with a green apron,
who told the knight that he had kept
a public house in town for a dozen
years, and enjoyed a goodtrade, which
was in a great measure owing to a
skittle-ground, in which the best people
of the place diverted themselves
occasionally: that justice Gobble, being
disobliged at his refusing to part
with a gelding which he had bred for
his own use, first of all shut up the
skittle-ground; but finding the publican
still kept his house open, he
took care that he should be deprived
of his licence, on pretence that the 

number of ale-houses was too great,
and that this man had been bred to
another employment. The poor publican,
being thus deprived of his bread,
was obliged to try the stay-making
business, to which he had served an
apprenticeship: but being very ill-qualified
for this profession, he soon
fell to decay, and contracted debts,
in consequence of which he was now
in prison, where he had no other
support but what arose from the labour
of his wife, who had gone to
service. 
The next prisoner who preferred
his complaint against the unrighteous
judge was a poacher, at whose
practices justice Gobble had for some
years connived, so as even to screen
him from punishment, in consideration
of being supplied with game
gratis, till at length he was disappointed
by accident. His lady had
invited guests to an entertainment,
and bespoke a hare, which the poacher
undertook to furnish. He laid
his snares accordingly over night; but 

they were discovered, and taken away
by the game-keeper of the gentleman
to whom the ground belonged. 
All the excuses the poacher could
make proved ineffectual in appeasing
the resentment of the justice and his
wife, at being thus disconcerted. Measures
were taken to detect the delinquent
in the exercise of his illicit occupation:
he was committed to safe custody; 
and his wife, with five bantlings,
was passed to her husband's settlement
in a different part of the country. 
A stout squat fellow, rattling with
chains, had just taken up the ball of
accusation, when Sir Launcelot was
startled with the appearance of a woman,
whose looks and equipage indicated
the most piteous distress. She
seemed to be turned of the middle
age, was of a lofty carriage, tall,
thin, weather-beaten, and wretchedly
attired: her eyes were inflamed
with weeping, and her looks displayed
that wildness and peculiarity which
denote distraction. Advancing to Sir
Launcelot, she fell upon her knees, 

and clasping her hands together, uttered
the following rhapsody in the most
vehement tone of affliction: 
“Thrice potent, generous, and
august emperor, here let my knees
cleave to the earth, until thou shalt
do me justice on that inhuman caitiff
Gobble. Let him disgorge my
substance which he hath devoured:
let him restore to my widowed arms
my child, my boy, the delight of my
eyes, the prop of my life, the staff
of my sustenance, whom he hath
torn from my embrace, stolen, betrayed,
sent into captivity, and murdered! 
—Behold these bleeding wounds
upon his lovely breast! see how they
mangle his lifeless coarse! Horrour!
give me my child, barbarians! his
head shall lie upon his Suky's bosom
—she will embalm him with her
tears. —Ha! plunge him in the deep!
shall my boy then float in a watry
tomb! —Justice, most mighty emperor!
justice upon the villain who
hath ruined us all! —May heaven's
dreadful vengeance overtake him! 

may the keen storm of adversity strip
him of all his leaves and fruit! may
peace forsake his mind, and rest be
banished from his pillow, so that all
his days shall be filled with reproach
and sorrow; and all his nights be
haunted with horrour and remorse!
may he be stung by jealousy without
cause, and maddened by revenge
without the means of execution!
may all his offspring be blighted and
consumed, like the mildewed ears of
corn, except one that shall grow up
to curse his old age, and bring his
hoary head with sorrow to the grave,
as he himself has proved a curse to
me and mine!” 
The rest of the prisoners, perceiving
the knight extremely shocked
at her misery and horrid imprecation,
removed her by force from his presence,
and conveyed her to another
room; while our adventurer underwent
a violent agitation, and could
not for some minutes compose himself
so well as to inquire into the nature
of this wretched creature's calamity. 

The shopkeeper, of whom he
demanded this satisfaction, gave him
to understand that she was born a
gentlewoman, and had been well
educated: that she married a curate,
who did not long survive his nuptials; 
and afterwards became the wife of
one Oakley, a farmer, in opulent circumstances:
that, after twenty years
cohabitation with her husband, he
sustained such losses by the distemper
among the cattle, as he could not repair; 
and that this reverse of fortune
was supposed to have hastened his
death: that the widow, being a woman
of spirit, determined to keep up
and manage the farm, with the assistance
of an only son, a very promising
youth, who was already contracted in
marriage with the daughter of another
wealthy farmer. Thus the mother
had a prospect of retrieving the
affairs of her family, when all her
hopes were dashèd and destroyed by
a ridiculous pique which Mrs. Gobble
conceived against the young farmer's
sweet-heart, Mrs. Susan Sedgemoor. 

This young woman chancing
to be at a country assembly, where
the grave-digger of the parish acted
as master of the ceremonies, was called
out to dance before Miss Gobble,
who happened to be there present also
with her mother. The circumstance
was construed into an unpardonable
affront by the justice's lady, who abused
the director, in the most opprobrious
terms, for his insolence and
ill-manners; and, retiring in a storm
of passion, vowed revenge against the
saucy minx who had presumed to vie
in gentility with Miss Gobble. The
justice entered into her resentment. 
The grave-digger lost his place; and
Suky's lover, young Oakley, was
pressed for a soldier. Before his mother
could take any steps for his discharge,
he was hurried away to the
East-Indies, by the industry and contrivance
of the justice. Poor Suky
wept and pined until she fell into a
consumption. The forlorn widow,
being thus deprived of her son, was
overwhelmed with grief to such a 

degree, that she could no longer manage
her concerns. Every thing
went backward: she ran in arrears
with her landlord, and the prospect
of bankruptcy aggravated her affliction,
while it added to her incapacity. 
In the midst of these diastrous circumstances,
news arrived that her son
Greaves had lost his life in a sea-engagement
with the enemy; and these
tidings almost instantly deprived her
of her reason. Then the landlord
seized for his rent; and she was arrested
at the suit of justice Gobble,
who had bought up one of her debts,
in order to distress her, and now pretended
that her madness was feigned. 
When the name of Greaves was
mentioned our adventurer started,
and changed colour; and, now the
story was ended, asked, with marks
of eager emotion, if the name of the
woman's first husband was not Wilford. 
When the prisoner answered
in the affirmative, he rose up, and
striking his breast, “Good heaven!
(cried he) the very woman who watched 

over my infancy, and even nourished
me with her milk! —She was
my mother's humble friend. —Alas!
poor Dorothy! how would your old
mistress grieve to see her favourite in
this miserable condition!” While he
pronounced these words, to the astonishment
of the hearers, a tear stole
softly down each cheek. Then he
desired to know if the poor lunatic
had any intervals of reason; and was
given to understand, that she was always
quiet, and generally supposed
to have the use of her senses, except
when she was disturbed by some extraordinary
noise, or when any person
touched upon her misfortune, or
mentioned the name of her oppressor,
in all which cases she started out into
extravagance and frenzy. They likewise
imputed great part of the disorder
to the want of quiet, proper food,
and necessaries, with which she was
but poorly supplied by the cold hand
of chance charity. Our adventurer
was exceedingly affected by the distress
of this woman, whom he resolved 

to relieve; and in proportion
as his commiseration was excited, his
resentment rose against the miscreant,
who seemed to have insinuated himself
into the commission of the peace
on purpose to harrass and oppress his
fellow-creatures. Thus animated, he
entered into consultation with Mr.
Thomas Clarke concerning the steps
he should take, first for their deliverance,
and then for prosecuting and
punishing the justice. In result of
this conference, the knight called
aloud for the jaylor, and demanded to
see a copy of his commitment, that
he might know the cause of his imprisonment,
and offer bail; or, in
case that should be refused, move for
a writ of Habeas Corpus. The jaylor
told him the copy of the writ
should be forthcoming; but after he
had waited some time, and repeated
the demand before witnesses, it was
not yet produced. Mr. Clarke then,
in a solemn tone, gave the jaylor to
understand, that an officer, refusing
to deliver a true copy of the commitment 

warrant, was liable to the forfeiture
of one hundred pounds for
the first offence; and for the second
to a forfeiture of twice that sum,
besides being disabled from executing
his office. 
Indeed, it was no easy matter to
comply with Sir Launcelot's demand; 
for no warrant had been granted, nor
was it now in the power of the justice
to remedy this defect, as Mr. Ferret had
taken himself away privately, without
having communicated the name
and designation of the prisoner. A
circumstance the more mortifying to
the jaylor, as he perceived the extraordinary
respect which Mr. Clarke
and the captain payed to the knight,
and was now fully convinced that he
would be dealt with according to law. 
Disordered with these reflections, he
imparted them to the justice, who
had in vain caused search to be made
for Ferret, and was now extremely
well inclined to set the knight and his
friends at liberty, though he did not
at all suspect the quality and importance 

of our adventurer. He could
not, however, resist the temptation
of displaying the authority of his
office; and therefore ordered the prisoners
to be brought before his tribunal,
that, in the capacity of a magistrate,
he might give them a severe
reproof, and proper caution, with regard
to their future behaviour. 
They were accordingly led thro' the
street in procession, guarded by the
constable and his gang, followed by
Crabshaw, who had by this time been
released from the stocks, and surrounded
by a crowd of people, attracted
by curiosity. When they arrived
at the justice's house, they were
detained for some time in the passage:
then a voice was heard, commanding
the constable to bring in the prisoners,
and they were introduced to the hall
of audience, where Mr. Gobble sat in
judgment, with a crimson velvet
night-cap on his head; and on his
right hand appeared his lady, puffed
up with the pride and insolence of her
husband's office, fat, frowzy, and not 

over-clean, well stricken in years,
without the least vestige of an agreeable
feature, having a rubicond nose,
ferret eyes, and imperious aspect. The
justice himself was a little, affected,
pert prig, who endeavoured to solemnize
his countenance by assuming an
air of consequence, in which pride,
impudence, and folly were strangely
blended. He aspired at nothing so
much as the character of an able
spokesman; and took all opportunities
of holding forth at vestry and quarter-sessions,
as well as in the administration
of his office in private. He would
not, therefore, let slip this occasion of
exciting the admiration of his hearers,
and, in an authoritative tone, thus addressed
our adventurer: 
“The laws of this land has provided
—I says, as how provision is
made by the laws of this here land,
in reverence to delinquems and manefactors,
whereby the king's peace is
upholden by we magistrates, who represents
his majesty's person, better
than in e'er a contagious nation under 

the sun: but, howsoemever, that there
king's peace, and this here magistrate's
authority, cannot be adequably and
identically upheld, if so be as how
criminals escapes unpunished. Now,
friend, you must be confidentious in
your own mind, as you are a notorious
criminal, who have trespassed again
the laws on divers occasions and
importunities; if I had a mind to exercise
the rigour of the law, according
to the authority wherewith I am wested,
you and your companions in iniquity
would be sewerely punished by
the statue: but we magistrates has a
power to litigate the sewerity of justice,
and so I am contented that you
shoulds be mercifully delt withal, and
even dismissed.” 
To this harangue the knight replied,
with solemn and deliberate accent,
“If I understand your meaning
aright, I am accused of being a notorious
criminal; but nevertheless you are
contented to let me escape with impunity. 
If I am a notorious criminal,
it is the duty of you, as a magistrate, 

to bring me to condign punishment; 
and if you allow a criminal to escape
unpunished, you are not only unworthy
of a place in the commission, but
become accessary to his guilt, and, to
all intents and purposes, socius criminis. 
With respect to your proffered mercy,
I shall decline the favour; nor do I
deserve any indulgence at your hands:
for, depend upon it, I shall shew no
mercy to you, in the steps I intend to
take for bringing you to justice. I understand
that you have been long hackneyed
in the ways of oppression, and
I have seen some living monuments of
your inhumanity—of that hereafter. 
I myself have been detained in prison,
without cause assigned. I have been
treated with indignity, and insulted
by jaylors and constables, led thro'
the streets like a felon, as a spectacle
to the multitude, obliged to dance
attendance in your passage, and afterwards
branded with the name of notorious
criminal. —I now demand to
see the information in consequence of
which I was detained in prison, the 

copy of the warrant of commitment
or detainer, and the face of the person
by whom I was accused. I insist
upon a compliance with these demands,
as the privileges of a British
subject; and if it is refused, I shall
seek redress before a higher tribunal.” 
The justice seemed to be not a little
disturbed at this peremptory declaration; 
which, however, had no
other effect upon his wife, but that of
enraging her choler, and inflaming her
countenance. “Sirrah! sirrah! (cried
she) do you dares to insult a worshipful
magistrate on the bench? —Can
you deny that you are a vagram, and
a dilatory sort of a Person? Han't the
man with the satchel made an affidavy
of it? —If I was my husband, I'd
lay you fast by the heels for your resumption,
and ferk you with a primineery
into the bargain, unless you
could give a better account of yourself
—I would.” 
Gobble, encouraged by this fillip,
resumed his petulance, and proceeded
in this manner: —“Heark ye,
friend, I might, as Mrs. Gobble very 

justly observes, trounce you for your
audacious behaviour; but I scorn to
take such advantages: howsomever,
I shall make you give an account of
yourself and your companions; for I
believes as how you are in a gang, and
all in a story, and perhaps you may
be found one day in a cord. —What
are you, friend? What is your station
and degree?” “I am a gentleman,” 
replied the knight. “Ay, that is
English for a sorry fellow, (said the
justice.) Every idle vagabond, who
has neither home nor habitation, trade
nor profession, designs himself a gentleman. 
But I must know how you
live?” “Upon my means.” “What
are your means?” —“My estate.” — 
“Whence doth it arise?” “From
inheritance.” “Your estate lies in
brass, and that you have inherited
from nature: but do you inherit lands
and tenements?” “Yes.” “But they
are neither here nor there, I doubt. — 
Come, come, friend, I shall bring
you about presently.” Here the examination
was interrupted by the arrival of
Mr. Fillet the surgeon, who chancing to 

pass, and seeing a croud about the
door, went in to satisfy his curiosity. 