


He enjoys an interview with Emilia, and makes
himself ample amends for all the mortifications
of his life. 
Godfrey, who had taken leave of his
sister, on pretence of making a short excursion
with Peregrine, whose health required the
enjoyment of fresh air, after his long confinement,
sent a message to her, that same night,
announcing his arrival, and giving her notice
that he would breakfast with her next morning; 

when he and our hero, who had dressed himself
for the purpose, taking a hackney-coach, repaired
to her lodging, and were introduced into a parlour,
adjoining to that in which the tea-table was
set. Here they had not waited many minutes
when they heard the sound of feet, coming down
stairs; upon which our hero's heart began to
beat the alarm, and he concealed himself behind
the screen, by the direction of his friend, whose
ears being saluted with Sophy's voice from the
next room, he flew into it with great ardour,
and enjoyed upon her lips the sweet transports of
a meeting so unexpected; for he had left her in
her father's house at Windsor. 
Amidst these emotions, he had almost forgot
the situation of Peregrine; when Emilia, assuming
an enchanting air, “Is not this (said
she) a most provoking scene to a young woman
like me, who am doomed to wear the willow,
by the strange caprice of my lover? Upon my
word, brother, you have done me infinite prejudice,
in promoting this jaunt with my obstinate
correspondent; who, I suppose, is so ravished
with this transient glimpse of liberty. that
he will never be persuaded to incur unnecessary
confinement for the future.” “My dear sister,
(replied the captain, tauntingly) your own pride
set him the example; so you must e'en stand to
the consequence of his imitation.” “'Tis a
hard case, however, (answered the fair offender)
that I should suffer all my life, by one venial
trespass. Heigh ho! who would imagine that a
sprightly girl, such as I, with ten thousand pounds,
should go a begging? I have a good mind to
marry the next person that asks me the question,
in order to be revenged upon this unyielding 

humourist. Did the dear fellow discover no inclination
to see me, in all the term of his releasement? 
Well, if ever I can catch the fugitive
again, he shall sing in his cage for life.” 
It is impossible to convey to the reader a just
idea of Peregrine's transports, while he overheard
this declaration; which was no sooner pronounced,
than, unable to resist the impetuosity
of his passion, he sprung from his lurking place,
exclaiming, “Here I surrender;” and rushing
into her presence, was so dazzled with her beauty,
that his speech failed: he was fixed, like a
statue, to the floor; and all his faculties were
absorpt in admiration. Indeed, she was now in
the full bloom of her charms, and it was nearly
impossible to look upon her without emotion. 
What then must have been the extasy of our
youth, whose passion was whetted with all the
incitements which could stimulate the human
heart! The ladies screamed with surprize at his
appearance, and Emilia underwent such agitation
as flushed every charm with irresistible energy:
her cheeks glowed with a most delicate suffusion,
and her bosom heaved with such bewitching undulation,
that the cambrick could not conceal
or contain the snowy hemispheres, that rose like
a vision of paradise to his view. 
While he was almost fainting with unutterable
delight, she seemed ready to sink under the tumults
of tenderness and confusion; when our
hero, perceiving her condition, obeyed the impulse
of his love, and circled the charmer in his
arms, without suffering the least frown or symptom
of displeasure. Not all the pleasures of his
life, had amounted to the ineffable joy of this
embrace, in which he continued for some minutes 

totally entranced. He fastened upon her
pouting lips, with all the eagerness of rapture; 
and, while his brain seemed to whirl round with
transport, exclaimed in a delirium of bliss,
“Heaven and earth! this is too much to bear!” 
His imagination was accordingly relieved, and
his attention in some measure divided, by the interposition
of Sophy, who kindly chid him for
his having overlooked his old friends: thus accosted,
he quitted his delicious armful, and, saluting
Mrs. Gauntlet, asked pardon for his neglect; 
observing, that such rudeness was excuseable,
considering the long and unhappy exile
which he had suffered, from the jewel of his
soul. Then turning to Emilia, “I am come,
madam, (said he) to claim the performance of
your promise, which I can produce under your
own fair hand: you may, therefore, lay aside all
superfluous ceremony and shyness, and crown
my happiness without farther delay; for, upon
my soul! my thoughts are wound up to the last
pitch of expectation, and I shall certainly run
distracted, if I am doomed to any term of probation.” 
His mistress, having by this time recollected
herself, replied with a most exhilerating smile,
“I ought to punish you, for your obstinacy, with
the mortification of a twelve-month's trial; but
'tis dangerous to tamper with an admirer of your
disposition, and therefore, I think, I must make
sure of you while it is in my power.” “You
are willing, then, to take me for better for worse,
in presence of heaven and these witnesses?” cried
Peregrine, kneeling, and applying her hand to
his lips. At this interrogation, her features
softened into an amazing expression of condescending 

love; and while she darted a side-glance,
that thrilled to his marrow, and heaved a sigh
more soft than zephyr's balmy wing, her answer
was, “Why—ay—and heaven grant me patience
to bear the humours of such a yokefellow.” 
“And may the same powers (replied
the youth) grant me life and opportunity to manifest
the immensity of my love. Mean while,
I have eighty thousand pounds, which shall be laid
immediately in your lap.” 
So saying, he sealed the contract upon her lips,
and explained the mystery of his last words,
which had begun to operate upon the wonder
of the two sisters. Sophy was agreeably surprised
with the account of his good fortune: nor was
it, in all probability, unacceptable to the lovely
Emilia; tho', from this information, she took an
opportunity to upbraid her admirer with the inflexibility
of his pride, which (she scrupled not
to say) would have baffled all the suggestions of
his passion, had not it been gratified by this providential
event. 
Matters being thus happily matured, the lover
begged that immediate recourse might be had to
the church, and his happiness ascertained before
night. But the bride objected, with great vehemence,
to such precipitation, being desirous of
her mother's presence at the ceremony; and she
was seconded in her opinion by her brother's
wife: upon which Peregrine, maddening with
desire, assaulted her with the most earnest intreaties,
representing, that, as her mother's consent
was already obtained, there was surely no
necessity for a delay, that must infallibly make
a dangerous impression upon his brain and constitution. 
He fell at her feet, in all the agony of 

impatience; swore that his life and intellects
would actually be in jeopardy by her refusal; and
when she attempted to argue him out of his demand,
began to rave with such extravagance,
that Sophy was frightened into conviction: and
Godfrey enforcing the remonstrances of his friend,
the amiable Emilia was teized into compliance. 
After breakfast the bridegroom and his companion
set out for the Commons for a licence,
having first agreed upon the house at which the
ceremony should be performed, in the lodgings
of the bride: and the permission being obtained,
they found means to engage a clergyman, who
undertook to attend them at their own time and
place. Then a ring was purchased for the occasion; 
and they went in search of the lieutenant,
with whom they dined at a tavern, and not only
made him acquainted with the steps they had
taken, but desired that he would stand god-father
to the bride: an employment which Jack accepted
with demonstrations of particular satisfaction; 
'till chancing to look into the street, and seeing
Cadwallader approach the door, in consequence
of a message they had sent to him by Pipes, he
declined the office in favour of the senior; who
was accordingly ordained for that purpose, on the
supposition that such a mark of regard might facilitate
his concurrence with a match, which,
otherwise, he would certainly oppose, as he was
a professed enemy to wedlock, and, as yet, ignorant
of Peregrine's intention. 
After having congratulated Pickle upon his
succession, and shook his two friends by the
hand, the misanthrope asked whose mare was
dead, that he was summoned in such a plaguy
hurry from his dinner, which he had been fain 

to gobble up like a cannibal. Our hero gave him
to understand, that they had made an appointment
to drink tea with two agreeable ladies, and were
unwilling that he should lose the opportunity of
enjoying an entertainment which he loved so
much. Crabtree, shrivelling up his face, like an
autumn leaf, at this intimation, cursed his complaisance,
and swore they should keep their assignation
without him; for he and letchery had
shook hands many years ago. 
The bridegroom, however, likening him unto
an old coachman, who still delights in the smack
of the whip, and dropping some flattering hints
of his manhood, even at these years, he was gradually
prevailed upon to accompany them to the
place of rendezvous; where, being ushered into
a dining-room, they had not waited three minutes
when they were joined by the parson, who
had observed the hour with great punctuality. 
This gentleman no sooner entered the room,
than Cadwallader, in a whisper to Gauntlet,
asked if that was not the cock-bawd; and before
the captain could make any reply, “What
an unconscionable whore-master the rogue is!
(said he) scarce discharged from confinement,
and sweetened with a little fresh air, and yet be
wenches with a pimp in canonicals in his pay.” 
The door again opened, and Emilia broke in
upon them, with such dignity of mien, and divinity
of aspect, as inspired every spectator with
astonishment and admiration. The lieutenant,
who had not seen her since her charms were
ripened into such perfection, expressed his wonder
and approbation in an exclamation of “Add's
zooks! what a glorious galley!” and the misanthrope's
visage was instantly metamorphosed into 

the face of a mountain-goat; he licked his lips
instinctively, snuffed the air, and squinted with
a most horrible obliquity of vision. 
The bride and her sister being seated, and
Hatchway having renewed his acquaintance with
the former, who recognized him with particular
civility, Peregrine withdrew into another apartment
with his friend Crabtree, to whom he imparted
the design of this meeting, which the latter
no sooner understood, than he attempted to
retreat, without making any other reply than
that of “Pshaw! rot your matrimony! can't
you put your neck in the noose, without my being
a witness of your folly?” 
The young gentleman, in order to vanquish
this aversion, stepped to the door of the next
room, and begged the favour of speaking with
Emilia, to whom he introduced the testy old
batchelor, as one of his particular friends, who
desired to have the honour of giving her away. 
The bewitching smile with which she received
his salute, and granted his request, at once overcame
the disapprobration of the misanthrope, who
with a relaxation in his countenance which had
never been perceived before that instant, thanked
her in the most polite terms for such an agreeable
mark of distinction. He accordingly led her
into the dining-room, where the ceremony was
performed without delay; and after the husband
had asserted his prerogative on her lips, the
whole company saluted her by the name of Mrs.
Pickle. 
I shall leave the sensible reader to judge what
passed at this juncture, within the bosoms of the
new-married couple: Peregrine's heart was fired
with inexpressible ardour and impatience; while 

the transports of the bride were mingled with a
dash of diffidence and apprehension. Gauntlet
saw it would be too much for both, to bear their
present tantalizing situation till night, without
some amusement to diverge their thoughts; and
therefore proposed to pass part of the evening at
the public entertainment in Marybone-gardens,
which were at that time frequented by the best
company in town. The scheme was relished by
the discreet Sophy, who saw the meaning of the
proposal, and the bride submitted to the persuasion
of her sister; so that, after tea, two coaches
were called, and Peregrine was forcibly separated
from his charmer, during the conveyance. 
While they stood before the orchestra, listening
to an English ballad, which was sung in a
very agreeable manner, our hero perceived a
taudry Frenchman leaning against a post, and entertaining
himself with a soliloquy upon the barbarous
want of taste in England, so conspicuous
in the applause which was given to that miserable
performance; and as his remarks were not made
without some insolent reflections upon the nation,
he marked him as a proper object for his ridicule,
and began to project some scheme for exposing
him to the mirth of the company, because
he looked upon him as some pert valet de chambre,
who assumed the character of a gentleman,
by the night; when he was saved the trouble of
inventing by an accident which the foreigner of
himself incurred. 
One of the waiters belonging to the place, had
marked with chalk the score of a company whom
he attended, on the very post which the Frenchman
had thought proper to occupy: so that,
when he walked away, he carried off the greatest 

part of the reckoning upon his bag and shoulders. 
The servant coming to add another bottle to the
account, perceived almost the whole particulars
of the bill effaced, and began to raise an hideous
outcry against the people that stood nearest him:
upon which our hero told him how the misfortune
had happened, and pointed out the person
who bore the impression upon his back. This
intelligence was no sooner communicated, than
the waiter, calling some of his brethren to his assistance,
went in pursuit of the delinquent (while
Pickle desired his company to take notice) and
telling him, that he had carried off part of a reckoning,
desired he would return, that they might
compare the marks upon his bag with the fragment
which remained upon the post. 
The Frenchman, who did not understand one
word of the English language, seeing himself accosted
in a very petulant manner by this attendant,
at first imagined that he and his companions
came with a design to affront him, because he
was a foreigner; and therefore thinking it incumbent
upon him to support the dignity of his
nation, began to talk very big in his native
tongue, and, in order to inforce his words, laid
his hand upon his sword, in a very menacing
posture: upon which the confederates flew upon
him, and securing both his arms, led him backward
through a lane of people, who laughed
heartily at his captivity, which he now believed to
be the effect of an information laid against him,
for some trespass upon our laws, and, with a
most ludicrous expression of fear, protested, that
he was utterly ignorant and innocent of the
crime for which he was apprehended. 

Being conducted to the spot, his back was applied
to the post, and the separate parts of the
score matched like two exchequer tallies; by
which means they were able to ascertain the reckoning,
and then dismiss'd the counterpart, who
had stood under their hands, with a most rueful
face of expectation, and afforded merriment to a
whole crowd of spectators, a great part of whom
gave him a convoy to the gate, by which he
made his retreat with great expedition. 
The new-married couple and their company
having made shift to spend the evening, and
supped on a slight collation in one of the boxes,
Peregrine's patience was almost quite exhausted; 
and taking Godfrey aside, he imparted his intention
to withdraw in private from the sea-wit of his
friend Hatchway, who would, otherwise, retard his
bliss, with unseasonable impediments, which, at
present, he could not possibly bear. Gauntlet,
who sympathized with his impatience, undertook
to intoxicate the lieutenant with bumpers to the
joy of the bride, and, in the mean time, desired
Sophy to retire with his sister, under the auspices
of Cadwallader, who promised to squire them
home. 
The ladies were accordingly conducted to the
coach, and Jack proposed to the captain, that,
for the sake of the joke, the bridegroom should
be plied with liquor, in such a manner as would
effectually disable him from enjoying the fruits of
his good fortune for one night at least. Gauntlet
seemed to relish the scheme, and they prevailed
upon Pickle to accompany them to a certain tavern,
on pretence of drinking a farewel glass to
a single life; there the bottle was circulated, till
Hatchway's brain began to suffer innovation, and 

as he had secured our hero's hat and sword, he
felt no apprehension of an elopement, which,
however, was effected; and the youth hastened
on the wings of love to the arms of his enchanting
bride. He found Crabtree in a parlour, waiting
for his return, and disposed to entertain him
with a lecture upon temperance; to which he paid
very little attention, but ringing for Emilia's
maid, desired to know if her mistress was a-bed. 
Being answered in the affirmative, he sent her up
stairs to announce his arrival, undressed himself to
a loose gown and slippers, and wishing the misanthrope
good-night, after having desired to see
him next day, followed in person to the delicious
scene, where he found her elegantly dished out,
the fairest daughter of chastity and love. 
When he approached, she was overwhelmed
with confusion, and hid her lovely face from his
transported view; while Mrs. Gauntlet, seeing his
eyes kindled at the occasion, kissed her charming
sister, who, throwing her snowy arms about her
neck, would have detained her in the room, had
not Peregrine gently disengaged her confidante
from her embrace, and conducted her trembling
to the door; which having bolted and barricadoed,
he profited by his good fortune, and his
felicity was perfect. 
Next day he rose about noon, and found his
three friends assembled, when he learned that Jack
had fallen in his own snare, and been obliged to
lie in the same tavern where he fell: a circumstance
of which he was so much ashamed, that
Peregrine and his wife escaped many jokes, which
he would have certainly cracked, had he not lain
under the predicament of this disgrace. In half
an hour after he came down, Mrs. Pickle appeared 

with Sophy, blushing like Aurora or the goddess
of health, and sending forth emanations of
beauty unparallelled: she was complimented upon
her change of situation by all present, and by
none more warmly than by old Crabtree, who declared
himself so well satisfied with his friend's
fortune, as to be almost reconciled to that institution,
against which he had declaimed during the
best part of his life. 
An express was immediately dispatched to Mrs.
Gauntlet, with an account of her daughter's marriage; 
a town-house was hired, and an handsome
equipage set up, in which the new-married pair
appeared at all public places, to the astonishment
of our adventurer's fair-weather friends, and the
admiration of all the world: for, in point of figure,
such another couple was not to be found in
the whole united kingdom. Envy despaired, and
detraction was struck dumb, when our hero's new
accession of fortune was consigned to the celebration
of public fame: Emilia attracted the notice
of all observers, from the pert templar to the Sovereign
himself, who was pleased to bestow encomiums
upon the excellence of her beauty. Many
persons of consequence, who had dropped the acquaintance
of Peregrine, in the beginning of his
decline, now made open efforts to cultivate his
friendship anew: but he discouraged all these advances
with the most mortifying disdain; and one
day, when the nobleman, whom he had formerly
obliged, came up to him in the drawing-room,
with the salutation of “Your servant, Mr. Pickle”,
he eyed him with a look of ineffable contempt,
saying, “I suppose your lordship is mistaken in
your man,” and turned his head another way, in
presence of the whole court. 

When he had made a circuit round all the
places frequented by the beau-monde, to the utter
confusion of those against whom his resentment
was kindled; paid off his debts, and settled his
money-matters in town; Hatchway was dismissed
to the country, in order to prepare for the reception
of his fair Emilia; and in a few days after
his departure, the whole company (Cadwallader
himself included) set out for his father's house,
and, in their way, took up Mrs. Gauntlet the
mother, who was sincerely rejoiced to see our
hero in the capacity of her son-in-law. From
her habitation they proceeded homewards at an
easy pace, and, amidst the acclamations of the
whole parish, entered their own house, where
Emilia was received in the most tender manner,
by Mr. Clover's wife, who had provided every
thing for her ease and accommodation, and, next
day, surrendered unto her the management of
her own houshold affairs. 