



The Houyhnhnms Notion of Truth and Falshood. The Author's Discourse disapproved by his Master. The Author gives a more particular Account of himself, and the Accidents of his Voyage. 

My Master heard me with great Appearances
of Uneasiness in his Countenance; 
because Doubting or not
believing, are so little known in
this Country, that the Inhabitants
cannot tell how to behave themselves
under such Circumstances. And I remember
in frequent Discourses with my Master concerning
the Nature of Manhood, in other Parts of the
World; having Occasion to talk of Lying, and
false Representation, it was with much Difficulty
that he comprehended what I meant; although he
had otherwise a most acute Judgment. For he argued
thus; That the Use of Spech was to make us 

understand one another, and to receive Information
of Facts; now if any one said the Thing which,
was not, these Ends were defeated; because I cannot
properly be said to understand him; and I am
so far from receiving Information, that he leaves
me worse than in Ignorance; for I am led to believe
a Thing Black when it is White, and Short when
it is Long. And these were all the Notions he had
concerning that Faculty of Lying, so perfectly well
understood, and so universally practised among human
Creatures. 
To return from this Digression; when I asserted
that the Yahoos were the only governing Animals
in my Country, which my Master said was altogether
past his Conception, he desired to know, whether
we had Houyhnhnms among us, and what was
their Employment: I told him, we had great Numbers; 
that in Summer they grazed in the Fields, and
in Winter were kept in Houses, with Hay and
Oats, where Yahoo Servants were employed to
rub their Skins smooth, comb their Manes, pick
their Feet, serve them with Food, and make their
Beds. I understand you well, said my Master; it
is now very plain from all you have spoken, that
whatever Share of Reason the Yahoos pretend to,
the Houyhnhnms are your Masters; I heartily wish
our Yahoos would be so tractable. I begged his Honour
would please to excuse me from proceeding any
farther, because I was very certain that the Account
he expected from me would be highly displeasing. 
But he insisted in commanding me to let him know
the best and the worst: I told him he should be
obeyed. I owned, that the Houyhnhnms among
us, whom we called Horses, were the most generous 

and comely Animal we had; that they excelled
in Strength and Swiftness; and when they belonged
to Persons of Quality, employed in Travelling,
Racing, and drawing Chariots, they were treated
with much Kindness and Care, till they fell into
Diseases, or became foundered in the Feet; but then
they were sold, and used to all kind of Drudgery
till they died; after which their Skins were stripped
and sold for what they were worth, and their
Bodies left to be devoured by Dogs and Birds of
Prey. But the common Race of Horses had not
so good Fortune, being kept by Farmers and Carriers,
and other mean People, who put them to
greater Labour, and feed them worse. I described
as well as I could, our Way of Riding; the Shape
and Use of a Bridle, a Saddle, a Spur, and a Whip; 
of Harness and Wheels. I added, that we fastened
Plates of a certain hard Substance called Iron at
the Bottom of their Feet, to preserve their Hoofs
from being broken by the Stony Ways on which we
often travelled. 
My Master, after some Expressions of great Indignation,
wondered how we dared to venture upon
a Houyhnhnm's Back; for he was sure, that the
meanest Servant in his House would be able to
shake off the strongest Yahoo; or by lying down,
and rouling upon his Back, squeeze the Brute to
Death. I answered, That our Horses were trained
up from three or four Years old to the several Uses
we intended them for; That if any of them proved
intolerably vicious, they were employed for Carriages; 
that they were severely beaten while they
were young for any mischievous Tricks: That the
Males, designed for the common Use of Riding or 

Draught, were generally castrated about two Years
after their Birth, to take down their Spirits, and
make them more tame and gentle: That they were
indeed sensible of Rewards and Punishments; but
his Honour would please to consider, that they had
not the least Tincture of Reason any more than the
Yahoos in this Country. 
It put me to the Pains of many Circumlocutions
to give my Master a right Idea of what I spoke; 
for their Language doth not abound in Variety of
Words, because their Wants and Passions are fewer
than among us. But it is impossible to express his
noble Resentment at our savage Treatment of the
Houyhnhnm Race; particularly after I had explained
the Manner and Use of Castrating Horses among
us, to hinder them from propagating their Kind,
and to render them more servile. He said, if it
were possible there could be any Country where Yahoos
alone were endued with Reason, they certainly
must be the governing Animal, because Reason
will in Time always prevail against Brutal Strength. 
But, considering the Frame of our Bodies, and
especially of mine, he thought no Creature of equal
Bulk was so ill-contrived, for employing that Reason
in the common Offices of Life; whereupon he desired
to know whether those among whom I lived,
resembled me or the Yahoos of his Country. I assured
him, that I was as well shaped as most of my
Age; but the younger and the Females were much
more soft and tender, and the Skins of the latter
generally as white as Milk. He said, I differed indeed
from other Yahoos, being much more cleanly,
and not altogether so deformed; but in point of
real Advantage, he thought I differed for the worse. 

That my Nails were of no Use either to my fore
or hinder Feet: As to my fore Feet, he could not
properly call them by that Name, for he never observed
me to walk upon them; that they were too
soft to bear the Ground; that I generally went with
them uncovered, neither was the Covering I sometimes
wore on them, of the same Shape, or so
strong as that on my Feet behind. That I could not
walk with any Security; for if either of my hinder
Feet slipped, I must inevitably fall. He then began
to find fault with other Parts of my Body; the
Flatness of my Face, the Prominence of my Nose,
mine Eyes placed directly in Front, so that I could
not look on either Side without turning my Head:
That I was not able to feed my self, without lifting
one of my fore Feet to my Mouth: And therefore
Nature had placed those Joints to answer that Necessity. 
He knew not what could be the Use of
those several Clefts and Divisions in my Feet behind; 
that these were too soft to bear the Hardness
and Sharpness of Stones without a Covering made
from the Skin of some other Brute; that my
whole Body wanted a Fence against Heat and Cold,
which I was forced to put on and off every Day
with Tediousness and Trouble. And lastly, that
he observed every Animal in this Country naturally
to abhor the Yahoos, whom the Weaker avoidsd,
and the Stronger drove from them. So that supposing
us to have the Gift of Reason, he could
not see how it were possible to cure that natural
Antipathy which every Creature discovered against
us; nor consequently, how we could tame and
render them serviceable. However, he would (as
he said) debate the Matter no farther, because he 

was more desirous to know my own Story, the
Country, where I was born, and the several Actions
and Events of my Life before I came hither. 
I assured him, how extreamly desirous I was
that he should be satisfied in every Point; but I
doubted much, whether it would be possible for me
to explain my self on several Subjects whereof his
Honour could have no Conception, because I saw
nothing in his Country to which I could resemble
them. That however, I would do my best, and
strive to express my self by Similitudes, humbly desiring
his Affistance when I wanted proper Words; 
which he was pleased to promise me. 
I said, my Birth was of honest Parents, in an
Island called England, which was remote from this
Country, as many Days Journey as the strongest of
his Honour's Servants could travel in the Annual
Course of the Sun. That I was bred a Surgeon,
whose Trade is to cure Wounds and Hurts in the Body,
got by Accident or Violence. That my Country
was governed by a Female Man, whom we called
Queen. That I left it to get Riches, whereby I might
maintain my self and Family when I should return. 
That in my last Voyage, I was Commander of the
Ship and had about fifty Yahoos under me, many of
which died at Sea, and I was forced to supply them
by others picked out from several Nations. That
our Ship was twice in Danger of being sunk; the
first Time by a great Storm, and the second, by
striking against a Rock. Here my Master interposed,
by asking me, How I could persuade Strangers
out of different Countries to venture with me,
after the Losses I had sustained, and the Hazards I
had run. I said, they were Fellows of desperate 

Fortunes, forced to fly from the Places of their Birth,
on Account of their Poverty or their Crimes. 
Some were undone by Law-suits; others spent all
they had in Drinking, Whoring and Gaming; 
others fled for Treason; many for Murder, Theft,
Poysoning, Robbery, Perjury, Forgery, Coining
false Money; for committing Rapes or Sodomy; 
for flying from their Colours, or deserting the Enemy; 
and most of them had broken Prison. None
of these durst return to their native Countries for fear
of being hanged, or of starving in a Jail; and therefore
were under a Necessity of seeking a Livelihood
in other Places. 
During this Discourse, my Master was pleased
often to interrupt me. I had made Use of many
Circumlocutions in describing to him the Nature of
the several Crimes, for which most of our Crew
had been forced to fly their Country. This Labour
took up several Days Conversation before he was able
to comprehend me. He was wholly at a Loss to
know what could be the Use or Necessity of practissing
those Vices. To clear up which I endeavoured
to give him some Ideas of the Desire of Power and
Riches; of the terrible Effects of Lust, Intemperance,
Malice, and Envy. All this I was forced to define
and describe by putting of Cases, and making Suppositions. 
After which, like one whose Imagination
was struck with something never seen or heard of
before, he would lift up his Eyes with Amazement
and Indignation. Power, Government, War, Law,
Punishment, and a Thousand other Things had no
Terms, wherein that Language could express them; 
which made the Difficulty almost insuperable to 

give my Master any Conception of what I meant:
But being of an excellent Understanding, much
improved by Contemplation and Converse, he at
last arrived at a competent Knowledge of what human
Nature in our Parts of the World is capable to
perform; and desired I would give him some particular
Account of that Land, which we call Europe,
especially, of my own Country. 
