




TRAVELS INTO SEVERAL Remote Nations OF THE WORLD.
By Captain Lemuel Gulliver.
PART II.
A Voyage to BROBDINGNAG.
LONDON:
Printed in the Year,
MDCCXXVI.





Chap. I.
A Great Storm described, the Longboat
sent to fetch Water, the Author
goes with it to discover the Country. 
He is left on Shore, is seized by one of
the Natives, and carried to a Farmer's
House. His Reception there with several
Accidents that happened to them. 
A Description of the Inhabitants. Pa. I

Chap. II.
A Description of the Farmer's Daughter. 
The Author carried to a Market-Town,
and then to the Metropolis. The
Particulars of his Journey p. 30
Chap. III.
The Author sent for to Court. The Queen
buys him of his Master the Farmer, and
presents him to the King. He disputes
with his Majesty's great Scholars. 
An Apartment at Court provided
for the Author. He is in high
Favour with the Queen. He stands
up for the Honour of his own Country. 
His Quarrels with the Queen's Dwarf. p. 43
Chap. IV.
The Country described. A Proposal for
correcting modern Maps. The King's
Palace, and some Account of the Metropolis. 

The Author's way of travelling. 
The chief Temple described. p. 67
Chap. V.
Several Adventures that happened to the
Author. The Execution of a Criminal. 
The Author shews his Skill in
Navigation. p. 78
Chap. VI.
Several Contrivances of the Author to
please the King and Queen. He shews
his Skill in Musick. The King enquires
into the State of Europe, which
the Author relates to him. The King's
Observations thereon. p. 101
Chap. VII.
The Author's Love of his Country. He
makes a Proposal of much Advantage 

to the King, which is rejected. The
King's great Ignorance in Politicks. 
The Learning of that Country very
imperfect and confined. Their Laws,
and military Affairs, and Parties in
the State. p. 122
Chap. VIII.
The King and Queen make a Progress
to the Frontiers. The Author attends
them. The manner in which he leaves
the Country very particularly related. 
He returns to England. p. 138



TRAVELS. PART II. A Voyage to Brobdingnag.




A great Storm described, the Long-Boat
sent to fetch Water, the Author goes
with it to discover the Country. He is
left on Shore, is seized by one of the
Natives, and carried to a Farmer's
House. His Reception there, with several
Accidents that happened there. A
Description of the Inhabitants. 
Having been condemned by
Nature and Fortune to an active
and restless Life, in ten Months
after my Return, I again left
my native Country, and took Shipping 

in the Downs on the 20th Day of June
1702. in the Adventure, Capt. John
Nicholas, a Cornish Man, Commander,
bound for Surat. We had a very prosperous
Gale till we arrived at the Cape
of Good-hope, where we landed for fresh
Water, but, discovering a Leak we unshipped
our Goods, and winter'd there; 
for the Captain falling sick of an Ague,
we could not leave the Cape till the end
of March. We then set sail, and had
a good Voyage till we passed the Streights
of Madagascar; but having got Northward
of that Island, and to about five
Degrees South Latitude, the Winds,
which in those Seas are observed to
blow a constant equal Gale between
the North and West from the beginning
of December to the beginning of May,
on the 19th of April began to blow
with much greater Violence, and more
Westerly than usual, continuing so for
twenty Days together, during which
time we were driven a little to the East
of the Molucca Islands, and about three 

Degrees Northward of the Line, as our
Captain found by an Observation he took
the 2d of May, at which time the Wind
ceased, and it was a perfect Calm, where
at I was not a little rejoyced. But he
being a Man well experienc'd in the Navigation
of those Seas, bid us all prepare
against a Storm, which accordingly happened,
the Day following: For a Southern
Wind, called the Southern Monsoon,
began to set in. 
Finding it was like to overblow,
we took in our Sprit-sail, and stood by
to hand the Fore-sail; but making foul
Weather, we look'd the Guns were all
fast, and handed the Missen. The Ship
lay very broad off, so we thought it better
spooning before the Sea, than trying
or hulling. We reeft the Fore-sail and
set him, we hawl'd aft the Fore-sheet; 
the Helm was hard a Weather. The
Ship wore bravely. We belay'd the Foredown-hall; 
but the Sail was split, and we
hawl'd down the Yard, and got the Sail 

into the Ship, and unbound all the things
clear of it. It was a very fierce Storm; 
the Sea broke strange and dangerous. 
We hawl'd off upon the Lanniard of
the Whipstaff, and helped the Man at
Helm. We would not get down our
Top-mast, but let all stand, because she
scudded before the Sea very well, and we
knew that the Top-mast being aloft, the
Ship was the wholesomer, and made better
way thro' the Sea, seeing we had Searoom. 
When the Storm was over, we set
Fore-sail and Main-sail, and brought the
Ship to. Then we set the Missen, Maintop-sail
and the Foretop-sail. Our Course
was East North-east, the Wind was at
South-west. We got the Star-board Tacks
aboard, we cast off our Weather-braces
and Lifts; we set in the Lee-braces, and
hawl'd forward by the Weather-bowlings,
and hawl'd them tight, and belayed
them, and hawl'd over the Missen Tack
to Windward, and kept her full and by
as near as she could lye. 

During this Storm, which was followed
by a strong Wind West South-west,
we were carried, by my Computation,
about five hundred Leagues to the East, so
that the oldest Sailor on Board could not
tell in what part of the World we were. 
Our Provisions held out well, our Ship
was staunch, and our Crew all in good
Health; but we lay in the utmost Distress
for Water. We thought it best to
hold on the same Course, rather than
turn more Northerly, which might have
brought us to the North-west parts of
Great Tartary, and into the frozen Sea. 
On the 16th Day of June 1703. a
Boy on the Top-mast discovered Land. 
On the 17th we came in full View of
a great Island or Continent (for we
knew not whether) on the South-side
whereof was a small Neck of Land jutting
out into the Sea, and a Creek too
shallow to hold a Ship of above one hundred
Tuns. We cast Anchor within a
League of this Creek, and our Captain 

sent a dozen of his Men well armed in the
Long Boat, with Vessels for Water, if any
could be found. I desired his leave to
go with them, that I might see the Country,
and make what Discoveries I could. 
When we came to Land we saw no River
or Spring, nor any sign of Inhabitants. 
Our Men therefore wander'd on the Shore
to find out some fresh Water near the Sea,
and I walked alone about a mile on
the other Side, where I observed the
Country all barren and rocky. I now
began to be weary, and seeing nothing
to entertain my Curiosity, I returned
gently down towards the Creek; and
the Sea being full in my View, I saw
our Men already got into the Boat, and
rowing for Life to the Ship. I was going
to hollow after them, although it
had been to little purpose, when I observed
a huge Creature walking after them
in the Sea, as fast as he could: He waded
not much deeper than his Knees, and
took prodigious strides: But our Men
had the start of him half a League, and the 

Sea thereabouts being full of sharp-pointed
Rocks, the Monster was not able to
overtake the Boat. This I was afterwards
told, for I durst not stay to see
the Issue of that Adventure; but ran as
fast as I could the way I first went; and
then climbed up a steep Hill, which gave
me some Prospect of the Country. I
found it fully cultivated; but that which
first surprized me was the Length of the
Grass, which in those Grounds that seemed
to be kept for Hay, was above twenty
Foot high. 
I fell into a high Road, for so I took
it to be, though it served to the Inhabitants
only as a foot Path through a Field of
Barley. Here I walked on for some time,
but could see little on either Side, it being
now near Harvest, and the Corn rising
at least forty Foot. I was an Hour
walking to the end of this Field, which
was fenced in with a Hedge of at least one
hundred and twenty Foot high, and the
Trees so lofty that I could make no Computation 

of their Altitude. There was
a Stile to pass from this Field into the
next. It had four Steps, and a Stone to
cross over when you came to the uppermost. 
It was impossible for me to climb
this Stile, because every Step was six Foot
high, and the upper Stone above twenty. 
I was endeavouring to find some Gap in
the Hedge, when I discovered one of
the Inhabitants in the next Field, advancing
towards the Stile, of the same Size
with him whom I saw in the Sea, pursuing
our Boat. He appeared as tall as an
ordinary Spire-steeple, and took about
ten Yards at every Stride, as near as I
could guess. I was struck with the utmost
Fear and Astonishment, and ran to
hide my self in the Corn, from whence
I saw him at the top of the Stile, looking
back into the next Field on the right
hand, and heard him call in a Voice many
degrees louder than a speaking Trumpet; 
but the Noise was so high in the
Air, that at first I certainly thought it
was Thunder. Whereupon seven Monsters 

like himself came towards him with
Reaping-hooks in their Hands, each Hook
about the largeness of six Scythes. These
People were not so well clad as the first,
whose Servants or Labourers they seemed
to be: For upon some Words he
spoke, they went to reap the Corn in
the Field where I lay. I kept from them
at as great a distance as I could, but was
forced to move with extreme Difficulty,
for the Stalks of the Corn were sometimes
not above a Foot distant, so that I could
hardly squeeze my Body betwixt them. 
I made a shift to go forward till I came
to a part of the Field where the Corn
had been laid by the Rain and Wind. 
Here it was impossible for me to advance
a step; for the Stalks were so interwoven
that I could not creep thorough, and the
Beards of the fallen Ears so strong and
pointed that they pierced through my
Cloaths into my Flesh. At the same
time I heard the Reapers not above an
hundred Yards behind me. Being quite
dispirited with Toil, and wholly overcome 

by Grief and Despair, I lay down
between two Ridges, and heartily wished
I might there end my Days. I bemoaned
my desolate Widow, and Fatherless
Children. I lamented my own Folly
and Wilfulness in attempting a second
Voyage against the Advice of all my
Friends and Relations. In this terrible
Agitation of Mind I could not forbear
thinking of Lilliput, whose Inhabitants
looked upon me as the greatest Prodigy
that ever appeared in the World: Where
I was able to draw an Imperial Fleet in
my Hand, and perform those other Actions
which will be recorded for ever in
the Chronicles of that Empire, while
Posterity shall hardly believe them, although
attested by Millions. I reflected
what a Mortification it must prove to
me to appear as inconsiderable in this
Nation as one single Lilliputian would
be among us. But this I conceived was
to be the least of my Misfortunes: For,
as human Creatures are observed to be
more savage and cruel in Proportion to 

their Bulk, what could I expect but to
be a Morsel in the Mouth of the first among
these enormous Barbarians that
should happen to seize me? Undoubtedly
Philosophers are in the right when
they tell us, that nothing is great or little
otherwise than by Comparison. It might
have pleased Fortune to let the Lilliputians
find some Nation, where the People
were as diminutive with respect to
them, as they were to me. And who
knows but that even this prodigious Race
of Mortals might be equally overmatched
in some distant part of the World,
whereof we have yet no Discovery? 
Scared and confounded as I was, I
could not forbear going on with these
Reflections, when one of the Reapers approaching
within ten Yards of the Ridge
where I lay, made me apprehend that
with the next Step I should be squashed
to Death under his Foot, or cut in two
with his Reaping-hook. And therefore
when he was again about to move, I 

screamed as loud as Fear could make me. 
Whereupon the huge Creature trod short,
and looking round about under him for
some time, at last espied me as I lay on the
Ground. He considered a while with the
Caution of one who endeavours to lay
hold on a small dangerous Animal in such
a manner that it may not be able either
to scratch or to bite him, as I myself have
sometimes done with a Weasel in England. 
At length he ventured to take me
up behind by the Middle between his fore
Finger and Thumb, and brought me within
three Yards of his Eyes, that he might
behold my Shape more perfectly. I guessed
his Meaning, and my good Fortune gave
me so much Presence of Mind, that I
resolved not to struggle in the least as
he held me in the Air, about sixty Foot
from the Ground, although he grievously
pinched my Sides, for fear I should slip
through his Fingers. All I ventured was
to raise mine Eyes towards the Sun, and
place my Hands together in a supplicating
Posture, and to speak some Words 

in an humble melancholy Tone, suitable
to the Condition I then was in. For
I apprehended every Moment that he
would dash me against the Ground, as
we usually do any little hateful Animal
which we have a mind to destroy. But
my good Star would have it, that he appeared
pleased with my Voice and Gestures,
and began to look upon me as a
Curiosity, much wondering to hear me
pronounce articulate Words, although he
could not understand them. In the
mean time I was not able to forbear
groaning and shedding Tears, and turning
my Head towards my Sides; letting
him know, as well as I could, how cruelly
I was hurt by the Pressure of his
Thumb and Finger. He seemed to apprehend
my Meaning; for, lifting up
the Lappet of his Coat, he put me gently
into it, and immediately ran along
with me to his Master, who was a substantial
Farmer, and the same Person I
had first seen in the Field. 

The Farmer having (as I supposed by
their Talk) received such an Account of
me as his Servant could give him, took a
piece of a small Straw, about the size of
a walking Staff, and therewith lifted up
the Lappets of my Coat; which it seems
he thought to be some kind of Covering
that Nature had given me. He blew
my Hairs aside to take a better View of
my Face. He called his Hinds about him,
and asked them (as I afterwards learned)
whether they had ever seen in the Fields
any little Creature that resembled me? 
He then placed me softly on the Ground
upon all four, but I got immediately up,
and walked slowly backwards and forwards,
to let those People see I had no
Intent to run away. They all sate down
in a Circle about me, the better to observe
my Motions, I pulled off my Hat,
and made a low Bow towards the Farmer. 
I fell on my Knees, and lifted up my
Hands and Eyes, and spoke several Words
as loud as I could: I took a Purse of
Gold out of my Pocket, and humbly 

presented it to him. He received it on
the Palm of his Hand, then applied it
close to his Eye, to see what it was, and
afterwards turned it several times with
the Point of a Pin, (which he took out
of his Sleeve,) but could make nothing
of it. Whereupon I made a Sign that
he should place his Hand on the Ground. 
I took the Purse, and opening it, poured
all the Gold into his Palm. There were
six Spanish Pieces of four Pistoles each,
besides twenty or thirty smaller Coins. 
I saw him wet the Tip of his little Finger
upon his Tongue, and take up one
of my largest Pieces, and then another,
but he seemed to be wholly ignorant
what they were. He made me a Sign to
put them again into my Purse, and the
Purse again into my Pocket, which after
offering to him several times, I thought
it best to do. 
The Farmer by this time was convinced
I must be a rational Creature. 
He spoke often to me, but the Sound of 

his Voice pierced my Ears like that of
a Water Mill, yet his Words were articulate
enough. I answered as loud as
I could, in several Languages, and he
often laid his Ear within two Yards of
me; but all in vain, for we were wholly
unintelligible to each other. He then
sent his Servants to their Work, and taking
his Handkerchief out of his Pocket,
he doubled and spread it on his left
Hand, which he placed flat on the
Ground, with the Palm upwards, making
me a Sign to step into it, as I could easily
do, for it was not above a Foot in thickness. 
I thought it my part to obey,
and for fear of falling, laid my self at
Length upon the Handkerchief, with the
Remainder of which he lapped me up to
the Head for further Security, and in this
manner carried me home to his House. 
There he called his Wife, and shewed
me to her; but she screamed and ran
back, as Women in England do at the
sight of a Toad or a Spider. However,
when she had a while seen my Behaviour, 

and how well I observed the Signs
her Husband made, she was soon reconciled,
and by degrees grew extremely
tender of me. 
It was about twelve at Noon, and a
Servant brought in Dinner. It was only
one substantial Dish of Meat (fit for the
plain Condition of an Husbandman)
in a Dish of about four and twenty
Foot Diameter. The Company were
the Farmer and his Wife, three Children,
and an old Grandmother: When
they were sat down, the Farmer
placed me at some Distance from him
on the Table, which was thirty Foot
high from the Floor. I was in a terrible
Fright, and kept as far as I could
from the Edge for fear of falling. The
Wife minced a Bit of Meat, then crumbled
some Bread on a Trencher, and
placed it before me. I made her a low
Bow, took out my Knife and Fork, and
fell to eat, which gave them exceeding
Delight. The Mistress sent her Maid 

for a small Dram-cup, which held about
three Gallons, and filled it with Drink,
I took up the Vessel with much difficulty
in both Hands, and in a most respectful
manner drank to her Ladyship's Health,
expressing the Words as loud as I could
in English, which made the Company
laugh so heartily, that I was almost
deafned with the Noise. This Liquor
tasted like a small Cyder, and was not
unpleasant. Then the Master made me
a Sign to come to his Trencher-side; 
but as I walked on the Table, being in
great Surprize all the Time, as the indulgent
Reader will easily conceive and excuse,
I happened to stumble against a
Crust, and fell flat on my Face, but received
no Hurt. I got up immediately,
and observing the good People to be in
much Concern, I took my Hat (which I
held under my Arm out of good Manners)
and waving it over my Head, made
three Huzza's, to shew I had got no Mischief
by my Fall. But advancing forwards
toward my Master (as I shall henceforth 

forth call him) his youngest Son who
sate next him, an arch Boy of about ten
Years old, took me up by the Legs, and
held me so high in the Air, that I trembled
every Limb; but his Father snatched
me from him, and at the same time
gave him such a Box on the left Ear, as
would have felled an European Troop
of Horse to the Earth, ordering him to
be taken from the Table. But being
afraid the Boy might owe me a Spight,
and well remembring how mischievous
all Children among us naturally are to
Sparrows, Rabbits, young Kittens, and
Puppy Dogs, I fell on my Knees, and
pointing to the Boy, made my Master to
understand, as well as I could, that I desired
his Son might be pardoned. The
Father complied, and the Lad took his
Seat again; whereupon I went to him and
kissed his Hand, which my Master took,
and made him stroak me gently with it. 
In the midst of Dinner, my Mistress's
favourite Cat leapt into her Lap, I 

heard a Noise behind me like that of a
dozen Stocking-Weavers at Work; and
turning my Head, I found it proceeded
from the purring of this Animal, who
seemed to be three times larger than an
Ox, as I computed by the View of her
Head, and one of her Paws, while her
Mistress was feeding and stroaking her. 
The Fierceness of this Creature's Countenance
altogether discomposed me; 
though I stood at the further End of the
Table, above fifty Foot off, and altho'
my Mistress held her fast for fear she
might give a Spring, and seize me in
her Talons. But it happened there was
no Danger; for the Cat took not the
least Notice of me when my Master
placed me within three Yards of her. 
And as I have been always told, and
found true by Experience in my Travels,
that flying, or discovering Fear before a
fierce Animal, is a certain Way to make
it pursue or attack you, so I resolved in
this dangerous Juncture to shew no manner
of Concern. I walked with Intrepidity 

five or six times before the very
Head of the Cat, and came within half
a Yard of her; whereupon she drew her
self back, as if she were more afraid of
me: I had less Apprehension concerning
the Dogs, whereof three or four came
into the Room, as it is usual in Farmers
Houses; one of which was a Mastiff,
equal in Bulk to four Elephants, and a
Greyhound somewhat taller than the
Mastiff, but not so large. 
When Dinner was almost done, the
Nurse came in with a Child of a Year
old in her Arms, who immediately spied
me, and began a Squall that you might
have heard from London-Bridge to Chelsea,
after the usual Oratory of Infants,
to get me for a Play-thing. The Mother
out of pure Indulgence took me
up, and put me towards the Child, who
presently seized me by the Middle, and
got my Head in his Mouth, where I
roared so loud that the Urchin was
frighted, and let me drop, and I should 

infallibly have broke my Neck if the
Mother had not held her Apron
under me. The Nurse to quiet her
Babe made use of a Rattle, which was
a kind of hollow Vessel filled with great
Stones, and fastned by a Cable to the
Child's Wast: But all in vain, so that
she was forced to apply the last Remedy by
giving it suck. I must confess no Object
ever disgusted me so much as the
sight of her monstrous Breast, which I
cannot tell what to compare with, so
as to give the curious Reader an Idea of
its Bulk, Shape and Colour. It stood
prominent six Foot, and could not be
less than sixteen in Circumference. The
Nipple was about half the Bigness of
my Head, and the Hew both of that and
the Dug so varified with Spots, Pimples
and Freckles, that nothing could appear
more nauseous: For I had a near sight
of her, she sitting down the more conveniently
to give Suck, and I standing on
the Table. This made me reflect upon
the fair Skins of our English Ladies, who 

appear so beautiful to us, only because
they are of our own Size, and their Defects
not to be seen but through a Magnifying-glass,
where we find by Experiment,
that the smoothest and whitest
Skins look rough and coarse, and ill coloured. 
I remember when I was at Lilliput,
the Complexions of those diminutive
People appeared to me the fairest in the
World, and talking upon this Subject
with a Person of Learning there, who
was an intimate Friend of mine, he said
that my Face appeared much fairer and
smoother when he looked on me from
the Ground, than it did upon a nearer
View when I took him up in my Hand,
and brought him close, which he confessed
was at first a very shocking sight. He
said he could discover great Holes in my
Skin; that the Stumps of my Beard were
ten times stronger than the Bristles of a
Boar, and my Complexion made up of
several Colours altogether disagreeable: 

Although I must beg leave to say for my
self, that I am as fair as most of my Sex
and Country, and very little sun-burnt
by my Travels. On the other Side,
discoursing of the Ladies in that Emperor's
Court, he used to tell me, one
had Freckles, another too wide a Mouth,
a third too large a Nose, nothing of
which I was able to distinguish. I confess
this Reflection was obvious enough; 
which however I could not forbear, lest
the Reader might think those vast Creatures
were actually deformed: For I must
do them Justice to say they are a comely
Race of People; and particularly the
Features of my Master's Countenance, although
he were but a Farmer, when I
beheld him from the Height of sixty
Foot, appeared very well proportioned. 
When Dinner was done, my Master
went out to his Labourers, and as I could
discover by his Voice and Gesture, gave
his Wife a strict Charge to take care of
me. I was very much tired and disposed 

to sleep, which my Mistress perceiving,
she put me on her own Bed, and covered
me with a clean white Handkerchief,
but larger and coarser than the Main-sail
of a Man of War. 
I slept about two Hours, and dreamed
I was at home with my Wife and Children,
which aggravated my Sorrows when
I awaked and found my self alone in a
vast Room, between two and three hundred
Foot wide, and above two hundred
high, lying in a Bed twenty Yards
wide. My Mistress was gone about her
houshold Affairs, and had locked me in. 
The Bed was eight Yards from the Floor. 
Some natural Necessities required me to
get down; I durst not presume to call,
and if I had, it would have been in vain,
with such a Voice as mine, at so great a
Distance as from the Room where I lay to
the Kitchen where the Family kept. While
I was under these Circumstances, two Rats
crept up the Curtains, and ran smelling
backwards and forwards on the Bed. One of 

them came up almost to my Face, whereupon
I rose in a Fright, and drew out
my Hanger to defend my self. These
horrible Animals had the Boldness to
attack me on both Sides, and one
of them held his Fore-feet at my Collar; 
but I had the good Fortune to
rip up his Belly before he could do me
any Mischief. He fell down at my
Feet, and the other seeing the Fate of
his Comrade, made his Escape, but not
without one good Wound on the Back,
which I gave him as he fled, and made
the Blood run trickling from him. After
this Exploit, I walked gently to and fro
on the Bed, to recover my Breath and
Loss of Spirits. These Creatures were
of the Size of a large Mastiff; but infinitely
more nimble and fierce, so that
if I had taken off my Belt before I
went to sleep, I must have infallibly been
torn to pieces and devoured. I measured
the Tail of the dead Rat, and
found it to be two Yards long, wanting
an Inch; but it went against my Stomach 

to drag the Carcass off the Bed, where
it lay still bleeding; I observed it had yet
some Life, but with a strong Slash cross
the Neck I thoroughly dispatched it. 
Soon after my Mistress came into
the Room, who seeing me all bloody,
ran and took me up in her Hand. I
pointed to the dead Rat, smiling and
making other signs to shew I was not hurt,
whereat she was extremely rejoiced, calling
the Maid to take up the dead Rat
with a pair of Tongs, and throw it out
of the Window. Then she set me on a
Table, where I shewed her my Hanger all
bloody, and wiping it on the Lappet of
my Coat, returned it to the Scabbard. 
I was pressed to do more than one thing,
which another could not do for me, and
therefore endeavoured to make my Mistress
understand that I desired to be set
down on the Floor; which after she had
done, my Bashfulness would not suffer
me to express my self farther than by
pointing to the Door, and bowing several 

times. The good Woman with much
Difficulty at last perceived what I would
be at, and taking me up again in her
Hand, walked into the Garden where she
set me down. I went on one side about
two hundred Yards, and beckoning to
her not to look or to follow me, I hid
my self between two Leaves of Sorrel,
and there discharged the Necessities of
Nature. 
I hope the gentle Reader will excuse
me for dwelling on these and the
like Particulars, which however insignificant
they may appear to grovelling vulgar
Minds, yet will certainly help a Philosopher
to enlarge his Thoughts and Imagination,
and apply them to the Benefit
of publick as well as private Life, which
was my sole Design in presenting this
and other Accounts of my Travels to the
World; wherein I have been chiefly studious
of Truth, without affecting any Ornaments
of Learning or of Style. But the
whole Scene of this Voyage made so 

strong an Impression on my Mind, and
is so deeply fixed in my Memory, that
in committing it to Paper I did not omit
one material Circumstance: However,
upon a strict Review, I blotted out several
Passages of less Moment which were
in my first Copy, for fear of being censured
as tedious and trifling, whereof
Travellers are often, perhaps not without
Justice, accused. 





A Description of the Farmer's Daughter. 
The Author carried to a Market-Town,
and then to the Metropolis. The
Particulars of his Journey. 
My Mistress had a Daughter of
nine Years old, a Child of toward
Parts for her Age, very
dextrous at her Needle, and skilful in
dressing her Baby. Her Mother and she
contrived to fit up the Baby's Cradle for
me against Night: The Cradle was put
into a small Drawer of a Cabinet, and
the Drawer placed upon a Hanging-shelf,
for fear of the Rats. This was my Bed
all the time I stay'd with those People,
though made more convenient by degrees,
as I began to learn their Language,
and make my Wants known. This
young Girl was so handy, that after I 

had once or twice pulled off my Cloaths
before her, she was able to dress and undress
me, though I never gave her that
Trouble when she would let me do
either my self. She made me seven
Shirts, and some other Linen, of as fine
Cloth as could be got, which indeed was
coarser than Sackcloth; and these she
constantly washed for me with her own
Hands. She was likewise my School-Mistress
to teach me the Language: 
When I pointed to any thing, she told
me the Name of it in her own Tongue,
so that in a few Days I was able to call
for whatever I had a mind to. She was
very good-natur'd, and not above forty
Foot high, being little for her Age. She
gave me the Name of Grildrig, which
the Family took up, and afterwards the
whole Kingdom. The Word imports
what the Latins call Nanunculus, the
Italians Homunceletino, and the English
Mannikin. To her I chiefly owe my
Preservation in that Country: We never
parted while I was there; I called her 

my Glumdalclitch, or little Nurse: And
I should be guilty of great Ingratitude
if I omitted this honourable Mention of
her Care and Affection towards me, which
I heartily wish it lay in my Power to requite
as she deserves, instead of being the
innocent but unhappy Instrument of her
Disgrace, as I have too much Reason to
fear. 
It now began to be known and talked
of in the Neighbourhood, that my Master
had found a strange Animal in the
Field about the bigness of a Splacknuck,
but exactly shaped in every part like a
human Creature; which it likewise imitated
in all its Actions; seemed to speak
in a little Language of its own, had already
learned several Words of theirs,
went erect upon two Legs, was tame
and gentle, would come when it was called,
do whatever it was bid, had the finest
Limbs in the World, and a Complexion
fairer than a Nobleman's Daughter of
three Years old. Another Farmer who 

lived hard by, and was a particular Friend
of my Master, came on a Visit on purpose
to enquire into the Truth of this
Story. I was immediately produced, and
placed upon a Table, where I walked as
I was commanded, drew my Hanger, put
it up again, made my Reverence to my
Master's Guest, asked him in his own
Language how he did, and told him he
was welcome, just as my little Nurse had
instructed me. This Man who was old
and dim sighted, put on his Spectacles to
behold me better, at which I could not
forbear laughing very heartily, for his
Eyes appeared like the Full-Moon shining
into a Chamber at two Windows. 
Our People, who discovered the cause
of my Mirth, bore me company in Laughing,
at which the old Fellow was Fool
enough to be angry and out of Countenance. 
He had the Character of a
great Miser, and to my Misfortune he
well deserved it by the cursed Advice he
gave my Master to shew me as a Sight upon
a Market-Day in the next Town, which 

was half an hour's riding, about two and
twenty Miles from our House. I guessed
there was some Mischief contriving,
when I observed my Master and his Friend
whispering long together, sometimes
pointing at me; and my Fears made me
fancy that I overheard and understood
some of their Words. But, the next
Morning Glumdalclitch my little Nurse
told me the whole Matter, which she had
cunningly picked out from her Mother. 
The poor Girl laid me on her Bosom,
and fell a weeping with Shame and Grief. 
She apprehended some Mischief would
happen to me from rude vulgar Folks,
who might squeeze me to Death or break
one of my Limbs by taking me in their
Hands. She had also observed how modest
I was in my Nature, how nicely I regarded
my Honour, and what an Indignity
I should conceive it to be exposed for
Money as a publick Spectacle to the meanest
of the People. She said, her Papa and
Mamma had promised that Gildrig should
be hers, but now she found they meant 

to serve her as they did last Year, when
they pretended to give her a Lamb, and
yet, as soon as it was fat, sold it to a
Butcher. For my own part, I may truly
affirm that I was less concerned than
my Nurse. I had a strong Hope which
never left me, that I should one Day recover
my Liberty; and as to the Ignominy
of being carried about for a Monster,
I considered my self to be a perfect
Stranger in the Country, and that such
a Misfortune could never be charged
upon me as a Reproach if ever I should
return to England; since the King of
Great Britain himself, in my Condition,
must have undergone the same Distress. 
My Master, pursuant to the Advice of
his Friend, carried me in a Box the next
Market day to the neighbouring Town,
and took along with him his little Daughter
my Nurse upon a Pillion behind
him. The Box was close on every side,
with a little Door for me to go in and
out, and a few Gimlet-holes to let in 

Air. The Girl had been so careful to
put the Quilt of her Baby's Bed into it,
for me to lye down on. However, I
was terribly shaken and discomposed in
this Journey, though it were but of half
an Hour. For the Horse went about
forty Foot at every Step, and trotted so
high, that the Agitation was equal to the
rising and falling of a Ship in a great
Storm, but much more frequent: Our
Journey was somewhat further than from
London to St. Albans. My Master alighted
at an Inn which he used to frequent; 
and after consulting a while with the Innkeeper,
and making some necessary Preparations,
he hired the Grultrud, or Cryer
to give notice through the Town of a
strange Creature to be seen at the Sign
of the Green Eagle not so big as a Splacnuck
(an Animal in that Country very
finely shaped, about six Foot long) and
in every part of the Body resembling an
human Creature, could speak several
Words, and perform an hundred diverting
Tricks. 

I was placed upon a Table in the
largest Room of the Inn, which might
be near three hundred Foot Square. My
little Nurse stood on a low Stool close
to the Table, to take care of me, and direct
what I should do. My Master, to
avoid a Croud, would suffer only thirty
People at a time to see me. I walked
about on the Table as the Girl commanded:
she asked me Questions as far as she
knew my Understanding of the Language
reached, and I answered them as loud as
I could. I turned about several times
to the Company, paid my humble Respects,
said they were welcome, and used
some other Speeches I had been taught. 
I took up a Thimble filled with Liquor,
which Glumdalclitch had given me for a
Cup, and drank their Health. I drew
out my Hanger, and flourished with it after
the manner of Fencers in England. 
My Nurse gave me part of a Straw,
which I exercised as a Pike, having learned
the Art in my Youth. I was that
day shewn to twelve Sets of Company, 

and as often forced to go over again
with the same Fopperies, till I was
half dead with Weariness and Vexation. 
For, those who had seen me made such
wonderful Reports, that the People were
ready to break down the Doors to come
in. My Master for his own Interest
would not suffer any one to touch me
except my Nurse; and, to prevent danger,
Benches were set round the Table
at such a distance as put me out of every
body's reach. However, an unlucky
School-Boy aimed a hazel Nut directly
at my Head, which very narrowly missed
me; otherwise, it came with so much
violence that it would have infallibly
knocked out my Brains, for it was almost
as large as a small Pumpion: But I had
the Satisfaction to see the young Rogue
well beaten, and turned out of the Room. 
My Master gave publick notice, that
he would shew me again the next Market-day,
and in the mean time he prepared
a more convenient Vehicle for me
which he had reason enough to do; for 

I was so tired with my first Journey, and
with entertaining Company for eight
Hours together, that I could hardly stand
upon my Legs, or speak a Word. It
was at least three Days before I recovered
my Strength; and that I might have
no rest at home, all the neighbouring
Gentlemen from an hundred Miles round,
hearing of my Fame, came to see me at
my Master's own House. There could not
be fewer than thirty Persons with their
Wives and Children (for the Country
was very populous;) and my Master demanded
the rate of a full Room whenever
he shewed me at home, although
it were only to a single Family: So that
for some time I had but little ease every
Day of the Week (except Wednesday,
which is their Sabbath) although I were
not carried to the Town. 
My Master finding how profitable I
was like to be, resolved to carry me to
the most considerable Cities of the Kingdom. 
Having therefore provided himself 

with all things necessary for a long Journey,
and settled his affairs at Home, he
took leave of his Wife, and upon the
17th of August 1703. about two Months
after my Arrival, we set out for the Metropolis,
situated near the middle of that
Empire, and about three thousand Miles
distance from our House: My Master
made his Daughter Glumdalclitch ride
behind him. She carried me on her
Lap in a Box tyed about her wast. The
Girl had lined it on all sides with the
softest Cloth she could get, well quilted
underneath, furnished it with her Baby's
Bed, provided me with Linen and other
Necessaries, and made every thing as convenient
as she could. We had no other
Company but a Boy of the House, who
rode after us with the Luggage. 
My Master's Design was to shew me
in all the Towns by the way, and to step
out of the Road for fifty or an hundred
Miles, to any Village or Person of Quality's
House where he might expect Custom. 

We made easy Journies of not above seven
or eightscore Miles a Day: For Glumdalclitch,
on purpose to spare me, complained
she was tired with the trotting of
the Horse. She often took me out of
my Box at my own Desire, to give me Air,
and shew me the Country, but always
held me fast by a Leading-string. We
passed over five or six Rivers many degrees
broader and deeper than the Nile
or the Ganges; and there was hardly a
Rivulet so small as the Thames at London-Bridge. 
We were ten Weeks in
our Journey, and I was shewn in eighteen
large Towns besides many Villages and
private Families. 
On the 26th Day of October, we arrived
at the Metropolis, called in their
Language Lorbrulgrud, or Pride of the
Universe. My Master took a Lodging
in the principal Street of the City, not
far from the Royal Palace, and put out
Bills in the usual Form, containing an
exact Description of my Person and Parts. 

He hired a large Room between three
and four hundred Foot wide. He provided
a Table sixty Foot in diameter,
upon which I was to act my Part, and
palisadoed it round three Foot from the
edge, and as many high, to prevent my
falling over. I was shewn ten times a
Day to the Wonder and Satisfaction of
all People. I could now speak the Language
tolerably well, and perfectly understood
every Word that was spoken to
me. Besides, I had learned their Alphabet,
and could make a shift to explain a
Sentence here and there; for Glumdalclitch
had been my Instructer while we
were at home, and at leisure Hours during
our Journey. She carried a little
Book in her Pocket, not much larger
than a Sanson's Atlas; it was a common
Treatise for the use of young Girls, giving
a short Account of their Religion; 
out of this she taught me my Letters,
and interpreted the Words. 





The Author sent for to Court. The Queen
buys him of his Master the Farmer, and
presents him to the King. He disputes
with his Majesty's great Scholars. 
An Apartment at Court provided
for the Author. He is in high
Favour with the Queen. He stands
up for the Honour of his own Country. 
His Quarrels with the Queen's Dwarf. 
The frequent Labours I underwent
every Day made in a few Weeks
a very considerable change in
my Health: The more my Master got by
me, the more unsatiable he grew. I had
quite lost my Stomach, and was almost
reduced to a Skeleton. The Farmer observed
it, and concluding I soon must
dye, resolved to make as good a Hand
of me as he could. While he was thus 

reasoning and resolving with himself, a
Slardral, or Gentleman Usher came from
Court, commanding my Master to carry
me immediately thither for the Diversion
of the Queen and her Ladies. Some of
the latter had already been to see me, and
reported strange Things of my Beauty,
Behaviour, and good Sense. Her Majesty
and those who attended her were beyond
Measure delighted with my Demeanor. 
I fell on my Knees, and begged
the Honour of kissing her Imperial Foot; 
but this Gracious Princess held out her
little Finger towards me (after I was set
on a Table) which I embraced in both
my Arms, and put the tip of it, with the
utmost respect, to my Lip. She made
me some general Questions about my
Country and my Travels, which I answer'd
as distinctly and in as few Words as I
could. She asked whether I would be
content to live at Court. I bowed down
to the board of the Table, and humbly
answered that I was my Master's Slave,
but if I were at my own Disposal, I 

should be proud to devote my Life to
her Majesty's Service. She then asked
my Master whether he were willing to
sell me at a good Price. He who apprehended
I could not live a Month,
was ready enough to part with me, and
demanded a thousand pieces of Gold,
which were ordered him on the spot,
each piece being about the bigness of
eight hundred Moydores; but, allowing
for the proportion of all Things between
that Country and Europe, and the high
price of Gold among them, was hardly
so great a sum as a thousand Guineas
would be in England. I then said to
the Queen, since I was now her Majesty's
most humble Creature and Vassal, I must
beg the favour, that Glumdalclitch, who
had always tended me with so much care
and kindness, and understood to do it so
well, might be admitted into her Service,
and continue to be my Nurse and
Instructor. Her Majesty agreed to my
Petition, and easily got the Farmer's consent,
who was glad enough to have his 

Daughter preferred at Court: and the
poor Girl herself was not able to hide
her Joy: My late Master withdrew, biding
me farewell, and saying he had left
me in a good Service; to which I replyed
not a Word, only making him a
slight bow. 
The Queen observed my coldness,
and when the Farmer was gone out of
the Apartment, asked me the reason. I
made bold to tell her Majesty that I
owed no other Obligation to my late
Master, than his not dashing out the
Brains of a poor harmless Creature found
by chance in his Field; which Obligation
was amply recompenced by the gain
he had made in shewing me through half
the Kingdom, and the price he had now
sold me for. That the Life I had since
led, was laborious enough to kill an Animal
of ten times my Strength. That my
Health was much impaired by the continual
drudgery of entertaining the Rabble
every hour of the Day, and that if my 

Master had not thought my Life in danger,
her Majesty would not have got so cheap a
Bargain. But as I was out of all fear of
being ill treated under the Protection of
so great and good an Empress, the Ornament
of Nature, the Darling of the
World, the Delight of her Subjects, the
Phœnix of the Creation; so, I hoped my
late Master's Apprehensions would appear
to be groundless, for I already found my
Spirits to revive by the Influence of her
most August Presence. 
This was the sum of my Speech,
delivered with great Improprieties and
Hesitation; the latter part was altogether
framed in the Style peculiar to that
People, whereof I learned some Phrases
from Glumdalclitch, while she was carrying
me to Court. 
The Queen giving great Allowance
for my Defectiveness in speaking, was
however surprised at so much Wit and
good Sense in so diminutive an Animal. 

She took me in her own Hands, and
carried me to the King, who was then
retired to his Cabinet. His Majesty, a
Prince of much Gravity, and austere
Countenance, not well observing my
Shape at first View, asked the Queen
after a cold Manner, how long it was
since she grew fond of a Splacnuck; for
such it seems he took me to be, as I lay
upon my Breast in her Majesty's right
Hand. But this Princess, who hath an
infinite deal of Wit and Humour, set me
gently on my Feet upon the Scrutore,
and commanded me to give His Majesty
an Account of my self, which I did in
a very few Words; and Glumdalclitch,
who attended at the Cabinet door, and
could not endure I should be out of her
sight, being admitted, confirmed all that
had passed from my Arrival at her Father's
House. 
The King, although he be as learned
a Person as any in his Dominions,
had been educated in the Study of Philosophy, 

and particularly Mathematicks; 
yet when he observed my Shape exactyl,
and saw me walk erect, before I began
to speak, conceived I might be a Piece
of Clock-work, (which is in that Country
arrived to a very great Perfection)
contrived by some ingenious Artist. But
when he heard my Voice, and found
what I delivered to be regular and rational,
he could not conceal his Astonishment. 
He was by no means satisfied
with the Relation I gave him of the
Manner I came into his Kingdom, but
thought it a Story concerted between
Glumdalclitch and her Father, who had
taught me a Set of Words to make me
sell at a higher Price. Upon this Imagination
he put several other Questions to
me, and still received rational Answers,
no otherwise defective than by a foreign
Accent, and an imperfect Knowledge in
the Language, with some rustick Phrases
which I had learned at the Farmer's
House, and did not suit the polite Stile
of a Court. 

His Majesty sent for three great
Scholars who were then in their weekly
waiting (according to the Custom in
that Country.) These Gentlemen, after
they had a while examined my Shape
with much Nicety, were of different
Opinions concerning me. They all agreed
that I could not be produced according
to the regular Laws of Nature,
because I was not framed with a Capacity
of preserving my Life, either by
Swiftness, or climbing of Trees, or digging
Holes in the Earth. They observed
by my Teeth, which they viewed
with great Exactness, that I was a carnivorous
Animal; yet most Quadrupeds
being an Overmatch for me, and Field-Mice,
with some others, too nimble,
they could not imagine how I should be
able to support my self, unless I fed
upon Snails and other Insects, which
they offered, by many learned Arguments,
to evince that I could not possibly
do. One of these Virtuosi seemed 

to think that I might be an Embrio, or
abortive Birth. But this Opinion was
rejected by the other two, who observed
my Limbs to be perfect and finished,
and that I had lived several Years, as it
was manifest from my Beard, the Stumps
whereof they plainly discovered through
a Magnifying-Glass. They would not
allow me to be a Dwarf, because my
Littleness was beyond all Degrees of
Comparison; for the Queen's favourite
Dwarf, the smallest ever known in that
Kingdom, was near thirty Foot high. 
After much Debate, they concluded
unanimously that I was only Relplum
Scalcath, which is interpreted literally,
Lusus Naturæ; a Determination exactly
agreeable to the modern Philosophy of
Europe, whose Professors, disdaining the
old Evasion of occult Causes, whereby
the Followers of Aristotle endeavour in
vain to disguise their Ignorance, have invented
this wonderful Solution of all
Difficulties, to the unspeakable Advancement
of human Knowledge. 

After this decisive Conclusion, I
entreated to be heard a Word or two. 
I applied my self to the King, and assured
His Majesty that I came from a Country
which abounded with several Millions of
both Sexes, and of my own Stature; 
where the Animals, Trees and Houses
were all in Proportion, and where by
consequence I might be as able to defend
my self, and to find Sustenance,
as any of his Majesty's Subjects could do
here; which I took for a full Answer to
those Gentlemens Arguments. To this
they only replied with a Smile of Contempt,
saying, That the Farmer had instructed
me very well in my Lesson. 
The King, who had a much better Understanding,
dismissing his learned Men,
sent for the Farmer, who by good Fortune
was not yet gone out of Town: 
Having therefore first examined him privately,
and then confronted him with me
and the young Girl, his Majesty began
to think that what we told him might 

possibly be true. He desired the Queen
to order that a particular Care should
be taken of me, and was of Opinion,
that Glumdalclitch should still continue
in her Office of tending me, because he
observed we had a great Affection for
each other. A convenient Apartment
was provided for her at Court; she had
a sort of Governess appointed to take
Care of her Education, a Maid to dress
her, and two other Servants for menial
Offices; but the Care of me was wholly
appropriated to her self. The Queen
commanded her own Cabinet-maker to
contrive a Box that might serve me for
a Bed-chamber, after the Model that
Glumdalclitch and I should agree upon. 
This Man was a most ingenious Artist,
and according to my Directions, in three
Weeks finished for me a wooden Chamber
of sixteen Foot square, and twelve
high, with Sash-windows, a Door, and
two Closets, like a London Bed-chamber. 
The Board that made the Cieling, was to
be lifted up and down by two Hinges, 

to put in a Bed ready furnished by her
Majesty's Upholsterer, which Glumdalclitch
took out every Day to air, made
it with her own Hands, and letting it
down at Night locked up the Roof over
me. A nice Workman, who was famous
for little Curiosities undertook to
make me two Chairs, with Backs and
Frames, of a Substance not unlike Ivory,
and two Tables, with a Cabinet to put
my Things in. The Room was quilted
on all Sides, as well as the Floor and
the Cieling, to prevent any Accident
from the Carelesness of those who carried
me, and to break the Force of a
Jolt when I went in a Coach. I desired
a Lock for my Door, to prevent
Rats and Mice from coming in: The
Smith, after several Attempts, made
the smallest that ever was seen among
them, for I have known a larger at the
Gate of a Gentleman's House in England. 
I made a shift to keep the Key
in a Pocket of my own, fearing Glumdalclitch
might lose it. The Queen likewise 

ordered the thinnest Silks that could
be gotten, to make me Cloaths, not
much thicker than an English Blanket,
very cumbersome till I was accustomed
to them. They were after the Fashion
of the Kingdom, partly resembling the
Persian, and partly the Chinese, and are
a very grave and decent Habit. 
The Queen became so fond of my
Company, that she could not dine without
me. I had a Table placed upon the
same at which her Majesty eat, just at
her left Elbow, and a Chair to sit on. 
Glumdalclitch stood upon a Stool on the
Floor, near my Table, to assist and take
care of me. I had an entire Set of silver
Dishes and Plates, and other Necessaries,
which in Proportion to those of
the Queen, were not much bigger than
what I have seen of the same kind in a
London Toy-shop, for the Furniture of
a Baby-house: These my little Nurse
kept in her Pocket, in a silver Box, and
gave me at Meals as I wanted them, always 

cleaning them her self. No Person
dined with the Queen but the two
Princesses Royal, the elder sixteen Years
old, and the younger at that time thirteen
and a Month. Her Majesty used to put
a Bit of Meat upon one of my Dishes,
out of which I carved for my self; and
her Diversion was to see me eat in Miniature. 
For the Queen (who had indeed
but a weak Stomach) took up at one
Mouthful, as much as a dozen English
Farmers could eat at a Meal, which to
me was for some time a very nauseous
sight. She would craunch the Wing of
a Lark, Bones and all, between her
Teeth, although it were nine times as
large as that of a full grown Turkey; 
and put a Bit of Bread in her Mouth,
as big as two twelvepenny Loaves. She
drank, out of a golden Cup, above a
Hogshead at a Draught. Her Knives
were twice as long as a Scythe, set strait
upon the Handle. The Spoons, Forks,
and other Instruments were all in the same
Proportion. I remember when Glumdalclitch 

carried me out of Curiosity to
see some of the Tables at Court, where
ten or a dozen of these enormous Knives
and Forks were lifted up together, I
thought I had never, till then, beheld so
terrible a Sight. 
It is the Custom that every Wednesday,
(which, as I have before observed,
was their Sabbath) the King and Queen,
with the Royal Issue of both Sexes,
dine together in the Apartment of his
Majesty, to whom I was now become a
great Favourite; and at these times my
little Chair and Table were placed at
his left Hand, before one of the Saltsellers. 
This Prince took a Pleasure in
conversing with me, enquiring into the
Manners, Religion, Laws, Government,
and Learning of Europe; wherein I
gave him the best Account I was able. 
His Apprehension was so clear, and his
Judgment so exact, that he made very
wise Reflexions and Observations upon
all I said. But, I confess, that after I 

had been a little too copious in talking
of my own beloved Country, of our
Trade, and Wars by Sea and Land, of
our Schisms in Religion, and Parties in
the State; the Prejudices of his Education
prevailed so far, that he could not
forbear taking me up in his Right Hand,
and stroaking me gently with the other,
after an hearty Fit of laughing, asked me
whether I were a Whig or a Tory. Then
turning to his first Minister, who waited
behind him with a white Staff near as
tall as the Main-mast of the Royal Soveraign,
he observed how contemptible
a thing was human Grandeur, which
could be mimicked by such diminutive
Insects as I: And yet, said he, I dare engage,
these Creatures have their Titles
and Distinctions of Honour, they contrive
little Nests and Burrows, that they
call Houses and Cities; they make a
Figure in Dress and Equipage; they
love, they fight, they dispute, they
cheat, they betray. And thus he continued
on, while my Colour came and 

went several times, with Indignation to
hear our noble Country, the Mistress of
Arts and Arms, the Scourge of France,
the Arbitress of Europe, the Seat of Virtue,
Piety, Honour and Truth, the Pride
and Envy of the World, so contemptuously
treated. 
But, as I was not in a Condition to
resent Injuries; so, upon mature Thoughts,
I began to doubt whether I was injured
or no. For, after having been accustomed
several Months to the Sight and Converse
of this People, and observed every
Object upon which I cast mine Eyes, to
be of proportionable Magnitude, the
Horror I had first conceived from
their Bulk and Aspect, was so far worn
off, that if I had then beheld a Company
of English Lords and Ladies in their
Finery and Birth-day Cloaths, acting
their several Parts in the most courtly
manner, of strutting, and bowing, and
prating; to say the Truth, I should have
been strongly tempted to laugh as much 

at them as the King and his Grandees
did at me. Neither indeed could I
forbear smiling at my self, when the
Queen used to place me upon her Hand
towards a Looking-glass, by which both
our Persons appeared before me in full
View together; and there could nothing
be more ridiculous than the Comparison: 
So that I really began to imagine my
self dwindled many Degrees below my
usual Size. 
Nothing angred and mortified me
so much as the Queen's Dwarf, who
being of the lowest Stature that was ever
in that Country (for I verily think he
was not full thirty Foot high) became
insolent at seeing a Creature so much
beneath him, that he would always affect
to swagger and look big as he passed by
me in the Queen's Anti-chamber, while
I was standing on some Table talking
with the Lords or Ladies of the Court,
and he seldom failed of a small Word
or two upon my Littleness; against 

which I could only revenge my self by
calling him Brother, challenging him to
wrestle, and such Repartees as are usual
in the Mouths of Court Pages. One Day
at Dinner this malicious little Cubb was
so nettled with something I had said to
him, that raising himself upon the Frame
of her Majesty's Chair, he took me up
by the Middle, as I was sitting down, not
thinking any harm, and let me drop into
a large silver Bowl of Cream, and then
ran away as fast as he could. I fell over
Head and Ears, and if I had not been a
good Swimmer, it might have gone very
hard with me; for Glumdalclitch in
that Instant happened to be at the other
End of the Room, and the Queen was
in such a Fright that she wanted Presence
of Mind to assist me. But my little
Nurse ran to my Relief, and took me out,
after I had swallowed above a Quart of
Cream. I was put to Bed; however I
received no other Damage than the Loss
of a Suit of Cloaths, which was utterly
spoiled. The Dwarf was soundly whipped, 

and as a further Punishment, forced
to drink up the Bowl of Cream, into
which he had thrown me; neither was
he ever restored to Favour: For, soon
after the Queen bestowed him to a Lady
of high Quality, so that I saw him no
more, to my very great Satisfaction; 
for I could not tell to what Extremity
such a malicious Urchin might have carried
his Resentment. 
He had before served me a scurvy
Trick, which set the Queen a laughing,
although at the same time she was heartily
vexed, and would have immediately
cashiered him, if I had not been so generous
as to intercede. Her Majesty had
taken a Marrow-bone upon her Plate,
and after knocking out the Marrow,
placed the Bone again in the Dish erect
as it stood before; the Dwarf watching
his Opportunity, while Glumdalclitch was
gone to the Side-board, mounted upon
the Stool she stood on to take care of me
at Meals, took me up in both Hands, and 

squeezing my Legs together, wedged them
into the Marrow-bone above my Wast,
where I stuck for some time, and made
a very ridiculous Figure. I believe it
was near a Minute before any one knew
what was become of me, for I thought
it below me to cry out. But as Princes
seldom get their Meat hot, my Legs
were not scalded, only my Stockings
and Breeches in a sad Condition. The
Dwarf, at my Entreaty, had no other
Punishment than a sound whipping. 
I was frequently rallied by the Queen
upon account of my Fearfulness, and she
used to ask me whether the People of my
Country were as great Cowards as my
self? The Occasion was this: The Kingdom
is much pestered with Flies in Summer; 
and these odious Insects, each of
them as big as a Dunstable Lark, hardly
gave me any Rest while I sat at Dinner,
with their continual humming and buzzing
about mine Ears. They would
sometimes alight upon my Victuals, and 

leave their loathsome Excrement or Spawn
behind, which to me was very visible,
though not to the Natives of that Country,
whose large Opticks were not so
acute as mine in viewing smaller Objects. 
Sometimes they would fix upon my
Nose or Forehead, where they stung me
to the Quick, smelling very offensively,
and I could easily trace that viscous Matter,
which our Naturalists tell us enables
those Creatures to walk with their Feet
upwards upon a Cieling. I had much
ado to defend my self against these detestable
Animals, and could not forbear
starting when they came on my Face. It
was the common Practice of the Dwarf
to catch a number of these Insects in his
Hand, as School-boys do among us, and
let them out suddenly under my Nose
on purpose to frighten me, and divert
the Queen. My Remedy was to cut them
in Pieces with my Knife as they flew in
the Air, wherein my Dexterity was much
admired. 

I remember one Morning when
Glumdalclitch had set me in my Box upon
a Window, as she usually did in fair
Days to give me Air (for I durst not venture
to let the Box be hung on a Nail out
of the Window, as we do with Cages in
England) after I had lifted up one of
my Sashes, and sat down at my Table to
eat a piece of Sweet Cake for my Breakfast,
above twenty Wasps, allured by the
smell, came flying into the Room, humming
louder than the Drones of as many
Bagpipes. Some of them seized my Cake,
and carried it piece-meal away, others
flew about my Head and Face, confounding
me with the Noise, and putting me
in the utmost terror of their Stings. 
However I had the Courage to rise and
draw my Hanger, and attack them in the
Air. I dispatched four of them, but the
rest got away, and I presently shut my
Window. These Creatures were as large
as Partridges, I took out their Stings, found
them an Inch and a half long, and as 

sharp as Needles. I carefully preserved
them all, and having since shewn them
with some other Curiosities in several
parts of Europe; upon my Return to
England I gave three of them to Gresham
College, and kept the fourth for
my self. 





The Country described. A Proposal for
correcting modern Maps. The King's
Palace, and some Account of the Metropolis. 
The Author's way of travelling. 
The chief Temple described. 
I now intend to give the Reader
a short Description of this Country,
as far as I travelled in it,
which was not above two thousand Miles
round Lorbrulgrud the Metropolis. For,
the Queen, whom I always attended, never
went further when she accompanied
the King in his Progresses, and there staid
till his Majesty returned from viewing
his Frontiers. The whole Extent of this
Prince's Dominions reacheth about six
thousand Miles in Length, and from three
to five in Breadth. From whence I cannot
but conclude that our Geographers of
Europe are in a great Error, by supposing 

nothing but Sea between Japan and
California; for it was ever my Opinion,
that there must be a Balance of Earth to
counterpoise the great Continent of Tartary; 
and therefore they ought to correct
their Maps and Charts, by joining
this vast Tract of Land to the North-west
Parts of America, wherein I shall be ready
to lend them my Assistance. 
The Kingdom is a Peninsula, terminated
to the North-east by a Ridge of
Mountains thirty Miles high, which are
altogether impassable by reason of the Volcanoes
upon the Tops. Neither do the
most Learned know what sort of Mortals
inhabit beyond those Mountains, or
whether they be inhabited at all. On
the three other Sides it is bounded by
the Ocean. There is not one Seaport
in the whole Kingdom, and those
Parts of the Coasts into which the Rivers
issue are so full of pointed Rocks, and
the Sea generally so rough, that there is
no venturing with the smallest of their 

Boats, so that these People are wholly
excluded from any Commerce with the
rest of the World. But the large Rivers
are full of Vessels, and abound with excellent
Fish, for they seldom get any
from the Sea, because the Sea-fish are of
the same Size with those in Europe, and
consequently not worth catching: whereby
it is manifest, that Nature in the Production
of Plants and Animals of so extraordinary
a Bulk is wholly confined to
this Continent, of which I leave the
Reasons to be determined by Philosophers. 
However, now and then they
take a Whale that happens to be dashed
against the Rocks, which the common
People feed on heartily. These Whales
I have known so large that a Man could
hardly carry one upon his Shoulders; and
sometimes for Curiosity they are brought
in Hampers to Lorbrulgrud: I saw one of
them in a Dish at the King's Table,
which passed for a Rarity, but I did not
observe he was fond of it; for I think
indeed the Bigness disguisted him, although 

I have seen one somewhat larger
in Greenland. 
The Country is well inhabited, for
it contains fifty one Cities, near an hundred
walled Towns, and a great number
of Villages. To satisfy my curious
Reader, it may be sufficient to describe
Lorbrulgrud. This City stands upon almost
two equal Parts on each side the
River that passes through. It contains
above eighty thousand Houses, and about
six hundred thousand Inhabitants. It is
in Length three Glonglungs (which make
about fifty four English Miles) and two
and a half in Breadth, as I measured it
my self in the Royal Map made by the
King's Order, which was laid on the
Ground on purpose for me, and extended
an hundred Feet; I paced the Diameter
and Circumference several times
barefoot, and computing by the Scale,
measured it pretty exactly. 
The King's Palace is no regular Edifice, 

but an heap of Buildings about seven
Miles round: The chief Rooms are
generally two hundred and forty Foot
high, and broad and long in Proportion. 
A Coach was allowed to Glumdalclitch
and me, wherein her Governess
frequently took her out to see the Town,
or go among the Shops; and I was always
of the Party, carried in my Box; 
although the Girl at my own Desire would
often take me out, and hold me in her
Hand, that I might more conveniently
view the Houses and the People, as we
passed along the Streets. I reckoned our
Coach to be about a Square of Westminster-Hall,
but not altogether so high; 
however. I cannot be very exact. One
Day the Governess ordered our Coachman
to stop at several Shops, where the
Beggars watching their Opportunity,
crouded to the sides of the Coach, and gave
me the most horrible Spectacles that ever
an English Eye beheld. There was a
Woman with a Cancer in her Breast,
swelled to a monstrous size, full of Holes, 

in two or three of which I could have
easily crept, and covered my whole Body. 
There was a Fellow with a Wen in his
Neck, larger than five Woolpacks, and
another with a couple of wooden Legs,
each about twenty Foot high. But, the
most hateful Sight of all was the Lice
crawling on their Cloaths. I could see distinctly
the Limbs of these Vermin with
my naked Eye, much better than those of
an European Louse through a Microscope,
and their Snouts with which they rooted
like Swine. They were the first I had
ever beheld, and I should have been curious
enough to dessect one of them, if I had
proper Instruments (which I unluckily left
behind me in the Ship) although indeed
the Sight was so nauseous, that it perfectly
turned my Stomach. 
Beside the large Box in which I was
usually carried, the Queen ordered a
smaller one to be made for me, of about
twelve Foot square, and ten high, for the
Convenience of Travelling, because the 

other was somewhat too large for Glumdalclitch's
Lap, and cumbersom in the
Coach; it was made by the same Artist,
whom I directed in the whole Contrivance. 
This travelling Closet was an
exact Square with a Window in the middle
of three of the Squares, and each
Window was latticed with Iron Wire on
the outside, to prevent Accidents in long
Journeys. On the fourth side, which had
no Window, two strong Staples were
fixed, through which the Person that carried
me, when I had a mind to be on
Horseback, put in a Leathern Belt, and
buckled it about his Waste. This was
always the Office of some grave trusty
Servant in whom I could confide, whether
I attended the King and Queen in
their Progresses, or were disposed to see
the Gardens, or pay a visit to some great
Lady or Minister of State in the Court,
when Glumdalclitch happened to be out
of Order: For I soon began to be known
and esteemed among the greatest Officers,
I suppose more upon Account of their 

Majesty's Favour than any Merit of my
own. In Journeys, when I was weary
of the Coach, a Servant on Horseback
would buckle my Box, and place it on
a Cushion before him; and there I had
a full Prospect of the Country on three
Sides from my three Windows. I had
in this Closet a Field-Bed and a Hammock
hung from the Cieling, two Chairs
and a Table, neatly screwed to the Floor,
to prevent being tossed about by the Agitation
of the Horse or the Coach. And
having been long used to Sea-Voyages,
those Motions, although sometimes very
violent, did not much discompose me. 
Whenever I had a mind to see the
Town, it was always in my Travelling-Closet,
which Glumdalclitch held in her
Lap in a kind of open Sedan, after the Fashion
of the Country, born by four Men,
and attended by two others in the Queen's
Livery. The People who had often
heard of me, were very curious to croud
about the Sedan, and the Girl was complaisant 

enough to make the Bearers stop,
and to take me in her Hand that I might
be more conveniently seen. 
I was very desirous to see the chief
Temple, and particularly the Tower belonging
to it, which is reckoned the
highest in the Kingdom. Accordingly
one Day my Nurse carried me thither, but
I may truly say I came back disappointed; 
for, the height is not above three thousand
Foot, and reckoning from the Ground
to the highest Pinnacle top; which allowing
for the difference between the size of
those People, and us in Europe, is no
great matter for Admiration, nor at all
equal in Proportion, (if I rightly remember)
to Salisbury Steeple. But, not to
detract from a Nation to which during
my Life I shall acknowledge my self extremely
obliged, it must be allowed that
whatever this famous Tower wants in
Height is amply made up in Beauty and
Strength. For the Walls are near an hundred
Foot thick, built of hewn Stone, 

whereof each is about forty Foot square,
and adorned on all sides with Statues of
Gods and Emperors cut in Marble larger
than the Life, placed in their several Niches. 
I measured a little Finger which
had fallen down from one of these Statues,
and lay unperceived among some
Rubbish, and found it exactly four Foot
and an Inch in length. Glumdalclitch
wrapped it up in an Handkerchief, and
carried it home in her Pocket to keep
among other Trinkets, of which the
Girl was very fond, as Children at her
Age usually are. 
The King's Kitchen is indeed a noble
Building, vaulted at top, and about six
hundred Foot high. The great Oven is
not so wide by ten Paces as the Cupola
at St. Paul's: For I measured the latter
on purpose after my Return. But if I
should describe the Kitchen-grate, the
prodigious Pots and Kettles, the joints
of Meat turning on the Spits, with many
other Particulars, perhaps I should be 

hardly believed; at least a severe Critick
would be apt to think I enlarged a little,
as Travellers are often suspected to do. 
To avoid which censure, I fear I have run
too much into the other extream; and that
if this Treatise should happen to be translated
into the Language of Brobdingnag,
(which is the general name of that Kingdom)
and transmitted thither, the King
and his People would have reason to
complain that I had done them an Injury
by a false and diminutive Representation. 
His Majesty seldom keeps above six hundred
Horses in his Stables: They are
generally from fifty four to sixty Foot
high. But when he goes abroad on solemn
Days, he is attended for State by
a Militia Guard of five hundred Horse,
which indeed I thought was the most
splendid Sight that could be ever beheld,
till I saw part of his Army in Battalia,
whereof I shall find another occasion to
speak. 





Several Adventures that happened to the
Author. The Execution of a Criminal. 
The Author shews his Skill in
Navigation. 
I Should have lived happy enough
in that Country, if my
Littleness had not exposed me
to several ridiculous and troublesome
Accidents: some of which I shall venture
to relate. Glumdalclitch often carried
me into the Gardens of the Court in my
smaller Box, and would sometimes take
me out of it and hold me in her Hand,
or set me down to walk. I remember,
before the Dwarf left the Queen, he followed
us one Day into those Gardens, and
my Nurse having set me down, he and
I being close together, near some Dwarf
Apple trees, I must need shew my Wit 

by a silly Allusion between him and the
Trees, which happens to hold in their
Language as it doth in ours. Whereupon,
the malicious Rogue watching his
Opportunity, when I was walking under
one of them, shook it directly over
my Head, by which a dozen Apples, each
of them near as large as a Bristol Barrel,
came tumbling about my Ears; one
of them hit me on the Back as I chanced
to stoop, and knocked me down flat on
my Face, but I received no other hurt,
and the Dwarf was pardoned at my Desire,
because I had given the Provocation. 
Another day Glumdalclitch left
me on a smooth Grass-plot to divert
my self while she walked at some distance
with her Governess. In the mean
time there suddenly fell such a violent
shower of Hail, that I was immediately
by the force of it struck to the Ground: 
And when I was down, the Hail-stones
gave me such cruel Bangs all over the 

Body, as if I had been pelted with Tennis
balls; however I made a shift to
creep on all four, and shelter my self
by lying flat on my Face on the Leeside
of a Border of Lemon Thyme,
but so bruised from Head to Foot that
I could not go abroad in ten Days. Neither
is this at all to be wondered at, because
Nature in that Country observing
the same Proportion thro' all her Operations,
a Hail stone is near eighteen hundred
times as large as one in Europe,
which I can assert upon Experience, having
been so curious to weigh and measure
them. 
But, a more dangerous Accident happened
to me in the same Garden, when
my little Nurse, believing she had put
me in a secure Place, which I often entreated
her to do, that I might enjoy my
own Thoughts, and having left my Box
at home to avoid the Trouble of carrying
it, went to another part of the Gardens
with her Governess and some Ladies 

of her Acquaintance. While she was
absent, and out of hearing, a small white
Spaniel belonging to one of the chief Gardeners,
having got by Accident into the
Garden, happened to range near the Place
where I lay: The Dog following the
Scent, came directly up, and taking me
in his Mouth, ran strait to his Master,
wagging his Tail, and set me gently on
the Ground. By good Fortune he had
been so well taught, that I was carried
between his Teeth without the least
Hurt, or even tearing my Clothes. But
the poor Gardener, who knew me well,
and had a great Kindness for me, was in
a terrible Fright: He gently took me
up in both his Hands, and asked me how
I did; but I was so amazed, and out of
Breath, that I could not speak a Word. 
In a few Minutes I came to my self,
and he carried me safe to my little Nurse,
who by this Time had returned to the
Place where she left me, and was in cruel
Agonies when I did not appear, nor answer
when she called: She severely reprimanded 

the Gardiner on Account of his
Dog. But the Thing was hushed up,
and never known at Court; for the Girl
was afraid of the Queen's Anger, and
truly as to my self, I thought it would
not be for my Reputation that such a
Story should go about. 
This Accident absolutely determined
Glumdalclitch never to trust me abroad
for the future out of her Sight. I had
been long afraid of this Resolution, and
therefore concealed from her some little
unlucky Adventures that happened in
those Times when I was left by my self. 
Once a Kite hovering over the Garden
made a Stoop at me, and if I had not
resolutely drawn my Hanger, and run
under a thick Espalier, he would have
certainly carried me away in his Talons. 
Another Time walking to the Top of a
fresh Mole-hill, I fell to my Neck in the
Hole, through which that Animal had
cast up the Earth, and coined some Lie,
not worth remembring, to excuse my 

self for spoiling my Clothes. I likewise
broke my right Shin against the Shell of
a Snail, which I happened to stumble
over, as I was walking alone, and thinking
on poor England. 
I cannot tell whether I were more
pleased or mortified, to observe in those
solitary Walks, that the smaller Birds did
not appear to be at all afraid of me, but
would hop about within a Yard distance,
looking for Worms, and other Food, with
as much Indifference and Security, as if
no Creature at all were near them. I
remember, a Thrush had the Confidence
to snatch out of my Hand, with his Bill,
a Piece of Cake that Glumdalclitch had
just given me for my Breakfast. When
I attempted to catch any of these Birds,
they would boldly turn against me, endeavouring
to pick my Fingers, which I
durst not venture within their Reach; 
and then they would turn back unconcerned,
to hunt for Worms or Snails, as
they did before. But one Day I took 

a thick Cudgel, and threw it with all my
Strength so luckily at a Linnet, that I
knocked him down, and seizing him by
the Neck with both my Hands, ran with
him in Triumph to my Nurse. However,
the Bird, who had only been stunned,
recovering himself, gave me so many
Boxes with his Wings on both Sides
of my Head and Body, though I held him
at Arms length, and was out of the Reach
of his Claws, that I was twenty Times
thinking to let him go. But I was soon
relieved by one of our Servants, who
wrung off the Bird's Neck, and I had
him next Day for Dinner, by the Queen's
Command. This Linnet, as near as I
can remember, seemed to be somewhat
larger than an English Swan. 
The Maids of Honour often invited
Glumdalclitch to their Apartments, and
desired she would bring me along with
her, on purpose to have the Pleasure of
seeing and touching me. They would
often strip me naked from Top to Toe, 

and lay me at full length in their Bosoms; 
wherewith I was much disgusted; because,
to say the Truth, a very offensive
Smell came from their Skins; which I do
not mention or intend to the Disadvantage
of those excellent Ladies, for whom
I have all manner of Respect; but, I
conceive that my Sense was more acute
in Proportion to my Littleness, and that
those illustrious Persons were no more
disagreeable to their Lovers, or to each
other, than People of the some Quality
are with us in England. And, after all,
I found their natural Smell was much
more supportable than when they used
Perfumes, under which I immediately
swooned away. I cannot forget that
an intimate Friend of mine in Lilliput
took the Freedom in a warm Day, when
I had used a good deal of Exercise, to complain
of a strong Smell about me, although
I am as little faulty that way as most
of my Sex: But I suppose his Faculty of
Smelling was as nice with regard to me,
as mine was to that of this People. Upon 

on this Point, I cannot forbear doing
Justice to the Queen my Mistress, and
Glumdalclitch my Nurse, whose Persons
were as sweet as those of any Lady in
England. 
That which gave me most Uneasiness
among these Maids of Honour,
when my Nurse carried me to visit them,
was to see them use me without any
manner of Ceremony, like a Creature
who had no sort of Consequence. For,
they would strip themselves to the Skin,
and put on their Smocks in my Presence,
while I was placed on their Toylet directly
before their naked Bodies, which,
I am sure, to me was very far from being
a tempting Sight, or from giving me
any other Emotions than those of Horror
and Disgust. Their Skins appeared
so coarse and uneven, so variously
coloured, when I saw them near,
with a Mole here and there as
broad as a Trencher, and Hairs hanging
from it thicker than Pack-threads, to 

say nothing further concerning the rest
of their Persons. Neither did they at
all scruple while I was by to discharge
what they had drunk, to the Quantity
of at least two Hogsheads, in a Vessel
that held above three Tuns. The handsomest
among these Maids of Honour,
a pleasant frolicksome Girl of Sixteen,
would sometimes set me astride upon
one of her Nipples, with many other
Tricks, wherein the Reader will excuse
me for not being over particular. But
I was so much displeased, that I intreated
Glumdalclitch to contrive some Excuse
for not seeing that young Lady any
more. 
One Day, a young Gentleman, who
was Nephew to my Nurse's Governess,
came and pressed them both to see an
Execution. It was of a Man who had
murdered one of that Gentleman's intimate
Acquaintance. Glumdalclitch was
prevailed on to be of the Company, very
much against her Inclination, for she was 

naturally tender-hearted: And, as for
my self, although I abhorred such kind
of Spectacles, yet my Curiosity tempted
me to see something that I thought
must be extraordinary. The Malefactor
was fixed in a Chair upon a Scaffold
erected for the Purpose, and his Head
cut off at a Blow with a Sword of about
forty Foot long. The Veins and Arteries
spouted up such a prodigious Quantity of
Blood, and so high in the Air, that the
great Jett d'eau at Versailles was not
equal, for the Time it lasted; and the
Head, when it fell on the Scaffold-Floor,
gave such a Bounce, as made me start,
although I were at least half an English
Mile distant. 
The Queen, who often used to hear
me talk of my Sea-Voyages, and took all
Occasions to divert me when I was melancholy,
asked me whether I understood
how to handle a Sail, or an Oar, and
whether a little Exercise of Rowing might
not be convenient for my Health. I 

answered, that I understood both very
well: For although my proper Employment
had been to be Surgeon or Doctor
to the Ship, yet often, upon a Pinch,
I was forced to work like a common
Mariner. But I could not see how
this could be done in their Country,
where the smallest Wherry was equal to
a First-rate Man of War among us, and
such a Boat as I could manage would never
live in any of their Rivers. Her
Majesty said, if I would contrive a Boat,
her own Joiner should make it, and she
would provide a Place for me to sail in. 
The Fellow was an ingenious Workman,
and, by my Instructions, in ten Days
finished a Pleasure-Boat, with all its Tackling,
able conveniently to hold eight
Europeans. When it was finished, the
Queen was so delighted, that she ran
with it in her Lap to the King, who
ordered it to be put in a Cistern full of
Water, with me in it, by Way of Tryal; 
where I could not manage my two Sculls,
or little Oars, for want of Room. But 

the Queen had before contrived another
Project. She ordered the Joiner to
make a wooden Trough of three hundred
Foot long, fifty broad, and eight
deep; which being well pitched to prevent
leaking, was placed on the Floor
along the Wall, in an outer Room of the
Palace. It had a Cock near the Bottom
to let out the Water when it began to
grow stale, and two Servants could easily
fill it in half an Hour. Here I often
used to row for my own Diversion, as
well as that of the Queen and her Ladies,
who thought themselves well entertained
with my Skill and Agility. Sometimes
I would put up my Sail, and then
my Business was only to steer, while the
Ladies gave me a Gale with their Fans; 
and when they were weary, some of the
Pages would blow my Sail forward with
their Breath, while I shewed my Art by
steering Starboard or Larboard, as I pleased. 
When I had done, Glumdalclitch
always carried back my Boat into her
Closet, and hung it on a Nail to dry. 

In this Exercise I once met an Accident
which had like to have cost me
my Life: For, one of the Pages having
put my Boat into the Trough, the Governess,
who attended Glumdalclitch,
very officiously lifted me up to place me
in the Boat, but I happened to slip through
her Fingers, and should have infallibly
fallen down forty Foot upon the Floor,
if by the luckiest Chance in the World,
I had not been stopp'd by a Corking-pin
that stuck in the good Gentlewoman's
Stomacher; the Head of the Pin passed
between my Shirt and the Waist-band of
my Breeches, and thus I was held by the
Middle in the Air till Glumdalclitch ran
to my Relief. 
Another Time, one of the Servants,
whose Office it was to fill my
Trough every third Day with fresh Water,
was so careless to let a huge Frog
(not perceiving it) slip out of his Pail. 
The Frog lay concealed till I was put 

into my Boat, but then seeing a resting
Place, climbed up, and made it lean so
much on one Side, that I was forced to
balance it with all my Weight on the
other, to prevent overturning. When
the Frog was got in, it hopped at once
half the Length of the Boat, and then
over my Head, backwards and forwards,
dawbing my Face and Clothes with its
odious Slime. The Largeness of its Features
made it appear the most deformed
Animal that can be conceived. However,
I desired Glumdalclitch to let me
deal with it alone. I banged it a good
while with one of my Sculls, and at last
forced it to leap out of the Boat. 
But, the greatest Danger I ever underwent
in that Kingdom, was from a
Monkey, who belonged to one of the
Clerks of the Kitchen. Glumdalclitch
had locked me up in her Closet, while
she went somewhere upon Business, or a
Visit. The Weather being very warm,
the Closet-Window was left open, as 

well as the Windows and the Door of
my bigger Box, in which I usually lived,
because of its Largeness and Conveniency. 
As I sat quietly meditating at
my Table, I heard something bounce
in at the Closet-Window, and skip
about from one Side to the other; whereat,
although I were much alarmed, yet
I ventured to look out, but not stirring
from my Seat; and then I saw this
this frolicksome Animal, frisking and leaping
up and down, till at last he came to
my Box, which he seemed to view with
great Pleasure and Curiosity, peeping in
at the Door and every Window. I retreated
to the farther Corner of my
Room, or Box, but the Monkey looking
in at every Side, put me into such
a Fright, that I wanted Presence of Mind
to conceal my self under the Bed, as I
might easily have done. After some
Time spent in peeping, grinning, and
chattering, he at last espied me, and
reaching one of his Paws in at the
Door, as a Cat does when she plays with 

a Mouse, although I often shifted Place
to avoid him, he at Length caught hold
of the Lappet of my Coat, (which being
made of that Country Cloth, was very
thick and strong,) and dragged me out. 
He took me up in his right Fore-foot,
and held me as a Nurse does a Child
she is going to suckle, just as I have seen
the same sort of Creature do with a
Kitten in Europe: And when I offered
to struggle, he squeezed me so hard, that
I thought it more prudent to submit. I
have good Reason to believe that he took
me for a young one of his own Species, by
his often stroaking my Face very gently
with his other Paw. In these Diversions
he was interrupted by a Noise at
the Closet Door, as if some Body were
opening it; whereupon he suddenly
leaped up to the Window, at which he
had come in, and thence upon the Leads
and Gutters, walking upon three Legs,
and holding me in the fourth, till he
clamber'd up to a Roof that was next to
ours. I heard Glumdalclitch give a Shreek 

at the Moment he was carrying me out. 
The poor Girl was almost distracted: That
Quarter of the Palace was all in an uproar,
the Servants ran for Ladders; the Monkey
was seen by hundreds in the Court,
sitting upon the Ridge of a Building,
holding me like a Baby in one of his
Fore-paws, and feeding me with the
other, by cramming into my Mouth some
Victuals he had squeezed out of the Bag
on one Side of his Chaps, and patting
me when I would not eat; whereat
many of the Rabble below could not
forbear laughing; neither do I think
they justly ought to be blamed, for without
Question the Sight was ridiculous
enough to every Body but my self. Some
of the People threw up Stones, hoping
to drive the Monkey down; but this was
strictly forbidden, or else very probably
my Brains had been dashed out. 
The Ladders were now applied, and
mounted by several Men, which the Monkey
observing, and finding himself almost 

most encompassed; not being able to
make Speed enough with his three Legs,
let me drop on a Ridge-Tyle, and made
his Escape. Here I sat for some Time three
hundred Yards from the Ground, expecting
every Moment to be blown down
by the Wind, or to fall by my own Giddiness,
and come tumbling over and over
from the Ridge to the Eves: But an
honest Lad, one of my Nurse's Footmen,
climbed up, and, putting me into his
Breeches-Pocket, brought me down safe. 
I was almost choaked with the filthy
Stuff the Monkey had crammed down
my Throat; but my dear little Nurse
picked it out of my Mouth with a
small Needle, and then I fell a vomiting,
which gave me great Relief. Yet
I was so weak, and bruised in the Sides,
with the Squeezes given me by this odious
Animal, that I was forced to keep
my Bed a Fortnight. The King, Queen,
and all the Court, sent every Day to enquire
after my Health, and her Majesty 

made me several Visits during my Sickness. 
The Monkey was killed, and an
Order made that no such Animal should
be kept about the Palace. 
When I attended the King after my
Recover, to return him Thanks for his
Favours, he was pleased to rally me a
good deal upon this Adventure. He
asked me what my Thoughts and Speculations
were while I lay in the Monkey's
Paw; how I liked the Victuals he
gave me; his manner of Feeding; and
whether the fresh Air on the Roof had
sharpen'd my Stomach. He desired to
know what I would have done upon
such an Occasion in my own Country. 
I told his Majesty, that in Europe we
had no Monkeys, except such as were
brought for Curiosities from other Places,
and so small, that I could deal with a
Dozen of them together, if they presumed
to attack me. And as for that
monstrous Animal with whom I was so
lately engaged, (it was indeed as large 

as an Elephant,) if my Fears had suffered
me to think so far as to make use
of my Hanger, (looking fiercely and clapping
my Hand upon the Hilt as I spoke,)
when he poked his Paw into my Chamber,
perhaps I should have given him such
a Wound, as would have made him glad
to withdraw it with more haste than he
put it in. This I delivered in a firm
Tone, like a Person who was jealous lest
his Honour should be called in question. 
However, my Speech produced nothing
else besides a loud Laughter, which all
the Respect due to his Majesty from those
about him could not make them contain. 
This made me reflect how vain
an Attempt it is for a Man to endeavour
doing himself Honour among those who
are out of all Degree of Equality or
Comparison with him. And yet I have
seen the Moral of my own Behaviour
very frequent in England since my Return,
where a little contemptible Varlet,
without the least Title to Birth, Person,
Wit, or common Sense, shall presume 

to look with Importance, and put
himself upon a Foot with the greatest
Persons of the Kingdom. 
I was every Day furnishing the Court
with some ridiculous Story; and Glumdalclitch,
although she loved me to Excess,
yet was arch enough to inform the
Queen, whenever I committed any Folly
that she thought would be diverting
to her Majesty. The Girl who had been
out of Order, was carried by her Governess
to take the Air about an Hour's
Distance, or thirty Miles from Town. 
They alighted out of the Coach near a
small Foot-path in a Field, and Glumdalclitch
setting down my travelling
Box, I went out of it to walk. There was
a Cow-Dung in the Path, and I must
needs try my Activity by attempting to
leap over it. I took a Run, but unfortunately
jumped short, and found my self
just in the Middle up to my Knees. I
waded through with some Difficulty, and
one of the Footmen wiped me as clean 

as he could with his Handkerchief; for
I was filthily bemired, and my Nurse
confined me to my Box till we returned
home; where the Queen was soon informed
of what had passed, and the Footmen
spread it about the Court; so that
all the Mirth, for some Days, was at my
Expence. 





Several Contrivances of the Author to
please the King and Queen. He shews
his Skill in Musick. The King enquires
into the State of Europe, which
the Author relates to him. The King's
Observations thereon. 
I used to attend the King's
Levee once or twice a Week,
and had often seen him under
the Barber's Hand, which indeed was at
first very terrible to behold: For the
Razor was almost twice as long as an
ordinary Scythe. His Majesty, according
to the Custom of the Country, was only
shaved twice a Week. I once prevailed
on the Barber to give me some
of the Suds or Lather, out of which I
picked forty or fifty of the strongest Stumps
of Hair. I then took a Piece of fine 

Wood, and cut it like the Back of a
Comb, making several Holes in it at
equal Distance with as small a Needle as
I could get from Glumdalclitch. I fixed
in the Stumps so artificially, scraping and
sloping them with my Knife towards
the Points, that I made a very tolerable
Comb; which was a seasonable Supply,
my own being so much broken in the
Teeth, that it was almost useless: Neither
did I know any Artist in that Country
so nice and exact, as would undertake
to make me another. 
And this puts me in Mind of an
Amusement wherein I spent many of my
leisure Hours. I desired the Queen's
Woman to save for me the Combings
of her Majesty's Hair, whereof in Time
I got a good Quantity, and consulting
with my Friend the Cabinet-Maker, who
had received general Orders to do little
Jobbs for me, I directed him to make
two Chair-Frames, no larger than those
I had in my Box, and then to bore little 

Holes with a fine Awl round those
Parts where I designed the Backs and
Seats; through these Holes I wove the
strongest Hairs I could pick out, just after
the manner of Cane-Chairs in England. 
When they were finished, I made
a Present of them to her Majesty, who
kept them in her Cabinet, and used to
shew them for Curiosities, as indeed
they were the Wonder of every one that
beheld them. The Queen would have
had me sit upon one of these Chairs, but
I absolutely refused to obey her, protesting
I would rather die a thousand
Deaths than place a dishonourable Part
of my Body on those precious Hairs
that once adorned her Majesty's Head. 
Of these Hairs (as I had always a mechanical
Genius) I likewise made a neat
little Purse about five Foot long, with
her Majesty's Name decyphered in Gold
Letters, which I gave to Glumdalclitch,
by the Queen's Consent. To say the
Truth, it was more for Shew than Use,
being not of strength to bear the Weight 

of the larger Coins, and therefore she
kept nothing in it, but some little Toys
that Girls are fond of. 
The King, who delighted in Musick,
had frequent Consorts at Court,
to which I was sometimes carried, and
set in my Box on a Table to hear them: 
But, the Noise was so great, that I could
hardly distinguish the Tunes. I am confident
that all the Drums and Trumpets
of a Royal Army, beating and sounding
together just at your Ears, could not
equal it. My Practice was to have my
Box removed from the Places where the
Performers sat, as far as I could, then to
shut the Doors and Windows of it, and
draw the Window-Curtains; after which
I found their Musick not disagreeable. 
I had learned in my Youth to play
a little upon the Spinet. Glumdalclitch
kept one in her Chamber, and a Master
attended twice a Week to teach her: I
call it a Spinet, because it somewhat resembled
that Instrument, and was play'd 

upon in the same Manner. A fancy
came into my Head that I would entertain
the King and Queen with an English
Tune upon this Instrument. But
this appeared extremely difficult: For,
the Spinet was near sixty Foot long, each
Key being almost a Foot wide, so that,
with my Arms extended, I could not
reach to above five Keys, and to press
them down required a good smart Stroak
with my Fist, which would be too great
a Labour, and to no Purpose. The
Method I contrived was this. I prepared
two round Sticks about the
Bigness of common Cudgels; they were
thicker at one End than the other, and
I covered the thicker Ends with a Piece
of a Mouse's Skin, that by rapping on
them, I might neither damage the Tops
of the Keys, nor interrupt the Sound. 
Before the Spinet a Bench was placed
about four Foot below the Keys, and I
was put upon the Bench. I ran sideling
upon it that Way and this, as fast as
I could, banging the proper Keys with 

my two Sticks, and made a Shift to play
a Jigg, to the great Satisfaction of both
their Majesties: But it was the most
violent Exercise I ever underwent, and
yet I could not strike above sixteen Keys,
nor, consequently, play the Bass and
Treble together, as other Artists do; 
which was a great Disadvantage to my
Performance. 
The King, who, as I before observed,
was a Prince of excellent Understanding,
would frequently order that I should be
brought in my Box, and set upon the
Table in his Closet: He would then
command me to bring one of my Chairs
out of the Box, and sit down within
three Yards Distance upon the Top of the
Cabinet, which brought me almost to a
level with his Face. In this Manner I
had several Conversations with him. I
one Day took the Freedom to tell his
Majesty, that the Contempt he discovered
towards Europe, and the rest of the
World, did not seem answerable to those 

excellent Qualities of the Mind he was
Master of. That Reason did not extend
it self with the Bulk of the Body: 
On the contrary, we observed in our
Country, that the tallest Persons were
usually least provided with it. That
among other Animals, Bees and Ants had
the Reputation of more Industry, Art,
and Sagacity, than many of the larger
Kinds; and that, as inconsiderable as
he took me to be, I hoped I might live
to do his Majesty some signal Service. 
The King heard me with Attention, and
began to conceive a much better Opinion
of me than he had ever before. 
He desired I would give him as exact
an Account of the Government of England,
as I possibly could; because, as
fond as Princes commonly are of their
own Customs, (for so he conjectured of
other Monarchs by my former Discourses,)
he should be glad to hear of any
Thing that might deserve Imitation. 
Imagine with thy self, courteous 

Reader, how often I then wished for
the Tongue of Demosthenes or Cicero,
that might have enabled me to celebrate
the Praise of my own dear native Country
in a Stile equal to its Merits and Felicity. 
I began my Discourse by informing
his Majesty that our Dominions consisted
of two Islands, which composed
three mighty Kingdoms under one Sovereign,
besides our Plantations in America. 
I dwelt long upon the Fertility
of our Soil, and the Temperature of
our Climate. I then spoke at large upon
the Constitution of an English Parliament,
partly made up of an illustrious
Body called the House of Peers,
Persons of the noblest Blood, and of
the most ancient and ample Patrimonies. 
I described that extraordinary Care always
taken of their Education in Arts
and Arms, to qualify them for being
Counsellors born to the King and Kingdom; 
to have a Share in the Legislature; 

to be Members of the highest Court of
Judicature, from whence there could be
no Appeal; and to be Champions always
ready for the Defence of their
Prince and Country, by their Valour,
Conduct and Fidelity. That these were
the Ornament and Bulwark of the Kingdom,
worthy Followers of their most renowned
Ancestors, whose Honour had
been the Reward of their Virtue, from
which their Posterity were never once
known to degenerate. To these were
joined several holy Persons, as part of
that Assembly, under the Title of Bishops,
whose peculiar Business it is to take
care of Religion, and of those who instruct
the People therein. These were
searched, and sought out, through the
whole Nation, by the Prince and his wisest
Counsellors, among such of the Priesthood
as were most deservedly distinguished
by the Sanctity of their Lives, and the
Depth of their Erudition, who were indeed
the spiritual Fathers of the Clergy
and the People. 

That, the other Part of the Parliament
consisted of an Assembly called the
House of Commons, who were all principal
Gentlemen, freely picked and culled
out by the People themselves, for
their great Abilities and Love of their
Country, to represent the Wisdom of
the whole Nation. And these two
Bodies make up the most august Assembly
in Europe, to whom, in Conjunction
with the Prince, the whole Legislature
is committed. 
I then descended to the Courts of
Justice, over which the Judges, those venerable
Sages and Interpreters of the
Law presided, for determining the disputed
Rights and Properties of Men, as
well as for the Punishment of Vice, and
Protection of Innocence. I mentioned
the prudent Management of our Treasury,
the Valour and Atchievements of our
Forces by Sea and Land. I computed
the Number of our People, by reckoning 

how many Millions there might be of
each religious Sect, or political Party
among us. I did not omit even our
Sports and Pastimes, or any other Particular
which I thought might redound
to the Honour of my Country. And I
finished all with a brief historical Account
of Affairs and Events in England for
about an hundred Years past. 
This Conversation was not ended
under five Audiences, each of several
Hours, and the King heard the whole
with great Attention, frequently taking
Notes of what I spoke, as well as Memorandums
of all Questions he intended
to ask me. 
When I had put an End to these
long Discourses, his Majesty in a sixth
Audience consulting his Notes, proposed
many Doubts, Queries, and Objections,
upon every Article. He asked
what Methods were used to cultivate
the Minds and Bodies of our young Nobility, 

and in what kind of Business they
commonly spent the first and teachable
Part of their Lives. What Course was
taken to supply that Assembly when any
noble Family became extinct. What
Qualifications were necessary in those
who are to be created new Lords: Whether
the Humour of the Prince, a Sum
of Money to a Court-Lady, or a Prime
Minister, or a Design of strengthening a
Party opposite to the publick Interest,
ever happened to be Motives in those
Advancements. What Share of Knowledge
these Lords had in the Laws of their
Country, and how they came by it, so
as to enable them to decide the Properties
of their Fellow-Subjects in the last
Resort. Whether they were always so
free from Avarice, Partialities, or Want,
that a Bribe, or some other sinister View,
could have no Place among them. Whether
those holy Lords I spoke of were
always promoted to that Rank upon account
of their Knowledge in religious
Matters, and the Sanctity of their Lives, 

had never been Compliers with the Times
while they were common Priests, or slavish
prostitute Chaplains to some Nobleman,
whose Opinions they continued servilely
to follow after they were admitted
into that Assembly. 
He then desired to know what Arts
were practised in electing those whom
I called Commoners: Whether a Stranger
with a strong Purse might not
influence the vulgar Voters to chuse him
before their own Landlord, or the most
considerable Gentleman in the Neighbourhood. 
How it came to pass, that
People were so violently bent upon getting
into this Assembly, which I allowed
to be a great Trouble and Expence,
often to the Ruin of their Families, without
any Salary or Pension: Because this
appeared such an exalted Strain of Virtue
and publick Spirit, that his Majesty
seemed to doubt it might possibly not
be always sincere: And he desired to
know whether such zealous Gentlemen 

could have any Views of refunding themselves
for the Charges and Trouble they
were at, by sacrificing the publick
Good to the Designs of a weak and
vicious Prince in Conjunction with a
corrupted Ministry. He multiplied his
Questions, and fifted me thoroughly upon
every Part of this Head, proposing
numberless Enquiries and Objections,
which I think it not prudent or convenient
to repeat. 
Upon what I said in relation to our
Courts of Justice, his Majesty desired
to be satisfied in several Points: And,
this I was the better able to do, having
been formerly almost ruined by a long
Suit in the Chancery, which was decreed
for me with Costs. He asked, what
Time was usually spent in determining
between Right and Wrong, and what
Degree of Expence. Whether Advocates
and Orators had Liberty to plead in
Causes manifestly known to be unjust,
vexatious, or oppressive. Whether Party 

in Religion or Politicks were observed
to be of any Weight in the Scale of
Justice. Whether those pleading Orators
were Persons educated in the general
Knowledge of Equity, or only in provincial,
national, and other local Customs. 
Whether they or their Judges had
any Part in penning those Laws which
they assumed the Liberty of interpreting
and glossing upon at their Pleasure. Whether
they had ever at different Times
pleaded for and against the same Cause,
and cited Precedents to prove contrary
Opinions. Whether they were a rich or
a poor Corporation. Whether they received
any pecuniary Reward for pleading
or delivering their Opinions. And
particularly, whether they were ever admitted
as Members in the lower Senate. 
He fell next upon the Management
of our Treasury, and said, he thought my
Memory had failed me, because I computed
our Taxes at about five or six Millions
a Year, and when I came to mention the 

Issues, he found they sometimes amounted
to more than double; for the Notes
he had taken were very particular in this
Point, because he hoped, as he told me,
that the Knowledge of our Conduct
might be useful to him, and he could not
be deceived in his Calculations. But, if
what I told him were true, he was still
at a Loss how a Kingdom could run out of
its Estate like a private Person. He asked
me, who were our Creditors; and
where we should find Money to pay
them. He wonder'd to hear me talk of
such chargeable and extensive Wars; that
certainly we must be a quarrelsome People,
or live among very bad Neighbours,
and that our Generals must needs be
richer than our Kings. He asked what
Business we had out of our own Islands,
unless upon the Score of Trade or Treaty,
or to defend the Coasts with our Fleet. 
Above all, he was amazed to hear me
talk of a mercenary standing Army in
the midst of Peace, and among a free
People. He said, if we were governed 

by our own Consent in the Persons of
our Representatives, he could not imagine
of whom we were afraid, or against
whom we were to fight, and
would hear my Opinion, whether a private
Man's House might not better be
defended by himself, his Children, and
Family, than by half a dozen Rascals
picked up at a venture in the Streets,
for small Wages, who might get an
hundred times more by cutting their
Throats. 
He laughed at my odd Kind of Arithmetick
(as he was pleased to call it)
in reckoning the Numbers of our People
by a Computation drawn from the
several Sects among us in Religion and
Politicks. He said, he knew no Reason,
why those who entertain Opinions
prejudicial to the Publick, should be obliged
to change, or should not be
obliged to conceal them. And as it
was Tyranny in any Government to require
the first, so it was Weakness not 

to enforce the second: For a Man
may be allowed to keep Poisons in his
Closet, but not to vend them about for
Cordials. 
He observed, that among the Diversions
of our Nobility and Gentry, I
had mentioned Gaming. He desired
to know at what Age this Entertainment
was usually taken up, and when
it was laid down; how much of their
Time it employed; whether it ever went
so high as to affect their Fortunes: Whether
mean vicious People, by their Dexterity
in that Art, might not arrive at
great Riches, and sometimes keep out
very Nobles in Dependance, as well as
habituate them to vile Companions,
wholly take them from the Improvement
of their Minds, and force them,
by the Losses they have received, to
learn and practise that infamous Dexterity
upon others. 
He was perfectly astonished with the 

historical Account I gave him of our
Affairs during the last Century, protesting
it was only an Heap of Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Murders, Massacres, Revolutions,
Banishments, the very worst Effects
that Avarice, Faction, Hypocrisy,
Perfidiousness, Cruelty, Rage, Madness,
Hatred, Envy, Lust, Malice, or Ambition,
could produce. 
His Majesty in another Audience
was at the Pains to recapitulate the
Sum of all I had spoken, compared the
Questions he made with the Answers I
had given; then taking me into his Hands,
and stroaking me gently, delivered himself
in these Words, which I shall never
forget, nor the Manner he spoke them
in: My little Friend Grildrig, you have
made a most admirable Panegyrick upon
your Country: You have clearly proved
that Ignorance, Idleness and Vice may
be sometimes the only Ingredients for
qualifying a Legislator: That Laws are
best explained, interpreted, and applied 

by those whose Interest and Abilities lie
in perverting, confounding, and eluding
them. I observe among you some
Lines of an Institution, which in its Original
might have been tolerable, but these
half erazed, and the rest wholly blurred
and blotted by Corruptions. It doth
not appear from all you have said, how
any one Virtue is required towards the
Procurement of any one Station among
you, much less that Men were ennobled
on Account of their Virtue, that
Priests were advanced for their Piety or
Learning, Soldiers for their Conduct or
Valour, Judges for their Integrity, Senators
for the Love of their Country, or
Counsellors for their Wisdom. As for
yourself; (continued the King,) who have
spent the greatest Part of your Life in
Travelling, I am well disposed to hope
you may hitherto have escaped many
Vices of your Country. But by what I
have gathered from your own Relation,
and the Answers I have with much Pains
wringed and extorted from you, I cannot 

but conclude the Bulk of your Natives
to be the most pernicious Race of little
odious Vermin that Nature ever suffered
to crawl upon the Surface of the
Earth. 





The Author's Love of his Country. He
makes a Proposal of much Advantage
to the King, which is rejected. The
King's great Ignorance in Politicks. 
The Learning of that Country very
imperfect and confined. Their Laws,
and military Affairs, and Parties in
the State. 
Nothing but an extreme Love
of Truth could have hinder'd me
from concealing this Part of my
Story. It was in vain to discover my
Resentments, which were always turned
into Ridicule; and I was forced to
rest with Patience while my noble and
most beloved Country was so injuriously
treated. I am heartily sorry as any of
my Readers can possibly be, that such
an Occasion was given: But this Prince 

happened to be so curious and inquisitive
upon every Particular, that it could
not consist either with Gratitude or good
Manners to refuse giving him what Satisfaction
I was able. Yet thus much I
may be allowed to say in my own Vindication,
that I artfully eluded many
of his Questions, and gave to every Point
a more favourable Turn by many Degrees
than the Strictness of Truth would
allow. For I have always borne that
laudable Partiality to my own Country,
which Dionysius Halicarnassensis with
so much Justice recommends to an Historian: 
I would hide the Frailties and
Deformities of my Political Mother, and
place her Virtues and Beauties in the
most advantageous Light. This was my
sincere Endeavour in those many Discourses
I had with that Monarch, although it
unfortunately failed of Success. 
But great Allowances should be given
to a King who lives wholly secluded
from the rest of the World, and must 

therefore be altogether unacquainted with
the Manners and Customs that most prevail
in other Nations: The want of
which Knowledge will ever produce many
Prejudices, and a certain Narrowness
of Thinking, from which we and the
politer Countries of Europe are wholly
exempted. And it would be hard, indeed,
if so remote a Prince's Notions
of Virtue and Vice were to be offered
as a Standard for all Mankind. 
To confirm what I have now said,
and further, to shew the miserable Effects
of a confined Education, I shall here insert
a Passage which will hardly obtain
Belief. In hopes to ingratiate my self
farther into his Majesty's Favour, I told
him of an Invention discovered between
three and four hundred Years ago, to
make a certain Powder, into an Heap
of which the smallest Spark of Fire falling,
would kindle the whole in a Moment,
although it were as big as a Mountain,
and make it all fly up in the Air 

together, with a Noise and Agitation
greater than Thunder. That a proper
Quantity of this Powder rammed into
an hollow Tube of Brass or Iron, according
to its Bigness, would drive a Ball of
Iron or Lead with such Violence and
Speed, as nothing was able to sustain its
Force. That the largest Balls thus discharged,
would not only destroy whole
Ranks of an Army at once, but batter the
strongest Walls to the Ground, sink down
Ships, with a Thousand Men in each, to
the Bottom of the Sea; and, when linked
together by a Chain, would cut
through Masts and Rigging, divide hundreds
of Bodies in the Middle, and lay
all waste before them. That we often
put this Powder into large hollow Balls
of Iron, and discharged them by an Engine
into some City we were besieging,
which would rip up the Pavements, tear
the Houses to pieces, burst and throw
Splinters on every Side, dashing out the
Brains of all who came near. That I
knew the Ingredients very well, which 

were cheap, and common; I understood
the Manner of compounding them, and
could direct his Workmen how to make
those Tubes of a Size proportionable to
all other Things in his Majesty's Kingdom,
and the largest need not be above
an hundred Foot long; twenty or thirty
of which Tubes, charged with the proper
Quantity of Powder and Balls, would batter
down the Walls of the strongest Town
in his Dominions in a few Hours, or destroy
the whole Metropolis, if ever it should
pretend to dispute his absolute Commands. 
This I humbly offered to his Majesty
as a small Tribute of Acknowledgment
in Return of so many Marks that I
had received of his Royal Favour and
Protection. 
The King was struck with Horror
at the Description I had given of those
terrible Engines, and the Proposal I had
made. He was amazed how so impotent
and groveling an Insect as I (these
were his Expressions) could entertain
such inhuman Ideas, and in so familiar 

a manner as to appear wholly unmoved
at all the Scenes of Blood and Desolation,
which I had painted as the common
Effects of those destructive Machines,
whereof he said, some evil Genius,
Enemy to Mankind, must have been
the first Contriver. As for himself, he
protested, that although few Things delighted
him so much as new Discoveries
in Art or in Nature, yet he would rather
lose half his Kingdom than be privy
to such a Secret, which he commanded
me, as I valued my Life, never to
mention any more. 
A strange Effect of narrow Principles
and short Views! that a Prince possessed
of every Quality which procures
Veneration, Love, and Esteem; of strong
Parts, great Wisdom, and profound Learning,
endued with admirable Talents for
Government, and almost adored by his
Subjects, should from a nice unnecessary
Scruple, whereof in Europe we can have
no Conception, let slip an Opportunity 

put into his Hands, that would have made
him absolute Master of the Lives, the Liberties,
and the Fortunes of his People. 
Neither do I say this with the least Intention
to detract from the many Virtues
of that excellent King, whose Character
I am sensible, will, on this Account,
be very much lessened in the Opinion of
an English Reader: But I take this Defect
among them to have risen from their
Ignorance, they not having hitherto reduced
Politicks into a Science, as the
more acute Wits of Europe have done. 
For I remember very well, in a Discourse
one Day with the King, when I
happened to say there were several thousand
Books among us written upon the
Art of Government, it gave him (directly
contrary to my Intention) a very
mean Opinion of our Understandings. 
He professed both to abominate and despise
all Mystery, Refinement, and Intrigue,
either in a Prince or a Minister. 
He could not tell what I meant by Secrets
of State, where an Enemy or some 

rival Nation were not in the Case. He
confined the Knowledge of Governing
within very narrow Bounds, to common
Sense and Reason, to Justice and
Lenity, to the speedy Determination
of civil and criminal Causes; with
some other obvious Topicks which are
not worth considering. And, he gave it
for his Opinion, that whoever could make
two Ears of Corn, or two Blades of Grass,
to grow upon a Spot of Ground where
only one grew before, would deserve
better of Mankind, and do more essential
Service to his Country than the whole
Race of Politicians put together. 
The Learning of this People is very
defective, consisting only in Morality, History,
Poetry, and Mathematicks, wherein
they must be allowed to excel. But,
the last of these is wholly applied to what
may be useful in Life, to the Improvement
of Agriculture and all mechanical
Arts; so that among us it would be little
esteemed. And as to Ideas, Entities, Abstractions 

and Transcendentals, I could
never drive the least Conception into
their Heads. 
No Law of that Country must exceed
in Words the Number of Letters in their
Alphabet, which consists only in two
and twenty. But, indeed, few of them
extend even to that Length. They are
expressed in the most plain and simple
Terms, wherein those People are not
mercurial enough to discover above one
Interpretation: And to write a Comment
upon any Law is a capital Crime. 
As to the Decision of civil Causes, or
Proceedings against Criminals, their Precedents
are so few, that they have little
Reason to boast of any extraordinary Skill
in either. 
They have had the Art of Printing,
as well as the Chinese, Time out of
mind: But their Libraries are not very
large; for that of the King's, which is
reckoned the biggest, doth not amount to 

above a thousand Volumes, placed in a
Gallery of twelve hundred Foot long,
from whence I had Liberty to borrow
what Books I pleased. The Queen's
Joiner had contrived in one of Glumdalclitch's
Rooms a kind of wooden
Machine five and twenty Foot high, formed
like a standing Ladder, the Steps were
each fifty Foot long: It was indeed a
moveable Pair of Stairs, the lowest End
placed at ten Foot Distance from the
Wall of the Chamber. The Book I had
a mind to read was put up leaning against
the Wall: I first mounted to the
upper Step of the Ladder, and turning
my Face towards the Book, began at
the Top of the Page, and so walking to
the Right and Left about eight or ten Paces,
according to the Length of the Lines, till
I had gotten a little below the Level of
mine Eyes, and then descending gradually
till I came to the Bottom: After
which I mounted again, and began the
other Page in the same manner, and
so turned over the Leaf, which I could 

easily do with both my Hands, for it was
as thick and stiff as a Paste-board, and in
the largest Folio's not above eighteen or
twenty Foot long. 
Their Stile is clear, masculine, and
smooth, but not florid, for they avoid
nothing more than multiplying unnecessary
Words, or using various Expressions. 
I have perused many of their Books,
especially those in History and Morality. 
Among the rest I was much diverted
with a little old Treatise, which always
lay in Glumdalclitch's Bed-Chamber,
and belonged to her Governess, a
grave elderly Gentlewoman, who dealt
in Writings of Morality and Devotion. 
The Book treats of the Weakness of
Human Kind, and is in little Esteem, except
among the Women and the Vulgar. 
However, I was curious to see
what an Author of that Country could
say upon such a Subject. This Writer
went through all the usual Topicks of
European Moralists, shewing how diminutive, 

contemptible, and helpless an
Animal was Man in his own Nature; 
how unable to defend himself from Inclemencies
of the Air, or the Fury of
wild Beasts: How much he was excelled
by one Creature in Strength, by another
in Speed, by a third in Foresight,
by a fourth in Industry. He added, that
Nature was degenerated in these latter
declining Ages of the World, and could
now produce only small abortive Births
in comparison of those in ancient
Times. He said, it was very reasonable
to think, not only that the Species of
Man were originally much larger, but
also, that there must have been Giants
in former Ages, which, as it is asserted
by History and Tradition, so it hath been
confirmed by huge Bones and Skulls casually
dug up in several Parts of the
Kingdom, far exceeding the common
dwindled Race of Man in our Days. He
argued, that the very Laws of Nature absolutely
required we should have been
made in the Beginning, of a Size more 

large and robust, not so liable to Destruction
from every little Accident of a
Tile falling from an House, or a Stone cast
from the Hand of a Boy, or of being
drowned in a little Brook. From this
way of Reasoning, the Author drew several
moral Applications useful in the
Conduct of Life, but needless here to
repeat. For my own part, I could not
avoid reflecting how universally this Talent
was spread, of drawing Lectures in
Morality, or, indeed, rather Matter of Discontent
and Repining, from the Quarrels
we raise with Nature. And, I believe,
upon a strict Enquiry, those Quarrels
might be shewn as ill-grounded among
us, as they are among that People. 
As to their Military Affairs, they boast
that the King's Army consists of an hundred
and seventy six thousand Foot, and
thirty two thousand Horse: If that may
be called an Army which is made up
of Tradesmen in the several Cities, and
Farmers in the Country, whose Commanders 

are only the Nobility and Gentry,
without Pay or Reward. They are,
indeed, perfect enough in their Exercises,
and under very good Discipline, wherein
I saw no great Merit; for how
should it be otherwise, where every Farmer
is under the Command of his own
Landlord, and every Citizen under that
of the principal Men in his own City,
chosen after the Manner of Venice by
Ballot? 
I have often seen the Militia of
Lorbrulgrud drawn out to exercise in
a great Field near the City, of twenty
Miles square. They were, in all, not
above twenty five thousand Foot, and six
thousand Horse; but it was impossible
for me to compute their Number, considering
the space of Ground they took
up. A Cavalier mounted on a large Steed
might be about an hundred Foot high. I
have seen this whole Body of Horse, upon
a Word of Command, draw their 

Swords at once, and brandish them in
the Air. Imagination can figure nothing
so grand, so surprising, and so astonishing: 
It looked as if ten thousand Flashes
of Lightning were darting at the same
Time from every Quarter of the Sky. 
I was curious to know how this
Prince, to whose Dominions there is no
Access from any other Country, came
to think of Armies, or to teach his
People the Practice of military Discipline. 
But I was soon informed, both
by Conversation, and reading their Histories: 
For, in the Course of many Ages
they have been troubled with the same
Disease to which so many other Governments
are subject; the Nobility often contending
for Power, the People for Liberty,
and the King for absolute Dominion. 
All which, however happily tempered
by the Laws of the Kingdom, have
been sometimes violated by each of the
three Parties, and have once or more 

occasioned Civil Wars, the last whereof
was happily put an End to by this Prince's
Grandfather by a general Composition; 
and the Militia, then settled with common
Consent, hath been ever since kept in the
strictest Duty. 





The King and Queen make a Progress
to the Frontiers. The Author attends
them. The Manner in which he leaves
the Country very particularly related. 
He returns to England. 
I had always a strong Impulse
that I should some Time
recover my Liberty, though it
was impossible to conjecture
by what Means, or to form any Project
with the least Hope of succeeding. The
Ship in which I sailed was the first ever
known to be driven within Sight of that
Coast, and the King had given strict Orders,
that if at any time another appeared,
it should be taken ashore, and, with all its
Crew and Passengers, brought in a Tumbril
to Lorbrulgrud. He was strongly bent
to get me a Woman of my own Size, 

by whom I might propagate the Breed: 
But, I think, I should rather have died
than undergone the Disgrace of leaving
a Posterity to be kept in Cages like tame
Canary Birds, and perhaps, in Time,
sold about the Kingdom to Persons of
Quality for Curiosities. I was, indeed,
treated with much Kindness: I was the
Favourite of a great King and Queen, and
the Delight of the whole Court, but it
was upon such a Foot as ill became the
Dignity of Human Kind. I could never
forget those domestick Pledges I had left
behind me. I wanted to be among People
with whom I could converse upon even
Terms, and walk about the Streets and
Fields without Fear of being trod to
Death like a Frog or a young Puppy. 
But my Deliverance came sooner than
I expected, and, in a Manner, not very
common: The whole Story and Circumstances
of which, I shall faithfully
relate. 
I had now been two Years in this 

Country; and, about the Beginning of
the third, Glumdalclitch and I attended
the King and Queen in a Progress to
the South Coast of the Kingdom. I was
carried, as usual, in my Travelling-Box,
which, as I have already described, was a
very convenient Closet of twelve Foot
wide. And I had ordered a Hammock
to be fixed, by silken Ropes, from the
four Corners at the Top, to break the
Jolts, when a Servant carried me before
him on Horseback, as I sometimes desired,
and would often sleep in my Hammock
while we were upon the Road. 
On the Roof of my Closet, not directly
over the Middle of the Hammock, I
ordered the Joyner to cut out a Hole of
a Foot square, to give me Air in hot
Weather, as I slept; which Hole I shut,
at Pleasure, with a Board that drew backwards
and forwards through a Groove. 
When we came to our Journey's End,
the King thought proper to pass a few
Days at a Palace he hath near Flanflasnic, 

a City within eighteen English Miles
of the Sea-side. Glumdalclitch and I
were much fatigued; I had gotten a
small Cold, but the poor Girl was so
ill as to be confined to her Chamber. I
longed to see the Ocean, which must be
the only Scene of my Escape, if ever it
should happen. I pretended to be worse
than I really was, and desired Leave to
take the fresh Air of the Sea, with a
Page whom I was very fond of, and who
had sometimes been trusted with me. I
shall never forget with what Unwillingness
Glumdalclitch consented, nor the
strict Charge she gave the Page to be careful
of me, bursting at the same Time into
a Flood of Tears, as if she had some
Foreboding of what was to happen. The
Boy took me out in my Box about half
an Hours Walk from the Palace towards
the Rocks on the Sea-shore. I ordered
him to set me down, and lifting up one
of my Sashes, cast many a wistful melancholy
Look towards the Sea. I found
my self not very well, and told the Page 

that I had a Mind to take a Nap in my
Hammock, which I hoped would do me
good. I got in, and the Boy shut the
Window close down to keep out the
cold. I soon fell asleep, and all I can
conjecture is, that while I slept, the Page
thinking no Danger could happen, went
among the Rocks to look for Bird's Eggs,
having before observed him from my
Window searching about, and picking
up one or two in the Clefts. Be that
as it will, I found my self suddenly
awaked with a violent Pull upon the Ring
which was fastned at the Top of my Box
for the Conveniency of Carriage. I felt
my Box raised very high in the Air, and
then born forward with prodigious Speed. 
The first Jolt had like to have shaken me
out of my Hammock, but afterwards the
Motion was easy enough. I called out
several Times, as loud as I could raise
my Voice, but all to no Purpose. I looked
towards my Windows, and could see
nothing but the Clouds and Sky. I heard
a Noise just over my Head like the clasping 

of Wings, and then began to perceive
the woful Condition I was in,
that some Eagle had got the Ring of my
Box in his Beak, with an Intent to let
it fall on a Rock like a Tortoise in a
Shell, and then pick out my Body, and
devour it. For the Sagacity and Smell
of this Bird enable him to discover his
Quarry at a great Distance, though better
concealed than I could be within a Two-Inch
Board. 
In a little Time I observed the Noise
and Flutter of Wings to increase very
fast, and my Box was tossed up and down
like a Sign-post in a windy Day. I heard
several Bangs or Buffets, as I thought,
given to the Eagle, (for such I am certain
it must have been that held the Ring
of my Box in his Beak,) and then all
on a sudden felt my self falling perpendicularly
down for above a Minute, but
with such incredible Swiftness that I almost
lost my Breath. My Fall was stopped by
a terrible Squash, that sounded louder to 

mine Ears than the Cataract of Niagara; 
after which I was quite in the dark for
another Minute, and then my Box began
to rise so high that I could see Light
from the Tops of my Windows. I now
perceived that I was fallen into the Sea. 
My Box, by the Weight of my Body, the
Goods that were in, and the broad Plates
of Iron fixed for Strength at the four
Corners of the Top and Bottom, floated
about five Foot deep in Water. I did
then, and do now suppose that the Eagle
which flew away with my Box was pursued
by two or three others, and forced
to let me drop while he was defending
himself against the rest, who hoped to
share in the Prey. The Plates of Iron
fasten'd at the Bottom of the Box, (for
those were the strongest,) preserved the
Balance while it fell, and hinder'd it
from being broken on the Surface of the
Water. Every Joint of it was well grooved; 
and the Door did not move on
Hinges, but up and down like a Sash,
which kept my Closet so tight that very 

little Water came in. I got with much
Difficulty out of my Hammock, having
first ventured to draw back the Slipboard
on the Roof already mentioned,
contrived on Purpose to let in Air, for
want of which I found my self almost
stifled. 
How often did I then wish my self
with my dear Glumdalclitch, from whom
one single Hour had so far divided me! 
And I may say, with Truth, that in the
midst of my own Misfortunes I could
not forbear lamenting my poor Nurse,
the Grief she would suffer for my Loss,
the Displeasure of the Queen, and the
Ruin of her Fortune. Perhaps many Travellers
have not been under greater Difficulties
and Distress than I was at this
Juncture, expecting every Moment to see
my Box dashed in Pieces, or at least overset
by the first violent Blast, or a rising
Wave. A Breach in one single Pane of
Glass would have been immediate Death: 
Nor could any Thing have preserved the 

Windows but the strong Lettice-Wires
placed on the out-side against Accidents
in Travelling. I saw the Water ooze
in at several Crannies, although the Leaks
were not considerable, and I endeavoured
to stop them as well as I could. I was
not able to lift up the Roof of my Closet,
which otherwise I certainly should have
done, and sate on the Top of it, where
I might, at least, preserve my self some
Hours longer than by being shut up, as I
may call it, in the Hold. Or if I escaped
these Dangers for a Day or two,
what could I expect but a miserable
Death of Cold and Hunger! I was four
Hours under these Circumstances, expecting,
and indeed wishing, every Moment
to be my last. 
I have already told the Reader, that
there were two strong Staples fixed upon
that Side of my Box which had no Window,
and into which the Servant who used
to carry me on horseback would put a leathern
Belt, and buckle it about his Waste. 

Being in this disconsolate State, I heard,
or at least thought, I heard some kind of
grating Noise on that Side of my Box
where the Staples were fixed, and soon after
I began to fancy that the Box was pulled,
or towed along in the Sea; for I now
and then felt a sort of tugging which
made the Waves rise near the Tops of
my Windows, leaving me almost in the
dark. This gave me some faint Hopes
of Relief, although I was not able to
imagine how it could be brought about. 
I ventured to unscrew one of my Chairs,
which were always fastned to the Floor; 
and having made a hard Shift to screw
it down again directly under the slipping
Board that I had lately opened, I
mounted on the Chair, and, putting my
Mouth as near as I could to the Hole,
I called for Help in a loud Voice, and
in all the Languages I understood. I
then fastned my Handkerchief to a Stick
I usually carried, and thrusting it up the
Hole, waved it several Times in the Air,
that if any Boat or Ship were near, the 

Seamen might conjecture some unhappy
Mortal to be shut up in this Box. 
I found no Effect from all I could
do, but plainly perceived my Closet to
be moved along; and in the Space of
an Hour, or better, that Side of the Box
where the Staples were, and had no
Window, struck against something that
was hard. I apprehended it to be a
Rock, and found my self tossed more
than ever. I plainly heard a Noise upon
the Cover of my Closet, like that of
a Cable, and the grating of it as it passed
through the Ring. I then found
my self hoisted up by Degrees, at least
three Foot higher than I was before. 
Whereupon, I again thrust up my Stick
and Handkerchief, calling for Help till
I was almost hoarse. In return to which,
I heard a great Shout repeated three
Times, giving me such Transports of Joy,
as are not to be conceived but by those
who feel them. I now heard a Trampling
over my Head, and somebody calling 

through the Hole with a loud Voice
in the English Tongue, If there be any
Body below, let them speak. I answered,
I was an Englishman, drawn by ill
Fortune into the greatest Calamity that
ever any Creature underwent, and begged,
by all that was moving, to be delivered
out of the Dungeon I was in. 
The Voice replied, I was safe, for my
Box was fasten'd to their Ship; and the
Carpenter should immediately come,
and saw an Hole in the Cover large enough
to pull me out. I answered, that
was needless, and would take up too
much Time, for there was no more to
be done, but let one of the Crew put
his Finger into the Ring, and take the
Box out of the Sea into the Ship, and
so into the Captain's Cabbin. Some of
them upon hearing me talk so wildly,
thought I was mad; others laughed; 
for indeed it never came into my Head
that I was now got among People of my
own Stature and Strength. The Carpenter
came, and in a few Minutes sawed 

a Passage about four Foot square, then
let down a small Ladder, upon which
I mounted, and from thence was taken
into the Ship in a very weak Condition. 
The Sailors were all in Amazement,
and asked me a thousand Questions,
which I had no Inclination to answer. 
I was equally confounded at the Sight
of so many Pigmies, for such I took
them to be, after having so long accustomed
mine Eyes to the monstrous Objects
I had left. But the Captain, Mr. Thomas
Wilcocks, an honest worthy Shropshire
Man, observing I was ready to faint,
took me into his Cabbin, gave me a Cordial
to comfort me, and made me turn
in upon his own Bed, advising me to take
a little Rest, of which I had great Need. 
Before I went to sleep I gave him to understand
that I had some valuable Furniture
in my Box too good to be lost; 
a fine Hammock, an handsome Field-Bed,
two Chairs, a Table, and a Cabinet: 

That my Closet was hung on all Sides,
or rather quilted with Silk and Cotton: 
That if he would let one of the Crew
bring my Closet into his Cabbin, I would
open it there before him, and shew him
my Goods. The Captain hearing me
utter these Absurdities, concluded I was
raving: However, (I suppose to pacify
me,) he promised to give Order as I
desired, and going upon Deck sent some
of his Men down into my Closet, from
whence (as I afterwards found) they
drew up all my Goods, and stripped off
the Quilting; but the Chairs, Cabinet
and Bed-sted being screwed to the Floor,
were much damaged by the Ignorance of
the Seamen, who tore them up by Force. 
Then they knocked off some of the
Boards for the Use of the Ship, and when
they had got all they had a mind for,
let the Hulk drop into the Sea, which by
Reason of many Breaches made in the
Bottom and Sides, sunk to rights. And
indeed I was glad not to have been a
Spectator of the Havock they made; because 

cause I am confident it would have sensibly
touched me, by bringing former
Passages into my Mind, which I had rather
forget. 
I slept some Hours, but perpetually
disturbed with Dreams of the Place
I had left, and the Dangers I had escaped. 
However, upon waking I found my
self much recovered. It was now about
eight a-Clock at Night, and the Captain
ordered Supper immediately, thinking I
had already fasted too long. He entertained
me with great Kindness, observing
me not to look wildly, or talk inconsistently; 
and when we were left alone,
desired I would give him a Relation
of my Travels, and by what Accident
I came to be set adrift in that monstrous
wooden Chest. He said, that about
twelve a Clock at Noon, as he
was looking through his Glass, he spied
it at a Distance, and thought it was a
Sail, which he had a mind to make, being
not much out of his Course, in 

hopes of buying some Biscuit, his own
beginning to fall short. That upon
coming nearer, and finding his Error,
he sent out his Long-Boat to discover
what I was; that his Men came back
in a Fright, swearing they had seen a
swimming House. That he laughed at
their Folly, and went himself in the
Boat, ordering his Men to take a strong
Cable along with them. That the Weather
being calm, he rowed round me
several times, observed my Windows,
and the Wire-Lattices that defended them. 
That he discovered two Staples upon one
Side, which was all of Boards, without
any Passage for Light. He then commanded
his Men to row up to that Side,
and fastening a Cable to one of the Staples,
ordered them to tow my Chest (as
they called it) towards the Ship. When
it was there, he gave Directions to fasten
another Cable to the Ring fixed in the
Cover, and to raise up my Chest with
Pullies, which all the Sailors were not
able to do above two or three Foot. He 

said, they saw my Stick and Handkerchief
thrust out of the Hole, and concluded
that some unhappy Men must be
shut up in the Cavity. I asked whether
he or the Crew had seen any prodigious
Birds in the Air about the Time he
first discovered me. To which he answered,
that discoursing this Matter with
the Sailors while I was asleep, one of
them said he had observed three Eagles
flying towards the North, but remarked
nothing of their being larger than the
usual Size, which I suppose must be imputed
to the great Height they were at; and
he could not guess the Reason of my Question. 
I then asked the Captain how far he
reckoned we might be from Land; he
said, by the best Computation he could
make, we were at least an hundred
Leagues. I assured him, that he must
be mistaken by almost half, for I had
not left the Country from whence I
came above two Hours before I dropt
into the Sea. Whereupon he began again
to think that my Brain was disturbed, 

of which he gave me a Hint, and
advised me to go to Bed in a Cabbin he
had provided. I assured him I was well
refreshed with his good Entertainment
and Company, and as much in my
Senses as ever I was in my Life. He
then grew serious, and desired to ask
me freely whether I were not troubled
in Mind by the Consciousness of some
enormous Crime, for which I was punished
at the Command of some Prince,
by exposing me in that Chest, as great
Criminals in other Countries have been
forced to Sea in a leaky Vessel without
Provisions: For although he should be
sorry to have taken so ill a Man into his
Ship, yet he would engage his Word to
set me safe on Shore in the first Port
where we arrived. He added, that his
Suspicious were much increased by some
very absurd Speeches I had delivered at
first to the Sailors, and afterwards to
himself, in Relation to my Closet or
Chest, as well as by my odd Looks and
Behaviour while I was at Supper. 

I begged his Patience to hear me
tell my Story, which I faithfully did from
the last time I left England to the Moment
he first discovered me. And as Truth
always forceth its Way into rational
Minds, so this honest worthy Gentleman,
who had some Tincture of Learning,
and very good Sense, was immediately
convinced of my Candour and Veracity. 
But further to confirm all I had
said, I entreated him to give Order that
my Cabinet should be brought, of which I
had the Key in my Pocket, (for he had
already informed me how the Seamen
disposed of my Closet.) I opened it in
his own Presence, and shewed him the
small Collection of Rarities I made in
the Country from whence I had been
so strangely delivered. There was the
Comb I had contrived out of the Stumps
of the King's Beard, and another of the
same Materials, but fixed into a Paring
of her Majesty's Thumb-nail, which
served for the Back. There was a Collection
of Needles and Pins from a Foot 

to half a Yard long: Four Wasp Stings,
like Joiners Tacks: Some Combings of
the Queen's Hair: A gold Ring which
one Day she made me a Present of in a
most obliging Manner, taking it from
her little Finger, and throwing it over
my Head like a Collar. I desired the
Captain would please to accept this
Ring, in Return of his Civilities, which
he absolutely refused. I shewed him a
Corn that I had cut off with my own
Hand, from a Maid of Honour's Toe,
it was about the Bigness of a Kentish
Pippin, and grown so hard, that when I
returned to England, I got it hollowed
into a Cup, and set in Silver. Lastly,
I desired him to see the Breeches I had
then on, which were made of a Mouse's
Skin. 
I could force nothing on him but
a Footman's Tooth, which I observed
him to examine with great Curiosity,
and found he had a Fancy for it. He
received it with Abundance of Thanks, 

more than such a Trifle could deserve. 
It was drawn by an unskilful Surgeon
in a Mistake from one of Glumdalclitch's
Men, who was afflicted with the
Tooth-ach, but it was as sound as any
in his Head. I got it cleaned, and put
it into my Cabinet. It was about a
Foot long, and four Inches in Diameter. 
The Captain was very well satisfied
with this plain Relation I had given
him, and said, he hoped when we returned
to England, I would oblige the
World by putting it in Paper, and making
it publick. My Answer was, That
I thought we were already over-stocked
with Books of Travels: That nothing
could now pass which was not extraordinary,
wherein I doubted some Authors
less consulted Truth than their own Vanity,
or Interest, or the Diversion of
ignorant Readers. That my Story could
contain little besides common Events,
without those ornamental Descriptions 

of strange Plants, Trees, Birds, and other
Animals, or of the barbarous Customs
and Idolatry of savage People, with
which most Writers abound. However,
I thanked him for his good Opinion,
and promised to take the Matter into
my Thoughts. 
He said, he wondered at one Thing
very much, which was, to hear me
speak so loud, asking me whether the
King or Queen of that Country were
thick of Hearing. I told him, it was
what I had been used to for above
two Years past; and that I admired as
much at the Voices of him and his Men,
who seemed to me only to whisper, and
yet I could hear them well enough. 
But when I spoke in that Country,
it was like a Man talking in the Street
to another looking out from the Top
of a Steeple, unless when I was placed
on a Table, or held in any Person's Hand. 
I told him, I had likewise observed
another Thing, that when I first got 

into the Ship, and the Sailors stood all
about me, I thought they were the most
little contemptible Creatures I had ever
beheld. For, indeed, while I was in
that Prince's Country, I could never endure
to look in a Glass after mine Eyes
had been accustomed to such prodigious
Objects, because the Comparison gave
me so despicable a Conceit of my self. 
The Captain said, that while we were
at Supper, he observed me to look at
every Thing with a sort of Wonder,
and that I often seemed hardly able to
contain my Laughter, which he knew
not well how to take, but imputed it
to some Disorder in my Brain. I answered,
it was very true; and I wondered
how I could forbear, when I saw
his Dishes of the Size of a silver Three-pence,
a Leg of Pork hardly a Mouthful,
a Cup not so big as a Nutshell; 
and so I went on, describing the rest of
his Houshold-stuff and Provisions after
the same Manner. For although the
Queen had ordered a little Equipage of 

all things necessary while I was in her
Service, yet my Ideas were wholly taken
up with what I saw on every side of
me, and I winked at my own Littleness
as People do at their own Faults. The
Captain understood my Raillery very well,
and merrily replied with the old English
Proverb, that he doubted mine Eyes
were bigger than my Belly, for he did
not observe my Stomach so good, although
I had fasted all Day; and continuing
in his Mirth, protested he would
have gladly given an hundred Pounds to
have seen my Closet in the Eagle's Bill,
and afterwards in its fall from so great
an height into the Sea; which would
certainly have been a most astonishing
Object, worthy to have the Description
of it transmitted to future Ages: And
the Comparison of Phaeton was so obvious,
that he could not forbear applying
it, although I did not much admire the
Conceit. 
The Captain having been at Tonquin 

was in his return to England driven North
eastward to the Latitude of 44 Degrees,
and of Longitude 143. But meeting a
Trade Wind two Days after I came on
board him, we sailed Southward a long
time, and coasting New-Holland kept our
Course West-south west, and then South-south-west
till we doubled the Cape of
Good-hope. Our Voyage was very prosperous,
but I shall not trouble the Reader
with a Journal of it. The Captain
called in at one or two Ports and sent
in his Long-boat for Provisions and fresh
Water, but I never went out of the Ship
till we came into the Downs, which was
on the 3d. Day of June 1706, about
nine Months after my Escape. I offered
to leave my Goods in Security for Payment
of my Freight; but the Captain
protested he would not receive one Farthing. 
We took kind leave of each other,
and I made him promise he would come
to see me at my House in Redriff. I
hired a Horse and Guide for five Shillings,
which I borrowed of the Captain. 

As I was on the Road, observing the
Littleness of the Houses, the Trees, the
Cattle and the People, I began to think
my self in Lilliput. I was afraid of trampling
on every Traveller I met, and often
called aloud to have them stand out of
the way, so that I had like to have gotten
one or two broken Heads for my Impertinence. 
When I came to my own House,
for which I was forced to enquire, one
of the Servants opening the Door, I bent
down to go in (like a Gooss under a Gate)
for fear of striking my Head. My Wife
ran out to embrace me, but I stooped
lower than her Knees, thinking she could
otherwise never be able to reach my
Mouth. My Daughter kneeled to ask
me Blessing, but I could not see her till
she arose, having been so long used to
stand with my Head and Eyes erect to above
sixty Foot; and then I went to take
her up with one Hand, by the Waste. I 

looked down upon the Servants and one
or two Friends who were in the House,
as if they had been Pigmies, and I a
Giant. I told my Wife she had been too
thrifty, for I found she had starved herself
and her Daughter to nothing. In
short, I behaved my self so unaccountably,
that they were all of the Captain's
Opinion when he first saw me, and concluded
I had lost my Wits. This I mention
as an Instance of the great Power of
Habit and Prejudice. 
In a little time I and my Family and
Friends came to a right Understanding: 
But my Wife protested I should never go
to Sea any more; although my evil Destiny
so ordered that she had not Power
to hinder me, as the Reader may know
hereafter. In the mean time I here conclude
the Second Part of my unfortunate
Voyages. 

The End of the Second Part.