


DEAR WAT,
I MENTIONED in my last, my uncle's design
of going to the duke of N&wblank;'s levee; which
design has been executed accordingly. His grace
has been so long accustomed to this kind of homage, 

that though the place he now fills does
not imply the tenth part of the influence, which
he exerted in his former office, he has given his
friends to understand, that they cannot oblige him
in any thing more, than in contributing to support
the shadow of that power which he no longer
retains in substance; and therefore he has still public
days, on which they appear at his levee. 
My uncle and I went thither with Mr. Barton,
who, being one of the duke's adherents, undertook
to be our introducer—The room was pretty well
filled with people, in a great variety of dress; but
there was no more than one gown and cassock, tho'
I was told his grace had, while he was minister, preferred
almost every individual that now filled the
bench of bishops in the house of lords; but, in all
probability, the gratitude of the clergy is like their
charity, which shuns the light—Mr. Barton was
immediately accosted by a person, well striken in
years, tall, and raw boned, with a hooked nose, and
an arch leer, that indicated, at least, as much cunning
as sagacity. Our conductor saluted him, by
the name of captain C&wblank;, and afterwards informed
us he was a man of shrewd parts, whom
the government occasionally employed in secret
services—But I have had the history of him more
at large, from another quarter—He had been,
many years ago, concerned in fraudulent practices,
as a merchant in France; and being convicted of
some of them was sent to the gallies, from whence
he was delivered by the interest of the late duke of
Ormond, to whom he had recommended himself
in a letter, as his name-sake and relation—He
was, in the sequel employed by our ministry as a
spy; and in the war of 1740, traversed all Spain,
as well as France, in the disguise of a capuchin,
at the extreme hazard of his life, in as much as
the court of Madrid had actually got scent of him,
and given orders to apprehend him at St. Sebastian's, 

from whence he had fortunately retired but a
few hours before the order arrived. This and
other hair-breadth 'scapes he pleaded so effectually
as a merit with the English ministry, that they allowed
him a comfortable pension, which he now
enjoys in his old age—He has still access to all
the ministers, ard is said to be consulted by them
on many subjects, as a man of uncommon understanding
and great experience—He is, in fact,
a fellow of some parts, and invincible assurance; 
and, in his discourse, he assumes such an air of
self-sufficiency, as may very well impose upon
some of the shallow politicians. But if he is not
at the helm of the administration. But, if he is not
belied, this, is not the only imposture of which he
is guilty—They say, he is at bottom not only a
Roman-catholic, but really a priest; and while
he pretends to disclose to our state-pilots all the
springs that move the cabinet of Versailles, he is
actually picking up intelligence for the service of
the French minister—Be that as it may, captain
C&wblank; entered into conversation with us in the
most familiar manner, and treated the duke's character
without any ceremony—“This wife-acre
(said he) is still a-bed; and I think, the best
thing he can do, is to sleep on till Christmas; for,
when he gets up, he does nothing but expose
his own folly. —Since Granville was turned out,
there has been no minister in this nation worth
the meal that whitened his periwig—They are
so ignorant, they scarce know a crab from a
cauliflower: and then they are such dunces, that,
there's no making them comprehend the plainest
proposition—In the beginning of the war, this
poor half-witted creature told me, in a great
fright that thirty thousand French had marched
from Acadie to Cape Breton”—“Where did they
find transports?” (said I) “Transports! (cried
he) I tell you, they marched by land—” “By 

land to the island of Cape Breton?” “What!
is Cape Breton an island?” Certainly. “Ha!
are you sure of that?” When I pointed it out
in the map he examined it earnestly with his
spectacles; then, taking me in his arms, “My
dear C&wblank;! (cried he) you always bring us good
news—Egad! I'll go directly, and tell the king
that Cape Breton is an island—” 
He seemed disposed to entertain us with more
anecdotes of this nature, at the expence of his
grace when he was interrupted by the arrival of
the Algerine ambassador; a venerable Turk, with
a long white beard, attended by his dragoman, or
interpreter, and another officer of his household,
who had got no stockings to his legs—Captain C&wblank; 
immediately spoke with an air of authority to a servant
in waiting, bidding him go and tell the duke
to rise, as there was a great deal of company come,
and, among others, the ambassador from Algiers
—Then, turning to us, “This poor Turk (said
he) notwithstanding his grey beard, is a greenhorn
—He has been several years resident in London,
and is still ignorant of our political revolutions. 
This visit is intended for the prime
minister of England; but you'll see how this
wife duke will receive it as a mark of attachment
to his own person—” Certain it is, the duke
seemed eager to acknowledge the complement—A
door opening, he suddenly bolted out, with a shaving
cloth under his chin, his face frothed up to
the eyes with soap lather; and running up to the
ambassador, grinned hideous in his face—“My
dear Mahomet! (said he) God love your long
beard, I hope the dey will make you a horsetail
at the next promotion, ha, ha, ha! —Have
but a moment's patience, and I'll send to you
in a twinkling—” So saying he retreated into
his den, leaving the Turk in some confusion. 
After a short pause, however, he said something to 

his interpreter, the meaning of which I had great
curiosity to know, as he turned up his eyes while
he spoke, expressing astonishment, mixed with devotion
—We were gratified by means of the communicative
captain C&wblank;, who conversed with the
dragoman as an old acquaintance. Ibrahim, the
ambassador, who had mistaken his grace for the
minister's fool, was no sooner undeceived by the
interpreter, than he exclaimed to this effect— 
“Holy prophet! I don't wonder that this nation
prospers, seeing it is governed by the counsel of
idiots; a series of men, whom all good mussulmen
revere as the organs of immediate inspiration!” 
Ibrahim was favoured with a particular
audience of short duration; after which the duke
conducted him to the door, and then returned to
diffuse his gracious looks among the crowd of his
worshippers. 
As Mr. Barton advanced to present me to his
grace, it was my fortune to attract his notice, before
I was announced—He forthwith met me more
than half way, and, seizing me by the hand, “My
dear sir Francis! (cried he) this is so kind—I
vow to gad! I am so obliged—Such attention
to a poor broken minister—Well—Pray when
does your excellency set sail? —For God's sake
have a care of your health, and eat stewed
prunes in the passage—Next to your own precious
health, pray, my dear excellency, take
care of the five Nations—Our good friends the
Five Nations—The Toryrories, the Maccolmacks,
the Out-o'the-ways, the Crickets, and
the Kickshaws—Let'em have plenty of blankets,
and stinkubus, and wampum; and your
excellency won't fail to scour the kettle, and
boil the chain, and bury the tree, and plant
the hatchet—Ha, ha, ha!” When he had uttered
this rhapsody, with his usual precipitation
Mr. Barton gave him to understand, that I was 

neither Sir Francis nor St. Francis; but simply
Mr. Melford, nephew to Mr. Bramble; who,
stepping forward, made his bow at the same time. 
“Odso! no more it is Sir Francis—(said this wife
statesman) Mr. Melford, I'm glad to see you— 
I sent you an engineer to fortify your dock—Mr.
Bramble—your servant Mr. Bramble—How dy'e,
good Mr. Bramble? Your nephew is a pretty
young fellow—Faith and troth, a very pretty fellow! 
—His father is my old friend—How does he
hold it? Still troubled with that damned disorder,
ha?” “No, my lord, (replied my uncle) all his
troubles are over—He has been dead these fifteen
years.” “Dead! how—Yes, faith! now I remember:
he is dead, sure enough—Well, and
how—does the young gentleman stand for Haverford
West? or—a—what dy'e—my dear Mr.
Milfordhaven, I'll do you all the service in my
power—I hope I have some credit left—” My
uncle then gave him to understand, that I was still
a minor; and that we had no intention to trouble
him at present for any favour whatsoever—“I came
hither with my nephew (added he) to pay our
respects to your grace; and I may venture to say
that his views and mine are at least as disinterested
as those of any individual in this assembly.” 
“My dear Mr. Brambleberry! you do me infinite
honour—I shall always rejoice to see you and
your hopeful nephew, Mr. Milfordhaven—My
credit, such as it is, you may command—I wish
we had more friends of your kidney—” 
Then, turning to Captain C&wblank;, “Ha, C&wblank;!
(said he) what news, C&wblank;? How does the
world wag? ha!” “The world wags much
after the old fashion, my lord (answered the
captain): the politicians of London and Westminster
have begun again to wag their tongues
against your grace and your short-lived popularity
wags like a feather, which the next puff of 

antiministerial calumny will blow away—” “A
pack of rascals (cried the duke)—Tories, Jacobites,
rebels; one half of them would wag their
heels at Tyburn, if they had their deserts—” 
So saying, he wheeled about; and, going round
the levee, spoke to every individual, with the most
courteous familiarity; but he scarce ever opened
his mouth without making some blunder, in relation
to the person or business of the party with
whom he conversed; so that he really looked like
a comedian hired to burlesque the character of a
minister—At length, a person of a very prepossessing
appearance coming in, his grace ran up, and,
hugging him in his arms, with the appellation of
“My dear Ch&wblank;s!” led him forthwith into the
inner apartment, or Sanctum Sanctorum of this political
temple. “That (said Captain C&wblank;) is
my friend C&wblank;T&wblank;, almost the only man of
parts who has any concern in the present administration
—Indeed, he would have no concern
at all in the matter, if the ministry did not find
it absolutely necessary to make use of his talents
upon some particular occasions—As for the common
business of the nation, it is carried on in a
constant routine by the clerks of the different
offices, otherwise the wheels of government
would be wholly stopt amidst the abrupt succession
of ministers, every one more ignorant than
his predecessor—I am thinking what a fine hovel
we should be in, if all the clerks of the treasury,
of the secretaries, the war office, and the admiralty,
should take it in their heads to throw up
their places in imitation of the great pensioner. 
—But, to return to C&wblank;T&wblank;; he certainly
knows more than all the ministry and all the opposition,
if their heads were laid together, and
talks like an angel on a vast variety of subjects. 
—He would really be a great man, if he had
any consistency or stability of character—Then 

it must be owned, he wants courage, otherwise
he would never allow himself to be cowed by
the great political bully, for whose understanding
he has justly a very great contempt. I have
seen him as much afraid of that overbearing
Hector, as ever school-boy was of his pedagogue; 
and yet this Hector, I shrewdly suspect,
is no more than a craven at bottom—Besides
this defect, C&wblank; has another, which he is at
too little pains to hide—There's no faith to be
given to his assertions, and no trust to be put in
his promises—However to give the Devil his
due, he's very good-natured; and even friendly,
when close urged in the way of solicitation
—As for principle, that's out of the question— 
In a word, he's a wit and an orator, extremely
entertaining, and he shines very often at the
expence even of those ministers to whom he is
a retainer—This is a mark of great imprudence,
by which he has made them all his enemies,
whatever face they may put upon the matter:
and sooner or later he'll have cause to wish he
had been able to keep his own counsel—I have
several times cautioned him on this subject; 
but 'tis all preaching to the desart—His vanity
runs away with his descretion—” I could not
help thinking the captain himself might have been
the better for some hints of the same nature.— 
His panegyrick, excluding principle and veracity,
puts me in mind of a contest I once over-heard, in
the way of altercation, betwixt two apple-women
in Spring-garden—One of those viragos having
hinted something to the prejudice of the other's moral
charact, her antagonist, setting her hands in her
sides, replied—“Speak out, hussy—I scorn your
malice—I own I'm both a whore and a thief; 
and what more have you to say? —Damn you,
what more have you to say? bating that, which
all the world knows, I challenge you to say 

black is the white of my eye—” We did not
wait for Mr. T&wblank;'s coming forth; but after
captain C&wblank; had characterised all the originals in
waiting, we adjourned to a coffee-house, where we
had buttered muffins and tea to breakfast, the said
captain still favouring us with his company—Nay,
my uncle was so diverted with his anecdotes, that
he asked him to dinner, and treated him with a fine
turbot, to which he did ample justice—That same
evening I spent at the tavern with some friends, one
of whom let me into C&wblank;'s character, which Mr.
Bramble no sooner understood, than he expressed
some concern for the connection he had made
and resolved to disengage himself from it without,
ceremony. 
We are become members of the Society for the
Encouragement of the Arts, and have assisted at
some of their deliberations, which were conducted
with equal spirit and sagacity—My uncle is extremely
fond of the institution, which will certainly be
productive of great advantages to the public, if,
from its democratical form, it does not degenerate
into cabal and corruption—You are already acquainted
with his aversion to the influence of the
multitude, which he affirms, is incompatible with
excellence, and subversive of order—Indeed his
detestation of the mob has been heightened by fear,
ever since he fainted in the room at Bath; and this
apprehension has prevented him from going to the
Little Theatre in the Hay-market, and other places
of entertainment, to which, however, I have had
the honour to attend the ladies. 
It grates old Square-Toes to reflect, that it is
not in his power to enjoy even the most elegant diversions
of the capital, without the participation of
the vulgar; for they now thrust themselves into all
assemblies, from a ridotto at St. James's, to a hop
at Rotherhithe. 

I have lately seen our old acquaintance Dick Ivy,
who we imagined had died of dram-drinking; but
he is lately emerged from the Fleet, by means of a
pamphlet which he wrote and published against the
government with some success. The sale of this
performance enabled him to appear in clean linen,
and he is now going about soliciting subscriptions,
for his Poems; but his breeches are not yet in the
most decent order. 
Dick certainly deserves some countenance for his
intrepidity and perseverance—It is not in the power
of disappointment, nor even of damnation, to drive
him to despair—After some unsuccessful essays in
the way of poetry, he commenced brandy-merchant,
and I believe his whole stock ran out through
his own bowels; then he consorted with a milkwoman,
who kept a cellar in Petty France: but he
could not make his quarters good, he was dislodged
and driven up stairs into the kennel by a corporal
in the second regiment of foot-guards—He was
afterwards the laureat of Blackfriers, from whence
there was a natural transition to the Fleet—As he
had formerly miscarried in panegyric, he now turned
his thoughts to satire, and really seems to have
some talent for abuse. If he can hold out till the
meeting of the parliament, and be prepared for
another charge, in all probability Dick will mount
the pillory, or obtain a pension, in either of which
events his fortune will be made—Mean while he
has acquired some degree of consideration with the
respectable writers of the age; and as I have subscribed
for his works, he did me the favour t'other
night to introduce me to a society of those geniuses; 
but I found them exceeding formal and reserved
—They seemed afraid and jealous of one
another, and sat in a state of mutual repulsion, like
so many particles of vapour, each surrounded by
its own electrified atmosphere. Dick, who has
more vivacity than judgment, tried more than 

once to enliven the conversation; sometimes making
an effort at wit, sometimes letting off a pun, and
sometimes discharging a conundrum; nay at
length he started a dispute upon the hackneyed comparison
betwixt blank verse and rhyme, and the
professors opened with great clamour; but, instead
of keeping to the subject, they launched out into
tedious dissertations on the poetry of the ancients; 
and one of them who had been a school-master,
displayed his whole knowledge of prosody, gleaned
from Disputer and Ruddiman. At last, I ventured
to say, I did not see how the subject in question
could be at all elucidated by the practice of the ancients,
who certainly had neither blank verse nor
rhyme in their poems, which were measured by
feet, whereas ours are reckoned by the number of
syllables—This remark seemed to give umbrage
to the pedant, who forthwith involved himself in a
cloud of Greek and Latin quotations, which nobody
attempted to dispel—A confused hum of
insipid observations and comments ensued; and,
upon the whole, I never passed a duller evening in
my life—Yet, without all doubt, some of them
were men of learning, wit, and ingenuity. As
they are afraid of making free with one another,
they should bring each his but, or whet-stone, along
with him, for the entertainment of the company
—My uncle says, he never desires to meet
with more than one wit at a time—One wit like a 
nuckle of ham in soup, gives a zest and flavour
to the dish; but more than one serves only to spoil
the pottage—And now I'm afraid I have given you
an unconscionable mess, without any flavour at all,
for which, I suppose, you will bestow your benedictions
upon 
your friend
and servant,
J. Melford 
London, June 5. 