


The behaviour of Mr. Morgan—his pride,
displeasure and generosity—the œconomy of
our mess described—Thomson's further
friendship—the nature of my duty explained
—the situation of the sick. 
While he was thus discoursing to me,
we heard a voice on the cockpit ladder,
pronounce with great vehemence, in a strange
dialect, “The devil and his dam blow me from
the top of Mounchdenny, if I go to him before
there is something in my belly;—let his
nose be as yellow as a saffron, or as plue as a
pell (look you) or as green as a leek, 'tis all
one.” —To this somebody answered, “So it
seems my poor mess-mate must part his cable
for want of a little assistance. —His fore-top-sail
is loose already; and besides, the doctor ordered
you to overhaul him;—but I see, you
don't mind what your master says.” —Here he 

was interrupted with, “Splutter and vons! you
lousy tog, who do you call my master? get
you gone to the doctor, and tell him my birth,
and my education, and my abilities; and
moreover, my behaviour is as good as his, or
any gentleman's (no disparagement to him) in
the whole world—Got pless my soul! does
he think, or conceive, or imagine, that I am
a horse, or an ass, or a goat, to trudge backwards
and forwards, and upwards and downwards,
and by sea and by land, at his will and
pleasures? —Go your ways, you rapscallion,
and tell doctor Atkins, that I desire and request,
that he will give a look upon the tying
man, and order something for him, if he be
dead or alive, and I will see him take it by
and by, when my craving stomach is satisfied,
look you.” —At this the other went away, saying,
that if they would serve him so, when he
was a dying, by G&sblank;d, he'd be foul of them in
the other world. —Here Mr. Thomson let me
know that the person we heard, was Mr. Morgan
the first mate, who was just come on board
from the hospital, where he had been with sick
people. —At the same time, I saw him come into
the birth. —He was a short thick man, with a
face garnished with pimples, a snub nose turned
up at the end, an excessive wide mouth, and little
fiery eyes, surrounded with skin puckered up in
innumerable wrinkles. —My friend immediately
made him acquainted with my case; when he regarded
me with a very lofty look, but without
speaking, set down a bundle he had in his hand,
and approached the cupboard, which when he
had opened, he exclaimed in a great passion,
“Cot is my life! all the pork is gone, as I am 

a christian!” Thomson then gave him to
understand, that as I had been brought on board
half famished, he could do no less than entertain
me with what was in the locker; and the
rather, as he had bid the steward enter me in
the mess. —Whether this disappointment made
Mr. Morgan more peevish than usual, or he really
thought himself too little regarded by his fellow-mate,
I know not, but after some pause, he
went on in this manner—“Mr. Thomson, perhaps
you do not use me with all the good
manners, and complaisance, and respect (look
you) that becomes you, because you have
not vouchsafed to advise with me in this affair. 
—I have, in my time (look you) been
a man of some weight, and substance, and
consideration, and have kept house and home,
and paid scot and lot, and the king's
taxes; ay, and maintained a family to boot. 
—And moreover, also, I am your senior, and
your elder, and your petter, Mr. Thomson.” 
—“My elder I'll allow you to be, but not my
better (cried Thomson, with some heat.)” — 
“Cot is my saviour, and witness too (said Morgan,
with great vehemence) that I am more
elder, and therefore more petter by many years
than you.” —Fearing this dispute might be attended
with some bad consequence, I interposed,
and told Mr. Morgan, I was very sorry for having
been the occasion of any difference between
him and the second mate; and that rather than
cause the least breach in their good understanding,
I would eat my allowance by myself, or seek admission
into some other company. —But Thomson,
with more spirit than discretion (as I thought)
insisted upon my remaining where he had appointed 

me; and observed that no man possessed
of generosity and compassion, would have any
objection to it, considering my birth and talents,
and the misfortunes I had of late so unjustly
undergone. —This was touching Mr. Morgan on
the right key, who protested with great earnestness,
that he had no objection to my being received
in the mess; but only complained, that
the ceremony of asking his consent was not observed. 
“As for a shentleman in distress (said
he, shaking me by the hand) I lose him as I
lose my own powels: For Got help me! I
have had vexations enough upon my own
pack.” —And as I afterwards learned, in so
saying he spoke no more than what was true; 
for he had been once settled in a very good situation
in Glamorganshire, and was ruined by being
security for an acquaintance. —All differences
being composed, he untied his bundle, which
consisted of three bunches of onions, and a great
lump of Cheshire-cheese wrapt up in a handkerchief; 
and taking some biscuit from the cupboard,
fell to with a keen appetite, inviting us to a
share of the repast. —When he had fed heartily
on this homely fare, he filled a large cup made
of a cocoa-nut-shell, with brandy, and drinking
it off, told us, “Prandy was the best menstruum
for onion and cheese.” —His hunger being appeased,
he began to shew a great deal of good humour; 
and being inquisitive about my birth, no
sooner understood that I was descended of a good
family, then he discovered a particular good-will
to me on that account, deducing his own pedigree
in a direct line from the famous Caractacus
king of the Britons, who was first the prisoner
and afterwards the friend of Claudius Cæsar. — 

Perceiving how much I was reduced in point
of linnen, he made me a present of two good
ruffled shirts, which with two of check Mr.
Thomson gave me, enabled me to appear with
decency. —Mean while the sailor, whom Mr.
Morgan had sent to the doctor, brought a prescription
for his mess-mate, which when Mr.
Welchman had read, he got up to prepare it,
and asked if the man was “Tead or alive.” — 
“Dead! (replied Jack) if he was dead he would
have no occasion for doctor's stuff. —No,
thank God, death has'n't as yet boarded him,
but they have been yard arm and yard arm
these three glasses.” —“Are his eyes open?
(continued the mate.)” —“His starboard
eye (said the sailor) is open, but fast jamm'd
in his head; and the haulyards of his underjaw
are given way.” —“Passion of my
heart! (cried Morgan) the man is as pad as
one would desire in a summer's day! —Did
you feel his pulses? To this, the other replied
with “Anan?” —Upon which this Cambro
Briton, with great earnestness and humanity, ordered
the tar to run to his mess-mate and keep
him alive till he should come with the medicine,
“and then (said he) you shall peradventure, pehold
what you shall see.” —The poor fellow with
great simplicity ran to the place where the sick man
lay, but in less than a minute, returned with a woful
countenance, and told us his comrade had struck. 
Morgan hearing this, exclaimed, “Mercy upon
my salfation! why did you not stop him till I
came?” —“Stop him (said the other) I hailed
him several times, but he was too far on his
way, and the enemy had got possession of his
close quarters; so that he did not mind me.” 

—“Well, well, (said he) we all owe heaven a
Teath. —Go your ways, you ragamuffin, and
take an example and a warning, look you, and
repent of your misteets.” —So saying, he
pushed the seamen out of the birth. 
While he entertained us with reflections suitable
to this event, we heard the boatswain pipe to
dinner; and immediately the boy belonging to our
mess, run to the locker, from whence he carried
off a large wooden platter, and in a few minutes,
returned with it full of boiled peas, crying,
“Scaldings,” all the way as he came. —The
cloath, consisting of a piece of an old sail, was
instantly laid, covered with three plates, which by
the colour, I could with difficulty discern to be
metal, and as many spoons of the same composition,
two of which were curtailed in the handles,
and the other in the lip. Mr. Morgan himself
enriched this mess with a lump of salt butter,
scooped from an old gallipot, and a handful of
onions shorn, with some pounded pepper. —I
was not very much tempted with the appearance of
this dish, of which, nevertheless, my mess-mates
eat heartily, advising me to follow their example,
as it was banyan day, and we could have no
meat till next noon. —But I had already laid in
sufficient for the occasion; and therefore desired
to be excused; expressing a curiosity to know the
meaning of banyan day. —They told me, that on
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, the ship's company
had no allowance of meat, and that these
meagre days were called banyan days, the reason of
which they did not know; but I have since learned
they take their denomination from a sect of devotees
in some parts of the East Indies, who never
taste flesh. 

After dinner, Thomson led me round the ship,
shewed me the different parts, described their
uses, and as far as he could, made me acquainted
with the particulars of the discipline and œconomy
my practised on board. —He then demanded of
the boatswain, an hammock for me, which was
flung in a very neat manner by my friend Jack
Rattlin; and as I had no bed-cloaths, procured
credit for me with the purser, for a matrass and
two blankets. —At seven a-clock in the evening,
Morgan visited the sick, and having ordered what
was proper for each, I assisted Thomson in making
up his prescriptions: But when I followed him with
the medicines into the sick birth or hospital, and observed
the situation of the patients, I was much less
surprised to find people die on board, than astonished
to find any body recover. —Here I saw about fifty
miserable distempered wretches, suspended in rows,
so huddled one upon another, that not more than
fourteen inches of space was allotted for each with
his bed and bedding; and deprived of the light
of the day, as well as of fresh air; breathing nothing
but a noisome atmosphere of the morbid
steams exhaling from their own excrements and
diseased bodies, devoured with vermin hatched
in the filth that surrounded them, and destitute
of every convenience necessary for people in that
helpless condition. 