


Proceeds for the capital. Takes up his lodging at
Bernay, where he is overtaken by Mr. Hornbeck,
whose head he longs to fortify. 
During this day's expedition, Mr. Jolter
took an opportunity of imparting to his
pupil the remarks he had made upon the industry
of the French, as an undeniable proof of which
he bad him cast his eyes around, and observe with
what care every spot of ground was cultivated; 
and from the fertility of that province, which is
reckoned the poorest in France, conceive the
wealth and affluence of the nation in general. 
Peregrine amazed as well as disgusted at this infatuation,
answered that what he ascribed to industry,
was the effect of meer wretchedness; the
miserable peasants being obliged to plough up
every inch of ground to satisfy their oppressive
landlords, while they themselves and their cattle
looked like so many images of famine; that their
extreme poverty was evident from the face of the
country, on which there was not one inclosure
to be seen, or any other object, except scanty
crops of barley and oats, which could never reward
the toil of the husbandman; that their habitations
were no better than paultry huts; that
in twenty miles of extent, not one gentleman's
house appeared; that nothing was more abject and
forlorn than the attire of their country people; 
and lastly, that the equipage of their travelling
chaises was infinitely inferior to that of a dungcart
in England; and that the postilion who then 

drove their carriage, had neither stockings to his
legs, nor a shirt to his back. 
The governor finding his charge so intractable,
resolved to leave him in the mist of his own ignorance
and prejudice, and reserve his observations
for those who would pay more deference
to his opinion; and indeed this resolution he had
often made, and as often broke, in the transports
of his zeal, that frequently hurried him out
of the plan of conduct which in his cooler moments
he had laid down. They halted for a refreshment
at Montreuil, and about eight in the
evening arrived at a village called Bernay, where
while they waited for fresh horses, they were informed
by the landlord, that the gates of Abbe
Ville were shut every night punctually at nine
o'clock; so that it would be impossible for them
to get admittance; and that there was not another
place of entertainment on the road where
they could pass the night; he therefore, as a friend,
advised them to stay at his house, where they
would find the best of accommodation, and proceed
upon their journey by times in the morning. 
Mr. Jolter, though he had travelled on that
road before, could not recollect whether or not
mine host spoke truth; but his remonstrance being
very plausible, our hero determined to follow
his advice, and being conducted into an apartment,
asked what they could have for supper. 
The landlord mentioned every thing that was eatable
in the house, and the whole being ingrossed
for the use of him and his attendants, he amused
himself till such time as it could be dressed, in conversing
with the daughter, who was a sprightly damsel
about the age of seventeen; and in strolling about
the house, which stands in a very rural situation. 

While he thus loitered away the time that hung
heavy on his hands, another chaise arrived at the
inn, and upon inquiry he found that the new
comers were Mr. Hornbeck and his lady. The
landlord, conscious of his inability to entertain this
second company, came and begged with great
humiliation that Mr. Pickle would spare them
some part of the victuals he had bespoke; but he
refused to part with so much as the wing of a partridge,
though at the same time he sent his compliments
to the strangers, and giving them to understand
how ill the house was provided for their
reception, invited them to partake of his supper. 
Mr. Hornbeck, who was not deficient in point of
politeness, and extremely well disposed for a relishing
meal, which he had reason to expect from
the savoury steam that issued from the kitchen,
could not resist this second instance of our young
gentleman's civility, which he acknowledged by
a message, importing that he and his wife would
do themselves the pleasure of profiting by his
courteous offer. Peregrine's cheeks glowed when
he found himself on the eve of being acquainted
with Mrs. Hornbeck, of whose heart he had already
made a conquest in imagination; and he
forthwith set his invention at work, to contrive
some means of defeating her husband's vigilance. 
When supper was ready, he in person gave
notice to his guests, and leading the lady into his
apartments, seated her in an elbow chair at the upper
end of the table, squeezing her hand and
darting a most insidious glance at the same time. 
This abrupt behaviour he practised on the presumption,
that a lady of her breeding was not to
be addressed with the tedious forms that must be
observed in one's advances to a person of birth 

and genteel education; and in all probability his
calculation was just, for Mrs. Hornbeck gave no
signs of discontent at this sort of treatment, but
on the contrary, seemed to consider it as a proof
of the young gentleman's regard; and though she
did not venture to open her mouth three times
during the whole repast, she shewed herself particularly
well satisfied with her entertainer, by
sundry sly and significant looks, while her husband's
eyes were directed another way, and divers
loud peals of laughter, signifying her approbation
of the sallies which he uttered in the course
of their conversation. Her spouse began to be
very uneasy at the frank demeanour of his yokefellow,
whom he endeavoured to check in her
vivacity, by assuming a severity of aspect; but
whether she obeyed the dictates of her own disposition,
which, perhaps, was merry and unreserved,
or wanted to punish Mr. Hornbeck for
his jealousy of temper; certain it is, her gaiety
increased to such a degree, that her husband was
grievously alarmed and incensed at her conduct,
and resolved to make her sensible of his displeasure,
by treading in secret upon her toes. He was,
however, so disconcerted by his indignation, that
he mistook his mark, and applied the sharp heel
of his shoe to the side of Mr. Jolter's foot, comprehending
his little toe that was studded with an
angry corn, which he invaded with such a sudden
jerk, that the governor, unable to endure the torture
in silence, started up, and dancing on the floor,
roared hideously with repeated bellowings, to the
unspeakable enjoyment of Peregrine and the lady,
who laughed themselves almost into convulsions
at the joke. Hornbeck, confounded at the mistake
he had committed, begged pardon of the injured 

tutor with great contrition, protesting that the
blow he had so unfortunately received, was intended
for an ugly cur, which he thought had
posted himself under the table. It was lucky for
him that there was actually a dog in the room, to
justify this excuse, which Jolter admitted with the
tears running over his cheeks, and the œconomy
of the table was re-composed. 
As soon, however, as the strangers could with
decency withdraw, this suspicious husband took
his leave of the youth, on pretence of being fatigued
with his journey, after having, by way of
compliment, proposed that they should travel together
next day; and Peregrine handed the lady
to her chamber, where he wished her good night
with another warm squeeze, which she returned. 
This favourable hint made his heart bound with a
transport of joy; he lay in wait for an opportunity
of declaring himself, and seeing the husband
go down into the yard with a candle, he glided
softly into his apartment, and found her almost
undressed. Impelled by the impetuosity of his
passion, which was still more inflamed by her present
luscious appearance, and encouraged by the
approbation she had already expressed, he ran towards
her with eagerness, crying, “Zounds!
madam, your charms are irresistible!” and without
further ceremony would have clasped her in
his arms, had not she begged him for the love of
God to retire, for should Mr. Hornbeck return
and find him there, she would be undone for ever. 
He was not so blinded by his passion but that he
saw the reasonableness of her fear, and as he could
not pretend to crown his wishes at that interview,
he avowed himself her lover, assured her that he
would exhaust his whole invention in finding a 

proper opportunity for throwing himself at her
feet; and in the mean time he ravished sundry
small favours, which she in the hurry of her fright
could not with-hold from his impudence of address. 
Having thus happily settled the preliminaries,
he withdrew to his own chamber, and
spent the whole night in contriving stratagems to
elude the jealous caution of his fellow-traveller. 