


The behaviour of Mrs. Grizzle at the wedding,
with an account of the guests. 
I hope it will not be thought uncharitable, if I
advance by way of conjecture, that Mrs.
Grizzle, on this grand occasion, summoned her
whole exertion, to play off the artillery of her
charms, upon the single gentlemen who were invited
to the entertainment: sure I am, she displayed
to the best advantage all the engaging qualities
she possessed: her affability at dinner was
altogether uncommon, her attention to the guests
was superfluously hospitable, her tongue was sheathed
with a most agreeable and infantine lisp, her address
was perfectly obliging; and though, conscious
of the extraordinary capacity of her mouth,
she would not venture to hazard a laugh, she
modelled her lips into an enchanting simper,
which played upon her countenance all day long; 
nay, she even profited by that defect in her vision
we have already observed, and securely contemplated
those features which were most to her likeing,
while the rest of the company believed her
regards were disposed in a quite contrary direction. 
With what humility of complaisance did she receive 

the compliments of those who could not
help praising the elegance of the banquet! and
how piously did she seize that opportunity of commemorating
the honours of her fire, by observing
that it was no merit in her to understand something
of entertainments, as she had occasion to
preside at so many, during the mayoralty of her
papa! Far from discovering the least symptom of
pride and exultation, when the opulence of her
family became the subject of conversation, she
assumed a severity of countenance; and after
having moralized on the vanity of riches, declared
that those who looked upon her as a fortune,
were very much mistaken; for her father had left
her no more than poor five thousand pounds,
which, with what little she had saved of the interest
since his death, was all she had to depend
upon: indeed, if she had placed her chief felicity
in wealth, she should not have been so forward
in destroying her own expectations, by advising
and promoting the event at which they were now
so happily assembled; but she hoped she should
always have virtue enough to postpone any interested
consideration, when it should happen to
clash with the happiness of her friends. Finally,
such was her modesty and self denial, that
she industriously informed those whom it might
concern, that she was no less than three years
older than the bride; though had she added ten
to the reckoning, she would have committed no
mistake in point of computation. 
To contribute as much as lay in her power to
the satisfaction of all present, she in the afternoon
regaled them with a tune on the harpsichord, accompanied
with her voice, which, though not the
most melodious in the world, I dare say, would 

have been equally at their service, could she have
vyed with Philomel in song; and as the last effort
of her complaisance when dancing was proposed,
she was prevailed upon, at the request of her new
sister, to open the ball in person. 
In a word, Mrs. Grizzle was the principal figure
in this festival, and almost eclipsed the bride, who
far from seeming to dispute the preheminence,
very wisely allowed her to make the best of her
talents; contenting herself with the lot to which
fortune had already called her, and which she
imagined would not be the less desirable, if her
sister-in-law were detached from the family. 
I believe I need scarce advertise the reader,
that during this whole entertainment, the commodore
and his lieutenant were quite out of their
element; and this indeed, was the case with the
bridegroom himself, who being utterly unacquainted
with any sort of polite commerce, found
himself under a very disagreeable restraint during
the whole scene. 
Trunnion, who had scarce ever been on shore
till he was paid off, and never once in his whole
life, in the company of any females above the
rank of those who herd upon the point at Portsmouth,
was more embarrassed about his behaviour
than if he had been surrounded at sea by
the whole French navy. He had never pronounced
the word Madam since he was born, so
that far from entering into conversation with the
ladies, he would not even return the compliment,
or give the least nod of civility when they drank
to his health; and I verily believe, would rather
have suffered suffocation, than allowed the simple
phrase, your servant, to proceed from his mouth. 
He was altogether as inflexible with respect to the 

attitudes of his body; for, either through obstinacy
or bashfulness, he sat upright without motion,
insomuch that he provoked the mirth of a
certain wag, who addressing himself to the lieutenant,
asked whether that was the commodore
himself, or the wooden lion that used to stand at
his gate? An image to which, it must be owned,
Mr. Trunnion's person bore no faint resemblance. 
Mr. Hatchway, who was not quite so unpolished
as the commodore, and had certain notions
that seemed to approach the ideas of common life,
made a less uncouth appearance; but then he was
a wit, and though of a very peculiar genius, partook
largely of that disposition which is common
to all wits, who never enjoy themselves, except
when their talents meet with those marks of distinction
and veneration, which (in their own
opinion) they deserve. 
These circumstances being premised, it is
not to be wondered at, if this triumvirate made
no objections to the proposal, when some of
the grave personages of the company made a
motion for adjourning into another apartment,
where they might enjoy their pipes and bottles,
while the young folks indulged themselves in the
continuance of their own favourite diversion. Thus
rescued, as it were, from a state of annihilation, the
first use the two lads of the castle made of their existence,
was to ply the bridegroom so hard with
bumpers, that in less than an hour he made divers
efforts to sing, and soon after was carried to bed, deprived
of all manner of sensation, to the utter disappointment
of the bridemen and maids, who, by
this accident, were prevented from throwing the
stocking, and performing certain other ceremonies 

practised on such occasions. As for the bride,
she bore this misfortune with great good humour,
and indeed, on all occasions, behaved like a discreet
woman, perfectly well acquainted with the
nature of her own situation. 