


MISS WILLIS has pronounced my doom
—you are going away, dear Miss Melford!—you
are going to be removed, I know not whither! what
shall I do? which way shall I turn for consolation? 
I know not what I say—all night long have I been
tossed in a sea of doubts and fears, uncertainty and
distraction, without being able to connect my
thoughts, much less to form any consistent plan of
conduct—I was even tempted to wish that I had
never seen you; or that you had been less amiable,
or less compassionate to your poor Wislon; and yet
it would be detestable ingratitude in me to form
such a wish, considering how much I am indebted
to your goodness, and the ineffable pleasure I have
derived from your indulgence and approbation— 
Good God! I never heard your name mentioned
without emotion! the most distant prospect of being
admitted to your company, filled my whole soul with
a kind of pleasing alarm! as the time approached,
my heart beat with redoubled force, and every nerve
thrilled with a transport of expectation; but,
when I found myself actually in your presence;— 
when I heard you speak;—when I saw you smile; 
when I beheld your charming eyes turned favourably 

upon me; my breast was filled with such
tumults of delight, as wholly deprived me of the
power of utterance, and wrapt me in a delirium of
joy!—encouraged by your sweetness of temper
and affability, I ventured to describe the feelings of
my heart—even then you did not check my presumption
—you pitied my sufferings, and gave me
leave to hope—you put a favourable—perhaps
too favourable a construction, on my appearance— 
certain it is, I am no player in love—I speak the
language of my own heart; and have no prompter
but nature. —Yet there is something in this
heart, which I have not yet disclosed—I flattered
myself—But, I will not—I must not proceed— 
Dear Miss Liddy! for Heaven's sake, contrive, if
possible, some means of letting me speak to you
before you leave Gloucester; otherwise, I know
not what will—But I begin to rave again—I will
endeavour to bear this trial with fortitude—while
I am capable of reflecting upon your tenderness
and truth, I surely have no cause to despair—yet I
am strangely affected. The sun seems to deny me
light—a cloud hangs over me, and there is a dreadful
weight upon my spirits! While you stay in this
place, I shall continually hover about your lodgings,
as the parted soul is said to linger about the grave
where its mortal consort lies—I know, if it is in
your power, you will task your humanity—your
compassion—shall I add, your affection? in order
to assuage the almost intolerable disquiet that torments
the heart of your afflicted, 
Wilson. 
Gloucester, March 31. 