


Peregrine sets out for the garison, and meets with
a nymph of the road, whom he takes into keeping,
and metamorphoses into a fine lady. 
In the mean time, our hero jogged along in a
profound reverie, which was disturbed by a
beggar-woman and her daughter, who solicited him
for alms, as he passed them on the road. The girl
was about the age of sixteen, and notwithstanding
the wretched equipage in which she appeared, exhibited
to his view a set of agreeable features, enlivened
with the complexion of health and chearfulness. 
The resolution I have already mentioned
was still warm in his imagination; and he looked
upon this young mendicant as a very proper object
for the performance of his vow. He therefore
entered into a conference with the mother,
and for a small sum of money purchased her property
in the wench, who did not require much
courtship and intreaty, before she consented to 

accompany him to any place that he should appoint
for her habitation. 
This contract being settled to his satisfaction,
he ordered Pipes to seat his acquisition behind
him upon the crupper, and alighting at the first
public house which they found upon the road,
he wrote a letter to Hatchway, desiring him to
receive this hedge-inamorata, and direct her to
be cleaned and cloathed in a decent manner,
with all expedition, so that she should be touchable
upon his arrival, which (on that account)
he would defer for the space of one day. This
billet, together with the girl, he committed to
the charge of Pipes, after having laid strong injunctions
upon him to abstain from all attempts
upon her chastity, and ordered him to make the
best of his way to the garison, while he himself
crossed the country to a market-town, where he
proposed to spend the night. 
Tom thus cautioned, proceeded with his
charge, and being naturally taciturn, opened not
his lips, until he had performed the best half of
his journey. But Thomas, notwithstanding his
irony appearance, was in reality composed of
flesh and blood; and his desire being titillated by
the contact of a buxome wench, whose right arm
embraced his middle as he rode, his thoughts began
to mutiny against his master, and he found
it almost impossible to withstand the temptation
of making love. 
Nevertheless, he wrestled with these rebellious
suggestions with all the reason that God had enabled
him to exert; and that being totally overcome,
his victorious passion suddenly broke out
in this address. “'Sblood! a believe master
thinks I have no more stuff in my body than a 

dried haddock, to turn me adrift in the dark
with such a spanker. D'ye think he don't, my
dear?” To this question his fellow traveller replied,
“Swanker! Anan!” And the lover resumed
his suit, saying, “Oons! how you tickle
my timbers! Something shoots from your arm,
through my stowage, to the very keel-stone. 
Han't you got quick-silver in your hand?” 
“Quicksilver! (said the lady) D&wblank;n the silver
that has crossed my hand this month. D'ye
think if I had silver, I shouldn't buy me a smock?” 
“Addsooks! ye baggage, (cried the lover) you
shouldn't want a smock nor a petticoat neither,
if you could have a kindness for a true-hearted
sailor, as sound and strong as a nine inch cable,
that would keep all clear above-board, and every
thing snug under the hatches.” “Curse your
gum (said the charmer) what's your gay balls
and your hatchets to me?” “Do but let us
bring to a little, (answered the woer, whose
appetite was by this time whetted to a most ravenous
degree) and I'll teach you to box the
compass, my dear. Ah! you strapper, what a
jolly bitch you are!” “Bitch! (exclaimed this
modern Dulcinea, incensed at the opprobrious
term) such a bitch as your mother, you dog. 
D&wblank;n ye, I've a good mind to box your jaws
instead of your comepiss. I'll let you know
as how I am meat for your master, you saucy
blackguard. You are worse than a dog, you old
flinty-faced, flea-bitten scrub: a dog wears his
own coat, but you wear your master's.” 
Such a torrent of disgraceful epithets from a
person who had no cloaths at all, converted the
gallant's love into choler, and he threatened to
dismount and seize her to a tree, when she should 

have a taste of his cat and nine tails athwart her
quarters; but, instead of being intimidated by
his menaces, she set him at defiance, and held
forth with such a flow of eloquence, as would
have intitled her to a considerable share of reputation,
even among the nymphs of Billingsgate; 
for this young lady, over and above a natural genius
for altercation, had her talents cultivated
among the venerable society of weeders, podders,
and hoppers, with whom she had associated from
her tender years. No wonder then, that she
soon obtained a compleat victory over Pipes,
who (as the reader may have observed) was very
little addicted to the exercise of speech: indeed
he was utterly disconcerted by her volubility of
tongue; and being altogether unfurnished with
answers to the distinct periods of her discourse,
very wisely chose to save himself the expence of
breath and argument, by giving her a full swing
of cable, so that she might bring herself up; 
while he rode onwards, in silent composure,
without taking any farther notice of his fair fellow-traveller
than if she had been his master's
cloak-bag. 
In spite of all the dispatch he could make, it
was late before he arrived at the garison, where
he delivered the letter and the lady to the lieutenant,
who no sooner understood the intention of
his friend, than he ordered all the tubs in the
house to be carried into the hall, and filled with
water; and Tom having provided himself with
swabs and brushes, divested the fair stranger of
her variegated drapery, which was immediately
committed to the flames, and performed upon her
soft and sleek person the ceremony of scrubbing,
as it is practised on board of the king's ships of 

war. Yet the nymph herself did not submit to
this purification without repining: she curs'd the
director, who was upon the spot, with many
abusive allusions to his wooden leg: and as for
Pipes the operator, she employed her talons so
effectually upon his face, that the blood ran over
his nose in sundry streams; and next morning,
when those rivulets were dry, his countenance resembled
the rough bark of a plumb-tree, plastered
with gum. Nevertheless, he did his duty with
great perseverance, cut off her hair close to the
scalp, handled his brushes with dexterity, applied
his swabs of different magnitude and texture,
as the case required, and lastly, rinsed her whole
body with a dozen pails of cold water, discharged
upon her head. 
These ablutions being executed, he dried her
with towels, accommodated her with a clean
shift, and acting the part of a valet de chambre,
cloathed her from head to foot, in clean and decent
apparel which had belonged to Mrs. Hatchway; 
by which means her appearance was altered
so much for the better, that when Peregrine
arrived next day, he would scarce believe his own
eyes. He was, for that reason, extremely well
pleased with his purchase, and now resolved to
indulge a whim which seized him at the very instant
of his arrival. 
He had (as I believe the reader will readily allow)
made considerable progress in the study of
character, from the highest rank to the most
humble station of life, and found it diversified in
the same manner, thro' every degree of subordination
and precedency: nay, he moreover observed,
that the conversation of those who are
dignified with the appellation of polite company, 

is neither more edifying nor entertaining than
that which is met with among the lower classes
of mankind; and that the only essential difference
in point of demeanor, is the form of an education,
which the meanest capacity can acquire, without
much study or application. Possessed of this notion,
he determined to take the young mendicant
under his own tutorage and instruction. In consequence
of which he hoped he should, in a few
weeks, be able to produce her in company, as an
accomplished young lady of uncommon wit, and
an excellent understanding. 
This extravagant plan he forthwith began to
execute with great eagerness and industry; and
his endeavours succeeded even beyond his expectation. 
The obstacle, in surmounting of
which he found the greatest difficulty, was an inveterate
habit of swearing, which had been indulged
from her infancy, and confirmed by the
example of those among whom she had lived. 
However, she had the rudiments of good sense
from nature, which taught her to listen to wholesome
advice, and was so docile as to comprehend
and retain the lessons which her governor recommended
to her attention; insomuch, that he ventured,
in a few days, to present her at table,
among a set of country squires, to whom she was
introduced as a niece of the lieutenant. In that
capacity she sat with becoming easiness of mien
(for she was as void of the mauvaise honte as any
dutchess in the land) bowed very graciously to
the compliments of the gentlemen; and tho' she
said little or nothing, because she was previously
cautioned on that score, she more than once gave
way to laughter, and her mirth happened to be
pretty well timed. In a word, she attracted the 

applause and admiration of the guests, who, after
she was withdrawn, complimented Mr. Hatchway
upon the beauty, breeding and good humour
of his kinswoman. 
But what contributed more than any other circumstance
to her speedy improvement, was some
small insight into the primer, which she had acquired
at a day-school, during the life of her father,
who was a day-labourer in the country. 
Upon this foundation did Peregrine build a most
elegant superstructure; he culled out choice sentences
from Shakespear, Otway, and Pope, and
taught her to repeat them with emphasis and
theatrical cadence: he then instructed her in the
names and epithets of the most celebrated players,
which he directed her to pronounce occasionally,
with an air of careless familiarity; and perceiving
that her voice was naturally clear, he enriched
it with remnants of opera tunes, to be
hummed during a pause in conversation, which
is generally supplied with the circulation of a
pinch of snuff. By means of this cultivation, she
became a wonderful proficient in the polite
graces of the age; she, with great facility, comprehended
the scheme of whist, tho' cribbidge
was her favourite game, with which she had
amused herself in her vacant hours, from her first
entrance into the profession of hopping; and brag
soon grew familiar to her practice and conception. 
Thus prepared, she was exposed to the company
of her own sex, being first of all visited by
the parson's daughter, who could not avoid shewing
that civility to Mr. Hatchway's niece, after
she had made her public appearance at church. 
Mrs. Clover, who had a great share of penetration, 

could not help entertaining some doubts
about this same relation, whose name she had
never heard the uncle mention, during the whole
term of her residence at the garison; but as the
young lady was treated in that character, she
would not refuse her acquaintance, and after
having seen her at the castle, actually invited
Miss Hatchway to her house. In short, she made
a progress thro' almost all the families in the
neighbourhood; and, by dint of her quotations,
(which, by the bye, were not always judiciously
used) she passed for a sprightly young lady, of
uncommon learning and taste. 
Peregrine having, in this manner, initiated her
in the beau monde of the country, conducted her
to London, where she was provided with private
lodgings and a female attendant; and put her
immediately under the tuition of his valet de
chambre, who had orders to instruct her in dancing
and the French language. He attended her
to plays and concerts, three or four times a
week; and when our hero thought her sufficiently
accustomed to the sight of great company, he
squired her in person to a public assembly, and
danced with her among all the gay ladies of
fashion: not but that there was still an evident
air of rusticity and aukwardness in her demeanor,
which was interpreted into an agreeable
wildness of spirit, superior to the forms of common
breeding. He afterwards found means to
make her acquainted with some distinguished
patterns of her own sex, by whom she was admitted
into their most elegant parties, and continued
to make good her pretensions to gentility,
with great circumspection, till one evening, being
at cards with a certain lady, whom she detected 

in the very fact of unfair conveyance, she taxed
her roundly with the fraud, and brought upon
herself such a torrent of sarcastic reproof, as overbore
all her maxims of caution, and burst open
the floodgates of her own natural repartee,
twanged off with the appellations of b&wblank; and
w&wblank;, which she repeated with great vehemence,
in an attitude of manual defiance, to the
terror of her antagonist, and the astonishment of
all present: nay, to such an unguarded pitch
was she provoked, that starting up, she snapt
her fingers, in testimony of disdain, and, as she
quitted the room, applied her hand to that part
which was the last of her that disappeared, inviting
the company to kiss it, by one of its coarsest
denominations. 
Peregrine was a little disconcerted at this oversight
in her behaviour, which, by the dæmon of
intelligence, was in a moment conveyed to all
the private companies in town; so that she was
absolutely excluded from all polite communication,
and Peregrine, for the present, disgraced
among the modest part of his female acquaintance,
many of whom not only forbad him their
houses, on account of the impudent insult he had
committed upon their honour as well as understanding,
in palming a common trull upon them,
as a young lady of birth and education, but also
aspersed his family, by affirming that she was actually
his own counsin-german, whom he had
precipitately raised from the most abject state of
humility and contempt. In revenge for this calumny,
our young gentleman explained the
whole mystery of her promotion, together with
the motives that induced him to bring her into the
fashionable world; and repeated among his companions, 

the extravagant encomiums which had
been bestowed upon her by the most discerning
matrons of the age. 
Mean while, the infanta herself being rebuked
by her benefactor, for this instance of misbehaviour,
promised faithfully to keep a stricter guard
for the future over her conduct, and applied herself
with great assiduity to the studies, in which
she was assisted by the Swiss, who gradually lost
the freedom of his heart, while she was profiting
by his instruction. In other words, she made a
conquest of her preceptor, who yielding to the
instigations of the flesh, chose a proper opportunity
to declare his passion, which was powerfully
recommended by his personal qualifications; and
his intentions being honourable, she listened to
his proposals of espousing her in private. In
consequence of this agreement, they made an
elopement together; and being buckled at the
fleet, consummated their nuptials in private lodgings,
by the Seven Dials, from which the husband
next morning sent a letter to our hero, begging
forgiveness for the clandestine step he had
taken, which he solemnly protested was not owing
to any abatement in his inviolable regard for
his master, whom he should always honour and
esteem to his latest breath, but intirely to the irresistible
charms of the young lady, to whom he
was now so happy as to be joined in the silken
bonds of marriage. 
Peregrine, tho' at first offended at his valet's
presumption, was, upon second thoughts, reconciled
to the event by which he was delivered
from an incumbrance; for by this time he had
performed his frolick, and begun to be tired of
his acquisition. He reflected on the former fidelity 

of the Swiss, which had been manifested in a
long course of service and attachment; and thinking
it would be cruelly severe to abandon him to
poverty and distress for one venial trespass, he
resolved to pardon what he had done, and enable
him in some shape to provide for the family
which he had intailed upon himself. 
With these sentiments, he sent a favourable
answer to the delinquent, desiring to see him as
soon as his passion would permit him to leave the
arms of his spouse, for an hour or two; and
Hadgi, in obedience to this intimation, repaired
immediately to the lodgings of his master, before
whom he appeared with a most penitential aspect. 
Peregrine, tho' he could scarce help laughing at
his rueful length of face, reprimanded him sharply
for his disrespect and ingratitude, in taking that
by stealth which he might have had for asking; 
and the culprit assured him, that next to the vengeance
of God, his displeasure was that which,
of all evils, he dreaded to incur; but that love
had distracted his brain in such a manner, as to
banish every other consideration but that of gratifying
his desire; and he owned, that he should
not have been able to preserve his fidelity and
duty to his own father, had they interfered with
the interest of his passion. He then appealed to
his master's own heart for the remission of his
guilt, alluding to certain circumstances of our
hero's conduct, which evinced the desperate effects
of love. In short, he made such an apology
as extorted a smile from his offended judge, who
not only forgave his transgression, but also promised
to put him in some fair way of earning a
comfortable subsistence. 

The Swiss was so much affected with this instance
of generosity, that he fell upon his knees,
and kissed his hand, praying to heaven, with
great fervour, to make him worthy of such goodness
and condescension. His scheme, he said, was
to open a coffeehouse and tavern in some creditable
part of the town, in hopes of being favoured
with the custom of a numerous acquaintance
he had made among upper servants and reputable
tradesmen, not doubting that his wife would be
an ornament to his bar, and a careful manager of
his affairs. Peregrine approved of the plan, towards
the execution of which he made him and
his wife a present of five hundred pounds, together
with a promise of erecting a weekly club
among his friends, for the reputation and advantage
of the house. 
Hadgi was so transported with his good fortune,
that he ran to Pipes, who was in the room, and
having hugged him with great cordiality, and
made his obeisance to his master, hied him home
to his yokefellow, to communicate his happiness,
cutting capers, and talking to himself all the
way. 