


Which the reader, on perusal, may wish
were chapter the last. 
The Doctor prescribed a repetatur
of the julep, and mixed the
ingredients secundem artem; Tom
Clarke hemmed thrice, to clear his
pipes; while the rest of the company,
including Dolly and her mother,
who had by this time administred
to the knight, composed themselves
into earnest and hushed attention. 
Then the young lawyer began
his narration to this effect: —“I tell 

ye what, gemmen, I don't pretend
in this here case to flourish and harangue
like a&wblank;having never been
called to—but what of that, d'ye
see?—perhaps I may know as much
as&wblank;&wblank;Facts are facts, as the saying
is. —I shall tell, repeat, and relate a
plain story—matters of fact, d'ye see,
without rhetoric, oratory, ornament,
or embellishment; without repetition,
tautology, circumlocution, or going
about the bush: facts which I shall
aver, partly on the testimony of my
own knowledge, and partly from the
information of responsible evidences of
good repute and credit, any circumstance
known to the contrary notwithstanding:
—for, as the law saith, if
so be as how there is an exception to
evidence, that exception is in its nature
but a denial of what is taken to
be good by the other party, and exceptio
in non exceptis, firmat regulam,
d'ye see. —But, howsomever, in regard
to this here affair, we need not
be so scrupulous as if we were pleading
before a judge sedente curia—” 

Ferret, whose curiosity was rather
more eager than that of any other
person in this audience, being provoked
by this preamble, dashed the
pipe he had just filled in pieces against
the grate; and after having pronounced
the interjection pish, with
an acrimony of aspect altogether peculiar
to himself, “If (said he) impertinence
and folly were felony by
the statute, there would be no want
of unexceptionable evidence to hang
such an eternal babbler.” “Anan,
babbler! (cried Tom, reddening with
passion, and starting up) I'd have you
to know, Sir, that I can bite as well
as babble; and that, if I am so minded,
I can run upon the foot after my
game without being in fault, as the
saying is; and which is more, I can
shake an old fox by the collar.” 
How far this young lawyer might
have proceeded to prove himself
staunch on the person of the misanthrope,
if he had not been prevented,
we shall not determine; but the
whole company were alarmed at his 

looks and expressions. Dolly's rosy
cheeks assumed an ash-colour, while
she ran between the disputants, crying,
“Naay, naay—vor the love of
God doant then, doan't then!” But
captain Crowe exerted a parental authority
over his nephew, saying, Avast,
Tom, avast! —Snugg's the
word—we'll have no boarding, d'ye
see. —Haul forward thy chair again,
take thy berth, and proceed with thy
story in a direct course, without yawning
like a Dutch yanky.” 
Tom, thus tutored, recollected
himself, resumed his seat, and, after
some pause, plunged at once into the
current of narration. “I told you
before, gemmen, that the gentleman
in armour was the only son of
Sir Everhard Greaves, who possessed
a free estate of five thousand a year in
our county, and was respected by all
his neighbours, as much for his personal
merit as for his family fortune. 
With respect to his son Launcelot,
whom you have seen, I can remember
nothing until he returned from the 

university, about the age of seventeen,
and then I myself was not more than
ten years old. The young gemman
was at that time in mourning for his
mother; though God he knows, Sir
Everhard had more cause to rejoice
than to be afflicted at her death:— 
for, among friends, (here he lowered
his voice, and looked round the
kitchen) she was very whimsical, expensive,
and ill-tempered, and, I'm
afraid, a little—upon the—flighty
order—a little touched or so;—but
mum for that—the lady is now dead; 
and it is my maxim, de mortuis nil
nisi bonum. The young squire was
even then very handsome, and looked
remarkably well in his weepers: but
he had an aukward air and shambling
gait, stooped mortally, and
was so shy and silent, that he would
not look a stranger in the face, nor
open his mouth before company. 
Whenever he spied a horse or carriage
at the gate, he would make his
escape into the garden, and from
thence into the park; where many's 

the good time and often he has been
found sitting under a tree, with a
book in his hand, reading Greek,
Latin, and other foreign linguas. 
Sir Everhard himself was no great
scholar, and my father had forgot his
classical learning; and so the rector of
the parish was desired to examine
young Launcelot. It was a long time
before he found an opportunity: the
squire always gave him the slip. — 
At length the parson catched him in
bed of a morning, and, locking the
door, to it they went tooth and nail. 
What passed betwixt them the Lord in
heaven knows; but, when the Doctor
came forth, he looked wild and haggard
as if he had seen a ghost, his
face as white as paper, and his lips
trembling like an aspen-leaf. “Parson,
(said the knight) what is the
matter? —how do'st find my son? I
hope he won't turn out a ninny, and
disgrace his family.” The Doctor,
wiping the sweat from his forehead,
replied, with some hesitation, “he
could not tell—he hoped the best— 

the squire was to be sure a very extraordinary
young gentleman”— 
But the father urging him to give
an explicit answer, he frankly declared,
that, in his opinion, the son
would turn out either a mirrour of
wisdom, or a monument of folly:
for his genius and disposition were altogether
preternatural. The knight
was sorely vexed at this declaration,
and signified his displeasure by saying,
the doctor, like a true priest, dealt in
mysteries and oracles, that would admit
of different and indeed contrary
interpretations. He afterwards consulted
my father, who had served as
steward upon the estate for above thirty
years, and acquired a considerable
share of his favour. “Will. Clarke,
(said he, with tears in his eyes) what
shall I do with this unfortunate lad? 
I would to God he had never been
born; for I fear he will bring my
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave. 
When I am gone, he will throw
away the estate, and bring himself
to infamy and ruin by keeping company 

with rooks and beggars. —O
Will! I could forgive extravagance
in a young man; but it breaks my
heart to see my only son give such
repeated proofs of a mean spirit and
sordid disposition!” 
Here the old gentleman shed a
flood of tears, and not without some
shadow of reason. By this time
Launcelot was grown so reserved to
his father, that he seldom saw him,
or any of his relations, except when
he was in a manner forced to appear
at table, and there his bashfulness
seemed every day to encrease. On
the other hand, he had formed some
very strange connexions. Every morning
he visited the stable, where he
not only conversed with the grooms
and helpers, but scraped acquaintance
with the horses: he fed his favourites
with his own hand, stroaked, caressed,
and rode them by turns; till at last
they grew so familiar, that, even when
they were a-field at grass, and saw
him at a distance, they would toss
their manes, whinny like so many 

colts at sight of the dam, and, galloping
up to the place where he stood,
smell him all over. —You must
know that I myself, though a child,
was his companion in all these excursions. 
He took a liking to me on account
of my being his godson, and
gave me more money than I knew
what to do with: he had always plenty
of cash for the asking, as my father
was ordered to supply him liberally,
the knight thinking that a command
of money might help to raise
his thoughts to a proper consideration
of his own importance. He never
could endure a common beggar, that
was not either in a state of infancy
or of old age: but, in other respects,
he made the guineas fly in such a
manner, as looked more like madness
than generosity. He had no
communication with your rich yeomen; 
but rather treated them and
their families with studied contempt,
because forsooth they pretended to
assume the dress and manners of the
gentry: they kept their footmen, 

their saddle-horses, and chaises: their
wives and daughters appeared in
their jewels, their silks, and their
sattins, their negligees and trollopees:
their clumsy shanks, like so
many shins of beef, were cased in
silk-hose and embroidered slippers:
their raw red fingers, gross as the
pipes of a chamber-organ, which had
been employed in milking the cows,
in twirling the mop or churn-staff,
being adorned with diamonds, were
taught to thrum the pandola, and
even to touch the keys of the harpsichord:
nay, in every village they kept
a rout and set up an assembly; and
in one place a hog-butcher was master
of the ceremonies. I have heard
Mr. Greaves ridicule them for their
vanity and aukward imitation; and
therefore, I believe, he avoided all
concerns with them, even when they
endeavoured to engage his attention. 
It was the lower sort of people with
whom he chiefly conversed, such as
ploughmen, ditchers, and other day-labourers. 
To every cottager in the 

parish he was a bounteous benefactor. 
He was, in the literal sense of the
word, a careful overseer of the poor; 
for he went from house to house, industriously
inquiring into the distresses
of the people. He repaired their
huts, cloathed their backs, filled their
bellies, and supplied them with necessaries
for exercising their industry
and different occupations. 
I'll give you one instance now, as
a specimen of his character. He and
I, strolling one day on the side of a
common, saw two boys picking hips
and haws from the hedges, one seemed
to be about five, and the other a
year older: they were both barefoot
and ragged; but at the same time fat,
fair, and in good condition. “Who
do you belong to?” (said Mr. Greaves.) 
“To Mary Stile, (replied the oldest)
the widow that rents one of them
housen.” “And how do'st live, my
boy? Thou lookest fresh and jolly;” 
resumed the squire. “Lived well
enough till yesterday,” answered the
child. “And pray what happened 

yesterday, my boy?” continued Mr.
Greaves. “Happened! (said he)
why, mammy had a coople of little
Welch keawes, that gi'en milk
enough to fill all our bellies; mammy's,
and mine, and Dick's here,
and my two little sisters at hoam:
yesterday the squire seized the keawes
for rent, God rot'un! Mammy's
gone to bed sick and sulky: my
two sisters be crying at hoam vor
vood; and Dick and I be come hither
to pick haws and bullies.” — 
My godfather's face grew red as
scarlet: he took one of the children
in either hand, and leading them
towards the house, found Sir Everhard
talking with my father before
the gate. Instead of avoiding the
old gentleman, as usual, he brushed
up to him with a spirit he had never
shewn before, and presenting
the two ragged boys, “Surely, Sir,
(said he) you will not countenance
that there ruffian your steward, in
oppressing the widow and the fatherless. 
On pretence of distraining for 

the rent of a cottage, he has robbed
the mother of these and other poor
infant-orphans of two cows, which
afforded them their whole sustenance. 
Shall you be concerned in
tearing the hard-earned morsel from
the mouth of indigence? Shall your
name, which has been so long mentioned
as a blessing, be now detested
as a curse by the poor, the helpless,
and forlorn? The father of these
babes was once your game-keeper,
who died of a consumption caught
in your service. —You see they are
almost naked—I found them plucking
haws and sloes, in order to appease
their hunger. —The wretched
mother is starving in a cold cottage,
distracted with the cries of other two
infants, clamorous for food; and
while her heart is bursting with anguish
and despair, she invokes heaven
to avenge the widow's cause upon the
head of her unrelenting landlord!” 
This unexpected address brought
tears into the eyes of the good old
gentleman. “Will Clarke, (said 

he to my father) how durst you
abuse my authority at this rate? 
You who know I have been always
a protector, not an oppressor of the
needy and unfortunate. I charge
you, go immediately and comfort
this poor woman with immediate
relief: instead of her own cows, let
her have two of the best milch cows
of my dairy: they shall graze in my
parks in summer, and be foddered
with my hay in winter. —She shall
sit rent-free for life; and I will take
care of these her poor orphans.” 
This was a very affecting scene. 
Mr. Launcelot took his father's hand
and kissed it, while the tears ran
down his cheeks; and Sir Everhard
embraced his son with great tenderness,
crying, “My dear boy! God
be praised for having given you such
a feeling heart.” My father himself
was moved, thof a practitioner
of the law, and consequently used
to distresses. —He declared, that he
had given no directions to distrain; 
and that the bailiff must have done 

it by his own authority. —“If that
be the case (said the young squire)
let the inhuman rascal be turned out
of our service.” 
Well, gemmen, all the children
were immediately cloathed and fed,
and the poor widow had well nigh
run distracted with joy. The old
knight, being of a humane temper
himself, was pleased to see such
proofs of his son's generosity: he
was not angry at his spending his
money, but at squandering away his
time among the dregs of the people. 
For you must know, he not only
made matches, portioned poor maidens,
and set up young couples that
came together without money; but
he mingled in every rustic diversion,
and bore away the prize in every
contest. He excelled every swain
of that district in feats of strength
and activity; in leaping, running,
wrestling, cricket, cudgel-playing,
and pitching the bar; and was confessed
to be, out of sight, the best
dancer at all wakes and holidays: 

happy was the country-girl who
could engage the young squire as
her partner! To be sure it was a
comely sight for to see as how the
buxom country-lasses, fresh and fragrant,
and blushing like the rose, in
their best apparel dight, their white
hose, and clean short dimity petticoats,
their gaudy gowns of printed
cotton; their top-knots, kissing-strings,
and stomachers, bedizened
with bunches of ribbons of various
colours, green, pink, and yellow; 
to see them crowned with garlands,
and assembled on May-day, to dance
before squire Launcelot, as he made
his morning's progress through the
village. Then all the young peasants
made their appearance with
cockades, suited to the fancies of
their several sweet-hearts, and boughs
of flowering hawthorn. The children
sported about like flocks of
frisking lambs, or the young fry
swarming under the sunny bank of
some meandering river. The old
men and women, in their holiday-garments, 

stood at their doors to
receive their benefactor, and poured
forth blessings on him as he passed:
the children welcomed him with
their shrill shouts; the damsels with
songs of praise; and the young men
with the pipe and tabor marched
before him to the May-pole, which
was bedecked with flowers and
bloom. There the rural dance began:
a plentiful dinner, with oceans
of good liquor, was bespoke at the
White Hart: the whole village was
regaled at the squire's expence; and
both the day and the night was spent
in mirth and pleasure. Lord help
you! he could not rest if he thought
there was an aching heart in the
whole parish. Every paultry cottage
was in a little time converted into
a pretty snug, comfortable habitation,
with a wooden porch at the
door, glass casements in the windows,
and a little garden behind
well stored with greens, roots, and
sallads. In a word, the poor's rate
was reduced to a meer trifle, and 

one would have thought the golden
age was revived in Yorkshire. But,
as I told you before, the old knight
could not bear to see his only son so
wholly attached to these lowly pleasures,
while he industriously shunned
all opportunities of appearing in that
superior sphere to which he was designed
by nature and by fortune. 
He imputed his conduct to meanness
of spirit, and advised with my father
touching the properest expedient to
wean his affections from such low-born
pursuits. My father counselled him
to send the young gentleman up to
London, to be entered as a student in
the Temple, and recommended to the
superintendance of some person who
knew the town, and might engage
him insensibly in such amusements
and connexions, as would soon lift his
ideas above the humble objects on
which they had been hitherto employed. 
This advice appeared so salutary,
that it was followed without
the least hesitation. The young
squire himself was perfectly well satisfied 

with the proposal, and in a
few days set out for the great city:
but there was not a dry eye in the
parish at his departure, although he
prevailed upon his father to pay in
his absence all the pensions he had
granted to those who could not live
on the fruit of their own industry. 
In what manner he spent his time at
London, it is none of my business to
inquire; those I know pretty well
what kind of lives are led by gemmen
of your Inns of Court. —I myself
once belonged to Serjeant's Inn,
and was perhaps as good a wit and
a critick as any Templar of them all. 
Nay, as for that matter, those I despise
vanity, I can aver with a safe
conscience, that I had once the honour
to belong to the society called
the Town: we were all of us attorneys
clerks, gemmen, and had our
meetings at an ale-house in Butcherrow,
where we regulated the diversions
of the theatre. 
But to return from this digression:
Sir Everhard Greaves did not seem 

to be very well pleased with the conduct
of his son at London. He got
notice of some irregularities and scrapes
into which he had fallen; and the
squire seldom wrote to his father, except
to draw upon him for money,
which he did so fast, that in eighteen
months the old gemman lost all patience. 
At this period squire Darnel chanced
to die, leaving an only daughter, a
minor, heiress of three thousand a year,
under the guardianship of her uncle
Anthony, whose brutal character all
the world knows. The breath was
no sooner out of his brother's body
than he resolved, if possible, to succeed
him in parliament as representative
for the borough of Ashenton. 
Now you must know, that this
borough had been for many years a
bone of contention between the families
of Greaves and Darnel; and at
length the difference was compromised
by the interposition of friends,
on condition that Sir Everhard and
Squire Darnel should alternately represent 

the place in parliament. They
agreed to this compromise for their
mutual convenience; but they were
never heartily reconciled. Their political
principles did not tally; and
their wives looked upon each other as
rivals in fortune and magnificence:
so that there was no intercourse between
them, thof they lived in the
same neighbourhood. On the contrary,
in all disputes, they constantly
headed the opposite parties. Sir Everhard
understanding that Anthony Darnel
had begun to canvass, and was
putting every iron in the fire, in violation
and contempt of the pactum familiæ
before mentioned, fell into a
violent passion, that brought on a
severe fit of the gout, by which he
was disabled from giving personal attention
to his own interest. My father,
indeed, employed all his diligence and
address, and spared neither money,
time, nor constitution, till at length he
drank himself into a consumption,
which was the death of him. But,
after all, there is a great difference 

between a steward and a principal. 
Mr. Darnel attended in propria persona,
flattered and caressed the women,
feasted the electors, hired mobs, made
processions, and scattered about his
money in such a manner, that our
friends durst hardly shew their heads
in public. 
At this very crisis our young squire,
to whom his father had writ an account
of the transaction, arrived unexpectedly
at Greavesbury-hall, and had a
long private conference with Sir Everhard. 
The news of his return spread
like wild-fire thro' all that part of the
country: bonfires were made, and the
bells set a ringing in several towns and
steeples; and next morning above
seven hundred people were assembled
at the gate, with music, flags and
streamers, to welcome their young
squire, and accompany him to the
borough of Ashenton. He set out on
foot with this retinue, and entered
one end of the town just as Mr. Darnel's
mob had come in at the other. 
Both arrived about the same time at 

the market-place; but Mr. Darnel,
mounting first into the balcony of
the town-house, made a long speech
to the people in favour of his own
pretensions, not without some invidious
reflections glanced at Sir Everhard,
his competitor. We did not
much mind the acclamations of his
party, which we knew had been
hired for the purpose: but we were
in some pain for Mr. Greaves, who
had not been used to speak in public. 
He took his turn however in
the balcony, and, uncovering his
head, bowed all round with the most
engaging courtesy. He was dressed
in a green frock trimmed with gold,
and his own dark hair flowed about
his ears in natural curls, while his
face was overspread with a blush,
that improved the glow of youth to
a deeper crimson, and I dare say set
many a female heart a palpitating. 
When he made his first appearance,
there was just such a humming and
clapping of hands as you may have
heard when the celebrated Garrick 

comes upon the stage in King Lear,
or King Richard, or any other top
character. But how agreeably were
we disappointed, when our young
gentleman made such an oration as
would not have disgraced a Pitt, an
Egmont, or a Murray! While he
spoke, all was hushed in admiration
and attention—you could have almost
heard a feather drop to the
ground. It would have charmed
you to hear with what modesty he
recounted the services which his father
and grandfather had done to
the corporation; with what eloquence
he expatiated upon the shameful infraction
of the treaty subsisting between
the two families; and with
what keen and spirited strokes of satire
he retorted the sarcasms of Darnel. 
He no sooner concluded his harangue,
than there was such a burst of applause
as seemed to rend the very sky. Our
musick immediately struck up; our
people advanced with their ensigns,
and, as every man had a good cudgel,
broken heads would have ensued, 

had not Mr. Darnel and his
party thought proper to retreat with
uncommon dispatch. He never offered
to make another public entrance,
as he saw the torrent ran so
violently against him; but sat down
with his loss, and withdrew his opposition,
though at bottom extremely
mortified and incensed. Sir Everhard
was unanimously elected, and
appeared to be the happiest man
upon earth; for, besides the pleasure
arising from his victory over this
competitor, he was now fully satisfied
that his son, instead of disgracing,
would do honour to his family. It
would have moved a heart of stone,
to see with what a tender transport
of paternal joy he received his dear
Launcelot, after having heard of his
deportment and success at Ashenton; 
where, by the bye, he gave a ball to
the ladies, and displayed as much elegance
and politeness as if he had been
bred at the court of Versailles. 
This joyous season was of short
duration: in a little time all the happiness 

of the family was overcast by
a sad incident, which hath left such
an unfortunate impression upon the
mind of the young gentleman, as, I
am afraid, will never be effaced. 
Mr. Darnel's niece and ward, the
great heiress, whose name is Aurelia,
was the most celebrated beauty of the
whole country—if I said the whole
kingdom, or indeed all Europe, perhaps
I should barely do her justice. 
I don't pretend to be a limner, gemmen; 
nor does it become me to delineate
such excellence: but surely I
may presume to repeat from the play; 
“O! she is all that painting can express,
“Or youthful poets fancy when they love!
At that time she might be about
seventeen, tall and fair, and so exquisitely
shaped—you may talk of
your Venus de Medicis, your Dianas,
your Nymphs, and Galateas; but if
Praxiteles, and Roubillac, and Wilton, 

were to lay their heads together,
in order to make a complete
pattern of beauty, they would hardly
reach her model of perfection. — 
As for complexion, poets will talk
of blending the lily with the rose,
and bring in a parcel of similes of
cowslips, carnations, pinks, and daisies. 
—There's Dolly, now, has got
a very good complexion:—indeed,
she's the very picture of health and
innocence. —You are, indeed, my
pretty lass;—but parva componere
magnis. —Miss Darnel is all amazing
beauty, delicacy, and dignity! 
Then the softness and expression of
her fine blue eyes; her pouting lips
of coral hue; her neck, that rises
like a tower of polished alabaster between
two mounts of snow. —I tell
you what, gemmen, it don't signify
talking: if e'er a one of you was to
meet this young lady alone, in the
midst of a heath or common, or any
unfrequented place, he would down
on his knees, and think he kneeled
before some supernatural being. I'll 

tell you more: she not only resembles
an angel in beauty, but a saint in
goodness, and an hermit in humility; 
—so void of all pride and affectation; 
so soft, and sweet, and affable,
and humane! Lord! I could
tell such instances of her charity! — 
Sure enough, she and Sir Launcelot
were formed by nature for each other:
howsoever, the cruel hand of fortune
hath intervened, and severed them for
ever. Every soul that knew them
both, said it was a thousand pities but
they should come together, and extinguish
in their happy union the mutual
animosity of the two families,
which had so often embroiled the
whole neighbourhood. Nothing was
heard but the praises of miss Aurelia
Darnel and Mr. Launcelot Greaves; 
and no doubt the parties were prepossessed,
by this applause, in favour of
each other. At length, Mr. Greaves
went one Sunday to her parish-church; 
but, though the greater part of the
congregation watched their looks,
they could not perceive that she took 

least notice of him; or that he seemed
to be struck with her appearance. 
He afterwards had an opportunity of
seeing her, more at leisure, at the
York-assembly, during the races; but
this opportunity was productive of
no good effect, because he had that
same day quarrelled with her uncle
on the turf. —An old grudge, you
know, gemmen, is soon inflamed to
a fresh rupture. It was thought Mr.
Darnel came on purpose to shew his
resentment. They differed about a
bet upon Miss Cleverlegs, and, in the
course of the dispute, Mr. Darnel called
him a petulant boy. The young
squire, who was as hasty as gunpowder,
told him he was man enough
to chastise him for his insolence; 
and would do it on the spot, if he
thought it would not interrupt the diversion. 
In all probability they would
have come to points immediately, had
not the gentlemen interposed; so that
nothing further passed, but abundance
of foul language on the part of 

Mr. Anthony, and a repeated defiance
to single combat. 
Mr. Greaves, making a low bow,
retired from the field; and in the
evening danced at the assembly with
a young lady from the Bishoprick,
seemingly in good temper and spirits,
without having any words with
Mr. Darnel, who was also present. 
But in the morning he visited that
proud neighbour betimes; and they
had almost reached a grove of trees
on the north-side of the town, when
they were suddenly overtaken by
half a dozen gentlemen, who had
watched their motions. It was in
vain for them to dissemble their design,
which could not now take effect. 
They gave up their pistols,
and a reconciliation was patched up
by the pressing remonstrances of their
common friends; but Mr. Darnel's
hatred still rankled at bottom, and
soon broke out in the sequel. About
three months after this transaction, his
niece Aurelia, with her mother, having 

been to visit a lady in the chariot,
the horses being young, and not used
to the traces, were startled at the braying
of a jack-ass on the common, and
taking fright, ran away with the carriage
like lightning. The coachman
was thrown from the box, and the ladies
screamed piteously for help. Mr.
Greaves chanced to be a horse-back
on the other side of an inclosure,
when he heard their shrieks; and
riding up to the hedge, knew the
chariot, and saw their disaster. The
horses were then running full speed
in such a direction, as to drive headlong
over a precipice into a stone-quarry,
where they and the chariot,
and the ladies, must be dashed in
pieces. You may conceive, gemmen,
what his thoughts were when
he saw such a fine young lady, in
the flower of her age, just plunging
into eternity; when he saw the lovely
Aurelia on the brink of being precipitated
among rocks, where her delicate
limbs must be mangled and
tore asunder; when he perceived that, 

before he could ride round by the gate,
the tragedy would be finished. The
fence was so thick and high, flanked
with a broad ditch on the outside, that
he could not hope to clear it, although
he was mounted on Scipio, bred out
of Miss Cowslip, the sire Muley, and
his grandsire the famous Arabian Mustapha. 
—Scipio was bred by my father,
who would not have taken a hundred
guineas for him from any other person
but the young squire. —Indeed, I
have heard my poor father say”— 
By this time Ferret's impatience was
become so outrageous, that he exclaimed
in a furious tone, “Damn your father,
and his horse, and his colt into
the bargain!” 
Tom made no reply; but began
to strip with great expedition. Captain
Crowe was so choaked with passion,
that he could utter nothing but
disjointed sentences: he rose from his
seat, brandished his  , and
seizing his nephew by the collar, cried,
“Odd's heartlikins! sirrah, I have a
good mind—Devil fire your running 

tackle, you land-lubber!—can't you
steer without all this tacking hither
and thither, and the Lord knows whither? 
—'Noint my block! I'd give
thee a rope's end for thy supper, if it
wan't”— 
Dolly had conceived a sneaking
kindness for the young lawyer, and
thinking him in danger of being
roughly handled, flew to his relief. 
She twisted her hand in Crowe's
neckcloth without ceremony, crying,
“Sha't then, I tell thee, old coger. 
—Who kears a vig vor thy voolish
trantrums?” 
While Crowe looked black in the
face, and ran the risque of strangulation
under the gripe of this amazon,
Mr. Clarke having disengaged himself
of his hat, wig, coat, and waistcoat,
advanced in an elegant attitude
of manual offence towards the misanthrope,
who snatched up a gridiron
from the chimney-corner, and Discord
seemed to clap her sooty wings
in expectation of battle. —But as the
reader may have more than once already 

cursed the unconscionable length
of this chapter, we must postpone to
the next opportunity the incidents
that succeeded this denunciation of
war. 