


The commodore sends a challenge to Gamaliel, and
is imposed upon by a waggish invention of the
lieutenant, Peregrine and Gauntlet. 
This affront Trunnion could by no means
digest: he advised with the lieutenant upon
the subject; and the result of their consultation was
a defiance which the old commander sent to Pickle,
demanding that he would meet him at such a place
on horseback with a brace of pistols, and give satisfaction
for the slight he had put upon him. 
Nothing could have afforded more pleasure to
Jack, than the acceptance of this challenge, 

which he delivered verbally to Mr. Gamaliel,
who was called out from the club at Tunley's
for that purpose. The nature of this message
had an instantaneous effect upon the constitution
of the pacific Pickle, whose bowels yearned with
apprehension, and underwent such violent agitation
on the spot, that one would have thought the operation
proceeded from some severe joke of the apothecary
which he had swallowed in his beer. 
The messenger despairing of a satisfactory answer,
left him in this woeful condition; and
being loath to lose any opportunity of raising the
laugh against the commodore, went immediately
and communicated the whole affair to the young
gentlemen, intreating them, for the love of God,
to concert some means of bringing old Hannibal
into the field. The two friends relished the proposal,
and after some deliberation, it was resolved
that Hatchway should tell Trunnion his invitation
was accepted by Gamaliel, who would meet him
at the place appointed, with his second, to-morrow
in the twilight, because if either should fall,
the other would have the better chance for escaping
in the dark; that Godfrey should personate old
Pickle's friend, and Peregrine represent his own
father, while the lieutenant should take care in
loading the pistols to keep out the shot, so as
that no damage might be done in the rencounter. 
These circumstances being adjusted, the lieutenant
returned to his principal with a most thundering
reply from his antagonist, whose courageous
behaviour, though it could not intimidate,
did not fail to astonish the commodore, who ascribed
it to the spirit of his wife, which had inspired
him. Trunnion that instant desired his
counsellor to prepare his cartridge-box, and order
the quietest horse in the stable to be kept ready 

saddled for the occasion; his eye seemed to lighten
with alacrity and pleasure at the prospect of smelling
gun-powder once more before his death; and
when Jack advised him to make his will, in case
of accident, he rejected his counsel with disdain,
saying, “What! dost think that Hawser Trunnion,
who has stood the fire of so many floating
batteries, runs any risk from the lousy pops of a
land-man? Thou shalt see, thou shalt see how
I will make him lower his top-sails.” Next day
Peregrine and the soldier provided themselves with
horses at the public house, from whence, at the
destined hour, they rode to the field of battle,
each of them being muffled in a great coat, which,
with the dimness of the light, effectually shielded
them from the knowledge of the one-eyed commander,
who having taken horse, on pretence of
enjoying the fresh air, soon appeared with Hatchway
in his rear. When they came within sight
of each other, the seconds advanced, in order to
divide the ground, and regulate the measures of
the combat; when it was determined by mutual
consent, that two pistols should be discharged on
each side, and that if neither should prove decisive,
recourse must be had to the broad-swords,
in order to ascertain the victory. These articles
being settled, the opponents rode forward to their
respective stations, when Peregrine cocking his
pistol, and presenting, counterfeited his father's
voice, and bad Trunnion take care of his remaining
eye. The commodore took his advice,
being unwilling to hazard his day-light, and very
deliberately opposed the patched side of his face
to the muzzle of his antagonist's piece, desiring
him to do his duty without further jaw. The
young man accordingly fired, and the distance being
small, the wad of his pistol took place with a 

smart stroke on the forehead of Trunnion, who
mistaking it for the ball, which he thought was
lodged in his brain, spurred up his steed in a state
of desperation towards his antagonist, and holding
his piece within two yards of his body, let it off,
without any regard to the laws of battle. Surprised
and enraged to see it had made no impression,
he hollowed in a terrible tone, “O! damn
ye, you have got your netting stuffed, I see;” 
and advancing, discharged his second pistol so near
his godson's head, that had he not been defended
by his great coat, the powder must have scorched
his face. Having thus thrown away his fire, he
remained at the mercy of Peregrine, who clapping
the piece he had in reserve to his head,
commanded him to beg his life, and ask pardon
for his presumption. The commodore made no
reply to this imperious injunction, but dropping
his pistol, and unsheathing his broad-sword with
a jirk, attacked our hero with such incredible agility,
that if he had not made shift to ward off the
stroke with his piece, the adventure, in all likelihood,
would have turned out a very tragical
joke. Peregrine finding it would be in vain for
him to think of drawing his weapon, and standing
on the defensive against this furious aggressor,
very fairly clapt spurs to his nag, and sought his
safety in flight. Trunnion pursued him with infinite
eagerness, and his steed being the better of
the two, would have overtaken the fugitive to
his peril, had he not been unfortunately encountered
by the boughs of a tree that happened to
stand on his blind side, and incommoded him so
much, that he was fain to quit his sword, and
lay hold on the mane, in order to maintain his
seat. Perry perceiving his disaster, wheeled about,
and now finding leisure to produce his weapon, 

returned upon his disarmed foe, and brandishing
his Ferrara, threatened to make him shorter by
the head, if he would not immediately crave
quarter, and yield. There was nothing farther
from the intention of the old gentleman than such
submission, which he flatly refused to pay, alledging
that he had already compelled his enemy to clap
on all his sails, and that his own present misfortune
was owing to accident, all one as if a ship
should be attacked, after she had been obliged to
heave her guns over-board in a storm. 
Before Peregrine had time to answer this remonstrance,
the lieutenant interposed, and taking
cognizance of the case, established a truce, until
he and the other second should discuss and decide
upon the merits of the cause. They accordingly
retired to a small distance, and after having conferred
a few minutes, Hatchway returned, and
pronounced the commodore vanquished by the
chance of war. 
Never was rage more transporting than that
which took possession of old Hannibal, when he
heard the sentence; it was some time before he
could utter aught, except the reproachful expression,
You lie! which he repeated more than twenty
times, in a sort of delirious insensibility; and when
he recovered the further use of speech, abused the
arbitrators with such bitter invectives, renouncing
their sentence, and appealing to another trial, that
the confederates began to repent of having carried
the joke so far; and Peregrine, in order to appease
his choler, owned himself overcome. 
This acknowledgement calmed the tumult of
his wrath, though he could not for some days
forgive the lieutenant; and the two young gentlemen
rode back to Tunley's, while Hatchway,
taking the commodore's horse by the bridle, reconducted 

him to his mansion, growling all the
way at Jack for his unjust and unfriendly decree; 
though he could not help observing, as how he
had made his words good, in making his adversary
strike his top-sails: “And yet (said he) before
God! I think the fellow's head is made of a
wool-pack; for my shot rebounded from his face
like a wad of spun-yarn from the walls of a ship. 
But if so be that son of a bitch of a tree hadn't
come athwart my weather-bow, d'ye see, I'll
be damned if I hadn't snapt his main-yard in the
slings, and mayhap let out his bulge-water into
the bargain.” He seemed particularly vain of
this exploit, which dwelt upon his imagination,
and was cherished as the child of his old age; for
though he could not with decency rehearse it to the
young men and his wife at supper, he gave shrewd
hints of his own manhood, even at these years, and
attested Hatchway as a voucher for his mettle,
while the triumvirate, diverted by his vanity, enjoyed
in secret the success of their imposition. 