


YES, Doctor I have seen the British Museum; 
which is a noble collection, and even stupendous,
if we consider it was made by a private man, a
physician, who was obliged to make his own fortune
at the same time: but great as the collection
is, it would appear more striking if it was arranged
in one spacious saloon, instead of being divided
into different apartments, which it does not entirely
fill—I could wish the series of medals was
connected, and the whole of the animal, vegetable,
and mineral kingdoms completed, by adding to
each at the public expence, those articles that are
wanting. It would likewise be a great improvement.
with respect to the library, if the deficiencies
were made up, by purchasing all the books of
character that are not to be found already in the
collection—They might be classed in centuries, according
to the dates of their publication, and catalogues
printed of them and the manuscripts, for
the information of those that want to consult, or
compile from such authorities. I could also wish
for the honour of the nation, that there was a complete
apparatus for a course of mathematics, mechanics, 

and experimental philosophy; and a good
salary settled upon an able professor, who should
give regular lectures on these subjects. 
But this is all idle speculation, which will never
be reduced to practice—Considering the temper of
the times, it is a wonder to see any institution whatsoever
established, for the benefit of the public. 
The spirit of party is risen to a kind of phrenzy,
unknown to former ages, or rather degenerated to
a total extinction of honesty and candour—You
know I have observed, for some time, that the public
papers are become the infamous vehicles of the
most cruel and perfidious defamation: every rancorous
knave—every desperate incendiary, that can
afford to spend half a crown or three shillings, may
skulk behind the press of a news-monger, and have
a stab at the first character in the kingdom, without
running the least hazard of detection, or
punishment. 
I have made acquaintance with a Mr. Barton,
whom Jery knew at Oxford; a good sort of a
man, though most ridiculously warped in his political
principles; but his partiality is the less offensive,
as it never appears in the stile of scurrility and
abuse. He is a member of parliament, and a retainer
to the court; and his whole conversation
turns upon the virtues and perfections of the ministers,
who are his patrons. 'T'other day, when he
was bedaubing one of those worthies, with the
most fulsome praise, I told him I had seen the same
nobleman characterised very differently, in one of
the daily-papers; indeed, so stigmatized, that if
one half of what was said of him was true, he
must be not only unfit to rule, but even unfit to
live: that those impeachments had been repeated
again and again, with the addition of fresh matter; 
and that as he had taken no steps towards his
own vindication, I began to think there was some 

foundation for the charge. “And pray, sir, (said
Mr. Barton) what steps would you have him
take? —Suppose he should prosecute the publisher,
who screens the anonymous accuser, and
bring him to the pillory for a libel; this is so
far from being counted a punishment, in terrorem,
that it will probably make his fortune. 
The multitude immediately take him into their
protection, as a martyr to the cause of defamation,
which they have always espoused—They
pay his fine, they contribute to the increase of
his stock, his shop his crowded with customers
and the sale of his paper rises in proportion to
the scandal it contains. All this time the prosecutor
is inveighed against as a tyrant and oppressor,
for having chosen to proceed by the way
of information, which is deemed a grievance; 
but if he lays an action for damages, he must
prove the damage, and I leave you to judge,
whether a gentleman's character may not be
brought into contempt, and all his views in life
blasted by calumny, without his being able to
specify the particulars of the damage he has
sustained.” 
“The spirit of defamation is a kind of heresy,
that thrives under persecution. The liberty of
the press is a term of great efficacy; and, like
that of the Protestant religion, has often served
the purposes of sedition—A minister, therefore,
must arm himself with patience, and
bear those attacks without repining—Whatever
mischief they may do in other respects,
the certainly contribute in one particular, to
the advantage of government; for those defamotory
articles have multiplied papers in such
a manner, and augmented their sale to such a
degree, that the duty upon stamps and advert sements
has made a very considerable addition to
the revenue.” Certain it is, a gentleman's 

honour is a very delicate subject to be handled by
a jury, composed of men, who cannot be supposed
remarkable either for sentiment or impartiality
—In such a case, indeed, the defendant is tried,
not only by his peers but also by his party; and I
really think, that, of all patriots, he is the most resolute
who exposes himself to such detraction, for
the sake of his country—If, from the ignorance or
partiality of juries, a gentleman can have no redress
from law, for being defamed in a pamphlet
or news-paper, I know but one other method of
proceeding against the publisher, which is attended
with some risque, but has been practised successfully,
more than once, in my remembrance—A
regiment of horse was represented, in one of the
news-papers, as having misbehaved at Dettingen; 
a captain of that regiment broke the publisher's
bones telling him, at the same time, if he went
to law, he should certainly have the like salutation
from every officer of the corps. Governor&wblank; 
took the same satisfaction on the ribs of an author,
who traduced him by name in a periodical paper. 
—I know a low fellow of the same class, who,
being turned out of Venice for his impudence and
scurrility, retired to Lugano, a town of the Grisons,
(a free people, God wot) where he found a
printing press, from whence he squirted his filth
at some respectable characters in the republic,
which he had been obliged to abandon. Some of
these, finding him out of the reach of legal chastisement,
employed certain useful instruments, such
as may be found in all countries, to give him the
bastinado; which, being repeated more than once,
effectually stopt the current of his abuse. 
As for the liberty of the press, like every other
privilege, it must be restrained within certain
bounds; for if it is carried to a breach of law, religion,
and charity, it becomes one of the greatest 

evils that ever annoyed the community. If the
lowest ruffian may stab your good name with impunity
in England, will you be so uncandid as to
exclaim against Italy for the practice of common
assassination? To what purpose is our property
secured, if our moral character is left defencless? 
People thus bated, grow desperate; and the despair
of being able to preserve one's character,
untainted by such vermin, produces a total neglect
of same; so that one of the chief incitements
to the practice of virtue is effectually destroyed. 
Mr. Barton's last consideration, respecting the
stamp duty, is equally wise and laudable with another
maxim which has been long adopted by our
financiers, namely, to connive at drunkenness,
riot, and dissipation, because they inhance the receipt
of the excise; not reflecting, that in providing
this temporary convenience, they are destroying
the morals, health, and industry of the
people—Notwithstanding my contempt for
those who flatter a minister, I think there is something
still more despicable in flattering a mob. 
When I see a man of birth, education, and fortune,
put himself on a level with the dregs of the
people, mingle with low mechanics, feed with
them at the same board, and drink with them in
the same cup, flatter their prejudices, harangue in
praise of their virtues, expose themselves to the
belchings of their beer, the fumes of their tobacco,
the grossness of their familiarity, and the impertinence
of their conversation, I cannot help
despising him, as a man guilty of the vilest prostitution,
in order to effect a purpose equally selfish
and illiberal. 
I should renounce politics the more willingly,
if I could find other topics of conversation, discussed
with more modesty and candour; but the 

dæmon of party seems to have usurped every department
of life. Even the world of literature
and taste is divided into the most virulent factions,
which revile, decry, and traduce the works of one
another. Yesterday, I went to return an afternoon's
visit to a gentleman of my acquaintance,
at whose house I found one of the authors of the
present age, who has written with some success— 
As I had read one or two of his performances,
which gave me pleasure, I was glad of this opportunity
to know his person; but his discourse, and
deportment destroyed all the impressions which
his writings had made in his favour. He took
upon him to decide dogmatically upon every subject,
without deigning to shew the least cause for
his differing from the general opinions of mankind,
as if it had been our duty to acquiesce in the
ipse dixit of this new Pythagoras. He rejudged
the characters of all the principal authors, who
had died within a century of the present time; 
and, in this revision, paid no sort of regard to the
reputation they had acquired—Milton was harsh
and prosaic; Dryden, languid and verbose; Butler
and Swift, without humour; Congreve, without
wit; and Pope destitute of any sort of poetical
merit—As for his cotemporaries, he could not
bear to hear one of them mentioned with any degree
of applause—They were all dunces, pedants,
plagiaries, quacks, and impostors; and you could
not name a single performance, but what was
tame, stupid, and insipid. It must be owned, that
this writer had nothing to charge his conscience
with, on the side of flattery; for, I understand,
he was never known to praise one line that was
written, even by those with whom he lived on
terms of good fellowship. This arrogance and
presumption, in depreciating authors, for whose
reputation the company may be interested, is such 

an insult upon the understanding, as I could not
bear without wincing. 
I desired to know his reasons for decrying some
works, which had afforded me uncommon pleasure; 
and, as demonstration did not seem to be
his talent, I dissented from his opinion with great
freedom. Having been spoiled by the deference
and humility of his hearers, he did not bear contradiction
with much temper; and the dispute
might have grown warm, had it not been interrupted
by the entrance of a rival bard, at whose
appearance he always quits the place—They
are of different cabals, and have been at open
war these twenty years—If the other was dogmatical,
this genius was declamatory: he did not
discourse, but harangue; and his orations were equally
tedious and turgid. He too pronounces ex
cathedra upon the characters of his cotemporaries; 
and though he scruples not to deal out praise, even
lavishly, to the lowest reptile in Grub-street who
will either flatter him in private, or mount the
public rostrum as his panegyrist, he damns all the
other writers of the age, with the utmost insolence
and rancour—One is a blunderbuss as being
a native of Ireland; another, a half-starved
louse of literature, from the banks of the Tweed; 
a third, an ass, because he enjoys a pension from
the government; a fourth, the very angel of dulness; 
because he succeeded in a species of writing
in which this Aristarchus had sailed; a fifth, who
presumed to make strictures upon one of his performances,
he holds as a bug in criticism, whose
stench is more offensive than his sting—In short,
except himself and his myrmidons, there is not a
man of genius or learning in the three kingdoms. 
As for the success of those, who have written
without the pale of this confederacy, he imputes
it entirely to want of taste in the public; not
considering, that to the approbation of that very 

tasteless public, he himself owes all the consequence
he has in life. 
Those originals are not fit for conversation. If
they would maintain the advantage they have
gained by their writing, they should never appear
but upon paper—For my part, I am shocked to find
a man have sublime ideas in his head, and nothing
but illiberal sentiments in his heart—The
human soul will be generally found most defective
in the article of candour—I am inclined to think,
no mind was ever wholly exempt from envy; 
which, perhaps, may have been implanted, as an
instinct essential to our nature. I am afraid we
sometimes palliate this vice, under the specious
name of emulation. I have known a person remarkably
generous, humane, moderate, and apparently
self-denying, who could not hear even a
friend commended, without betraying marks of
uneasiness; as if that commendation had implied
an odious comparison to his prejudice, and every
wreath of praise added to the other's character,
was a garland plucked from his own temples. 
This is a malignant species of jealousy, of which
I stand acquitted in my own conscience—Whether
it is a vice, or an infirmity, I leave you to
inquire. 
There is another point, which I would much
rather see determined; whether the world was
always as contemptible, as it appears to me at
present? —If the morals of mankind have not
contracted an extaraordinary degree of depravity,
within these thirty years, then must I be infected
with the common vice of old men, difficilis, querulus,
laudatur temporis acti; or, which is more probable,
the impetuous pursuits and avocations of
youth have formerly hindered me from observing
those rotten parts of human nature, which now
appear so offensively to my observation. 

We have been at court, and change, and every
where; and every where we find food for spleen,
and subject for ridicule—My new servant, Humphry
Clinker, turns out a great original; and Tabby
is a changed creature—She has parted with
Chowder; and does nothing but smile, like Malvolio
in the play—I'll be hanged if she is not acting a
part which is not natural to her disposition, for
some purpose which I have not yet discovered. 
With respect to the characters of mankind, my
curiosity is quite satisfied: I have done with the
science of men, and must now endeavour to amuse
myself with the novelty of things. I am, at present,
by a violent effort of the mind, forced from
my natural bias; but this power ceasing to act, I
shall return to my solitude with redoubled velocity. 
Every thing I see, and hear, and feel, in
this great reservoir of folly, knavery, and sophistication,
coutributes to inhance the value of a
country life, in the sentiments of 
yours always,
Matt. Bramble 
London, June 2. 