


He returns to London, and meets with Cadwallader,
who entertains him with a curious dialogue. 
The young gentleman having performed
these last offices, in honour of his deceased
benefactor, and presented Mr. Jolter to the long-expected
living, which at this time happened to
be vacant, returned to London, and resumed his
former gaiety: not that he was able to shake
Emilia from his thoughts, or even to remember
her without violent emotions; for, as he recovered
his vigour, his former impatience recurred,
and therefore he resolved to plunge himself headlong
into some intrigue, that might engage his
passions, and amuse his imagination. 
A man of his accomplishments could not fail
to meet with a variety of subjects, on which his
gallantry would have been properly exercised; 
and this abundance distracted his choice, which
at any time was apt to be influenced by caprice
and whim. I have already observed, that he had
lifted his view, through a matrimonial perspective,
as high as a lady of the first quality and distinction; 
and now, that he was refused by Miss
Gauntlet, and enjoyed a little respite from the
agonies of that flame which her charms had
kindled in his heart, he renewed his assiduities to
her grace; and, though he durst not yet risk an
explanation, enjoyed the pleasure of seeing himself
so well received in quality of a particular acquaintance,
that he flattered himself with the belief
of his having made some progress in her 

heart; and was confirmed in this conceited notion,
by the assurances of her woman, whom, by
liberal largesses, he retained in his interest, because
she found means to persuade him, that she
was in the confidence of her lady. But, notwithstanding
this encouragement, and the sanguine
suggestions of his own vanity, he dreaded
the thoughts of exposing himself to her ridicule
and resentment, by a premature declaration, and
determined to postpone his addresses, until he
should be more certified of the probability of succeeding
in his attempt. 
While he remained in this hesitation and suspence,
he was one morning very agreeably surprized
with the appearance of his friend Crabtree,
who, by the permission of Pipes, to whom he
was well known, entered his chamber before he
was awake, and, by a violent shake of the
shoulder, disengaged him from the arms of sleep. 
The first compliments having mutually passed,
Cadwallader gave him to understand, that he had
arrived in town over-night in the stage-coach
from Bath, and entertained him with such a ludicrous
account of his fellow-travellers, that Peregrine,
for the first time since their parting, indulged
himself in mirth, even to the hazard of
suffocation. 
This relation was confined to a curious dialogue
that passed betwixt a woollen-draper and
his wife, who were his only companions during
the best part of the journey. The lady laboured
under a Diabetes, in consequence of having used
the waters injudiciously for another complaint; 
and, that she might not be an impediment to the
carriage, by ordering it to halt, as often as she
should have occasion to disembogue, she had provided 

herself with a leathern convenience, which
her husband carried in the pocket of his great
coat, conveying it privately to her, when she
found herself necessitated to use it; and afterwards,
taking the opportunity to empty it out at
the window, when the Misanthrope's head chanced
to be turned another way. 
As this couple embarked with Crabtree, in the
full persuasion of his being utterly bereft of the
sense of hearing, they kept no sort of reserve in
their conversation; and at last fairly quarrelled,
on account of the good man's want of alertness,
in handing the commodity, when his help-mate's
occasions were so extremely pressing, that her
flood-gates gave way, before she was prepared for
the irruption. Smarting with this disagreeable
circumstance, “Odds plague! you nincompoop,
(cried she) you have fumbled so long about the
pot, that I have drenched myself all over. I
wish to God you had received the stream in your
mouth.” “I thank you for your good-will, my
dear, (answered the patient husband) you would
promote me to the honour of being a pissing-post.” 
“I'm sure, (retorted his yoke-fellow, snatching
the utensil from his hand) you are fit for no other
post; and, accordingly, suffer yourself to be piss'd
upon by every body. Witness your pitiful behaviour
at the E. O. table, when that officer bullied
you out of twenty guineas, which you wan't
obliged to pay.” “There you happen to be
wide of the matter, (said the draper) the whole
company gave it against me, as a fair bett; besides,
the captain threatened to cut my throat,
and I did not choose to give him that trouble.” 
“Cut your throat! (exclaimed the virago) I
would a durst; you had a good action against him 

for putting you in fear of your life. But you are
a poor tool, good for nothing but squandering
away my money. If you had possessed spirit
enough to follow my advice, you might have been
a deputy of the ward, by this time. But, all
your care is to sit among your companions of the
garden, and sing bunting-songs, till you get drunk,
leaving your trade at sixes and sevens, and your
family to go to the dogs.” 
The husband (pacific as he was) being nettled
at these insinuations, frankly told her, that his
affairs had never prospered, since she had persuaded
him to swear a book-debt against a gentleman's
executor, after he had been paid by the
deceased. Upon which, her eyes lightened with
fury, and she called him a mean-spirited sorry
fellow, for upbraiding her, a weak woman, with
what she had done for his own good. “Sirrah,
(said she) I suppose you would be base enough
to turn evidence against me, if you thought you
could get any thing by the information, though
that was the only thing you ever did for your
poor family. Who is to provide for my children,
if their father don't?” “And I wish from my
heart their father would provide for them,” (said
the husband, irritated by the epithets she had uttered.) 
“An't you their father, Mr. Wiseacre,
(cried the aggressor:) Ha'n't I brought you five
as fine babes as any in the parish?” “Yes, yes,
(replied the other) you have brought me several
very fine children, that must be allowed; but,
whether or not they are of my begetting, is a
question that I am not quite so clear about.” 
“How, fellor! (replied the wife) do you doubt
my vartue?” “No, not I, (answered the
shopkeeper) I have no doubts about the matter. 

It is a long time since surgeon C&wblank; assured me,
that he would suckle upon his thumb all the children
I should ever beget; and I have other convincing
reasons to support his opinion.” 
These last words had scarce proceeded from his
mouth, when his sweet-blooded spouse, leaving
her duty and obedience on the left hand, and forgetting
that she was subject to the eye of any unconcerned
spectator, lifted up the machine she
had just replenished, and made such application
with it to the forehead of her husband, as pressed
the two sides of it together, by which means,
the contents were squirted out in a full stream,
that played upon the visage of the astonished
Misanthrope; and, not satisfied with the vengeance
she had taken, she quitted her weapon,
and assaulted him with tooth and nail, exclaiming
all the time, “Ah! you pitiful cuckoldy
scrub, have you the impudence to own to my
face, that you married a woman of my character,
when you knew your own infirmities? You
had a base design upon my fortune, you slave,
although you was sensible that you could never
deserve it. But, I'll be revenged of you, if
there be a man to be had for love or money.” 
Thus, far from attempting to clear herself
from the imputation implied in her husband's
words, she construed his declaration into an acknowledgment
of the ill usage she had suffered; 
and while she trumpeted her own wrongs, with
great vociferation, exercised her claws with such
rancour and agility, that the poor draper was
fain to roar aloud for assistance; and as Cadwallader
had no inclination to interpose, he would,
in all probability, have met with the fate of Orpheus,
had not his cries reached the ears of the 

coachman, who descended from his box, and
partly by threats, and partly by intreaties, put an
end to her operations. 