


DEAR DICK,
SINCE the last trouble I gave you, I have
met with a variety of incidents, some of them of a
singular nature, which I reserve as a fund for conversation; 
but there are others so interesting, that
they will not keep in petto till meeting. 
Know then, it was a thousand pounds to a six-pence,
that you should now be executing my will,
instead of perusing my letter! Two days ago, our
coach was overturned in the midst of a rapid river,
where my life was saved with the utmost difficulty,
by the courage, activity, and presence of mind of
my servant Humphry Clinker —But this is not the
most surprising circumstance of the adventure — 
The said Humphry Clinker proves to be Matthew
Loyd, natural son of one Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan,
of you know any such person —You see,
Doctor, that, notwithstanding all your philosophy,
it is not without some reason that we Welshmen
ascribe such energy to the force of blood —But we
shall discuss this point on some future occasion. 
This is not the only discovery which I made in
consequence of our disaster —We happened to be
wrecked upon a friendly shore —The lord of the
manor is no other than Charles Dennison, our
fellow-rake at Oxford —We are now happily
housed with that gentleman, who has really attained
to that pitch of rural felicity, at which I have been
aspiring these twenty years in vain. He is blessed
with a consort, whose disposition is suited to his
own in all respects; tender, generous, and benevolent 
—She, moreover, possesses an uncommon share
of understanding, fortitude, and discretion, and is 

admirably qualified to be his companion, confidant,
counseller, and coadjutrix. These excellent persons
have an only son, about nineteen years of age,
just such a youth as they could have wished that
Heaven would bestow to fill up the measure of
their enjoyment —In a word, they know no other
allay to their happiness, but their apprehension and
anxiety about the life and concern, of this beloved
object. 
Our old friend, who had the misfortune to be a
second brother, was bred to the law, and even
called to the bar; but he did not find himself qualified
to shine in that province, and had very little
inclination for his profession —He disobliged his
father, by marrying for love, without any consideration
of fortune; so that he had little or no-think
to depend upon for some years but his practice,
which afforded him a bare subsistance; and the
prospect of an increasing family, began to give him
disturbance and disquiet. In the mean time, his
father dying, was succeeded by his elder brother, a
fox-hunter, and a sot, who neglected his affairs,
insulted and oppressed his servants, and in a few
years had well nigh ruined the estate, when he was
happily carried off by a fever, the immediate consequence
of a debauch. Charles, with the approbation
of his wife, immediately determined to quit
business, and retire into the country, although this
resolution was strenuously and zealously opposed by
every individual, whom he consulted on the subject. 
Those who had tried the experiment, assured him
that he could not pretend to breathe in the country
for less than the double of what his estate produced; 
that, in order to be upon the footing of a gentleman,
he would be obliged to keep horses, hounds,
carriages, with a suitable number of servants, and
maintain an elegant table for the entertainment of
his neighbours; the farming was a mystery, known 

only to those who had been bred up to it from the
cradle, the success of it depending not only upon
skill and industry, but also upon such attention and
œconomy as no gentleman could be supposed to give
or practice; accordingly every attempt made by
gentlemen miscarried, and not a few had been
ruined by their prosecution of agriculture —Nay,
they affirmed that he would find it cheaper to buy
hay and oats for his cattle, and to go to market for
poultry, eggs, kitchen herbs, and roots, and every
the most inconsiderable article of house-keeping,
than to have those articles produced on his own
ground. 
These objections did not deter Mr. Dennison,
because they were chiefly founded on the supposition,
that he would be obliged to lead a life of
extravagance and dissipation, which he and his consort
equally detested, despised, and determined to
avoid —The objects he had in view, were health
of body, peace of mind, and the private satisfaction
of domestic quiet, unallyed by actual want, and
uninterrupted by the fears of indigence —He was
very moderate in his estimate of the necessaries,
and even of the comforts of life —He required
nothing but wholsome air, pure water, agreeable
exercise, plain diet, convenient lodging, and decent
apparel. He reflected, that if a peasant without
education, or any great share of natural sagacity,
could maintain a large family, and even become
opulent upon a farm, for which he payed an annual
rent of two or three hundred pounds to the
landlord, surely he himself might hope for some
success from his industry, having no rent to pay
but, on the contrary, three or four hundered pounds
a-year to receive —He considered, that the earth
was an indulgent mother, that yielded her fruits
to all her children without distinction. He had
studied the theory of agriculture with a degree of 

eagerness and delight; and he could not conceive
there was any mystery in the practice, but what he
should be able to disclose by dint of care and application. 
With respect to houshould expence, he
entered into a minute detail and investigation, by
which he perceived the assertions of his friends
were altogether erroneous —He found he should
save sixty pounds a-year in the single article of
house-rent, and as much more in pocket-money
and contingencies; that even butcher's-meat was
twenty per cent. cheaper in the country than in
London; but that poultry, and almost every other
circumstance of house-keeping, might be had for
less than one half of what they cost in town; besides,
a considerable saving on the side of dress, in
being delivered from the oppressive imposition of
ridiculous modes, invented by ignorance, and
adobted by folly. 
As to the danger of vying with the rich in pomp
and equipage, it never gave him the least disturbance. 
He was now turned of forty, and, having
lived half that time in the busy scenes of life, was
well skilled in the science of mankind. There
cannot be in nature a more contemptible figure
than that of man, who with five hundered a year
presumes to rival in expence a neighbour who possesses
five times that income —His ostentation, far
from concealing, seves only to discover his indigence,
and render his vanity the more shocking; 
for it attracts the eyes of censure, and excites the
spirit of inquiry. There is not a family in the
county, nor a servant in his own house, nor a farmer
in the parish, but what knows the utmost
farthing that his lands produce, and all these behold
him with scorn or compassion. I am surprised
that these reflections do not occur to persons in this
unhappy dilemma, and produce a salutary effect; 
but the truth is, of all the passions incident to human 

man nature, vanity is that which most effectually
perverts the faculties of the understanding; nay, it
sometimes becomes so incredibly depraved, as to
aspire at infamy, and find pleasure in bearing the
stigmas of reproach. 
I have now given you a sketch of the character
and situation of Mr. Dennison, when he came
down to take possession of his estate; but as the
messenger, who carries the letters to the next town
is just setting off, I shall reserve what further I
have to say on this subject, till the next post, when
you shall certainly hear from 
yours always,
Matt. Bramble. 
Oct. 8. 