


Peregrine holds a consultation with his friends, in
consequence of which he bids adieu to the Fleet. 
He arrives at his father's house, and asserts his
right of inheritance. 
Nor did our hero keep the misanthrope in
ignorance of this happy turn of fortune: 
Pipes was dispatched to the senior, with a message
requesting his immediate presence; and he
accordingly appeared, in obedience to the summons,
growling with discontent, for having been
deprived of several hours of his natural rest. His
mouth was immediately stopped with the letter, at
which he smiled horrible a ghastly grin; and, after
a compliment of congratulation, they entered into
close divan, about the measures to be taken in
consequence of this event. 
There was no room for much debate: it was
unanimously agreed, that Pickle should set out,
with all possible dispatch, for the garison, to
which Gauntlet and Hatchway resolved to attend
him; and Pipes was accordingly ordered to
prepare a couple of post-chaises, while Godfrey
went to procure bail for his friend, and provide
them with money for the expence of the expedition,
but not before he was desired by Peregrine
to conceal this piece of news from his sister, that
our youth might have an opportunity to surprise
her in a more interesting manner, after he
should have settled his affairs. 
All these previous steps being taken in less than
an hour, our hero took his leave of the Fleet,
after he had left twenty guineas with the warden 

for the relief of the poor prisoners, a great number
of whom conveyed him to the gate, pouring
forth prayers for his long life and prosperity; and
he took the road to the garison, in the most elevated
transports of joy, unallayed with the least
mixture of grief at the death of a parent whose
paternal tenderness he had never known; so that
his breast was absolutely a stranger to that boasted
&grS;&grt;&gro;&grr;&grg;&grhg;, or instinct of affection, by which the
charities are supposed to subsist. 
Of all the journeys he had ever made, this,
sure, was the most delightful: he felt all the extasy
that must naturally be produced in a young
man of his imagination, from such a sudden transition,
in point of circumstance; he found himself
delivered from confinement and disgrace,
without being obliged to any person upon earth
for his deliverance; he had it now in his power
to retort the contempt of the world, in a manner
suited to his most sanguine wish; he was reconciled
to his friend, and enabled to gratify his
love, even upon his own terms; and saw himself
in possession of a fortune more ample than his first
inheritance, with a stock of experience that
would steer him clear of all those quicksands
among which he had been formerly wrecked. 
In the middle of their journey, while they
halted at an inn for a short refreshment and
change of horses, a postilion ran up to Peregrine
in the yard, and falling at his feet, clasped his
knees with great eagerness and agitation, and presented
to him the individual face of his old valet
de chambre. The youth perceiving him in such
an abject garb and attitude, commanded him to
rise, and tell the cause of such a miserable reverse
in his fortune. Upon which Hadgi gave him to 

understand, that he had been ruined by his wife,
who having robbed him of all his cash and valuable
effects, had eloped from his house, with
one of his own customers, who appeared in the
character of a French count, but was in reality
no other than an Italian fidler; that, in consequence
of this retreat, he (the husband) was disabled
from paying a considerable sum which he
had set apart for his wine-merchant, who being
disappointed in his expectation, took out an extent
against his effects; and the rest of his creditors
following his example, hunted him out of
house and home: so that, finding his person in
danger at London, he had been obliged to escape
into the country, skulking about from one village
to another, till being quite destitute of all
support, he had undertaken his present office, to
save himself from starving. 
Peregrine listened with compassion to his lamentable
tale, which too well accounted for his
not appearing in the Fleet, with offers of service
to his master in distress, a circumstance that
Pickle had all along imputed to his avarice and
ingratitude; and he assured him, that as he had
been the means of throwing in his way the temptation
to which he fell a sacrifice, he would charge
himself with the retrieval of his affairs: in the
mean time, he made him taste of his bounty, and
desired him to continue in his present employment,
until he should return from the garison,
when he would consider his situation, and do
something for his immediate relief. 
Hadgi attempted to kiss his shoe, and wept, or
affected to weep, with sensibility, at this gracious
reception; he even made a merit of his unwillingness
to exercise his new occupation, and earnestly 

begged that he might be allowed to give
immediate attendance upon his dear master, from
whom he could not bear the thoughts of a second
parting. His intreaties were reinforced by the
intercession of his two friends, in consequence of
which the Swiss was permitted to follow them at
his own leisure, while they set forwards, after a
slight repast, and reached the place of their destination
before ten o' clock at night. 
Peregrine, instead of alighting at the garison,
rode straightway to his father's house; and no
person appearing to receive him, not even a servant
to take care of his chaise, he dismounted
without assistance, and being followed by his
two friends, advanced into the hall, where perceiving
a bell-rope, he made immediate application
to it, in such a manner as brought a couple
of footmen into his presence. After having reprimanded
them, with a stern look, for their neglect,
in point of attendance, he commanded
them to shew him into an apartment; and, as
they seemed unwilling to yield obedience to his
orders, asked if they did not belong to the family? 
One of them, who took upon himself the office
of spokesman, replied with a sullen air, that
they had been in the service of old Mr. Pickle,
and now that he was dead, thought themselves
bound to obey no body but their lady, and her son
Mr. Gamaliel. This declaration had scarce proceeded
from his mouth, when our hero gave them
to understand, that since they were not disposed
to own any other master, they must change their
quarters immediately; and ordered them to decamp
without further preparation: and as they
still continued restiff, they were kicked out of 

doors by the captain and his friend Hatchway. 
Squire Gam, who overheard every thing that
passed, and was now more than ever inflamed
with that rancour which he had sucked with his
mother's milk, flew to the assistance of his adherents,
with a pistol in each hand, bellowing
Thieves! thieves! with great vociferation, as if
he had mistaken the business of the strangers, and
actually believed himself in danger of being
robbed. Under this pretence he discharged a
piece at his brother, who luckily escaping the
shot, closed with him in a moment, and wresting
the other pistol from his gripe, turned him
out into the court-yard, to the consolation of his
two dependants. 
By this time, Pipes and the two postilions had
taken possession of the stables, without being opposed
by the coachman and his deputy, who
quietly submitted to the authority of their new
sovereign; but the noise of the pistol had alarmed
Mrs. Pickle, who running down stairs, with
the most frantic appearance, attended by two
maids and the curate, who still maintained his
place of chaplain and ghostly director in the family,
would have assaulted our hero with her
nails, had not she been restrained by her attendants,
who, tho' they prevented her from using
her hands, could not hinder her from exercising
her tongue, which she wagged against him with
all the virulence of malice. She ask'd, if he
was come to butcher his brother, to insult his father's
corpse, and triumph in her affliction; she
bestowed upon him the epithets of spendthrift,
jailbird, and unnatural ruffian; she begg'd pardon
of God for having brought such a monster
into the world, accused him of having brought 

his father's grey hairs with sorrow to the grave; 
and affirmed, that were he to touch the body, it
would bleed at his approach. 
Without pretending to refute the articles of
this ridiculous charge, he allowed her to ring out
her alarm; and then calmly replied, that if she
did not quietly retire to her chamber, and behave
as became a person in her present situation, he
should insist upon her removing to another lodging,
without delay; for he was determined to be
master in his own family. The lady, who, in
all probability, expected that he would endeavour
to appease her with all the tenderness of filial
submission, was so much exasperated at his cavalier
behaviour, that her constitution could not
support the transports of her spirits; and she was
carried off by her women, in a fit, while the
officious clergyman was dismiss'd after his pupil,
with all the circumstances of disgrace. 
Our hero having thus made his quarters good,
took possession of the best apartment in the house,
and sent notice of his arrival to Mr. Clover, who,
with his wife, visited him in less than an hour,
and was not a little surprised to find him so suddenly
settled in his father's house. The meeting
of Julia and her brother was extremely pathetic. 
She had always loved him with uncommon
tenderness, and looked upon him as the ornament
of her family; but she had heard of his extravagancies
with regret, and tho' she considered
the stories that were circulated at his expence, as
the malicious exaggerations of his mother and her
darling son, her apprehension had been grievously
alarmed by an account of his imprisonment and
distress, which had been accidentally conveyed
to that country by a gentleman from London, 

who had been formerly of his acquaintance: she
could not, therefore, without the most tender
emotions of joy, see him, as it were, restored to his
rightful inheritance, and re-established in that
station of life which she thought he could fill with
dignity and importance. 
After their mutual expressions of affection, she
retired to her mother's chamber, with a view to
make a second offer of her service and attendance,
which had been already rejected with scorn
since her father's death; while Peregrine consulted
his brother-in-law, about the affairs of the
family, so far as they had fallen within his cognizance
and observation. 
Mr. Clover told him, that though he was
never favoured with the confidence of the defunct,
he knew some of his intimates, who had
been tampered with by Mrs. Pickle, and even
engaged to second the remonstrances by which
she had often endeavoured to persuade her husband
to settle his affairs by a formal will; but
that he had from time to time evaded their importunities
with surprising excuses of procrastination,
that plainly appeared to be the result of invention
and design, far above the supposed pitch
of his capacity; a circumstance from which Mr.
Clover concluded, that the old gentleman imagined
his life would not have been secure, had
he once taken such a step as must have rendered it
unnecessary to the independence of his second son. 
He moreover observed, that, in consequence of
this information, he no sooner heard of Mr.
Pickle's death, which happened at the club, than
he went directly, with a lawyer, to his house,
before any cabal or conspiracy could be formed
against the rightful heir; and, in presence of 

witnesses provided for the purpose, sealed up all
the papers of the deceased, after the widow had,
in the first transports of her sorrow and vexation,
fairly owned, that her husband had died intestate. 
Peregrine was extremely well satisfied with
this intelligence, by which all his doubts were
dispelled, and having chearfully supped with his
friends on a cold collation which his brother-in-law
had brought in his chariot, they retired to
rest, in different chambers, after Julia had met
with another repulse from her capricious mother,
whose overflowing rage had now subsided into the
former channel of calm inveteracy. 
Next morning the house was supplied with
some servants from the garison, and preparations
made for the funeral of the deceased; and Gam
having taken lodgings in the neighbourhood,
came with a chaise and cart to demand his mother,
together with his own cloaths, and her personal
effects. 
Our hero, tho' he would not suffer him to enter
the door, allowed his proposal to be communicated
to the widow, who eagerly embraced the
opportunity of removing, and was, with her own
baggage, and that of her beloved son, conveyed
to the place which he had prepared for her reception; 
whither she was followed by her woman,
who was desired by Peregrine to assure her
mistress, that, until a regular provision could be
settled upon her, she might command him, in
point of money, or any other accommodation in
his power. 