


They meet with a dreadful alarm on the road, arrive
at their journey's end. Peregrine is introduced
to Emily's brother; these two young gentlemen
misunderstand each other. Pickle departs
for the garison. 
As they travelled at an easy rate, they had
performed something more than one half
of their journey, when they were benighted near
an inn, at which they resolved to lodge; the accommodation
was very good, they supped together
with great mirth and enjoyment, and it was
not till after he had been warned by the yawns of
the ladies, that he conducted them to their apartment; 
and wishing them good night, retired to
his own, and went to rest. 
The house was crowded with country people
who had been at a neighbouring fair, and now
regaled themselves with ale and tobacco in the
yard; so that their consideration, which at any
time was but slender, being now overwhelmed by
this debauch, they staggered in to their respective
kennels, and left a lighted candle sticking to
one of the wooden pillars that supported the
gallery. The flame in a little time laid hold on
the wood, which was as dry as tinder, and the
whole gallery was on fire, when Peregrine suddenly
waked, and found himself almost suffocated. 
He sprung up in an instant, slipped on
his breeches, and throwing open the door of his
chamber, saw the whole entry in a blaze. 
Heavens! what were the emotions of his soul,
when he beheld the volumes of flame and smoke 

rolling towards the room where his dear Emilia
lay! Regardless of his own danger, he darted
himself through the thickest of the gloom, when
knocking hard, and calling at the same time to
the ladies, with the most anxious intreaty to be
admitted; the door was opened by Emilia in her
shift, who asked with the utmost trepidation,
what was the matter? He made no reply, but
snatching her up in his arms, like another Æneas,
bore her through the flames to a place of safety; 
where leaving her, before she could recollect hersel,
or pronounce one word, but “Alas! my
cousin Sophy!” he flew back to the rescue of
that young lady, and found her already delivered
by Pipes, who having been alarmed by the smell
of fire, had got up, rushed immediately to the
chamber where he knew these companions lodged,
and (Emily being saved by her lover) brought
off Miss Sophy, with the loss of his own shockhead
of hair, which was singed off in his retreat. 
By this time the whole inn was alarmed,
every lodger, as well as servant, exerted himself,
in order to stop the progress of this calamity; 
and there being a well replenished horsepond
in the yard, in less than an hour the fire
was totally extinguished, without having done
any other damage than that of consuming about
two yards of the wooden gallery. 
All this time our young gentleman closely attended
his fair charge, each of whom had swooned
with apprehension; but as their constitutions
were good, and their spirits not easily dissipated,
when upon reflection they found themselves and
their company safe, and that the flames were
happily quenched, the tumult of their fears subsided, 

they put on their cloaths, recovered their
good humour, and began to rally each other on
the trim in which they had been secured. Sophy
observed, that now Mr. Pickle had an indisputable
claim to her cousin's affection; and therefore she
ought to lay aside all affected reserve for the future,
and frankly avow the sentiments of her
heart. Emily retorted the argument, putting
her in mind, that by the same claim Mr. Pipes
was intitled to the like return from her. Her
friend admitted the force of the conclusion, provided
she could not find means of satisfying her
deliverer in another shape; and turning to the
valet, who happened to be present, asked if his
heart was not otherwise engaged? Tom, who
did not conceive the meaning of the question,
stood silent according to custom; and the interrogation
being repeated, answered with a grin,
“Heart-whole as a biscuit, I'll assure you, Mistress.” 
“What! (said Emilia) have you never
been in love, Thomas?” “Yes, forfooth, (replied
the valet, without hesitation) sometimes of
a morning.” Peregrine could not help laughing,
and his mistress looked a little disconcerted at
this blunt repartee; while Sophy, slipping a purse
into his hand, told him there was something to
purchase a periwig. Tom having consulted his
master's eyes, refused the present, saying, “No,
thank ye as much as if I did.” And though she
insisted upon his putting it in his pocket, as a
small testimony of her gratitude, he could not
be prevailed upon to avail himself of her generosity; 
but following her to the other end of the
room, thrust it into her sleeve without ceremony,
exclaiming, “I'll be damned to hell if I do.” 
Peregrine having checked him for his boorish 

behaviour, sent him out of the room, and begged
that Miss Sophy would not endeavour to debauch
the morals of his servant, who rough and uncultivated
as he was, had sense enough to perceive
that he had no pretension to any such acknowledgment. 
But she argued with great vehemence,
that she should never be able to make
an acknowledgment adequate to the service he
had done her, and that she should never be perfectly
easy in her own mind, until she found
some opportunity of manifesting the sense she had
of the obligation: “I do not pretend (said she)
to reward Mr. Pipes; but I shall be absolutely
unhappy, unless I am allowed to give him some
token of my regard.” 
Peregrine thus earnestly sollicited, desired that
since she was bent upon displaying her generosity,
she would not bestow upon him any pecuniary
gratification, but honour him with some trinket,
as a mark of consideration; because he himself
had such a particular value for the fellow, on account
of his attachment and fidelity, that he
should be sorry to see him treated on the footing
of a common mercenary domestick. 
There was not one jewel in the possession of
this grateful young lady, that she would not have
gladly given as a recompence, or badge of distinction,
to her rescuer: but his master pitched
upon a seal ring of no great value that hung at
her watch; and Pipes being called in, had permission
to accept that testimony of Miss Sophy's
favour. Tom received it accordingly with sundry
scrapes, and having kissed it with great devotion,
put it on his little finger, and strutted off,
extremely proud of his acquisition. 

Emilia, with a most enchanting sweetness of
aspect, told her lover, that he had instructed her
how to behave towards him; and taking a diamond
ring from her finger, desired he would
wear it for her sake. He received the pledge as
became him, and presented another in exchange,
which she at first refused, alledging that it would
destroy the intent of her acknowledgment; but
Peregrine assured her, he had accepted her jewel,
not as a proof of her gratitude, but as the mark
of her love; and that if she refused a mutual
token, he should look upon himself as the object
of her disdain. Her eyes kindled, and her cheeks
glowed with resentment at this impudent intimation,
which she considered as an unseasonable insult; 
and the young gentleman perceiving her
emotion, stood corrected for his temerity, and
asked pardon for the liberty of his remonstrance,
which he hoped she would ascribe to the prevalence
of that principle alone, which he had always
taken pride in avowing. 
Sophy seeing him disconcerted, interposed in
his behalf, and chid her cousin for having practised
such unnecessary affectation; upon which
Emilia, softened into compliance, held out her
finger as a signal of her condescension. Peregrine
put on the ring with great eagerness,
mumbled her soft white hand in an extasy, which
would not allow him to confine his embraces to
that limb, but urged him to seize her by the
waist, and snatch a delicious kiss from her love-pouting
lips; nor would he leave her a butt to
the ridicule of Sophy, on whose mouth he instantly
committed a rape of the same nature; so
that the two friends, countenanced by each
other, reprehended him with such gentleness of 

rebuke, that he was almost tempted to repeat the
offence. 
The morning being now lighted up, and the
servants of the inn on foot, he ordered some chocolate
for breakfast, and at the desire of the ladies
sent Pipes to see the horses fed, and the chariot
prepared, while he went to the bar, and discharged
the bill. 
These measures being taken, they set out
about five o'clock, and having refreshed themselves
and their cattle at another inn on the road,
during the heat of the day, they proceeded in
the afternoon; and, without meeting with any
other accident, safely arrived at the place of
their destination, where Mrs. Gauntlet expressed
her joy at seeing her old friend Mr. Pickle, whom,
however, she kindly reproached for the long discontinuance
of his regard. Without explaining
the cause of that interruption, he protested that
his love and esteem had never been discontinued,
and that for the future he should omit no occasion
of testifying how much he had her friendship at
heart. She then made him acquainted with her
son, who at that time was in the house, being
excused from his duty by furlow. 
This young man, whose name was Godfrey,
was about the age of twenty, of a middling size,
vigorous make, remarkably well shaped, and the
scars of the small pox, of which he bore a good
number, added a peculiar manliness to the air of
his countenance. His capacity was good, and
his disposition naturally frank and easy; but he
had been a soldier from his infancy, and his education
was altogether in the military stile. He
looked upon taste and letters as meer pedantry,
beneath the consideration of a gentleman, and 

every civil station of life as mean, when compared
with the profession of arms. He had made
great progress in the gymnastic sciences of dancing,
fencing and riding, played perfectly well
on the German flute, and above all things valued
himself upon a scrupulous observance of all
the points of honour. 
Had Peregrine and he considered themselves
upon equal footing, in all probability they would
have immediately entered into a league of intimacy
and friendship; but this sufficient soldier
looked upon his sister's admirer as a young student
raw from the university, and utterly ignorant
of mankind, while squire Pickle beheld
Godfrey in the light of a needy volunteer,
greatly inferior to himself in fortune, as well as
every other accomplishment. This mutual misunderstanding
could not fail of producing animosities. 
The very next day after Peregrine's arrival,
some sharp repartees passed between them
in presence of the ladies, before whom each endeavoured
to assert his own superiority. In these
contests our hero never failed of obtaining the
victory, because his genius was more acute, and
his talents better cultivated than those of his antagonist,
who therefore took umbrage at his success,
became jealous of his reputation, and began
to treat him with marks of scorn and disrespect. 
His sister saw, and dreading the consequence
of his ferocity, not only took him to talk in
private for his impolite behaviour, but also intreated
her lover to make allowances for the
roughness of her brother's education. He kindly
assured her, that whatever pains it might cost him
to vanquish his own impetuous temper, he would 

for her sake endure all the mortifications to
which her brother's arrogance might expose him; 
and after having stayed with her two days, and
enjoyed several private interviews, during which
he acted the part of a most passionate lover, he
took his leave of Mrs. Gauntlet over-night, and
told the young ladies he would call early next
morning, to bid them farewel. He did not neglect
this piece of duty, and found the two friends
and breakfast already prepared in the parlour. 
All three being extremely affected with the
thoughts of parting, a most pathetic silence for
some time prevailed, till Peregrine put an end to
it, by lamenting his fate, in being obliged to exile
himself so long from the dear object of his most
interesting wish; and begged with the most earnest
supplications, that she would now, in consideration
of the cruel absence he must suffer,
give him the consolation which she had hitherto
refused, namely, that of knowing he possessed
a place within her heart. The confidante seconded
his request, representing that it was now
no time to disguise her sentiments, when her
lover was about to leave the kingdom, and might
be in danger of contracting other connexions,
unless he was confirmed in his constancy, by
knowing how far he could depend upon her love; 
and in short, she was plied with such irresistible
importunities, that she answered in the utmost
confusion, “Tho' I have avoided literal acknowledgments,
methinks the circumstances of
my behavior might have convinced Mr. Pickle,
that I do not regard him as a common acquaintance.” 
“My charming Emily! (cried the impatient
lover, throwing himself at her feet) why
will you deal out my happiness in such scanty 

portions? Why will you thus mince the declaration
which would overwhelm me with pleasure,
and chear my lonely reflection, while I sigh
amid the solitude of separation?” His fair mistress,
melted by this image, replied, with the
tears gushing from her eyes, “I'm afraid I shall
feel that separation more severely than you imagine” 
Transported at this flattering confession,
he pressed her to his breast, and while her head
reclined upon his neck, mingled his tears with
hers in great abundance, and breathed the most
tender vows of eternal fidelity. The gentle heart
of Sophy could not bear this scene unmoved,
she wept with sympathy, and encouraged the lovers
to resign themselves to the will of fate, and
support their spirits with the hope of meeting
again on happier terms. Finally, after mutual
promises, exhortations and endearments, Peregrine
took his leave, his heart being so full, that
he could scarce pronounce the word “Adieu!” 
and mounting his horse at the door, set out with
Pipes for the garison. 