


dear mary Jones,
MISS Liddy is so good as to unclose me in a
kiver as fur as Gloster, and the carrier will bring
it to hand —God send us all safe to Monmouthshire,
for I'm quite jaded with rambling —'Tis a
true saying, live and learn —O woman, what
chuckling and changing have I seen! —Well,
there's nothing sartain in this world —Who would
have thought that mistriss, after all the pains taken
for the good of her prusias sole, would go for
to throw away her poor body? that she would cast
the heys of infection upon such a carrying-crow as
Lashmyhago! as old as Matthewfullin, as dry as
a red herring, and as pore as a starved veezel — 
O, Molly; hadst thou seen him come down the
ladder, in a shurt so scanty, tht it would not kiver 

his nakedness! —The young 'squire called him
Dunquickset; but he looked for all the world like
Cradoc-ap-Morgan, the ould tinker, that suffered
at Abergany for steeling of kettle —Then he's
a profane scuffle, and, as Mr. Clinker says, no better
than an impfiddle, continually playing upon
the pyebill and the new-burth —I doubt he has
as little manners as money; for he cant't say a civil
word, much more make me a present of a pair of
gloves for good-will; but he looks as if he wanted
to be very forewood and familiar —O! that ever a
gentlewoman of years and discretion should tare
her air, and cry and disporridge herself for such a
nubjack! as the song goes — 
“I vow she would fain have a burd
That bids such a price for an owl.”
but for, sartain, he must have dealt with some
Scotch musician to bring her to this pass —As for
me, I put my trust in the Lord; and I have got a
slice of witch elm sowed in the gathers of my under
petticoat; and Mr. Clinker assures me, that
by the new light of grease, I may deify the devil
and all his work —But I nose what I nose —If
mistriss should take up with Lashmyhago, this is
no sarvice for me —Thank God, there's no want
of places; and if it wan't for wan thing, I would
—but, no matter —Madam Baynar's woman
has twenty good pounds a-year and parquisites; 
and dresses like a parson of distinkson —I dined with
her and the valley de shambles, with bags and golden
jackets; but there was nothing kimfittable to
eat, being as how they live upon board, and having
nothing but a piss of could cuddling tart and
some blamangey, I was tuck with the cullick, and
a murcy it was that mistriss had her viol of assings
in the cox. 

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this
match will go forewood; for things are come to a
creesus; and have seen with my own hays, such
smuggling —But I scorn for to exclose the secrets
of the family; and if it wance comes to marrying,
who nose but the frolick may go round —I believes
as how, Miss Liddy would have no reversion if her
swan would appear; and you would be surprised,
Molly, to receive a bride's fever from your humble
servant—but this is all suppository, dearl girl; 
and I have sullenly promised to Mr. Clinker, that
neither man, woman, nor child, shall no that arrow
said a civil thing to me in the way of infection 
—I hopes to drink your health at Brambleton-hall,
in a horn of October, before the month be
out —Pray let my bed be turned once a-day, and
the windore opened, while the weather is dry; 
and burn a few billets with some brush in the footman's
garret, and see their mattrash be dry as a
bone; for both our gentlemen have got a sad could
by lying in the damp shits at sir Tummas Ballsart's. 
No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and
the rest of our fellow-sarvents, being, 
Dear Mary Jones,
always yours,
Win. Jenkins. 
Oct. 4. 