


DEAR DICK,
I HAVE done with the waters; therefore your
advice comes a day too late—I grant that physick is
no mystery of your making. I know it is a mystery
in its own nature; and, like other mysteries, requires
a strong gulp of faith to make it go down
—Two days ago, I went into the King's Bath, by
the advice of our friend Ch&wblank;, in order to clear
the strainer of the skin, for the benefit of a free perspiration; 
and the first object that saluted my eye,
was a child full of scrophulous ulcers, carried in the
arms of one of the guides, under the very noses of the
bathers. I was so shocked at the sight, that I retired
immediately with indignation and disgust—Suppose
the matter of those ulcers, floating on the water,
comes in contact with my skin, when the pores are
all open, I would ask you what must be the consequence? 
—Good Heaven, the very thought makes
my blood run cold; we know not what sorea may be
running into the water while we are bathing, and
what sort of matter we may thus imbibe; the
king's-evil, the scurvy, the cancer, and the pox; 
and, no doubt, the heat will render the virus the
more volatile and penetrating. To purify myself
from all such contamination, I went to the duke of
Kingston's private Bath, and there I was almost
suffocated for want of free air; the place was so
small, and the steam so stifling. 
After all, if the intention is no more than to wash
the skin, I am convinced that simple element is
more effectual than any water impregnated with
salt and iron; which, being astringent, will certainly
contract the pores, and leave a kind of crust upon 

the surface of the body. But I am now as much
afraid of drinking, as of bathing; for, after a long
conversation with the Doctor, about the construction
of the pump and the cistern, it is very far from
being clear with me, that the patients in the Pump-room
don't swallow, the scourings of the bathers. I
can't help suspecting, that there is, or may be, some
regurgitation from the bath into the cistern of the
pump. In that case, what a delicate beveridge is
every day quaffed by the drinkers; medicated with
the sweat, and dirt, and dandriff; and the abominable
discharges of various kinds, from twenty different
diseased bodies, parboiling in the kettle below. 
In order to avoid this filthy composition, I had recourse
to the spring that supplies the private baths on
the Abbey-green; but I at once perceived something
extraordinary in the taste and smell; and, upon inquiry,
I find that the Roman baths in this quarter,
were found covered by an old burying ground, belonging
to the Abbey; thro' which, in all probability,
the water drains in its passage. so that as we
drink the decoction of living bodies at the Pump-room,
we swallow the strainings of rotten bones and
carcases at the private bath—I vow to God, the
very idea turns my stomach!—determined, as I am,
against any farther use of the Bath waters, this consideration
would give me little disturbance, if I
could find any thing more pure, or less pernicious,
to quench my thirst; but, although the natural
springs of excellent water are seen gushing spontaneous
on every side, from the hills that surround us,
the inhabitants in general, make use of well-water,
so impregnated with nitre, or alum, or some other
villanous mineral, that it is equally ungrateful to
the taste, and mischievous to the constitution. It
must be owned, indeed, that here, in Milshamstreet,
we have a precarious and scanty supply from
the hill; which is collected in an open bason in the 

Circus, liable to be defiled with dead dogs, cats,
rats, and every species of nastiness, which the rascally
populace may throw into it, from mere wantonness
and brutality.— 
Well, there is no nation that drinks so hoggishly,
as the English—What passes for wine among us,
is not the juice of the grape. It is an adulterous
mixture, brewed up of nauseous ingredients, by
dunces, who are bunglers in the art of poison-making; 
and yet we, and our forefathers, are and
have been poisoned by this cursed drench, without
taste or flavour—The only genuine and wholesome
beveridge in England, is London-porter, and Dorchester
table-beer; but as for your ale and your
gin, your cider, and your perry, and all the trashy
family of made wines, I detest them as infernal
compositions, contrived for the destruction of the
human species. —But what have I to do with the
human species? except a very few friends, I care
not if the whole was— 
Hark ye, Lewis, my misanthropy increases
every day—The longer I live, I find the folly and
the fraud of mankind grow more and more intolerable
—I wish I had not come from Brambleton hall; 
after having lived in solitude so long, I cannot bear
the hurry and impertinence of the multitude; besides
every thing is sophisticated in these crowded
places. Snares are laid for our lives in every thing
we eat or drink: the very air we breathe, is loaded
with contagion. We cannot even sleep, without
risque of insection. I say, infection—This place is
the rendezvous of the diseased—You won't deny,
that many diseases are infections; even the consumption
itself, is highly infections. When a person
dies of it in Italy, the bed and bedding are
destroyed; the other furniture is exposed to the
weather, and the apartment white-washed, before 

it is occupied by any other living soul. You'll
allow, that nothing receives infection sooner, or retains
it longer, than blankets, feather-beds, and
matrasses—'Sdeath! how do I know what miserable
objects have been stewing in the bed where I now
lie!—I wonder, Dick, you did not put me in mind
of sending for my own matrasses—But, if I had not
been an ass, I should not have needed a remembrancer
—There is always some plaguy reflection
that rises up in judgment against me, and ruffles my
spirits—Therefore, let us change the subject— 
I have other reasons for abridging my stay at
Bath—You know sister Tabby's complexion—If
Mrs. Tabitha Bramble had been of any other race,
I should certainly have looked upon her as the most
—But, the truth is, she has found means to interest
my affection; or, rather, she is beholden to the
force of prejudice, commonly called the ties of
blood. Well, this amiable maiden has actually
commenced a flirting correspondence with an Irish
baronel of sixty-five. His name is sir Ulic Mackilligut. 
He is said to be much out at elbows; and,
I believe, has received false intelligence with respect
to her fortune. Be that as it may, the connexion
is exceedingly ridiculous, and begins already to
excite whispers. For my part, I have no intention
to dispute her free agency; though I shall fall upon
some expedient to undeceive her paramour, as to
the point which he has principally in view. But I
don't think her conduct in a proper example for
Liddy, who has also attracted the notice of some
coxcombs in the rooms; and Jery tells me, he
suspects a strapping fellow, the knight's nephew,
of some design upon the girl's heart. I shall,
therefore, keep a strict eye over her aunt and her,
and even shift the scene, if I find the matter grow
more serious—You perceive what an agreeable 

task it must be, to a man of my kidney, to have
the cure of such souls as these—But, hold, you shall
not have another peevish word (till the next occasion)
from 
yours,
Matt. Bramble. 
Bath, April the 28. 