


CHAP. I.
An account of Mr. Gamaliel Pickle. The
disposition of his sister described. He yields
to her sollicitations, and retires to the country. p. 1
CHAP. II.
He is made acquainted with the characters of Commodore
Trunnion and his adherents; meets with
them by accident, and contracts an intimacy with
that commander. p. 6
CHAP. III.
Mrs. Grizzle exerts herself in finding a proper
match for her brother; who is accordingly introduced
to the young lady whom he marries in due
season. p. 20
CHAP. IV.
The behaviour of Mrs. Grizzle at the wedding,
with an account of the guests. p. 25

CHAP. V.
Mrs. Pickle assumes the reins of government in her
own family; her sister-in-law undertakes an
enterprize of great moment; but is for some time
diverted from her purpose, by a very interesting
consideration. p. 29
CHAP. VI.
Mrs. Grizzle is indefatigable in gratifying her
sister's longings. Peregrine is born, and managed
contrary to the directions and remonstrances
of his aunt, who is disgusted upon that account; 
and resumes the plan which she had before rejected. p. 37
CHAP. VII.
Divers stratagems are invented and put in practice,
in order to overcome the obstinacy of Trunnion,
who at length is teized and tortured into the noose
of wedlock. p. 50
CHAP. VIII.
Preparations are made for the commodore's wedding,
which is delayed by an accident that hurried
him the Lord knows whither. p. 56
CHAP. IX.
He is found by the lieutenant; reconducted to his
own house; married to Mrs. Grizzle, who meets
with a small misfortune in the night, and asserts
her prerogative next morning; in consequence of
which her husband's eye is endangered. p. 65
CHAP. X.
The commodore being in some cases restif, his lady
has recourse to artifice in the establishment of her
throne; she exhibits symptoms of pregnancy, to
the unspeakable joy of Trunnion, who nevertheless
is baulked in his expectation. p. 73

CHAP. XI.
Mrs. Trunnion erects a tyranny in the garrison,
while her husband conceives an affection for his
nephew Perry, who manifests a peculiarity of
disposition even in his tender years. p. 80
CHAP. XII.
Peregrine is sent to a boarding-school, and becomes
remarkable for his genius and ambition. p. 85
CHAP. XIII.
He exercises his talents at the expence of the school-master,
whose character and business declining,
he desires to be recalled. p. 90
CHAP. XIV.
The commodore takes Peregrine under his own care. 
The boy arrives at the garrison;—is strangely
received by his own mother;—enters into a confederacy
with Hatchway and Pipes, and executes
a couple of waggish enterprizes upon his aunt. p. 98
CHAP. XV.
The triumvirate turn the stream of their wit upon
the commodore, who by their means is embroiled
with an attorney, and terrified with an apparition. p. 106
CHAP. XVI.
He is also by their device engaged in an adventure
with the exciseman, who does not find his account
in his own drollery. p. 112
CHAP. XVII.
The commodore detects the machinations of the conspirators,
and hires a tutor for Peregrine, whom
he settles at Winchester school. p. 12

CHAP. XVIII.
Peregrine distinguishes himself among his school-fellows,
exposes his tutor, and attracts the particular
notice of the master. p. 126
CHAP. XIX.
He is concerned in a dangerous adventure with a
certain gardener; heads an insurrection in the
school; takes the field with his adherents, marches
up into the country, and fixes his head quarters at
an inn. p. 133
CHAP. XX.
The governors tamper with their pupils. Peregrine
is deserted, prevailed upon to return, and submit
to correction; sublimes his ideas, commences gallant,
and becomes acquainted with Miss Emily
Gauntlet. 
CHAP. XXI.
He inquires into the situation of this young lady
with whom he is enamoured; elopes from school; 
is found by the lieutenant, reconveyed to Winchester,
and sends a letter with a copy of verses
to his mistress. p. 151
CHAP. XXII.
His messenger meets with a misfortune, to which he
applies a very extraordinary expedient that is attended
with strange consequences. p. 161
CHAP. XXIII.
Peregrine is summoned to attend his uncle, is more
and more hated by his own mother; appeals to
his father, whose condescension is defeated by the
dominion of his wife. p. 168

CHAP. XXIV.
Trunnion is enraged at the conduct of Pickle. 
Peregrine resents the injustice of his mother, to
whom he explains his sentiments in a letter. Is
entered at the University of Oxford, where he
signalizes himself as a youth of an enterprising
genius. p. 174
CHAP. XXV.
He is insulted by his tutor, whom he lampoons; 
makes considerable progress in polite literature; 
and in an excursion to Windsor meets with Emilia
by accident, and is very coldly received. p. 182
CHAP. XXVI.
After sundry unsuccessful efforts, he finds means to
come to an explanation with his mistress; and a
reconciliation ensues. p. 191
CHAP. XXVII.
He atchieves an adventure at the assembly, and
quarrels with his governor. p. 201
CHAP. XXVIII.
He receives a letter from his aunt, breaks with the
commodore, and disobliges the lieutenant, who,
nevertheless, undertakes his cause. p. 210
CHAP. XXIX.
He becomes melancholy and despondent; is favoured
with a condescending letter from his uncle, reconciles
himself to his governor, and sets out
with Emilia and her friend for Mrs. Gauntlet's
house. p. 218

CHAP. XXX.
They meet with a dreadful alarm on the road, arrive
at their journey's end. Peregrine is introduced
to Emily's brother; these two young gentlemen
misunderstand each other. Pickle departs
for the garison. p. 225
CHAP. XXXI.
Peregrine is overtaken by Mr. Gauntlet, with
whom he fights a duel, and contracts an intimate
friendship. He arrives at the garison, and
finds his mother as implacable as ever. He is
insulted by his brother Gam, whose preceptor he
disciplines with a horse-whip. p. 233
CHAP. XXXII.
He projects a plan of revenge, which is executed
against the curate. p. 242
CHAP. XXXIII.
Mr. Sackbut and his pupil conspire against Peregrine,
who being apprized of their design by his
sister, takes measures for counterworking their
scheme, which is executed by mistake upon Mr.
Gauntlet. This young soldier meets with a
cordial reception from the commodore, who generously
decoys him into his own interest. p. 248
CHAP. XXXIV.
The two young gentlemen display their talents for
gallantry, in the course of which they are involved
in a ludicrous circumstance of distress, and
afterwards take vengeance on the author of their
mishap. p. 258

CHAP. XXXV.
Peregrine has an interview with his sister Julia. 
Is interrupted and attacked by his mother, and
relieved by his friend Gauntlet. Julia is settled
in the garison, and Trunnion affronted by his
old friend Gamaliel Pickle. p. 265
CHAP. XXXVI.
The commodore sends a challenge to Gamaliel, and
is imposed upon, by a waggish invention of the
lieutenant, Peregrine and Gauntlet. p. 271
CHAP. XXXVII.
Peregrine takes leave of his aunt and sister, sets
out from the garison, parts with his uncle and
Hatchway on the road, and with his governor
arrives in safety at Dover. p. 276
CHAP. XXXVIII.
He adjusts the method of his correspondence with
Gauntlet; meets by accident with an Italian
Charlatan, and a certain apothecary, who proves
to be a noted character. p. 280