


Peregrine resolves to return to England, is diverted
with the odd characters of two of his countrymen,
with whom he contracts an acquaintance in the
apartments of the Palais Royal. 
In the mean time, our hero received a letter
from his aunt, importing that the commodore
was in a very declining way, and longed much to 

see him at the garison; and at the same time he
heard from his sister, who gave him to understand
that the young gentleman who had for some
time made his addresses to her, was become very
pressing in his solicitations; so that she wanted to
know in what manner she should answer his repeated
intreaties. These two considerations determined
the young gentleman to return to his
native country, a resolution that was far from
being disagreeable to Jolter, who knew that the
incumbent on a living which was in the gift of
Trunnion, was extremely old, and that it would
be his interest to be upon the spot at the said incumbent's
decease. 
Peregrine, who had resided about fifteen
months in France, thought he was now sufficiently
qualified for eclipsing most of his cotemporaries
in England, and therefore prepared for his
departure with infinite alacrity, being moreover
inflamed with the most ardent desire of revisiting
his friends, and renewing his connections, particularly
with Emilia, whose heart, he by this
time, thought he was able to reduce on his own
terms. 
As he proposed to make the tour of Flanders
and Holland in his return to England, he resolved
to stay in Paris a week or two after his affairs
were settled, in hopes of finding some agreeable
companion disposed for the same journey, and in
order to refresh his memory, made a second circuit
round all the places in that capital, where
any curious production of art is to be seen. In
the course of this second examination he chanced
to enter the Palais Royal, just as two gentlemen
alighted from a Fiacre at the gate, and all three
being admitted at the same time, he soon perceived 

that the strangers were of his own country. 
One of them was a young man, in whose air
and countenance appeared all the uncouth gravity
and supercilious self-conceit of a physician piping
hot from his studies, while the other, to whom
his companion spoke by the appellation of Mr.
Pallet, displayed at first sight a strange composition
of levity and assurance. Indeed their characters,
dress and address were strongly contrasted; 
the doctor wore a suit of black, and a huge tyewig,
neither suitable to his own age, nor the fashion
of the country where he then lived; whereas
the other, though seemingly turned of fifty,
strutted in a gay summer dress of the Parisian cut,
with a bag to his own grey hair, and a red feather
in his hat, which he carried under his arm. As
these figures seemed to promise something entertaining,
Pickle entered into conversation with
them immediately, and soon discovered that the
old gentleman was a painter from London, who
had stole a fortnight from his occupation, in order
to visit the remarkable paintings of France and
Flanders; and that the doctor had taken the opportunity
of accompanying him in his tour. Being
extremely talkative, he not only communicated
these particulars to our hero in a very few
minutes after their meeting, but also took occasion
to whisper in his ear, that his fellow traveller
was a man of vast learning, and beyond all doubt,
the greatest poet of the age. As for himself, he
was under no necessity of making his own elogium; 
for he soon gave such specimens of his
taste and talents, as left Pickle no room to doubt
of his capacity. 
While they stood considering the pictures in
one of the first apartments, which are by no 

means the most masterly compositions, the Swiss,
who sets up for a connoisseur, looking at a certain
piece, pronounced the word magnifique!
with a note of admiration; upon which Mr. Pallet,
who was not at all a critick in the French
language, replied with great vivacity, “Manufac,
you mean, and a very indifferent piece of
manufacture it is; pray gentleman take notice,
there is no keeping in those heads upon the back
ground, nor no relief in the principal figure:
then you'll observe the shadings are harsh to the
last degree; and come a little closer this way— 
don't you perceive that the fore-shortening of that
arm is monstrous—agad, sir! there is an absolute
fracture in the limb—doctor, you understand anatomy,
don't you think that muscle evidently misplaced? 
Heark ye, Mr. what d'ye call um, (turning
to the attendant) what is the name of the
dauber who painted that miserable performance?” 
The Swiss imagining that he was all this time
expressing his satisfaction, sanctioned his supposed
commendation, by exclaiming sans prix. “Right,
cried Pallet, I could not recollect his name,
though his manner is quite familiar to me. We
have a few pieces in England, done by that same
sangpree; but there they are in no estimation; 
we have more taste among us, than to relish the
productions of such a miserable gout. Isn't he an
ignorant coxcomb, doctor?” The physician ashamed
of his companion's blunder, thought it
was necessary for the honour of his own character,
to take notice of it before the stranger, and
therefore answered his question, by repeating this
line from Horace, 

Mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur.

The painter, who was rather more ignorant of
Latin than of French, taking it for granted that
this quotation of his friend, conveyed an assent to
his opinion, “Very true, said he, a most sensible
observation! mute aye toe numbing he, (what
is't?) Deity, fable honour hate her. It is indeed
a most mute benumbing piece; and the fable
shews that the painter was very little honoured
by the deity.” Peregrine was astonished at this
surprising perversion of the words and meaning of
a Latin line, which, at first, he could not help
thinking was a premeditated joke; but upon
second thoughts, he saw no reason to doubt that
it was the extemporaneous effect of sheer pertness
and ignorance, at which he broke out into an
immoderate fit of laughter. Pallet believing that
the gentleman's mirth was occasioned by his arch
animadversion upon the work of sangpree, underwent
the same emotion in a much louder
strain, and endeavoured to heighten the jest, by
more observations of the same nature; while the
doctor confounded at his impudence and want of
knowledge, reprimanded him in these words of
Homer, 

&grS;&gria;&grg;&gra;, &grm;&grha; &grt;&gri;&grst; &grasa;&grl;&grl;&gro;&grst; &grAs;&grc;&gra;&gri;&grwc;&grn;, &grt;&gro;&gruc;&grt;&gro;&grn; &gras;&grk;&gro;&grus;&grs;&grh; &grm;&gru;&grq;&gro;&grn;.
This rebuke, the reader will easily perceive, was
not calculated for the meridian of his friend's intellects,
but uttered with a view of raising his own
character in the opinion of Mr. Pickle, who retorted
this parade of learning in three verses from the
same author, being part of the speech of Polydamas
to Hector, importing that it is impossible for
one man to excel in every thing. The self-sufficient
physician, who did not expect such a repartee 

from a youth of Peregrine's appearance,
looked upon his reply as a fair challenge, and instantly
rehearsed forty or fifty lines of the Iliad in
a breath; and observing that the stranger made
no effort to match this effusion, interpreted his
silence into submission; then, in order to ascertain
his victory, insulted him with divers fragments
of authors, whom his supposed competitor
did not even know by name; while Mr. Pallet
stared with admiration at the profound scholarship
of his companion. Our young gentleman, far
from repining at this superiority, laughed within
himself at the ridiculous ambition of the pedantic
doctor, who must have been at infinite pains
in conning these detached pieces, with a view of
retailing them in company for the credit of his
genius and knowledge. He rated him in his own
mind as a meer index-hunter, who held the eel of
science by the tail, and foresaw an infinite fund of
diversion in his solemnity and pride, if properly
extracted by means of his fellow-traveller's vanity
and assurance. Prompted by these considerations,
he resolved to cultivate their acquaintance, and, if
possible, amuse himself at their expence in his
journey through Flanders, understanding that they
were determined upon the same route. In this
view he treated them with extraordinary attention,
and seemed to pay particular deference to
the remarks of the painter, who with great intrepidity
pronounced judgment upon every picture in
the palace, or in other words, exposed his own
nakedness, in every sentence that proceeded from
his mouth. 
When they came to consider the murder of the
innocents by Le Brun, the Swiss observed that it
was un beau morçeau, and Mr. Pallet replied, 

“Yes, yes, one may see with half an eye, that
it can be the production of no other; for Bomorsos's
stile, both in colouring and drapery, is altogether
peculiar; then his design is tame, and his
expression antic and unnatural. Doctor, you
have seen my judgment of Solomon, I think I
may without presumption—but, I don't choose
to make comparisons, I leave that odious task to
other people, and let my works speak for themselves. 
France, to be sure, is rich in the arts,
but what is the reason? the king encourages men
of genius with honour and rewards: whereas, in
England, we are obliged to stand upon our own
feet, and combat the envy and malice of our
brethren; agad! I have a good mind to come
and settle here in Paris; I should like to have an
apartment in the Louvre, with a snug pension of
so many thousand livres.” In this manner did
Pallet proceed with an eternal rotation of tongue,
floundering from one mistake to another, until it
was the turn of Poussin's seven sacraments to be
examined. Here again the Swiss out of the abundance
of his zeal, expressed his admiration, by
saying, these pieces were impayable; when the
painter turning to him with an air of exultation,
“Pardon me, friend, there you happen to be
mistaken, these are none of impayable's, but done
by Nicholas Pouseen. I have seen prints of them
in England, so that none of your tricks upon travellers,
Mr. Swish or Swash, or what's your
name. He was very much elated by this imaginary
triumph of his understanding, which animated
him to persevere in his curious observations upon
all the other pieces of that celebrated collection; 
but perceiving that the doctor manifested no signs
of pleasure and satisfaction, but rather beheld 

them with a silent air of disdain, he could not
digest his indifference, and asked with a waggish
sneer, if ever he had seen such a number of master-pieces
before? The physician eying him with
a look of compassion mingled with contempt, observed
that there was nothing there which deserved
the attention of any person acquainted with
the ideas of the ancients; and that the author of
the finest piece now in being, was unworthy to
clean the brushes of one of those great masters,
who are celebrated by the Greek and Roman
writers. “O lud! O lud! (exclaimed the
painter, with a loud laugh) you have fairly
brought yourself into a dilemma at last, dear doctor; 
for it is well known that your ancient Greek
and Roman artists knew nothing at all of the
matter, in comparison with our modern masters; 
for this good reason, because they had but three
or four colours, and knew not how to paint with
oil: besides, which of all your old fusty Grecians
would you put upon a footing with the divine
Raphael, the most excellent Michael Angelo, Bona
Roti, the graceful Guido, the bewitching Titian,
and above all others, the sublime Rubens, the” 
—He would have proceeded with a long catalogue
of names which he had got by heart for
the purpose, without retaining the least idea of
their several qualifications, had not he been interrupted
by his friend, whose indignation being
kindled by the irreverence with which he mentioned
the Greeks; he called him blasphemer,
Goth, Bæotian, and in his turn, asked with great
vehemence, which of those puny moderns could
match with Panænus of Athens, and his brother
Phidias, Polycletus of Sicyon, Polygnotus the 

Thrasian, Parrhasius of Ephesus, sirnamed &grA;&grb;&grr;&gro;&grd;&gri;&gra;&gri;&grt;&gro;&grst;,
and Apelles the prince of painters? He
challenged him to shew any portrait of these days
that could vye with the Helen of Zeuxis the Heraclean,
or any composition equal to the sacrifice
of Iphigenia, by Timanthes the Sicyonian; not
to mention the twelve gods of Asclepiadorus the
Athenian, for which Mnason, tyrant of Elatea,
gave him about three hundred pounds a piece, or
Homer's hell by Nicias, who refused sixty talents,
amounting to upwards of eleven thousand pounds,
and generously made a present of it to his own
country. He desired him to produce a collection
equal to that in the temple of Delphos, mentioned
in the &grI;&grwc;&grn; of Euripedes; where Hercules
and his companion Iolaus are represented in the
act of killing the Lernæan hydra, with golden
sickles &grc;&grr;&gru;&grs;&grea;&gra;&gri;&grst; &grara;&grr;&grp;&gra;&gri;&grst;, where Bellerophon appears
upon his winged steed, vanquishing the fire-breathing
chimera &grt;&graa;&grn; &grp;&gru;&grr;&gri;&grp;&grn;&grea;&gro;&gru;&grs;&gra;&grn;; and the war of the
giants is described. Here Jupiter stands wielding
the red hot thunderbolts. &grK;&gre;&grr;&gra;&gru;&grn;&grog;&grn; &gra;&grm;&grf;&gria;&grp;&gru;&grr;&groa;&grn;, there
Pallas dreadful to the view &grG;&gro;&grr;&grg;&grwc;&grp;&grog;&grn;, brandisheth
her spear against the huge Enceladus; and Bacchus
with slender ivy rods, defeats and slays the
&grg;&grac;&grst; &grt;&gre;&grk;&grn;&gro;&grn;, or mighty son of earth. The painter
was astonished and confounded at this rhapsody of
names and instances, which was uttered with
surprising eagerness and rapidity; suspecting at
first that the whole was the creation of his own
brain; but when Pickle, with a view of flattering
the doctor's self-conceit, espoused his side of
the question, and confirmed the truth of every
thing he advanced, Mr. Pallet changed his opinion,
and in emphatic silence adored the immensity
of his friend's understanding. In short, Peregrine 

easily perceived that they were false enthusiasts,
without the smallest pretensions to taste
and sensibility; and pretended to be in raptures
with they knew not what; the one thinking it
was incumbent upon him to express transports on
seeing the works of those who had been most
eminent in his profession, whether they did or
did not really raise his admiration; and the other
as a scholar deeming it his duty to magnify the ancients
above all competition, with an affected fervour,
which the knowledge of their excellencies
never inspired. Indeed our young gentleman so
successfully accommodated himself to the disposition
of each, that long before their review
was finished, he was become a particular favourite
with both. 
From the Palais Royal he accompanied them to
the cloisters of the Carthusians, where they considered
the history of St. Bruno, by Le Sueur,
whose name being utterly unknown to the painter,
he gave judgment against the whole composition,
as pitiful and paultry; though in the opinion of
all good judges, it is a most masterly performance. 
Having satisfied their curiosity in this place,
Peregrine sollicited them to favour him with their
company at dinner; but whether out of caution
against the insinuations of one whose character
they did not know, or by reason of a prior engagement,
they declined his invitation on pretence
of having an appointment at a certain ordinary,
though they expressed a desire of being farther acquainted
with him; and Mr. Pallet took the freedom
of asking his name, which he not only declared,
but promised, as they were strangers in
Paris, to wait upon them next day in the forenoon,
in order to conduct them to the hotel de 

Tholouse, and the houses of several other noblemen,
remarkable for painting or curious furniture. 
They thankfully embraced his proposal,
and that same day made inquiry among the English
gentlemen, about the character of our hero, which
they found so much to their satisfaction, that upon
their second meeting, they courted his good graces
without reserve; and as they had heard of his intended
departure, begged earnestly to have the honour
of accompanying him through the Low Countries. 
He assured them that nothing could be
more agreeable to him, than the prospect of having
such fellow-travellers; and they immediately
appointed a day for setting out on that tour. 