


I am reduced to great misery—assaulted on
Tower-hill by a press-gang, who put me on
board a tender—my usage there—my arrival
on board of the Thunder man of war, where
I am put in irons, and afterwards released
by the good offices of Mr. Thomson, who recommends
me as assistant to the surgeon— 
he relates his own story, and makes me acquainted
with the characters of the captain,
surgeon, and first mate. 
I applauded the resolution of Miss Williams,
who a few days after, was hired in quality of
bar-keeper, by one of the ladies who had witnessed
in her behalf at the Marshalsea; and who
since that time had got credit with a wine merchant,
whose favourite she was, to set up a convenient
house of her own. —Thither my fellow
lodger repaired, after having taken leave of me,
with a torrent of tears, and a thousand protestations
of eternal gratitude; assuring me, she would
remain in this new situation no longer than till
she should pick up money sufficient to put her
other design in execution. 
As for my own part, I saw no resource but
the army or navy, between which I hesitated so
long, that I found myself reduced to a starving condition. 
—My spirit began to accommodate itself to
my beggarly fate, and I became so mean, as to 

go down towards Wapping, with an intention to
enquire for an old school-fellow of mine, who
(I understood) had got the command of a small
coasting vessel, then in the river, and implore
his assistance. —But my destiny prevented this abject
piece of behaviour; for as I crossed Tower-wharf,
a squat tawny fellow, with a hanger by
his side, and a cudgel in his hand, came up to
me, calling, “Yo, ho! brother, you must
come along with me.” —As I did not like his
appearance, instead of answering his salutation,
I quickened my pace in hopes of ridding myself of
his company; which he perceiving, whistled aloud,
and immediately another sailor appeared
before me, who laid hold of me by the collar and
began to drag me along. —Not being of a humour
to relish such treatment, I disengaged myself of
the assailant, and with one blow of my cudgel,
laid him motionless on the ground: and perceiving
myself surrounded in a trice, by ten or a
dozen more, exerted myself with such dexterity
and success, that some of my opponents were fain
to attack me with drawn cutlasses; and after an
obstinate engagement, in which I received a large
wound on the head, and another on my left
cheek, I was disarmed, taken prisoner, and carried
on board a pressing tender; where, after being
pinioned like a malefactor, I was thrust down
into the hold, among a parcel of miserable
wretches, the sight of whom well nigh distracted
me. —As the commanding officer had not humanity
enough to order my wounds to be dressed,
and I could not use my own hands, I desired one
of my fellow-captives who was unfettered, to take
a handkerchief out of my pocket and tie it round
my head to stop the bleeding. He pulled out my 

handkerchief ('tis true) but instead of applying
it to the use for which I designed it, went to
the grating of the hatchway, and with astonishing
composure, sold it before my face to a bum-boat-woman *  then on board, for a quart of gin,
with which he treated his companions, regardless
of my circumstance and intreaties. 
I complained bitterly of this robbery, to the
midshipman on deck, telling him at the same time,
that unless my hurts were dressed, I should bleed
to death. But compassion was a weakness of
which no man could justly accuse this person,
who squirting a mouthful of dissolved tobacco
upon me, through the gratings, told me, “I was
a mutinous dog, and that I might die and be
damned.” —Finding there was no other remedy,
I appealed to patience, and laid up this usage
in my memory, to be recalled at a fitter season. 
—In the mean time, loss of blood, vexation and
want of food, contributed, with the noisome stench
of the place, to throw me into a swoon; out of
which I was recovered by a tweak of the nose,
administred by the tar who stood centinel over
us, who at the same time regaled me with a
draught of flip, and comforted me with the hopes
of being put on board of the Thunder next day,
where I would be freed from handcuffs, and cured
of my wounds by the doctor. —I no sooner heard
him name the Thunder, than I asked, if he had
belonged to that ship long; and he giving me to
understand, he had belonged to her five years, 

I enquired if he knew lieutenant Bowling? — 
“Know lieutenant Bowling (said he)—odds my
life! and that I do;—and a good seaman he
is, as ever stept upon forecastle,—and a brave
fellow as ever crackt bisket;—none of your
Guinea pigs,—nor your fresh-water, wishy
washy, fair-weather fowls. —Many a taught
gale of wind has honest Tom Bowling and I
weathered together. —Here's his health with
all my heart, where-ever he is, a-loft or a-low
—in heaven or in hell—all's one for
that—he needs not be ashamed to shew himself.” 
—I was so much affected with this elogium,
that I could not refrain from telling him,
I was lieutenant Bowling's kinsman; at which
he expressed an inclination to serve me, and when
he was relieved brought some cold boiled beef in
a platter and biscuit, on which we supped plentifully,
and afterwards drank another can of flip together. 
While we were thus engaged, he recounted
a great many exploits of my uncle, who
(I found) was very much beloved by the ship's
company, and pitied for the misfortune that happened
to him in Hispaniola, which I was very
glad to be informed was not so great as I
imagined; for captain Oakhum had recovered
of his wounds, and actually at that time, commanded
the ship. Having by accident, in my
pocket my uncle's letter written from Port
Louis, I gave it my benefactor (whose name was
Jack Rattlin) for his perusal; but honest Jack
told me frankly, he could not read, and desired
to know the contents, which I immediately communicated: 
When he heard that part of it, in
which, he says, he had wrote to his landlord in
Deal; he cried, “Body o' me! that was old 

Ben. Block,—he was dead before the letter
came to hand. —Ey, ey, had Ben been
alive, lieutenant Bowling would have had no
occasion to sculk so long. —Honest Ben
was the first man that taught him to hand,
reef and steer. —Well, well, we must all die,
that's certain,—we must all come to port
sooner or later,—at sea or on shore; we must
be fast moored one day,—death's like the best
bower anchor, as the saying is, it will bring
us all up.” —I could not but signify my approbation
of the justness of Jack's reflections; and
enquired into the occasion of the quarrel between
captain Oakhum and my uncle, which he explained
in this manner. —“Captain Oakhum,
to be sure, is a good man enough,—besides,
he's my commander;—but what's that to me! 
—I do my duty, and value no man's anger of
a rope's end. —Now the report goes, as how
he is a lord's, or baron knight's brother, whereby
(d'ye see me) he carries a strait arm, and
keeps a loof from his officers, thof, may hap,
they may be as good men in the main as he. 
Now we lying at anchor in Tuberoon bay,
lieutenant Bowling had the middle watch, and
as he always kept a good-look out, he made
(d'ye see) three lights in the offing, whereby
he run down to the great cabbin for orders,
and found the captain asleep;—whereupon
he waked him, which put him in a
main high passion, and he swore woundily
at the lieutenant, and called him lousy
Scotch son of a whore, (for I being then
centinel in the steerage, heard all) and swab
and swabbard, whereby the lieutenant returned
the salute, and they jawed together fore and 

aft a good spell, till at last the captain turned
out, and laying hold of a rattan, came athwart
Mr. Bowling's quarter; whereby he told the
captain, that if he was not his commander,
he would heave him over-board, and demanded
satisfaction a-shore, whereby in the morning
watch, the captain went ashore in the pinnace,
and afterwards the lieutenant carried
the cutter a-shore; and so they, leaving the
boats crews on their oars, went away together; 
and so (d'ye see) in less than a quarter of an
hour we heard firing, whereby we made for
the place, and found the captain lying wounded
on the beach, and so brought him on board
to the doctor, who cured him in less than six
weeks. But the lieutenant clapt on all the
sail he could bear, and had got far enough a-head
before we knew any thing of the matter; so
that we could never after get sight of him,
for which we were not sorry, because the captain
was mainly wroth, and would certainly
have done him a mischief;—for he afterwards
caused him to be run on the ships books,
whereby he lost all his pay, and if he should
be taken, would be tried as a deserter.” 
This account of the captain's behaviour gave
me no advantageous idea of his character; and
I could not help lamenting my own fate, that
had subjected me to such a commander. However,
making a virtue of necessity, I put a good
face on the matter, and next day was with the
other pressed men put on board of the Thunder
lying at the Nore. —When we came along-side,
the mate who guarded us thither, ordered my
hand-cuffs to be taken off, that I might get on
board the easier; which being perceived by some 

of the company who stood upon the gangboards
to see us enter, one of them called to Jack Rattlin,
who was busied in doing this friendly office for
me; “Hey, Jack, what Newgate galley have
you boarded in the river as you came along? 
Have we not thieves enow among us already?” 
Another observing my wounds, which still remained
exposed to the air, told me, my seams
were uncaulked, and that I must be new payed. 
—A third, seeing my hair clotted together with
blood, as it were, into distinct cords, took notice,
that my bows were manned with the red ropes,
instead of my side. —A fourth asked me, if I
could not keep my yards square without iron
braces? and in short, a thousand witticisms of
the same nature, were passed upon me, before I
could get up the ship's side. —After we had been
all entered upon the books, I enquired at one of
my ship-mates where the surgeon was, that I might
have my wounds dressed, and had actually got as
far as the middle deck (for our ship carried eighty
guns) in my way to the cock-pit, when I was
met by the same midshipman who had used me so
barbarously in the tender: He seeing me free from
my chains, asked, with an insolent air, who had
released me? To this I foolishly answered, with
a countenance that too plainly declared the state
of my thoughts; “Whoever did it, I am persuaded
did not consult you in the affair.” —I
had no sooner uttered these words, than he cried,
“D&wblank;n you, you saucy son of a b&wblank;ch, I'll
teach you to talk so to your officer.” —So
saying, he bestowed on me several severe stripes,
with a supple Jack he had in his hand; and going
to the commanding officer, made such a report
of me, that I was immediately put in irons by 

the master at arms, and a centinel placed over
me. —Honest Rattlin, as soon as he heard of my
condition, came to me, and administred all the
consolation he could, and then went to the surgeon
in my behalf, who sent one of his mates
to dress my wounds. This mate was no other
than my old friend Thomson, with whom I became
acquainted at the Navy-office, as before
mentioned. If I knew him at first sight, it was
not so easy for him to recognize me, disfigured
with blood and dirt, and altered by the misery I
had undergone. —Unknown as I was to him, he
surveyed me with looks of compassion, and handled
my sores with great tenderness. When he had
applied what he thought proper, and was about
to leave me, I asked him if my misfortunes had
disquised me so much, that he could not recollect
my face? Upon this he observed me with great
earnestness for some time, and at length, protested
he could not recollect one feature of my countenance. 
—To keep him no longer in suspence,
I told him my name; which when he heard, he
embraced me with affection, and professed his sorrow
in seeing me in such a disagreeable situation. 
I made him acquainted with my story, and when
he heard how inhumanly I had been used in the
tender, he left me abruptly, assuring me, I should
see him again soon. I had scarce time to wonder
at his sudden departure, when the master at
arms came to the place of my confinement, and
bid me follow him to the quarter-deck, where I
was examined by the first lieutenant, who commanded
the ship in the absence of the captain,
touching the treatment I had received in the tender
from my friend the midshipman, who was
present to confront me. —I recounted the particulars 

of his behaviour to me, not only in the
tender, but since my being on board the ship,
part of which being proved by the evidence of
Jack Rattlin and others, who had no great devotion
for my oppressor, I was discharged from
confinement to make way for him, who was delivered
to the master at arms to take his turn in
the Bilboes. —And this was not the only satisfaction
I enjoyed, for I was, at the request of the
surgeon, exempted from all other duty, than that
of assisting his mates in making and administring
medicines to the sick. —This good office I owed
to the friendship of Mr. Thomson, who had represented
me in such a favourable light to the
surgeon, that he demanded me of the lieutenant,
to supply the place of his third mate, who was
lately dead. —When I had obtained this favour,
my friend Thomson carried me down to the cockpit,
which is the place allotted for the habitation of
the surgeon's mates: And when he had shewn me
their birth (as he called it) I was filled with astonishment
and horror. —We descended by divers ladders
to a space as dark as a dungeon, which I understood
was immersed several feet under water, being
immediately above the hold: I had no sooner approached
this dismal gulph, than my nose was saluted
with an intolerable stench of putrified
cheese, and rancid butter, that issued from an
apartment at the foot of the ladder, resembling
a chandler's shop, where, by the faint glimmering
of a candle, I could perceive a man with a pale
meagre countenance, sitting behind a kind of
desk, having spectacles on his nose, and a pen in
his hand. —This (I learned of Mr. Thomson)
was the ship's steward, who sat there to distribute
provision to the several messes, and to mark 

what each received. —He therefore presented my
name to him, and desired I might be entered in
his mess; then taking a light in his hand, conducted
me to the place of his residence, which
was a square of about six feet, surrounded with
the medicine chest, that of the first mate, his
own, and a board by way of table fastened to
the mizen-mast; it was also enclosed with canvas
nailed round to the beams of the ship, to screen
us from the cold, as well as the view of the midshipmen
and quarter-masters, who lodged within
the cable tiers on each side of us: In this gloomy
mansion, he entertained me with some cold salt
pork, which he brought from a sort of locker,
fixed above the table; and calling for the boy of
the mess, sent him for a can of beer, of which
he made excellent flip to crown the banquet. — 
By this time I began to recover my spirits, which
had been exceedingly depressed with the appearance
of every thing about me, and could no
longer refrain from asking the particulars of Mr.
Thomson's fortune, since I had seen him in
London. —He told me, that being disappointed
in his expectations of borrowing money to gratify
the rapacious s&wblank;t&wblank;ry at the Navy-office,
he found himself utterly unable to subsist any
longer in town, and had actually offered his service,
in quality of mate, to the surgeon of a
merchant's ship bound to Guinea on the slaving
trade; when one morning, a young fellow, of
whom he had some acquaintance, came to his
lodgings, and informed him, that he had seen a
warrant made out in his name at the Navy-office,
for surgeon's second mate of a third rate: This
unexpected piece of good news he could scarcely
believe to be true; more especially, as he had 

been found qualified at Surgeon's-hall for third
mate only; but that he might not be wanting
to himself, he went thither to be assured, and
actually found it so: Whereupon, demanding his
warrant, it was delivered to him, and the oaths
administred immediately. —That very afternoon,
he went to Gravesend in the tilt-boat, from
whence he took a place in the tide-coach for
Rochester; next morning got on board the
Thunder, for which he was appointed, then lying
in the harbour at Chatham; and the same
day was mustered by the clerk of the checque. 
—And well it was for him, that such expedition
was used; for in less then twelve hours after
his arrival, another William Thomson came on
board, affirming that he was the person for whom
the warrant was expedited, and that the other
was an impostor. —My friend was grievously alarmed
at this accident; the more so, as his
namesake had very much the advantage over him,
both in assurance and dress. —However, to acquit
himself of the suspicion of imposture, he produced
several letters written from Scotland to him
in that name, and recollecting that his indentures
were in his box on board, he brought them up,
and convinced all present, that he had not assumed
a name which did not belong to him. 
—His competitor enraged, that they should hesitate
in doing him justice (for to be sure, the warrant
had been designed for him) behaved with so much
indecent heat, that the commanding officer, (who
was the same gentleman I had seen) and the surgeon,
were offended at his presumption, and making a
point of it with their friends in town, in less than
a week got the first confirmed in his station. — 
“I have been on board (said he) ever since, and as 

this way of life is become familiar to me,
have no cause to complain of my situation. — 
The surgeon is a good-natured indolent man; 
the first mate (who is now on shore on duty)
is indeed a little proud and cholerick, as all
Welchmen are, but in the main, a friendly
honest fellow. —The lieutenants I have no concern
with; and as for the captain, he is too
much of a gentleman to know a surgeon's
mate, even by sight.” 