


DEAR PHILLIPS,
WITHOUT waiting for your answer to my
last, I proceed to give you an account of our journey
to London, which has not been wholly barren
of adventure. Tuesday last, the 'squire took his
place in a hired coach and four, accompanied by
his sister and mine, and Mrs. Tabby's maid, Winifred
Jenkins, whose province it was to support 

Chowder on a cushion in her lap. I could scarce
refrain from laughing, when I looked into the vehicle,
and saw that animal sitting opposite to my
uncle, like any other passenger. The 'squire, ashamed
of his situation, blushed to the eyes: and,
calling to the postillions to drive on, pulled the glass
up in my face. I, and his servant John Thomas,
attended them on horseback. 
Nothing worth mentioning occurred, till we arrived
on the edge of Marlborough Downs. There
one of the four horses fell, in going down hill at a
round trot; and the postillion behind, endeavouring
to stop the carriage, pulled it on one side into
a deep rut, where it was fairly overturned. I had
rode on about two hundred yards before; but,
hearing a loud scream, galloped back and dismounted,
to give what assistance was in my power. 
When I looked into the coach, I could see nothing
distinctly, but the nether end of Jenkins, who was
kicking her heels and squalling with great vociferation. 
All on a sudden, my uncle thrust up his
bar pate, and bolted through the window, as nimble
as a grashopper, having made use of poor
Win's posteriors as a step in rise in his ascent. — 
The man (who had likewise quitted his horse)
dragged this forlorn damsel, more dead than alive,
through the same opening. Then Mr. Bramble,
pulling the door off its hinges with a jerk, laid
hold on Liddy's arm, and brought her to the light; 
very much frighted, but little hurt. It fell to my
share to deliver our aunt Tabitha, who had lost
her cap in the struggle; and being rather more
than half frantic, with rage and terror, was no
bad representation of one of the sister Furies that
guard the gates of hell—She expressed no sort of
concern for her brother, who ran about in the cold,
without his periwig, and worked with the most astonishing
agility, in helping to disentangle the horses 

from the carriage: but she cried, in a tone of
distraction, “Chowder! Chowder! my dear
Chowder! my poor Chowder is certainly killed.” 
This was not the case—Chowder, after having
tore my uncle's leg in the confusion of the fall, had
retreated under the seat, and from thence the footman
drew him by the neck; for which good office
he bit his fingers to the bone. The fellow, who
is naturally surly, was so provoked at this assault,
that he saluted his ribs with a hearty kick, exclaiming,
“Damn the nasty son of a bitch, and them
that he belongs to!” A benediction, which was
by no means lost upon the implacable virago his
mistress. —Her brother, however, prevailed upon
her, to retire into a peasant's house, near the scene
of action, where his head and hers were covered,
and poor Jenkins had a fit—Our next care was
to apply some sticking-plaister to the wound in his
leg, which exhibited the impression of Chowder's
teeth; but he never opened his lips against the delinquent
—Mrs. Tabby, alarmed at this scene,
“You say nothing, Matt (cried she); but I know
your mind—I know the spite you have to that
poor unfortunate animal! I know you intend to
take his life away!” “You are mistaken, upon
my honour! (replied the 'squire, with sarcastic
smile) I should be incapable of harbouring any
such cruel design against an object so amiable and
inoffensive; even if he had not the happiness to
be your favourite.” 
John Thomas was not so delicate. The fellow,
whether really alarmed for his life, or instigated by
the desire of revenge, came in, and bluntly demanded,
that the dog should be put to death; on
the supposition, that if ever he should run mad
hereafter, he, who had been bit by him, would be
infected—My uncle calmly argued upon the absurdity
of his opinion, observing, that he himself was 

in the same predicament, and would certainly take
the precaution he proposed, if he was not sure he
ran no risque of infection. Nevertheless, Thomas
continued obstinate; and, at length, declared, that
if the dog was not shot immediately, he himself
would be his executioner—This declaration opened
the flood-gates of Tabby's eloquence, which
would have shamed the first rate oratress of Billingsgate. 
The footman retorted in the same stile; and
the 'squire dismissed him from his service, after
having prevented me from giving him a good horse-whipping
for his insolènce. 
The coach being adjusted, another difficulty occurred
—Mrs. Tabitha absolutely refused to enter
it again, unless another driver could be found to
take the place of the postillion; who, she affirmed,
had overturned the carriage from malice aforethought
—After much dispute, the man resigned
his place to a shabby country fellow, who undertook
to go as far as Marlborough, where they could
be better provided; and at that place we arrived
about one o'clock, without farther impediment. 
Mrs. Bramble, however, found new matter of offence; 
which, indeed, she had a particular genius
for extracting at will from almost every incident in
life. We had scarce entered the room at Marlborough,
where we stayed to dine, when she exhibited
a formal complaint against the poor fellow who
had superseded the postillion. She said, he was
such a beggarly rascal, that he had ne'er a shirt to
his back; and had the impudence to shock her
sight by shewing his bare posteriors, for which act
of indelicacy he deserved to be set in the stocks. 
Mrs. Winifred Jenkins confirmed the assertion,
with respect to his nakedness, observing, at the
same time, that he had a skin as fair as alabaster. 

“This is a heinous offence, indeed, (cried my
uncle) let us hear what the fellow has to say in
his own vindication.” He was accordingly summoned
and made his appearance, which was equally
queer and pathetic. He seemed to be about
twenty years of age, of a middling size, with bandy
legs, stooping shoulders, high forehead, sandy
locks, pinking eyes, flat nose, and long chin— 
but his complexion was of a sickly yellow: his looks
denoted famine; and the rags that he wore, could
hardly conceal what decency requires to be covered
—My uncle, having surveyed him attentively,
said, with an ironical expression in his countenance,
“An't you ashamed, fellow, to ride postilion without
a shirt to cover your backside from the view
of the ladies in the coach?” “Yes, I am, an
please your noble honour (answered the man); 
but necessity has no law, as the saying is—And
more than that, it was an accident—My breeches
cracked behind, after I had got into the saddle.—” 
“You're an impudent varlet, (cried Mrs. Tabby)
for presuming to ride before persons of fashion
without a shirt—” “I am so, an please your
worthy ladyship (said he); but I'm a poor Wiltshire
lad. —I ha'nt a shirt in the world, that I
can call my own, nor a rag of clothes, an please
your ladyship, but what you see—I have no
friend, nor relation upon earth to help me out— 
I have had the fever and ague these six months,
and spent all I had in the world upon doctors,
and to keep soul and body together; and, saving
your ladyship's good presence, I ha'n't broke
bread these four and twenty hours—” 
Mrs. Bramble, turning from him, said, she had
never seen such a filthy tatterdemalion, and bid
him begone; observing, that he would fill the room
full of vermin—Her brother darted a significant
glance at her, as she retired with Liddy into another 

apartment; and then asked the man if he was
known to any person in Marlborough? —When he
answered, that the landlord of the inn had known
him from his infancy; mine host was immediately
called, and being interrogated on the subject, declared
that the young fellow's name was Humphrey
Clinker. That he had been a love-begotten babe,
brought up in the work-house, and put out apprentice
by the parish to a country black-smith,
who died before the boy's time was out: that he
had for some time worked under his ostler, as a
helper and extra-postilion, till he was taken ill of
the ague, which disabled him from getting his
bread: that, having sold or pawned every thing he
had in the world for his cure and subsistence, he
became so miserable and shabby, that he disgraced
the stable, and was dismissed; but that he never
heard any thing to the prejudice of his character in
other respects. “So that the fellow being sick
and destitute, (said my uncle) you turned him
out to die in the streets.” “I pay the poor's
rate (replied the other), and I have no right to
maintain idle vagrants either in sickness or
health: besides, such a miserable object would
have brought a discredit upon my house—” 
“You perceive (said the 'squire turning to me)
our landlord is a Christian of bowels—Who shall
presume to censure the morals of the age when
the very publicans exhibit such examples of
humanity? —Hark ye, Clinker, you are a
most notorious offender—You stand convicted
of sickness, hunger, wretchedness and want— 
But, as it does not belong to me to punish criminals,
I will only take upon me the task of
giving you a word of advice—Get a shirt
with all convenient dispatch, that your nakedness
may not henceforward give offence to travelling 

gentlewomen, especially maidens in
years—” 
So saying, he put a guinea in the hand of the
poor fellow, who stood staring at him in silence,
with his mouth wide open, till the landlord pushed
him out of the room. 
In the afternoon, as our aunt stept into the
coach, she observed, with some marks of satisfaction,
that the postillion, who rode next to her, was
not a shabby wretch like the ragamuffin who had
drove them to Marlborough. Indeed, the difference
was very conspicuous: this was a smart fellow,
with a narrow brimmed hat, with gold cording,
a cut bob, a decent blue jacket, leather
breeches, and a clean linen shirt, pussed above
the waist-band. When we arrived at the castle on
Spin-hill, where we lay, this new postillion was remarkably
assiduous, in bringing in the loose parcels; 
and, at length, displayed the individual countenance
of Humphry Clinker, who had metamorphosed
himself in this manner, by relieving from
pawn part of his own cloaths, with the money he
had received from Mr. Bramble. 
Howsoever pleased the rest of the company were
with such a favourable change in the appearance
of this poor creature, it soured on the stomach of
Mrs Tabby, who had not yet digested the affront
of his naked skin—She tossed her nose in disdain,
saying, she supposed her brother had taken
him into favour, because he had insulted her with
his obscenity; that a fool and his money were
soon parted: but that if Matt. intended to take
the fellow with him to London, she would not
go a foot further that way—My uncle said nothing
with his tongue, though his looks were sufficiently
expressive; and next morning Clinker-did
not appear, so that we proceeded without further
alteration to Salt-hill, where we proposed 

to dine—There, the first person that came to the
side of the coach, and began to adjust the footboard,
was no other than Humphry Clinker. — 
When I handed out Mrs. Bramble, she eyed him
with a furious look, and passed into the house— 
My uncle was embarrassed, and asked him peevishly
what had brought him hither? The fellow
said, his honour had been so good to him, that he
had not the heart to part with him; that he would
follow him to the world's end, and serve him all
the days of his life without fee or reward— 
Mr. Bramble did not know whether to chide or
laugh at this declaration—He foresaw much contradiction
on the side of Tabby; and, on the other
hand, he could not but be pleased with the gratitude
of Clinker, as well as with the simplicity of
his character—“Suppose I was inclined to take
you into my service, (said he) what are your
qualifications? what are you good for” “An
please your honour, (answered this original) I
can read and write, and do the business of the
stable indifferent well—I can dress a horse, and
shoe him, and bleed and rowel him; and as for
the practise of sow-gelding, I won't turn my
back on e'er a he in the county of Wilts—Then
I can make hog's puddings and hob nails, mend
kettles, and tin sauce-pans—” Here uncle burst
out a laughing; and enquired, what other accomplishments
he was master of—“I know something
of a single-stick, and psalmody, (proceeded
Clinker) I can play upon the jew's harp, sing
Black-ey'd Susan, Arthur o'Bradley and divers
other songs; I can dance a Welsh jig, and
Nancy Dawson; wrestle a fall with any lad of
my inches, when I'm in heart; and, under correction,
I can find a hare when your honour
wants a bit of game.” “Foregad! thou art a 

complete fellow, (cried my uncle, still laughing)
I have a good mind to take thee into my
family—Pr'ythee, go and try if thou canst
make peace with my sister—Thou hast given
her much offence by shewing her thy naked
tail.” 
Clinker accordingly followed us into the room,
cap in hand, where, addressing himself to Mrs.
Tabitha, “May it please your ladyship's worship
(cried he) to pardon and forgive my offences,
and, with God's assistance, I shall take care that
my tail shall never rise up in judgment against
me, to offend your ladyship again—Do, pray,
good, sweet, beautiful lady, take compassion
on a poor sinner—God bless your noble countenance; 
I am sure you are too handsome and
generous to bear malice—I will serve you on my
bended knees, by night and by day, by land
and by water; and all for the love and pleasure
of serving such an excellent lady—” 
This compliment and humiliation had some effect
upon Tabby; but she made no reply; and
Clinker, taking silence for consent, gave his attendance
at dinner. The fellow's natural awkwardness
and the flutter of his spirits were productive
of repeated blunders in the course of his attendance
—At length, he spilt part of a custard upon her
right shoulder; and starting back, trod upon
Chowder, who set up a dismal howl—Poor
Humphry was so disconcerted at this double mistake
that he dropt the china dish, which broke into
a thousand pieces; then, falling down upon his
knees, remained in that posture gaping, with a
most ludicrous aspect of distress—Mrs. Bramble
slew to the dog, and, snatching him in her arms,
presented him to her brother, saying, “This is
all a concerted scheme against this unfortunate
animal, whose only crime is its regard for me— 

Here it is: kill it at once: and then you'll be
satisfied.” 
Clinker, hearing these words, and taking them
in the literal acceptation, got up in some hurry,
and, seizing a knife from the side-board, cried,
“Not here, an please your ladyship—it will daub
the room—Give him to me and I'll carry him
in the ditch by the road side—” To this proposal
he received no other answer, than a hearty
box on the ear, that made him stagger to the other
side of the room. “What! (said she to her brother)
am I to be affronted by every mangy hound
that you pick up in the highway? I insist upon
your sending this rascallion about his business
immediately—” “For God's sake, sister,
compose yourself, (said my uncle) and consider,
that the poor fellow is innocent of any intention
to give you offence—” “Innocent as the
babe unborn”—(cried Humphry.) “I see it
plainly, (exclaimed this implacable maiden) he
acts by your direction; and you are resolved to
support him in his impudence—This is a bad
return for all the services I have done you; for
nursing you in your sickness, managing your
family, and keeping you from ruining yourself
by your own imprudence—But now you shall
part with that rascal or me, upon the spot, without
faith: loss of time; and the world shall see,
whether you have more regard for your own
flesh and blood, or for a beggarly foundling,
taken from the dunghill—” 
Mr. Bramble's eyes began to glisten, and his
teeth to chatter. “If stated fairly, (said he, raising
his voice) the question is, whether I have
spirit to shake off an intollerable yoke, by one
effort of resolution, or meanness enough to do
an act of cruelty and injustice, to gratify the
rancour of a capricious woman—Hark ye, 

Mrs. Tabitha Bramble, I will now propose an
alternative in my turn—Either discard your four-footed
favourite, or give me leave to bid you
eternally adieu—For I am determined that he
and I shall live no longer under the same roof; 
and now to dinner with what appetite you may—” 
Thunder-struck at this declaration, she sat down
in a corner; and, after a pause of some minutes,
“Sure I don't understand you, Matt! (said the)” 
And yet I spoke in plain English—” answered
the 'squire, with a peremptory look. “Sir, (resumed
this virago, effectually humbled) it is
your prerogative to command, and my duty to
obey. I can't dispose of the dog in this place; 
but if you'll allow him to go in the coach to
London, I give you my word, he shall never
trouble you again—” 
Her brother, entirely disarmed by this mild reply,
declared, she could ask him nothing in reason
that he would refuse; adding, “I hope, sister,
you have never found me deficient in natural affection.” 
Mrs. Tabitha immediately rose, and,
throwing her arms about his neck, kissed him on
the cheek: he returned her embrace with great
emotion, Liddy sobbed, Win. Jenkins cackled,
Chowder capered, and Clinker skipped about,
rubbing his hands for joy of this reconciliation. 
Concord being thus restored, we finished our
meal with comfort; and in the evening arrived at
London, without having met with any other adventure. 
My aunt seems to be much mended by
the hint she received from her brother. She has
been graciously pleased to remove her displeasure
from Clinker, who is now retained as a footman; 
and in a day or two will make his appearance in a
new suit of livery; but as he is little acquainted
with London, we have taken an occasional valet, 

whom I intend hereafter to hire as my own servant. 
We lodge in Golden-square, at the house of one
Mrs. Norton, a decent sort of a woman, who takes
great pains to make us all easy. My uncle proposes
to make a circuit of all the remarkable scenes
of this metropolis, for the entertainment of his
pupils; but as both you and I are already acquainted
with most of those he will visit, and with some
others he little dreams of, I shall only communicate
what will be in some measure new to your observation. 
Remember me to our jesuitical friends,
and believe me ever, 
Dear knight,
yours affectionately
J. Melford. 
London, May 24. 