


DEAR LEWIS,
I RECEIVED your bill upon Wiltshire, which
was punctually honoured; but as I don't choose to
keep so much cash by me, in a common lodging-house,
I have deposited 250l. in the bank of Bath,
and shall take their bills for it in London, when I
leave this place, where the season draws to an end 
—You must know, that now being a foot, I am, resolved
to give Liddy a glimpse of London. She is one
of the best hearted creatures I ever knew, and gains
upon my affection every day—As for Tabby, I
have dropt such hints to the Irish baronet, concerning
her fortune, as, I make no doubt, will cool the
iardour of his addresses. Then her pride will take
the alarm; and the rancour of state maidenhood
being chased, we shall hear nothing but slander and
abuse of Sir Ulick Mackilligut—This rupture, I
foresee, will facilitate our departure from Bath; 
where, at present, Tabby seems to enjoy herself
with peculiar satisfaction. For my part, I detest it
so much, that I should not have been able to stay so
long in the place if I had not discovered some old
friends; whose conversation alleviates my disgust— 
Going to the coffee-house one forenoon, I could 

not help contemplating the company, with equal
surprize and compassion—We consisted of thirteen
individuals; seven lamed by the gout, rheumatism,
or palsy; three maimed by accident; and the rest
either deaf or blind. One hobbled, another hopped,
a third dragged his legs after him like a
wounded snake, a fourth straddled betwixt a pair
of long crutches, like the mummy of a felon hanging
in chains; a fifth was bent into a horizontal
position, like a mounted telescope, shoved in by a
couple of chairmen; and a sixth was the bust of a
man, set upright in a wheel machine, which the
waiter moved from place to place. 
Being struck with some of their faces, I consulted
the subscription book; and, perceiving the names
of several old friends, began to consider the groupe
with more attention. At length I discovered rear
admiral Balderick, the companion of my youth,
whom I had not seen since he was oppointed lieutenant
of the Severn. He was metamorphosed into
an old man, with a wooden leg and a weatherbeaten
face which appeared the more ancient from his
grey locks, that were truly venerable—Sitting
down at the table, where he was reading a newspaper,
I gazed at him for some minutes, with a
mixture of pleasure and regret, which made my
heart gush with tenderness; then, taking him by
the hand, “Ah, Sam, (said I) forty years ago I
little thought—” I was too much moved to
proceed. “An old friend, sure enough! (cried
he, squeezing my hand, and surveying me eagerly
thro' his glasses) I know the looming of the
vessel, though she has been hard strained since
we parted; but I can't heave up the name—” 
The moment I told him who I was, he exclaimed,
“Ha! Matt. my old fellow cruizer, still afloat!” 
And, starting up, hugged me in his arms. His
transport, however, beded me no good; for, in 

saluting me, he thrust the spring of his spectacles
into my eye, and, at the same time, set his wooden
stump upon my gouty toe; an attack that made
me shed tears in sad earnest—After the hurry of our
recognition was over, he pointed out two of our
common friends in the room: the bust was what
remained of colonel Cockril, who had lost the use
of his limbs in making an American campain; and
the telescope proved to be my college chum, sir
Reginald Bently; who, with his new title, and
unexpected inheritance, commenced fox-hunter,
without having served his apprenticeship to the
mystery; and, in consequence of following the
hounds through a river, was seized with an inflammation
in his bowels, which has contracted him into
his present attitude. 
Our former correspondence was forthwith renewed,
with the most hearty expressions of mutual
good-will; and as we had met so unexpectedly, we
agreed to dine together that very day at the tavern. 
My friend Quin, being luckily unengaged, obliged
us with his company; and, truly, this was the
most happy day I have passed these twenty years. 
You and I, Lewis, having been always together,
never tasted friendship in this high gout, contracted
from long absence. I cannot express the half of
what I felt at this casual meeting of three or four
companions, who had been so long separated, and
so roughly treated by the storms of life. It was a
renovation of youth; a kind of resuscitation of the
dead, that realized those interesting dreams, in
which we sometimes retrieve our ancient friends
from the grave. Perhaps my enjoyment was not
the less pleasing for being mixed with a strain of
melancholy, produced by the remembrance of past
scene, that conjured up the ideas of some endearing
connexions, which the hand of Death has actually
dissolved. 

The spirits and good humour of the company
seemed to triumph over the wreck of their constitutions. 
They had even philosophy enough to
joke upon their own calamities; such is the power
of friendship, the sovereign cordial of life—I afterwards
found, however, that they were not without
their moments, and even hours of disquiet. 
Each of them apart, in succeeding conferences, expatiated
upon his own particular grievances; and
they were all malecontents at bottom—Over and
above their personal disasters, they thought themselves
unfortunate in the lottery of life. Balderick
complained, that all the recompense he had received
for his long and hard service, was the half-pay of
a rear admiral. The colonel was mortified to see
himself over-topped by upstart generals, some of
whom he had once commanded; and, being a man
of a liberal turn, could ill put up with a moderate
annuity, for which he had sold, his commission. 
As for the baronet, having run himself considerably
in debt, on a contested election, he has been
obliged to relinquish his seat in parliament, and his
seat in the country at the same time, and put his
estate to nurse: but his chagrin, which is the effect
of his own misconduct, does not affect me
half so much as that of the other two; who have
acted honourable and distinguished parts on the
great theatre, and are now reduced to lead a weary
life in this stewpan of idleness and insignificance. 
They have long left off using the waters, after
having experienced their inefficacy. The diversions
of the place they are not in a condition to enjoy. 
How then do they make shift to pass their
time? In the forenoon, they crawl out to the
Rooms or the coffee-house, where they take a
hand at whist, or descant upon the General Advertiser; and their evenings they murder in private
parties, among peevish invalids, and insipid old 

women—This is the case with a good number of
individuals, whom nature seems to have intended
for better purposes. 
About a dozen years ago, many decent families,
restricted to small fortunes, besides those that came
hither on the score of health, were tempted to settle
at Bath, where they could then live comfortably,
and even make a genteel appearance, at a small
expence: but the madness of the times has made
the place too hot for them, and they are now obliged
to think of other migrations—Some have already
fled to the mountains of Wales, and others
have retired to Exeter. Thither, no doubt, they
will be followed by the flood of luxury and extravagance,
which will drive them from place to place
to the very Land's End; and there, I suppose,
they will be obliged to ship themselves to some other
country. Bath is become a mere sink of profligacy
and extortion. Every article of house-keeping is
raised to an enormous price; a circumstance no
longer to be wondered at, when we know that every
petty retainer of fortune piques himself upon keeping
a table, and thinks 'tis for the honour of his
character to wink at the knavery of his servants,
who are in a confederacy with the market-people; 
and, of consequence, pay whatever they demand. 
Here is now a mushroom of opulence, who pays a
cook seventy guineas a week for furnishing him
with one meal a day. This portentous frenzy is
become so contagious, that the very rabble and refuse
of mankind are infected. I have known a
negro-driver, from Jamaica, pay over-night to the
master of one of the Rooms, sixty-five guineas for
tea and coffee to the company, and leave Bath next
morning, in such obscurity, that not one of his
guests had the slightest idea of his person, or even
made the least inquiry about his name. Incidents 

of this kind are frequent; and every day teems with
fresh absurdities, which are too gross to make a
thinking man merry. —But I feel the spleen creeping
on me apace; and therefore will indulge you
with a cessation, that you may have no unnecessary
cause to curse your correspondence with, 
Dear Dick,
yours ever,
Matt. Bramble. 
Bath, May 5. 