


The Knot that puzzles human Wisdom,
the Hand of Fortune sometimes will
untie, familiar as her Garter. 
When the doctor made his next
appearance in Sir Launcelot's
apartment, the knight addressed him
in these words: “Sir, the practice of
medicine is one of the most honourable
professions exercised among the
sons of men; a profession which hath
been revered at all periods and in all
nations, and even held sacred in the
most polished ages of antiquity. The
scope of it is to preserve the being, and
confirm the health of our fellow-creatures; 
of consequence, to sustain the
blessings of society, and crown life
with fruition. The character of a
physician, therefore, not only supposes
natural sagacity, and acquired erudition,
but it also implies every delicacy
of sentiment, every tenderness of
nature, and every virtue of humanity. 

That these qualities are centered
in you, doctor, I would willingly believe:
but it will be sufficient for my
purpose, that you are possessed of common
integrity. To whose concern I
am indebted for your visits, you best
know: but if you understand the art
of medicine, you must be sensible by
this time, that with respect to me your
prescriptions are altogether unnecessary
—come, Sir, you cannot—you don't
believe that my intellects are disordered. 
Yet, granting me to be really
under the influence of that deplorable
malady, no person has a right to
treat me as a lunatic, or to sue out a
commission, but my nearest kindred. 
—That you may not plead ignorance
of my name and family, you shall understand
that I am Sir Launcelot
Greaves, of the county of York, baronet; 
and that my nearest relation is
Sir Reginald Meadows, of Cheshire,
the eldest son of my mother's sister— 
that gentleman, I am sure, had no
concern in seducing me by false pretences
under the clouds of night into 

the fields, where I was surprised,
overpowered, and kidnapped by armed
ruffians. Had he really believed
me insane, he would have proceeded
according to the dictates of
honour, humanity, and the laws of
his country. Situated as I am, I have
a right, by making application to the
lord chancellor, to be tried by a jury
of honest men. —But of that right I
cannot avail myself, while I remain
at the mercy of a brutal miscreant, in
whose house I am inclosed, unless you
contribute your assistance. Your assistance,
therefore, I demand, as you
are a gentleman, a christian, and a
fellow-subject, who, tho' every other
motive should be overlooked, ought
to interest himself in my case as a
common concern, and concur with
all your power towards the punishment
of those who dare commit such
outrages against the liberty of your
country.” 
The doctor seemed to be a little
disconcerted; but after some recollection,
resumed his air of sufficiency and 

importance, and assured our adventurer
he would do him all the service in
his power; but, in the mean time,
advised him to take the potion he had
prescribed. 
The knight's eyes lightning with
indignation, “I am now convinced,
(cried he) that you are accomplice in
the villainy which has been practised
upon me; that you are a sordid
wretch, without principle or feeling,
a disgrace to the faculty, and a reproach
to human nature—yes, sirrah,
you are the most perfidious of all assassins
—you are the hireling minister
of the worst of all villains; who from
motives even baser than malice, envy,
and revenge, rob the innocent of all
the comforts of life, brand them with
the imputation of madness, the most
cruel species of slander, and wantonly
protract their misery, by leaving them
in the most shocking confinement, a
prey to reflections infinitely more bitter
than death—but I will be calm— 
do me justice at your peril. I demand
the protection of the legislature—if I 

am refused,—remember, a day of
reckoning will come—you and the rest
of the miscreants who have combined
against me, must, in order to cloak
your treachery, have recourse to murder; 
an expedient which I believe
you very capable of embracing, or a
man of my rank and character cannot
be much longer concealed—Tremble,
caitif, at the thoughts of my release
—in the mean time, be gone,
lest my just resentment impel me to
dash out your brains upon that marble
—away—” 
The honest doctor was not so firmly
persuaded of his patient's lunacy as
to reject his advice, which he made
what haste he could to follow, when
an unexpected accident intervened. 
That this may be properly introduced,
we must return to the knight's brace
of trusty friends, captain Crowe and
lawyer Clarke, whom we left in sorrowful
deliberation upon the fate of
their patron. Clarke's genius being
rather more fruitful in resources than
that of the seaman, he suggested an 

advertisement, which was accordingly
inserted in the daily papers; importing
that, “Whereas a gentleman
of considerable rank and fortune had
suddenly disappeared on such a night
from his house near Golden-square,
in consequence of a letter delivered
to him by a porter; and there is great
reason to believe some violence hath
been offered to his life: any person
capable of giving such information as
may tend to clear up this dark transaction,
shall, by applying to Mr. Thomas
Clarke, attorney, at his lodgings
in Upper Brook-street, receive proper
security for the reward of one hundred
guineas, to be paid to him upon
his making the discovery required.” 
The porter who delivered the letter
appeared accordingly, but could
give no other information, except that
it was put into his hand with a shilling,
by a man muffled up in a great
coat, who stopped him for the purpose,
in his passing through Queenstreet. 
It was necessary that the advertisement
should produce an effect 

upon another person, who was no
other than the hackney coachman,
who drove our hero to the place of
his imprisonment. This fellow had
been enjoined secrecy, and indeed
bribed to hold his tongue, by a considerable
gratification, which, it was
supposed, would have been effectual,
as the man was a master coachman
in good circumstances, and well
known to the keeper of the madhouse,
by whom he had been employed
on former occasions of the
same nature. Perhaps his fidelity to
his employer, reinforced by the hope
of many future jobbs of that kind,
might have been proof against the offer
of fifty pounds; but double that
sum was a temptation he could not
resist. He no sooner read the intimation
in the Daily Advertiser, over his
morning's pot at an ale-house, than
he entered into consultation with his
own thoughts; and having no reason
to doubt that this was the very fare he
had conveyed, he resolved to earn the
reward, and abstain from all such adventures 

in time coming. He had the
precaution, however, to take an attorney
along with him to Mr. Clarke,
who entered into a conditional bond; 
and, with the assistance of his uncle,
deposited the money, to be forthcoming
when the conditions should be fulfilled. 
These previous measures being
taken, the coachman declared what
he knew, and discovered the house in
which Sir Launcelot had been immured. 
He moreover accompanied our
two adherents to a judge's chamber,
where he made oath to the truth of
his information; and a warrant was imediately
granted to search the house of
Bernard Shackle, and set at liberty Sir
Launcelot Greaves, if there found. 
Fortified with this authority, they
engaged a constable with a formidable
posse, and embarking them in coaches,
repaired, with all possible expedition,
to the house of Mr. Shackle, who
did not think proper to dispute their
claim, but admitted them, though
not without betraying evident symptoms
of consternation. One of 

the servants directing them, by his
master's order, to Sir Launcelot's
apartment; they hurried up stairs in
a body, occasioning such a noise as
did not fail to alarm the physician,
who had just opened the door to retire,
when he perceived their irruption. 
Captain Crowe conjecturing he
was guilty, from the confusion that
appeared in his countenance, made no
scruple of seizing him by the collar,
as he endeavoured to retreat; while
the tender-hearted Tom Clarke, running
up to the knight with his eyes
brimful of joy and affection, forgot all
the forms of distant respect, and
throwing his arms around his neck,
blubbered in his bosom. 
Our hero did not receive this proof
of his attachment unmoved. He
strained him in his embrace, honoured
him with the title of his deliverer,
and asked him by what miracle he
had discovered the place of his confinement. 
The lawyer began to unfold
the various steps he had taken,
with equal minuteness and self-complacency, 

when Crowe, dragging the
doctor still by the collar, shook his
old friend by the hand, protesting he
was never so overjoyed since he got
clear of a Sallee Rover on the coast
of Barbary; and that two glasses ago
he would have started all the money
he had in the world in the hold of any
man who would have shewn Sir Launcelot
safe at his moorings. The knight,
having made a proper return to this
sincere manifestation of good will, desired
him to dismiss that worthless
fellow, meaning the doctor, who,
finding himself released, withdrew
with some precipitation. 
Then our adventurer, attended by
his friends, walked with a deliberate
pace to the outward gate, which he
found open, and getting into one of
the coaches, was entertained by the
way to his own house with a detail
of every measure which had been
pursued for his release. In his own
parlour he found Mrs. Dolly Cowslip,
who had been waiting with great fear
and impatience for the issue of Mr. 

Clarke's adventure. She now fell upon
her knees, and bathed the knight's
hand with tears of joy; while the face
of this young woman, recalling the
idea of her mistress, roused his heart
to strong emotions, and stimulated his
mind to the immediate atchievement
he had already planned. As for Crabshaw,
he was not the last to signify
his satisfaction at his master's return. 
After having kissed the hem of his
garment, he retired to the stable,
where he communicated these tidings
to his friend Gilbert, whom he saddled
and bridled: the same office he performed
for Bronzomarte; then putting
on his squire-like attire and accoutrements,
he mounted one, and
led the other to the knight's door,
before which he paraded, uttering
from time to time repeated shouts, to
the no small entertainment of the populace,
until he received orders to
house his companions. Thus commanded,
he led them back to their
stalls, resumed his livery, and rejoined
his fellow-servants, who were resolved 

to celebrate the day with banquets
and rejoicings. 
Their master's heart was not sufficiently
at ease to share in their festivity. 
He held a consultation with his
friends in the parlour, whom he acquainted
with the reasons he had to
believe Miss Darnel was confined in
the same house which had been his
prison: a circumstance which filled
them with equal pleasure and astonishment. 
Dolly, in particular, weeping
plentifully, conjured him to deliver
her dear lady without delay. Nothing
now remained but to concert the plan
for her deliverance. As Aurelia had
informed Dolly of her connection
with Mrs. Kawdle, at whose house
she proposed to lodge, before she was
overtaken on the road by her uncle,
this particular was now imparted to
the council, and struck a light which
seemed to point out the direct way to
Miss Darnel's enlargement. 
Our hero, accompanied by Mrs.
Cowslip, and Tom Clarke, set out
immediately for the house of Dr. 

Kawdle, who happened to be abroad; 
but his wife received them with great
courtesy. She was a well-bred, sensible,
genteel woman, and strongly
attached to Aurelia by the ties of affection
as well as of consanguinity. 
She no sooner learned the situation of
her cousin than she expressed the most
impatient concern for her being set at
liberty; and assured Sir Launcelot she
would concur in any scheme he should
propose for that purpose. There was
no room for hesitation or choice; he
attended her immediately to the
judge, who, upon proper application,
issued another search-warrant for Aurelia
Darnel. The constable and his
posse were again retained; and Sir
Launcelot Greaves once more crossed
the threshold of Mr. Bernard Shackle. 
Nor was the search-warrant the only
implement of justice with which he
had furnished himself for this visit. 
In going thither, they agreed upon
the method in which they should introduce
themselves gradually to Miss
Darnel, that her tender nature might 

not be too much shocked by their sudden
appearance. 
When they arrived at the house
therefore, and produced their credentials,
in consequence of which a female
attendant was directed to shew
the lady's apartment, Mrs. Dolly first
entered the chamber of the accomplished
Aurelia, who, lifting up her
eyes, screamed aloud, and flew into
the arms of her faithful Cowslip. 
Some minutes elapsed before Dolly
could make shift to exclaim,—“Am
coom to live and daai with my beloved
leady!” “Dear Dolly! (cried
her mistress) I cannot express the
pleasure I have in seeing you again— 
Good heaven! what solitary hours of
keen affliction have I passed since we
parted!—but, tell me, how did you
discover the place of my retreat?— 
has my uncle relented?—do I owe
your coming to his indulgence?” 
Dolly answered in the negative; 
and by degrees gave her to understand
that her cousin, Mrs. Kawdle, was in
the next room; that lady immediately 

appeared, and a very tender scene
of recognition passed between the two
relations. It was she who, in the
course of conversation, perceiving that
Aurelia was perfectly composed, declared
the happy tidings of the approaching
deliverance. When the
other eagerly insisted upon knowing
to whose humanity and address she
was indebted for this happy turn of
fortune, her cousin declared the obligation
was due to a young gentleman
of Yorkshire, called Sir Launcelot
Greaves. At mention of that name,
her face was overspread with a crimson
glow, and her eyes beamed redoubled
splendor. —“Cousin, (said
she, with a sigh) I know not what to
say—that gentleman,—Sir Launcelot
Greaves was surely born—Lord
bless me!—I tell you, cousin, he has
been my guardian angel.—” 
Mrs. Kawdle, who had maintained
a correspondence with her by letters,
was no stranger to the former part of
the connexion subsisting between those
two lovers, and had always favoured 

the pretensions of our hero, without
being acquainted with his person. She
now observed with a smile, that as
Aurelia esteemed the knight her guardian
angel, and he adored her as a
demi-deity, nature seemed to have
intended them for each other; for
such sublime ideas exalted them both
above the sphere of ordinary mortals. 
She then ventured to intimate that he
was in the house, impatient to pay his
respects in person. At this declaration,
the colour vanished from her
cheeks; which, however, soon underwent
a total suffusion. Her heart
panted; her bosom heaved; and her
gentle frame was agitated by transports
rather violent than unpleasing. 
She soon, however, recollected herself,
and her native serenity returned; 
when, rising from her seat, she
declared she would see him in the next
apartment, where he stood in the most
tumultuous suspence, waiting for permission
to approach her person. Here
she broke in upon him, arrayed in an
elegant white undress, the emblem of 

her purity, beaming forth the emanations
of amazing beauty, warmed and
improved with a glow of gratitude and
affection. His heart was too big for
utterance; he ran towards her with
rapture, and, throwing himself at her
feet, imprinted a respectful kiss upon
her lilly hand. “This, divine Aurelia,
(cried he) is a foretaste of that
ineffable bliss, which you was born to
bestow! —Do I then live to see you
smile again? to see you restored to liberty; 
your mind at ease, and your
health unimpaired!” “You have lived
(said she) to see my obligations to Sir
Launcelot Greaves accumulated in
such a manner, that a whole life spent
in acknowledgment will scarce suffice
to demonstrate a due sense of his
goodness.” “You greatly over-rate
my services, which have been rather
the duties of common humanity, than
the efforts of a generous passion, too
noble to be thus evinced;—but let
not my unseasonable transports detain
you a moment longer on this detested
scene—Give me leave to hand you
into the coach, and commit you to 

the care of this good lady, attended
by this honest young gentleman, who
is my particular friend.” So saying,
he presented Mr. Thomas Clarke,
who had the honour to salute the fair
hand of the ever amiable Aurelia. 
The ladies being safely coached under
the escorte of the lawyer, Sir
Launcelot assured them he should wait
on them in the evening, at the house
of Dr. Kawdle, whither they immediately
directed their course. Our
hero, who remained with the constable
and his gang, enquired for Mr.
Bernard Shackle, upon whose person
he intended to serve a writ of conspiracy,
over and above a prosecution for
robbery, in consequence of his having
disencumbered the knight of his money
and other effects, on the first
night of his confinement. Mr. Shackle
had discretion enough to avoid this
encounter, and even to anticipate the
indictment for felony, by directing
one of his servants to restore the cash
and papers, which our adventurer accordingly
received, before he quitted
the house. 

In the prosecution of his search
after Shackle, he chanced to enter
the chamber of the bard, whom he
found in dishabille, writing at a table,
with a bandage over one eye,
and his head covered with a night-cap
of bays. The knight, having
made an apology for his intrusion,
desired to know if he could be of
any service to Mr. Distich, as he was
now at liberty to use the little influence
he had, for the relief of his fellow
sufferers. —The poet having eyed him
for some time askance, “I told you,
(said he) your stay in this place would
be of short duration. —I have sustained
a small disaster on my left eye, from
the hands of a rascally cordwainer,
who pretends to believe himself the
king of Prussia; and I am now in
the very act of galling his majesty
with keen iambicks. —If you can help
me to a roll of tobacco, and a bottle
of geneva, so;—If you are not so
inclined, your humble servant—I
shall share in the joy of your deliverance.” 

The knight declined gratifying him
in these particulars, which he apprehended
might be prejudicial to his
health; but offered his assistance in
redressing his grievances, provided he
laboured under any cruel treatment,
or inconvenience. “I comprehend
the full extent of your generosity:
(replied the satyrist) you are willing to
assist me in every thing, except the
only circumstances in which assistance
is required—God b' w' ye—If you
see Ben Bullock, tell him I wish he
would not dedicate any more of his
works to me. —Damn the fellow; 
he has changed his note, and begins
to snivel. —For my part, I stick to
my former maxim; defy all the world,
and will die hard, even if death should
be preceded by damnation.” 
The knight finding him incorrigible,
left him to the slender chance of being
one day comforted by the dram-bottle; 
but resolved, if possible, to
set on foot an accurate inquiry into
the oeconomy and transactions of this
private inquisition, that ample justice 

might be done in favour of every injured
individual confined within its walls. 
In the afternoon, he did not fail to
visit his Aurelia; and all the protestations
of their mutual passion were
once more interchanged. He now
produced the letter, which had caused
such fatal disquiet in his bosom; and
Miss Darnel no sooner eyed the paper,
than she recollected it was a formal
dismission, which she had intended
and directed for Mr. Sycamore. This
the uncle had intercepted, and cunningly
inclosed in another cover, addressed
to Sir Launcelot Greaves, who
was now astonished beyond measure
to see the mystery so easily unfolded. 
The joy that now diffused itself in the
hearts of our lovers, is more easily
conceived than described; but, in
order to give a stability to this mutual
satisfaction, it was necessary that Aurelia
should be secured from the tyranny
of her uncle, whose power of
guardianship would not otherwise for
some months expire. 
Dr. Kawdle and his lady having 

entered into their deliberations on
this subject, it was agreed that Miss
Darnel should have recourse to the
protection of the lord-chancellor: but
such application was rendered unnecessary
by the unexpected arrival of
John Clump with the following letter
to Mrs. Kawdle from the steward of
Anthony Darnel, dated at Aurelia's
house in the country. “Madam, it
hath pleased God to afflict Mr. Darnel
with a severe stroke of the dead palsy. 
—He was taken yesterday, and
now lies insensible, seemingly at the
point of death. Among the papers
in his pocket, I found the inclosed,
by which it appears that my honoured
young lady Miss Darnel is confined
in a private mad-house. I am afraid
Mr. Darnel's fate is a just judgment
of God upon him for his cruelty to
that excellent person. I need not exhort
you, madam, to take, immediately
upon the receipt of this, such
measures as will be necessary for the
enlargement of my poor young lady. 
In the mean time, I shall do the needful 

for the preservation of her property
in this place, and send you an account
of any further alteration that may
happen; being very respectfully, Madam,
your most obedient humble servant,
Ralph Mattocks.” 
Clump had posted up to London
with this intimation, on the wings
of love, and being covered with clay
from the heels to the eyes upwards,
he appeared in such an unfavourable
light at Dr. Kawdle's door, that the
footman refused him admittance. 
Nevertheless, he pushed him aside,
and fought his way up-stairs into the
dining-room, where the company was
not a little astonished at such an apparition. 
The fellow himself was no
less amazed at seeing Aurelia, and
his own sweetheart Mrs. Dolly Cowslip. 
He forthwith fell upon his
knees, and, in silence, held out the
letter, which was taken by the doctor,
and presented to his wife, according
to the direction. She did not fail to
communicate the contents, which were
far from being unwelcome to the individuals 

who composed this little society. 
Mr. Clump was honoured
with the approbation of his young lady,
who commended him for his zeal
and expedition; bestowed upon him
an handsome gratuity in the mean
time, and desired to see him again
when he should be properly refreshed
after the fatigue he had undergone. 
Mr. Thomas Clarke being consulted
on this occasion, gave it as
his opinion, that Miss Darnel should
without delay, choose another guardian
for the few months that remained
of her minority. The opinion was
confirmed by the advice of some eminent
lawyers, to whom immediate recourse
was had; and Dr. Kawdle,
being the person pitched upon for
this office, the necessary forms were
executed with all possible dispatch. 
The first use the doctor made of his
guardianship was to sign a power, constituting
Mr. Ralph Mattocks his attorney
pro tempore, for managing the
estate of Miss Aurelia Darnel; and
this was forwarded to the steward by 

the hands of Clump, who set out
with it for the seat of Darnel-hill,
though not without a heavy heart,
occasioned by some intimation he had
received, concerning the connexion
between his dear Dolly, and Mr.
Clarke the lawyer. 