


He is concerned in a dangerous adventure with a
certain gardener; heads an insurrection in the
school; takes the field with his adherents, marches
up into the country, and fixes his head quarters at
an inn. 
He and some of his companions one day entered
a garden in the suburbs, and having
indulged their appetites, desired to know what satisfaction
they must make for the fruit they had
pulled. The gardener demanded what (in their
opinion) was an exorbitant price, and they with
many opprobious terms refused to pay it. The
peasant being surly and intractable, insisted upon
his right; neither was he deficient or sparing in
the eloquence of vulgar abuse. His guests attempted
to retreat, a scuffle ensued, in which Peregrine
lost his cap, and the gardener being in
danger from the number of his foes, called to his
wife to let loose the dog, who instantly flew to
his master's assistance; and after having tore the
leg of one, and the shoulder of another, put the
whole body of scholars to flight. Enraged at the
indignity which had been offered to them, they
solicited a reinforcement of their friends, and with
Tom Pipes at their head, marched back to the
field of battle. Their adversary seeing them approach,
called his apprentice, who worked at the
other end of the ground, to his assistance, armed
him with a mattock, while he himself wielded an
hoe, bolted his door on the inside, and flanked
with his man and mastiff, waited the attack without
flinching. He had not remained three minutes 

in this posture of defence, when Pipes, who acted
as the enemy's forlorn hope, advanced to the gate
with great intrepidity, and clapping his foot to the
door, which was none of the stoutest, with the
execution and dispatch of a petard, split it into a
thousand pieces. This sudden execution had an
immediate effect upon the 'prentice, who retreated
with great precipitation, and escaped at
a postern gate. But the master placed himself
like another Hercules in the breach; and when
Pipes brandishing his cudgel, stepped forward to
engage him, levelled his weapon with such force
and dexterity at his head, that had the skull been
made of penetrable stuff, the iron edge must have
cleft his pate in twain. Casemated as he was,
the instrument cut sheer even to the bone, on
which it struck with such amazing violence, that
sparks of real fire were produced by the collision. 
And let not the incredulous reader pretend to
doubt the truth of this phænomenon, until he
shall have first perused the ingenious Peter Kolben's
Natural History of the Cape of Good Hope,
where the inhabitants commonly use to strike
fire with the shin-bones of lions which have been
killed in that part of Africk. 
Pipes, though a little disconcerted, far from
being disabled by the blow, in a trice retorted
the compliment with his truncheon, which, had
not his antagonist expeditiously slipped his head
aside, would have laid him breathless across his
own threshold; but, happily for him, he received
the salutation upon his right shoulder, which
crashed beneath the stroke, and the hoe dropped
instantly from his tingling hand. Tom perceiving,
and being unwilling to forego the advantage
he had gained, darted his head into the bosom of 

this son of earth, and overturned him on the
plain, being himself that instant assaulted by the
mastif, who fastened upon the outside of his
thigh. Feeling himself incommoded by this assailant
in his rear, he quitted the prostrate gardener
to the resentment of his associates, who
poured upon him in shoals, and turning about,
laid hold with both his hands of this ferocious
animal's throat, which he squeezed with such incredible
force and perseverance, that the creature
quitted his hold; his tongue lolled out of his
jaws, the blood started from his eyes, and he
swung a lifeless trunk between the hands of his
vanquisher. 
It was well for his master that he did not
longer exist; for by this time he was overwhelmed
by such a multitude of foes, that his
whole body scarce afforded points of contact to
all the fists that drummed upon it, consequently,
to use a vulgar phrase, his wind was almost knocked
out, before Pipes had leisure to interpose in his
behalf, and persuade his offenders to desist, by
representing that the wife had gone to alarm the
neighbourhood, and that in all probability, they
would be intercepted in their return. They accordingly
listened to his remonstrances, and
marched homewards in triumph, leaving the gardener
in the embraces of his mother earth, from
which he had not power to move when he was
found by his disconsolate helpmate and some
friends whom she had assembled for his assistance. 
Among these was a blacksmith and farrier, who
took cognizance of his carcase, every limb of
which having examined, he declared there was
no bone broke, and taking out his fleam, blooded
him plentifully as he lay. He was then conveyed 

to his bed, from which he was not able to stir
during a whole month, and his family coming
upon the parish, a formal complaint was made to
the master of the college, and Peregrine represented
as the ring-leader of those who committed
this barbarous assault. An inquiry was immediately
set on foot, and the articles of impeachment
being fully proved, our hero was sentenced to be
severely chastised in the face of the whole school. 
This was a disgrace the thoughts of which his
proud heart could not brook. He resolved to make
his elopement rather than undergo the punishment
to which he was doomed; and having signified
his sentiments to his confederates, they promised,
one and all, to stand by him, and either
screen him from chastisement, or share his fate. 
Confiding in this friendly protestation, he appeared
unconcerned on the day that was appointed
for his punishment; and when he was called to
his destiny, advanced towards the scene, attended
by the greatest part of the scholars, who intimated
their determination to the master, and
proposed that Peregrine should be forgiven. The
superior behaved with that dignity of demeanor
which became his place, represented the folly and
presumption of their demand, reprehended them
for their audacious proceeding, and ordered every
boy to his respective station; but they had gone
too far to retract, and instead of obeying the injunction
they had received, marched directly out
of the college, with their captain in the midst of
them, and halting on a rising ground at the distance
of a short mile from town, held a council
to deliberate on what was to be done. 
This consultation was too tumultuous to end
in any unanimous decision, so that Mr. Pickle 

put himself at their head, and proceeded straight
forward till the hurry and confusion that prevailed
among them should subside; while Tom
Pipes, who had by this time joined the company,
brought up the rear with great calmness and tranquillity,
and never once inquired into the reason
of this extraordinary migration. They pursued
this indeterminate course for six miles, when a
public-house presenting itself to their view, there
was a proposal made to halt for refreshment, and
they disposed of themselves accordingly, as the
conveniencies of the place would permit. Having
made a very hearty breakfast on bread and butter
and cheese, which they took care to dilute with
a proportionable quantity of ale; a motion was
made for holding another board, from which the
younger boys were excluded, that they might,
as much as possible, avoid clamour and distraction
in their counsels. Here Peregrine being invested
with the supreme command, made a public
speech to his constituents, wherein having
thanked them for their generous interposition in
his favour, and the great honour they now conferred
upon him, he observed that in all likelihood,
they should in a little time reap the fruits
of their resolution, and be recalled with honour
to the studies they had left; but as it would be
necessary to persevere a little longer, that the
masters might see they were not mere boys whom
they had disobliged, he proposed that they should
dismiss the minor brothers who were not capable
of enduring a little fatigue, and deposit all their
money in the hands of one person who should be
chosen for that trust, and to regulate their expence
upon the road; while they advanced farther
into the country, and waited patiently for 

the terms which would undoubtedly be propounded
unto them. The proposal was unanimously
embraced, the money produced, to the amount of
ten guineas, and put into the hands of Pipes, who
was elected caterer and purser to the whole community; 
and the young boys being exhorted to
return, the rest, to the number of five and
twenty, departed under the auspices of Peregrine,
who conducted them ten miles farther to a certain
village, where they took up their lodging at an
inn, and bespoke something hot for supper; after
which they called for punch and strong beer, and
indulged themselves in such intemperance, that
in a little time riot and disorder prevailing, they
sallied forth in quest of willing dames to crown
their enjoyment, and committed many other excesses
which the prudence and authority of Peregrine
could not restrain. 
In the morning the landlord saved them the
trouble of calling for a bill, and they had the mortification
to see that their night's extravagance had
mounted up their expence to one half of their
whole stock. They discharged the reckoning,
and as few or none of them had any inclination
or appetite for breakfast, put themselves in motion,
and marched onwards for seven miles before
they made another halt. This happened on the
edge of a common, where they perceived the
sign of the George, to the no small comfort and
satisfaction of some among them, whose tongues
by this time cleaved to the roofs of their mouths,
in consequence of the debauch of last night. Here
then they paused, and having moistened their
throats with plentiful streams of ale, began to relish
the situation, and ordered their steward to
provide something for dinner. The people of the 

house would have gladly dispensed with their custom,
as they had no great faith either in the finances
or principles of their guests, who seemed too
young to be possessed of much money or consideration. 
But as they lived in a solitary place, unprovided
with defence against the insults to which
they might be exposed from the resentment of
such a disorderly crowd, they would not venture
to signify their distrust, and lamented that there
was nothing in the house with which they could
entertain them. Tom Pipes, who had observed
a flock of geese upon the common, and abundance
of poultry in the yard, took no notice of the
landlord's declaration, but went out, and in less
than five minutes returned with provision sufficient
to regale twice the number of his associates. 
The woman durst not venture to disapprove of
what he had done, but after having assured him
that the fowls were none of her own, very peaceably
employed her whole family in preparing
them for the fire, and some bacon and greens being
added to the repast, our company disposed
themselves in different groups upon the grass, and
dined with great mirth and satisfaction, without
once recollecting that another such meal would
utterly exhaust their common fund. However,
this sweet insensibility did not long prevail; about
four o'clock they called to pay, and were very
much startled to find themselves charged no less
than two pounds eleven and sixpence for the entertainment
they had received. They looked
upon this reckoning as unconscionable, and disputed
every article accordingly; but the landlady
solemnly protested that the sum would barely indemnify
her, and imputed great part of the charge
to the unnecessary number of geese and chickens 

which had been slaughtered without her knowledge
or consent. 
Pipes, who on certain subjects, thought a little
too much at large, proposed to punish her
for her exorbitant demand, by marching off
without paying one farthing; but this advice Peregrine
declined with disdain, looking upon such
an expedient as inconsistent with the dignity of
the corps which he had the honour to command; 
and ordered that the bill should be immediately
discharged. This affair being settled to the satisfaction
of all parties concerned, they resumed
their march, and in the evening arrived at a certain
market town, where they resolved to fix
their quarters until they should hear tidings from
the college which they had left. With this view
they chose their residence at the best inn belonging
to the place, and determined to manage the
remains of their fortune with great frugality. But
the spirits of some amongst them beginning to
flag, in consequence of the fatigue of their journey,
and their own reflection that now represented
the folly of their design, with the uncomfortable
circumstances that must in a few hours attend the
consumption of their stock; this prudent scheme
of œconomy was over-ruled, a huge bowl of
punch prepared, and Pipes ordered to enliven the
company with a song. Their cares were in a
little time overwhelmed, and the greatest part of
the night was consumed in mirth and jollity; 
though next morning they waked in the horrors,
and universal despondence took place, when they
learnt that their bank was scarce able to defray
the expence of their bill, which they received next
their stomachs, and were obliged to discharge. 

They were now reduced to a dilemma that
occasioned another general consultation, in which
they agreed to club their pocket-pieces and silver
buckles for present support, and give notice by
letters of their situation to their respective relations,
taking care to ascribe their distress to the
ill usage they had met with at school: on this occasion
Peregrine produced the ring and medal he
had received from Mrs. Trunnion, and Pipes not
only presented his own purse, which was pretty
well furnished, but even made a proffer of his
silver whistle, with the chain by which it had for
many years depended from his neck. They
thanked him for his disinterested attachment, but
all his sollicitations could not prevail upon the
chiefs to profit by this instance of his good fellowship; 
because they considered him as a person
whose assistance in this particular it was neither
just nor honourable to use. 