


Hornbeck is informed of his wife's adventure with
Peregrine, for whom he prepares a stratagem,
which is rendered ineffectual by the information
of Pipes. The husband is ducked for his intention,
and our hero apprehended by the patrole. 
There was another person, however, still
ungained; and that was no other than her
footman, whose secrecy our hero attempted to
secure in the morning by an handsome present,
which he received with many professions of gratitude
and devotion to his service; yet this complaisance
was nothing but a cloak used to disguise
the design he harboured of making his master acquainted
with the whole transaction. Indeed this
lacquey had been hired, not only as a spy upon
his mistress, but also as a check on the conduct
of the governante, with promise of ample reward, 

if ever he should discover any sinister or suspicious
practices in the course of their behaviour: and
as for the footman whom they had brought from
England, he was retained in attendance upon the
person of his master, whose confidence he had
lost, by advising him to gentle methods of reclaiming
his lady, when her irregularities had subjected
her to his wrath. 
The Flemish valet, in consequence of the office
he had undertaken, wrote to Hornbeck by
the first post, giving an exact detail of the adventure
at Versailles, with such a description of
the pretended brother, as left the husband no
room to think he could be any other person than
his first dishonourer; and exasperated him to such
a degree, that he resolved to lay an ambush for
this invader, and at once disqualify him from disturbing
his repose, by maintaining further correspondence
with his wife. 
Mean while the lovers enjoyed themselves
without restraint, and Peregrine's plan of inquiry
after his dear Unknown was for the present postponed. 
His fellow-travellers were confounded at
his mysterious motions, which filled the heart of
Jolter with anxiety and terror. This careful
conductor was fraught with such experience of
his pupil's disposition, that he trembled with the
apprehension of some sudden accident, and lived
in continual alarm, like a man that walks under
the wall of a nodding tower. Nor did he enjoy
any alleviation of his fears, when upon telling the
young gentleman, that the rest of the company
were desirous of departing for Antwerp, he answered,
they were at liberty to consult their own
inclinations; but for his own part, he was resolved
to stay in Brussels a few days longer. By 

this declaration, the governor was confirmed in
the opinion of his having some intrigue upon the
anvil; and in the bitterness of his vexation, took
the liberty of signifying his suspicion, and reminding
him of the dangerous dilemmas to which
he had been reduced by his former precipitation. 
Peregrine took his caution in good part, and
promised to behave with such circumspection, as
would screen him from any troublesome consequences
for the future: but, nevertheless, behaved
that same evening in such a manner, as
plainly shewed, that his prudence was nothing
else than vain speculation. He had made an appointment
to spend the night, as usual, with
Mrs. Hornbeck; and about nine o'clock hastened
to her lodgings, when he was accosted in the
street by his old discarded friend Thomas Pipes,
who, without any other preamble, told him, that
for all he had turned him adrift, he did not choose
to see him run full sail into his enemy's harbour,
without giving him timely notice of the danger. 
“I'll tell you what, (said he) mayhap you think
I want to curry favour, that I may be taken in
tow again; if you do, you have made a mistake
in your reckoning. I am old enough to be laid
up, and have wherewithal to keep my planks
from the weather. But this here is the affair; I
have known you since you were no higher than
a marlinespike, and shouldn't care to see you deprived
of your carriages at these years: whereby
I am informed by Hornbeck's man, whom I this
afternoon fell in with by chance, as how his master
has got intelligence of your boarding his
wife, and has steer'd privately into this port, with
a large compliment of hands, in order, d'ye see,
to secure you while you are under the hatches, 

and cut away your tackle, without fear or mercy. 
Now if so be as how you have a mind to give
him a salt eel for his supper, here am I, without
hope of fee or reward, ready to stand by you as
long as my timbers will stick together; and if I
expect any recompence, may I be bound to eat
oakum and drink bilge-water for life.” 
Startled at this information, Peregrine examined
him upon the particulars of his discourse
with the lacquey; and when he understood that
Hornbeck's intelligence flowed from the canal of
his Flemish footman, he believed every circumstance
of Tom's report, thanked him for this
warning, and after having reprimanded him for
his misbehaviour at Lisle, assured him that it
should be his own fault if ever they should part
again. He then deliberated with himself whether
or not he should retort the purpose upon his adversary; 
but, when he considered that Hornbeck
was not the aggressor, and made that unhappy
husband's case his own, he could not help acquitting
his intention of revenge; though, in his
opinion, it ought to have been executed in a more
honourable manner; and therefore he determined
to chastise him for his want of spirit. Nothing
surely can be more insolent and unjust than
this determination, which induced him to punish
a person, for his want of courage to redress the
injury which he himself had done to his reputation
and peace; and yet this barbarity of decision
is sanctioned by the opinion and practice of
mankind. 
With these sentiments he returned to the inn,
and putting a pair of pistols in his pocket, ordered
his valet de chambre and Pipes to follow him at a
small distance, so as that they should be within 

call, in case of necessity, and posted himself within
thirty yards of his Dulcinea's door. There he
had not been above half an hour, when he perceived
four men take up their station on the other
side, with a view, as he guessed, to watch for
his going in, that he might be taken unaware. 
But when they had tarried a considerable time in
that corner, without reaping the fruits of their
expectation, their leader, persuaded that the gallant
had gained admittance by some secret means,
approached the door with his followers, who,
according to the instructions they had received,
no sooner saw it opened, than they rushed in,
leaving their employer in the street, where he
thought his person would be least endangered. 
Our adventurer seeing him alone, advanced with
speed, and clapping a pistol to his breast, commanded
him to follow his footsteps, without noise,
on pain of immediate death. 
Terrified at this sudden apparition, Hornbeck
obeyed in silence; and in a few minutes they arrived
at the quay, where Pickle halting, gave
him to understand, that he was no stranger to
his villainous design; and told him, that if he
conceived himself injured by any circumstance of
his conduct, he would now give him an opportunity
of resenting the wrong, in a manner becoming
a man of honour. “You have a sword
about you, (said he) or if you don't choose to
put the affair on that issue, here is a brace of
pistols, take which you please.” Such an address
could not fail to disconcert a man of his character. 
After some hesitation, he in a faultering
accent denied that his design was to mutilate
Mr. Pickle, but that he thought himself intitled
to the benefit of the law, by which he would 

have obtained a divorce, if he could have procured
evidence of his wife's infidelity; and with
that view had employed people to take advantage
of the information he had received. With regard
to his alternative, he declined it intirely, because
he could not see what satisfaction he should
enjoy, in being shot through the head, or run
through the lungs, by a person who had already
wronged him in an irreparable manner; and
lastly, his fear made him propose, that the affair
should be left to the arbitration of two creditable
men, altogether unconcerned in the dispute. 
To these remonstrances, Peregrine replied, in
the stile of a hot-headed young man, conscious
of his own unjustifiable behaviour, that every
gentleman ought to be a judge of his own honour; 
and therefore he would submit to the decision
of no umpire whatsoever; that he would
forgive his want of courage, which might be a
natural infirmity, but his mean dissimulation he
could not pardon; and that, as he was certified
of the rascally intent of his ambuscade, by undoubted
intelligence, he would treat him, not
with a retaliation of his own treachery, but with
such indignity as a scoundrel deserves to suffer; 
unless he would make one effort to maintain the
character he assumed in life: so saying, he again
presented his pistol, which being rejected as before,
he called his two ministers, and ordered
them to duck him in the canal. 
This command was pronounced and executed
almost in the same breath, to the unspeakable
terror and disorder of the poor shivering patient,
who, having undergone the immersion, ran about
like a drowned rat, squeaking for assistance and
revenge. His cries were overheard by the patrole, 

which, chancing to pass that way, took
him under their protection, and, in consequence
of his complaint and information, went in pursuit
of our adventurer and his attendants, who
were soon overtaken and surrounded. Rash and
inconsiderate as the young gentleman was, he
did not pretend to stand upon the defensive, against
a file of musketeers, although Pipes had
drawn his cutlass at their approach, but surrendered
himself without opposition, and was conveyed
to the main guard, where the commanding
officer, engaged by his appearance and address,
treated him with all imaginable respect,
and hearing the particulars of his adventure, assured
him, that the prince would consider the
whole as a Tour de jeunesse, and order him to be
released without delay. 
Next morning, when this gentleman gave in
his report, he made such a favourable representation
of the prisoner, that our hero was on the
point of being discharged; when Hornbeck preferred
a complaint, accusing him of a purposed
assassination, and praying that such punishment
should be inflicted upon him, as his highness
should think adequate to the nature of the crime. 
The prince, perplexed with this petition, in consequence
of which he foresaw, that he must disoblige
a British subject, sent for the plaintiff, of
whom he had some knowledge, and in person exhorted
him to drop the prosecution, which would
only serve to propagate his own shame. But
Hornbeck was too much incensed to listen to any
proposal of that kind, and peremptorily demanded
justice against the prisoner, whom he represented
as an obscure adventurer, who had made
repeated attempts upon his honour and his life. 

Prince Charles told him, that what he had advised
was in the capacity of a friend, but, since
he insisted upon his acting as a magistrate, the
affair should be examined, and determined according
to the dictates of justice and truth. 
The petitioner being dismissed with this promise,
the defendant was in his turn brought before
the judge, whose prepossession in his favour,
was in a great measure weakened by what his antagonist
had said to the prejudice of his birth and
reputation. 