


DEAR WAT,
EVERY day is now big with incidents and discovery 
—Young Mr. Dennison proves to be no
other than that identical person whom I have execrated
so long under the name of Wilson —He had
eloped from college at Cambridge, to avoid a
match that he detested, and acted in different parts
of the country as a stroller, untill the lady in question
made choice of a husband for herself then he returned
to his father, and disclosed his passion for
Liddy, which met with the approbation of his parents,
though the father little imagined that Mr.
Bramble was his old companion Matthew Loyd. 
The young gentleman, being empowered to make
honourable proposals to my uncle and me, had been
in search of us all over England, without effect; 
and he it was whom I had seen pass on horseback by
the window of the inn, where I stood with my
sister, but he little dreamed that we were in the
house —As for the real Mr. Wilson, whom I called
forth to combat, by mistake, he is the neighbour
and intimate friend of old Mr. Dennison, and this
connection had suggested to the son the idea of
taking that name while he remained in obscurity. 
You may easily conceive what pleasure I must
have felt on discovering that the honour of your family
was in no danger from the conduct of a sister,
whom I love with uncommon affection; that, instead
of debasing her sentiments and views to a
wretched stroller, she had really captivated the
heart of a gentleman, her equal in rank and superior
in fortune; and that, as his parents approved
of his attachment, I was on the eve of acquiring a 

brother-in-law so worthy of my friendship and
esteem. George Dennison is, without all question,
one of the most accomplished young fellows
in England. His person is at once elegant and
manly, and his understanding highly cultivated. 
Though his spirit is lofty, his heart is kind; and his
manner so engaging, as to command veneration
and love, even from malice and indifference. When
I weigh my own character with his, I am ashamed
to find myself so light in the balance; but the
comparison excites no envy —I propose him as a
model for imitation —I have endeavoured to recommend
myself to his friendship, and hope I have
already found a place in his affection. I am, however,
mortified to reflect what flagrant injustice we
every day commit, and what absurd judgment we
form, in viewing objects through the falsifying
medium of prejudice and passion, Had you asked
me a few days ago, the picture of Wilson the
player, I should have drawn a portrait very unlike
the real person and character of George Dennison 
—Without all doubt, the greatest advantage acquired
in travelling and perusing mankind in the
original, is that of dispelling those shameful clouds
that darken the faculties of the mind, preventing
it from judging with candour and precision. 
The real Wilson is a great original, and the best
tempered, companionable man I ever knew —I
question if ever he was angry or low spirited in his
life. He makes no pretensions to letters; but he
is an adept in every thing else that can be either
useful or entertaining. Among other qualifications,
he is a complete sportsman, and counted the
best shot in the county. He and Dennison, and
Lismahago and I, attended by Clinker, went a
shooting yesterday, and made great havock among-the
partridges —To-morrow we shall take the field
against the woodcocks and snipes, In the evening 

we dance and sing, or play at commerce, loo and
quadrille. 
Mr. Dennison is an elegant poet, and has written
some detached pieces on the subject of his passion
for Liddy, which must be very flattering to the
vanity of a young woman —Perhaps he is one of
the greatest theatrical geniuses that ever appeared. 
He sometimes entertains us with reciting favourite
speeches from our best plays. We are resolved to
convert the great hall into a theatre, and get up
the Beaux Stratagem without delay —I think I shall
make no contemptible figure in the character of
Scrub; and Lismahago will be very great in Captain
Gibbet —Wilson undertakes to entertain the
country people with Harlequin Skeleton, for which
he has got a jacket ready painted with his own
hand. 
Our society is realy enchanting. Even the severity
of Lismahago relaxes, and the vinegar of
Mrs. Tabby is remarkably dulcified, ever since it
was agreed that she should take precedency of her
niece in being first noosed: for, you must know,
the day is fixed for Liddy's marriage; and the
banns for both couples have been already once published
in the parish church. The captain earnestly
begged that one trouble might serve for all, and
Tabitha assented with a vile affectation of reluctance. 
Her inamorata, who came hither very slenderly
equipt, has sent for his baggage to London,
which, in all probability, will not arrive in time
for the wedding; but it is of no great consequence,
as every thing is to be transacted with the utmost
privacy —Meanwhile, directions are given for making
out the contracts of marriage; which are very
favourable for both females; Liddy will be secured
in a good jointure; and her aunt will remain mistress
of her own fortune, except one half of the
interest, which her husband shall have a right to 

enjoy for his natural life: I think this is as little in
conscience as can be done for a man who yokes
with such a partner for life. 
These expectants seem to be so happy, that if
Mr. Dennison had an agreeable daughter, I believe,
I should be for making the third couple in this
country dance. The humour seems to be infectious; 
for Clinker, alias Loyd, has a month's mind
to play the fool, in the same fashion, with Mrs.
Winifred Jenkins. He has even sounded me on
the subject; but I have given him no encouragement
to prosecute this scheme —I told him I
thought he might do better, as there was no engagement
nor promise subsisting; that I did not
know what designs my uncle might have formed
for his advantage; but I was of opinion, that he
should not, at present, run the risque of disobliging
him by any premature application of this nature — 
Honest Humphry protested, he would suffer death
sooner than do or say any thing that should give
offence to the 'squire but he owned he had a
kindness for the young woman and had reason to
think she looked upon him with a favourable eye; 
that he considered this mutual manifestation of
good will, as an engagement understood, which
ought to be binding to the conscience of an honest
man; and he hoped the 'squire and I would be of
the same opinion, when we should be at leisure to
bestow any thought about the matter —I believe
he is in the right; and we shall find time to take
his case into consideration —You see we are fixed
for some weeks at least, and as you have had a
long respite, I hope you will begin immediately to
discharge the arrears due to 
Your affectionate,
J. Melford. 
Oct. 14. 