


In which this recapitulation draws to
a close. 
When the landlady entered the
room from whence the groaning
proceeded, she found the squire
lying on his back under the dominion
of the night-mare, which rode him
so hard, that he not only groaned and
snorted, but the sweat ran down his
face in streams. The perturbation of
his brain, occasioned by this pressure,
and the fright he had lately undergone,
gave rise to a very terrible
dream, in which he fancied himself
apprehended for a robbery. The horror
of the gallows was strong upon
him, when he was suddenly awaked
by a violent shock from the doctor; 
and the company broke in upon his
view, still perverted by fear, and bedimmed
by slumber. His dream was
now realized by a full persuasion that
he was surrounded by the constable
and his gang. The first object that 

presented itself to his disordered view
was the figure of Ferret, who might
very well have passed for the finisher
of the law: against him therefore the
first effort of his despair was directed. 
He started upon the floor; and seizing
a certain utensil, that shall be nameless,
launched it at the misanthrope
with such violence, that, had he not
cautiously slipped his head aside, it is
supposed that actual fire would have
been produced from the collision of
two such hard and solid substances. 
All future mischief was prevented by
the strength and agility of captain
Crowe, who, springing upon the assailant,
pinioned his arms to his sides,
crying, “O damn ye, if you are for
running a-head, I'll soon bring you
to your bearings.” The squire thus
restrained, soon recollected himself,
and gazing upon every individual in
the apartment, “Wounds! (said he)
I've had an ugly dream. I thought,
for all the world, they were carrying
me to Newgate; and that there was
Jack Ketch coom to vetch me before 

my taim.” Ferret, who was the person
he had thus distinguished, eying him
with a look of the most emphatic malevolence,
told him, it was very natural
for a knave to dream of Newgate; 
and that he hoped to see the
day when this dream would be found
a true prophecy, and the commonwealth
purged of all such rogues and
vagabonds: but it could not be expected
that the vulgar would be honest
and conscientious, while the great
were distinguished by profligacy and
corruption. The squire was disposed
to make a practical reply to this insinuation,
when Mr. Ferret prudently
withdrew himself from the scene of
altercation. The good woman of the
house persuaded his antagonist to take
out his nap, assuring him that the eggs
and bacon, with a mug of excellent
ale, should be forthcoming in due season. 
The affair being thus fortunately
adjusted, the guests returned to the
kitchen, and Mr. Clarke resumed his
story to this effect. “You'll please to
take notice, gemmen, that besides the 

instances I have alledged of Sir Launcelot's
extravagant benevolence, I could
recount a great many others of the
same nature, and particularly the laudable
vengeance he took of a country
lawyer. —I'm sorry that any such
miscreant should belong to the profession. 
He was clerk of the assize,
gemmen, in a certain town, not a
great way distant, and having a blank
pardon left by the judges for some
criminals, whose cases were attended
with favourable circumstances, he
would not insert the name of one who
could not procure a guinea for the
fee; and the poor fellow, who had
only stole an hour-glass out of a shoemaker's
window, was actually executed
after a long respite; during
which he had been permitted to go
abroad, and earn his subsistence by his
daily labour. 
“Sir Launcelot, being informed of
this barbarous act of avarice, and
having some ground that bordered on
the lawyer's estate, not only rendered
him contemptible and infamous, by 

exposing him as often as they met on
the grand jury, but also, being vested
with the property of the great tythes,
proved such a troublesome neighbour,
sometimes by making waste among
his hay and corn, sometimes by instituting
suits against him for petty trespasses,
that he was fairly obliged to
quit his habitation, and remove into
another part of the kingdom. All
these avocations could not divert Sir
Launcelot from the execution of a
wild scheme, which has carried his
extravagance to such a pitch, that I
am afraid if a statute—you understand
me, gemmen, were sued, the
jury would—I don't choose to explain
myself further on this circumstance. 
Be that as it may, the servants
at Greavesbury-hall were not a
little confounded, when their master
took down from the family armoury
a compleat suit of armour, which had
belonged to his great grandfather, Sir
Marmaduke Greaves, a great warrior,
who lost his life in the service of
his king. This armour being scoured, 

repaired, and altered, so as to fit Sir
Launcelot, a certain knight, whom I
don't choose to name, because I believe
he cannot be proved compos mentis,
came down seemingly on a visit,
with two attendants; and, on the eve
of the festival of St. George, the armour
being carried into the chapel,
Sir Launcelot (Lord have mercy upon
us!) remained all night in that dismal
place, alone and without light, though
it was confidently reported all over the
country, that the place was haunted
by the spirit of his great great uncle,
who, being lunatic, had cut his throat
from ear to ear, and was found dead
on the communion table.” 
It was observed, that while Mr.
Clarke rehearsed this circumstance,
his eyes began to stare, and his teeth
to chatter; while Dolly, whose looks
were fixed invariably on this narrator,
growing pale, and hitching her joinstool
nearer the chimney, exclaimed
in a frightened tone, “Moother,
moother, in the neame of God, look
to 'un! how a quakes! as I'm a 

precious saoul, a looks as if a saw
something.” Tom forced a smile, and
thus proceeded: 
“While Sir Launcelot tarried within
the chapel, with the doors all
locked, the other knight stalked round
and round it on the outside, with his
sword drawn, to the terror of divers
persons who were present at the ceremony. 
As soon as day broke he
opened one of the doors, and, going
in to Sir Launcelot, read a book for
some time, which we did suppose to
be the constitutions of knight-errantry:
then we heard a loud slap which
ecchoed through the whole chapel,
and the stranger pronounce with an
audible and solemn voice, “In the
name of God, St. Michael, and St.
George, I dub thee knight—be faithful,
bold, and fortunate.” You cannot
imagine, gemmen, what an effect
this strange ceremony had upon the
people who were assembled. They
gazed at one another in silent horror; 
and, when Sir Launcelot came forth
completely armed, took to their heels 

in a body, and fled with the utmost
precipitation. I myself was overturned
in the crowd; and this was
the case with that very individual person
who now serves him as a squire. 
He was so frightened that he could
not rise, but lay roaring in such a
manner, that the knight came up, and
gave him a thwack with his launce
across the shoulders, which roused him
with a vengeance. For my own part,
I freely own I was not altogether unmoved
at seeing such a figure come
stalking out of a church in the grey of
the morning; for it recalled to my remembrance
the idea of the ghost in
Hamlet, which I had seen acted in
Drury-lane, when I made my first
trip to London; and I had not yet got
rid of the impression. 
“Sir Launcelot, attended by the
other knight, proceeded to the stable; 
from whence, with his own hands,
he drew forth one of his best horses,
a fine mettlesome sorrel, who had got
blood in him, ornamented with rich
trappings. In a trice the two knights, 

and the other two strangers, who now
appeared to be trumpeters, were
mounted. Sir Launcelot's armour
was lacquered black; and on his
shield was represented the moon in
her first quarter, with the motto impleat
orbeam. The trumpets having
sounded a charge, the stranger pronounced
with a loud voice, “God preserve
this gallant knight in all his honourable
atchievements; and may he
long continue to press the sides of his
now adopted steed, which I denominate
Bronzomarte, hoping that he will rival
in swiftness and spirit Bayardo,
Brigliadoro, or any other steed of past
or present chivalry? After another
flourish of the trumpets, all four clapped
spurs to their horses, Sir Launcelot
couching his launce, and galloped
to and fro, as if they had been mad,
to the terror and astonishment of all
the spectators. What should have
induced our knight to choose this here
man for his squire, is not easy to determine; 
for, of all the servants about
the house, he was the least likely either 

to please his master, or engage in
such an undertaking. His name is
Timothy Crabshaw, and he acted in
the capacity of whipper-in to Sir Everhard. 
He afterwards married the
daughter of a poor cottager, by whom
he has several children, and was employed
about the house as a ploughman
and carter. To be sure the fellow
has a dry sort of humour about
him: but he was universally hated
among the servants for his abusive
tongue and perverse disposition, which
often brought him into trouble; for
though the fellow is as strong as an
elephant, he has no more courage naturally
than a chicken—I say naturally,
because, since his being a member
of knight-errantry, he has done some
things that appear altogether incredible
and præternatural. 
“Timothy kept such a bawling,
after he had received the blow from
Sir Launcelot, that every body on the
field thought some of his bones were
broken; and his wife, with five bantlings,
came snivelling to the knight, 

who ordered her to send the husband
directly to his house. Tim accordingly
went thither, groaning piteously
all the way, creeping along
with his body bent like a Greenland
canoe. As soon as he entered the
court, the outward door was shut; 
and Sir Launcelot coming down stairs
with a horsewhip in his hand, asked
what was the matter with him that he
complained so dismally? To this question
he replied, that it was as common
as duck-weed in his country, for
a man to complain when his bones
were broke.” “What should have
broke your bones?” said the knight. 
“I cannot guess, (answered the other)
unless it was that delicate switch that
your honour in your mad pranks
handled so dextrously upon my carcase.” 
Sir Launcelot then told him,
there was nothing so good for a bruise
as a sweat, and he had the remedy in
his hand. Timothy eying the horsewhip
askance, observed that there
was another still more speedy; to wit,
a moderate pill of lead, with a sufficient 

dose of gun-powder. “No,
rascal, (cried the knight) that must
be reserved for your betters.” So saying,
he employed the instrument so
effectually, that Crabshaw soon forgot
his fractured ribs, and capered about
with great agility. When he had
been disciplined in this manner to
some purpose, the knight told him he
might retire; but ordered him to return
next morning, when he should
have a repetition of the medicine, provided
he did not find himself capable
of walking in an erect posture. The
gate was no sooner thrown open, than
Timothy ran home with all the speed
of a grey-hound, and corrected his
wife, by whose advice he had pretended
to be so grievously damaged in
his person. No body dreamed that
he would next day present himself at
Greavesbury-hall; nevertheless, he was
there very early in the morning, and
even closetted a whole hour with Sir
Launcelot. He came out making wry
faces, and several times slapped himself
on the fore-head, crying, “Bodikins! 

thof he be creazy, I an't, that
I an't!” When he was asked what
was the matter, he said, he believed
the devil had got in him, and he
should never be his own man again. 
That same day the knight carried him
to Ashenton, where he bespoke those
accoutrements which he now wears; 
and while these were making, it was
thought the poor fellow would have
run distracted. He did nothing but
growl, and curse, and swear to himself,
run backwards and forwards between
his own hutt and Greavesbury-hall,
and quarrel with the horses in
the stable. At length his wife and family
were removed into a snug farmhouse
that happened to be empty, and
care taken that they should be comfortably
maintained. 
“These precautions being taken,
the knight, one morning, at daybreak,
mounted Bronzomarte, and
Crabshaw as his squire, ascended the
back of a clumsy cart-horse, called
Gilbert. This again was looked upon
as an instance of insanity in the 

said Crabshaw; for, of all the horses
in the stable, Gilbert was the most
stubborn and vicious, and had often
like to have done a mischief to Timothy
while he drove the cart and
plough. When he was out of humour
he would kick and plunge as if
the devil was in him. He once thrust
Crabshaw into the middle of a quickset-hedge,
where he was terribly torn; 
another time he canted him over his
head into a quagmire, where he stuck
with his heels up, and must have perished
if people had not been passing
that way; a third time he seized him
in the stable with his teeth by the rim
of the belly, and swung him off the
ground, to the great danger of his life; 
and I'll be hanged if it was not owing
to Gilbert that Crabshaw was now
thrown into the river. Thus mounted
and accoutred, the knight and his
squire set out on their first excursion. 
They turned off from the common
highway, and travelled all that day
without meeting any thing worth recounting:
but, in the morning of the 

second day, they were favoured with
an adventure. The hunt was upon
a common, through which they travelled,
and the hounds were in full
cry after a fox, when Crabshaw,
prompted by his own mischievous disposition,
and neglecting the order of
his master, who called aloud to him
to desist, rode up to the hounds, and
crossed them at full gallop. The
huntsman, who was not far off, running
towards the squire, bestowed upon
his head such a memento with his
pole, as made the landschape dance
before his eyes; and in a twinkling
he was surrounded by all the fox-hunters,
who plied their whips about
his ears with infinite agility. Sir
Launcelot advancing at an easy pace,
instead of assisting the disastrous squire,
exhorted his adversaries to punish him
severely for his insolence, and they
were not slow in obeying this injunction. 
Crabshaw finding himself in
this disagreeable situation, and that
there was no succour to be expected
from his master, on whose prowess he 

had depended, grew desperate; and,
clubbing his whip, laid about him
with great fury, wheeling about Gilbert,
who was not idle; for he, having
received some of the favours intended
for his rider, both bit with
his teeth, and kicked with his heels; 
and at last made his way through the
ring that incircled him, though not
before he had broke the huntsman's
leg, lamed one of the best horses on
the field, and killed half a score of
the hounds. Crabshaw seeing himself
clear of the fray, did not tarry to
take leave of his master, but made the
most of his way to Greavesbury-hall,
where he appeared hardly with any
vestige of the human countenance, so
much had he been defaced in this adventure. 
He did not fail to raise a
great clamour against Sir Launcelot,
whom he cursed as a coward in plain
terms, swearing he would never serve
him another day: but whether he altered
his mind on cooler reflection, or
was lectured by his wife, who well
understood her own interest, he rose 

with the cock, and went again in
quest of Sir Launcelot, whom he
found on the eve of a very hazardous
enterprize. In the midst of a lane
the knight happened to meet with a
party of about forty recruits, commanded
by a serjeant, a corporal,
and a drummer, which last had his
drum slung at his back; but seeing
such a strange figure mounted on a
high-spirited horse, he was seized
with an inclination to divert his
company. With this view he braced
his drum, and, hanging it in its proper
position, began to beat a point of
war, advancing under the very nose of
Bronzomarte; while the corporal exclaimed,
“Damn my eyes, who have
we got here? old king Stephen, from
the horse armoury, in the Tower; or
the fellow that rides armed at my
lord mayor's shew.” The knight's
steed seemed at least as well pleased
with the sound of the drum as were
the recruits that followed it; and signified
his satisfaction in some curvettings
and caprioles, which did not at 

all discompose the rider, who, addressing
himself to the serjeant, “Friend,
said he, you ought to teach your drummer
better manners. I would chastise
the fellow on the spot for his insolence,
were it not out of the respect
I bear to his majesty's service.” 
“Respect mine a&wblank;! (cried this
ferocious commander) what, d'ye
think to frighten us with your pewter
pisspot on your scull, and your
lacquer'd potlid on your arm? get
out of the way and be damned, or
I'll raise with my halbert such a clutter
upon your target, that you'll remember
it the longest day you have to
live.” At that instant, Crabshaw arriving
upon Gilbert, “So rascal, said Sir
Launcelot, you are returned. Go and
beat in that scoundrel's drum-head.” 
“The squire, who saw no weapons
of offence about the drummer
but a sword, which he hoped the
owner durst not draw; and being resolved
to exert himself in making atonement
for his desertion, advanced
to execute his master's orders: but 

Gilbert, who liked not the noise,
refused to proceed in the ordinary
way. Then the squire turning his
tail to the drummer, he advanced
in a retrograde motion, and with
one kick of his heels, not only broke
the drum into a thousand pieces,
but laid the drummer in the mire,
with such a blow upon his hip-bone,
that he halted all the days of his
life. The recruits, perceiving the
discomfiture of their leader, armed
themselves with stones; the serjeant
raised his halbert in a posture of defence,
and immediately a severe action
ensued. By this time, Crabshaw
had drawn his sword, and begun
to lay about him like a devil
incarnate; but, in a little time, he
was saluted by a volley of stones,
one of which knocked out two of
his grinders, and brought him to
the earth, where he had like to
have found no quarter; for the
whole company crowded about him,
with their cudgels brandished; and
perhaps he owed his preservation to 

their pressing so hard that they hindered
one another from using their
weapons. Sir Launcelot, seeing with
indignation the unworthy treatment
his squire had received, and scorning
to stain his launce with the blood of
plebeians, instead of couching it in
the rest, seized it by the middle, and
fetching one blow at the serjeant,
broke in twain the halbert which
he had raised as a quarter-staff for his
defence. The second stroke encountered
his pate, which being the hardest
part about him, sustained the shock
without damage; but the third, lighting
on his ribs, he honoured the giver
with immediate prostration. The
general being thus overthrown, Sir
Launcelot advanced to the relief of
Crabshaw, and handled his weapon
so effectually, that the whole body
of the enemy were disabled or routed,
before one cudgel had touched
the carcass of the fallen squire. As
for the corporal, instead of standing
by his commanding officer, he
had overleaped the hedge, and run 

to the constable of an adjoining village
for assistance. Accordingly, before
Crabshaw could be properly
remounted, the peace officer arrived
with his posse; and by the corporal
was charged with Sir Launcelot
and his squire, as two highwaymen. 
The constable, astonished at
the martial figure of the knight, and
intimidated at sight of the havock he
had made, contented himself with
standing at a distance, displaying the
badge of his office, and reminding
the knight that he represented his
majesty's person. Sir Launcelot, seeing
the poor man in great agitation,
assured him that his design was to enforce,
not violate the laws of his
country; and that he and his squire
would attend him to the next justice
of the peace; but, in the mean time,
he, in his turn, charged the peace-officer
with the serjeant and the drummer,
who had begun the fray. The
justice had been a pettifogger, and
was a sycophant to a nobleman in the
neighbourhood, who had a post at 

court. He therefore thought he
should oblige his patron, by shewing
his respect for the military; and
treated our knight with the most
boorish insolence; but refused to
admit him into his house, until he
had surrendered all his weapons of
offence to the constable. Sir Launcelot
and his squire being found the
aggressors, the justice insisted upon
making out their mittimus, if they
did not find bail immediately; and
could hardly be prevailed upon to
agree that they should remain at
the house of the constable, who,
being a publican, undertook to keep
them in safe custody, until the knight
could write to his steward. Mean
while he was bound over to the peace; 
and the serjeant with his drummer
were told they had a good action against
him for assault and battery, either
by information or indictment. 
They were not, however, so fond of
the law as the justice seemed to be. 
Their sentiments had taken a turn in
favour of Sir Launcelot, during the 

course of his examination, by which
it appeared that he was really a gentleman
of fashion and fortune; and
they resolved to compromise the affair
without the intervention of his
worship. Accordingly, the serjeant
repaired to the constable's house,
where the knight was lodged; and
humbled himself before his honour,
protesting with many oaths, that if
he had known his quality he would
have beaten the drummer's brains about
his ears, for presuming to give
his honour or his horse the least disturbance; 
thof the fellow, he believed,
was sufficiently punished in
being a cripple for life. Sir Launcelot
admitted of his apologies; and
taking compassion on the fellow who
had suffered so severely for his folly,
resolved to provide for his maintenance. 
Upon the representation of
the parties to the justice, the warrant
was next day discharged; and
the knight returned to his own house,
attended by the serjeant and the drummer
mounted on horseback, the 

recruits being left to the corporal's
charge. 
“The halberdeer found the good
effects of Sir Launcelot's liberality; 
and his companion being rendered
unfit for his majesty's service by the
heels of Gilbert, is now entertained
at Greavesbury-hall, where he will
probably remain for life. As for
Crabshaw, his master gave him to
understand, that if he did not think
him pretty well chastised for his
presumption and flight by the discipline
he had undergone in the last
two adventures, he would turn him
out of his service with disgrace. Timothy
said he believed it would be
the greatest favour he could do him
to turn him out of a service in which
he knew he should be rib-roasted
every day, and murdered at last. In
this situation were things at Greavesbury-hall
about a month ago, when
I crossed the country to Ferry-bridge,
where I met my uncle: probably,
this is the first incident of their second
excursion; for the distance between 

this here house and Sir Launcelot's
estate, does not exceed fourscore or
ninety miles.” 