


Peregrine receives a letter from Hatchway, in
consequence of which he repairs to the garison,
and performs the last offices to his aunt. He is
visited by Mr. Gauntlet, who invites him to his
marriage. 
In this circle of amusements our hero's time
was parcelled out, and few young gentlemen
of the age enjoyed life with greater relish,
notwithstanding those intervening checks of
reason, which served only to whet his appetite
for a repetition of the pleasures she so prudently
condemned; when he received the following letter,
by which he was determined to visit his estate
in the country. 


Cousin Pickle,
I hope you are in a better trim than your aunt,
who hath been fast moored to her bed these
seven weeks, by several feet of under-water logging
in her hold and hollop, whereby I doubt her
planks are rotted, so as she cannot chuse but
fall to pieces in a short time. I have done all in
my power to keep her tight and easy, and free
from sudden squalls that might overstrain her. 
And here have been the doctors, who have
skuttled her lower deck, and let out six gallons
water. For my own part, I wonder how the devil
it came there; for you know as how it was a liquor
she never took in. But as for those fellows
the doctors, they are like unskilful carpenters,
that in mending one leak, make a couple; and
so she fills again apace. But the worst sign of all
is this here, she won't let a drop of Nantz go betwixt
the combings of her teeth, and has quite
lost the rudder of her understanding, whereby
she yaws woundily in her speech, palavering
about some foreign part called the New Geereusalem,
and wishing herself in a safe birth in the
river Geordun. The parson, I must say, strives
to keep her steady, concerning the navigation of
her soul, and talks very sensibly of charity and the
poor, whereof she hath left a legacy of two hundred
pounds in her will. And here has been Mr.
Gamaliel and your brother my lord, demanding
entrance at the gate, in order to see her; but
I would not suffer them to come aboard, and
pointed my patereroes, which made them sheer
off. Your sister Mrs. Clover keeps close watch
upon her kinswoman, without ever turning in,
and a kind-hearted young woman it is. I should 

be glad to see you at the garison, if the wind of
your inclination sits that way; and mayhap it
may be a comfort to your aunt, to behold you
along-side of her, when her anchor is speak. So
no more at present, but rests 
Your friend
And humble servant to command,
Jno Hatchway. 
Next morning, after the receipt of this epistle,
Peregrine, in order to manifest his regard to his
aunt, as well as his friendship for honest Jack,
set out on horseback for their habitation, attended
by Pipes, who longed to see his old messmate; 
but, before he reached the garison, Mrs.
Hatchway had given up the ghost, in the threescore
and fifth year of her age. The widower
seemed to bear his loss with resignation, and behaved
very decently upon the occasion, though
he did not undergo those dangerous transports of
sorrow, which some tender-hearted husbands have
felt at the departure of their yoke-fellows. The
lieutenant was naturally a philosopher, and so
well disposed to acquiesce in the dispensations of
providence, that in this, as well as in every other
emergency of his life, he firmly believed, that
every thing which happened was for the best. 
Peregrine's task, therefore, was not so great in
comforting him, as in consoling his own sister,
who with great poignancy and sincerity of grief,
lamented the death of the only relation with
whom she had maintained any intimacy of correspondence; 
for her mother was as implacable as
ever, in her enmity against her and Peregrine, 

and rather more determined in her rancour,
that which was originally a sudden transport of
indignation, being by this time settled into a
confirmed inveteracy of hate. As for Gam,
who was now dignified by the country-people
with the appellation of the young squire, he still
acted in the capacity of minister to the caprice
and vengeance of his mother, taking all opportunities
of disturbing Julia's peace, slandering her
reputation, and committing outrages against the
tenants and domestics of her husband, who was
a man of a quiet and timorous disposition. 
But the chief amusement of young Pickle, in
his later years, was the chace, in which he acquired
some renown by his intrepidity and remarkable
figure, which improved every day in deformity; 
insomuch, as to suggest a ludicrous
scheme of revenge to a gentleman in the neighbourhood,
who having been affronted by the insolence
of Crookback, cloathed a large baboon
that was in his possession, in a dress that resembled
the hunting-equipage of Gam; and ordering
the animal to be set astride, and tied upon
the back of his keenest hunter, turned them out
one day after the hounds; and the horse in a little
time outstripping all the rest in the field, the
rider was mistaken for Gam by the whole company,
who saluted him as he passed with a hollow,
observing, that the squire had his usual good
luck, in being better mounted than his neighbours. 
Pickle afterwards appearing in his own
person, created great astonishment in the spectators,
one of whom asked if he had split himself
in twain, and pointed out his representative, who
was by this time almost up with the hounds:
upon which, the identical Gam went in pursuit 

of the impostor; and when he overtook him was
so much enraged at the counterfeit, that he attacked
the baboon whip in hand, and, in all probability,
would have sacrificed him to his resentment,
had not he been prevented by the other
foxhunters, who interposed, in order to make up
the difference betwixt two brothers of the sport,
and were equally surprised and diverted, when
they distinguished the quality of Crookback's antagonist,
which they rescued from his rage, and
reconveyed to its master. 
Peregrine, at the request of his friend Jack,
took charge of his aunt's funeral, to which his
parents were invited, though they did not think
proper to appear, or pay the least regard to his
sollicitations, when he desired permission to wait
upon them in person. Nevertheless, old Gamaliel,
at the instigation of his wife, afterwards obtained
an order from Doctor's Commons, obliging
Hatchway to produce the will of his wife, on
the supposition that she had bequeathed to him
some part of the money which (she knew) was at
her own disposal. But from this step he reaped
no other satisfaction than that of finding himself
altogether neglected by the testatrix, who had
left all her effects to her husband, except one
thousand pounds, with her jewels, to Julia's
daughter, the benefaction mentioned in the lieutenant's
letter, and some inconsiderable legacies
to her favourite domesticks. 
A few days after the interment of this good
lady, our hero was agreeably surprised with a visit
from his friend Godfrey, who had come to
England in consequence of that promotion which
he owed to his interest, tho' the soldier himself
placed it to the credit of a certain courtier who 

had formerly promised to befriend him, and now
finding his advancement unowned, very modestly
arrogated the merit of it to himself. He communicated
his good fortune to Pickle, who complimented
him upon it as an event of which he
had no precognition; and at the same time told
him, that, in consequence of his preferment, his
cousin at Windsor had consented to his being immediately
united in the bands of wedlock with his
lovely Sophy; that the wedding-day was already
fixed; and that nothing would be wanting to his
happiness, if Peregrine would honour the nuptials
with his presence. 
Our hero accepted the invitation with great
eagerness, when he learned that Emilia would be
there in quality of bride's maid; and now repeated
what he had formerly written to his friend,
namely, that he was not only willing, but extremely
impatient to attone for his mad behaviour
to that young lady, by laying himself and his
whole fortune at her feet. Godfrey thanked him
for his honourable intention, and promised to use
his influence, and that of Sophy, in his behalf,
tho' he seemed dubious of their success, on account
of his sister's delicacy, which could not
pardon the least shadow of disrespect. He owned,
indeed, he was not certain that she would appear
in the same company with Pickle; but as she had
made no stipulations on that score, he would interpret
her silence in the most favourable manner,
and keep her in ignorance of his design, until
she should find it too late to retract with any
decency. The hope of seeing and conversing
with Emilia, and perhaps of being reconciled to
her, after having suffered so much and so long
from her displeasure, raised a tumult of ideas in 

his breast, and produced a strange inquietude of
joy and perturbation. Gauntlet having stayed
with him a few days, and signified the time appointed
for his spousals, took his leave, in order
to prepare for the occasion; while Peregrine,
with his friend Hatchway, made a tour among his
acquaintance in the country, with a view of
sounding their inclinations touching a project
which he had lately conceived, of offering himself
as a candidate for a certain borough in the
neighbourhood, at the ensuing election for members
of parliament. 
This scheme, which was suggested to him by
one of his quality patrons, would have succeeded
according to his wish, had the election taken
place immediately; but before that happened, his
interest was overbalanced by some small accidents
that will be recorded in the sequel. In the mean
time, he repaired to Windsor on the eve of his
friend's marriage, and understood from Godfrey,
that it was with the utmost difficulty he and Sophy
could prevail upon his sister to be present at
the wedding, when she was informed that her
lover was invited, and that her consent had not
been obtained until they had promised, on the
part of Peregrine, that he should not renew the
old topic, nor even speak to her in the stile of a
former acquaintance. 
Our young gentleman was nettled at this preliminary,
to which, however, he said he would
adhere; and so well did he think himself fortified
with pride and resentment, that he resolved to
behave towards her with such indifference, as
would, he hoped, mortify her vanity, and thereby
punish her for the implacability of her disposition. 
Armed with these sentiments, he was 

next day introduced by Godfrey to the bride,
who received him with her usual sweetness of
temper and affability; and Emilia being present,
he saluted her with a distant bow, which she acknowledged
with a cold curt'sy, and an aspect of
ice. Tho' this deportment confirmed his displeasure,
her beauty undermined his resolution; 
he thought her charms were infinitely improved
since their last parting, and a thousand fond images
recurring to his imagination, he felt his whole
soul dissolving into tenderness and love. 
In order to banish those dangerous ideas, he
endeavoured to enter into a gay conversation
with Sophy, on the subject of the approaching
ceremony; but his tongue performed its office
very aukwardly, his eyes were attracted towards
Emilia, as if they had been subject to the power
of fascination; in spite of all his efforts, a deep
sigh escaped from his bosom, and his whole appearance
indicated anxiety and confusion. 
The bridegroom perceiving his condition,
abridged the visit, and having conducted his
companion to his own lodgings, expressed his
concern at having been the innocent occasion of
his uneasiness, by exposing him to the sight of
Emilia, which he perceived had given him pain. 
Peregrine, who had by this time recollected the
dictates of his pride, assured him, that he was
very much mistaken in the cause of his disorder,
which was no other than a sudden qualm, to
which he had been for some time subject; and to
shew him how philosophically he could bear the
disdain of Emilia, which, with all deference to
her conduct, he could not help thinking a little
too severe, he desired, as the bridegroom had
made preparations for a private ball in the evening, 

that he would provide him with an agreeable
partner; in which case he would exhibit undoubted
proofs of the tranquillity of his heart. “I
was in hopes (answered Godfrey) of being able,
with the assistance of Sophy, to make up matters
between you and my sister, and for that reason
kept her unengaged to any other gentleman for
the night; but since she is so peevishly obstinate,
I shall take care to accommodate you with a very
handsome young lady, whose partner will not be
sorry to exchange her for Emilia. 
The thoughts of having an opportunity to coquet
with another woman, under the eye of this
implacable mistress, supported his spirits during
the ceremony which put Gauntlet in possession of
his heart's desire; and, by means of this cordial,
he found himself so undisturbed at dinner, tho'
he sat opposite to his fair enemy, that he was able
to pass some occasional jokes upon the new-married
couple, with some appearance of mirth
and good humour. Nor did Emily any otherwise
seem affected by his presence, than by excepting
him from the participation of those genial
regards which she distributed to the rest of the
company. This easiness of behaviour on her
side, reinforced his resolution, by giving him
pretence to call her sensibility in question; for he
could not conceive how any woman of acute
feelings could sit unmoved, in presence of a man
with whom she had such recent and intimate connexion:
not considering, that she had much more
reason to condemn his affectation of unconcern,
and that her external deportment might, like his
own, be an effort of pride and resentment. 
This contest, in point of dissimulation, continued
till night, when the company was paired 

for dancing, and Peregrine began the ball by
walking a minuet with the bride; then he took
out the young lady to whom he was recommended
by Gauntlet, being very well pleased to see
that her person was such as might have inspired
even Emily herself with jealousy, though, at the
same time, he perceived his mistress coupled
with a gay young officer, whom (with all due
deference to his own qualifications) he considered
as no despicable rival. However, he himself first
began hostilities, by becoming all of a sudden
particular with his partner, whom he forthwith
assailed with flattering compliments, that soon
introduced the subject of love, upon which he
expatiated with great art and elocution, using not
only the faculty of speech, but also the language
of the eyes, in which he was a perfect connoisseur. 
This behaviour soon manifested itself to the
whole assembly, the greatest part of whom believed
that he was in good earnest captivated by
the heart of his partner, while Emilia, penetrating
into his design, turned his own artillery upon
himself, by seeming to listen with pleasure to the
addresses of his rival, who was no novice in the
art of making love: she even affected uncommon
vivacity, and giggled aloud at every whisper
which he conveyed into her ear, insomuch that
she, in her turn, afforded speculation to the company,
who imagined the young soldier had made
a conquest of the bridegroom's sister. 
Pickle himself began to cherish the same opinion,
which gradually invaded his good humour,
and, at length, filled his bosom with rage. He
strove to suppress his indignation, and called
every consideration of vanity and revenge to his 

aid: he endeavoured to wean his eyes from the
fatal object that disturbed him, but they would
not obey his direction and command; he wished
himself deprived of all sensation, when he heard
her laugh, and saw her smile upon the officer; 
and, in the course of country-dancing, when he
was obliged to join hands with her, the touch
thrill'd thro' all his nerves, and kindled a flame
within him which he could not contain. In a
word, his endeavours to conceal the situation of
his thoughts, were so violent, that his constitution
could not endure the shock; the sweat ran
down his forehead in a stream, the colour vanished
from his cheeks, his knees began to totter,
and his eyesight to fail: so that he must have
fallen at his full length upon the floor, had not
he retired very abruptly into another room, where
he threw himself upon a couch, and fainted. 
In this condition he was found by his friend,
who seeing him withdraw with such symptoms of
disorder, followed him thither; and when he recovered
the use of his faculties, pressed him to
make use of a bed in that house, rather than expose
himself to the night air, by going home to
his own lodgings: but not being able to prevail
upon him to accept the offer, he wrapped him
up in a cloak, and conducting him to the inn
where he lodged, helped him to undress and go
to bed, where he was immediately seized with a
violent fit of the ague. Godfrey behaved with
great tenderness, and would have actually bore
him company all night, notwithstanding the circumstances
of his own situation, had not his
friend insisted upon his returning to the company,
and making his apology to his partner for his sudden
departure. 

This was a step absolutely necessary towards
maintaining the quiet of the assembly, which he
found in great consternation, occasioned by his
absence; for some of the ladies seeing the bridegroom
follow the stranger in his retreat, the
meaning of which they did not comprehend, began
to be afraid of a quarrel; and Emilia, upon
pretence of that supposition, was so much alarmed,
that she could not stand, and was fain to
have recourse to a smelling bottle. 
The bride, who understood the whole mystery,
was the only person that acted with deliberation
and composure; she imputed Emilia's
disorder to the right cause, which was no other
than concern for the condition of her lover, and
assured the ladies there was nothing extraordinary
in Mr. Pickle's going off, he being subject to
fainting fits, by which he was often overtaken
without any previous notice. The arrival of
Gauntlet confirmed the truth of this declaration; 
he made an apology to the company, in the name
of his friend, who, he told them, was suddenly
taken ill; and they returned to their diversion of
dancing, with this variation: Emilia was so disordered
and fatigued, that she begged to be excused
from continuing the exercise; and Peregrine's
partner being disengaged, was paired with
the young officer for whom she was originally
designed. 
Mean while, the bride withdrew into another
apartment, with her sister, and expostulated with
her upon her cruelty to Mr. Pickle, assuring her,
from Godfrey's information, that he had undergone
a severe fit on her account, which, in all
likelihood, would have a dangerous effect upon
his constitution. Tho' Emily was inflexible in 

her answers to the kind remonstrances of the
gentle Sophy, her heart was melting with the
impressions of pity and love; and finding herself
unable to perform the duty of her function, in
putting the bride to bed, she retired to her own
chamber, and, in secret, sympathized with the
distemper of her lover. 
In the morning, as early as decency would
permit him to leave the arms of his dear wife,
captain Gauntlet made a visit to Peregrine, who
had passed a very tedious and uneasy night, having
been subject to short intervals of delirium,
during which Pipes had found it very difficult to
keep him fast belayed. He owned indeed to
Godfrey, that his imagination had been haunted
by the ideas of Emilia and her officer, which tormented
him to an unspeakable degree of anguish
and distraction; and that he would rather suffer
death than a repetition of such excruciating reflections. 
He was, however, comforted by his
friend, who assured him, that his sister's inclinations
would, in time, prevail over all the endeavours
of resentment and pride, illustrating this
asseveration by an account of the manner in which
she was affected by the knowledge of his disorder,
and advising him to implore the mediation of Sophy,
in a letter which she should communicate
to Emilia. 
This was an opportunity which our hero
thought too favourable to be neglected; and
therefore calling for paper, he sat up in his bed,
and, in the first transports of his emotion, wrote
the following petition to Godfrey's amiable
wife. 


Dear madam,
The affliction of a contrite heart can never
appeal to your benevolence in vain; and
therefore I presume to approach you, in this season
of delight, with the language of sorrow, requesting
that you will espouse the cause of an unhappy
lover, who mourns with unutterable anguish
over his ruined hope, and interceed for my
pardon with that divine creature, whom, in the
intemperance and excess of passion, I have so mortally
offended. Good heaven! is my guilt inexpiable? 
Am I excluded from all hope of remission? 
Am I devoted to misery and despair? 
I have offered all the atonement which the most
perfect and sincere penitence could suggest, and
she rejects my humility and repentance. If her
resentment would pursue me to the grave, let her
signify her pleasure; and may I be branded with
the name of villain, and remembered with infamy
and detestation to all posterity, if I hesitate
one moment in sacrificing a life which is odious
to Emilia. Ah! madam, while I thus pour forth
the effusions of my grief and distraction, I look
around the apartment in which I lie, and every
well-known object that salutes my view, recals
to my remembrance that fond, that happy day,
on which the fair, the good, the tender hearted
Sophy became my advocate, though I was a
stranger to her acquaintance, and effected a
transporting reconciliation between me and
that same inchanting beauty, that is now so
implacably incensed. If she is not satisfied
with the pangs of remorse and disappointment,
the transports of madness I have undergone; let
her prescribe what farther penance she thinks I 

ought to endure; and when I decline her sentence,
let me be the object of her eternal disdain. 
I commit myself, dear madam! dear Sophy!
dear partner of my friend! to your kind interposition. 
I know you will manage my cause, as
a concern on which my happiness intirely depends; 
and I hope every thing from your compassion
and benefience, while I fear every thing
from her rigour and barbarity. Yes! I call it
barbarity, a savageness of delicacy altogether inconsistent
with the tenderness of human nature; 
and may the most abject contempt be my portion,
if I live under its infliction! But I begin
to rave. I conjure you by your own humanity
and sweetness of disposition, I conjure you by
your love for the man whom heaven hath decreed
your protector, to employ your influence
with that angel of wrath, in behalf of 
Your obliged and
Obedient servant,
P. Pickle. 
This epistle was immediately transmitted by
Godfrey to his wife, who perused it with marks
of the most humane sympathy; and carrying it
into her sister's chamber, “Here is something
(said she, presenting the paper) which I must recommend
to your serious attention.” Emilia,
who immediately guessed the meaning of this address,
absolutely refused to look upon it, or even
to hear it read, till her brother entering the apartment,
reprimanded her sharply for her obstinacy
and pride, accused her of folly and dissimulation,
and entered so warmly into the interests of his 

friend, that she thought him unkind in his remonstrances,
and bursting into a flood of tears,
reproached him with partiality and want of affection. 
Godfrey, who entertained the most
perfect love and veneration for his sister, asked
pardon for having given offence, and kissing the
drops from her fair eyes, begg'd she would, for
his sake, listen to the declaration of his friend. 
Thus sollicited, she could not refuse to hear
the letter, which when he had repeated, she lamented
her own fate, in being the occasion of so
much uneasiness, desired her brother to assure Mr.
Pickle, that she was not a voluntary enemy to
his peace; on the contrary, she wished him all
happiness, tho' she hoped he would not blame
her for consulting her own, in avoiding any future
explanation or connexion with a person
whose correspondence she found herself under a
necessity to renounce. 
In vain did the new-married couple exhaust
their eloquence in attempting to prove, that the
reparation which our hero had offered was adequate
to the injury she had sustained; that in reconciling
herself to a penitent lover, who subscribed
to her own terms of submission, her honour
would be acquitted by the most scrupulous
and severe judges of decorum; and that her inflexibility
would be justly ascribed to the pride
and insensibility of her heart. She turned a deaf
ear to all their arguments, exhortations and intreaties,
and threatened to leave the house immediately,
if they would not promise to drop that
subject of discourse. 
Godfrey, very much chagrined at the bad success
of his endeavours, returned to his friend, and
made as favourable a report of the affair, as the 

nature of his conversation with Emilia would
permit; but as he could not avoid mentioning
her resolution in the close, Peregrine was obliged
to drink again the bitter draught of disappointment,
which put his passions into such a state of
agitation, as produced a short extasy of despair,
in which he acted a thousand extravagancies. 
This paroxysm, however, soon subsided into a
settled reserve of gloomy resentment, which he
in secret indulged, detaching himself as soon as
possible from the company of the soldier, on pretence
of retiring to rest. 
While he lay ruminating upon the circumstances
of his present situation, his friend Pipes,
who knew the cause of his anxiety, and firmly
believed that Emilia loved his master in her heart,
howsoever she might attempt to disguise her sentiments; 
I say, Thomas was taken with a conceit
which he thought would set every thing to
rights, and therefore put it in execution, without
farther delay. Laying aside his hat, he ran directly
to the house of Sophy's father, and affecting
an air of surprize and consternation, to which
he had never before been subject, thundered at
the door with such an alarming knock, as in a
moment brought the whole family into the hall. 
When he was admitted, he began to gape, stare,
and pant at the same time, and made no reply,
when Godfrey asked what was the matter, till
Mrs. Gauntlet expressed her apprehensions about
his master; at whose name being mentioned, he
seemed to make an effort to speak, and in a bellowing
tone pronounced “Brought himself up,
split my top-sails!” So saying, he pointed to his
own neck, and rose upon his tiptoes, by way of
explaining the meaning of his words. 

Godfrey, without staying to ask another question,
rushed out, and flew towards the inn, with
the utmost horror and concern; while Sophy,
who did not rightly understand the language of
the messenger, addressing herself to him a second
time, said with great earnestness, “I hope no
accident has happened to Mr. Pickle!” “No
accident at all, (replied Tom) he has only hanged
himself for love.” These words had scarce proceeded
from his mouth, when Emilia, who stood
listening at the parlour-door, shrieked aloud,
and dropped down senseless upon the floor; while
her sister, who was almost equally shocked at the
intelligence, had recourse to the assistance of her
maid, by whom she was supported from falling. 
Pipes hearing Emily's voice, congratulated
himself upon the success of his stratagem, he
sprung to her assistance, and lifting her up into an
easy chair, stood by her, until he saw her recover
from her swoon, and heard her call upon
his master's name, with all the frenzy of despairing
love. Then he bent his course back to the
inn, overjoyed at the opportunity of telling Peregrine
what a confession he had extorted from
his mistress, and extremely vain of this proof of
his own sagacity. 
In the mean time, Godfrey arriving at the
house, in which he supposed this fatal catastrophe
had happened, ran up stairs to Peregrine's chamber,
without staying to make any inquiry below; 
and finding the door locked, burst it open with
one stroke of his foot. But, what was his amazement,
when, upon entrance, our hero starting
up from the bed, saluted him with a boisterous
exclamation of “Z&wblank;ds! who's there?” He
was struck dumb with astonishment, which also 

rivetted him to the place where he stood, scarce
crediting the testimony of his own senses, 'till
Peregrine, with an air of discontent which denoted
him displeased with his intrusion, dispelled
his apprehension by a second address, saying, “I
see you consider me as a friend, by your using me
without ceremony.” 
The soldier, thus convinced of the falsehood of
the information he had received, began to imagine,
that Pickle had projected the plan which
was executed by his servant; and looking upon it
as a piece of unjustifiable finesse, which might be
attended with very melancholy consequences to
his sister or wife, he answered in a supercilious
tone, that he must blame himself for the interruption
of his repose, which was intirely owing
to the sorry jest he had set on foot. 
Pickle, who was the child of passion, and
more than half mad with impatience before this
visit, hearing himself treated in such a cavalier
manner, advanced close up to Godfrey's breast,
and assuming a stern, or rather frantic countenance,
“Heark ye, Sir, (said he) you are mistaken
if you think I jest; I am in downright
earnest I assure you.” Gauntlet, who was not a
man to be brow beaten, seeing himself thus
bearded by a person of whose conduct he had, he
thought, reason to complain, put on his military
look of defiance, and erecting his chest, replied
with an exalted voice, “Mr. Pickle, whether
you was in jest or earnest, you must give me
leave to tell you, that the scheme was childish,
unseasonable, and unkind, not to give it an
harsher term.” “Death, Sir, (cried our adventurer)
you trifle with my disquiet: if there is
any meaning in your insinuation, explain yourself, 

and then I shall know what answer it will befit
me to give.” “I came with very different
sentiments, (resumed the soldier) but since you
urge me to expostulation, and behave with such
unprovoked loftiness of displeasure, I will, without
circumlocution, tax you with having committed
an outrage upon the peace of my family,
in sending your fellow to alarm us with such an
abrupt account of your having done violence upon
yourself.” Peregrine, confounded at this imputation,
stood silent, with a most savage aspect of
surprize, eager to know the circumstance to
which his accuser alluded, and incensed to find it
without the sphere of his comprehension. 
While these two irritated friends stood fronting
each other with mutual indignation in their eyes
and attitudes, they were joined by Pipes, who
without taking the least notice of the situation
in which he found them, told his master, that he
might up with the top-gallant-masts of his heart,
and out with his rejoicing pendants; for as to mistress
Emily, he had clapt her helm a-weather,
the vessel wore, and now she was upon the other
tack, standing right into the harbour of his good
will. 
Peregrine, who was not yet a connoisseur in
the terms of his lacquey, commanded him, upon
pain of his displeasure, to be more explicit in his
intelligence; and by dint of divers questions, obtained
a perfect knowledge of the scheme which
he had put in execution for his service. This information
perplexed him not a little; he would
have chastised his servant upon the spot, for his
temerity, had not he plainly perceived, that the
fellow's intention was to promote his ease and
satisfaction; and on the other hand, he knew not 

how to acquit himself of the suspicion which he
saw Godfrey entertain of his being the projector
of the plan, without condescending to an explanation,
which his present disposition could not brook. 
After some pause, however, turning to Pipes, with a
severe frown, “Rascal! (said he) this is the second
time I have suffered in the opinion of that lady
by your ignorance and presumption; if ever you
intermeddle in my affairs for the future, without
express order and direction, by all that's sacred! 
I will put you to death without mercy. Away,
and let my horse be saddled this instant.” 
Pipes having withdrawn, in order to perform
this piece of duty, our young gentleman, addressing
himself again to the soldier, and laying
his hand upon his breast, said with a solemnity of
regard, “Captain Gauntlet, upon my honour,
I am altogether innocent of that shallow device
which you impute to my invention; and I don't
think you do justice either to my intellects or honour,
in supposing me capable of such insolent
absurdity. As for your sister, I have once in my
life affronted her in the madness and impetuosity
of desire; but I have made such acknowledgements,
and offered such atonement, as few women
of her sphere would have refused; and before
God! I am determined to endure every torment
of disappointment and despair, rather than
prostrate myself again to the cruelty of her unjustifiable
pride.” So saying, he stalked suddenly
down stairs, and took horse immediately, his spirits
being supported by resentment, which prompted
him to vow within himself, that he would seek
consolation for the disdain of Emilia, in the possession
of the first willing wench he should meet
upon the road. 

While he set out for the garison with these sentiments,
Gauntlet, in a suspence between anger,
shame and concern, returned to the house of his
father-in-law, where he found his sister still violently
agitated from the news of Peregrine's death,
the mystery of which he forthwith unravelled,
recounting at the same time the particulars of the
conversation which had happened at the inn, and
describing the demeanour of Pickle with some
expressions of asperity, which were neither agreeable
to Emilia, nor approved by the gentle Sophy,
who tenderly chid him, for allowing Peregrine
to depart in terms of misunderstanding. 