


In which the Clouds that cover the catastrophe
begin to disperse. 
We must now leave Capt. Crowe
and his nephew Mr. Clarke,
arguing with great vehemence about
the fatal intelligence obtained from
the conjurer, and penetrate at once
the veil that concealed our hero. 
Know then, reader, that Sir Launcelot
Greaves, repairing to the place described
in the billet which he had 

received, was accosted by a person
muffled in a cloak, who began to
amuse him with a feigned story of
Aurelia; to which, while he listened
with great attention, he found himself
suddenly surrounded by armed
men, who seized and pinioned down
his arms, took away his sword, and
conveyed him by force into a hackney-coach
provided for the purpose. 
In vain he expostulated on this violence
with three persons who accompanied
him in the vehicle. He could
not extort one word by way of reply; 
and, from their gloomy aspects, he
began to be apprehensive of assassination. 
Had the carriage passed
through any unfrequented place, he
would have endeavoured to alarm
the inhabitants; but it was already
clear of the town, and his conductors
took care to avoid all villages and inhabited
houses. 
After having travelled about two
miles, the coach stopped at a large
iron-gate, which being opened, our
adventurer was led in silence thro' 

a spacious house into a tolerably decent
apartment, which he understood
was intended for his bed-chamber. 
In a few minutes after his arrival, he
was visited by a man of no very prepossessing
appearance, who endeavoured
to smoothe his countenance,
which was naturally stern, welcomed
our adventurer to his house; exhorted
him to be of good cheer, assuring
him he should want for nothing; 
and desired to know what he would
choose for supper. 
Sir Launcelot, in answer to this civil
address, begged he would explain
the nature of his confinement, and
the reasons for which his arms were
tied like those of the worst malefactor. 
The other postponed till tomorrow
the explanation he demanded; 
but, in the mean time, unbound
his fetters, and as he declined eating,
left him alone to his repose. He took
care, however, in retiring, to double-lock
the door of the room, whose
windows were grated on the outside
with iron. 

The knight, being thus abandoned
to his own meditations, began to
ruminate on the present adventure
with equal surprize and concern; but
the more he revolved circumstances,
the more was he perplexed in his
conjectures. According to the state
of the mind, a very subtle philosopher
is often puzzled by a very plain
proposition; and this was the case
of our adventurer—What made the
strongest impression upon his mind,
was a notion that he was apprehended
on suspicion of treasonable practices,
by a warrant from the secretary of
state, in consequence of some false
malicious information; and that his
prison was no other than the house of
a messenger, set apart for the accommodation
of suspected persons. In
this opinion, he comforted himself
by recollecting his own conscious innocence,
and reflecting that he should
be intitled to the privilege of habeas
corpus, as the act including that inestimable
jewel, was happily not suspended
at this time. 

Consoled by this self-assurance, he
quietly resigned himself to slumber; 
but, before he fell asleep, he was very
disagreeably undeceived in his conjecture. 
His ears were all at once saluted
with a noise from the next room,
conveyed in distinct bounces against
the wainscot; then an hoarse voice
exclaimed, “Bring up the artillery— 
let Brutandorf's brigade advance—detach
my black hussars to ravage the
country—let them be new-booted— 
take particular care of the spur-leathers
—make a desert of Lusatia— 
bombard the suburbs of Pera—go, tell
my brother Henry to pass the Elbe
at Meissen with forty battalions and
fifty squadrons—so ho, you major-general
Donder, why don't you finish
your second parallel?—send hither
the engineer Schittenbach—I'll lay
all the shoes in my shop, the breach
will be practicable in four and twenty
hours—don't tell me of your works— 
you and your works may be damn'd”— 
“Assuredly, (cried another voice
from a different quarter) he that 

thinks to be saved by works is in a
state of utter reprobation—I myself
was a prophane weaver, and trusted
to the rottenness of works—I kept my
journeymen and 'prentices at constant
work; and my heart was set upon
the riches of this world, which was
a wicked work—but now I have got
a glimpse of the new-light—I feel
the operations of grace—I am of the
new birth—I abhor good works—I
detest all working but the working
of the spirit—Avaunt, Satan—O!
how I thirst for communication with
our sister Jolly”— 
“The communication is already
open with the Marche, (said the first)
but as for thee, thou caitif, who hast
presumed to disparage my works, I'll
have thee rammed into a mortar with
a double charge of powder, and
thrown into the enemy's quarters.” 
This dialogue operated like a train
upon many other inhabitants of the
place: one swore he was within three
vibrations of finding the longitude,
when this noise confounded his calculation: 

a second, in broken English,
complained he vas distorped in
the moment of de proshection—a
third, in the character of his holiness,
denounced interdiction, excommunication,
and anathemas; and swore by
St. Peter's keys, they should howl ten
thousand years in purgatory, without
the benefit of a single mass. A
fourth began to hollow in all the vociferation
of a fox-hunter in the
chace; and in an instant the whole
house was in an uproar—The clamour,
however, was of a short duration. 
The different chambers being
opened successively, every individual
was effectually silenced by the
sound of one cabalistical word, which
was no other than waistcoat: a charm
which at once cowed the king of
P&wblank;, dispossessed the fanatic, dumb-founded
the mathematician, dismayed
the alchemist, deposed the pope, and
deprived the 'squire of all utterance. 
Our adventurer was no longer in
doubt concerning the place to which
he had been conveyed; and the more 

he reflected on his situation, the more
he was overwhelmed with the most
perplexing chagrin. He could not
conceive by whose means he had been
immured in a mad-house; but he
heartily repented of his knight-errantry,
as a frolic which might have very
serious consequences, with respect
to his future life and fortune. After
mature deliberation, he resolved to
demean himself with the utmost circumspection,
well knowing that every
violent transport would be interpreted
into an undeniable symptom of insanity. 
He was not without hope of
being able to move his jailor by a due
administration of that which is generally
more efficacious than all the
flowers of elocution; but when he
rose in the morning, he found his
pockets had been carefully examined,
and emptied of all his papers and
cash. 
The keeper entering, he enquired
about these particulars, and was given
to understand that they were all
safely deposited for his use, to be 

forthcoming at a proper season: but,
at present, as he should want for nothing,
he had no occasion for money. 
The knight acquiesced in this declaration,
and eat his breakfast in quiet. 
About eleven, he received a visit from
the physician, who contemplated his
looks with great solemnity; and having
examined his pulse, shook his
head, saying, “Well, Sir, how d'ye
do?—come, don't be dejected— 
every thing is for the best—you are in
very good hands, Sir, I assure you:
and I dare say will refuse nothing that
may be thought conducive to the recovery
of your health.”— 
“Doctor, (said our hero) if it is
not an improper question to ask, I
should be glad to know your opinion
of my disorder”—“O! Sir, as to that
—(replied the physician) your disorder
is a—kind of a—Sir, 'tis very
common in this country—a sort of
a”— “Do you think my distemper
is madness, doctor?” —“O Lord! 
Sir,—not absolute madness—no—not
madness—you have heard, no doubt, 

of what is called a weakness of the
nerves, Sir,—tho' that is a very inaccurate
expression; for this phrase,
denoting a morbid excess of sensation,
seems to imply that sensation itself is
owing to the loose cohesion of those
material particles which constitute the
nervous substance, inasmuch as the
quantity of every effect must be proportionable
to its cause; now you'll
please to take notice, Sir, if the case
were really what these words seem to
import, all bodies, whose particles do
not cohere with too great a degree of
proximity, would be nervous; that
is, endued with sensation—Sir, I shall
order some cooling things to keep you
in due temperature; and you'll do
very well—Sir, your humble servant.” 
So saying, he returned, and our
adventurer could not but think it was
very hard that one man should not
dare to ask the most ordinary question
without being reputed mad, while
another should talk nonsense by the
hour, and yet be esteemed as an oracle
—The master of the house finding 

Sir Launcelot so tame and tractable,
indulged him after dinner with
a walk in a little private garden, under
the eye of a servant who followed
him at a distance. Here he was
saluted by a brother prisoner, a man
seemingly turned of thirty, tall and
thin, with staring eyes, a hook-nose,
and a face covered with pimples. 
The usual compliments having
passed, the stranger, without further
ceremony, asked if he would oblige
him with a chew of tobacco, or could
spare him a mouthful of any sort of
cordial, declaring he had not tasted
brandy since he came to the house— 
The knight assured him it was not
in his power to comply with his request; 
and began to ask some questions
relating to the character of their
landlord, which the stranger represented
in very unfavourable colours. 
He described him as a ruffian, capable
of undertaking the darkest schemes
of villainy. He said his house was a
repository of the most flagrant iniquities:
that it contained fathers kidnapped 

by their children, wives confined
by their husbands, gentlemen of fortune
sequestered by their relations,
and innocent persons immured by the
malice of their adversaries. He
affirmed this was his own case; and
asked if our hero had never heard of
Dick Distich, the poet and satirist. 
“Ben Bullock and I (said he) were
confident against the world in arms— 
did you never see his ode to me beginning
with “Fair blooming youth.” 
We were sworn brothers, admired
and praised, and quoted each other,
Sir: we denounced war against all the
world, actors, authors, and critics; and
having drawn the sword, threw away
the scabbard—we pushed through
thick and thin, hacked and hewed
helter skelter, and became as formidable
to the writers of the age, as the
Bœotian band of Thebes. My friend
Bullock, indeed, was once rolled in
the kennel; but soon 
He vig'rous rose, and from th' effluvia strong
Imbib'd new life, and scour'd and stunk along.

Here is a satire, which I wrote in an
alehouse when I was drunk—I can
prove it by the evidence of the landlord
and his wife: I fancy you'll own
I have some right to say with my
friend Horace, 

Qui me commorit, meliùs non tangere clamo;
Flebit et insignis toto cantabitur urbe.—
The knight, having perused the
papers, declared his opinion that the
verses were tolerably good; but at
the same time observed that the author
had reviled as ignorant dunces
several persons who had writ with
reputation, and were generally allowed
to have genius: a circumstance
that would detract more from his
candour, than could be allowed to
his capacity. 
“Damn their genius! (cried the
satyrist) a pack of impertinent rascals! 
I tell you, Sir, Ben Bullock
and I had determined to crush all that
were not of our own party—besides, 

I said before, this piece was written
in drink.” “Was you drunk too
when it was printed and published?” 
“Yes, the printer shall make affidavit
that I was never otherwise than
drunk or maudlin, till my enemies,
on pretence that my brain was turned,
conveyed me to this infernal
mansion—” 
“They seem to have been your
best friends, (said the knight) and
have put the most tender interpretation
on your conduct; for, waving
the plea of insanity, your character
must stand as that of a man who hath
some small share of genius, without
an atom of integrity—Of all those
whom Pope lashed in his Dunciad,
there was not one who did not richly
deserve the imputation of dulness; and
every one of them had provoked the
satirist by a personal attack. In this
respect the English poet was much
more honest than his French pattern
Boileau, who stigmatized several men
of acknowledged genius; such as
Quinault, Perrault, and the celebrated 

Lulli; for which reason every
man of a liberal turn must, in spite of
all his poetical merit, despise him as
a rancorous knave. If this disingenuous
conduct cannot be forgiven in a
writer of his superior genius, who will
pardon it in you whose name is not
half emerged from obscurity?” 
“Heark ye, friend, (replied the
bard) keep your pardon and your
counsel for those who ask it; or, if
you will force them upon people,
take one piece of advice in return: If
you don't like your present situation,
apply for a committee without delay:
they'll find you too much of a fool to
have the least tincture of madness; 
and you'll be released without further
scruple: in that case I shall rejoice in
your deliverance; you will be freed
from confinement, and I shall be happily
deprived of your conversation.” 
So saying, he flew off at a tangent,
and our knight could not help smiling
at the peculiar virulence of his disposition. 
Sir Launcelot then endeavoured
to enter into conversation with 

his attendant, by asking how long
Mr. Distich had resided in the house; 
but he might as well have addressed
himself to a Turkish mute: the fellow
either pretended ignorance, or
refused an answer to every question
that was proposed. He would not
even disclose the name of his landlord,
nor inform him whereabouts the
house was situated. 
Finding himself agitated with impatience
and indignation, he returned
to his apartment, and the door being
locked upon him, began to review,
not without horror, the particulars of
his fate. “How little reason (said he
to himself) have we to boast of the
blessings enjoyed by the British subject,
if he holds them on such a precarious
tenure: if a man of rank and
property may be thus kidnapped even
in the midst of the capital; if he may
be seized by ruffians, insulted, robbed,
and conveyed to such a prison as this,
from which there seems to be no possibility
of escape; Should I be indulged
with pen, ink, and paper, and 

appeal to my relations, or to the magistrates
of my country, my letters
would be intercepted by those who
superintend my confinement. Should
I try to alarm the neighbourhood, my
cries would be neglected as those of
some unhappy lunatic under necessary
correction. Should I employ the force
which heaven has lent me, I might
imbrue my hands in blood, and after
all find it impossible to escape through
a number of successive doors, locks,
bolts, and centinels. Should I endeavour
to tamper with the servant,
he might discover my design, and
then I should be abridged of the little
comfort I enjoy. People may inveigh
against the Bastile in France, and the
Inquisition in Portugal; but I would
ask, if either of these be in reality so
dangerous or dreadful as a private
mad-house in England, under the direction
of a ruffian. The Bastile is
a state prison, the Inquisition is a spiritual
tribunal; but both are under
the direction of government. It seldom, 

if ever, happens that a man intirely
innocent is confined in either; 
or, if he should, he lays his account
with a legal trial before established
judges. But in England, the most
innocent person upon earth is liable to
be immured for life under the pretext
of lunacy, sequestered from his wife,
children, and friends, robbed of his
fortune, deprived even of necessaries,
and subjected to the most brutal treatment
from a low-bred barbarian, who
raises an ample fortune on the misery
of his fellow-creatures, and may, during
his whole life, practise this horrid
oppression, without question or controul.” 
This uncomfortable reverie was interrupted
by a very unexpected sound
that seemed to issue from the other
side of a thick party-wall. It was a
strain of vocal music, more plaintive
than the widow'd turtle's moan, more
sweet and ravishing than Philomel's
love-warbled song. Through his ear
it instantly pierced into his heart; for
at once he recognized it to be the voice 

of his adored Aurelia. Heavens!
what was the agitation of his soul,
when he made this discovery! how
did every nerve quiver! how did his
heart throb with the most violent
emotion! He ran round the room in
distraction, foaming like a lion in the
toil—then he placed his ear close to
the partition, and listened as if his
whole soul was exerted in his sense of
hearing. When the sound ceased to
vibrate on his ear, he threw himself
on the bed; he groaned with anguish,
he exclaimed in broken accents; and
in all probability his heart would have
burst, had not the violence of his sorrow
found vent in a flood of tears. 
These first transports were succeeded
by a fit of impatience, which had
well-nigh deprived him of his senses
in good earnest. His surprize at finding
his lost Aurelia in such a place,
the seeming impossibility of relieving
her, and his unspeakable eagerness to
contrive some scheme for profiting by
the interesting discovery he had made,
concurred in brewing up a second extasy, 

during which he acted a thousand
extravagancies, which it was well
for him the attendants did not observe. 
Perhaps it was well for the servant that
he did not enter while the paroxysm
prevailed: had this been the case, he
might have met with the fate of Lychas,
whom Hercules in his frenzy
destroyed. 
Before the cloth was laid for supper,
he was calm enough to conceal
the disorder of his mind: but he
complained of the head-ach, and desired
he might be next day visited by
the physician, to whom he resolved to
explain himself in such a manner, as
should make an impression upon him,
provided he was not altogether destitute
of conscience and humanity. 