


An adventure happens to Pipes, in consequence of
which he is dismissed from Peregrine's service. 
The whole company set out for Ghent in the Diligence. 
Our hero is captivated by a lady in
that carriage; interests her spiritual director in
his behalf. 
The doctor being fairly engaged on the subject
of the ancients, would have proceeded
the Lord knows how far, without hesitation, had
not he been interrupted by the arrival of Mr.
Jolter, who in great confusion told them, that
Pipes having affronted a soldier, was then surrounded
in the street, and would certainly be put
to death, if some person of authority did not immediately
interpose in his behalf. 
Peregrine no sooner learn'd the danger of his
trusty squire, than snatching up his sword, he ran
down stairs, and was followed by the Chevalier,
intreating him to leave the affair to his management. 
Within ten yards of the door they found
Tom with his back to a wall, defending himself
manfully with a mopstick against the assault of
three or four soldiers, who at sight of the Maltese
cross desisted from the attack, and were taken
into custody by order of the knight. One of
the aggressors being an Irishman, begged to be
heard with great importunity, before he should
be sent to the guard; and by the mediation of
Pickle, was accordingly brought into the Hotel,
with his companions, all three bearing upon their
heads and faces evident marks of their adversary's
prowess and dexterity. The spokesman 

being confronted with Pipes, informed the company,
that having by accident met with Mr. Pipes,
whom he considered as his countryman, though
fortune had disposed of them in different services,
he invited him to drink a glass of wine; and accordingly
carried him to a Cabaret, where he introduced
him to his comrades; but in the course
of the conversation, which turned upon the
power and greatness of the kings of France and
England, Mr. Pipes had been pleased to treat
his Most Christian Majesty with great disrespect; 
and when he (the entertainer) expostulated with
him in a friendly manner about his impolite behaviour,
observing, that he being in the French
service, would be under the necessity of resenting
his abuse, if he did not put a stop to it before the
other gentlemen of the cloth should comprehend
his meaning, he had set them all three at defiance,
dishonoured him in particular with the
opprobrious epithet of rebel to his native king and
country, and even drank (in broken French) to
the perdition of Lewis and all his adherents!
that compelled by this outragious conduct, he,
as the person who had recommended him to their
society, had, in vindication of his own character,
demanded satisfaction of the delinquent, who on
pretence of fetching a sword, had gone to his
lodging, from whence he all of a sudden sallied
upon them with the mopstick, which he employed
in the annoyance of them all without distinction,
so that they were obliged to draw in
their own defence. 
Pipes being questioned by his master, with regard
to the truth of this account, owned that
every circumstance was justly represented; saying,
he did not value their cheese-toasters a pinch 

of oakum; and that if the gentlemen had not
shot in betwixt them, he would have trimmed
them to such a tune, that they should not have
had a whole yard to square. Peregrine reprimanded
him sharply for his unmannerly behaviour,
and insisted upon his asking pardon of those
he had injured, upon the spot. But no consideration
was efficacious enough to produce such concession; 
to this command he was both deaf and
dumb, and the repeated threats of his master had
no more effect than if they had been addressed
to a marble statue. At length, our hero incensed
at his obstinacy, started up, and would have
chastised him with manual operation, had not he
been prevented by the Chevalier, who found
means to moderate his indignation so far, that he
contented himself with dismissing the offender
from his service; and after having obtained the
discharge of the prisoners, gave them a Louis to
drink, by way of recompence for the disgrace and
damage they had sustained. 
The Knight perceiving our young gentleman
very much ruffled at this accident, and reflecting
upon the extraordinary deportment and appearance
of his valet, whose hair had by this time
adopted a grizzled hue, imagined he was some
favourite domestic, who had grown grey in the
service of his master's family, and that, of consequence,
he was uneasy at the sacrifice he had
made. Swayed by this conjecture, he earnestly
sollicited in his behalf; but all he could obtain,
was a promise of re-admitting him into favour on
the terms already proposed, or at least on condition
that he should make his acknowledgment to
the Chevalier, for his want of reverence and respect
for the French monarch. 

Upon this condescension, the culprit was called
up stairs, and made acquainted with the mitigation
of his fate; upon which he said, he would
down on his marrow-bones to his own master,
but would be damn'd before he would ask pardon
of e'er a Frenchman in Christendom. Pickle,
exasperated at this blunt declaration, ordered him
out of his presence, and charged him never to appear
before his face again; while the officer in
vain employed all his influence and address to appease
his resentment, and about midnight took
his leave, with marks of mortification at his want
of success. 
Next day the company agreed to travel through
Flanders in the Diligence, by the advice of Peregrine,
who was not without hope of meeting
with some adventure or amusement in that carriage; 
and Jolter took care to secure places for
them all, it being resolved that the valet de
chamber and the doctor's man should attend the
vehicle on horseback; and as for the forlorn
Pipes, he was left to reap the fruits of his own
stubborn disposition, notwithstanding the united
efforts of the whole triumvirate, who endeavoured
to procure his pardon. 
Every previous measure being thus taken, they
set out from Lisle about six in the morning, and
found themselves in the company of a female adventurer,
a very handsome young lady, a Capuchin,
and a Rotterdam Jew. Our young gentleman
being the first of this society that entered, surveyed
the strangers with an attentive eye, and
seated himself immediately behind the beautiful
unknown, who at once attracted his attention. 
Pallet seeing another lady uninengaged, in imitation
of his friend, took possession of her neighbourhood; 

the physician paired with the priest,
and Jolter sat down by the Jew. 
The machine had not proceeded many furlongs,
when Pickle accosting the fair incognita,
congratulated himself upon his happiness, in being
the fellow-traveller of so charming a lady. 
She, without the least reserve or affectation,
thanked him for his compliment, and replied with
a sprightly air, that now they were embarked in
one common bottom, they must club their endeavours
to make one another as happy as the
nature of their situation would permit them to
be. Encouraged by this frank intimation, and
captivated by her fine black eyes and easy behaviour,
he attached himself to her from that moment; 
and in a little time the conversation became
so particular, that the Capuchin thought
proper to interfere in the discourse, in such a
manner as gave the youth to understand, that
he was there on purpose to superintend her conduct. 
He was doubly rejoiced at this discovery,
in consequence of which he hoped to profit in his
addresses, not only by the young lady's restraint,
that never fails to operate in behalf of the lover,
but also by the corruptibility of her guardian,
whom he did not doubt of rendering propitious
to his cause. Flushed with these expectations,
he behaved with uncommon complacency to the
father, who was charmed with the affability of
his carriage, and on the faith of his generosity
abated of his vigilance so much, that our hero
carried on his suit without further molestation; 
while the painter, in signs and loud bursts of
laughter, conversed with his Dulcinea, who was
perfectly well versed in these simple expressions 

of satisfaction, and had already found means to
make a dangerous invasion upon his heart. 
Nor were the governor and physician unemployed,
while their friends interested themselves
in this agreeable manner. Jolter no sooner perceived
the Hollander was a Jew, than he entered
into an investigation of the Hebrew tongue, in
which he was a connoisseur; and the doctor at
the same time attacked the Mendicant on the ridiculous
maxims of his order, together with the
impositions of priest-craft in general, which (he
observed) prevail so much among those who profess
the Roman Catholic religion. 
Thus coupled, each committee enjoyed their
own conversation apart, without any danger of
encroachment; and all were so intent upon their
several topics, that they scarce allowed themselves
a small interval in viewing the desolation of
Menin, as they passed through that ruined frontier. 
About twelve o'clock they arrived at Courtray,
where the horses are always, changed, and
the company halt an hour for refreshment. Here
Peregrine handed his charmer into an apartment,
where she was joined by the other lady; and on
pretence of seeing some of the churches in town,
put himself under the direction of the Capuchin,
from whom he learn'd, that the young lady was
wife to a French gentleman, to whom she had
been married about a year, and that she was now
on her journey to visit her mother, who lived in
Brussels, and who at that time laboured under a
lingering distemper, which, in all probability,
would soon put a period to her life. He then
launched out in praise of her daughter's virtue
and conjugal affection; and lastly told him, that
he was her father confessor, and pitched upon to 

be her conductor through Flanders, by her husband,
who, as well as his wife, placed the utmost
confidence in his prudence and integrity. 
Pickle easily comprehended the meaning of
this insinuation, and took the hint accordingly. 
He tickled the priest's vanity with extraordinary
encomiums upon the disinterested principles of his
order, which were detached from all worldly pursuits,
and altogether devoted to the eternal salvation
of mankind. He applauded their patience,
humility and learning, and lavished a world of
praise upon their talent in preaching, which (he
said) had more than once operated so powerfully
upon him, that had he not been restrained by
certain considerations which he could not possibly
wave, he should have embraced their tenets, and
begg'd admission into their fraternity; but, as the
circumstances of his fate would not permit him
to take such a salutary measure for the present,
he intreated the good father to accept a small token
of his love and respect, for the benefit of
that convent to which he belonged. So saying,
he pulled out a purse of ten guineas, which the
Capuchin observing, turned his head another way,
and lifting up his arm, displayed a pocket almost
as high as his collar-bone, in which he deposited
the money. 
This proof of affection for the order produced
a sudden and surprising effect upon the friar. In
the transport of his zeal he wrung this semi-convert's
hand, showered a thousand benedictions
upon his head, and exhorted him, with the tears
flowing from his eyes, to perfect the great work
which the finger of God had begun in his heart; 
and as an instance of his concern for the welfare
of his precious soul, the holy brother promised to 

recommend him strenuously to the pious admonitions
of the young woman under his care, who
was a perfect saint upon earth, and endued with
the peculiar gift of mollifying the hearts of obdurate
sinners. “O father! (cried the hypocritical
projector, who by this time perceived that
his money was not thrown away) if I could be
favoured but for one half hour with the private
instructions of that inspired devotee, my mind
presages, that I should be a stray'd sheep brought
back into the fold, and that I should find easy entrance
at the gates of heaven! There is something
supernatural in her aspect; I gaze upon her
with the most pious fervor, and my whole soul
is agitated with tumults of hope and despair!” 
Having pronounced this rhapsody with transport
half natural and half affected, the priest assured
him, that these were operations of the spirit,
which must not be repressed; and comforted him
with the hope of enjoying the blessed interview
which he desired, protesting, that as far as his
influence extended, his wish should be that very
evening indulged. The gracious pupil thanked
him for his benevolent concern, which he swore
should not be squandered upon an ungrateful object; 
and the rest of the company interrupting
the conversation, they returned in a body to the
inn, where they dined all together; and the ladies
were persuaded to be our hero's guests. 
As the subjects on which they had been engaged
before dinner were not exhausted, each
brace resumed their former theme, when they
were replaced in the Diligence. The painter's
mistress finished her conquest, by exerting her
skill in the art of ogling, accompanied by frequent
bewitching sighs, and some tender French 

songs that she sung with such pathetic expression,
as quite melted the resolution of Pallet, and
utterly subdued his affection: and he, to convince
her of the importance of her victory, gave a specimen
of his own talents, by entertaining her
with that celebrated English ditty, the burthen
of which begins with, The pigs they lie with their
arses bare. 