


MY DEAREST LETTY,
I AM in such a fright, lest this should not come
safe to hand by the conveyance of Jarvis the carrier,
that I beg you will write to me, on the receipt of
it, directing to me, under cover, to Mrs. Winifred
Jerkins, my aunt's maid, who is a good girl, and
has been so kind to me in my affliction, that I have
made her my confidant; as for Jarvis, he was very
shy of taking charge of my letter and the little
parcel, because his sister Sally had like to have lost
her place on my account: indeed I cannot blame
the man for his caution; but I have made it worth
his while. —My dear companion and bed-fellow, it
is a grievous addition to my other misfortunes, that
I am deprived of your agreeable company and conversation,
at a time when I need so much the comfort
of your good humour and good sense; but, I
hope, the friendship we contracted at the boarding-school,
will last for life—I doubt not but on
my side it will daily increase and improve, as I gain 

experience, and learn to know the value of a true
friend. —O, my dear Letty! what shall I say about
poor Mr. Wilson? I have promised to break off all
correspondence, and, if possible, to forget him:
but, alas! I begin to perceive that will not be in
my power. As it is by no means proper that the
picture should remain in my hands, lest it should
be the occasion of more mischief, I have sent it to
you by this opportunity, begging you will either
keep it safe till better times, or return it to Mr.
Wilson himself, who, I suppose, will make it his
business to see you at the usual place. If he should
be low-spirited at my sending back his picture, you
may tell him I have no occasion for a picture, while
the original continues engraved on my—But
no; I would not have you tell him that neither; 
because there must be an end of our correspondence
—I wish he may forget me, for the sake of his own
peace; and yet if he should, he must be a barbarous
—But 'tis impossible—poor Wilson cannot
be false and inconstant: I beseech him not to write
to me, nor attempt to see me for some time; for,
considering the resentment and passionate temper of
my brother Jery, such an attempt might be attended
with consequences which would make us all miserable
for life—let us trust to time and the chapter
of accidents; or rather to that Providence which
will not fail, sooner or later, to reward those that
walk in the paths of honour and virtue. —I would
offer my love to the young ladies: but it is not fit
that any of them should know you have received
this letter. —If we go to Bath, I shall send you my
simple remarks upon that famous centre of polite
amusement, and every other place we may chance
to visit; and I flatter myself that my dear Miss
Willis will be punctual in answering the letters of
her affectionate 
Lydia Melford. 
Clifton, April 6. 