


Mackshane's malice—I am taken up and imprisoned
for a spy—Morgan meets with
the same fate—Thomson is tampered with
to turn evidence against us—disdains
the proposal, and is maltreated for his integrity
—Morgan is released to assist the
surgeon during an engagement with some
French ships of war—I remain fettered
on the poop, exposed to the enemy's shot,
and grow delirious with fear—am comforted
after the battle by Morgan, who
speaks freely of the captain; is over-heard
by the centinel, who informs against him,
and again imprisoned—Thomson grows desperate,
and notwithstanding the remonstrances
of Morgan and me, goes over-board
in the night. 
In the mean time, the storm subsided into a
brisk gale, that carried us into the warm latitudes,
where the weather became intolerable and
the crew very sickly. —The doctor left nothing 

unattempted towards the completion of his vengeance
against the Welchman and me. He
went among the sick under pretence of enquiring
into their grievances, with a view of picking up
complaints to our prejudice; but finding himself
frustrated in that expectation, by the good-will
we had procured from the patients by our diligence
and humanity, he took the resolution of
listening to our conversation, by hiding himself
behind the canvas that surrounded our birth; 
here too he was detected by the boy of our mess,
who acquainted us with this piece of behaviour,
and one night, while we were picking a large
bone of salt-beef, Morgan discerned something
stir against our hangings, which immediately interpreting
to be the doctor, he tipt me the wink,
and pointed to the place, where I could evidently
perceive some body standing; upon which, I
snatched up the bone, and levelled it with all my
force at him, saying, “Whoever you are, take
that for your curiosity.” —It had the desired
effect, for we heard the listener tumble down,
and afterwards crawl to his own cabbin. —I applauded
myself much for this feat, which turned
out one of the most unlucky exploits of my life,
Mackshane from that night marking me out for
destruction. —About a week thereafter, as I was
going my rounds among the sick, I was taken prisoner,
and carried to the poop by the master at
arms, where I was loaded with irons, and stapled
to the deck, on pretence that I was a spy on
board, and had conspired against the captain's life. 
—How ridiculous soever this imputation was, I
did not fail to suffer by it all the rigour that
could be shewn to the worst of criminals, being
exposed in this miserable condition to the scorching 

heat of the sun by day, and the unwholesome
damps by night, during the space of twelve days,
in which time I was neither brought to trial, nor
examined touching the probability of my charge. 
—I had no sooner recovered the use of my reflection,
which had been quite overthrown by this
accident, than I sent for Thomson, who, after
condoling with me on the occasion, hinted to me,
that I owed this misfortune to the hatred of the
doctor, who had given in an information against me
to the captain, in consequence of which I was
arrested, and all my papers seized. —While I was
cursing my capricious fate, I saw Morgan ascend
the poop, guarded by two corporals, who made
him sit down by me, that he might be pinioned
in the same machine. —Notwithstanding my situation,
I could scarce refrain from laughing at
the countenance of my fellow prisoner, who,
without speaking one word, allowed his feet to
be inclosed in the rings provided for that purpose; 
but when they pretended to fasten him on his
back, he grew outragious, and drawing a large
cuteau from his side-pocket, threatened to rip up
the belly of the first man who should approach
him, in order to treat him in such an unworthy
manner. —They were preparing to use him
very roughly, when the lieutenant on the quarter-deck,
called up to them to let him remain as he
was. —He then crept towards me, and taking me
by the hand, bid me “put my trust in Got.” 
—And looking at Thomson, who sat by us
trembling, with a pale visage, told him, there
were two more rings for his feet, and he should
be glad to find him in such good company. — 
But it was not the intention of our adversary to
include the second mate in our fate: Him he excepted 

to be his drudge in attending the sick,
and if possible, his evidence against us: With
this view he founded him afar off, but finding
his integrity incorruptible, he harrassed him so
much out of spite, that in a short time this mild
creature grew weary of his life. 
While I and my fellow-prisoner comforted
each other in our tribulation, the admiral discovered
four sail of ships to leeward, and made
signal for our ship and four more to chace: Hereupon,
every thing was cleared for an engagement,
and Mackshane foreseeing he would have occasion
for more assistants than one, obtained Morgan's
liberty; while I was left in this deplorable
posture to the chance of battle. —It was almost
dark when we came up with the sternmost chace,
which we hailed, and enquired who they were; 
they gave us to understand they were French
men of war, upon which captain Oakhum commanded
them to send their boat on board of him; 
but they refused, telling him, if he had any
business with them, to come on board of their
ship: He then threatned to pour in a broad-side
upon them, which they promised to return. — 
Both sides were as good as their word, and the
engagement began with great fury. —The reader
may guess how I passed my time, lying in this
helpless situation, amidst the terrors of a sea-fight; 
expecting every moment to be cut asunder or
dashed in pieces by the enemy's shot! I endeavoured
to compose myself as much as possible,
by reflecting that I was not a whit more exposed
than those who were stationed about me; but
when I beheld them employed without intermission,
in annoying the foe, and encouraged by
the society and behaviour of one another, I 

could easily perceive a wide difference between
their condition and mine: However, I concealed
my agitation as well as I could, till the head of
the officer of Marines, who stood near me, being
shot off, bounced from the deck athwart my
face, leaving me well-night blinded with brains. 
—I could contain myself no longer, but began
to bellow with all the strength of my lungs; 
when a drummer coming towards me, asked if
I was wounded; and before I could answer, received
a great shot in his belly which tore out his
intrails, and he fell flat on my breast. —This accident
entirely bereft me of all discretion: I redoubled
my cries, which were drowned in the
noise of the battle; and finding myself disregarded,
lost all patience and became frantick; vented
my rage in oaths and execrations, till my spirits
being quite exhausted, I remained quiet and insensible
of the load that oppressed me. —The engagement
lasted till broad day, when captain
Oakhum, finding he was like to gain neither
honour nor advantage by the affair, pretended to
be undeceived by seeing their colours; and hailing
the ship with whom he had fought all night,
protested he believed them Spaniards, and the
guns being silenced on each side, ordered the
barge to be hoisted out, and went on board of
the French commodore. —Our loss amounted to
ten killed and eighteen wounded, most part of
whom afterwards died. —My fellow-mates had no
sooner dispatched their business in the cockpit,
than full of friendly concern, they came to visit
me. —Morgan ascending first, and seeing my
face almost covered with brains and blood, concluded
I was no longer a man for this world; and
calling to Thomson with great emotion, bid him 

come up and take his last farewel of his comrade
and countryman, who was posting to a petter
place, where there were no Mackshanes nor Oakhums
to asperse and torment him. —“No (said
he, taking me by the hand) you are going to
a country where there is more respect shewn
to unfortunate shentlemen, and where you will
have the satisfaction of peholding your adversaries
toffing upon pillows of purning primstone.” 
—Thomson alarmed at this apostrophe,
made haste to the place where I lay, and sitting
down by me, with tears in his eyes, enquired
into the nature of my calamity. —By this time
I had recollected myself so far as to be able to
converse rationally with my friends, whom, to
their great satisfaction, I immediately undeceived
with regard to their apprehension of my being
mortally wounded. —After I had got myself disengaged
from the carnage in which I wallowed,
and partaken of a refreshment which my friends
brought along with them, we entered into discourse
upon the hardships we sustained, and spoke
very freely of the authors of our misery; which
being over-heard by the centinel who guarded
me, he was no sooner relieved, than he reported
to the captain every syllable of our conversation,
according to the orders he had received: The effects
of this soon appeared in the arrival of the
master at arms, who replaced Morgan in his former
station; and gave the second mate a caution to
keep a strict guard over his tongue, if he did not
chuse to accompany us in our confinement. — 
Thomson foreseeing that the whole slavery of attending
and dressing the sick and wounded, must
now fall upon his shoulders, as well as the ill
usage of Mackshane, grew desperate at the prospect, 

and though I never heard him swear before,
imprecated dreadful curses on the heads
of his oppressors, declaring, that he would rather
quit life altogether, than be much longer under
the power of such barbarians. —I was not a little
startled at his vivacity, and endeavoured to alleviate
his complaints, by representing the subject
of my own, with as much aggravation as it
would bear, by which comparison he might
see the balance of misfortune lay on my side,
and take an example from me of fortitude and
submission, till such time as we could procure
redress, which (I hoped) was not far off, considering,
that we should probably be in a harbour
in less than three days, where we should
have an opportunity of preferring our complaints
to the admiral. —The Welchman joined in my remonstrances,
and was at great pains to demonstrate,
that it was every man's duty as well as
interest to resign himself to the divine will, and
look upon himself as a centinel upon duty, who
is by no means at liberty to leave his post before
he is relieved. —Thomson listened attentively to
what we said, and at last, shedding a flood of
tears, shook his head, and left us, without making
any reply. —About eleven at night, he came
to see us again, with a settled gloom on his countenance,
and gave us to understand, that he had
undergone excessive toil since he saw us, and in
recompence, had been grosly abused by the doctor,
who taxed him with being confederate with
us, in a design of taking away his life and that
of the captain. After some time spent in mutual
exhortation, he got up, and squeezing me by the
hand with an uncommon fervour, cried, “God
bless you both,” and left us to wonder at his 

singular manner of parting with us, which did
not fail to make an impression on us both. 
Next morning, when the hour of visitation
came round, this unhappy young man was a missing,
and after strick search, supposed to have
gone over-board in the night; which was certainly
the case. 