


Preparations are made for the commodore's wedding,
which is delayed by an accident that hurried
him the Lord knows whither. 
The fame of this extraordinary conjunction
spread all over the county; and on the
day appointed for their spousals, the church was
surrounded by an inconceivable multitude. The
commodore, to give a specimen of his gallantry,
by the advice of his friend Hatchway, resolved
to appear on horseback on the grand occasion, at
the head of all his male attendants, whom he had
rigged with the white shirts and black caps formerly
belonging to his barge's crew; and he
bought a couple of hunters for the accommodation
of himself and his lieutenant. With this
equipage then he set out from the garrison for the
church, after having dispatched a messenger to
apprize the bride that he and his company were
mounted; whereupon she got immediately into
the coach, accompanied by her brother and his
wife, and drove directly to the place of assignation,
where several pews were demolished, and
divers persons almost pressed to death, by the eagerness
of the crowd that broke in to see the ceremony
performed. Thus arrived at the altar,
and the priest in attendance, they waited a whole 

half hour for the commodore, at whose slowness
they began to be under some apprehension, and
accordingly dismissed a servant to quicken his
pace. The valet having rode something more
than a mile, espied the whole troop disposed in a
long field, crossing the road obliquely, and headed
by the bridegroom and his friend Hatchway, who
finding himself hindered by a hedge from proceeding
farther in the same direction, fired a
pistol, and stood over to the other side, making
an obtuse angle with the line of his former course; 
and the rest of the squadron followed his example,
keeping always in the rear of each other,
like a flight of wild geese. 
Surprized at this strange method of journeying,
the messenger came up, and told the commodore
that his lady and her company expected him in
the church, where they had tarried a considerable
time, and were beginning to be very uneasy at his
delay; and therefore desired he would proceed
with more expedition. To this message Mr.
Trunnion replied, “Hark ye, brother, don't
you see we make all possible speed? go back and
tell those who sent you, that the wind has shifted
since we weighed anchor, and that we are obliged
to make very short trips in tacking, by reason of
the narrowness of the channel; and that as we
lie within six points of the wind, they must
make some allowance for variation and leeway.” 
“Lord, Sir! said the valet, what occasion have
you to go zig zag in that manner? Do but clap
spurs to your horses, and ride straight forward,
and I'll engage you shall be at the church porch
in less than a quarter of an hour.” “What!
right in the wind's eye? answered the commander,
ahey! brother, where did you learn your navigation? 

Hawser Trunnion is not to be taught at
this time of day how to lie his course, or keep
his own reckoning. And as for you, brother,
you know best the trim of your own frigate.” 
The courier finding he had to do with people
who would not be easily persuaded out of their
own opinions, returned to the temple, and made a
report of what he had seen and heard, to the no
small consolation of the bride, who had begun to
discover some signs of disquiet. Composed, however,
by this piece of intelligence, she exerted her
patience for the space of another half hour, during
which period seeing no bridegroom arrive,
she was exceedingly alarmed; so that all the spectators
could easily perceive her perturbation, which
manifested itself in frequent palpitations, heart-heavings,
and alterations of countenance, in spite
of the assistance of a smelling-bottle which she
incessantly applied to her nostrils. 
Various were the conjectures of the company
on this occasion: some imagined he had mistaken
the place of rendezvous, as he had never been at
church since he first settled in that parish; others
believed he had met with some accident, in consequence
of which his attendants had carried him
back to his own house; and a third set, in which
the bride herself was thought to be comprehended,
could not help suspecting that the commodore had
changed his mind. But all these suppositions,
ingenious as they were, happened to be wide of
the true cause that detained him, which was no
other than this: the commodore and his crew
had by dint of turning, almost weathered the
parson's house that stood to windward of the
church, when the notes of a pack of hounds unluckily
reached the ears of the two hunters which 

Trunnion and the lieutenant bestrode. These fleet
animals no sooner heard the enlivening sound,
than eager for the chace they sprung away all of a
sudden, and straining every nerve to partake of
the sport, flew across the fields with incredible
speed, overleaping hedges and ditches, and every
thing in their way, without the least regard to
their unfortunate riders. The lieutenant, whose
steed had got the heels of the other, finding it
would be great folly and presumption in him to
pretend to keep the saddle with his wooden leg,
very wisely took the opportunity of throwing
himself off in his passage through a field of rich
clover, among which he lay at his ease; and
seeing his captain advancing at full gallop, hailed
him with the salutation of “What chear? ho!” 
The commodore, who was in infinite distress, eying
him askance, as he passed, replied with a faultering
voice, “O damn ye! you are safe at an
anchor; I wish to God I were as fast moored.” 
Nevertheless, conscious of his disabled heel, he
would not venture to try the same experiment
which had succeeded so well with Hatchway, but
resolved to stick as close as possible to his horse's
back, until providence should interpose in his behalf. 
With this view he dropped his whip, and
with his right hand laid fast hold on the pummel,
contracting every muscle in his body to secure
himself in the seat, and grinning most formidably,
in consequence of this exertion. In this attitude
he was hurried on a considerable way, when all
of a sudden his view was comforted by a five bar
gate that appeared before him, as he never doubted
that there the career of his hunter must necessarily
end. But, alas! he reckoned without his
host; far from halting at this obstruction, the 

horse sprung over it with amazing agility, to the
utter confusion and disorder of his owner, who
lost his hat and periwig in the leap, and now began
to think in good earnest, that he was actually
mounted on the back of the devil. He recommended
himself to God, his reflection forsook
him, his eye-sight and all his other senses failed,
he quitted the reins, and fastening by instinct on
the mane, was in this condition conveyed into the
midst of the sportsmen, who were astonished at
the sight of such an apparition. Neither was their
surprize to be wondered at, if we reflect on the
figure that presented itself to their view. The
commodore's person was at all times an object of
admiration; much more so on this occasion,
when every singularity was aggravated by the circumstances
of his dress and disaster. 
He had put on in honour of his nuptials his best
coat of blue broad cloth, cut by a taylor of Ramsgate,
and trimmed with five dozen of brass buttons,
large and small; his breeches were of the
same piece, fastened at the knees with large
bunches of tape; his waistcoat was of red pluth
lapelled with green velvet, and garnished with
vellum holes; his boots bore an intimate resemblance
both in colour and shape to a pair of leathern
buckets; his shoulder was graced with a
broad buff belt, from whence depended a huge
hanger with a hilt like that of a backsword; and
on each side of his pummel appeared a rusty pistol
rammed in a case covered with bear-skin. 
The loss of his tye-periwig and laced hat, which
were curiosities of the kind, did not at all contribute
to the improvement of the picture, but on
the contrary, by exhibiting his bald pate, and the
natural extension of his lanthorn jaws, added to 

the peculiarity and extravagance of the whole. 
Such a spectacle could not have failed of diverting
the whole company from the chace, had
his horse thought proper to pursue a different
route, but the beast was too keen a sporter to
choose any other way than that which the stag
followed; and therefore, without stopping to gratify
the curiosity of the spectators, he in a few minutes
outstripped every hunter in the field; and
there being a deep hollow way betwixt him and
the hounds, rather than ride round about the
length of a furlong to a path that crossed the lane,
he transported himself at one jump, to the unspeakable
astonishment and terror of a waggoner
who chanced to be underneath, and saw this phenomenon
fly over his carriage. This was not the
only adventure he atchieved. The stag having
taken a deep river that lay in his way, every man
directed his course to a bridge in the neighbourhood; 
but our bridegroom's courser despising
all such conveniences, plunged into the stream
without hesitation, and swam in a twinkling to
the opposite shore. This sudden immersion into
an element of which Trunnion was properly a
native, in all probability helped to recruit the
exhausted spirits of his rider, who at his landing
on the other side gave some tokens of sensation,
by hollowing aloud for assistance, which he could
not possibly receive, because his horse still maintained
the advantage he had gained, and would
not allow himself to be overtaken. 
In short, after a long chace that lasted several
hours, and extended to a dozen miles at least, he
was the first in at the death of the deer, being seconded
by the lieutenant's gelding, which actuated 

by the same spirit, had, without a rider, followed
his companion's example. 
Our bridegroom finding himself at last brought
up, or in other words, at the end of his career,
took the opportunity of this first pause, to desire
the huntsmen would lend him a hand in dismounting; 
and was by their condescension safely
placed on the grass, where he sat staring at the
company as they came in, with such wildness of
astonishment in his looks, as if he had been a
creature of another species, dropt among them
from the clouds. 
Before they had fleshed the hounds, however,
he recollected himself, and seeing one of the
sportsmen take a small flask out of his pocket and
apply it to his mouth, judged the cordial to be no
other than neat Coniac, which it really was; and
expressing a desire of participation, was immediately
accommodated with a moderate dose, which
perfectly compleated his recovery. 
By this time he and his two horses had engrossed
the attention of the whole crowd; while
some admired the elegant proportion and uncommon
spirit of the two animals, the rest contemplated
the surprising appearance of their master,
whom before they had only seen en passant; 
and at length, one of the gentlemen, accosting
him very courteously, signified his wonder at
seeing him in such an equipage, and asked if he
had not dropped his companion by the way. 
“Why, look ye, brother, (replied the commodore)
mayhap you think me an odd sort of a
fellow, seeing me in this trim, especially as I
have lost part of my rigging; but this here is the
case, d'ye see: I weighed anchor from my own
house this morning at ten A.M. with fair weather, 

and a favourable breeze at south southeast,
being bound to the next church, on the
voyage of matrimony: but howsomever, we had
not run down a quarter of a league, when the
wind shifting, blowed directly in our teeth; so
that we were forced to tack all the way, d'ye see,
and had almost beat up within sight of port,
when these sons of bitches of horses, which I
had bought but two days before (for my own
part, I believe they are devils incarnate) luffed
round in a trice, and then refusing the helm,
drove away like lightning with me and my lieutenant,
who soon came to anchor in an exceeding
good birth. As for my own part, I have
been carried over rocks, and flats, and quicksands; 
among which I have pitched away a special
good tye-periwig, and an iron-bound hat; 
and at last, thank God! am got into smooth water
and safe riding: but if ever I venture my carcase
upon such a hare'um scare'um blood of a
bitch again, my name is not Hawser Trunnion,
d&wblank;n my eyes!” 
One of the company, struck with this name,
which he had often heard, immediately laid hold
on his declaration at the close of this singular account; 
and observing that his horses were very
vicious, asked how he intended to return? “As
for that matter, (replied Mr. Trunnion) I am
resolved to hire a sledge or waggon, or such a
thing as a jack-ass; for I'll be d&wblank;n'd if ever I
cross the back of a horse again.” “And what
do you propose to do with these creatures? (said
the other, pointing to the hunters) they seem to
have some mettle; but then they are meer colts,
and will take the devil and all of breaking. 
Methinks this hither one is shoulder-slipped.” 

“Damn them, (cried the commodore) I wish
both their necks were broke, thof the two cost
me forty good yellow-boys.” “Forty guineas!
(exclaimed the stranger, who was a squire and a
jocky, as well as owner of the pack) Lord! 
Lord! how a man may be imposed upon! Why,
these cattle are clumsy enough to go to plow:
mind what a flat counter; do but observe how
sharp this here one is in the withers; then he's
fired in the further fetlock.” In short, this connoisseur
in horse-flesh, having discovered in them
all the defects which can possibly be found in that
species of animals, offered to give him ten guineas
for the two, saying, he would convert them
into beasts of burthen. The owner, who (after
what had happened) was very well disposed to
listen to any thing that was said to their prejudice,
implicitly believed the truth of the stranger's
asseverations, discharged a furious volley
of oaths against the rascal who had taken him
in, and forthwith struck a bargain with the
squire, who paid him instantly for his purchase; 
in consequence of which he won the plate at the
next Canterbury races. 
This affair being transacted to the mutual satisfaction
of both parties, as well as to the general
entertainment of the company, who laughed
in their sleeves at the dexterity of their friend,
Trunnion was set upon the squire's own horse,
and led by his servant in the midst of this cavalcade,
which proceeded to a neighbouring village,
where they had bespoke dinner, and where our
bridegroom found means to provide himself with
another hat and wig. With regard to his marriage,
he bore his disappointment with the temper
of a philosopher; and the exercise he had 

undergone having quickened his appetite, sat
down at table in the midst of his new acquaintance,
making a very hearty meal, and moistening
every morsel with a draught of the ale, which
he found very much to his satisfaction. 