


The commodore takes Peregrine under his own care. 
The boy arrives at the garrison;—is strangely
received by his own mother;—enters into a confederacy
with Hatchway and Pipes, and executes
a couple of waggish enterprizes upon his aunt. 
Trunnion having obtained this permission
that very afternoon, dispatched the lieutenant
in a post chaise to Keypstick's house, from
whence in two days he returned with our young
hero; who being now in the eleventh year of his
age, had outgrown the expectation of all his family,
and was remarkable for the beauty and elegance
of his person. His godfather was transported
at his arrival, as if he had been actually
the issue of his own loins. He shook him heartily
by the hand, turned him round and round, surveyed
him from top to bottom, bad Hatchway
take notice how handsomely he was built; 
squeezed his hand again, saying, “Damn ye, you
dog, I suppose you don't value such an old crazy
son of a bitch as me, a rope's end. You have forgot
how I wont to dandle you on my knee, when
you was a little urchin no higher than the David,
and played a thousand tricks upon me, burning
my bacco-pouches and poisoning my rumbo: O!
damn ye, you can grin fast enough I see; I warrant
you have learnt more things than writing
and the Latin lingo.” Even Tom Pipes expressed
uncommon satisfaction on this joyful occasion; 
and coming up to Perry, thrust forth his forepaw,
and accosted him with the salutation of
“What chear, my young master? I am glad see 

thee with all my heart.” These compliments being
passed, his uncle halted to the door of his
wife's chamber, at which he stood hollowing,
“Here's your kinsman Perry, belike you won't
come and bid him welcome.” “Lord! Mr.
Trunnion, said she, why will you continually harrass
me in this manner with your impertinent intrusion?” 
“I harrow you, replied the commodore,
'sblood! I believe your upper works are damaged. 
I only came to inform you that here was your
cousin, whom you have not seen these four long
years; and I'll be damned if there is such another
of his age within the king's dominions, d'ye see,
either for make or mettle; he's a credit to the
name, d'ye see, but damn my eyes I'll say no
more of the matter; if you come you may, if
you won't you may let it alone.” “Well, I
won't come then (answered his yoke-fellow) for
I am at present more agreeably employed.” 
“Oho! you are? I believe so too;” cried the
commodore, making wry faces and mimicking
the action of dram-drinking. Then addressing
himself to Hatchway, “Prithee Jack, said he,
go and try thy skill on that stubborn hulk; if any
body can bring her about I know you wool.” 
The lieutenant accordingly taking his station at
the door, conveyed his perswasion in these words,
“What won't you turn out and hail little Perry? 
It will do your heart good to see such a handsome
young dog; I'm sure he is the very moral of you,
and as like as if he had been spit out of your
own mouth, as the saying is; do shew a little
respect for your kinsman, can't you.” To this
remonstrance she replied in a mild tone of voice,
“Dear Mr. Hatchway, you are always teazing
one in such a manner; sure I am, no body can 

tax me with unkindness, or want of natural affection;” 
so saying, she opened the door, and
advancing to the hall where her nephew stood, received
him very graciously, and observed that he
was the very image of her papa. 
In the afternoon he was conducted by the commodore
to the house of his parents; and strange
to tell, no sooner was he presented to his mother
than her countenance changed, she eyed him with
tokens of affliction and surprize, and bursting
into tears, exclaimed her child was dead, and this
was no other than an impostor whom they had
brought to defraud her sorrow. Trunnion was
confounded at this unaccountable passion, which
had no other foundation than caprice and whim; 
and Gamaliel himself so disconcerted and unsettled
in his own belief, which began to waver, that he
knew not how to behave towards the boy, whom
his godfather immediately carried back to the
garrison, swearing all the way that Perry should
never cross their threshold again with his goodwill. 
Nay, so much was he incensed at this unnatural
and absurd renunciation, that he refused
to carry on any further correspondence with
Pickle, until he was appeased by his sollicitations
and submission, and Peregrine owned as his son
and heir. But this acknowledgment was made
without the privity of his wife, whose vicious
aversion he was obliged, in appearance, to adopt. 
Thus exiled from his father's house, the young
gentleman was left entirely to the disposal of the
commodore, whose affection for him daily increased,
insomuch, that he could scarce prevail
upon himself to part with him, when his education
absolutely required that he should be otherwise
disposed of. 

In all probability, this extraordinary attachment
was, if not produced, at least rivetted by
that peculiar turn in Peregrine's imagination,
which we have already observed; and which,
during his residence in the castle, appeared in
sundry stratagems he practised upon his uncle and
aunt, under the auspices of Mr. Hatchway, who
assisted him in the contrivance and execution of
all his schemes. Nor was Pipes exempted from
a share in their undertakings; for, being a trusty
fellow, not without dexterity in some cases, and
altogether resigned to their will, they found him
a serviceable instrument for their purpose, and
used him accordingly. 
The first sample of their art was exhibited upon
Mrs. Trunnion, from whose chamber Peregrine
having secreted a certain utensil, divers holes were
drilled through the bottom of it by their operator; 
and then it was replaced in a curious case that
stood by the bed-side, in which it was reserved
for midnight-occasions. The good lady had that
evening made several extraordinary visits to her
closet, and that sort of exercise never failed of
having a diuretic effect upon her constitution; so
that she and her husband were scarce warm
in bed, when she found it convenient to reach
out her hand, and introduce this receptacle under
the cloaths. It was then that Peregrine's roguery
took effect. The commodore, who had just
composed himself to rest, was instantly alarmed
with a strange sensation in his right shoulder, on
which something warm seemed to descend in various
streams: he no sooner comprehended the
nature of this shower, which in a twinkling bedewed
him from head to foot, than he exclaimed,
“Blood and oons! I'm afloat?” and starting 

up, asked with great bitterness if she had pissed
through a watering can. Equally surprized and offended
at the indecent question, she began to regale
him with a lecture on the subject of that respect
in which she thought him so deficient; but
perceiving the source of his displeasure, was silenced
in the middle of the first sentence; and after
a short pause of astonishment, screamed with vexation. 
As there was a necessity for shifting the bed-linnen,
she got up with great reluctance, rung
her bell, and when her maid entered, presented
this new fashioned cullender, and threatened with
many choleric expressions to split it into a thousand
pieces on her skull. Thunderstruck at the
phænomenon, it was some time before the attendant
could open her lips in her own vindication; 
at length, however, she protested she was innocent
as the babe unborn, and that the pot was
sound and intire when she rinsed it in the afternoon. 
Her suspicion was of consequence transferred
upon Perry, against whom she uttered many menacing
invectives; though she was afterwards
ashamed of disclosing her resentment, and in the
mean time was fain to take up her night's
lodging in another apartment; while Trunnion,
after a string of unmeaning oaths, which were
extorted from him by his present uncomfortable
situation, could not help laughing at the adventure; 
and Peregrine with his confederates, applauded
themselves in secret for having reduced
them to such ridiculous distress. 
Encouraged by the impunity with which they
performed this feat, our associates atchieved another,
that had like to have been attended with 

very serious consequences. Mrs. Trunnion having
one day received a sudden call which she
could not help obeying, her nephew, who was
always on the scout, took that opportunity of
gliding unseen into her closet, and finding her
case open, infused into one of the bottles a good
quantity of powdered jallap, which had been purchased
by the lieutenant for that purpose. He had
desired the apothecary from whom he bought it,
to give him as much as would impregnate two
quarts of brandy, which, he guessed, each bottle
might contain; and never dreamed that the patient,
though left to her own discretion, was in
any danger of taking an over-dose; he therefore
directed Perry to convey the whole proportion
into one of the full bottles that stood at some distance
from that which he would perceive was in
present use, that the spirits might have time to
extract the virtues of the root before it should
come to their turn. Every thing was done according
to his prescription, and a very small hole
being bored in the wainscot, through which they
could reconnoitre her from another room; they
observed her motions by turns, with a view of
seeing whether or not she would be alarmed by
the extraordinary taste of the tincture they had
made. 
When they had watched in this manner for
three or four days, Pipes being upon duty, perceived
her take the first cup of the composition,
which she had no sooner swallowed, than she began
to shut her eyes, smack her lips, spit and
express all the marks of loathing and disgust: nevertheless,
she seemed to doubt her own sense,
rather than the flavour of the Coniac, the neatness
of which she had already experienced, and 

therefore repeated the cordial, as if in defiance to
her own distaste; taking care, however, to arm
her palate with a large lump of sugar, through
which it was strained in its passage. 
Hatchway was startled when he understood she
had taken such a dangerous draught of the medicine,
especially as she had immediately after stepped
into the coach to go to church, where he
feared she might catch cold, or be otherwise affected,
to the jeopardy of her person and the prejudice
of her reputation. Nor was his fear altogether
disappointed. The service was not half
performed, when Mrs. Trunnion was suddenly
taken ill; her face underwent violent flushings
and vicissitudes of complexion; a cold clammy
sweat bedewed her forehead, and her bowels were
afflicted with such agonies, as compelled her to
retire in the face of the congregation. She was
brought home in torture, which was a little assuaged
when the dose began to operate; but such
was the excess of evacuation she sustained, that
her spirits were quite exhausted, and she suffered
a succession of fainting fits that reduced her to
the brink of the grave, in spite of all the remedies
that were administered by a physician who
was called in the beginning of her disorder, and
who, after having examined the symptoms, declared
that the patient had been poisoned with
arsenic, and prescribed oily draughts and lubricating
injections to defend the coats of the stomach
and intestines from the vellicating particles
of that pernicious mineral; at the same time hinting,
with a look of infinite sagacity, that it was
not difficult to divine the whole mystery; and
affecting to deplore the poor lady, as if she was
exposed to more attempts of the same nature; 

thereby glancing obliquely at the innocent commodore,
whom the officious son of Æsculapius
suspected as the author of this expedient, to rid
his hands of a yoke-fellow, for whom he was
well known to have no great devotion. This
impertinent and malicious insinuation made some
impression upon the by-standers, and furnished
ample field for slander, to asperse the morals
of Trunnion, who was represented through
the whole district as a monster of barbarity. 
Nay, the sufferer herself, though she behaved
with great decency and prudence, could not help
entertaining some small diffidence of her husband:
not that she imagined he had any design upon her
life, but that he had been at pains to adulterate
the brandy, with the view of detaching her from
that favourite liquor. 
On this supposition she resolved to act with
more caution for the future, without setting on
foot any inquiry about the affair; while the
commodore imputing her indisposition to some
natural cause, after the danger was past, never
bestowed a thought upon the subject; so that the
perpetrators were quit for their fear, which, however,
had punished them so effectually, that they
never would hazard any more jokes of the same
nature. 