


Godfrey executes a scheme at Bath, by which a
whole company of sharpers is ruined. 
On the evening after their arrival at Bath,
Godfrey, who had kept himself up all day
for that purpose, went in boots to the billiard
table; and two gentlemen being at play, began
to bet with so little appearance of judgment, that
one of the adventurers then present was inflamed
with the desire of profiting by his inexperience; 
and when the table was vacant, invited him to
take a game for amusement. The soldier, assuming
the air of a self-conceited dupe, answered,
that he did not choose to throw away his
time for nothing, but, if he pleased, would
piddle for a crown a game. This declaration
was very agreeable to the other, who wanted to
be further confirmed in the opinion he had conceived
of the stranger, before he would play for
any thing of consequence. The partie being accepted,
Gauntlet put off his coat, and beginning
with seeming eagerness, won the first game, because
his antagonist kept up his play, with a view
of encouraging him to wager a greater sum. The
soldier purposely bit at the hook, the stakes were
doubled, and he was again victorious, by the
permission of his competitor. He now began to 

yawn; and observing, that it was not worth his
while to proceed in such a childish manner, the
other swore, in an affected passion, that he would
play with him for twenty guineas. The proposal
being embraced (thro' the connivance of Godfrey)
the money was won by the sharper, who
exerted his dexterity to the uttermost, fearing
that otherwise his adversary would decline continuing
the game. 
Godfrey thus conquered, pretended to lose his
temper, curs'd his own ill luck, swore that the
table had a cast, and that the balls did not run
true, changed his mast, and with great warmth
challenged his enemy to double the sum. The
gamester, with feigned reluctance, complied with
his desire, and having got the first two hazards,
offered to lay one hundred guineas to fifty on the
game. The odds were taken; and Godfrey
having allowed himself to be overcome, began
to rage with great violence, broke the mast to
pieces, threw the balls out at the window, and,
in the fury of his indignation, defied his antagonist
to meet him to-morrow, when he should be
refreshed from the fatigue of travelling. This
was a very welcome invitation to the gamester,
who imagining that the soldier would turn out a
most beneficial prize, assured him, that he would
not fail to be there next forenoon, in order to
give him his revenge. 
Gauntlet went home to his lodgings, fully
certified of his own superiority; and took his
measures with Peregrine, touching the prosecution
of their scheme; while his opponent made
a report of his success to the brethren of the gang,
who resolved to be present at the decision of the 

match, with the view of taking advantage of the
stranger's passionate disposition. 
Affairs being thus concerted on both sides, the
players met, according to appointment, and the
room was immediately filled with spectators, who
either came thither by accident, curiosity, or design. 
The match was fixed for one hundred
pounds a game, the principals chose their instruments,
and laid aside their coats, and one of the
knights of the order proffered to lay another hundred
on the head of his associate. Godfrey took
him up on the instant. A second worthy of the
same class seeing him so eager, challenged him to
treble the sum; and his proposal met with the
same reception, to the astonishment of the company,
whose expectation was raised to a very interesting
pitch. The game was begun, and the
soldier having lost the first hazard, the odds were
offered by the confederacy, with great vociferation; 
but no body would run such a risk, in favour
of a person who was utterly unknown. The
sharper having gained the second also, the noise
increased to a surprising clamour, not only of the
gang, but likewise of almost all the spectators,
who desired to lay two to one against the brother
of Emilia. 
Peregrine, who was present, perceiving the
cupidity of the association sufficiently inflamed,
all of a sudden opened his mouth, and answered
their betts, to the amount of twelve hundred
pounds; which were immediately deposited, on
both sides, in money and notes: so that this was
(perhaps) the most important game that ever was
plaid at billiards. Gauntlet seeing the agreement
settled, struck his antagonist's ball into the pocket,
in a twinkling, tho' it was in one of those situations 

which are supposed to be against the striker. The
betters were a little discomposed at this event,
for which, however, they consoled themselves,
by imputing the success to accident; but when,
at the very next stroke, he sprung it over the
table, their countenances underwent an instantaneous
distraction of feature, and they waited, in
the most dreadful suspense, for the next hazard,
which being likewise taken, with infinite ease, by
the soldier, the blood forsook their cheeks, and
the interjection Zounds! pronounced with a look
of consternation, and in a tone of despair, proceeded
from every mouth, at the same instant of
time. They were overwhelmed with horror and
astonishment at seeing three hazards taken in as
many strokes, from a person of their friend's
dexterity; and shrewdly suspected, that the
whole was a scheme preconcerted for their destruction:
on this supposition they changed the
note, and attempted to effect their own indemnification,
by proposing to lay the odds in favour of
Gauntlet; but so much was the opinion of the
company altered by that young gentleman's success,
that no body would venture to espouse the
cause of his competitor, who chancing to improve
his game by the addition of another lucky hit,
diminished the concern, and revived the hopes of
his adherents. But, this gleam of fortune, did
not long continue: Godfrey collected his whole
art and capacity, and augmenting his score to
number ten, indulged himself with a view of the
whole fraternity. The visages of these professors
had adopted different shades of complexion,
at every hazard he had taken; from their natural
colour they had shifted into a sallow hue; from
thence into pale; from pale into yellow, which 

degenerated into a mahogony tint; and now they
saw seventeen hundred pounds of their stock depending
upon a single stroke, they stood like so
many swarthy Moors, jaundiced with terror and
vexation. The fire which naturally glowed in
the cheeks and nose of the player, seemed utterly
extinct, and his carbuncles exhibited a livid
appearance, as if a gangrene had already made
some progress in his face; his hand began to
shake, and his whole frame was seized with such
trepidation, that he was fain to swallow a bumper
of brandy, in order to re-establish the tranquillity
of his nerves. This expedient, however,
did not produce the desired effect; for he aimed
the ball at the lead with such discomposure, that
it struck on the wrong side, and came off at an
angle which directed it full in the middle hole. 
This fatal accident was attended with an universal
groan, as if the whole universe had gone
to wreck: and notwithstanding that tranquillity
for which adventurers are so remarkable, this
loss made such an impression upon them all, that
each, in particular, manifested his chagrin, by
the most violent emotions. One turned up his
eyes to heaven, and bit his nether lip; another
gnawed his fingers, while he stalked across the
room; a third blasphemed with horrible imprecations; 
and he who played the partie, sneaked
off, grinding his teeth together, with a look that
baffles all description, and as he crossed the
threshold, exclaiming, “A damn'd bite, by
G&wblank;d!” 
The victors, after having insulted them, by
asking if they were disposed for another chance,
carried off their winning, with the appearance of
great composure, though in their hearts they 

were transported with unspeakable joy; not so
much on account of the booty they had gained,
as in consideration of having so effectually destroyed
such a nest of pernicious miscreants. 
Peregrine believing, that now he had found
an opportunity of serving his friend, without giving
offence to the delicacy of his honour, told
him, upon their arrival at their lodgings, that
fortune had at length enabled him to become in
a manner independent, or at least to make himself
easy in his circumstances, by purchasing a
company with the money he had won. So saying,
he put his share of the success in Gauntlet's
hand, as a sum that of right belonged to him,
and promised to write in his behalf to a nobleman,
who had interest enough to promote such a
quick rise in the service. 
Godfrey thanked him for his obliging intention,
but absolutely refused, with great loftiness
of demeanour, to appropriate to his own use any
part of the money which Pickle had gained, and
seemed affronted at the other's entertaining a sentiment
so unworthy of his character. He would
not even accept, in the way of loan, such an
addition to his own stock, as would amount to
the price of a company of foot; but expressed
great confidence in the future exertion of that talent
which had been blessed with such a prosperous
beginning. Our hero finding him thus obstinately
deaf to the voice of his own interest,
resolved to govern himself in his next endeavours
of friendship, by his experience of this ticklish
punctilio; and in the mean time, gave a handsome
benefaction to the hospital, out of these
first fruits of his success in play, and reserved two 

hundred pounds for a set of diamond ear-rings and
solitaire, which he intended for a present to
Miss Emily. 