


The history of Miss Williams. 
My father was an eminent merchant in the
city, who having, in the course of trade, suffered
very considerable losses, retired in his old age
with his wife to a small estate in the country, which
he had purchased with the remains of his fortune. 
—At that time I being but eight years of age,
was left in town for the convenience of education; 
boarded with an aunt, who was a rigid
Presbyterian, and who confined me so closely to
what she called the duties of religion, that in
time I grew weary of her doctrines, and by degrees
conceived an aversion for the good books
she daily recommended to my perusal. As I increased
in age, and appeared with a person not
disagreeable, I contracted a good deal of acquaintance
among my own sex; one of whom, after
having lamented the restraint I was under from
the narrowness of my aunt's sentiments, told me,
I must now throw off the prejudices of opinion
imbibed under her influence and example, and
learn to think for myself;—for which purpose
she advised me to read Locke, Shaftsbury, Tindal,
Hobbs, and all the books that are remarkable
for their deviation from the old way of thinking,
and by comparing one with another, I
would soon be able to form a system of my own. 
—I followed her advice, and whether it was owing
to my prepossession against what I had formerly 

read, or the clearness of argument in these
my new instructors, I know not, but I studied
them with pleasure, and in a short time became
a professed Free-thinker. Proud of my new improvement,
I argued in all companies, and that
with such success, that I soon acquired the reputation
of a philosopher, and few people durst undertake
me in a dispute. —I grew vain upon my
good fortune, and at length pretended to make
my aunt a proselyte to my opinion; but she no
sooner perceived my drift, than taking the alarm,
she wrote to my father an account of my heresy,
and conjured him, as he tendered the good of
my soul, to remove me immediately from the
dangerous place where I had contracted such sinful
principles: Accordingly, my father ordered me
into the country, where I arrived in the fifteenth
year of my age, and by his command, gave him
a detail of all the articles of my faith, which he
did not find so unreasonable as they had been represented. 
—Finding myself suddenly deprived of
the company and pleasures of the town, I grew
melancholy, and it was some time before I could
relish my situation. —But solitude became every
day more and more familiar to me, and I consoled
myself in my retreat with the enjoyment of
a good library, at such times as were not employed
in the management of the family, (for
my mother had been dead three years) in visiting,
or some other party of rural diversion. — 
Having more imagination than judgment, I addicted
myself too much to poetry and romance; 
and in short was looked upon as a very extraordinary
person by every body in the country where
I resided. —I had one evening strayed with a
book in my hand, into a wood that bordered on 

the high road, at a little distance from my father's
house; when a certain drunken 'squire,
riding by, perceived me, and crying, “Z&wblank;ds!
there's a charming creature!” alighted in a
moment, catched me in his arms, and treated
me so rudely, that I shrieked as loud as I could,
and in the mean time opposed his violence with
all the strength that rage and resentment could
inspire. —During this struggle, another horseman
came up, who seeing a lady so unworthily used,
dismounted and flew to my assistance. —My ravisher,
mad with disappointment, or provoked
with the reproaches of the other gentleman,
quitted me, and running to his horse, drew a
pistol from the saddle and fired it at my protector,
who happily receiving no damage, went up, and
with the butt end of his whip, laid him prostrate
on the ground, before he could use the other,
which his antagonist immediately seized, and
clapping to the 'squire's breast, threatned to put
him to death for his cowardice and treachery: 
Upon this I interposed and begged his life, which
was granted to my request, after he had asked
pardon, and swore his intention was only to obtain
a kiss. —However, my defender thought proper
to unload the other pistol, and throw away
the flints, before he gave him his liberty. —This
courteous stranger conducted me home, where
my father having learned the signal service he had
done me, loaded him with caresses, and insisted
on his lodging that night at our house. —If the
obligation he had conferred upon me justly inspired
me with sentiments of gratitude, his appearance
and conversation seemed to intitle him
to somewhat more. —He was about the age of
two and twenty, among the tallest of the middle-size; 

had chesnut coloured hair which he wore
tied up in a ribbon; a high polished fore-head,
a nose inclining to the aquiline, lively blue eyes,
red pouting lips, teeth as white as snow, and a
certain openness of countenance,—but what
need I describe any more particulars of his person? 
I hope you will do me the justice to believe
I do not flatter, when I say he was the exact resemblance
of you; and if I had not been well
acquainted with his family and pedigree, I should
have made no scruple of concluding him your
brother. —He spoke little, and seemed to have no
reserve, for what he said was ingenuous, sensible,
and uncommon. —In short (said she, bursting into
tears) he was formed for the ruin of our sex. 
—His behaviour was modest and respectful, but
his looks were so significant that I could easily
observe, he secretly blessed the occasion that introduced
him to my acquaintance. —We learned
from his discourse that he was eldest son of a
wealthy gentleman in the neighbourhood, to
whose name we were no strangers; that he had
been to visit an acquaintance in the country,
from whose house he was returning home, when
my shrieks brought him to my rescue. —All night
long my imagination formed a thousand ridiculous
expectations: There was so much of
knight-errantry in this gentleman's coming to the
relief of a damsel in distress, with whom he immediately
became enamoured, that all I had read
of love and chivalry recurred to my fancy, and I
looked upon myself as a princess in some region
of romance, who being delivered from the
power of a brutal giant or satyr by a generous
Oroondates, was bound in gratitude, as well as
led by inclination, to yield up my affections to 

him without reserve. In vain did I endeavour
to chastise these foolish conceits by reflexions more
reasonable and severe: The amusing images took
full possession of my mind, and my dreams represented
my hero sighing at my feet, in the language
of a despairing lover. —Next morning after
breakfast he took his leave, when my father begged
the favour of a further acquaintance with
him; to which he replied by a compliment to
him, and a look to me so full of eloquence and
tenderness, that my whole soul received the soft
impression. —In a short time he repeated his visit; 
and as a recital of the particular steps he pursued
to ruin me, would be too tedious and impertinent,
let it suffice to say, he made it his
business to insinuate himself into my esteem, by
convincing me of his own good sense, and at the
same time flattering my understanding: This he
performed in the most artful manner, by seeming
to contradict me often through misapprehension,
that I might have an opportunity of clearing
myself, the more to my own honour. — 
Having thus secured my good opinion, he began
to give me some tokens of a particular passion
founded on a veneration for the qualities
of my mind, and as an accidental ornament, admir'd
the beauties of my person; till at length,
being fully persuaded of his conquest, he chose a
a proper season for the theme, and disclos'd his
love in terms so ardent and sincere, that it was
impossible for me to disguise the sentiments of my
heart, and he received my approbation with the
most lively transport. After this mutual declaration,
we contrived to meet more frequently,
which we did in private interviews, where we
enjoy'd the conversation of one another, in all 

the elevation of fancy and impatience of hope,
that reciprocal adoration can inspire. —He professed
his honourable intentions, of which I made
no question, lamented the avaritious disposition of
his father, who had destin'd him for the arms of
another, and vowed eternal fidelity with such an
appearance of candour and devotion, that I became
a dupe to his deceit, and in an evil hour
crowned his eager desire with full possession. — 
Cursed be the day on which I gave away my innocence
and peace, for a momentary gratification
which has entailed upon me such misery and
horror! cursed be my beauty that first attracted
the attention of the seducer! cursed be my education,
that by refining my sentiments, made my
heart the more susceptible! cursed be my good
sense that fixed me to one object, and taught me
the preference I enjoyed was but my due! Had
I been ugly, no body would have tempted me; 
had I been ignorant, the charms of my person
would not have atoned for the coarseness of my
conversation; had I been giddy, my vanity
would have divided my inclinations, and my
ideas would have been so diffused, that I should
never have listened to the enchantments of one
alone. 
But to return to my unfortunate story; we
gave a loose to guilty pleasure, which for some
months banished every other concern. —But by
degrees, his visits became less frequent, and his
behaviour less warm: I perceived his coldness,
my heart took the alarm, my tears reproached
him, and I insisted upon the performance of
his promise to espouse me, that whatever should
happen, my reputation might be safe: He seemed
to acquiesce in my proposal, and left me on pretence 

of finding a proper clergyman to unite us
in the bands of wedlock. —But alas! the Inconstant
had no intention to return: I waited
a whole week with the utmost impatience; 
sometimes doubting his honour, at other times
inventing excuses for him, and condemning myself
for harbouring the least suspicion of his faith. 
—At length, I understood from a gentleman
who dined at our house, that this perfidious
wretch was on the point of setting out for London
with his bride, to buy cloaths for their approaching
nuptials. —This information distracted
me! the more so, as I found myself some months
gone with child, and reflected, that it would be
impossible to conceal my disgrace, which would
not only ruin the character I had acquired in the
country, but also bring the grey hairs of an indulgent
parent with sorrow to the grave. Rage
took possession of my soul; I denounced a thousand
imprecations, and formed as many schemes of
revenge against the traitor who had undone me!
then my resentment would subside to silent sorrow: 
I recalled the tranquility I had lost, I wept over
my infatuation, and sometimes a ray of hope
would intervene, and for a moment cheer my
drooping heart; I would revolve all the favourable
circumstances of his character, repeat the
vows he made, ascribe his absence to the vigilance
of a suspicious father, who compelled him
to a match his soul abhorred, and comfort myself
with the expectation of seeing him before
the thing should be brought to any terms of agreement. 
—But how vain was my imagination? 
The villain left me without remorse, and in a
few days the news of his marriage spread all over
the country. —My horror was then inconceivable! 

and had not the desire of revenge diverted the resolution,
I should infallibly have put an end to
my miserable life. —My father observed the symptoms
of my despair; and though I have good
reason to believe, he guessed the cause, was at a
great deal of pains to seem ignorant of my affliction,
while he endeavoured with paternal fondness
to alleviate my distress. I saw his concern,
which increased my anguish, and raised my fury
against the author of my calamity, to an implacable
degree. Having furnished myself with a
little money, I made an elopement from this unhappy
parent in the night-time, and about break
of day, arrived at a small town from whence a
stage-coach set out for London, in which I embarked,
and next day alighted in town; the spirit
of revenge having supported me all the way against
every other reflection. —My first care was
to hire a lodging, in which I kept myself very
retired, having assumed a feigned name, that my
character and situation might be the better concealed. 
—It was not long before I found out the
house of my ravisher, whither I immediately
repaired in a transport of rage, determined to act
some desperate deed for the satisfaction of my despair,
though the hurry of my spirits would not
permit me to concert or resolve upon a particular
plan. When I demanded admission to Lothario
(so let me call him) I was desired to send up my
name and business; but this I refused, telling the
porter I had business for his master's private ear: 
Upon which I was conducted into a parlour until
he should be informed of my request. — 
There I remained about a quarter of an hour,
when a servant entered and told me his master
was engaged with company, and begged to be 

excused at that time. —My temper could hold out
no longer: I pulled a poignard from my bosom
where I had concealed it, and rushing out, flew
up stairs like a fury, exclaiming. “Where is this
perfidious villain! could I once plunge this
dagger into his false heart, I would then die
satisfied.” —The noise I made alarmed not only
the servants, but the company also, who hearing
my threats, came forwards to the stair-case to see
what was the matter. By this time I was seized,
disarmed, and with-held by two footmen; in this
situation I felt the most exquisite torture in beholding
my undoer approach with his young wife; 
I could not endure the sight, was deprived of my
senses, and fell into a severe fit, during which
I know not how I was treated; but when I recovered
the use of reflection, found myself on a
bed in a paultry apartment, where I was attended
by an old woman, who asked a thousand impertinent
questions relating to my condition; and
informed me that my behaviour had thrown the
whole family into confusion; that Lothario affirmed
I was mad, and pretended to have me
sent to Bedlam; but my lady persuaded herself
there was more in my conduct than he cared
should be known, and had taken to her bed on bare
suspicion, having first ordered that I should be
narrowly looked to. —I heard all she said without
making any other reply, than desiring she would
do me the favour to call a chair; but this (she
told me) could not be done without her master's
consent, which, however, was easily procured,
and I was conveyed to my own lodging in a state of
mind that baffles all description. The agitation
of my thoughts produced a fever, which brought
on a miscarriage; and I believe it is well for my 

conscience that heaven thus disposed of my burden; 
for let me own to you with penitence and horror,
if I had brought a living child into the world,
my frenzy would have prompted me to sacrifice
the little innocent to my resentment of the wrongs
done me by the father. 
After this event my rage abated, and my hate
became more deliberate and calm; when one day,
my landlady informed me that there was a gentleman
below who desired to see me, having
something of consequence to impart, which he
was sure would contribute to my peace of mind. 
—I was exceedingly alarmed at this declaration,
which I attempted to interpret a thousand ways; 
and before I came to any determination he entered
my room, with an apology for intruding
upon me against my knowledge or consent. —I
surveyed him some time, but could not remember
to have seen him before; then with a faultering
accent, demanded what was his business with me? 
—Upon which, he desired I would give him a
particular audience, and he did not doubt of
communicating something that would conduce
to my satisfaction and repose. As I thought myself
sufficiently guarded against any violence, I
granted his request, and bid the woman withdraw. 
—The stranger then advancing, gave me to
understand that he was well acquainted with the
particulars of my story, having been informed of
them from Lothario's own mouth—that from the
time he knew my misfortunes, he had entertained
a detestation for the author of them; which had of
late been increased and inflamed to a desire of revenge,
by a piece of dishonourable conduct towards him
—that hearing of my melancholy situation, he
had come with an intention of offering his assistance 

and comfort, and was ready to espouse
my quarrel and forthwith take vengeance on my
seducer, provided I would grant him one consideration,
which (he hoped) I should see no reason
to refuse. —Had all the artifice of hell
been employed in composing a persuasive, it could
not have had a more instantaneous or favourable
effect than this discourse had upon me. —I was
transported with a delirium of gloomy joy; I
hugged my companion in my arms, and vowed
that if he would make good his promise, my soul
and body should be at his disposal. —The contract
was made; he devoted himself to my revenge,
undertook to murder Lothario that very night,
and to bring me an account of his death before
morning. —Accordingly, about two of the clock,
he was introduced to my chamber, and assured me
my perfidious lover was no more; that although
he was not entitled to such an honourable proceeding,
he had fairly challenged him to the field,
where he upbraided him with his treachery towards
me, for whom (he told him) his sword
was drawn, and after a few passes, left him weltering
in his blood. —I was so savaged by my
wrongs, that I delighted in the recital of this adventure,
made him repeat the particulars, feasted
my eyes with the blood that remained on his
cloaths and sword, and yielded up my body as
a recompence for the service he had done me. 
My imagination was so engrossed by these ideas,
that in my sleep I dreamed Lothario appeared
before me, pale, mangled and bloody, blamed my
rashness, protested his innocence, and pleaded his
own cause so pathetically, that I was convinced
of his fidelity, and waked in a fit of horror and
remorse. —My bed-fellow endeavoured to sooth, 

console, and persuade me that I had but barely
done justice to myself. —I dropt asleep again, and
the same apparition recurred to my fancy. —In
short, I passed the night in great misery, and
looked upon my avenger with such abhorrence,
that in the morning, perceiving my aversion, he
insinuated there was still a possibility of Lothario's
recovery; it was true, he left him wounded
on the ground, but not quite dead; and perhaps
his hurts might not be mortal. —At these words
I started up, bid him fly for intelligence, and if
he could not bring me tidings of Lothario's
safety, at least consult his own and never return,
for I was resolved to surrender myself to justice,
and declare all that I knew of the affair, that, if
possible, I might expiate my own guilt, by incurring
the rigours of a sincere repentance and ignominious
death. —He very coolly represented the
unreasonableness of my prejudice against him,
who had done nothing but what his love of me
inspired, and honour justified;—that now he had
at the risk of his life, been subservient to my revenge,
I was about to discard him as an infamous
agent occasionally necessary: and that
even if he should be so lucky as to bring news of
Lothario's safety, it was probable my former resentment
might revive, and I would upbraid him
with having failed in his undertaking. —I assured
him that, on the contrary, he would be dearer to
me than ever, as I should be convinced he acted
more on the principles of a man of honour, than
on those of a mercenary assassin, and scorned to
take away the life of an adversary (how inveterate
soever) which fortune had put in his power. 
—“Well then, madam, (said he) whatever
may have happened, I shall find it no difficult 

to satisfy you in that.” —And took his leave,
in order to enquire into the consequences of his
duel. —I was now more sensible than ever of the
degrees of guilt and misery; all the affliction I
had suffered hitherto was owing to my own credulity
and weakness, and my conscience could
only accuse me of venal crimes; but now that I
looked upon myself as a murderer, it is impossible
to express the terrors of my imagination, which
was incessantly haunted by the image of the deceased,
and my bosom stung with the most exquisite
agonies, of which I saw no end. —At
length, Horatio (for so I shall call my keeper)
returned, and telling me I had nothing to fear,
delivered into my hands a billet containing these
words. 

Madam,
“As I understand it is of consequence to
your peace, I take this liberty to inform
you, that the wounds I received from Horatio
are not mortal. This satisfaction my humanity
could not deny even to a person who
has endeavoured to disturb the repose, as well
destroy the life of 
“Lothario.” 
Being well acquainted with his hand, I had
no reason to suspect an imposition in this letter,
which I read over and over with a transport of
joy, and caressed Horatio so much, that he appeared
the happiest men alive. Thus was I won
from despair by the menaces of a greater misfortune 

than that which depressed me. —Griefs are
like usurpers, the most powerful deposes all the
rest—But my raptures were not lasting—that
very letter which in a manner re-established my
tranquility, in a little time banished my peace. 
—His unjust reproaches, while they waked my
resentment, recalled my former happiness, and
filled my soul with rage and sorrow. —Horatio,
perceiving the situation of my mind, endeavoured
to divert my chagrin, by treating me with all the
amusements and entertainments of the town. 
I was gratified with every indulgence I could desire; 
introduced into the company of other kept-mistresses,
by whom an uncommon deference was
paid me; and I began to lose all remembrance of
my former condition, when an accident brought
it back to my view with all its interesting circumstances. 
—Diverting myself one day with
some news papers, which I had not before perused,
the following advertisement attracted my
attention. 
“Whereas a young gentlewoman disappeared
from her father's house, in the
county of &wblank;, about the end of September,
on account (as is supposed) of some uneasiness
of mind, and has not been as yet
heard of; whoever will give an information
about her, to Mr. &wblank; of Gray's-Inn, shall
be handsomely rewarded; or if she will return
to the arms of her disconsolate parent, she
will be received with the utmost tenderness,
whatever reasons she may have to think otherwise,
and may be the means of prolonging the
life of a father, already weighed down almost
to the grave with age and sorrow.” 

This pathetic remonstrance had such an effect
on me, that I was fully resolved to return
like the prodigal son, and implore the forgiveness
of him who gave me life; but alas! upon inquiry,
I found he had paid his debt to nature a
month before, lamenting my absence to his last
hour, having left his fortune to a stranger as a
mark of his resentment of my unkind and undutiful
behaviour. —Penetrated with remorse on this
occasion, I sunk into the most profound melancholy,
and considered myself as the immediate
cause of his death. —I lost all relish for company,
and indeed most of my acquaintances no sooner
perceived my change of temper, than they abandoned
me. Horatio, disgusted at my insensibility,
or (which is more probable) cloyed with possession,
became colder and colder every day, till at
last he left me altogether, without making any
apology for his conduct; or securing me against
the miseries of want, as a man of honour ought
to have done, considering the share he had in
my ruin; for I afterwards learned that the quarrel
between Lothario and him, was a story
trumped up to rid the one of my importunities,
and give the other the enjoyment of my person,
which, it seems, he lusted after, upon seeing me
at the house of my seducer. —Reduced to this
extremity, I cursed my own simplicity, uttered
horrid imprecations against the treachery of Horatio; 
and as I became every day more and more
familiarized to the loss of innocence, resolved to
be revenged on the sex in general, by practising
their own arts upon themselves. —Nor was an opportunity
long wanting: An old gentlewoman,
under pretence of sympathizing, visited me,
and after having condoled with me on my misfortunes, 

and professed a disinterested friendship,
began to display the art of her occupation, in encomiums
on my beauty, and invectives against
the wretch who had forsaken me; insinuating
withal that it would be my own fault if I did not
still make my fortune by the extraordinary qualifications
with which nature had endowed me. — 
I soon understood her drift, and gave her such
encouragement to explain herself, that we came to
an agreement immediately to divide the profits of
my prostitution, accruing from such gallants as she
should introduce to my acquaintance. The first
stroke of my dissimulation, was practised upon a
certain J&wblank;ge, to whom I was recommended by
this matron, as an innocent creature just arrived
from the country; he was so transported with
my appearance and feigned simplicity, that he
paid a hundred guineas for the possession of me
for one night only, during which I behaved in
such a manner, as to make him perfectly well-pleased
with his purchase. 