


He is taken into the protection of a great man; 
sets up for member of parliament; is disappointed
in his expectation, and finds himself
egregiously outwitted. 
Among these professed patrons, the
greatest part of whom Peregrine saw thro',
there was one great personage, who seemed to
support with dignity the sphere in which fortune
had placed him. His behaviour to Pickle was
not a series of grinning complaisance, in a flat
repetition of general expressions of friendship and
regard. He demeaned himself with a seemingly
honest reserve, in point of profession; his advances
to Peregrine appeared to be the result of
deliberation and experiment; he chid the young
gentleman for his extravagance with the authority
of a parent, and the sincerity of a fast 

friend; and having, by gradual inquiries, made
himself acquainted with the state of his private
affairs, condemned his conduct with an air of
candour and concern. He represented to him
the folly and dangerous consequences of the profligate
life in which he had plunged himself,
counselled him with great warmth to sell off his
race-horses, which would otherwise insensibly eat
him up; to retrench all superfluous expence,
which would only serve to expose him to the ridicule
and ingratitude of those who were benefited
by it; to lay out his money upon secure
mortgages, at good interest; and carry into execution
his former design of standing candidate
for a borough, at the ensuing election for a new
parliament; in which case, this nobleman promised
to assist him with his influence and advice; 
assuring him, that if he could once procure a seat
in the house, he might look upon his fortune as
already made. 
Our adventurer perceived the wisdom and sanity
of this advice, for which he made his acknowledgments
to his generous monitor, protesting
that he would adhere to it in every particular,
and immediately set about a reformation. 
He accordingly took cognizance of his most minute
affairs, and after an exact scrutiny, gave
his patron to understand, that, exclusive of his
furniture, his fortune was reduced to fourteen
thousand three hundred and thirty pounds, in
Bank and South-Sea annuities, over and above
the garison and its appendages, which he reckoned
at sixty pounds a year. He therefore desired,
that as his lordship had been so kind as to favour
him with his friendship and advice, he would extend
his generosity still farther, by putting him in 

a way of making the most advantage of his money. 
My lord said, that for his own part he did not
chuse to meddle in money-matters; that he
would find abundance of people ready to borrow it
upon land-security; but that he ought to be extremely
cautious in a transaction of such consequence; 
promising at the same time, to employ
his own steward, in seeking out a mortgager to
whom it might be safely lent. 
This agent was accordingly set at work, and
for a few days made a fruitless inquiry; so that
the young gentleman was obliged to have recourse
to his own intelligence, by which he got
notice of several people of reputed credit, who
offered him mortgages for the whole sum; but
when he made a report of the particulars to his
noble friend, his lordship started such doubts and
objections relating to each, that he was deterred
from entering into any engagements with the proposers; 
congratulating himself, in the mean time,
on his good fortune, in being favoured with the
advice and direction of such a sage counsellor. 
Nevertheless, he began to be impatient, after
having unsuccessfully consulted all the money-brokers
and conveyancers about town, and resolved
to try the expedient of a public advertisement. 
But he was persuaded by my lord to
postpone that experiment, until every other method
should have failed, because it would attract
the attention of all the pettifoggers in London,
who (though they might not be able to overreach)
would infallibly harrass and teize him out
of all tranquillity. 
It was on the back of this conversation that
Peregrine, chancing to meet the steward near his
lord's house, stopped him in the street, to give 

him an account of his bad luck; at which the
other expressed some concern, and rubbing his
chin with his hand, in a musing posture, told
Pickle, there was a thought just come into his
head, pointing out one way of doing his business
effectually. The youth, upon this intimation,
begg'd he would accompany him to the next coffee-house,
in which having chosen a private situation,
this grave manager gave him to understand,
that a part of my lord's estate was mortgaged, in
consequence of a debt contracted by his grandfather,
for provision to the younger children of
the family; and that the equity of redemption
would be foreclosed in a few months, unless the
burthen could be discharged. “My lord (said
he) has always lived in a splendid manner, and
notwithstanding his ample fortune, together with
the profits accruing from the posts he enjoys, he
saves so little money, that, upon this occasion, I
know he will be obliged to borrow ten thousand
pounds, to make up the sum that is requisite to
redeem the mortgage. Now, certain I'am, that
when his design comes to be known, he will be
sollicited on all hands, by people desirous of lending
money upon such undoubted security; and
'tis odds but he has already promised the preference
to some particular acquaintance. However,
as I know he has your interest very much
at heart, I will (if you please) sound his lordship
upon the subject, and in a day or two give you
notice of my success.” 
Peregrine, ravished with the prospect of settling
this affair so much to his satisfaction, thanked
the steward for his friendly hint and undertaking,
which he assured him should be acknowledged by
a more solid proof of his gratitude, provided the 

business could be brought to bear; and next day,
he was visited by this kind manager, with the
happy news of his lordship's having consented to
borrow ten thousand pounds of his stock, upon
mortgage, at the interest of five per Cent. This
information he received as an instance of the singular
esteem of his noble patron; and the papers
being immediately drawn and executed, the money
was deposited in the hands of the mortgager,
who, in the hearing of the lender, laid strong
injunctions on his steward to pay the interest
punctually at quarter-day. 
The best part of our hero's fortune being thus
happily deposited, and the agent gratified with a
present of fifty pieces, he began to put his retrenching
scheme in execution; all his servants
(Pipes excepted) were discharged, his chariot and
running-horses disposed of, his house-keeping
broke up, and his furniture sold by auction: nay,
the heat of his disposition was as remarkable in
this, as in any other transaction of his life; for
every step of his saving project was taken with
such eagerness, and even precipitation, that most
of his companions thought he was either ruined
or mad. But he answered all their expostulations
with a string of prudent apophthegms, such as,
“The shortest follies are the best;” “Better
to retrench upon conviction than compulsion;” 
and divers other wise maxims, seemingly the result
of experience and philosophic reflection. To
such a degree of enthusiasm did his present œconomy
prevail, that he was actually seized with
the desire of amassing; and as he every day received
proposals, from those brokers whom he
had employed, about the disposal of his cash, he 

at length ventured fifteen hundred pounds upon
bottomry, being tempted by the excessive premium. 
But it must be observed, for the honour of our
adventurer, that this reformation did not at all interfere
with the good qualities of his heart: he
was still as friendly and benevolent as ever, tho'
his liberality was more subjected to the restraint
of reason; and he might have justly pleaded, in
vindication of his generosity, that he retrenched
the superfluities in his own way of living, in order
to preserve the power of assisting his fellow-creatures
in distress. Numberless were the objects
to which he extended his charity in private. 
Indeed, he exerted this virtue in secret, not only
on account of avoiding the charge of ostentation,
but also because he was ashamed of being
detected in such an awkward unfashionable practice,
by the censorious observers of this humane
generation. In this particular, he seemed to
confound the ideas of virtue and vice; for he did
good as other people do evil, that is, by stealth; 
and was so capricious in point of behaviour, that
frequently, in public, he wagged his tongue in
satirical animadversions upon that poverty, which
his hand had, in private, relieved. Yet, far
from shunning the acquaintance, or discouraging
the solicitation of those who, he thought, wanted
his assistance, he was always accessible, open, and
complacent to them, even when the haughtiness
of his temper kept his superiors at a distance; 
and often saved a modest man the anguish and
confusion of declaring himself, by penetrating into
his necessity, and anticipating his request, in a
frank offer of his purse and friendship. 

Not that he practised this beneficence to all the
needy of his acquaintance, without distinction; 
there is always a set of idle profligate fellows,
who having squandered away their own fortunes,
and conquered all sense of honour and shame,
maintain themselves by borrowing from those
who have not yet finished the same career, and
want resolution to resist their importunate demands. 
To these he was always inflexible; 
though he could not absolutely detach himself from
their company, because, by dint of effrontery,
and such of their original connexions as they have
been able to retain, they find admission to all
places of fashionable resort. 
Several insuccessful attacks had been made upon
his pocket, by beggars of this class, one of
the most artful of whom, having one day joined
him in the Mall, and made the usual observation
on the weather, damned the fogs of London,
and began a dissertation on the difference of air,
preferring that of the county in which he was
born, to any climate under the sun. “Was you
ever in Gloucestershire?” (said he to Peregrine)
who replying in the negative, he thus went on:
“I have got a house there, where I should be
glad to see you. Let us go down together, during
the Easter-holidays; I can promise you good
country-fare and wholesome exercise; for I have
every thing within myself, and as good a pack of
fox-hounds as any in the three kingdoms. I
shan't pretend to expatiate upon the elegance of
the house, which to be sure is an old building; 
and these, you know, are generally cold, and
not very convenient. But, curse the house! the
dirty acres about it are the thing; and a damn'd
fine parcel they are, to be sure. If my old 

grandmother was dead—she can't live another
season, for she's turned of fourscore, and quite
wore out: nay, as for that matter, I believe I
have got a letter in my pocket, giving an account
of her being despaired of by the doctors. Let me
see—No, d&wblank;n it, I left it at home, in the pocket
of another coat.” 
Pickle, who from the beginning of this harangue,
saw its tendency, seemed to yield the
most serious attention to what he said; breaking
in upon it, every now and then, with the interjections,
Hum! Ha! The deuce! and several
civil questions, from which the other conceived
happy omens of success; till perceiving
they had advanced as far as the passage into St.
James's, the mischievous youth interrupted him
all at once, saying, “I see you are for the end
of the walk; this is my way.” With these
words he took his leave of the saunterer, who
would have delayed his retreat, by calling to him
aloud, that he had not yet described the situation
of his castle. But Peregrine, without stopping,
answered in the same tone, “Another time will
do as well;” and in a moment disappeared, leaving
the projector very much mortified with his disappointment; 
for his intention was to close the
description, with a demand of twenty pieces, to
be repaid out of the first remittance he should receive
from his estate. 
It would have been well for our hero, had he
always acted with the same circumspection: but
he had his unguarded moments, in which he fell
a prey to the unsuspecting integrity of his own
heart. There was a person among the number
of his acquaintances, whose conversation he particularly
relished, because it was frank, agreeable, 

and fraught with many sensible observations upon
the craft and treachery of mankind. This gentleman
had made shift to discuss a very genteel
fortune, though it was spent with taste and reputation,
and now was reduced to his shifts for
the maintenance of his family, which consisted
of a wife and child. Not that he was destitute
of the necessaries of life, being comfortably supplied
by the bounty of his friends: but this was
a provision not at all suited to his inclination; 
and he had endeavoured, by divers unsuccessful
schemes, to retrieve his former independency. 
Peregrine happened one evening to be sitting
alone in a coffee-house, where he over-heard a
conversation between this schemer and another gentleman,
touching an affair that engaged his attention. 
The stranger had been left trustee for fifteen
hundred pounds bequeathed to the other's
daughter by an aunt, and was strongly solicited
to pay the money to the child's father, who assured
him, he had then an opportunity to lay it
out in such a manner, as would greatly conduce
to the advantage of his family. The trustee reminded
him of the nature of his charge, which
made him accountable for the money, until the
child should have attained the age of eighteen; 
but at the same time gave him to understand,
that if he could procure such security as would
indemnify him from the consequences, he would
forthwith pay the legacy into his hands. To this
proposal the father replied, that it was not to be
supposed he would risque the fortune of his only
child, upon any idle or precarious issue; and
therefore he thought it reasonable, that he should
have the use of it in the mean time; and that, as
to security, he was loth to trouble any of his 

friends about an affair which might be compromised
without their interposition; observing, that
he would not look upon his condescension as a
favour, if obtained by a security, on which he
could borrow the same sum from any usurer in
town. 
After much importunity on one side, and evasion
on the other, the money'd gentleman told
him, that though he would not surrender the
sum deposited in his hands, for the use of his
daughter, he would lend him what he should
have occasion for, in the mean time; and if, upon
her being of age, he should be able to obtain
her concurrence, the money should be placed to
her account; provided he could find any person
of credit, who would join with him in a bond,
for the assurance of the lender. This proviso
was an obstruction which the other would not
have been able to surmount, without great difficulty,
had not his cause been espoused by our
hero, who thought it was pity a man of honour
and understanding should suffer in his principal
concerns, on such a paultry consideration. He
therefore, presuming on his acquaintance, interposed
in the conversation as a friend, who interested
himself in the affair; and being fully informed
of the particulars, offered himself as a
security for the lender. 
This gentleman being a stranger to Peregrine,
was next day made acquainted with his funds; 
and, without farther scruple, accommodated his
friend with one thousand pounds, for which he
took their bond, payable in six months, though
he protested that the money should never be demanded,
until the infant should be of age, unless
some accident should happen which he could not 

then foresee. Pickle believed this declaration sincere,
because he could have no interest in dissembling:
but what he chiefly depended upon,
for his own security, was the integrity and confidence
of the borrower, who assured him, that
happen what will, he should be able to stand between
him and all danger; the nature of his plan
being such, as would infallibly treble the sum in a
very few months. 
In a little time after this transaction, writs being
issued out for electing a new parliament, our
adventurer, by the advice of his patron, went
into the country, in order to canvass for a borough,
and lined his pockets with a competent
share of bank-notes for the occasion. But, in
this project, he unfortunately happened to interfere
with the interest of a great family in the opposition,
who, for a long series of years, had
made members for that place; and were now so
much offended at the intrusion of our young
gentleman, that they threatened to spend ten
thousand pounds in frustrating his design. This
menace was no other than an incitement to Peregrine,
who confided so much in his own influence
and address, that he verily believed he
should be able to baffle his grace, even in his
own territories, and by that victory establish his
reputation and interest with the minister, who,
through the recommendation of his noble friend,
countenanced his cause, and would have been
very well pleased to see one of his greatest enemies
suffer such a disgraceful overthrow, which
would have, moreover, in a great measure shaken
his credit with his faction. 
Our hero, intoxicated with the ideas of pride
and ambition, put all his talents to the test, in the 

execution of this project. He spared no expence
in treating the electors; but finding himself rivalled,
in this respect, by his competitor, who
was powerfully supported, he had recourse to
those qualifications in which he thought himself
superior. He made balls for the ladies, visited
the matrons of the corporation, adapted himself
to their various humours with surprising facility,
drank with those who loved a cherishing cup in
private, made love to the amorous, prayed with
the religious, gossiped with those who delighted
in scandal, and with great sagacity contrived
agreeable presents to them all. This was the
most effectual method of engaging such electors
as were under the influence of their wives; and
as for the rest, he assailed them in their own
way, setting whole hogsheads of beer and wine
abroach, for the benefit of all comers; and into
those sordid hearts that liquor would not open,
he found means to convey himself by the help of
a golden key. 
While he thus exerted himself, his antagonist
was not idle; his age and infirmities would not
permit him to enter personally into their parties; 
but his steward and adherents bestirred themselves
with great industry and perseverance; and
the market for votes ran so high, that Pickle's
ready money was exhausted before the day of
election; and he was obliged to write to his patron
an account of the dilemma to which he was
reduced; intreating him to take such speedy measures,
as would enable him to finish the business
which he had so happily begun. 
This nobleman communicated the circumstances
of the case to the minister, and in a day
or two our candidate found credit with the receiver-general 

of the county, who lent him
twelve hundred pounds on his personal note,
payable on demand. By means of this new supply,
he managed matters so successfully, that an
evident majority of votes was secured in his interest; 
and nothing could have obstructed his election,
had not the noble peer who set up his competitor,
in order to avoid the shame and mortification
of being foiled in his own borough, offered
to compromise the affair with his honour, by
giving up two members in another place, provided
the opposition should cease in his own corporation. 
This proposal was greedily embraced; 
and, on the eve of election, Peregrine received
an intimation from his patron, desiring him to
quit his pretensions, on pain of his and the minister's
displeasure; and promising that he should
be elected for another place. 
No other disappointment in life could have given
him such chagrin as he felt at the receit of this
tantalizing order, by which the cup of success was
snatched from his lip, and all the vanity of his
ambitious hope humbled in the dust. He curs'd
the whole chain of his court connexions, inveighed
with great animosity against the rascally
scheme of politicks, to which he was sacrificed; 
and in conclusion swore he would not give up the
fruits of his own address for the pleasure of any
minister upon earth. This laudable resolution,
however, was rendered ineffectual by his friend
the receiver-general, who was bearer of the
message, and (after having, in vain, endeavoured
to persuade him to submission) fairly arrested him
upon the spot for the money he had advanced; 
this expedient being performed by virtue of a writ 

which he had been advised to take out, in case
the young man should prove refractory. 
The reader, who, by this time, must be
pretty well acquainted with the disposition of our
adventurer, may easily conceive how he relished
this imprisonment. At first, all the faculties of
his soul were swallowed up in astonishment and
indignation; and some minutes elapsed before
his nerves would obey the impulse of his rage,
which manifested itself in such an application to
the temples of the plaintiff, as laid him sprawling
on the floor. This assault, which was committed
in a tavern whither he had been purposely decoyed,
attracted the regard of the bailiff and his
followers, who, to the number of four, rushed
upon him at once, in order to overpower him; 
but his wrath inspired him with such additional
strength and agility, that he disengaged himself
from them in a trice, and seizing a poker, which
was the first weapon that presented itself to his
hand, exercised it upon their skulls with incredible
dexterity and execution. The officer himself,
who had been the first that presumed to lay
violent hands upon him, felt the first effects of
his fury, in a blow upon the jaws, in consequence
of which he lost three of his teeth, and fell
athwart the body of the receiver, with which he
form'd the figure of a St. Andrew's cross: one of
his myrmidons seeing the fate of his chief, would
not venture to attack the victor in front, but
wheeling to one side, made an attempt upon him
in flank, and was received obliquely by our hero's
left hand and foot, so masterly disposed to the
right side of his leg, and the left side of his neck,
that he bolted head foremost into the chimney, 

where his chin was encountered by the grate,
which, in a moment, seared him to the bone. 
The rest of the detachment did not think proper
to maintain the dispute, but evacuating the room
with great expedition, locked the door on the
outside, and bellowed aloud to the receiver's servants,
beseeching them to come to the assistance
of their master, who was in danger of his life. 
Mean while, this gentleman having recollected
himself, demanded a parley; which having
with difficulty obtained of our incensed candidate,
in consequence of the most submissive application,
he complained grievously of the young
gentleman's intemperance and heat of disposition,
and very calmly represented the danger of his
rashness and indiscretion. He told him, that
nothing could be more outrageous or idle, than
the resistance he had made against the laws of his
country, because he would find it impracticable
to withstand the whole executive power of the
county, which he could easily raise to apprehend
and secure him; that over and above the disgrace
that would accrue to him from this imprudent
conduct, he would knock his own interest on
the head, by disobliging his friends in the administration,
who were, to his knowledge, at present
very well disposed to do him service; that,
for his own part, what he had done was by the
express order of his superiors, and not out of any
desire of distressing him; and that, far from being
his enemy, notwithstanding the shocking insult
he had sustained, he was ready to withdraw
the writ, provided he would listen to any reasonable
terms of accommodation. 
Peregrine, who was not more prone to anger
than open to conviction, being appeased by his 

condescension, moved by his arguments, and
chid by his own reflection for what he had done
in the precipitation of his wrath, began to give
ear to his remonstrances; and the bailiffs being
ordered to withdraw, they entered into a conference,
the result of which was our adventurer's
immediate departure for London: so that next
day his competitor was unanimously chosen, because
no body appeared to oppose his election. 
The discontented Pickle, on his arrival in
town, went directly to the house of his patron,
to whom, in the anguish of his disappointment,
he bitterly complained of the treatment he had
received, by which, besides the disgrace of his
overthrow, he was no less than two thousand
pounds out of pocket, exclusive of the debt for
which he stood engaged to the receiver. His
lordship, who was prepared for this expostulation,
on his knowledge of the young man's impetuous
temper, answered all the articles of his
charge with great deliberation, giving him to understand
the motives that induced the minister to
quit his interest in that borough; and soothing
him with assurances that his loss would be amply
rewarded by his honour, to whom he was next
day introduced by this nobleman, in the warmest
stile of recommendation. The minister, who
was a pattern of complaisance, received him with
the most engaging affability; thanked him very
kindly for his endeavours to support and strengthen
the interest of the administration; and faithfully
promised to lay hold on the first opportunity to
express the sense he had of his zeal and attachment; 
desiring to see him often at his levee, that
in the multiplicity of business he might not be
in danger of forgetting his services and desert. 