


Dear Molly,
WE are all upon the ving—Hey for London,
girl! Fecks! we have been long enough here; for
we're all turned tipsy turvy—Mistress has excarded
Sir Ulic for kicking of Chowder; and I
have sent O Frizzle away, with a flea in his ear
—I've shewn him how little I minded his tinsy
and his long tail—A fellor, who would think for
to go, for to ofer, to take up with a dirty trollop
under my nose—I ketched him in the very fect,
coming out of the house-maid's garnet. —But I
have gi'en the dirty slut a siserary. O Molly!
the servants at Bath are devils in garnet—They
lite the candle at both ends—Here's nothing but
ginketting, and waisting, and thieving, and tricking,
and trigging and then they are never content
—They won't suffer the 'squire and mistress
to stay any longer; because they have been already
above three weeks in the house; and they
look for a couple of ginneys a-piece at our going
away; and this is a perquisite they expect every
month in the season; being as how no family has
a right to stay longer than four weeks in the same
lodgings; and so the cuck swears, she will pin the
dish clout to mistress's tail; and the house-maid
vows, she'll put cowitch in master's bed, if so be
he don't discamp without furder ado—I don't
blame them for making the most of their market,
in the way of vails and perquisites; and I defy the
devil to say I am a tail-carrier, or ever brought a 

poor sarvant into trouble—But then they oft to
have some conscience, in vronging those that be
sarvants like themselves—For you must no, Molly,
I missed three quarters of blond-lace, and a remnant
of muslin, and my silver thimble; which was
the gift of true love: they were all in my workbasket,
that I left upon the table in the sarvants—hall,
when mistresses bell rung; but if they had
been under lock and kay, 'twould have been all
the same; for there are double kays to all the
locks in Bath; and they say as how the very teeth
an't safe in your head, if you sleep with your
mouth open—And so says I to myself, them things
could not go without hands; and so I'll watch their
waters: And so I did with a vitness; for then it
was I found Bett consarned with O Frizzle. And
as the cuck had thrown her slush at me, because
I had taken part with Chowder, when he sit with
the turnspit, I resolved to make a clear kitchen
and throw some of her fat into the fire. I ketched
the chare-woman going out with her load in the
morning, before she thought I was up, and
brought her to mistress with her whole cargo— 
Marry, what do'st think she had got in the name
of God? Her buckets were foaming full of our
best bear, and her lap was stuffed with a cold
tongue, part of a buttock of beef, half a turkey,
and a swinging lump of butter, and the matter of
ten mould kandles, that had scarce ever been lit. 
The cuck brazened it out, and said it was her rite
to rummage the pantry; and she was ready for to
go before the mare: that he had been her potticary
many years, and would never think of hurting a
poor sarvant, for giving away the scraps of the
kitchen—I went another way to work with madam
Betty, because she had been saucy, and called
me skandelous names; and said O Frizzle
couldn't abide me, and twenty other odorous falsehoods. 

I got a varent from the mare, and her
box being sarched by the constable, my things came
out sure enuff; besides a full pound of vax candles,
and a nite-cap of mistress, that I could sware to on
my cruperal oaf—O! the madam Mopstick came
upon her merry bones, and as the 'squire wouldn't
hare of a persecution, she escaped a shewering: but
the longest day she has to live, she'll remember
your 
humble sarvant,
Winifred Jenkins. 
Bath, May 15. 
If the hind should come again, before
we be gone, pray send me
the shift and apron, with the vite
gallow manky shoes; which
you'll find in my pillowber— 
Sarvice to Saul— 