


An epidemick fever rages among us—we
abandon our conquests—I am seized with
the distemper; write a petition to the captain,
which is rejected—I am in danger
of suffocation through the malice of Crampley; 
and relieved by a serjeant—my fever
increases—the chaplain wants to
confess me—I obtain a favourable crisis
—Morgan's affection for me proved—the
behaviour of Mackshane and Crampley towards
me—Captain Oakhum is removed
into another ship with his beloved doctor— 
our new captain described—an adventure
of Morgan. 
The change of the atmosphere, occasioned
by this phœnomenon, conspired with the
stench that surrounded us, the heat of the climate,
our own constitutions impoverished by bad provision,
and our despair, to introduce the bilious
fever among us, which raged with such violence
that three fourths of those whom it invaded,
died in a deplorable manner; the colour of their
skin, being by the extreme putrefaction of their
juices, changed into that of foot. 
Our conductors finding things in this situation,
perceived it was high time to relinquish our conquests,
which we did, after having rendered their 

artillery useless and blown up their walls with
gun-powder. —Just as we sailed from Bocca Chica
on our return to Jamaica, I found myself threatened
with the symptoms of this terrible distemper; 
and knowing very well that I stood no chance
for my life, if I should be obliged to lie in the
cockpit, which by this time, was grown intolerable
even to people in health, by reason of the heat
and unwholsome smell of decayed provision; I
wrote a petition to the captain representing my
case, and humbly imploring his permission to
lie among the soldiers in the middle-deck, for the
benefit of the air: But I might have spared myself
the trouble; for this humane commander refused
my request, and ordered me to continue in the
place allotted for the surgeon's mates, or else be
contented to lie in the hospital, which, by the
bye, was three degrees more offensive and more
suffocating than our own birth below. —Another
in my condition, perhaps, would have submitted
to his fate, and died in a pet; but I could not
brook the thought of perishing so pitifully,
after I had weathered so many gales of hard fortune: 
I therefore, without minding Oakhum's
injunction, prevailed upon the soldiers (whose
good-will I had acquired) to admit my hammock
among them; and actually congratulated myself
upon my comfortable situation, which Crampley
no sooner understood, than he signified to the
captain, my contempt of his orders; and was
invested with power to turn me down again into
my proper habitation. —This barbarous piece of
revenge, incensed me so much against the author,
that I vowed, with bitter imprecations, to call
him to a severe account, if ever it should be in 

my power; and the agitation of my spirits increased
my fever to a violent degree. —While I
lay gasping for breath in this infernal abode, I
was visited by a serjeant, the bones of whose nose
I had reduced and set to rights, after they had
been demolished by a splinter during our last engagement: 
He being informed of my condition,
offered me the use of his birth in the middle-deck,
which was inclosed with canvas and well-aired
by a port-hole that remained open within
it. —I embraced this proposal with joy, and was
immediately conducted to the place, where I was
treated, while my illness lasted, with the utmost
tenderness and care by this grateful halberdier,
who had no other bed for himself than a hencoop,
during the whole passage. —Here I lay and
enjoyed the breeze, notwithstanding of which,
my malady gained ground, and at length my
life was despaired of, though I never lost hopes of
recovery, even when I had the mortification to
see, from my cabbin window, six or seven thrown
over-board every day, who died of the same distemper. 
This confidence, I am persuaded, conduced
a good deal to the preservation of my life,
especially, when joined to another resolution I took
at the beginning, namely, to refuse all medicine,
which I could not help thinking co-operated with
the disease, and instead of resisting putrefaction, promoted
a total degeneracy of the vital fluid. —When
my friend Morgan, therefore, brought his diaphoretic
boluses, I put them in my mouth, 'tis true, but
without any intention of swallowing them; and
when he went away, spit them out, and washed
my mouth with water-gruel: I seemingly complied
in this manner, that I might not affront the 

blood of Caractacus, by a refusal which might
have intimated a diffidence of his physical capacity; 
for he acted as my physician; doctor Macshane
never once enquiring about me, or even
knowing where I was. —When my distemper
was at the height, Morgan thought my case desperate,
and after having applied a blister to the
nape of my neck, squeezed my hand, bidding
me, with a woful countenance, recommend myself
to Got and my reteemer; then taking his
leave, desired the chaplain to come and administer
some spiritual consolation to me; but before
he arrived, I had made shift to rid myself of the
troublesome application the Welchman had bestowed
on my back. —The parson having felt my
pulse, enquired into the nature of my complaints,
hemmed a little, and began thus: “Mr. Random,
God out of his infinite mercy hath been
pleased to visit you with a dreadful distemper,
the issue of which no man knows. —You may be
permitted to recover, and live many days on the
face of the earth: and, which is more probable,
you may be taken away and cut off in the flower
of your youth: It is incumbent on you, therefore,
to prepare for the great change, by repenting
sincerely of your sins; of this there cannot
be a greater sign, than an ingen'ous confession,
which I conjure you to make, without hesitaton
or mental reservation; and when I am
convinced of your sincerity, I will then give
you such comfort as the situation of your soul
will admit of. Without doubt, you have been
guilty of numberless transgressions, to which
youth is subject, as swearing, drunkenness,
whoredom, and adultery; tell me therefore, without 

out reserve, the particulars of each, especially of
the last, that I may be acquainted with the true
state of your conscience: For no physician
will prescribe for his patient until he knows
the circumstances of his disease.” As I was
not under any apprehensions of death, I could
not help smiling at the doctor's inquisitive remonstrance,
which I told him savoured more of the
Roman than of the Protestant church, in recommending
auricular confession, a thing, in my opinion,
not at all necessary to salvation, and which,
for that reason, I declined. —This reply disconcerted
him a little; however, he explained away
his meaning, in making learned distinctions between
what was absolutely necessary, and what
was only convenient; then proceeded to ask what
religion I professed: I answered, that I had not
as yet considered the difference of religions, consequently
had not fixed on any one in particular,
but that I was bred a Presbyterian. —At this
word the chaplain discovered great astonishment,
and said, he could not comprehend how a Presbyterian
was entitled to any post under the English
government. —Then he asked if I had ever
received the Sacrament, or taken the oaths; 
to which I replying in the negative, he held up
his hands, assured me he could do me no service,
wished I might not be in a state of reprobation; 
and returned to his mess-mates, who were making
merry in the ward-room, round a table well
stored with bumbo *  and wine. —This insinuation,
terrible as it was, had not such an effect
upon me, as the fever, which, soon after he had 

left me, grew outragious; I began to see strange
chimeras, and concluded myself on the point of
becoming delirious: But before that happened,
was in great danger of suffocation, upon which
I started up in a kind of frantic fit, with an intention
to plunge myself into the sea, and as my
friend the serjeant was not present, would certainly
have cooled myself to some purpose, had I not
perceived a moisture upon my thigh, as I endeavoured
to get out of my hammock: The appearance
of this revived my hopes, and I had
reflection and resolution enough to take the
advantage of this favourable symptom, by tearing
the shirt from my body and the sheets from my
bed, and wrapping myself in a thick blanket,
in which inclosure, for about a quarter of an
hour, I felt the pains of hell; but it was not
long before I was recompensed for my suffering
by a profuse sweat, that bursting from the whole
surface of my skin, in less than two hours, relieved
me from all my complaints, except that
of weakness; and left me as hungry as a kite. —I
enjoyed a very comfortable nap, after which I was
regaling myself with the agreeable reverie of my future
happiness, when I heard Morgan, on the outside
of the curtain, ask the serjeant, if I was still alive? 
“Alive! (cried the other) God forbid he should
be otherwise! he has lain quiet these five
hours, and I do not chuse to disturb him, for
sleep will do him great service.” “Ay, (said
my fellow-mate) he sleeps so found, (look
you) that he will never waken till the great
trump plows. —Got be merciful to his soul. 
—He has paid his debt, like an honest man. 
—Ay, and moreover, he is at rest from all
persecutions, and troubles, and afflictions, of 

which, Got knows, and I know, he had his
own share. —Ochree! Ochree! he was a promising
youth indeed!” —So saying, he groaned
grievously, and began to whine in such a manner,
as persuaded me he had a real friendship for
me. —The serjeant, alarmed at his words, came
into the birth, and while he looked upon me, I
smiled, and tipt him the wink; he immediately
guessed my meaning, and remained silent, which
confirmed Morgan in his opinion of my being
dead; whereupon he approached with tears in his
eyes, in order to indulge his grief with a sight of
the object: And I counterfeited death so well, by
fixing my eyes, and droping my under-jaw, that
he said, “There he lies, no petter than a lump
of clay, Got help me.” And observed by
the distortion of my face, that I must have had
a strong struggle. I should not have been able
to contain myself much longer, when he began
to perform the last duty of a friend, in closing
my eyes and my mouth; upon which, I suddenly
snapped at his fingers, and discomposed him so
much, that he started back, turned pale as ashes,
and stared like the picture of horror! Although
I could not help laughing at his appearance, I was
concerned for his situation, and stretched out my
hand, telling him, I hoped to live and eat some
salmagundy of his making in England. —It was
some time before he could recollect himself so
far as to feel my pulse, and enquire into the particulars
of my disease: But when he found I had
enjoyed a favourable crisis, he congratulated me
upon my good fortune; not failing to ascribe it,
under Got, to the blister he had applied to my
back, at his last visit; which, by the bye, said 

he, must now be removed and dressed: He was
actually going to fetch dressings, when I feigning
astonishment, said, “Bless me! sure you
never applied a blister to me—there is nothing
on my back, I assure you.” —Of this he could
not be convinced till he had examined, and then
endeavoured to conceal his confusion, by expressing
his surprize in finding the skin untouched,
and the plaister missing. —In order to excuse myself
for paying so little regard to his prescription,
I pretended to have been insensible when it was
put on, and to have pulled it off afterwards, in
a fit of delirium. This apology satisfied my
friend, who on this occasion abated a good deal
of his stiffness in regard to punctilios; and as we
were now safely arrived at Jamaica, where I had
the benefit of fresh provision, and other refreshments,
I recovered strength every day, and in a
short time, my health and vigour were perfectly
re-established. —When I got up at first, and was
just able to crawl about the deck, with a staff in
my hand, I met doctor Mackshane, who passed
by me with a disdainful look, and did not
vouchsafe to honour me with one word: After
him came Crampley, who strutting up to me,
with a fierce countenance, pronounced, “Here's
fine discipline on board, when such lazy sculking
sons of b&wblank;ches as you, are allowed, on
pretence of sickness, to lollop at your ease,
while your betters are kept to hard duty!” 
—The sight and behaviour of this malicious scoundrel,
enraged me so much, that I could scarce refrain
from laying my cudgel across his pate; 
but when I considered my present feebleness, and
the enemies I had in the ship, who wanted only 

a pretence to ruin me, I restrained my passion,
and contented myself with telling him, I had not
forgot his insolence and malice, and that I hoped
we should meet one day on shore. —At this he
grinned, shook his fist at me, and swore he longed
for nothing more than such an opportunity. 
Mean while, our ship was ordered to be heaved
down, victualled and watered, for her return to
England; and our captain, for some reason or
other, not thinking it convenient for him to revisit
his native country at this time, exchanged
with a gentleman, who on the other hand, wished
for nothing so much, as to be safe without the
tropick; all his care and tenderness of himself,
being insufficient to preserve his complexion from
the injuries of the sun and weather. 
Our tyrant having left the ship, and carried his
favourite Mackshane along with him, to my inexpressible
satisfaction; our new commander came
on board, in a ten-oar'd barge, overshadowed
with a vast umbrella, and appeared in every thing
quite the reverse of Oakhum, being a tall, thin,
young man, dressed in this manner; a white hat
garnished with a red feather, adorned his head,
from whence his hair flowed down upon his
shoulders, in ringlets tied behind with a ribbon. — 
His coat, consisting of pink-coloured silk, lined
with white, by the elegance of the cut retired
backward, as it were, to discover a white sattin
waistcoat embroidered with gold, unbuttoned at
the upper part, to display a broch set with garnets,
that glittered in the breast of his shirt,
which was of the finest cambrick, edged with
right mechlin: The knees of his crimson velvet
breeches scarce descended so low as to meet his 

silk stockings, which rose without spot or wrinkle
on his meagre legs, from shoes of blue Meroquin,
studded with diamond buckles, that flamed forth
rivals to the sun! A steel-hilted sword, inlaid with
figures of gold, and decked with a knot of ribbon
which fell down in a rich tossle, equipped his
side; and an amber-headed cane hung dangling
from his wrist: —But the most remarkable parts of
his furniture were, a mask on his face, and
white gloves on his hands, which did not seem
to be put on with an intention to be pulled off
occasionally, but were fixed with a ring set with
a ruby on the little finger of one hand, and by
one set with a topaz on that of the other. — 
In this garb, captain Whiffle, for that was his
name, took possession of the ship, surrounded
with a crowd of attendants, all of whom, in their
different degrees, seemed to be of their patron's
disposition; and the air was so impregnated with
persumes, that one may venture to affirm the clime
of Arabia Fœlix was not half so sweet-scented. 
—My fellow-mate, observing no surgeon among
his train, thought he had found an occasion too
favourable for himself to be neglected; and remembring
the old proverb, “Spare to speak,
and spare to speed,” resolved to sollicit the
new captain's interest immediately, before any
other surgeon could be appointed for the ship. 
—With this view he repaired to the cabbin, in
his ordinary dress, consisting of a check-shirt
and trousers, a brown linen waistcoat, and a
night-cap of the same, neither very clean, which
for his further misfortune, happened to smell
strong of tobacco. —Entering without any ceremony,
into this sacred place, he found captain 

Whiffle reposing upon a couch, with a wrapper
of fine chintz about his body, and a muslin cape
bordered with lace upon his head; and after several
low conge's, began in this manner: — 
“Sir, I hope you will forgive, and excuse, and
pardon the presumption of one who has not
the honour of being known unto you, but
who is, nevertheless, a shentleman porn and
pred, and moreover has had misfortunes, Got
help me, in the world.” —Here he was interrupted
by the captain, who at first sight of him
had started up with great amazement at the novelty
of the apparition; and having recollected
himself, pronounced, with a look and tone signifying
disdain, curiosity and surprize, “Zauns!
who art thou?” —“I am surgeon's first
first mate on board of this ship (replied Morgan)
and I most vehemently desire and beseech
you with all submission, to be pleased to condescend
and vouchsafe to enquire into my character,
and my pehaviour, and my deserts,
which, under Got, I hope, will entitle me to
the vacancy of surgeon.” —As he proceeded
in his speech, he continued advancing towards
the captain, whose nostrils were no sooner saluted
with the aromatick flavour that exhaled from
him, than he cried with great emotion, “Heaven
preserve me! I am suffocated! —Fellow,
Fellow, away with thee! —Curse thee, fellow!
get thee gone,—I shall be stunk to death!” — 
At the noise of his outcries, his servants run into
his apartment, and he accosted them thus; 
“Villains! cut-throats! traitors! I am betrayed! 
I am sacrificed! —Will you not carry that
monster away? or must I be stifled with the 

stench of him? oh! oh!” —With these interjections,
he sunk down upon his settee in a
fit; his valet de chambre plied him with a smelling-bottle,
one footman chased his temples with
Hungary water, another sprinkled the floor with
spirits of lavender, and a third pushed Morgan
out of the cabbin; who coming to the place where
I was, sat down with a demure countenance,
and, according to his custom, when he received
any indignity which he durst not revenge, began
to sing a Welch ditty. —I guessed he was under
some agitation of spirits, and desired to know
the cause; but instead of answering me directly,
he asked with great emotion, if I thought him a
monster and a stinkard? “A monster and a
stinkard (said I, with some surprize) did any
body call you so?” —“Got is my judge (replied
he) captain Fifle did call me both; ay,
and all the water in the Tawy will not wash
it out of my remembrance. —I do affirm, and
avouch, and maintain, with my soul, and my
pody, and my plood, look you, that I have no
smells about me, but such as a christian ought
to have, except the effluvia of topacco, which
is a cephalic, odoriferous, aromatick herb, and
he is a son of a mountain-goat who says otherwise. 
—As for my being a monster, let that be
as it is; I am as Got was pleased to create me,
which, peradventure, is more than I shall aver
of him who gave me that title; for I will proclaim
it before the world, that he is disguised,
and transfigured, and transmographied with
affectation and whimsies; and that he is more
like a papoon than one of the human race.” 