


Peregrine is summoned to attend his uncle, is more
and more hated by his own mother; appeals to
his father, whose condescension is defeated by the
dominion of his wife. 
But waving these reflections, let us return
to Peregrine, who received a summons to
attend his uncle, and in a few days arrived with
Mr. Jolter and Pipes at the garrison, which he
filled with joy and satisfaction. The alteration,
which, during his absence, had happened in his
person, was very favourable to his appearance,
which from that of a comely boy, was converted
into that of a most engaging youth. He was already
taller than a middle-sized man, his shape
ascertained, his sinews well knit, his mien greatly
improved, and his whole figure as elegant and
graceful, as if it had been cast in the same mould
with the Apollo of Belvidere. 
Such an outside could not fail of prepossessing
people in his favour. The commodore,
notwithstanding the advantageous reports he had
heard, found his expectation exceeded in the person
of Peregrine, and signified his approbation in
the most sanguine terms. Mrs. Trunnion was
struck with his genteel address, and received him
with uncommon marks of complacency and affection; 
he was caressed by all the people in the
neighbourhood, who, while they admired his accomplishments,
could not help pitying his infatuated
mother, who was deprived of that unutterable
delight which any other parent would 

have enjoyed in the contemplation of such an
amiable son. 
Divers efforts were made by some well-disposed
people, to conquer, if possible, this monstrous
prejudice; but their endeavours, instead of curing,
served only to inflame the distemper, and she never
could be prevailed upon to indulge him in the
least mark of maternal regard. On the contrary,
her original disgust degenerated into such inveteracy
of hatred, that she left no stone unturned to
alienate the commodore's affection for this her
innocent child, and even practised the most malicious
defamation to accomplish her purpose. 
Every day did she abuse her husband's ear with
some forged instance of Peregrine's ingratitude to
his uncle, well knowing that it would reach the
commodore's knowledge at night. 
Accordingly Mr. Pickle used to tell him at the
club, that his hopeful favourite had ridiculed him
in such a company, and aspersed his spouse upon
another occasion; and thus retail the little scandalous
issue of his own wife's invention. Luckily
for Peregrine, the commodore paid no great regard
to the authority of his informer, because he
knew from what canal his intelligence flowed; 
besides, the youth had a staunch friend in Mr.
Hatchway, who never failed to vindicate him
when he was thus unjustly accused, and always
found argument enough to confute the assertions
of his enemies. But, though Trunnion had been
dubious of the young gentleman's principles, and
deaf to the remonstrances of the lieutenant, Perry
was provided with a bulwark strong enough to
defend him from all such assaults. This was no
other than his aunt, whose regard for him was
perceived to increase in the same proportion as his 

own mother's diminished; and indeed, the augmentation
of the one was, in all probability, owing
to the decrease of the other; for the two ladies,
with great civility, performed all the duties
of good neighbourhood, and hated each other
most piously in their hearts. 
Mrs. Pickle having been disobliged at the
splendor of her sister's new equipage, had ever
since that time, in the course of her visiting, endeavoured
to make people merry with satirical
jokes on that poor lady's infirmities; and Mrs.
Trunnion seized the very first opportunity of
making reprisals, by inveighing against her unnatural
behaviour to her own child; so that Peregrine,
as on the one hand he was abhorred, so
on the other was he caressed in consequence of
this contention; and I firmly believe that the
most effectual method of destroying his interest at
the garrison, would have been the shew of countenancing
him at his father's house: but, whether
this conjecture be reasonable or chimerical,
certain it is the experiment was never tried, and
therefore Mr. Peregrine ran no risk of being disgraced. 
The commodore, who assumed, and justly
too, the whole merit of his education, was now
as proud of the youth's improvements, as if he
had actually been his own offspring; and sometimes
his affection rose to such a pitch of enthusiasm,
that he verily believed him to be the issue
of his own loins. Notwithstanding this favourable
predicament in which our hero stood with his
aunt and her husband, he could not help feeling
the injury he suffered from the caprice of his
mother; and though the gaiety of his disposition
hindered him from afflicting himself with reflexions
of any gloomy cast, he did not fail to forsee 

that if any sudden accident should deprive him
of the commodore, he would in all likelihood
find himself in a very disagreeable situation. 
Prompted by this consideration, he one evening
accompanied his uncle to the club, and was introduced
to his father, before that worthy gentleman
had the least inkling of his arrival. 
Mr. Gamaliel was never so disconcerted as at
this rencounter. His own disposition would not
suffer him to do any thing that might create the
least disturbance, or interrupt his evening's enjoyment; 
and so strongly was he impressed with the
terror of his wife, that he durst not yield to the
tranquillity of his temper: and, as I have already
observed, his inclination was perfectly neutral. 
Thus distracted between different motives, when
Perry was presented to him, he sat silent and absorpt,
as if he did not or would not perceive the
application; and when he was urged to declare
himself by the youth, who pathetically begged to
know how he had incurred his displeasure, he
answered in a peevish strain, “Why, good now,
child, what would you have me to do? your
mother can't abide you.” “If my mother is so
unkind, I will not call it unnatural, (said Peregrine,
the tears of indignation starting from his
eyes) as to banish me from her presence and affection,
without the least cause assigned; I hope
you will not be so unjust as to espouse her barbarous
prejudice.” Before Mr. Pickle had time to
reply to this expostulation, for which he was not
at all prepared, the commodore interposed, and
enforced his favourite's remonstrance, by telling
Mr. Gamaliel that he was ashamed to see any
man drive in such a miserable manner under his
wife's petticoat.” As for my own part, (said he, 

raising his voice, and assuming a look of importance
and command) before I would suffer myself
to be steered all weathers by any woman in Christendom,
d'ye see, I'd raise such a hurricane about
her ears that”—Here he was interrupted by
Mr. Hatchway, who thrusting his head towards
the door, in the attitude of one that listens, cried
“Ahey! there's your spouse come to pay us a
visit.” Trunnion's features that instant adopted
a new disposition: fear and confusion took possession
of his countenance; his voice from a tone
of vociferation sunk into a whisper of “Sure you
must be mistaken, Jack;” and in great perplexity
he wiped off the sweat which had started on his
forehead at this false alarm. The lieutenant having
thus punished him for the rhodomontade he
had uttered, told him with an arch sneer, that
he was deceived by the sound of the outward door
creaking upon its hinges, which he mistook for
Mrs. Trunnion's voice, and desired him to proceed
with his admonitions to Mr. Pickle. It is
not to be denied that this arrogance was a little
unseasonable in the commodore, who was in all
respects as effectually subdued to the dominion of
his wife, as the person whose submission he then
ventured to condemn; with this difference of disposition: 
Trunnion's subjection was like that of
a bear, chequered with fits of surliness and rage; 
whereas Pickle bore the yoke like an ox, without
repining. No wonder then that this indolence,
this sluggishness, this stagnation of temper, rendered
Gamaliel incapable of withstanding the arguments
and importunity of his friends, to which
he at length surrendered, acquiesced in the justice
of their observations, and taking his son by the 

hand, promised to favour him for the future with
his love and fatherly protection. 
But this laudable resolution did not last; Mrs.
Pickle still dubious of his constancy, and jealous
of his communication with the commodore, never
failed to interrogate him every night about
the conversation that happened at the club; and
regulate her exhortations according to the intelligence
she received. He was no sooner, therefore,
safely conveyed to bed, (that academy in which
all notable wives communicate their lectures)
when her catechism began; and she in a moment
perceived something reluctant and equivocal in
her husband's answers. Arroused at this discovery,
she employed her influence and skill with such
success, that he disclosed every circumstance of
what had happened; and after having sustained a
most severe rebuke for his simplicity and indiscretion,
humbled himself so far as to promise
that he would next day annul the condescensions
he had made, and for ever renounce the ungracious
object of her disgust. This undertaking
was punctually performed in a letter to the commodore,
which she herself dictated in these words. 

Sir,
Whereas my good-nature being last night
imposed upon, I was persuaded to countenance
and promise I know not what to that
vicious youth, whose parent I have the misfortune
to be; I desire you will take notice that I revoke
all such countenance and promises, and shall never
look upon that man as my friend, who will
henceforth in such a cause solicit, 
Sir, yours, &c.
Gam. Pickle. 