


My grandfather makes his will. —Our second
visit—he dies—his will is read in presence
of all his living descendants—the disappointment
of my female cousins—my uncle's
behaviour. 
A few weeks after our first visit, we were
informed that the old judge, after a fit of
thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had sent
for a notary and made his will; that the distemper
had mounted from his legs to his stomach,
and being conscious of his approaching end, he
had desired to see all his descendants without exception. 
—In obedience to this summons, my 

uncle set out with me a second time, to receive
the last benediction of my grandfather; often
repeating by the road, “Ey, ey, we have brought
up the old hulk at last. —You shall see,—you
shall see the effect of my admonition.” — 
When we entered his chamber, which was
crowded with his relations, we advanced to the
bed-side, where we found him in his last agonies,
supported by two of his grand-daughters, who
sat on each side of him, sobbing most piteously,
and wiping away the froth and slaver as it gathered
on his lips, which they frequently kissed
with a shew of great anguish and affection. — 
I know not whether or not he perceived my uncle,
who approached him with these words, “What!
he's not a weigh. —How fare ye,—how fare
ye, old gentleman? —Lord have mercy upon
your poor sinful soul.” —But the dying man
turned his sunken eyes towards us,—when my
uncle went on. —“Here's poor Rory come to
see you before you die and receive your blessing. 
—What man! don't despair,—you have
been a great sinner, 'tis true,—what then? 
There's a righteous judge above,—isn't there? 
He minds me no more than a porpuss. —Yes,
yes, he's a going,—the land crabs will have
him, I see that;—his anchor's a peak, i' faith!” 
—This homely consolation scandalized the company
so much, and especially the parson, who
probably thought his province-invaded, that we
were obliged to retire into another room, where
in a few minutes, we were convinced of my grandfather's
decease, by a dismal yell uttered by the young
ladies in his apartment; whither we immediately
hastened, and found his heir, who had retired a little 

before, into a closet under pretence of giving vent
to his sorrow, asking, with a countenance beslubbered
with tears, if his grandpapa was certainly
dead? —“Dead! (says my uncle, looking at the
body) ay, ay, I'll warrant him as dead as a
herring. —Odd's fish! now my dream is
out for all the world. —I thought I stood upon
the Fore-castle, and saw a parcel of carrion
crows foul of a dead shark that floated along-side,
and the devil perching on our sprit-sail-yard,
in the likeness of a blue bear—who,
d'ye see, jumped over-board upon the carcase,
and carried it to the bottom in his claws.” — 
“Out upon thee, reprobate (cries the parson)
out upon thee, blasphemous wretch! —Dost
thou think his honour's soul is in the possession
of Satan?” —The clamour immediately arose,
and my poor uncle, who was shouldered from
one corner of the room to the other, was obliged
to lug out in his own defence, and swear he
would turn out for no man, till such time as he
knew who had a title to send him a-drift. — 
“None of your tricks upon travellers (said he;)
may hap, old buff has left my kinsman here,
his heir;—If he has, it will be the better for
his miserable soul. —Odd's bob! I'd desire no
better news. —I'd soon make a clear ship, I
warrant you.” —To avoid any farther disturbance,
one of my grandfather's executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew
should have all manner of justice; that a day should
be appointed, after the funeral, for examining the
papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; 
till such time every desk and cabinet in
the house should remain close sealed; and that he
was very welcome to be witness of this ceremony, 

which was immediately performed to his satisfaction. 
—In the mean time, orders were given
to provide mourning for all the relations, in which
number I was included: but my uncle would not
suffer me to accept of it, until I should be assured
whether or no I had reason to honour his
memory so far. —During this interval, the conjectures
of people, with regard to the old gentleman's
will, were various: as it was well known,
he had, besides his landed estate, which was worth
700l. per annum, six or seven thousand pounds at
interest. Some imagined, that the whole real
estate (which he had greatly improved) would go
to the young man whom he always entertained as
his heir; and that the money would be equally
divided between my female cousins (five in number)
and me. —Others were of opinion, that as
the rest of his children had been already provided
for, he would only bequeath two or three hundred
pounds to each of his grand-daughters, and
leave the bulk of the sum to me, to atone for
his unnatural usage towards my father. —At
length the important hour arrived, and the will
was produced in the midst of the expectants,
whose looks and gestures formed a groupe that
would have been very entertaining to an unconcerned
spectator. —But the reader can scarce conceive
the astonishment and mortification that appeared,
when an attorney pronounced aloud, the
young 'squire sole heir of all his grandfather's
estate personal and real. —My uncle, who had
listened with great attention, sucking the head
of his cudgel all the while, accompanied these
words of the attorney with a stare, and whew,
that alarmed the whole assembly. The eldest and
pertest of my female competitors, who had been 

always very officious about my grandfather's person,
enquired with a faultering accent, and visage
as yellow as an orange, “if there were no legacies?” 
she was answered, “none at all.” — 
Upon which she fainted away. —The rest, whose
expectations (perhaps) were not so sanguine,
supported their disappointment with more resolution; 
though not without giving evident marks
of indignation, and grief at least as genuine as
that which appeared in them at the old gentleman's
death. My conductor, after having kicked
with his heel for some time against the wainscot,
began: “So there's no legacy, friend, ha!— 
here's an old Succubus;—but somebody's soul
howls for it, d&wblank;n me!” —The parson of the
parish, who was one of the executors, and had
acted as ghostly director of the old man, no
sooner heard this, than he cried out, “Avaunt,
unchristian reveler! avaunt! wilt thou not allow
the soul of his honour to rest in the
grave till the resurrection?” —But this zealous
pastor did not find himself so warmly seconded,
as formerly, by the young ladies, who now joined
my uncle against him, and accused him of having
acted the part of a busy-body with their grandpapa,
whose ears he had most certainly abused
by false stories to their prejudice, or else he would
not have neglected them, in such an unnatural
manner. —The young 'squire was much diverted
with this scene, and whispered to my uncle, that
if he had not murdered his dogs, he would have
shewn him glorious sun, by hunting a black badger
(so he term'd the clergyman). —The surly
lieutenant, who was not in an humour to relish
this amusement, replied, “you and your dogs
may be damned. —I suppose you'll find them 

with your old dad, in the latitude of hell. — Come, Rory—about ship, my lad, we must
steer another course, I think.”—and away we
went. 