


DEAR KNIGHT,
THE fatal knot are now tied. The comedy
is near a close; and the curtain is ready to drop:
but, the latter scenes of this act I shall recapitulate
in order. —About a fortnight ago, my uncle made
an excursion a cross the country, and brought hither
a particular friend, one Mr. Baynard, who has
just lost his wife, and was for some time disconsolate,
though by all accounts he had much more
cause for joy than for sorrow at this event. —His
countenance, however, clears up apace; and he 

appears to be a person of rare accomplishments. — 
But we have received another still more agreeable
reinforcement to our company, by the arrival of
Miss Willis from Gloucester. She was Liddy's
bosom friend at the boarding-school, and being earnestly solicited to assist at the nuptials, her mother
was so obliging as to grant my sister's request, and
even to come with her in person. Liddy, accompanied
by George Dennison and me, gave them
the meeting half-way, and next day conducted
them hither in safety. Miss Willis is a charming
girl, and, in point of disposition, an agreeable contrast
to my sister, who is rather too grave and sentimental
for my turn of mind —The other is gay,
frank, a little giddy, and always good-humoured. 
She has, moreover, a genteel fortune, is well born,
and remarkably handsome. —Ah Phillips! if these
qualities were permanent if her humour would
never change, nor her beauties decay, what efforts
would I not make —But these are idle reflections 
—my destiny must one day be fulfilled. 
At present we pass the time as agreeably as we
can —We have got up several farces which afforded
unspeakable entertainment by the effects
they produced among the country people, who are
admitted to all our exhibitions —Two nights ago
Jack Wilson acquired great applause in Harlequin
Skeleton, and Lismahago surprized us all in the
character of Pierot. —His long lank sides, and
strong marked features, were all peculiarly adapted
to his part. —He appeared with a ludicrous stare,
from which he had discharged all meaning: he
adopted the impressions of fear and amazement so
naturally, that many of the audience were infected
by his looks; but when the skeleton held him in
chase, his horror became most divertingly picturesque,
and seemed to endow him with such præternatural
agility as confounded all the spectators. It 

was a lively representation of Death in pursuit of
Consumption, and had such an effect upon the
commonalty, that some of them shrieked aloud,
and others ran out of the hall in the utmost consternation. 
This is not the only instance in which the lieutenant
has already excited our wonder. His temper
which had been soured and shrivelled by disappointment
and chagrin, is now swelled out, and
smoothed like a raisin in plum-porridge. From
being reserved and punctilious, he is become easy
and obliging. He cracks jokes, laughs and banters
with the most facetious familiarity; and, in a
word, enters into all our schemes of merriment
and pastime —The other day his baggage arrived
in the waggon from London, contained in two
large trunks and a long deal box not unlike a coffin. 
The trunks were filled with his wardrobe, which
he displayed for the entertainment of the company,
and he freely owned, that it consisted chiefly of the
opima spolia taken in battle. What he selected for
his wedding suit, was a tarnished white cloth faced
with blue velvet, embroidered with silver; but, he
valued himself most upon a tye-periwig, in which
he had made his first appearance as a lawyer above
thirty years ago. This machine had been in
buckle ever since, and now all the servants in the
family were employed to frizz it out for the occasion,
which was yesterday celebrated at the parish
church. George Dennison and his bride were distinguished
by nothing extraordinary in their apparel. 
His eyes lightened with eagerness and joy,
and she trembled with coyness and confusion. My
uncle gave her away, and her friend Willis supported
her during the ceremony. 
But my aunt and her paramour took the pas,
and formed, indeed, such a pair of originals, as, I
believe, all England could not parallel. She was 

dressed in the stile of 1739; and the day being cold,
put on a manteel of green velvet laced with gold; 
but this was taken off by the bridegroom, who
threw over her shoulders a fur cloak of American
fables, valued at four score guineas, a present
equally agreeable and unexpected. Thus accoutred,
she was led up to the altar by Mr. Dennison, who
did the office of her father: Lismahago advanced
in the military step with his French coat reaching
no farther than the middle of his thigh, his campaign
wig that surpasses all description, and a
languishing leer upon his countenance, in which
there seemed to be something arch and ironical. 
The ring, which he put upon her finger, he had
concealed till the moment it was used. He now
produced it with an air of self-complacency. It
was a curious antique, set with rose diamonds; he
told us afterwards, it had been in his family two
hundred years, and was a present from his grandmother. 
These circumstances agreeably flattered
the pride of our aunt Tabitha, which had already
found uncommon gratification in the captain's generosity; 
for he had, in the morning, presented
my uncle with a fine bear's skin, and a Spanish
fowling-piece, and me with a case of pistols curiously
mounted with silver. At the same time, he gave
Mrs. Jenkins an Indian purse, made of silk grass,
containing twenty crown pieces. You must know,
this young lady, with the assistance of Mr. Loyd,
formed the third couple who yesterday sacrificed to
Hymen. I wrote to you in my last, that he had
recourse to my mediation, which I employed successfully
with my uncle; but Mrs. Tabitha held
out till the love-sick Jenkins had two fits of the
mother; then she relented, and those two cooing
turtles were caged for life —Our aunt made an
effort of generosity in furnishing the bride with her
superfluties of clothes and linen, and her example 

was followed by my sister; nor did Mr. Bramble
and I neglect her on this occasion. It was, indeed,
a day of peace offering —Mr. Dennison insisted
upon Liddy's accepting two bank notes of one
hundred pounds each, as pocket-money; and his
lady gave her a diamond necklace of double that
value. There was, besides, a mutual exchange of
tokens among the individuals of the two families
thus happily united 
As George Dennison and his partner were judged
improper objects of mirth, Jack Wilson had resolved
to execute some jokes on Lismahago, and
after supper began to ply him with bumpers, when
the ladies had retired; but the captain perceiving
his drift, begged for quarter, alledging that the
adventure, in which he had engaged, was a very
serious matter; and that it would be more the part
of a good Christian to pray that he might be
strengthened, than to impede his endeavours to
finish the adventure. —He was spared accordingly,
and permitted to ascend the nuptial couch with all
his senses about him. —There he and his consort
sat in state, like Saturn and Cybele, while the
benediction-posset was drank; and a cake being
broken over the head of Mrs. Tabitha Lismahago,
the fragments were distributed among the bystanders,
according to the custom of the antient
Britons, on the supposition that every person who
ate of this hallowed cake, should that night have
a vision of the man or woman whom Heaven
designed should be his or her wedded mate. 
The weight of Wilson's waggery fell upon honest
Humphry and his spouse, who were bedded in
an upper room, with the usual ceremony of throwing
the stocking. —This being performed, and the
company withdrawn, a sort of catterwauling ensued,
when Jack found means to introduce a real
cat shod with walnut-shells, which galloping along 

the boards, made such a dreadful noise as effectually
discomposed our lovers. —Winifried screamed
aloud, and shrunk under the bed-cloaths. —Mr.
Loyd, believing that Satan was come to buffet him
in propria persona, laid aside all carnal thoughts, and
began to pray aloud with great fervency. —At
length, the poor animal, being more afraid than
either, leaped into the bed, and meauled with the
most piteous exclamation. —Loyd, thus informed
of the nature of the annoyance, rose and set the
door wide open, so that this troublesome visitan
retreated with great expedition; then securing
himself, by means of a double bolt, from a second
intrusion, he was left to enjoy his good fortune
without further disturbance. 
If one may judge from the looks of the parties,
they are all very well satisfied with what has passed,
—george Dennison and his wife are too delicate to
exhibit any strong-marked signs of their mutual satisfaction,
but their eyes are sufficiently expressive. 
—Mrs. Tabitha Lismahago is rather fulsome in
signifying her approbation of the captain's love; 
while his deportment is the very pink of gallantry, 
—He sighs, and ogles, and languishes at this amiable
object; kisses her hand, mutters ejaculations
of rapture, and sings tender airs; and, no
doubt, laughs internally at her folly in believing
him sincere. —In order to shew how little his vigour
was impaired by the fatigues of the proceeding day,
he this morning danced a Highland saraband over
a naked back-sword, and leaped so high, that I
believe he would make no contemptible figure as a
vaulter at Sadler's Wells —Mr. Matthew Loyd,
when asked how he relishes his bargain, throws
up his eyes, crying, “For what we have received,
Lord make us thankful: amen.” —His helpmate
giggles, and holds her hand before her eyes,
affecting to be ashamed of having been in bed with 

a man. —Thus all these widgeons enjoy the novelty
of their situation; but, perhaps their note will
be changed, when they are better acquainted with
the nature of the decoy. 
As Mrs. Willis cannot be persuaded to stay, and
Liddy is engaged by promise to accompany her
daughter back to Gloucester, I fancy there will be
a general migration from hence, and that most of
us will spend the Christmas holidays at Bath; in
which case, I shall certainly find an opportunity to
beat up your quarters. —By this time, I suppose,
you are sick of alma mater, and even ready to execute
that scheme of peregrination, which was last
year concerted between you and 
your affectionate
J. Melford. 
Nov. 8. 