


THANK Heaven! dear Lewis, the clouds are
dispersed, and I have now the clearest prospect of
my summer campaign, which, I hope, I shall be
able to begin to-morrow. I took the advice of
counsel, with respect to the case of Clinker, in
whose favour a lucky incident has intervened. The
fellow who accused him, has had his own battery
turned upon himself. —Two days ago, he was apprehended
for a robbery on the highway, and
committed on the evidence of an accomplice. 
Clinker, having moved for a writ of habeas corpus,
was brought before the lord chief justice, who,
in consequence of an affidavit of the gentleman
who had been robbed, importing that the said
Clinker was not the person who stopped him on
the highway, as well as in consideration of the
postillion's character and present circumstances,
was pleased to order, that my servant should be 

admitted to bail, and he has been discharged accordingly,
to the unspeakable satisfaction of our
whole family, to which he has recommended himself
in an extraordinary manner, not only by his
obliging deportment, but by his talents of preaching,
praying, and singing psalms, which he has
exercised with such effect, that even Tabby respects
him as a chosen vessel. If there was any
thing like affectation or hypocrisy in this excess of
religion, I would not keep him in my service; 
but, so far as I can observe, the fellow's character
is downright simplicity, warmed with a kind of
enthusiasm, which renders him very susceptible of
gratitude and attachment to his benefactors. 
As he is an excellent horseman, and understands
farriery, I have bought a stout gelding for his use,
that he may attend us on the road, and have an
eye to our cattle, in case the coachman should not
mind his business. My nephew, who is to ride
his own saddle horse, has taken, upon trial, a servant
just come from abroad with his former master,
sir William Strollop, who vouches for his honesty. 
The fellow, whose name is Dutton, seems
to be a petit-maitre. —He has got a smattering of
French, bows, and grins, and shrugs, and takes
snuff a la mode de France, but values himself chiefly
upon his skill and dexterity in hair-dressing—If I
am not much deceived by appearance, he is, in all
respects, the very contrast of Humphry Clinker. 
My sister has made up matters with lady Griskin; 
though, I must own, I should not have been sorry
to see that connexion entirely destroyed: but Tabby
is not of a disposition to forgive Barton, who, I
understand, is gone to his seat in Berkshire for the
summer season. I cannot help suspecting, that in
the treaty of peace, which has been lately ratified
betwixt those two females, it is stipulated, that her
ladyship shall use her best endeavours to provide an 

agreeable help mate for our sister Tabitha, who
seems to be quite desperate in her matrimonial designs. 
Perhaps, the match-maker is to have a valuable
consideration in the way of brokerage, which
she will most certainly deserve, if she can find any
man in his senses, who will yoke with Mrs. Bramble
from motives of affection or interest. 
I find my spirits and my health affect each other
reciprocally—that is to say, every thing that discomposes
my mind, produces a correspondent disorder
in my body; and my bodily complaints are
remarkably mitigated by those considerations that
dissipate the clouds of mental chagrin—The imprisonment
of Clinker brought on those symptoms
which I mentioned in my last, and now they are
vanished at his discharge. —It must be owned, indeed,
I took some of the tincture of ginseng, prepared
according to your prescription, and found it
exceedingly grateful to the stomach; but the pain
and sickness continued to return, after short intervals,
till the anxiety of my mind was entirely removed,
and then I found myself perfectly at ease. 
We have had fair weather these ten days, to the
astonishment of the Londoners, who think it portentous. 
If you enjoy the same indulgence in
Wales, I hope Barns has got my hay made, and
safe cocked, by this time. As we shall be in motion
for some weeks, I cannot expect to hear from
you as usual; but I shall continue to write from
every place at which we make any halt, that you
may know our track, in case it should be necessary
to communicate any thing to. 
your assured friend,
Matt. Bramble. 
London, June 14. 