


He exercises his talents at the expence of the school-master,
whose character and business declining,
he desires to be recalled. 
As the German professed himself a man of
learning, and sometimes affected to make
a parade of it, by examining the younger boys on
the rudiments or grammar, which he made shift
to comprehend; Peregrine, who was advanced
as far as Cornelius Nepos, used to teize and perplex 

him, by frequently begging his explanation
of certain sentences in that author, while the
usher was engaged in some other employment. 
On these occasions he practised a thousand pitiful
shifts to conceal his own nakedness; sometimes
reprehending the boy for disturbing him in
his meditations, sometimes pleading the weakness
of his eyes, that hindered him from considering
the passage; and sometimes remitting him to the
dictionary, as a punishment for his inattention
when it was construed by Mr. Jennings. Notwithstanding
these evasions, he was persecuted by
his tormentor with such perseverance, that he
could find no other resource than that of pretending
to be in a violent hurry, in consequence of
which he always quitted the place; so that whenever
Perry and his companions were incommoded
by his presence, they had recourse to this expedient,
which never failed to expel him in a trice. 
Not contented with having thus rendered him
contemptible in the eyes of his disciples, this indefatigable
wag exercised his invention in various
contrivances, to plague, disturb and expose him. 
Conscious of his own defect in point of stature
and proportion, the little pedant used all the additions
of art and address to improve his person,
and raise himself as near as possible to the standard
dimensions of nature; with this view he wore
shoes with heels three inches high, strutted like
a peacock in walking, and erected his head with
such muscular exertion, as rendered it impossible
for him to extend his vision downwards blow the
preternatural prominence of his breast. Peregrine,
therefore, taking advantage of this foppery, used
to strew his way with bean-shells, on which
whenever he chanced to tread, his heels slipped 

from under him, his hunch pitched upon the
ground, and the furniture of his head fell off in
the shock; so that he lay in a very ludicrous attitude
for the entertainment of the spectators. He
moreover seized opportunities of studding his
breeches with large pins, which when he sat down
with a sudden jirk, penetrated the skin of his posteriors,
and compelled him to start up again with
infinite expedition, and roar hideously with the
pain. Nay, perceiving that he was extremely penurious
in his house-keeping, he spoilt many a
pot of excellent soup maigre, by slily conveying
into it handfuls of salt or soot, and even drove
needles into the heads of sundry fowls, that from
the suddenness of their death he might conclude
some infection was communicated to his poultry,
and dispose of them accordingly for the half of their
value. But no instance of young Pickle's mischievous
talents affected him with such immediate perplexity
and confusion as this that I am going to recount. 
Being apprized by one of his friends that a lady
of fashion intended to visit his school on a certain
day, without giving any previous notice of her
coming, that she might be an eye-witness of the
accommodation in his house before she would
commit her son to his care, he ordered his
boarders and apartments to be dished out for the
occasion, spared no pains in adorning his own
person, and in particular employed a whole hour
in adjusting a voluminous tye, in which he proposed
to make his appearance. Thus prepared,
he waited with great confidence and tranquillity,
and no sooner saw the coach appear at a distance,
than he went to his closet in order to put on the
periwig, which he had deposited in a box, that no
accident might ruffle or discompose it before it
was presented to her ladyship; but neither the 

box nor its contents were to be found. At first
he thought it might be misplaced by some of the
servants, to whom he called with great eagerness
and vociferation, while he himself ran from room
to room in quest of what he wanted: the domesticks
could give him no intelligence of his tye; 
he heard the gates opened to admit the equipage,
his impatience increased, he swore in high Dutch,
the noise of the wheels on his pavement saluted
his ears, his vexation redoubled, and tossing his
night-cap on the floor, he waddled down stairs
to the hall for his ordinary periwig, which he now
found himself compelled to wear. How shall I
describe his distraction when he understood that
too was missing! he became quite delirious,
foamed at the mouth, danced to and fro in the
passage like one bereft of his senses, blasphemed
alternately in English and French, and must have
been found by the lady in that frantic condition,
had not his servants conveyed him to his own
chamber by force. 
The noble visitant was received by Jennings,
who told her that Mr. Keypstick was confined
to his bed, and explained the whole œconomy of
the school so much to her satisfaction, that she
resolved to honour them with the charge of her
own offspring. Keypstick fell sick in good earnest,
and his intellects seemed to have received a rude
shock from the violence of the passion into which
he had been precipitated by the roguery of Peregrine,
who had concealed both periwigs in the
cellar, and now having enjoyed his trick, carried
them back unperceived to the places from
which they had been removed. 
A whole week elapsed before the master recovered
so much temper as to appear decently in public; 

and even then his countenance was stormy,
and his resentment against the authors of his disgrace
so intense, that he promised a reward of
five guineas to any boy that would discover the
principal actor, or any of the accomplices concerned
in this audacious intrigue; declaring that
no consideration should screen the offenders from
condign punishment, could they once be convicted
of the trick. 
Pickle had not conducted this Jeu d'esprit
without participation, and some there were privy
to the affair whose fidelity was not incorruptible; 
but their secrecy was secured by the terror of Peregrine,
whose authority and influence was such
as to baffle the master in all his endeavours to unravel
the conspiracy. 
This extraordinary reserve, and the recollection
of several other mortifying jokes he had
undergone, inspired him with ungenerous suspicions
of Mr. Jennings, who he could not help
thinking had been at the bottom of them all, and
spirited up principles of rebellion in the school,
with a view of making himself independent. Possessed
with this chimera, which was void of all foundation,
the German descended so low as to tamper
in private with the boys, from whom he hoped
to draw some very important discovery; but he
was disappointed in his expectation; and this
mean practice reaching the ears of his usher, he
voluntarily resigned his employment, and finding
interest to obtain holy orders in a little time after,
left the kingdom, hoping to find a settlement in
some of our American plantations. 
The departure of Mr. Jennings produced a
great revolution in the affairs of Keypstick, which
declined from that moment, because he had neither 

authority to enforce obedience, nor prudence to
maintain order among his scholars; so that the
school degenerated into anarchy and confusion,
and he himself dwindled in the opinion of his
imployers, who looked upon him as superannuated,
and withdrew their children from his tuition. 
Peregrine seeing this dissolution of their society,
and finding himself every day deprived of some
companion, began to repine at his situation, and
resolved, if possible, to procure his release from
the jurisdiction of a person whom he both detested
and despised. With this view he went to work,
and composed the following billet, addressed to
the commodore, which was the first specimen of
his composition in the epistolary way. 

Honoured and loving uncle,
Hoping you are in good health, this serves
to inform you, that Mr. Jennings is
gone, and Mr. Keypstick will never meet with
his fellow. The school is already almost broke
up, and the rest daily going away; and I beg of
you of all love to have me fetched away also, for
I cannot bear to be any longer under one who is
a perfect ignoramus, who scarce knows the declination
of musa, and is more fit to be a scare-crow
than a schoolmaster; hoping you will send for
me soon, with my love to my aunt and my duty
to my honoured parents, craving their blessing
and yours. And this is all at present from, honoured
uncle, your well-beloved and dutiful nephew
and godson, and humble servant to command
'till death 
Peregrine Pickle. 

Trunnion was overjoyed at the receit of this
letter, which he looked upon as one of the greatest
efforts of human genius, and as such communicated
the contents to his lady, whom he had disturbed
for the purpose in the middle of her devotion,
by sending a message to her closet, whither
it was her custom very frequently to retire. She
was out of humour at being interrupted, and
therefore did not peruse this specimen of her nephew's
understanding with all the relish that the
commodore himself had enjoyed; on the contrary,
after sundry paralytical endeavours to speak,
(for her tongue sometimes refused its office) she
observed that the boy was a pert jackanapes, and
deserved to be severely chastised for treating his
betters with such disrespect. Her husband undertook
his godson's defence, representing with great
warmth that he knew Keypstick to be a good for
nothing pimping old rascal, and that Perry shewed
a great deal of spirit and good sense in desiring to
be taken from under his command; he therefore
declared that the boy should not live a week
longer with such a shambling son of a bitch, and
sanctioned his declaration with abundance of
oaths. 
Mrs. Trunnion composing her countenance
into a look of religious demureness, rebuked him
for his profane way of talking, and asked in a
magisterial tone if he intended never to lay aside
that brutal behaviour? Irritated at this reproach,
he answered in terms of indignation, that he knew
how to behave himself as well as e'er a woman
that wore a head, had her mind her own affairs,
and with another repetition of oaths gave her to
understand that he would be master in his own
house. 

This insinuation operated upon her spirits like
friction upon a glass globe, her face gleamed with
resentment, and every pore seemed to emit particles
of flame. She replied with incredible fluency
of the bitterest expressions. He retorted equal
rage in broken hints and incoherent imprecations. 
She rejoined with redoubled fury, and in conclusion
he was fain to betake himself to flight, ejaculating
curses against her; and muttering something
concerning the brandy-bottle, which, however,
he took care should never reach her ears. 
From his own house he went directly to visit Mrs.
Pickle, to whom he imparted Peregrine's epistle
with many encomiums upon the boy's promising
parts; and finding his commendations but coldly
received, desired she would permit him to take
his godson under his own care. 
This lady, whose family was now increased by
another son that seemed to engross her care for
the present, had not seen Perry during a course
of four years, and with regard to him, was perfectly
weaned of that infirmity known by the
name of maternal fondness; she therefore consented
to the commodore's request with great condescension,
and a polite compliment to him on
the concern he had all along manifested for the
welfare of the child. 