


He cultivates an acquaintance with the Misanthrope,
who favours him with a short sketch of
his own history. 
Peregrine was extremely well pleased at this
occasional rebuke, which occurred so seasonably,
that he could scarce believe it accidental. 
He looked upon Cadwallader as the greatest curiosity
he had ever known, and cultivated the old 

man's acquaintance with such insinuating address,
that in less than a fortnight he obtained his confidence; 
and as they one day walked into the fields
together, the Manhater disclos'd himself, in these
words: “Tho' the term of our communication
has been but short, you must have perceived,
that I treat you with uncommon marks of regard; 
which, I assure you, is not owing to your
personal accomplishments, nor the pains you take
to oblige me; for the first I overlook, and the
last I see through: but there is something in
your disposition which indicates a rooted contempt
for the world, and I understand you have
made some successful efforts, in exposing one
part of it to the ridicule of the other. It is upon
this assurance, that I offer you my advice and
assistance, in prosecuting other schemes of the
same nature; and to convince you that such an
alliance is not to be rejected, I will now give you
a short sketch of my history, which will be published
after my death, in forty seven volumes of
my own compiling. 
I was born about forty miles from this place,
of parents who having a very old family-name to
support, bestowed their whole fortune on my elder
brother; so that I inherited of my father
little else than a large share of choler, to which
I am indebted for a great many adventures that
did not always end to my satisfaction. At the
age of eighteen I was sent up to town, with a
recommendation to a certain peer, who found
means to amuse me with the promise of a commission,
for seven whole years; and 'tis odds but
I should have made my fortune by my perseverance,
had not I been arrested, and thrown into
the Marshalsea by my landlord, on whose credit 

I had subsisted three years, after my father had
renounced me as an idle vagabond. There I remained
six months, among those prisoners who
have no other support than chance charity; and
contracted a very valuable acquaintance, which
was of great service to me in the future emergencies
of my life. 
I was no sooner discharged, in consequence of
an act of parliament for the relief of insolvent
debtors, than I went to the house of my creditor,
whom I cudgelled without mercy; and that
I might leave nothing undone of those things
which I ought to have done, my next stage was
to Westminster-hall, where I waited until my
patron came forth from the house, and saluted
him with a blow that laid him senseless on the
pavement: but my retreat was not so fortunate
as I could have wished, the chairmen and lacquies
in waiting having surrounded and disarmed
me in a trice, I was committed to Newgate,
and loaded with chains; and a very sagacious
gentleman, who was afterwards hanged, having
sat in judgment upon my case, pronounced me
guilty of a capital crime, and foretold my condemnation
at the Old Baily. His prognostic,
however, was disappointed; for no body appearing
to prosecute me at the next sessions, I was
discharged, by order of the court. It would be
impossible for me to recount, in the compass of
one day's conversation, all the particular exploits
in which I bore a considerable share: suffice it to
say, I have been, at different times, prisoner in
all the jails within the bills of mortality. I have
broke from every round-house on this side
Temple-bar. No bailiff, in the days of my
youth and desperation, durst execute a writ upon 

me without a dozen followers; and the
justices themselves trembled when I was brought
before them. 
I was once maimed by a carman, with whom
I quarrelled, because he ridiculed my leek on St.
David's day; my skull was fractured by a butcher's
cleaver, on the like occasion. I have
been run thro' the body five times, and lost the
tip of my left ear by a pistol bullet. In a rencounter
of this kind, having left my antagonist
for dead, I was wise enough to make my retreat
into France; and a few days after my arrival at
Paris entering into conversation with some officers
on the subject of politics, a dispute arose, in
which I lost my temper, and spoke so irreverently
of the Grand Monarque, that next morning I
was sent to the bastile, by virtue of a Lettre de
Cachet. There I remained for some months, deprived
of all intercourse with rational creatures; 
a circumstance for which I was not sorry, as I
had the more time to project schemes of revenge
against the tyrant who confined me, and the
wretch who had betrayed my private conversation:
but tired, at length, with these fruitless
suggestions, I was fain to unbend the severity of
my thoughts by a correspondence with some industrious
spiders, who had hung my dungeon
with their ingenious labours. 
I considered their work with such attention,
that I soon became an adept in the mystery of
weaving, and furnished myself with as many useful
observations and reflections on that art, as
will compose a very curious treatise, which I intend
to bequeath to the Royal Society, for the
benefit of our woolen manufacture; and this
with a view to perpetuate my own name, rather 

than befriend my country: for, thank heaven! 
I am weaned from all attachments of that kind,
and look upon myself as one very little obliged to
any society whatsoever. Although I presided with
absolute power over this long-legg'd community,
and distributed rewards and punishments to each,
according to his deserts, I grew impatient of
my situation; and my natural disposition, one
day, prevailing, like a fire which had long been
smothered, I wreaked the fury of my indignation
upon my innocent subjects, and in a twinkling
destroyed the whole race. While I was employed
in this general massacre, the turnkey, who
brought me food, opening the door, and perceiving
my transport, shrugged up his shoulders,
and leaving my allowance, went out, pronouncing,
Le pauvre diable! la tete lui tourne. My passion
no sooner subsided than I resolved to profit by
this opinion of the jailor, and from that day counterfeited
lunacy with such success, that in less
than three months I was delivered from the
bastile, and sent to the gallies, in which they
thought my bodily vigour might be of service,
although the faculties of my mind were decayed. 
Before I was chained to the oar, I received three
hundred stripes by way of welcome, that I might
thereby be rendered more tractable, notwithstanding
I used all the arguments in my power to
persuade them, I was only mad north, north west,
and when the wind was southerly, knew a hawk
from an hand-saw. 
In our second cruize we had the good fortune
to be overtaken by a tempest, during which the
slaves were unbound, that they might contribute
the more to the preservation of the galley, and 

have a chance for their lives, in case of a shipwreck. 
We were no sooner at liberty, than
making ourselves masters of the vessel, we robbed
the officers, and ran her on shore among rocks
on the coast of Portugal; from whence I hastened
to Lisbon, with a view of obtaining my passage
in some ship bound for England, where, by
this time, I hoped my affair would be forgotten. 
But before this scheme could be accomplished,
my evil genius led me into company; and being
intoxicated, I began to broach doctrines on the
subject of religion, at which some of the partie
were scandalized and incensed; and I was next
day dragged out of bed by the officers of the inquisition,
and conveyed to a cell in the prison
belonging to that tribunal. 
At my first examination my resentment was
strong enough to support me under the torture,
which I endured without flinching; but my resolution
abated, and my zeal immediately cooled,
when I understood from a fellow-prisoner,
who groaned on the other side of the partition,
that in a short time there would be an Auto da
Fe; in consequence of which I would, in all
probability, be doomed to the flames, if I would
not renounce my heretical errors, and submit to
such penance as the church should think fit to
prescribe. This miserable wretch was convicted
of Judaism, which he had privately practised, by
connivance, for many years, until he had amassed
a fortune sufficient to attract the regard of the
church. To this he fell a sacrifice, and accordingly
prepared himself for the stake; while I, not at all
ambitious of the crown of martyrdom, resolved 

to temporize: so that, when I was brought to
the question the second time, I made a solemn
recantation; and, as I had no worldly fortune to
obstruct my salvation, was received into the bosom
of the church, and, by way of penance, enjoined
to walk barefoot to Rome, in the habit of
a pilgrim. 
During my peregrination thro' Spain, I was
detained as a spy, until I could procure credentials
from the inquisition at Lisbon; and behaved
with such resolution and reserve, that, after being
released, I was deemed a proper person to be
employed in quality of a secret intelligencer, at
a certain court. This office I undertook, without
hesitation; and being furnished with money
and bills of credit, crossed the Pyrenees, with
intention to revenge myself upon the Spaniard
for the severities I had undergone, during my
captivity. 
Having therefore effectually disguised myself,
by a change of dress, and a large patch on one
eye, I hired an equipage, and appeared at Bologna,
in quality of an itinerant physician; in
which capacity I succeeded tolerably well, till
my servants decamped in the night, with my
baggage, and left me in the condition of Adam. 
In short, I have travelled over the greatest part
of Europe, as a beggar, pilgrim, priest, soldier,
gamester, and quack; and felt the extremes of
indigence and opulence, with the inclemency of
weather, in all its vicissitudes. I have learned
that the characters of mankind are every where
the same; that common sense and honesty bear
an infinitely small proportion to folly and vice; 
and that life is at best a paulty province. 

After having suffered innumerable hardships,
dangers, and disgraces, I returned to London,
where I lived some years in a garret, and picked
up a subsistence, such as it was, by vending purges
in the streets, from the back of a pied horse; in
which situation I used to harrangue the mob, in
broken English, under pretence of being an High
German doctor. 
At last an uncle died, by whom I inherit an
estate of three hundred pounds per annum, tho',
in his life-time, he would not have parted with a
six-pence, to save my soul and body from perdition. 
I now appear in the world, not as a member
of any community, or what is called a social creature; 
but meerly as a spectator, who entertains
himself with the grimaces of a jack-pudding, and
banquets his spleen in beholding his enemies at
loggerheads. That I may enjoy this disposition,
abstracted from all interruption, danger, and participation,
I feign myself deaf; an expedient by
which I not only avoid all disputes, and their
consequences, but also become master of a thousand
little secrets, which are every day whispered
in my presence, without any suspicion of
their being overheard. You saw how I handled
that shallow politician at my lady Plausible's the
other day. The same method I practise upon
the crazed tory, the bigot whig, the sour supercilious
pedant, the petulant critic, the blustering
coward, the fawning tool, the pert pimp, sly
sharper, and every other species of knaves and
fools with which this kingdom abounds. 
In consequence of my rank and character I
obtain free admission to the ladies, among whom 

I have obtained the appellation of the Scandalous
Chronicle; and as I am considered (while silent)
in no other light than that of a footstool or elbow
chair, they divest their conversation of all restraint
before me, and gratify my sense of hearing
with strange things, which (if I could prevail
upon myself to give the world that satisfaction)
would compose a curious piece of secret history,
and exhibit a quite different idea of characters
from what is commonly entertained. 
By this time, young gentleman, you may perceive,
that I have it in my power to be a valuable
correspondent; and that it will be your interest
to deserve my confidence.” 