


Peregrine is sent to a boarding-school, becomes remarkable
for his genius and ambition. 
The commodore understanding her determination,
to which her husband did not
venture to make the least objection, interested
himself so much in behalf of his favourite, as to
fit him out at his own charge, and accompany
him in person to the place of his destination; 
where he defrayed the expence of his entrance,
and left him to the particular care and inspection
of the usher, who having been recommended to
him as a person of parts and integrity, received
per advance a handsome consideration for the task
he undertook. 
Nothing could be better judged than this piece
of liberality; the assistant was actually a man of
learning, probity, and good sense; and though
obliged by the scandalous administration of fortune
to act in the character of an inferior teacher,
had by his sole capacity and application, brought
the school to that degree of reputation which it
never could have obtained from the talents of his
superior. He had established an œconomy, which
though regular, was not at all severe, by enacting
a body of laws suited to the age and comprehension
of every individual; and each transgressor
was fairly tried by his peers, and punished according
to the verdict of the jury. No boy was
scourged for want of apprehension, but a spirit of
emulation was raised by well-timed praise and artful
comparison, and maintained by a distribution
of small prizes, which were adjudged to those who 

signalized themselves either by their industry, sobriety
or genius. This tutor, whose name was
Jennings, began with Perry, according to his
constant maxim, by examining the soil; that is,
studying his temper, in order to consult the biass
of his disposition, which was strangely perverted
by the absurd discipline he had undergone. He
found him in a state of sullen insensibility, which
the child had gradually contracted in a long course
of stupifying correction; and at first he was not
in the least actuated by that commendation which
animated the rest of his school-fellows; nor was
it in the power of reproach to excite his ambition,
which had been buried, as it were, in the grave
of disgrace: the usher therefore had recourse to
contemptuous neglect, with which he affected to
treat this stubborn spirit; foreseeing that if he retained
any seeds of sentiment, this weather would
infallibly raise them into vegetation: his judgment
was justified by the event; the boy in a little time
began to make observations; he perceived the
marks of distinction with which virtue was rewarded,
grew ashamed of the despicable figure he
himself made amongst his companions, who far
from courting, rather shunned his conversation; 
and actually pined at his own want of importance. 
Mr. Jennings saw and rejoiced at his mortification,
which he suffered to proceed as far as possible,
without endangering his health. The child
lost all relish for diversion, loathed his food, grew
pensive, solitary, and was frequently found weeping
by himself. These symptoms plainly evinced
the recovery of his feelings, to which his governor
thought it now high time to make application; 
and therefore by little and little altered his
behaviour from the indifference he had put on, to 

the appearance of more regard and attention. 
This produced a favourable change in the boy,
whose eyes sparkled with satisfaction one day,
when his master expressed himself with a shew of
surprize in these words, “So, Perry! I find you
don't want genius, when you think proper to use
it.” Such encomiums kindled the spirit of emulation
in his little breast; he exerted himself with
surprising alacrity, by which he soon acquitted
himself of the imputation of dullness, and obtained
sundry honorary silver pennies, as acknowledgements
of his application: his schoolfellows now
sollicited his friendship as eagerly as they had
avoided it before; and in less than a twelvemonth
after his arrival, this supposed dunce was remarkable
for the brightness of his parts; having in
that short period learnt to read English perfectly
well, made great progress in writing, enabled
himself to speak the French language without hesitation,
and acquired some knowledge in the rudiments
of the Latin tongue. The usher did not
fail to transmit an account of his proficiency to
the commodore, who received it with transport,
and forthwith communicated the happy tidings to
the parents. 
Mr. Gamaliel Pickle, who was never subject
to violent emotions, heard them with a sort of
phlegmatic satisfaction that scarce manifested itself
either in his countenance or expressions; nor did
the child's mother break forth into that rapture
and admiration which might have been expected,
when she understood how much the talents of her
first-born had exceeded the hope of her warmest
imagination. Not but that she professed herself
well pleased with Perry's reputation; though she
observed that in these commendations the truth was 

always exaggerated by school-masters, for their own
interest; and pretended to wonder that the usher
had not mingled more probability with his praise. 
Trunnion was offended at her indifference and
want of faith, and believing that she refined too
much in her discernment, swore that Jennings
had declared the truth, and nothing but the
truth; for he himself had prophecied from the
beginning, that the boy would turn out a credit
to his family. But by this time Mrs. Pickle was
blessed with a daughter, whom she had brought
into the world about six months before the intelligence
arrived; so that her care and affection being
otherwise engrossed, the praise of Perry was
the less greedily devoured. The abatement of her
fondness was an advantage to his education, which
would have been retarded, and perhaps ruined by
pernicious indulgence and preposterous interposition,
had her love considered him as an only
child; whereas her concern being now diverted
to another object that shared, at least, one half
of her affection, he was left to the management
of his preceptor, who tutored him according to
his own plan, without any lett or interruption. 
Indeed all his sagacity and circumspection were
but barely sufficient to keep the young gentleman
in order; for now that he had won the palm of
victory from his rivals in point of scholarship, his
ambition dilated, and he was seized with the desire
of subjecting the whole school by the valour
of his arm. Before he could bring this project to
bear, innumerable battles were fought with various
success; every day a bloody nose and complaint
were presented against him, and his own
visage commonly bore some livid marks of obstinate
contention. At length, however, he accomplished 

his aim; his adversaries were subdued,
his prowess acknowledged, and he obtained the
laurel in war as well as wit. Thus triumphant,
he was intoxicated with success. His pride rose in
proportion to his power, and in spite of all the
endeavours of Jennings, who practised every method
he could invent for curbing his licentious
conduct, without depressing his spirit, he contracted
a large proportion of insolence, which a
series of misfortunes that happened to him in the
sequel could scarce effectually tame. Nevertheless
there was a fund of good nature and generosity
in his composition; and though he established
a tyranny among his comrades, the tranquillity
of his reign was maintained by the love rather
than by the fear of his subjects. 
In the midst of all this enjoyment of empire,
he never once violated that respectful awe with
which the usher had found means to inspire him; 
but he by no means preserved the same regard for
the principal master, an old illiterate German
quack, who had formerly practised corn-cutting
among the quality, and sold cosmetic washes to
the ladies, together with teeth-powders, hair-dying
liquors, prolifick elixirs, and tinctures to
sweeten the breath. These nostrums, recommended
by the art of cringing, in which he was consummate,
ingratiated him so much with people of
fashion, that he was enabled to set up-school with
five and twenty boys of the best families, whom
he boarded on his own terms, and undertook to
instruct in the French and Latin languages, so as
to qualify them for the colleges of Westminster
or Eaton. While this plan was in its infancy,
he was so fortunate as to meet with Jennings,
who for the paultry consideration of thirty pounds 

a year, which his necessities compelled him to
accept, took the whole trouble of educating the
children upon himself, contrived an excellent system
for that purpose, and by his assiduity and
knowledge executed all the particulars to the entire
satisfaction of those concerned, who by the
bye, never inquired into his qualifications, but
suffered the other to enjoy the fruits of his labour
and ingenuity. 
Over and above a large stock of avarice, ignorance
and vanity, this superior had certain ridiculous
peculiarities in his person, such as a hunch
upon his back, and distorted limbs, that seemed
to attract the satirical notice of Peregrine, who,
young as he was, took offence at his want of reverence
for his usher, over whom he sometimes
chose opportunities of displaying his authority,
that the boys might not misplace their veneration. 
Mr. Keypstick, therefore, such as I have
described him, incurred the contempt and displeasure
of this enterprising pupil, who now being
in the tenth year of his age, had capacity enough
to give him abundance of vexation. 