


Hot Well, April 18. 
DEAR PHILLIPS,
I GIVE Mansel credit for his invention, in
propagating the report that I had a quarrel with a
mountebank's merry Andrew at Gloucester: but I
have too much respect for every appendage of wit,
to quarrel even with the lowest buffoonery; and
therefore I hope Mansel and I shall always be good
friends. I cannot, however, approve of his drowning
my poor dog Ponto, on purpose to convert
Ovid's pleonasm into a punning epitaph—deerant
quoque Littora Ponto: for, that he threw him into
the Isis, when it was so high and impetuous, with
no other view than to kill the fleas, is an excuse
that will not hold water—But I leave poor Ponto
to his fate, and hope Providence will take care to
accommodate Mansel with a drier death. 
As there is nothing that can be called company
at the Well, I am here in a state of absolute rustication: 
This, however, gives me leisure to observe
the singularities in my uncle's character,
which seems to have interested your curiosity. 
The truth is, his disposition and mine, which, like
oil and vinegar, repelled one another at first, have
now begun to mix by dint of being beat up together. 
I was once apt to believe him a complete Cynic; 
and that nothing but the necessity of his occasions
could compel him to get within the pale of society
—I am now of another opinion. I think his peevishness
arises partly from bodily pain, and partly
from a natural excess of mental sensibility; for, I 

suppose the mind as well as the body, is in some
cases endued with a morbid excess of sensation. 
I was t'other day much diverted with a conversation
that passed in the Pump-room, betwixt him
and the famous Dr. L&wblank;n, who is come to ply
at the Well for patients. My uncle was complaining
of the stink, occasioned by the vast quantity of
mud and slime, which the river leaves at low ebb
under the windows of the Pump-room. He observed,
that the exhalations arising from such a
nuisance, could not but be prejudicial to the weak
lungs of many consumptive patients, who came to
drink the water. The Doctor overhearing this
remark, made up to him, and assured him he was
mistaken. He said, people in general were so misled
by vulgar prejudices, that philosophy was hardly
sufficient to undeceive them. Then humming
thrice, he assumed a most ridiculous solemnity of
aspect, and entered into a learned investigation of
the nature of stink. He observed, that stink, or
stench, meant no more than a strong impression on
the olfactory nerves; and might be applied to substances
of the most opposite qualities; that in the
Dutch language, stinken signified the most agreeable
perfume, as well as the most fetid odour, as
appears in Van Vloudel's translation of Horace, in
that beautiful ode, Quis multa gracilis, &c. —The
words liquidus perfusus odoribus, he translates van
civet & moschata gestinken: that individuals differed
toto cœlo in their opinion of smells, which, indeed,
was altogether as arbitrary as the opinion of beauty; 
that the French were pleased with the putrid effluvia
of animal food; and so were the Hottentots in
Africa, and the savages in Greenland; and that the
Negroes on the coast of Senegal would not touch
fish till it was rotten; strong presumptions in favour
of what is generally called stink, as those nations
are in a state of nature, undebauched by luxury, 

unseduced by whim and caprice: that he had reason
to believe the stercoraceous flavour, condemned by
prejudice as a stink, was, in fact, most agreeable to
the organs of smelling; for, that every person who
pretended to nauseate the smell of another's excretions,
snuffed up his own with particular complacency; 
for the truth of which he appealed to all the
ladies and gentlemen then present: he said the inhabitants
of Madrid and Edinburgh found particular
satisfaction in breathing their own atmosphere, which
was always impregnated with stercoraceous effluvia:
that the learned Dr. B&wblank;, in his treatise on the Four
digestions, explains in what manner the volatile
effluvia from the intestines, stimulate and promote
the operations of the animal œconomy: he affirmed,
the last Grand Duke of Tuscany, of the Medicis
family, who refined upon sensuality with the spirit
of a philosopher, was so delighted with that odour,
that he caused the essence of ordure to be extracted,
and used it as the most delicious perfume: that he
himself, (the doctor) when he happened to be low-spirited,
or fatigued with business, found immediate
relief and uncommon satisfaction from hanging over
the stale contents of a close-stool, while his servant
stirred it about under his nose; nor was this effect
to be wondered at, when we consider that this
substance abounds with the self-same volatile salts
that are so greedily smelled to by the most delicate
invalids, after they have been extracted and sublimed
by the chemists. —By this time the company began
to hold their noses; but the doctor, without taking
the least notice of this signal, proceeded to shew,
that many fetid substances were not only agreeable
but salutary; such as assafœlida, and other medicinal
gums, resins, roots and vegetables, over and above
burnt feathers, tanpits, candle snuffs, &c. In short,
he used many learned arguments to persuade his audience 

out of their senses; and from stench made a
transition to filth, which he affirmed was also a mistaken
idea, in as much as objects so called, were no
other than certain modifications of matter, consisting
of the same principles that enter into the composition
of all created essences, whatever they may
be: that in the filthiest production of nature, a
philosopher considered nothing but the earth, water,
salt, and air of which it was compounded: that, for
his own part, he had no more objection to drinking
the dirtiest ditch water, than he had to a glass of water
from the Hot Well, provided he was assured there
was nothing poisonous in the concrete. Then addressing
himself to my uncle, “Sir, (said he) you
seem to be of a dropsical habit, and probably will
soon have a confirmed ascites: if I should be present
when you are tapped, I will give you a convincing
proof of what I assert, by drinking without
hesitation the water that comes out of your
abdomen.” —The ladies made wry faces at this
declaration, and my uncle changing colour, told him
he did not desire any such proof of his philosophy: 
“But I should be glad to know (said he) what
makes you think I am of a dropsical habit?” “Sir,
I beg pardon, (replied the Doctor) I perceive your
ancles are swelled, and you seem to have the facies
leucophlegmatica. Perhaps, indeed, your disorder
may be oedematous, or gouty, or it may be the
lues venerea: if you have any reason to flatter
yourself it is this last, sir, I will undertake to cure
you with three small pills, even if the disease
should have attained its utmost inveteracy. Sir,
it is an arcanum which I have discovered, and
prepared with infinite labour. —Sir, I have lately
cured a woman in Bristol—a common prostitute,
sir, who had got all the worst symptoms
of the disorder; such as nodi, tophi, and gummata, 

verrucæ, cristæ Galli, and a serpiginous
eruption, or rather a pocky itch all over her
body. —By that time she had taken the second
pill, sir, by Heaven! she was as smooth as my
hand, and the third made her as sound and as
fresh as a new born infant.” “Sir, (cried my
uncle peevishly) I have no reason to flatter myself
that my disorder comes within the efficacy of
your nostrum. But, this patient you talk of,
may not be so sound at bottom as you imagine.” 
I can't possibly be mistaken: (rejoined the physician)
for I have had communication with
her three times—I always ascertain my cures in
that manner.” At this remark, all the ladies
retired to another corner of the room, and some
of them began to spit—As to my uncle, though he
was ruffled at first by the doctor's saying he was
dropsical, he could not help smiling at this ridiculous
confession, and, I suppose, with a view to punish
this original, told him there was a wart upon
his nose, that looked a little suspicious. “I don't
pretend to be a judge of those matters; (said he)
but I understand that warts are often produced
by the distemper; and that one upon your nose
seems to have taken possession of the very keystone
of the bridge, which I hope is in no danger
of falling.” L&wblank;n seemed a little confounded
at this remark, and assured him it was nothing but
a common excrescence of the cuticula, but that the
bones were all sound below; for the truth of this
assertion he appealed to the touch, desiring he would
feel the part. My uncle said it was a matter of such
delicacy to meddle with a gentleman's nose, that he
declined the office—upon which, the Doctor turning
to me, intreated me to do him that favour.
complied with his request, and handled it so rough I
ly, and he sneezed, and the tears ran down hi-cheeks, 

to the no small entertainment of the company,
and particularly of my uncle, who burst out
a-laughing for the first time since I have been with
him; and took notice, that the part seemed to be
very tender. “Sir, (cried the Doctor) it is naturally
a tender part; but to remove all possibility
of doubt, I will take off the wart this very night.” 
So saying, he bowed with great solemnity all
round, and retired to his own lodgings, where he
applied a caustic to the wart; but it spread in such a
manner as to produce a considerable inflammation,
attended with an enormous swelling; so that when
he next appeared, his whole face was overshadowed
by this tremendous nozzle; and the rueful eagerness
with which he explained this unlucky accident, was
ludicrous beyond all description. —I was much
pleased with meeting the original of a character,
which you and I have often laughed at in description; 
and what surprizes me very much, I find the
features in the picture, which has been drawn for
him, rather softened than over-charged.— 
As I have something else to say; and this letter
has run to an unconscionable length, I shall now
give you a little respite, and trouble you again by
the very first post. I wish you would take it in
your head to retaliate these double strokes upon 
Your's always,
J. Melford. 