


DEAR KNIGHT,
I THINK those people are unreasonable, who
complain that Bath is a contracted circle, in which
the same dull scenes perpetually revolve, without
variation—I am, on the contrary, amazed to find
so small a place, so crowded with entertainment and
variety. London itself can hardly exhibit one species
of diversion, to which we have not something
analogous at Bath, over and above those singular
advantages that are peculiar to the place. Here,
for example a man has daily opportunities of seeing
the most remarkable characters of the community. 
He sees them in their natural attitudes and true
colours; descended from their pedestals, and divested
of their formal draperies, undisguised by art
and affectation—Here, we have ministers of slate,
judges, generals, bishops, projectors, philosophers,
wise, poets, players, chemists, fiddlers, and bussoons. 
If he makes any considerable stay in the
place, he is sure of meeting with some particular
friend, whom he did not expect to see; and to me
there is nothing more agreeable, than such casual
rencounters—Another entertainment, peculiar to
Bath, arises from the general mixture of all degrees
assembled in our public rooms, without distinction
of rank or fortune. This is what my uncle reprobates, 

as a monstrous jumble of heterogeneous principles; 
a vile mob of noise and impertinence,
without decency or subordination. But this chaos
is to me a source of infinite amusement. 
I was extremely diverted, last ball-night, to see
the Master of the Ceremonies leading, with great
solemnity, to the upper end of the room, an antiquated
Abigail, dressed in her lady's cast-clothes; 
whom he (I suppose) mistook for some countess
just arrived at the Bath. The ball was opened by
a Scotch lord, with a mulatto heiress from St.
Christopher's; and the gay colonel Tinsel danced all
the evening with the daughter of an eminent tinman
from the borough of Southwark—Yesterday
morning, at the Pump-room, I saw a broken-winded
Wapping landlady squeeze through a circle
of peers, to salute her brandy merchant, who
stood by the window, prop'd upon crutches; and
a paralytic attorney of Shoe-lane, in shufling up
to the bar, kicked the shins of the chancellor of
England, while his lordship, in a cut bob, drank
a glass of water at the pump. I cannot account
for my being pleased with these incidents, any other
way than by saying, they are truly ridiculous in
their own nature, and serve to heighten the humour
in the farce of life, which I am determined to enjoy
as long as I can.— 
Those, follies that move my uncle's spleen excite
my laughter. He is as tender as a man without
a skin; who cannot bear the slightest touch without
slinching. What tickles another would give him
torment; and yet he has what we may call lucid
intervals, when he is remarkably facetious—Indeed,
I never know a hypochondraic so apt to be infected
with good-humour. He is the most risible misanthrope
I ever met with. A lucky joke, or any ludicrous
incident, will set him a-laughing immoderately,
even in one of his most gloomy paroxysms; 

and when the laugh is over, he will curse his own
imbecility. In conversing with strangers, he betrays
no marks of disquiet—He is splenetic with his
familiars only; and not even with them, while
they keep his attention employed; but when his
spirits are not exerted externally, they seem to recoil
and to prey upon himself—He has renounced the
waters with execration; but he begins to find a
more efficacious, and, certainly, a much more palatable
remedy in the pleasures of society. He has
discovered some old friends, among the invalids of
Bath; and, in particular, renewed his acquaintance
with the celebrated James Quin, who certainly did
not come here to drink water. You cannot doubt,
but that I had the strongest curiosity to know this
original; and it was gratified by Mr. Bramble, who
has had him twice at our house to dinner. 
So far as I am able to judge, Quin's character is
rather more respectable than it has been generally
represented. His bon mots are in every witling's
mouth; but many of them have a rank flavour,
which one would be apt to think was derived from
a natural grossness of idea. I suspect, however,
that justice has not been done the author, by the
collectors of those Quiniania; who have let the best
of them slip through their fingers, and only retained
such as were suited to the taste and organs of the
multitude. How far he may relax in his hours of
jollity, I cannot pretend to say; but his general
conversation is conducted by the nicest rules of
propriety; and Mr. James Quin is, certainly, one
the best bred men in the kingdom. He is not
only a most agreeable companion; but (as I am
credibly informed) a very honest man; highly sum
ceptible of friendship, warm steady, and evesgenerous
in his attachments; disdaining flattery
and incapable of meaness and dissimulation. Were
I to judge, however from Quin's eye alone I 

should take him to be proud, insolent, and cruel. 
There is something remarkably severe and forbidding
in his aspect; and, I have been told, he was
ever disposed to insult his inferiors and dependants. 
—Perhaps that report has influenced my opinion
of his looks—You know we are the fools of prejudice. 
Howsoever that may be, I have as yet seen
nothing but his favourable side: and my uncle,
who frequently confers with him in a corner, declares
he is one of the most sensible men he ever
knew—He seems to have a reciprocal regard for old
Square-toes, whom he calls by the familiar name
of Matthew, and often reminds of their old tavern-adventures:
on the other hand, Matthew's eyes
sparkle whenever Quin makes his appearance—Let
him be never so jarring and discordant, Quin puts
him in tune; and, like treble and bass in the same
concert, they make excellent musick together— 
T'other day, the conversation turning upon Shakespeare,
I could not help saying, with some emotion,
that I would give an hundred guineas to see Mr.
Quin act the part of Falstaff; upon which, turning
to me with a smile, “And I would give a thousand,
young gentleman, (said he) that I could
gratify your longing.” My uncle and he are
perfectly agreed in their estimate of life; which
Quin says, would stink in his nostrils, if he did
not steep it in claret. 
I want to see this phenomenon in his cups; and
have almost prevailed upon my uncle to give him a
small turtle at the Bear. In the mean time, I must
entertain you with an incident, that seems to confirm
the judgment of those two cynic philosophers. 
I took the liberty to differ in opinion from Mr.
Bramble, when he observed, that the mixture of
people in the entertainments of this place was destructive
of all order and urbanity; that it rendered
the plebeians insufferably arrogant and troublesome, 

and vulgarized the deportment and sentiments of
those who moved in the upper spheres of life. He
said, such a preposterous coalition would bring us
into contempt with all our neighbours; and was
worse in fact than debasing the gold coin of the
nation. I argued, on the contrary, that those plebeians
who discovered such eagerness to imitate the
dress and equipage of their superiors, would likewise
in time, adopt their maxims and their manners
be polished by their conversation, and refined
by their example, but when I appealed to Mr.
Quin, and asked if he did not think that such an
unreserved mixture would improve the whole mass
—“Yes, (said he) as a plate of marmalade would
improve a pan of sirreverence.” 
I owned I was not much conversant in high-life,
but I had seen what were called polite assemblies in
London and elswhere; that those of Bath seemed
to be as decent as any; and that, upon the whole,
the individuals that composed it, would not be
found deficient in good manners and decorum. 
“But let us have recourse to experience, (said I)
—Jack Holder, who was intended for a parson,
has succeeded to an estate of two thousand a year
by the death of his elder brother. He is now at
the Bath, driving about in a phaeton and sour,
with French horns. He has treated with turtle
and claret at all the taverns in Bath and Bristol,
till his guests are gorged with good chear: he
has bought a dozen suits of fine clothes, by the
advice of the Master of the Ceremonies, under
whose tuition he has entered himself: he has
lost some hundreds at billiards to sharpers, and
taken one of the nymphs of Avon-street into
keeping; but, finding all these channells insufficient
to drain him of his current cash, his counsellor
has engaged him to give a general tea-drinking
to-morrow at Wiltshire's room. In 

order to give it the more ecclat, every table is to
be furnished with sweet-meats and nosegays; 
which, however, are not to be touched till notice
is given by the ringing of a bell, and then the
ladies may help themselves without restriction. 
This will be no bad way of trying the company's
breeding—” 
“I will abide by that experiment, (cried my
uncle) and if I could find a place to stand secure,
without the vortex of the tumult, which I know
will ensue, I would certainly go thither and enjoy
the scene.” Quin proposed that we should
take our station in the musick-gallery; and we took
his advice. Holder had got thither before us, with
his horns perdue; but we were admitted. The
tea-drinking passed as usual; and the company
having risen from the tables, were sauntering in
groupes, in expectation of the signal for attack,
when the bell beginning to ring, they flew with
eagerness to the desart, and the whole place was
instantly in commotion. There was nothing but
justling, scrambling, pulling, snatching, struggling,
scolding, and screaming. The nosegays were torn
from one another's hands and bosoms; the glasses
and china went to wreck; the tables and floor were
strewed with comfits. Some cried; some swore; 
and the tropes and figures of Billingsgate were used
without reserve in all their native zest and flavour; 
nor were those flowers of rhetoric unattended with
significant gesticulation. Some snapped their fingers; 
some forked them out; some clapped their
hands, and some their back-sides; at legth, they
fairly proceeded to pulling caps, and every thing
seemed to presage a general battle; when Holder
ordered his horns to sound a change with a view to
annimate the combatants, and inflame the contest; 
but this manœuvre produced an effect quite contrary
to what he expected. It was a note of reproach 

that roused them to an immediate sense of
their disgraceful situation. They were ashamed of
their absurd deportment, and suddenly desisted. 
They gathered up their caps, rustles, and handkerchiefs; 
and great part of them retired in silent
mortification. 
Quin laughed at this adventure; but my uncle's
delicacy was hurt. He hung his head in manifest
chagrin, and seemed to repine at the triumph of his
judgment—Indeed, his victory was more complete
than he imagined; for, as we afterwards learned,
the two amazons who singularized themselves most
in the action, did not come from the purlies of
Puddle-dock, but from the courtly neighbourhood
of St. James's palace. One was a baroness, and
the other a wealthy knight's dowager—My uncle
spoke not a word, till we had made our retreat good
to the coffee-house; where, taking off his hat and
wiping his forehead, “I bless God (said he) that
Mrs. Tabitha Bramble did not take the field today!” 
“I would pit her for a cool hundred
(cried Quin) against the best shake-bag of the
whole main.” The truth is, nothing could
have kept her at home but the accident of her having
taken physick before she knew the nature of the
entertainment. She has been for some days furbishing
up an old suit of black velvet, to make her
appearance as Sir Ulic's partner at the next ball. 
I have much to say of this amiable kinswoman; 
but she has not been properly introduced to your
acquaintance, She is remarkably civil to Mr.
Quin; of whose sarcastic humour she seems to
stand in awe; but her caution is no match for her
impertinence. “Mr. Gwynn, (said she the other
day) I was once vastly entertained with your
playing the Ghost of Gimlet at Drury-lane,
when you rose up through the stage, with a
white face and red eyes, and spoke of quails 

upon the frightful por cofine—Do, pray, spout a
little the Ghost of Gimlet.” “Madam, (said
Quin, with a glance of ineffable disdain) the
Ghost of Gimlet is laid, never to rise again—” 
Insensible of his check, she proceeded: “Well,
to be sure, you looked and talked so like a real
ghost; and then the cock crowed so natural. I
wonder how you could teach him to crow so
exact, in the very nick of time; but I suppose,
he's game—An't he game, Mr. Gwynn?” 
Dunghill, madam.” “Well, dung-hill, or
not dung-hill, he has got such a clear counter-tenor,
that I wish I had such another at Brambleton-hall,
to wake the maids of a morning. Do
you know where I could find one of his brood?” 
“Probably in the work-house of St. Giles's parish,
madam; but I protest I know not his particular
mew.” My uncle, frying with vexation, cried,
“Good God, sister, how you talk! I have told
you twenty times, that this gentleman's name is
not Gwynn.—” “Hoity toity, brother mine,
(she replied) no offence, I hope—Gwynn is an
honourable name, of true old British extraction
—I thought the gentleman had been come of
Mrs. Helen Gwynn, who was of his own profession; 
and if so be that were the case, he might
be of king Charles's breed, and have royal blood
in his veins—” “No, madam, (answered Quin,
with great solemnity) my mother was not a
whore of such distinction—True it is, I am
sometimes tempted to believe myself of royal
descent; for my inclinations are often arbitrary
—If I was an absolute prince, at this instant, I
believe I should send for the head of your cook
in a charger—She has committed felony
on the
person of that John Dory; which is mangled
in a cruel manner, and even presented without
sauce—O tempora! O mores!” 

This good-humoured sally turned the conversation
into a less disagreeable channel—But, lest you
should think my scribble as tedious as Mrs. Tabby's
clack, I shall not add another word, but that
I am, as usual, 
yours,
J. Melford. 
Bath, April 30. 