


DEAR MARY,
HAVING the occasion of my cousin Jenkins of
Aberga'ny, I send you, as a token, a turkey-shell
comb, a kiple of yards of green ribbon, and a
sarment upon the nothingness of good works, which
was preached in the Tabernacle; and you will also
receive a horn-buck for Saul, whereby she may
learn her letters; for I'm much consarned about
the state of her poor sole—and what are all the
pursuits of this life to the consarns of that immortal
part? —What is life but a veil of affliction? 
—O Mary! the whole family have been in such
a constipation! —Mr. Clinker has been in trouble,
but the gates of hell have not been able to prevail
against him. —His virtue is like poor gould, seven
times tried in the fire. He was tuck up for a rubbery,
and had before gustass Busshard, who made
his mittamouse; and the pore youth was sent to
prison upon the false oaf of a willian, that wanted
to sware his life away for the looker of cain. 
The 'squire did all in his power, but could not
prevent his being put in chains, and confined
among common manufactors, where he stud like
an innocent sheep in the midst of wolves and tygers. 
—Lord knows, what mought have happened
to this pyehouse young man, if master had not
applied to Apias Korkus, who lives with the ould
bailiff, and is, they say, five hundred years ould,
(God bless us!) and a congeror: but, if he be,
sure I am he don't deal with the devil, otherwise
he wouldn't have fought out Mr. Clinker, as he
did, in spite of stone walls, iron bolts, and double
locks, that flew open at his command; for Ould
Scratch has not a greater enemy upon hearth than
Mr. Clinker, who is, indeed, a very powerfull 

labourer in the Lord's vineyard. I do no more
than yuse the words of my good lady, who has
got the infectual calling; and, I trust, that even
myself, though unworthy, shall find grease to be
excepted. —Miss Liddy has been touch'd to the
quick, but is a little timorsome: howsomever, I
make no doubt, but she, and all of us, will be
brought, by the endeavours of Mr. Clinker, to
produce blessed fruit of generation and repentance. 
—As for master and the young 'squire, they have
as yet had narro glimpse of the new light. —I doubt
as how their harts are hardened by worldly wisdom,
which, as the pyebill faith, is foolishness in the
sight of God. 
O Mary Jones, pray without seizing for grease
to prepare you for the operations of this wonderful
instrument, which, I hope, will be exorcised this
winter upon you and others at Brambleton-hall. — 
To-morrow, we are to set out in a cox and four
for Yorkshire; and, I believe, we shall travel that
way far, and far, and farther than I can tell; but
I shan't go so far as to forget my friends; and
Mary Jones will always be remembered as one of
them by her 
humble sarvant,
Win. Jenkins. 
London, June 14. 