


He prevails upon Emilia to accompany him to
a masquerade, makes a treacherous attempt
upon her affection, and meets with a deserved
repulse. 
Scarce a night elapsed in which he did
not conduct her to some public entertainment; 
and when, by dint of his insidious carriage,
he thought himself in full possession of her
confidence and affection, he lay in wait for an opportunity; 
and hearing her observe in conversation,
that she had never been at a masquerade,
begged leave to attend her to the next ball; at
the same time, extending his invitation to the
young lady, in whose company he had found her
at the play, she being present when this subject
of discourse was introduced. He had flattered
himself, that this gentlewoman would decline the
proposal, as she was a person seemingly of a demure
disposition, who had been born and bred in
the city, where such diversions are looked upon
as scenes of lewdness and debauchery. For once,
however, he reckoned without his host; curiosity
is as prevalent in the city as at the court-end of
the town: Emilia no sooner signified her assent
to his proposal, than her friend, with an air of
satisfaction, agreed to make one of the partie; 
and he was obliged to thank her for that complaisance 

which laid him under infinite mortification. 
He set his genius at work, to invent some
scheme for preventing her unseasonable intrusion. 
Had an opportunity offered, he would have acted
as her physician, and administered a medicine
that would have laid her under the necessity of
staying at home: but his acquaintance with her
being too slight to furnish him with the means of
executing this expedient, he devised another,
which was practised with all imaginable success. 
Understanding that her grandmother had left her
a sum of money independent of her parents, he
conveyed a letter to her mother, intimating, that
her daughter, on pretence of going to the masquerade,
intended to bestow herself in marriage to
a certain person, and that in a few days she would
be informed of the circumstances of the whole
intrigue, provided she would keep this information
secret, and contrive some excuse for detaining
the young lady at home, without giving
her cause to believe she was apprized of her intention. 
This billet, subscribed, Your well-wisher
and unknown humble servant, had the desired
effect upon the careful matron, who, on the
ball-day, feigned herself so extremely ill, that
miss could not, with any decency, quit her
mamma's apartment; and therefore sent her apology
to Emilia in the afternoon, immediately after
the arrival of Peregrine, who pretended to be
very much afflicted with the disappointment,
while his heart throbbed with a transport of joy. 
About ten o'clock the lovers set out for the
Hay-market, he being dressed in the habit of
Pantaloon, and she in that of Columbine; and
they had scarce entered the house, when the
music struck up, the curtain was withdrawn, and 

the whole scene displayed at once, to the admiration
of Emilia, whose expectation was infinitely
surpassed by this exhibition. Our gallant
having conducted her through all the different
apartments, and described the œconomy of the
place, led her into the circle, and, in their turn,
they danced several minuets; then going to the sideboard,
he prevailed upon her to eat some sweetmeets
and drink a glass of Champagne; and,
after a second review of the company, they engaged
in country-dances, at which exercise they
continued, until our adventurer concluded, that
his partner's blood was sufficiently warmed for
the prosecution of his design. On this supposition,
which was built upon her declaring, that
she was thirsty and fatigued, he persuaded her to
take a little refreshment and repose; and for that
purpose, handed her down stairs into the eating-room,
where having seated her on the floor, he
presented her with a glass of wine and water; 
and as she complained of being faint, enriched
the draught with some drops of a certain elixir,
which he recommended as a most excellent restorative,
though it was no other than a stimulating
tincture, which he had treacherously provided
for the occasion. Having swallowed this
potion, by which her spirits were manifestly exhilerated,
she ate a slice of ham with the wing of
a cold pullet, and concluded the meal with a
glass of Burgundy, which she drank at the earnest
intreaty of her admirer. These extraordinary
cordials co-operating with the ferment of her
blood, which was heated by violent motion,
could not fail to affect the constitution of a delicate
young creature, who was naturally sprightly
and volatile. Her eyes began to sparkle with unusual 

usual fire and vivacity, a thousand brilliant sallies
of wit escaped her, and every mask that accosted
her, underwent some smarting repartee. 
Peregrine, overjoyed at the success of his administration,
proposed that they should resume
their places at the country-dances, with a view
to promote and assist the efficacy of his elixir; 
and when he thought her disposition was properly
adapted for the theme, began to ply her with all
the elocution of love. In order to elevate his
own spirits to that pitch of resolution which his
scheme required, he drank two whole bottles of
Burgundy, which inflamed his passion to such a
degree, that he found himself capable of undertaking
and perpetrating any scheme for the gratification
of his desire. 
Emilia, warmed by so many concurring incentives,
in favour of the man she loved, abated
considerably of her wonted reserve, listened to
his protestations with undissembled pleasure, and
in the confidence of her satisfaction, even owned
him absolute master of her affections. Ravished
with this confession, he now deemed himself on
the brink of reaping the delicious fruits of his art
and assiduity; and the morning being already
pretty far advanced, assented with rapture to the
first proposal she made of retiring to her lodgings. 
The blinds of the chariot being pulled up, he
took advantage of the favourable situation of her
thoughts; and on pretence of being whimsical,
in consequence of the wine he had swallowed,
clasped her in his arms, and imprinted a thousand
kisses on her pouting lips, a freedom which
she pardoned as the privilege of intoxication. 
While he thus indulged himself with impunity,
the carriage halted, and Pipes opening the door, 

his master handed her into the passage, before she
perceived that it was not her uncle's house, at
which they had alighted. 
Alarmed at this discovery, she with some confusion
desired to know his reason for conducting
her to a strange place at these hours: but he
made no reply, until he had led her into an apartment,
when he gave her to understand, that as
her uncle's family must be disturbed by her going
thither so late in the night, and the streets near
Temple-bar were infested by a multitude of robbers
and cut-throats, he had ordered his coachman
to halt at this house, which was kept by a
relation of his, a mighty good sort of a gentlewoman,
who was proud of an opportunity to
accommodate a person for whom he was known
to entertain such tenderness and esteem. 
Emilia had too much penetration to be imposed
upon by this plausible pretext: in spite of
her partiality for Peregrine, which had never been
inflamed to such a pitch of complacency before,
she comprehended his whole plan in a twinkling; 
and though her blood boiled with indignation,
thanked him, with an affected air of serenity, for
his kind concern, and expressed her obligation to
his cousin; but, at the same time, insisted upon
going home, lest her absence should terrify her
uncle and aunt, who she knew would not retire
to rest, till her return. 
He urged her, with a thousand remonstrances,
to consult her own ease and safety, promising to
send Pipes into the city, for the satisfaction of her
relations: but finding her obstinately deaf to his
intreaties, he assured her, that he would in a few
minutes comply with her request; and, in the
mean time, begg'd she would fortify herself against 

the cold with a cordial, which he poured out in
her presence, and which (now that her suspicion
was aroused) she refused to taste, notwithstanding
all his importunities. He then fell upon
his knees before her, and the tears gushing from his
eyes, swore that his passion was wound up to such
a pitch of impatience, that he could no longer live
upon the unsubstantial food of expectation; and
that, if she would not vouchsafe to crown his happiness,
he would forthwith sacrifice himself to her disdain. 
Such an abrupt address, accompanied with
all the symptoms of frantic agitation, could not
fail to perplex and affright the gentle Emilia,
who, after some recollection, replied with a resolute
tone, that she could not see what reason
he had to complain of her reserve, which she was
not at liberty to lay intirely aside, until he should
have avowed his intentions in form, and obtained
the sanction of those whom it was her duty
to obey. “Divine creature! (cried he, seizing
her hand, and pressing it to his lips) it is from
you alone I hope for that condescension, which
would overwhelm me with transports of celestial
bliss. The sentiments of parents are sordid, silly,
and confined; seek not then to subject my passion
to such low restrictions as were calculated
for the purposes of common life. My love is too
delicate and refined, to wear those vulgar fetters,
which serve only to destroy the merit of voluntary
affection, and to upbraid a man incessantly
with the articles of compulsion, under which he
lies. My dear angel! spare me the mortification
of being compelled to love you, and reign sole
empress of my heart and fortune. I will not affront
you so much as to talk of settlements; my 

all is at your disposal. In this pocket-pook are
notes to the amount of two thousand pounds; 
do me the pleasure to accept of them; to-morrow
I will lay ten thousand more in your lap. In
a word, you shall be mistress of my whole estate,
and I shall think myself happy in living dependent
on your bounty!” 
Heavens! what were the emotions of the virtuous,
the sensible, the delicate, the tender Emilia's
heart, when she heard this insolent declaration
from the mouth of a man, whom she had
honoured with her affection and esteem! It was
not simply horror, grief, or indignation that she
felt, in consequence of this unworthy treatment,
but the united pangs of all together, which produced
a sort of hysteric laugh, while she told
him, that she could not help admiring his generosity. 
Deceived by this convulsion, and the ironical
compliment that attended it, the lover thought
he had already made great progress in his operations,
and that it was now his business to storm
the fort by a vigorous assault, that he might spare
her the confusion of yielding without resistance. 
Possessed by this vain suggestion, he started up,
and folding her in his arms, began to obey the
furious dictates of his unruly and ungenerous desire; 
upon which, with an air of cool determination,
she demanded a parley; and when, upon
her repeated request, he granted it, addressed herself
to him in these words, while her eyes gleamed
with all the dignity of the most awful resentment. 
“Sir, I scorn to upbraid you with a repetition
of your former vows and protestations,
nor will I recapitulate the little arts you have
practised to ensnare my heart; because, though 

by dint of the most perfidious dissimulation, you
have found means to deceive my opinion, your
utmost efforts have never been able to lull the vigilance
of my conduct, or to engage my affection
beyond the power of discarding you without
a tear, whenever my honour should demand such
a sacrifice. Sir, you are unworthy of my concern
or regret, and the sigh that now struggles
from my breast, is the result of sorrow, for my
own want of discernment. As for your present
attempt upon my chastity, I despise your power,
as I detest your intention. Though, under the
mask of the most delicate respect, you have decoyed
me from the immediate protection of my
friends, and contrived other impious stratagems
to ruin my peace and reputation, I confide too
much in my own innocence, and the authority
of the law, to admit one thought of fear, much
less to sink under the horror of this shocking situation,
into which I have been seduced. Sir,
your behaviour on this occasion, is in all respects
low and contemptible: for, ruffian as you are,
you durst not harbour one thought of executing
your execrable scheme, while you knew my brother
was near enough to prevent, or revenge the
insult; so that you must not only be a treacherous
villain, but also a most despicable coward.” 
Having expressed herself in this manner, with a
most majestic severity of aspect, she opened the
door, and walked down stairs with surprising resolution,
committed herself to the care of a
watchman, who accommodated her with a hackney-chair,
in which she was safely conveyed to
her uncle's house. 
Mean while, the lover was so confounded and
over-awed, by these cutting reproaches, and her 

animated behaviour, that all his resolution forsook
him, and he found himself not only incapable
of obstructing her retreat, but even of uttering
one syllable to deprecate her wrath, or extenuate
the guilt of his own conduct. The nature
of his disappointment, and the keen remorse
that seized him, when he reflected upon the dishonourable
predicament in which his character
stood with Emilia, raised such perturbation in
his mind, that his silence was succeeded by a violent
fit of distraction, during which he raved like
A Bedlamite, and acted a thousand extravagancies,
which convinced the people of the house, (a certain
bagnio) that he had actually lost his wits. 
Pipes, with great concern, adopted the same opinion; 
and, being assisted by the waiters, hindered
him, by main force, from running out and
pursuing the fair fugitive, whom, in his delirium,
he alternately cursed and commended, with horrid
imprecations, and lavish applause. His faithful
valet, having waited two whole hours, in hope
of seeing this gust of passion overblown, and perceiving
that the paroxysm seemed rather to increase,
very prudently sent for a physician of his
master's acquaintance, who having considered the
circumstances and symptoms of the disorder, directed,
that he should be plentifully blooded,
without loss of time, and prescribed a draught to
compose the tumult of his spirits. These orders
being punctually performed, he grew more calm
and tractable, recovered his reflection so far, as
to be ashamed of the extasy he had undergone,
suffered himself quietly to be undressed, and put
to bed, where the fatigue occasioned by his exercise
at the masquerade, co-operated with the present
dissipation of his spirits to lull him in a profound 

found sleep, which greatly tended to the preservation
of his intellects: not that he found himself
in a state of perfect tranquillity, when he
waked about noon; the remembrance of what
had passed overwhelmed him with mortification. 
Emilia's invectives still sounded in his ears; and
while he deeply resented her disdain, he could
not help admiring her spirit, and in his heart did
homage to her charms. 