


The commodore being in some cases restif, his lady
has recourse to artifice in the establishment of her
throne; she exhibits symptoms of pregnancy, to
the unspeakable joy of Trunnion, who nevertheless
is baulked in his expectation. 
These innovations were not effected without
many loud objections on his part; and
divers curious dialogues passed between him and
his yoke-fellow, who always came off victorious
from the dispute; insomuch that his countenance
gradually fell; he began to suppress, and at length
intirely devoured his chagrin; the terrors of superior
authority were plainly perceivable in his
features, and in less than three months he became
a thorough-paced husband. Not that his
obstinacy was extinguished, tho' overcome; in
some things he was as inflexible and muleish as
ever, but then he durst not kick so openly, and
was reduced to the necessity of being passive in
his resentments. Mrs. Trunnion, for example,
proposed that a coach and six should be purchased,
as she could not ride on horseback, and
the chaise was a scandalous carriage for a person
of her condition; the commodore, conscious of
his own inferior capacity in point of reasoning,
did not think proper to dispute the proposal, but
lent a deaf ear to her repeated remonstrances,
tho' they were inforced with every argument
which she thought could sooth, terrify, shame or
decoy him into compliance: in vain did she urge
the excess of affection she had for him, as meriting 

some return of tenderness and condescension; 
he was even proof against certain menacing
hints she gave, touching the resentment of a
slighted woman; and he stood out against all the
considerations of dignity or disgrace, like a bulwark
of brass. Neither was he moved to any
indecent or unkind expressions of contradiction,
even when she upbraided him with his sordid disposition,
and put him in mind of the fortune and
honour he had acquired by his marriage, but
seemed to retire within himself, like a tortoise
when attacked, that shrinks within its shell, and
silently endure the scourge of her reproaches,
without seeming sensible of the smart. 
This, however, was the only point in which she
had been baffled since her nuptials; and as she
could by no means digest the miscarriage, she
tortured her invention for some new plan by
which she might augment her influence and authority:
what her genius refused was supplied
by accident; for she had not lived four months in
the garrison when she was seized with frequent
qualms and reachings, her breasts began to harden,
and her stomach to be remarkably prominent:
in a word, she congratulated herself on
the symptoms of her own fertility, and the commodore
was transported with joy, at the prospect
of an heir of his own begetting. 
She knew this was the proper season for vindicating
her own sovereignty, and accordingly employed
the means which nature had put in her
power. There was not a rare piece of furniture
and apparel for which she did not long; and one
day as she went to church, seeing lady Stately's
equipage arrive, she suddenly fainted away. Her
husband, whose vanity had never been so perfectly 

gratified as with this promised harvest of his own
sowing, took the alarm immediately, and in order
to prevent relapses of that kind, which might
be attended with fatal consequences to his hope,
gave her leave to bespeak a coach, horses and liveries
to her own liking. Thus authorized, she
in a very little time exhibited such a specimen of
her own taste and magnificence as afforded speculation
to the whole county, and made Trunnion's
heart quake within him, because he foresaw
no limits to her extravagance, which also
manifested itself in the most expensive preparations
for her lying in. 
Her pride, which had hitherto regarded the representative
of her father's house, seemed now to
lose all that hereditary respect, and prompt her
to outshine and undervalue the elder branch of
her family. She behaved to Mrs. Pickle with a
sort of civil reserve that implied a conscious superiority,
and an emulation in point of grandeur
immediately commenced between the two sisters. 
She every day communicated her importance to
the whole parish, under pretence of taking the air
in her coach, and endeavoured to extend her acquaintance
among people of fashion. Nor was
this an undertaking attended with great difficulty,
for all persons whatever, capable of maintaining
a certain appearance, will always find admission
into what is called the best company, and be
rated in point of character according to their own
valuation, without subjecting their pretensions to
the smallest doubt or examination. In all her visits
and parties she seized every opportunity of declaring
her present condition, observing that she
was forbid by her physicians to taste such a pickle,
and that such a dish was poison to a woman in her 

way: nay, where she was on a footing of familiarity,
she affected to make wry faces, and
complained that the young rogue began to be very
unruly, writhing herself into divers contortions,
as if she had been grievously incommoded by the
mettle of this future Trunnion. The husband
himself did not behave with all the moderation
that might have been expected; at the club he
frequently mention'd this circumstance of his
own vigour as a pretty successful feat to be performed
by an old fellow of fifty-five, and confirmed
the opinion of his strength by redoubled
squeezes of the landlord's hand, which never
failed of extorting a satisfactory certificate of his
might. When his companions drank to the Hans
en kelderr, or Jack in the low cellar, he could
not help displaying an extraordinary complacence
of countenance, and signified his intention of
sending the young dog to sea, as soon as he should
be able to carry a cartridge, in hopes of seeing
him an officer before his own death. 
This hope helped to console him under the extraordinary
expence to which he was exposed by
the profusion of his wife, especially when he considered
that his compliance with her prodigality
would be limited to the expiration of the nine
months, of which the best part was by this time
elapsed; yet in spite of all this philosophical resignation,
her fancy sometimes soared to such a
ridiculous and intolerable pitch of insolence and
absurdity, that his temper forsook him, and he
could not help wishing in secret, that her pride
might be confounded in the dissipation of her most
flattering hopes, even tho' he himself should be
a principal sufferer by the disappointment. These,
however, were no other than the suggestions of 

temporary disgusts, that commonly subsided as
suddenly as they arose, and never gave the least
disturbance to the person who inspired them, because
he took care to conceal them carefully from
her knowledge. 
Mean while she happily advanced in her reckoning,
with the promise of a favourable issue; the
term of her computation expired, and in the
middle of the night she was visited by certain
warnings that seemed to bespeak the approach of
the critical moment. The commodore got up
with great alacrity, and called the midwife, who
had been several days in the house; the gossips
were immediately summoned, and the most interesting
expectations prevailed; but the symptoms
of labour gradually vanished, and, as the
matrons sagely observed, this was no more than
a false alarm. 
Two nights after they received a second intimation,
and as she was sensibly diminished in the
waist, every thing was supposed to be in a fair
way; yet this visitation was not more conclusive
than the former; her pains wore off in spite of
all her endeavours to encourage them, and the
good women betook themselves to their respective
homes, in expectation of finding the third attack
decisive, alluding to the well-known maxim, that
number three is always fortunate. For once,
however, this apothegm failed; the next call was
altogether as ineffectual as the former; and
moreover, attended with a phænomenon which
to them was equally strange and inexplicable:
this was no other than such a reduction in the
size of Mrs. Trunnion as might have been expected
after the birth of a full-grown child. 
Startled at such an unaccountable event, they sat 

in close divan; and concluding that the case was
in all respects unnatural and prodigious, desired
that a messenger might be immediately dispatched
for some male practitioner in the art of midwifery. 
The commodore, without guessing the cause
of their perplexity, ordered Pipes immediately on
this piece of duty; and in less than two hours
they were assisted by the advice of a surgeon of
the neighbourhood, who boldly affirmed that the
patient had never been with child. This asseveration
was like a clap of thunder to Mr. Trunnion,
who had been during eight whole days and
nights in continual expectation of being hailed
with the appellation of father. 
After some recollection he swore the surgeon
was an ignorant fellow, and that he would
not take his word for what he advanced, being
comforted and confirmed in his want of faith by
the insinuations of the midwife, who still persisted
to feed Mrs. Trunnion with hopes of a
speedy and safe delivery; observing that she had
been concerned in many a case of the same nature,
where a fine child was found, even after
all signs of the mother's pregnancy had disappeared. 
Every twig of hope, how slender soever
it may be, is eagerly caught hold on by
people who find themselves in danger of being
disappointed. To every question proposed by her
to the lady with the preamble of “Han't you?” 
or “Don't you?” an answer was made in the affirmative,
whether agreeable to truth or not, because
the respondent could not find in her heart
to disown any symptom that might favour the
notion she had so long indulged. 

This experienced proficient in the obstetric
art was therefore kept in close attendance for the
space of three weeks, during which the patient
had several returns of what she pleased herself
with believing to be labour-pains, till at length
she and her husband became the standing joke of
the parish; and this infatuated couple could scarce
be prevailed upon to part with their hopes, even
when she appeared as lank as a greyhound, and
they were furnished with other unquestionable
proofs of their having been deceived. But they
could not for ever remain under the influence of
this sweet delusion, which at last faded away, and
was succeeded by a paroxism of shame and confusion,
that kept the husband within doors for the
space of a whole fortnight, and confined his lady
to her bed for a series of weeks, during which
she suffered all the anguish of the most intense
mortification; yet even this was subdued by the
lenient hand of time. 
The first respite from her chagrin was employed
in the strict discharge of what are called the
duties of religion, which she performed with the
most rancorous severity, setting on foot a persecution
in her own family, that made the house
too hot for all the menial servants, even ruffled
the almost invincible indifference of Tom Pipes,
harrassed the commodore himself out of all patience,
and spared no individual but lieutenant
Hatchway, whom she never ventured to disoblige. 