


The governors tamper with their pupils. Peregrine
is deserted, prevailed upon to return, and submit
to correction; sublimes his ideas, commences gallant,
and becomes acquainted with Miss Emily
Gauntlet. 
Mean while the master, surprised and
disconcerted at such an unprecedented secession,
convened all the tutors of those who
were concerned in this dangerous association, in
order to concert proper measures for recalling
them; and after mature deliberation, as it was
the opinion of every body, that such a number
of raw, hot-headed boys, without money, conduct, 

experience or plan, could not possibly cohere
for any length of time, they resolved to
leave them to the operation of their own passions; 
not doubting that as the first impulse
gradually weakened, they would drop off one by
one, and the whole confederacy be thus melted
down. The return of the young boys justified
the prognostic; but the masters were not a little
alarmed, when they understood that the rest had
chosen a general, submitted to certain regulations,
and adopted a determinate design. They
resolved, nevertheless, to give them a little more
scope, and waited four and twenty hours for the
effect of their forbearance; when hearing no accounts
from the deserters, they began to consider
this revolt as a very serious affair; and in
pursuance of their advice and direction, the governors
set out in quest of their stray pupils. 
It was not difficult to discover the rout they
had taken; such a remarkable caravan could not
pass unheeded; they got intimation of their advances
from stage to stage, and at night arrived
at an inn that stood on the road, about two
miles short of the town where the adventurers
had settled their head quarters. From hence they
repaired in a body to the house of a neighbouring
justice, who, in consequence of their representations,
granted a warrant to apprehend and secure
the body of Thomas Pipes, as an idle vagabond
and seducer of youth. Thus authorised,
they went early next morning to the town,
and set up their horses at another inn, where
they remained incognito, until they had engaged
the constable with a competent number of assistants; 
then a person was sent to inform Mr. 

Pipes, that his company was desired at the White
Hart. 
Tom received this message immediately after
the contribution of effects, already mentioned; 
and imparted the contents to his master, who
rightly judging that it concerned the common
cause, desired him to obey the summons. He
followed the messenger accordingly; and no
sooner set his nose within the room to which he
was directed, than the constable and his posse
sprung upon him, before he had the least intimation
of his design, or any opportunity of acting
in his own defence. 
Thus overpowered, he was made acquainted
with the cause of his being arrested, which, in
all appearance, did not give him a great deal of
concern, and in private committed to jail, where
he was left to his own meditations. 
This previous measure being successfully taken,
the tutors went into separate apartments, and
sending for their respective pupils, each plied his
own charge in particular with such arguments as
he judged most conducive to dissuade him from
persevering in the imprudent scheme which he
had already prosecuted too far. No great eloquence
was required to accomplish this aim, which
was already more than half effected by their own
reflections; and therefore the greatest part of
them yielded to such reasonable remonstrances,
and consented to return to school, provided they
might be indulged with a general amnesty for
what they had done. This they were impowered
to promise to all of them, except Peregrine,
whom, as ringleader and first cause of this disturbance,
the master had marked out for a public
example. For this reason he stood out against 

all the admonitions of Mr. Jolter, who in vain
conjured him to put up with a little correction,
rather than run the risk of being ignominiously
expelled, and of forfeiting the friendship of his
uncle, on whom he knew his chief dependance
was built; till at length, seeing his adherents
persuaded out of their allegiance, and himself
bereft of all company and means of subsistence,
he with great reluctance resigned himself to his
fate; and having obtained the discharge of Pipes,
was reconducted to the college, where, notwithstanding
the intercession of his governor, who
begged earnestly that his punishment might be
mitigated, our unfortunate hero was publickly
horsed, in terrorem of all whom it might concern. 
This disgrace had a very sensible effect upon
the mind of Peregrine, who having, by this
time, passed the fourteenth year of his age, began
to adopt the pride and sentiments of a man. 
Thus dishonourably stigmatized, he was ashamed
to appear in public as usual; he was incensed
against his companions for their infidelity and irresolution,
and plunged into a profound reverie
that lasted several weeks, during which he shook
off his boyish connections, and fixed his view
upon objects which he thought more worthy of
his attention. 
In the course of his gymnastic exercises, at
which he was very expert, he contracted intimacies
with several youths who were greatly his
superiors in point of age, and who, pleased with
his aspiring genius and address, introduced him
into parties of gallantry, which strongly captivated
his inclination. He was by nature particularly
adapted for succeeding in adventures of
this kind; over and above a most engaging person 

that improved with his years, he possessed a dignified
assurance, an agreeable ferocity which inhanced
the conquest of the fair who had the good
fortune to enslave him, unlimited generosity, and
a fund of humour which never failed to please. 
Nor was he deficient in the more solid accomplishments
of youth; he had profited in his studies
beyond expectation, and besides that sensibility
of discernment which is the foundation
of taste, and in consequence of which he distinguished
and enjoyed the beauties of the Classics,
he had already given several specimens of a
very promising poetic talent. 
With this complexion and these qualifications,
no wonder that our hero attracted the notice
and affection of the young Delias in town,
whose hearts had just begun to flutter for they
knew not what. Inquiries were made concerning
his condition; and no sooner were his expectations
known, than he was invited and caressed
by all the parents, while their daughters
vyed with each other in treating him with particular
complacency. He inspired love and emulation
wherever he appeared; envy and jealous
rage followed of course; so that he became a very
desirable, though a very dangerous acquaintance. 
His moderation was not equal to his success; 
his vanity took the lead of his passions, dissipating
his attention, which might otherwise have fixed
him to one object; and he was possessed with the
rage of increasing the number of his conquests. 
With this view he frequented public walks, concerts
and assemblies, became remarkably rich and
fashionable in his cloaths, gave entertainments
to the ladies, and was in the utmost hazard of
turning out a most egregious coxcomb. 

While his character thus wavered between the
ridicule of some, and the regard of others, an
accident happened, which, by contracting his
view to one object, detached him from those
vain pursuits that would in time have plunged
him into an abyss of folly and contempt. Being
one evening at the ball which is always given to
the ladies at the time of the races, the person
who acted as master of the ceremonies, knowing
how fond Mr. Pickle was of every opportunity
to display himself, came up and told him, that
there was a fine young creature at the other end
of the room, who seemed to have a great inclination
to dance a minuet, but wanted a partner,
the gentleman who attended her being in boots. 
Peregrine's vanity being arroused at this intimation,
he went up to reconnoitre the young
lady, and was struck with admiration at her
beauty. She seemed to be of his own age, was
tall, and tho' slender, exquisitely shaped; her
hair was auburn, and in such plenty, that the
barbarity of dress had not been able to prevent
it from shading both sides of her forehead,
which was high and polished; the contour of
her face was oval, her nose very little raised into
the aquiline form, that contributed to the spirit
and dignity of her aspect; her mouth was small,
her lips plump, juicy and delicious, her teeth regular
and white as driven snow, her complexion
incredibly delicate and glowing with health, and
her full blue eyes beamed forth vivacity and love:
her mein was at the same time commanding and
engaging, her address perfectly genteel, and her
whole appearance so captivating, that our young
Adonis looked, and was overcome. 

He no sooner recollected himself from his astonishment,
than he advanced to her with a graceful
air of respect, and begged she would do him
the honour to walk a minuet with him. She
seemed particularly pleased with his application,
and very frankly complied with his request. This
pair was too remarkable to escape the particular
notice of the company: Mr. Pickle was well
known by almost every body in the room, but
his partner was altogether a new face, and of
consequence underwent the criticism of all the
ladies in the assembly; one whispered, “She has
a good complexion, but don't you think she is a
little awry?” A second pitied her for her masculine
nose; a third observed, that she was aukward
for want of seeing company; a fourth distinguished
something very bold in her countenance; 
and in short, there was not a beauty in
her whole composition, which the glass of envy
did not pervert into a blemish. 
The men, however, looked upon her with different
eyes; among them her appearance produced
an universal murmur of applause; they encircled
the space on which she danced, and were
enchanted by her graceful motion. While they
launched out in the praise of her, they expressed
their displeasure at the good fortune of her partner,
whom they damned for a little finical coxcomb,
that was too much engrossed by the contemplation
of his own person, to discern or deserve
the favour of his fate. He did not hear,
therefore could not repine at these invectives; 
but while they imagined he indulged his vanity,
a much more generous passion had taken possession
of his heart. 

Instead of that petulance of gaiety for which
he had been distinguished in his public appearance,
he now gave manifest signs of confusion
and concern; he danced with an anxiety which
impeded his performance, and blushed to the
eyes at every false step he made. Though this
extraordinary agitation was overlooked by the
men, it could not escape the observation of the
ladies, who perceived it with equal surprize and
resentment; and when Peregrine led this fair unknown
to her seat, expressed their pique in an
affected titter, which broke from every mouth
at the same instant, as if all of them had been
informed by the same spirit. 
Peregrine was nettled at this unmannerly mark
of disapprobation, and, in order to increase their
chagrin, endeavoured to enter into particular
conversation with their fair rival. The young
lady herself, who neither wanted penetration,
nor the consciousness of her own accomplishments,
resented their behaviour, though she triumphed
at the cause of it, and gave her partner
all the encouragement he could desire. Her mother,
who was present, thanked him for his civility
in taking such notice of a stranger, and he
received a compliment of the same nature from
the young gentleman in boots, who was her own
brother. 
If he was charmed with her appearance, he
was quite ravished with her discourse, which was
sensible, spirited and gay. Her frank and sprightly
demeanour excited his own confidence and good
humour; and he described to her the characters
of those females who had honoured them with
such a spiteful mark of distinction, in terms so
replete with humorous satire, that she seemed to 

listen with particular complacency of attention,
and distinguished every nymph thus ridiculed with
such a significant glance, as overwhelmed her
with chagrin and mortification. In short, they
seemed to relish each other's conversation, during
which our young Damon acquitted himself with
great skill in all the duties of gallantry; he laid
hold of proper opportunities to express his admiration
of her charms, had recourse to the silent
rhetoric of tender looks, breathed divers insidious
sighs, and attached himself wholly to her
during the remaining part of the entertainment. 
When the company broke up, he attended
her to her lodgings, and took leave of her with
a squeeze of the hand, after having obtained permission
to visit her next morning, and been informed
by the mother that her name was Miss
Emilia Gauntlet. 
All night long he closed not an eye, but
amused himself with plans of pleasure, which his
imagination suggested, in consequence of this
new acquaintance. He arose with the lark, adjusted
his air into an agreeable negligence of
curl, and dressing himself in a genteel grey frock
trimmed with silver binding, waited with the
utmost impatience for the hour of ten, which
no sooner struck, than he hied him to the
place of appointment, and inquiring for Miss
Gauntlet, was shewn into a parlour. Here he
had not waited above ten minutes, when Emilia
entered in a most inchanting undress, with all
the graces of nature playing about her person,
and in a moment rivetted the chains of his slavery
beyond the power of accident to unbind. 
Her mother being still abed, and her brother
gone to give orders about the chaise, in which 

they proposed to return that same day to their
own habitation, he enjoyed her company tête a
tête a whole hour, during which he declared his
love in the most passionate terms, and begged
that he might be admitted into the number of
those admirers whom she permitted to visit and
adore her. 
She affected to look upon his vows and protestations
as the ordinary effects of gallantry, and very
obligingly assured him, that were she to live in
that place, she should be glad to see him often; 
but as the spot on which she resided was at a
considerable distance, she could not expect he
would go so far upon such a trifling occasion, or
take the trouble of providing himself with her
mamma's permission. 
To this favourable hint he answered with all
the eagerness of the most fervid passion, that he
had uttered nothing but the genuine dictates of
his heart, and desired nothing so much as an opportunity
of evincing the sincerity of his professions; 
and that though she lived at the extremity
of the kingdom, he would find means to
lay himself at her feet, provided he could visit
her with her mother's consent, which he assured
her he would not fail to sollicit. 
She then gave him to understand, that her habitation
was about sixteen miles from Winchester,
in a village which she named, and where (as he
could easily collect from her discourse) he would
be no unwelcome guest. 
In the midst of this communication they were
joined by Mrs. Gauntlet, who received him with
great courtesy, thanked him again for his politeness
to Emy at the Ball, and anticipated his intention, 

by saying that she should be very glad to
see him at her house, if ever his occasions should
call him that way. 