


MRS. JONES
PROVIDINCH hath bin pleased to make great
halteration in the pasture of our affairs. —We
were yesterday three kiple chined, by the grease of
God, in the holy bands of mattermoney; and I
now subscrive myself Loyd at your sarvice. —All
the parish allowed that young 'squire Dallison and
his bride was a comely pear for to see. —As for madam
Lashmiheygo, you nose her picklearities—her
head, to be sure, was fintastical; and her spouse
had rapt her with a long marokin furze cloak from
the land of the selvidges, thof they say it is of immense
bally —The captain himself had a huge hassock
of air, with three tails and a tumtawdry coat
boddered with sulfur.—wan said he was a monkey-bank; 
and the ould bottler swore he was the born
imich of Titidal. —For my part, I says nothing,
being as how the captain has done the handsome
thing by me. —Mr. Loyd was dressed in a little frog,
and checket with gold binding; and thof he don't
enter in caparison with great folks of quality, yet
he has got as good blood in his veins as arrow privet
'squire in the county; and then his pursing is
far from contentible. —Your humble sarvant had
on a plain pea-green tabby sack, with my Runnela
cap, ruff, toupee, and side curls —They said, I
was the very moral of lady Rickmanstone, but not
so pale—that may well be, for her ladyship is
my elder by seven good years and more. —Now, 

Mrs. Mary, our satiety is to suppurate —Mr. Millfart
goes to Bath along with the Dallisons, and the
rest of us push home to Wales, to pass our Chrishmarsh
at Brampleton-hall. —As our apartments is to
be the yallow pepper, in the thurd story, pray
carry my things thither. —Present my cumpliments
to Mrs. Gwillim, and I hope she and I will
live upon dissent terms of civility. —Being, by
God's blessing, removed to a higher spear, you'll
excuse my being familiar with the lower sarvents
of the family; but, as I trust you'll behave respectful,
and keep a proper distance, you may always
depend upon the good will and purtection of 
Your's,
W. Loyd. 
Nov. 