


Peregrine distinguishes himself among his school-fellows,
exposes his tutor, and attracts the particular
notice of the master. 
Thus left to the prosecution of his studies,
Peregrine was in a little time a distinguished
character, not only for his acuteness
of apprehension, but also for that mischievous
fertility of fancy, of which we have already given
such pregnant examples. But as there was
a great number of such luminaries in this new
sphere to which he belonged, his talents were not
so conspicuous, while they shone in his single
capacity, as they afterwards appeared, when they
concentrated and reflected the rays of the whole
constellation. 
At first he confined himself to piddling game,
exercising his genius upon his own tutor, who
attracted this attention, by endeavouring to season
his mind with certain political maxims, the
fallacy of which he had discernment enough to
perceive. Scarce a day passed, on which he did
not find means to render Mr. Jolter the object of
ridicule; his violent prejudices, ludicrous vanity,
aukward solemnity and ignorance of mankind,
afforded continual food for the raillery, petulance
and satire of his pupil, who never neglected
an opportunity of laughing, and making
others laugh at his expence. 

Sometimes in their parties, by mixing brandy
in his wine, he decoyed this pedagogue into a
debauch, during which his caution forsook him,
and he exposed himself to the censure of the
company. Sometimes, when the conversation
turned upon intricate subjects, he practised upon
him the Socratic method of confutation, and,
under pretence of being informed, by an artful
train of puzzling questions, insensibly betrayed
him into self-contradiction: and at one time
he, in a most dexterous manner, set on foot a
correspondence between him and the chambermaid
of the house, which ended in his utter
shame and confusion. The wench was handsome,
Jolter was frail; and one evening, while
in his cups, beheld her with a carnal eye. 
Perry, who was ever on the catch, discovered
his longing, and prevailed upon the object of his
passion to feed his flame with small favours, until
it became too violent to be restrained: he then
urged his addresses with redoubled ardor, promised,
vowed, bribed and intreated; the inamorata
seemed to yield, and blessed him with a declaration,
that her chamber-door should be left open
at midnight. 
True to the assignation, he rose at the hour
appointed, and full of the most vigorous expectation,
in his shirt, darkling explored his way to
the place of rendezvous. His heart throbbed
with joy when he found immediate admittance; 
he saw the cap of his Dulcinea, who seemed to
be asleep; he sprung into bed, and clasped in his
arms—oh heavens! no other than the
traitor Pipes, who, by his master's direction, personated
the maid; and returned the embrace
with such muscular contraction, that the unfortunate 

lover felt the disappointment, and the impossibility
of disengaging himself, at the same
time. His malicious pupil, attended by another
scholar who lived in the same house, and the fly
jilt who was the cause of this disaster, immediately
entered the room with lights, and detected
the forlorn governor in all the mortification of
disgrace. 
This adventure destroyed all the remains of
authority which he had hitherto preserved over
Peregrine; so that, for the future, no sort of ceremony
subsisted between them, and all Mr. Jolter's
precepts were conveyed in hints of friendly
advice, which the other might either follow or
neglect at his own pleasure. No wonder then
that Peregrine gave a loose to his inclinations,
and by dint of genius and an enterprising temper,
made a figure among the younger class of heroes
in the college. 
Before he had been a full year at Winchester,
he had signalized himself in so many atchievements,
in defiance to the laws and regulations of
the place, that he was looked upon with admiration,
and actually chosen Dux, or leader, by
a large body of his contemporaries. It was not
long before his fame reached the ears of the master,
who sent for Mr. Jolter, communicated to
him the information he had received, and desired
him to check the vivacity of his charge, and
redouble his vigilance in time to come, else he
should be obliged to make a public example of
his pupil for the benefit of the school. 
The governor, conscious of his own unimportance,
was not a little disconcerted at this injunction,
which it was not in his power to fulfil
by any compulsive means. He therefore went 

home in a very pensive mood, and after mature
deliberation, resolved to expostulate with Peregrine
in the most familiar terms, and endeavour
to dissuade him from practices which might affect
his character as well as interest. He accordingly
frankly told him the subject of the master's discourse,
represented the disgrace he might incur
by neglecting this warning; and putting him in
mind of his own situation, hinted the consequences
of the commodore's displeasure, in case
he should be brought to disapprove of his conduct. 
These insinuations made the greater impression,
as they were delivered with many expressions
of friendship and concern. The young
gentleman was not so raw, but that he could perceive
the solidity of Mr. Jolter's advice, to which
he promised to conform, because his pride was interested
in the affair; and he considered his own
reformation as the only means of avoiding that
infamy which even in idea he could not bear. 
His governor finding him so reasonable, profited
by these moments of reflection, and in order
to prevent a relapse, proposed that he should
engage in some delightful study that would agreeably
amuse his imagination, and gradually detach
him from those connexions which had involved
him in so many troublesome adventures. 
For this purpose, he, with many rapturous encomiums,
recommended the mathematics, as
yielding more rational and sensible pleasure to a
youthful fancy than any other subject of contemplation; 
and actually began to read Euclid with
him that same afternoon. 
Peregrine entered upon this branch of learning
with all that warmth of application which boys
commonly yield on the first change of study; 

but he had scarce advanced beyond the Pons Asinorum,
when his ardor abated, the test of truth
by demonstration did not elevate him to those
transports of joy with which his preceptor had
regaled his expectation; and before he arrived
at the fortieth and seventh proposition, he began
to yawn drearily, make abundance of wry faces,
and thought himself but indifferently paid for his
attention, when he shared the vast discovery of
Pythagoras, and understood that the square of
the hypothenuse was equal to the squares of the
other two sides of a right-angled triangle. He
was ashamed, however, to fail in his undertaking,
and persevered with great industry, until he had
finished the first four books, acquired plain trigonometry,
with the method of algebraical calculation,
and made himself well acquainted with
the principles of surveying. But no consideration
could prevail upon him to extend his inquiries
farther in this science; and he returned with
double relish to his former avocations, like a
stream which being dammed, accumulates more
force, and bursting o'er its mounds, rushes down
with double impetuosity. 
Mr. Jolter saw with astonishment and chagrin,
but could not resist the torrent. His behaviour
was now no other than a series of licence and effrontery; 
prank succeeded prank, and outrage
followed outrage with surprising velocity. Complaints
were every day preferred against him; in
vain were admonitions bestowed by the governor
in private, and menaces discharged by the masters
in publick; he disregarded the first, despised the
latter, divested himself of all manner of restraint,
and proceeded in his career to such a pitch of audacity,
that a consultation was held upon the subject, 

in which it was determined that this untoward
spirit should be humbled by a severe and ignominious
flogging for the very next offence he
should commit; and in the mean time that Mr.
Jolter should be desired to write in the master's
name to the commodore, requesting him to remove
Tom Pipes from the person of his nephew,
the said Pipes being a principal actor and abettor
in all his malversations; and to put a stop to the
monthly visitations of the mutilated lieutenant,
who had never once failed to use his permission,
but came punctual to a day, always fraught with
some new invention. Indeed, by this time, Mr.
Hatchway was as well known, and much better
beloved by every boy in the school than the master
who instructed him, and always received by
a number of the scholars who used to attend
Peregrine when he went forth to meet his friend,
and conduct him to his lodging with public testimonies
of joy and applause. 
As for Tom Pipes he was not so properly the
attendant of Peregrine, as master of the revels to
the whole school. He mingled in all their parties,
and superintended the diversions, deciding between
boy and boy, as if he acted by commission
under the great seal. He regulated their motions
by his whistle, instructed the young boys in the
games of hussle-cap, leap-frog, and chuck farthing; 
imparted to those of a more advanced age
the sciences of cribbidge and all-fours, together
with the method of storming the castle, acting
the comedy of Prince Arthur, and other pantomimes,
as they are commonly exhibited at sea; 
and instructed the seniors who were distinguished
by the appellation of bloods, in cudgel playing,
dancing the St. Giles's hornpipe, drinking flip 

and smoaking tobacco. These qualifications had
rendered him so necessary and acceptable to the
scholars, that exclusive of Perry's concern in the
affair, his dismission in all probability, would have
produced some dangerous convulsion in the community. 
Jolter, therefore, knowing his importance,
informed his pupil of the directions he had
received, and very candidly asked how he should
demean himself in the execution; for he durst not
write to the commodore without this previous
notice, fearing that the young gentleman, as soon
as he should get an inkling of the affair, would
follow the example, and make his uncle acquainted
with certain anecdotes, which it was the
governor's interest to keep concealed. Peregrine
was of opinion that he should spare himself the
trouble of conveying any complaints to the commodore; 
and if questioned by the master, assure
him he had complied with his desire; at the same
time he promised faithfully to conduct himself
with such circumspection for the future, that the
masters should have no temptation to revive the
inquiry. But the resolution attending this extorted
promise was too frail to last, and in less
than a fortnight our young hero found himself
intangled in an adventure from which he was not
extricated with his usual good fortune. 