


DEAR WAT,
ADVENTURES begin to thicken as we advance
to the southward. —Lismahago has now professed
himself the admirer of our aunt, and carries on his
addresses under the sanction of her brother's approbation; 
so that we shall certainly have a wedding
by Christmas. I should be glad you was
present at the nuptials, to help me to throw the
stocking, and perform other ceremonies peculiar to
that occasion —I am sure it will be productive
of some diversion; and, truly, it would be worth
your while to come across the country on purpose
to see two such original figures in bed together,
with their laced night-caps; he, the emblem of
good cheer, and she, the picture of good-nature. 
All this agreeable prospect was clouded, and had
well nigh vanished entirely, in consequence of a
late misunderstanding between the future brothers-in-law,
which, however, is now happily removed. 
A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit
a relation, met with lord Oxmington at his house,
who asked us to dine with him next day, and we
accepted the invitation. —Accordingly, leaving
our women under he case of captain Lismahago,
at the inn where we had loged the preceding
night, in a little town, about a mile from his lordship's
dwelling, we went at the hour appointed,
and had a fashionable meal served up with much
ostentation to a company of about a dozen persons,
none of whom we had ever seen before. —His
lordship is much more remarkable for his pride
and caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; 
and, indeed, it appeared, that he
considered his guests merely as objects to shine 

upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own magnificence. 
—There was much state, but no courtesy; 
and a great deal of compliment without any
conversation. —Before the desert was removed, our
noble entertainer proposed three general toasts; 
then calling for a glass of wine, and bowing all
round, wished us a good afternoon. This was
the signal for the company to break up, and they
obeyed it immediately, all except our 'squire, who
was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission. 
—He changed countenance, bit his lips in silence,
but still kept his seat, so that his lordship
found himself obliged to give us another hint, by
saying, he should be glad to see us another time,
“there is no time like the time present (cried
Mr. Bramble); your lordship has not yet drank
a bumper to the best in Christendom.” “I'll
drink no more bumpers to-day (answered our
landlord); and I am sorry to see you have drank
too many. —Order the gentleman's carriage to
the gate.” —So saying, he rose and retired
abruptly; our 'squire starting up at the same time,
laying his hand upon his sword, and eying him
with a most ferocious aspect. The master having
vanished in this manner, our uncle bad one of the
servants to see what was to pay; and the fellow
answering, “This is no inn,” “I cry you mercy,
(cried the other) I perceive it is not; if it
were, the landlord would be more civil. — 
There's a guinea, however; take it, and tell
your lord, that I shall not leave the country till
I have had an opportunity to thank him in person
for his politeness and hospitality.” 
We then walked down stairs through a double
range of lacqueys, and getting into the chaise,
proceeded homewards. Perceiving the 'squire
much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment,
observing, that as lord Oxmington was 

well known to have his brain very ill timbered, a
sensible man should rather laugh, than be angry at
his ridiculous want of breeding. —Mr. Bramble
took umbrage at my presuming to be wiser than
he upon this occasion; and told me, that as he
had always thought for himself in every occurrence
in life, he would still use the same privilege,
with my good leave. 
When we returned to our inn, he closetted Lismahago; 
and having explained his grievance, desired
that gentleman to go and demand satisfaction
of lord Oxmington in his name. —The lieutenant
charged himself with this commission, and
immediately set out a horseback for his lordship's
house attended, at his own request, by my man
Archy Macalpine, who had been used to military
service; and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted
upon an ass, this couple might have passed for
the knight of La Mancha and his 'squire Panza. 
It was not till after some demur that Lismahago
obtained a private audience, at which he formally
defied his lordship to single combat, in the name
of Mr. Bramble, and desired him to appoint the
time and place. Lord Oxmington was so confounded
at this unexpected message, that he could
not, for some time, make any articulate reply; but
stood staring at the lieutenant with manifest marks
of perturbation. At length, ringing a bell with
great vehemence, he exclaimed, “What! a commoner
send a challenge to a peer of the realm! 
—Privilege! privilege! —Here's a person brings
me a challenge from the Welchman that dined
at my table—An impudent fellow!—My wine
is not yet out of his head.” 
The whole house was immediately in commotion. 
—Macalpine made a soldierly retreat with the
two horses; but the captain was suddenly surrounded
and disarmed by the footmen, whom a 

French valet de chambre headed in this exploit; 
his sword was passed through a close-stool, and his
person through the horse pond. —In this plight
he returned to the inn, half mad with his disgrace. 
—So violent was the rage of his indignation, that
he mistook its object —He wanted to quarrel with
Mr. Bramble; he said, he had been dishonoured
on his account, and he looked for reparation at
his hands. —My uncle's back was up in a moment; 
and he desired him to explain his pretensions 
—“Either compel lord Oxmington to give
me satisfaction, (cried he) or give it me in your
own person.” “The latter part of the alternative
is the most easy and expeditious (replied
the 'squire, starting up): if you are disposed for
a walk, I'll attend you this moment.” 
Here they were interrupted by Mrs. Tabby, who
had overhead all that passed. —She now burst
into the room, and running betwixt them, in great
agitation, “Is this your regard for me, (said she
to the lieutenant) to seek the life of my brother?” 
Lismahago, who seemed to grow cool
as my uncle grew hot, assured her he had a very
great respect for Mr. Bramble, but he had still
more for his own honour, which had suffered pollution; 
but if that could be once purified, he
should have no further cause of dissatisfaction. 
—The 'squire said, he should have thought it incumbent
upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's
honour; but, as he had now carved for himself, he
might swallow and digest it as well as he could— 
in a word, what betwixt the meditation of Mrs.
Tabitha, the recollection of the captain, who perceived
he had gone too far, and the remonstrances
if your humble servant, who joined them at this
juncture, those two originals were perfectly reconciled; 
and then we proceeded to deliberate upon
the means of taking vengeance for the insults they 

had received from the petulent peer; for, until
that aim should be accomplished, Mr. Bramble
swore, with great emphasis, that he would not
leave the inn where we now lodged, even if he
should pass his Christmas on the spot. 
In consequence of our deliberations, we next
day, in the forenoon, proceeded in a body to his
lordship's house, all of us, with our servants, including
the coachman, mounted a horseback, with
our pistols loaded and ready primed. —Thus prepared
for action, we paraded solemnly and slowly
before his lordship's gate, which we passed three
times in such a manner, that he could not but see
us, and suspect the cause of our appearance. — 
After dinner we returned, and performed the same
cavalcade, which was again repeated the morning
following; but we had no occasion to persist in
these manœuvres. —About noon, we were visited
by the gentleman, at whose house we had first
seen lord Oxmington. —He now came to make
apologies in the name of his lordship, who declared
he had no intention to give offence to my uncle
in practising what had been always the custom
of his house; and that as for the indignities which
had been put upon the officer, they were offered
without his lordship's knowledge, at the instigation
of his valet de chambre. —“If that be the
case, (said my uncle in a peremptory tone)
I shall be contented with lord Oxmington's personal
excuses; and I hope my friend will be
satisfied with his lordship's turning that insolent
rascal out of his service.” —“Sir (cried Lismahago)
I must insist upon taking personal vengeance
for the personal injuries I have sustained.” 
After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this
manner. —His lordship, meeting us at our friend's
house, declared he was sorry for what had happened; 
and that he had no intention to give umbrage 
—The valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant 

upon his knees, when Lismahago, to the
astonishment of all present, gave him a violent kick
on the face, which laid him on his back, exclaimed
in a furious tone, “Oui je te pardome, gens
foutre.” 
Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure,
which threatened abundance of vexation
to our family; for the 'squire is one of those who
will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather than leave
what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish
upon their honour and reputation. His lordship
had no sooner pronounced his apology, with a very
bad grace, than he went away in some disorder,
and, I dare say, he will never invite another
Welchman to his table. 
We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement,
in order to prosecute our journey; but we
follow no determinate course —We make small deviations,
to see the remarkable towns, villas, and
curiosities on each side of our route; so that we
advance by slow steps towards the borders of Monmouthshire:
but in the midst of these irregular
motions, there is no abberration nor eccentricity
in that affection with which I am, dear Wat, 
Yours always,
J. Melford. 
Sept. 28. 