


The young gentleman having settled his domestic affairs,
arrives in London, and sets up a gay
equipage. He meets with Emilia, and is introduced
to her uncle. 
His aunt, at the earnest solicitation of Julia
and her husband, took up her quarters at
the house of that affectionate kinswoman, who
made it her chief study to comfort and cherish
the disconsolate widow; and Jolter, in expectation 

of the living, which was not yet vacant, remained
in garison, in quality of land-steward
upon our hero's country-estate. As for the lieutenant,
our young gentleman communed with
him, in a serious manner, about the commodore's
proposal of his taking Mrs. Trunnion to
wife; and Jack, being quite tired of the solitary
situation of a batchelor, which nothing but the
company of his old commander could have enabled
him to support so long, far from discovering
aversion to the match, observed with an arch
smile, that it was not the first time he had commanded
a vessel in the absence of Captain Trunnion; 
and therefore, if the widow was willing,
he would chearfully stand by her helm, and, as
he hoped the duty would not be of long continuance,
do his endeavour to steer her safe into
the port, where the commodore might come on
board, and take charge of her again. 
In consequence of this declaration, it was determined
that Mr. Hatchway should make his
addresses to Mrs. Trunnion, as soon as decency
would permit her to receive them; and Mr. Clover
and his wife promised to exert their influence
in his behalf. Mean while, Jack was desired to
live at the castle as usual, and assured, that it
should be put wholly in his possession, as soon as
he should be able to accomplish this matrimonial
scheme. 
When Peregrine had settled all these points to
his own satisfaction, he took leave of all his
friends, and repairing to the great city, purchased
a new chariot and horses, put Pipes and another
lacquey into rich liveries, took elegant lodgings
in Pall-mall, and made a most remarkable appearance
among people of fashion. It was owing 

to this equipage, and the gaiety of his personal
deportment, that common fame, which is always
a common liar, represented him as a young
gentleman who had just succeeded to an estate of
five thousand pounds per annum, by the death of
an uncle; that he was intitled to an equal fortune
at the decease of his own father, exclusive of
two considerable jointures, which would devolve
upon him, at the demise of his mother and aunt. 
This report (false and ridiculous as it was) he
could not find in his heart to contradict; not but
that he was sorry to find himself so misrepresented:
but his vanity would not allow him to
take any step that might diminish his importance
in the opinion of those who courted his acquaintance,
on the supposition that his circumstances
were actually as affluent as they were said
to be. Nay, so much was he infatuated by this
weakness, that he resolved to encourage the deception,
by living up to the report; and accordingly,
engaged in the most expensive parties
of pleasure; believing, that before his present
finances should be exhausted, his fortune would
be effectually made, by the personal accomplishments
he should have occasion to display to the
beau monde, in the course of his extravagance. 
In a word, vanity and pride were the ruling foibles
of our adventurer, who imagined himself sufficiently
qualified to retrieve his fortune in various
shapes, long before he could have any idea of
want or difficulty. He thought he should have
it in his power, at any time, to make prize of a
rich heiress, or opulent widow; his ambition had
already aspired to the heart of a young handsome
duchess dowager, to whose acquaintance he had
found means to be introduced: or, should matrimony 

chance to be unsuitable to his inclinations,
he never doubted, that by the interest he might
acquire among the nobility, he should be favoured
with some lucrative post, that would amply recompense
him for the liberality of his disposition. 
There are many young men, who entertain the
same expectations, with half the reason he had to
be so presumptuous. 
In the midst of these chimerical calculations,
his passion for Emilia did not subside; but, on
the contrary, began to rage to such an inflammation
of desire, that her idea interfered with
every other reflection, and absolutely disabled him
from prosecuting the other lofty schemes which
his imagination had projected. He therefore laid
down the honest resolution of visiting her in all the
splendor of his situation, in order to practise upon
her virtue with all his art and address, to the utmost
extent of his influence and fortune. Nay,
so effectually had his guilty passion absorb'd his
principles of honour, conscience, humanity, and
regard for the commodore's last words, that he
was base enough to rejoice at the absence of his
friend Godfrey, who being then with his regiment
in Ireland, could not dive into his purpose,
or take measures for frustrating his vicious
design. 
Fraught with these heroic sentiments, he determined
to set out for Sussex in his chariot and
six, attended by his valet de chambre and two
footmen; and as he was now sensible, that in his
last essay he had mistaken his cue, he determined
to change his battery, and sap the fortress, by
the most submissive, soft, and insinuating behaviour. 

On the evening that preceded this purposed
expedition, he went into one of the boxes at the
play-house, as usual, to shew himself to the ladies; 
and in reconnoitring the company through
a glass, (for no other reason, but because it was
fashionable to be purblind) perceived his mistress
very plainly dressed, in one of the seats above the
stage, talking to another young woman of a very
homely appearance. Though his heart beat the
alarm with the utmost impatience at sight of his
Emilia, he was for some minutes deterred from
obeying the impulse of his love, by the presence
of some ladies of fashion, who, he feared, would
think the worse of him, should they see him
make his compliments in public to a person of
her figure. Nor would the violence of his inclination
have so far prevailed over his pride, as to
lead him thither, had not he recollected, that his
quality-friends would look upon her as some handsome
Abigail, with whom he had an affair of gallantry,
and of consequence gave him credit for
the intrigue. 
Encouraged by this suggestion, he complied
with the dictates of love, and flew to the place
where his charmer sat. His air and dress were
so remarkable, that it was almost impossible he
should have escaped the eyes of a curious observer,
especially as he had chosen a time for
coming in, when his entrance could not fail to
attract the notice of the spectators; I mean, when
the whole house was hushed in attention to the
performance on the stage. Emilia, therefore,
had perceived him at his first approach; she found
herself discovered by the direction of his glass,
and guessing his intention by his abrupt retreat
from the box, summoned all her fortitude to her 

aid, and prepared for his reception. He advanced
to her with an air of eagerness and joy, tempered
with modesty and respect, and expressed his satisfaction
at seeing her, with a seeming reverence
of regard. Though she was extremely well pleased
at this unexpected behaviour, she suppressed the
emotions of her heart, and answered his compliments
with affected ease and unconcern, such as
might denote the good humour of a person who
meets by accident with an indifferent acquaintance. 
After having certified himself of her own
good health, he very kindly inquired about her
mother and Miss Sophy, gave her to understand,
that he had lately been favoured with a letter
from Godfrey, and that he had actually intended
to set out next morning on a visit to Mrs. Gauntlet,
which (now that he was so happy as to meet
with her) he would postpone, until he should
have the pleasure of attending her to the country. 
After having thanked him for his polite intention,
she told him, that her mother was expected
in town in a few days, and that she herself
had come to London some weeks ago, to
give her attendance upon her aunt, who had
been dangerously ill, but was now pretty well
recovered. 
Although the conversation of course turned
upon general topics, during the entertainment,
he took all opportunities of being particular with
his eyes, through which he conveyed a thousand
tender protestations. She saw, and inwardly rejoiced
at the humility of his looks; but, far from
rewarding it with one approving glance, she industriously
avoided this ocular intercourse, and
rather coquetted with a young gentleman that
ogled her from the opposite box. Peregrine's 

penetration easily detected her sentiments, and
he was nettled at her dissimulation, which served
to confirm him in his unwarrantable designs
upon her person. He persisted in his assiduities
with indefatigable perseverance; when the play
was concluded, handed her and her companion to
an hackney-coach, and with difficulty was permitted
to escort them to the house of Emilia's
uncle, to whom our hero was introduced by the
young lady, as an intimate friend of her brother
Godfrey. 
The old gentleman, who was no stranger to
the nature of Peregrine's connexion with his
sister's family, prevailed upon him to stay supper,
and seemed particularly well pleased with his conversation
and deportment, which, by help of his
natural sagacity, he wonderfully adapted to the
humour of his entertainer. After supper, when
the ladies were withdrawn, and the citizen called
for his pipe, our sly adventurer followed his example; 
and though he abhorred the plant, smoaked
with an air of infinite satisfaction, and expatiated
upon the virtues of tobacco, as if he had
been deeply concerned in the Virginia trade. In
the progress of the discourse, he consulted the
merchant's disposition; and the national debt
coming upon the carpet, held forth upon the
funds like a professed broker. When the alderman
complained of the restrictions and discouragement
of trade, his guest inveighed against
exorbitant duties, with the nature of which he
seemed as well acquainted as any commissioner
of the customs; so that the uncle was astonished
at the extent of his knowledge, and expressed
his surprize, that a gay young gentleman, like
him, should have found either leisure or inclination 

to consider subjects so foreign to the fashionable
amusements of youth. 
Pickle laid hold on this opportunity to tell
him, that he was descended from a race of merchants; 
and that, early in life, he had made it
his business to instruct himself in the different
branches of trade, which he not only studied as
his family-profession, but also as the source of
all our national riches and power. He then
launched out in praise of commerce, and the promoters
thereof; and, by way of contrast, employed
all his ridicule, in drawing such ludicrous
pictures of the manners and education of what is
called high life, that the trader's sides were shaken
by laughter, even to the danger of his life; and
he looked upon our adventurer as a miracle of
sobriety and good sense. 
Having thus ingratiated himself with the uncle,
Peregrine took his leave, and next day in the
forenoon visited the niece in his chariot, after
she had been admonished by her kinsman to behave
with circumspection, and cautioned against
neglecting or discouraging the addresses of such a
valuable admirer. 