


Dear Mary,
THE 'squire has been so kind as to rap my bit
of nonsense under the kiver of his own sheet —O,
Mary Jones! Mary Jones! I have had trials and
trembulation. God help me! I have been a vixen:
and a griffin these many days —Sattin has had power
to tempt me in the shape of van Ditton, the young
'squire's wally de shamble; but by God's grease
he did not purvail —I thoft as how, there was no
arm in going to play at Newcastle, with my hair
dressed in the Parish Fashion; and as for the trifle
of paint, he said as how my complexion wanted
rouch, and so I let him put it on with a little Spanish
owl; but a mischievous mob of colliers, and
such promiscous ribble rabble, that could bare no
smut but their own, attacked us in the street, and
called me hoar and painted Issabel, and splashed my 

close, and spoiled me a complete set of blond lace
triple ruffles, not a pin the worse for the ware — 
They cost me seven good sillings, to lady Griskin's
woman at London. 
When I axed Mr. Clinker what they meant by
calling me Issabel, he put the byebill into my hand,
and I read of van Issabel a painted harlot, that was
thrown out of a vindore, and the dogs came and
licked her blood —But I am no harlot; and, with
God's blessing, no dog shall have my poor blood
to lick: marry, Heaven forbid, amen! As for
Ditton, after all his courting, and his compliment,
he stole away an Irishman's bride, and took a
French leave of me and his master; but I vally
not his going a farting; but I have had hanger on
his account —Mistress scoulded like mad; thof I
have the comfit that all the family took my part,
and even Mr. Clinker pleaded for me on his bended
knee; thof, God he knows, he had raisins
enuff to complain; but he's a good sole, abounding
with Christian meekness, and one day will meet
with his reward. 
And now, dear Mary, we have got to Haddingborrough,
among the Scots, who are civil enuff
for our money, thof I don't speak their lingo — 
But they should not go for to impose upon foreigners; 
for the bills in their houses say, they have
different easements to let; and behold there is nurro
geaks in the whole kingdom, nor any thing for
poor servants, but a barrel with a pair of tongs
thrown a cross; and all the chairs in the family are
emptied into this here barrel once aday; and at
ten o'clock at night the whole cargo is flung out
of a back vindore that looks into some street or
lane, and the maid calls gardy loo to the passengers,
which signifies Lord have mercy upon you!
and this is done every night in every house in Haddingborrough; 
so you may guess, Mary Jones, what 

a sweet savour comes from such a number of profuming
pans; but they say it is wholesome, and,
truly, I believe it is; for being in the vapours,
and thinking of Issabel and Mr. Clinker, I was
going into a fit of astericks, when this fiff, saving
your presence, took me by the nose so powerfully
that I sneezed three times, and found myself wonderfully
refreshed; and this to be sure is the raisin
why there are no fits in Haddingborrough. 
I was likewise made believe, that there was nothing
to be had oat-meal and seeps-heads; but
if I hadn't been a fool, I mought have known there
could be no heads without kerkasses —This very
blessed day I dined upon a delicate leg of Velsh
mutton and cully-flower; and as for the oat-meal,
I leave that to the servants of the country, which
are pore drudges, many of them without shoes or
stockings —Mr. Clinker tells me here is a great
call of the gospel; but I wish some of our family
be not fallen off from the rite way —O, if
I was given to tail-baring, I have my own secrets
to discover —There has been a deal of huggling
and flurtation betwixt mistress and an ould Scots
officer, called Kismycago. He looks for all the
orld like the scare-crow that our gardener set up
to frite away the sparrows; and what will come
of it, the Lord nows; but come what will, it shall
never be said that I menchioned a syllabub of the
matter —Remember me kindly to Saul and the
kitten —I hope they got the horn-buck, and will
put it to a good yuse, which is the constant prayer
of, 
Dear Molly,
your loving friend,
Win Jenkins. 
Addingborough,
July 13. 