


I carry my qualifications to the navy-office— 
the nature of it—the behaviour of the s&wblank;t&wblank;y
—Strap's concern for my absence
—a battle betwixt him and a blacksmith
—the troublesome consequences of it— 
his harrangue to me—his friend the
school-master recommends me to a French
apothecary, who entertains me as a journeyman. 
I would willingly have gone home to sleep,
but was told by my companions, that we must
deliver our letters of qualification at the navy-office
before one a-clock; upon which we repaired
thither, and gave them to the s&wblank;t&wblank;y,
who opened and read them, and I was mightily
pleased to find myself qualified for second mate of a
third rate. When he had stuck them all together
on a file, one of our company asked if there were
any vacancies; to which he answered, No. Then
I ventured to enquire if any ships were to be
put in commission soon. —At which he surveyed
me with a look of ineffable contempt, and pushing
us out of his office, locked the door without
deigning us one word. —We went down stairs
and conferred together on our expectations, when
I understood that each of them had been recommended
to one or other of the commissioners; 
and each of them promised the first vacancy that 

should fall; but that none of them relied solely
upon that interest, without a present to the s&wblank;t&wblank;y,
with whom the c&wblank;mm&wblank;rs went snacks. 
—For which reason each had provided a small
purse; and I was asked what I proposed to give? 
—This was a vexatious question to me, who (so
far from being in a capacity to gratify a ravenous
s&wblank;t&wblank;y) had not wherewithal to buy me a
dinner. —I therefore answered, I had not determined
yet what to give; and sneaked off towards
my own lodging, cursing my fate all the way,
and inveighing with much bitterness against the
barbarity of my grandfather, and the sordid avarice
of my relations, who left me a prey to
contempt and indigence. —Full of these disagreeable
reflections, I arrived at the house where I
lodged, and relieved my landlord from great anxiety
on my account; for this honest man believed
I had met with some dismal accident, and that
he should never see me again. —Strap, who had
been to see me in the morning, understanding
I had been abroad all night, was almost distracted,
and after having obtained leave of his
master, had gone in quest of me, though he was
even more ignorant of the town than I. Not
being willing to inform my landlord of my adventure,
I told him, I had met an acquaintance at
Surgeon's-hall, with whom I spent the evening
and night, but being very much infested by bugs,
I had not slept much, and therefore intended to
take a little repose; so saying, I went to bed and
desired to be awakened if Strap happened to come
while I should be asleep. —I was accordingly
roused by my friend himself, who entered my
chamber about three a-clock in the afternoon; 
and presented a figure to my eyes, that I could 

scarce believe real. —In short, this affectionate
shaver, setting out towards Surgeon's-hall, had
enquired for me there to no purpose; from thence
he found his way to the navy-office, where he
he could hear no tidings of me, because I was
unknown to every body then present; he afterwards
went upon Change in hopes of seeing me
upon the Scotch walk; but without any success: 
At last, being almost in dispair of finding me, he
resolved to ask every body he met in the street,
if perchance any one could give him information
about me: and actually put his resolution in practice,
in spite of the scoffs, curses and reproaches
with which he was answered; until a blacksmith's
'prentice, seeing him stop a porter with a burden
on his back, and hearing his question, for which
he received a hearty curse, called to him, and
asked if the person he enquired after was not
a Scotchman? —Strap replied with great eagerness,
“Yes, and had on a brown coat with
long skirts.” —“The same (said the blacksmith)
I saw him pass about an hour ago.” — 
“Did you so? (cried Strap, rubbing his hands)
Odd! I am very glad of that—which way
went he?” —“Towards Tyburn in a cart,
(said he) if you make good speed, you may
get thither time enough to see him hanged.” — 
This piece of wit incensed my friend to such a
degree, that he called the blacksmith scoundrel,
and protested he would fight him for half a farthing
—“No, no, (said the other, stripping)
I'll have none of your money—you Scotchmen
seldom carry any about you—but I'll
fight you for love.” —There was a ring immediately
formed by the mob; and Strap finding he
could not get off honourably without fighting, 

at the same time burning with resentment against
his adversary, quitted his cloaths to the care of
the multitude, and the battle began with great
violence on the side of Strap, who in a few minutes
exhausted his breath and spirits on his patient
antagonist, who sustained the assault with
great coolness, till finding the barber quite spent,
he returned the blows he had lent him, with such
interest, that Strap, after having received three falls
on the hard stones, gave out, and allowed the
blacksmith to be the better man. —The victory
being thus decided, it was proposed to adjourn to
a cellar hard by and drink friends. —But when
my friend began to gather up his cloaths, he perceived
that some honest person or other had made
free with his shirt, neckcloath, hat and wig,
which were carried off; and probably his coat and
waistcoat would have met with the same fate, had
they been worth the stealing. —It was in vain for
him to make a noise, which only yielded mirth to
the spectators; he was fain to get off in this
manner, which he accomplished with much difficulty,
and appeared before me, all besmeared
with blood and dirt. —Notwithstanding this misfortune,
such was his transport at finding me safe
and sound, that he had almost stifled and stunk
me to death with his embraces. —After he had
cleaned himself and put on one of my shirts, and
a woolen night-cape instead of hat and wig; I
recounted to him the particulars of my night's
campaign, which filled him with admiration, and
made him repeat with great energy an observation
which was often in his mouth, viz.
“London is the devil's drawing room.” —As
neither of us had dined, he desired me to get up,
and the milk-woman coming round at that instant, 

he went down stairs and brought up a quart,
with a penny brick, on which we made a comfortable
meal. He then shared his money with
me, which amounted to eighteen-pence, and left
me, with an intention to borrow an old wig and
hat of his friend the school-master. 
He was no sooner gone, than I began to consider
my situation with great uneasiness, and revolved
all the schemes my imagination could suggest,
in order to chuse and pursue some one that would
procure me bread; for it is impossible to express
the pangs I felt, when I reflected on the miserable
dependance in which I lived, at the expence of
a poor barber's boy. —My pride took the alarm,
and having no hopes of succeeding at the navy-office,
I came to a resolution of enlisting in the
foot guards next day, coute qui coute. —This extravagant
design, by flattering my disposition,
gave great satisfaction, and I was charging the
enemy at the head of my own regiment, when
Strap's return interrupted my reverie. —The
school-master had made him a present of the
tye-wig which he wore when I was introduced to
him, together with an old hat, whose brims
would have overshadowed a Colossus. —Though
Strap had ventured to wear them in the dusk, he
did not chuse to entertain the mob by day; therefore
went to work immediately and reduced them
both to a moderate size. While he was employed
in this manner, he addressed me thus: —“To
be sure, Mr. Random, you are born a gentleman,
and have a great deal of learning—and
indeed look like a gentleman, for as to person
you may hold up your head with the best of
them. —On the other hand, I am a poor, but
honest cobler's son—my mother was as industrious 

a woman as ever broke bread, 'till
such time as she took to drinking, which you
very well know—but every body has failings
—humanum est errare. —Now for myself I am
a poor journeyman barber, tolerably well made,
and understand some Latin, and have a smattering
of Greek—but what of that? perhaps
I might also say that I know a little of
the world—but that is not to the purpose— 
though you be gentle and I simple, it does
not follow but that I who am simple may do a
good office to you who are gentle. —Now this
is the case—my kinsman the school-master— 
perhaps you did not know, how nearly he is
related to me—I'll satisfy you in that presently
—his mother and my grandfather's
sister's nephew—no, that's not it—my
grandfather's brother's daughter—rabbit it! 
I have forgot the degree—but this I know, he
and I are cousins seven times removed.” —My
impatience to know the good office he had done
me, got the better of my temper, and I interrupted
him at this place, with, “D&wblank;n your
relation and pedigree,—if the school-master or
you can be of any advantage to me, why don't
you tell it, without all this preamble.” —When
I pronounced these words with some vehemence,
Strap looked at me for some time with a grave
countenance, and then went on: “Surely, our
pedigree is not to be d&wblank;n'd, because it is not
so noble as yours. —I am very sorry to see
such an alteration in your temper of late— 
you was always fiery, but now you are grown
as crabbed as old Periwinkle the drunken tinker,
on whom you and I (God forgive us) plaid
so many unlucky tricks, while we were at 

school;—but I will no longer detain you in
suspence, because (doubtless) nothing is more
uneasy than doubt—dubio procul dubio nil dubius. 
—My friend, or relation, or which you
will, or both, the school-master, being informed
of the regard I have for you—for you may
be sure, I did not fail to let him know your
good qualities—by the by, he has undertaken
to teach you the pronounciation of the English-tongue,
without which (he says) you will be
unfit for business in this country. —I say, my
relation has spoke in your behalf to a French
apothecary who wants a journeyman; and
on his recommendation, you may have fifteen
pounds per year, bed and board, whenever you
please.” —I was too much interested in this
piece of news to entertain it with indifference; 
but jumping up, I insisted on Strap's accompanying
me immediately to the house of his friend, that
I might not lose this opportunity through the least
delay or neglect on my part. —We were informed
that the school-master was in company at a public
house in the neighbourhood, whither we repaired,
and found him drinking with the very individual
apothecary in question. When he was called to
the door at our desire, and observed my impatience,
he broke out in his usual term of admiration: 
“O Ch&wblank;st! I suppose when you heard of this
offer, you did not take leisure enough to come
down stairs, but leapt out of the window; 
did you overturn no porter nor oyster-woman
in your way? —It was a mercy of God you
did not knock your brains out against some
post in your career. —O' my conscience! I
believe had I been in the inmost recesses of
my habitation,—the very penetralia,—even in 

bed with my wife; your eagerness would have
surmounted bolts, bars, decency and every
thing. —The den of Cacus, or Sancti sanctorum
could not have hid me from you. But
come along, the gentleman of whom I spoke
is in the house, I will present you to him
forthwith.” —When I entered the room, I
perceived four or five people smoaking, one of
whom the school-master accosted thus: —“Mr.
Lavement, here is the young man of whom
I spoke to you.” —The apothecary, who was
a little old withered man, with a forehead about
an inch high, a nose turned up at the end,
large cheek bones that helped to form a pit for his
little grey eyes, a great bag of loose skin hanging
down on each side in wrinkles, like the alforjas
of a baboon; and a mouth so accustomed to that
contraction which produces grinning, that he
could not pronounce a syllable without discovering
the remains of his teeth, which consisted of
four yellow fangs, not improperly by anatomists,
called canine. —This person (I say) after having
eyed me sometime; said, “Oho, 'tis ver well,
Mons. Concordance;—yong man, you are ver
welcome, take one coup of bierre.—and come
to mine house to-marrow morning, Mons.
Concordance vil shew you de way.” —Upon
this I made my bow, and as I went out of the room,
could hear him say, Ma foy! ce'st un beau garçon,
ce'st un galliard. —As I had by my own application
while I served Crab, acquired the French
tongue well enough to read authors written in
that language, and understand any thing that occurred
in conversation, I determined to pretend
ignorance to my new master, that he and his
family, whom I supposed to be of the same country, 

not being on the reserve before me, might
possibly discover something in discourse, which
would either yield me amusement or advantage. 
—Next morning Mr. Concordance carried me to
the apothecary's house, where the bargain was
made, and orders given to provide an apartment
for me immediately. —But before I entered
upon business, the school-master recommended
me to his taylor who gave me credit for a suit of
cloaths to be paid out of the first moiety of my
wages, and they were begun that very day; he
afterwards accommodated me with a new hat, on
the same terms; so that in a few days, I hoped
to make a very fashionable appearance. —In the
mean time, Strap conveyed my baggage to the place
allotted for me, which was a back room up two
pair of stairs, furnished with a pallet for me to lie
upon, a chair without a back, an earthen chamber-pot
without a handle, a bottle by way of candle-stick,
and a triangular piece of glass instead of
a mirrour; the rest of its ornaments having
been lately removed to one of the garrets, for the
convenience of the servant of an Irish captain,
who lodged in the first floor. 