


The School-master uses me barbarously. —I
form a project of revenge, in which I am
assisted by my uncle. —I leave the village
—am settled at an university by his generosity. 
On our way back to the village, my uncle
spoke not a word during the space of a
whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence,
the tune of, Why should we quarrel for riches, &c.
his visage being contracted all the while into a
most formidable frown. At length his pace was
increased to such a degree, that I was often left
behind a considerable way, which when he perceived,
he would wait for me; and when I was
almost up with him, call out in a surly tone,
“Bear a hand, damme!—must I bring to every
minute for you, you lazy dog.” —Then laying
hold of me by the arm, haul me along, until
his good nature (of which he had a good share)
and reflection, getting the better of his passion,
he would say, “Come, my boy, don't be cast
down,—the old rascal is in hell,—that's some
satisfaction;—you shall go to sea with me,
my lad. —A light heart and a thin pair of
breeches, goes thro' the world brave boys; as the
song goes—eh!” —Though this proposal did 

not at all suit my inclination, I was afraid of discovering
my aversion to it, lest I should disoblige
the only friend I had in the world; and he was
so much a seaman, that he never dreamt I could
have any objection to his design; consequently,
gave himself no trouble in consulting my approbation. 
But this resolution was soon dropt, at
the advice of our usher, who assured Mr. Bowling,
it would be a thousand pities to baulk my genius,
which would certainly, one day, make my fortune
on shore, provided it received due cultivation. 
—Upon which, this generous tar determined
(though he could ill afford it) to give me university
education; and accordingly, settled my board
and other expences, at a town not many miles
distant, famous for its colleges, whither we repaired
in a short time. —But before the day of our
departure, the school-master, who no longer had
the fear of my grandfather before his eyes, laid
aside all decency and restraint, and not only abused
me in the grossest language his rancour could
suggest, as a wicked profligate, dull, beggarly
miscreant, whom he had taught out of charity; 
but also inveighed in the most bitter manner against
the memory of the judge (who by the bye
had procured that settlement for him) hinting,
in pretty plain terms, that the old gentleman's
soul was damn'd to all eternity, for his injustice
in neglecting to pay for my learning. —This
brutal behaviour, added to the sufferings I had
formerly undergone, made me think it high time
to be revenged of this insolent pedagogue. Having
consulted my adherents, I found them all
staunch in their promises to stand by me; and
our scheme was this: —In the afternoon preceeding
the day of departure for the university, I 

was to take the advantage of the usher's going
out to make water (which he regularly did
at four o'clock) and shut the great door, that
he might not come to the assistance of his superior. 
This being done, the assault was to be begun,
by my advancing to the master and spitting
in his face. I was to be seconded by two of the
strongest boys in the school, who were devoted
to me; their business was to join me in dragging
the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be
laid, and his bare posteriors heartily flogged with
his own birch, which we proposed to wrest from
him in the struggle; but if we should find him
too many for us all three, we were to demand
the assistance of our competitors, who should be
ready to reinforce us, or oppose any thing that
might be undertaken by the rest of the boys
for the master's relief. One of my principal assistants
was called Jeremy Gawky, son and her
of a wealthy gentleman in the neighbourhood; 
and the name of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet
of a family which had given shoemakers to
the village time out of mind. —I had once saved
Gawky's life, by plunging into a river where he
was on the point of being drowned, and by the
help of swimming, dragging him ashore; I had
often rescued him from the clutches of those
whom his insufferable arrogance had provoked, to
a resentment he was not able to sustain;—and I
had many times saved his reputation and posteriors,
by performing his exercises at school; so that it
is not to be wondered at, if he had a particular
regard for me and my interests. The attachment
of Strap, flowed from a voluntary, disinterested
inclination, which had manifested itself on many
occasions in my behalf, having once rendered me 

the same service as I had afforded to Gawky, by
saving my life at the risk of his own; and often
fathered offences I had committed, for which he
suffered severely, rather than I should feel the
the weight of the punishment I deserved. —These
two champions were the more willing to engage
in this enterprize, as they intended to leave the
school next day, as well as I; the first being ordered
by his father to return into the country,
and the other being bound apprentice to a barber,
at a market town not far off. 
In the mean time, my uncle being informed of
my master's behaviour to me, was enraged beyond
all composition, and vowed revenge so
heartily, that I could not refrain from telling
him the scheme I had concerted, which he heard
with great satisfaction, at every sentence squirting
out a mouthful of spittle, tinctured with tobacco,
of which he constantly chewed a large quid. —At
last, pulling up his breeches, he cried, “No,
no, Z&wblank;ds! that won't do neither,— 
howsomever, 'tis a bold undertaking, my lad,
—that I must say, i' faith!—but lookée,
lookée, how dost propose to get clear off?— 
won't the enemy give chace, my boy?—ay,
ay, that he will, I warrant—and alarm the
whole coast—ah! G&sblank;d help thee, more sail
than ballast, Rory. —Let me alone for that— 
leave the whole to me—I'll shew him the foretop-sail,
I will. —If so be that your ship-mates
are jolly boys, and won't flinch, you shall see,
you shall see; egad, I'll play him a salt-water
trick—I'll bring him to the gang-way, and
anoint him with a cat and nine tails,—he
shall have a round dozen doubled, my lad,
he shall—and be left lashed, to his meditations.” 

—We were very proud of our associate,
who immediately went to work, and prepared
the instrument of his revenge with great
skill and expedition; after which, he ordered our
baggage to be packed up and sent off, a day before
our attempt, and got horses ready to be
mounted, as soon as the affair should be over. 
At length the hour arrived, when our auxiliary,
seizing the opportunity of the usher's absence,
bolted in, secured the door, and immediately laid
hold of the pedant by his collar, who bawled out
“Murder! Thieves!”—with the voice of a
stentor. Though I trembled all over like an aspenleaf,
I knew there was no time to be lost, and
accordingly got up, and summoned our associates
to my assistance. —Strap without any hesitation
obeyed the signal, and seeing me leap upon the
master's back, ran immediately to one of his legs,
which pulling with all his force, this dreadful
adversary was soon humbled to the ground; upon
which Gawky, who had hitherto remained in
his place, under the influence of an universal trepidation,
hastened to the scene of action, and insulted
the fallen tyrant with a loud huzza, in
which the whole school joined. —This noise alarmed
the usher, who finding himself shut out,
endeavoured, partly by threats, and partly by entreaties,
to procure admission. —My uncle bid
him have a little patience, and he would let him
in presently; but if he pretended to move from
that place, it should fare the worse with the
son of a b&wblank;ch his superior, on whom he intended
only to bestow a little wholesome chastisement,
for his barbarous usage of Rory, “to
which (said he) you are no stranger.” —By
this time we had dragged the criminal to a post, 

to which Bowling tied him with a rope he had
provided on purpose, after having fastened his
hands behind his back, pulled down his breeches,
and tucked up his garments and shirt, as far as
they would go—In this ludicrous posture he
stood (to the no small entertainment of the boys,
who crowded about him, and shouted with
great exultation at the novelty of the sight) venting
bitter imprecations against the lieutenant, and
reproaching his scholars with treachery and rebellion:
when the usher was admitted, whom
my uncle accosted in this manner: “Harkée,
Mr. Syntax, I believe you are an honest man,
d'ye see—and I have a respect for you— 
but for all that, we must for our own security
(d'ye see) belay you for a short time.” —With
these words, he pulled out some fathoms of cord,
which the honest man no sooner saw, than he
protested with great earnestness, that he would
allow no violence to be offered to him, at the
same time accusing me of perfidy and ingratitude. 
But Bowling representing, that it was in vain to resist,
and that he did not mean to use him with violence
and indecency; but only to hinder him from raising
the hue and cry against us, before we should be
out of their power; he allowed himself to be
bound to his own desk, where he sat a spectator
of the punishment inflicted on his principal. 
My uncle having upbraided this arbitrary wretch
with his inhumanity to me, told him, that he
proposed to give him a little discipline for the
good of his soul: which he immediately put in
practice, with great vigour and dexterity. This
smart application to the pedant's withered posteriors,
gave him such exquisite pain, that he roared
like a mad bull, danced, cursed, blasphemed, and 

acted to the life, the part of a frantick bedlamite. 
When the lieutenant thought himself sufficiently
revenged, he took his leave of him in these words,
“Now, friend, you'll remember me the longest
day you have to live—I have given you a
lesson, that will let you know what flogging
is, and teach you to have more sympathy for
the future—shout, boys, shout.” —This
ceremony was no sooner over, than my uncle
proposed they should quit the school, and convoy
their old comrade Rory to a public house, about
a mile from the village, where he would
treat them all. —This offer being joyfully embraced,
he addressed himself to Mr. Syntax, and
begged him to accompany us, which he refused
with great disdain, telling my benefactor, that he
was not the man he took him to be—“Well, well,
old surly (replied my uncle, shaking his hand)
thou art an honest fellow notwithstanding; and
if ever I have the command of a ship, thou
shalt be school master, i' faith.” So saying,
he dismissed the boys, and locking the door, left
the two preceptors to console one another; while
we moved forwards on our journey, attended by
a numerous retinue, whom he treated according
to his promise. —We parted with many tears,
and lay that night at an inn on the road, about
ten miles short of the town where I was to remain,
at which we arrived next day, and I found
I had no cause to complain of the accommodations
provided for me; being boarded at the house of
an apothecary, who had married a distant relation
of my mother. In a few days after, my uncle
set out for his ship, after having settled the necessary
funds for my maintenance and education. 