


A strange adventure—in consequence of which
I am extremely happy—Crampley does
me ill offices with the captain: But his malice
is defeated by the good-nature and
friendship of the surgeon—we return to
Port-Royal—our captain gets the command
of a larger ship, and is succeeded by
an old man—Brayl is provided for— 
we receive orders to sail for England. 
When my patients were all in a fair' way,
my companion and commander, whose
name was Brayl, carried me up the country to
the house of a rich planter, with whom he was
acquainted; where we were sumptuously entertained, 

and in the evening set out on our return
to the ship. When we had walked about a
mile by moon-light, we perceived a horseman behind
us, who coming up, wished us good even,
and asked which way we went: His voice, which
was quite familiar to me, no sooner struck my ear,
than, in spite of all my resolution and reflection,
my hair bristled up, and I was seized with a violent
fit of trembling, which Brayl mis-interpreting,
bid me be under no concern, for he would
stand by me. —I told him, he was mistaken in the
cause of my disorder; and addressing myself to the
person on horse-back, said, “I could have sworn by
your voice, that you was a dear friend of mine,
if I had not been certain of his death.” —To
this, after some pause, he replied, “There are
many voices as well as faces that resemble one
another; but pray, what was your friend's
name?” I satisfied him in that particular,
and gave a short detail of the melancholy fate of
Thomson, not without many sighs and some
tears. A silence ensued which lasted some minutes,
and then the conversation turned on indifferent
subjects, till we arrived at a house on the road,
where the horseman alighted, and begged with
so much earnestness, that we would go in and
drink a bowl of punch with him, that we could
not resist. —But if I was alarmed at his voice,
what must my amazement be, when I discovered
by the light, the very person of my lamented
friend! Perceiving my confusion, which was extreme,
he clasped me in his arms and bedewed my
face with tears. —It was some time ere I recovered
the use of my reason, overpowered with
this event, and longer still before I could speak. 

So that all I was capable of, was to return his
embraces, and to mingle the overflowings of my
joy with his; while honest Brayl, affected with
the scene, wept as fast as either of us, and signified
his participation of our happiness, by
hugging us both, and capering about the room like
a mad-man. —At length I retrieved the use of my
tongue, and cried, “Is it possible, can you be
my friend Thomson? No certainly, alas! he was
drowned! and I am now under the deception
of a dream!” —Then I relapsed into tears. 
—He was at great pains to convince me of
his being the individual person whom I regretted,
and bidding me sit down and compose
myself, promised to explain his sudden disappearance
from the Thunder, and to account for his
being at present in the land of the living. —This he
acquitted himself of, after I had drank a glass of
punch, and recollected myself; by informing us,
that with a determination to rid himself of a
miserable existence, he had gone in the night-time
to the head, while the ship was on her way,
from whence he slipped down, as softly as he
could by the bows, into the sea, where, after
he was heartily ducked, he began to repent of
his precipitation, and as he could swim very well,
kept himself above water, in hopes of being taken
up by some of the ships astern;—that in this situation,
he hailed a large vessel and begged to be
taken in, but was answered, that she was a heavy
sailor, and therefore they did not chuse to
lose time, by bringing to; however, they threw
an old chest over-board, for his convenience, and
told him, that some of the ships a-stern would certainly
save him;—that no other vessel came 

within sight or cry of him, for the space of three
hours, during which time he had the mortification
of finding himself in the middle of the ocean
alone, without support or resting-place, but what
a few crazy boards afforded; till at last, he
discerned a small sloop steering towards him, upon
which he set up his throat, and had the good fortune
to be heard and rescued from the dreary
waste, by their boat, which was hoisted out on
purpose. —“I was no sooner brought on board
(continued he) than I fainted; and when I
recovered my senses, found myself in bed, regaled
with a most noisome smell of onions
and cheese, which made me think at first,
that I was in my own hammock, along-side of
honest Morgan, and that all which had passed
was no more than a dream. —Upon enquiry I
understood that I was on board of a schooner
belonging to Rhode Island, bound for Jamaica,
with a cargo of geese, pigs, onions, and cheese; 
and that the master's name was Robertson,
by birth a North Briton, whom I knew at
first sight to be an old school-fellow of mine. 
—When I discovered myself to him, he was
transported with surprize and joy, and begged
to know the occasion of my misfortune, which
I did not think fit to disclose, because I knew
his notions with regard to religion, were very
severe and confined; therefore contended myself
with telling him, I fell over-board by accident; 
but made no scruple of explaining the
nature of my disagreeable station, and of acquainting
him with my determined purpose
never to return to the Thunder man of war.” 
“—Although he was not of my opinion in that 

particular, knowing that I must lose my cloaths,
and what pay was due to me, unless I went
back to my duty; yet, when I described
the circumstances of the hellish life I led,
under the tyrannic sway of Oakhum and
Mackshane; and among other grievances,
hinted a dissatisfaction at the irreligious deportment
of my ship-mates, and the want of the
true Presbyterian gospel doctrine; he changed
his sentiments, and conjured me with great vehemence
and zeal to lay aside all thoughts of
rising in the navy; and that he might shew
how much he had my interest at heart, undertook
to provide for me in some shape or other,
before he should leave Jamaica. —This he
performed to my heart's desire, by recommending
me to a gentleman of fortune, with
whom I have lived ever since, in quality of surgeon
and overseer to his plantations. —He and
his lady are now at Kingston, so that I am, for
the present, master of this house, to which,
from my soul, I bid you welcome, and hope
you will favour me with your company during
the remaining part of the night.” —I needed
not a second invitation; but Mr. Brayl, who was
a diligent and excellent officer, could not be persuaded
to sleep out of the ship: However, he
supped with us, and after having drank a chearful
glass, set out for the vessel, which was not
above three miles from the place, escorted by a
couple of stout Negroes, whom Mr. Thomson
ordered to conduct him. —Never were two
friends more happy in the conversation of one
another than we, for the time it lasted: I related
to him the particulars of our attempt upon Carthagena, 

of which he had heard but an imperfect
account; and he gratified me with a narration of
every little incident of his life since we parted. 
—He assured me, it was with the utmost reluctance,
he could resist his inclination of coming
down to Port-Royal to see Morgan and me, of
whom he had heard no tidings since the day of
our separation; but that he was restrained by the
fear of being detained as a deserter. —He told me,
that when he heard my voice in the dark, he
was almost as much surprized as I was at seeing
him afterwards; and in the confidence of friendship,
disclosed a passion he entertained for the
only daughter of the gentleman with whom he
lived, who, by his description, was a very amiable
young lady, and did not disdain his addresses; 
that he was very much favoured by her parents,
and did not despair of obtaining their consent to
the match, which would at once render him independent
of the world. —I congratulated him on
his good fortune, which he protested should never
make him forget his friend; and towards morning
we betook ourselves to rest. 
Next day he accompanied me to the ship,
where Mr. Brayl entertained him at dinner, and
having spent the afternoon together, he took his
leave of us in the evening, after he had forced
upon me ten pistoles, as a small token of his affection. 
—In short, while we staid here, we saw one
another every day, and generally eat at the same
table, which was plentifully supplied by him,
with all kinds of poultry, butcher's meat, oranges,
limes, lemons, pine-aples, Madeira-wine,
and excellent rum; so that this small interval of
ten days, was by far the most agreeable period of
my life. 

At length, the Lizzard arrived; and as my
patients were all fit for duty, they and I were
ordered on board of her, where I understood
from Mr. Tomlins, that there was a dryness between
the lieutenant and him, on my account; 
that rancorous villain having taken the opportunity
of my absence, to fill the captain's ears
with a thousand scandalous stories, to my prejudice; 
among other things affirming, that I had been
once transported for theft, and that when I was
in the Thunder man of war I had been whipt
for the same crime. —The surgeon, on the other
hand, having heard my whole story from my
own mouth, defended me strenuously, and in the
course of that good-natured office, recounted all
the instances of Crampley's malice against me,
while I remained on board of that ship. —Which
declaration, while it satisfied the captain of my
innocence, made the lieutenant as much my defender's
enemy as mine. This infernal behaviour
of Crampley, with regard to me, added such fuel
to my former resentment, that at certain times, I
was quite beside myself with the desire of revenge,
and was even tempted to pistol him on the quarter-deck,
though an infamous death must inevitably
have been my reward. —But the surgeon,
who was my confident, argued against such a
desperate action so effectually, that I stifled the
flame which consumed me for the present, and
resolved to wait a more convenient opportunity. 
—In the mean time, that Mr. Tomlins
might be the more convinced of the wrongs I
suffered by this fellow's slander, I begged he
would go and visit Mr. Thomson, whose wonderful
escape I had made him acquainted with, and 

enquire of him into the particulars of my conduct,
while he was my fellow-mate. This the
surgeon complied with, more through curiosity
to see a person whose fate had been so extraordinary,
than to confirm his good opinion of me,
which, he assured me, was already firmly established. 
—He therefore set out for the dwelling-place
of my friend, with a letter of introduction
from me; and being received with all the civility
and kindness I expected, returned to the ship,
not only satisfied with my character, beyond the
power of doubt or insinuation, but also charmed
with the affability and conversation of Thomson,
who loaded him and me with presents of fresh
stock, liquors and fruit. As he would not venture
to come and see us on board, lest Crampley
should know and detain him, when the time of
our departure approached, I obtained leave to go
and bid him farewell. —After we had vowed an
everlasting friendship, he pressed upon me a purse
with four double dubloons, which I refused as long as
I could, without giving umbrage; and having cordially
embraced each other, I returned on board, where
I found a small box, with a letter directed for
me, to the care of Mr. Tomlins. —Knowing the
superscription to be of Thomson's hand-writing,
I opened it with some surprize, and learned that
this generous friend, not contented with loading
me with the presents already mentioned, had sent
for my use and acceptance, half a dozen fine
shirts, and as many linnen waistcoats and caps,
with twelve pair of new thread-stockings. — 
Being thus provided with money, and all necessaries
for the comfort of life, I began to look upon
myself as a gentleman of some consequence, and
felt my pride dilate apace. 

Next day we sailed for Port-Royal, where we
arrived safely with our prizes; and as there was
nothing to do on board, I went ashore, and having
purchased a laced waistcoat, with some other
cloaths at a vendue, made a swaggering figure for
some days, among the taverns, where I ventured
to play a little at hazard, and came off with fifty
pistoles in my pocket. Mean while our captain
was promoted to a ship of twenty guns, and the
command of the Lizzard given to a man turned
of fourscore, who had been lieutenant since the
reign of king William to this time, and notwithstanding
his long service, would have probably
died in that station, had he not employed some
prize-money he had lately received, to make
interest with his superiors. My friend Brayl was
also made an officer about the same time, after he
had served in quality of midshipman and mate
five and twenty years. Soon after these alterations,
the admiral pitched upon our ship to carry
home dispatches for the ministry; accordingly we
set sail for England, having first scrubbed her
bottom, and taken in provision and water for the
occasion. 