


We lodge at a house near Amiens, where I am
robbed by the capuchin, who escapes while
I am asleep—I go to Noyons in search
of him, but without success—I wake
my condition known to several people, but
find no relief—I grow desperate—join
a company of soldiers—inlist in the regiment
of Picardy—we are ordered into
Germany—I find the fatigues of the
march almost intolerable—quarrel with
my comrade in a dispute upon politicks— 
he challenges me to the field, wounds and
disarms me. 
The third night of our pilgrimage, we
passed at a house near Amiens, where Balthazar
being unknown, we supped upon indifferent
fare, and sower wine, and were fain to lie
in a garret upon an old mattrass, which, I believe,
had been in the possession of ten thousand
myriads of fleas, time out of mind. —We did
not invade their territory with impunity; in less
than a minute we were attacked with stings innumerable,
in spite of which, however, I fell
fast asleep, being excessively fatigued with our
day's march, and did not wake till nine next 

morning, when, seeing myself alone, I started
up in a terrible fright, and examining my pockets,
found my presaging fear too true! My companion
had made free with my cash, and left me
to seek my way to Paris by myself! I run down
stairs immediately; and with a look full of grief and
amazement, enquired for the mendicant, who,
they gave me to understand, had set out four
hours before, after having told them, I was a little
indisposed, and desired I might not be disturbed,
but be informed when I should wake he had taken
the road to Noyons, where he would wait
for my coming, at the Coq D'Or. —I spoke not
a word, but with a heavy heart, directed my
course to that place, at which I arrived in the afternoon,
fainting with weariness and hunger; 
but learned, to my utter confusion, that no such
person had been there! —It was happy for me
that I had a good deal of resentment in my constitution,
which animated me on such occasions,
against the villainy of mankind, and enabled me
to bear misfortunes otherwise intolerable. —Boiling
with indignation, I discovered to the host
my deplorable condition, and inveighed with
great bitterness against the treachery of Balthazar; 
at which he shrugged up his shoulders, and
with a peculiar grimace on his countenance, said,
he was sorry for my misfortune; but there was
no remedy like patience. —At that instant some
guests arrived, to whom he hastened to offer his
service, leaving me mortified at his indifference,
and fully persuaded that an inn-keeper is the
same sordid animal all over the world. —While I
stood in the porch, forlorn and undetermined,
venting ejaculations of curses against the thief
who had robbed me, and the old priest who recommended 

him to my friendship; a young
gentleman richly dressed, attended by a valet de
chambre and two servants in livery, arrived at the
inn. I thought I perceived a good deal of sweetness
and good nature in his countenance; therefore,
he had no sooner alighted than I accosted
him, and in a few words explained my situation: 
He listened with great politeness, and when I had
made an end of my story, said, “Well, monsieur,
what would you have me do?” I
was effectually abashed at this interrogation, which
I believed no man of common sense or generosity
could make, and made no other reply than a low
bow: He returned the compliment still lower,
and tript into an apartment, while the landlord
let me know, that my standing there to interrupt
company gave offence, and might do him infinite
prejudice. —He had no occasion to repeat his insinuation; 
I moved from the place immediately; and
was so much transported with grief, anger, and disdain,
that a torrent of blood gushed from my nostrils. 
—In this extasy, I quitted Noyons, and betook
myself to the fields, where I wandered about
like one distracted, till my spirits were quite exhausted,
and I was obliged to throw myself down
at the root of a tree, to rest my wearied limbs. 
—Here my rage forsook me, I began to feel the
importunate cravings of nature, and relapsed into
silent sorrow and melancholy reflection. I revolved
all the crimes I had been guilty of, and
found them so few and venial, that I could not
comprehend the justice of that providence, which
after having exposed me to so much wretchedness
and danger, left me a prey to famine at last
in a foreign country, where I had not one friend
or acquaintance to close my eyes, and do the 

last offices of humanity to my miserable carcase. 
—A thousand times I wished myself a bear, that
I might retreat to woods and desarts, far from
the inhospitable haunts of man, where I could
live by my own talents independant of treacherous
friends, and supercilious scorn. 
As I lay in this manner, groaning over my
hapless fate, I heard the sound of a violin, and
raising my head, perceived a company of men
and women dancing on the grass at some distance
from me. —I looked upon this to be a favourable
season for distress to attract compassion, when every
selfish thought is banished, and the heart
dilated with mirth and social joy; wherefore I
got up and approached those happy people, whom
I soon discovered to be a party of soldiers, with
their wives and children, unbending and diverting
themselves at this rate, after the fatigue of
a march. —I had never before seen such a parcel
of scare-crows together, neither could I reconcile
their meagre gaunt looks, their squalid and ragged
attire, and every other external symptom of extreme
woe, with this appearance of festivity. — 
I saluted them however, and was received with
great politesse; after which they formed a ring
and danced around me. —This jollity had a wonderful
effect upon my spirits! I was infected with
their gayety, and in spite of my dismal situation
forgot my cares, and joined in their extravagance. 
—When we had recreated ourselves a good while
at this diversion, the ladies spread their manteaus
on the ground, upon which they emptied their
knapsacks, of some onions, coarse bread, and
and few flasks of poor wine: Being invited to a
share of the banquet, I sat down with the rest,
and in the whole course of my life never made a 

more comfortable meal. —When our repast was
ended, we got up again to dance; and now that
I found myself refreshed, I behaved to the admiration
of every body: I was loaded with a
thousand compliments, and professions of friendship; 
the men commended my person and agility,
and the women were loud in the praise of my
bonne grace;—the serjeant in particular, expressed
so much regard for me, and described the agreemens
of a soldier's life, with so much art, that
I began to listen to his proposal of enlisting me
in the service; and the more I considered my
own condition, the more I was convinced of the
necessity I was under to come to a speedy determination. 
—Having therefore maturely weighed
the circumstances pro and con, I signified my consent,
and was admitted into the regiment of Picardy,
said to be the oldest corps in Europe. — 
The company to which this command belonged,
was quartered at a village not far off, whither we
marched next day, and I was presented to my
captain, who seemed very well pleased with my
appearance, gave me a crown to drink, and ordered
me to be accommodated with cloaths, arms
and accoutrements. —Whereupon I sold my livery
suit, purchased linnen, and as I was at great pains
to learn the exercise, in a very short time became
a compleat soldier. 
It was not long before we received orders to
join several more regiments, and march with all
expedition into Germany, in order to reinforce
Marechal Duc de Noailles, who was then encamped
with his army on the side of the river
Main, to watch the motions of the English, Austrians,
and Hessians, under the command of the
earl of Stair. We began our march accordingly, 

and then I became acquainted with that part of a
soldier's life to which I had been a stranger hitherto. 
—It is impossible to describe the hunger and
thirst I sustained, and the fatigue I underwent in
a march of so many hundred miles; during which,
I was so much chafed with the heat and motion
of my limbs, that in a very short time the inside
of my thighs and legs were deprived of skin, and
I proceeded in the utmost torture. —This misfortune
I owed to the plumpness of my constitution,
which I cursed, and envied the withered condition
of my comrades, whose bodies could not
spare juice enough to supply a common issue,
and were indeed proof against all manner of friction. 
The continual pain I felt made me fretful,
and my peevishness was increased by the mortification
of my pride in seeing these miserable
wretches, whom a hard gale of wind would
have scattered through the air like chaff, bear
those toils with alacrity, under which I was ready
to sink. 
One day while we enjoyed a halt, and the soldiers
with their wives had gone out to dance, according
to custom, my comrade staid at home
with me on pretence of friendship, and insulted
me with his pity and consolation! He told me,
though I was young and tender at present, I
would soon be seasoned to the service; and he
did not doubt but I should have the honour to
contribute in some measure to the glory of the
king. —“Have courage, therefore, my child
(said he) and pray to the good God, that you
may be as happy as I am, who have had the
honour of serving Lewis the Great, and of receiving
many wounds in helping to establish
his glory.” —When I looked upon the contemptible 

object that pronounced these words, I
was amazed at the infatuation that possessed him; 
and could not help expressing my astonishment at
the absurdity of a rational being, who thinks
himself highly honoured in being permitted to
encounter abject poverty, oppression, famine,
disease, mutilation, and evident death, merely
to gratify the vicious ambition of a prince, by
whom his sufferings were disregarded, and his
name utterly unknown. —I observed, that if his
situation was the consequence of compulsion, as
having been pressed into the service, I would
praise his patience and fortitude in bearing his lot; 
—if he had taken up arms in defence of his injured
country, he was to be applauded for his
patriotism;—or if he had fled to this way of life
as a refuge from a greater evil, he was justifiable
in his own conscience, (though I could have no
notion of misery more extreme than that he suffered;)
but to put his condition on the footing
of conducting to the glory of his prince, was no
more than professing himself a desperate slave,
who voluntarily underwent the utmost wretchedness
and peril, and committed the most flagrant
crimes, to sooth the barbarous pride of a fellow-creature,
his superior in nothing but the power he
derived from the submission of such wretches as he. 
The soldier was very much affronted at the liberty
I took with his king, which, he said, nothing but
my ignorance could excuse: He affirmed, that the
characters of princes were sacred, and ought not
to be profaned by the censure of their subjects,
who were bound by their allegiance to obey their
commands, of what nature soever, without scruple
or repining—And advised me to correct the rebellious
principles I had imbibed among the 

English, who, for their insolence to their kings,
were notorious all over the world, even to a
proverb: 

Le roy'd Angleterre,
Est le roy de l'Enfer.
In vindication of my countrymen, I adduced
all the arguments commonly used to prove that
every man has a natural right to liberty; that allegiance
and protection are reciprocal; that when
the mutual tie is broken by the tyranny of the
king, he is accountable to the people for his
breach of contract, and subject to the penalty of
the law; and that those insurrections of the
English, which are branded with the name of
rebellion, by the slaves of arbitrary power, were
no other than glorious efforts to rescue that independance
which was their birthright, from the
ravenous claws of usurping ambition. —The
Frenchman, provoked at the little deference I paid
to the kingly name, lost all patience, and reproached
me in such a manner, that my temper
forsook me, and I clenched my fist, with an intention
to give him a hearty box on the ear. — 
Perceiving my design, he started back, and demanded
a parley; upon which I checked my indignation,
and he gave me to understand that a
Frenchman never forgave a blow; therefore if I
was not weary of my life, I would do well to
spare him that mortification, and do him the honour
of measuring his sword with mine, like a
gentleman. —I took his advice and followed him
to a field hard by, where indeed I was ashamed
at the pitiful figure of my antagonist, who was
a poor, little, shivering creature decrepid with 

age, and blind of one eye. —But I soon found
the folly of judging from appearances; being at the
second pass wounded in the sword hand, and immediately
disarmed with such a jerk, that I
thought the joint was dislocated. —I was no less
confounded than enraged at this event, especially
as my adversary did not bear his success with all
the moderation that might have been expected; 
for he insisted upon my asking pardon for my presumption
in affronting his king and him. —This
I would by no means comply with, but told him,
it was a mean condescension, which no gentleman
in his circumstances ought to propose, nor
none in my situation perform;—and that if he
persisted in his ungenerous demand, I would in
my turn claim satisfaction with my musket, at
which weapon we should be more upon a par,
than with the sword, of which he seemed so
much master. 