


He takes his passage in a Cutter for Deal— 
we are accosted by a priest, who proves to
be a Scottishman—his professions of
friendship—he is affronted by the lieutenant,
who afterwards appeases him by
submission—my uncle embarks—I am
introduced by the priest to a capuchin, in
whose company I set out for Paris—the
character of my fellow-traveller—an
adventure on the road—I am shocked at
his behaviour. 
When our repast was ended, we walked
down to the harbour, where we found a
Cutter that was to sail for Deal in the evening,
and Mr. Bowling agreed for his passage: In the
mean time, we sauntered about the town, to
satisfy our curiosity, our conversation turning on
the subject of my designs, which were not as
yet fixed: Neither can it be supposed, that my
mind was at ease, when I found myself reduced
almost to extreme poverty, in the midst of foreigners,
among whom I had not one acquaintance
to advise or befriend me. —My uncle was
sensible of my forlorn condition, and pressed me
to accompany him to England, where he did not
doubt of finding some sort of provision for me: 
But besides the other reasons I had for avoiding
that kingdom, I looked upon it, at this time, as 

the worst country in the universe for a poor honest
man to live in; and therefore determined to
remain in France, coute que coute. —I was confirmed
in this resolution, by a reverend priest,
who passing by at this time, and overhearing us
speak English, accosted us in the same language,
telling us he was our countryman, and wishing
it might be in his power to do us any service: 
We thanked this grave person for his courteous
offer, and invited him to drink a glass with us,
which he did not think proper to refuse, and we
went all together into a tavern of his recommending. 
After having drank to our healths in a
bumper of good Burgundy, he began to enquire
into our situation, and asked particularly the place
of our nativity, which we no sooner named, than
he started up, and wringing our hands with great
fervour, shed a flood of tears, crying, “I come
from the same part of the country! perhaps
you are my own relations.” —I was on my
guard against his caresses, which I suspected very
much, when I remembered the adventure of the
money-dropper; but without any appearance of
diffidence, observed, that as he was born in that
part of the country, he must certainly know our
families, which (howsoever mean our present appearance
might be) were none of the most obscure
and inconsiderable. —Then I discovered our
names, to which I found he was no stranger; he
had known my grandfather personally; and notwithstanding
an absence of fifty years from Scotland,
recounted so many particulars of the families
in the neighbourhood, that my scruples were
entirely removed, and I thought myself happy in
his acquaintance. —In the course of our conversation,
I disclosed my condition without reserve, 

and displayed my talents to such advantage, that
the old father looked upon me with admiration,
and assured me, that if I stayed in France, and
listened to reason, I could not fail of making my
fortune, to which he would contribute all in his
power. 
My uncle began to be jealous of the priest's
insinuation, and very abruptly declared, that if
ever I should renounce my religion, he would
break off all connexion and correspondence with
me; for it was his opinion, that no honest man
would swerve from the principles in which he
was bred, whether Turkish, Protestant or Roman. 
—The father, affronted at this declaration,
with great vehemence, began a long discourse,
setting forth the danger of obstinacy, and shutting
one's eyes against the light: He said, that
ignorance would be no plea towards justification,
when we had opportunities of being better informed; 
and that, if the minds of people had
not been open to conviction, the Christian religion
would not have been propagated in the
world; and we should now be in a state of Pagan
darkness and barbarity: He endeavoured to
prove, by some texts of scripture, and many
quotations from the fathers, that the Pope was
the successor of St. Peter, and vicar of Jesus
Christ; that the church of Rome was the true,
holy, catholick church; and that the protestant faith
was an impious heresy, and damnable schism, by
which many millions of souls would suffer everlasting
perdition. —When he had finished his sermon,
which I thought, he pronounced with
more zeal than discretion, he addressed himself
to my uncle, and desired to know his objections
to what had been said. The lieutenant, whose 

attention had been wholly engrossed by his own
affairs, took the pipe out of his mouth, and replied,
“As for me, friend, d'ye see, I have no
objection to what you say, it may be either true
or false, for what I know; I meddle with no
body's affairs but my own; the gunner to
his linstock, and the steersman to the helm,
as the saying is. —I trust to no creed but the
compass, and do unto every man as I would
be done by; so that I defy the pope, the devil,
and the pretender; and hope to be saved
as well as another.” —This association of persons
gave great offence to the friar, who protested,
in a mighty passion, that if Mr. Bowling
had not been his countryman, he would have
caused him to be imprisoned for his insolence. 
—I ventured to disapprove of my uncle's rashness,
and appeased the old gentleman, by assuring him,
there was no offence intended by my kinsman,
who by this time, sensible of his error, shook
the injured party by the hand, and asked pardon
for the freedom he had taken. —Matters being
amicably compromised, he invited us to come
and see him in the afternoon at the convent to
which he belonged, and took his leave for the
present; when my uncle recommended it strongly
to me to persevere in the religion of my forefathers,
whatever advantages I might propose to
my self by a change, which could not fail of
disgracing myself, and dishonouring my family. 
—I assured him no consideration should induce
me to forfeit his friendship and good opinion, on
that score; at which he discovered great satisfaction,
and put me in mind of dinner, which
we immediately bespoke, and when it was ready
eat together. 

I imagined my acquaintance with the Scottish
Priest, if properly managed, might turn out to my
advantage, and therefore resolved to cultivate it
as much as I could. With this view we visited
him at his convent, according to his invitation,
where he treated us with wine and sweet-meats,
and shewed us every thing that was remarkable
in the monastery. —Having been thus entertained,
we took our leave, though not before I
had promised to see him next day; and the
time fixed for my uncle's embarking being come,
I accompanied him to the harbour, and saw him
on board. —We parted not without tears, after
we had embraced and wished one another all
manner of prosperity; and he intreated me to
write to him often, directing to lieutenant
Thomas Bowling, at the sign of the Union
flag, near the Hermitage, London. 
I returned to the house in which we had met,
where I passed the night in a very solitary manner,
reflecting on the severity of my fate, and
endeavouring to project some likely scheme of
life for the future; but my invention failed me,
I saw nothing but unsurmountable difficulties in
my way, and was ready to despair at the miserable
prospect! That I might not, however, neglect any
probable means, I got up in the morning, and went
directly to the father, whose advice and assistance
I implored. —He received me very kindly, and
gave me to understand, that there was one way
of life in which a person of my talents could not
fail of making a great figure. —I guessed his
meaning, and told him once for all, I was fully
determined against any alteration in point of religion,
therefore if his proposal regarded the
church, he might save himself the trouble of 

explaining it. He shook his head and sighed,
saying, “Ah! son, son, what a glorious prospect
is here spoiled, by your stubborn prejudice! 
Suffer yourself to be persuaded by reason,
and consult your temporal welfare, as
well as the concerns of your eternal soul. —I
can, by my interest, procure your admission
as a noviciate into this convent, where I will
superintend and direct you with a truly paternal
affection.” —Then he launched out into
the praises of a monastic life, which no noise
disturbs, no cares molest, and no danger invades
—where the heart is weaned from carnal attachments,
the grosser appetites subdued and
chastised, and the soul wasted to the divine regions
of philosophy and truth, on the wings of
studious contemplation. —But his eloquence was
lost upon me, whom two considerations enabled
to withstand his temptations; namely, my promise
to my uncle, and my aversion to an ecclesiastical
life; for as to the difference of religion,
I looked upon it as a thing of too small moment
to come in competition with a man's fortune. 
—Finding me immoveable on this head, he told
me, he was more sorry than offended at my noncompliance,
and still ready to employ his good offices
in my behalf. —“The same erroneous maxims
(said he) that obstruct your promotion
in the church, will infallibly prevent your
advancement in the army; but if you can
brook the condition of a servant, I am acquainted
with some people of rank at Versailles,
to whom I can give you letters of recommendation,
that you may be entertained by some
one of them, in quality of maitre d'hotel; 
and I do not doubt that your qualifications 

will soon entitle you to a better provision.” 
—I embraced his offer with great eagerness; and
he appointed me to come back in the afternnoon,
when he would not only give me the letters, but
likewise introduce me to a capuchin of his acquaintance,
who intended to set out for Paris
next morning, in whose company I might travel,
without being at the expence of one livre during
the whole journey. This piece of good news
gave me infinite pleasure; I acknowledged my
obligation to the benevolent father, in the most
grateful expressions; and he performed his promise
to a tittle, in delivering the letters, and
making me acquainted with the capuchin, with
whom I departed next morning by break of day. 
It was not long before I discovered my fellow-traveller
to be a merry facetious fellow, who, notwithstanding
his profession and appearance of
mortification, loved good eating and drinking better
than his rosary, and paid more adoration to a
pretty girl than to the Virgin Mary, or St. Genevive. 
—He was a thick brawny young man,
with red eye-brows, a hook nose, a face covered
with freckles; and his name was Frere Balthazar. 
His order did not permit him to wear linnen, so
that having little occasion to undress himself, he
was none of the cleanliest animals in the world; 
and his constitution was naturally so strong scented,
that I always thought it convenient to keep
to the windward of him in our march. —As he
was perfectly well known on the road, we fared
sumptuously without any cost, and the fatigue of
our journey was much alleviated by the good humour
of my companion, who sung an infinite
number of catches on the subjects of love and
wine. —We took up our lodging the first night 

at a peasant's house, not far from Abbe Ville,
where we were entertained with an excellent
ragout, cooked by our landlord's daughters, one
of whom was very handsome: After having eat
heartily, and drank a sufficient quantity of vin
du Pais, we were conducted to a barn, where
we found a couple of carpets spread upon clean
straw for our reception. —We had not lain in
this situation above half an hour, when we heard
somebody knock softly at the door, upon which
Balthazar got up, and let in our host's two daughters,
who wanted to have some private conversation
with him in the dark; when they had
whispered together some time, the capuchin came
to me, and asked if I was insensible to love, or
so hard-hearted as to refuse a share of my bed to
a pretty maid, who had a tendresse for me. — 
I must own, to my shame, that I suffered myself
to be overcome by my passion, and with
great eagerness seized the occasion, when I understood
that the amiable Nanette was to be my
bedfellow. —In vain did my reason suggest the respect
I owed to my dear mistress Narcissa; the
idea of that lovely charmer, rather increased than
allayed the ferment of my spirits; and the young
Paisanne had no reason to complain of my remembrance. 
—Early in the morning, the kind
creatures left us to our repose, which lasted till
eight o'clock, when we got up, and were treated
at breakfast with chocolate and l' eau de vie,
by our paramours, of whom we took a tender
leave, after my companion had confessed and given
them absolution. —While we proceeded on
our journey, the conversation turned upon the
night's adventure, being introduced by the capuchin,
who asked me how I liked my lodging: 

I declared my satisfaction, and talked in raptures
of the agreeable Nanette; at which he shook his
head, and smiling said, she was a morçeau pour la
bonne bouche. “I never valued myself (continued
he) upon any thing so much as the conquest
of Nanette; and, vanity apart, I have been
pretty fortunate in my amours.” —This information
shocked me not a little, as I was well
convinced of his intimacy with her sister; and
though I did not care to tax him with downright
incest, I professed my astonishment at his last
night's choice, when, I supposed, the other was
at his devotion. —To this he answered, that besides
his natural complaisance to the sex, he
had another reason to distribute his favours equally
between them; namely, to preserve peace in
the family, which could not otherwise be maintained; 
—that moreover Nanette had conceived
an affection for me, and he loved her too well
to baulk her inclination; more especially, when
he had an opportunity of obliging his friend at
the same time. —I thanked him for this instance
of his friendship, though I was extremely disgusted
at his want of delicacy, and cursed the occasion
that threw me in his way. —Libertine as
I was, I could not bear to see a man behave so
wide of the character he assumed: I looked upon
him as person of very little worth or honesty,
and should have even kept a wary eye upon my
pocket, if I had thought he could have any temptation
to steal. —But I could not conceive the
use of money to a capuchin, who is obliged, by
the rules of his order, to appear like a beggar, and
enjoys all other necessaries of life gratis; besides, my
fellow-traveller seemed to be of a complexion too
careless and sanguine, to give me any apprehension 

on that score; so that I proceeded with great
confidence, in expectation of being soon at my
journey's end. 