


He is made acquainted with the characters of Commodore
Trunnion and his adherents; meets with
them by accident, and contracts an intimacy with
that commander. 
This loquacious publican soon gave him
sketches of all the characters in the county; 
and, among others, described that of his next
neighbour Commodore Trunnion, which was altogether
singular and odd. “The commodore 

and your worship (said he) will in a short time
be hand and glove; he has a power of money,
and spends like a prince—that is, in his own way— 
for to be sure he is a little humoursome, as the
saying is, and swears woundily; tho' I'll be
sworn he means no more harm than a sucking
babe. Lord help us! it will do your honour's
heart good to hear him tell a story, as how he lay
along-side of the French, yard-arm and yard-arm,
board and board, and of heaving grapplings,
and stink-pots, and grapes, and round and double-headed
partridges, crows and carters—Laud have
mercy upon us! he has been a great warrior in
his time, and lost an eye and a heel in the service
—Then, he does not live like any other
Christian land-man; but keeps garrison in his
house, as if he were in the midst of his enemies,
and makes his servants turn out in the night,
watch and watch (as he calls it) all the year
round. His habitation is defended by a ditch,
over which he has laid a draw-bridge, and planted
his court-yard with patereroes continually loaded
with shot, under the direction of one Mr.
Hatchway, who had one of his legs shot away,
while he acted as lieutenant on board of the commodore's
ship; and now, being on half-pay, lives
with him as his companion. The lieutenant is
a very brave man, a great joker, and, as the saying
is, hath got the length of his commander's
foot—Tho' he has another favourite in the house
called Tom Pipes, that was his boatswain's mate,
and now keeps the servants in order. Tom is a
man of few words, but an excellent hand at a
song concerning the boatswain's whistle, husslecap
and chuck-farthing—there is not such another
pipe in the county—So that the commodore lives 

very happy in his own manner; thof he be sometimes
thrown into perilous passions and quandaries,
by the application of his poor kinsmen,
whom he can't abide, because as how some of
them were the first occasion of his going to sea. 
Then he sweats with agony at the sight of an attorney; 
just for all the world, as some people
have an antipathy at a cat; for it seems he was
once at law, for striking one of his officers, and
cast in a swinging sum. He is, moreover, exceedingly
afflicted with goblins that disturb his
rest, and keep such a racket in his house, that
you would think (God bless us!) all the devils in
hell had broke loose upon him. It was no longer
ago than last year about this time, that he was
tormented the live-long night by two mischievous
spirits that got into his chamber, and played a
thousand pranks about his hammock, (for there
is not one bed within his walls.) Well, Sir, he
rung his bell, called up all his servants, got lights,
and made a thorough search; but the devil a
goblin was to be found. He had no sooner turned
in again, and the rest of the family gone to sleep,
than the foul fiends began their game anew. The
commodore got up in the dark, drew his cutlass,
and attacked them both so manfully, that, in five
minutes, every thing in the apartment went to
pieces. The lieutenant hearing the noise, came
to his assistance; and Tom Pipes being told what
was the matter, lighted his match, and going
down to the yard, fired all the patereroes, as signals
of distress. Well, to be sure, the whole
parish was in a pucker: some thought the French
had landed; others imagined the commodore's
house was beset by thieves: for my own part, I
called up two dragoons that are quartered upon 

me; and they swore with deadly oaths, it was a
gang of smugglers engaged with a party of their
regiment that lies in the next village; and mounting
their horses like lusty fellows, rode up into
the country as fast as their beasts could carry
them. Ah, Master! these are hard times, when
an industrious body cannot earn his bread, without
fear of the gallows. Your worship's father (God
rest his soul!) was a good gentleman, and as
well respected in this parish, as e'er a he that
walks upon neat's leather. And if your honour
should want a small parcel of fine tea, or a few
anchors of right Nantz, I'll be bound you shall
be furnished to your heart's content. But, as I
was saying, the hubbub continued till morning,
when the parson being sent for, conjured the spirits
into the Red Sea; and the house has been
pretty quiet ever since. True it is, Mr. Hatchway
makes a mock of the whole affair; and told
his commander in this very blessed spot, that the
two goblins were no other than a couple of jackdaws
which had fallen down the chimney, and
made a flapping with their wings up and down
the apartment. But the commodore, who is
very choleric, and does not like to be jeered, fell
into a main high passion, and stormed like a perfect
hurricane, swearing that he knew a devil
from a jack-daw as well as e'er a man in the
three kingdoms. He owned, indeed, that the
birds were found, but denied that they were the
occasion of the uproar. For my own part,
Master, I believe much may be said on both sides
of the question; thof to be sure, the devil is always
going about, as the saying is.” 
This circumstantial account, extraordinary as
it was, never altered one feature in the countenance 

of Mr. Pickle, who having heard it to an
end, took the pipe from his mouth, saying, with a
look of infinite sagacity and deliberation, “I do
suppose he is of the Cornish Trunnions. What
sort of a woman is his spouse?” “Spouse!
cried the other; odd's heart! I don't think he
would marry the queen of Sheba. Lack a day! 
Sir, he won't suffer his own maids to lie in the
garrison, but turns them into an out-house, every
night, before the watch is set. Bless your honour's
soul! he is, as it were, a very oddish kind
of a gentleman. Your worship would have seen
him before now; for, when he is well, he and
my good master Hatchway come hither every
evening, and drink a couple of canns of rumbo
apiece; but he has been confined to his house
this fortnight, by a plaguy fit of the gout, which,
I'll assure your worship, is a good penny out of
my pocket.” 
At that instant, Mr. Pickle's ears were saluted
with such a strange noise, as even discomposed
the muscles of his face, which gave immediate
indications of alarm. This composition of notes
at first resembled the crying of quails, and croaking
of bull-frogs; but, as it approached nearer,
he could distinguish articulate sounds pronounced
with great violence, in such a cadence as one
would expect from a human creature scolding
thro' the organs of an ass. It was neither speaking
nor braying, but a surprising mixture of both,
employed in the utterance of terms absolutely unintelligible
to our wondering merchant, who had
just opened his mouth to express his curiosity,
when the landlord, starting up at the well known
sound, cried, “Odd's niggers! there is the commodore
with his company, as sure as I live!” 

and with his apron began to wipe the dust off an
elbow-chair placed at one side of the fire, and
kept sacred for the ease and convenience of this
infirm commander. While he was thus occupied,
a voice still more uncouth than the former,
bawled aloud, “Ho! the house, a hoy!” Upon
which the publican, clapping an hand to each
side of his head, with his thumbs fixed on his
ears, rebellowed in the same tone, which he had
learned to imitate, “Hilloah.” The voice
again exclaimed, “Have you got any attorneys
aboard?” and when the landlord replied,
“No, no;” this man of strange expectation
came in, supported by his two dependants, and
displayed a figure every way answerable to the
oddity of his character. He was in stature at
least six feet high, tho' he had contracted an habit
of stooping, by living so long on board; his
complexion was tawny, and his aspect rendered
hideous by a large scar across his nose, and a
patch that covered the place of one eye. Being
seated in his chair, with great formality the landlord
complimented him upon his being able to
come abroad again; and having, in a whisper,
communicated the name of his fellow-guest,
whom the commodore already knew by report,
went to prepare, with all imaginable dispatch, the
first allowance of his favourite liquor, in three
separate canns, (for each was accommodated with
his own portion apart) while the lieutenant sat
down on the blind-side of his commander; and
Tom Pipes, knowing his distance, with great
modesty took his station in the rear. After a
pause of some minutes, the conversation was begun
by this ferocious chief, who fixing his eye
upon the lieutenant with a sternness of countenance 

not to be described, addressed him in these
words: “D&wblank;n my eyes! Hatchway, I always
took you to be a better seaman than to overset
our chaise in such fair weather. Blood! didn't
I tell you we were running bump ashore, and bid
you set in the lee-brace, and haul upon a wind?” 
“Yes, replied the other with an arch sneer. I
do confess as how you did give such orders, after
you had run us foul of a post, so as that the carriage
lay along, and could not right herself.” “I
run you foul of a post! cried the commander; 
d&wblank;n my heart! you're a pretty dog, an't you,
to tell me so above board to my face? Did I
take charge of the chaise? Did I stand at the
helm?” No, answered Hatchway; that I must
confess you did not steer; but howsomever, you
cunned all the way, and so, as you could not see
how the land lay, being blind of your larboard
eye, we were fast ashore, before you knew any
thing of the matter. Pipes, who stood abaft,
can testify the truth of what I say.” “D&wblank;n
my limbs! resumed the commodore, I don't value
what you or Pipes says, a rope yarn. You're
a couple of mutinous—I'll say no more; but,
you shan't run your rig upon me. Damn
ye, I am the man that learnt you, Jack
Hatchway, to splice a rope, and raise a perpendicular.” 
The lieutenant, who was perfectly well acquainted
with the trim of his captain, did not
chuse to carry on the altercation any farther; but,
taking up his cann, drank to the health of the
stranger, who very courteously returned the compliment,
without, however, presuming to join
in the conversation, which suffered a considerable
pause. During this interruption, Mr. Hatchway's 

wit display'd itself in several practical jokes
upon the commodore, with whom, he knew, it
was dangerous to tamper in any other way. Being
without the sphere of his vision, he securely pilfered
his tobacco, drank his rumbo, made wry faces,
and (to use the vulgar phrase) cocked his eye at
him, to the no small entertainment of the spectators,
Mr. Pickle himself not excepted, who gave
evident tokens of uncommon satisfaction at the
dexterity of this marine pantomime. 
Mean while, the captain's choler gradually subsided,
and he was pleased to desire Hatchway by
the familiar and friendly diminutive of Jack, to
read a news-paper that lay on the table before
him. This task was accordingly undertaken by
the lame lieutenant, who, among other paragraphs,
read that which follows, with an elevation
of voice that seemed to prognosticate something
extraordinary. “We are informed that
admiral Bower will very soon be created a British
peer, for his eminent services during the war,
particularly in his late engagement with the French
fleet.” Trunnion was thunder-struck at this
piece of intelligence. The mug dropt from his
hand, and shivered into a thousand pieces; his
eye glistened like that of a rattle-snake, and some
minutes elapsed before he could pronounce,
“Avast! overhaul that article again.” It was
no sooner read the second time, than smiting
the table with his fist, he started up, and with
the most violent emphasis of rage and indignation,
exclaimed, “D&wblank;n my heart and liver? 'tis a
land lie, d'ye see; and I will maintain it to be a
lie, from the sprit-sail-yard to the mizzen top-sail
haulyards! blood and thunder! Will. Bower a
peer of this realm! a fellow of yesterday, that 

scarce knows a mast from a manger; a snotty-nose
boy, whom I myself have ordered to the
gun, for stealing eggs out of the hen-coops! and
I Hawser Trunnion, who commanded a ship before
he could keep a reckoning, am laid aside,
d'ye see, and forgotten! If so be, as this be the
case, there is a rotten plank in our constitution,
which ought to be hove down and repaired, damn
my eyes! For my own part, d'ye see, I was
none of your Guinea-pigs; I did not rise in the
service by parliamenteering interest, or a handsome
bitch of a wife. I was not hoisted over
the bellies of better men, nor strutted athwart
the quarter-deck in a laced doublet and thingumbobs
at the wrists. Damn my limbs! I have been
a hard-working man, and served all offices on
board from cook's shifter to the command of a
vessel. Here, you Tunley, there's the hand of
a seaman, you dog.” So saying, he laid hold on
the landlord's fist, and honoured him with such a
squeeze, as compelled him to roar with great vociferation,
to the infinite satisfaction of the commodore,
whose features were a little unbended,
by this acknowledgment of his vigour; and he
thus proceeded in a less outrageous strain: “They
make a damned noise about this engagement with
the French: but, agad! it was no more than
a bum-boat battle, in comparison with some that
I have seen. There was old Rook and Jennings,
and another whom I'll be damned before I name,
that knew what fighting was. As for my own
share, d'ye see, I am none of those that hollow
in their own commendation: but if so be that
I were minded to stand my own trumpeter, some
of those little fellows that hold their heads so
high, would be taken all aback, as the saying is; 

they would be ashamed to shew their colours,
d&wblank;n my eyes! I once lay eight glasses along-side
of the Floor de Louse, a French man of war,
tho' her metal was heavier, and her complement
larger by an hundred hands than mine. You,
Jack Hatchway, damn ye, what d'ye grin at? 
D'ye think I tell a story, because you never
heard it before?” 
“Why, look ye, Sir, answered the lieutenant,
I'm glad to find you can stand your own
trumpeter, on occasion; thof I wish you would
change the tune; for that is the same you have
been piping every watch, for these ten months
past. Tunley himself will tell you, he has heard
it five hundred times.” “God forgive you, Mr.
Hatchway, said the landlord, interrupting him; 
as I'm an honest man, and a housekeeper, I never
heard a syllab of the matter.” 
This declaration, tho' not strictly true, was
extremely agreeable to Mr. Trunnion, who, with
an air of triumph, observed, “Aha! Jack, I
thought I should bring you up, with your gibes
and your jokes. But suppose you had heard it
before, is that any reason why it shouldn't be
told to another person? There's the stranger,
belike he has heard it five hundred times too; 
han't ye, brother?” addressing himself to Mr.
Pickle; who, replying with a look expressing
curiosity, “No, never;” he thus went on:
“Well, you seem to be an honest, quiet sort of
a man; and therefore, you must know, as I
said before, I fell in with a French man of war,
Cape Finisterre bearing about six leagues on the
weather-bow, and the chace three leagues to
leeward, going before the wind: whereupon I set
my studding-sails, and coming up with her, 

hoisted my jack and ensign, and poured in a
whole broadside, before you could count three
rattlins in the mizzen shrouds; for I always keep
a good look-out, and love to have the first fire.” “That I'll be sworn, said Hatchway; for the
day we made the Triumph, you ordered the men
to fire, when she was hull-to, by the same token
we below pointed the guns at a flight of gulls; 
and I won a cann of punch from the gunner, by
killing the first bird.” Exasperated at this sarcasm,
he replied with great vehemence, “You
lie, lubber! d&wblank;n your bones! what business
have you to come always athwart my hawse in
this manner? You, Pipes, was upon deck, and
can bear witness, whether or not I fired too soon. 
Speak, you blood of a&wblank;and that upon the
word of a seaman: how did the chace bear of
us, when I gave orders to fire?” 
Pipes, who hitherto had sat silent, being thus
called upon to give his evidence, after diverse
strange gesticulations, opened his mouth like a
gasping cod, and with a cadence like that of the
east wind singing through a cranny, pronounced,
“Half a quarter of a league right upon our lee-beam.” 
“Nearer, you porpuss-fac'd swab!
(cried the commodore) nearer by twelve fathom:
but, howsomever, that's enough to
prove the falsehood of Hatchway's jaw—and so,
brother, d'ye see, (turning to Mr. Pickle) I lay
along-side of the Floor de Louse, yard-arm and
yard-arm, plying our great guns and small arms,
and heaving in stink-pots, powder-bottles, and
hand-grenades, till our shot was all expended,
double-headed, partridge and grape: then we
loaded with iron crows, marlin spikes, and old
nails, but finding the Frenchman took a great 

deal of drubbing, and that he had shot away all
our rigging, and killed and wounded a great number
of our men, d'ye see, I resolved to run him
on board upon his quarter, and so ordered our
grapplings to be got ready; but Monsieur perceiving
what we were about, filled his topsails
and sheered off, leaving us like a log upon the
water, and our scuppers running with blood.” 
Mr. Pickle and the landlord paid such extraordinary
attention to the rehearsal of this exploit,
that Trunnion was encouraged to entertain them
with more stories of the same nature, after which
he observed by way of encomium on the government,
that all he had gained in the service was a
lame foot and the loss of an eye. The lieutenant,
who could not find in his heart to lose any opportunity
of being witty at the expence of his commander,
gave a loose to his satirical talent once
more, saying, “I have heard as how you came
by your lame foot, by having your upper-decks
overstowed with liquor, whereby you became
crank, and rolled, d'ye see, in such a manner,
that by a pitch of the ship, your starboard heel
was jammed in one of the scuppers; and as for
the matter of your eye, that was knocked out by
your own crew when the Lightning was paid off:
there's poor Pipes, who was beaten into all the
colours of the rainbow for taking your part, and
giving you time to sheer off; and I don't find as
how you have rewarded him according as he deserves.” 
As the commodore could not deny the
truth of these anecdotes, however unseasonably
they were introduced, he affected to receive them
with good humour, as jokes of the lieutenant's
own inventing; and reply'd, “Ay, ay, Jack,
every body knows your tongue is no slander; 

but, howsomever, I'll work you to an oil for
this, you dog.” So saying, he lifted up one of his
crutches, intending to lay it gently a-cross Mr.
Hatchway's pate; but, Jack, with great agility,
tilted up his wooden leg, with which he warded
off the blow, to the no small admiration of Mr.
Pickle, and utter astonishment of the landlord,
who, by the bye, had expressed the same amazement,
at the same feat, at the same hour, every
night, for three months before. Trunnion then
directing his eye to the boatswain's mate, “You,
Pipes, (said he) do you go about and tell people
that I did not reward you for standing by me,
when I was hussled by those rebellious rapscallions; 
damn you, ha'n't you been rated on the books
ever since?” Tom, who indeed had no words
to spare, sat smoaking his pipe with great indifference,
and never dreamed of paying any regard
to these interrogations, which being repeated
and reinforced with many oaths, that (however)
produced no effect, the commodore pulled out
his purse, saying, “Here, you bitch's baby, here's
something better than a smart ticket; and threw
it at his silent deliverer, who received and pocketed
his bounty, without the least demonstration
of surprize or satisfaction; while the donor turning
to Mr. Pickle, “You see brother, (said he)
I make good the old saying, we sailors get money
like horses, and spend it like asses; come, Pipes,
let's have the boatswain's whistle, and be jovial.” 
This musician accordingly, applied to his mouth
the silver instrument that hung at a button-hole
of his jacket, by a chain of the same metal, and
though not quite so ravishing as the pipe of
Hermes, produced a found so loud and shrill, that
the stranger (as it were instinctively) stopped 

his ears, to preserve his organs of hearing from
such a dangerous invasion. The prelude being
thus executed, Pipes fixed his eyes upon the egg
of an ostrich that depended from the cieling,
and without once moving them from that object,
performed the whole cantata in a tone of voice
that seemed to be the joint issue of an Irish bagpipe,
and a sow-gelder's horn; the commodore,
the lieutenant and landlord joined in the chorus,
repeating this elegant stanza, 
Bustle, bustle, brave boys!
Let us sing, let us toil,
And drink all the while,
Since labour's the price of our joys.
The third line was no sooner pronounced, than
the cann was lifted to every man's mouth with
admirable uniformity; and the next word taken
up at the end of their draught, with a twang
equally expressive and harmonious. In short,
the company began to understand one another; 
Mr. Pickle seemed to relish the entertainment,
and a correspondence immediately commenced
between him and Trunnion, who shook him by
the hand, drank to further acquaintance, and
even invited him to a mess of pork and pease in
the garrison. The compliment was returned,
good fellowship prevailed, and the night was
pretty far advanced, when the merchant's man
arrived with a lanthorn to light his master home; 
upon which, the new friends parted, after a mutual
promise of meeting next evening in the same
place. 