


He projects a violent scheme, in consequence of
which he is involved in a most fatiguing adventure,
which greatly tends towards the augmentation
of his chagrin. 
Thus debarred of personal communication
with his mistress, he essayed to retrieve her
good graces by the most submissive and pathetic
letters, which he conveyed by divers artifices to
her perusal; but reaping no manner of benefit
from these endeavours, his passion acquired a degree
of impatience, little inferior to downright
frenzy; and he determined to run every risk of
life, fortune, and reputation, rather than desist
from his unjustifiable pursuit. Indeed his resentment
was now as deeply concerned as his love,
and each of these passions equally turbulent and
loud in demanding gratification. He kept centinels
continually in pay, to give him notice of her
outgoings, in expectation of finding some opportunity
to carry her off; but her circumspection
entirely frustrated this design; for she suspected
every thing of that sort from a disposition like
his, and regulated her motions accordingly. 
Baffled by her prudence and penetration, he
altered his plan, and, on pretence of being called
to his country-house by some affair of importance,
he departed from London, and taking lodgings at
a farmer's house, that stood near the road through
which she must have necessarily passed, in her
return to her mother, concealed himself from all
intercourse, except with his valet de chambre
and Pipes, who had orders to scour the country, 

and reconnoitre every horse, coach, or carriage,
that should appear on that high way, with a view
of intercepting his Amanda in her passage. 
He had waited in this ambuscade a whole week,
when his valet gave him notice, that he and his
fellow-scout had discovered a chaise and six, driving
at full speed towards them; upon which,
they had flapped their hats over their eyes, so as
that they might not be known, in case they
should be seen, and concealed themselves behind
a hedge, from whence they could perceive in the
carriage, as it passed, a young man plainly dressed,
with a lady in a mask, of the exact size, shape, and
air of Emilia; and that Pipes followed them at a
distance, while he rode back to communicate this
piece of intelligence. 
Peregrine would scarce allow him time to conclude
his information; he ran down to the stable,
where his horse was kept ready saddled for the
purpose, and never doubting that the lady in
question was his mistress, attended by one of her
uncle's clerks, mounted immediately, and rode
full gallop after the chaise, which (when he had
proceeded about two miles) he understood from
Pipes, had put up at a neighbouring inn. Though
his inclination prompted him to enter her apartment
without farther delay, he suffered himself
to be dissuaded from taking such a precipitate
step, by his privy counsellor, who observed, that
it would be impracticable to execute his purpose
of conveying her against her will from a public
inn, that stood in the midst of a populous village,
which would infallibly rise in her defence; and
advised him to lie in wait for the chaise, in some
remote and private part of the road, where they
might accomplish their aim without difficulty or 

danger. In consequence of this admonition, our
adventurer ordered Pipes to reconnoitre the inn,
that she might not escape another way, while he
and the valet, in order to avoid being seen, took
a circuit by an unfrequented path, and placed
themselves in ambush, on a spot which they chose
for the scene of their atchievement. Here they
tarried a full hour, without seeing the carriage,
or hearing from their centinel; so that the youth,
unable to exert his patience one moment longer,
left the foreigner in his station, and rode back to
his faithful lacquey, who assured him, that the
travellers had not yet hove up their anchor, or
proceeded on their voyage. 
Notwithstanding this intimation, Pickle began
to entertain such alarming suspicions, that he
could not refrain from advancing to the gate,
and inquiring for the company which had lately
arrived in a chaise and six. The inn-keeper,
who was not at all pleased with the behaviour of
those passengers, did not think proper to observe
the instructions he had received; on the contrary,
he plainly told him, that the chaise did not
halt, but only entered at one door, and went
out at the other, with a view to deceive those
who pursued it, as he guessed from the words of
the gentleman, who had earnestly desired, that
his route might be concealed from any person who
should inquire about their motions. “As for
my own peart, measter, (continued this charitable
publican) I believes as how they are no
better than they should be, else they wouldn't be
in such a deadly fear of being overtaken. Methinks,
(said I) when I saw them in such a
woundy pother to be gone, oddsheartikins! this
must be some Lundon prentice running away with 

his measter's daughter, as sure as I'm a living
soul. But, be he who will, sartain it is, a
has nothing of the gentleman about en; for,
thof a axed such a favour, a never once put hand
in pocket, or said, “Dog, will you drink?” 
Howsomever, that don't argufy in reverence of
his being in a hurry; and a man may be sometimes
a little too judgmatical in his conjunctures.” 
In all probability, this loquacious landlord would
have served the travellers effectually, had Peregrine
heard him to an end; but this impetuous
youth, far from listening to the sequel of his observations,
interrupted him in the beginning of
his career, by asking eagerly, which road they
followed; and having received the inn-keeper's
directions, clapp'd spurs to his horse, commanding
Pipes to make the valet acquainted with his
course, that they might attend him with all imaginable
dispatch. 
By the publican's account of their conduct,
his former opinion was fully confirmed; he plied
his steed to the height of his mettle, and so much
was his imagination ingrossed by the prospect of
having Emilia in his power, that he did not perceive
the road on which he travelled, was quite
different from that which led to the habitation of
Mrs. Gauntlet. The valet de chambre was an
utter stranger to that part of the country; and
as for Mr. Pipes, such considerations were altogether
foreign to the œconomy of his reflection. 
Ten long miles had our hero rode, when his
eyes were blessed with the sight of the chaise ascending
an hill, at the distance of a good league; 
upon which, he doubled his diligence in such a
manner, that he gained upon the carriage every
minute, and at length approached so near to it 

that he could discern the lady and her conductor,
with their heads thrust out at the windows, looking
back, and speaking to the driver alternately,
as if they earnestly besought him to augment the
speed of his cattle. 
Being thus, as it were, in sight of port, while
he crossed the road, his horse happened to plunge
into a cart-rut, with such violence, that he was
thrown several yards over his head; and the
beast's shoulder being slipt by the fall, he found
himself disabled from plucking the fruit, which
was almost within his reach; for he had left his
servants at a considerable distance behind him; 
and although they had been at his back, and supplied
him with another horse, they were so indifferently
mounted, that he could not reasonably
expect to overtake the flyers, who profited so
much by this disaster, that the chaise vanished in
a moment. 
It may be easily conceived, how a young man
of his disposition passed his time, in this tantalizing
situation. He ejaculated with great fervency,
but his prayers were not the effects of resignation. 
He ran back on foot with incredible
speed, in order to meet his valet, whom he unhorsed
in a twinkling; and taking his seat, began
to exercise his whip and spurs, after having
ordered the Swiss to follow him on the other
gelding, and commit the lame hunter to the care
of Pipes. 
Matters being adjusted in this manner, our
adventurer prosecuted the race with all his might; 
and having made some progress, was informed
by a countryman, that the chaise had struck off
into another road, and, according to his judgment,
was by that time about three miles ahead; 

though, in all probability, the horses would not
be able to hold out much longer, because they
seemed to be quite spent when they passed his
door. Encouraged by this intimation, Peregrine
pushed on with great alacrity; though he could
not regain sight of the desired object, till the
clouds of night began to deepen, and even then
he enjoyed nothing more than a transient glimpse; 
for the carriage was no sooner seen, than shrouded
again from his view. These vexatious circumstances
animated his endeavours, while they
irritated his chagrin; and in short, he continued
his pursuit till the night was far advanced, and
himself so uncertain about the object of his care,
that he entered a solitary inn, with a view of obtaining
some intelligence, and to his infinite joy,
perceived the chaise standing by itself, and the
horses panting in the yard. In full confidence
of his having arrived at last at the goal of all his
wishes, he alighted instantaneously, and running
up to the coachman, with a pistol in his hand,
commanded him, in an imperious tone, to conduct
him to the lady's chamber, on pain of death. 
The driver, affrighted at this menacing address,
protested with great humility, that he did not know
whither his fare had retired; for that he himself
was paid and dismissed from this service, because he
would not undertake to drive them all night cross
the country, without stopping to refresh his horses:
but he promised to go in quest of the waiter, who
would shew him to their apartment. He was accordingly
detached on that errand, while our
hero stood centinel at the gate, till the arrival
of his valet de chambre, who joining him by accident,
before the coachman returned, relieved
him in his watch; and then the young gentleman, 

exasperated at his messenger's delay, rushed
with fury in his eyes from room to room, denouncing
vengeance upon the whole family; but
he did not meet with one living soul, until he entered
the garret, where he found the landlord and
his wife in bed. This chicken-hearted couple,
by the light of a rush-candle that burned on the
hearth, seeing a stranger burst into the chamber,
in such a terrible attitude, were seized with consternation; 
and exalting their voices, in a most
lamentable strain, begg'd for the passion of Christ,
that he would spare their lives, and take all
they had. 
Peregrine, guessing from this exclamation, and
the circumstance of their being abed, that they
mistook him for a robber, and were ignorant of
that which he wanted to know, dispelled their
terror, by making them acquainted with the cause
of his visit, and desired the husband to get up
with all possible dispatch, in order to assist and
attend him in his search. 
Thus reinforced, he rummaged every corner
of the inn, and at last finding the ostler in the
stable, was by him informed, (to his unspeakable
mortification) that the gentleman and lady
who arrived in the chaise, had immediately hired
post-horses for a certain village at the distance of
fifteen miles, and departed without halting for
the least refreshment. Our adventurer, mad
with his disappointment, mounted his horse in an
instant, and, with his attendant, took the same
road, with full determination to die, rather than
desist from the prosecution of his design. He
had, by this time, rodeupwards of thirty miles since
three o'clock in the afternoon; so that the horses
were almost quite jaded, and travelled this stage 

so slowly, that it was morning before they reached
the place of their destination, where, far from
finding the fugitives, he understood, that no such
persons as he described had passed that way, and
that, in all likelihood, they had taken a quite
contrary direction, while, in order to mislead him
in his pursuit, they had amused the hostler with a
false route. This conjecture was strengthned,
by his perceiving (now for the first time) that
he had deviated a considerable way from the road,
through which they must have journeyed, in order
to arrive at the place of her mother's residence; 
and these suggestions utterly deprived him
of the small remains of recollection, which he
had hitherto retained. His eyes rolled about,
witnessing rage and distraction; he foamed at the
mouth, stamped upon the ground with great violence,
uttered incoherent imprecations against
himself and all mankind, and would have sallied
forth again he knew not whither, upon the same
horse, which he had already almost killed with
fatigue, had not his confident found means to
quiet the tumult of his thoughts, and recal his
reflection, by representing the condition of the
poor animals, and advising him to hire fresh
horses, and ride post across the country, to the
village in the neighbourhood of Mrs. Gauntlet's
habitation, where they should infallibly intercept
the daughter, provided they could get the start
of her upon the road. 
Peregrine not only relished, but forthwith
acted in conformity with this good counsel. His
own horses were committed to the charge of the
landlord, with directions for Pipes, in case he
should come thither in quest of his master; and
a couple of stout geldings being prepared, he and 

his valet took the road again, steering their course
according to the motions of the post-boy, who
undertook to be their guide. They had almost
finished the first stage, when they descried a
post-chaise just halting at the inn where they proposed
to change horses; upon which, our adventurer,
glowing with a most interesting presage,
put his beast to the full speed, and approached
near enough to distinguish, (as the travellers
quitted the carriage) that he had at last come up
with the very individual persons whom he had
pursued so long. 
Flushed with the discovery, he galloped into
the yard so suddenly, that the lady and her conductor
scarce had time to shut themselves up in
a chamber, to which they retreated with great
precipitation; so that the pursuer was now certain
of having housed his prey. That he might,
however, leave nothing to fortune, he placed
himself upon the stair, by which they had ascended
to the apartment, and sent up his compliments to
the young lady, desiring the favour of being admitted
to her presence, otherwise he should be
obliged to wave all ceremony, and take that liberty
which she would not give. The servant
having conveyed this message through the keyhole,
returned with an answer, importing, that
she would adhere to the resolution she had taken,
and perish rather than comply with his will. 
Our adventurer, without staying to make any
rejoinder to this reply, ran up stairs, and thundering
at the door for entrance, was given to understand
by the nymph's attendant, that a blunderbuss
was ready primed for his reception, and
that he would do well to spare him the necessity
of shedding blood, in defence of a person who 

had put herself under his protection. “All the
laws of the land (said he) cannot now untie the
knots by which we are bound together; and
therefore I will guard her as my own property; 
so that you had better desist from your fruitless
attempt, and thereby consult your own safety:
for, by the God that made me! I will discharge
my piece upon you, as soon as you set your nose
within the door; and your blood be upon your
own head.” These menaces from a citizen's
clerk, would have been sufficient motives for
Pickle to storm the breach, although they had
not been reinforced by that declaration, which
informed him of Emilia's having bestowed herself
in marriage upon such a contemptible rival. This
sole consideration added wings to his impetuosity,
and he applied his foot to the door with such irresistible
force, as bursted it open in an instant, entering
at the same time with a pistol ready cock'd
in his hand. His antagonist, instead of firing
his blunderbuss, when he saw him approach,
started back, with evident signs of surprize and
consternation, exclaiming, “Lord Jesus! Sir,
you are not the man! and, without doubt, are
under some mistake with regard to us.” 
Before Peregrine had time to answer this salutation,
the lady hearing it, advanced to him,
and pulling off a mask, discovered a face which
he had never seen before. The Gorgon's head,
according to the fables of antiquity, never had a
more instantaneous or petrifying effect, than that
which this countenance produced upon the astonished
youth. His eyes were fixed upon this unknown
object, as if they had been attracted by
the power of inchantment, his feet seemed rivetted
to the ground, and after having stood motionless 

for the space of a few minutes, he dropped
down in an apoplexy of disappointment and despair. 
The Swiss, who had followed him, seeing
his master in this condition, lifted him up,
and laying him upon a bed in the next room, let
him blood immediately, without hesitation, being
always provided with a case of lancets, against
all accidents on the road. To this foresight our
hero, in all probability, was indebted for his life. 
By virtue of a very copious evacuation, he recovered
the use of his senses; but the complication
of fatigues, and violent transports which he
had undergone, brewed up a dangerous fever in
his blood; and a physician being called from the
next market-town, several days elapsed before
he would answer for his life. 