


In which it appears that the Knight,
when heartily set in for sleeping, was
not easily disturbed. 
In all probability the kitchen of
the Black Lion, from a domestic
temple of society, and good-fellowship,
would have been converted into
a scene or stage of sanguinary dispute,
had not Pallas or Discretion interposed
in the person of Mr. Fillet, and with
the assistance of the hostler disarmed
the combatants not only of their
arms, but also of their resentment. 
The impetuosity of Mr. Clarke was
a little checked at sight of the gridiron,
which Ferret brandished with
uncommon dexterity; a circumstance
from whence the company were,
upon reflexion, induced to believe, 

that before he plunged into the sea
of politicks, he had occasionally figured
in the character of that facetious
droll, who accompanies your itinerant
physicians, under the familiar appellation
of Merry-Andrew, or Jack-Pudding,
and on a wooden stage entertains
the populace with a solo on
the salt-box, or a sonnata on the tongs
and gridiron. Be that as it may, the
young lawyer seemed to be a little discomposed
at the glancing of this extraordinary
weapon of offence, which
the fair hands of Dolly had scoured,
until it shone as bright as the shield of
Achilles; or as the emblem of good
old English fare, which hangs by a
red ribbon round the neck of that
thrice-honoured sage's head, in velvet
bonnet cased, who presides by
rotation at the genial board, distinguished
by the title of the Beef-stake
Club: where the delicate rumps irresistibly
attract the stranger's eye,
and, while they seem to cry “Come
cut me—come cut me,” constrain,
by wondrous sympathy, each mouth 

to overflow: where the obliging and
humorous Jemmy B&wblank;t, the gentle
Billy H&wblank;d, replete with human
kindness, and the generous
Johnny B&wblank;d, respected and beloved
by all the world, attend as the
priests and ministers of Mirth, good
Cheer, and Jollity, and assist with
culinary art the raw, unpractised,
aukward guest. 
But, to return from this digressive
simile: the hostler no sooner stept
between those menacing antagonists
than Tom Clarke very quietly resumed
his cloaths, and Mr. Ferret
resigned the gridiron without further
question. The doctor did not find it
quite so easy to release the throat of
Capt. Crowe from the masculine grasp
of the virago Dolly, whose fingers
could not be disengaged until the honest
seaman was almost at the last gasp. 
After some pause, during which he
panted for breath, and untied his neck-cloth,
“Damn thee, for a brimstone
galley (cried he); I was never so grappled
withal since I knew a card from 

a compass. —Adzooks! the jade
has so taughtened my rigging, d'ye
see, that I—Snatch my bowlings,
if I come athwart thy hawser, I'll
turn thy keel upwards—or mayhap
set thee a-driving under thy bare
poles—I will—I will, you hell-fire,
saucy—I will.” 
Dolly made no reply; but seeing
Mr. Clarke sit down again with great
composure, took her station likewise
at the opposite side of the apartment. 
Then Mr. Fillet requested the lawyer
to proceed with his story, which, after
three hems, he accordingly prosecuted
in these words. 
“I told you, gemmen, that Mr.
Greaves was mounted on Scipio,
when he saw miss Darnel and her
mother in danger of being hurried
over a precipice. Without reflecting
a moment he gave Scipio the
spur, and at one spring he cleared
five and twenty feet, over hedge and
ditch, and every obstruction. Then
he rode full speed, in order to turn
the coach-horses; and, finding them 

quite wild and furious, endeavoured
to drive against the counter of the
hither horse, which he missed, and
staked poor Scipio on the pole of
the coach. The shock was so great,
that the coach-horses made a full
stop within ten yards of the quarry,
and Mr. Greaves was thrown forwards
towards the coach-box, which
mounting with admirable dexterity,
he seized the reins before the horses
could recover of their fright. At
that instant the coachman came running
up, and loosed them from the
traces with the utmost dispatch. Mr.
Greaves had now time to give his
attention to the ladies, who were
well nigh distracted with fear. He
no sooner opened the chariot-door
than Aurelia, with a wildness of look,
sprung into his arms; and, clasping
him round the neck, fainted away. 
I leave you to guess, gemmen, what
were his feelings at this instant. The
mother was not so discomposed, but
that she could contribute to the recovery
of her daughter, whom the young 

squire still supported in his embrace. 
At length she retrieved the use of her
senses, and perceiving the situation in
which she was, the blood revisited her
face with a redoubled glow, while she
desired him to set her down upon the
turf. 
“Mrs. Darnel, far from being
shy or reserved in her compliments
of acknowledgments, kissed Mr.
Launcelot without ceremony, the
tears of gratitude running down her
cheeks: she called him her dear son,
her generous deliverer, who, at the
hazard of his own life, had saved her
and her child from the most dismal
fate that could be imagined. Mr.
Greaves was so much transported on
this occasion, that he could not help
disclosing a passion, which he had hitherto
industriously concealed. “What
I have done (said he) was but a common
office of humanity, which I
would have performed for any of my
fellow-creatures: but, for the preservation
of miss Aurelia Darnel, I would
at any time sacrifice my life with pleasure.” 

The young lady did not hear
this declaration unmoved: her face was
again flushed, and her eyes sparkled
with pleasure: nor was the youth's
confession disagreeable to the good
lady her mother, who at one glance
perceived all the advantages of such
an union between the two families. 
“Mr. Greaves proposed to send the
coachman to his father's stable for
a pair of sober horses, that could be
depended upon, to draw the ladies
home to their own habitation; but
they declined the offer, and chose to
walk, as the distance was not great. 
He then insisted upon his being their
conductor; and, each taking him
under the arm, supported them to
their own gate, where such an apparition
filled all the domestics with
astonishment. Mrs. Darnel, taking
him by the hand, led him into the
house, where she welcomed him with
another affectionate embrace, and indulged
him with an ambrosial kiss
of Aurelia, saying, “But for you,
we had both been by this time in 

eternity. —Sure it was heaven that
sent you as an angel to our assistance!” 
She kindly inquired if he had himself
sustained any damage in administring
that desperate remedy to which
they owed their lives. She entertained
him with a small collation; 
and, in the course of the conversation,
lamented the animosity which
had so long divided two neighbouring
families of such influence and character. 
He was not slow in signifying
his approbation of her remarks, and
expressing the most eager desire of
seeing all those unhappy differences removed:
in a word, they parted with
mutual satisfaction. 
“Just as he advanced from the outward
gate, on his return to Greavesbury-hall,
he was met by Anthony
Darnel on horseback, who riding up
to him with marks of surprize and resentment,
saluted him with “Your
servant, Sir. —Have you any commands
for me?” The other replying
with an air of indifference, “None
at all,” Mr. Darnel asked, what had 

procured him the honour of a visit. The
young gentleman, perceiving by the
manner in which he spoke that the
old quarrel was not yet extinguished,
answered, with equal disdain, that
the visit was not intended for him; 
and that, if he wanted to know the
cause of it, he might inform himself
by his own servants. “So I shall
(cried the uncle of Aurelia); and perhaps
let you know my sentiments of
the matter—” “Hereafter as it may
be,” said the youth; who, turning
out of the avenue, walked home, and
made his father acquainted with the
particulars of this adventure. 
“The old gentleman chid him for
his rashness; but seemed pleased with
the success of his attempt, and still
more so, when he understood his sentiments
of Aurelia, and the deportment
of the ladies. 
“Next day the son sent over a servant
with a compliment, to enquire
about their health; and the messenger,
being seen by Mr. Darnel, was
told that the ladies were indisposed, 

and did not chuse to be troubled
with messages. The mother was
really seized with a fever, produced
by the agitation of her spirits, which
every day became more and more
violent, until the physicians despaired
of her life. Believing that her end
approached, she sent a trusty servant
to Mr. Greaves, desiring that she
might see him without delay; and
he immediately set out with the messenger,
who introduced him in the
dark. He found the old lady in
bed, almost exhausted, and the fair
Aurelia sitting by her, overwhelmed
with grief, her lovely hair in the utmost
disorder, and her charming eyes
inflamed with weeping. The good
lady beckoning Mr. Launcelot to approach,
and directing all the attendants
to quit the room, except a favourite
maid, from whom I learned
the story, she took him by the hand,
and fixing her eyes upon him with all
the fondness of a mother, shed some
tears, in silence, while the same marks
of sorrow trickled down his cheeks. 

After this affecting pause, “My dear
son (said she), Oh! that I could have
lived to see you so indeed! you find me
hastening to the goal of life”—Here
the tender-hearted Aurelia, being unable
to contain herself longer, broke
out into a violent passion of grief, and
wept aloud. The mother, waiting
patiently till she had thus given vent
to her anguish, calmly intreated her
to resign herself submissively to the
will of heaven: then turning to Mr.
Launcelot, “I had indulged (said she)
a fond hope of seeing you allied to my
family. —This is no time for me to
insist upon the ceremonies and forms
of a vain world. —Aurelia looks upon
you with the eyes of tender prepossession.” 
No sooner had she pronounced these words than he threw
himself on his knees before the young
lady, and, pressing her hand to his
lips, breathed the softest expressions
which the most delicate love could
suggest. “I know (resumed the
mother) that your passion is mutually
sincere; and I should die satisfied, 

if I thought your union would not be
opposed: but that violent man, my
brother-in-law, who is Aurelia's sole
guardian, will thwart her wishes with
every obstacle that brutal resentment
and implacable malice can contrive. 
Mr. Greaves, I have long admired
your virtues, and am confident that I
can depend upon your honour. — 
You shall give me your word, that,
when I am gone, you will take no
steps in this affair without the concurrence
of your father; and endeavour,
by all fair and honourable
means, to vanquish the prejudices,
and obtain the consent of her uncle:
the rest we must leave to the dispensation
of Providence.” 
“The squire promised, in the most
solemn and fervent manner, to obey
all her injunctions, as the last dictates
of a parent whom he should never
cease to honour. Then she favoured
them both with a great deal of salutary
advice, touching their conduct before
and after marriage; and presented
him with a ring, as a memorial of her 

affection: at the same time he pulled
another off his finger, and made a tender
of it as a pledge of his love to Aurelia,
whom her mother permitted to
receive this token. Finally, he took
a last farewel of the good matron, and
returned to his father with the particulars
of this interview. 
“In two days Mrs. Darnel departed
this life, and Aurelia was removed to
the house of a relation, where her
grief had like to have proved fatal to
her constitution. 
“In the mean time, the mother
was no sooner committed to the earth
than Mr. Greaves, mindful of her exhortations,
began to take measures for
a reconciliation with the guardian. He
engaged several gentlemen to interpose
their good offices; but they always
met with the most mortifying
repulse: and at last Anthony Darnel
declared, that his hatred to the house
of Greaves was hereditary, habitual,
and unconquerable. He swore he
would spend his heart's blood to perpetuate
the quarrel; and that, sooner 

than his niece should match with
young Launcelot, he would sacrifice
her with his own hand. The young
gentleman, finding his prejudice so
rancorous and invincible, left off
making any further advances; and,
since he found it impossible to obtain
his consent, resolved to cultivate the
good graces of Aurelia, and wed her
in despite of her implacable guardian. 
He found means to establish a literary
correspondence with her, as soon as
her grief was a little abated; and even
to effect an interview, after her return
to her own house: but he soon had
reason to repent of this indulgence. 
The uncle entertained spies upon the
young lady, who gave him an account
of this meeting; in consequence of
which she was suddenly hurried to
some distant part of the country, which
we never could discover. 
“It was then we thought Mr.
Launcelot a little disordered in his
brain, his grief was so wild, and his
passion so impetuous. He refused all
sustenance, neglected his person, renounced 

his amusements, rode out in
the rain, sometimes bare headed,
strolled about the fields all night, and
became so peevish, that none of the
domesticks durst speak to him, without
the hazard of broken bones. 
Having played these pranks for about
three weeks, to the unspeakable chagrin
of his father, and the astonishment
of all that knew him, he suddenly
grew calm, and his good humour
returned. But this, as your
sea-faring people say, was a deceitful
calm, that soon ushered in a dreadful
storm. 
“He had long sought an opportunity
to tamper with some of Mr. Darnel's
servants, who could inform him
of the place where Aurelia was confined; 
but there was not one about the
family who could give him that satisfaction:
for the persons who accompanied
her, remained as a watch upon
her motions, and none of the other
domestics were privy to the transaction. 
All attempts proving fruitless, he could
no longer restain his impatience; but 

throwing himself in the way of the
uncle, upbraided him in such harsh
terms, that a formal challenge ensued. 
They agreed to decide their difference
without witnesses; and one
morning, before sun-rise, met on that
very common where Mr. Greaves had
saved the life of Aurelia. The first
pistol was fired on each side without
any effect; but Mr. Darnel's second
wounded the young squire in the
flank: nevertheless, having a pistol in
reserve, he desired his antagonist to
ask his life. The other, instead of
submitting, drew his sword; and Mr.
Greaves, firing his piece into the air,
followed his example. The contest
then became very hot, tho' of short
continuance. Darnel being disarmed
at the first onset, our young squire gave
him back the sword, which he was
base enough to use a second time
against his conqueror. Such an instance
of repeated ingratitude and brutal
ferocity divested Mr. Greaves of
his temper and forbearance. He attacked
Mr. Anthony with great fury, 

and at the first longe ran him up to
the hilt, at the same time seizing with
his left hand the shell of his enemy's
sword, which he broke in disdain. 
Mr. Darnel having fallen, the other
immediately mounted his horse, which
he had tied to a tree before the engagement; 
and riding full speed to
Ashenton, sent a surgeon to Anthony's
assistance. He afterwards ingenuously
confessed all these particulars
to his father, who was overwhelmed
with consternation, for the wounds of
Darnel were judged mortal; and as
no person had seen the particulars of
the duel, Mr. Launcelot might have
been convicted of murder. 
“On these considerations, before a
warrant could be served upon him,
the old knight, by dint of the most
eager intreaties, accompanied with
marks of horror and despair, prevailed
upon his son to withdraw himself from
the kingdom, until such time as the
storm should be overblown. Had his
heart been unengaged, he would have
chose to travel; but at this period, 

when his whole soul was engrossed
and so violently agitated by his passion
for Aurelia, nothing but the fear of
seeing the old gentleman run distracted,
would have induced him to desist
from the pursuit of that young lady
far less quit the kingdom where she,
resided. Well then, gemmen, he
repaired to Harwich, where he embarked
for Holland, from whence he
proceeded to Brussels, where he procured
a pass-port from the French
king, by virtue of which he travelled
to Marseilles, and there took a tartan
for Genoa. The first letter sir Everhard
received from him was dated at
Florence. Mean while the surgeon's
prognostic was not altogether verified. 
Mr. Darnel did not die immediately
of his wounds; but he lingered a long
time, as it were in the arms of death,
and even partly recovered: yet, in all
probability, he will never be wholly restored
to the enjoyment of his health; 
and is obliged every summer to attend
the hot well at Bristol. As his wounds
began to heal, his hatred to Mr. 

Greaves seemed to revive with augmented
violence; and he is now, if
possible, more than ever determined
against all reconciliation. Mr. Launcelot,
after having endeavoured to
amuse his imagination with a succession
of curious objects, in a tour of
Italy, took up his residence at a town
called Pisa, and there fell into a deep
melancholy, from which nothing could
rouse him but the news of his father's
death. 
“The old gentleman (God rest his
soul) never held up his head after the
departure of his darling Launcelot; 
and the dangerous condition of Darnel
kept up his apprehension: this
was reinforced by the obstinate silence
of the youth, and certain accounts of
his disordered mind, which he had received
from some of those persons who
take pleasure in communicating disagreeable
tidings. A complication of
all these grievances, co-operating with
a severe fit of the gout and gravel,
produced a fever, which in a few days
brought sir Everhard to his long home; 

after he had settled his affairs with
heaven and earth, and made his peace
with God and man. I'll assure you,
gemmen, he made a most edifying
and christian end: he died regretted
by all his neighbours except Anthony,
and might be said to be embalmed by
the tears of the poor, to whom he was
always a bounteous benefactor. 
“When the son, now sir Launcelot,
came home, he appeared so meagre,
wan, and hollow-eyed, that the
servants hardly knew their young master. 
His first care was to take possession
of his fortune, and settle accounts
with the steward who had succeeded
my father. These affairs being discussed,
he spared no pains to get intelligence
concerning miss Darnel; 
and soon learned more of that young
lady than he desired to know; for it
was become the common talk of the
country, that a match was agreed upon
between her and young squire Sycamore,
a gentleman of a very great
fortune. These tidings were probably
confirmed under her own hand, 

in a letter which she wrote to sir
Launcelot. The contents were never
exactly known but to the parties themselves:
nevertheless, the effects were
too visible; for, from that blessed moment,
he spoke not one word to any
living creature for the space of three
days: but was seen sometimes to shed
a flood of tears, and sometimes to burst
out into a fit of laughing. At last he
broke silence, and seemed to wake
from his disorder. He became more
fond than ever of the exercise of
riding, and began to amuse himself
again with acts of benevolence. One
instance of his generosity and justice
deserves to be recorded in brass or
marble: you must know, gemmen,
the rector of the parish was lately
dead, and sir Everhard had promised
the presentation to another clergyman. 
In the mean time, sir Launcelot
chancing one Sunday to ride through
a lane, perceived a horse saddled and
bridled feeding on the side of a fence; 
and casting his eyes around, beheld
on the other side of the hedge an object 

lying extended on the ground,
which he took to be the body of a
murdered traveller. He forthwith
alighted; and, leaping into the field,
descried a man at full length wrapped
in a great coat, and writhing in agony. 
Approaching nearer, he found
it was a clergyman, in his gown and
caffock. When he inquired into the
case, and offered his assistance, the
stranger rose up, thanked him for his
courtesy, and declared that he was
now very well. The knight, who
thought there was something mysterious
in this incident, expressed a desire
to know the cause of his rolling in
the grass in that manner; and the
clergyman, who knew his person,
made no scruple in gratifying his curiosity. 
“You must know, sir, said
he, I serve the curacy of your own
parish, for which the late incumbent
payed me twenty pounds a year; but
this sum being scarce sufficient to
maintain my wife and children, who
are five in number, I agreed to read
prayers in the afternoon at another 

church about four miles from hence; 
and for this additional duty I receive
ten pounds more: as I keep a horse,
it was formerly an agreeable exercise
rather than a toil; but of late years I
have been afflicted with a rupture, for
which I consulted the most eminent
operators in the kingdom; but I have
no cause to rejoice in the effects of
their advice, though one of them assured
me I was completely cured. 
The malady is now more troublesome
than ever, and often comes upon me
so violently while I am on horseback,
that I am forced to alight, and lie
down upon the ground, until the cause
of the disorder can for the time be reduced.” 
Sir Launcelot not only condoled
with him upon his misfortune, but desired
him to throw up the second cure,
and he would pay him ten pounds a
year out of his own pocket. Your
generosity confounds me, good sir:
(cried the clergyman) and yet I ought
not to be surprised at any instance of
benevolence in sir Launcelot Greaves; 

but I will check the fulness of my
heart. I shall only observe, that your
good intention towards me can hardly
take effect. The gentleman, who
is to succeed the late incumbent, has
given me notice to quit the premises,
as he hath provided a friend of his
own for the curacy.” “What! (cried
the knight) does he mean to take your
bread from you, without assigning any
other reason?” “Surely, sir, replied
the ecclesiastic, I know of no other
reason. I hope my morals are irreproachable,
and that I have done my
duty with a conscientious regard: I
may venture an appeal to the parishioners
among whom I have lived these
seventeen years. After all, it is natural
for every man to favour his own
friends in preference to strangers. As
for me, I propose to try my fortune
in the great city; and I doubt not but
providence will provide for me and
my little ones.” To this declaration
Sir Launcelot made no reply; but riding
home set on foot a strict enquiry
into the character of this man, whose 

name was Jenkins. He found that
he was a reputed scholar, equally remarkable
for his modesty and good
life; that he visited the sick, assisted
the needy, compromised disputes among
his neighbours, and spent his
time in such a manner as would have
done honour to any christian divine. 
Thus informed, the knight sent for
the gentleman to whom the living
had been promised, and accosted him
to this effect: “Mr. Tootle, I have
a favour to ask of you. The person
who serves the cure of this parish, is
a man of good character, beloved by
the people, and has a large family. I
shall be obliged to you if you will
continue him in the curacy.” The
other told him he was sorry he could
not comply with his request, being
that he had already promised the curacy
to a friend of his own.” “No
matter: (replied Sir Launcelot) since
I have not interest with you, I will
endeavour to provide for Mr. Jenkins
in some other way.” 

That same afternoon he walked
over to the curate's house, and told
him that he had spoken in his behalf
to Dr. Tootle, but the curacy was preengaged. 
The good man having
made a thousand acknowledgments
for the trouble his honour had taken; 
“I have not interest sufficient to make
you curate, (said the knight) but I
can give you the living itself, and that
you shall have.” So saying, he retired; 
leaving Mr. Jenkins incapable
of uttering one syllable, so powerfully
was he struck with this unexpected
turn of fortune. The presentation
was immediately made out; and in a
few days Mr. Jenkins was put in possession
of his benefice, to the inexpressible
joy of the congregation. Hitherto
every thing went right, and
every unprejudiced person commended
the knight's conduct: but, in a little
time, his generosity seemed to overleap
the bounds of discretion; and
even in some cases might be thought
tending to a breach of the king's
peace. For example, he compelled, 

vi & armis, a rich farmer's son to
marry the daughter of a cottager,
whom the young fellow had debauched. 
Indeed it seems there was
a promise of marriage in the case,
though it could not be legally ascertained. 
The wench took on dismally; 
and her parents had recourse to
Sir Launcelot, who, sending for the
delinquent, expostulated with him severely
on the injury he had done the
young woman, and exhorted him to
save her life and reputation by performing
his promise; in which case
he (Sir Launcelot) would give her
three hundred pounds to her portion. 
Whether the farmer thought there
was something interested in this uncommon
offer, or was a little elevated
by the consciousness of his father's
wealth; he rejected the proposal with
rustic disdain, and said, if so be as
how the wench would swear the child
to him, he would settle it with the
parish: but declared, that no squire
in the land should oblige him to
buckle with such a cracked pitcher. 

This resolution, however, he could
not maintain: for, in less than two
hours, the rector of the parish had
direction to publish the banns, and
the ceremony was performed in due
course. 
Now, though we know not precisely
the nature of the arguments that
were used with the farmer, we may
conclude they were of the minatory
species; for the young fellow could
not, for some time, look any person in
the face. The knight acted as the
general redresser of grievances. If a
woman complained to him of being
ill treated by her husband, he first inquired
into the foundation of the
complaint; and if he found it just,
catechised the defendant. If the
warning had no effect, and the man
proceeded to fresh acts of violence; 
then his judge took the execution of
the law in his own hand, and horsewhipped
the party. Thus he involved
himself in several law-suits, that
drained him of pretty large sums of
money. He seemed particularly incensed 

at the least appearance of oppression; 
and supported divers poor
tenants against the extortion of the
landlords. Nay, he has been known
to travel two hundred miles as a volunteer; 
to offer his assistance in the
cause of a person, who he heard was
by chicanery and oppression wronged
of a considerable estate. He accordingly
took her under his protection,
relieved her distresses, and was at a
vast expence in bringing the suit to a
determination; which being unfavourable
to his client, he resolved to
bring an appeal into the house of
lords, and certainly would have executed
his purpose, if the gentlewoman
had not died in the interim.” 
At this period Ferret interrupted
the narrator, by observing that the
said Greaves was a common nusance,
and ought to be prosecuted on the statute
of barretry. “No, sir, (resumed
Mr. Clarke) he cannot be convicted
of barretry, unless he is always at variance
with some person or other, a
mover of suits and quarrels, who disturbs 

the peace under colour of law. 
Therefore he is in the indictment
stiled, Communis malefactor, calumniator
& seminator litium. “Prithee,
truce with thy definitions, (cried Ferret)
and make an end of thy long-winded
story. Thou hast no title to
be so tedious, until thou comest to
have a coif in the court of common
pleas.” Tom smiled contemptuous,
and had just opened his mouth to
proceed, when the company were
disturbed by a hideous repetition of
groans, that seemed to issue from the
chamber in which the body of the
squire was deposited. The landlady
snatched the candle, and ran into the
room, followed by the doctor and the
rest; and this accident naturally suspended
the narration. In like manner
we shall conclude the chapter, that
the reader may have time to breathe,
and digest what he has already heard. 