


DEAR LEWIS,
I HAVE followed your directions with some
success, and might have been upon my legs by this
time, had the weather permitted me to use my
saddle horse. I rode out upon the Downs last Tuesday,
in the forenoon, when the sky, as far as the
visible horizon, was without a cloud: but before I
had gone a full mile, I was overtaken instantaneously
by a storm of rain that wet me to the skin in
three minutes—whence it came the devil knows; 
but it has laid me up (I suppose for one fortnight. 
It makes me sick to hear people talk of the fine air
upon Clifton-Downs: how can the air be either
agreeable or salutary, where the dæmon of vapours
descends in a perpetual drizzle? My confinement is
the more intolerable, as I am surrounded with domestic
vexations. —My niece has had a dangerous fit
of illness, occasioned by that cursed incident at
Gloucester, which I mentioned in my last. —She
is a poor good-natured simpleton, as soft as butter,
and as easily melted—not that she's a fool—the girl's
parts are not despicable, and her education has not
been neglected; that is to say, she can write and
spell, and speak French, and play upon the harpsichord; 
then she dances finely, has a good figure,
and is very well inclined; but, she's deficient in
spirit, and so susceptible—and so tender forsooth!
—truly, she has got a languishing eye, and reads
romances—Then there's her brother, 'squire Jery,
a pert jackanapes, full of college-petulance and self-conceit; 
proud as a German count, and as hot
and hasty as a Welch mountaineer. As for that
fantastical animal, my sister Tabby, you are no 

stranger to her qualifications—I vow to God, she
is sometimes so intolerable, that I almost think she's
the devil incarnate come to torment me for my sins; 
and yet I am conscious of no sins that ought to entail
such family-plagues upon me—why the devil should
not I shake of these torments at once? I an't married
to Tabby, thank Heaven! nor did I beget the
other two: let them chose another guardian: for
my part, I an't in a condition to take care of myself; 
much less to superintend the conduct of giddy-headed
boys and girls. You earnestly desire to know
the particulars of our adventure at Gloucester,
which are briefly these, and I hope they will go no
further: —Liddy had been so long cooped up in a
boarding-school, which, next to a nunnery, is
the worst kind of seminary that ever was contrived
for young women, that she became as inflammable
as touch-wood; and going to a play in holyday-time,
—'sdeath, I'm ashamed to tell you!
she fell in love with one of the actors—a handsome
young fellow that goes by the name of Wilson. 
The rascal soon perceived the impression he had
made, and managed matters so as to see her at a
house where she went to drink tea with her governess. 
—This was the beginning of a correspondence,
which they kept up by means of a jade of a milliner
who made and dressed caps for the girls at the
boarding-school. When we arrived at Gloucester,
Liddy came to stay at lodgings with her aunt, and
Wilson bribed the maid to deliver a letter into her
own hands; but it seems Jery had already acquired
so much credit with the maid, (by what means he
best knows) that she carried the letter to him, and so
the whole plot was discovered. The rash boy, without
saying a word of the matter to me, went immediately
in search of Wilson; and I suppose, treated
him with insolence enough. The theatrical hero was
too far gone in romance to brook such usage: he replied 

in blank verse, and a formal challenge ensued. 
They agreed to meet early next morning and decide
the dispute with sword and pistol. I heard nothing
at all of the affair, till Mr. Morley came to my bedside
in the moring, and told me he was afraid my
nephew was going to fight, as he had been overheard
talking very loud and vehement with Wilson
at the young man's lodgings the night before, and
afterwards went and bought powder and ball at a
shop in the neighbourhood. I got up immediately,
and upon inquiry found he was just gone out. I
begged Morley to knock up the mayor, that he
might interpose as a magistrate, and in the mean
time I hobbled after the squire, whom I saw at a
distance walking at a great pace towards the city gate
—in spite of all my efforts, I could not come up
till our two combatants had taken their ground, and
were priming their pistols. An old house luckily
screened me from their view; so that I rushed upon
them at once, before I was perceived. They were
both confounded, and attempted to make their escape
different ways; but Morley coming up with
constables at that instant, took Wilson into custody,
and Jery followed him quietly to the mayor's
house. All this time I was ignorant of what had
passed the preceding day; and neither of the parties
would discover a tittle of the matter. The
mayor observed that it was great presumption in
Wilson who was a stroller, to proceed to such ex
tremities with a gentleman of family and fortune; 
and threatened to commit him on the vagrant act. 
—The young fellow bustled up with great spirit,
declaring he was a gentleman, and would be treated
as such; but he refused to explain himself further. 
The master of the company being sent for, and
examined, touching the said Wilson, said the young
man had engaged with him at Birmingham about
six months ago; but never would take his salary; 
that he had behaved so well in his private character, 

as to acquire the respect and good-will of all his
acquaintance, and that the public owned his merit,
as an actor, was altogether extraordinary. —After
all, I fancy, he will turn out to be a run-way
prentice from London—The manager offered to
bail him for any sum, provided he would give his
word and honour that he would keep the peace; 
but the young gentleman was on his high ropes,
and would by no means lay himself under any restrictions:
on the other hand, Hopefull, was equally
obstinate; till at length the mayor declared,
that If they both refused to be bound over, he
would immediately commit Wilson as a vagrant to
hard labour. I own I was much pleased with Jery's
behaviour on this occasion: he said that rather
than Mr. Wilson should be treated in such an ignominious
manner, he would give his word and
honour to prosecute the affair no further while they
remained at Gloucester—Wilson thanked him for
his generous manner of proceeding, and was discharged. 
On our return to our lodgings, my nephew
explained the whole mystery; and I own I
was exceedingly incensed. —Liddy being questioned
on the subject, and very severely reproached by
that wild-cat my sister Tabby, first swooned away,
then dissolving into a flood of tears, confessed all
the particulars of the correspondence, at the same
time giving up three letters, which was all she had
received from her admirer. The last, which Jery
intercepted, I send you inclosed, and when you
have read it, I dare say you won't wonder at the
progress the writer had made in the heart of a simple
girl, utterly unacquainted with the characters
of mankind. Thinking it was high time to remove
her from such a dangerous connection, I carried
her off the very next day to Bristol; but the
poor creature was so frightened and fluttered, by
our threats and expostulations, that she fell sick the 

fourth day after our arrival at Clifton, and continued
so ill for a whole week that her life was despaired
of. It was not till yesterday that Dr. Rigge declared
her out of danger. You cannot imagine what I
have suffered, partly from the indiscretion of this
poor child, but much more from the fear of losing
her entirely. This air is intolerably cold, and the
place quite solitary—I never go down to the well
without returning low-spirited; for there I meet
with half a dozen poor emaciated creatures, with
ghostly looks, in the last stage of a consumption,
who have made shift to linger through the winter,
like so many exotic plants languishing in a hot-house; 
but, in all appearance, will drop into their graves
before the sun has warmth enough to mitigate the
rigour of this ungenial spring. —If you think the
Bath water will be of any service to me, I will go
thither as soon as my niece can bear the motion of
the coach. —Tell Barns I am obliged to him for
his advice; but don't choose to follow it. If Davis
voluntarily offers to give up the farm, the other
shall have it; but I will not begin at this time of
day to distress my tenants, because they are unfortunate,
and cannot make regular payments: I
wonder that Barns would think me capable of such
oppression—As for Higgins, the fellow is a notorious
poacher, to be sure; and an impudent rascal
to set his snares in my own paddock; but, I suppose,
he thought he had some right (especially in
my absence) to partake of what nature seems to
have intended for common use—you may threaten
him in my name, as much as you please, and if he
repeats the offence, let me know it before you have
recourse to justice. —I know you are a great
sportsman, and oblige many of your friends. I
need not tell you to make use of my grounds; but
it may be necessary to hint, that I'm more afraid
of my fowling piece than of my game. When you 

can spare two or three brace of partridges, send them
over by the stage coach, and tell Gwyllim that she
fyrgot to pack up my flannels and wide shoes in the
trunk-mail—I shall trouble you as usual, from time
to time, till at last I suppose you will be tired of
corresponding with 
Your assured friend,
M. Bramble. 
Clifton, April 17. 