

Mr. and Mrs. Percy accepted of Lord
Oldborough's invitation. They found
apartments prepared for them at Clermont-Park,
and several servants ready to
attend, with the officious promptitude
with which a great man's domestics usually
wait upon those, who are supposed
to stand high in their master's favor.
During his illness Lord Oldborough
had always breakfasted in his own room,
but his Lordship appeared at the breakfast-table
the morning after the ball,
ready to receive his guests. Nothing
could be more gracious, more polite,
more kind, than his reception of Mr.
Percy and his family. From the moment
he was introduced to the wife and
daughters of his friend, he seemed to
throw aside the reserve and coldness of

his manner, to forget at once the statesman
and the minister, the affairs of Europe,
and the intrigues of the cabinet,
to live entirely for the present moment,
and the present company. The company
consisted of the Percy family,
Count Altenberg, and Mr. Temple.—It
was a common practice with Lord Oldborough,
to set conversation a-going—then
to become silent, and retire to his
own thoughts—he would just throw the
ball, and leave others to run for it. But
now he condescended at least to join
in the pursuit, though apparently without
ambition to obtain distinction in the
race. After breakfast he showed the ladies
into his library, and as he was himself
disabled, requested Mr. Temple to
take down such books or prints as he
thought most worthy of their attention.
Literature had been neglected, perhaps
under-valued, by Lord Oldborough since
he had devoted himself to politics, but
he could at will recall the classical stores
of his youth; and on modern books his

quick eye and ear, joined to his strong
and rapid judgment, enabled him to decide
better than many who make it the
only business of thier lives to read. Even
Mr. Percy, who knew him best, was
surprised; and still more surprised was
Mr. Temple, who had seen him in varieties
of company, some of the highest
rank and fashion both in wit and literature,
where his Lordship had appeared
either absent of mind, or a silent listener.
But he now exerted those powers of
conversation, which he usually suffered
to lie dormant. Instead of waiting in
proud expectation, that those who were
in his company should prove their claims
to his attention, he now exerted himself
to produce his own intellectual treasures.
Evidently not for the vanity of display,
but to encourage his guests to produce
those talents, which he seemed to take
it for granted that they possessed. It
appeared to be his sole object, his pride
and pleasure, to pay attention to the
wife and daughters of his friend, and to

show them and him to advantage to an
illustrious foreigner.—
“Yes,” said he, apart to Count Altenberg— “I
am proud to show you a
specimen of a cultivated independent
country gentleman and his family.”
With his usual penetration, Lord Oldborough
soon discerned the characteristics
of each of the ladies of this family—the
good sense and good breeding of
Mrs. Percy—the wit and generous simplicity
of Rosamond; the magnanimity
and superior understanding of Caroline.
As instances of these different qualities
appeared, his quick and brightening eye
marked his approbation, sometimes by a
glance at Count Altenberg, by a nod to
Mr. Temple, or by a congratulatory
smile, as he turned to Mr. Percy.
“I now comprehend,” said his Lordship,
“why Mr. Percy could never be
induced to take a part in public business.
Ladies, you have done a great injury to
your country.—You have made this
gentleman too happy in domestic life.”

Lord Oldborough spoke this in a tone
of raillery, and with a smile—but the
smile was succeeded by a deep sigh, and
a dark gloom of countenance. At this
moment one of his secretaries, Mr. Shaw,
came in with papers to be signed. The
minister reappeared.—Lord Oldborough's
mind turned instantly to business; 
he withdrew to a table apart, sat
down, and began to look over the first
paper that was laid before him. Mr.
Percy rang the bell, and something was
said about not intruding on his Lordship's
time—he looked up—
“Mr. Temple, you are free.—Mr.
Shaw shall finish whatever letters it is
necessary should be written this morning.
You shall have the pleasure of
being with your friends. It is a pleasure
you deserve, Sir, and can appreciate.
Mrs. Percy expressed a wish to see the
grounds, you will show them to these
ladies.—I am a prisoner still,” said his
Lordship, looking down at his gouty
hand— “and always shall be a prisoner,”

—added he, turning his eye upon the
papers which Mr. Shaw held.—
The ladies accompanied by Mr. Temple,
and by Count Altenberg, went out
to walk. Mr. Percy staid one moment
to express his sense of the extraordinary
politeness and kindness, with which
Lord Oldborough had honored him and
his family.
“You owe me no thanks, my dear
Sir.—Kindness can be repaid only by
kindness.—It is a species of debt, which
in the course of my life I have seldom
been called upon to pay.”
This was said not in a voice either of
sentiment or of compliment, but rather in
an austere tone, and with a stern countenance
of conquered emotion. Without
looking at Mr. Percy, he received and
answered the farewell shake of the hand; 
his lips were instantly after strongly compressed,
and taking up his pen the man
was again absorbed in the minister.
Mr. Percy joined the party who were
going to walk in the park. Count Altenberg

had been unusually silent in Lord
Oldborough's company; with the becoming
deference of a young man, in the
presence of one superior in age, and in
high situation, he had listened eager to
learn, instead of impatient to talk.—Attention
of course now turned upon him,
as the stranger, and the foreigner.
With the same perfect taste and good
breeding, with which he knew how to
pay honor due; he received it, and appeared
as much at his ease, whether he
was in the shade or the light; whether
he was unnoticed, or the object of general
attention. He had that air of self possession,
which characterizes a person
secure of his own resources, and not
afraid to produce his abilities.
The conversation turned at first upon
the beauties of nature—Clermont-Park
was one of the really magnificent places
in England, which an Englishman may
feel proud to show to a foreigner.
Count Altenberg politely and justly observed,
how different the country seats

of our nobility are from the ruinous
and comfortless Chateaux, of most of the
French nobility.
Clermont-Park, however, was not new
to the Count. Commissioner Falconer
had the day after his arrival shown him
every thing that was to be seen; his attention,
therefore, as they pursued their
walk, was not so much distracted by
external objects, as to prevent him from
wishing to converse. Finding that Mr.
Percy had travelled, he spoke of Swisserland
and Italy, and without any of
the jargon of a connoisseur, showed that
he felt with sensibility and enthusiasm
the beautiful and sublime. It soon appeared,
that he had seen various countries,
not merely with the eye of a painter
and a poet, but of a philosophical
traveller, who can allow for the differences
of national taste, and discern how
it's variations are influenced by climate,
education, government, and local circumstances.
In his rapid panorama of
foreign countries, he showed variety of

knowledge, and without illiberal prejudice
against any nation, an amiable predilection
for his native country. Next
to his own country he preferred England,
which, as he said, by the mother's
side he might call his own. She had
early instilled into him an admiration
for our free constitution, and a love of
our domestic habits: but he had never
before visited this country, and he was
particularly desirous to obtain an accurate
knowledge of England, and of the
manners and modes of life of it's inhabitants.
He seemed thus eager to obtain
information, not merely to gratify a cursory
or selfish curiosity, but with a view
to the future, and with a hope of doing
permanent good.—It was clear that he
was not only a philosophical, but a benevolent
traveller, to whom nothing that
concerns his fellow-creatures is foreign
or indifferent. His treasuring up all he
had seen abroad, that could be useful at
home, reminded Caroline of Colonel
Hungerford; but she observed that Count

Altenberg's views were more enlarged; 
he was unbiassed by professional habits; 
his sphere of action was higher; heir to
extensive property, with all the foreign
rights of territorial dominion hereditarily
his; and with a probability of obtaining
the political power of ministerial station; 
plans, which in other circumstances
might have been romantic, with Count
Albert's prospects and abilities were
within the bounds of sound judgment
and actual practicability. But whatever
these intentions might be, they were
only to be inferred from his conversation; 
he scarcely spoke of himself, or of his
own designs; whatever he was led to
say on such subjects, he seemed, immediately
after he had said it, to feel as an
impropriety, not justified by the slight
interest, which the acquaintance of a
few hours could inspire.
He changed the conversation by asking
some questions about a celebrated
English writer. In return for the information
Mr. Percy gave him, he spoke of

some recent foreign publications—related
several anecdotes of literary foreigners.
His anecdotes were interesting, because,
in each, there was something characteristic
of the individual, or illustrative
of some general principle of human
nature. To gratify Mr. Percy, the
Count spoke of some public events of
which he had had means of obtaining
information. He had not neglected any
of the opportunities he enjoyed, and
whether he talked of civil or military
affairs, he showed the same efficient
knowledge, and the same superior ability.
Caroline, leaning on her father's arm,
listened with a countenance full of intelligence,
animation, and sympathy: she
looked, alternately, at the Count and at
her father, whose satisfaction she saw
and enjoyed. Feeling that he was appreciated
by the father, inspired by the
charms of the daughter, and excited by
the idea he had formed of her character,
Count Altenberg had indeed been uncommonly

agreeable, entertaining, and
eloquent. During this walk, though
Caroline said but little, yet that little,
to a man of the Count's discernment,
was sufficient to show good judgment
and great capacity.—This increased the
admiration and interest, which her beauty
and manners, and all he had heard of
her conduct, created.
It is said to be one of the characteristics
of genius, that it is able quickly to
discover and elicit genius, wherever it
exists. It is certain that with the celerity
of intuition, of sympathy, or of
practised penetration, Count Albert perceived
Caroline's intellectual superiority.
He had been, at first, curious to discover
whether her mental qualifications
were equal to her extraordinary personal
beauty; but he had soon forgotten his
intention of trying her abilities, in anxiety
to convince her of his own. The
whole turn and style of his conversation
now proved, more than any compliment
could possibly have shown, the high opinion

he had of her understanding, and
of the elevation of her mind.—A woman
may always judge of the real estimation
in which she is held, by the conversation
which is addressed to her.
“All this time, where was Rosamond,
Mrs. Percy, and Mr. Temple.—Mr.
Temple had taken them to see a fine
view; Mr. Percy proposed to sit down
and quietly wait their return; Caroline
and the Count seemed to have no objection
to oblige him, and they placed
themselves under a spreading beech.—They
had not been seated many minutes
before they were interrupted by the appearance
of Commissioner Falconer,
who came, by a cross path, from the
house.
“At last I have found you. What a
prodigious walk you have taken!” cried
the Commissioner, wiping his forehead— “But
where's Mrs. Percy and the rest
of your party? ... I have so walked to
catch you—rode over on purpose to pay
my compliments to the ladies before they

return home—And I come charge d'affaires
from Mrs. Falconer to Mrs. Percy
... I must see Mrs. Percy—Oh, here
she is, coming down the hill ... Ay,
from the point of view ... Mercy! how
you have walked—I am not equal to the
grand tour—It kills me.—But I am so
sorry I was not here time enough to do
the honors of Clermont-Park, as Lord
Oldborough is confined.—Who has Mrs.
Percy for her cicerone—Ha! Mr. Temple—I
thought he was always so busy—Deputed
by Lord Oldborough—really!
—Hum—I hope Lord Oldborough
did not conceive, that there was
any want of empressement on my part.
 ... I should have been here a full hour
sooner, but that my ladies were so late
at breakfast after sitting up—And I
thought your ladies might have been
fatigued too ... but Miss Caroline Percy
I see, fresh as a rose—”
The Commissioner then, as if half in
jest, half in earnest, paid Caroline a
profusion of compliments upon her appearance

the preceding night—numbered,
on his fingers, the conquests she
had made, and the hearts she had broken—Mrs.
Percy, Rosamond, and Mr.
Temple came up, and, as soon as they
had expressed their raptures on the
beauty of the view, Mr. Falconer presented
his note from Mrs. Falconer to
Mrs. Percy, to which, he said, he was
most anxious to be the bearer of a favorable
answer, as he knew that he should
otherwise be ill-received at home, and
the disappointment would be great. The
note contained a pressing invitation to a
play, which the young people at Falconer-Court
had it in contemplation to
represent.—Whether it was to be Zara
or Cato, they had not yet positively decided—for
Cato they were in terrible
distress for a Marcia—Could Miss Caroline
Percy be prevailed upon to try
Marcia? She would look the part so
well, and, no doubt, act it so well—Or
if she preferred Zara, Miss Georgiana
Falconer would, with pleasure, take the

part of the confidante.—Dresses in great
forwardness, Turkish or Roman, convertible,
in a few hours' notice, should
wait Miss Percy's decision.
“Well, my dear Caroline, what say
you?” cried Mrs. Percy.
Caroline was going to answer—
“No, no, don't answer yet,” interrupted
the Commissioner, “let me add,
what I find Mrs. Falconer took it for
granted I would say, that there can be
no possible difficulty or inconvenience,
about the goings and comings, and
horses, and carriages, and beds, and all
those sort of things—for our horses and
carriages can have nothing to do, whilst
the ladies are rehearsing ... shall attend
you any day—any hour—and beds we
can contrive—So, I beseech you, let
none of these vulgar sublunary considerations
deprive us of a Zara or a Marcia—But
say, which shall it be?—Which
character, my charming cousin, will you
do us the honor and pleasure to take?”
Count Altenberg advanced a step, full

of eager expectation.—When he heard
Caroline pronounce, with great politeness,
a refusal, for the first moment he
looked disappointed, but the next seemed
satisfied and pleased.—It would
have highly gratified and interested him,
to have seen Caroline act either the sublime
or the tender heroine, but he preferred
seeing her support her own character
with modest dignity.
Commissioner Falconer pleaded and
pressed in vain; Caroline was steady in
her refusal, though the manner of it was
so gentle, that every instant he thought
he should vanquish her reluctance.—At
length he turned from the ladies to the
gentlemen for assistance.
“Mr. Temple, I am sure you will
join my entreaties—Count Altenberg! ...”
Count Altenberg “would not presume
to ask a favor, which had been refused to
the Commissioner and to Mrs. Falconer.”
—Caroline understood and gave him
credit for his politeness.

“Then, if I must give up this point,” 
said the Commissioner, “at least do not
let me return disappointed in every
respect—let me hope, that you will all
favor us with your company at our
play.”
This invitation was accepted with many
thanks.—
“And, remember, you must not run
away from us that night,” added the
Commissioner— “Mrs. Falconer will
have reason to be jealous of Clermont-Park,
if she finds that it draws our
friends and relations away from Falconer-Court.”
The carriage, which had been ordered
to the great gate of the park, was
now waiting there,—and the Commissioner
took leave of his relations, with
many shakes of the hand and many expressions
of regret.—Count Altenberg
continued talking to Caroline till the last
moment, and after he had handed her into
the carriage, as he took leave of Mr.
Percy, he said that he had to thank him

and his family for some of the most
agreeable among the many agreeable
hours he had passed since he came to
England.
On their way home, this happy family
party eagerly talked over every thing
and every body that had interested them—first
and chiefly, they spoke of Count
Altenberg. Caroline said how often,
during their walk, she had regretted her
mother and sister's absence. She recollected
and reminded her father of some
of the striking circumstances they had
heard, and Mr. Percy and she repeated
so many curious and interesting anecdotes,
so many just observations and
noble sentiments, that Mrs. Percy and
Rosamond were quite charmed with the
Count. Rosamond, however, was surprised
by the openness and ease, with
which Caroline praised and talked of this
gentleman.
“I will say nothing,” thought she— “for
I am determined to be prudent this
time.—But certainly here is no danger

that her love should unsought be won.—Only
this I may and must think,
that Caroline cannot, without affectation,
avoid seeing that she has made a
conquest.”—
Mistaken again, Rosamond—Caroline
had neither seen nor suspected it.—Count
Altenberg's gratitude for the hospitality
shown to his countrymen at the
time of the shipwreck, his recent acquaintance
with her brother Alfred, and all
he had heard of her father from the grateful
tenants at Percy-Hall, accounted,
as Caroline justly thought, for the eagerness
he had shown to be introduced to
her family. His conversing so much
with her she thought was natural, as
he was a stranger to most of the company,
and had some subjects of conversation
in common with her and her
family.—Caroline was not apt to imagine
admiration in every word or look; 
she was not expert in construing every
compliment into a declaration or an
innuendo of love.

His conversation, during their walk,
had been perfectly free from all compliment.
It had been on subjects so interesting,
that she had been carried on
without having had time to think of
love. A good and great character had
opened to her view, and she had been
so absorbed in sympathy, that though
she had thought of nothing but Count
Altenberg, she had never thought of him
with any reference to herself.
The morning after their return home,
Count Altenberg came to the Hills, accompanied
by Mr. Temple. They staid
till it was late; for the Count seemed to
forget the hour of the day, till reminded
of it by Mr. Temple. Caroline, in her
own family, at her home, pleased Count
Altenberg particularly,—The interest he
felt about her increased, and he afterwards
took or made frequent opportunities of
calling at the Hills: His conversation
was generally addressed to Mr. Percy,
but he observed Caroline with peculiar
attention—and Rosamond was confirmed

in her opinion.—A few weeks passed in
this manner, while the play was preparing
at Falconer-Court.—Caroline pursued
her usual occupations with a well regulated
mind, yet not without a wish
frequently recurring, to see and hear
more of Count Altenberg. Her father
and mother were still more anxious on
this subject,—they both agreed in thinking,
that, as far as they had yet seen,
Count Altenberg was a person suited to
Caroline, in every respect a man to whom,
on every account but one, they could
heartily wish to see her united.—On every
account but one—he was a foreigner, and
if she were to marry him, they would
lose her, perhaps, for ever.—This almost
balanced in their hearts every other advantage.—However,
they thought and
spoke even to each other very little upon
the subject; for though the idea that he
might become attached to Caroline was
unavoidably suggested by his looks and
manner, and by the distinguishing attention

he had paid her; yet they knew, that
admiration sometimes is of a transient
nature in the mind of a young man, and
that there is a wide difference between
liking a woman's company, and thinking
of marrying her. Of the Count's views
or engagements they knew nothing; their
meeting with him had been accidental,
they had, perhaps, little chance of more
than a slight intercourse with him, during
his stay in this part of the country.—At
all events, they formed no plots, laid
no plans against the liberty, much less
against the fortune of Count Altenberg; 
all that they resolved upon ... and this
they deemed their duty as parents, was
to give their daughter every proper opportunity
in their power of seeing a person
of his merit, talents, and character:
This they felt incumbent on them more
particularly in their present situation, in
the retired, recluse life, which their confined
fortune obliged them to lead—a
mode of life which precluded their daughters

from the advantages of seeing that
style of company and various society, to
a share of which they were, by birth and
education, entitled.—Nor could Mr. and
Mrs. Percy forget, that Caroline had refused
to quit them in adversity, or to
leave her humble home, when Lady Jane
Granville offered her all the pleasures of
the metropolis, and with the patronage
of fashion, all the means of success, all
the chances of conquest and establishment,
which would have been so eagerly
desired, so instantly accepted by most
girls of Caroline's age, and of half her
personal charms. Her parents, therefore,
were resolved to spare no trouble,
and no expense, which they could possibly
afford now, when any opportunity
offered, either for her temporary amusement,
or permanent advantage.
They saw and heard no more of Count
Altenberg till the day of the play at Falconer-Court.—But
before we go to the
play, let us take a peep behind the
scenes, and inquire what is, and has been

doing by the Falconer family. Even they
who are used to the ennui subsequent to
dissipation, even they who have experienced
the vicissitudes of coquetry, the
mortifications of rivalry, and the despair
of disappointed vanity, can scarcely conceive
the complication of disagreeable
ideas and emotions, with which Miss
Georgiana Falconer awoke the morning
after the magnificent ball.
The image of her beautiful rival disturbed
her morning dreams, and stood
before her fancy the moment she opened
her eyes. Wakening, she endeavored to
recollect and compare all that had passed
the preceding night; but there had been
such tumult in her mind, that she had
only a vague remembrance of the transactions:
she had a confused idea, that the
Count was in love, and that he was not
in love with her; she had fears that, during
the heat of competition, she had betrayed
unbecoming emotion; but gradually
habitual vanity predominated; her
hopes brightened, she began to fancy that

the impression made by her rival might
be easily effaced, and that they should
see no more of the fair phantom. That
branch of the Percy family, she recollected,
were to be considered only as decayed
gentry; and she flattered herself,
that they would necessarily and immediately
sink again into that obscurity, from
which her mother's ill-fated civility had
raised them.—Her mother, she knew,
had invited these Percys against her
will, and would be particularly careful on
account of Sir Robert Percy (and Arabella)
not to show them any further attention.
Thus things would, in a day or
two, fall again into their proper train.— “No
doubt the Count will call this morning,
to know how we do after the ball.”
So she rose, and resolved to dress herself
with the most becoming negligence.
Very different was the result of her
experienced mother's reflections. Mrs.
Falconer saw, that her daughter's chance
of the Count was now scarcely worth considering; 
that it must be given up at once,

to avoid the danger of utter ruin to other
speculations of a more promising kind.—The
mother knew the unmanageable violence
of her daughter's temper; she had
seen her Georgiana expose herself the
preceding night at the ball to her particular
friends, and Mrs. Falconer knew
enough of the world to dread reports, originating
from particular friends; she
dreaded, also, that on some future similar
occasion the young lady's want of command
over her jealousy should produce
some terribly ridiculous scene, confirm
the report that she had an unhappy passion
for Count Altenberg, stigmatize her
as a forlorn maiden, and ruin her chance
of any other establishment. In this instance
she had been misled by her own
and her daughter's vanity. It was mortifying,
to be sure, to find that she had
been wrong; and still more provoking to
be obliged to acknowledge, that Mr. Falconer
was right; but in the existing circumstances,
it was absolutely necessary,
and Mrs. Falconer, with a species of satisfaction,

returned to her former habits
of thinking, and resumed certain old
schemes, from which the arrival of the
Count had diverted her imagination.—She
expected the two Mr. Clays at Falconer-Court
the next day.—Either of
them, she thought, might be a good
match for Georgiana.—To be sure, it was
said that French Clay had gaming debts
to a large amount upon his hands,—this
was against him; but, in his favor, there
was the chance of his elder brother's dying
unmarried, and leaving him Clay-Hall.—Or
take it the other way, and
suppose English Clay to be made the object.—He
was one of the men who professedly
have a horror of being taken in
to marry—yet no men are more likely
“to run into the danger to avoid the apprehension.”—Suppose
the worst, and
that neither of the Clays could be worked
to any good purpose, Mrs. Falconer
had still in reserve that pis aller Petcalf,
whose father, the good General, was at

Bath, with the gout in his stomach; and
if he should die, young Petcalf would
pop into possession of the General's lodge
in Asia Minor ,—not
so fine a place, to
be sure, nor an establishment so well appointed,
as Clay-Hall, but still with a
Nabob's fortune a great deal might be
done,—and Georgiana might make Petcalf
throw down the lodge and build.—So
at the worst she might settle very comfortably
with young Petcalf, whom she
could manage as she pleased, provided
she never let him see her penchant for
Count Altenberg.—Mrs. Falconer determined
to turn the tables dexterously, and
to make it appear, that the Count admired
Georgiana, but saw she could not be
induced to leave England.— “We must,” 
said she to herself, “persuade English
Clay, that I would not for any consideration
give my daughter to a foreigner.”
In consequence of these plans and reflections,
Mrs. Falconer began her new
system of operations, by writing that

note full of superfluous civility to Mrs.
Percy, with which Commissioner Falconer
had been charged:—the pressing
Caroline to play Zara, or Marcia—the
leaving to her the choice of dresses
and characters; the assurance that Miss
Georgiana Falconer would take the confidante's
part with pleasure, were all strokes
of Mrs. Falconer's policy. By these
means she thought she could most effectually
do away all suspicion of her own
or her daughter's jealousy of Miss Caroline
Percy. Mrs. Falconer foresaw, that,
in all probability, Caroline would decline
acting; but if she had accepted, Mrs.
Falconer would have been sincerely pleased,
confident, as she was, that Caroline's
inferiority to her Georgiana, who was an
accomplished actress, would be conspicuously
manifest.
As soon as Mrs. Percy's answer, and
Caroline's refusal, arrived, Mrs. Falconer
went to her daughter Georgiana's apartment,
who was giving directions to her

maid, Lydia Sharpe, about some part of
Zara's dress.—
“My dear,” said Mrs. Falconer, looking
carelessly at the dress— “You won't
want a very expensive dress for Zara.—”
“Indeed, Ma'am, I shall,” cried
Georgiana— “Zara will be nothing, unless
she is well dressed.”
“Well, my dear, you must manage as
well as you can with Lydia Sharpe.—Your
last court dress surely she can make
do vastly well, with a little alteration to
give it a Turkish air.”
“Oh! dear me, Ma'am—a little alteration!” 
cried Lydia, “no alteration upon
the face of Heaven's Earth, that I could
devise from this till Christmas, would give
it a Turkish air.—You don't consider, nor
conceive, Ma'am, how skimping these
here court trains are now—for say the
length might answer, it's length without
any manner of breadth you know, Ma'am—Look,
Ma'am, a mere strip!—Only
two breadths of three quarters bare

each—which gives no folds in nature,
nor drapery, nor majesty, which, for a
Turkish queen, is indispensably requisite,
I presume.”
“Another breadth or two would make
it full enough, and cotton velvet will do,
and come cheap,” said Mrs. Falconer.
“Cotton velvet!” cried Miss Georgiana,
“I would not wear cotton velvet like
the odious, shabby Miss Chattertons,
who are infamous for it.”
“But on the stage, what eye could
detect it, child?” said Mrs. Falconer.
“Eye! Ma'am, no, to be sure, at that
distance, but the first touch to any body
that understands velvets would betray it,
and them that is on the stage along with
Miss Georgiana, or behind the scenes
will detect it. ... And I understood the
ladies was to sup in their dresses, and on
such an occasion I presumed you would
like Miss Georgiana to have an entire
cap à pié new dress, as the Lady Arlingtons,
and every body has seen her appear
in this, and has it by heart, I may say

... and the Count too, who, of course,
will expect to see Zara spick and span—But
I leave it all to your own better judgment,
Ma'am—I am only just mentioning ...”
“All I know is, that the play will be
nothing unless it is well dressed,” cried
Miss Georgiana— “and I never will play
Zara in old trumpery.”
“Well, my dear, there's your blue
satin, or your pink, or your green, or
your white, or ... I am sure you have
dresses enough.—Lydia, produce them,
and let me see.”—
Lydia covered the bed with various
finery, but to every dress that was produced
some insuperable objection was
started by the young lady, or by her
maid.
“I remember you had a lavender satin,
that I do not see here, Georgiana,” said
Mrs. Falconer.
“The color did not become me, Ma'am,
and I sold it to Lydia.”—
Sold!—gave, perhaps some innocent

reader may suspect that the young lady
meant to say.—No; this buying and
selling of finery now goes on frequently
between a certain class of fashionable
maids and mistresses.—And some young
ladies are now not ashamed to become
old clothes women.
“Vastly well,” said Mrs. Falconer,
smiling, “You have your own ways and
means, and I am glad of it, for I can tell
you, there is no chance of my getting
you any money from your father; I dare
not speak to him on that subject, for he
was extremely displeased with me about
Mrs. Sparkes' last bill.—So if you want
a new dress for Zara, you and Lydia
Sharpe must settle it as well as you can
between you. I will, in the mean time,
go and write a note, while you make
your bargain.”
“Bargain! Me! Ma'am,” cried Lydia
Sharpe, as Mrs. Falconer left the room— “I
am the worst creature extant at bargaining,
especially with ladies.—But any
thing I can do certainly to accommodate,
I shall, I'm sure, be happy.”

“Well then,” said Miss Georgiana,
“if you take this white satin off my
hands, Lydia, I am sure I shall be happy.”
“I have no objection, Ma'am, that is,
I'm in duty bound to make no manner
of objections,” said Lydia, with a very
sentimental air, hanging her head aside,
and with one finger rubbing her under lip
slowly, as she contemplated the white
satin, which her young mistress held up
for sale.—I am really scrupulous ... but
you're sensible, Miss Georgiana, that
your white satin is so all frayed with the
crape sleeves. Lady Trant recommended—”
“Only a very little frayed.”
“But in the front breadth, Ma'am,
you know that makes a world of difference,
because there's no hiding, and with
satin no turning—and not a bit neither
to new body.”
“The body is perfectly good.”
“I beg pardon for observing, but you
know, Ma'am, you noticed yourself how

it was blacked and soiled by wearing under
your black lace last time, and that
you could not wear it again on that
account.”
“I!—but you—”
“To be sure, Ma'am, there's a great
deal of difference between I and you; 
only when one comes to bargaining ...”
She paused, seeing wrath gathering
black and dire in her young lady's countenance;—before
it burst she changed her
tone, and continued— “All I mean to
say, Ma'am, is, that white satin being
a style of thing I could not pretend to
think of wearing in any shape myself, I
could only take it to part with again, and
in the existing circumstances, I'm confident
I should lose by it.—But rather than
disoblige, I'll take it at whatever you
please.”—
“Nay; I don't please about the matter,
Lydia—But I am sure you had an
excellent bargain of my lavender satin,
which I had worn but twice.”
“Dear heart! La! Ma'am, if you

know what trouble I had with Mrs.
Sparkes, the dress-maker, about it—because
of the coffee-stain. ... And I vow
to my stars, I am ashamed to mention
it; but Mrs. Scrags, Lady Trant's woman,
and both the Lady Arlingtons'
maids, can vouch for the truth of it. I
did not make a penny, but lost, Ma'am,
last year, by you and Miss Bell; that is,
not by you nor Miss Bell, but by all I
bought, and sold to disadvantage; which,
I am morally certain, you would not
have permitted, had you known of it, as I
told Mrs. Scrags, who was wondering
and pitying of me; my young ladies,
Mrs. Scrags, says I—”
“No matter,” interrupted Georgiana.
“No matter what you said to Mrs.
Scrags, or Mrs. Scrags to you—but tell
me, at once, Lydia, what you can afford
to give me for these three gowns.”
“I afford to give!” said Lydia Sharpe.
“Well, the times is past, to be sure,
and greatly changed, since ladies used
to give, but now it's their maids must

give—Then suppose ... let's see, Ma'am,
for the three, the old white satin, and
the blue satin, and the black lace ...
Why, Ma'am, if you'd throw me the
pink crape into the bargain, I don't
doubt but I could afford to give you
nine guineas, Ma'am”—said the maid.
“Then, Lydia Sharpe, you will never
have them, I promise you,” cried the
mistress— “Nine guineas! how can you
have the assurance to offer me such a
sum? As if I had never bought a gown
in my life, and did not know the value
or price of any thing—Do you take me
for a fool?”
“Oh dear! no, Miss, I'm confident
that you know the value and price to
the uttermost penny; but only you forget
that there's a difference betwixt the
buying and selling price for ladies; but
if you please, Ma'am—I would do any
thing to oblige and accommodate you—I
will consult the Lady Arlingtons'
women, Miss Flora, and Miss Pritchard,
who is judges in this line—most honorable

appraisers—And if they 'praise the
articles, on inspection, a shilling higher,
I am sure I shall submit to their jurisdiction—if
they say ten guineas, Ma'am
you shall have it, for I love to be at a
word and a blow—and to do every thing
genteel—So I'll step and consult my
friends, Ma'am, and give you my ultimatum
in half an hour.”
So saying, whilst her young mistress
stood flushed and swelling with pride
and anger, which, however, the sense
of her own convenience and interest
controlled, the maid swept up the many
colored robes in her arms, and carried
them up the back-stairs, to hold her
consultation with her friends, the most
honorable of appraisers.—
“Well, my dear,” said Mrs. Falconer,
returning as she heard the maid quit the
room— “Have you driven your bargain
for the loan? Have you raised the
supplies.”
“No, indeed, Ma'am—for Lydia is
grown a perfect Jew—She may well say

she is related to Sharpe, the attorney—She
is the keenest—most interested creature
in the world—and grown very saucy
too.”—
“Like all those people—my dear,
but one can't do without them”—
“But one can change them”—
“But to use their own language, one
is not sure of bettering oneself—and then
their wages are to be paid—and all one's
little family secrets are at their mercy”—
“It's very provoking—It is very
provoking”—repeated Miss Georgiana,
walking up and down the room—Such
an extortioner!—For my blue satin, and
my white satin, and my black lace, and
my pink crape, only nine guineas!
What do you think of that, Ma'am?”
“I think, my dear, you pay a prodigious
premium for ready money; but
nine guineas will dress Zara decently, I
dare say, if that's your object.”
“Nine guineas! Ma'am, cried Miss
Georgiana, impossible—I can't act at
all—so there's an end of the matter.”

“Not an end of the matter ... quite—said
Mrs. Falconer, coolly—for in
that case I must look out for another
Zara.”
“And where will you find one,
Ma'am?”
“The Lady Arlingtons have both fine
figures—and, I dare say, would either
of them oblige me.”
“Not they—Lady Anne, with her
indolence and her languor—a Lady
who looks as if she was saying, ‘Quasha
tell Quaco to tell Fibba to pick up this
pin that lies at my foot;’ do you think
she'd get a part by heart, Ma'am, to
oblige you—or that she could, if she
would, act Zara?—no more than she
could fly!”—
“But her sister, Lady Frances, would
and could”—said Mrs. Falconer— “She
is quick enough, and I know she longs
to try Zara”—
“Longs!—Lord, Ma'am, she longs
for fifty things in a minute—Quick!—Yes,
but don't depend on her, I advise

you, for she does not know, for two seconds
together, what she would have or
what she would do.”
“Then I have a resource in one who,
I am persuaded, will not disappoint me
or any body else,” said Mrs. Falconer—
“Who can you mean, Ma'am?”
“Miss Caroline Percy—Count Altenberg
put it into my head—he observed,
that she would look the character
remarkably well—and I will write to her
directly.”
Without power of articulating, Miss
Georgiana Falconer fixed her eyes upon
her mother for some moments.
“You think I have lost my senses
this morning—I thought, and I am afraid
so did many other people, that you had
lost yours last night.—Another such
scene, your friends the Lady Arlingtons
for spectators, you are ridiculous, and,
of course, undone for life in the fashionable
world—Establishment, and every
thing else that is desirable, irrevocably
out of the question—I am surprised, that

a girl of your understanding and really
polished manners, Georgiana, should the
moment any thing crosses or vexes you,
show no more command of temper, grace,
or dignity, than the veriest country-girl—When
things go wrong do you see me
lose all presence of mind, or rather do
you ever see me change a muscle of my
countenance?”
“The muscles of some people's countenance,
Ma'am, I suppose, are differently
made from others—Mine will
change with my feelings, and there is no
remedy, for my feelings unfortunately
are uncommonly acute.”
“That is a misfortune, indeed, Georgiana,
but not without remedy I trust—If
you will take my advice ...”
“Were you ever in love, Ma'am?”
“Properly—when every thing was
settled for my marriage—but not improperly,
or it might never have come
to my wedding-day.—Headstrong child,
listen to me, or you will never see that
day with Count Altenberg”—

“Do you mean, Ma'am, to ask Miss
Caroline Percy to play Zara?”
“I will answer no question, Georgiana,
till you have heard me patiently.”
“I only hope, Ma'am, you'll put it
in the play-bill ... or, if you don't, I
will—Zara—Miss Caroline Percy—by
particular desire of Count Altenberg.”
“Whatever I do, you may hope and
be assured, Georgiana, shall be properly
done,” cried Mrs. Falconer, rising
with dignity— “and since you are not
disposed to listen to me, I shall leave
you to your own inventions, and go and
write my notes”—
“La, Mamma! dear Mamma! dear'st
Mamma!” cried the young lady, throwing
her arms round her mother, and
stopping her. “You that never change
a muscle of your countenance, how
hasty you are with your own Georgiana—sit
down and I'll listen patiently.”—
Mrs. Falconer seated herself, and Miss
Georgiana prepared to listen patiently,
armed with a piece of gold fringe, which

she rolled and unrolled, and held in different
lights and varied festoons whilst
her mother spoke, or as the young lady
would say—lectured.—Mrs. Falconer
was too well aware of the impracticableness
of her daughter's temper, to tell her
upon this occasion the whole truth,
even if her own habits would have permitted
her to be sincere. She never
mentioned to Georgiana, that she had
totally given up the scheme of marrying
her to Count Altenberg, and that she
was thoroughly convinced there was no
chance of her winning him; but, on the
contrary, she represented to the young
lady, that the Count had only a transient
fancy for Miss Caroline Percy,
which would never come to any serious
proposal, unless it was opposed; that in
a short time they should go to Town,
and the Count, of course, would return
with Lord Oldborough; then the game
would be in her own hands, provided,
in the mean time, Georgiana should
conduct herself with prudence and temper,

and let no creature see or suspect
any sort of anxiety, for that would give
such an advantage against her, and such
a triumph to Caroline and her friends,
who, as Mrs. Falconer said, were, no
doubt, all on the watch to “interpret,” 
or misinterpret, “motions, looks, and
eyes”— “My dear,” concluded the
mother, “your play is to show yourself
always easy and happy, whatever
occurs—occupied with other things, surrounded
by other admirers, and encouraging
them properly ... properly of
course to pique the jealousy of your
Count.”
“My Count!”—said Georgiana, with
half a smile— “but, Miss ... You
say, this fancy of his will pass away—but
when? When?”
“You young people always say, ‘but
when?’ You have no idea of looking
forward—a few months, a year, more or
less, what does it signify? Georgiana,
are you in such imminent danger of
growing old or ugly?”—

Georgiana turned her eyes involuntarily
towards the glass, and smiled.
“But, Ma'am, you were not in earnest
then about getting another Zara.”
“The offer I made—the compliments
I paid in the note I wrote this morning,
were all necessary to cover your mistakes
of the night.”
“Made! Wrote!” cried the young
lady, with terror in her voice and eyes—Good
Heavens! mother, what have
you done?”
“—I had no doubt at the time
I wrote,” continued Mrs. Falconer,
coolly, “I had no other idea but that
Miss Caroline Percy would decline.”
“Oh! Ma'am,” cried Georgiana,
half crying, then stamping with passion.
“Oh! Ma'am, how could you imagine,
or affect to imagine, that that girl, that
odious girl who was born to be my plague,
with all her affected humility, would
decline—decline!—No, she will be transported
to come sweeping in, in gorgeous
tragedy—Zara! Marcia—If the whole

family can beg or borrow a dress for her,
we are undone—that's our only chance
... Oh! mother, what possessed you
to do this?”
“Gently, pretty Passionate, and trust
to my judgment in future,” putting into
her daughter's hand Mrs. Percy's note.
“Miss Caroline Percy ... sorry ...
out of her power!—Oh, charming!—a
fine escape!” cried Georgiana, delighted— “You
may be sure it was for
want of the dress, though ... Mamma”—
“No matter—but about yours, my
dear”—
“Oh! yes, Ma'am; my dress, that's
the only difficulty now.”
“I certainly wish you, my darling,
to appear well, especially as all the world
will be here—The two Clays, by the
by, here's their letter—they come to
morrow ... and, in short, the whole
world—But, as to money, there's but
one way of putting your father into good
humor enough with you, to touch upon
that string”—

“One way—well, if there be one
way—any way”—
“Petcalf!”—
“Oh, Petcalf! is my abhorrence—
“There's the thing!—He was speaking
to your father seriously about you,
and your father sounded me—I said you
would never agree, and he was quite
displeased—that and Mrs. Sparkes's bill
completely overset him.”
“Now, if you had your wish, Georgiana—what
would be your taste,
child?”—
“My wish! My taste—Oh! that
would be for a delicate, delicate, soft,
sentimental blue satin, with silver fringe,
looped with pearl, for my first act,—and
in my last.”
“Two dresses. Oh, you extravagant!
Out of all possibility.”—
“I am only wishing,—telling you my
taste, dear Mamma—You know there
must be a change of dress, in the last
act, for Zara's nuptials—Now for my

wedding dress, Mamma, my taste would
be— 
‘Shine out, appear, be found, my lovely Zara,’
in bridal white and silver.
“You know, Ma'am, I am only supposing.”
“Well then, supposition for supposition,” 
replied Mrs. Falconer—Supposing
I let your father hope that you are not
so decided to abhor poor Petcalf ...”
“Oh! dear Mamma, I am so persecuted
about that Petcalf ... and compared
with Count Altenberg, my father
must be blind, or think me an idiot.”
“Oh! between him and the Count,
there is no comparison to be sure ...
But I forgot to mention, that what your
father builds upon is our poor old friend,
the General's, death; Clay here, in a
postscript, you see, mentions the gout
in his stomach—So I am afraid he is as
good as gone, as your father says, and
then, The Lodge in Asia-Minor is certainly
a pretty place to sit down upon, if
one could do no better.”

“But, Ma'am, the Count's vast possessions
and rank!”
“I grant you all that, my dear; but
our present object is the play—Zara's
royal robes cannot be had for nothing,
you know—you never listened to my
infallible means of obtaining your wish—I
think I can engage, that the Commissioner
will not refuse us, if you will
empower me to say to him, that by this
time twelvemonth, if nothing better
offers ... mind my if—Petcalf shall
be rewarded for his constancy.”
“If ... Oh, dear me! ... But before
this time twelvemonth the Count ...”
“Or one of the Clays might offer,
and in that case, my if brings you off
safe with your father”—
“Well, then, Mamma, upon condition
that you will promise me, upon your
word, you will lay a marked emphasis
upon your if ... I believe, for Zara's
sake, I must”—
“I knew you would behave at last
like a sensible girl,” said Mrs. Falconer

— “I'll go and speak to your father directly”—
Mrs. Falconer thus fairly gained her
point, by setting Georgiana's passion for
dress against her passion for Count Altenberg; 
and having, moreover, under
false pretences, extorted from the young
lady many promises to keep her temper
prudently, and to be upon the best
terms possible with her rival; the mother
went away perfectly satisfied with
her own address.
The father was brought to perform
his part, not without difficulty—Carteblanche
for Zara's sentimental blue and
bridal white robes, was obtained, silver
fringe and pearls inclusive—The triumphant
Zara rang for the base confidante
of her late distresses—Lydia Sharpe reentered,
with the four dresses upon sale; 
but she and her guineas, and the most
honorable appraisers, all were treated
with becoming scorn—And as Lydia
obeyed her young lady's orders to replace
her clothes in her wardrobe, and never

to think of them more, they suddenly
rose in value in her estimation, and she
repented that she had been quite so
much of an extortioner. She knew the
difference of her mistress's tone, when
disappointed or disqualified, and guessed
that supplies had been obtained by some
means or other— “New dresses, I smell,
are the order of the day,” said Lydia
Sharpe to herself— “But I'll engage she
will want me presently to make them up—So
I warrant I won't come down off
my high horse till I see why.”— “Miss
Georgiana Falconer, Ma'am, I beg pardon—you
are the mistress—I meant
only to oblige and accommodate when
called upon—but if I'm not wanted ...
I'm not wanted—and I hope ladies will
find them that will be more abler and
willinger to serve them.”
So saying, half flouncing, half pouting,
she retired—Her young mistress,
aware that Lydia's talents and expeditious
performance, as a mantua-maker
and a milliner, were essential to the appearance

of Zara, suppressed her own
resentment, submitted to her maid's insolence,
and brought her into humor
again that night, by a present of the famous
white satin.
In due time, consequently, the Turkish
dresses were in great forwardness—Lest
we should never get to the play,
we forbear to relate all the various frettings,
jealousies, clashing vanities, and
petty quarrels, which occurred between
the actresses and their friends, during
the getting up of this piece and it's rehearsals.—We
need mention only, that
the seeds of irreconcilable dislike were
sown at this time between the Miss Falconers
and their dear friends, the Lady
Arlingtons—There was some difficulty
made by Lady Anne about lending her
diamond crescent for Zara's turban; 
Miss Georgiana could never forgive this—And
Lady Frances, on her part, was
provoked, beyond measure, by an order
from the Duke, her uncle, forbidding
her to appear on the stage—She had

some reason to suspect, that this order
came in consequence of a treacherous
paragraph in a letter of Georgiana's to
Lady Trant, which went round, through
Lady Jane Granville, to the Duke, who,
otherwise, as Lady Frances observed,
“in the midst of his politics, might never
have heard a word of the matter.”
Mrs. Falconer had need of all her
power over the muscles of her face, and
all her address, in these delicate and difficult
circumstances—Her daughter
Arabella, too!—was sullen, the young
lady was subject to her brother John's
fits of obstinacy. For some time she
could not be brought to undertake the
part of Selima, and no other Selima was
to be had.—She did not see why she
should condescend to play the confidante
for Georgiana's Zara—Why she was to
be sacrificed to her sister; and Sir Robert
Percy, her admirer, not even to be
invited, because the other Percys were
to come—”
“Mrs. Falconer plied her well with

flattery, through Colonel Spandrill; and,
at last, Arabella was pacified by a promise,
that the following week “Love
in a Village,” or “The Lord of the
Manor”—should be acted, in which she
should choose her part, and in which
her voice and musical talents would be
brought forward,—and Sir Robert Percy
and his friends should be the principal
auditors.
Recovered, or partly recovered from
her fit of the sullens, she was prevailed
upon to say, she would try what she
could do in Selima.
The parts were learnt by heart; the
dresses, after innumerable alterations,
finished to the satisfaction of the heroes
and heroines of the drama.
Their quarrels, and the quarrels of
their friends and of their servants, male
and female, were at last hushed to temporary
repose, and—the great, the important
day arrived.
The preceding evening, Mrs. Falconer,
as she sat quite exhausted in the green

room, was heard to declare, she was so
tired, that she would not go through the
same thing again, for one month, to be
Queen of England.