

Vain of shewing that he was not in
the slightest degree jealous, Connal
talked to Ormond in the most free manner
imaginable, touching with indifference
even on the very subject which
Ormond, from feelings of delicacy and
honour, had anxiously avoided. Connal
seemed to be perfectly aware how matters
had stood before his arrival between Dora
and our young hero. “It was all very
well,” he said—“quite natural—in the
common course of things—impossible
even it should have been otherwise—A
young woman, who saw no one else, must
inevitably fall in love with the first agreeable
young man who made love to her—

or who did not make love to her. It was
quite equal to him which. He had heard
wonders from his father-in-law elect on
that last topic, and he was willing to
oblige him, or any other gentleman or
lady, by believing miracles. As a good
Catholic, he was always ready to ‘believe,
because it was impossible.’”
Ormond, extremely embarrassed by
the want of delicacy and feeling with
which this polished coxcomb spoke, had,
however, sufficient presence of mind to
avoid, either by word or look, making
any particular application of what was
said.
“!You have really prodigous presence
of mind, and discretion, and tact, for a
young man who has, I presume, had so
little practice in these affairs,” said Connal; 
“but don't constrain yourself
longer. I speak frankly to take off all
embarrassment on your part, you see
there exists none on mine—never for a
moment—no; how can it possibly signify,”

continued he, “to any man of
common sense, who, or what, a woman
liked before she saw him. You don't
think a man, who has seen any thing of
the world, would trouble himself to inquire
whether he was, or was not, the
first love of the woman he is going to
marry. To marry—observe the emphasis— 
distinguish—distinguish, and seriously
let us calculate.”
Ormond gave no interruption to his
calculations, and the petit-maitre, in a
tone of philosophic fatuity, asked “of the
numbers of your English or Irish wives— 
all excellent—how many, I pray you,
do you calculate are now married to the
man they first fell in love with, as they
call it. My good Sir, not five per cent,
depend on it. The thing is morally impossible,
unless girls are married out of a
convent, as with us in France, and very
difficult even then; and after all, what
are the French husbands the better for
it? I understand English husbands think

themselves best off. I don't pretend to
judge; but they seem to prefer what
they call domestic happiness to the French
esprit de société. Still, this may be prejudice
of education—of country. Each
nation has its taste—Every thing is for
the best in this world for people who
know how to make the best of it—You
would not think, to look at me, I was so
philosophic—but even in the midst of
my military career I have thought— 
thought profoundly—Every body in
France thinks now,” said M. de Connal,
taking a pinch of snuff with a very pensive
air.
“Every body in France thinks now!” 
repeated Ormond.
“Every man of a certain rank, that
is to say.”
“That is to say of your rank?” said
Ormond.
‘Nay, I don't give myself as an example; 
but!—you may judge—I own I
am surprised to find myself philosophising

here in the Black Islands—but one philosophises
every where.’”
“And you would have more time for
it here, I should suppose, than at Paris.”
“Time, my dear Sir—no such thing!
Time is merely in idea; but Tais toi
Jean Jacques! Tais toi Condillac! To
resume the chain of our reasoning—love
and marriage—I say it all comes to much
the same thing in France and in these
countries—after all. There is more gallantry
perhaps before marriage in England,
more after marriage in France— 
which has the better bargain? I don't
pretend to decide. Philosophic doubt for
me, especially in cases where 'tis not
worth while to determine; but I see I
astonish you, Mr. Ormond.”
“You do indeed,” said Ormond, ingenuously.
“I give you joy—I envy you,” said
M. de Connal, sighing. “After a certain
age, if one lives in the world one can't
be astonished—that's a lost pleasure.”
“To me who have lived out of the

world it is a pleasure, or rather a sensation— 
I am not sure whether I should call
it a pleasure—that is not likely to be
soon exhausted,” said Ormond.
“A sensation! and you are not sure
whether you should call it a pleasure.
Do you know you've a genius for metaphysics?”
“I!” exclaimed Ormond.
“Ah! now I have astonished you
again. Good! whether pleasurable or
not, trust me, nothing is so improving to
a young man as to be well astonished.
Astonishment I conceive to be a sort of
mental electric shock—electric fire; it
opens at once and enlightens the understanding:
and really you have an understanding
so well worth enlightening—I
do assure you, that your natural acuteness
will, whenever and wherever you
appear, make you un homme marquant.”
“Oh! spare me, Mr. Connal,” said
Ormond. “I am not used to French
compliment.”
“No, upon my honour, without compliment,

in all English bonhommie” (laying
his hand upon his heart)—“upon the
honour of a gentleman, your remarks
have sometimes perfectly astonished me.”
“Really!” said Ormond; “but I
thought you had lived so much in the
world, you could not be astonished.”
“I thought so, I own,” said Connal; 
“But it was reserved for M. Ormond to
convince me of my mistake, to revive an
old pleasure—more difficult still than to
invent a new one! In recompense, I
hope I give you some new ideas—just
throw out opinions for you—Accept— 
reject—reject now—accept an hour, a
year hence perhaps—just as it strikes— 
merely materials for thinking I give you.”
“Thank you,” said Ormond; “and
be assured they are not lost upon me.
You have given me a great deal to think
of seriously.”
“Seriously!—no; that's your fault,
your national fault—Permit me—What
you want chiefly in conversation—in

every thing, is a certain degree of—of— 
you have no English word—lightness.”
“Légèreté, perhaps you mean.” said
Ormond.
“Precisely.—I forgot you understood
French so well.—Légèreté—untranslateable!— 
You seize my idea.”
He left Ormond, as he fancied, in admiration
of the man who, in his own
opinion, possessed the whole theory and
practice of the art of pleasing, and the
science of happiness.
M. de Connal's conversation and example
might have produced a great effect
on the mind of a youth of Ormond's
strong passions, lively imagination, and
total ignorance of the world, if he had
met this brilliant officer in indifferent
society.—Had he seen Connal only as a
man shining in company, or considered
him merely as a companion, he must
have been dazzled by his fashion, charmed
by his gaiety, and imposed upon by his
decisive tone.

Had such a vision lighted on the
Black Islands, and appeared to our hero
suddenly, in any other circumstances but
those in which it did appear, it might
have struck and overawed him; and
without inquiring “whether from heaven
or hell,” he might have followed whereever
it led or pointed the way. But in
the form of a triumphant rival—without
delicacy, without feeling, neither deserving
or loving the woman he had won,— 
not likely to make Dora happy,—almost
certain to make her father miserable,— 
there was no danger that Black
Connal could ever obtain any ascendancy
over Ormond; on the contrary, Connal
was useful in forming our hero's character.
The electric shock of astonishment
did operate in a salutary manner in opening
Harry's understanding: the materials
for thinking were not thrown away:— 
he did think—even in the Black
Islands,—and in judging of Connal's
character, he made continual progress in

forming his own:—he had motive for
exercising his judgment, he was anxious
to study the man's character on Dora's
account.
Seeing his unpolished friend, old
Corny, and this finished young man of the
world, in daily contrast, Ormond had
occasion to compare the real and the factitious,
both in matter and manner:—he
distinguished, and felt often acutely, the
difference between that politeness of the
heart, which respects and sympathises
with the feelings of others, and that conventional
politeness, which is shewn
merely to gratify the vanity of him by
whom it is displayed. In the same way
he soon discriminated in conversation between
Corny's power of original thinking,
and M. de Connal's knack of throwing
old thoughts into new words; between
the power of answering an argument,
and the art of evading it by a repartee.
But it was chiefly in comparing different
ideas of happiness and modes of life, that

our young hero's mind was enlarged by
Connal's conversation—whilst the comparison
he secretly made between this
polished gentleman's principles and his
own was always more satisfactory to his
pride of virtue than Connal's vanity
could have conceived to be possible.
One day some conversation passed
between Connal and his father-in-law
elect, as he now always called him, upon
his future plans of life.
Good Corny said he did not know
how to hope, that, during the few
years he had to live, Connal would not
think of taking his daughter from him to
the continent of France—to Paris, as
from some words that had dropped from
Mademoiselle, he had reason to fear.
“No,” Connal said, “he had formed
no such cruel intention:—the Irish half of
Mademoiselle must have blundered on
this occasion. He would do his utmost,
if he could with honour, to retire from
the service; unless the service imperiously

called him away, he should settle
in Ireland:—he should make it a point
even, independently of his duty to his own
father, not to take Miss O'Shane from
her country and her friends.”
The father, open-hearted and generous
himself, was fond to believe what he
wished, and confiding in these promises,
the old man forgave all that he did not
otherwise approve in his future son-in-law,
and thanked him almost with tears
in his eyes; still repeating, as his natural
penetration remonstrated against his credulity,
“But I could hardly have believed this
from such a young man as you, Captain
Connal. Indeed, how you could ever
bring yourself to think of settling in
retirement, is wonderful to me; but love
does mighty things, brings about great
changes.”
French common-places of sentiment
upon love, and compliments on Dora's
charms and his own sensibility, were

poured out by Connal, and the father left
the room satisfied.
Connal then, throwing himself back in
his chair, burst out a laughing, and turning
to Ormond, the only person in the
room, said—
“Could you have conceived this?”
“Conceived what, Sir?” said Ormond.
“Conceived this king Corny's capacity
for belief? What!—believe that I
will settle in his Black Islands—I!—as
well believe me to be half marble, half
man, like the unfortunate in the Black
Islands of the Arabian Tales.
the Black Islands!—No:—could you
conceive a man on earth could be found
so simple as to credit such a thing.”
“Here is another man on earth, who
was simple enough to believe it,” said
Ormond, “and to give you credit for it.”
“You!”—cried Connal, “That's too
much!—Impossible—”
“But when you said it—when I heard
you promise it to Mr. O'Shane—”

“Oh, mercy!—Don't kill me with
laughing,” said he, laughing affectedly,
“Oh! that face of yours, there is no
standing it. You heard me promise,— 
and the accent on promise. Why, even
women, now-a-days, don't lay such an
emphasis on a promise.”
“That, I suppose, depends on who
gives it,” said Ormond.
“Rather on who receives it,” said
Connal, “but look here, you who understand
the doctrine of promises, tell
me what a poor conscientious man must
do, who has two pulling him different
ways.”
“A conscientious man cannot have
given two diametrically opposite promises.”
“Diametrically!—Thank you for that
word—it just saves my lost conscience.
Commend me always to an epithet in the
last resource for giving one latitude
of conscience in these nice cases—I have
not given two diametrically opposite— 
No: I have only given four that cross

one another. One to your king Corny; 
another to my angel, Dora; another to
the dear aunt; and a fourth, to my
dearer self. First, promise to king
Corny to settle in the Black Islands; a
gratuitous promise, signifying nothing,— 
read Burlamaqui: second promise to
Mademoiselle, to go and live with her
at Paris; with her,—on the face of it absurd!
a promise, extorted too, under fear
of my life, of immediate peril of being
talked to death, see Vatel on extorted
promises—void: third promise to my
angel Dora, to live wherever she pleases; 
but that's a lover's promise made to be
broken, see Love's Calendar, or, if you
prefer the bookmen's authority, I don't
doubt that, under the head of promises
made when a man is not in his right
senses, some of those learned fellows
in wigs, would here bring me off sain et
sauf: but now for my fourth promise, I
am a man of honour—when I make a promise
intending to keep it, no man so

scrupulous; all promises made to myself
come under this head; and I have promised
myself to live, and make my wife
live, wherever I please, or not to live
with her at all. This promise I shall
hold sacred.—Oblige me with a smile,
Mr. Ormond—a smile of approbation.”
“Excuse me, Mr. Connal, that is impossible,
I am sincere.”
“So am I, and sincerely you are too
romantic. See things as they are, as a
man of the world, I beseech you.”
“I am not a man of the world, and I
thank God for it,” cried Ormond.
“Thank your God for what you
please,” said Connal, “but in disdaining
to be a man of the world, you will not, I
hope, refuse to let me think you a man of
common sense.”
“Think what you please of me,” said
Ormond, rather haughtily, “what I think
of myself is the chief point with me.”
“You will lose this little brusquerie
of manner,” said Connal, “when you

have mixed more with mankind. We
are all made providentially dependant
on one another's good opinion. Even
I, you see, cannot live without yours.”
Whether from vanity, from the habit
of wishing to charm every body in every
house he entered, especially any one
who made resistance; or whether he was
piqued and amused with Ormond's frank
and natural character, and determined
to see how far he could urge him,
Connal went on, though our young hero
gave him no encouragement to hope that
he should win his good opinion.
“Candidly,” said he, “put yourself
in my place for a moment—I was in
England, following my own projects—I
was not in love with the girl as you— 
Well,—pardon—as anybody might have
been—But I was at a distance, that makes
all the difference—I am sent for over
by two fathers, one of whom did not,
till lately, find out that I was his eldest
son, and I am told that in consequence

of my droit d'ainé (right as eldest son,)
and of some inconceivable promise between
two Irish fathers over a punch-bowl,
I am to have the refusal, I should rather
say the acceptance, of a very pretty girl
with a very pretty fortune.—Now, except
just at the moment when the overture
reached me, it could not have been listened
to for a moment by such a man as I am.”
“Insufferable coxcomb,” said Ormond
to himself.
“But to answer a question, which I
omitted to answer just now to my father-in-law— 
What could induce me to
come over and think of settling in the
Black Islands? I answer—for I am
determined to win your confidence by
my candour, I answer in one word, un
billiard—a billiard table. To tell you
all, I confess—”
“Confess nothing, I beg, Mr. Connal,
to me, that you do not wish to be
known to Mr. O'Shane, I am his friend
—he is my benefactor.”


“You would not repeat—you are a
gentleman, and a man of honour.”
“I am: and as such I desire, on
this occasion, not to hear what I ought
neither to repeat nor to keep secret— 
It is my duty not to leave my benefactor
in the dark as to any point.”
“Oh, come—come,” interrupted Connal,
“we had better not take it on this
serious tone, lest, if we begin to talk
of duty, we should presently conceive it
to be our duty to run one another through
the body, which would be no pleasure.”
“No pleasure,” said Ormond, “but
if it became a duty, I hope, on all occasions,
I should be able to do or to bear
whatever I thought a duty.—Therefore
to avoid any misunderstanding, Mr.
Connal, let me beg that you will not
honour me further with your confidence.
I cannot undertake to be the confidant
of any, one of whom I have never professed
myself to be the friend.”
“Cà suffit,” said Connal, lightly. “We

understand one another now perfectly— 
you shall in future play the part of prince,
and not of confidant.—Pardon me, I
forgot your highness's pretensions;” so
saying, he gaily turned on his heel, and
left the room.
From this time forward, little conversation
passed between Mr. Connal
and Ormond,—little indeed between
Ormond and Dora. With Mademoiselle
Ormond had long ceased to be a
favourite, and even her loquacity now
seldom addressed itself to him.—He
was in a painful situation;—he spent as
much of his time as he could at the farm
his friend had given him. As soon as
O'Shane found, that there was no truth
in the report of Black Connal's intended
marriage in England, that he claimed in
earnest his promise of his daughter, and
that Dora herself inclined to the new
love, his kind heart felt for poor Harry.
Though he did not know all that had
passed, yet he saw the awkwardness and

difficulty of Ormond's present situation,
and, whatever it might cost him to part
with his young friend, with his adopted
son, Corny determined not to detain him
longer.
“Harry Ormond, my boy,” said he to
him one day, “time for you to see something
of the world, also for the world to
see something of you; I've kept you here
for my own pleasure too long,—as long
as I had any hope of settling you as I
wished, 'twas a sufficient excuse to myself; 
but now I have none left—I must
part with you: and so, by the blessing,
God helping me to conquer my selfishness,
and the yearnings of my heart towards
you, I will—I mean,” continued
he, “to send you far from me, to banish
you for your good from the Black Islands
entirely. Nay, don't you interrupt
me, nor say a word, for if you do, I shall
be too soft to have the heart to do you
justice. You know you said yourself,
and I felt it for you, that it was best you

should leave this. Well, I have been
thinking of you ever since, and licking
different projects into shape for you—listening
too to every thing Connal threw
out; but all he says that way is in the
air—no substance, when you try to have
and to hold—too full of himself, that
youngster, to be a friend to another.”
“There is no reason why he should
be my friend, Sir,” said Ormond, “I do
not pretend to be his,—and I rejoice not
to be under any obligations to him.”
“Right!—and high!—Just as I feel
for you. After all, I approve of your
own wish to go into the British service
in preference to any foreign service, and
you could not be of the Irish Brigade— 
Harry.”
“Indeed, Sir, I infinitely prefer,” 
said Ormond, “the service of my own
country—the service in which my father— 
I know nothing of my father, but I
have always heard him spoken of as a
good officer, I hope I shall not disgrace

his name.—The English service for me,
Sir, if you please.”
“Why then I'm glad you see things
as I do, and are not run away with by
uniform, and all that.—I have lodged the
needful in the Bank, to purchase a commission
for you, my son. Now! no
more go to thank me, if you love me,
Harry—than you would your own father.
I've written to a friend to chuse a regiment
in which there'd be as little danger
as possible for you.”
“As little danger as possible,” repeated
Harry, surprised.
“Phoo! you don't think I mean as
little danger of fighting.—I would not
wrong you so.—No:—but as little danger
of gambling.—Not that you're inclined
to it, or any thing else that's bad—but
there is no knowing what company
might lead the best into; and it is my
duty and inclination to look as close
to all these things, as if for my own
son.”

“My kind father—no father could be
kinder,” cried Harry, quite overpowered.
“So then you go as soon as the commission
comes.—That's settled—and I
hope I shall be able to bear it, Harry,
old as I am. There may perhaps be a
delay of a little time longer than you
could wish.”
“Oh, Sir, as long as you wish me to
stay with you—”
“Not a minute beyond what's necessary.— 
I mention the cause of delay,
that you may not think I'm dallying
for my own sake. You remember General
Albemarle, who came here one day
last year—election time, canvassing—the
general that had lost the arm.”
“Perfectly, Sir, I remember your
answer—‘I will give my interest to this
empty sleeve.’”
“Thank you—never a word lost upon
you. Well, now I have hopes that this
man—this general, will take you by the
hand, for he has a hand left yet, and a powerful

one to serve a friend: and I've requested
him to keep his eye upon you, and I have
asked his advice—so we can't stir till we
get it, and that will be eight days, or ten
say. My boy you must bear on as you
are—we have the comfort of the workshop
to ourselves, and some rational recreation; 
good shooting we will have
soon too for the first time this season.”
Among the various circumstances
which endeared Harry to our singular monarch,
his skill and keenness as a sportsman
were not inconsiderable:—he was
an excellent horseman, and an excellent
shot; and he knew where all the game in
the island was to be found, so that, when
his good old patron was permitted by the
gout to take the field, Harry's assistance
saved him a vast deal of unnecessary toil,
and gratified him in his favourite amusement,
whilst he, at the same time, sympathised
in the sport. Corny, beside being
a good shot, was an excellent mechanic; 
he beguiled the hours, when there was

neither hunting or shooting, in a workshop
which was furnished with the best
tools. Among the other occupations at
the work-bench, he was particularly skilful
in making and adjusting the locks of
guns, and in boring and polishing the inside
of their barrels to the utmost perfection; 
he had contrived and executed a
tool for the enlarging the barrel of a gun
in any particular part so as to increase its
effect in adding to the force of the discharge,
and in preventing the shot from
scattering too widely.
The hope of the success of his contrivance,
and the prospect of going out
with Harry on the approaching first of
September, solaced king Corny, and
seemed to keep up his spirits, through all
the vexation he felt concerning Connal
and this marriage, which evidently was
not to his taste. It was to Dora's, however,
and was becoming more evidently
so every hour—and soon M. Connal
pressed, and Mademoiselle urged, and

Dora named the happy day—and Mademoiselle,
in transports, prepared to go to
Dublin, with her niece, to chuse the
wedding-clothes, and Connal to bespeak
the equipages. Mademoiselle was quick
in her operations when dress was in
question—the preparations for the delightful
journey were soon made—the
morning for their departure came—the
carriage and horses were sent over the
water early—and O'Shane and Harry
afterwards accompanied the party in the
boat to the other side of the lake, where
the carriage waited with the door open.
Connal, after handing in Mademoiselle,
turned to look for his destined bride— 
who was taking leave of her father— 
Harry Ormond standing by. The moment
she quitted her father's embrace,
father Jos poured with both his hands on
her head the benedictions of all the saints,
and specially recommended her to the protection
of the angel Gabriel. Released
from father Jos, Capt. Connal hurried

her on, Harry held out his hand to
her as she passed—“Good by, Dora,
probably I shall never see you again.”
“Oh, Harry!” said she, one touch of
natural feeling stopping her short.
“Oh, Harry!—Why?” bursting into
tears, she drew her hand from Connal
and gave it to Harry; Harry received
the hand openly and cordially, shook it
heartily, but took no advantage, and no
notice of the feelings by which he saw
her at that moment agitated.
“Forgive!” she began.
“Good by, dear Dora.—God bless
you—may you be as happy—half as
happy as I wish you to be.”
“To be sure she will—happy as the
day is long,” said Mademoiselle, leaning
out of the carriage, “why will you
make her cry, Mr. Ormond, spoiling her
eyes at parting. Come in to me, Dora,
M. de Connal is waiting to hand you,
mon enfant.”
“Is her dressing-box in, and all right,”

asked Captain Connal, as he handed
Dora into the carriage, who was still
weeping.
“Bad compliment to M. de Connal,
mon amie. Vrai scandale!” said Mademoiselle,
pulling up the glass, while Dora
sunk back in the carriage, sobbing without
restraint.
“Good morning,” said Connal, who
had now mounted his horse, “au révoir,
mon beau-père,” and bowing gracefully
to Mr. Ormond, “Adieu, Mr. Ormond,
command me too, in any way you please.— 
Drive on!”