

Whilst they were at breakfast the
next morning in lady Delacour's dressing-room,
Marriott knocked at the door,
and, immediately opening it, exclaimed
in a joyful tone, “Miss Portman, they're
eating it! Ma'am, they're eating it as fast
as ever they can!”
“Bring them in; your lady will give
you leave, Marriott, I fancy,” said miss
Portman. Marriott brought in her gold
fishes; some green leaves were floating
on the top of the water in the glass
globe.

“See, my lady,” said she, “what miss
Portman has been so good to bring from
Oakly-park for my poor gold fish, who,
I am sure, ought to be much obliged to
her, as well as myself.” Marriott set
the globe beside her lady, and retired.
“From Oakly-park! And by what
name impossible to pronounce must I
call these green leaves, to please botanic
ears?” said lady Delacour.
“This,” replied Belinda, “is what
‘Th' unlearned, duckweed; learned, lemma, call,’
and it is to be found in any ditch or standing
pool.”
“And what possessed you, my dear,
for the sake of Marriott and her gold
fishes, to trouble yourself to bring such
stuff a hundred and seventy miles?”
“To oblige little Charles Percival,” 
said miss Portman. “He was anxious to
keep his promise of sending it to your
Helena. She found out in some book
that she was reading with him last summer,
that gold fishes are fond of this plant;

and I wish,” added Belinda in a timid
voice, “that she were here at this instant
to see them eat it!”
Lady Delacour was silent for some
minutes, and kept her eyes steadily upon
the gold fishes. At length she said, “I
never shall forget how well the poor
little creature behaved about those gold
fishes. I grew amazingly fond of her
whilst she was with me. But you
know, circumstanced as I was, after
you left me I could not have her at
home.”
“But now I am here,” said Belinda,
“will she be any trouble to you? And
will she not make your home more agreeable
to you, and to lord Delacour, who
was evidently very fond of her?”
“Ah! my dear,” said lady Delacour,
“you forget, and so do I at times, what
I have to go through. It is in vain to
talk, to think of making home, or any
place, or any thing, or any person agreeable
to me now. What am I? The
outside rind is left—the sap is gone. The

tree lasts from day to day by miracle— 
it cannot last long. You would not
wonder to hear me talk in this way, if
you knew the terrible night I had last
night after we parted. But I have these
nights constantly now.—Let us talk of
something else. What have you there?
A manuscript?”
“Yes, a little journal of Charles Percival's,
which he sent for the entertainment
of Helena,”
Lady Delacour stretched out her hand
for it. “The boy will write as like his
father as possible,” said she, turning over
the leaves. “I wish to have this poor
girl with me—but I have not spirits.
And you know, whenever lord Delacour
can find a house that will suit us, we
shall leave town, and I could not take
Helena with me. But this may be the
last opportunity I may ever have of seeing
her; and I can refuse you nothing,
my dear. So, will you go for her? She
can stay with us a few days. Lady
Boucher, that most convenient dowager,

who likes going about, no matter where,
all morning, will go with you to Mrs.
Dumont's academy in Sloane-street. I
would as soon go to a bird-fancier's as to
a boarding-school for young ladies. Indeed,
I am not well enough to go any
where. So I will throw myself upon a
sofa, and read this child's journal. I
wonder how that or any thing else can
interest me now.”
Belinda, who had been used to the
variations of lady Delacour's spirits, was
not much alarmed by the despondent
strain in which she now spoke, especially
when she considered that the thoughts of
the dreadful trial this unfortunate woman
was soon to go through must naturally
depress her courage. Rejoiced at the
permission that she had obtained to go
for Helena, miss Portman sent immediately
to lady Boucher, who took her to
Sloane-street.
“Now, my dear considerate miss
Portman,” said lady Boucher, “I must
beg and request that you will hurry miss

Delacour into the carriage as fast as possible.
I have not a moment to spare; 
for I am to be at a china auction at two,
that I would not miss for the whole
world. Well, what's the matter with
the people? Why does not James
knock at the door? Can't the man
read? Can't the man see?” cried the
purblind dowager. “Is not that Mrs.
Dumont's name on the door before his
eyes?”
“No, ma'am, I believe this name is
Ellicott,” said Belinda.
“Ellicott, is it? Ay, true. But
what's the man stopping for then? Mrs.
Dumont's is the next door, tell the blind
dunce. Mercy on us! To waste one's
time in this way! I shall, as sure as fate,
be too late for the china auction. What
upon earth stops us?”
“Nothing but a little covered cart,
which stands at Mrs. Dumont's door.
There, now it is going; an old man is
drawing it out of the way as fast as he
can.”

“Open the coach-door, James!” cried
lady Boucher the moment that they had
drawn up. “Now, my dear considerate
miss Portman, remember the auction,
and don't let miss Delacour stay to change
her dress or any thing.”
Belinda promised not to detain her
ladyship a minute. The door at Mrs.
Dumont's was open, and a servant was
assisting an old man to carry in some
geraniums and balsams out of the covered
cart which had stopped the way. In
the hall a crowd of children were gathered
round a high stand, on which they
were eagerly arranging their flower-pots,
and the busy hum of voices was so loud,
that, when miss Portman first went in,
she could neither hear the servant, nor
make him hear her name. Nothing was
to be heard but “O, how beautiful!
O, how sweet! That's mine! That's
yours! The great rose geranium for
miss Jefferson! The white Provence
rose for miss Adderly! No, indeed,

miss Pococke, that's for miss Delacour; 
the old man said so.”
“Silence, silence, mesdemoiselles!” cried
the voice of a French woman, and all
was silence. The little crowd looked
towards the hall-door; and from the
midst of her companions, Helena Delacour,
who now caught a glimpse of
Belinda, sprang forward, throwing
down her white Provence rose as she
passed.
“Lady Boucher's compliments,
ma'am,” said the servant to Mrs. Dumont,
“she's in indispensable haste,
and she begs you won't let miss Delacour
think of changing her dress.”
It was the last thing of which miss
Delacour was likely to think at this
instant. She was so much overjoyed,
when she heard that Belinda was come
by her mamma's desire to take her home,
that she would scarcely stay whilst Mrs.
Dumont was tying on her straw hat, and
exhorting her to let lady Delacour know

how it happened that she was “so far
from fit to be seen.”
“Yes, ma'am; yes, ma'am, I'll remember; 
I'll be sure to remember,” 
said Helena tripping down the steps.
But just as she was getting into the carriage,
she stopped at the sight of the old
man, and exclaimed,
“O, good old man! I must not forget
you.”
“Yes, indeed you must though, my
dear miss Delacour,” said lady Boucher,
pulling her into the carrige. “'Tis no
time to think of good old men now.”
“But I must. Dear miss Portman,
will you speak for me? I must pay—I
must settle—and I have a great deal to
say.”
Miss Portman desired the old man to
call in Berkeley square at lady Delacour's; 
and this satisfying all parties, they drove
away.
When they arrived in Berkeley square,
Marriott told them that her lady was just
gone to lie down. Charles Percival's

little journal, which she had been reading,
was left on the sofa, and Belinda gave it
to Helena, who eagerly began to look
over it. “Thirteen pages! O, how good
he has been to write so much for me!” said
she; and she had almost finished reading
it before her mother came into the room.
Lady Delacour shrunk back as her
daughter ran towards her; for she recollected
too well the agony she had once
suffered from an embrace of Helena's.
The little girl appeared more grieved
than surprised at this; and after kissing
her mother's hand; without speaking,
she again looked down at the manuscript.
“Does that engross your attention so
entirely, my dear,” said lady Delacour,
“that you can neither spare one word nor
one look for your mother?”
“O mamma! I only tried to read
because I thought you were angry with
me.”
“An odd reason for trying to read,
my dear!” said lady Delacour with a

smile: “have you any better reason for
thinking I was angry with you?”
“Ah, I know you are not angry now,
for you smile” said Helena; “but I
thought at first that you were, mamma,
because you gave me only your hand to
kiss.”
“Only my hand—The next time, simpleton!
I'll give you only my foot to kiss,” 
said her ladyship, sitting down and holding
out her foot playfully.
Her daughter threw aside the book,
and kneeling down kissed her foot, saying
in a low voice, “Dear mamma, I never
was so happy in my life; for you never
looked so very, very kindly at me before.”
“Do not judge always of the kindness
people feel for you, child, by their looks; 
and remember that it is possible a person
might, have felt more than you could
guess by their looks. Pray now, Helena,
you who are such a good judge of physiognomy,
should you guess that I was
dying, by my looks?”

The little girl laughed, and repeated
“Dying?—O no, mamma.”
“O no! because I have such a fine
colour in my cheeks—Hey?
“Not for that reason, mamma,” said
Helena, withdrawing her eyes from her
mother's face.
“What, then you know rouge already
when you see it?—You perceive some difference,
for instance, between miss Portman's
colour and mine? Upon my word,
you are a nice observer. Such nice
observers are sometimes dangerous to
have near one.”
“I hope, mother,” said Helena, “that
you do not think I would try to find
out any thing that you wish, or that
I imagined you wished, I should not
know?”
“I do not understand you, child,” 
cried lady Delacour, raising herself suddenly
upon the sofa, and looking full in
her daughter's face.
Helena's colour rose to her temples; 
but, with a firmness that surprised even

Belinda, she repeated what she had said
nearly in the same words.
“Do you understand her, miss Portman?” 
said lady Delacour.
“She expresses, I think,” said Belinda,
“a very honourable sentiment, and one
that is easily understood.”
“Ay, in general, certainly,” said
lady Delacour, checking herself; “but I
thought that she meant to allude to something
in particular—that was what I did
not understand. Undoubtedly, my dear,
you have just expressed a very honourable
sentiment, and one that I should
scarcely have expected from a child of
your age.”
“Helena, my dear!” said her mother
after a silence of some minutes, “did you
ever read the Arabian Tales?—‘Yes,
mamma,’ I know must be the answer. But
do you remember the story of Zobeide,
who carried the porter home with her, on
condition that, let him hear or see what
he might, he would ask no questions?”
“Yes, mamma.”

“On the same conditions should you
like to stay with me for a few days?”
“Yes. On any conditions, mamma, I
should like to stay with you.”
“Agreed then, my dear!” said lady
Delacour. “And now let us go to the gold
fishes, and see them eat lemma, or whatever
you please to call it.”
Whilst they were looking at the gold
fishes, the old man who had been desired
by miss Portman to call, arrived. “Who
is this fine gray haired old man?” said
lady Delacour. And Helena, who did
not know the share which Belinda's aunt
and her own mother had in the transaction,
began with great eagerness to tell
the history of the poor gardener, who had
been cheated by some fine ladies out of
his aloe, &c. She then related how kind
lady Anne Percival and her aunt Margaret
had been to this old man; that they
had gotten him a place as a gardener at
Twickenham; and that he had pleased the
family to whom he was recommended so
much by his good behaviour, that, as they

were leaving their house, and obliged to
part with him, they had given him all
the geraniums and balsams out of the
green-house of which he had the care,
and these he had been this day selling to
the young ladies at Mrs. Dumont's. “I
received the money for him, and I was
just going to pay him,” said Helena,
“when miss Portman came; and that put
every thing else out of my head. May I go
and give him his money now, mamma?”
“He can wait a few minutes,” said
lady Delacour, who had listened to this
story with much embarrassment and impatience.
“Before you go, Helena,
favour us with the names of the fine ladies
who cheated this old gardener out of
his aloe?”
“Indeed, mamma, I don't know their
names.”
“No!—Did you never ask lady Anne
Percival, or your aunt Margaret?—Look
in my face, child! Did they never inform
you?”
“No, ma'am, never. I once asked

lady Anne, and she said that she did not
choose to tell me; that it would be of no
use to me to know.”
“I give lady Anne Percival more credit
and more thanks for this,” cried lady Delacour,
“than for all the rest. I see she
has not attempted to lower me in my
child's opinion. I am the fine lady,
Helena—I was the cause of his being
cheated—I was intent upon the noble end
of outshining a certain Mrs. Luttridge— 
the noble means I left to others, and the
means have proved worthy of the end. I
deserve to be brought to shame for my
folly; yet my being ashamed will do nobody
any good but myself. Restitution
is in these cases the best proof of repentance.
Go, Helena, my love! settle your
little affairs with this old man, and bid
him call here again tomorrow. I will
see what we can do for him.”
Lord Delacour had this very morning
sent home to her ladyship a handsome
diamond ring, which had been intended
as a present for Mrs. Luttridge, and

which he imagined would therefore be
peculiarly acceptable to his lady. In the
evening, when his lordship asked her how
she liked the ring, which he desired the
jeweller to leave for her to look at, she
answered, that it was a handsome ring,
but that she hoped he had not purchased
it for her.
“It is not actually bought, my dear,” 
said his lordship; “but if it suits your
fancy, I hope you will do me the honour
to wear it for my sake.”
“I will wear it for your sake, my
lord,” said lady Delacour, “if you desire
it; and as a mark of your regard it
is agreeable—But as to the rest— 
‘My taste for diamonds now is o'er,
‘The sparkling baubles please no more.’
If you wish to do me a kindness, I will
tell you what I should like much better
than diamonds, though I know it is rather
ungracious to dictate the form and
fashion of a favour. But as my dictatorship

in all human probability cannot last
much longer&wblank;”
“O, my dear lady Delacour! I must
not hear you talk in this manner: your
dictatorship, as you call it, will I hope
last many, many happy years. But to the
point—What should you like better, my
dear, than this foolish ring?”
Her ladyship then expressed her wish,
that a small annuity might be settled
upon a poor old man, whom she said she
had unwittingly injured. She told the
story of the rival galas and the aloe, and
concluded by observing, that her lord was
in some measure called upon to remedy
part of the unnumbered ills which had
sprung from her hatred of Mrs. Luttridge,
as he had originally been the cause of her
unextinguishable ire. Lord Delacour
was flattered by this hint, and the annuity
was immediately promised to the old
gardener.
In talking to this old man afterward,
lady Delacour found, that the family in

whose service he lately lived had a house
at Twickenham that would just answer
her purpose. Lord Delacour's inquiries
had hitherto been unsuccessful; he was
rejoiced to find what he wanted just as he
was giving up the search. The house
was taken, and the old man hired as
gardener—a circumstance which seemed
to give him almost as much pleasure as
the annuity; for there was a morello
cherry-tree in the garden which had succeeded
the aloe in his affection: “it
would have grieved him sorely,” he said,
“to leave his favourite tree to strangers,
after all the pains he had been at in netting
it to keep off the birds.”
As the period approached when her
fate was to be decided, lady Delacour's
courage seemed to rise; and at the same
time her anxiety, that her secret should
not be discovered, appeared to increase.
“If I survive this business,” said she, “it
is my firm intention to appear in a new
character, or rather to assert my real character.
I will break through the spell of

dissipation—I will at once cast off all the
acquaintance that are unworthy of me— 
I will, in one word, go with you, my dear
Belinda! to Mr. Percival's. I can bear
to be mortified for my good; and I am
willing, since I find that lady Anne Percival
has behaved generously to me with
regard to Helena's affections—I am willing
that the recovery of my moral health
should be attributed to the salubrious air
of Oakly-park. But it would be inexpressible,
intolerable mortification to me,
to have it said or suspected in the world
of fashion, that I retreated from the ranks
disabled instead of disgusted. A voluntary
retirement is graceful and dignified; 
a forced retreat is awkward and humiliating.
You must be sensible that I could
not endure to have it whispered—‘Lady
Delacour now sets up for being a prude,
because she can no longer be a coquette.’ 
Lady Delacour would become the subject
of witticisms, epigrams, caricatures
without end. It would just be the very
thing for odious Mrs. Luttridge; then

she would revenge herself without mercy
for the ass and her paniers. We should have
‘Lord and Lady D&wblank;, or The Domestic
Tête-à-Tête, or The reformed Amazon,’ 
stuck up in a print-shop window! Oh,
my dear! think of seeing such a thing! I
should die with vexation, and of all
deaths that is the death I should like
the least.”
Though Belinda could not entirely
enter into those feelings, which thus
made lady Delacour invent wit against
herself, and anticipate caricaturas; yet
she did every thing in her power to calm
her ladyship's apprehensions of a discovery.
“My dear,” said lady Delacour, “I
have perfect confidence in lord Delacour's
promise, and in his good nature, of which
he has within these few days given me
proofs that are not lost upon my heart; 
but, he is not the most discreet man in
the world. Whenever he is anxious
about any thing, you may read it a mile
off in his eyes, nose, mouth, and chin.

And to tell you all my fears in one
word, Marriott informed me this morning,
that the Luttridge, who came from
Harrowgate to Rantipole to meet lord
Delacour, finding that there was no drawing
him to her, has actually brought
herself to town.
“To town!—At this strange time of
year! How will my lord resist this unequivocal,
unprecedented proof of passion?
—If she catch hold of him again, I
am undone. Or, even suppose him firm as
a rock, her surprise, her jealousy, her
curiosity, will set all engines at work,
to find out by what witchcraft I have
taken my husband from her. Every precaution
that prudence could devise against
her malicious curiosity I have taken.— 
Marriott, you know, is above all temptation.
—That vile wretch (naming the
person whose quack medicines had nearly
destroyed her), that vile wretch will be
silent from fear, for his own sake. He is
yet to be paid and dismissed. That
should have been done long ago, but I

had not money both for him and Mrs.
Franks the millener. She is now paid; 
and lord Delacour—I am glad to tell
his friend how well he deserves her
good opinion—lord Delacour in the
handsomest manner supplied me with
the means of satisfying this man. He is
to be here at three o'clock to day; and
this is the last interview he will ever
have with lady Delacour in the mysterious
boudoir.”
The fears which her ladyship expressed
of Mrs. Luttridge's malicious curiosity
were not totally without foundation— 
Champfort was at work for her and for
himself. The memorable night of lady
Delacour's overturn, and the bustle that
Marriott made about the key of the
boudoir, were still fresh in his memory; 
and he was in hopes that, if he could discover
the mystery, he should at once regain
his power over lord Delacour, reinstate
himself in his lucrative place, and
obtain a handsome reward, or, more properly
speaking, bribe, from Mrs. Luttridge.

The means of obtaining information
of all that passed in lady Delacour's
family were, he thought, still in his
power, though he was no longer an inmate
of the house. The stupid maid
was not so stupid as to be impenetrable
to the voice of flattery, or, as Mr. Champfort
called it, the voice of love. He found
it his interest to court, and she her pleasure
to be courted. On these ‘coquettes
of the second table,’—on these underplots
in the drama, much of the comedy and
some of the tragedy of life depend.
Under the unsuspected mask of stupidity
this worthy mistress of our intriguing
valet de chambre concealed the quick
ears of a listener, and the demure eyes
of a spy. Long however did she listen,
and long did she spy in vain, till at last
Mr. Champfort gave her notice in writing,
that his love would not last another week,
unless she could within that time contrive
to satisfy his curiosity; and that, in short,
she must find out the reason why the
boudoir was always locked, and why

Mrs. Marriott alone was to be trusted
with the key. Now it happened that
this billet-doux was received on the very
day appointed for lady Delacour's last
interview with the quack surgeon in the
mysterious boudoir. Marriott, as it was
her custom upon such occasions, let the
surgeon in, and showed him up the back
stairs into the boudoir, locked the door,
and bade him wait there till her lady came.
The man had not been punctual to the
hour appointed; and lady Delacour, giving
up all expectation of his coming till the
next day, had retired to her bed-chamber,
where she of late usually at this hour secluded
herself to read methodistical books,
or to sleep. Marriott, when she went up to
let her lady know that the person, as she
always called him, was come, found her
so fast asleep that she thought it a pity
to waken her, as she had not slept at all
the preceding night. She shut the door
very softly, and left her lady to repose.
At the bottom of the stairs she was met
by the stupid maid, whom we immediately

dispatched with orders to wash
some lace—“Your lady's asleep,” said
she, “and pray let me have no running
up and down stairs.” The room into
which the stupid maid went was directly
underneath the boudoir; and whilst she
was there she thought that she heard the
steps of a man's foot walking over head.
She listened more attentively—she heard
them again. She armed herself with a
glass of jelly in her hand, for my lady,
and hurried up stairs instantly to my lady's
room. She was much surprised to see
my lady fast asleep. Her astonishment
at finding that Mrs. Marriott had told her
the truth was such, as for a moment to
bereave her of all presence of mind, and
she stood with the door ajar in her hand.
As thus she stood she was roused by the
sound of some one clearing his throat
very softly in the boudoir—His throat— 
for she recollected the footsteps she had
heard before, and she was convinced it
could be no other than a masculine throat.
She listened again, and stooped down to

try whether any feet could be seen under
the door. As she was in this attitude, her
lady suddenly turned on her bed, and
the book which she had been reading
fell from the pillow to the floor with a
noise, that made the listener start up instantaneously
in great terrour. The noise,
however, did not waken lady Delacour,
who was in that dead sleep which is
sometimes the effect of laudanum. The
noise was louder than what could have
been made by the fall of a book alone,
and the girl described a key that had fallen
along with the book. It occurred to her,
that this might possibly be the key of the
boudoir. From one of those irresistible
impulses which some people make an
excuse for doing whatever they please,
she seized it, resolved at all hazards to
open the mysterious door. She was cautiously
putting the key into the key-hole,
so as not to make the least noise, when
she was suddenly startled by a voice behind
her, which said, “Who gave you
leave to open that door?”

She turned, and saw Helena standing
at the half open bed-chamber door.
“Mercy, miss Delacour!—Who thought
of seeing you!—For God's sake, don't
make a noise to waken my lady!”
“Did my mother desire you to go into
that room?” repeated Helena.
“Dear me! No, miss,” said the maid,
putting on her stupid face. “But I only
thought to open the door to let in a little
air to freshen the room, which my lady
always likes, and bids me to do—and I
thought&wblank;”
Helena took the key gently from her
hand without listening to any more of
her thoughts, and the woman left the
room muttering something about jelly,
and my lady. Helena went to the side
of her mother's bed, determined to wait
there till she awakened, then to give her
the key, and tell her the circumstance.
Notwithstanding the real simplicity of
this little girl's character, she was, as her
mother had discovered, a nice observer,
and she had remarked that her mother

never let any one but Marriott go into
the boudoir. This remark did not excite
her to dive into the mystery: on the contrary,
she carefully repressed all curiosity,
remembering the promise she had given
to her mother when she talked of Zobeide
and the porter. She had not been without
temptation to break this promise; for
the house-maid, who usually attended her
toilette, had employed every art in her
power to stimulate her curiosity. As she
was dressing Helena this morning, she
had said to her,
“The reason I was so late calling you,
miss, this morning, was because I was so
late myself last night—for I went to the
play, miss, last night, which was Bluebeard— 
Lord bless us! I'm sure, if I had
been Bluebeard's wife, I should have
opened the door if I'd died for it:—for
to have the notion of living all day long,
and all night too, in a house in which
there was a room that one was never to
go into, is a thing I could not put up
with.” Then after a pause, and after

waiting in vain for some reply from Helena,
she added,—“Pray, miss Delacour,
did you ever go into that little room
within my lady's bed-chamber, that Mrs.
Marriott keeps the key of always?”
“No,” said Helena.
“I've often wondered what's in it— 
but then that's only because I'm a simpleton.
I thought, to be sure, you knew.”
Observing that Helena looked much
displeased, she here broke off her speech,
hoping that what she had said would
operate in due time, and that she should
thus excite the young lady to get the
secret from Marriott, which she had no
doubt afterward of worming from miss
Delacour.
In all this she calculated ill; for what
she had said only made Helena distrust
and dislike her. It was the recollection
of this conversation, that made her follow
the maid to her mother's bedchamber, to
see what detained her there so long.
Helena had heard Marriott say, that
“she ought not to run up and down

stairs, because her lady was asleep,” 
and it appeared extraordinary, that but
a few minutes after this information she
should have gone into the room with a
glass of jelly in her hand.
“Ah mamma!” thought Helena, as
she stood beside her mother's bed, “you
did not understand, and perhaps you did
not believe me, when I said that I would
not try to find out any thing that you
wished me not to know. Now I hope
you will understand me better.”
Lady Delacour opened her eyes— 
“Helena!” cried she starting up, “how
came you by that key?”
“O, mother! don't look as if you
suspected me.” She then told her mother
how the key came into her hands.
“My dear child, you have done me
an essential service,” said lady Delacour.
“You know not it's importance, at least
in my estimation. But what gives me
infinitely more satisfaction, you have
proved yourself worthy of my esteem— 
my love.”

Marriott came into the room and
whispered a few words to her lady.
“You may speak out, Marriott, before
my Helena,” said lady Delacour, rising
from the bed as she spoke—“Child as
she is, Helena has deserved my confidence; 
and she shall be convinced that,
where her mother has once reason to
confide, she is incapable of suspicion.
Wait here for a few minutes, my dear.”
She went to her boudoir, paid and
dismissed the surgeon expeditiously— 
then returned—and taking her daughter
by the hand, she said,
“You look all simplicity, my dear!
I see you have no vulgar school-girl curiosity.
You will have all your mother's
strength of mind; may you never have
any of her faults, or any of her misfortunes!— 
I speak to you not as to a child,
Helena, for you have reason far above your
years; and you will remember what I
now say to you as long as you live. You
will possess talents, beauty, fortune; you
will be admired, followed, and flattered,

as I have been:—but do not throw away
your life as I have thrown away mine, to
win the praise of fools. Had I used but
half the talents I possess, as I hope you
will use yours, I might have been an ornament
to my sex, I might have been
a lady Anne Percival.”
Here lady Delacour's voice failed— 
but, commanding her emotion, she in a
few moments went on speaking.
“Choose your friends well, my dear
daughter! It was my misfortune, my folly,
early in life to connect myself with a
woman, who under the name of frolic
led me into every species of mischief.
You are too young, too innocent, to hear
the particulars of my history now; but
you will hear them all at a proper time
from my best friend miss Portman. I shall
leave you to her care, my dear, when I
die.”
“When you die!—O, mother!” said
Helena, “but why do you talk of dying?” 
and she threw her arms round her mother.
“Gently, my love!” said lady Delacour,

shrinking back; and she seized
this moment to explain to her daughter
why she shrunk in this manner from her
caresses, and why she talked of dying.
Helena was excessively shocked.
“I wished, my dear,” resumed her
mother calmly, “I wished to have spared
you the pain of knowing all this. I have
given you but little pleasure in my life, it
is unjust to give you so much pain. We
shall go to Twickenham to morrow, and
I will leave you with your aunt Margaret,
my dear, till all is over. If I die,
Belinda will take you with her immediately
to Oakly-park—you shall have as
little sorrow as possible. If you had
shown me less of your affectionate temper,
you would have spared yourself the
anguish that you now feel, and you
would have spared me&wblank;”
“My dear kind mother,” interrupted
Helena, throwing herself on her knees
at her mother's feet, “do not send me
away from you—I don't wish to go to
my aunt Margaret—I don't wish to go

to Oakly-park—I wish to stay with you.
Do not send me away from you; for I
shall suffer ten times more if I am not
with you, though I know I can be of no
use.”
Overcome by her daughter's entreaties,
lady Delacour at last consented that she
should remain with her, and that she
should accompany her to Twickenham.
The remainder of this day was taken
up in preparations for their departure.
The stupid maid was immediately dismissed.
No questions were asked, and
no reasons for her dismissal assigned, except
that lady Delacour had no farther
occasion for her services. Marriott alone
was to attend her lady to Twickenham.
Lord Delacour, it was settled, should
stay in town, lest the unusual circumstance
of his attending his lady should
excite public curiosity. His lordship, who
was naturally a good natured man, and
who had been touched by the kindness
his wife had lately shown him, was in
extreme agitation during the whole of

this day, which he thought might possibly
be the last of her existence. She,
on the contrary, was calm and collected; 
her courage seemed to rise with the necessity
for its exertion.
In the morning when the carriage came
to the door, as she parted with lord Delacour,
she put into his hand a paper that
contained some directions and requests,
with which she said she hoped that he
would comply, if they should prove to be
her last requests. The paper contained
only some legacies to her servants, a provision
for Marriott, and a bequest, to her
excellent and beloved friend Belinda
Portman, of the cabinet in which she
kept Clarence Hervey's letters.
Interlined in this place, lady Delacour
had written these words: “My daughter
is nobly provided for; and lest any doubt
or difficulty should arise from the omission,
I think it necessary to mention that the
said cabinet contains the valuable jewels
left to me by my late uncle, and that it is
my intention that the said jewels should be

part of my bequest to the said Belinda
Portman.—If she marry a man of good
fortune, she will wear them for my sake:
if she do not marry an opulent husband,
I hope she will sell the jewels
without scruple, as they are intended for
her convenience, and not as an ostentatious
bequest. It is fit that she should
be as independent in her circumstances,
as she is in her mind.”
Lord Delacour with much emotion
looked over this paper, and assured her
ladyship that she should be obeyed, if&wblank; 
He could say no more.
“Farewell then, my lord!” said she:
“Keep up your spirits, for I intend to
live many years yet to try them.”