

Belinda was alone, and reading,
when Mrs. Freke dashed into the room.
“How do, dear creature!” cried she,
stepping up to her, and shaking hands
with her boisterously—“How do?— 
Glad to see you, 'faith!—Been long
here? Tremendously hot to day!”
She flung herself upon the sofa beside
Belinda, threw her hat upon the table,
and then continued speaking.
“And how d'ye go on here, poor
child!—'God! I'm glad you're alone— 
Expected to find you encompassed by a

whole host of the righteous. Give me
credit for my courage in coming to deliver
you out of their hands. Luttridge
and I had such compassion upon you,
when we heard you were close prisoner
here!—I swore to set the distressed
damsel free, in spite of all the dragons
in Christendom—So let me carry you off
in triumph in my unicorn, and leave
these good people to stare when they
come home from their sober walk, and
find you gone. There's nothing I like
so much as to make good people stare— 
I hope you're of my way o'thinking— 
You don't look as if you were though—but
I never mind young ladies' looks—always
give the lie to their thoughts.— 
Now we talk o'looks—Never saw you
look so well in my life—as handsome as
an angel!—And so much the better for
me.—Do you know, I've a bet of twenty
guineas on your head—on your face, I
mean. There's a young bride at Harrowgate,
lady H&wblank;, they're all mad
about her, the men swear she's the

handsomest woman in England, and I
swear I know one ten times as handsome.
They've dared me to make good
my word, and I've pledged myself to
produce my beauty at the next ball, and
to pit her against their belle for any
money.—Most votes carry it.—I'm willing
to double my bet since I've seen
you again.—Come, had not we best be
off? Now don't refuse me and make
speeches—you know that's all nonsense
—I'll take all the blame upon myself.”
Belinda, who had not been suffered to
utter a word whilst Mrs. Freke ran on
in this strange manner, looked in unfeigned
astonishment; but when she
found herself seized and dragged towards
the door, she drew back with a
degree of gentle firmness that equally
astonished Mrs. Freke. With a smiling
countenance, but a steady tone, she said,
“that she was sorry Mrs. Freke's knighterrantry
should not be exerted in a better
cause, for that she was neither a prisoner,
nor a distressed damsel.”

“And will you make me lose my
bet?” cried Mrs. Freke. “O, at all
events you must come to the ball!—I'm
down for it.—But I'll not press it now,
because you're frightened out of your
poor little wits, I see, at the bare
thoughts of doing any thing out of rule,
by these good people. Well, well! it
shall be managed for you—leave that to
me.—I'm used to managing for cowards.
—Pray tell me—You and lady
Delacour are off, I understand?—Give ye
joy!—She and I were once great friends; 
that is to say, I had over her ‘that
power which strong minds have over
weak ones;’ but she was too weak for
me—one of those people that have neither
courage to be good, nor to be bad.”
“The courage to be bad,” said Belinda,
“I believe, indeed, that she does
not possess.”
Mrs. Freke stared.—“Why, I heard
you had quarrelled with her!”
“If I had,” said Belinda, “I hope
that I should still do justice to her merits.

It is said that people are apt to
suffer more by their friends than their
enemies. I hope that will never be the
case with lady Delacour, as I confess
that I have been one of her friends.”
“'Gad, I like your spirit—you don't
want courage, I see, to fight even for
your enemies. You are just the kind of
girl I admire—I see you've been prejudiced
against me by lady Delacour.
But whatever stories she may have
trumped up, the truth of the matter is
this; there's no living with her she's so
jealous—so ridiculously jealous—of that
lord of hers, for whom all the time she
hasn't the impudence to pretend to care
more than I do for the sole of my boot,” 
said Mrs. Freke, striking it with her
whip, “but she hasn't the courage to
give him tit for tat.—Now this is what I
call weakness.—Pray, how do she and
Clarence Hervey go on together?—Are
they out o'the hornbook of platonics
yet?”

“Mr. Hervey was not in town when
I left it,” said Belinda.
“Was not he?—Ho! ho!—He's off
then!—Ay, so I prophesied. She's not
the thing for him—He has some strength
of mind—some soul—above vulgar prejudices
—So must a woman be to hold
him. He was caught at first by her
grace and beauty, and that sort of stuff; 
but I knew it could not last—knew she'd
dilly dally with Clary, till he would turn
upon his heel and leave her there.”
“I fancy that you are entirely mistaken
both with respect to Mr. Hervey and
lady Delacour,” Belinda very seriously
began to say; but Mrs. Freke interrupted
her, and ran on— 
“No! no! no! I'm not mistaken; 
Clarence has found her out.—She's a very
woman—that he could forgive her, and
so could I—But she's a mere woman— 
and that he can't forgive—no more
can I.”
There was a kind of drollery about

Mrs. Freke, which, with some people,
made the odd things she said pass for
wit. Humour she really possessed; 
and when she chose it, she could be diverting
to those who like buffoonery in
women. She had set her heart upon
winning Belinda over to her party. She
began by flattery of her beauty; but as
she saw that this had no effect, she next
tried what could be done by insinuating
that she had a high opinion of her understanding,
by talking to her as an
esprit fort.
“For my part,” said she, “I own I
should like a strong devil better than a
weak angel.”
“You forget,” said Belinda, “that
it is not Milton, but Satan, who says,
‘Fallen spirit, to be weak is to be miserable.”
“You read, I see!—I did not know
you were a reading girl.—So did I once!
but I never read now. Books only spoil
the originality of genius. Very well for

those who can't think for themselves— 
But when one has made up one's opinions,
there is no use in reading.”
“But to make them up,” replied Belinda,
“may it not be useful?”
“Of no use upon earth to minds of a
certain class.—You, who can think for
yourself, should never read.”
“But I read that I may think for myself.”
“Only ruin your understanding, trust
me. Books are full of trash—nonsense
—Conversation is worth all the books in
the world.”
“And is there never any nonsense in
conversation?”
“What have you here?” continued
Mrs. Freke, who did not choose to attend
to this question; exclaiming as she
reviewed each of the books on the table
in their turns, in the summary language
of presumptuous ignorance. ‘Smith's
Theory of Moral Sentiments’—Milk and
water! ‘Moore's Travels’—Hasty pudding!
‘La Bruyere’—Nettle porridge!

This is what you were at when I came
in, was it not?” said she, taking up a
book in which she saw Belinda's mark,
“Essay on the Inconsistency of Human
Wishes.’ Poor thing! who bored you
with this task?”
“Mr. Percival recommended it to
me, as one of the best essays in the
English language.”
“The devil! They seem to have put
you in a course of the bitters—a course
of the woods might do your business
better. Do you ever hunt?—Let me
take you out with me some morning— 
You'd be quite an angel on horseback; 
or let me drive you out some day in my
unicorn.”
Belinda declined this invitation, and
Mrs. Freke strode away to the window
to conceal her mortification, threw up the
sash, and called out to her groom,
“Walk those horses about, block-head!” 
—Mr. Percival and Mr. Vincent
at this instant came into the room.

“Hail, fellow! well met,” cried Mrs.
Freke, stretching out her hand to Mr.
Vincent.
It has been remarked, that an antipathy
subsists between creatures, who,
without being the same, have yet a
strong external resemblance. Mr. Percival
saw this instinct rising in Mr. Vincent,
and smiled.
“Hail, fellow! well met, I say—Shake
hands, and be friends, man!—Though
I'm not in the habit of making apologies,
if it will be any satisfaction to you,
I beg your pardon for frightening your
poor devil of a black.”
Then turning towards Mr. Percival,
she measured him with her eye, as a
person whom she longed to attack. She
thought, that if Belinda's opinion of the
understanding of these Percivals could
be lowered, she should rise in her opinion:
accordingly, she determined to
draw Mr. Percival into an argument.
“I've been talking treason, I believe,

to miss Portman,” cried she, “for I've
been opposing some of your opinions,
Mr. Percival.”
“If you opposed them all, madam,” 
said Mr. Percival, “I should not think
it treason.”
“Vastly polite!—But I think all our
politeness hypocrisy. What d'ye say to
that?”
“You know that best, madam!”
“Then I'll go a step farther; for I'm
determined you shall contradict me.— 
I think all virtue is hypocrisy.”
“I need not contradict you, madam,” 
said Mr. Percival, “for the terms which
you make use of contradict themselves.”
“It is my system,” pursued Mrs.
Freke, “that shame is always the cause
of the vices of women.”
“It is sometimes the effect,” said Mr.
Percival; “and, as cause and effect are
reciprocal, perhaps you may, in some instances,
be right.”
“O! I hate qualifying arguers— 
Plump assertion or plump denial for me

—You shan't get off so—I say, shame
is the cause of all women's vices.”
“False shame, I suppose you mean?” 
said Mr. Percival.
“Mere play upon words!—All shame
is false shame—We should be a great
deal better without it. What say you,
miss Portman?—Silent—hey?—Silence
that speaks!”
“Miss Portman's blushes,” said Mr.
Vincent, “speak for her.”
“Against her,”—said Mrs. Freke— 
“Women blush because they understand.”
“And you would have them understand
without blushing?” said Mr. Percival.
“So would I; for nothing can be
more different than innocence and ignorance.
Female delicacy—” 
“This is just the way you men spoil
women,” cried Mrs. Freke, “by talking
to them of the delicacy of their sex, and
such stuff. This delicacy enslaves the
pretty delicate dears.”
“No; it enslaves us,” said Mr. Vincent.

“I hate slavery! Vive la liberté!” 
cried Mrs. Freke—“I'm a champion for
the Rights of Women.”
“I am an advocate for their happiness,” 
said Mr. Percival, “and for their
delicacy, as I think it conduces to their
happiness.”
“I'm an enemy to their delicacy, as
I am sure it conduces to their misery.”
“You speak from experience?” said
Mr. Percival.
“No, from observation.—Your most
delicate women are always the greatest
hypocrites; and, in my opinion, no hypocrite
can or ought to be happy.”
“But you have not proved the hypocrisy,” 
said Belinda. “Delicacy is not, I
hope, an indisputable proof of it?—If you
mean false delicacy—” 
“To cut the matter short at once,” 
cried Mrs. Freke, “why, when a woman
likes a man, does not she go and
tell him so honestly?”
Belinda, surprised by this question

from a woman, was too much abashed
instantly to answer.
“Because she's a hypocrite. That is
and must be the answer.”
“No,” said Mr. Percival, “because,
if she be a woman of sense, she knows
that by such a step she would disgust
the object of her affection.”
“Cunning!—cunning!—cunning!— 
the arms of the weakest.”
“Prudence!—prudence!—the arms
of the strongest. Taking the best means
to secure our own happiness without injuring
that of others, is the best proof of
sense and strength of mind, whether in
man or woman. Fortunately for society,
the same conduct in ladies which best secures
their happiness most increases ours.”
Mrs. Freke beat the devil's tattoo for
some moments, and then exclaimed— 
“You may say what you will, but the
present system of society is radically
wrong:—whatever is, is wrong.”
“How would you improve the state
of society?” asked Mr. Percival calmly.

“I'm not tinker general to the world,” 
said she.
“I am glad of it,” said Mr. Percival; 
“for I have heard that tinkers often
spoil more than they mend.”
“But if you want to know,” said
Mrs. Freke, “what I would do to improve
the world, I'll tell you: I'd have
your sex taught to say, Horns! horns!
I defy you.”
“This would doubtless be a great improvement,” 
said Mr. Percival; “but
you would not overturn society to attain
it? would you? Should we find things
much improved by tearing away what
has been called the decent drapery of
life?”
“Drapery, if you ask me my opinion,” 
cried Mrs. Freke, “drapery, whether
wet or dry, is the most confoundedly indecent
thing in the world.”
“That depends on public opinion, I
allow,” said Mr. Percival. “The Lacedæmonian
ladies, who were veiled only

by public opinion, were better covered
from profane eyes, than some English
ladies are in wet drapery.”
“I know nothing of the Lacedæmonian
ladies, I took my leave of them
when I was a schoolboy—girl—I should
say. But, pray, what o'clock is it by
you—I've sat till I'm cramped all over,” 
cried Mrs. Freke, getting up and stretching
herself so violently that some part of
her habiliments gave way. “Honi soit
qui mal y pense!” said she, bursting into
a horse laugh.
Without sharing in any degree that
confusion which Belinda felt for her,
she strode out of the room, saying, “Miss
Portman, you understand these things
better than I do; come and set me to
rights.”
When she was in Belinda's room, she
threw herself into an arm chair, and
laughed immoderately.
“How I have trimmed Percival this
morning!” said she.

“I am glad you think so,” said Belinda; 
“for I really was afraid he had
been too severe upon you.”
“I only wish,” continued Mrs. Freke,
“I only wish his wife had been by.
Why the devil did not she make her
appearance?—I suppose the prude was
afraid of my demolishing and unrigging
her.”
“There seems to have been more
danger of that for you than for any body
else,” said Belinda, as she assisted to
set Mrs. Freke's rigging, as she called it,
to rights.
“I do, of all things, delight in hauling
good people's opinions out of their
musty drawers, and seeing how they look
when they're all pulled to pieces before
their faces. Pray, are those lady Anne's
drawers or yours?” said Mrs. Freke,
pointing to a chest of drawers.
“Mine.”
“I'm sorry for it; for, if they were hers,
to punish her for shirking me, by the
Lord, I'd have every rag she has in the

world out in the middle of the floor in
ten minutes! You don't know me— 
I'm a terrible person when provoked— 
Stop at nothing!”
As Mrs. Freke saw no other chance
left of gaining her point with Belinda,
she tried what intimidating her would do.
“I stop at nothing,” repeated she,
fixing her eyes upon miss Portman, to
fascinate her by terrour. “Friend or foe!
Peace or war! Take your choice.— 
Come to the ball at Harrowgate, I win
my bet, and I'm your sworn friend.— 
Stay away, I lose my bet, and am your
sworn enemy.”
“It is not in my power, madam,” said
Belinda calmly, “to comply with your
request.”
“Then you'll take the consequences,” 
cried Mrs. Freke. She rushed past her,
hurried down stairs, and called out,
“Bid my blockhead bring my unicorn.”
She, her unicorn, and her blockhead,
were out of sight in a few minutes.

Good may be drawn from evil. Mrs.
Freke's conversation, though at the time
it confounded Belinda, roused her, upon
reflection, to examine by her reason for
the habits and principles which guided
her conduct. She had a general feeling
that they were right and necessary; but
now, with the assistance of lady Anne
and Mr. Percival, she established in her
own understanding the exact boundaries
between right and wrong. She
felt a species of satisfaction and security,
from seeing the demonstration of those
axioms of morality, in which she had previously
acquiesced. Reasoning gradually
became as agreeable to her as wit; 
nor was her taste for wit diminished, it
was only refined by this process. She
now compared and judged of the value
of the different species of this brilliant
talent.
Mrs. Freke's wit, thought she, is like
a squib let off in the street by vulgar mischievous
boys—The passengers start— 
but it is only the terrour of a moment.

Lady Delacour's wit is like an elegant
fire work played off at a festival—The
spectators applaud—but it is only the
admiration of a moment. Lady Anne
Percival's wit is like
“The refulgent lamp of night—”
We
“Love the mild rays, and bless the useful light.”
“Miss Portman,” said Mr. Percival,
“are not you afraid of making an enemy
of Mrs. Freke, by declining her invitation
to Harrowgate?”
“I think her friendship more to be
dreaded than her enmity,” replied Belinda.
“Then you are not to be terrified by
an obeah-woman?” said Mr. Vincent.
“Not in the least, unless she were to
come in the shape of a false friend,” said
Belinda.
“Till lately,” said Mr. Vincent, “I
was deceived in the character of Mrs.
Freke. I thought her a dashing, free-spoken,
free-hearted sort of eccentric

person, who would make a staunch
friend, and a jolly companion. As a
mistress or a wife, no man of any taste
could think of her. Compare that woman
now with one of our creole ladies.”
“But why with a creole?” said Mr.
Percival.
“For the sake of contrast in the first
place—Our creole women are all softness,
grace, delicacy—” 
“And indolence,” said Mr. Percival.
“Their indolence is but a slight, and,
in my judgment, an amiable defect; it
keeps them out of mischief, and it attaches
them to domestic life. The activity
of a Mrs. Freke would never excite
their emulation, and so much the better.”
“So much the better, no doubt,” 
said Mr. Percival. “But is there no
other species of activity, that might excite
their ambition with propriety? Without
diminishing their grace, softness, or
delicacy, might not they cultivate their
minds? Do you think ignorance, as well

as indolence, an amiable defect essential
to the female character?”
“Not essential. You do not, I hope,
imagine that I am so much prejudiced in
favour of my countrywomen, that I can
neither see nor feel the superiority in
some instances of European cultivation?
I speak only in general.”
“And in general,” said lady Anne
Percival, “does Mr. Vincent wish to
confine our sex to the bliss of ignorance?”
“If it be bliss,” said Mr. Vincent,
“what reason would they have for complaint?”
“if,” said Belinda; “but that is a
question which you have not yet decided.”
“And how can we decide it?” said
Mr. Vincent. “The taste and feelings
of individuals must be the arbiters of
their happiness.”
“You leave reason quite out of the
question, then,” said Mr. Percival,
“and refer the whole to taste and feeling?

So that, if the most ignorant person
in the world assert that he is happier
than you are, you are bound to believe
him.”
“Why should not I?” said Mr. Vincent.
“Because,” said Mr. Percival,
“though he can judge of his own pleasures,
he cannot judge of yours; his are
common to both, but yours are unknown
to him.—Would you, at this instant,
change places with that ploughman yonder,
who is whistling as he goes for
want of thought? or, would you choose
to go a step higher in the bliss of ignorance,
and turn savage?”
Mr. Vincent laughed, and protested
that he should be very unwilling to give
up his title to civilized society; and that,
instead of wishing to have less knowledge,
he regretted that he had not more.
“I am sensible,” said he, “that I have
many prejudices:—miss Portman has
made me ashamed of some of them.”
There was a degree of candour in Mr.

Vincent's manner and conversation
which interested every body in his favour; 
Belinda amongst the rest. She
was perfectly at ease in Mr. Vincent's
company, because she considered him
as a person who wished for her friendship,
without having any design to engage
her affections. From several hints
that dropped from him, from Mr. Percival,
and from lady Anne, she was persuaded
that he was attached to some
creole lady; and all that he said in favour
of the elegant softness and delicacy of his
countrywomen confirmed this opinion.
Miss Portman was not one of those
young ladies who fancy that every gentleman
who converses freely with them
will inevitably fall a victim to the power
of their charms, and who see in every
man a lover, or nothing.