

Accustomed to study human nature,
Dr. X&wblank;had acquired peculiar
sagacity in judging of character. Notwithstanding
the address, with which lady
Delacour concealed the real motives for
her apparently thoughtless conduct, he
quickly discovered that the hatred of Mrs.
Luttridge was her ruling passion. Above
nine years of continual warfare had exasperated
the tempers of both parties, and
no opportunities of manifesting their mutual
antipathy were ever neglected. Extravagantly
as lady Delacour loved admiration,
the highest possible degree of

positive praise was insipid to her taste, if
it did not imply some superiority over the
woman whom she considered as her perpetual
rival.
Now, it had been said by the coachmaker,
that Mrs. Luttridge would sport a
most elegant new vis-à-vis, on the King's
birthday. Lady Delacour was immediately
ambitious to outshine her in equipage; 
and it was this paltry ambition, that
made her condescend to all the meanness
of the transaction, by which she obtained
miss Portman's draught, and Clarence
Hervey's two hundred guineas.—The
great, the important day at length arrived.
—Her ladyship's triumph in the morning,
at the drawing-room, was complete.— 
Mrs. Luttridge's dress, Mrs. Luttridge's
vis-à-vis, Mrs. Luttridge's horses, were
nothing—absolutely nothing, in comparison
with lady Delacour's—her ladyship
enjoyed the full exultation of vanity; and
at night she went in high spirits to the
birthnight ball.
“O, my dearest Belinda,” said she, as

she left her dressing-room, how terrible
a thing it is, that you cannot go with me!
—None of the joys of this life are without
allow!—'Twould be too much to see in
one night Mrs Luttridge's mortification,
and my Belinda's triumph.—Adieu! my
love—we shall live to see another birthday,
it is to be hoped.—Marriott, my
drops.—O, I have taken them.”
Belinda, after her ladyship's departure,
retired to the library.—Her time passed so
agreeably during lady Delacour's absence,
that she was surprised when she heard the
clock strike twelve.
“Is it possible,” thought she, “that I
have spent three hours by myself in a
library, without being tired of my existence!
—How different are my feelings
now, to what they would have been in the
same circumstances six months ago!—I
should then have thought the loss of a
birthnight ball a mighty trial of temper.— 
It is singular, that my having spent a
winter with one of the most dissipated
women in England should have sobered

my mind so completely. If I had never
seen the utmost extent of the pleasures
of the world, as they are called, my imagination
might have misled me to the end
of my life; but now I can judge from my
own experience, and I am convinced that
the life of a fine lady would never make
me happy.—Dr. X&wblank;told me, the other
day, that he thinks me formed for something
better, and he is incapable of flattery.”
The idea of Clarence Hervey was so
intimately connected with that of his
friend, that miss Portman could seldom
separate them in her imagination—and
she was just beginning to reflect upon the
manner in which Clarence looked, whilst
he declared to sir Philip Baddely, that he
would never give up Dr. X&wblank;, when
she was startled by the entrance of Marriott.
“O miss Portman, what shall we do!
—What shall we do?—My lady! my
poor lady!” cried she.
“What is the matter?” said Belinda.

“The horses—the young horses!—O
I wish my lady had never seen them.—O
my lady, my poor lady, what will become
of her!”
It was some minutes before Belinda
could obtain from Marriott any intelligible
account of what had happened.
“All I know, ma'am, is what James
has just told me,” said Marriott.—“My
lady gave the coachman orders upon no
account to let Mrs. Luttridge's carriage
get before hers.—Mrs. Luttridge's coachman
would not give up the point either.— 
My lady's horses were young and ill broke,
they tell me, and there was no managing
of them no ways.—The carriages got some
how across one another, and my lady was
overturned, and all smashed to atoms.— 
O ma'am!” continued Marriott, “if it
had not been for Mr. Hervey, they say,
my lady would never have been got out of
the crowd alive.—He's bringing her home
in his own carriage—God bless him!”
“But is lady Delacour hurt?” cried Belinda.

“She must—to be sure she must,
ma'am,” cried Marriott, putting her hand
to her bosom.—“But let her be ever so
much hurt, my lady will keep it to herself
—the footmen swear she did not give
a scream, not a single scream; so it's their
opinion she was no ways hurt—But that I
know can't be—And indeed, they are
thinking so much about the carriage, that
they can't give one any rational account of
any thing—and as for myself, I'm sure I'm
in such a flutter.—Lord knows, I advised
my lady not to go with the young horses,
no later than”—
“Hark!” cried Belinda, “here they
are.” She ran down stairs instantly. The
first object that she saw was lady Delacour
in convulsions—the street-door was
open—the hall was crowded with servants.
Belinda made her way through them, and,
in a calm voice, requested that lady Delacour
might immediately be brought to her
own dressing-room, and that she should
there be left to Marriott's care and hers.
Mr. Hervey assisted in carrying lady Delacour

—she came to her senses as they were
taking her up stairs. “Set me down— 
set me down,” she exclaimed. “I am
not hurt—I am quite well.—Where's Marriott?
Where's miss Portman?”
“Here we are—you shall be carried
quite safely—trust to me,” said Belinda,
in a firm tone, “and do not struggle.”
Lady Delacour submitted—she was in
agonizing pain; but her fortitude was so
great that she never uttered a groan. It
was the constraint which she had put upon
herself, by endeavouring not to scream,
which threw her into convulsions. “She
is hurt, I am sure she is hurt, though she
will not acknowledge it,” cried Clarence
Hervey. “My ancle is sprained, that's
all,” said lady Delacour—“lay me on this
sofa, and leave me to Belinda.”
“What's all this?” cried lord Delacour,
staggering into the room: he was much intoxicated,
and in this condition had just
come home, as they were carrying lady
Delacour up stairs: he could not be made
to understand the truth, but as soon as he

heard Clarence Hervey's voice, he insisted
upon going up to his wife's dressing room.
It was a very unusual thing, but neither
Champfort nor any one else could restrain
him, the moment that he had formed this
idea; he forced his way into the room.
“What's all this?—Colonel Lawless!” 
said he, addressing himself to Clarence
Hervey, whom, in the confusion of his
mind, he mistook for the colonel, the first
object of his jealousy. “Colonel Lawless,” 
cried his lordship, “you are a villain—I
always knew it.”
“Softly!—she's in great pain, my lord,” 
said Belinda, catching lord Delacour's
arm, just as he was going to strike Clarence
Hervey. She led him to the sofa
where lady Delacour lay, and uncovering
her ancle, which was much swelled, showed
it to him. His lordship, who was a
humane man, was somewhat moved by
this appeal to his remaining senses, and he
began roaring as loud as he possibly
could for arquebusade.
Lady Delacour rested her head upon

the back of the sofa, her hands moved with
convulsive twitches—she was perfectly
silent. Marriott was in a great bustle,
running backwards and forwards for she
knew not what, and continually repeating,
“I wish nobody would come in here but
miss Portman and me.—My lady says nobody
must come in.—Lord bless me!— 
my lord here too!”
“Have you any arquebusade, Marriott?
Arquebusade, for your lady directly!” 
cried his lordship, following her to the
door of the boudoir, where she was going
for some drops.
“O my lord, you can't come in, I assure
you, my lord, there's nothing here, my
lord, nothing of the sort,” said Marriott,
setting her back against the door.—Herterrour
and embarrassment instantly recalled
all the jealous suspicions of lord Delacour.
“Woman!” cried he, “I will see whom
you have in this room!—You have some
one concealed there, and I will go in.”— 
Then with brutal oaths he dragged Marriott

from the door, and snatched the key
from her struggling hand.
Lady Delacour started up, and gave a
scream of agony. “My lord!—Lord Delacour,” 
cried Belinda, springing forward,
“hear me.”
Lord Delacour stopped short.—“Tell
me then,” cried lord Delacour, “is not a
lover of lady Delacour's concealed there?” 
“No!—No!—No!” answered Belinda.
—“Then a lover of miss Portman's,” said
lord Delacour—“Gad! we have hit it now,
I believe.”
“Believe whatever you please, my
lord,” said Belinda hastily—“but give me
the key.”
Clarence Hervey drew the key from
lord Delacour's hand, gave it to miss
Portman without looking at her, and immediately
withdrew.—Lord Delacour followed
him with a sort of drunken laugh; 
and no one remained in the room but
Marriott, Belinda, and lady Delacour.— 
Marriott was so much fluttered, as she said,

that she could do nothing.—Miss Portman
locked the room door, and began to undress
lady Delacour who lay motionless.
“Are we by ourselves,” said lady Delacour,
opening her eyes.
“Yes—are you much hurt?” said Belinda.
“O, you are a charming girl!” 
said lady Delacour.—“Who would have
thought you had so much presence of
mind and courage—have you the key
safe?” “Here it is,” said Belinda, producing
it; and she repeated her question
—“are you much hurt?” “I am not in
pain now,” said lady Delacour, “but I
have suffered terribly.—If I could get rid
of all this finery—if you could put me to
bed I could sleep perhaps.”
Whilst Belinda was underssing lady
Delacour, she shrieked several times; but
between every interval of pain she repeated,
“I shall be better to morrow.” As
soon as she was in bed, she desired Marriott
to give her double her usual quantity
of laudanum; for that all the inclination
which she had felt to sleep was gone, and

that she could not endure the shooting
pains that she felt in her breast.
“Leave me alone with your lady, Marriott,” 
said Miss Portman, taking the bottle
of laudanum from her trembling hand,
“and go to bed; for I am sure you are not
able to sit up any longer.”
As she spoke, she took Marriott into
the adjoining dressing-room.—“O dear
miss Portman,” said Marriott, who was
sincerely attached to her lady, and who at
this instant forgot all her jealousies, and all
her love of power—“I'll do any thing you
ask me—but pray let me stay in the room,
though I know I'm quite helpless.—It will
be too much for you to be here all night
by yourself.—The convulsions may take
my lady.—What shrieks she gives every
now and then!—and nobody knows what's
the matter but ourselves; and every body
in the house is asking me why a surgeon
is not sent for, if my lady is so much hurt.
O I can't answer for it to my conscience,
to have kept the matter secret so long; for
to be sure a physician, if had in time,

might have saved my lady—but now nothing
can save her!”—And here Marriott
burst into tears.
“Why don't you give me the laudanum?” 
cried lady Delacour, in a loud peremptory
voice—“Give it to me instantly.” 
—“No,” said miss Portman firmly.— 
“Hear me, lady Delacour—you must allow
me to judge, for you know that you are
not in a condition to judge for yourself— 
or rather you must allow me to send for a
physician, who may judge for us both.”
“A physician!” cried lady Delacour,
—“Never—never.—I charge you let no
physician be sent for.—Remember your
promise—you cannot betray me—you will
not betray me.”
“No,” said Belinda, “of that I have
given sufficient proof—but you will betray
yourself—it is already known by your
servants that you have been hurt by the
overturn of your carriage—if you do not
let either a surgeon or physician see you,
it will excite surprise and suspicion,—It

is not in your power when violent pain
seizes you to refrain from”—“It is,” 
interrupted lady Delacour, “not another
scream shall you hear—only do not, do not,
my dear Belinda, send for a physician.”
“You will throw yourself again into
convulsions,” said Belinda—“Marriott
you see, has lost all command of herself— 
I shall not have strength to manage you— 
perhaps I may lose my presence of mind,
I cannot answer for myself—your husband
may desire to see you.”
“No danger of that,” said lady Delacour,
“tell him my ancle is sprained— 
tell him I am bruised all over—tell him
any thing you will—he will not trouble
himself any more about me—he will forget
all that passed to night by the time he is
sober—O!—give me the laudanum,
dearest Belinda—and say no more about
physicians.”
It was in vain to reason with lady Delacour.
Belinda attempted to persuade
her—“for my sake, dear lady Delacour,”

said she, “let me send for Dr. X&wblank;, he
is a man of honour, your secret will be
perfectly safe with him.”
“He will tell it to Clarence Hervey,” 
said lady Delacour—“of all men living I
would not send for Dr. X&wblank;, I will not
see him if he comes.”
“Then,” said Belinda, calmly, but
with a fixed determination of countenance,
“I must leave you to morrow morning— 
I must return to Bath.”
“Leave me! Remember your promise.”
“Circumstances have occurred, about
which I have made no promise,” said
Belinda—“I must leave you, unless you
will now give me your permission to send
for Dr. X&wblank;.”
Lady Delacour hesitated. “You see,” 
continued Belinda “that I am in earnest,
when I am gone you will have no friend
left—when I am gone your secret will
inevitably be discovered, for without me
Marriott will not have sufficient strength
of mind to keep it.”

“Do you think we might truft Dr.
X&wblank;?” said lady Delacour.
“I am sure you may trust him,” said
Belinda with energy: “I will pledge
my life upon his honour.”
“Then send for him, since it must be
so,” said lady Delacour.
No sooner had the words passed lady
Delacour's lips, than Belinda flew to execute
her orders.—Marriott recovered her
senses, when she heard that her ladyship
had consented to send for a physician,
but she declared, that she could not conceive
how any thing less than the power
of magic could have brought her lady to
such a determination.
Belinda had scarcely dispatched a servant
for Dr. X&wblank;, when lady Delacour
repented of the permission she had given,
and all that could be said to pacify, only
irritated her temper.—She became delirious,
Belinda's presence of mind never
forsook her, she remained quietly beside
the bed waiting for the arrival of Dr.
X&wblank;, and she absolutely refused admittance

to the servants, who, drawn by their
lady's outrageous cries, continually came
to her door with offers of assistance.
About four o'clock the doctor arrived,
and miss Portman was relieved from some
of her anxiety. He assured her that there
was no immediate danger, and he promised
that the secret which she had entrusted
to him should be faithfully kept.— 
He remained with her some hours, till
lady Delacour became more quiet and
fell afleep, exhausted with delirious exertions.
—“I think I may now leave you,” 
said Dr. X&wblank;, but as he was going
through the dressing-room, Belinda stopped
him.—“Now that I have time to
think of myself,” said she—“let me consult
you as my friend—I am not used to
act entirely for myself, and I shall be most
grateful if you will assist me with your
advice.—I hate all mysteries, but I feel
myself bound in honour to keep the secret,
with which lady Delacour has entrusted
me.—Last night I was so circumstanced,

that I could not extricate her ladyship
without exposing myself to—to suspicion.”
“Miss Portman then related all that
had passed about the mysterious door,
which lord Delacour, in his fit of drunken
jealousy, had insisted upon breaking open.
“Mr. Hervey,” continued Belinda,
“was present when all this happened— 
he seemed much surprised—I should be
sorry that—he should remain in an errour
which might be fatal to my reputation— 
you know a woman ought not even to be
suspected—yet how to remove this suspicion
I know not, because I cannot enter
into any explanation without betraying
lady Delacour—she has, I know, a peculiar
dread of Mr. Hervey's discovering
the truth.”
“And is it possible,” cried Dr. X&wblank;,
“that any woman should be so meanly
selfish, as thus to expose the reputation of
her friend, merely to preserve her own
vanity from mortification.”
“Hush—don't speak so loud,” said Belinda,

“you will awaken her—and at present
she is certainly more an object of pity
than of indignation.—If you will have the
goodness to come with me, I will take
you by a back-staircase up to the mysterious
boudoir.—I am not too proud to
give positive proofs of my speaking truth; 
the key of that room now lies on lady
Delacour's bed—it was that which she
grasped in her hand during her delirium— 
she has now let it fall—it opens both the
doors of the boudoir—you shall see,” 
added miss Portman, with a smile, “that
I am not afraid to let you unlock either of
them.”
“As a police man,” said Dr. X&wblank;, “I
believe that I should absolutely refuse to
take any external evidence of a lady's
truth; but demonstration is unanswerable
even by enemies, and I will not sacrifice
your interests to the foppery of my politeness
—so I am ready to follow you. The
curiosity of the servants may have been
excited by last night's disturbance, and I

see no method so certain as that which
you propose of preventing busy Rumour.
That goddess (let Ovid say what he
pleases) was born and bred in a kitchen,
or a servant's hall.—But,” continued
Dr. X&wblank;,“my dear miss Portman, you
will put a stop to a number of charming
stories by this prudence of yours—a romance
called the Mysterious Boudoir, of
nine volumes at least, might be written
on this subject, if you would only condescend
to act like almost all other heroines,
that is to say, without common sense.”
The doctor now followed Belinda, and
satisfied himself by ocular demonstration,
that this cabinet was the retirement of
disease, and not of pleasure.
It was about eight o'clock in the morning
when Dr. X&wblank;got home; he found
Clarence Hervey waiting for him. Clarence
seemed to be in great agitation,
though he endeavoured, with all the power
which he possessed over himself, to suppress
his emotion.

“You have been to see lady Delacour,” 
said he, calmly—“Is she much hurt?— 
It was a terrible accident.”
“She has been much hurt,” said Dr.
X&wblank;, “and she has been for some hours
delirious—but ask me no more questions
now, for I am asleep and must go to bed
—unless you have any thing to say that
can waken me—you look as if some great
misfortune had befallen you, what is the
matter?”
“O, my dear friend,” said Hervey,
taking his hand—“do not jest with me,
I am not able to bear your raillery in my
present temper—in one word, I fear that
Belinda is unworthy of my esteem—I can
tell you no more—except that I am more
miserable than I thought any woman could
make me.”
“You are in a prodigious hurry to be
miserable,” said Dr. X&wblank;;“upon my
word, I think you would make a mighty
pretty hero in a novel; you take things
very properly for granted, and stretched

out upon that sofa, you act the distracted
lover vastly well—and to complete the
matter, you cannot tell me why you are
more miserable than ever man or hero was
before.—I must tell you then, that you
have still more cause for jealousy than
you suspect.—Ay, start—every jealous
man starts at the sound of the word jealousy
—a certain symptem this of the
disease.”
“You mistake me,” cried Clarence
Hervey, “no man is less disposed to jealousy
than I am—but—
“But your mistress—no, not your mistress,
for you have never yet declared to
her your attachment—but the lady you
admire will not let a drunken man unlock
a door, and you immediately suppose—
“She has mentioned the circumstance
to you!” exclaimed Hervey, in a joyful
tone—“then she must be innocent.”
“Admirable reasoning!—I was going
to have told you just now, if you would
have suffered me to speak connectedly,
that you have more reason for jealousy

than you suspect, for miss Portman has
actually unlocked for me—for me! look
at me—the door, the mysterious door— 
and whilst I live, and whilst she lives, we
can neither of us ever tell you the cause
of the mystery.—All I can tell you is,
that no lover is in the case, upon my
honour—and now, if you should ever
mistake curiosity in your own mind for
jealousy, expect no pity from me.”
“I should deserve none,” said Clarence
Hervey, “you have made me the
happiest of men.”
“The happiest of men!—No, no; 
keep that superlative exclamation for a
future occasion.—But now you behave
like a reasonable creature, you deserve to
hear the praises of your Belinda—I am so
much charmed with her, that I wish&wblank;”
“When can I see her,” interrupted
Hervey,“I'll go to her this instant.”
“Gently,” said Dr. X&wblank;,“you forget
what time of the day it is—you forget
that miss Portman has been up all night—

that lady Delacour is extremely ill—and
that this would be the most unseasonable
opportunity you could possibly choose for
your visit.”
To this observation Clarence Hervey
assented; but he immediately seized a
pen from the doctor's writing-table, and
began a letter to Belinda.—The doctor
threw himself upon his sofa, saying— 
“Waken me when you want me”—and
in a few minutes he was fast asleep.
“Doctor, upon second thoughts,” said
Clarence, rising suddenly, and tearing
his letter down the middle, “I cannot
write to her yet—I forgot the reformation
of lady Delacour—how soon do you think
she will be well?—Besides, I have another
reason for not writing to Belinda—at present
you must know, my dear doctor, that
I have, or had, another mistress.”
“Another mistress indeed!” cried
doctor X&wblank;, trying to waken himself.
“Good God! I do believe you've been
asleep.”

“I do believe I have.”
“But is it possible that you could fall
sound asleep in that time?”
“Very possible,” said the doctor,
“what is there so extraordinary in a man's
falling asleep?—Men are apt to sleep
some time within the four and twenty
hours—unless they have half a dozen
mistresses to keep them awake, as you
seem to have, my good friend.”
A servant now came into the room with
a letter, that had just arrived express from
the country for Dr. X&wblank;.”
“This is another affair,” cried he,
rousing himself.
The letter required the doctor's immediate
attendance. He shook hands with
Clarence Hervey—
“My dear friend, I am really concerned
that I cannot stay to hear the history of
your six mistresses; but you see that this
is an affair of life and death.”
“Farewel,” said Clarence, “I have
not six, I have only three goddesses; even
if you count lady Delacour for one.—But

I really wanted your advice, in good
earnest.”
“If your case be desperate, you can
write, cannot you?—Direct to me at
Horton-hall, Cambridge.—In the mean
time, as far as general rules go, I can
give you my advice gratis, in the formula
of an old Scotch song— 
‘'Tis good to be merry and wise,
'Tis good to be honest and true,
'Tis good to be off with the old luve,
Before you be on with the new.”