

Whilst Mrs. Hungerford was wasting
her good advice upon Lady Angelica,
Sir James Harcourt, at his toilette, received
this day's letters, which he read,
as usual, while his hair was dressing.— 
Some of these letters were from creditors,
who were impatient to hear when his
advantageous marriage would be concluded,
or when he would obtain that place
which had been so long promised. The
place at court, as he was this post informed
by a private, very confidential letter,
under a government cover and huge
seal, from his intimate friend, my Lord
Skreene, “ministers had found themselves
under the unfortunate necessity of
giving away, to secure three votes on a
certain cabinet question.”

Sir James threw the letter from him,
without reading the rest of his dear
friend's official apologies—“So the place
at court is out of the question, a wife
must be my last resource,” thought he,
but how to bring her to the point?—
Sir James knew, that though he was
now in high favor, he might, at some
sudden turn of caprice, be discarded or
deserted by his fair one, as had been the
fate of so many of his predecessors.— 
The ruling passion, vanity, must be
touched, and the obvious means of wakening
jealousy were in his power. He
determined to pay attentions to Miss
Caroline Percy: his experience in the
tactics of gallantry supplying the place
of knowledge of the human heart, he
counterfeited the symptoms of a new passion,
and acted “The Inconstant” so
well, that Lady Angelica had no doubt
of his being what he appeared. She was
not prepared for this turn of fate, well
as she thought she knew her game, and
at this unlucky moment, just when she

wanted to play off Sir James against Mr.
Barclay—and in an old castle in the
country, too, where no substitute was to
be had!
Her Ladyship was the more vexed,
because Mrs. Hungerford must see her
distress. Unused to any thing that opposed
her wishes, she lost all temper,
and every word and look manifested resentment
and disdain towards her innocent
and generous rival. In this jealousy,
as there was no mixture of love
to color and conceal it's nature, it could
not pass for refinement of sentiment, it
bore no resemblance to any thing noble,
it must have been detected, even by a
less penetrating and less interested observer
than Mr. Barclay.—His eyes were
now completely opened.
In the mean time, Caroline's character,
the more it was brought into
light, the more it's value, goodness, and
purity appeared.—In the education of
a beauty, as of a prince, it is essential
early to inspire an utter contempt of

flattery, and to give the habit of observing,
and consequently the power of
judging of character.
Sir James Harcourt was quite astonished
by the composure, with which a
young girl, who looked as if she had
never heard, as if she did not know that
she was handsome, received the full fire
of his flattery. He was mistaken, however,
in thinking that she had never
heard, or that she did not know she was
handsome.—Her parents had not attempted,
by paltry absurd deceit, to conceal
from her this truth; so that there
was no danger, that the pleasure of
making the discovery should be suddenly
and dangerously associated with a
first admirer. Whilst her parents had
never pretended to deny that she was
handsome, they had inspired her with
the ambition to be something better than
a beauty, and to disdain the compliments,
which are paid to mere personal
charms—Nor had gentlemen much
chance of imposing upon her by false

professions of love. Without being rendered
suspicious, Caroline had been so
well accustomed to observe whether the
action was suited to the word and the
word to the action, that no one could,
without offending her, “overdo a passion,” 
even a passion for herself. She
saw at once, through his assumed appearance,
that Sir James Harcourt had
not the slightest attachment to her; 
Rosamond also, whose penetration was
quickened on this occasion by affection
for her sister, discerned the truth immediately,
and her indignation could scarcely
be restrained.
Caroline, on this occasion, when, perhaps,
some little temptation might have
been felt by some ladies, remembered
her own prayer against coquetry, her
manner towards Sir James was free from
all possibility of reproach or misconstruction.
And by simply and steadily adhering
to the truth, and going the straight
road, she avoided all the difficulties in
which she would have been involved, had

she deviated but for a moment into any
crooked path.
It may seem small praise, that she
avoided all coquetry and deception by
word or look; yet those who know the
world and the fair sex best will be inclined
to have the highest opinion of a
young lady, who entirely deserved this
praise.—But to return to Lady Angelica
Headingham. She was pleased to see
Sir James Harcourt at a fault, and delighted
to see him mortified. Her Ladyship's
disdainful manner towards Caroline
was thrown aside,
“And all the cruel language of the eye”
changed at once. Lady Angelica acknowledged,
“that no one could show
more magnanimity, than Miss Caroline
Percy had displayed in her conduct to
Sir James Harcourt.”—This speech
was made of course to be repeated, and
when Caroline heard it, she could not
help smiling at the word magnanimity,

which sounded to her rather too grand
for the occasion.
Sir James Harcourt finding himself
completely foiled in his schemes, and
perceiving that the parties were closing
and combining in a manner which his
knowledge of the world had not taught
him to foresee, endeavored with all possible
address and expedition, to make his
separate peace with Lady Angelica. Her
Ladyship, however, was proud to show,
that she had too much sense and spirit,
to accept again the homage of this recreant
knight. He had not time to sue
for pardon—his adventure might have
ended in a jail. So forthwith he took his
departure from Hungerford-Castle, undetermined
whether he should again haste
to court to beg a place, or bend his
course to the city, there to barter his
fashion against the solid gold of some
merchant, rolling in his Majesty's coin,
who might be silly enough to give his
daughter, for a bow, to a courtier without
a shilling. On one point, however,

Sir James was decided—betide him weal,
betide him wo,—that his next mistress
should neither be a wit, nor a beauty,
nor yet a patroness.
After the departure of the baronet,
the Lady Angelica expected to find her
remaining lover at her feet, in transports
of joy and gratitude for this haughty dismissal
of his rival.—No such thing!— 
Mr. Barclay seemed disposed to throw
himself at the feet of another, and of the
last person in the world, at whose feet her
Ladyship could bear to think of seeing
him. Yet if she had even now taken
Mrs. Hungerford's friendly warning, she
might still have saved herself from mortification.
But she was hurried on by
her evil genius—the spirit of coquetry.
She had promised to pay a visit this
summer to an aunt of Mr. Barclay's,
Lady B&wblank;, who lived in Leicestershire.
And now, when every thing was arranged
for her reception, Lady Angelica changed
her mind, and told Mr. Barclay, that she
could not go, that she had just received

letters from town, from several of her
fashionable friends, who were setting out
for Weymouth, and who insisted upon her
meeting them there—And there was a
delightful Miss Kew, a protégée of hers,
who was gone to Weymouth in the hope
and trust, that her Ladyship would produce
her and her new novel at the reading
parties, which Lady Angelica had
projected.—She declared that “she
could not possibly disappoint Miss Kew
—besides, she had promised to carry Mr.
Seebright to Weymouth, to introduce
him and his poem to her friends,—his
subscription and the success of his poem
entirely depended upon her going to
Weymouth—she could not possibly disappoint
him.
Mr. Barclay thought more of his own
disappointment—and said so—at which
her Ladyship rejoiced, for she wished to
make this a trial of her power; and she
desired rather, that her reasons should
not appear valid, and that her excuses
should not be reasonable, on purpose

that she might compel Mr. Barclay to
submit to her caprice, and carry him off
in triumph in her train.
She carelessly repeated, that “Leicestershire
was out of the question at this
time, but that Mr. Barclay might attend
her, if he pleased.”—
But it did not please him—“He did not
think, that his aunt was properly treated,
and he preferred her to all the bel-esprits
and fine ladies who were going to Weymouth
—her charming self excepted.”
She depended too much on the power
of that charming self.—Mr. Barclay,
whose bands she had gradually loosened,
now made one resolute effort, asserted
and recovered his liberty.—He declared,
that “to Weymouth he could not have
the honor of attending her Ladyship—if
her Ladyship thought the claims and
feelings of her protégées of greater consequence
than his, if she held herself
more bound by the promises she had
given to Mr. Seebright, Miss Kew, or
any of her bel-esprit friends, than by those

with which she had honored his aunt,
he could not presume to dispute her
pleasure, or further to press Lady B.'s
request, he could only lament—and submit.”
Lady Angelica flattered herself, that
this was only a bravado, or a temporary
ebullition of courage, but, to her surprise
and dismay, Mr. Barclay continued firm,
calm, and civil.—His heart now turned
to the object, on which his understanding
had long since told him it should fix.
He saw that Miss Caroline Percy was all
that could make him happy for life, if
he could win her affections. But of the
possibility of succeeding he had great
doubts. He had, to be sure, some circumstances
in his favor: he was of a
good family, and had a considerable fortune; 
in a worldly point of view he was
a most advantageous match for Caroline
Percy, but he knew, that an establishment
was not the first object, either with
her, or with her parents; neither could
he wish, that any motives of interest

should operate in his favor. His character,
his principles, were good, and he
had reason to believe, that Mr. Percy
was impressed with a highly favorable
opinion of his good sense and general
understanding. Caroline talked to him
always as if she liked his conversation,
and felt esteem for his character; but
the very freedom and ease of her manner
showed, that she had no thoughts of him.
—He was many years older than Caroline:
—he was six and thirty, and she was
eighteen, this did not amount to an absolute
disparity, but it was an alarming
difference.—Mr. Barclay, who estimated
himself with perfect impartiality and
candor, was sensible, that though his
temper was good, yet that it was somewhat
fastidious, and though his manners
were polite, yet they were reserved, they
wanted that amenity, gayety, and frankness,
which might be essential to win
and keep a lady's heart. The more his
love, the more doubts of his own deserts
increased; but at last he determined to

try his fate. He caught a glimpse of
Caroline one morning as she was drawing
in the Oriel—Her sister and the two
Lady Pembrokes were in the library,
and he thought he was secure of finding
her alone.
“May I beg the favor of a few minutes.
 ... he began with a voice of
much emotion as he entered the room,
but he stopped short at the sight of Lady
Angelica.
In spite of all the rouge she wore, her
Ladyship's change of color was striking.
Her lips trembled and grew pale—Mr.
Barclay's eyes fixed upon her for one
moment with astonishment, then turning
calmly away, he addressed himself to
Caroline, his emotion recurring, though
he merely spoke to her of a drawing
which she was examining, and though he
only said,
“Is this yours?”
“Yes, Lady Angelica has just given
it to me; it is one of her drawings—a
view of Weymouth.”

“Very beautiful,” said Mr. Barclay,
coldly,—“a view of Weymouth.”
“Where I hope to be the day after to
morrow,” cried Lady Angelica, speaking
in a hurried, piqued, and haughty
voice,—“I am dying to get to Weymouth.
—Mr. Barclay, if you have any
letters for your friends there, I shall be
happy to carry them.—Only let them be
given to my woman in time,” added her
Ladyship, rising; “and now I must go
and say vivace! presto! prestissimo! to
her preparations.—Well, have you any
commands?”
“No commands—but my best wishes
for your Ladyship's health and happiness,
whenever and wherever you
go.”
Lady Angelica sunk down upon her
seat—made a strong effort to rise again
—but was unable.—Caroline, without
appearing to take any notice of this,
turned to Mr. Barclay, and said—“Will
you have the goodness now to give me

the book, which you were so kind as to
promise me?”
Mr. Barclay went in search of it.
Caroline proceeded with her drawing,
gave Lady Angelica time to recover,
and left her the hope, that her perturbation
had not been noticed. Her Ladyship,
as soon as she could, left the room,
repeating that she had some orders to
give for her departure.—Caroline
waited some time in vain for Mr. Barclay
and his book. Afterwards, as she
was going up stairs, she was met by
Rosamond, who, with a face full of mystery,
whispered,
“Caroline ... my father wants you
this instant in my mother's dressing-room
 ... Mr. Barclay,”—added she, in
a low voice, and nodding her head, “Oh
I see you know what I mean—I knew
he would propose for you, I said so last
night.—Now go to my father, and you
will hear all the particulars.—Are the
Lady Pembrokes in the library?”

“But my dear Rosamond,” said Caroline,
stopping Rosamond, “let me
beg that you will not mention this to the
Lady Pembrokes.”—
“Why not?” said Rosamond, “your
intimate friends! I thought you had no
secrets for them?”
“No secrets of my own.—But I have
no right to tell my most intimate friends
another person's secret.”
“But I dare say Mr. Barclay would
have no objection—I am sure it is to his
credit.”
“But I don't know whether he would
choose to have it told—I have no right
to tell it. It might be ... in all probability
it will be of consequence to him,
that it should not be known.—My father
is waiting for me, I have not time to
reason or explain further; but I do earnestly
beg, Rosamond, that you will not
mention or hint it to the Lady Pembrokes,
or to any one else.”
“Not to Mrs. Mortimer?” said Rosamond.—

“To no one—promise me!” urged
Caroline, eagerly.
“Well, well, I do promise you.— 
Now go to my father.—You have less
vanity than any one I ever saw,”—pursued
Rosamond, as she went down stairs,
“and how you can contrive always to
think of others instead of yourself I am
sure I do not know.”
“I think you might guess,” said Caroline.
Caroline heard from her father the
confirmation of Rosamond's intelligence,
and she received from him and from her
mother the kind assurance, that they
would leave her entirely at liberty, to
accept or refuse Mr. Barclay, according
as her own judgment and feelings might
dictate. They said, that though it might
be, in point of fortune, a highly advantageous
match, and though they saw
nothing to which they could object in
his character, understanding, and temper,
yet they should not attempt to influence
her in his favor.—They begged

her to decide entirely for herself, and
to consult only her own happiness.
“All I insist upon, my dear daughter,
is, that you should, without any idle and
unjust generosity, consider first and
solely what is for your own happiness.”
“And for Mr. Barclay's”—said Caroline.
“And for Mr. Barclay's, as far as you
are concerned, but remember, the question
he asks you is, whether you can love
him, whether you will marry him, not
whether you would advise him to love or
marry somebody else.—Don't I know all
that passes in your mind?”
“Not all, perhaps,” said Caroline,
“nor can I tell it you, because it is
another person's secret.—Therefore, I
am sure, you will not question me
further, but since you are so kind as to
trust to my judgment, trust to it entirely,
when I assure you that I will, without
any idle or unjust generosity, consider,
principally, what is for my own
happiness.”

“I am satisfied,” said Mr. Percy, “no
—one thing more—Without meaning or
wishing to penetrate into any other person's
affairs, I have a full right to say to
my daughter all that may be necessary,
to assist her in deciding on a point the
most material to her happiness. Now,
Caroline,” continued her father, looking
away from her, “observe, I do not endeavor,
from my knowledge of your
countenance, even to guess whether
what I imagine is fact. But I state to
you this supposition—Suppose you had
been told, that another lady is attached to
Mr. Barclay.”
“I never was told so,” interrupted
Caroline, “but I have discovered it by
accident ... No—I have said too much
—I do not think that person is attached
to him, but that she might easily have
become attached, if this proposal had
been made to her, instead of to me. And
I think, that their two characters are exactly
suited to each other—Much better
suited than mine could be to Mr. Barclay,

or his to me; she has wit, and imagination,
and great vivacity; he has
judgment, prudence, and solid sense; in
each there is what would compensate
for what is wanting in the other, and both
together would make a happy union.”
“My dear Caroline,” said her father,
“I must put you upon your guard
against the too easy faith of a sincere
affectionate heart. I am really surprised
that you, who have always shown such
good judgment of character, should now
be so totally mistaken, as to think a
woman capable of a real love, who is
merely acting a part from vanity and
coquetry.”
“Vanity! coquetry!” repeated Caroline,
“Nobody upon Earth is more free
from vanity and coquetry than. ...
Surely you do not imagine I am thinking
of Lady Angelica Headingham?—Oh
no: I have no compassion for her—I
know, that, if she suffers from losing Mr.
Barclay, it will be only from losing ‘the
dear delight of giving pain,’ and I should

be very sorry she ever again enjoyed that
delight at Mr. Barclay's expense. I
assure you I am not thinking of Lady
Angelica.”
Both Mr. and Mrs. Percy were in
doubt, whether Caroline was thinking of
her sister Rosamond, or of her friend
Lady Mary Pembroke; but without attempting
to discover, they only repeated
that, whoever the person in question
might be, or however amiable or dear to
Caroline, she ought not to let this idea
interfere with her own happiness, or influence
her in giving an answer to Mr.
Barclay's proposal, which she ought
either to accept or decline, according as
her own feelings and judgment should
decide.—“My dear, do not determine
rashly,” continued Mrs. Percy—“Now
that he is your lover. Mr. Barclay will,
perhaps, appear in a new light to you.
—Till you have seen and considered him
in this point of view, believe me, you
cannot tell what your feelings may be. I
request, that you will take some time to

consider, before you give Mr. Barclay any
answer.”
Mrs. Percy added, that perhaps Caroline
might feel unwilling to take this
advice, because she might have heard
young ladies accused of coquetry, or jilting,
who, after having delayed to give
a decided answer to a proposal, had at
last given a negative; but she said she
thought such censures were absurd and
unjust, for that it was impossible a young
woman could always determine at once,
whether a gentleman, whose character
she had had no opportunities of studying,
and whom she had never considered as a
lover, would suit her, and make her
happy for life or not.
“In the present case,” continued Mrs.
Percy, “your father and I will, if you
wish to take time to decide, make Mr.
Barclay clearly understand, that he is
not to consider this as any encouragement,
and as to the rest,”—added Mrs.
Percy, “when you are sure that you
mean right, and that you do right, you

will not, my dear Caroline, I hope, be
deterred from determining upon what is
best for your own happiness, merely by
the weak fear of what idle foolish people
will say about an affair in which they
have no concern.”
Caroline assured her mother, that no
such weak fear acted upon her mind; 
and that in any case, where she had the
least doubt whether she could like a
person as a husband or not, she should
certainly ask for time to consider, before
she would give an answer: but that, with
respect to Mr. Barclay, she had had
sufficient opportunities of seeing and
judging of him in the character of a
lover, whilst he had been the admirer of
Lady Angelica; that she fully appreciated
his good qualities, and was grateful
for his favorable opinion; but that she
felt perfectly certain, that she did not and
could not love him; and therefore she
desired, as soon as possible, to put him
out of the pain of suspense, to prevent
him from having the mortification of

showing himself the admirer of one, by
whom he must ultimately be refused; 
and to leave him at liberty to turn his
thoughts elsewhere, to some person to
whom he was better suited, and who was
better suited to him.
Mr. Barclay had made Mrs. Hungerford
alone his confidant.—As to Lady
Angelica Headingham, he thought that
her Ladyship could not be in any doubt
of the state of his affections as far as she
was concerned, and that was all she had
a right to know. He never had actually
declared his passion for her, and his attentions
had completely ceased, since the
determination she had made to break
her engagement with his aunt, but Lady
Angelica had still imagined, that he would
not be able to bring himself to part with
her for ever, and she trusted that, even
at the moment of getting into her carriage,
she might prevail upon him to
forget his wrongs, and might at last
carry him off.—These hopes had been
checked, and for a moment overthrown

by Mr. Barclay's appearance this morning
in the Oriel; the emotion with which
she saw him speak to Caroline, and the
indifference with which she heard him
wish her Ladyship health and happiness
at Weymouth, or wherever she went,
for an instant convinced her of the truth.
—But obstinate vanity recurred to the
hope, that he was not yet irreclaimable,
and under this persuasion she hurried
on the preparations for her departure,
impatient for the moment of crisis—of
triumph.
The moment of crisis arrived—but not
of triumph. Lady Angelica Headingham's
landau came to the door.—But
trunks packed and corded gave no pang
to her former lover—Mrs. Hungerford
did not press her to stay—Mr. Barclay
handed her into the carriage—she stooped
to conquer, so far as to tell him, that,
“as she had only Mr. Seebright and her
maid, she could give him a seat in her
carriage, if he would come to Weymouth,
and that she would thence, in

a fortnight at farthest, go to his aunt,
dear Lady B&wblank;, in Leicestershire.”— 
But all in vain—she saw it would not
do—bid her servant shut the carriage-door—desired
Mr. Seebright to draw up
the glass, and, with a look of angry
contempt towards Mr. Barclay, threw
herself back on the seat to conceal the
vexation, which she could not control,
and drove away for ever from irreclaimable
lovers, and lost friends.—We do
not envy Mr. Seebright his trip to Weymouth,
with his patroness in this humor; 
but without troubling ourselves
further to inquire what became of her,
we leave her
“To flaunt, and go down a disregarded thing.”
Rosamond was never zealous in favor
of Mr. Barclay. She said, that there
was no occasion to pity him, because
he was only soberly and quietly in love; 
that he had compared, and judged, and
calculated well; that, after casting up his
moral accounts, he had found, that between

Lady Angelica Headingham, and
Miss Caroline Percy, the balance of
good qualities, and the chance of domestic
happiness stood in favor of the
latter, wherefore he had to her transferred
his heart. Perhaps Rosamond was
not interested in Mr. Barclay's favor,
because there appeared no difficulty in
his way; she thought that Caroline
esteemed him more, and was more likely
to marry him, than any other gentleman
she had seen; and then the dénouement
would be too near, too clear, and commonplace.—Rosamond
said, that “in
this case Caroline would just be married
like any body else, to a man with a
good fortune, good character, good sense,
and every thing very good, but nothing
extraordinary, and she would be settled
at Mr. Barclay's seat in Leicestershire,
and she would be Mrs. Barclay, and,
perhaps, happy enough, but nothing extraordinary.”
This plain view of things, and this positive
termination of all hope of romance,

did not please Rosamond's imagination.
—She was relieved, when at last Caroline
surprised her with the assurance,
that there was no probability of Mr.
Barclay's succeeding in his suit. “And
yet,” said Caroline, “if I were compelled
at this moment to marry, of all
men I have ever yet seen Mr. Barclay
is the person, to whom I could engage
myself with the least reluctance—the
person with whom I think I should have
the best security for happiness.”
Rosamond's face again lengthened.— 
“If that is the case,” said she, “though
you have no intention of marrying him
at present, you will, I suppose, be reasoned
into marrying him in time.”—
“No,” said Caroline, “for I cannot
be reasoned into loving him.”
“There's my own, dear Caroline,” 
cried Rosamond, “I was horribly afraid,
that this man of sense would have convinced
you, that esteem was quite sufficient
without love.”

“Impossible!” said Caroline. “There
must be some very powerful motive, that
could induce me to quit my family, my
parents, my brothers and sister, the companions
and friends to whom I am attached
by every possible tie of gratitude,
esteem, affection, long and dear habit,
I can conceive no motive sufficiently
powerful, except love.”—
Rosamond was delighted.—
“For what else could I marry,” continued
Caroline, “I who am left by the
kindest of parents freely to my own
choice—could I marry,—for a house
in Leicestershire? or for a barouche and
four? on Lady Jane Granville's principles
for an establishment? or on the
Missy notion of being married, and having
a house of my own, and ordering
my own dinner, and, like Miss Dennel
in Camilla, having every day minced
veal and mashed potatoes?—Was this
your notion of me?” said Caroline,
with a look of such surprise, that Rosamond

was obliged to fall immediately to
protestations, and appeals to common
sense.—
“How was it possible she could have
formed such ideas!”
“Then why were you so much surprised
and transported just now, when I
told you, that no motive but love could
induce me to marry?”
“I don't recollect being surprised, I
was only delighted.—I never suspected
that you could marry without love, but
I thought, that you and I might differ as
to the quantity—the degree.”
“No common degree of love, and no
common love, would be sufficient to induce
me to marry,”—said Caroline.
“Once, and but once, before in your
life, you gave me the idea of your having
such an exalted opinion of love,” 
replied Rosamond.—
“But to return to Mr. Barclay,” said
Caroline. “I have, as I promised my
father that I would, consulted in the first
place my own heart, and considered my

own happiness.—He has not made any
impression upon my heart.—Independently
of the difference of age, of which
I should think little, if he suited me in
every other respect, there is a coldness,
an austerity of manner and temper, which
I could not love, unless it were connected
with enthusiasm of character. But Mr.
Barclay appears to me incapable of that
enthusiasm, which rises either to the
moral or intellectual sublime. I respect
his understanding, and esteem his principles,
but ... in conversing with him,
I always feel ... and in passing my life
with him, how much more should I feel!
that there is a want of the higher qualities
of the mind. He shows no invention,
no genius, no magnanimity—nothing
heroic, nothing great, nothing
which could waken sympathy, or excite
that strong attachment, which I think
that I am capable of feeling for a superior
character—for a character at once
good and great.”—
“And where upon Earth are you to

find such a man?—Who is romantic
now?” cried Rosamond. “But I am
very glad that you are a little romantic,
I am glad that you have in you a touch
of human absurdity, else how could you
be my sister, or how could I love you
I do?”—
“I am heartily glad that you love me,
but I am not sensible of my present
immediate claim to your love by my
touch of human absurdity,” said Caroline,
smiling.—“What did I say, that
was absurd or romantic?”
“My dear, people never think their
own romance absured.—Well! granted
that you are not romantic, since that is
a point, which I find I must grant before
we can go on.—Now, tell me, was
Mr. Barclay very sorry when you refused
him?” said Rosamond.
“I dare not tell you, that there is yet
no danger of his breaking his heart,” 
said Caroline.
“So I thought,”—cried Rosamond,

with a look of ineffable contempt.—“I
thought he was not a man to break his
heart for love. With all his sense, I dare
say he will go back to his Lady Angelica
Headingham. I should not be surprised,
if he went after her to Weymouth
to morrow.”
“I should,” said Caroline; “especially
as he has just ordered his carriage
to take him to his aunt, Lady B&wblank;,
in Leicestershire.”—
“Oh poor man!”—said Rosamond,
“now I do pity him.”—
“Because he is going to his aunt?”
“No, Caroline—you are very cruel— 
because I am sure he is very much
touched and disappointed by your refusal.
He cannot bear to see you again.
—Poor! poor Mr. Barclay! I have been
shamefully ill-natured.—I hope I did not
prejudice your mind against him—I'll
go directly and take leave of him—Poor
Mr. Barclay!”
Rosamond, however, returned a few

minutes afterwards, to complain that
Mr. Barclay had not made efforts enough
to persuade Caroline to listen to him.
“If he had been warmly in love, he
would not so easily have given up hope.
‘None, without hope, e'er lov'd the brightest fair;
‘But Love can hope, where Reason should despair.’
“That, I think, is perfectly true,” 
said Rosamond.
Never—begging Rosamond and the
poet's pardon—never—except where
Reason is very weak, or where the brightest
fair has some touch of the equivocating
fiend. Love ... let poets and
lovers say what they will to the contrary,
can no more subsist without hope,
than flame can exist without fuel. In
all the cases cited to prove the contrary,
we suspect that there has been some inaccuracy
in the experiment, and that by
mistake, a little, a very little hope has
been admitted. The slightest portion,
a quantity imperceptible to common observation,
is known to be quite sufficient

to maintain the passion; but a total exclusion
of hope secures it's extinction.
Mr. Barclay's departure was much
regretted by all at Hungerford-Castle,
most, perhaps, by the person who expressed
that regret the least, Lady
Mary Pembroke—who now silently enjoyed
the full chorus of praise, that was
poured forth in honor of the departed.
Lady Mary's common mode of enjoying
the praise of her friends was not in silence; 
all she thought and felt usually
came to her lips with the ingenuous vivacity
of youth and innocence. Caroline
had managed so well by not managing
at all, that Lady Mary, far from guessing
the real cause of Mr. Barclay's sudden
departure, repeatedly expressed surprise,
that her aunt Hungerford did not
press him to stay a little longer; and
once said, she “wondered how Mr.
Barclay could leave Hungerford-Castle
whilst Caroline was there,—that she had
begun to think he had formed an attachment,
which would do him more honor

than his passion for Lady Angelica
Headingham, but that she feared he
would have a relapse of that fit of folly,
and that it would at last end fatally in
marriage.”—
Mrs. Hungerford smiled at the openness,
with which her niece told her conjectures,
and at the steadiness with which
Caroline kept Mr. Barclay's secret, by
saying no more than just the thing she
ought. “The power of keeping a secret
is very different from the habit of dissimulation.
—You would convince me of
this, if I had doubted it,” said Mrs.
Hungerford to Caroline.—“Now that
the affair is settled, my dear, I must insist
upon your praising me, as I have
praised you for discretion.—I hope I
never influenced your decision by word
or look, but I will now own to you, that
I was very anxious, that you should decide
precisely as you have done.—Mr.
Barclay is a sensible man, an excellent
man, one who will make any amiable
woman he marries happy.—I am convinced

of it, or I should not, as I do,
wish to see him married to my niece— 
yet I never thought him suited to you.
Yours is a character without pretension,
yet one, which, in love and marriage,
would not, I believe, be easily satisfied,
would require great qualities, a high tone
of thought and action, a character superior
and lofty as your own.”
Mrs. Hungerford paused, and seemed
lost in thought. Caroline felt, that this
lady had seen deeply into her mind, and
that she appreciated her fully. This
conviction, beyond all praise, and all
demonstrations of fondness, increases affection,
confidence, and gratitude, in
strong and generous minds. Caroline
endeavoured, but could not well express
in words what she felt at this instant.
“My dear,” said Mrs. Hungerford.— 
“We know that we are speaking plain
truth to each other.—We need no flowers
of speech.—I understand you, and you
understand me. We are suited to each
other. ... Yes, notwithstanding the difference

of age, and a thousand other
differences, we are suited to each other.
This possibility of a friendship between
youth and age, is one of the rewards
Heaven grants to the early and late cultivation
of the understanding, and of the
affections. Late as it is with me in life,
I have not, thank God, survived my affections.
—How can I ever, whilst I have
such children, such friends!” After a
pause of a few moments of seemingly
pleasurable reflections, Mrs. Hungerford
continued—“I have never considered
friendship as but a name—as a mere
worldly commerce of interest.—I believe
in disinterested affection, taking the word
disinterested in it's proper sense; and I have
still, believe me, the power of sympathising
with a young friend,—such a young friend
as Caroline Percy. Early as it is with
her in life, she has so cultivated her understanding,
so regulated her mind, that
she cannot consider friendship merely as
a companionship in frivolous amusement,
or a mixture of gossipping confidences

and idle sentiment; therefore, I am proud
enough to hope, that she can and will
be the friend of such an old woman as I
am.”—
“It would be the pride of my life, to
have—to deserve such a friend,” cried
Caroline—“I feel all the condescension
of this kindness.—I know you are much
too good to me.—I am afraid you think
too highly of me. But Mrs. Hungerford's
praise does not operate like flattery,
—though it exalts me in my own
opinion, it shall not make me vain,—it
excites my ambition to be—all she thinks
me.”
“You are all I think you,”—said
Mrs. Hungerford—“and that you may
hereafter be something yet nearer than
a friend to me, is the warmest wish of
my heart. ...But, no, I will not indulge
myself in expressing that wish.— 
Such wishes are never wise where we
have no power, no right to act—Such
wishes often counteract their own object
—Anticipations are always imprudent.

—But,...about my niece, Lady
Mary Pembroke. I particularly admire
the discretion, still more than the kindness,
with which you have acted with
respect to her and Mr. Barclay—You
have left things to their natural course.
You have not by any imprudent zeal or
generosity hazarded a word, that could
hurt the delicacy of either party. You
seem to have been fully aware, that
wherever the affections are concerned,
the human mind is most tenacious of
what one half of the philosophers in the
world will not allow to exist, and the
other half cannot define.—Influenced as
we all are every moment in our performances
and aversions, sometimes imperceptibly,
sometimes avowedly, by the
most trifling, and often the silliest causes,
yet the wisest of us start, and back, and
think it incumbent on our pride in love-affairs,
to resist the slightest interference,
or the best advice, from the best friends.
—What! love upon compulsion!—No
—Jupiter is not more tenacious of his

thunder-bolt, than Cupid is of his arrows.
Blind as he is, none may presume
to direct the hand of that little
urchin.”—
Here the conversation was interrupted
by the entrance of a servant, who brought
the postbag—with many letters for Mrs.
Hungerford.