

BeholdLady Jane Granville reinstated
in her fortune, occupying a fine house,
in a fashionable Square, with suitable
equipage and establishment; carriages
rolling to her door; tickets crowding her
servant's hands; an influx, an affluence of
friends, and congratulations such as quite
astonished Caroline.—
“Where were these people all the time
I lived in Clarges Street?” thought she.
Lady Jane, though she knew from experience
the emptiness and insincerity of
such demonstrations of regard, was, nevertheless,
habitually pleased by them,
and proud to be in a situation, where
numbers found it worth while to pay her
attentions. Her Ladyship, notwithstanding
her foibles, was not, like a mere

fashionable friend, forgetful of favors,
and incapable of gratitude. Warm in
her affection to Caroline, she was eager
to do every thing that could contribute to
her pleasure and advantage.—The
dressing, the producing her young friend
was her prime object.
The pretensions of individuals are often
cruelly mortified, when they come
to encounter the vast competition of a
capital city. As King James said to the
country gentleman at court,— “The little
vessels, that made a figure on the lake,
appear insignificant on the ocean!”
Caroline had neither the pretensions of
a provincial wit, nor of a country beauty; 
happily for her she had not formed
high expectations of pleasure, any hope
of producing effect, or even sensation,
upon her first appearance in the fashionable
world. As she said in her letters to
her friends at home, nothing could be
more dull, or tiresome, than the first experience
of a young lady's introduction
into life; nothing, as she assured Rosamond,

could be less like the reality, than
the delightful representations in novels,
where every day produces new scenes,
new adventures, and new characters.
“She was ashamed,” as she said, “to
write such stupid letters from London; 
but unless she were to have recourse to
invention, she literally had not anything
entertaining to tell. She would, if Rosamond
was in despair, invent a few conquests,
and, like great historians, put in
some fine speeches supposed to have been
spoken by celebrated characters.”
In reality, Caroline's beauty had not
passed so completely unobserved as her
modesty and inexperience imagined.
She did not know the signs of the times.—On
her first entrance into a public room,
eyes turned upon her, the eyes of mothers
with apprehension,—of daughters, with
envy.—Some gentlemen looked with admiration,
others, with curiosity.
“A new face!—Who is she?”
“A relation of Lady Jane Granville's.”

“What has she?”
“I don't know—nothing, I believe.”
“Nothing, certainly,—a daughter of
the Percy, who lost his fortune.”—
All apprehensions ceased on the part
of the ladies—and generally all admiration
on the part of the gentlemen.—Opera
glasses turned another way.—Pity succeeding
to envy, a few charitably disposed,
added,
“Ah! poor thing! unprovided for
... What a pity!”
“Do you dance to night?”
“Does our quadrille come next?”
Some gentleman, an abstract admirer
of beauty, perhaps, asked the honor of
her hand—to dance.—But there the abstraction
generally ended.—A few, indeed,
went farther, and swore that she
was a fine girl, prophesied that she
would take, and declared they would be
d—d if they would not think of her, if
they could afford it.—
From their prophecies or their oaths
nothing ensued, and even the civilities

and compliments she received from Lady
Jane's particular friends and acquaintance,
though in a more polite style, were
equally unmeaning and unproductive.
Ten days passed without leaving a trace
behind.
Unluckily for Caroline, her brother
Alfred was about this time obliged to
leave town. He was summoned to the
country by Mr. Leicester. Dr. Percy
was so continually employed, that she
could scarcely have a few minutes in a
week of his company, now that Lady
Jane's health no longer required his professional
attendance. Caroline, who had
always been used to domestic society and
conversation, was thus compelled to live
completely in public, without the pleasures
of home, and without the amusement
young people generally enjoy in
company, when they are with those of
their own age, to whom they can communicate
their thoughts. Lady Jane Granville
was so much afraid of Caroline's not
appearing fashionable, that she continually

cautioned her against expressing her
natural feelings at the sight of any thing
new and surprising, or at the perception
of the tiresome or ridiculous.—Her
Ladyship would never permit her protégée
to ask the name of any person in
public places, or at private parties—because
not to know certain people “argues
yourself unknown.”
“I'll tell you who every body is, when
we go home”—When she was at home,
Lady Jane was generally too much tired to
explain or to comprehend the description
of these nameless bodies. And even
when her Ladyship was able to satisfy
her curiosity, Caroline was apt to mistake
afterwards the titles and histories of
the personages, and by the misnomers
of which she was guilty provoked Lady
Jane past endurance—Whether it was
from want of natural genius in the scholar,
or interest in the study, or from the
teacher's thus unphilosophically separating
the name and the idea, it is certain,
that Caroline made but slow progress in

acquiring her fashionable nomenclature.—She
was nearly in despair at her own
want of memory, when fortunately, a
new instructress fell in her way, who was
delighted with her ignorance, and desired
nothing better than to tell her who
was who;—in every private party and
public place, to point out the ridiculous
or notorious, and at the moment the
figures were passing, whether they heard
or not, to relate anecdotes characteristic
and illustrative.—This new, entertaining
preceptress, was Lady Frances Arlington.
Her Ladyship having quarrelled
with Miss Georgiana Falconer, hated to
go out with Mrs. Falconer, hated still
more to stay at home with the old tapestry-working
Duchess her aunt, and
was delighted to have Lady Jane Granville
to take her every where—She cared
little what any person thought of herself,
much less what they thought of Caroline—therefore
free from all the delicacies
and anxieties of Lady Jane's friendship
and systems—Lady Frances, though from

different premises, coming to the same
conclusion—agreed, that thinking of
Caroline's advantages—was stuff!—and
that all she had to do was to amuse herself
in town.—Caroline was the most
convenient companion to go out with,
for she never crossed her Ladyship about
partners, or places, never vied with her
for admiration, or seemed to mind her
flirtations, but quietly suffering her to
draw off all the fashionable beaux, whom
Lady Jane stationed upon duty—she let
Lady Frances Arlington talk, or dance,
to her heart's content, and was satisfied often
to sit still and be silent. The variety
of words and ideas, facts and remarks,
which her lively and practised companion
poured into her mind, Caroline
was left to class for herself, to generalise,
and to make her own conclusions—Now
she had means of amusement: she
took pleasure in observing all that was
going on, and she knew something
of the characters and motives of the actors
in such different scenes. As a speculator,

she was particularly struck by
the eagerness of all the players, at their
different games of love, interest, ar ambition.
And in various sets of company,
she was diverted by observing how each
thought themselves the whole world—Here
a party of young ladies and gentlemen,
practising, morning, noon, and night,
cotillon steps for their quadrille—And
while they are dancing the quadrille,
jockey gentlemen ranged against the
wall in the ball-room, talking of their
horses—grave wigs and snuff-boxes in
a corner settling the fate of Europe,
proving that they were, are, or ought to
be behind the scenes. At the card-tables
sharpened faces seeing nothing in the
universe but their cards.
At the piano, a set of signors and signoras,
and ladies of quality, mingled together
full of duets, soloes, overtures, cavatinas,
expression, execution, and thorough
bass—mothers in agonies, daughters
pressed or pressing forward; some young
and trembling with shame; more, though

young, yet confident of applause; others,
and these the saddest among the gay,
veteran female exhibitors, tired to death,
yet forced to continue the unprofitable
glories.
In one grand party, silence and state; 
in another group, rival matrons chasing
round the room the heir presumptive to
a dukedom, or wedging their daughters
closer and closer to that door-way, through
which Lord William—must pass.
Here a poet acting enthusiasm with a
chapeau bras—there another dying of
ennui to admiration—here a wit cutting
and slashing right or wrong—there
a man of judgment standing by,
silent as the grave—all for notoriety.
Whilst others of high rank, birth, or
wealth, without effort or merit, secure
of distinction, looked down with sober
contempt upon the poor strugglers and
wranglers for fame.
Caroline had as yet seen but few of
the literary candidates for celebrity; 
only those privileged few, who, combining

the pretensions of rank and talent, had a
natural right to be in certain circles, or
those who, uniting superior address, had
risen or forced their way into fine company—Added
to these were two or three,
who were invited to parties as being the
wonder and show of the season—Persons
whom the pride of rank found it
gratifying to have at command, and who
afforded to them a most happy relief from
the dullness of their habitual existence.
Caroline, though pitying the exhibitors,
whenever she met any of this description,
had great curiosity to see more of literary
society. But Lady Jane systematically
hung back on this point, and
evaded her promises.
“Yes, my dear, I did promise to take
you to Lady Angelica Headingham's,
and Lady Spilsbury's, but there's time
enough—not yet ... not till I have
established you in a higher society ...
Not for your advantage to get among the
blue-stockings—the blue rubs off—and
the least shade might ruin you with ...

some people—If you were married, I
should introduce you to that set with
pleasure ... for they entertain me vastly,
and it is a great privation to me this
winter—A long fast—But even this abstinence
from wit I can endure for your
sake, my dear Caroline—you are my first
object,—If you would take the bel
esprit line decidedly.—Talents you have,
but not courage sufficient—And even if
you had, you are scarce old enough—With
your beauty and grace ... you
have a better chance in the circle you
are in, my dear.”
But Lady Frances Arlington, who
thought only of her own chance of
amusement, seconded Caroline's wish to
see the literary set—Nothing could be
more stupid, her Ladyship said, than
running round always in the same circle—for
her part, she loved to see clever
odd people,—And though her auntduchess
would not let her go to Lady
Spilsbury's, yet Lady Frances was sure,
that, with Lady Jane Granville for her
chaperon, she could get a passport for

Lady Angelica Headingham's, “because
Lady Angelica is a sort of cousin, I
can't tell you how many times removed,
but just as many as will serve my present
purpose—A connexion quite near enough
to prove her fashionable, and respectable,
and all that—So, my dear Lady Jane—I'll
ask leave,” concluded Lady
Frances, “and we will go next conversazione
day.”—
No—Lady Jane was firm to what she
believed to be for Caroline's interest, and
she refused to take Caroline into that set,
and therefore declined the honor of chaperoning
her Ladyship to Lady Angelica
Headingham's.
“Oh, my dear Lady Jane! you couldn't,
you wouldn't be so cruel? When I am
dying with impatience to see my cousin
make herself ridiculous, as I hear she does
more and more every day with that Baron
Wilhelmberg—Wilhelmberg, I said,
not Altenberg—Miss Caroline Percy
need not have turned her head so quickly.
Lady Angelica's man is a German, and

yours was a Pole, or Prussian, was not
he?—Do you know the ugliest man I
ever saw in my life, and the handsomest,
were both Poles,—but they are all well
bred.”—
“But about Lady Angelica's German
Baron,” interrupted Lady Jane.
“Yes, what sort of a person is he?” 
said Caroline.
“As unlike your Count Altenberg as
possible—An oddish looking genius—oldish
too—like one's idea of an alchymist,
or a professor, or a conjuror—like
any thing, rather than a man of fashion—but,
nevertheless, since he has got
into fashion, the ladies have all found
out, that he is very like a Roman Emperor—And
so he is—like any head on
an old coin.”—
“But how comes there to be such a
value set on this head?—How came he
into fashion?” said Lady Jane.
“Is it possible, you don't know?—Oh!
it was when you were out of the
world he first made the great noise—

by dreaming—yes, dreaming—dreaming
himself, and making every body else
dream as he pleases; he sported last
season a new theory of dreaming—joins
practice to theory too—Very extraordinary—interprets
all your dreams to
your satisfaction they say—and ...
quite on philosophical principles, can
make you dream whatever he pleases.—True—upon
my veracity.”
“Did your Ladyship ever try his
skill?” said Lady Jane.
“Not I; for the Duchess would not
hear of him,—but, I long the more to
know what he could make me dream.—He
certainly is very clever, for he was
asked last winter every where.—All the
world ran mad—Lady Spilsbury, and my
wise cousin, I understand, came to pulling
wigs for him.—Angelica conquered
at last; you know Angelica was
always a little bit of a coquet ... not a
little bit neither.—At first, to be sure,
she thought no more of love for the
German Emperor, than I do this minute—

But he knew how to coquet also.
... Who would have thought it?—So
there were notes, and verses, and
dreams, and interpretations, and I can't
tell you what—But, so far, the man is no
charlatan; he has made Lady Angelica
dream the very dream he chose—the
strangest too imaginable—that she is in
love with him.—And the interpretation
is, that she will take him “for better for
worse.”
“That is your own interpretation, is
not it, Lady Frances?” said Caroline.
“Is it possible there is any truth in
it?” said Lady Jane.
“All true—positively—I hear.—And
of all things, I should like to see Lady
Angelica and the Baron face to face—tête
à tête—or profile by profile, in the
true Roman Emperor and Empress
style ... medal style.”
“So should I, I confess,” said Lady
Jane, smiling.
“The best, or the worst of it is,” 
continued Lady Frances, “that, after

all, this baron bold is, I've a notion, no
better than an adventurer; for I heard
a little bird sing, that a certain ambassador
hinted confidentially, that the Baron
de Wilhelmberg would find it difficult to
prove his sixteen quarterings. But now,
upon both your honors, promise me
you'll never mention this—Never give
the least confidential hint of it to man,
woman, or child; because it might get
round, spoil all our sport, and never
might I have the dear delight of drawing
the caricature.”
“Now your Ladyship is not serious,
I am sure,” said Caroline.
“Never more serious—never so serious
in my life—and, I assure you,” 
cried Lady Frances, speaking very earnestly
and anxiously, “If you give the
least hint, I will never forgive you while
I live—for I have set my heart on doing
the caricature.”
“Impossible! that, for the mere
pleasure of drawing a caricature, you

would let your own cousin expose herself
with an adventurer,” said Caroline.
“La! Lady Angelica is only my
cousin a hundred removes. I can't help
her being ridiculous—Every body, I
dare say, has ridiculous cousins—and
laugh one must.—If one was forbid to
laugh at one's relatives, it would be sad
indeed for those who have extensive connexions.—Well,
Lady Jane, I am glad
to see that you don't pique yourself on
being too good to laugh.—So I may
depend on you.—One party for Lady
Angelica's is fixed for Monday.”
No—Lady Jane had, it is certain,
some curiosity and some desire, to laugh
at her neighbor's expense. So far, Lady
Frances had, with address, touched her
foible for her purpose; but Lady Jane's
affection for Caroline strengthened her
against the temptation. She was persuaded,
that it would be a disadvantage
to Caroline to go to this conversazione.—She
would not upon any account have

Miss Percy be seen in the blue-stocking
set at present—she had her reasons.—To
this resolution her Ladyship adhered,
though Lady Frances Arlington, pertinacious
to accomplish any purpose she
took into her fancy, returned morning
after morning to the charge.—Sometimes
she would come with intelligence
from her fetcher and carrier of news, as
she called him, Captain Nuttall.—One
day, with a very dejected conuntenance,
her Ladyship came in, saying—
“It's off—It's all off—Nuttall thinks
it will never be a match.”
The next day, in high spirits, she
brought word—
“It's on—It's on again—Nuttall
thinks it will certainly be a match,—and
Angelica is more delightfully ridiculous
than ever! Now, my dear Lady Jane,
Tuesday?—next week?—the week afterward?
In short, my dearest Lady
Jane, once for all, will you ever take me
to her conversazione?”
“Never,—my dear Lady Frances,

till Miss Caroline Percy is married”—said
Lady Jane— “I have my own
reasons.”
“Then I wish Miss Caroline Percy
was to be married to morrow—I have
my own reasons. But, after all, tell me,
is there any the least chance of Miss
Percy's being married?”
“Not the least chance,” said Caroline.
“That is her own fault,” said Lady
Jane, looking mortified and displeased.
“That cannot be said of me, there's
one comfort,” cried Lady Frances. If
I'm not married, 'tis not my fault; but
my papa's, who, to make an eldest son,
left me only a poor 5000l. portion.
What a shame to rob daughters for sons,
as the grandees do! I wish it had
pleased Heaven to have made me the
daughter of an honest merchant, who
never thinks of this impertinence—then,
with my plum, or plums, I might
have chosen the first spendthrift Lord in
the land, or may be, I might have been

blessed with an offer from that paragon
of perfection, Lord William.—Do you
know what made him such a paragon of
perfection?—His elder brother's falling
sick, and being like to die. Now, if the
brother should recover, adieu to my Lord
William's perfections.”—
“Not in the opinion of all,” said
Lady Jane, “Lord William was a
favorite of mine, and I saw his merit
long ago, and shall see it, whether his
elder brother dies or recovers.”
“At all events,” continued Lady
Frances, “he will be a paragon, you will
see, only till he is married, and then,— 
‘How shall I your true love know
From any other man?’
“By the by, the other day, Lord
William, in flying from the chase of
matrons, in his fright ... (he always
looks like a frightened hare, poor creature!)
... took refuge between you two
ladies. Seriouly, Lady Jane, do you
know, I think you manage vastly well

for your protégée—You are not so
broad as Mrs. Falconer.”
“Broad! I beg your Ladyship's pardon
for repeating your word,” cried Lady
Jane,—looking quite angry, and feeling
too angry to parry, as she usually did,
with with— “I really don't understand
your Ladyship.”
“Then I must wish your Ladyship a
good morning, for I've no time or talents
for explanation,” said Lady Frances,
running off, delighted to have produced a
sensation.
Lady Jane range for her carriage, and
made no observations on what had
passed. But in the evening she declared,
that she would not take Lady
Frances Arlington out with her any
more, that her Ladyship's spirits were
too much for her,— “Besides,” my dear
Caroline, “when she is with you, I
never hear you speak a word, you leave
it entirely to her Ladyship.—After all,
she is, if you observe, a perfectly selfish
creature.”

Lady Jane recollected various instances
of this selfishness.
“She merely makes a tool of me—my
carriage, my servants, my time, myself,
always to be at her service, whenever
the aunt-duchess cannot, or will not, do
her Ladyship's behests.—For the slightest
errand she could devise, she would
send me to the antipodes; bid me fetch
her a tooth-pick from the farthest inch
of the city. Well! I could pardon
all the trouble she gives for her fancies,
if she would take any trouble for others
in return.—No—Ask her to do the least
thing for you, ... and, she tells you,
she'd be very glad ... but she does
not know how—or, she would do
it this minute—but that she has not
time—or, she would have remembered
it certainly, but that she forgot
it.”—
Caroline admitted, that Lady Frances
was thoughtless and giddy, but she hoped
not incurably selfish, as Lady Jane now
seemed to suppose.

“Pardon me, she is incurably selfish—Her
childishness made me excuse
her for a great while; I fancied she was
so giddy, that she could not remember
any thing; but I find she never forgets
any thing, on which she has set her own
foolish head.—Giddy! I can't bear
people, who are too giddy to think of any
body but themselves.”
Caroline endeavored to excuse her
Ladyship, by saying, that, by all accounts,
she had been educated in a way
that must make her selfish. ... “Idolized,
and spoilt, I think you told me she
was?”
“True, very likely; let her mother,
or her grandmother, settle that account—I
am not to blame, and I will not suffer
for it.—You know, if we entered
like your father into the question of education,
we might go back to Adam and
Eve, and find nobody to blame but
them.—In the mean time, I will not
take Lady Frances Arlington out with
me any more; on this point I am determined.—For,

suppose I forgave her selfishness
and childishness, and all that,
why should I be subject to her impertinence?—She
has been suffered to say
whatever comes into her head, and to
think it wit.—Now, as far as I am concerned,
I will teach her better.”
Caroline, who always saw the best
side of characters, said something in
favor of Lady Frances, and pleaded her
freedom from art and dissimulation.—
“My dear Caroline, she is not half
so free from dissimulation, as you are
from envy and jealousy.—She is always
in your way, and you never see it.—I
can't bear to hear you defend her, when
I know she would and does sacrifice you; 
at any time and all times, to her own
amusement. But she shall not stand in
your light—for you are a generous, unsuspicious
creature.—Lady Frances shall
never go out with me again—and I have
just thought of an excellent way of settling
that matter.—I'll change my coach

for a vis-a-vis—which will carry only two.”
This Lady Jane, quick and decided,
immediately accomplished; she adhered
to her resolution, and never did take
Lady Frances Arlington out with her
more.
Returning from the party this evening—a
party where they met Lord William,
who had sat beside Caroline at supper,
Lady Jane began to reproach her with
having been unusually reserved and
silent.
Caroline said she was not conscious
of this.
“I hope and trust, I am not too broad,” 
continued Lady Jane, with a very proud
and proper look— “but I own, I think
there is as much indelicacy in a young
lady's hanging back too much, as in
her coming too forward.—And gentlemen
are apt to overrate their consequence
as much, if they find you are
afraid to speak to them, as if you

were to talk, ... like Miss Falconer
herself.—”
Caroline assented fully to the truth of
this remark; assured Lady Jane, that
she had not intentionally hung back, or
been reserved; that she had no affectation
of this sort.—In a word, she promised
to exert herself more in conversation,
since Lady Jane desired it.
“I do wish it,” my dear— “You
don't get on—there's no getting you on.—You
certainly do not talk enough to gentlemen
when they sit beside you.—It
will be observed.”
“Then, Ma'am, I hope it will be
observed too,” said Caroline, smiling,
“that the gentlemen do not talk to
me.”
“No matter—you should find something
to say to them—you have plenty
of gold, but no ready change about you.—Now,
as Lord Chesterfield tells us,
you know, that will never do.”
Caroline was perfectly sensible of this

—she knew she was deficient in the sort
of conversation of the moment, requisite
for fine company and public places.—
“But when I have nothing to say,
is not it better for me to say nothing,
Ma'am?”
“No, my dear—Half the world are
in that predicament; but would it mend
our condition to reduce our parties to
quaker's silent meetings?—My dear, you
must condescend to talk without saying
any thing—And you must bear to hear
and say the same words a hundred times
over—and another thing, my dear Caroline,
I wish you would cure yourself of
looking fatigued.—You will never be
thought agreeable, unless you can endure,
without showing that you are tired,
the most stupid people extant—”
Caroline smiled, and said, she recollected
her father's telling her, “that the
Prince de Ligne, the most agreeable
man of his day, declared, that his secret
depended not on his wit or talents for

conversation, but on his power of concealing
the ennui he felt in stupid company.”
“Well, my dear, I tell you so, as
well as the Prince de Ligne, and let me
see that you profit by it to morrow.”
The next night they went to a large
party, at a very fine lady's.—It was dull,
but Caroline did her best to look happy,
and exerted herself to talk to please Lady
Jane, who, from her card-table, from
time to time, looked at her, nodded,
and smiled.—When they got into their
carriage, Lady Jane, before she had
well drawn up the glass, began to praise
her for her performance this evening.— “Really,
my dear, you got on very well
to night.—And I hear Miss Caroline
Percy is very agreeable.—And, shall I
tell you who told me so?—No; that
would make you too vain.—But I'll
leave you to sleep upon what has been
said—to morrow you shall hear more.”
The next morning, Caroline had stolen
away from visitors, and quietly in her

own room was endeavoring to proceed
in her copy of the miniature for Mr.
Gresham, when Lady Jane came into
her apartment, with a letter and it's cover
in her hand.— “A letter, in which
you, Caroline, are deeply concerned.”
A sudden hope darted across Caroline's
imagination, and illuminated her countenance.—As
suddenly it vanished, when
she saw on the cover of the letter, no
foreign post mark, no foreign hand—but
a hand unknown to her.
“Deeply concerned!—how can I ...
how ... how am I ... concerned in
this, Ma'am?”—she asked—with difficulty
commanding her voice, to articulate
the words.
“Only a proposal for you, my dear,” 
said Lady Jane, smiling— “Not a proposal
for which you need blush—as
you'll see—if you'll read—”
But observing that Caroline was not
at this moment capable of reading,—without
seeming to notice the tremor of
her hand—and that she was holding the

letter upside down before her eyes, Lady
Jane, with kind politeness passed on to
the picture, at which her young friend
had been at work, and stooping to examine
the miniature with her glass, made
some observations on the painting, and
gave Caroline time to recover.—Nor did
her Ladyship look up till Caroline exclaimed,
“John Clay!—English Clay!—”
“Yes—Clay, of Clay-Hall, as Mrs.
Falconer would say.—You see, my love,
I told you truly, it was no blushing
matter.—I am sorry I startled you by
my abruptness.—Surprises are generally
ill-judged—and always ill-bred—Acquit
me, I beseech you, of all but thoughtlessness,”—said
Lady Jane, sitting down
by Caroline, and kindly taking her hand— “I
hope you know I am not Mrs.
Falconer.”
“I do, indeed,” said Caroline, pressing
her hand, “I feel all your kindness,
all your politeness.”
“Of course, I knew that a proposal

from Clay, of Clay-Hall, would be to
you ... just what it is to me,” said
Lady Jane.— “I hope you cannot apprehend
that, for the sake of his seven or
ten thousand, whatever he has per annum,
I should press such a match upon
you, Caroline.—No, no, you are worth
something much better.”
“Thank you, my dear Lady Jane,” 
cried Caroline, embracing her with warm
gratitude.
“Why, child, you could not think
me so ... merely mercenary.—No—touch
me upon family—or fashion ... any
of my aristocratic prejudices, as your
father calls them, and I might, perhaps,
be a little peremptory.—But John Clay
is a man just risen from the ranks ...
lately promoted form being a manufacturers's
son, to be a subaltern in good
company ... looking to rise another step
by purchase ... No, no—a Percy could
not accept such an offer, no loss of fortune
could justify such a mésalliance.—Such
was my first feeling, and I am sure

yours, when you read at the bottom of
this awkwardly folded epistle, ‘Your
Ladyship's most devoted, &c. John
Clay.’”—
“I believe I had no feeling, but pure
surprise,” said Caroline.— “I scarcely
think Mr. Clay can be in earnest—for,
to the best of my recollection, he never
spoke five words to me in his life!”—
“English Clay, my dear.—Has not
he said every thing in one word?—I
should have been a little surprised, but
that I have been seeing this good while
the dessous des cartes.—Don't flatter
yourself, that love for you offers Clay-Hall—No; 
but hatred to Mrs. and Miss
Falconer.—There have been quarrels
upon quarrels, and poor Lady Trant in
the middle of them, unable to get out—and
John Clay swearing he is not to
be taken in—and Miss Falconer buffeting
Lady Trant with the willow he left
on her brows—and Mrs. Falconer smiling
through the whole, and keeping the secret,

which every body knows.—In
short, my dear, 'tis not worth explaining
to you—but John Clay certainly hopes
to complete the mortification of the Falconers,
by giving himself to you.—Besides,
you are in fashion.—Too much
has been said about him—I'm tired of
him.—Write your answer, my dear—or
I'm to write, am I?—Well, give me
some gilt paper—let us do the thing properly.” 
Properly the thing was done—The
letter folded, not awkwardly, was
sealed and shut, Caroline delighted with
Lady Jane, and Lady Jane delighted
with herself.
“So there's an end of that matter,” 
said Lady Jane. “I saw how it would
be long ago; but I was glad you saw nothing
of it, lest you should not have let
it come to a declaration.—Now a refusal
is always creditable; therefore, I own, I
should have been mortified, if the season
had passed without your having one proposal.—But
now you have nothing to

be ashamed of—you've killed your man—and
I hope and trust I shall live to
see you kill another.”
Caroline laughed, but said she was
glad Lady Jane was not one of those,
who count refusals as so many proofs of
a young lady's merit; for her own part,
she acknowledged she was inclined to
think, that they were sometimes proofs
rather of coquetry and duplicity.
Lady Jane hesitated, and said she did
not see this—she could not agree to
this.—
The conversation went on, till her
Ladyship and Caroline came to a complete
opposition of opinion on a principle,
which, though it was only stated in
general, and in the abstract, her Ladyship
defended with an urgency, and Caroline
resisted with a steadiness, which
are seldom shown about any merely
speculative point, unless there is some
secret apprehension of their being soon
reduced to practice.
Lady Jane asserted, that a woman

should always let an attachment come
to a declaration, before she permits a
man to see her mind, even though determined
upon a refusal.”
Caroline thought this would be using
the man ill.
Lady Jane maintained, that it would
be using him much worse, to refuse him
before he asked.
“But without refusing,” Caroline said,
that “a gentleman might be led to perceive
when he was not likely to be accepted,
and thus would be saved the
pain and humiliation of a rejected proposal.”
“It was not a young lady's first business
to think of that—her first duty was
to do what was right and proper for herself”—Lady
Jane said.
“Certainly; but the very question is,
what is right and proper?”
“To give a distinct answer when a
distinct question is asked, neither more
nor less,” said Lady Jane. “Caroline,
on these subjects you must trust to one

who knows the world, to tell you the
opinion of the world. A woman is safe,
and cannot be blamed by friend or foe,
if she adhere to the plain rule ‘Stay till
you are asked.’ Till a gentleman thinks
proper, is form, to declare his attachment,
nothing can be more indelicate
than for a lady to see it.”
“Or, in some cases, more disingenuous,
more cruel, than to pretend to be
blind to it.”
“Cruel!—Cruel is a word of the last
century, or the century before the last.—Cruelty
is never heard of now, my dear—Gentlemen's
hearts don't break in
these our days—Or suppose an odd
heart should break; if the lady is treating
it according to rule, she is not to
blame.—Why did not the proud tongue
speak?—Whatever happens she is acquitted
by the world.”
“And by her own conscience? Surely
not if she deceive, and injure by deception.”
Lady Jane warmly repeated, that “she

knew the world ... that at her time of
life she ought to know the world, and
that she was certain any line of conduct
but that which she had pointed
out, would expose a woman to the
charge of indelicacy, and, perhaps, of
impertinence.”
These were heavy charges, Caroline
felt, but she thought, that, when not deserved,
they could be borne better than
self-reproaches for the want of candor
and truth.
Lady Jane observed, that, in the catalogue
of female virtues, delicacy must
have the foremost place.
Caroline made a distinction between
real delicacy and punctilio.
Lady Jane was inclined to call it a
distinction without a difference.—She,
however, more prudently said, that
punctilio was necessary as the guard of
female delicacy.
Undoubtedly. But the greater virtue
should not be sacrificed to the
less—Truth and sincerity, Caroline

thought, must be classed among
the highest virtues of woman, as well as
of man, and she hoped they were perfectly
consistent with the utmost feminine
modesty and delicacy. She asked
whether, after all, the plea of delicacy
and punctilio was not sometimes used to
conceal the real motives—Perhaps
ladies, in pretending to be too delicate
to see a gentleman's sentiments, were
often, in fact, gratifying their own vanity,
and urging him to that declaration,
which was to complete the female
triumph.
Lady Jane grew angry—but fearing
lest Caroline should perceive, that she
had some particular object in view ...
doubtful whether Caroline knew, or did
not know, her aim—and further having
a secret hope, that, like, other young
ladies who support fine sentiments about
love and generosity in conversation, she
might, when it came to the test, forget
them, her Ladyship urged her opinion
no further.

Indeed she candidly acknowledged,
that much might be said on Caroline's
side of the question—and there the matter
ended.