

“Where were we when all this began?” 
cried lady Delacour, forcing herself
to resume an air of gayety&wblank;“O,
masquerade was the order of the day— 
tragedy or comedy? which suits your genius
best, my dear?”
“Whichever suits your ladyship's taste
least”
“Why, my woman, Marriott, says, I
ought to be tragedy; and, upon the notion
that people always succeed best when
they take characters diametrically opposite

to their own—Clarence Hervey's principle
—Perhaps you don't think that he has
any principles; but there you are wrong; 
I do assure you, he has sound principles— 
of taste.
“Of that,” said Belinda, with a constrained
smile, “he gives the most convincing
proof, by his adrairing your ladyship
so much.”
“And by his admiring miss Portman
so much more. But whilst we are making
speeches to one another, poor Marriott
is standing in distress like Garrick,
between tragedy and comedy.”
Lady Delacour opened her dressing-room
door, and pointed to her as she stood
with the dress of the comic muse on one
arm, and the tragic muse on the other.
“I am-afraid I have not spirits enough
to undertake the comic muse,” said miss
Portman.
Marriott, who was a personage of prodigious
consequence, and the judge in the
last resort at her mistress's toilette, looked
extremely out of humour at having been

kept waiting so long; and yet more so, at
the idea that her appellant jurisdictions
could be disputed.
“Your ladyship's taller than miss
Portman by half a head,” said Marriott,
“and to be sure will best become tragedy,
with this long train; besides, I'd
settled all the rest of your ladyship's dress.
Tragedy, they say, is always tall, and, no
offence, your ladyships' taller than miss
Portman by half a head.”
“For head read inch,” said lady Delacour,
“if you please.”
“When things are settled, one can't
bear to have them unsettled—but your
ladyship must have your own way, to be
sure—I'll say no more,” cried she, throwing
down the dresses.
“Stay, Marriott,” said lady Delacour,
and she placed herself between the angry
waiting-maid and the door.
“Why will you, who are the best creature
in the world, put yourself into these
furies about nothing—have patience with
us, and you shall be satisfied.”

“That's another affair,” said Marriott.
“Miss Portman,” continued her ladyship,
“don't talk of not having spirits— 
you that are all life and spirits!—What say
you, Belinda?—O yes, you must be the
comic muse; and I, it seems, must be
tragedy, because Marriott has a passion
for seeing me ‘come sweeping by.’ And
because Marriott must have her own way
in every thing—she rules me with a rod of
iron, my dear—so tragedy I needs must
be—Marriott knows her power.”
There was an air of extreme vexation
in lady Delacour's countenance, as she
pronounced these last words, in which
evidently more was meant than met the
ear. Upon many occasions miss Portman
had observed, that Marriott exercised
despotic authority over her mistress; and
she had seen, with surprise, that a lady,
who would not yield an iota of power to
her husband, submitted herself to every
caprice of the most insolent of waiting-women.
For some time, Belinda imagined

that this submission was merely an
air, as she had seen some other fine ladies
proud of appearing to be governed by a
favourite maid; but she was soon convinced,
that Marriott was no favourite
with lady Delacour; that her ladyship's
was not proud humility, but fear. It
seemed certain, that a woman, extravagantly
fond of her own will, would never
have given it up without some very substantial
reason. It seemed as if Marriott
was in possession of some secret, which
should for ever remain unknown. This
idea had occurred to miss Portman more
than once; but never so forcibly as upon
the present occasion. There had always
been some mystery about her ladyship's
toilette; at certain hours doors were
bolted, and it was impossible for any body
but Marriott to obtain admission. Miss
Portman at first imagined that lady Delacour
dreaded the discovery of her cosmetic
secrets, but her ladyship's rouge
was so glaring, and her pearl powder was
so obvious, that Belinda was convinced

there must be some other cause for this toilette
secresy. There was a little cabinet
beyond her bedchamber, which lady Delacour
called her boudoir, to which there
was an entrance by a back stair-case; 
but no one ever entered there but Marriott.
One night, lady Delacour, after
dancing with great spirit at a ball, at her
own house, fainted suddenly; miss Portman
attended her to her bedchamber, but
Marriott begged that her lady might be
left alone with her, and she would by
no means suffer Belinda to follow her into
the boundoir.—All these things Belinda recollected
in the space of a few seconds,
as she stood contemplating Marriott and
the dresses. The hurry of getting ready
for the masquerade, however, dispelled
these thoughts, and by the time she was
dressed, the idea of what Clarence Hervey
would think of her appearance was
uppermost in her mind. She was anxious
to know, whether he would discover her
in the character of the comic muse.
Lady Delacour was discontented with

her tragic attire, and she grew still more
out of humour with herself, when she
saw Belinda.
“I protest Marriot has made a perfect
fright of me,” said her ladyship, as she
got into her carriage, “and I'm positive
my dress would become you a million of
times better than your own.”
Miss Portman regretted that it was too
late to change.
“Not at all too late, my dear,” said
lady Delacour; “never too late for women
to change their minds, their dress,
or their lovers. Seriously, you know we
are to call at my friend lady Singleton's— 
she sees masks to night—I'm quite intimate
there; I'll make her let me step
up to her own room, where no soul can
interrupt us, and there we can change
our dresses, and Marriott will know nothing
of the matter. Marriott's a faithful
creature, and very fond of me; fond of
power too—but who is not?—we must
all have our faults—one would not quarrel

with such a good creature as Marriott
for a trifle.” Then suddenly changing
her tone, she said, “not a human being
will find us out at the masquerade; for no
one but Mrs. Freke knows that we are
two muses. Clarence Hervey swears he
should know me in any disguise—but I
defy him—I shall take special delight in
puzzling him. Harriot Freke has told
him, in confidence, that I'm to be the
widow Brady, in man's clothes; now
that's to be Harriot's own character, so
Hervey will make fine confusion.”
As soon as they got to lady Singleton's,
lady Delacour and miss Portman immediately
went up stairs to exchange
dresses. Poor Belinda, now that she felt
herself in spirits to undertake the comic
muse, was rather vexed to be obliged to
give up her becoming character; but there
was no resisting the polite energy of lady
Delacour's vanity. Her ladyship ran as
quick as lightning into a closet within
the bedchamber, saying to lady Singleton's

woman, who attempted, to follow
with—“Can I do any thing for your
ladyship.”—“No, no, no—nothing, nothing
—thank ye, thank ye,—I want no assistance
—I never let any body do any thing
for me but Marriott;” and she bolted herself
in the closet. In a few minutes she
half opened the door, threw out her tragic
robes, and cried, “Here, miss Portman,
give me yours—quick—and let's see
whether comedy or tragedy will be ready
first.”
“Lord bless and forgive me,” said lady
Singleton's woman, when lady Delacour
at last threw open the door, when she
was completely dressed—“but, if your
la'ship has not been dressing all this time
in that den, without any thing in the
shape of a looking-glass—and not to let
me help! I that should have been so
proud.”
Lady Delacour put half a guinea into
the waiting-maid's hand, laughed affectedly
at her own whimsicalities, and declared,

that she could always dress herself
better without a glass than with one.
At this went off admirably well with
every body but miss Portman; she could
not help thinking it extraordinary, that a
person who was obviously fond of being
waited upon, would never suffer any person
to assist her at her toilette except
Marriott, a woman of whom she was evidently
afraid. Lady Delacour's quick eye
saw curiosity painted in Belinda's countenance,
and for a moment she was embarrassed; 
but she soon recovered herself,
and endeavoured to turn the course of
miss Portman's thoughts, by whispering to
her some nonsense about Clarence Hervey
—A cabalistical name, which she
knew had the power, when pronounced
in a certain tone, of throwing Belinda into
confusion.
The first person they saw, when they went
into the drawing-room at lady Singleton's,
was this very Clarence Hervey, who
was not in a domino. He had laid a

wager with one of his acquaintance, that
he could perform the part of the serpent,
such as he is seen in Fuseli's well known
picture. For this purpose he had exerted
much ingenuity in the invention and execution
of a length of coiled skin, which he
manœuvered with great dexterity, by
means of internal wires; his grand difficulty
had been to manufacture the rays
that were to come from his eyes. He had
contrived a set of phosphoric rays, which
he was certain would charm all the fair
daughters of Eve. He forgot, it seems,
that phosphorus could not well be seen by
candle light. When he was just equipped
as a serpent, his rays set fire to part of his
envelope, and it was with the greatest difficulty
that he was extricated. He escaped
unhurt, but his serpent's skin was
utterly consumed; nothing remained, but
the melancholy spectacle of it's skeleton.
He was obliged to give up the hopes of
shining at the masquerade, but he resolved
to be at lady Singleton's, that he
might meet lady Delacour and miss Portman.

The moment that the tragic and
comic muse appeared, he invoked them
with much humour and mock pathos, declaring
that he knew not which of them
could best sing his adventure. After a
recital of his misfortune had entertained
the company, and after the muses had
performed their parts to the satisfaction of
the audience, and their own, the conversation
ceased to be supported in masquerade
character; muses and harlequins,
gipsies and Cleopatras, began to talk of
their private affairs, and of the news and
the scandal of the day.
A groupe of gentlemen, amongst whom
was Clarence Hervey, gathered round the
tragic muse; as Mr. Hervey had hinted
that he knew she was a person of distinction,
though he would not tell her name.
He thought that he could not flatter her
ladyship more than by abusing miss
Portman. After he had exercised his wit
for some time, without obtaining from the
tragic muse one single syllable, he whispered,
“Lady Delacour, why this unnatural

reserve? do you imagine, that
through this tragical disguise I have not
found you out?”
The tragic muse, apparently absorbed
in meditation, vouchsafed no reply.
“The devil a word can you get for your
pains, Hervey,” said a gentleman of his
acquaintance, who joined the party at this
instant. “Why didn't you stick to t'other
muse, who, to do her justice, is as errant
a flirt as your heart could wish for.”
“There's danger in flirting,” said Clarence,
“with an errant flirt of Mrs. Stanhope's
training. There's a kind of electricity
about that girl. I have a sort of
cobweb feeling, an imaginary net coming
all over me.
“Fore-warned is fore-armed,” replied his
companion—“a man must be a novice indeed,
that could be taken in at this time
of day by a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's.”
“That Mrs. Stanhope must be a good
clever dame, faith,” said a third gentleman,
—“There's no less than six of her nieces,
whom she has got off within these four

winters—Not one of 'em now, that has
not made a catch-match—There's the
eldest of the set, Mrs. Tollemache, what
had she, in the devil's name, to set up
with in the world, but a pair of good
eyes—Her aunt, to be sure, taught her
the use of them early enough—They
might have rolled to all eternity, before
they would have rolled me out of my
senses; but you see, they did Tollemache's
business—However, they are going
to part now, I hear—Tollemache was
tired of her, before the honey-moon was
over, as I foretold. Then there's the
musical girl—Joddrell, who was no more
ear than a post, went and married her,
because he had a mind to set up for a
connoisseur in music; and Mrs. Stanhope
flattered him that he was one.”
The gentlemen joined in the general
laugh—The tragic muse sighed—
Even were she at the School for Scandal,
the tragic muse not laugh, except
behind her mask,” said Clarence
Hervey.

“Far be it from her, to laugh at those
follies which she must for ever deplore!” 
said Belinda, in a feigned voice—“What
miseries spring from these ill-suited marriages!
—The victims are sacrificed, before
they have sense enough to avoid their
fate.”
Clarence Hervey imagined, that this
speech alluded to lady Delacour's own
marriage.
“Damn me, if I know any woman,
young or old, that would avoid being
married, if she could, though, damn
me:” cried sir Philip Baddely, a gentleman
who always supplied “each vacuity
of sense” with an oath—“But damn me,
Rochfort, didn't Valleton marry one of
those nieces?”
“Yes: she was a mighty fine dancer,
and had good legs enough: Mrs. Stanhope
got poor Valleton to fight a duel
about her place in a country dance, and
then he was so pleased with himself for
his prowess, that he married the girl.”
Belinda made an effort to change her

seat, but she was encompassed so, that
she could not retreat.
“As to Jenny Mason, the fifth of the
nieces,” continued the witty gentleman,
“she was as brown as mahogany, and
had neither eyes, nose, mouth, nor legs:
what Mrs. Stanhope could do with her,
I often wondered; but she took courage,
rouged her up, set her a going as a dasher,
and she dashed herself into Tom Levit's
curricle, and Tom coudn't get her out
again, till she was the honourable Mrs.
Levit—She then took the reins into her
own hands, and I hear, she's driving him
and herself the road to ruin, as fast as
they can gallop. As for this Belinda
Portman, 'twas a good hit to send her
to lady Delacour's; but I take it, she
hangs upon hands; for last winter, when
I was at Bath, she was hawked about
every where, and the aunt was puffing
her with might and main. You heard
of nothing, wherever you went, but of
Belinda Portman, and Belinda Portman's
accomplishments—Belinda Portman, and

her accomplishments, I'll swear, were as
well advertised, as Packwood's razor
strops.”
“Mrs. Stanhope overdid the business,
I think,” resumed the gentleman who
began the conversation—“Girls brought
to the hammer this way don't go off well.
It's true, Christie himself is no match for
dame Stanhope—many of my acquaintance
were tempted to go and look at the
premises, but not one, you may be sure,
had a thought of becoming a tenant for
life.”
“That's an honour reserved for you,
Clarence Hervey,” said another, tapping
him upon the shoulder—“Give ye joy,
Hervey,—Give ye joy!”
“Me!” said Clarence, starting.
“I'll be hanged if he didn't change
colour,” said his facetious companion; 
“and all the young men again joined in
a laugh.”
“Laugh on, my merry men all!” cried
Clarence, “but the devil's in it if I don't
know my own mind better than any of

you—you don't imagine I go to lady Delacour's
to look for a wife?—Belinda
Portman's a good pretty girl, but what
then? do you think I'm an idiot—do you
think I could be taken in by one of the
Stanhope school? Do you think I don't
see as plainly as any of you, that Belinda
Portman's a composition of art and affectation?”
“Hush—not so loud, Clarence; here
she comes,” said his companion. “The
comic muse, is not she?”—
Lady Delacour, at this moment, came
lightly tripping towards them, and addressing
herself in the character of the
comic muse, to Hervey, exclaimed,
“Hervey! my Hervey! most favoured
of my votaries, why do you forsake me?
“Why mourns my friend, why weeps his down-cast eye?
“That eye where mirth and fancy used to shine.
“Though you have lost your serpent's
form, your own may please any of the
fair daughters of Eve.”

Mr. Hervey bowed; all the gentlemen,
who stood near him, smiled; the tragic
muse gave an involutary sigh.
“Could I borrow a sigh, or a tear, from
my tragic sister,” pursued lady Delacour,
“however unbecoming to my character,
I would, if only sighs or tears can win the
heart of Clarence Hervey—Let me practise” 
—and her ladyship practised sighing
with much comic effect.
“Persuasive words, and more persuasive sighs,”
said Clarence Hervey.
“A good bold Stanhope cast of the
net, faith,” whispered one of his companions
—“Melpomene, hast thou forgot
thyself to marble?” pursued lady Delacour
—“I am not very well,” whispered
miss Portman to her ladyship—“could we
get away?”
“Get away from Clarence Hervey, do
you mean?” replied her ladyship, in a
whisper—'tis not easy, but we'll try
what can be done, if it is necessary.”—
Belinda had no power to reply to this
raillery, indeed she scarcely heard the

words that were said to her; but she put
her arm within lady Delacour's, who, to
her great relief, had the good nature to
leave the room with her immediately.— 
Her ladyship, though she would sacrifice
the feelings of others, without compunction,
to her vanity, whenever the power of
her wit was disputed; yet towards those
by whom it was acknowledged, she showed
some mercy.
“What is the matter with the child?” 
said she, “as she went down the stair-case.”
“Nothing, if I could have air,” said
Belinda. There was a crowd of servants
in the hall.
“Why does lady Delacour avoid me so
pertinaciously? What crime have I committed,
that I was not favoured with one
word,” said Clarence Hervey, who had
followed them down stairs, and overtook
them in the hall.
“Do see, if you can find any of my
people,” cried lady Delacour.
“Lady Delacour the comic muse!” 
exclaimed Mr. Hervey—“I thought,”—

“No matter what you thought,” interrupted
her ladyship—“Let my carriage
draw up, for here's a young friend of yours
trembling so about nothing, that I am half
afraid she will faint; and you know it
would not be so pleasant to faint here
amongst footmen—Stay! this supper room
is empty—O, I did not mean to tell you
to stay,” said she to Hervey, who involuntarily
followed her in the utmost consternation.
“I'm perfectly well, now—perfectly
well,” said Belinda.
“Perfectly a simpleton, I think,” said
lady Delacour—“Nay, my dear, you must
be ruled, your mask must come off; didn't
you tell me you wanted air—What now!
This is not the first time Clarence Hervey
has ever seen your face without a mask,
is it? It's the first time indeed he, or any
body else, ever saw it of such a colour, I
believe.”
When lady Delacour pulled off Belinda's
mask, her face was, during the first instant,

pale; the next moment, crimsoned over
with a burning blush.—
“What is the matter with ye both?— 
How he stands!” said lady Delacour,
turning to Mr. Hervey—“Did you never
see a woman blush before?—or did you
never say or do any thing to make a woman
blush before?—Will you give miss
Portman a glass of water?—there's some
behind you on that sideboard, man!— 
but he has neither eyes, ears, nor understanding
—Do go about your business,” 
said her ladyship, pushing him towards
the door—“Do go about your business,
for I haven't common patience with you
—on my conscience, I believe the man's
in love—and not with me!—There's
sal-volatile for you, child,” continued she
to Belinda. “O, you can walk now— 
but remember you're on slippery ground
—remember Clarence Hervey is not a
marrying man, and you are not a married
woman.”
“It is perfectly indifferent to me, madam,” 
Belinda said, with a voice and
look of proud indignation.

“Lady Delacour, your carriage has
drawn up,” said Clarence Hervey, returning
to the door, but without entering.
“Then put this ‘perfectly well,’ and
‘perfectly indifferent’ lady into it,” said
lady Delacour.
He obeyed without uttering a syllable.
“Dumb! Absolutely dumb: I protest,” 
said her ladyship, as he handed
her in afterward. “Why Clarence, the
casting of your sepent's skin seems to
have quite changed your nature—nothing
but the simplicity of the dove left; and I
expect to hear you cooing presently—don't
you, miss Portman?” She ordered the
coachman to drive to the Pantheon.
“To the Pantheon! I was in hopes
your ladyship would have the goodness to
set me down at home; for indeed I shall
be a burden to you, and every body else
at the masquerade.”
“If you have made any appointment
for the rest of the evening in Berkeley
square, I'll set you down certainly, if you
insist upon it, my dear; for punctuality

is a virtue—but prudence is a virtue too,
in a young lady; who, as your aunt Stanhope
would say, has to establish herself in
the world.—Why these tears, Belinda?
—Or are they tears? for by the light of
the lamps I can scarcely tell; tho' I'll
swear I saw the handkerchief at the eyes.
—What is the meaning of all this? You'd
best trust me; for I know as much of men
and manners, as your aunt Stanhope at
least; and in one word, you have nothing to
fear from me, and every thing to hope
from yourself; if you will only dry up your
tears, keep on your mask, and take my
advice; you'll find it as good as your aunt
Stanhope's.”
“My aunt Stanhope's! O,” cried Belinda,
“never, never more will I take
such advice—never more will I expose
myself to be insulted as a female adventurer
—Little did I know in what a light
I appeared—Little did I know what gentlemen
thought of my aunt Stanhope—of
my cousins—of myself.”
“Gentlemen! I presume Clarence Hervey

stands at this instant, in your imagination,
as the representative of all the
gentlemen upon earth; and he, instead of
Anacharsis Cloots, is now to be sure
l'orateur du genre humain—Pray let me
have a specimen of the eloquence, which,
to judge by it's effects, must be powerful
indeed.”
Miss Portman, not without some reluctance,
repeated the conversation which
she had heard—“And is this all?” cried
lady Delacour—“Lord, my dear, you
must either give up living in the world,
or expect to hear yourself, and your aunts,
and your cousins, and your friends, from
generation to generation, abused every
hour in the day, by their friends, and your
friends—'tis the common course of things.
Now you know what a multitude of obedient
humble servants, dear creatures, and
very sincere and most affectionate friends,
I have, in my writing desk, and on my
mantle-piece, not to mention the cards
which crowd the common rack from intimate
acquaintance; who cannot live

without the honour, or favour, or pleasure,
of seeing lady Delacour twice a week
—do you think I'm fool enough to imagine
that they would care the hundredth
part of a straw, if I were this minute
thrown into the Red, or the Black sea!— 
No, I have not one real friend in the world,
except Harriot Freke—yet, you see, I am
the comic muse, and mean to keep it up— 
keep it up to the last—on purpose to provoke
those, who would give their eyes to
be able to pity me—I humbly thank them,
no pity for lady Delacour—Follow my example,
Belinda; elbow your way through
the crowd; if you stop to be civil and
beg pardon, and ‘hope I didn't hurt ye,’ 
you will be trod under foot.—Now you'll
meet those young men continually, who
took the liberty of laughing at your aunt,
and your cousins, and yourself; they are
men of fashion—Show them you've no
feeling, and they'll acknowledge you for
a woman of fashion—you'll marry better
than any of your cousins, Clarence Hervey
if you can; and then it will be your turn

to laugh about nets and cages—As to love
and all that—”
The carriage stopped at the Pantheon,
just as her ladyship came to the words
“love and all that,”—her thoughts took a
different turn, and during the remainder
of the night she exhibited, in such a manner
as to attract universal admiration,
all the ease, and grace, and gayety of Euphrosyne.
To Belinda the night appeared long
and dull; the common place wit of chimney-sweepers
and gipsies; the antics of
harlequins; the graces of flower girls and
Cleopatras, had not power to amuse her; 
for her thoughts still recurred to that conversation,
which had given her so much pain
—pain which lady Delacour's raillery had
failed to obliterate.
“How happy you are, lady Delacour,” 
said she, when they got into the carriage
to go home—“How happy you are to
have such an amazing flow of spirits!”—
“Amazing you might well say, if you
knew all,” said lady Delacour—and she

heaved a deep sigh, threw herself back
in the carriage, let fall her mask, and was
silent.—It was broad day-light, and Belinda
had a full view of her countenance,
which was the picture of despair—She
uttered not one syllable more, nor had
miss Portman the courage to interrupt
her meditations, till they came within
sight of lady Singleton's; when Belinda
ventured to remind her, that she had
resolved to stop there, and change dresses,
before Marriott saw them.
“No, it's no matter,” said lady Delacour
—“Marriott will leave me at the
last, like all the rest—'tis no matter.”— 
Her ladyship sunk back into her former
attitude; but after she had remained silent
for some moments, she started up and
exclaimed—
“If I had served myself, with half the
zeal that I have served the world, I should
not now be thus forsaken!—I have sacrificed
reputation, happiness—every thing,
to the love of frolic—All frolic will soon
be at an end with me—I am dying—and

I shall die unlamented by any human being.
—If I were to live my life over again,
what a different life it should be!—What
a different person I would be! —But it is
all over now—I am dying.”
Belinda's astonishment at these words,
and at the solemn manner in which they
were pronounced, was inexpressible; she
gazed at lady Delacour, and then repeated
the word—“dying!”—“Yes, dying,” 
said lady Delacour.
“But you seem to me, and to all the
world, in perfect health; and but half an
hour ago in perfect spirits,” said Belinda.
“I seem to you, and to all the world,
what I am not—I tell you I am dying,” 
said her ladyship, in an emphatic tone.
Not a word more passed, till they got
home. Lady Delacour hurried up stairs,
bidding Belinda follow her, to her dressing-room.
Marriott was lighting the six
wax candles on the dressing-table—“As
I live, they have changed dresses after all,”

said Marriott to herself, as she fixed her
eyes upon lady Delacour and miss Portman.
“I'll be burnt, if I don't make my
lady remember this.”
“Marriott, you need not wait; I'll
ring when I want you,” said lady Delacour,
and taking one of the candles from
the table, she passed on hastily with
miss Portman, through her dressing-room,
through her bedchamber, and to the door
of the mysterious cabinet.
“Marriott, the key of this door,” cried
she, impatiently, after she had, in vain,
attempted to open it.
“Heavenly graciousness!” cried Marriott,
“is my lady out of her senses?”
“The key—the key—quick, the key,” 
repeated lady Delacour, in a peremptory
tone. She seized it as soon as Marriott
drew it from her pocket, and unlocked
the door.
“Had not I best put the things to rights,
my lady?” said Marriott, catching fast
hold of the opening door.
“I'll ring when you are wanted, Marriott,”

said lady Delacour; and pushing
open the door with violence, she rushed
forward to the middle of the room, and
turning back, she beckoned to Belinda to
follow her—“Come in, what is it you are
afraid of?” said she.—Belinda went on,
and the moment she was in the room,
lady Delacour shut and locked the door.
The room was rather dark, as there was no
light in it, except what came from one
candle, which lady Delacour held in her
hand, and which burned but dimly.— 
Belinda, as she looked round, saw nothing
but a confusion of linen rags—vials, some
empty, some full—and she perceived that
there was a strong smell of medicines.
Lady Delacour, whose motions were all
precipitate, like those of a person whose
mind is in great agitation, looked from
side to side of the room, without seeming
to know what she was in search of.—She
then, with a species of fury, wiped the
paint from her face, and returning to Belinda,
held the candle so as to throw the
light full upon her livid features.—Her eyes

were sunk, her cheeks hollow—no trace
of youth or beauty remained on her death-like
countenance, which formed a horrid
contrast with her gay fantastic dress.
“You are shocked, Belinda,” said she,
“but as yet you have seen nothing—look
here,”—and baring one half of her bosom,
she revealed a hideous spectacle.
Belinda sunk back into a chair—lady
Delacour flung herself on her knees before
her.
“Am I humbled, am I wretched
enough?” cried she, her voice trembling
with agony—“Yes, pity me, for what
you have seen; and a thousand times
more, for that which you cannot see— 
my mind is eaten away like my body, by
incurable disease—inveterate remorse— 
remorse for a life of folly—of folly which
has brought on me all the punishments
of guilt.”
“My husband,” continued she, and
her voice suddenly altere, from the tone
of grief to that of anger—“My husband
hates me—no matter—I despise him—His

relations hate me—no matter—I despise
them—My own relations hate me—no
matter, I never wish to see them more— 
never shall they see my sorrow—never
shall they hear a complaint, a sigh from
me. There is no torture which I could
not more easily endure than their insulting
pity. I will die, as I have lived, the envy
and admiration of the world. When I
am gone, let them find out their mistake; 
and moralise, if they will, over my grave.” 
—She paused—Belinda had no power to
speak.
“Promise, swear to me,” resumed lady
Delacour vehemently, seizing Belinda's
hand, “that you will never reveal to any
mortal what you have seen and heard
this night. No living creature suspects
that lady Delacour is dying by inches,
except Marriott, and that woman, whom
but a few hours ago I thought my real
friend, to whom I trusted every secret
of my life, every thought of my heart.— 
Fool! ideot! Dupe that I was to trust to
the friendship of a woman, whom I knew

to be without principle—but I thought
she had honour; I thought she could never
betray me—O Harriot! Harriot! you
to desert me!—Any thing else I could
have borne—but you, who I thought
would have supported me in the tortures
of mind and body which I am to go
through—you, that I thought would receive
my last breath—you to desert me!—Now
I am alone in the world—left to the mercy
of an insolent waiting-woman.”
Lady Delacour hid her face on Belinda's
lap, and almost stifled by the violence
of contending emotions, she at last gave
vent to them, and sobbed aloud.
“Trust to one,” said Belinda, pressing
her hand with all the tenderness which
humanity could dictate, “who will never
leave you at the mercy of an insolent waiting
woman—trust to me.”
“Trust to you,” said lady Delacour,
looking up eagerly in Belinda's face; 
“yes—I think—I may trust to you—for
though a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, I have
seen this day, and have seen with surprise,

symptoms of artless feeling about
you. This was what tempted me to open
my mind to you, when I found that I had
lost the only friend—but I will think no
more of that—if you have a heart, you
must feel for me—Leave me now—tomorrow
you shall hear my whole history— 
now I am quite exhausted—ring for Marriott.” 
—Marriott appeared with a face of
constrained civility, and latent rage.— 
“Put me to bed, Marriott,” said lady Delacour,
with a subdued voice—“but first
light miss Portman to her room—she need
not—yet—see the horrid business of my
toilette:”
Belinda, when she was left alone, immediately
opened her shutters, and threw
up the sash to refresh herself with the
morning air. She felt excessively fatigued,
and in the hurry of her mind, she
could not think of any thing distinctly.
She took off her masquerade dress, and
went to bed, in hopes of forgetting, for a
few hours, what she felt indelibly impressed
upon her imagination. But it

was in vain that she endeavoured to compose
herself to sleep; her ideas were in
too great and painful confusion. For
some time, whenever she closed her eyes,
the face and form of lady Delacour, such
as she had just beheld them, seemed to
haunt her; afterward, the idea of Clarence
Hervey, and the painful recollection
of the conversation she had overheard,
recurred to her; the words, “do you
think I don't know that Belinda Portman
is a composition of artifice and affectation,” 
were fixed in her memory. She
recollected with the utmost minuteness
every look of contempt, which she had seen
in the faces of the young gentlemen, whilst
they spoke of Mrs. Stanhope the matchmaker.
Belinda's mind, however, was
not yet sufficiently calm to reflect: she
seemed only to live over again the preceding
night. At last the strange motley
figures which she had seen at the masquerade
flitted before her eyes, and she sunk
into an uneasy slumber.