

A boy passing by saw what had happened,
and ran to the house, calling as
he went to some workmen, who hastened
to the place, where they heard the howling
of the dogs. Ormond neither heard
nor saw—till Moriarty said—“He must
be carried home;” and some one approaching
to lift the body, Ormond
started up, pushed the man back, without
uttering a syllable—made a sign to
Moriarty, and between them they carried
the body home.—Sheelah and the women
came out to meet them, wringing their
hands, and uttering loud lamentations,
and the dogs ran to and fro yelling. Ormond,
bearing his burden, as if insensible

of what he bore, walked onward, looking
at no one, answering none, but forcing
his way straight into the house, and on— 
on—till they came to O'Shane's bed-chamber,
which was upon the ground
floor—there laid him on his bed.—The
women had followed, and all those who
had gathered on the way rushed in to
see and to bewail. Ormond looked up,
and saw the people about the bed, and
made a sign to Moriarty to keep them
away, which he did, as well as he could.— 
But they would not be kept back— 
Sheelah, especially, pressed forward, crying
loudly, till Moriarty, with whom
she was struggling, pointed to Harry.— 
Struck with his fixed look, she submitted
at once—“Best leave him!” said she.— 
She put every body out of the room before
her, and turning to Ormond, said,
they would leave him “a little space of
time till the priest should come, who was
at a clergy dinner, but was sent for.”
When Ormond was left alone he locked

the door, and kneeling beside the
dead, offered up prayers for the friend
he had lost, and there remained some
time in stillness and silence, till Sheelah
knocked at the door, to let him know
that the priest was come.—Then retiring,
he went to the other end of the
house, to be out of the way. The room
to which he went was that in which
they had been reading the letters just
before they went out that morning.— 
There was the pen which Harry had
taken from his hand, and the answer just
begun.
“Dear General, I hope my young
friend Harry Ormond—”
That hand could write no more!— 
That warm heart was cold!—The certainty
was so astonishing, so stupifying,
that Ormond, having never yet shed a tear,
stood with his eyes fixed on the paper,
he knew not how long, till he felt some
one touch his hand.—It was the child,
little Tommy, of whom O'Shane was

so fond, and who was so fond of him. The
child, with his whistle in his hand, stood
looking up at Harry, without speaking.— 
Ormond gazed on him for a few instants,
then snatched him in his arms, and
burst into an agony of tears.—Sheelah,
who had let the child in, now came and
carried him away.—“God be thanked for
them tears,” said she, “they will bring
relief”—and so they did.—The necessity
for manly exertion—the sense of duty— 
pressed upon Ormond's recovered reason.— 
He began directly, and wrote all the
letters that were necessary to his guardian,
and to Miss O'Faley, to communicate
the dreadful intelligence to Dora.
The letters were not finished till late
in the evening. Sheelah came for them,
and leaving the door, and the outer door
to the hall open, as she came in, Ormond
saw the candles lighted, and smelt the
smell of tobacco and whiskey, and heard
the sound of many voices.
“The wake, dear, which is beginning,” 
said she, hastening back to shut

the doors, as she saw him shudder— 
“Bear with it, Master Harry,” said
she—“hard for you!—but bear with us,
dear, 'tis the custom of the country— 
and what else can we do but what the
forefathers did—how else for us to shew
respect, only as it would be expected,
and has always been?—and great comfort
to think we done our best, for him
that is gone—and comfort to know his
wake will be talked of long hereafter,
over the fires at night—of all the people
that is there without—and that's
all we have for it now—so bear with it,
dear.”
This night, and for two succeeding
nights, the doors of Corny Castle remained
open for all who chose to come.
Crowds, as many, and more than the
Castle could hold, flocked to king Corny's
wake, for he was greatly beloved.
There was, as Sheelah said, “plenty
of cake, and wine, and tea, and tobacco,
and snuff—every thing handsome as possible,
and honourable to the deceased,

who was always open-handed and open-hearted,
and with open house too.”
His praises from time to time were
heard, and then the common business of
the country was talked of—and jesting
and laughter went on—and all night
there were tea-drinkings for the women,
and punch for the men. Sheelah, who
grieved most, inwardly, for the dead,
went about incessantly through the
crowd, serving all, seeing that none, especially
them who came from a distance,
should be neglected—that none should
have after to complain—or to say that
any thing at all was wanting or niggardly.
Mrs. Betty, Sheelah's daughter, sat
presiding at the tea-table, giving the
keys to her mother when wanted, but
never forgetting to ask for them again.
Little Tommy took his cake, and hid
himself under the table, close by his
mother, Mrs. Betty, and could not be
tempted out but by Sheelah, whom he followed,
watching when she would go in
to Mr. Harry; and when the door opened,

he held by her gown, and squeezed in
under her arm—she not hindering him.
When she brought Mr. Harry his meals,
she would set the child up at the table
with him for company—and to tempt
him to take something.—The child slept
with him, for Tommy could not sleep
with any body else.
Ormond had once promised his deceased
friend, that if he was in the
country when he died, he would put
him into his coffin.—He kept his promise.— 
The child hearing a noise, and
knowing that Mr. Harry had gone into
the room, could not be kept out;—the
crowd had left that room, and the child
looked at the bed with the curtains looped
up with black—and at the table at the
foot of the bed, with the white cloth
spread over it, and the seven candlesticks
placed upon it.—But the coffin fixed his
attention, and he threw himself upon it,
clinging to it, and crying bitterly upon
king Corny, his dear king Corny, to
come back to him.

It was all Sheelah could do to drag
him away;—Ormond, who had always
liked this boy, felt now more fond of him
than ever, and resolved that he would
see that he was taken care of hereafter.
“You are in the mind to attend the
funeral, Sir, I think you told me,” said
Sheelah.
“Certainly,” replied Ormond.
“Excuse me then,” said Sheelah, “if
I mention—for you can't know what to
do without.—There will be high mass,
may be you know, in the chapel.—And
as it's a great funeral, thirteen priests
will be there, attending.—And when the
mass will be finished, it will be expected
of you, as first of kin considered, to walk
up first with your offering—whatsoever
you think fit, for the priests—and to lay
it down on the altar;—and then each and
all will follow, laying down their offerings,
according as they can.—I hope I'm
not too bold or troublesome, Sir.”
Ormond thanked her for her kindness,

—and felt it was real kindness.— 
He, consequently, did all that was expected
from him handsomely. After the
masses were over, the priests who could
not eat any thing before they said mass,
had breakfast and dinner joined.—Sheelah
took care “the clergy was well served.”— 
Then the priests—though it was not
essential that all should go, did all, to
Sheelah's satisfaction, accompany the funeral
the whole way, three long miles,
to the burying-place of the O'Shanes; 
a remote old abbey ground, marked only
by some scattered trees, and a few sloping
grave stones. King Corny's funeral was
followed by an immense concourse of
people, on horseback and on foot; men
women, and children;—when they passed
by the doors of cabins, a set of the women
raised the funeral cry—not a savage
howl, as is the custom in some
parts of Ireland, but chaunting a kind
of funeral cry, not without harmony,
simple and pathetic. Ormond was convinced,

that in spite of all the festivity at
the wake, which had so disgusted him, the
poor people mourned sincerely for the
friend they had lost.
We forgot to mention, that Dr. Cambray
came to the Black Islands the day
after O'Shane's death, and had done all
he could to prevail upon Ormond to
come to his house while the wake was
going on, and till the funeral should be
over. But Ormond thought it right to stay
where he was, as none of the family were
there, and there was no way in which
he could so strongly mark, as Sheelah
said, his respect for the dead. Now that
it was all over, he had at least the consolation
of thinking, that he had not shrunk
from any thing that was, or that he conceived
to be his duty. Doctor Cambray
was pleased with his conduct, and at
every moment he could spare came to
see him, doing all he could to console
him, by strengthening in Ormond's mind
the feelings of religious submission to

the will of Heaven, and of pious hope and
confidence. Ormond had no time left
him for the indulgence of sorrow—business
pressed upon him.
Cornelius O'Shane's will, which Sir
Ulick blamed Harry for not mentioning
in the first letter, was found to be at his
bankers in Dublin. All his property was
left to his daughter, except the farm,
which he had given to Ormond; this
was specially excepted, with legal care:
also a legacy of five hundred pounds
was left to Harry; a provision for little
Tommy; a trifling bequest to Sir
Ulick, being his cousin; and legacies to
servants. Miss O'Faley was appointed
sole executrix—this gave great umbrage
to Sir Ulick O'Shane, and appeared
extraordinary to many people; but the
will was in due form, and nothing could
be done against it, however much might
be said.
Miss O'Faley, without taking notice
of any thing Ormond said of the money

which had been lodged in bank to pay
for his commission, wrote as executor
to beg him to do various business for
her, all which he did, and fresh letters
came with new requests, inventories to
be taken, things to be sent to Dublin,
money to be received and paid, stewards'
and agents' accounts to be settled, business
of all kinds, in short, came pouring
in upon him; a young man unused to it,
and with a mind peculiarly averse from
it at this moment. But when he found
that he could be of service to any one
belonging to his benefactor, he felt
bound in gratitude, to exert himself to
the utmost. These circumstances, however
disagreeable, had an excellent effect
upon his character, giving him habits of
business, which were ever afterwards of
use to him. It was remarkable that the
only point in his letters, which had
concerned his business, still continued
unanswered. Another circumstance hurt
his feelings—instead of Miss O'Faley's
writing to make her own requests, Mr.

Connal was soon deputed by mademoiselle
to write for her. He spoke of the
shock the ladies had felt, and the distressing
circumstances in which they
were; all in common place phrases,
which Ormond could not well endure,
and from which he could judge nothing
of Dora's real feelings.
“The marriage must, of course,” Mr.
Connal said, “be put off for some time,
and as it would be painful to the ladies
to return to Corny Castle, he had advised
their staying in Dublin; and they and he
feeling assured that, from Mr. Ormond's
regard for the family, they might take
the liberty of troubling him, they requested
so and so, and the executor
begged he would see this settled and
that settled”—at last, with gradually
forgotten apologies, falling very much
into the style of a person writing to
an humble friend or dependant, bound
to consider requests as commands.
Our young hero's pride was piqued
on the one side as much as his gratitude

was alive on the other. Sir Ulick
O'Shane wrote word, that he was at
this time peculiarly engaged with affairs
of his own.—He said, that as to
the material point of the money lodged
for the commission, he would see the
executor, and do what he could to
have that settled; but as to all lesser
points, Sir Ulick said, he really had
not leisure to answer letters at present.— 
He enclosed a note to Dr. Cambray,
whom he recommended it to his
ward to consult, and whose advice and
assistance he now requested for him in
pressing terms. In consequence of this
direct application from the young gentleman's
guardian, Dr. Cambray felt
himself authorised and called upon,
where, otherwise, delicacy might have
prevented him from interfering. It was
fortunate for Ormond, that he had Dr.
Cambray's counsel to guide him, else
he would, in the first moments of feeling,
have yielded too much to both
the impulses of gratitude and of pride.

In the first impulse of generous pride,
Ormond wanted to give up the farm
which his benefactor had left him, because
he wished, that no possible suspicion
of interested motives having influenced
his attachment to Cornelius
O'Shane should exist; especially with
Mr. Connal, who, as the husband of
Dora, would soon be the lord of all in
the Black Islands.
On the other hand, when Mr. Connal
wrote word, that the executor, having
no written order from the deceased to
that effect, could not pay the five hundred
pounds, lodged in the bank, for
his commission, Ormond was on the
point of flying out with intemperate indignation—
“Was not his own word sufficient— 
was not the intention of his benefactor
apparent from the letters—would not
this justify any executor, any person of
common sense or honour?”
Dr. Cambray, his experienced and

placid counsellor, brought all these sentiments
to due measure, by mildly shewing
what was law and justice; and what
was fit and proper in each case; putting
jealous honour, and romantic generosity,
as they must be put, out of the question
in business.
He prevented Ormond from embroiling
himself with Connal about the legacy,
and from giving up his farm.— 
He persuaded him to decline having
any thing to do with the affairs of the
Black Islands.
A proper agent was appointed, who
saw Ormond's accounts settled and
signed, so that no blame or suspicion
could rest upon him. It is unnecessary
to enter into particulars, but it is essential
to observe, that in the course
of these affairs Dr. Cambray had an
opportunity of seeing a good deal of
Ormond's conduct and character, and
he became attached to our young hero.
“There seems no probability, Mr. Ormond,”

said Dr. Cambray, “of your
immediately having your commission
purchased. Your guardian, Sir Ulick
O'Shane, will be detained some time
longer, I understand, in Dublin. You
are in a desolate situation here—you
have now done all that you ought to
do—leave these Black Islands, and come
to Vicar's Vale—you will find there a
cheerful family, and means of spending
your time more agreeably, perhaps
more profitably, than you can have here.— 
I am sensible that no new friends
can supply to you the place of him you
have lost; but you will find pleasure
in the perception, that you have, by
your own merit, attached to you one
friend in me, who will do all in his
power to soothe and serve you. Will
you come? will you—” added he, smiling,
“trust yourself to me, you have
already found that I do not flatter?
Will you come to us?—The sooner
the better—to-morrow if you can.”

It scarcely need be said, that this
invitation was most cordially accepted.
Next day Ormond was to leave the
Black Islands; Sheelah was in despair
when she found he was going: the
child hung upon him so, that he could
hardly get out of the house, till Moriarty
promised to come back for the
boy, and bring him over in the
boat often, to see Mr. Ormond. Moriarty
would not stay in the islands
himself, he said, after Harry went—he
set the cabin, and little tenement, which
O'Shane had given him, and the rent
was to be paid him by the agent.— 
Ormond went, for the last time, this
morning, to Ormond's Vale, to settle
his own affairs there; he and Moriarty,
took an unusual path across this part
of the island to the water side, that
they might avoid that which they had
followed the last time they were out,
on the day of Corny's death. They
went, therefore, across a lone track of

heath bog; where, for a considerable
time, they saw no living being.
On this bog, of which Cornelius
O'Shane had given Moriarty a share,
the grateful poor fellow had, the year before,
amused himself with cutting in large
letters of about a yard long, the words—
“LONG LIVE KING CORNY.”
He had sowed the letters with broom
seed in the spring, and had since forgotten
ever to look at them,—but they
were now green, and struck the eye.
“Think then of this being all the
trace that's left of him on the face of
the earth!” said Moriarty, “I'm glad
I did even that same.”
After crossing this lone bog, when
they came to the water side, they
found a great crowd of people, seemingly
all the inhabitants of the islands
assembled there, waiting to take leave
of Master Harry, and each got a word
and a look from him before they would
let him step into the boat.

“Aye, go to the continent,” said Sheelah,
“aye, go to fifty continents, and in
all Ireland you'll not find hearts warmer
to you, than those of the Black Islands,
that knows you best from a child,
Master Harry, dear.”