

There was an air of benevolence
and perfect sincerity in the politeness,
with which lady Anne Percival received
Belinda, that was peculiarly agreeable
to her agitated and harassed mind.
“I am afraid,” said Belinda, “that your
ladyship will think me capricious for
coming to you at last an unbidden guest,
after having so often refused your kind
invitations.”
“Nay,” said lady Anne, “your surrendering
yourself at discretion, just when I
was going to raise the siege in despair,

is the most flattering thing possible to
my self-complacency. And the only
terms I shall impose are, that you will
stay at Oakly-park with us as long as we
can make it agreeable to you, and no
longer. Whether those who cease to
please, or those who cease to be pleased,
are most to blame , it may sometimes
be difficult to determine—so difficult,
that, when this becomes a question between
two friends, they perhaps had
better part than venture upon the discussion.”
Lady Anne Percival could not avoid
suspecting, that something disagreeable
had passed between lady Delacour and
Belinda; but she was not troubled with
the disease of idle curiosity, and her example
prevailed upon Mrs. Margaret
Delacour, who dined with her, to refrain
from all questions and comments.
The prejudice, which this lady
had conceived against our heroine, as

being a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, had
lately been vanquished by the favourable
representations of her conduct which she
had heard from her nephew, and by the
kindness that Belinda had shown to little
Helena.
“Madam,” said Mrs. Delacour, addressing
herself to miss Portman with
some formality, but much dignity, “permit
me, as one of my lord Delacour's
nearest relations now living, to return you
my thanks, for having, as my nephew informs
me, exerted your influence over
lady Delacour for the happiness of his
family. My little Helena, I am sure,
feels her obligations towards you, and I
rejoice that I have had an opportunity of
expressing, in person, my sense of what
our family owes to miss Portman. As to
the rest, her own heart will reward her.
The praise of the world is but an inferiour
consideration. However, it deserves to
be mentioned, as an instance of the
world's candour, and for the singularity of
the case, that every body agrees in speaking

well even of so handsome a young
lady as miss Portman.”
“She must have had extraordinary
prudence,” said lady Anne; “and the
world does justly to reward it with extraordinary
esteem.”
Belinda, with equal pleasure and surprise,
observed that all this was said naturally,
and that the report, which she
had feared was public, had never reached
Mrs. Delacour, or lady Anne Percival.
In fact, it was known and believed
only by those who had been prejudiced
by the malice, or folly, of sir Philip Baddely.
Piqued by the manner in which
his addresses had been received by Belinda,
he readily listened to the comfortable
words of his valet de chambre, who
assured him that he had it from the best
possible authority (lord Delacour's own
gentleman, Mr. Champfort,) that his
lordship was deeply taken with miss
Portman—that the young lady managed
every thing in the house—that she had

been very prudent, to be sure, and had
refused large presents—but that there
was no doubt of her becoming lady Delacour,
if ever his lordship should be at
liberty. Sir Philip was the person who
mentioned this to Clarence Hervey, and
sir Philip was the person who hinted it
to Mrs. Stanhope, in the very letter
which he wrote to implore her influence
in favour of his own proposal. This manœuvring
lady represented this report as
being universally known and believed, in
hopes of frightening her niece into an immediate
match with the baronet. In the
whole extent of Mrs. Stanhope's politic
imagination, she had never foreseen the
possibility of her niece's speaking the
simple truth to lady Delacour, and she
had never guarded against this danger.
She never thought of Belinda's mentioning
this report to her ladyship, because
she would never have dealt so openly,
had she been in the place of her niece.
Thus her art and falsehood operated
against her own views, and produced

consequences diametrically opposite to
her expectations.—It was her exaggerations
that made Clarence Hervey speak
to Belinda; and that made lady Delacour
believe, when Belinda repeated what he
had said, that this report was universally
known and credited; her own suspicions
were by these means again awakened,
and her jealousy and rage were raised to
such a pitch, that, no longer mistress of
herself, she insulted her friend and guest.
Miss Portman was then obliged to do the
very thing that Mrs. Stanhope most dreaded; 
to leave lady Delacour's house and
all it's advantages. As to sir Philip Baddely,
Belinda never thought of him from
the moment she read her aunt's letter till
after she had left her ladyship; her mind
was firmly decided upon this subject; yet
she could not help fearing, that her aunt
would not understand her reasons, or approve
her conduct. She wrote to Mrs.
Stanhope in the most kind and respectful
manner; assured her that there had been
no foundation whatever for the report,

which had produced so much uneasiness; 
that lord Delacour had always treated
her with politeness and good nature, but
that such thoughts or views as had been
attributed to him, she was convinced, had
never entered his lordship's mind; that
hearing of the publicity of this report had,
however, much affected lady D&wblank;. “I
have therefore,” said Belinda, “thought
it prudent to quit her ladyship, and to
accept of an invitation from lady Anne
Percival to Oakly-park. I hope, my dear
aunt, that you will not be displeased by
my leaving town without seeing sir Philip
Baddely again. Our meeting could indeed
answer no purpose, as it is entirely
out of my power to return his partiality.
Of his character, temper, and manners, I
know enough to be convinced, that our
union could tend only to make us both
miserable. After what I have seen, nothing
can ever tempt me to marry from
any of the common views of interest or
ambition.”
On this subject Belinda, though she

declared her own sentiments with firm
sincerity, touched as slightly as she
could, because she anxiously wished to
avoid all appearance of braving the opinions
of an aunt, to whom she was under
obligations. She was tempted to pass
over in silence all that part of Mrs. Stanhope's
letter, which related to Clarence
Hervey; but, upon reflection, she determined
to conquer her repugnance to
speak of him, and to make perfect sincerity
the steady rule of her conduct.
She therefore acknowledged to her aunt,
that, of all the persons she had hitherto
seen, this gentleman was the most agreeable
to her; but at the same time she
assured her, that the refusal of sir Philip
Baddely was totally independent of all
thoughts of Mr. Hervey—that, before
she had received her aunt's letter, circumstances
had convinced her that Mr. Hervey
was attached to another woman.
She concluded by saying, that she had
neither romantic hopes nor wishes, and

that her affections were at her own command.
Belinda, just when the carriage was at
the door to take her to Oakly-park, received
the following angry answer from
Mrs. Stanhope:
“Henceforward, Belinda, you may
manage your own affairs as you think
proper; I shall never more interfere with
my advice. Refuse whom you please— 
go where you please—get what friends,
and what admirers, and what establishment
you can—I have nothing more to
do with it—I wash my hands of it—I
will never more undertake the management
of young people. There's your
sister Tollemache has made a pretty return
for all my kindness! She is going to
be parted from her husband, and basely
throws all the blame upon me.—But 'tis
the same with all of you.—There's your
cousin Joddrell refused me a hundred
guineas last week, though the piano forte
and harp I bought for her before she
was married stood me in double that

sum, and are now useless lumber on my
hands; and she never could have had
Joddrell without them, as she knows as
well as I do. As for Mrs. Levit, she
never writes to me, and takes no manner
of notice of me. But this is no matter,
for her notice can be of no consequence
now to any body. He has run out every
thing she had in the world!—All Levit's
fine estates advertised in to day's paper— 
an execution in the house, I'm told. I expect
that she will have the assurance to
come to me in her distress; but she shall
find my doors shut, I promise her. Your
cousin Valleton's match has, through
her own folly, turned out like all the rest.
She, her husband, and all his relations
are at daggersdrawing; and Valleton
will die soon, and won't leave her a farthing
in his will, I foresee, and all the fine
Valleton estate goes to God knows who!
“If she had taken my advice after marriage
as before, it would have been all
her own at this instant. But the passions
run away with people, and they forget

every thing—common sense, gratitude,
and all—as you do, Belinda. Clarence
Hervey will never think of you, and I
give you up!—Now manage for yourself
as your please, and as you can! I'll have
nothing more to do with the affairs of
young ladies, who will take no advice.
“Selena Stanhope.
“P. S. If you return directly to lady
Delacour's, and marry sir Philip Baddely,
I will forgive the past.”
The regret which Belinda felt at having
grievously offended her aunt was somewhat
alleviated by the reflection that
she had acted with integrity and prudence.
Thrown off her guard by anger, Mrs.
Stanhope had inadvertently furnished her
niece with the best possible reasons
against following her advice with regard
to sir Philip Baddely, by stating that her
sister and cousins, who had married with
mercenary views, had made themselves
miserable, and had shown their aunt
neither gratitude nor respect.

It is scarcely necessary to say, that
Belinda did not return to lady Delacour,
nor change her mind with respect to sir
Philip Baddely; but as soon as she had
read this letter, she got into the carriage
with lady Anne Percival, and they pursued
their journey to Oakly-park.
The tranquillity of Belinda's mind was
gradually restored by the society that she
enjoyed there. She found herself in the
midst of a large and cheerful family, with
whose domestic happiness she could not
forbear to sympathise. There was an affectionate
confidence, an unconstrained
gayety in this house, which forcibly struck
her, from it's contrast with what she had
seen at lady Delacour's. She perceived,
that between Mr. Percival and lady
Anne there was a union of interests,
occupations, taste, and affection. She was
at first astonished by the openness with
which they talked of their affairs in her
presence; that there were no family secrets,
nor any of those petty mysteries which
arise from a discordance of temper or

struggle for power. In conversation,
every person expressed without constraint
their wishes and opinions; and wherever
these differed, reason and the general
good were the standards to which they
appealed. The elder and younger part
of the family were not separated from
each other; even the youngest child in
the house seemed to form part of the
society, to have some share and interest
in the general occupations or amusements.
The children were treated neither as
slaves nor as playthings, but as reasonable
creatures; and the ease with which
they were managed, and with which
they managed themselves, surprised Belinda; 
for she heard none of that
continual lecturing which goes forward
in some houses, to the great fatigue and
misery of all the parties concerned, and
of all the spectators. Without force, or any
factitious excitements, the taste for knowledge,
and the habits of application, were
induced by example, and confirmed by
sympathy. Mr. Percival was a man of

science and literature, and his daily pursuits
and general conversation were in the
happiest manner instructive and interesting
to his family. His knowledge of the
world, and his natural gayety of disposition,
rendered his conversation not only useful,
but in the highest degree amusing.
From the merest trifles he could lead to
some scientific fact, some happy literary
allusion, or philosophic investigation.
Lady Anne Percival had, without any
pedantry or ostentation, much accurate
knowledge, and a taste for literature,
which made her the chosen companion
of her husband's understanding, as well
of his heart. He was not obliged to reserve
his conversation for friends of his
own sex, nor was he forced to seclude
himself in the pursuit of any branch of
knowledge; the partner of his warmest
affections was also the partner of his
most serious occupations; and her sympathy
and approbation, and the daily
sense of her success in the education of
their children, inspired him with a degree

of happy social energy, unknown to
the selfish solitary votaries of avarice and
ambition.
In this large and happy family there
was a variety of pursuits. One of the
boys was fond of chemistry, another of
gardening; one of the daughters had a
talent for painting, another for music; 
and all their acquirements and accomplishments
contributed to increase their
mutual happiness, for there was no envy
or jealousy amongst them.
Those who unfortunately have never
enjoyed domestic happiness, such as
we have just described, will perhaps
suppose the picture to be visionary and
romantic; there are others, it is hoped
many others, who will feel that it is
drawn from truth and real life. Tastes
that have been vitiated by the stimulus of
dissipation might, perhaps, think these
simple pleasures insipid.
Every body must ultimately judge of
what makes them happy, from the comparison
of their own feelings in different

situations. Belinda was convinced by
this comparison, that domestic life was
that which could alone make her really
and permanently happy. She missed
none of the pleasures, none of the gay
company, to which she had been accustomed
at lady Delacour's. She was
conscious at the end of each day, that
it had been agreeably spent; yet there
were no extraordinary exertions made to
entertain her, every thing seemed in it's
natural course, and so did her mind.
Where there was so much happiness, no
want of what is called pleasure was ever
experienced. She had not been at
Oakly-park a week, before she forgot that
it was within a few miles of Harrowgate,
and she never once recollected her vicinity
to this fashionable water-drinking
place for a month afterward.
“Impossible!” some young ladies will
exclaim. We hope others will feel, that it
was perfectly natural. But to deal fairly
with our readers, we must not omit to
mention a certain Mr. Vincent, who

came to Oakly-park during the first
week of Belinda's visit, and who stayed
there during the whole succeeding month
of felicity. Mr. Vincent was a creole; 
he was about two and twenty; his person
and manners were striking and engaging; 
he was tall, and remarkably
handsome; he had large dark eyes, an
aquiline nose, fine hair, and a sun burnt
complexion, which gave him a manly
appearance; his countenance was open
and friendly, and when he spoke upon
any interesting subject it lighted up,
and became full of fire and animation.
He used much gesture in conversation; 
he had not the common manners of
young men who are, or who aim at
being thought, fashionable, but he was
perfectly at ease in company, and all that
was uncommon about him appeared foreign.
He had a frank, ardent temper,
incapable of art or dissimulation, and so
unsuspicious of all mankind, that he
could scarcely believe falsehood existed
in the world, even after he had himself

been it's dupe. He was in extreme
astonishment at the detection of any
species of baseness in a gentleman; for he
considered honour and generosity as
belonging indefeasibly, if not exclusively,
to the privileged orders. His notions of
virtue were certainly aristocratic in the
extreme, but his ambition was to entertain
such only as would best support and
dignify an aristocracy. His pride was
magnanimous, not insolent; and his social
prejudices were such as, in some degree,
to supply the place of the power
and habit of reasoning, in which he was
totally deficient. One principle of philosophy
he practically possessed in perfection; 
he enjoyed the present, undisturbed
by any unavailing regret for the past, or
troublesome solicitude about the future.
All the goods of life he tasted with epicurean
zest; all the evils he braved with
stoical indifference. The mere pleasure
of existence seemed to keep him in
perpetual good humour with himself and
others; and his never-failing flow of animal

spirits exhilarated even the most
phlegmatic. To persons of a cold and
reserved temper he sometimes appeared
rather too much of an egotist; for he talked
with fluent enthusiasm of the excellent
qualities and beauties of whatever he loved,
whether it were his dog, his horse, or his
country: but this was not the egotism of
vanity; it was the overflowing of an affectionate
heart, confident of obtaining
sympathy from his fellow-creatures, because
conscious of feeling it for all that
existed.
He was as grateful as he was generous; 
and, though high-spirited and impatient
of restraint, he would submit
with affectionate gentleness to the voice
of a friend, or listen with deference to the
counsel of those in whose superiour judgment
he had confidence. Gratitude, respect,
and affection, all conspired to give
Mr. Percival the strongest power over
his soul. Mr. Percival had been a guardian
and a father to him. His own
father, an opulent creole, on his death-bed

requested that his son, who was then
about eighteen, might be immediately
sent to England for the advantages of an
European education. Mr. Percival, who
had a regard for the father, arising from
circumstances which it is not here necessary
to explain, accepted the charge
of young Vincent, and managed so well,
that his ward when he arrived at the age
of twenty-one did not feel relieved from
any restraint. On the contrary, his attachment
to his guardian increased from
that period, when the laws gave him full
command over his fortune and his actions.
Mr. Vincent had been at Harrowgate
for some time before Mr. Percival came
into the country; but as soon as he heard
of Mr. Percival's arrival, he left half
finished a game at billiards, of which, by
the by, he was extremely fond, to pay his
respects at Oakly-park. At the first
sight of Belinda, he did not seem much
struck with her appearance; perhaps,
from his thinking that there was too little

languor in her eyes, and too much colour
in her cheeks: he confessed that she was
graceful, but her motions were not quite
slow enough to please him.
It is somewhat singular, that lady Delacour's
faithful friend, Harriet Freke,
should be the cause of Mr. Vincent's first
fixing his favourable attention on miss
Portman.
He had a black servant of the name of
Juba, who was extremely attached to
him; he had known Juba from a boy,
and had brought him over with him,
when he first came to England, because
the poor fellow begged so earnestly to go
with young massa. Juba had lived with
him ever since, and accompanied him
wherever he went. Whilst he was at
Harrowgate, Mr. Vincent lodged in the
same house with Mrs. Freke. Some dispute
arose between their servants, about
the right to a coach-house, which each
party claimed as exclusively their own.
The master of the house was appealed to
by Juba, who sturdily maintained his

massa's right; he established it, and rolled
his massa's curricle into the coach-house
in triumph. Mrs. Freke, who
heard and saw the whole transaction
from her window, said, or swore, that
she would make Juba repent of, what
she called, his insolence. The threat
was loud enough to reach his ears, and
he looked up in astonishment, to hear
such a voice from a woman; but an instant
afterward he began to sing very
gayly, as he jumped into the curricle to
turn the cushions, and then danced himself
up and down by the springs, as if
rejoicing in his victory. A second and a
third time Mrs. Freke repeated her threat,
confirming it by an oath, and then violently
shut down the window and disappeared.
Mr. Vincent, to whom Juba,
with much simplicity, expressed his aversion
of the man-woman who lived in the
house with them, laughed at the odd
manner in which the black imitated her
voice and gesture, but thought no more
of the matter. Some time afterward

however, Juba's spirits forsook him, he
was never heard to sing or to whistle,
he scarcely ever spoke even to his master,
who was much surprised by this sudden
change from gayety and loquacity to melancholy
and taciturnity. Nothing could
draw from the poor fellow any explanation
of the cause of this alteration in his
humour; and though he seemed excessively
grateful for the concern which his
master showed about his health, no kindness
or amusement could restore him to
his wonted cheerfulness. Mr. Vincent
knew that he was passionately fond of
music; and having heard him once express
a wish for a tambarine, he gave
him one: but Juba never played upon it,
and his spirits seemed every day to grow
worse and worse. This melancholy lasted
during the whole time that he remained
at Harrowgate, but from the first day of
his arrival at Oakly-park he began to
mend: after he had been there a week,
he was heard to sing, and whistle, and
talk as he used to do, and his master

congratulated him upon his recovery.
One evening his master asked him to go
back to Harrowgate for his tambarine, as
little Charles Percival wished to hear him
play upon it. This simple request had a
wonderful effect upon poor Juba; he
began to tremble from head to foot, his
eyes became fixed, and he stood motionless; 
after some time he suddenly clasped
his hands, fell upon his knees, and exclaimed:
“O, massa, Juba die! If Juba go back,
Juba die!” and he wiped away the drops
that stood upon his forehead. “But me
will go, if massa bid—me will die!”
Mr. Vincent began to imagine, that the
poor fellow was out of his senses. He
assured him, with the greatest kindness,
that he would almost as soon hazard his
own life, as that of such a faithful, affectionate
servant; but he pressed him to explain
what possible danger he dreaded
from returning to Harrowgate. Juba was
silent, as if afraid to speak—“Don't fear
to speak to me,” said Mr. Vincent, “I

will defend you: if any body have injured,
or if you dread that any body
will injure you, trust to me, I will protect
you.”
“Ah, massa, you no can! Me die, if me
go back! Me no can say word more;” and
he put his finger upon his lips, and shook
his head. Mr. Vincent knew that Juba
was excessively superstitious; and convinced
that, if his mind were not already
deranged, it would certainly become so,
were any secret terrour thus to prey upon
his imagination, he assumed a very grave
countenance, and assured him, that he
should be extremely displeased if he persisted
in this foolish and obstinate silence.
Overcome by this, Juba burst into tears,
and answered,
“Den me will tell all.”
This conversation passed before miss
Portman and Charles Percival, who were
walking in the park with Mr. Vincent,
at the time he met Juba and asked him
to go for the tambarine. When he came
to the words “me will tell all,” he made

a sign that he wished to tell it to his
master alone. Belinda and the little boy
walked on to leave him at liberty to speak; 
and then, though with a sort of reluctant
horrour, he told that the figure of an old
woman, all in flames, had appeared to
him in his bedchamber at Harrowgate
every night, and that he was sure she was
one of the obeah-women of his own
country, who had pursued him to Europe
to revenge his having once, when he was
a child, trampled upon an egg shell that
contained some of her poisons. The extreme
absurdity of this story made Mr.
Vincent burst out a laughing: but his
humanity the next instant made him
serious; for the poor victim of superstitious
terrour, after having revealed what,
according to the belief of his country, it
is death to mention, fell senseless on the
ground. When he came to himself, he
calmly said, that he knew he must now
die, for that the obeah-women never forgave
those that talked of them or their
secrets; and, with a deep groan, he added,

that he wished he might die before
night, that he might not see her again.
It was in vain to attempt to reason him
out of the idea, that he had actually seen
this apparition: his account of it was,
that it first appeared to him in the coach-house
one night, when he went thither in
the dark—that he never afterward went
to the coach-house in the dark—but that
the same figure of an old woman, all in
flames, appeared at the foot of his bed
every night whilst he stayed at Harrowgate; 
and that he was then persuaded she
would never let him escape from her
power, till she had killed him. That
since he had left Harrowgate, however,
she had not tormented him, for he had
never seen her, and he was in hopes that
she had forgiven him; but that now he
was sure of her vengeance for having
spoken of the past.
Mr. Vincent knew the astonishing
power, which the belief in this species
of sorcery  has over the minds of the

Jamaica negroes; they pine and actually
die away, from the moment they fancy
themselves under the malignant influence
of these witches. He almost gave poor
Juba over for lost. The first person that
he happened to meet after this conversation
was Belinda, to whom he eagerly
related it, because he had observed, that
she had listened with much attention and
sympathy to the beginning of the poor
fellow's story. The moment that she
heard of the flaming apparition, she recollected
having seen a head drawn in
phosphorus, which one of the children
had exhibited for her amusement, and it
occurred to her that, perhaps, some imprudent
or ill-natured person might have
terrified the ignorant negro by similar
means. When she mentioned this to Mr.
Vincent, he recollected the threat that
had been thrown out by Mrs. Freke, the
day that Juba had taken possession of
the disputed coach-house; and from the
character of this lady, Belinda judged
that she would be likely to play such a

trick, and to call it as usual fun or frolic.
Miss Portman proposed that a figure
should be drawn with phosphorus, as nearly
as possible to resemble that which Juba
had described, and that it should be shown
to him at night, to try whether it would
excite his apprehensions. Mr. Vincent
drew the figure of a frightful old woman
on the wall, opposite to the foot of Juba's
bed. In the morning he told his master
that he had been again visited by the
obeah-woman, and he exhibited all the
signs of extreme terrour. Belinda then
suggested that one of the children should
show him the phosphorus, and should
draw some ludicrous figure with it in his
presence. This was done, and it had the
effect that she expected. Juba, familiarised
by degrees with the object of his
secret horrour, and convinced that no
obeah-woman was exercising over him
her sorceries, recovered his health and
spirits. His gratitude to miss Portman,
who was the immediate cause of his cure,
was as simple and touching as it was

lively and sincere. This was the circumstance
which first turned Mr. Vincent's
attention towards Belinda. Upon examining
the room in which the negro
used to sleep at Harrowgate, the strong
smell of phosphorus was perceived, and
part of the paper was burnt on the very
spot where he had always seen the figure,
so that he was now perfectly convinced
that this trick had been purposely played
to frighten him, in revenge for his having
kept possession of the coach-house.
Mrs. Freke, when she found herself
detected, gloried in the jest, and told the
story as a good joke wherever she went— 
triumphing in the notion, that it was she
who had driven both master and man from
Harrowgate.
The exploit was, however, by no means
agreeable in it's consequences to her friend
Mrs. Luttridge, who was now at Harrowgate.
For reasons of her own, she was
very anxious to fix Mr. Vincent in her
society, and she was much provoked by
Mrs. Freke's conduct. The ladies came

to high words upon the occasion, and an
irreparable breach would have ensued,
had not Mrs. Freke, in the midst of her
rage, recollected Mr. Luttridge's electioneering
interest: and suddenly changing
her tone, she declared that “she was
really sorry to have driven Mr. Vincent
from Harrowgate; that her only intention
was to get rid of his black; she would lay
any wager that, with Mrs. Luttridge's
assistance, they could soon get the gentleman
back again;” and she proposed as
a certain method of fixing Mr. Vincent
in Mrs. Luttridge's society, to invite Belinda
to Harrowgate.
“You may be sure,” said Mrs. Freke,
“that she must by this time be cursedly
tired of her visit to those stupid good
people at Oakly-park, and never woman
wanted an excuse to do any thing she
liked: so trust to her own ingenuity to
make some decent apology to the Percivals
for running away from them. As
to Vincent, you may be sure Belinda
Portman is his only inducement for staying

with that precious family party; and
if we have her, we have him. Now, we
can be sure of her, for she has just quarrelled
with our dear lady Delacour. I
had the whole story from my maid, who
had it from Champfort. Lady Delacour
and she are at daggersdrawing, and it
will be delicious to her to hear her ladyship
handsomely abused. We are the
declared enemies of her enemy, so we
must be her friends. Nothing unites folk
so quickly, and so solidly, as hatred of
some common foe.”
This argument could not fail to convince
Mrs. Luttridge, and the next day
Mrs. Freke commenced her operations.
She drove in her unicorn to Oakly-park,
to pay miss Portman a visit. She had no
acquaintance either with Mr. Percival
or lady Anne, and she had always treated
Belinda, when she met her in town,
rather cavalierly, as an humble companion
of lady Delacour. But it cost Mrs.
Freke nothing to change her tone: she
was one of those ladies, who can remember

or forget people, be perfectly
familiar or strangely rude, just as it suits
the convenience, fashion, or humour of
the minute.