

Before he left town, Dr. X&wblank; 
called in Berkeley-square, to see lady Delacour; 
he found that she was out of all
immediate danger.—Miss Portman was
sorry that he was obliged to quit her at
this time, but she felt the necessity for
his going; he was sent for to attend Mr.
Horton, an intimate friend of his, a gentleman
of great talents, and of the most
active benevolence, who had just been
seized with a violent fever, in consequence
of his exertions? in saving the poor inhabitants
of a village in his neighbourhood

from the effects of a dreadful fire, which
broke out in the middle of the night.
Lady Delacour, who heard Dr. X&wblank; 
giving this account to Belinda, drew back
her curtain, and said—
“Begone this instant, doctor—I am
out of all immediate danger, you say— 
but if I were not—I must die in the
course of a few months, you know—and
what is my life or death, compared with
the chance of saving your excellent
friend!—He is of some use in this world
—I am of none—begone, this instant,
doctor.”
“What a pity,” said Dr. X&wblank;, as
he left the room, “that a woman who is
capable of so much magnanimity should
have wasted her life on petty objects.”
“Her—O, sir,
if you could save her!” cried Belinda.
Doctor X&wblank;shook his head—but
returning to Belinda, after going half way
down stairs, he added, “when you read
this paper, you will know all that I can
tell you upon the subject.”

Belinda, the moment the doctor was
gone, shut herself up in her own room,
to read the paper which he had given to
her. Dr. X&wblank;first stated all that he
thought would be most efficacious in mitigating
the pain that lady Delacour might
feel, and all that could be done, with the
greatest probability of prolonging her life.
—Then he concluded with the following
words:
“These are all temporising expedients:
according to the usual progress of the
disease, lady Delacour may live a year
or perhaps two.
“It is possible that her life might be
saved by a skilful surgeon.—By a few
words that dropped from her ladyship last
night, I apprehend that she has some
thoughts of submitting to an operation,
which will be attended with much pain
and danger, even if she employ the most
experienced surgeon in London; but if
she put herself, from a vain hope of
secrecy, into ignorant hands, she will inevitably
destroy herself.”

After reading this paper, Belinda had
some faint hopes that lady Delacour's life
might be saved; but she determined to
wait till doctor X&wblank;should return to
town, before she mentioned his opinion to
his patient; and she earnestly hoped that
no idea of putting herself into ignorant
hands would recur to her ladyship.
Lord Delacour, in the morning, when
he was sober, retained but a confused
idea of the events of the preceding night; 
but he made an awkwardly good natured
apology to miss Portman for his intrusion,
and for the disturbance he had occasioned,
which he said must be laid to the blame
of lord Studly's admirable Burgundy.
—He expressed much concern for lady
Delacour's terrible accident, but he could
not help observing, that if his advice had
been taken the thing could not have happened
—that it was the consequence of
her ladyship's self-willedness about the
young horses.
“How she got the horses without paying
for them, or how she got money to

pay for them, I know not,” said his lordship; 
“for I said I would have nothing to
do with the business, and I have kept to
my resolution.”
His lordship finished his morning visit
to miss Portman, by observing that “the
house would now be very dull for her; that
the office of a nurse was ill-suited to so
young and beautiful a lady, but that her
undertaking it with so much cheerfulness
was a proof of a degree of good nature,
that was not always to be met with in the
young and handsome.”
The manner in which lord Delacour
spoke convinced Belinda, that he was in
reality attached to his wife, however the
fear of being, or of appearing to be governed
by her ladyship might have
estranged him from her, and from home.
—She now saw in him much more good
sense, and symptoms of a more amiable
character than his lady had described, or
than she ever would allow that he possessed.
The reflections however, which miss

Portman made upon the miserable life
this ill-matched couple led together
did not incline her in favour of marriage
in general; great talents on one
side, and good nature on the other, had,
in this instance, tended only to make
each party unhappy. Matches of interest,
convenience, and vanity, she was
convinced diminished, instead of increasing
happiness.—Of domestic felicity
she had never, except during her childhood,
seen examples—she had, indeed,
heard from Dr. X&wblank;descriptions of the
happy family of lady Anne Percival, but
she feared to indulge the romantic hope
of ever being loved by a man of superiour
genius and virtue, with a temper
and manners suited to her taste.—The
only person she had seen, who at all
answered this description, was Mr. Hervey,
and it was firmly fixed in her mind,
that he was not a marrying man, and
consequently not a man of whom any
prudent woman would suffer herself to
think with partiality. She could not doubt

that he liked her society and conversation; 
his manner had sometimes expressed
more than cold esteem.—Lady Delacour
had assured her that it expressed love; 
but lady Delacour was an imprudent woman
in her own conduct, and not scrupulous
as to that of others.—Belinda was
not guided by her opinions of propriety,
and now that her ladyship was confined
to her bed, and not in a condition to give
her either advice or protection, she felt
that it was peculiarly incumbent on her to
guard, not only her conduct from reproach,
but her heart from the hopeless
misery of an ill-placed attachment.—she
examined herself with firm impartiality— 
she recollected the excessive pain that she
had endured, when she first heard Clarence
Hervey say, that Belinda Portman
was a compound of art and affectation; but
this she thought was only the pain of offended
pride—of proper pride.—She recollected
the extreme anxiety she had felt,
even within the last four and twenty hours,

concerning the opinion which he might
form of the transaction about the key of
the boudoir—but this anxiety she justified
to herself; it was due, she thought, to
ber reputation; it would have been inconsistent
with female delicacy, to have
been indifferent about the suspicions that
necessarily arose from the circumstances
in which she was placed.—Before Belinda
had completed her self-examination, Clarence
Hervey called to inquire after lady
Delacour.—Whilst he spoke of her ladyship,
and of his concern for the dreadful
accident, of which he believed himself
to be in a great measure the cause, his
manner and language were animated and
unaffected; but the moment that this
subject was exhausted, he became embarrassed; 
though he distinctly expressed
perfect confidence and esteem for her, he
seemed to wish, and yet to be unable to
support the character of a friend, contradistinguished
to an admirer. He seemed
conscious that he could not, with propriety,
advert to the suspicions and jealousy

which he had felt the preceding night; 
for a man who has never declared love
would be absurd and impertinent, were
he to betray jealousy.—Clarence was destitute
neither of address nor presence of
mind, but an accident happened, when
he was just taking leave of miss Portman,
which threw him into utter confusion.— 
It surprised, if it did not confound Belinda.
—She had forgotten to ask Dr. X&wblank; 
for his direction; and as she thought it
might be necessary to write to him concerning
lady Delacour's health, she begged of
Mr. Hervey to give it to her.—He took a
letter out of his pocket, and wrote the
direction with a pencil, but as he opened
the paper, to tear off the outside, on which
he had been writing, a lock of hair dropped
out of the letter; he hastily stooped
for it, and as he took it up from the
ground the lock unfolded.—Belinda,
though she cast but one involuntary,
hasty glance at it, was struck with the
beauty of it's colour, and it's uncommon
length.—The confusion of Clarence Hervey

convinced her, that he was extremely
interested about the person to whom the
hair belonged, and the species of alarm
which she had felt at this discovery,
opened her eyes effectually to the state of
her own heart.—She was sensible that the
sight of a lock of hair, however long, or
however beautiful, in the hands of any
man but Clarence Hervey, could not possibly
have excited any emotion in her
mind. “Fortunately,” thought she, “I have
discovered that he is attached to another,
whilst it is yet in my power to command
my affections, and he shall see that I am
not so weak as to form any false expectations
from what I must now consider as
mere common place flattery.” Belinda
was glad that lady Delacour was not present
at the discovery of the lock of hair,
as she was aware that she would have
rallied her unmercifully upon the occasion; 
and she rejoiced that she had not been
prevailed upon to give madame la comtesse
de Pomenars a lock of her belle eltevelure.
She could not help thinking,

from the recollection of several minute
circumstances, that Clarence Hervey had
endeavoured to gain an interest in her
affections, and she felt that there would
be great impropriety in receiving his ambiguous
visits during lady Delacour's confinement
to her room.—She therefore
gave orders, that Mr. Hervey should not
in future be admitted, till her ladyship
should again see company. This precaution
proved totally superfluous, for Mr.
Hervey never called again, during the
whole course of lady Delacour's confinement; 
though his servant regularly came
every morning with inquiries after her
ladyship's health.—She kept her room for
about ten days: a confinement to which
she submitted with extreme impatience; 
bodily pain she bore with fortitude?, but
constraint and ennui she could not endure.
One morning as she was sitting up in
bed, looking? over a large collection of
notes, and cards of inquiry after her
health, she exclaimed—

“These people will soon be tired of 
bidding their footmen put in their heads
to inquire whether I am alive or dead— 
I must appear amongst them again, if it
be only for a few minutes, or they will
forget me.—When I am fatigued, I will
retire, and you, my dear Belinda, shall
represent me—so tell them to open my
doors, and unmuffle the knocker—let me
hear the sound of music and dancing,
and let the house be filled again, for Heaven's
sake.—Dr. Zimmermann should
never have been my physician, for he
would have prescribed solitude.—Now
solitude and silence are worse for me than
poppy and mandragora.—It is impossible
to tell how much silence tires the ears of
those who have not been used to it.—For
mercy's sake, Marriott,” continued her
ladyship, turning to Marriott, who just
then came softly into the room.—“For
mercy's sake, don't walk to all eternity
on tiptoes—to see people gliding about

like ghosts makes me absolutely fancy
myself amongst the shades below.—I
would rather be stunned by the loudest
peal, that ever thundering footman gave
at my door, than hear Marriott lock that
boudoir, as if my life depended on my
not hearing the key turned.”
“Dear me! I never knew any lady that
was ill, except my lady, complain of
one's not making a noise to disturb her,” 
said Marriott.
“Then, to please you, Marriott, I will
complain of the only noise that does, or
ever did disturb me—the screaming of
your odious macaw.”
Now Marriott had a prodigious affection
for this macaw, and she defended it
with as much eagerness as if it had been
her child.
“Odious! O dear, my lady! to call
my poor macaw odious!—I didn't expect
it would ever have come to this—I am
sure I don't deserve it—I'm sure I don't
deserve, that my lady should have taken
such a dislike to me.”

And here Marriott actually burst into
tears.—“But my dear Marriott,” said lady
Delacour, “I only object to your macaw
—may not I dislike your macaw without
disliking you?—I have heard of ‘love me,
love my dog’—but I never heard of ‘love
me, love my bird.’—Did you, miss Portman?”
Marriott turned sharply round upon
miss Portman, and darted a fiery look at
her through the midst of her tears.—“Then
'tis plain,” said she, “who I'm to thank
for this,” and as she left the room her lady
could not complain of her shutting the door
after her too gently.
“Give her three minutes grace, and she
will come to her senses,” said lady Delacour
—“for she is not a bankrupt in sense.
—O, three minutes won't do, I must allow
her three days grace, I perceive,” said
lady Delacour, when Marriott half an hour
afterward reappeared, with a face which
might have sat for the picture of ill humour.
Her ill humour, however, did not prevent
her from attending her lady as usual; she

performed all her customary offices with
the most officious zeal, but in profound
silence, except every now and then she
would utter a sigh, which seemed to say,
“See how much I'm attached to my lady,
and yet my lady hates my macaw!” Her
lady, who perfectly understood the language
of sighs, and felt the force of Marriott's,
forbore to touch again on the tender
subject of the macaw, hoping that
when her house was once more filled with
company, she should be relieved by more
agreeable noises from continually hearing
this pertinacious tormentor.
As soon as it was known that lady Delacour
was sufficiently recovered to receive
company, her door was crowded with carriages; 
and as soon as it was understood
that balls and concerts were to go on as
usual at her house, her “troops of friends” 
appeared to congratulate her, and to amuse
themselves.
“How stupid it is,” said lady Delacour
Belinda, “to hear congratulatory
speeches from people, who would not care

if I were in the black hole at Calcutta this
minute; but we must take the world as it
goes—dirt and precious stones mixed together.
Clarence Hervey, however, n'a
pas unc ame de boue; he I am sure has
been really concerned for me: he thinks
that his young horses were the sole cause
of the whole evil, and he blames himself
so sincerely, and so unjustly, that I really
was half tempted to undeceive him; but
that would have been doing him an injury; 
for you know great philosophers tell us,
that there is no pleasure in the world equal
to that of being well deceived, especially
by the fair sex.—Seriously, Belinda, is it
my fancy, or is not Clarence wonderfully
changed?—Is not he grown pale, and thin,
and serious, not to say melancholy? What
have you done to him since I have been
ill?”
“Nothing—I have never seen him.”
“No! then the thing is accounted for
very naturally—he is in despair, because
he has been banished from your divine
presence.”

“More likely because he has been in
anxiety about your ladyship,” said Belinda.
“I will find out the cause, let it be what
it may,” said lady Delacour—“luckily
my address is equal to my curiosity, and
that is saying a great deal.”
Notwithstanding all her ladyship's address,
her curiosity was baffled; she could
not discover Clarence Hervey's secret, and
she began to believe, that the change which
she had noticed in his looks and manner
was imaginary or accidental. Had she
seen more of him, at this time she would
not have so easily given up her suspicions; 
but she saw him only for a few minutes
every day, and during that time he talked
to her with all his former gayety: besides,
lady Delacour had herself a daily part to
perform, which occupied almost her whole
attention. Notwithstanding the vivacity
which she affected, Belinda perceived that
she was now more seriously alarmed than
she had ever been about her health. It
was all that her utmost exertions could accomplish,

to appear for a short time in the
day—some evenings she came into company
only for half an hour, on other days
only for a few minutes, just walked through
the rooms, paid her compliments to every
body, complained of a nervous head ache,
left Belinda to do the honours for her, and
retired.
Miss Portman was now really placed in
a difficult and dangerous situation, and
she had ample opportunities of learning
and practising prudence.—All the fashionable
dissipated young men in London frequented
lady Delacour's house, and it was
said, that they were drawn thither by the
attractions of her fair representative. The
gentlemen considered a niece of Mrs.
Stanhope's as their lawful prize. The
ladies wondered that the men could think
Belinda Portman a beauty; but whilst they
affected to scorn, they sincerely feared her
charms.—Thus, left entirely to her own
discretion, she was exposed at once to the
malignant eye of envy, and the insidious
voice of flattery—she had no friend, no

guide, and scarcely a protector: her aunt
Stanhope's letters, indeed, continually supplied
her with advice, but with advice
which she could not follow consistently
with her own feelings and principles.— 
Lady Delacour, even if she had been well,
was not a person on whose counsels she
could rely: our heroine was not one of
those daring spirits, who are ambitious of
acting for themselves; she felt the utmost
diffidence of her own powers, yet at the
same time a firm resolution not to be led
even by timidity into follies, which the example
of lady Delacour had taught her to
despise. Belinda's prudence seemed to
increase with the necessity for it's exertion.
It was not the mercenary wily prudence of
a young lady, who has been taught to
think it virtue to sacrifice the affections of
her heart to the interests of her fortune— 
it was not the prudence of a cold and selfish,
but of a modest and generous woman.
—She found it most difficult to satisfy herself
in her conduct towards Clarence Hervey:
he seemed mortified and miserable if

she treated him merely as a common acquaintance,
yet she felt the danger of admitting
him to the familiarity of friendship:
had she been thoroughly convinced that he
was attached to some other woman, she
hoped that she could freely converse with
him, and look upon him as a married man; 
but notwithstanding the lock of beautiful
hair, she could not entirely divest herself
of the idea that she was beloved, when she
observed the extreme eagerness with which
Clarence Hervey watched all her motions,
and followed her with his eye as if his fate
depended upon her. She remarked that
he endeavoured as much as possible to
prevent this species of attention from being
noticed, either by the public or by herself:
his manner towards her every day became
more distant and respectful, more constrained
and embarrassed; but now and
then a different look and expression escaped.
She had often heard of Mr. Hervey's
great address in affairs of gallantry,
and she was sometimes inclined to believe
that he was trifling with her, merely for

the glory of a conquest over her heart; at
other times she suspected him of deeper
designs upon her, such as would deserve
contempt and detestation; but upon the
whole she was disposed to believe, that he
was entangled by some former attachment
from which he could not extricate himself
with honour; upon this supposition
she thought him worthy of her esteem,
and of her pity.
About this time sir Philip Baddely began
to pay a sort of lounging attention to
Belinda—he knew that Clarence Hervey
liked her, and this was the principal cause
of his desire to attract her attention.— 
“Belinda Portman,” became his favourite
toast, and amongst his companions he
gave himself the air of talking of her with
rapture.
“Rochfort,” said he, one day to his
friend—“damme, if I was to think of
Belinda Portman in any way, you take me
—Clary would look damned blue—hey?
damned blue, and devilish small, and
cursed silly too—hey?”

“‘Pon honour, I should like to see
him,” said Rochfort—’“pon honour he
deserves it from us, sir Phil, and I'll stand
your friend with the girl, and it will do
no harm to give her a hint of Clary's
Windsor flame—as a dead secret—'pon
honour he deserves it from us.”
Now it seems that sir Philip Baddely
and Mr. Rochfort, during the time of
Clarence Hervey's intimacy with them,
observed that he paid frequent visits at
Windsor, and they took it into their heads
that he kept a mistress there. They
were very curious to see her, and unknown
to Clarence, they made several attempts
for this purpose; at last, one evening,
when they were certain that he was
not at Windsor, they scaled the high garden
wall of the house which he frequented,
and actually obtained a sight of a beautiful
young girl and an elderly lady, whom
they took for her gouvernante. This adventure
they kept a profound secret from
Clarence, because they knew that he
would have quarrelled with them immediately,

and would have called them to
account for their intrusion. They now
determined to avail themselves of their
knowledge, and of his ignorance of this
circumstance; but they were sensible that
it was necessary to go warily to work,
lest they should betray themselves. Accordingly
they began by dropping distant
mysterious hints about Clarence Hervey,
to lady Delacour and miss Portman.— 
Such for instance as—
“Damme, we all know Clary's a perfect
connoisseur in beauty—hey, Rochfort
—one beauty at a time is not enough
for him—hey, damme? And it is not
fashion, nor wit, nor elegance, and all
that—that he looks for always.”
These observations were accompanied
with the most significant looks.—Belinda
heard and saw all this in painful silence,
but lady Delacour often used her address
to draw some farther explanation from sir
Philip—his regular answer was—“No, no,
your ladyship must excuse me there, I
can't peach, damme—hey, Rochfort?”

He was in hopes from the reserve with
which miss Portman began to treat Clarence,
that he should, without making any
distinct charge, succeed in disgusting her
with his rival.—Mr. Hervey was about
this time less assiduous than formerly in
his visits at lady Delacour's; sir Philip
was there every day, and often for miss
Portman's entertainment exerted himself
so far as to tell the news of the town.— 
One morning, when Clarence Hervey
happened to be present, the baronet
thought it incumbent upon him to eclipse
his rival in conversation, and he began to
talk of the last fête champêtre, at Frogmore.
“What a cursed unlucky overturn
that was of yours, lady Delacour, with
those famous young horses—why—what
with this sprain, and this nervous business,
you've not been able to stir out since the
birthday, and you've missed the breakfast,
and all that, at Frogmore—why all the
world staid broiling in town on purpose
for it, and you that had a card too—how
damned provoking.”

“I regret extremely that my illness
prevented me from being at this charming
fête.—I regret it more on miss Portman's
account than on my own,” said her ladyship.
—Belinda assured her that she felt
no mortification from the disappointment.
“O, damme! but I would have driven
you in my curricle,” said sir Philip—“It
was the finest sight and best conducted I
ever saw, and only wanted miss Portman
to make it complete.—We had gipsies,
and Mrs. Mills the actress for the queen
of the gipsies; and she gave us a famous
good song, Rochfort, you know—and
then there was two children upon an ass,
damme, I don't know how they came
there, for they're things one sees every
day—and belonged only to two of, the
soldiers wives—for we had the whole band
of the Staffordshire playing at dinner, and
we had some famous glees—and Fawcett
gave us his laughing song, and then we
had the launching of the ship, and only it
was a boat, it would have been well
enough—but damme, the song of Polly

Oliver was worth the whole—except the
Flemish Hercules—du Crow, you know,
dressed in light blue and silver—and miss
Portman! I wish you had seen this! three
great coach wheels on his chin, and a
ladder and two chairs and two children on
them—and after that, he sported a musquet
and bayonet with the point of the
bayonet on his chin—faith! that was
really famous!—but I forgot the Pyrrhic
dance, miss Portman, which was damned
fine too—danced in moors and spurs by
those Hungarian fellows—they jump and
turn about, and clap their knees with
their hands, and put themselves in all
sorts of ways—and then we had that song
of Polly Oliver, as I told you before, and Mrs.
Mills gave us—no, no—it was a drummer
of the Staffordshire dressed as a gipsy girl,
gave us the cottage on the moor, the most
charming thing, and would suit your
voice, miss Portman—damme you'd sing
it like an angel—but where was I?—O,
then they had tea—and fire places built
of brick, out in the air—and then the entrance

to the ball room was all a colonade
done with lamps and flowers, and that
sort of thing—and there was some bon
mot (but that was in the morning) amongst
the gipsies about an orange, and the
stadtholder—and then there was a Turkish
dance, and a Polonese dance, all very
fine, but nothing to come up to the
Pyrrhic touch, which was a great deal
the most knowing, in boots and spurs— 
damme, now I cant describe the thing to
you, 'tis a cursed pity you weren't there,
damme.”
Lady Delacour assured sir Philip that
she had been more entertained by the description,
than she could have been by the
reality.—“Clarence, was not it the best
description you ever heard?—But pray
favour us with a touch of the Pyrrhic
dance, sir Philip?”
Lady Delacour spoke with such polite
earnestness, and the baronet had so little
penetration and so much conceit, that he
did not suspect her of irony: he eagerly
began to exhibit the Pyrrhic dance, but

in such a manner, that it was impossible
for human gravity to withstand the sight.
—Rochfort laughed first, lady Delacour
followed him, and Clarence Hervey and
Belinda could no longer restrain themselves.
“Damme, now I believe you've all
been quizzing me, damme,”—cried the
baronet, and he fell into a sulky silence,
eyeing Clarence Hervey and miss Portman
from time to time with what he meant
for a knowing look. His silence and sulkiness
lasted till Clarence took his leave.
Soon afterward Belinda retired to the
music room. Sir Philip then begged to
speak a few words to lady Delacour, with
a face of much importance; and after a
preamble of nonsensical expletives, he
said that his regard for her ladyship and
miss Portman made him wish to explain
hints which had been dropped from him
at times, and which he could not explain
to her satisfaction, without a promise of
inviolable secresy—“As Hervey is, or
was a sort of a friend, I can't, damme,

mention this sort of thing without such a
preliminary.”—Lady Delacour gave the
preliminary promise, and sir Philip informed
her, that people began to take
notice that Hervey was an admirer of
miss Portman's, and that it might be a
disadvantage to the young lady, as Mr.
Hervey could have no serious intentions,
because he had an attachment, to his certain
knowledge, elsewhere.
“A matrimonial attachment?” said
lady Delacour.
“Why damme, as to matrimony, I
can't say, but the girl's so famously beautiful,
and Clary has been constant to her
so many years”—
“Many years—then she is not young?”
“O, damme, yes, she is not more than
seventeen—and let her be what else she
will, she's a famous fine girl—I had a
sight of her once at Windsor, by stealth.”
And then the baronet described her
after his manner.—“Where Clary keeps
her now I can't make out, but he has
taken her away from Windsor.—She was

then with a gouvernante, and is as proud
as the devil, which smells like matrimony
for Clary.”
“And do you know this peerless damsel's
name?”
“Damme, I think the old jezabel called
her miss St. Pierre—ay, damme—it was
Virginia too—Virginia St. Pierre.”
“Virginia St. Pierre, a pretty romantic
name,” said lady Delacour—“miss Portman
and I are extremely obliged by your
attention to the preservation of our hearts
—and I promise you we shall keep your
council, and our own.”
Sir Philip then, with more than his usual
complement of oaths, pronounced miss
Portman to be the finest girl he had ever
seen, and took his leave.
When lady Delacour repeated this story
to Belinda, she concluded by saying— 
“Now my dear, you know sir Philip
Baddely has his own views in telling us
all this—in telling you all this—for evidently
he admires you, and consequently
hates Clarence.—So I believe only half

the man says, and the other half, though
it has made you turn so horribly pale, my
love, I consider as a thing of no manner
of consequence to you.”
“Of no manner of consequence to me,
I assure your ladyship,” said Belinda, “I
have always considered Mr. Hervey as—”
“O, as a common acquaintance, no
doubt—but we'll pass over all those pretty
speeches—I was going to say that this
‘mistress of the wood’ can be of no consequence
to your happiness, because whatever
that fool sir Philip may think, Clarence
Hervey is not a man to go and
marry a girl who has been his mistress for
half a dozen years—do not look so shocked
my dear, I really cannot help laughing
—I congratulate you, however, that the
thing is no worse—it is all in rule and incourse
—when a man marries he sets up
new equipages, and casts off old mistresses
—or if you like to see the thing as
a woman of sentiment, rather than as a
woman of the world, here is the prettiest
opportunity for your lover's making a sacrifice.

—I am sorry I cannot make you
smile, my dear—but consider, as nobody
knows this naughty thing but ourselves,
we are not called upon to bristle up our
morality, and the most moral ladies in
the world do not expect men to be as
moral as themselves—so we may suit the
measure of our external indignation to our
real feelings—sir Philip cannot stir in the
business—for he knows Clarence would
call him out, if his secret viz to Virginia
was to come to light—I advise you d'aller
votre train with Clarence, without seeming
to suspect him in the least—there is nothing
like innocence in these cases, my
dear—but I know by the Spanish haughtiness
of your air at this instant, that you
would sooner die the death of the sentimental
—than follow my advice.”
Belinda without any haughtiness, but
with firm gentleness, replied, “that she
had no designs whatever upon Mr. Hervey,
and that therefore there could be no
necessity for any manœuvring on her part.
—That the ambiguity of his conduct towards

her had determined her long since
to guard her affections, and that she had
the satisfaction to feel, that they were entirely
under her command.”
“That is a great satisfaction indeed,
my dear,” said lady Delacour—“It is a
pity that your countenance, which is
usually expressive enough, should not at
this instant obey your wishes and express
perfect fidelity—But though you feel no
pain from disappointed affection, doubtless
the concern that you show arises from
the necessity you are under of withdrawing
a portion of your esteem from Mr.
Hervey—this is the style for you, is it
not?—After all, my dear, the whole may
be a quizzification of sir Philip's—and yet
he gave me such a minute description of
her person!—I am sure the man has not
invention or taste enough to produce such
a fancy piece.”
“Did he mention,” said Belinda, in a
low voice—“the colour of her hair?”
“Yes—light brown—but the colour of

this hair seems to affect you more than all
the rest.”
Here, to Belinda's great relief, the conversation
was interrupted by the entrance
of Marriott.—From all she had heard, but
especially from the agreement between the
colour of the hair which dropped from
Hervey's letter with sir Philip's description
of Virginia's, miss Portman was convinced
that Clarence had some secret attachment; 
and she could not help blaming
him in her own mind, for having, as she
thought, endeavoured to gain her affections,
whilst he knew that his heart was
engaged to another.—Mr. Hervey, however,
gave her no farther reason to suspect
him of any design to win her love; for
about this time his manner towards her
charged, he obviously endeavoured to
avoid her; his visits were short, and his
attention was principally directed to lady
Delacour; when she retired, he took his
leave, and sir Philip Baddely had the field
to himself.—The baronet, who thought
that he had succeeded in producing a

coldness between Belinda and his rival,
was surprised to find, that he could not
gain any advantage for himself; for some
time he had not the slightest thoughts of
any serious connexion with the lady, but
at last he was piqued by her indifference,
and by the raillery of his friend Rochfort.
“'Pon honour,” said Rochfort, “the
girl must be in love with Clary, for she
minds you no more than if you were nobody.”
“Damme, I could make her sing to
another tune, if I pleased,” said sir Philip; 
“but damme, it would cost me too
much—a wife's too expensive a thing,
damme, nowadays.—Why, a man could
have twenty curricles, and a fine stud,
and a pack of hounds, and as many mistresses
as he chooses into the bargain, for
what it would cost him to take a wife.— 
O, damme, Belinda Portman's a fine girl,
but not worth so much as that comes to— 
and yet, confound me, if I should not like
to see how blue Clary would look, if I

were to propose for her in good earnest
—hey, Rochfort!—I should like to pay
him for the way he served us about that
quiz of a doctor, hey?”
“Ay,” said Rochfort, “you know he
told us there was a tant pis and a tant
mieux in every thing—he's not come to the
tant pis yet.—'Pon honour, sir Philip, the
thing rests with you.”
The baronet vibrated for some time,
between the fear of being taken in by one
of Mrs. Stanhope's nieces, and the hope
of triumphing over Clarence Hervey.— 
At last, what he called love prevailed over
prudence, and he was resolved, cost him
what it would, to have Belinda Portman.
He had not the least doubt of being accepted,
if he made a proposal of marriage; 
consequently, the moment that he
came to this determination, he could not
help assuming d'avance the tone of a
favoured lover.
“Damme,” cried sir Philip, “one
night at lady Delacour's concert, I think
that Mr. Hervey has taken out a patent

for talking to miss Portman—but damme
if I give up this place, now I have got
it,” cried the baronet, seating himself beside
Belinda.
Mr. Hervey did not contest his seat,
and sir Philip kept his post during the
remainder of the concert, but though he
had the field entirely to himself, he could
not think of any thing more interesting,
more amusing, to whisper in Belinda's
ear, than—“Don't you think the candles
want snuffing famously ?”