

Ormond had written to Monsieur et
Madame de Connal, to announce his
intentions of spending some time in
Paris—to thank them for their invitation
to their house, an invitation which, however,
he declined accepting, but requested
Monsieur de Connal to secure
apartments for him in some hotel near
them.
Upon his arrival, he found every thing
prepared for a Milord Anglois—handsome
apartments—a fashionable carriage,
well powdered laquais, and a
valet de chambre, waited the orders of
Monsieur.
Connal was with him a few minutes

after his arrival—welcomed him to Paris
with cordial gaiety, was more glad, and
more sorry, and said more in five minutes,
and above all made more protestatations
of regard, than an Englishman
would make in a year.
“He was rejoiced! delighted! enchanted
to see Mr. Ormond.—Madame
de Connal was absolutely transported
with joy, when she heard he was on his
road to Paris. Madame was now at
Versailles—but she would return in a
few days—she would be in despair at
Mr. Ormond's not accepting the apartments
in the Hotel de Connal, which
were actually prepared for him.—But,
in fact it was nearly the same thing, within
two doors of them.—He hoped Mr.
Ormond liked his apartments—but in
truth that was of little consequence, for
he would never be in them, except when
he was asleep or dressing.”
Ormond thought the apartments quite
superb, and was going to have thanked

Monsieur de Connal for the trouble he
had taken, but at the word superbe, Connal
ran on again with French vivacity
of imagination.
“Certainly, Mr. Ormond ought,” he
said, “to have every thing now in the
first style.” He congratulated our hero
on his accession of fortune, “of which
Madame de Connal and he had heard with
inexpressible joy. And Mademoiselle
O'Faley too, she who had always prophesied,
that they should meet in happiness
at Paris, was now absolutely in extacy.”
“You have no idea, in short, my dear
Ormond, of what a strong impression
you left in all our minds, no conception
of the lively interest you always inspired.”
It was a lively interest, which had
slumbered quietly for a considerable time,
but now it wakened with perfectly good
grace.—Ormond set little value on these
sudden protestations, and his pride felt

a sort of fear, that it should be supposed
he was deceived by them.—Yet, altogether,
the manner was agreeable,
and Connal was essentially useful at
this moment; as Sir Ulick had justly
observed, a coxcomb in fashion may,
in certain circumstances, be a useful
friend.
“But my dear fellow,” cried Connal,
“what savage cut your hair last?—It is
a sin to trust your fine head to the barbarians— 
my hair dresser shall be with
you in the twinkling of an eye, I will
send my taylor—allow me to chuse your
embroidery, and see your lace, before
you decide—I am said to have a tolerable
taste,—the ladies say so, and they
are always best judges.—The French
dress will become you prodigiously, I
foresee—but, just Heaven!—what buckles!— 
those must have been had before the
flood,—no disparagement to your taste,
what could you do better in the Black
Islands. Paris is the only place for bijouterie—

except in steel, Paris surpasses
the universe—your eyes will be dazzled
by the Palais Royal. But this hat!— 
you know it can't appear—it would destroy
you—my chapelier shall be with
you instantly.—It will all be done in five
minutes—you have no idea of the celerity
with which you may command
every thing at Paris.—But I am so sorry
that Madame is at Versailles, and that I
am under a necessity of being there myself
to-morrow for the rest of this week— 
but I have a friend, a little abbé, who
will be delighted in the mean time to
shew you Paris.”
From the moment of his arrival at
Paris, Ormond resolved to put Florence
Annaly completely out of his thoughts,
and to drown in gaiety and dissipation
the too painful recollection of her duplicity
towards him. Ormond was glad
that he should have a few days to look
about him, and to see something of
Paris.

He should like, as he told M. Connal,
to go to the play to accustom himself to
the language.—He must wear off his
English or Irish awkwardness a little,
before he should be presented to Madame
de Connal, or appear in French
society.
A profusion of compliments followed
from Monsieur de Connal—but Ormond
persisting—it was settled that he should
go incog this night to the Théâtre François.
Connal called upon him in the evening,
and took him to the theatre.
They were in une petite loge, where
they could see without being seen. In
the box with them was the young abbé,
and a pretty little French actress, Mademoiselle
Adrienne. At the first coup d'œil,
the French ladies did not strike him as
handsome, they looked as he said like
dolls, all eyes and rouge; and rouge, as
he thought, very unbecomingly put on in
one frightful red patch or plaister, high

upon the cheek, without any pretence
to imitate natural colour.
“Eh fi donc!” said the abbé, “what
you call the natural colour, that would
be rouge coquette, which no woman of quality
can permit herself.”
“No, Dieu merci,” said the actress,
“that is for us—'tis very fair we should
have some advantages in the competition,
they have so many—by birth—if
not by nature.”
M. Connal explained to Ormond, “that
the frightful red patch, which offended
his eye, was the mark of a woman of
quality—women only of a certain rank
have the privilege of wearing their rouge
in that manner—your eye will soon
grow accustomed to it, and you will like
it as a sign of rank and fashion.”
The actress shrugged her shoulders,
said something about “la belle nature,” 
and the good taste of Monsieur l'Anglois.— 
The moment the curtain drew up, she
told him the names of all the actors and
actresses as they appeared—noting the

value and celebrity of each. The play
was unfortunately for Ormond, a tragedy; 
and Le Kain was at Versailles.
Ormond thought he understood French
pretty well, but he did not comprehend
what was going on. The French tone
of tragic declamation, so unnatural to
his ear, distracted his attention so much,
that he could not make out the sense
of what any of the actors said.
“'Tis like the quality rouge,” said
Connal;—“your taste must be formed
to it.—But your eye and your ear will
accommodate themselves to both.—You
will like it in a month.”
M. de Connal said this was always
the first feeling of foreigners.—“But
take patience,” said he, “go on listening,
and in a night or two, perhaps in an
hour or two, you will find the sense will
break in upon you all at once. You
will never find yourself at a loss in society.— 
Talk, at all events, whether you
speak ill or well. Talk—don't aim at

correctness—we don't expect it. Besides,
as they will tell you, we like to
see how a stranger ‘plays with our
language.’”
M. de Connal's manner was infinitely
more agreeable towards Ormond now,
than in former days.
There was perhaps still at the bottom
of his mind the same fund of self-conceit,
but he did not take the same arrogant
tone. It was the tone not of a superior
to an inferior, but of a friend, in a new
society, and a country to which he is a
stranger. There was as little of the
protector in his manner as possible, considering
his natural presumption, and
his acquired habits; considering that he
had made his own way in Paris, and
that he thought, to be the first man in
a certain circle at Paris was to be nearly
the first man in the universe. The next
morning, the little abbé called to pay
his compliments, and offer his services.
M. de Connal being obliged to go to

Versailles,—in his absence, the abbé 
would be very happy, he said, to attend
Mr. Ormond, and to shew him Paris:
he believed, he humbly said, that he had
the means of shewing him every thing
that was worth his attention.
Away they drove.
“Gare! gare!” cried the coachman,
chacing away the droves of walkers before
him. There being no foot-paths in
the streets of Paris, they were continually
driven up close to the walls.
Ormond at first shrunk frequently at
the sight of their peril and narrow escapes.
“Monsieur apparemment is nervous
after his voyage?” said the abbé.
“No, but I am afraid the people will
be run over.—I will make the coachman
drive more quietly.”
“Du tout!—not at all,” said the little
abbé, who was of a noble family, and
had all the airs of it.—“Leave him to
settle it with the people, they are used to
it.—And, after all, what have they to

think of but to take care of themselves— 
la canaille.”
“La canaille,”—synonymous with the
swinish mullitude, an expression of contempt,
for which the Parisian nobility
have since paid terribly dear.
Ormond, who was not used to it, found
it difficult to abstract his sympathy from
his fellow creatures, by whatever name
they were called; and he could not exclusively
command his attention, to admire
the houses and churches which his
abbé continually pointed out to his attention.
He admired, however, the fine façade
of the Louvre,—the Place de Louis XV,
—the astonishingly brilliant spectacle of
the Palais Royal,—Nôtre Dame,—a few
handsome bridges, and the drives on the
Boulevards.
But in fact there was at that time
much more to be heard, and less to be
seen, than at present in Paris. Paris
was not then as fine a city as it now is.
Ormond, in his secret soul, preferred

the bay of Dublin to all he then saw on
the banks of the Seine.
The little abbé was not satisfied with
the paucity of his exclamations, and
would have given him up, as un froid
Anglois,—but that, fortunately, our young
hero had each night an opportunity of
redeeming his credit. They went to the
play;—he saw French comedy!—he saw
and heard Molet, and Madame de la
Ruette: the abbé was charmed with
his delight, his enthusiasm, his genuine
enjoyment of high comedy, and his quick
feeling of dramatic excellence. It was
indeed perfection—beyond any thing of
which Ormond could have formed an
idea. Every part well performed—nothing
to break the illusion!
This first fit of dramatic enthusiasm
was the third day at its height, when
Connal returned from Versailles, and it
was so strong upon him, and he was so
full of Molet and Madame de la Ruette,
that he could scarcely listen to what

Connal said of Versailles, the king's
supper, and Madame la Dauphine.
“No doubt—he should like to see all
that—but at all events he was positively
determined so see Molet, and Madame
de la Ruette, every night they acted.”
Connal smiled, and only answered— 
“Of course he would do as he pleased.” 
But in the mean time, it was now Madame
de Connal's night for seeing company,
and he was to make his debut in
a French assembly.
Connal called for him early, that they
might have a few minutes to themselves,
before the company should arrive.
Ormond felt some curiosity, a little
anxiety, a slight flutter of the heart, at
the thought of seeing Dora again.
The arrival of her husband interrupted
these thoughts.
Connal took the light from the hands
of Crepin, the valet, and reviewed Ormond
from head to foot.
“Very well, Crepin;—you have done

your part, and Nature has done hers,
for Monsieur.”
“Yes, truly,” said Crepin, “Nature
had done wonders for Monsieur; and
Monsieur, now he is dressed, has really
all the air of a Frenchman.”
“Quite l'air comme il faut!—l'air noble!” 
added Connal, and he agreed with Crepin
in opinion, that French dress made
an astonishing difference in Mr. Ormond.
“Madame de Connal I am sure will
think so,” continued Connal;—“will see
it with admiration—for she really has
good taste. I will pledge myself for your
success.—With that figure, with that
air, you will turn many heads in Paris— 
if you will but talk enough.—Say every
thing that comes into your head—don't
be like an Englishman, always thinking
about the sense—the more nonsense the
better—trust me,—livrez vous—let yourself
out—follow me and fear nothing,” 
cried he, running down stairs, delighted
with Ormond and with himself.

He foresaw he should gain credit by
producing such a man.—He really wished
that Ormond should succeed in French
society, and that he should pass his time
agreeably at Paris.
No man could feel better disposed towards
another.—Even if he should take
a fancy to Madame, it was to the polite
French husband a matter of indifference,
except so far as the arrangement might,
or might not, interfere with his own
views.
And these views?—What were they?— 
Only to win all the young man's fortune
at play.———A cela près—excepting
this he was sincerely Ormond's friend,
ready to do every thing possible—de
faire l'impossible, to oblige and entertain
him.
Connal enjoyed Ormond's surprise at
the magnificence of his hotel. After
ascending a spacious staircase, and passing
through antichamber after antichamber,
they reached the splendid salon,

blazing with lights, reflected on all
sides in mirrors, that reached from the
painted ceiling to the inlaid floor.
“Not a creature here yet—happily.”
“Madame begs,” said the servant,
“that Monsieur will pass on into the
boudoir.”
“Anybody with Madame?”
“No one but Madame de Clairville.”
“Only l'amie intime,” said Connal— 
“The bosom friend.”
“How will Dora feel?—How will it
be with us both,” thought Ormond, as
he followed the light step of the husband.
“Entrez!—Entrez toujours.”
Ormond stopped at the threshold, and
absolutely dazzled by the brilliancy of
Dora's beauty, her face, her figure, her
air so infinitely improved, so fashioned!— 
“Dora!—Ah! Madame de Connal,” 
cried Ormond.
No French actor could have done it
better than nature did it for him.

Dora gave one glance at Ormond— 
pleasure, joy, sparkled in her eyes!— 
Then leaning on the lady who stood beside
her, almost sinking, Dora sighed,
and exclaimed— 
“Ah! Harry Ormond!”
The husband vanished.
“Ah ciel!” said l'amie intime, looking
towards Ormond.
“Help me to support her, Monsieur— 
while I seek l'eau de Cologne.”
Ormond, seized with sudden tremour,
could scarcely advance.
Dora sunk on the sofa, clasping her
beautiful hands, and exclaiming— 
“The companion of my earliest days!”
Then Ormond, excused to himself,
sprang forward— 
“Friend of my childhood!” cried he— 
“Yes, my sister,—your father promised
me this friendship—this happiness,” said
he, supporting her, as she raised herself
from the sofa.
“Ah! I know it well, Monsieur—I

understand it all,” said Madame de
Clairville.
“Où est il? où est il?—Where is he,
Monsieur Ormond?” cried Mademoiselle,
throwing open the door. “Ah ciel, comme
il est beau! A perfect Frenchman
already! And how much embellished by
dress!—Ah! Paris for that.—Did I not
prophesy?—Dora, my darling, do me
the justice—But how seized!—Comme
vous voila saisi.—Here's l'amie with
l'eau de Cologne. Ah! my child, recover
yourself, for here is some one—the
Comte de Jarillac it is, entering the salon.”
The promptitude of Dora's recovery
was a new surprise to our hero. “Follow
me,” said she to him, and with Parisian
ease and grace she glided into the
salon to receive M. de Jarillac—presented
Ormond to M. le Comte—“Anglois—Irlandois— 
an English an Irish gentleman— 
The companion of her childhood,” 
with the slightest, lightest tone of sentiment

imaginable;—and another count
and another came, and a baron, and a
marquis, and a duke, and Madame la
Comtesse de———, and Madame la Duchesse— 
——; and all were received with
ease, respect, vivacity, or sentiment,
as the occasion required;—now advancing
a step or two to mark empressement
where requisite. Regaining always, imperceptibly,
the most advantageous situation
and attitude for herself. Presenting
Ormond to every one—quite intent
upon him, yet appearing entirely occupied
with every body else; and, in short,
never forgetting them, him, or herself
for an instant.
“Can this be Dora?” thought Ormond,
in admiration, yet in astonishment
that divided his feelings. It was
indeed wonderful to see how quickly, how
completely, the Irish country girl had
been metamorphosed into a French woman
of fashion.
And now surrounded by admirers,

by adorers in embroidery, and blazing
with crosses and stars—she received les
hommages—enjoyed le succès—accepted
the incense, without bending too low or
holding herself too high—not too sober,
nor too obviously intoxicated. Vanity in
all her heart, yet vanity not quite turning
her head, not more than was agreeable
and becoming—extending her smiles to
all, and hoping all the time that Harry
Ormond envied each. Charmed with
him, for her early passion for him had revived
in an instant. The first sight of
his figure and air, the first glance in the
boudoir had been sufficient. She knew,
too, how well he would succeed at Paris,
how many rivals she would have in a
week—these perceptions, sensations, and
conclusions, requiring so much time in
slow words to express, had darted through
Dora's head in one instant, had exalted
her imagination, and touched her heart— 
as much as that heart could be touched.
Ormond mean time breathed more

freely, and recovered from his tremours.
Madame de Connal, surrounded by
adorers, and shining in the salon, was
not so dangerous as Dora half fainting in
the boudoir;—nor had any words that wit
or sentiment could devise power to please
or touch him so much as the “Harry Ormond!” 
which had burst naturally from
Dora's lips. Now he began almost to
doubt whether nature or art prevailed.— 
Now he felt himself safe at least, since he
saw that it was only the coquet of the
Black Islands transformed into the coquet
of the Hotel de Connal. The
transformation was curious, was admirable; 
Ormond thought he could admire
without danger, and, in due time,
perhaps gallant, with the best of them
all, without feeling, without scruple.
The tables were now arranging for
play. The conversation he heard every
where round him related to the good or
bad fortune of the preceding nights. Ormond
perceived, that it was the custom of

the house to play every evening, and the
sentences that reached him about bets
and debts confirmed the hint which his
guardian had given him, that Connal
played high.
At present, however, he did not seem
to have any design upon Ormond, he was
engaged at the farther end of the room.
He left Ormond quite to himself, and to
Madame, and never once even asked
him to play.
There seemed more danger of his being
left out, than of his being taken in.
“Donnez moi le bras—Come with me,
Monsieur Ormond”—said Mademoiselle,
“and you shall lose nothing,—while they
are settling about their parties, we can
get one little moment's chat.”
She took him back to the boudoir.
“I want to make you know your
Paris,” said she—“here we can see the
whole world pass in review, and I shall
tell you every thing most necessary for
you to know;—for example—who is who

—and still more it imports you to know
who and who are together.”
“Look at that lady, beautiful as the
day, in diamonds.”
“Madame de Connal do you mean?” 
said Ormond.
“Ah! no; not her always!”—said
Mademoiselle—“though she has the
apple here, without contradiction,” continued
Mademoiselle, still speaking in
English, which it was always her pride
to speak to whoever could understand
her.
“Absolutely!—without vanity, though
my niece, I may say it, she a perfect
creature—and mise à ravir!—Did you
ever see such a change for the best in
one season.—Ah! Paris!—Did I not tell
you well?—And you felt it well yourself— 
you lost your head, I saw that, at first
sight of her, à la Françoise—the best
proof of your taste and sensibilité—she
has infinite sensibility too!—interesting,
and at the height, what you English call
the tip-top of the fashion here.”

“So it appears, indeed,” said Ormond,
“by the crowd of admirers I see round
Madame de Connal.”
“Admirers! yes, adorers you may
say—Encore! If you added lovers you
would not be much wrong; dying for
love—éperdument épris!—See, there, he
who is bowing now—Monsieur le Marquis
de Beaulieu—homme de cour—plein
d'esprit—homme marquant—very remarkable
man. But—Ah voilà qui entre— 
of the court. Did you ever see finer
entrée made by man into a room, so full
of grace. Ah! Le Comte de Belle Chasse— 
How many women already he has lost!— 
It is a real triumph to Madame de Connal
to have him in her chains.—What a
smile!—C'est lui qui est aimable pour
nous autres—d'une soumission pour les
femmes—d'une fierté pour les hommes.
—As the lamb gentle for the pretty
woman; as the lion terrible for the man.
It is that Comte de Belle Chasse, who is
absolutely irresistible.”

“Absolutely irresistible,” Ormond repeated,
smiling, “not absolutely, I
hope.”
“Oh, that is understood—you do not
doubt la sagesse de Madame?—Besides
heureusement there is an infinite safety
for her in the number, as you see, of her
adorers. Wait till I name them to vou, I
shall give you a catalogue raisonnée.”
With rapid enunciation Mademoiselle
went through the names and rank of the
circle of adorers, noting with complacency
the number of ladies, to whom each
man of gallantry was supposed to have
paid his addresses—next to being of the
blood royal this appearing to be the highest
distinction.
“And à propos, Monsieur d'Ormond,
you, yourself, when do you count to go
to Versailles?—Ah! when you shall see
the king and the king's supper, and Madame
la Dauphine! Ah!”
Mademoiselle was recalled from the
extacy in which she had thrown up her

eyes to Heaven, by some gentleman
speaking to her as he passed the open
cabinet door arm in arm with a lady— 
Mademoiselle answered, with a profound
inclination of the head, whispering to
Ormond after they had passed—M. le duc
de C&wblank;with Madame de la Tour.
“Why he is constant always to that
woman, Heaven knows better than I.— 
Stand, if you are so good, Monsieur, a
little more this way, and give your attention,
they don't want you yet at play.”
Then designating every person at the
different card tables, she told that such a
lady is such a gentleman's wife, and
there is M. le Baron de L&wblank;her lover,
the gentleman who looks over her cards— 
and that other lady with the joli pompon,
she is intimate with M. de la Tour,
the husband of the lady who passed with
M. le Duc. Mademoiselle explained all
these arrangements with the most perfect
sang froid, as things of course, that every
body knew and spoke of, except just before

the husbands;—but there was no
mystery, no concealment—“What use?— 
To what good?”
Ormond asked whether there were any
ladies in the room, who were supposed to
be faithful to their husbands.
“Eh!—Ma niece par exemple, Madame
de Connal—I may cite as a woman
of la plus belle reputation, sans tâche— 
what you call unblemish.”
“Assuredly,” said Ormond, “you
could not, I hope, think me so indiscreet— 
I believe I said ladies in the plural
number.”
“Ah! oui, assuredly, and I can name
you twenty. To begin, there, do you
see that woman standing up, who has the
air as if she think of nothing at all, and
nobody thinking of her, with only her
husband near her, cet grand homme blême.— 
There is Madame de la Rousse—d'une
réputation intacte!—frightfully dressed as
she is always!—But hold, you see that
pretty little Comtesse de la Brie, all in

white?—Charmante! I give her to you
as a reputation against which slander
cannot breathe—Nouvelle mariée—bride— 
in what you call de honey moon;—but
we don't know that in French—no matter!— 
again, since you are curious in
these things, there is another reputation
without spot, Madame de St. Ange, I
warrant her to you—bien froide celle-là,
cold as any English, married a full year— 
and still her choice to make;—allons,
there is three I give you already, without
counting my niece; and wait, I will
find you yet another,” said Mademoiselle,
looking carefully through the crowd.
She was relieved from her difficulty by
the entrance of the little abbé, who came
to summon Monsieur to Madame de Connal,
who did him the honour to invite
him to the table. Ormond played, and
fortune smiled upon him as she usually
does upon a new votary; and beauty
smiled upon him perhaps on the same
principle. Connal never came near

him till supper was announced; then only
to desire him to give his arm to a charming
little Countess—La Nouvelle Mariée— 
Madame de Connal belonging, by right
of rank, to Monsieur le Comte de Belle
Chasse. The supper was one of the delightful
petit soupers for which Paris was
famous at that day, and which she will
never see again.
The moralist, who considers the essential
interests of morality more than the
immediate pleasures of society, will think
this rather a matter of rejoicing than regret.
How far such society and correct
female conduct be compatible, is a question
which it might take too long a time
to decide.
Therefore, be it sufficient here to say,
that Ormond, without staying to examine
it, was charmed with the present effect; 
with the gaiety, the wit, the politeness,
the ease, and altogether with that indescribable
thing, that untranslateable
esprit de société. He could not afterwards

remember any thing very striking
or very solid that had been said, but all
was agreeable at the moment, and there
was great variety. Ormond's self love
was, he knew not how, flattered. Without
effort, it seemed to be the object of
every body to make Paris agreeable to
him; and they convinced him, that he
would find it the most charming place in
the world—without any disparagement
to his own country, to which all solid
honours and advantages were left undisputed.
The ladies whom he had thought
so little captivating at first view at the
theatre, were all charming on further
acquaintance, so full of vivacity, and
something so flattering in their manner,
that it put a stranger at once at his ease.
Towards the end of the supper he found
himself talking to two very pretty women
at once, with good effect, and thinking
at the same time of Dora and the Comte
de Belle Chasse. Moreover, he thought
he saw that Dora was doing the same

between the irresistible Duke and the
Comte plein d'esprit, from whom, while
she was listening and talking without
intermission, her eyes occasionally strayed,
and once or twice met those of Ormond.
“Is it indiscreet to ask you, whether
you passed your evening agreeably?” 
said M. de Connal, when the company had
retired.
“Delightfully,” said Ormond, “the
most agreeable evening I ever passed in
my life!”
Then fearing that he had spoken with
too much enthusiasm, and that the husband
might observe that his eyes, as he
spoke, involuntarily turned towards Madame
de Connal, he moderated (he might
have saved himself the trouble), he moderated
his expression by adding, “that
as far as he could yet judge, he thought
French society very agreeable.”
“You have seen nothing yet, you are
right not to judge hastily,” said Connal,

“But so far, I am glad you are tolerably
well satisfied.”
“Ah! oui, Monsieur Ormond,” cried
Mademoiselle, joining them, “we shall
fix you at Paris, I expect.”
“You hope, I suppose you mean, my
dear aunt,” said Dora, with such flattering
hope in her voice, and in the expression
of her countenance, that Ormond
decided that he— 
“Certainly, intended to spend the
winter at Paris.”
Connal, satisfied with this certainty,
would have let Ormond go.—But Mademoiselle
had many compliments to make
him and herself upon his pronunciation,
and his fluency in speaking the French
language—really like a Frenchman himself.— 
The Marquis de Beaulieu had
said so to her—she was sure M. d'Ormond
could not fail to succeed in Paris,
with that perfection added to all his other
advantages. It was the greatest of all
advantage in the world—the greatest advantage

in the universe—she was going
on to say, but Connal finished the flattery
better.
“You would pity us, Ormond,” cried
he, interrupting Mademoiselle, “if you
could see and hear the Vandals, they
send to us from England with letters
of introduction—barbarians who can
neither sit, stand, nor speak—nor even
articulate the language. How many of
these butors! rich, of good family, I
have been sometimes called upon to introduce
into society, and to present at
court!—Upon my honour it has happened
to me, to wish they might hang themselves
out of my way, or be found dead
in their beds the day I was to take them
to Versailles.”
“It is really too great a tax upon the
good breeding of the lady of the house,” 
said Madame de Connal, “deplorable!
when she has nothing better to say of an
English guest, than that ‘Ce monsieur la
a un grand talent pour le silence.’”

Ormond, conscious that he had talked
away at a great rate, was pleased by this
indirect compliment.
“But such personnages muëts never
really see French society. Every body
is quit of them for a supper—not a petit
souper—no, no, an invitation to a great
assembly, where they see nothing. Milord
Anglois is lost in the crowd, or
stuck across a door-way by his own
sword.—Now, what could any letter
of recommendation do for such a fellow
as that?”
“The letters of recommendation which
are of most advantage,” said Madame
de Connal—“are those which are written
in the countenance.”
Ormond had presence of mind enough
not to bow, though the compliment
was directed distinctly to him—a look
of thanks he knew was sufficient. As
he retired, Mademoiselle, pursuing to the
door, begged that he would come as
early as he could the next morning, that

she might introduce him to her apartments,
and explain to him all the superior
conveniences of a French house.
M. de Connal representing, however,
that the next day Mr. Ormond was to
go to Versailles, Mademoiselle acknowledged
that was an affair to which all
others must yield.
Well flattered by all the trio, and
still more perhaps by his own vanity, our
young hero was at last suffered to depart.
The first appearance at Versailles was
a matter of great consequence.—Court
dress was then an affair of as much importance
at Paris, as it seems to be now
in London, if we may judge by the columns
of birth day dresses, and the honourable
notice of gentlemen's coats and
waistcoats. It was then at Paris, however,
as it is now, and ever will be all
over the world, essential to the appearance
of a gentleman, that whatever time,
pains, or expense it might have cost,

he should, from the moment he is dressed,
be or at least seem above his dress. In
this as in most cases, the shortest and
safest way to seem is to be. Our young
hero being free from personal conceit,
or overweening anxiety about his appearance,
looked at ease. He called at
the Hotel de Connal the day he was to
go to Versailles, and Mademoiselle was
in extacy at the sight of his dress,
exclaiming, “superbe!—magnifique!”
Connal seemed more struck with his
air than his dress, and Dora, perhaps,
was most pleased with his figure—she
was silent—but it was a silence that
spoke—her husband heeded not what it
said, but, pursuing his own course, observed,
that to borrow the expression
of Crepin, the valet de chambre, no
contemptible judge in these cases, Monsieur
Ormond looked not only as if he was
né coiffè, but as if he had been born with
a sword by his side. “Really, my dear
friend,” continued Connal, “you look

as if you had come at once full dressed
into the world, which in our days is better
than coming ready armed out of the
head of Jupiter.”
Mademoiselle O'Faley now seizing
upon Ormond, whom she called her pupil,
carried him off, to shew him her apartments,
and to shew him the whole house; 
which she did with many useful notes— 
pointing out the convenience, and entire
liberty, that result from the complete separation
of the apartments of the husband
and wife in French houses.
“You see, Monsieur et Madame with
their own staircases—their own passages,
their own doors in and out, and all separate
for the people of Monsieur, and
the women of Madame, and here through
this little door you go into the apartments
of Madame.”
Ormond's English foot stopped respectfully— 
“Eh, entrez toujours,” said Mademoiselle,
as the husband had said before
at the door of the boudoir.

“But Madame de Connal is dressing,
perhaps,” said Ormond.
“Et puis?—and what then? you must
get rid as fast as you can of your English
préjugés—and she is not here neither,” 
said Mademoiselle opening the door.
Madame de Connal was in an inner
apartment; and Ormond, the instant after
he entered this room with Mademoiselle,
heard a quick step, which he knew was
Dora's, running to bolt the door of the
inner room—he was glad that she had
not quite got rid of her English prejudices.
She pointed out to him all the accommodations
of a French apartment—Mademoiselle
had not at this moment the slightest
malice, or bad intention in any thing
she was saying—she simply spoke in all
the innocence of a Frenchwoman—if
that term be intelligible.—If she had
any secret motive, it was merely the vanity
of shewing that she was quite Parisienne— 
and there again she was mistaken,
for having lived half her life out

of Paris, she had forgotten, if she ever
had it, the tone of good society—and
upon her return had overdone the matter,
exaggerated the French manners, to
prove to her niece, that she knew les
usages—les convenances, les nuances— 
enfin la mode de Paris!—a more dangerous
guide in Paris for a young married
woman in every respect could
scarcely be found.
M. de Connal's valet now came to let
Mr. Ormond know, that Monsieur waited
his orders.—But for this interruption,
he was in a fair way to hear all the private
history of the family,—all the secrets
that Mademoiselle knew.
Of the amazing communicativeness of
Frenchwomen on all subjects our young
hero had as yet no conception.