

Lord Oldborough was engaged with
some gentlemen from the city about a
loan when Alfred arrived. His Lordship's
attention was given entirely to
this business. By the length of time
which the negotiators staid, they tried
Alfred's patience, but the minister sat
with immovable composure, till they
knew their own minds, and till they
departed.—Then, the loan at once dismissed
from his thoughts, he was ready
for Alfred—
“You have married, I think, Mr.
Alfred Percy, since I saw you last—I
congratulate you.”
His Lordship was not in the habit of
noticing such common events; Alfred
was surprised and obliged by the interest
in his private affairs, which this congratulation
denoted.

“I congratulate you, Sir, because I
understand you have married a woman
of sense. To marry a fool—to form—or
to have any connexion with a fool,” continued
his Lordship, his countenance
changing remarkably as he spoke—“I
conceive to be the greatest evil, the
greatest curse, that can be inflicted on a
man of sense.”
He walked across the room with long,
firm, indignant strides—then stopping
short, he exclaimed,
“Lettres de cachet!—Dangerous
instruments in bad hands! ... As what
are not?—But one good purpose they
answered—They put it in the power of
the head of every noble house to disown,
and to deprive of the liberty to disgrace
his family, any member, who should
manifest the will to commit desperate
crime, or desperate folly.”
Alfred was by no means disposed to
join in praise even of this use of a lettre
de cachet, but he did not think it a proper
time to argue the point, as he saw

Lord Oldborough was under the influence
of some strong passion. Alfred waited
in silence, till he should explain himself
further.
His Lordship unlocked a desk, and
produced a letter.
“Pray, Mr. Percy ... Mr. Alfred
Percy, have you heard any thing lately
of the Marchioness of Twickenham?”
“No, my Lord—”
Alfred, at this instant, recollected the
whisper which he had once heard at
chapel, and he added—“Not of late,
my Lord.”
“There,” said Lord Oldborough,
putting a letter into Alfred's hands— 
“There is the sum of what I have
heard.”
The letter was from the Duke of
Greenwich, informing Lord Oldborough,
that an unfortunate discovery had been
made of an affair between the Marchioness
of Twickenham and a certain
Captain Bellamy, which rendered an
immediate separation necessary.

“So!” thought Alfred, “my brother
Godfrey had a fine escape of this fair lady.”
“I have seen her once since I received
that letter, and I never will see
her again,” said Lord Oldborough— 
“that's past—all that concerns her is
past and irremediable—Now as to the
future, and to what concerns myself.
I have been informed—how truly I
cannot say—that some time ago a rumour,
a suspicion of this intrigue, was
whispered in what they call the fashionable
world.”
“I believe that your Lordship has
been truly informed,” said Alfred—And
he then mentioned the whisper he had
heard at the chapel.
“Ha!—Further, it has been asserted to
me, that a hint was given to the Marquis of
Twickenham, of the danger of suffering
that ... what is the man's name—Bellamy
—to be so near his wife—And that
the hint was disregarded.”
“The Marquis did very weakly, or
very wickedly,” said Alfred.

“All wickedness is weakness, Sir, you
know—but to our point—I have
been assured, that the actual discovery of
the intrigue was made to the Marquis
some months previous to the birth of his
child—And that he forbore to take any
notice of this, lest it might affect the legitimacy
of that child. After the birth
of the infant—a boy—subsequent indiscretions
on the part of the Marchioness,
the Marquis would make it appear, gave
rise to his first suspicions.—Now, Sir,
these are the points, of which, as my
friend, and as a professional man, I
desire you to ascertain the truth. If the
facts are as I have thus heard, I presume
no divorce can be legally obtained.”
“Certainly not, my Lord.”
“Then I will direct you instantly to
the proper channels for information.”
Whilst Lord Oldborough wrote directions,
Alfred assured him he would fulfil
his commission with all the discretion
and celerity in his power.

“The next step,” continued Lord
Oldborough—“for, on such a subject,
I wish to say all that is necessary at
once, that it may be banished from my
mind—Your next step, supposing the
facts to be ascertained, is to go with this
letter—my answer to the Duke of Greenwich
—See him—and see the Marquis.
In matters of consequence have nothing
to do with secondary people—deal with
the principals.—Show in the first
place, as a lawyer, that their divorce is
unattainable—Next, show the Marquis,
that he destroys his son and heir by
attempting it.—The Duke, I believe,
would be glad of a pretext for dissolving
the political connexion between me and
the Greenwich family. He fears me,
and he fears the world; he dares not
abandon me without a pretence for the
dissolution of friendship. He is a weak
man, and never dares to act without a
pretext; but show him that a divorce is
not necessary for his purpose—a separation
will do as well—Or without it, I

am ready to break with him at council,
in the House of Lords, on a hundred
political points, and let him shield himself
as he may from the reproach of desertion,
by leaving the blame of quarrel
on my impracticability, or on what he
will, I care not—so that my family be
saved from the ignominy of divorce.”
As he sealed his letter, Lord Oldborough
went on in abrupt sentences.
“I never counted on a weak man's
friendship—I can do without his Grace
—Woman! Woman! The same— 
ever since the beginning of the world!”
Then turning to Alfred to deliver the
letter into his hand,
“Your brother, Major Percy, Sir ...
I think I recollect ... He was better in
the West Indies.”
“I was just thinking so, my Lord,” 
said Alfred.
“Yes—Better encounter the plague
than a fool.”
Lord Oldborough had never, before,
distinctly adverted to his knowledge of

his niece's partiality for Godfrey, but his
Lordship now added,
“Major Percy's honorable conduct
is not unknown; I trust honorable conduct
never was, and never will be, lost
upon me.—This to the Duke of
Greenwich ... and this to the Marquis
—Since it was to be, I rejoice that ...
this Captain Bellamy is the gallant— 
Had it been your brother, Sir, could
there have been any love in the case ...
not, observe, that I believe in love,
much less am I subject to the weakness
of remorse—but a twinge might have
seized my mind—I might possibly have
been told, that the Marchioness was married
against her inclination—But I am
at ease on that point—My judgment of
her was right.—You will let me know,
in one word, the result of your negotiation
without entering into particulars— 
Divorce, or no divorce, is all I wish to
hear.”
Alfred did not know all the circumstances
of the Marchioness of Twickenham's

marriage, nor the peremptory manner
in which it had been insisted upon
by her uncle, otherwise he would have
felt still greater surprise, than that which
he now felt, at the stern unbending character
of the man—Possessed as Lord Oldborough
was by the opinion, that he had
at the time judged and acted in the best
manner possible, no after events could
make him doubt the justice of his own
decision, or could at all shake him in his
own estimation.
Alfred soon brought his report,
“In one word,—no divorce, my
Lord.”—
“That's well—I thank you, Sir.”—
His Lordship made no further inquiries—not
even whether there was to be a
separation.
Alfred was commissioned by the Duke
of Greenwich to deliver a message, which,
like the messages of the Gods in Homer,
he delivered verbatim, and without comment.
His Grace of Greenwich trusts Lord

Oldborough will believe, that notwithstanding
the unfortunate circumstances,
which dissolved in some degree the
family connexion, it was the farthest
possible from his Grace's wish or thoughts,
to break with Lord Oldborough, as long
as private feelings, and public principles,
could be rendered by any means compatible.”—
Lord Oldborough smiled in scorn— 
and Alfred could scarcely command his
countenance.—
Lord Oldborough prepared to give his
Grace the opportunity, which he knew
he desired, of differing with him on principle:
his Lordship thought his favor
and power were now sufficiently established,
to be able to do without the Duke
of Greenwich, and his pride prompted
him to show this to his Grace, and to the
world. He carried it with a high hand
for a short time, but even whilst he felt
most secure, and when all seemed to bend
and bow before his genius and his away,
many circumstances and many persons

were combining, to work the downfall of
his power.
One of the first slight circumstances,
which shook his favor, was a speech he
had made to some gentleman about the
presentation of the Deanery to Buckhurst
Falconer. It had been supposed
by many, who knew the court which
Commissioner Falconer paid to Lord
Oldborough, that it was through his
Lordship's interest, that this preferment
was given to the son; but when some
person, taking this for granted, spoke of
it to his Lordship, he indignantly disclaimed
all part in the transaction, and
it is said, that he added “Sir, I know
what is due to private regard as a man— 
and as a minister, what must be yielded
to parliamentary influence; but I never
could have advised the bestowing ecclesiastical
benefice and dignity upon any
one, whose conduct was not his first
recommendation.”
This speech, made in a moment of
proud and perhaps unguarded indignation,

was repeated with additions, suppressions,
variations, and comments.— 
Any thing will at court serve the purpose
of those who wish to injure, and it
is inconceivable what mischief was done
to the minister by this slight circumstance—In
the first place, the nobleman
high in office, and the family connexions
of the nobleman, who had made the exchange
of livings, and given the promise
of the Deanery to Bishop Clay, were
offended beyond redemption,—because,
they were in the wrong.—Then, all who
had done, or wished to do wrong in similar
instances, were displeased by reflection
or by anticipation—But chiefly Lord
Oldborough was injured by misrepresentation
in the quarter, where it was of most
consequence to him to preserve his influence.
It was construed by the highest
authority into disrespect, and an imperious
desire to encroach on favor, to control
prerogative, and to subdue the mind
of his sovereign. Insidious arts had long
been secretly employed to infuse these

ideas; and when once the jealousy of
power was excited, every trifle confirmed
the suspicion, which Lord Oldborough's
uncourtierlike character was little calculated
to dispel. His popularity now
gave umbrage, and it was hinted, that he
wished to make himself the independent
minister of the people.
The affairs of the country prospered
however under his administration; there
was trouble, there was hazard in change.
It was argued, that it was best to wait at
least for some reverse of fortune in war,
or some symptom of domestic discontent,
before an attempt should be made to displace
this minister, formidable by his
talents, and by the awe his commanding
character inspired.
The habit of confidence and deference
for his genius and integrity remained, and
to him no difference for some time appeared,
in consequence of the secret— 
decay of favor.
Commissioner Falconer, timid, anxious,
restless,—was disposed by circumstances

and by nature, or by second nature, to
the vigilance of a dependant's life; accustomed
to watch and consult daily the
barometer of court favor, he soon felt the
coming storm; and the moment he saw
prognostics of the change, he trembled,
and considered how he should best provide
for his own safety before the hour of
danger arrived.—Numerous libels against
the minister appeared, which Lord Oldborough
never read, but the Commissioner,
with his best spectacles, read them
all. For he well knew and believed what
the sage Selden saith, that,
“Though some make slight of libels,
yet you may see by them how the wind
sets.”
After determining by the throwing up
of these straws which way the wind set,
the Commissioner began with all possible
skill and dexterity to trim his boat.
But dexterous trimmer though he was,
and “prescient of change,” he did not
yet foresee from what quarter the storm
would come.—

While the Commissioner was foreseeing
and preparing for the downfall of his
patron, Lord Oldborough was silently
collecting proofs of the duplicity of Cunningham
Falconer, of the intrigues he
had been carrying on abroad, and at
home, to have himself appointed embassador
to Denmark by the Greenwich
influence, in case of a change of ministry,
or at all events, in despite of Lord Oldborough,
by whom he had been recalled.
—Count Altenberg's letters had unveiled
completely the Envoy's treachery as far
as it related to his intrigues abroad, and
other friends detected some of his manœuvres
with politicians at home, to
whom he had endeavored to pay court,
by betraying confidence reposed in him
respecting the Tourville papers. Much
of the mischief Cunningham had done
this great minister still operated, unknown
to his unsuspicious mind: but sufficient
was revealed, to determine Lord Oldborough
to dismiss him from all future
hopes of his favor; and, as it was his Lordship's

custom when he felt contempt, to
discard Cunningham for ever from his
thoughts.
“Mr. Commissioner Falconer,” he began
one morning, the moment the Commissioner
entered his cabinet, “Mr. Commissioner
Falconer,” in a tone which
instantly dispelled the smile at entrance
from the Commissioner's countenance,
and in the same moment changed his
whole configurature,
“My confidence is withdrawn from
your son, Mr. Cunningham Falconer—for
ever—and not without good reason—As
you may ... if you are not aware of it
already ... see, by those papers.”—
Lord Oldborough turned away, and
asked his secretaries for his red box— 
as he was going to Council—
Just as he left his cabinet, he looked
back, and said:
“Mr. Falconer, you should know, if
you be not already apprised of it, that
your son, Cunningham, is on his road to
Denmark—You should be aware, that

the journey is not made by my desire,
or by his Majesty's order, or by any
official authority—consequently, he is
travelling to the Court of Denmark at
his own expense or yours—Unless he
can prevail upon his Grace of Greenwich
to defray his ambassadorial travelling
charges, or can afford to wait for
them till a total change of administration—Of
which, Sir, if I see any symptoms
to day in council,” added his
Lordship, in the tone of bitter irony,
“I will give you fair notice—for fair
dealing is what I practise.”
This said, the Minister left the Commissioner
to digest his speech as he
might, and repaired to Council, where
he found every thing apparently as
smooth as usual, and where he was received
by all, especially by the highest,
with perfect consideration.
Meantime Commissioner Falconer was
wretched beyond expression, wretched
in the certainty that his son, that he
himself, had probably lost, irrecoverably,

one excellent patron, before they had
secured, even in case of change, another—This
premature discovery of
Cunningham's intrigues totally disconcerted
and overwhelmed him; and, in
the bitterness of his heart, he cursed the
duplicity, which he had taught and encouraged
still more by example than by
precept. But Cunningham's duplicity
had more and closer folds than his own
—Cunningham, conceited of his diplomatic
genius, and fearful of the cautious
timidity of his father, did not trust that
father with the knowledge of all he did,
or half of what he intended; so that
the Commissioner, who had thought
himself at the bottom of every thing,
now found that he, too, had been cheated
by his son with false confidences, and
was involved by him in the consequences
of a scheme, of which he had never been
the adviser. The Commissioner would
never have advised the setting out on a
journey to the court of Denmark at his
private expense, on the faith of promises,


on the hope of a change of ministry, on
the private assurance that he should be
accredited, and that his services should
be rewarded by the new administration.
Commissioner Falconer knew too well,
by the experience of Cumberland and
others, the fate of those, who suffer themselves
to be lured on by second-hand
promises; and who venture, without being
publicly acknowledged by their employers,
to undertake any diplomatic
mission. Nor would Cunningham, whose
natural disposition to distrust was greater
than his father's, have sold himself to
any political tempter without first signing
and sealing the compact, had he
been in possession of his cool judgment,
and had he been in any other than the
desperate circumstances in which he was
placed. He was at once incensed and
terrified by Lord Oldborough's unexpected
recall—After having delayed, by
every imaginable pretence, to obey, till
his Lordship's orders were repeated in
that peremptory tone, which left him no


further possibility of evasion, he dreaded
to appear before the haughty irritated
minister; and, perhaps, his secret conscience
whispered, that his recall might
be in consequence of the detection of
some of his intrigues. In this dilemma,
deceived also by promises from the
Greenwich party, and by the news from
home, that the immediate dismission or
resignation of Lord Oldborough was expected:
Cunningham had ventured upon
this bold stroke for an embassy.
On Lord Oldborough's return from
council, the Commissioner finding, from
his secret informants, that every thing
had gone on smoothly; and being overawed
by the confident security of the
minister, began to doubt his former belief,
and, in spite of all the symptoms of
change, was now inclined to think, that
none would take place—The sorrow and
contrition with which he next appeared
before Lord Oldborough were, therefore,
truly sincere; and when he found himself
alone once more with his Lordship,


earnest was the vehemence with which
he disclaimed his unworthy son, and
disavowed all knowledge of the transaction.
“If I had seen cause to believe, that
you had any part in this transaction,
Sir, you would not be here at this moment—Therefore,
your protestations are
superfluous—None would be accepted if
any were necessary.”
The very circumstance of the son's
not having trusted the father completely
saved the Commissioner, for this time,
from utter ruin—He took breath—and
presently—Oh, weak man! doomed
never to know how to deal with a strong
character—fancying that his intercession
might avail for his son, and that the
pride of Lord Oldborough might be appeased,
and might be suddenly wrought
to forgiveness, by that tone and posture
of submission and supplication used
only by the subject to offended Majesty,
he actually threw himself at the feet of
the minister.

“My gracious Lord!—a pardon for
my son.”
“I beseech you, Sir!”—cried Lord
Oldborough—endeavoring to stop him
from kneeling—The Commissioner sunk
instantly on his knee.
“Never will the unhappy father rise
till his son be restored to your favor, my
Lord.”
“Sir,” said Lord Oldborough—“ I
have no favor for those who have no
sense of honor—Rise, Mr. Falconer,
and let not the father degrade himself
for the son—unavailingly.”
The accent and look were decisive,
the Commissioner rose. Instead of being
gratified, his patron seemed shocked, if
not disgusted; far from being propitiated
by this sacrifice of dignity, it rendered
him still more averse; and no consolatory
omen appearing, the Commissioner
withdrew in silence, repenting that he
had abased himself.—After this some
days and nights passed with the Commissioner
in all the horrors of indecision


—could the minister weather the storm
or not?—should Mr. Falconer endeavor
to reinstate himself with Lord Oldborough,
or secure in time favor with the
Duke of Greenwich?—Mrs. Falconer,
to whom her husband's groans in the
middle of the night at last betrayed the
sufferings of his mind, drew from him
the secret of his fears and meditations.
She advised strongly the going over, decidedly,
and in time, but secretly, to the
Greenwich faction.
The Commissioner knew, that this
could not be done secretly. The attention
of the minister was now awake to
all his motions, and the smallest movement
towards his Grace of Greenwich
must be observed and understood—On
the other hand, to abide by a falling
minister was folly, especially when he
had positively withdrawn his favor from
Cunningham, who had the most to expect
from his patronage. Between these
opposite difficulties, notwithstanding
the urgent excitations of Mrs. Falconer,


the poor Commissioner could not bring
himself to decide, till the time for action
was past.
Another blow came upon him, for
which he was wholly unprepared—There
arrived from abroad accounts—of the
failure of a secret expedition; and the
General, in his despatches, named Colonel
John Falconer as the officer, to
whose neglect of orders he principally
attributed the disappointment.—It appeared,
that orders had been sent to
have his regiment at a certain place at a
given hour. At the moment these orders
came, Colonel John Falconer was out
on a shooting party. The troops, of
course, on which the General had relied,
did not arrive in time, and all his
other combinations failed from this neglect
of discipline, and disobedience of
orders. Colonel Falconer was sent home
to be tried by a Court Martial.
“I pity you, Sir”—said Lord Oldborough,
as Commissioner Falconer,
white as ashes, read in his presence,


these despatches—“I pity you, Sir,
from my soul—Here is no fault of yours
—The fault is mine.”
It was one of the few faults of this nature,
which Lord Oldborough had ever
committed. Except in the instance of the
Falconer family, none could name any,
whom his Lordship had placed in situations,
for which they were inadequate
or unfit. Of this single error he had not
foreseen the consequences; they were
more important, more injurious to him,
and to the public, than he could have
calculated or conceived.—It appeared
now as if the Falconer family were
doomed to be his ruin. That the public
knew, in general, that John Falconer
had been promoted by ministerial favor,
Lord Oldborough was aware; but he
imagined, that the peculiar circumstances
of that affair were known only
to himself, and to Commissioner Falconer's
family. To his astonishment he
found, at this critical moment, that the
whole transaction had reached the ear

of Majesty, and that it was soon publicly
known. The Commissioner, with
protestations and oaths, declared that
the secret had never, by his means,
transpired. It had been divulged by the
baseness of his son Cunningham, who
betrayed it to the Greenwich faction.
They, skilled in all the arts of undermining
a rival, employed the means
that were thus put into their power with
great diligence and effect.
It was observed at levee, that the Sovereign
looked coldly upon the minister
—Every courtier whispered, that Lord
Oldborough had been certainly much
to blame—Disdainful of their opinions,
Lord Oldborough was sensibly affected
by the altered eye of his Sovereign.
“What! After all my services!— 
At the first change of fortune!”
This sentiment swelled in his breast,
but his countenance was rigidly calm,
his demeanor towards the courtiers and
towards his colleagues more than usually
firm, if not haughty.

After the levee he demanded a private
audience.
Alone with the King, the habitual influence
of this great minister's superior
genius operated. The cold manner was
changed, or, rather, it was changed involuntarily.
From one “not used to
the language of apology,” the frank
avowal of a fault must have a striking
effect. Lord Oldborough took upon
himself the whole blame of the disaster
that had ensued, in consequence of his
error, an error frequent in other ministers,
uncommon in him, almost unprecedented.
He was answered with a smile of royal
raillery, that the peculiar family circumstances,
which had determined his Lordship
so rapidly to promote that officer,
must, to all fathers of families and heads
of houses, if not to statesmen and generals,
be a sufficient and home apology.
Considering the peculiar talent which
his sovereign possessed, and in which he
gloried, that of knowing the connexions

and domestic affairs, not only of the nobility
near his person, but of private
individuals remote from his court, Lord
Oldborough had little cause to be surprised,
that this secret transaction should
be known to his Majesty.—Something
of this his Lordship, with all due respect,
hinted in reply. At the termination of
this audience, he was soothed by the
condescending assurance, that whilst the
circumstances of the late unfortunate
reverse naturally created regret and mortification,
no dissatisfaction with his ministerial
conduct mixed with these feelings.
On the contrary, he was assured,
that fear of the effect a disappointment
might have on the mind of the public,
in diminishing confidence in his Lordship's
efforts for the good of the country,
was the sentiment which had lowered
the spirits, and clouded the brow of Majesty.
His Lordship returned thanks for the
gracious demonstration of these sentiments—and
bowing respectfully, withdrew.—In


the faces and behaviour of
the courtiers, as in a glass, he saw reflected
the truth. They all pretended
to be in the utmost consternation; and
he heard of nothing but “apprehensions
for the effect on the public mind,” and
“fears for his Lordship's popularity.” 
—His secretary, Mr. Temple, heard,
indeed, more of this than could reach
his Lordship's ear directly; for, even
now, when they thought they foresaw
his fall, few had sufficient courage to
hazard the tone of condolence with Lord
Oldborough, or to expose the face of
hypocrisy to the severity of his penetrating
eye. In secret every means had
been taken to propagate in the city the
knowledge of all the circumstances that
were unfavorable to the minister, and to
increase the dissatisfaction which any
check in the success of our armies naturally
produces. The tide of popularity,
which had hitherto supported the minister,
suddenly ebbed, and he fell, in public
opinion, with astonishing rapidity.

For the moment all was forgotten, but
that he was the person who had promoted
John Falconer to be a Colonel,
against whom the cry of the populace
was raised with all the clamor of national
indignation. The Greenwich faction
knew how to take advantage of this disposition.—It
happened to be some festival,
some holiday, when the common
people, having nothing to do, are more
disposed than at any other time, to intoxication
and disorder.—The emissaries
of designing partisans mixed with the
populace, and a mob gathered round the
minister's carriage, as he was returning
late from the House of Lords. The
same carriage, and the same man, whom,
but a few short weeks before, this populace
had drawn with loud huzzas, and
almost with tears of affection. Unmoved
of mind, as he had been, when he heard
their huzzas, Lord Oldborough now listened
to their execrations, till from
abuse they began to proceed to outrage.—Stones
were thrown at his carriage.

One of his servants narrowly
escaped being struck.—Lord Oldborough
was alone—he threw open his
carriage-door, and sprang out on the
step.
“Whose life is it you seek?” cried
he, in a voice which obtained instant silence.—“Lord
Oldborough's?—Lord
Oldborough stands before you.—Take
his life who dares—a life spent in your
service.—Strike!—But strike openly.— 
You are Englishmen, not assassins.”
Then, turning to his servants, he added,
in a calm voice,
“Home—slowly.—Not a man here
will touch you. Keep your master in
sight.—If I fall, mark by what hand.”—
Then stepping down into the midst of
the people, he crossed the street to the
flagged pathway, the crowd opening to
make way for him. He walked on with
a deliberate firm step. The mob moving
along with him, sometimes huzzaing,
sometimes uttering horrid execrations in
horrid tones.—Lord Oldborough, preserving

absolute silence, still walked on,
never turned his head, or quickened his
pace, till he reached his own house.— 
Then, facing the mob, as he stood waiting
till the door should be opened, the
people, struck with his intrepidity, with
one accord joined in a shout of applause.
—The next instant, and before the
door was opened, they cried,
“Hat off!—Hat off!”
Lord Oldborough's hat never stirred.
—A man took up a stone.
“Mark that man!”—cried Lord Oldborough.
The door opened.—“Return to
your homes, my countrymen, and bless
God that you have not, any of you,
murder to answer for this night.”
Then entering his house, he took off
his hat, and gave it to one of his attendants.—His
secretary, Temple, had run
down stairs to meet him, inquiring what
was the cause of the disturbance.
“Only,” said Lord Oldborough, “that

I have served the people, but never bent
to them.”
“Curse them! they are not worth
serving.—Oh! I thought they'd have
taken my Lord's life that minute,” cried
his faithful servant Rodney.—“The sight
left my eyes.—I thought he was gone
for ever.—Thank God! he's safe.—Take
off my Lord's coat—I can't—for the soul
of me.—Curse those ungrateful people!”
“Do not curse them, my good Rodney,” 
said Lord Oldborough, smiling.— 
“Poor people, they are not ungrateful,
only mistaken. Those who mislead
them are to blame.—The English are
a fine people.—Even an English mob,
you see, is generous, and just, as far as it
knows.”—
Lord Oldborough was sound asleep
this night, before any other individual
in the house had finished talking of the
dangers he had escaped.
The civil and military courage shown
by the minister in the sudden attack

upon his character and person were
such, as to raise him again at once to
his former height in public esteem. His
enemies were obliged to affect admiration.
The Greenwich party, foiled in
this attempt, now disavowed it.—News
of a victory effaced the memory of the
late disappointment.—Stocks rose—addresses
for a change of ministry were
quashed—addresses of thanks and congratulation
poured in—Lord Oldborough
gave them to Mr. Temple to answer,
and kept the strength of his attention
fixed upon the great objects which were
essential to the nation, and the sovereign
he served.
Mr. Falconer saw that the storm had
blown over, the darkness was past, Lord
Oldborough, firm and superior, stood
bright in power, and before him the
Commissioner bent more obsequious,
more anxious than ever.—Anxious he
might well be; unhappy father! the life,
perhaps, of one of his sons, his honor
certainly at stake, the fortune of another,

his existence ruined!—And what
hopes of propitiating him, who had so
suffered by the favor he had already
shown—who had been betrayed by one
of the family—and disgraced by another.
—The Commissioner's only hope was
in the recollection of the words,
“I pity you from my soul, Sir,”— 
which burst from Lord Oldborough, even
at the moment when he had most reason
to be enraged against Colonel Falconer.
Following up this idea, and working on
the generous compassion, of which but
for this indication he would not have
supposed the stern Lord Oldborough to
be susceptible, the Commissioner appeared
before him every day the image
of a broken-hearted father.—In silence
Lord Oldborough from time to time
looked at him, and by these looks, more
than by all the promises of all the great
men who had ever spoken to him, Mr.
Falconer was reassured; and, as he told
Mrs. Falconer, who, at this time, was in
dreadful anxiety, he felt certain, that

Lord Oldborough would not punish him
for the faults of his sons—he was satisfied,
that his place and his pension would
not be taken from him, and that, at least
in fortune, they should not be utterly
ruined.—In this security the Commissioner
showed rather more than his customary
degree of strength of mind, and
more knowledge of Lord Oldborough's
character, than he had upon most other
occasions evinced.
Things were in this state, when, one
morning, after Lord Oldborough had
given orders, that no one should be admitted,
as he was dictating some public
papers of consequence to Mr. Temple,
the Duke of Greenwich was announced.
His Grace sent in a note to signify, that
he waited upon Lord Oldborough by
order of his Majesty; and that, if this
hour were not convenient, he begged to
have the hour named, at which his Grace
could be admitted.—His Grace was admitted
instantly.—Mr. Temple retired— 
for it was evident—this was to be a secret

conference.—His Grace of Greenwich
entered with the most important
solemnity—infinitely more ceremonious
than usual, he was at last seated, and,
after heavy and audible sighs, still hesitated
to open his business. Through the
affected gloom and dejection of his countenance
Lord Oldborough saw a malicious
pleasure lurking, whilst, in a studied
exordium, he spoke of the infinite
reluctance, with which he had been compelled,
by his Majesty's express orders,
to wait upon his Lordship on a business
the most painful to his feelings. As being
a public colleague—as a near and
dear connexion—as a friend in long habits
of intimacy with his Lordship, he
had prayed his Majesty to be excused.
—But it was his Majesty's pleasure—he
had only now to beg his Lordship to believe,
that it was with infinite concern,
&c.”—Lord Oldborough, though suffering
under this circumlocution, never
condescended to show any symptom of
impatience, but allowing his Grace to

run the changes on the words and forms
of apology, when these were exhausted,
his Lordship simply said, that “his Majesty's
pleasure of course precluded all
possibility of hesitation, and all necessity
for apology.”—
His Grace was vexed to find Lord
Oldborough still unmoved, he was sure
this tranquillity could not long endure—he
continued—
“A sad business, my Lord—A terrible
discovery ... I really can hardly
bring myself to speak ...”
Lord Oldborough gave his Grace no
assistance.
“My private regard” ... he repeated.
A smile of contempt on Lord Oldborough's
countenance.
“Your Lordship's hitherto invulnerable
public integrity” ...
A glance of indignation from Lord
Oldborough.
“Hitherto invulnerable!—Your Grace
will explain.”

“Let these ... these fatal notes ...
letters ... unfortunately got into the
hands of a leading ... impracticable
member of opposition ... and by him
laid ... Would that I had been apprised
... or could have conceived it
possible ... time enough to prevent that
step ... but it was done before I had
the slightest intimation—laid before his
Majesty ...”
Lord Oldborough calmly received the
letters from his Grace.
“My own hand-writing, and private
seal, I perceive.”
The Duke sighed—And whilst Lord
Oldborough drew out, opened, and read
the first letter in the parcel—his Grace
went on—
“This affair has thrown us all into
the greatest consternation—It is to be
brought before parliament immediately
... unless a resignation should take
place ... which we should all deplore
... The impudence, the inveteracy of
that fellow, is astonishing ... no silencing

him—We might hush up the affair
if his Majesty had not been apprised; 
but where the interest of the service is
concerned, his Majesty is warm.”
“His Majesty!” cried Lord Oldborough
—“His Majesty could not, I
trust, for a moment imagine these letters
to be mine?”
“But for the hand and seal which I
understood your Lordship to acknowledge,
I am persuaded his Majesty could
not have believed it.”
“Believed!—My King! ... did
he believe it?” cried Lord Oldborough
—His agitation was for a moment excessive,
uncontrollable—“ No! that I
will never believe, till I have it from his
own lips”—Then commanding himself—
“Your Grace will have the goodness
to leave these letters with me till to morrow.”
His Grace, with infinite politeness
and regret, was under the necessity of
refusing this request—His orders were

only to show the letters to his Lordship,
and then to restore them to the hands of
the member of opposition, who had laid
them before his Majesty.
Lord Oldborough took off the cover
of one of the letters, on which was
merely the address and seal—The address
was written also at the bottom of
the letter enclosed, therefore the cover
could not be of the least importance,
“The Duke could not,” Lord Oldborough
said, “refuse to leave this with
him?”
To this his Grace agreed—“protesting
that he was far from wishing to make
difficulties.—“If there was any thing
else he could do ... any thing his
Lordship would wish to have privately
insinuated, or publicly said?”
His Lordship with proud thanks, assured
the Duke he did not wish to have
any thing privately insinuated, and whatever
it was necessary to say or do publickly,
he should do himself, or give
orders to have done. His Lordship entered

into no further explanation.—The
Duke at last was obliged to take his leave
“earnestly hoping and trusting that this
business would terminate to his Lordship's
entire satisfaction.”
No sooner was the Duke gone, than
Lord Oldborough rang for his carriage.
“Immediately—and Mr. Temple, instantly.”—
Whilst his carriage was coming to the
door; in the shortest manner possible
Lord Oldborough stated the facts to his
secretary, that letters had been forged
in his Lordship's name, promising to
certain persons—promotion in the army
—and navy—gratification—and pensions.
Some of the letters were addressed to
persons who had actually obtained promotion,
shortly after the time of these
letters, other letters contained reproaches
for having been ill used. Even from the
rapid glance Lord Oldborough had taken
of these papers, he had retained the
names of several of the persons to whom

they were addressed—and the nature of
the promotion obtained. They were
persons who could have had no claim
upon an honest minister.—His Lordship
left a list of them with Mr. Temple—also
the cover of the letter, on which was
a specimen of the forged writing and the
private seal.—
“I am going to the King.—His Majesty
probably has set out for Windsor.
—If so I shall follow him.—In my absence,
Mr. Temple, think for me—I
know you feel for me.—The object
is, to discover the authors of this forgery?”—
“My Lord, may I consult with Mr.
Alfred Percy.”
“Yes—with no other person—.”
On going to the palace Lord Oldborough
found, that the King had set out
for Windsor—he followed him thither
—arrived just as his Majesty was
mounting his horse.—Surprised at the
sight of the minister the King took his

foot out of the stirrup, and prepared to
dismount.
“I beg I may not detain your Majesty—I
see I am late,”—said Lord Oldborough.
“Is the business urgent, my Lord?”
“No, please your Majesty, for it
concerns principally myself.—It can,
therefore, wait your Majesty's leisure at
any hour your Majesty may appoint.”
The King dismounted instantly.
“This moment, my Lord, I am at
leisure for any business that concerns
your Lordship.”
The King returned to the palace—Lord Oldborough
followed, and all the
spectators on foot and horseback were
left full of curiosity.
Notwithstanding the condescension of
his Majesty's words and manner, and
the polite promptitude to attend to any
business that concerned his Lordship, it
was evident to Lord Oldborough's penetration,
that there was an unusual coldness
and formality in the King's countenance

and deportment, unlike the
graciousness of his reception, when
satisfied and pleased.—Nor did his air
become less reserved, when they were
alone in the cabinet; on the contrary,
the King looked as one prepared to hear,
but determined to say as little as possible.
Lord Oldborough placed himself so as
to give the King the advantage of the
light, which he did not fear to have full
on his own countenance.
“Please your Majesty, certain letters,
signed with my name, and sealed with
my seal, have, I am informed, been laid
before your Majesty.”
“Your Lordship has been rightly informed.”
“I trust ... I hope your Majesty.
...”
At the firm assertion, in the tone with
which Lord Oldborough pronounced, I
trust—his Majesty's eye changed—and
moved away from Lord Oldborough's,
when he, with respectful interrogation

of tone, added “I hope your Majesty
could not believe those letters to be
mine.”
“Frankly, my Lord,” said the King,
assuming an open air—“the assertions,
the insinuations of no man, or set of
men, of any rank, or weight in my
dominions, could by any imaginable
means have induced me to conceive it
possible, that such letters had been written
by your Lordship. Not for one
moment could my belief have been compelled
by any evidence, less strong than
your Lordship's hand writing and seal.
I own, I thought I knew your Lordship's
seal and writing; but I find,
and rejoice to find, that I have been deceived.”
“I thank your Majesty—I cannot
feel surprise, that a forgery and a counterfeit,
which, at first view, compelled
my own belief of their being genuine,
should, for a moment, have deceived your
Majesty. But, I own, I had flattered

myself, that my sovereign knew my heart
and character yet better than my seal
and signature.”
“Undoubtedly, my Lord.”—
“And I should have hoped, that, if
your Majesty had perused those letters,
no assertions could have been necessary,
on my part, to convince your Majesty,
that they could not be mine.—I have
now only to rejoice, that your Majesty is
undeceived—And that I have not intruded
unnecessarily upon your Majesty
with this explanation.—I am fully sensible
of your Majesty's goodness, in
having thus permitted me to make, as
early as possible, to your Majesty, this
assertion of my innocence.—For the
proofs of it, and for the detection of the
guilty, I am preparing; and I hope to
make these as clear to your Majesty, as
your Majesty's assurance of the pleasure
you feel in being undeceived is satisfactory
... consolatory to me—I detain
your Majesty no longer,” concluded

Lord Oldborough, with a bow of profound
yet proud respect.
“My Lord,” said the King, “I have
no doubt that this affair will redound to
your honor, and terminate to your Lordship's
entire satisfaction.”
The very phrase used by the Duke of
Greenwich.
“As to myself, your Lordship can
have no further anxiety, but I wish your
Lordship's endeavors to detect and bring
proofs home to the guilty may be
promptly successful—for the gratification
of your own feelings, and the satisfaction
of the public mind, before the
matter should be brought forward in
parliament.
As his Majesty quitted the cabinet he
added some gracious phrases, expressive
of the high esteem he felt for the minister,
and the interest he had always, and
should always take, in whatever could
contribute to his public and private ...
satisfaction”—(again).
To an eye and ear less practised in

courts than this minister's, all that had
been said would have been really satisfactory,
but Lord Oldborough discerned
a secret embarrassment in the smile,
a constraint in the manner, a care,
an effort to be gracious in the language,
a caution, a rounding of the periods, a
recurrence to technical phrases of compliment
and amity, a want of the free
fluent language of the heart; language
which, as it flows, whether from sovereign
or subject, leaves a trace, that the
art of courtier or of monarch cannot
imitate—In all attempts at such imitation,
there is a want, of which vanity
and even interest is not always sensible,
but which feeling perceives instantly—Lord
Oldborough felt it—and twice,
during this audience, he was on the point
of offering his resignation, and twice,
exerting strong power over himself, he
refrained.
He saw plainly, that he was not where
he had been in the King's confidence or
favor; that his enemies had been at

work, and, in some measure, had succeeded; 
that suspicions had been infused
into the King's mind.—That his King had
doubted him, his Majesty had confessed
—and Lord Oldborough discerned, that
there was no genuine joy at the moment
his Majesty was undeceived, no real
anxiety for his honor, only the ostensible
manifestation unsuitable to the occasion
—repeatable—or recordable.
Still there was nothing of which he
could complain; every expression, if
written down or repeated, must have
appeared proper and gracious from the
sovereign to his minister; and for that
minister to resign at such a moment,
from pride or pique, would have been
fatal to the dignity, perhaps to the integrity
of his character.
Lord Oldborough reasoned thus as he
stood before the King, and compelled
himself, during the whole audience, and
to the last parting moment, to preserve
an air and tone of calm respectful self-possession.
His Majesty mounted his

horse, and galloped off to take a ride in
the park; while, full of care, his Lordship
got into his carriage to return to
town.