

During the course of Ormond's
tour through Ireland, he frequently
found himself in company with those
who knew the history of public affairs
for years past, and were but too well
acquainted with the political profligacy
and shameful jobbing of Sir Ulick
O'Shane.
Some of these gentlemen, knowing
Mr. Ormond to be his ward, refrained,
of course, from touching upon any subject
relative to Sir Ulick, and when
Ormond mentioned him, evaded the
conversation, or agreed in general terms
in praising his abilities, wit, and address.
But, after a day or two's journey

from Castle Hermitage, when he
had got beyond his own and the adjoining
counties—when he went into
company with those who happened to
know nothing of his connexion with
Sir Ulick O'Shane, then he heard him
spoken of in a very different manner.— 
He was quite astonished and dismayed
by the general abuse, as he thought
it, which was poured upon him.
“Well! every man of abilities excites
envy—every man who takes a part
in politics, especially in times when
parties run high, must expect to be
abused; they must bear it, and their
friends must learn to bear it for them.”
Such were the reflections, with which
Ormond at first comforted himself. As
far as party abuse went, this was quite
satisfactory; even facts, or what are
told as facts, are so altered by the manner
of seeing them by an opposite
party, that, without meaning to traduce,
they calumniate.—Ormond entrenched

himself in total disbelief, and cool assertion
of his disbelief, of a variety of
anecdotes he continually heard discreditable
to Sir Ulick. Still he expected,
that when he went into other company,
and met with men of Sir Ulick's own
party, he should obtain proofs of the
falsehood of these stories, and by that
he might he able, not only to contradict,
but to confute them. People, however,
only smiled, and told him that he
had better inquire no further, if he expected
to find Sir Ulick an immaculate
character. Those who liked him
best, laughed off the notorious instances
of his public defection of principle, and
of his private jobbing, as good jokes; 
proofs of his knowledge of the world,— 
his address, his frankness, his being
“not a bit of a hypocrite.” But even
those who professed to like him best,
and to be least scrupulous with regard
to public virtue, still spoke with a sort
of facetious contempt of Sir Ulick as

a thorough going friend of the powers
that be—as a hack of administration— 
as a man who knew well enough what
he was about. Ormond was continually
either surprised or hurt by these insinuations.
The concurrent testimony of numbers,
who had no interest or prejudice to
serve, operated by degrees upon him,
so as to enforce conviction, and this
was still more painful.
Harry became so sore and irritable
upon this subject, that he was now
every day in danger of getting into
some quarrel in defence of his guardian.
Several times the master of the
house prevented this, and brought him
to reason, by representing that the persons
who talked of Sir Ulick were quite
ignorant of his connexion with him,
spoke only according to general opinion,
and to the best of their belief,
of a public character who was fair game.
It was at that time much the fashion

among a certain set in Dublin to try
their wit upon each other in political
and poetical squibs:—the more severe,
the more bitter these were, the more
they were admired; the talent for invective
was in the highest demand at
this period in Ireland, it was considered
as the unequivocal proof of intellectual
superiority. The display of it was admired,
as it could not be enjoyed without
a double portion of that personal
promptitude to give the satisfaction of
a gentleman, on which the Irish pride
themselves: the taste of the nation, both
for oratory and manners, has become of
late years so much more refined, that
when any of the lampoons of that day
are now recollected, people are surprised
at the licence of abuse which
was then tolerated, and even approved in
fashionable society. Sir Ulick O'Shane,
as a well known public character, had
been the subject of a variety of puns,
bon mots, songs, and epigrams, which

had become so numerous as to be collected
under the title of Ulysseana.— 
Upon the late separation of Sir Ulick
and his lady, a new edition, with a caricature
frontispiece, had been published; 
unfortunately for Ormond, this had just
worked its way from Dublin to this part
of the country.
It happened one day, at a gentleman's
house, where this Ulysseana had
not yet been seen, a lady, a visitor and
a stranger, full of some of the lines
which she had learned by heart, began
to repeat them for the amusement
of the tea-table. Ladies do not always
consider how much mischief they may
do by such imprudence, nor how they
may hazard valuable lives for the sake
of producing a sensation by the repetition
of a severe thing. Ormond came
into the room after dinner, and with
some other gentlemen gathered round
the tea-table, while the lady was repeating
some extracts from the new

edition of the Ulysseana. The master
and mistress of the house made reiterated
attempts to stop the lady, but she
was too intent upon herself and her
second-hand wit, to comprehend or take
these hints, she went on reciting the
following lines:
To serve in Parliament the nation,
Sir Ulick read his recantation:
At first he joined the patriot throng,
But soon perceiving he was wrong,
He ratted to the courtier tribe,
Bought by a title and a bribe;
But how that new found friend to bind
With any oath—of any kind,
Disturb'd the premiers wary mind.
“Upon his faith.—Upon his word.”
Oh! that, my friend, is too absurd.
“Upon his honour.”—Quite a jest.
“Upon his conscience.”—No such test.
“By all he has on earth.”—'Tis gone.
“By all his hopes of heav'n.”—They're none.
“How then secure him in our pay,
He can't be trusted for a day?”
How?—When you want the fellow's throat,
Pay by the job,—you have his vote.

Sir Ulick himself, had he been present,
would have laughed off the epigram
with the best grace imaginable,
and so, in good policy, ought Ormond
to have taken it. But he felt it too
much, and was not in the habit of laughing
when he was vexed. Most of the
company, who knew any thing of his
connexion with Sir Ulick, or who understood
the agonising looks of the
master and mistress of the house, politely
refrained from smiles or applause; 
but a cousin of the lady who repeated
the lines, a young man, who was one
of the hateful tribe of quizzers, on purpose
to try Ormond, praised the verses
to the skies, and appealed to him for
his opinion.
“I can't admire them, Sir,” replied
Ormond.
“What fault can you find with them?” 
said the young man, winking at the
by-standers.
“I think them incorrect in the first

place, Sir,” said Ormond, “and altogether
I think them indifferent.”
“Well, at any rate they can't be
called moderate,” said the young gentleman,
“and as to incorrect, the substance
I fancy is correctly true.”
“Fancy, Sir!—It would be hard if
character were to be at the mercy of
fancy,” cried Ormond, hastily, but checking
himself, he, in a mild tone, added,
“before we go any further, Sir, I should
inform you that I am a ward of Sir
Ulick O'Shane's.”
“Oh, mercy!” exclaimed the lady,
who had repeated the verses, “I am
sure I did not know that, or I would
never have said a word—I declare I
beg your pardon, Sir.”
Ormond's bow and smile, spoke his
perfect satisfaction with the lady's contrition,
and his desire to relieve her
from further anxiety. So the matter
might have happily ended, but her cousin,
though he had begun merely with

an intention to try Ormond's temper,
now felt piqued by Harry's spirit, and
thought it incumbent upon him to persist.
Having drank enough to be ill
humoured, he, in an aggravating and
ill bred manner, replied— 
“Your being Sir Ulick O'Shane's
ward may make a difference in your
feelings, Sir, but I don't see why it should
make any in my opinion.”
“In the expression of that opinion at
least, Sir, I think it ought.”
The master of the house now interfered,
to explain and pacify, and Ormond
had presence of mind and command
enough over himself to say no more
while the ladies were present; he sat
down, and began talking about some
trifle in a gay tone, but his flushed cheek,
and altered manner, shewed that he
was only repressing other feelings.—The
carriages of the visitors were announced,
and the strangers rose to depart. Ormond
accompanied the master of the

house to hand the ladies to their carriages.
To mark his being in perfect
charity with the fair penitent, he shewed
her particular attention, which quite
touched her, and as he put her into
her carriage, she, all the time, repeated
her apologies, declared it should be
a lesson to her for life, and cordially
shook hands with him at parting. For
her sake, he wished that nothing more
should be said on the subject. But,
on his return to the hall, he found
there the cousin, buttoning on his great
coat, seeming loth to depart: still in ill
humour, the gentleman said— 
“I hope you are satisfied with that
lady's apologies, Mr. Ormond.”
“I am, Sir, perfectly.”
“That's lucky: for apologies are easier
had from ladies than gentlemen, and
become them better.”
“I think it becomes a gentleman as
well as a lady to make candid apologies,
where they are conscious of being

wrong—if there was no intention to
give offence.”
“If is a great peace-maker, Sir, but
I scorn to take advantage of an if.”
“Am I to suppose then, Sir,” said
Ormond, “that it was your intention
to offend me?”
“Suppose what you please, Sir, I
am not in the habit of explanation or
apology.”
“Then, Sir, the sooner we meet the
better,” said Ormond.
In consequence Ormond applied to an
officer present, whose conduct on the
occasion had been perfectly gentlemanlike,
to be his second. Ormond felt
that he had restrained his anger sufficiently— 
he was now as firm as he had
been temperate.—The parties met and
fought: the man who deserved to have
suffered, by the chance of this rational
mode of deciding right and wrong, escaped
unhurt; Ormond received a wound
in his arm.—It was only a flesh wound.—

He was at the house of a very hospitable
gentleman, whose family were kind to
him: the inconvenience and pain were
easily borne. In the opinion of all, in
that part of the world, who knew the
facts, he had conducted himself as well
as the circumstances would permit; and,
as it was essential, not only to the character
of a hero, but of a gentleman at
that time in Ireland, to fight a duel, we
may consider Ormond as fortunate in not
having been in the wrong. He rose in
favour with the ladies, and in credit
with the gentlemen, and he heard no
more of the Ulysseana; but he was concerned
to see paragraphs in all the Irish
papers, about the duel that had been
fought between M. N. Esq. jun. of&wblank;,
and H. O. Esq. in consequence of a
dispute that arose about some satirical
verses repeated by a lady on a certain
well-known character nearly related to
one of the parties.
A flaming account of the duel followed,

in which there was the usual newspaper
proportion of truth and falsehood:
Ormond knew, and regretted that this
paragraph must meet the eyes of his
guardian; and still more he was sorry,
that Dr. Cambray should see it. He
knew the doctor's christian abhorrence of
the system of duelling altogether; and,
by the statement in the papers, it appeared
that that gallant youth, H. O. Esq., to
whom the news-writer evidently wished
to do honour, had been far more forward
to provoke the fight, than he had been, or
than he ought to have been:—his own
plain statement of facts, which he wrote
to Dr. Cambray, would have set every
thing to rights, but his letter crossed the
doctor's on the road. As he was now in
a remote place, which the delightful mail
coach roads had not then reached—where
the post came in only three days in the
week—and where the mail cart either
broke down, lost a wheel, had a tired horse,
was overturned or robbed, at an average

once a fortnight; our hero had nothing
for it but to take patience, and amuse
himself by calculating dates and chances
upon his restless sofa.—His taste for
reading stood him in stead upon this
occasion, and enabled him to pass agreeably
some of the hours of bodily confinement,
which men, and young men accustomed
to a great deal of exercise,
liberty, and locomotion, generally find
so intolerably irksome. At length his
would was well enough for him to travel— 
letters for him arrived: a warm, affectionate
one from his guardian; and one
from Dr. Cambray, which relieved his
anxiety.
“I must tell you, my dear young
friend,” said Doctor Cambray, “that
while you have been defending Sir Ulick
O'Shane's public character, (of which,
by the by, you know nothing,) I have
been defending your private character,
of which I hope and believe I know
something. The truth always is known

in time, with regard to every character,
and therefore, independently of other
motives, moral and religious, it is more
prudent to trust to time and truth for
their defence, than to sword and pistol.
I know you are impatient to hear what
were the reports to your disadvantage,
and from whom I had them. I had them
from the Annalys, and they heard them
in England, through various circuitous
channels of female correspondents in
Ireland. As far as we can trace them,
we think that they originated with your
old friend Miss Black. The first account
Lady Annaly heard of you after she
went to England was, that you were
living a most dissolute life in the Black
Islands with king Corny, who was described
to be a profligate rebel, and his
companion, an excommunicated catholic
priest. King, priest, and prince Harry,
getting drunk together regularly every
night of their lives. The next account
which Lady Annaly received some months

afterwards, in reply to inquiries she had
made from her agent was, that it was
impossible to know any thing for certain
of Mr. Harry Ormond, as he always kept
in the Black Islands. The report was,
that he had lately seduced a girl of the
name of Peggy Sheridan, a respectable
gardener's daughter, who was going
to be married to a man of the name of
Moriarty Carroll, a person whom Mr.
Ormond had formerly shot in some unfortunate
drunken quarrel. The match
between her and Moriarty had been
broken off in consequence.—The following
year accounts were worse and worse.
This Harry Ormond had gained the
affections of his benefactor's daughter,
who, as he had been warned by her father,
was betrothed to another man.
The young lady was afterwards, by her
father's anger, and by Ormond's desertion
of her, thrown into the arms of
a French adventurer, whom Ormond
brought into the house, under pretence

of learning French from him. Immediately
after the daughter's elopement
with the French master, the poor father
died suddenly, in some extraordinary
manner, when out shooting with this
Mr. Ormond, to whom a considerable
landed property, and a large legacy in
money, were, to every body's surprise,
found to be left in a will which he produced,
and which the family did not
think fit to dispute. There were strange
circumstances told concerning the wake
and burial, all tending to prove, that this
Harry Ormond had lost all feeling.— 
Hints were further given, that he had
renounced the Protestant religion, and
had turned Catholic for the sake of absolution.”
Many times during the perusal of this
extravagant tissue of falsehoods, Ormond
laid down and resumed the paper, unable
to refrain from exclamations of indignation
and contempt;—sometimes almost
laughing at the absurdity of the

slander. “After this,” thought he, “who
can mind common reports:—and yet Dr.
Cambray says, that these excited some
prejudice against me in the mind of
Lady Annaly.—With such a woman I
should have thought it imposible.—Could
she believe me capable of such crimes:— 
me, of whom she had once a good opinion?— 
me, in whose fate she said she
was interested?”
He took Dr. Cambray's letter again,
and read on; he found that Lady Annaly
had not credited these reports, as to the
atrocious accusations; but they had so
far operated, as to excite doubts and
suspicions. In some of the circumstances,
there was a sufficient spice of
truth to preserve the falsehood. For example,
with regard both to Peggy Sheridan
and Dora the truth had been plausibly
mixed with falsehood. The story
of Peggy Sheridan, Lady Annaly had
some suspicion might be true. Her ladyship,
who had seen Moriarty's generous

conduct to Ormond, was indignant at
his ingratitude. She was a woman prompt
to feel strong indignation against all that
was base; and, when her indignation was
excited, sometimes was incapable of hearing
what was said on the other side of the
question. Her daughter Florence, of a
calmer temper and cooler judgment, usually
acted as moderator on these occasions.
She could not believe that Harry Ormond
had been guilty of faults, that were so
opposite to the sort which they had seen
in his disposition:—violence, not treachery,
was his fault. But why, if there
was nothing wrong, Lady Annaly urged— 
why did not he write to her, as she had
requested he would, when his plans for
his future life were decided?—She had
told him, that her son might probably be
able to assist him.—Why could not he
write one line?
Ormond had heard that her son was
ill, and that her mind was so absorbed
with anxiety, that he could not at

first venture to intrude upon her with
his selfish concerns. This was his first
and best reason; but afterwards, to be
sure, when he heard that the son was
better, he might have written.—He wrote
at that time such a sad scrawl of a hand,
he was so little used to letter-writing,
that he was ashamed to write.—Then it
was too late after so long a silence, &c.
Foolish as these reasons were, they had,
as we have said before, acted upon our
young hero, and have, perhaps, in as
important circumstances, prevented many
young men from writing to friends able
and willing to serve them. It was rather
fortunate for Ormond, that slander
did not stop at the first plausible falsehoods; 
when the more atrocious charges
came against him, Miss Annaly, who
had never deserted his cause, declared
her absolute disbelief. The discussions
that went on between her and her mother,
kept alive their interest about this
young man. He was likely to have been

forgotten during their anxiety in the
son's illness; but fresh reports had
brought him to their recollection frequently; 
and when their friend Dr. Cambray
was appointed to the living of Castle
Hermitage, his evidence perfectly reinstated
Harry in Lady Annaly's good
opinion.—As if to make amends for the
injustice she had done him by believing
any part of the evil reports, she was
now anxious to see him again. A few
days after Dr. Cambray wrote, Ormond
received a very polite and gratifying
letter from Lady Annaly, requesting, that
as “Annaly” lay in his route homewards,
he would spend a few days there,
and give her an opportunity of making
him acquainted with her son. It is
scarcely necessary to say, that this invitation
was eagerly accepted.