

Letter from Dr. Percy to his sister
Rosamond.
I never told you, my dear
Rosamond, that the beautiful Constance
was Mr. Gresham's daughter; I told you
only that I saw her at his house. To
the best of my belief, she is no relation
to him. She is daughter to Mr. Gresham's
sick partner.—And this partner,— 
now Rosamond, here is coincidence, if
not romance, enough to please you— 
this partner is Mr. Panton, the London
correspondent of the shipwrecked Dutch
merchants, the very Panton and Co., to
whom my father lately wrote to recommend
Godfrey's friend, young Captain
Henry—captain no more.—I have not
seen him yet, he is invisible in the counting-house,

in the remote city, in ultimate
Broad-Street, far as pole from pole, from
me at Mrs. Panton's fine house in Grosvenor
Square.
“But now to have done with an old
story, before I begin with a new—I will
tell you at once all I know, or probably
shall ever know, about Constance. She
is sole heiress to her father's fortune,
which, on his repeated word, I believe,
amounts to hundreds of thousands. She
is accomplished, and amiable, and, as I
told you before, beautiful: but luckily
her style of beauty, which is that of one
of Rubens's wives, does not particularly
strike my fancy, otherwise I should, even
at the hazard of letting the fat father die
of hypochondriacism, and at the danger
of losing that introduction to practice in
the city, of which I have reason to hope
from his care, avoid the temptation of
seeing Miss Panton as I do every day.
“Even if it were honorably in my power,
I should not like to make my fortune,
as it is called, by marriage; at least I

never yet saw the woman to whom I
would put myself under this species of
obligation.—Love might bend me to it,
but nothing else could.—You will call it
pride, perhaps, but I would rather owe
my rise in the world to my own exertions,
than to the favor even of a fair lady.—Besides,
I would really and truly rather have
a profession, than be an idle gentleman; 
I love my profession, and feel ambitious
to distinguish myself in it, and to make
you all proud of your brother, Dr.
Percy.—These general principles are
strengthened beyond the possibility of
doubt, by the particular circumstances of
the present case. A young unknown physician,
I have been introduced by a friend
to this family, and have, in my medical
capacity, been admitted to a degree of
familiarity in the house, which none shall
ever have cause to repent.—Physicians,
I think, more than men in any other profession,
are called upon for scrupulous
good faith, because in some respects they
are more trusted in families, and have

more opportunities of intimacy, than
those of any other profession. I know,
my dear Rosamond, you will not suspect
me of assuming fine sentiments that are
foreign to my real feelings; but I must
now inform you, that if I were the greatest
scoundrel upon Earth, and if I could
make myself agreeable and acceptable to
Miss Panton, and if it were equally in
my will, and in my power, to take advantage
of the confidence reposed in me,
and to rob this old man of his daughter,
yet I should never be, in the language of
the market, one shilling the better for
her.—Her father, a man of low birth,
and having, perhaps, in spite of his
wealth, suffered from the proud man's
contumely, has determined to ennoble
his family by means of his only child,
and she is not to enjoy his fortune, unless
she marry one who has a title.—If
she unites herself with any man below the
rank of a baron's son, he swears she shall
never see the color of sixpence of his money.
—I understand, that a certain Lord

Roadster, eldest son of Lord Runnymede,
is the present candidate for her favor— 
or rather, for her wealth; and that his
Lordship is patronised by her father.— 
Every thing that could be done by the
vulgar selfishness and monied pride of her
father and mother in law, to spoil Miss
Panton, and to make her consider herself
as the first and only object of consequence
in this world, has been done—and
yet she is not in the least spoilt.—Shame
to all systems of education! there are
some natures so good, that they will go
right, where all about them go wrong.— 
My father will not admit this, and will
exclaim, Nonsense!—I will try to say
something, that he will allow to be sense.
—Miss Panton's own mother was of a
good family, and, I am told, was an amiable
woman, of agreeable manners, and
a cultivated mind, who had been sacrificed
for fortune to this rich city husband.
Her daughter's first principles
and ideas of manners and morals were
formed by her precepts and example.—

After her mother's death, she had the advantage
of an excellent and enlightened
friend in her father's partner, Mr. Gresham,
who, having no children of his own,
took pleasure, at all his leisure moments,
in cultivating little Constance.—Then
the contrast between her parents and
him, between their ignorance and his
enlightened liberality, must have early
struck her mind, and thus, I suppose, by
observing their faults and follies, she
learned to form for herself an opposite
character and manners.—No one, however,
by her behaviour to her father and
mother, would believe that she perceived
they had any defects, she treats them
with such propriety and deference.—Mrs.
Panton, who, by the by, is only her mother-in-law—Mrs.
Panton is a huge,
protuberant woman, with a full blown
face, a bay wig, and artificial flowers; 
talking in an affected little voice, when
she is in company, and when she has
on her company clothes and manners, but
bawling loud, in a vulgarly broad cockney

dialect, when she is at her ease in
her own house.—She has an inordinate
passion for dress, and a rage for fine people.
I have a chance of becoming a favorite,
because I am ‘of a good fammully,
and Mrs. Panton says, ‘she knows very
well I have been egg and bird in the best
company.’—
“My patient. ... Observe, my patient
is the last person of whom I speak
or think.—My patient is nervous, and
hypochondriac, and just a man of whom
one mercenary physician might write to
another, ‘I send you a fat goose, you know
how to pluck it.’—As I do not believe, that
you have much taste for medical detail,
I shall not trouble you with the particulars
of this old gentleman's case; but
pray for his recovery, for if I succeed in
setting him up again, it will set me up
&lblank; For the
first time I have this day, after many
calls, seen Godfrey's friend, young Mr.
Henry.—He is handsome, and, as you
ladies say, interesting.—He is particularly

gentleman-like in his manners; but he
looks unhappy, and I thought he was
reserved towards me.—But I have no
right yet to expect that he should be
otherwise.—He spoke of Godfrey with
strong affection.
Yours, truly,
Erasmus Percy.”
In the care of Mr. Panton's health,
Dr. Percy was now the immediate successor
to a certain apothecary of the
name of Coxeater, who, by right of flattery,
had reigned for many years over
the family with arbitrary sway, till he
offended the lady of the house by agreeing
with her husband upon some disputed
point about a julep. The apothecary
had a terrible loss of old Panton, for he
swallowed more drugs in the course of a
week, than any man in the city swallows
in a year. At the same time, he
was so economical of these very drugs,
that when Dr. Percy ordered the removal
from his bedchamber of a range of half

full phials, he was actually near crying
at the thoughts of the waste of such a
quantity of good physic, and “that it
might do somebody good,” he insisted
upon his footman's swallowing, in his
presence, “the bottoms of the bottles.”— 
Dr. Percy's explanation of the nature of
the drugs, and remonstrances against the
jarring mixtures he would make in the
poor fellow's stomach, were of no more
avail than the wry faces of the patient.
Old Panton stuck to his point, repeating,
that “It was a sin to throw away so
much good physic, which had been all
paid for, and that if he did not take it
himself, somebody else in the family
should.”—He finished, by turning away
the footman for refusing to swallow the
dregs of the last bottle.—Panton was obstinate
by fits, but touch his fears about
his health, and he would be as docile as
the malade imaginaire to his wife, or as
my Lord Fortagral was to his physician,
on the days when his Lordship did
not digest well.—This merchant, retired

from business, was now as much
engrossed with his health, as ever he had
been with his wealth.
When Dr. Percy was first called in, he
found his patient in a lamentable state,
in an arm chair, dying with the apprehension
of having swallowed in a peach
a live earwig, which he was persuaded
had bred, was breeding, or would breed
in his stomach. However ridiculous
this fancy may appear, it had taken such
hold of the man, that he was really
wasting away,—his appetite failing as
well as his spirits.—He would not take
the least exercise, or stir from his chair,
scarcely move or permit himself to be
moved, hand, foot, or head, lest he
should disturb or waken this nest of earwigs.
Whilst these “reptiles” slept, he
said, he had rest, but when they wakened,
he felt them crawling about and
pinching his intestines.—The wife had
laughed, and the apothecary had flattered
in vain: Panton angrily persisted
in the assertion, that he should die—and

then they'd “see who was right.”—Dr.
Percy recollected a case, which he had
heard from a celebrated physician, of a
hypochondriac, who fancied that his
intestines were sealed up by a piece of
wax which he had swallowed, and who,
in this belief, refused to eat or drink any
thing.—Instead of fighting against the
fancy, the judicious physician humored
it—showed the patient sealing wax dissolving
in spirit of wine, and then persuaded
him to take some of that spirit to
produce the same effect. The patient
acceded to the reasoning, took the remedy,
said that he felt that his intestines
were unsealing ... were unsealed—but,
alas! they had been sealed so long, that
they had lost their natural powers and
actions, and he died lamenting that his
excellent physician had not been called
in soon enough.—
Dr. Percy was more fortunate, for he
came in time to kill the earwigs for his
patient before they had pinched him to

death. Erasmus showed Mr. Panton the
experiment of killing one of these insects,
by placing it within a magic circle of
oil, and prevailed upon him to destroy
his diminutive enemies with castor oil.
When this hallucination, to speak in
words of learned length,—when this hallucination
was removed, there was still a
more difficult task, to cure our hypochondriac
of the three remote causes of
his disease—idleness of mind—indolence
of body—and the habit of drinking every
day a bottle of London particular; to prevail
upon him to diminish the quantity
per diem, was deemed impossible by his
wife; especially as Mr. Coxeater, the
apothecary, had flattered him with the
notion, that to live high was necessary for
a gouty constitution, and that he was
gouty.—N. B. He never had the gout in
his life.
Mrs. Panton augured ill of Dr. Percy's
success, and Constance grew pale when
he touched upon this dangerous point.

Yet he had hopes.—He recollected the
ingenious manner in which Dr. Brown 
worked upon a highland chieftain, to induce
him to diminish his diurnal quantity
of spirituous potation. But here was
no family pride to work upon, at least
no family arms were to be had. Erasmus
found a succedaneum, however, in the
love of titles and of what are called fine
people. Lord Runnymede had given Mr.
Panton a golden beaker of curious workmanship,
on which his Lordship's arms
were engraved; of this present the citizen
was very fond and vain: observing this,
Dr. Percy was determined to render it
subservient to his purposes. He knew
they would be right glad of any opportunity
of producing and talking of this
beaker to all their acquaintance.—He
therefore advised—no, not advised,—for
with some minds if you advise you are
not listened to, if you command you are
obeyed. He commanded that his patient

should have his madeira always decanted
into the curious beaker, for certain
galvanic advantages that every
knowing porter drinker is aware of— 
Erasmus emptied a decanter of Madeira
into the beaker to show that it held more
than a quart. This last circumstance
decided Mr. Panton to give a solemn
promise to abide by the advice of his
physician, who seized this auspicious
moment to act upon the imagination of
his patient, by various medical anecdotes.
Mr. Panton seemed to be much
struck with the account of bottles made
of antimonial glass, which continue, for
years, to impregnate successive quantities
of liquor with the same antimonial
virtues. Dr. Percy then produced a
piece of colored crystal about the size
of a large nut, which he directed his patient
to put into the beaker, and to add
another of these medicated crystals
every day, till the vessel should be half
full, to increase the power of the drug
by successive additions, and by this arrangement,

Panton was gradually reduced
to half his usual quantity of
wine.
Dr. Percy's next difficulty was how
to supply the purse-full and purse-proud
citizen with motive and occupation.
Mr. Panton had an utter aversion and
contempt for all science and literature; 
he could not conceive that any man
“could sit down to read for amusement,” 
but he enjoyed a party of pleasure
in a good boat on the water, to one of
the aits or islets in the Thames at the right
season, to be regaled with eel-pie. One
book he had read, and one play he liked— 
no, not a play, but a pantomime. The
book was Robinson Crusoe, the pantomime
Harlequin Friday. He had been
heard to say, that if ever he had a villa,
there should be in it an island like Robinson
Crusoe's, and why not a fortress, a
castle, and a grotto? this would be something
new, and why should not he have
his fancy, and why should not there be
Panton's Folly as well as any of the thousand

Follies in England?—Surely he
was rich enough to have a Folly.—His
physician cherished this bright idea.
Mrs. Panton was all this time dying to
have a villa on the Thames. Dr. Percy
proposed, that one should be made on
Mr. Panton's plan. The villa was bought,
and every day the hypochondriac. ...
hypochondriac now no more ... went
to his Villa-Crusoe, where he fussed, and
furbished, and toiled at his desert island
in the Thames, as hard as ever he labored
to make his plum in the counting-house.—In
due course he recovered his
health, and, to use his own expression,
became “as alert as any man in all England
of his inches in the girt, thanks be
to Dr. Percy!”—
We find the following letter from Dr.
Percy, written, as it appears, some
months after his first attendance upon
Mr. Panton.
“Yes, my dear friends at home,
Alfred tells you truth, and does not flatter
much. The having set up again this

old citizen, who was thought bankrupt
in constitution, has done me honor in
the city, and, as Alfred assures you,
has spread my name through Broad-street,
and Fleet-street, and Milk-street,
embracing the wide extremes between
High Holborn and St. Mary Axe,
‘And even Islington has heard my fame.’
“In earnest, I am getting fast into
practice in the city—and Rosamond
must not turn up her aristocratic lip at
the city—Very good men, in every sense
of the word, some of the best men I
know, inhabit what she is pleased to call
the wrong end of the town.
“Mr. Gresham is unceasing and indefatigable
in his kindness to me. I consider
it as an instance of this kindness,
that he has found employment for my
poor friend, O'Brien, has made him his
porter, a pleasanter place than he had
with the painter that pleased nobody.
O'Brien sees me almost every day, and

rejoices in what he calls my prosperity.
“‘Heaven for ever prosper your
Honor,’ is the beginning and end of all
he says, and, I believe, of all he thinks.
—Is not it singular, that my first step
towards getting into practice should
have been prepared by that which seemed
to threaten my ruin—the quarrel
with Frumpton within the verge of his
hospital?—
“A delicacy strikes me, and begins
at this moment, in the midst of my prosperity,
to make my pride uneasy.
“I am afraid, that my father should
say Erasmus gets on by patronage after
all,—by the patronage of a poor Irish
porter, and a rich English merchant.— 
Pray make my father explain to me exactly
his ideas.—Is the assistance of
friends to be called patronage? I beg
my father will write to me soon on this
subject—if it be only yes or no to this
plain question, to quiet my troubled
spirit.

“Adieu, my dear friends, you must
not expect such long letters from me
now that I am becoming a busy man.
Alfred and I see but little of one another,
we live at such a distance, and we are
both so gloriously industrious.—But we
have holiday minutes, when we meet
and talk more in the same space of time,
than any two wise men. ... I did not
say, women ... that you ever saw.
“Yours, affectionately,
“Erasmus Percy.
“Sunday morning.
“P. S. I have just recollected, that I
forgot to answer your question about
Mr. Henry.—I do see him whenever I
have time to go, and whenever he will
come to Mr. Gresham's, which is very
seldom.—Mr. Gresham has begged him
repeatedly to come to his house every
Sunday, when Henry must undoubtedly
be at leisure.—Yet Mr. Henry has been
there but seldom since the first six weeks
after he came to London.—I cannot yet

understand whether this arises from
pride, or from some better motive. Mr.
Gresham says he likes what he has seen
of him, and well observes, that a young
officer, who has lived a gay life in the
army, must have great power over his
own habits, and something uncommon
in his character, to be both willing and
able thus suddenly and completely to
change his mode of life, and to conform
to all the restraints and disagreeable circumstances
of his new situation.
“I hope my father will answer my
question very explicitly—and, without
fail, by return of the post, as an impatient
school-boy always says.”
Extract of a letter from Mr. Percy, to
Erasmus Percy.
“&lblank; I cannot
have been sufficiently explicit in stating
my opinions respecting patronage, since
you, my dear son, could so far mistake
my meaning, as to imagine that I should
object to your receiving assistance from

your friends to advance yourself in your
profession.—Friends which have been
made for you by your parents, I consider
as part of your patrimony. I inherited
many from my father, for which
I respect and bless his name. During the
course of my life, I have had the happiness
of gaining the regard of some persons
of talents and virtue, some of them
in high station; this regard will extend
to my children while I live, and descend
to them when I am no more. I never
cultivated them with a view to advancing
my family, but I make no doubt that
their friendship will assist my sons in
their progress through their several professions.
I hold it to be just and right,
that friends should give, and that young
men should gratefully accept, all the
means and opportunities of bringing professional
acquirements and abilities into
notice. Afterwards, the merit of the candidate,
and his fitness for any given
situation ought, and probably will, ultimately
decide whether the assistance has

been properly or improperly given. If
family friends procure for any young
man a reward of any kind which he has
not merited, I should object to that, as
much as if the place or the reward had
been bestowed by a professed patron,
from political or other interested motives.
—If my friends were to assist you merely
because you were my sons, bore my
name, or represented that which you can
no longer represent, the Percy estate, I
should not think this just or honorable; 
but your being my sons ought, in another
point of view, to influence them in
your favor; they know the principles
which have been instilled into you, the
education you have received, the examples
you have seen,—from all these,
they can form a judgment of what you
are likely to be, and for what situations
you are qualified, therefore it is but reasonable,
that they should recommend you
preferably to strangers, perhaps of equal
ability. They may and ought to begin
with this prepossession or this presumption

in your favor, but I trust they will end
with a conviction of it's being justified.— 
If not, their influence should cease to be
exerted. In short, every young man has,
or may have friends, and they will do all
they can to assist him; if they do so according
to his merits, they do well; if
in spite of his demerits, they do ill; but
whilst nothing is practised to prevent the
course of free competition, or to discourage
active emulation, there can be no
evil to the community, there is no injurious
patronage.—So much for family
friends.—Now as to friends of your
own making—Surely, my dear son, they
are as much your own earning, and all
the advantages they can be to you is as
honorably yours, as your fees. Whatever
assistance you may receive from Mr.
Gresham, I consider in this light.— 
As to gratitude—I acknowledge that in
some cases gratitude might be guilty of
partial patronage—but I do not think
you have much to fear on this head, and
you need not trouble yourself with

scruples about your patron, the grateful
Irish porter.—In the first place it was,
strictly speaking, for an instance of professional
merit, humanity, and civil
courage, that this man had reason to be
obliged to you—all he has done, or could
do in return, was to make your conduct
known, and thus he has obtained for
you, opportunities of showing what
farther professional merit you may possess.—
“If you had saved a minister of state
from breaking his neck, and he in return
had made you surgeon-general to our
armies, without knowing whether you
were qualified for that situation, I should
call that partial and pernicious patronage.
—But if you had cured a great man
of a dangerous disease, and he afterwards
exerted himself to recommend you as a
physician to his friends and acquaintance,
this I should consider as part of your fit
reward.
“So now, my dear son, I hope you
fully understand me, and that you will

not torment yourself with idle scruples,
or attribute to me false delicacies, and a
prudery, a puritanism of independence,
which I utterly disclaim.—Go on and
prosper, and depend upon the warm
sympathy and entire approbation of your
affectionate father,
L. Percy.”
Letter from Alfred Percy to Mrs. Percy.
“My Dear Mother,
Notwithstanding Rosamond's dread
of such a commonplace ending for her
heroine, I own, that from all I have
heard to Mr. Barclay, if he had been
but ten years’ younger, and a little more
of a laughing philosopher ... and if
Caroline could but have loved him, I
should have been very glad to have had
him for a brother-in-law; but since these
things cannot be, I regret as little as
possible, that the Leicestershire estate
is not to come into our family, and that
I have not the drawing of the marriage
settlements. I feel the love of money,

and still more the love of landed property
growing fast upon me, as I look over
parchments and hear of fees—hear of
fees, for I am not come to touching
many. What a miser I shall become
when I actually touch them, if the
bare imagination of a fee can thus act
upon my mercenary propensities!
“Give my love to Rosamond, and
thanks for her letters from Hungerford-Castle.
I rejoice that change of fortune
has made no change in your reception
there. Rosamond's letters were great
delight to me, and I kept them always
to read when the business of the day was
done, and I read them by my single
candle in my lone chamber.—I would
rather live in my lone chamber all my
days, and never see a wax-light all my
nights, than be married to your Lady Angelica
Headingham. I give Mr. Barclay
joy of having escaped from her charms.
I prefer an indenture tripartite, however
musty or tiresome, to a triple
tyrant, however fair or entertaining.

“So you expect me to be very entertaining
next vacation, and you expect
to hear all I have seen, heard, felt, and
understood, since I came to London.
Alas! Rosamond, I have no wonders to
relate, and lest you should be disappointed
when we meet, I had best tell
you now, and at once, all I have to say
about myself. My history is much like
that of the first years at the Bar of every
young lawyer—short and bitter—much
law and few fees. Some, however, I have
received.
“A few of my father's friends, who
are so unfortunate as to be at law, have
been so good as to direct their attorneys
to give me briefs. But most of his
friends, to my loss ... I am too generous,
observe, to say to my sorrow, are
wise enough to keep clear of lawsuits.
I heard his friend, the late Chancellor,
say the other day to some one who
wanted to plunge into a suit in chancery,
“‘If any body were to take a fancy

to a corner of my estate, I would rather,
—provided always that nobody knew
it,—let him have it, than go to law for
it.'—
“But to go on with my own affairs.
“A little while after my interview
with Lord Oldborough, his Lordship
 ... to my surprise—for I thought his
offer to ‘assist me in my profession, if
ever it should lie in his line,’ was a mere
courtier's promise,—sent his attorney to
me, with a brief in a cause of Colonel
Hauton's. The Colonel has gone to
law (most ungrateful as he is) with his
uncle, who was his guardian, and who
managed all his affairs for years.—I need
not explain to you the merits of the suit,
or the demerits of the plaintiff. It is
enough to tell you, that I was so fortunate
as to perceive, that the Colonel's
claim was what we call barred in law by
the statute of limitations—(Let my father
rise to explain) I, all-glorious, with the
hope of making a good point which had

escaped the other counsel employed on
our side, went into court with my act
in my hand; but when I was beginning
to make my point, the senior counsel
would not permit me to speak, snatched
the book from my hand, stated my objection
as his own, never even acknowledged
the assistance he had received
from me—obtained a nonsuit against the
Colonel, and had all the honor and
triumph of the day.—Some few gentlemen
of the bar, who were near me, knew
the truth, and they were indignant.—I
hear that my senior, whose name I will
never tell you lest you should hate it,
has got into great practice by the gaining
of this suit. Be that as it may, I
would not change places and feelings with
him at this moment.
‘Grant me an honest fame, or grant me none!’
“Mr. Grose, Lord Oldborough's solicitor,
a rich rogue and very saucy, was
obliged to employ me, because his client

ordered it, and Lord Oldborough is not
a man to be disobeyed, either in private
or public affairs: but the attorney was
obviously vexed and scandalized by his
Lordship's employing me, a young barrister,
of whom nobody had ever heard,
and who was not recommended by him,
or under the protection even of any solicitor
of eminence. Mr. Grose knew
well how the suit was gained, but he
never mentioned it to Lord Oldborough; 
on the contrary, he gave all the credit
to my Senior. This dry story of a point
at law, is the most interesting thing I
have to tell you about myself.—I have
seen nothing, heard nothing, know nothing,
but of law, and I begin to feel it
difficult to write, speak, or think, in any
but professional language. Tell my
father, that I shall soon come to talking
law Latin and law French.
“I know no more of what is going on
in this great metropolis, than if I were
at Tobolski. Buckhurst Falconer used
to be my newspaper, but since he has

given up all hopes of Caroline, he seldom
comes near me. I have lost in him
my fashionable Daily Advertiser, my
Belle Assemblée, and tête a tête magazine.
“Last Sunday I went to his fashionable
chapel to hear him preach, he is
much admired—but I don't like his manner,
or his sermons—too theatrical and
affected—too rhetorical and antithetical,
evidently more suited to display the talents
of the preacher, than to do honor
to God or good to man.—He told me,
that if he could preach himself into a
deanery, he should think he had preached
to some purpose; and could die with a
safe conscience, as he should think he
had not labored in vain in his vocation.
—Of all men, I think a dissipated clergyman
is the most contemptible. How
much Commissioner Falconer has to
answer for, who forced him, or who lured
him, knowing how unfit he was for it,
into the church!—The Commissioner
frets because the price of iniquity has

not yet been received—the living of
Chipping-Friars is not yet Buckhurst's.
—The poor paralytic incumbent, for
whose death he is praying daily, is still
living, and, as Buckhurst says, may
shake on many a long year.—How Buckhurst
lives in the mean time at the rate
he does, I cannot tell you—that art of
living in style upon nothing is an art,
which I see practised by numbers, but
which is still a mystery to me.—However,
the Falconers seem in great favor at
present; the Commissioner hopes Lord
Oldborough may do something for Buckhurst.
—Last Sunday, when I went to
hear him preach, I saw the whole family
of the Falconers, in grandeur, in
the Duke of Greenwich's seat.—The
Marchioness of Twickenham was there,
and looked beautiful, but, as I thought,
unhappy. After the sermon, I heard
Lady Somebody, who was in the next
seat to me, whisper to a Lady Otherbody,
just as she was rising after the
blessing, “My dear Madam, did you

hear the shocking report about the Marchioness
of Twickenham?”—Then a
very close and confidential whisper.— 
Then, loud enough for me to hear— 
“But, I do suppose, as there are hopes
of an heir, all will be hushed—for the
present.”
“Just then the Duke of Greenwich
and the Marquis and Marchioness came
down the aisle, and as they past, my
scandal-mongers smiled, and curtsied,
and were so delighted to see their dear
Marchioness.—The Miss Falconers, following
in the wake of nobility, seemed
too much charmed with themselves, to
see or know me—till Lord Oldborough,
though listening to the Duke, espied me,
and did me the honor to bow; then the
Misses put up their glasses to see who I
could be, and they also smiled, and curtsied,
and were delighted to see me.
“It is well for us, that we don't live
on their smiles and curtsies.—They went
off in the Marchioness of Twickenham's

superb equipage.—I had a full view of
her as she drew up the glass, and a more
melancholy countenance than hers I
have seldom seen.—Lord Oldborough
hoped my father was well—but never
mentioned Godfrey.—The Marchioness
does not know me, but she turned at the
name of Percy, and I thought sighed.— 
Now, Rosamond, I put that sigh in for
you—Make what you can of it, and of
the half-heard mysterious whisper. I
expect that you will have a romance in
great forwardness, before Monday, the
3d of next month, when I hope to see
you all.
“No letters from Godfrey.—Erasmus
desires me to thank my father for his
letter, which has completely satisfied his
scruples of conscience. He has been so
busy of late, he tells me, he has not had
time to record for you all his doings.— 
In one word he is doing exceedingly well.
His practice increases every day in the
city in spite of Dr. Frumpton. Adieu till

Monday the 3rd—Happy Monday!— 
‘Restraint that sweetens liberty.'—My
dear mother, which do you think loves
vacation-time most, a lawyer or a school-boy?
—How few have such homes to go
to as I have!
“I was interrupted just now by a letter
from a certain farmer, of the name of
Grimwood, who has written to me— 
‘because I am a friend to justice, and
my father's son, &c.’ and has given me a
long account of a quarrel he has with
Dr. Leicester, about the tithe of peaches
—said Grimwood is so angry, that he
can neither spell nor write intelligibly,
and he swears that he'll go to law with
the Doctor, and if it cost him a thousand
guineas in gold, he will have the law of
the Doctor. I wish my father would be
so kind, as to send to Mr. Grimwood,
(he lives at Pegginton) and advise him
to keep clear of Attorney Sharpe, and
to keep cool, if possible, till Monday
the 3rd, and then I will make up the
quarrel if I can.—Observe, more is to be

done on Monday the 3rd, than ever was
done on any other Monday.
Your affectionate Son,
Alfred Percy.”
“P. S.—I open my letter to tell you a
delightful piece of news—that Lord Oldborough
has taken Temple for his private
secretary, and will bring him in for the
borough of—. How his Lordship
found him out to be the author of that
famous pamphlet, which bore Cunningham's
name, I do not know. I know,
that I kept the secret, as in honor bound.
But Lord Oldborough has the best ways
and means of obtaining intelligence of
any man in England. It is singular that
he never said one word about the pamphlet
to Temple, nor ever appeared to him
to know that it was his writing.—I cannot
understand this.”
To comprehend why Lord Oldborough
had never mentioned the pamphlet to
Mr. Temple, it was necessary to know

more than Alfred had opportunities of
discovering of this minister's character.
His Lordship did not choose to acknowledge
to the world, that he had been
duped by Cunningham Falconer. Lord
Oldborough would sooner repair an error
than acknowledge it. Not that he was
uncandid.—But he considered candor as
dangerous and impolitic in a public character.
Upon some occasion, soon after Mr.
Temple came to be his Lordship's secretary,
Mr. Temple acknowledged to a
gentleman, in Lord Oldborough's presence,
some trifling official mistake he
had made; Lord Oldborough, as soon
as the gentleman was gone, said to his
secretary,
“Sir, if you make a mistake, repair
it—that is sufficient.—Sir, you are young
in political life—You don't know, I see,
that candor hurts a political character in
the opinion of fools—that is, of the greater
part of mankind.—Candor may be advantageous— 
to a moral writer, or to a

private gentleman, but not to a minister
of state. A statesman, if he would govern
public opinion, must establish a
belief in his infallibility.”
Upon this principle Lord Oldborough
abided, not only by his own measures,
but by his own instruments, right or
wrong, he was known to support those
whom he had once employed or patronised.
—Lucky this for the Falconer family!
Letter from Alfred to Erasmus.
“MY DEAR DOCTOR,
“How I pity you who have no vacations.
—Please, when next you sum up
the advantages and disadvantages of the
professions of Law and Medicine, to set
down vacations to the credit side of the
Law—You who work for life and death
can have no pause, no respite; whilst I
from time to time may, happily, leave
all the property, real and personal, of
my fellow creatures, to it's lawful or unlawful
owners. Now, for six good weeks

to come, I may hang sorrow and cast
away care, and forget the sound and
smell of parchments, and the din of the
courts.
“Here I am, a happy prisoner at
large, in this nut-shell of a house at the
Hills, which you have never seen since
it has become the family mansion.—I am
now in the actual tenure and occupation
of the little room, commonly called Rosamond's
room, bounded on the N&wblank;E&wblank; 
W&wblank;and S&wblank;by blank &wblank; &wblank; (N. B.
a very dangerous practice of leaving
blanks for your boundaries in your leases,
as an eminent attorney told me last
week). Said room containing in the
whole 144 square feet, 4½ square inches,
superficial measure, be the same more or
less.—I don't know how my father and
mother, and sisters, who all their lives
were used to range in spacious apartments,
can live so happily, cooped up
as they now are; but their bodies, as well
as minds, seem to have a contractile
power, which adapts them to their present

confined circumstances. Procrustes,
though he was a mighty tyrant, could fit
only the body to the bed.—I found all at
home as cheerful and contented as in the
days when we lived magnificently at
Percy-Hall. I have not seen the Hungerfords
yet; Colonel H. is, I hear,
attached to Lady Elizabeth Pembroke.
—I know very little of her, but Caroline
assures me she is an amiable, sensible
woman, well suited to him, and to all
his family.—I need not, however, expatiate
on this subject, for Caroline says
that she wrote you a long letter, the day
after she returned from Hungerford-Castle.
—I have a great deal to do since I
came home, to explain, and indeed to
decipher, the short-hand notes, which
you have lately sent instead of decent
letters.—I have, however, supplied all
your deficiencies, and told the history
of Panton's quarrel about the wig—and
have given a full account of the green
ribbon scene at Lady Spilsbury's.
And now I must tell you what has

happened to me since I came to the
country.—Do you remember my receiving
a very angry, very ill-spelled letter,
from a certain farmer Grimwood of
Pegginton, who swore, that if it cost
him a thousand guineas in gold, he
would have the law of the Doctor—viz.
Dr. Leicester—about a tithe of peaches.
—My father, at my request, was so good
as to send for said Grimwood, and to
prevent him from having recourse in his
ire to Attorney Sharpe.—With prodigious
difficulty, the angry farmer was restrained
till my arrival; when I came home I
found him waiting for me, and literally
foaming at the mouth, with the furious
desire for law. I flatter myself, I did
listen to his story with a patience, which
Job might have been admired for. I
was well aware that till he had exhausted
himself, and was practically convinced
that he had nothing more to say, he
would be incapable of listening to me,
or to the voice of the angel of peace.— 
When at last, absolute fatigue of reiteration

had reduced him to silence, when
he had held me by the button, till he
was persuaded he had made me fully
master of his case, I prevailed upon him
to let me hear what could be said on the
opposite side of the question.—And after
some hours' cross-examination of six witnesses,
repeaters, and reporters, and after
an infinite confusion of said I's, and said
he's, it was made clearly to appear, that
the whole quarrel originated in the mistake
of a few words in a message, which
Dr. Leicester's proctor had given to his
son, a boy of seven years old, who had
left it with a deaf gate-keeper of seventy-six,
who repeated it to farmer Grimwood,
at a moment when the farmer was
overheated and overtired, and consequently
prone to misunderstanding and to
anger.—The most curious circumstance
in the whole business is ... that the
word peaches had never been mentioned
by Dr. Leicester's proctor in the original
message; and Dr. Leicester really did not
know, that Mr. Grimwood of Pegginton

was possessed of a single peach. Grimwood,
though uncommonly obstinate
and slow, is a just man; and when I at
last brought the facts with indisputable
evidence home to his understanding, he
acknowledged that he had been too hasty,
rejoiced that he had not gone to law,
begged the Doctor and the Doctor's
proctor's pardon, thanked me with his
whole honest, heart, and went home in
perfect charity with all mankind.—Mr.
Sharpe, who soon heard of the amicable
conclusion of this affair, laughs at me,
and pronounces that I shall never make
a lawyer, and that my friends need never
flatter themselves with the notion of my
rising at the bar.—But ... Caroline
and Rosamond, at this instant, have appeared
at each of my elbows, and summon
me out to walk with them.
Yours truly,
A. Percy.”
“My letter was forgotten yesterday
and I am glad of it. Blessings on Farmer

Grimwood of Pegginton; little did
I think, that he and his quarrel about
tithe peaches, would have such happy
influence on my destiny. Blessings on
farmer Grimwood of Pegginton, I repeat; 
he has been the cause of my seeing
such a woman!—of my receiving
such a look of approbation, such a
smile!—She is niece to our good rector
—come to spend a few days with him.
—Grimwood went to the vicarage to
make up his quarrel with Dr. Leicester
—I do not know what he said of me,
but I find it has left a very favorable
impression in the good Doctor's mind.
—He came here yesterday, and brought
with him his charming niece.—My dear
Erasmus, you know that I have often
prayed that I might never fall in love,
seriously, till I had some reasonable
prospect of being able to marry—but I
begin to retract my prayer for indifference,
and to be of opinion, that the
most prudent thing a professional man
can do is to fall in love—to fall in love

with such a woman as Sophia Leicester.
—What a new motive for exertion!— 
Animated by delightful hope, perseverance,
even in the most stupid drudgery,
will be pleasure.—Hope!—but I
am far from hope—far at this instant
from knowing distinctly what I hope— 
or wish—or mean.—I will write again
soon and explain.”