

Mr. Percy fortunately possessed, independently
of the Percy estate, a farm
worth about seven or eight hundred a
year, which he had purchased with part
of his wife's fortune; on which he had
built a Lodge, that he had intended for
the future residence of one of his sons.
The Hills was the name of this Lodge, to
which all the family now retired. Though
it was in the same county with Percy-Hall,
Clermont-Park, Falconer-Court,
Hungerford-Castle, and within reach of
several other gentlemen's seats, yet from
it's being in a hilly part of the country,
through which no regular road had been
made, it was little frequented, and gave
the idea not only of complete retirement,
but of remoteness. Though a lonely situation,
it was, however, a beautiful one.

The house stood on the brow of a hill,
and looked into a deep glen, through the
steep descent of which ran a clear and
copious rivulet rolling over a stony bed; 
the rocks were covered with mountain
flowers, and wild shrubs ... But nothing
is more tiresome than a picture in
prose. We shall, therefore, beg our readers
to recal to their imagination some of
the views they may have seen in Wales,
and they will probably have a better idea
of this place, than any that we could give
by the most labored description, amplified
with all the epithets in the English language.
The house at the Hills, though finished,
was yet but scantily furnished, and was
so small, that it could hardly hold the family,
who were now obliged to take refuge
in it. However, they were well
disposed to accommodate each other; 
they had habits of order, and had so little
accustomed themselves to be waited upon,
that this sudden change in their fortune
and way of life did not appear terrible as

it would to many in the same rank. Undoubtedly
they felt the loss of real conveniences,
but they were not tormented
with ideal wants, or with the pangs of
mortified vanity. Evils they had to bear,
but they were not the most dreadful of
all evils,—those of the imagination.
They felt themselves sustained in adversity,
not by the obstinacy of pride, or
the evanescent spirit of romance, but by
the permanent power of true philosophy
and religion.
Mr. Percy, to whom his whole family
looked for counsel and support, now
showed all the energy and decision of his
character. What he knew must be done
sooner or later he did decidedly at first.
The superfluities, to which his family
had been accustomed, were instantly
abandoned. The great torment of decayed
gentry is the remembrance of their
former station, and a weak desire still to
appear what their fortune no longer allows
them to be. This folly Mr. Percy had
not to combat in his family, where all

were eager to resign even more of their
own comforts than the occasion required,
and where all were anxious to exert
themselves to contribute to the good
of the whole, without considering any
thing they were able to do for this purpose
as a degradation. It was the object
now for the family who were at home, to
live as frugally as possible, that they
might save as much of their small income
as they could, to assist and forward the
sons in their professions.
The eldest son, Godfrey, could not yet
have heard of the change in his father's
fortune, and in his own expectations; 
but from a pasage in his last letter, it was
evident that he had some idea of the possibility
of such a reverse, and that he was
preparing himself to live with economy.
From Alfred and Erasmus Mr. Percy
had at this trying time the satisfaction of
receiving at once the kindest and the
most manly letters, containing strong
expressions of gratitude to their father
for having given them such an education

as would enable them, notwithstanding
the loss of hereditary fortune, to become
independent and respectable. What
would have been the difference of their
fate, and of their feelings, had they been
suffered to grow up into mere idle lounging
gentlemen, or four-in-hand coachmen!— 
In different words, but with the
same spirit, both brothers declared that
this change in the circumstances of their
family did not depress their minds, but,
on the contrary, gave them new and
powerful motives for exertion. It seemed
to be the first wish of their souls, to fulfil
the fond hopes and predictions of their
father, and to make some return for the
care their parents had taken of their education.
They were determined, that no honorable
opportunity of distinguishing, or advancing
themselves, should pass unimproved; 
and they looked forward with
confident hope to the time when their
perseverance should be rewarded, and
when, instead of being an expense to

their father, they might share with their
family the profits of Law and Medicine.
Their father, pleased by the sanguine
hopes and ardent spirit expressed in these
letters, had too much experience to sympathize
entirely in this enthusiasm. He
was sensible, that a considerable time must
elapse before they could make any thing
by law or medicine. They were as yet
only in the outset of their professions, the
difficult beginning, when men must toil
often without reward, be subject to
crosses and losses, and rebukes and rebuffs,
when their rivals push them back,
and when they want the assistance of
friends to help them forward, whilst with
scarcely the means to live they must appear
like gentlemen.
Beside the faithful steward, two servants,
who were much attached to the family,
accompanied them to their retirement.
One was Mrs. Harte, who had
lived with Mrs. Percy above thirty years; 
and who, from being a housekeeper with

handsome wages and plenary power over
a numerous household at Percy-Hall, now
served with increased zeal at the Hills,
doing a great part of the work of the
house herself, with the assistance only of
a stout country girl newly hired, whose
awkwardness and ignorance, or, as Mrs.
Harte expressed it, whose comical ways,
she bore with a patience that cost her
more than all the rest. The other servant,
who followed the altered fortunes of
the Percy family, was a young man of
the name of Johnson, whom Mr. Percy
had bred up from a boy, and who was so
creditable a servant, that he could readily
have obtained a place with high
wages in any opulent family, either in the
country, or in London; but he chose to
abide by his master, who could now only
afford to give him very little. Indeed
Mr. Percy would not have kept any male
servant in his present circumstances, but
out of regard for this young man, who
seemed miserable at the thoughts of leaving
him, and who undertook to make

himself useful in the farm, as well as in
the house.
Very different was Johnson from the
present race of fine town servants, who
follow with no unequal steps the follies
and vices of their betters, and who, by
their insolence and extravagance, become
the just torments of their masters.—Very
different was Johnson from some country
servants, who with gross selfishness look
solely to their own eating and drinking,
and whose only thought is how to swallow
as much, and do as little as possible.
Those, who have been acquainted only
with servants of this description, will deem
the account of Johnson and Mrs. Harte
to be romantic and incredible; but it is
to be hoped that there are some, who
have had happier experience, and who
can testify that servants, who have been
brought up in well regulated families,
who have never been exposed to the example
of profligacy, or to temptations to
extravagance, and who have been treated
with judicious kindness, are capable of

the attachment, fidelity, and disinterested
gratitude, which is here recorded.
Beside the assistance that he received
from these servants in settling his family
comfortably in their new and much confined
habitation, Mr. Percy's own skill as
a workman proved of signal service. It
had always been his opinion, that a country
gentleman ought to understand the
principles of mechanics and architecture,
that he might at least be capable of directing
the workmen he employs.
In the remote part of the country
where he now resided, no tolerable workmen
were to be had, and in a thousand
little instances, which make no figure in
history, but which produce great effect
in the daily comforts of a house, Mr.
Percy's family felt the advantage of his
mechanical knowledge.
As soon as he had settled his home,
Mr. Percy looked abroad to a tract of
improvable ground, on which he might
employ his agricultural skill.&wblank;Adam
Smith says that many gentlemen, particularly

those, who have retired from trade,
are apt to injure themselves by sanguine
speculations in agriculture. But those,
who have lived on their own estates, and
who have been in the habit of attending
to country business, are sufficiently acquainted
with the details of practice, to
guard against the fallacies of theory.
Smith further observes, that the rich
usually lose by carrying on improvements,
because they trust to stewards,
agents, and factors of various denominations,
by whom they are cheated. But
this is not an inevitable evil, neither is it
essential to their condition; they may see
with their own eyes, and, better still, they
may attach to them persons, who will
not be merely eye-servants.—Even when
he labored under the disadvantage of being
rich, Mr. Percy contrived to do this,
and he seemed likely to reap the benefit
of his prudence now that he had become
poor. He had reason to rejoice in having
really led the life of a country gentleman.
He understood the business of an agriculturist,

and he was ably assisted in all
the details of farming and management
by those servants, whom he had attached
to him whilst he was opulent. Never in
the most prosperous days did the old
steward seem so fully interested in his
master's affairs, so punctual and active in
executing his commands, and, above all,
so respectful in his manner to his master,
as now in his fallen fortunes.
It would be uninteresting to readers
who are not farmers, to enter into a detail
of Mr. Percy's probable improvements.
It is enough to say, that his hopes were
founded upon experience, and upon calculations,
and that he was a man capable
of calculating. He had been long in the
habit of keeping accurate accounts, not
such as gentlemen display when they are
pleased to prove that their demesne, or
their farm, produces more than ever farm
or demesne produced before. Mr. Percy's
exact accounts, and his habits of regularity,
were really of use to him, both
as they regarded the past and the future.

All the tradesmen with whom he had
dealt were, notwithstanding his change of
fortune, ready to trust him; and those
who were strangers, and whom he had
now occasion to employ, finding themselves
regularly paid, soon acquired confidence
in his punctuality. So that far
from being terrified at having so little, he
felt surprised at having still so much money
at his command.—The enjoyment of
high credit must surely give more pleasurable
feelings than the mere possession
of wealth.
Often, during the first year after he
had been deprived of the Percy estate,
Mr. Percy declared, that, as to himself,
he had actually lost nothing; for he had
never been expensive or luxurious; his
personal enjoyments were nearly the
same, and his active pursuits were not very
different from what they had always
been. He had, it is true, less time than
he wished to give to literature, or to indulge
in the company and conversation
of his wife and daughters; but even the

pain of this privation was compensated
by the pleasure he felt in observing the
excellencies in their characters, which adversity
developed.&wblank;How much temper
and strength of mind are necessary,
to enable women to support the loss of
wealth and station!—A man who has received
a liberal education may maintain
himself with honor by the exertion of his
abilities in respectable professions, and
in a variety of employments, which are
allowed to be gentlemanlike. In doing
this he continues to be on a footing with
his equals in birth; his personal merit
and mental qualifications ensure him admission
into the first societies; but a woman,
by the caprice, the cruelty of custom,
is degraded by the very industry
which should obtain respect, and, if unmarried,
she loses the prospect of being
suitably established in life. Mr. Percy,
aware of these circumstances, now looked
upon his daughters with peculiar tenderness,
as he saw them bear their change
of fortune cheerfully.—It has by some

persons been thought, that women who
have been suffered to acquire literary
tastes, whose understandings have been
cultivated and refined, are apt to disdain,
or to become unfit for the useful minutiæ 
of domestic duties. In the education of
her daughters Mrs. Percy had guarded
against this danger, whilst at the same
time she had encouraged them to cultivate
a taste for literature, which adds so
much in all conditions of life to the capacity
for happiness. Her object had not
been to make them merely accomplished
and showy, she had endeavored
to render them amiable and useful, and
she now experienced the happy effects of
her prudence. Instead of seeing her
daughters sighing for pleasures that were
out of their reach, she found them contented,
active, and useful, in their humble
home. At first they had felt it somewhat
irksome, in their change of circumstances,
to be forced to spend a considerable
portion of their time in preparations
for the mere business of living, but

they perceived, that this constraint gave a
higher relish to their favorite employments,
and a new spring to their minds.
After the domestic business of the day was
done, they enjoyed, with fresh delight, the
pleasures of which it is not in the power
of fortune to deprive us.
Soon after the Percy family were settled
at the Hills, they were surprised by
a visit from Commissioner Falconer—surprised
—because, though they knew that
he had a certain degree of common-place
friendship for them as relations, yet
they were aware, that his regard was not
independent of fortune, and they had
never supposed, that he would come to
seek them in their retirement. After some
general expressions of condolence on their
losses, their change of situation, and the
inconveniences to which a large family,
bred up, as they had been, in affluence,
must suffer in their present abode, he
went out to walk with Mr. Percy, and
he then began to talk over his own family
affairs. With polite acknowledgment

to Mr. Percy of the advantage he had derived
from his introduction to Lord Old-borough,
and with modestly implied compliments
to his own address in turning
that introduction to the best possible account,
Mr. Falconer led to the subject on
which he wanted to dilate.
“You see, my dear Mr. Percy,” said
he, “without vanity I may now venture
to say, my plans for advancing my family
have all succeeded; my sons have
risen in the world, or rather have been
pushed up beyond my most sanguine
hopes.”
“I give you joy with all my heart,” 
—said Mr. Percy.
“But my good Sir, listen to me; your
sons might have been in as advantageous
situations, if you had not been too proud
to profit by the evidently favorable dispositions,
which Lord Oldborough showed
towards you and yours.”
“Too proud! no my friend, I assure
you, pride never influenced my conduct; 
I acted from principle.”

“So you are pleased to call it.—But
we will not go back to the past—no
man likes to acknowledge he has been
wrong.—Let us, if you please, look to
the future. You know that you are now
in a different situation from what you
were formerly, when you could afford to
follow your principles, or your systems.
Now, my dear Sir, give me leave to tell
you, that it is your duty, absolutely your
duty, to make use of your interest for your
sons. There is not a man in England,
who, if he chose it, might secure for his
sons a better patron than you could.”
“I trust,” replied Mr. Percy, “that
I have secured for my sons what is
better than a good patron,—a good education.”
“Both are best,” said Mr. Falconer.
“Proud as you are, cousin Percy, you
must allow this, when you look round,
and see who rises, and how.—And now
we are by ourselves let me ask you
frankly, and seriously, why do you object
to patronage?”

“Frankly and seriously then, because
I detest and despise the whole system of
patronage.”
“That's very strong,” said Mr. Falconer.
“And I am glad for your sake,
and for the sake of your family, that
nobody heard it, but myself.”
“If the whole world heard me,” pursued
Mr. Percy, “I should say just the
same—Strong—very strong!—I am glad
of it—for—(Excuse me,—you are my
relation, and we are on terms of familiarity)
the delicate, guarded, qualifying,
trimming, mincing, pouncet-box, gentleman-usher
mode of speaking truth,
makes no sort of impression. Truth
should always be strong,—speaking, or
acting.”
“Well! well! I beg your pardon; as
strong let it be as you please, only let it
be cool, and then we cannot fail to understand
one another. I think you were
going to explain to me why you detest
and despise what you call the system of
patronage.”

“Because, I believe it to be ruinous
to my country. Whenever the honors of
professions, civil, military, or ecclesiastical,
are bestowed by favor, not earned
by merit; whenever the places of trust
and dignity in a state are to be gained by
intrigue and solicitation, there is an end
of generous emulation, and consequently
of exertion. Talents and integrity, in
losing their reward of glory, lose their
vigour, and often their very existence.
If the affairs of this nation were guided,
and if her battles were fought by the corrupt,
imbecile creatures of patronage, how
would they be guided?—how fought?— 
Wo be to the country, that trusts to
such rulers and such defenders! Wo
has been to every country, that has so
trusted.—May such never be the fate of
England!—And that it never may, let
every honest independent Englishman set
his face, his hand, his heart against this
base, this ruinous system!—I will for
one.”—
“For one!—alas!” said Mr. Falconer,

with a sigh meant to be heard, and
a smile not intended to be seen.— 
“What can one do in such a desperate
case?—I am afraid certain things will
go on in the world for ever, whether we
profit by them or not.—And if I grant
that patronage is sometimes a public
evil, you must allow that it is often a
private benefit.”
“I doubt even that,” said Mr. Percy,
“for those young men, who are brought
up to expect patronage in any profession.
 ... But,” said Mr. Percy, checking
himself,—“I forget who I am speaking
to; I don't wish to say any thing
that can hurt your feelings, especially,
when you are so kind to come to see me
in adversity, and when you show so
much interest in my affairs.”
“Oh! pray go on, go on,” said the
Commissioner, smiling, “you will not
hurt me, I assure you; consider I am
too firm in the success of my system, to
be easily offended on that point.—Go on
—Those young men who are brought

up to expect patronage in any profession”—
“Are apt to depend upon it too
much,” continued Mr. Percy, “and
consequently neglect to acquire knowledge.
They know, that things will be
passed over for them, and they think that
they need not be assiduous, because they
are secure of being provided for, independently
of their own exertions; and if
they have a turn for extravagance, they
may indulge it, because a place will set
all to rights.”
“And if they are provided for, and if
they do get good places, are not they
well enough off?” said Mr. Falconer— 
“I'll answer for it, your sons would think
so?”
Mr. Percy, with a look of proud humility,
replied, “I am inclined to believe,
that my sons would not think
themselves well off, unless they were distinguished
by their own merit.”
“To be sure,”—said Mr. Falconer,
correcting himself—“of course I mean

that too; but a young man can never
distinguish himself, you know, so well
as when his merit is raised to a conspicuous
situation—”
“Or disgrace himself so effectually,
as when he is raised to a situation for
which he is unprepared and unfit.”
The Commissioner's brow clouded— 
some unpleasant reflexion or apprehension
seemed to cross his mind.—Mr.
Percy had no intention of raising any; 
he meant no allusion to the Commissioner's
sons—he hastened to turn what
he had said more decidedly upon his
own.
“I have chosen for my sons, or rather
they have chosen for themselves,” continued
he,—“professions which are independent
of influence, and in which it
could be of little use to them. Patrons
can be of little advantage to a lawyer or
a physician.—No judge, no attorney, can
push a lawyer up, beyond a certain
point—he may rise like a rocket, but he
will fall like a stick, if he be not supported

by his own inherent powers.— 
Where property or life is at stake, men
will not compliment, or even be influenced
by great recommendations—they
will consult the best lawyer, and the
best physician, whoever he may be.— 
I have endeavored to give my Alfred
and Erasmus such an education, as shall
enable them honestly to work their own
way to eminence.”
“A friend's helping hand is no bad
thing,” said Mr. Falconer, “in that hard
and slippery ascent.”
“As many friends, as many helping
hands in a fair way, as you please,” said
Mr. Percy—“I by no means would inculcate
the antisocial, absurd, impossible
doctrine, that young men, or any
men, can, or ought to be independent of
the world. Let my sons make friends
for themselves, and enjoy the advantage
of mine. I object only to their becoming
dependant, wasting the best years of their
lives in a miserable, debasing servitude
to patrons—to patrons, who at last may

perhaps capriciously desert them at their
utmost need.”
Again, without designing it, Mr.
Percy wakened unpleasant recollections
in the mind of the Commissioner.
“Ah! there you touch a tender string
with me”—said Mr. Falconer, sighing.
“I have known something of that in my
life. Lord N&wblank;and Mr. G&wblank;did
indeed use me shamefully ill.—But I was
young then, and did not choose my friends
well. I know more of the world now,
and have done better for my sons—and
shall do better, I trust, for myself.—In
the mean time, my dear Mr. Percy, let
us think of your affairs.—Such a man as
you should not be lost here on a farm
amongst turnips and carrots.—So Lord
Oldborough says and thinks—and, in
short, to come to the point at once, I
was not sounding you from idle curiosity
respecting patronage, or from any impertinent
desire to interfere with your concerns; 
but I come, commissioned by
Lord Oldborough, to make an offer,

which, I am persuaded, whatever theoretical
objections might occur,” said the
Commissioner with a significant smile,— 
“Mr. Percy is too much a man of practical
sense to reject. Lord Oldborough
empowers me to say, that it is his wish
to see his government supported and
strengthened by men of Mr. Percy's
talents and character; that he is persuaded,
that Mr. Percy would speak well
in parliament; that if Mr. Percy will
join us, his Lordship will bring him into
parliament, and give him thus an opportunity
of at once distinguishing himself,
advancing his family, repairing the injustice
of fortune, and serving his country.”—
Commissioner Falconer made this offer
with much pomposity, with the air of a
person sure that he is saying something
infinitely flattering, and at the same time
with a lurking smile on his countenance,
at the idea of the ease and certainty with
which this offer would induce Mr. Percy
to recant all he had said against patrons

and patronage.—He was curious to hear
how the philosopher would change his
tone: but, to his surprise, Mr. Percy
did not alter it in the least.
He returned his respectful and grateful
acknowledgements to Lord Oldborough,
but begged leave totally to decline
the honor intended him; he could not,
he said, accept it consistently with his
principles—He could not go into parliament
with a view to advance himself, or
to provide for his family.
The Commissioner interrupted to qualify,
for he was afraid he had spoken too
broadly, and observed that what he had
said was quite confidential.
Mr. Percy understood it so, and assured
him there was no danger that it
should be repeated.—The Commissioner
was then in a state to listen again
quietly.
Mr. Percy said, that when he was
rich, he had preferred domestic happiness
to ambition, therefore he had never
stood for the county to which he belonged,

that now he was poor, he felt an
additional reason for keeping out of parliament,
that he might not put himself
in a situation to be tempted—A situation
where he must spend more than he
could afford, and could only pay his expenses
by selling his conscience.—
The Commissioner was silent with
astonishment for some moments after
Mr. Percy ceased speaking.—He had
always thought his good cousin a singular
man, but he had never thought him
a wrongheaded fool till this moment.— 
At first he was somewhat vexed, for Mr.
Percy's sake and for the sake of his sons,
that he refused such an offer—for the
Commissioner had some of the feelings
of a relation—but more the habits of a
politician, and these last, in a few moments,
reconciled him to what he thought
the ruin of his cousin's prospects in life.
Mr. Falconer considered, that if Mr.
Percy were to go into parliament, to
join their party, and to get near Lord
Oldborough, he might become a dangerous

rival. He pressed the matter,
therefore, no longer with urgency, but
only just sufficient to enable him to report
to Lord Oldborough, that he had
executed his commission, but had found
Mr. Percy impracticable.