

The only interest, that honest people
can take in the fate of rogues, is in their
detection and punishment; the reader
then will be so far interested in the fate
of Mr. Champfort, as to feel some satisfaction
at his being safely lodged in gaol.
The circumstance, which led to this desirable
catastrophe, was the anonymous letter
to Mr. Vincent. From the first moment
that Marriott saw or heard of this
letter, she was convinced, she said, that
“Mr. Champfort was at the bottom of it.” 
Lady Delacour was equally convinced, that
Harriot Freke was the author of the epistle; 
and she supported her opinion, by observing,
that Champfort could neither write nor
spell english. Marriott and her lady were

both right. It was a joint, or rather a
triplicate performance. Champfort, in conjunction
with the stupid maid, furnished
the intelligence, which Mrs. Freke manufactured; 
and when she had put the whole
into proper style and form, Mr. Champfort
got her rough draught fairly copied at his
leisure, and transmitted his copy to Mr.
Vincent. Now, all this was discovered by
a very slight circumstance. The letter was
copied by Mr. Champfort, upon a sheet
of mourning paper, off which he thought
that he had carefully cut the edges; but
one bit of the black edge remained, which
did not escape Marriott's scrutinizing eye.
“Lord bless my stars, my lady!” she exclaimed,
“this must be the paper; I
mean, may be the paper, that Mr. Champfort
was cutting a quire of, the very day
before miss Portman left town. It's a
great while ago, but I remember it, as well
as if it was yesterday; I saw a parcel of
black jags of paper littering the place, and
asked what had been going on? and was
told, that it was only Mr. Champfort, who

had been cutting some paper, which, to be
sure, I concluded, my lord had given to
him, having no farther occasion for; as my
lord, and you my lady, were just going out
of mourning at that time, as you may remember.”
Lord Delacour, when the paper was
shown to him, recognised it immediately
by a private mark, which he had put on
the outside sheet of a division of letter paper,
which, indeed, he had never given to
Champfort, but which he had missed
about the time Marriott mentioned. Between
the leaves of this paper, his lordship
had put, as it was often his practice,
some bank notes. They were notes but
of small value, and when he missed them,
he was easily persuaded by Champfort, that,
as he had been much intoxicated the preceding
night, he had thrown them away
with some useless papers. He rummaged
through his writing-desk in vain, and then
gave up the search. It was true, that, on
this very occasion, he gave Champfort the
remainder of some mourning paper, which

he made no scruple, therefore, of producing
openly. Certain that he could swear to
his own private mark upon this paper, and
that he could identify his notes, by their
numbers, &c., of which he had luckily
a memorandum, lord Delacour, enraged
to find himself both robbed and duped by
a favourite servant, in whom he had placed
implicit confidence, was effectually roused
from his natural indolence; he took such
active and successful measures, that Mr.
Champfort was committed to gaol, to take
his trial for the robbery. To make peace
for himself, he confessed, that he had been
instigated by Mrs. Freke, to get the anonymous
letter written. This lady was now
suffering just punishment for her frolics,
and lady Delacour thought her fallen
so much below indignation, that she advised
Belinda to take no manner of notice
of her conduct, except simply returning
the letter to her, with “miss Portman's,
Mr. Vincent's, and lord and lady Delacour's
compliments and thanks, to a sincere

friend, who had been the means of
bringing villainy to justice.”
So much for Mrs. Freke and Mr.
Champfort, who, both together, scarcely
deserve an episode of ten lines.
Now to return to Mr. Vincent. He perceived
the advantage, which he had gained
with Belinda, and animated by fresh hope,
he pressed his suit with all the ardour of
his sanguine temper. Though little disposed
to fear any future evil, especially in the
midst of present felicity, yet he was aware
of the danger that might ensue to him,
from Clarence Hervey's arrival; he was
therefore impatient for the intermediate
day to pass, and it was with heartfelt joy,
that he saw the carriages at last at the
door, which were actually to convey them
to Oakly-park. Mr. Vincent, who had all
the West Indian love for magnificence,
had, upon this occasion, an extremely handsome
equipage. Lady Delacour, though
she was disappointed by Clarence Hervey's
not appearing, did not attempt to delay
their departure. She contented herself

with leaving a note, to be delivered to him
on his arrival, which, she still flattered herself,
would induce him immediately to go
to Harrowgate. The trunks were fastened
upon the carriages, the imperial was
carrying out, Marriott was full of a world
of business, lord Delacour was looking at
his horses as usual, Helena was patting
Mr. Vincent's great dog, and Belinda was
rallying her lover, upon his taste for “the
pomp, pride, and circumstance” of glorious
travelling—
When an express arrived from Oakly-park.
It was to delay their journey for a
few weeks. Mr. Percival and lady Anne
wrote word, that they were unexpectedly
called from home, by&wblank;. Lady Delacour
did not stay to read by what, or by
whom, she was so much delighted by this
reprieve. Mr. Vincent bore the disappointment
as well as could be expected; 
particularly, when Belinda observed, to
comfort him, that “the mind is it's own
place;” and that hers, she believed, would
be the same at Twickenham as at Oakly-park.

Nor did she give him any reason to
doubt her steadiness, or to regret that she was
not immediately under the influence of his
own friends. The dread of being unduly biassed
by lady Delacour, and the strong desire
Belinda felt to act honourably by Mr. Vincent,
to show him that she was not trifling
with his happiness, and that she was incapable
of the meanness of retaining a lover
as a pis aller; were motives, which acted
more powerfully in his favour, than all
that even lady Anne Percival could have
looked or said. The contrast between
the openness and decision of his conduct
towards her and Clarence Hervey's vaccillation
and mystery; the belief, that Mr.
Hervey was, or ought to be, attached to
another woman; the conviction, that Mr.
Vincent was strongly attached to her, and
that he possessed many of the good qualities
essential to her happiness, operated
every day more and more strongly upon
her inclinations. We shall spare the reader
a journal of a lady's doubts and scruples,
and of a lover's hopes and fears; it will

be sufficient to relate, that the lover's hopes
at last rose to expectations; and that the
scrupulous lady acknowledged them to be
reasonable.
Where was Clarence Hervey all this
time? Lady Delacour, alas! could not
divine. She every morning was certain,
that he would appear that day, and every
night she was forced to acknowledge her
mistake. No inquiries—and she had made
all that could be made, by address and
perseverance—no inquiries could clear up
the mystery of Virginia and Mrs. Ormond:
and her impatience to see her friend Clarence
every hour increased. She was divided
between her confidence in him, and
her affection for Belinda; unwilling to give
him up, yet afraid to injure her happiness,
or to offend her, by injudicious advice,
and improper interference. One thing
kept lady Delacour for some time in spirits
—miss Portman's assurances, that she
would not bind herself by any promise, or
engagement, to Mr. Vincent, even when
decided in his favour; and that she should

hold both him and herself perfectly free,
till they were actually married. This was
according to lady Anne and Mr. Percival's
principles; and lady Delacour was never
tired of expressing directly, or indirectly,
her admiration of the prudence and propriety
of their doctrine. But what availed
her reliance even upon this saving clause
against previous promises? for at length, a
consent—blushing consent—was given, to
ratify the most solemn of all vows at the
altar, and preparations were now going to
be made for the marriage of Augustus
Vincent and Belinda Portman.
Lady Delacour recollected her own promise,
to give her sincere congratulations
to the victorious knight; and she endeavoured
to persuade Belinda and herself,
that she was well satisfied with the approaching
union; she was, however, somewhat
less disposed to like Mr. Vincent,
from the discovery, which she accidentally
made, of his being still upon good terms
with odious Mrs. Luttridge. Helena, one
morning, was playing with a large dog of

Mr. Vincent, of which he was excessively
fond; it was called Juba, after his
faithful servant.
“Helena, my dear,” said lady Delacour,
“take care! don't trust your hand
in that creature's monstrous mouth.”
“I can assure your ladyship,” cried
Mr. Vincent, “that he is the very quietest
and best creature in the world.”
“No doubt,” said Belinda, smiling,
“since he belongs to you; for you know,
as Mr. Percival tells you, every thing, animate
or inanimate, that is under your
protection, you think, must be the best
of it's kind in the universe.”
“But really, Juba is the best creature
in the world,” repeated Mr. Vincent,
with great eagerness—“Juba is, without
exception, the best creature in the universe.”
“Juba, the dog, or Juba, the man,” 
said Belinda? “you know, they cannot be
both the best creatures in the universe.”
“Well! Juba, the man, is the best
man—and Juba, the dog, is the best dog,

in the universe,” said Mr. Vincent, laughing,
with his usual candour, at his own
foible, when it was pointed out to him— 
“But, seriously, lady Delacour, you need
not be in the least afraid to trust miss Delacour
with this poor fellow; for, do you know,
during a whole month, that I lent him to
Mrs. Luttridge, at Harrowgate, she used
constantly to let him sleep in the room
with her; and now, whenever he sees her,
he licks her hand, as gently as if he were
a lapdog; and it was but yesterday, when
I had him there, she declared, he was more
gentle than any lapdog in London.”
At the name of Luttridge lady Delacour
changed countenance, and she continued
silent for some time. Mr. Vincent,
attributing her sudden seriousness to
dislike or fear of his dog, took him out
of the room.
“My dear lady Delacour,” said Belinda,
observing that she still retained an
air of displeasure, “I hope your antipathy
to odious Mrs. Luttridge does not extend
to every body who visits her.”

“Tout au contraire,” cried lady Delacour,
starting from her reverie, and assuming
a playful manner; “I have made a
general gaol-delivery of all my old hatreds; 
and even odious Mrs. Luttridge, though
a hardened offender, must be included in
this act of grace; so you need not fear that
Mr. Vincent should fall under my royal
displeasure, for consorting with this state
criminal. Though I can't sympathize with
him, I forgive him, both for liking that
great dog, and that little woman; especially
as I shrewdly suspect, that he likes the
lady's E O table better than the lady.”
“E O table! Good Heavens! You
do not imagine that Mr. Vincent—”
“Nay, my dear, don't look so terribly
alarmed! I assure you, I did not mean to
hint, that there was any serious, improper
attachment to the E O table; only a
little flirtation, perhaps, to which his passion
for you has, doubtless, put a stop.”
“I'll ask him the moment I see him,” 
cried Belinda, “if he is fond of play; I
know, he used to play at billiards at Oakly-park,

but merely as an amusement.
Games of address, as Mr. Percival says,
are not to be put upon a footing with
games of hazard.”
“A man may, however, contrive to lose
a good deal of money at billiards, as poor
lord Delacour can tell you. But I beseech
you, my dear, do not betray me to Mr.
Vincent; ten to one I am mistaken, for
his great dog put me out of humour—”
“But with such a doubt upon my
mind, unsatisfied—”
“It shall be satisfied; lord Delacour
shall make inquiries for me.—Lord Delacour
shall make inquiries, did I say?— 
will, I should have said. If Champfort had
heard me, to what excellent account he
might have turned that unlucky shall.
What a nice grammarian a woman had
need to be, who would live well with a
husband inferiour to her in understanding!
With a superiour or an equal, she might
use shall and will as inaccurately as she
pleases. Glorious privilege! How I shall
envy it you, my dear Belinda! But how

can you ever hope to enjoy it? Where
is your superiour? Where is your equal?”
Mr. Vincent, who had by this time
seen his dog fed, which was one of his
daily pleasures, returned, and politely assured
lady Delacour, that Juba should
not again intrude. To make her peace
with Mr. Vincent, and to drive the E O
table from Belinda's thoughts, her ladyship
now turned the conversation from
Juba, the dog, to Juba, the man. She
talked of Harriot Freke's phosphoric Obeah
woman, of whom, she said, she had heard
an account from miss Portman. She
spoke of Juba's marriage, and of his master's
generosity to him. From thence
she went on to the African slave trade,
by way of contrast, and she finished precisely
where she had intended, and where
Mr. Vincent could have wished, by praising
a poem called ‘The dying Negro,’ which
he had, the preceding evening, brought to
read to Belinda. This praise was peculiarly
agreeable, because he was not perfectly
sure of his own critical judgment,

and his knowledge of English literature
was not as extensive as Clarence Hervey's; 
a circumstance, which lady Delacour had
discovered one morning, when they went
to see Pope's famous villa at Twickenham.
Flattered by her present confirmation
of his taste, Mr. Vincent readily complied
with a request to read the poem to
Belinda; they were all deeply engaged by
the charms of poetry, when they were suddenly
interrupted by the entrance of— 
Clarence Hervey!
The book dropped from Vincent's hand,
the instant that he heard his name. Lady
Delacour's eyes sparkled with joy. Belinda's
colour rose, but her countenance
maintained an expression of calm dignity.
Mr. Hervey, upon his first entrance, appeared
prepared to support an air of philosophic
composure, which forsook him
before he had walked across the room.
He seemed overpowered by the kindness,
with which lady Delacour received him— 
struck by the reserve of Belinda's manner— 
but not surprised, or displeased, at

the sight of Mr. Vincent. On the contrary,
he desired immediately to be introduced
to him, with the air of a man resolute
to cultivate his friendship. Provoked
and perplexed, lady Delacour, in a tone
of mingled reproach and astonishment,
exclaimed—“Though you have not done
me the honour, Mr. Hervey, to take any
other notice of my last letter, I am to
understand, I presume, by the manner in
which you desired me to introduce you to
our friend Mr. Vincent, that it has been
received.”
“Received! Good Heavens! Have
not you had my answer?” cried Clarence
Hervey, with a voice and look of extreme
surprise and emotion! “Has not your
ladyship received a packet?”
“I have had no packet!—I have had no
letter!—Mr. Vincent, do me the favour
to ring the bell,” cried lady Delacour,
eagerly—“I'll know, this instant, what's
become of it.”
“Your ladyship must have thought

me—,” and, as he spoke, his eye involuntarily
glanced towards Belinda.
“No matter what I thought you,” 
cried lady Delacour, who forgave him
every thing for this single glance—“if I
did you a little injustice, Clarence, when
I was angry, you must forgive me; for, I
assure you, I do you a great deal of justice
at other times.”
“Did any letter, any packet, come
here for me? Inquire, inquire,” said she,
impatiently, to the servant, who came
in. No letter or packet was to be heard of.
It had been directed, Mr. Hervey now
remembered, to her ladyship's house in
town. She gave orders to have it immediately
sent for; but scarcely had she
given them, when, turning to Mr. Hervey,
she laughed and said—
“A very foolish compliment to you
and your letter, for you certainly can
speak as well as you can write; nay, better,
I think—though you don't write ill,
neither—but you can tell me, in two
words, what in writing would take half

a volume. Leave this gentleman and lady
to—‘The dying Negro;’ and let me hear
your two words, in lord Delacour's dressing-room,
if you please,” said she, opening
the door of an adjoining apartment.
“Lord Delacour will not be jealous if he
find you tête à tête with me, I promise
you. But you shall not be compelled.
You look—”
“I look,” said Mr. Hervey, affecting
to laugh, “as if I felt the impossibility of
putting half a volume into two words. It
is a long story, and—”
“And I must wait for the packet,
whether I will or no—well, be it so,” said
lady Delacour. Struck with the extreme
perturbation into which he was thrown,
she pressed him with no farther raillery,
but instantly attempted to change the
conversation to general subjects.
Again she had recourse to ‘The dying
Negro.’ Mr. Vincent, to whom she now
addressed herself, said, “for my part, I
neither have, nor pretend to have, much
critical taste; but I admire in this poem

the manly, energetic spirit of virtue, which
it breathes.” From the poem, an easy
transition was made to the author; and
Clarence Hervey, exerting himself to join
in the conversation, observed, “that this
writer (Mr. Day) was an instance, that
genuine eloquence must spring from the
heart. Cicero was certainly right,” continued
he, addressing himself to Mr. Vincent,
in his definition of a great orator,
“to make it one of the first requisites, that
he should be a good man.”
Mr. Vincent coldly replied, “This definition
would exclude too many men of
superiour talents, to be easily admitted.”
“Perhaps the appearance of virtue,” 
said Belinda, “might, on many occasions,
succeed, as well as the reality.”
“Yes, if the man be as good an actor
as Mr. Hervey,” said lady Delacour, “and
if he suit ‘the action to the word’—the
word to the action.”
Belinda never raised her eyes whilst her
ladyship uttered these words; Mr. Vincent
was, or seemed to be, so deeply engaged

in looking for something in the
book, which he held in his hand, that he
could take no farther part in the conversation; 
and a dead silence ensued.
Lady Delacour, who was naturally impatient
in the extreme, especially in the vindication
of her friends, could not bear to
see, as she did by Belinda's countenance,
that she had not forgotten Marriott's story
of Virginia St. Pierre; and though her
ladyship was convinced, that the packet
would clear up all mysteries, yet she could
not endure, that even in the interim
‘poor Clarence’ should be unjustly suspected; 
nor could she refrain from trying
an expedient, which just occurred to her,
to satisfy herself and every body present.
She was the first to break silence.
“To do ye justice, my friends, you
are all good company this morning. Mr.
Vincent is excusable, because he is in love; 
and Belinda is excusable, because—because
—Mr. Hervey, pray help me to an excuse
for miss Portman's stupidity, for I am
dreadfully afraid of blundering out the

truth. But why do I ask you to help
me? In your present condition, you seem
totally unable to help yourself.—Not a
word!—Run over the common places of
conversation—whether fashion—scandal— 
duels—deaths—marriages—Will none of
these do? Suppose, then, you were to entertain
me with other people's thoughts,
since you have none of your own unpacked
—Forfeit to arbitrary power,” continued
her ladyship, playfully, seizing Mr. Vincent's
book. “I have always observed,
that none submit with so good a grace to
arbitrary power from our sex, as your true
men of spirit, who would shed the last
drop of their blood; to resist it from one
of their own. Inconsistent creatures, the
best of you!—So read this charming little
poem to us, Mr. Hervey, will you?”
He was going to begin immediately,
but lady Delacour put her hand upon the
book, and stopped him.
“Stay; though I am tyrannical, I will
not be treacherous. I warn you, then,
that I have imposed upon you a difficult,

a dangerous task. If you have any ‘sins
unwhipt of justice,’ there are lines, which
I defy you to read without faultering— 
Listen to the preface.” 
Her ladyship then began as follows:

“Mr. Day, indeed, retained, during
all the periods of his life, as might be expected
from his character, a strong detestation
of female seduction&wblank; Happening
to see some verses, written by a
young lady, on a recent event of this nature,
which was succeeded by a fatal catastrophe
—the unhappy young woman, who
had been a victim to the perfidy of a lover,
overpowered by her sensibility of shame,
having died of a broken heart—he addressed
the fair poetess, in whose sentiments
he sympathized, in the following
manner.”

Lady Delacour paused, and fixed her
eyes upon Clarence Hervey. He, with
all the appearance of conscious innocence,
received the book, without hesitation,

from her hands, and read aloud the lines,
to which she pointed.
“Swear by the dread avengers of the tomb,
By all thy hopes, by death's tremendous gloom,
That, ne'er by thee deceiv'd, the tender maid
Shall mourn her easy confidence betray'd,
Nor weep in secret the triumphant art,
With bitter anguish rankling in her heart;
So may each blessing, which impartial fate
Throws on the good, but snatches from the great,
Adorn thy favour'd course with rays divine,
And Heaven's best gift, a virtuous love, be thine!”

Mr. Hervey read these lines with so
much unaffected, unembarrassed energy,
that lady Delacour could not help casting
a triumphant look at Belinda, which said,
or seemed to say—
“You see, I was right in my opinion
of Clarence!”
Belinda's countenance openly expressed
satisfaction; it seemed to say—“I am
glad, that Mr. Hervey is worthy of our
esteem, though he can no longer have
any claim to my love.” Her manner toward

him distinctly marked the same
sentiment. That reserve, which had been
retained, as long as she had any suspicion
of his having acted dishonourably, was
now dissipated, and she addressed her conversation
to him with that easy, friendly
familiarity, which a man of his discernment
could not misunderstand. Had Mr.
Vincent been left to his own observations,
he would have seen the truth; but he was
alarmed and deceived by lady Delacour's
imprudent expressions of joy, and by the
significant looks, that she gave her friend,
miss Portman, which seemed to be looks
of mutual intelligence. He scarcely dared
to turn his eyes toward his mistress, or
upon him, whom he thought his rival; 
but he kept them anxiously fixed upon
her ladyship, in whose face, as in a glass,
he seemed to study every thing that was
passing.
“Pray, have you ever played at chess,
since we saw you last?” said lady Delacour
to Clarence. “I hope you do not forget,

that you are my knight. I do not forget
it, I assure you—I own you as my knight
to all the world, in public and private— 
do not I, Belinda?”
A dark cloud overspread Mr. Vincent's
brow—he listened not to Belinda's answer.
Seized with a transport of jealousy,
he darted at Mr. Hervey a glance of
mingled scorn and rage; and, after saying a
few unintelligible words to miss Portman
and lady Delacour, he left the room.
Clarence Hervey, who seemed afraid to
trust himself longer with Belinda, withdrew
a few minutes afterward.
“My dear Belinda!”—exclaimed lady
Delacour, the moment that he was out of
the room—“how glad I am he is gone,
that I may say all the good I think of him.
In the first place; Clarence Hervey loves
you. Never was I so fully convinced of it,
as this day.—Why had not we that letter
of his sooner?—That will explain all to
us—but I ask for no explanation; I ask
for no letter, to confirm my opinion, my

conviction—that he loves you: on this
point I cannot be mistaken; he fondly
loves you.”
“He fondly loves her!—Yes, to be sure,
I could have told you that news long ago,” 
cried the dowager lady Boucher, who was
in the room before they were aware of her
entrance; they had both been so eager,
the one listening, and the other speaking.
“Fondly loves her!” repeated the dowager— 
“Yes; and no secret, I promise
you, lady Delacour:”—and then, turning
to Belinda, she began a congratulatory
speech, upon the report of her approaching
marriage with Mr. Vincent.—“I distress
you, I see, and it's quite out of rule,
I am sensible, to speak in this sort of way,
miss Portman; but, as I'm an old acquaintance,
and an old friend, and an old
woman, you'll excuse me. I can't help
saying, I feel quite rejoiced at your meeting
with such a match—every way eligible,
and every way agreeable.—A charming
young man, I hear, lady Delacour: I see,
I must only speak to you, or I shall make

miss Portman sink to the centre of the
Earth, which I would not wish to do, especially
at such a critical moment as this.
A charming young man! I hear, with a
noble West Indian fortune, and a noble
spirit, and well connected, and passionately
in love—no wonder—But I have
done now, I promise you; I'll ask no questions—so,
don't run away, miss Portman; 
I'll ask no questions, I promise you.”
To ensure the performance of this promise,
lady Delacour asked, “What news
there was in the World?” This question,
she knew, would keep the dowager in delightful
employment. “I live quite out
of the world here; but since lady Boucher
has the charity to come to see me, we shall
hear all the ‘secrets worth knowing,’ from
the best authority.”
“Then, the first piece of news, I have
for you, is, that my lord and my lady Delacour
are absolutely reconciled; and that
they are the happiest couple that ever
lived.”
“All very true,” replied lady Delacour.

“True!” repeated lady Boucher, “Why,
my dear lady Delacour, you amaze me!
—Are you in earnest?—Was there ever
any thing so provoking?—There have I
been contradicting the report, wherever I
went, for I was convinced, that the whole
story was a mistake, and a fabrication.”
“The history of the reformation might
not be exact, but the reformation itself
your ladyship may depend upon, since
you hear it from my own lips.”
“Well, how amazing!—How incredible!
—Lord bless me—but your ladyship
certainly is not in earnest? for you look
just the same, and speak just in the same
sort of way: I see no alteration, I confess.”
“And what alteration, my good lady
Boucher, did you expect to see? Did
you think, that, by way of being exemplarily
virtuous, I should, like lady Q&wblank;,
let my sentences come out of my mouth
only at the rate of a word a minute?” 
“Like—minute—drops—from—off—the—eaves.”

“Or did you expect, that, in hopes of
being a pattern for the rising generation,
I should hold my features in
penance, immoveably, thus—like some
of the poor ladies of Antigua, who, after
they have blistered their faces all over, to
get a fine complexion, are forced, whilst
the new skin is coming, to sit, without
speaking, smiling, or moving muscle or
feature, lest an indelible wrinkle should
be the consequence.”
Lady Boucher' was impatient to have
this speech finished, for she had a piece of
news to tell. “Well!” cried she, “there's no
knowing what to believe, or disbelieve, one
hears so many strange reports; but I have
a piece of news for you, that you may all
depend upon. I have one secret worth
knowing, I can tell your ladyship—and
one, your ladyship and miss Portman, I'm
sure, will be rejoiced to hear. Your friend,
Clarence Hervey, is going to be married.”
“Married!—married!” cried lady Delacour.
“Ay, ay, your ladyship may look

as much astonished as you please, you
cannot be more so than I was, when I
heard it. Clarence Hervey! miss Portman,
that was looked upon so completely,
you know, as not a marrying man; and
now the last man upon earth, that your
ladyship would suspect of marrying in this
sort of way!”
“In what sort of way?—My dear Belinda,
how can you stand this fire?” said
lady Delacour, placing a skreen dexterously,
to hide her face from the dowager's observation.
“I do not want—I do not wish for a
skreen, I thank you,” said Belinda, putting
it aside, with gentle composure.
“Now only guess, who he is going to
marry?” continued lady Boucher—“Who,
do you guess, miss Portman?”
“An amiable woman, I should guess,
from Mr. Hervey's general character,” said
Belinda.
“O an amiable woman, I take for
granted; every woman is amiable of course,
as the newspapers tell us, when she is

going to be married,” said the dowager:— 
“an amiable woman, to be sure; but
that means nothing. Guess again. And
not from general character, my dear
Belinda; for there is no judging, in
these cases, from general character, of
what people will like or dislike.”
“Then I will leave it to your ladyship
to guess, this time, if you please,” said
Belinda.
“You will neither of you guess, till
doomsday!” cried the dowager; “I must
tell you Mr. Hervey's going to marry— 
in the strangest sort of way!—a girl that
nobody knows—a daughter of a Mr.
Hartley.—The father can give her a good
fortune, it is true; but one should not have
supposed, that fortune was an object with
Mr. Hervey, who has such a noble one
of his own. It's really difficult to believe
it.”
“So difficult, that I find it quite impossible,” 
said lady Delacour, with an incredulous smile.
“Depend upon it, my dear lady Delacour,”

said the dowager, laying the
convincing weight of her arm upon her
ladyship's—“depend upon it, my dear
lady Delacour, that my information is
correct. Guess whom I had it from.”
“Willingly. But first let me tell you,
that I have seen Mr. Hervey within this
half hour, and I never saw a man look less
like a bridegroom.”
“Indeed! well, I've heard too, that he
didn't like the match: but what a pity,
when you saw him yourself this morning,
that you didn't get all the particulars out
of him. But let him look like what he
will, you'll find, that my information is
perfectly correct.—Guess whom I had it
from. From Mrs. Margaret Delacour: it
was at her house, that Clarence Hervey
first met Mr. Hartley, who, as I mentioned,
is the father of the young lady. There
was a charming scene, and some romantic
story, about his finding the girl in a cottage,
and calling her Virginia something
or other, but I didn't clearly understand
about that. However, this much is certain,

that the girl, as her father told Mrs.
Delacour, is desperately in love with Mr.
Hervey, and they are to be married immediately.
Depend upon it, you'll find
my information correct. Good morning
to you.—Lord bless me! now I recollect,
I once heard, that Mr. Hervey was a great
admirer of miss Portman,” said the dowager.
“Your ladyship's information upon
that point, I can assure you, from the
best authority, was not correct;” said
Belinda.
“You have not the presumption, to call
your own the best authority, I hope,” 
said lady Delacour.
The inquisitive dowager, whose curiosity
was put upon a new scent, immediately
fastened her eyes upon Belinda's
face; but from that she could make out
nothing.—Was it because she had not the
best eyes, or because there was nothing
to be seen? To determine this question,
she looked through her glass, to take a
clearer view; but lady Delacour drew off

her attention, by suddenly exclaiming— 
“My dear lady Boucher, when you go
back to town, do send me a bottle of
concentrated anima of quassia.”
“Ah! ha! have I made a convert of
you at last?” said the dowager, and,
satisfied with the glory of this conversion,
she departed.
“Admire my knowledge of human
nature, my dear Belinda,” said lady Delacour.
“Now she will talk, at the next
place she goes to, of nothing, but of my faith
in anima of quassia; and she will forget
to make a gossiping story out of that most
imprudent hint, I foolishly gave her, about
Clarence Hervey's having been an admirer
of yours.
“Do not leave the room, Belinda, I
have a thousand things to say to you, my
dear.”
“Excuse me, at present, my dear lady
Delacour, I am impatient to write a few
lines to Mr. Vincent. He went away—”
“In a fit of jealousy, and I am glad of it.”
“And I am sorry for it,” said Belinda—“sorry

that he should have so
little confidence in me, as to feel jealousy
without cause—without sufficient cause,
I should say; for certainly, your ladyship
gave pain, by the manner in which you
received Mr. Hervey.”
“Lord, my dear, you would spoil any
man upon Earth. You could not act more
foolishly, if the man were your husband.
—Are you privately married to him?— 
If you be not,—for my sake—for your own
—for Mr. Vincent's,—do not write till we
see the contents of Clarence Hervey's
packet.”
“It can make no alteration in what I
write,” said Belinda.
“Well, my dear, write what you please; 
but I only hope, you will not send your
letter, till the packet arrives.”
“Pardon me; I shall send it as soon as
I possibly can:—the ‘dear delight of
giving pain’ does not suit my taste.”
Lady Delacour, as soon as she was left
alone, began to reconsider the dowager's
story: notwithstanding her unbelieving

smile, it alarmed her, for she could not
refuse to give it some degree of credit,
when she learnt that Mrs. Margaret Delacour
was the authority from whom it
came. Mrs. Delacour was a woman of
scrupulous veracity, and rigid in her dislike
to gossiping; so that it was scarcely
probable, a report originating with her,
however it might be altered by the way,
should prove to be totally void of foundation.
The name of Virginia coincided
with sir Philip Baddely's hints, and with
Marriott's discoveries: these circumstances
considered, lady Delacour knew not what
opinion to form; and her eagerness to receive
Mr. Hervey's packet every moment
increased. She walked up and down the
room—looked at her watch—fancied that
it had stopped—held it to her ear—rang
the bell every quarter of an hour, to inquire
whether the messenger was not yet
come back. At last, the long expected
packet arrived.—She seized it, and
hurried with it immediately to Belinda's
room.

“Clarence Hervey's packet, my love
—Now, woe be to the person who interrupts
us!” She bolted the door as she
spoke—rolled an arm chair to the fire— 
“Now for it!” said she, seating herself.
—“The devil upon two sticks, if he were
looking down upon me from the housetop,
or Champfort, who is the worse devil
of the two, would, if he were peeping
through the key hole, swear I was going
to open a love letter—and so I hope I am.
Now for it!” cried she, breaking the
seal.
“My dear friend,” said Belinda, laying
her hand upon lady Delacour's, “before
we open this packet, let me speak to you,
whilst our minds are calm.”
“Calm! It is the strangest time for your
mind to be calm.—But I must not affront
you by my incredulity. Speak, then,
but be quick, for I do not pretend to be
calm; it not being, thank my stars—‘mon
métier d'être philosophe.’—Crack goes the
last seal—Speak now, or forever after hold
your tongue, my calm philosopher of

Oakly-park; but do you wish me to attend
to what you are going to say?”
“Yes,” replied Belinda, smiling, “that
is the usual wish of those who speak.”
“Very true; and I can listen tolerably well,
when I don't know what people are going to
say; but when I know it all before hand,
I have an unfortunate habit of not being
able to attend to one word. Now, my
dear, let me anticipate your speech, and,
if my anticipation be wrong, then you
shall rise to explain; and I will,” said she,
(putting her finger on her lips) “listen
to you, like Harpocrates, without moving
an eye-lash.”
Belinda, as the most certain way of
being heard, consented to hear, before she
spoke.
“I will tell you,” pursued lady Delacour,
“if not what your are going to say
to me, at least what you say to yourself,
which is fully as much to the purpose.
You say to yourself, ‘Let this packet of
Clarence Hervey contain what it may,
it comes too late. Let him say, or let

him do, 'tis all the same to me,—because
—(now for the reasoning)—because things
have gone so far with Mr. Vincent, that
lady Anne Percival, and all the world,
(at Oakly-park) will blame me, if I retract.
Then I have actually written to
my aunt Stanhope; and preparations are
absolutely making for my wedding. In
short, things have gone so far, that
I cannot recede; because—things have
gone so far.’—This is the rondeau of your
argument. Nay, hear me out, then you
shall have your turn, my dear, for an
hour, if you please. Let things have gone
ever so far, they can stop, and turn about
again, cannot they? Lady Anne Percival
is your friend, of course can wish only for
your happiness. You think she is ‘the
thing that's most uncommon, a reasonable
woman:’ then she cannot be angry with
you for being happy your own way. So I
need not, as the orators say, labour this
point any more. Now, as to your aunt,
your writing to her so precipitately was
certainly wrong; that is, contrary to my

advice. But the fear of displeasing Mrs.
Stanhope a little more or less, is not to
be put in competition with the hope of
your happiness for life, especially as you
have contrived to exist some months in a
state of utter excommunication from her
favour. After all, you know Mrs. Stanhope
will not grieve for any thing but the
loss of Mr. Vincent's fortune; and Mr. Hervey's
fortune might do as well, or almost
as well: at least, she may compound with
her pride for the difference, by considering,
that an english member of parliament is,
in the eyes of the world (the only eyes
with which she sees) a better connexion,
than the son of a West India planter,
even though he may be a protégé of lady
Anne Percival.
“Spare me your indignation, my dear!
—What a look was there!—Reasoning
for Mrs. Stanhope, must not I reason as
Mrs. Stanhope does?—Now, as to these
preparations for the wedding, you are not
a girl, to marry beause your wedding
gown is made up. Some few guineas are

thrown away, perhaps; do not throw away
your whole happiness after them; that
would be sorry economy. Trust to me,
my dear, as I have to you, in time of
need. Or, if you fear to be obliged to
one, who never was afraid of being obliged
to you, ten to one the preparations for a
wedding, though not the wedding, may
be necessary immediately.—No matter to
Mrs. Franks who the bridegroom may be; 
so that her bill be paid, she will not care
the turning of a feather, whether it be paid
by Mrs. Vincent or Mrs. Hervey. I
hope I have convinced, I am sure I have
made you blush, my dear, and that is
some satisfaction. A blush at this moment
is an earnest of victory. I o,
triumphe! Now I will open my packet; 
my hand shall not be held an instant
longer.”
“I absolve you from the penance of
hearing me for an hour, but I claim your
promise to attend to me for a few minutes,
my dear friend,”. said Belinda: “I thank
you most sincerely for your kindness; I

should not hesitate to accept from you
any species of obligation.”
“Thanks! thanks!—there's a dear
good girl!—my own Belinda!”
“But indeed you totally misunderstand
me; your reasoning—”
“Show me the fault of it; I challenge
all the logic of all the Percivals.”
“Your reasoning is excellent, if your
facts were not taken for granted.—You
have taken it for granted, that Mr. Hervey
is in love with me.”
“No,” said lady Delacour; “I take
nothing for granted, as you will find, when
I open this packet.”
“You have taken it for granted,” continued
Belinda, “that I am still secretly
attached to him—I assure you that I am
not.”
“That I can tell, without opening the
packet,” said lady Delacour.
“And you take it for granted,” said
Belinda, “that I am restrained only by
fear of lady Anne Percival, my aunt, and
the world, from breaking off with Mr.

Vincent? If you will read this letter, which
I was writing to him when you came into
the room, perhaps you will be convinced
of your mistake.”
“Then you do really and bona fide, as
my old uncle, the lawyer, used to say— 
really, and bona fide, love Mr. Vincent?”
“Can you imagine, that I would consent
to marry a man without loving
him?” said Belinda, indignantly.
“No; but you might love him positively
—not comparatively—or superlatively.
—In short, my dear, you might not
know your own mind—Mr. Hervey's return
might make a difference. I really
am so much afraid of offending you, that
I can hardly find words—but, in fact, you
certainly did once like my poor Clarence,
and in spite of all Mr. Percival's cure for
first loves, I am inclined—”
“You are inclined,” said Belinda, “to
consider love as a distemper that can be
had but once.”
“You could not be witty, my dear, if
you felt the passion. Believe me, Belinda,

you are deceiving yourself; you are not in
love with Mr. Vincent; if you marry him,
you will repent it; you will be miserable.”
“I do not pretend to be what is called
in love with Mr. Vincent; nor do I think
it necessary to my happiness, or to his,
that I should.—But I esteem, I love
him—”
“Ay, ay,” said lady Delacour, “as
half the world do when they marry.”
“As it would be happy for half the
world if they did,” replied Belinda, mildly,
but with a firmness of tone that her
ladyship felt—“I should despise myself,
and deserve no pity from any human being,
if, after all I have seen, I could think of
marrying from motives of convenience or
interest.”
“O, pardon me! I meant not to insinuate
such an idea; I meant but to hint,
my dearest Belinda, that a heart, such as
yours, is formed for love, in it's highest,
purest, happiest state—”

“Such as can be secured only by a
union with a man of sense and virtue; 
such as may be not merely the amusement
of a few months, but the charm of years,” 
said Belinda; “such as I hope to enjoy
with Mr. Vincent, without being in love
with him. Mr. Vincent has behaved
toward me with honour and sincerity; he
has given me proofs of the steadiness of his
affection, and of his confidence in my integrity.
I have had full leisure to consult
my judgment and my feelings. The former
is in his favour, the latter are not
against him.”
“Not against him!—Hum! May I ask,
would you, if you discovered that Mr.
Vincent kept a Virginia, discard him for
ever from your thoughts?”
“If I discovered that he had deceived,
and behaved dishonourably to any woman,
I certainly should banish him from my regard.”
“With as much ease as you did Clarence
Hervey?”

“With more, perhaps.”
“Then you acknowledge—that's all I
want—that you liked Clarence better than
ever you did Vincent?”
“I do—but that time is intirely past,
and I never look back to it.”
“But if you were forced to look back
to it, my dear, if Clarence Hervey proposed
for you, would not you cast a lingering
look behind? Would this make no
change?”
“None.”
“You would refuse him?”
“Without hesitation.”
“Then I will go and read my packet
in my own room,” cried lady Delacour,
rising hastily, with evident displeasure.
“Not even your displeasure, my dear
friend,” said Belinda, “can alter my determination; 
and I can bear your anger,
for I know it arises from your regard for
me.”
“I never loved you so little as at this
instant, Belinda.”

“You will do me justice when you are
cool!”
“Cool!” repeated lady Delacour, as
she left the room, “I never wish to be as
cool as you are, Belinda!”