

The evening after the departure of the
happy trio, who were gone to Dublin to
buy wedding dresses, the party remaining
at Castle Corny consisted only of king
Corny, Ormond, and father Jos. When
the candles were lighted, his majesty
gave a long and loud yawn, Harry set
the back gammon table for him, and
father Jos, as usual, settled himself in the
chimney corner; “and now mademoiselle's
gone,” said he, “I shall take leave
to indulge myself in my pipe.”
“You were on the continent this
morning, father Jos,” said Cornelius,
“Did ye learn any news for us? Size
ace! that secures two points.”

“News! I did,” said father Jos.
“Why not tell it us then?”
“I was not asked. You both seemed
so wrapped up, I waited my time and
opportunity. There's a new parson come
to Castle Hermitage.”
“What new person?” said King
Corny. “Doublets, aces, Harry.”
“A new parson I'm talking of,” said
father Jos, “that has just got the living
there; and they say Sir Ulick's mad
about it, in Dublin, where he is still.”
“Mad!—Three men up—and you
can't enter, Harry. Well, what is he
mad about?”
“Because of the presentation to the
living,” replied the priest, “which government
wouldn't make him a compliment
of, as he expected.”
“He is always expecting compliments
from government,” said Corny, “and
always getting disappointments—Such
throws as you have, Harry—Sixes! again— 
Well, what luck!—all over with me—

It is only a hit at any rate! But what
kind of man,” continued he, “is this
new clergyman?”
“Oh! them parsons is all one kind,” 
said father Jos.
“All one kind! No, no more than our
own priests,” said Corny. “There's
good and bad, and all the difference in
life.”
“I don't know any thing at all about
it,” said father Jos, sullenly; “but this
I know, that no doubt he'll soon be over
here, or his proctor, looking for the
tithes.”
“I hope we will have no quarrels,” 
said Corny.
“They ought to be abolished,” said
father Jos, “the tithes, that is, I mean.”
“And the quarrels too, I hope,” said
Ormond.
“Oh! It's not our fault if there's
quarrels,” said father Jos.
“Faults on both sides generally in all
quarrels,” said Corny.

“In lay quarrels like enough,” said
father Jos. “In church quarrels it don't
become a good Catholic to say that.”
“What?” said Corny.
“That,” said the priest.
“Which,” said Corny.
“That which you said, that there's
faults on both sides; sure there's but
one side, and that's our own side, can be
in the right—there can't be two right
sides, can there? and consequently there
won't be two wrong sides, will there?— 
Ergo, there cannot, by a parity of rasoning,
be two sides in the wrong.”
“Well, Harry, I'll take the black
men now, and gammon you,” said Corny.
“Play away, man—what are you thinking
of—is it of what father Jos said—'tis
beyond the limits of the human understanding.”
Father Jos puffed away at his pipe for
some time.
“I was tired and ashamed of all the
wrangling for two-pence with the last
man,” said king Corny, “and I believe

I was sometimes too hard and too hot
myself; but if this man's a gentleman, I
think we shall agree,” said Cornelius.
“Did you hear his name, or any thing
at all about him, father?”
“He is one of them refugee families,
the Huguenots, banished France by the
adict of Nantz—they say—and his name's
Cambray.”
“Cambray!” exclaimed Ormond.
“A very good name,” said O'Shane; 
“but what do you know of it, Harry?”
“Only, Sir, I happened to meet with
a Dr. Cambray the winter I was in
Dublin, whom I thought a very agreeable,
respectable, amiable man—and I wonder
whether this is the same person.”
“There is something more now, Harry
Ormond, I know by your face,” said
Corny: “there's some story, of or being
to Dr. Cambray—what is it?”
“No story, only a slight circumstance— 
which, if you please, I'd rather not
tell you, Sir,” said Ormond.
“That is something very extraordinary,

and looks mysterious,” said father
Jos.
“Nothing mysterious, I assure you,” 
said Ormond—“a mere trifle, which, if
it concerned only myself, I would tell
directly.”
“Let him alone, father,” said king
Corny, “I am sure he has a good reason— 
and I'm not curious—only let me
whisper this in your ear to shew you my
own penetration, Harry—I'd lay my life” 
(said he, stretching over and whispering)— 
“I'd lay my life Miss Annaly has
something to do with it.”
“Miss Annaly!—nothing in the world— 
only—yes, I recollect she was present.”
“There now—would not any body
think I'm a conjurer—a physiognomist is
cousin (and not twice removed) from a
conjurer.”
“But I assure you, though you happened
to guess right partly as to her being
present, you are totally mistaken, Sir, as
to the rest.”

“My dear Harry, totally means wholly— 
if I'm right in a part, I can't be mistaken
in the whole—I am glad to make
you smile any way—and I wish I was
right altogether, and that you was as rich
as Crœsus into the bargain; but stay a
bit—if you come home a hero from the
wars—that may do—ladies are mighty
fond of heroes.”
It was in vain that Ormond assured
his good old imaginative friend that he
was upon a wrong scent. Cornelius
stopped to humour him: but was convinced
that he was right; then turned
to the still smoking father Jos, and went
on asking questions about Dr. Cambray.
“I know nothing at all about him,” 
said father Jos, “but this, that father
M‘Cormuck has dined with him, if I'm
not misinformed, oftener than I think
becoming in these times—making too
free! And in the chapel last Sunday, I
hear he made a very extraordinary address
to his flock—there was one took

down the words and handed them to me— 
after remarking on the great distress
of the season—first and foremost about
the keeping of fast days the year—he
allowed the poor of his flock, which is
almost all, to eat meat whenever offered
to them, because, said he, many would
starve—now mark the obnoxious words— 
‘if it was not for their benevolent Protestant
neighbours, who make soup and
broth for them.’”
“What is there obnoxious in that?” 
said Cornelius.
“Wait till you hear the end—‘and
feed and clothe the distressed.’”
“That is not obnoxious either, I hope,” 
said Ormond, laughing.
“Young gentleman, you belong to the
establishment, and no judge in this case,
permit me to remark,” said father Jos,
“and I could wish Mr. O'Shane would
hear to the end, before he joins in a Protestant
laugh.”
“I've heard of ‘a protestant wind’

before,” said Harry—“but not of a protestant
laugh.”
“Well, I'm serious, father Jos,” said
Corny, “let me hear to the end what
makes your face so long.”
‘And, I am sorry to say, shew more
charity to them than their own people,
the rich catholics, sometimes do.’
“If that is not downright slander, I
don't know what is,” said father Jos.
“Are you sure it is not truth, father?” 
said Corny.
“And if it was, even, so much the
worse, to be telling it in the chapel and
to his flock—very improper in a priest— 
very extraordinary conduct!”
Father Jos worked himself up to a high
pitch of indignation, and railed and
smoked for some time, while O'Shane
and Ormond joined in defending M'Cormuck,
and his address to his flock— 
and even his dining with the new clergyman
of the parish. Father Jos gave up,
and had his punch.—The result of the

whole was, that Ormond proposed to pay
his respects the next morning to Dr. Cambray.
“Very proper,” said O'Shane—“do
so—fit you should—you are of his people,
and you are acquainted with the gentleman— 
and I'd have you go and shew
yourself safe to him, that we've made no
tampering with you.”
Father Jos could not say so much,
therefore he said nothing.
“A very exact church goer at the little
church there you've always been, at the
other side of the lake—I never hindered— 
make what compliment you will proper
for me—say I'm too old and clumsy for
morning visitings, and never go out of my
islands. But still I can love my neighbour
in or out of them, and hope, in the
name of peace, to be on good terms.
Sha'n't be my fault if them tithes come
across. Then I wish that bone of contention
was from between the two churches.
Mean time, I'm not snarling, if others is

not craving; and I'd wish for the look of
it, for your sake, Harry, that it should
be all smooth; so say any thing you will
for me to this Dr. Cambray,—though we
are of a different faith, I should do any
thing in reason.”
“Reason! what's that about reason?” 
said father Jos, “I hope faith comes before
reason.”
“And after it, too, I hope, father,” 
said Corny.
Father Jos finished his punch, and
went to sleep upon it.
Ormond next morning paid his visit— 
Dr. Cambray was not at home; but Harry
was charmed with the neatness of his
house, and with the amiable and happy
appearance of his family. He had never
before seen Mrs. Cambray or her daughters,
though he had met the doctor in Dublin.
The circumstance which Harry had
declined mentioning, when Corny questioned
him about his acquaintance with
Dr. Cambray, was very slight, though

father Jos had imagined it to be of mysterious
importance. It had happened,
that among the dissipated set of young
men with whom Marcus O'Shane and
Harry had passed that winter in Dublin,
a party had one Sunday gone to hear the
singing at the Asylum, and had behaved
in a very unbecoming manner during the
service—and during the sermon. Dr.
Cambray preached—He spoke to the
young gentlemen afterwards with mild
but becoming dignity. Harry Ormond
instantly, sensible of his error, made proper
apologies, and erred no further. But
Marcus O'Shane in particular, who was
wilful, and not accustomed to endure any
thing, much less any person, that crossed
his humour, spoke of Dr. Cambray afterwards
with vindictive bitterness, and
with all his talents of mimickry endeavoured
to make him ridiculous. Harry
defended him with a warmth of ingenuous
eloquence, which did him much honour; 
and with truth, courage, and candour,

that did him still more, corrected some of
Marcus's misstatements, declaring that
they had all been much to blame. Lady
Annaly and her daughter were present,
and this was one of the circumstances to
which her ladyship had alluded, when she
said that some things had occurred, that
had prepossessed her with a favourable
opinion of Ormond's character. Dr.
Cambray knew nothing of the attack or
the defence till some time afterwards; 
and it was now so long ago, and Harry
was so much altered since that time, that
it was scarcely to be expected the doctor
should recollect even his person. However,
when Dr. Cambray came to the
Black Islands to return his visit, he did
immediately recognize Ormond, and
seemed so much pleased with meeting
him again, and so much interested about
him, that Corny's warm heart was immediately
won. Independently of this, the
doctor's persuasive benevolent politeness
could not have failed to operate, as it

usually did, even on a first acquaintance,
in pleasing and conciliating even those
who were of opposite opinions.
“There, now,” said Corny, when the
doctor was gone—“There, now, is a
sincere minister of the Gospel for you,
and a polite gentleman into the bargain.
Now that's politeness, that does not trouble
me—that's not for show—that's for
us, not himself, mark!—and conversation!
Why that man has conversation for the
prince and the peasant—the courtier and
the anchorite. Did not he find plenty
for me, and got more out of me than I
thought was in me—and the same if I'd
been a monk of La Trappe, he would
have made me talk like a pie. Now
there's a man of the high world that the
low world can like, very different from—”
Poor Corny paused, checked himself,
and then resumed—
“Principles, religion, and all no hindrance!— 
liberal and sincere too! Well!
I only wish—father Jos, no offence— 
I only wish for Dr. Cambray's sake,

and the Catholic church's sake, I was,
for one day, Archbishop of Canterbury,
or Primate of all Ireland, or whatever
else makes the bishops in your
church, and I'd skip over dean and archdeacon,
and all, and make that man
clean a bishop before night.”
Harry smiled, and wished he had the
power as well as the good will.
Father Jos said, “a man ought to be
ashamed not to think of his own first.”
“Now, Harry, don't think I'd make a
bishop lightly,” continued king Corny,— 
“I would not—I've been a king too long
for that; and though only a king of my
own fashion, I know what's fit for governing
a country, observe me!—Cousin
Ulick would make a job of a bishop, but
I would not—nor I would'nt to please
my fancy. Now don't think I'd make
that man a bishop just because he noticed
and praised my gimcracs, and inventions,
and substitutes.”
Father Jos smiled, and demurely abased
his eye.

“Oh! then you don't know me as well
as you think you do, father,” said O'Shane.
—“Nor what's more, Harry,—not his
noting down the two regiments to make
inquiry for friends for you, Harry,
shouldn't have bribed me to partiality— 
though I could have kissed his shoe-ties
for it.”
“Mercy on you!” said father Jos— 
“This doctor has bewitched you.”
“But did you mind, then,” persisted
Corny, “the way he spoke of that cousin
of mine, Sir Ulick, who he saw I did
not like, and who has been, as you tell us,
bitter against him, and even against his
getting the living. Well, the way this
Doctor Cambray spoke then, pleased
me—good morals without preaching— 
there's do good to your enemies—The true
Christian doctrine—and the hardest point.
Oh! let father Jos say what he will,
there's the man will be in Heaven before
many—heretic or no heretic, Harry!”
Father Jos shrugged up his shoulders

and then fixing the glass in his spectacles,
replied—
“We shall see better when we come
to the tithes.”
“That's true,” said Corny.
He walked off to his workshop, and
took down his fowling piece to put the
finishing stroke to his work for the next
day, which was to be the first day of partridge
shooting—he looked forward with
delight—anticipating the innocent gratification
he should have in going out shooting
with Harry, and trying his new fowling
piece.—“But I won't go out to-morrow
till the post has come in, for my
mind couldn't enjoy the sport till I was
satisfied whether the answer could come
about your commission, Harry;—my
mind misgives me—that is, my calculation
tells me, that it will come to-morrow.”
Good Corny's presentiments or calculations
were just—the next morning the
little post boy brought answers to various

letters which he had written about Ormond— 
one to Ormond from Sir Ulick
O'Shane, repeating his approbation of
his ward's going into the army; approving
of all the steps Cornelius had taken,
especially of his intention of paying for
the commission.
“All well,” Cornelius said—The next
letter was from Cornelius's banker, saying,
that the five hundred pound was
lodged, ready.—“All well.”—The army
agent wrote, “that he had commissions in
two different regiments, waiting Mr.
O'Shane's choice and orders per return
of post, to purchase in conformity.”— 
“That's all well.” General Albemarle's
answer to Mr. O'Shane's letter was most
satisfactory—in terms that were not
merely officially polite, but kind; “he assured
Mr. O'Shane that he should, as far as
it was in his power, pay attention to
the young gentleman, whom Mr. O'Shane
had so strongly recommended to his care
and by whose appearance and manner the

general said he had been prepossessed,
when he saw him some months ago at
Corny Castle. There was a commission
vacant in his son's regiment, which he
recommended to Mr. Ormond.”
“The very thing I could have wished
for you, my dear boy;—you shall go off
the day after to-morrow—not a moment's
delay—I'll answer the letters this minute.”
But Harry reminded him, that the post
did not go out till the next day, and
urged him not to lose this fine day—this
first day of the season for partridge
shooting.
“Time enough for my business after
we come home—the post does not go
out till morning.”
“That's true—come off, then—let's
enjoy the fine day sent us, and my gun
too—I forgot;—for I do believe, Harry,
I love you better even than my gun,” 
said the warm-hearted Corny. “Call Moriarty!
let us have him with us, he'll enjoy

it beyond all—one of the last day's
shooting with his own prince Harry!— 
but, poor fellow, we'll not tell him that.”
Moriarty and the dogs were summoned,
and the fineness of the day, and the
promise of good sport, put Moriarty in
remarkably good spirits. By degrees
king Corny's own spirits rose, and he
forgot that it was the last day with prince
Harry, and he enjoyed the sport. After
various trials of his new fowling-piece,
both the king and the prince agreed, that
it succeeded to admiration. But even
in the midst of his pride in his success,
and his joy in the sport, his superior
fondness for Harry prevailed, and shewed
itself in little, almost delicate instances
of kindness, which could hardly have
been expected from his unpolished mind.
As they crossed a bog, he stooped every
now and then, and plucked different
kinds of bog-plants and heaths.
“Here, Harry,” said he, “mind these
for Dr. Cambray.—Remember yesterday

his mentioning a daughter of his was
making the botanical collection, and
there's Sheelah can tell you all the Irish
names and uses.—Some I can note for
you myself;—and here, this minute, by
great luck! the very thing he wanted!
the andromeda, I'll swear to it:—throw
away all and keep this—carry it to her
to-morrow—for I will have you make a
friend of that Dr. Cambray;—and no
way so sure or fair to the father's heart,
as by proper attention to the daughter— 
I know that by myself.—Hush, now! till
I have that partridge!—Whirr!—Shot
him clean—my dear gun!—Was not that
good, Harry?”
Thus they continued their sport till
late; and returning, loaded with game,
had nearly reached the palace, when
Corny, who had marked a covey, quitted
Harry, and sent his dog to spring it, at
a distance much greater than the usual
reach of a common fowling-piece. Harry
heard a shot, and a moment afterwards

a violent shout of despair;—he knew
the voice to be that of Moriarty, and
running to the spot from whence it came,
he found his friend, his benefactor, weltering
in his blood. The fowling-piece
overloaded, had burst, and a large splinter
of the barrel had fractured the skull,
and had sunk into the brain. As Moriarty
was trying to raise his head,
O'Shane uttered some words, of which
all that was intelligible was the name of
Harry Ormond. His eyes fixed on Harry,
but the meaning of the eye was gone.
He squeezed Harry's hand, and an instant
afterwards O'Shane's hand was
powerless. The dearest, the only real
friend Harry Ormond had upon earth,
was gone for ever!