

It was during the latter years of the
life of Lewis the fifteenth, and during
the reign of Madame du Barré, that
Ormond was at Paris. The court of
Versailles was at this time in all its
splendour, if not in all its glory.
At le souper du roi, Ormond beheld,
in all the magnificence of dress and
jewels, the nobility, wealth, fashion, and
beauty of France. Well might the brilliancy
dazzle the eyes of a youth fresh
from Ireland, when it amazed even old
embassadors, accustomed to the ordinary
grandeur of courts. When he recovered
from his first astonishment, when his
eyes were a little better used to the

light, and he looked round and considered
all these magnificently decorated
personages, assembled for the purpose of
standing at a certain distance to see
one man eat his supper, it did appear to
him an extraordinary spectacle: and the
very great solemnity and devotion of
the assistants, so unsuited to the French
countenance, inclined him to smile. It
was well for him, however, that he kept
his Irish risible muscles in order, and
that no courtier could guess his thoughts— 
a smile would have lost him his reputation.
Nothing in the world appeared
to Frenchmen formerly of more importance
than their court etiquette; 
though there were some who began
about this time to suspect, that the court
order of things might not be co-existent
with the order of nature—though there
were some philosophers and statesmen
began to be aware, that the daily routine
of the courtier's etiquette was not as necessary
as the motions of the sun, moon,

and planets. Nor could it have been
possible to convince half at least of the
crowd, who assisted at the king's supper
this night, that all the French national
eagerness about the health, the looks,
the words, of le Roi, all the attachment,
le dévouement, professed habitually—perhaps
felt habitually—for the reigning
monarch, whoever or whatever he might
be, by whatever name; notre bon roi,
or simply, notre roi de France; should
in a few years pass away, and be no more
seen.
Ormond had no concern with the
affairs of the nation, nor with the future
fate of any thing he beheld—he was only
a spectator, a foreigner—and his business
was, according to Mademoiselle's maxim,
to enjoy to-day, and to reflect to-morrow.
His enjoyment of this day was complete— 
he not only admired, but was admired.
In the vast grand crowd he was distinguished— 
some nobleman of note asked
who he was—another observed l'air

noble—another exclaimed “Le bel Anglois!” 
and his fortune was made at
Paris, especially as a friend of Madame
du Barré's asked where he bought his
embroidery— 
He went afterwards, at least in Connal's
society, by the name of “Le bel
Anglois.” Half in a tone of raillery, yet
with a look that shewed she felt it to be
just, Madame de Connal first adopted
the appellation, and then changed the
term to “mon bel Irlandois.” Invitations
upon invitations poured upon Ormond.
It was who should have him at
their parties—he was every where—attending
Madame de Connal—and she,
how proud to be attended by Ormond!
He dreaded lest his principles should not
withstand the strong temptation. He
could not leave her, but he determined
to see her only in crowds. Accordingly,
he avoided every select party,—I'amie
intime could never for the first three
weeks get him to one petit comité, though

Madame de Connal assured him that
her friend's petit soupers “were charming,
worth all the crowded assemblies in
Paris.”—Still he pursued his plan, and
sought for safety in a course of dissipation.
“I give you joy,” said Connal to him
one day, “you are fairly launched! you
are no distressed vessel to be taken in
tow, nor a petty bark to sail in any man's
wake. You have a gale, and are likely
to have a triumph of your own.”
Connal was, upon all occasions, careful
to impress upon Ormond's mind, that
he left him wholly to himself, for he was
aware that in former days he had
offended his independent spirit by airs
of protection. He managed better now— 
he never even invited him to play,
though it was his main object to draw
him to his faro table. He made use of
some of his friends or confederates, who
played for him; Connal occasionally
coming to the table as an unconcerned
spectator. Ormond played with so

much freedom, and seemed to be so genteelly
indifferent whether he lost or won,
that he was considered as an easy dupe.
Time only was necessary, Connal thought,
to lead him on gradually, and without
alarm, to let him warm to the passion
for play. Mean while Madame de Connal
felt as fully persuaded, that Ormond's
passion for her would increase. It was
her object to fix him at Paris—but she
should be content, perfectly happy with
his friendship, his society, his sentiments— 
Her own sentiment for him, as she
confessed to Madame de Clairville, was
absolutely invincible—but it should never
lead her beyond the bounds of virtue.
It was involuntary—it should never be
a crime.
Madame de Clairville, who understood
her business, and spoke with all the
fashionable cant of sensibility, asked how
it was possible, that an involuntary sentiment
could ever be a crime?
As certainly as the novice among a
band of sharpers is taught by the technical

language of the gang to conquer his
horror of crime—so certainly does the
cant of sentiment operate upon the female
novice, and vanquish her fear of
shame, and moral horror of vice.
The allusion is coarse,—so much the
better,—strength, not elegance, is necessary
on some occasions to make an impression.
The truth will strike the good sense
and good feelings of our countrywomen,
and unadorned, they will prefer it to
German or French sophistry. By such
sophistry, however, was Dora led on insensibly.
But Ormond did not yet advance in
learning the language of sentiment—he
was amusing himself in the world,—and
Dora imagined, that the dissipation in
which he lived prevented him from having
time to think of his passion—she
began to hate the dissipation.
Connal one day, when Dora was present,
observed that Ormond seemed to

be quite in his natural element in this
sea of pleasure.
“Who would have thought it?” said
Dora, “I thought Mr. Ormond's taste
was more for domestic happiness and
retirement.”
“Retirement at Paris!” said Ormond.
“Domestic happiness at Paris!” said
Connal.
Madame de Connal sighed—No, it
was Dora that sighed.
“Where do you go to-night?” said
her husband.
“No where—I shall stay at home.— 
And you?”—said she, looking up at
Harry Ormond.
“To Madame de la Tour's.”
“That's the affair of half an hour— 
only to appear—” 
“Afterwards to the opera,” said Ormond.
“And after the opera—can't you sup
here?” said Madame de Connal.
“With the utmost pleasure—but that

I am engaged to Madame de la Brie's
ball.”
“That's true,” cried Madame de Connal,
starting up, “I had forgot it—so
am I this fortnight—I may as well go to
the opera, too, and I can carry you to
Madame de la Tours—I owe her a five
minutes sitting—Though she is un peu
precieuse—And what can you find in
that little cold Madame de la Brie—do
you like ice?”
“He like to break de ice, I suppose,” 
said Mademoiselle—“Ma foi, you must
then take a hatchet there.”
“No occasion; I had rather slide
upon the ice than break it—My business
at Paris is merely, you know, to amuse
myself,” said he, looking at Connal,
“Glissez mortels n'appuyez pas.”
“But if de ice should melt of itself,” 
said Mademoiselle, “what would you
do den? What would become of him,
den, do you think, my dear niece?”
It was a case which he did not like to

consider—Dora blushed—No creature
was so blind as Mademoiselle, with all
her boasted quickness and penetration.
From this time forward no more was
heard of Madame de Connal's taste for
domestic life and retirement—she seemed
quite convinced, either by her husband,
or by Mr. Ormond, or both, that
no such thing was practicable at Paris.
She had always liked le grand monde— 
she liked it better now than ever, when
she found Ormond in every crowded
assembly, every place of public amusement— 
a continual round of breakfasts,
dinners, balls—court balls—bal masqué— 
bal de l'opera—plays—grand entertainments,
petits soupers—fêtes at Versailles— 
pleasure in every possible form
and variety of luxury and extravagance
succeeded day after day, and night after
night—and Ormond, le bel Irlandois,
once in fashion, was every where, and
every where admired, flattered by the
women, who wished to draw him in to

be their partners at play, still more flattered
by those who wished to engage
him as a lover—most of all flattered by
Dora.—He felt his danger.—Improved in
coquetry by Parisian practice and
power, Dora tried her utmost skill—she
played off with great dexterity her
various admirers to excite his jealousy— 
the Marquis de Beaulieu, the witty
marquis, and the Count de Belle-Chasse,
the irresistible count, were dangerous
rivals. She succeeded in exciting Ormond's
jealousy, but in his noble mind
there were strong opposing principles to
withstand his selfish gratification.—It
was surprising with what politeness to
each other, with how little love, all the
suitors carried on this game of gallantry,
and competition of vanity.
Till Ormond appeared, it had been the
general opinion, that before the end of the
winter or the spring, the count de Belle
Chasse would be triumphant. Why
Ormond did not enter the lists, when

there appeared to all the judges such a
chance of his winning the prize, seemed
incomprehensible to the spectators,
and still more to the rival candidates.
Some settled it with the exclamation
“Inoui!” Others pronounced that it was
English bizarrerie. Every thing seemed
to smooth the slippery path of temptation— 
the indifference of her husband— 
the imprudence of her aunt, and of Madame
de Clairville—the general customs
of French society—the peculiar profligacy
of the society into which he happened
to be thrown—the opinion which
he saw prevailed, that if he withdrew
from the competition a rival would immediately
profit by his forbearance, conspired
to weaken his resolution.
Many accidental circumstances concurred
to increase the danger.—At these
balls, to which he went originally to avoid
Dora in smaller parties, Madame de
Connal, though she constantly appeared,
seldom danced.—She did not dance well

enough to bear comparison with French
dancers; Ormond was in the same situation.
The dancing which was very well
in England would not do in Paris—no
late lessons could, by any art, bring them
to an equality with French nature.
“Ah, il ne danse pas!—He dances
like an Englishman.” At the first ball
this comforted the suitors, and most the
Count de Belle-Chasse; but this very
circumstance drew Ormond and Dora
closer together—she pretended head aches,
and languor, and lassitude, and, in short,
sat still.
But it was not to be expected, that the
Comte de Belle-Chasse could give up
dancing:—the Comte de Belle-Chasse
danced like le dieu de la danse, another
Vestris; he danced every night, and
Ormond sat and talked to Dora, for it
was his duty to attend Madame, when
the little abbé was out of the way.
The spring was now appearing, and
the spring is delightful in Paris, and the

promenades in the Champs Elysées, and
in the Bois de Boulogne, and the promenade
in Long-Champ commenced.—Riding
was just coming into high fashion with
the French ladies; and, instead of riding
in man's clothes, and like a man, it was
now the ambition de monter à cheval à 
l'Angloise—to ride on a sidesaddle and
in an English riding habit, was now the
ambition. Now Dora, though she could
not dance as well—could ride better than
any Frenchwoman, and she was ambitious
to shew herself and her horsemanship
in the Bois de Boulogne:—but she
had no horse that she liked. Le Comte
de Belle-Chasse offered to get one broke
for her at the king's riding-house—this
she refused:—but fortunately Ormond,
as was the custom with the English at
that time, had, after his arrival, some
English horses brought over to him at
Paris. Among these was the horse he
had once broke for Dora.
For this an English sidesaddle was

procured—she was properly equipped
and mounted.
And the two friends, le bel Irlandois,
as they persisted in calling Ormond; and
la belle Irlandoise, and their horses, and
their horsemanship, were the admiration
of the promenade.
The Comte de Belle-Chasse sent to
London for an English horse at any
price.—He was out of humour—and Ormond
in the finest humour imaginable.— 
Dora was grateful; her horse was a beautiful,
gentle-spirited creature:—it was
called Harry—it was frequently patted
and caressed, and told how much it was
valued and loved.
Ormond was now in great danger, because
he felt himself secure that he was
only a friend—l'ami de la maison.