

“A prudence undeceiving, undeceived,
That nor too little, nor too much believed;
That scorned unjust Suspicion's coward fear,
And without weakness knew to be sincere.”
Lord Lyttelton's Monody on his Wife.
Mrs. Stanhope, a well-bred woman, accomplished
in that branch of knowledge,
which is called the art of rising in the
world, had, with but a small fortune, contrived
to live in the highest company. She
prided herself upon having established
half a dozen nieces most happily; that is
to say, upon having married them to men
of fortunes far superiour to their own. One
niece still remained unmarried—Belinda
Portman, of whom she was determined

to get rid with all convenient expedition.
Belinda was handsome, graceful, sprightly,
and highly accomplished; her aunt
had endeavoured to teach her, that a young
lady's chief business is to please in society,
that all her charms and accomplishments
should be invariably subservient to one
grand object—the establishing herself in
the world.
“For this, hands, lips, and eyes were put to school,
And each instructed feature had it's rule.”
Mrs. Stanhope did not find Belinda such
a docile pupil as her other nieces, for she
had been educated chiefly in the country; 
she had early been inspired with a taste for
domestic pleasures; she was fond of reading,
and disposed to conduct herself with
prudence and integrity. Her character,
however, was yet to be developed by circumstances.
Mrs. Stanhope lived at Bath, where she
had opportunities of showing her niece
off, as she thought, to advantage; but as
her health began to decline, she could not

go out with her as much as she wished.
After manœuvering with more than her
usual art, she succeeded in fastening Belinda
upon the fashionable lady Delacour
for the season. Her ladyship was so
much pleased by miss Portman's accomplishments
and vivacity, as to invite her
to spend the winter with her in London.
Soon after her arrival in town, Belinda received
the following letter from her aunt
Stanhope.
Crescent, Bath.
“After searching every place I could
think of, Anne found your bracelet in your
dressing table, amongst a heap of odd things,
which you left behind you to be thrown
away—I have sent it to you by a young
gentleman, who came to Bath (unluckily)
the very day you left me—Mr. Clarence
Hervey—an acquaintance, and great admirer
of my lady Delacour's. He is really an
uncommonly pleasant young man, is highly
connected, and has a fine independent
fortune. Besides, he is a man of wit and

gallantry, quite a connoisseur in female
grace and beauty—just the man to bring
a new face into fashion—So my dear Belinda,
I make it a point—look well when
he is introduced to you, and remember,
what I have so often told you, that nobody
can look well without taking some pains
to please.
“I see—, or at least when I went
out more than my health will at present
permit—I used to see multitudes of silly
girls, seemingly all cut out upon the same
pattern, who frequented public places
day after day, and year after year, without
any idea further than that of diverting
themselves, or of obtaining transient admiration
—How I have pitied and despised
the giddy creatures, whilst I have observed
them playing off their unmeaning airs,
vying with one another in the most obvious,
and consequently the most ridiculous manner,
so as to expose themselves before the
very men they would attract; chattering,
tittering, and flirting; full of the present
moment, never reflecting upon the future;

quite satisfied if they got a partner at a
ball, without ever thinking of a partner
for life. I have often asked myself, what
is to become of such girls, when they
grow old or ugly, or when the public eye
grows tired of them? If they have large
fortunes, it is all very well; they can afford,
to divert themselves for a season or two
without doubt; they are sure to be sought
after and followed, not by mere danglers,
but by men of suitable views and pretensions
—But nothing to my mind can be
more miserable than the situation of a
poor girl, who, after spending not only
the interest, but the solid capital of her
small fortune in dress, and frivolous extravagance,
fails in her matrimonial expectations,
(as many do merely from not beginning
to speculate in time). She finds
herself at five or six and thirty a burden
to her friends, destitute of the means of
rendering herself independent (for the
girls I speak of never think of learning to
play cards), de trop in society, yet obliged
to hang upon all her acquaintance,

who wish her in Heaven, because she
is unqualified to make the expected return
for civilities, having no home, I mean
no establishment, no house, &c. fit for the
reception of company of a certain rank.— 
My dearest Belinda, may this never be your
case!—You have every possible advantage,
my love: no pains have been spared
in your education, and (which is the essential
point) I have taken care that this
should be known—So that you have the
name of being perfectly accomplished— 
You will also have the name of being very
fashionable, if you go much into public,
as doubtless you will with lady Delacour.
—Your own good sense must make you
aware, my dear, that from her ladyship's
situation and knowledge of the world, it
will always be proper, upon all subjects of
conversation, for her to lead and you to
follow—It would be very unfit for a young
girl like you, to suffer yourself to stand in
competition with lady Delacour, whose
high pretensions to wit and beauty are
indisputable. I need say no more to you
upon this subject, my dear. Even with

your limited appearance, you must have
observed how foolish young people offend
those who are the most necessary to their
interests, by an imprudent indulgence of
their vanity.
“Lady Delacour has an incomparable
taste in dress—Consult her, my dear, and
do not, by an ill-judged economy, counteract
my views—Apropos—I have no
objection to your being presented at court.
You will, of course, have credit with all
her ladyship's trades-people, if you manage
properly. To know how and when to lay
out money, is highly commendable, for in
some situations, people judge of what one
can afford by what one actually spends.— 
I know of no law, which compels a young
lady, to tell what her age or her fortune
may be—You have no occasion for caution
yet on one of these points.
“I have covered my old carpet with a
handsome green baize, and every stranger,
who comes to see me, I observe, takes it
for granted, that I have a rich carpet
under it. Say every thing, that is proper,

in your best manner for me to lady Delacour.—
Adieu, my dear Belinda,
Yours very sincerely,
Selina Stanhope.”
It is sometimes fortunate, that the means,
which are taken to produce certain effects
upon the mind, have a tendency directly
opposite to what is expected. Mrs. Stanhope's
perpetual anxiety about her niece's
appearance, manners, and establishment
had completely worn out Belinda's patience; 
she had become more insensible to
the praises of her personal charms and accomplishments,
than young women of her
age usually are, because she had been so
much flattered and shown off, as it is called,
by her match-making aunt.—Yet Belinda
was fond of amusement, and had
imbibed some of Mrs. Stanhope's prejudices
in favour of rank and fashion. Her
taste for literature declined in proportion

to her intercourse with the fashionable
world, as she did not in this society perceive
the least use in the knowledge that
she had acquired. Her mind had never
been roused to much reflection; she had
in general acted but as a puppet in the
hands of others. To her aunt Stanhope she
had hitherto paid unlimited, habitual, blind
obedience; but she was more undesigning,
and more free from affectation and
coquetry, than could have been expected,
after the course of documenting,
which she had gone through. She was
charmed with the idea of her visit to lady
Delacour, whom she thought the most
agreeable—no, that is too feeble an expression— 
the most fascinating person she
had ever beheld. Such was the light in
which her ladyship appeared, not only to
Belinda, but to all the world—that is to
say, all the world of fashion, and she knew
of no other.—The newspapers were full
of lady Delacour's parties, and lady Delacour's
dresses, and lady Delacour's bon
mots: every thing, that her ladyship said,

was repeated as witty; every thing, that
her ladyship wore, was imitated as fashionable.
Female wit sometimes depends on
the beauty of it's possessor, for it's reputation; 
and the reign of beauty is proverbially
short. Fashion often capriciously
deserts her favourites, even before nature
withers their charms. Lady Delacour
seemed to be a fortunate exception to
these general rules: long after she had
lost the bloom of youth, she continued to
be admired as a fashionable bel esprit; and
long after she had ceased to be a novelty
in society, her company was courted by
all the gay, the witty, and the gallant.
To be seen in public with lady Delacour,
to be a visitor at her house, were privileges,
of which numbers were vehemently
ambitious; and Belinda Portman
was congratulated and envied by all her
acquaintance, for being admitted as an
inmate. How could she avoid thinking
herself singularly fortunate?
A short time after her arrival at lady
Delacour's, Belinda began to see through
the thin veil, with which politeness covers

domestic misery.—Abroad, and at home,
lady Delacour was two different persons.
Abroad she appeared all life, spirit, and
good humour—at home, listless, fretful,
and melancholy; she seemed like a spoiled
actress off the stage, over stimulated
by applause, and exhausted by the exertions
of supporting a fictitious character.
—When her house was filled with well-dressed
crowds, when it blazed with
lights, and resounded with music and
dancing, lady Delacour, in the character
of the mistress of the revels, shone the soul
and spirit of pleasure and frolic—But the
moment the company retired, when the
music ceased, and the lights were extinguishing,
the spell was dissolved.
She would sometimes walk up and down
the empty magnificent saloon, absorbed in
thoughts seemingly of the most painful nature.
For some days after Belinda's arrival in
town, she heard nothing of lord Delacour; 
his lady never mentioned his name, except
once accidentally, as she was showing

miss Portman the house, she said— 
“Don't open that door—those are only
lord Delacour's apartments.”—The first
time Belinda ever saw his lordship, he was
dead drunk in the arms of two footmen,
who were carrying him up stairs to his
bedchamber; his lady, who was just returned
from Ranelagh, passed by him on
the landing place with a look of sovereign
contempt.
“What is the matter?—Who is this?” 
said Belinda.
“Only the body of my lord Delacour,” said
her ladyship—“his bearers have brought
it up the wrong staircase—take it down
again, my good friends—let his lordship
go his own way—don't look so shocked
and amazed, Belinda—don't look so new,
child—this funeral of my lord's intellects
is to me a nightly, or,” added her ladyship,
looking at her watch and yawning—“I
believe I should say a daily ceremony.— 
Six o'clock I protest!”
The next morning, as her ladyship and
miss Portman were sitting at the breakfast

table, after a very late breakfast, lord
Delacour entered the room.
“Lord Delacour—sober, my dear,”— 
said her ladyship to miss Portman, by way of
introducing him. Lord Delacour, sober,
did not appear to Belinda more agreeable
or more rational, than lord Delacour drunk.
His haggard yet bloated countenance was
expressive of sullen discontent, and inveterate
obstinacy. “How old do you
take my lord to be?” whispered her ladyship,
as she saw Belinda's eye fixed upon
the trembling hand, which carried his teacup
to his lips—“I'll lay you a wager,” 
continued she, aloud—“I'll lay your birth-night
dress, gold fringe, and yellow laurel
wreaths into the bargain, that you don't
guess right.”—
“I hope you don't think of going to
this birthnight, lady Delacour?” said his
lordship.
“I'll give you six guesses, and I'll bet
you don't come within sixteen years,”— 
pursued her ladyship, still looking at
Belinda.

“You cannot have the new carriage you
have bespoke,”—said his lordship. “Will
you do me the honour to attend to me,
lady Delacour.”
“Then you won't venture to guess,
Belinda,” said her ladyship, (without honouring
her lord with the smallest portion
of her attention)—“Well, I believe you
are right—for certainly you would guess
him to be six and sixty, instead of six and
thirty—but then he can drink more than
any two legged animal in his majesty's
dominions; and you know that is an advantage,
which is well worth twenty or
thirty years of a man's life—especially to
persons, who have no other chance of distinguishing
themselves.”
“If some people had distinguished
themselves a little less in the world,”—retorted
his lordship, “it would have been
well!”
“As well!—how flat?”—
“Flatly then I have to inform you, lady
Delacour, that I will neither be contradicted,
nor laughed at—You understand

me.—It would be as well, flat or not flat,
my lady Delacour, if your ladyship would
attend more to your own conduct, and
less to others!”
“To that of others—his lordship means,
if he means any thing—Apropos—Belinda
—did not you tell me Clarence Hervey is
coming to town?—You have never seen
him?—Well, I'll describe him to you by
negatives. He is not a man, who ever says
any thing flat—He is not a man who must
be wound up with half a dozen bottles of
champaign, before he can go—He is not a
man, who, when he does go, goes wrong,
and won't be set right—He is not a man,
whose whole consequence, if he were married,
would depend on his wife—He is
not a man, who, if he were married, would
be so desperately afraid of being governed
by his wife, that he would turn gambler,
jockey, or sot; merely to show, that he
could govern himself.”—
“Go on, lady Delacour,” said his lordship,
who had been in vain attempting to
balance a spoon on the edge of his teacup,
during the whole of this speech,

which was delivered with the most animated
desire to provoke—“Go on, lady
Delacour—all I desire is, that you should
go on—Clarence Hervey will be much
obliged to you, and I am sure so shall I,
—go on, my lady Delacour—go on, and
you'll oblige me.”
“I never will oblige you, my lord, that
you may depend upon,” cried her ladyship,
with a look of indignant contempt.
His lordship whistled, rang for his
horses, and looked at his nails with a
smile. Belinda shocked, and in a great
confusion, rose to leave the room, dreading
the gross continuance of this matrimonial
dialogue.
“Mr. Hervey, my lady,” said a footman,
opening the door; and he was scarcely
announced, when her ladyship went forward
to receive him with an air of easy
familiarity—“Where have you buried
yourself, Hervey, this age past?” cried
she, shaking hands with him—“There's
absolutely no living in this most stupid of
all worlds, without you, Mr. Hervey— 
miss Portman—but don't look as if you

were half asleep, man—What are you
dreaming of Clarence?—Why looks your
grace so heavily to day?”
“Oh I have passed a miserable night,” 
replied Clarence, throwing himself into
an actor's attitude, and speaking in a fine
tone of stage declamation.
“What was your dream, my lord, I pray you tell me?”
said her ladyship in a similar tone—Clarence
went on— 
“O lord, methought what pain it was to dance!
What dreadful noise of fiddles in my ears!
What sights of ugly belles within my eyes!
—Then came wandering by,
A shadow like a devil, with red hair,
Dizened with flow'rs; and she bawl'd out aloud,
Clarence is come, false, fleeting, perjur'd Clarence!”
“O, Mrs. Luttridge to the life!” cried
lady Delacour. “I know where you have
been now, and I pity you—But sit down,” 
said she, making room for him between
Belinda and herself upon the sofa—“Sit

down here, and tell me what could take
you to that odious Mrs. Luttridge's.”
Mr. Hervey threw himself on the sofa,
lord Delacour whistled as before, and left
the room without uttering a syllable.
“But my dream has made me forget myself,
strangely,” said Mr. Hervey, turning
to Belinda, and producing her bracelet,
“Mrs. Stanhope promised me, that if I
delivered it safely, I should be rewarded
by the honour of putting it on the owner's
fair arm.” A conversation now took place
on the nature of ladies' promises—on fashionable
bracelets—on the size of the arm
of the Venus de Medicis—on lady Delacour's,
and miss Portman's—on the thick
legs of ancient statues—and on the various
defects and absurdities of Mrs. Luttridge
and her wig.—On all these topics Mr.
Hervey displayed much wit, gallantry,
and satire, with so happy an effect, that
Belinda, when he took leave, was precisely
of her aunt's opinion, that he was a most
uncommonly pleasant young man.
Clarence Hervey might have been more

than a pleasant young man, if he had not
been smitten with the desire of being
thought superiour in every thing, and of
being the most admired person in all companies.
He had been early flattered with
the idea, that he was a man of genius; and
he imagined, that, as such, he was entitled
to be imprudent, wild, and eccentric. He
affected singularity, in order to establish
his claims to genius. He had considerable
literary talents, by which he was distinguished
at Oxford; but he was so
dreadfully afraid of passing for a pedant,
that when he came into the company of
the idle and the ignorant, he pretended to
disdain every species of knowledge. His
chameleon character seemed to vary in different
lights, and according to the different
situations, in which he happened to
be placed. He could be all things to all
men—and to all women—He was supposed
to be a favourite with the fair sex; 
and of all his various excellencies and defects,
there was none, on which he valued
himself so much as on his gallantry. He

was not profligate; he had a strong sense
of honour, and quick feelings of humanity; 
but he was so easily led, or rather
so easily excited by his companions, and
his companions were now of such a sort,
that it was probable he would soon become
vicious. As to his connexion with lady
Delacour, he would have started with
horrour at the idea of disturbing the peace
of a family; but in her family, he said,
there was no peace to disturb: he was
vain of having it seen by the world, that
he was distinguished by a lady of her wit
and fashion, and he did not think it imcumbent
on him to be more scrupulous, or
more attentive to appearance, than her ladyship.
By lord Delacour's jealousy he was
sometimes provoked, sometimes amused,
and sometimes flattered. He was constantly
of all her ladyship's parties, in
public and private; consequently he saw
Belinda almost every day, and every day
he saw her with increasing admiration of
her beauty, and with increasing dread of
being taken in, to marry a niece of “the

catch-match-maker;” the name by which
Mrs. Stanhope was known among the
men of his acquaintance. Young ladies,
who have the misfortune to be conducted
by these artful dames, are always supposed
to be partners in all the speculations,
though their names may not appear in the
firm of the house. If he had not been
prejudiced by the character of her aunt,
Mr. Hervey would have thought Belinda
an undesigning, unaffected girl; but now
he suspected her of artifice in every word,
look, and motion; and even when he felt
himself most charmed by her powers of
pleasing, he was most inclined to despise
her for what he thought such premature
proficiency in scientific coquetry. He
had not sufficient resolution, to keep beyond
the sphere of her attraction; but
frequently, when he found himself within
it, he cursed his folly, and drew back
with sudden terrour. His manner towards
her was so variable and inconsistent, that
she knew not how to interpret it's language.
Sometimes she fancied, that with

all the eloquence of eyes he said, “I
adore you, Belinda;” at other times she
imagined, that his guarded silence meant
to warn her, that he was so entangled by
lady Delacour, that he could not extricate
himself from her snares. Whenever
this last idea struck her, it excited, in the
most edifying manner, her indignation
against coquetry in general, and against
her ladyship's in particular; she became
wonderfully clear sighted to all the improprieties
of her ladyship's conduct. Belinda's
newly acquired moral sense was
so much shocked, that she actually wrote
a full statement of her observations, and
her scruples, to her aunt Stanhope, concluding
by a request, that she might not
remain under the protection of a lady,
whose character she could not approve,
and whose intimacy might perhaps be
injurious to her reputation, if not to her
principles.
Mrs. Stanhope answered Belinda's letter
in a very guarded style; she rebuked
her niece severely for her imprudence in

mentioning names in such a manner, in a
letter sent by the common post; assured
her, that her reputation was in no danger; 
that she hoped no niece of hers would set
up for a prude; a character more suspected
by men of the world, than even
that of a coquette; that the person aluded
to was a perfectly fit chaperon for
any young lady to appear with in public,
as long as she was visited by the first
people in town; that as to any thing in
the private conduct of that person, and
as to any private brouilleries between her
and her lord, Belinda should observe, on
these dangerous topics, a profound silence,
both in her letters, and her conversation; 
that as long as the lady continued under
the protection of her husband, the world
might whisper, but would not speak out; 
that as to Belinda's own principles, she
would be utterly inexcusable, if, after
the education she had received, they
could be hurt by any bad examples; that
she could not be too cautious in her management
of a man of&wblank;'s character

that she could have no serious cause
for jealousy in the quarter she apprehended,
as marriage there could not be the
object; and there was such a difference
of age, that no permanent influence could
probably be obtained by the lady; that
the most certain method for miss Portman
to expose herself to the ridicule of one
of the parties, and to the total neglect of
the other, would be to betray anxiety or
jealousy: that, in short, if she were fool
enough to lose her own heart, there would
be little chance of her being wise enough
to win that of&wblank;, who was evidently
a man of gallantry rather than of
sentiment, and who was known to play
his cards well, and to have good luck,
whenever hearts were trumps.
Belinda's fears of lady Delacour, as a
dangerous rival, were much quieted by
the artful insinuations of Mrs. Stanhope,
with respect to her age, &c. and in proportion,
as her fears subsided, she blamed
herself for her having written too harshly
of her ladyship's conduct. The idea, that

whilst she appeared as lady Delacour's
friend, she ought not to propagate any stories
to her disadvantage, operated powerfully
upon Belinda's mind, and she reproached
herself for having told, even her aunt,
what she had seen in private. She thought
that she had been guilty of treachery,
and she wrote again immediately to Mrs.
Stanhope, to conjure her to burn her last
letter, to forget, if possible, it's contents,
and to believe, that not a syllable of a similar
nature should ever more be heard from
her: she was just concluding with the
words—“I hope my dear aunt will consider
all this an an errour of my judgment,
and not of my heart,”—when lady Delacour
burst into the room, exclaiming, in a
tone of gayety—“Tragedy or comedy, Belinda?
The masquerade dresses are come.
But how's this?” added she, looking full
in Belinda's face—“tears in the eyes!
blushes in the cheeks! tremors in the
joints! and letters shuffling away! But
you novice of novices, how awkwardly
shuffled!—A niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, and

so unpractised a shuffler!—And is it credible
she should tremble in this ridiculous
way about a love-letter or two?”
“No love-letters, indeed, lady Delacour,” 
said Belinda, holding the paper
fast, as her ladyship, half in play, half in
earnest, attempted to snatch it from her.
“No love-letters! then it must be treason,
and see it I must, by all that's good,
or by all that's bad—I see the name of
Delacour!”—and her ladyship absolutely
seized the letters by force, in spite of all
Belinda's struggles and entreaties.
“I beg, I request, I conjure you not
to read it!” cried miss Portman, clasping
her hands. “Read mine, read mine, if
you must, but don't read my aunt Stanhope's
—Oh! I beg, I entreat, I conjure
you!” and she threw herself upon her
knees.
“You beg! you intreat! you conjure!
Why, this is like the duchess de Brinvilliers,
who wrote on her paper of poisons,
Whoever finds this, I entreat, I conjure
them, in the name of more saints than

I can remember, not to open the paper
any farther.—What a simpleton, to know
so little of the nature of curiosity.”
As she spoke, lady Delacour opened
Mrs. Stanhope's letter, read it from beginning
to end, folded it up coolly when
she had finished it, and simply said, “the
person alluded to is almost as bad as her
name at full length: does Mrs. Stanhope
think no one can make out an innuendo in
a libel, or fill up a blank, but an attorney
general?” pointing to a blank in Mrs. Stanhope's
letter, left for the name of Clarence
Hervey.
Belinda was in too much confusion,
either to speak or think.
“You were right to swear they were
not love-letters,” pursued her ladyship,
laying down the papers. “I protest I
snatched them by way of frolic—I beg
pardon. All I can do now is not to read
the rest.”
“Nay—I beg—I wish—I insist upon
your reading mine,” said Belinda.

When lady Delacour had read it, her
countenance suddenly changed—“Worth
a hundred of your aunt's, I declare,” said
she, patting Belinda's cheek. “What a
treasure, to meet with any thing like a new
heart—all hearts, nowadays, are secondhand
at best.”
Lady Delacour spoke with a tone of
feeling which Belinda had never heard
from her before, and which at this moment
touched her so much, that she took her
ladyship's hand and kissed it.