

Larry drove off at full gallop, and
kept on at a good rate, till he got out
of the great gate, and beyond the sight
of the crowd; then pulling up, he
turned to lord Colambre, “Plase your
honour, I did not know nor guess ye
was my lord, when I let you have the
horses; did not know who you was
from Adam, I'll take my affidavit.”
“There's no occasion,” said lord
Colambre; “I hope you don't repent
letting me have the horses, now you
do know who I am?”
“Oh! not at all, sure: I'm as glad as
the best horse I ever crossed, that your
honour is my lord—but I was only telling
your honour, that you might not
be looking upon me as a time-sarver.”
“I do not look upon you as a time-sarver,

Larry; but keep on, that time
may serve me.”
In two words, he explained his cause
of haste; and, no sooner explained than
understood, Larry thundered away
through the town of Clonbrony, bendover
his horses, plying the whip, and
lending his very soul at every lash.
With much difficulty, lord Colambre
stopped him at the end of the town, at
the post office. The post was gone out
—gone a quarter of an hour.
“May be, we'll overtake the mail,” 
said Larry: and, as he spoke, he slid
down from his seat, and darted into the
public house, reappearing in a few moments
with a copper of ale and a horn
in his hand: he and another man held
open the horses' mouths, and poured
the ale through the horn down their
throats.
“Now, they'll go with spirit!”
And, with the hope of overtaking the
mail, Larry made them go “for life or
death,” as he said: but in vain! At

the next stage, at his own inn-door,
Larry roared for fresh horses, till he
got them—harnessed them with his own
hands, holding the six shilling piece,
which lord Colambre had given him,
in his mouth all the while; for he
could not take time to put it into his
pocket.
“Speed ye! I wish I was driving
you all the way, then,” said he. The
other postillion was not yet ready.— 
“Then, your honour sees,” said he,
putting his head into the carriage,
concarning of them Garraghtie's—old
Nick and St. Dennis,—the best part,
that is, the worst part, of what I told
you proved true; and I'm glad of it,
that is, I'm sorry for it—but glad your
honour knows it in time. So Heaven
prosper you! And may all the saints
(barring St. Dennis) have charge of
you and all belonging to you, till we
see you here again!—and when will it
be?”
“I cannot say when I shall return to

you myself, but I will do my best to send
your landlord to you soon. In the mean
time, my good fellow, keep away from
the sign of the horseshoe—A man of
your sense, to drink, and make an ideot
and a brute of yourself!”
“True!—And it was only when I
had lost hope, I took to it—but now!
Bring me the book, one of yees, out of
the landlady's parlour—By the virtue
of this book, and by all the books that
ever was shut and opened, I won't
touch a drop of spirits, good or bad, till
I see your honour again, or some of
the family, this time twelve month— 
that long I'll live on hope—But mind,
if you disappoint me, I don't swear,
but I'll take to the whiskey, for comfort,
all the rest of my days. But don't
be staying here, wasting your time,
advising me.—Bartley! take the reins,
can't ye?” cried he, giving them to
the fresh postillion; “and keep on,
for your life, for there's thousands
of pounds depending on the race—

So, off, off! Bartely, with speed of
light!”
Bartley did his best; and such was
the excellence of the roads, that, notwithstanding
the rate at which our hero
travelled, he arrived safely in Dublin,
and just in time to put his letter into the
post-office, and to sail in that night's
packet. The wind was fair when lord
Colambre went on board, but before
they got out of the Bay it changed; 
they made no way all night; in the
course of the next day they had the
mortification to see another packet
from Dublin sail past them, and when
they landed at Holyhead were told the
packet, which had left Ireland twelve
hours after them, had been in an hour
before them. The passengers had taken
their places in the coach, and engaged
what horses could be had.
Lord Colambre was afraid, that Mr.
Garraghty was one of them; a person
exactly answering his description had
taken four horses, and set out half an

hour before in great haste for London.
Luckily, just as those who had taken
their places in the mail were getting into
the coach, lord Colambre saw among
them a gentleman, with whom he had
been acquainted in Dublin, a barrister,
who was come over during the long
vacation, to make a tour of pleasure in
England. When lord Colambre explained
the reason he had for being in
haste to reach London, he had the good
nature to give up to him his place in
the coach. Lord Colambre travelled
all night, and delayed not one moment,
till he reached his father's house, in
London.
“My father at home?”
“Yes, my lord; in his own room— 
the agent from Ireland with him, on
particular business—desired not to be
interrupted—but I'll go and tell him,
my lord, you are come.”
Lord Colambre ran past the servant,
as he spoke—made his way into the
room—found his father, sir Terence

O'Fay, and Mr. Garraghty—leases open
on the table before them; a candle
lighted; sir Terence sealing; Garraghty
emptying a bag of guineas on the table,
and lord Clonbrony actually with
pen in his hand, ready to sign.
As the door opened, Garraghty started
back, so that half the contents of his
bag rolled upon the floor.
“Stop, my dear father, I conjure
you,” cried lord Colambre, springing
forward, and kneeling to his father; at
the same moment snatching the pen
from his hand.
“Colambre! God bless you, my
dear boy! at all events. But how came
you here?—And what do you mean?” 
said his father.
“Burn it!” cried sir Terence,
pinching the sealing wax—“for I
burnt myself with the pleasure of the
surprise.”
Garraghty, without saying a word,
was picking up the guineas that were
scattered upon the floor.

“How fortunate I am,” cried lord
Colambre, “to have arrived just in
time to tell you, my dear father, before
you put your signature to these papers,
before you conclude this bargain, all I
know, all I have seen, of that man.”
“Nick Garraghty, honest old Nick; 
do you know him, my lord?” said sir
Terence.
“Too well, sir.”
“Mr. Garraghty, what have you
done, to offend my son? I did not
expect this,” said lord Clonbrony.
“Upon my conscience, my lord,
nothing, to my knowledge,” said Mr.
Garraghty, picking up the guineas,
“but showed him every civility, even
so far as offering to accommodate him
with cash, without security. And
where will you find the other agent,
in Ireland, or any where else, will do
that? To my knowledge, I never did
any thing, by word or deed, to offend
my lord Colambre; nor could not, for I
never saw him, but for ten minutes, in

my days; and then he was in such a
foaming passion, begging his lordship's
pardon, owing to the misrepresentations
he met with of me, I presume, from a
parcel of blackguards, that he went
amongst, incognito, he would not let
me, or my brother Dennis, say a word,
to set him right; but exposed me before
all the tenantry, and then threw
himself into a hack and drove off here,
to stop the signing of these leases, I
perceive—But I trust,” concluded he,
putting the replenished money bag
down with a heavy sound on the table,
opposite to lord Clonbrony—'I trust,
my lord Clonbrony will do me justice,
that's all I have to say.”
“I comprehend the force of your
last argument, fully, sir,” said lord
Colambre.—“May I ask how many
guineas there are in the bag. I don't
ask whether they are my father's or
not.”
“They are to be your lordship's
father's sir, if he thinks proper,” replied

Garraghty. “How many, I don't know
that I can justly, positively say—five
hundred, suppose.”
“And they would be my father's,
if he signed those leases—I understand
that perfectly, and understand that my
father would lose three times that sum
by the bargain.—My dear father,
you start—but it is true—Is not this
the rent, sir, at which you were going
to let Mr. Garraghty have the land?”— 
placing a paper before lord Clonbrony.
“It is—the very thing.”
‘And here, sir, written with my own
hand, are copies of the proposals I saw,
from responsible, respectable tenants,
offered and refused.—It it so, or is it
not, Mr. Garraghty?—deny it, if you
can.”
Mr. Garraghty grew pale, his lips
quivered; he stammered, and after a
shocking convulsion of face, could at
last articulate—only,
“That there was a great difference
between tenant and tenant, his lordship

must be sensible, especially for so
large a rent; as great a difference as
between agent and agent.”—“I am
sensible—especially for so large a property!” 
said lord Colambre, with cool
contempt. “You find, sir, I am well
informed with regard to this transaction; 
you will find also, that I am equally
well informed, with respect to every
part of your conduct towards my father
and his tenantry. If, in relating to him
what I have seen and heard, I should
make any mistakes, you are here; and
I am glad you are, to set me right, and
to do yourself justice.”
“O! as to that, I should not presume
to contradict any thing your lordship
asserts from your own authority: where
would be the use? I leave it all to
your lordship. But, as it is not particularly
agreeable to stay, to hear one's
self abused—sir Terence! I'll thank
you to hand me my hat! ... And
if you'll have the goodness, my lord

Clonbrony, to look over finally the accounts
before morning, I'll call at your
leisure to settle the balance, as you
find convenient: as the leases, I'm
quite indifferent.”
So saying, he took up his money bag.
“Well, you'll call again in the morning,
Mr. Garraghty?” said sir Terence; 
“and by that time, I hope we shall understand
this misunderstanding better.”
Sir Terence pulled lord Clonbrony's
sleeve—“Don't let him go with the
money—it's much wanted!”
“Let him go,” said lord Colambre:
“money can be had by honourable
means.”
“Wheugh!—He talks as if he had
the bank of England at his command,
as every young man does,” said sir Terence.
Lord Colambre deigned no reply.
Lord Clonbrony walked undecidedly
between his agent and his son—looked
at sir Terence, and said nothing.

Mr. Garraghty departed: lord Clonbrony
called after him from the head of
the stairs—
“I shall be at home, and at leisure
in the morning.” Sir Terence ran down
stairs after him: lord Colambre waited
quietly for their return.
“Fifteen hundred guineas, at a stroke
of a goose quill!—That was a neat hit,
narrowly missed, of honest Nick's!” 
said lord Clonbrony. “Too bad! too
bad, faith!—I am much, very much obliged
to you, Colambre, for that hint:
by to morrow morning we shall have
him in another tune.”
“And he must double the bag, or,
quit,” said sir Terence.
“Treble it, if you please, Terry.
—Sure, three times five's fifteen:— 
fifteen hundred down, or he does not
get my signature to those leases for his
brother, nor get the agency of the Colambre
estate. ... Colambre, what
more have you to tell of him; for since

he is making out his accounts against
me, it is no harm to have a per contra
against him, that may ease my balance.”
“Very fair! very fair!” said sir Terence.
—“My lord, trust me for remembering
all the charges against him— 
every item: and when he can't clear
himself, if I don't make him buy a good
character dear enough, why, say I'm a
fool, and don't know the value of character,
good or bad!”
“If you know the value of character,
sir Terence,” said lord Colambre,
“you know that it is not to be bought
or sold.” Then, turning from sir Terence
to his father, he gave a full and
true account of all he had seen in his
progress through his Irish estates; and
drew a faithful picture, both of the bad
and good agent. Lord Clonbrony, who
had benevolent feelings, and was fond of
his tenantry, was touched; and, when
his son ceased speaking, repeated several
times—

“Rascal! rascal! How dare he use
my tenants so—the O'Neills in particular!
—Rascal! bad heart!—I'll have
no more to do with him.”
But suddenly, recollecting himself,
he turned to sir Terence, and added,
“That's sooner said than done. ...
I'll tell you honestly, Colambre, your
friend, Mr. Burke, may be the best man
in the world—but he is the worst man
to apply to for a remittance, or a loan,
in a HURRY! He always tells me, ‘he
can't distress the tenants.’”—“And he
never, at coming into the agency,
even,” said sir Terence, “advanced a
good round sum to the landlord, by way
of security for his good behaviour.
Now, honest Nick did that much for
us, at coming in.”
“And at going out, is he not to be
repaid!” said lord Colambre.
“That's the devil!” said lord Clonbrony:
“that's the very reason I can't
conveniently turn him out.”
“I will make it convenient to you,

sir, if you will permit me,” said lord
Colambre.—“In a few days I shall be
of age, and will join with you in raising
whatever sum you want, to free you
from this man. Allow me to look over
his account; and whatever the honest
balance may be, let him have it.”
“My dear boy!” said lord Clonbrony,
“you're a generous fellow. Fine
Irish heart!—glad you're my son! But
there's more, much more that you don't
know,” added he, looking at sir Terence,
who cleared his throat; and
lord Clonbrony, who was on the point
of opening all his affairs to his son, stopped
short.
“Colambre,” said he, “we will not
say any thing more of this at present; 
for nothing effectual can be done, till
you are of age, and then we shall see all
about it.”
Lord Colambre perfectly understood
what his father meant, and what was
meant by the clearing of sir Terence's
throat. Lord Clonbrony wanted his

son to join him in opening the estate to
pay his debts; and sir Terence feared
that, if lord Colambre were abruptly
told the whole sum total of the debts,
he would never be persuaded to join in
selling or mortgaging so much of his
patrimony, as would be necessary for
their payment. Sir Terence thought,
that the young man, ignorant probably
of business, and unsuspicious of the
state of his father's affairs, might be
brought, by proper management, to any
measures they desired. Lord Clonbrony
wavered between the temptation
to throw himself upon the generosity of
his son, and the immediate convenience
of borrowing a sum of money from his
agent, to relieve his present embarrassments.
“Nothing can be settled,” repeated
he, “till Colambre is of age; so it does
not signify talking of it.”
“Why so, sir,” said lord Colambre; 
“though my act, in law, may not be
valid till I am of age, my promise, as a

man of honour, is binding now; and, I
trust, would be as satisfactory to my
father, as any legal deed whatever.”
“Undoubtedly, my dear boy—but”—
“But what,” said lord Colambre, following
his father's eye, which turned
to sir Terence O'Fay, as if asking his
permission to explain.
“As my father's friend, sir, you
ought, permit me to say, at this moment,
to use your influence to prevail
upon him to throw aside all reserve
with a son, whose warmest wish is to
serve him, and to see him at ease and
happy,”
“Generous! dear boy!” cried lord
Clonbrony. “Terence, I can't stand
it; but, how shall I bring myself to
name the amount of the debts.”
“At some time or other I must
know it,” said lord Colambre; “I cannot
be better prepared at any moment
than the present; never more disposed
to give my assistance to relieve all difficulties.
Blindfold, I cannot be led to

any purpose, sir,” said he, looking at
sir Terence: “the attempt would be
degrading and futile. Blindfolded I
will not be—but, with my eyes open,
I will see, and go straight and prompt
as heart can go to my father's interest; 
without a look or thought to my
own.”
“By St. Patrick! the spirit of a
prince, and an Irish prince, spoke
there,” cried sir Terence: “and if I'd
fifty hearts, you'd have all in your
hand this minute, at your service, and
warm. Blindfold you! after that, the
man that would attempt it desarves to
be shot; and I'd have no sincerer pleasure
in life, than shooting him this moment,
was he my best friend. But it's
not Clonbrony, or your father, my lord,
would act that way, no more than sir
Terence O'Fay—there's the schedule
of the debts,” drawing a paper from his
bosom; “and I'll swear to the lot, and
not a man on Earth could do that but
myself.”

Lord Colambre opened the paper.— 
His father turned aside, covering his
face with both his hands.
“Tut! man,” said sir Terence; “I
know him now better than you; he
will stand, you'll find, the shock of that
regiment of figures—he is steel to the
back-bone, and proof spirit.”
“I thank you, my dear father,” said
lord Colambre, “for trusting me thus
at once with a view of the truth. At
first sight it is, I acknowledge, worse
than I expected; but I make no doubt
that, when you allow me to examine
Mr. Garraghty's accounts, and Mr.
Mordicai's claims, we shall be able to
reduce this alarming total considerably,
my dear father. You think we learn
nothing but Latin and Greek at Cambridge; 
but you are mistaken.”
“The devil a pound, nor a penny,” 
said sir Terence; “for you have to deal
with a Jew, and old Nick; and I'm
not a match for them. I don't know
who is; and I have no hope of getting

any abatement. I've looked over the
accounts till I'm sick.”
“Nevertheless, you will observe,
that fifteen hundred guineas have been
saved to my father, at one stroke, by
his not signing those leases.”
“Saved to you, my lord; not your
father, if you plase,” said sir Terence.
“For now I'm upon the square with
you, I must be straight as an arrow,
and deal with you as the son and
friend of my friend; before, I was considering
you only as the son and heir,
which is quite another thing, you
know; accordingly, acting for your father
here, I was making the best bargain
against you I could; honestly,
now I tell you. I knew the value of
the lands well enough: we were as
sharp as Garraghty, and he knew it; 
we were to have had the difference from
him, partly in cash, and partly in balance
of accounts—you comprehend— 
and you only would have been the
loser, and never would have known it,

may be, till after we all were dead and
buried; and then you might have set
aside Garraghty's lease easy, and no
harm done to any but a rogue, that
desarved it; and, in the mean time, an
accommodation to my honest friend, my
lord, your father, here.—But, as fate
would have it, you upset all by your
progress incognito through them estates.
—Well, it's best as it is, and I
am better pleased to be as we are, trusting
all to a generous son's own heart.
Now put the poor father out of pain,
and tell us what you'll do, my dear.”
“In one word then,” said lord Colambre; 
“I will, upon two conditions,
either join my father in levying fines to
enable him to sell or mortgage whatever
portion of his estate is necessary for the
payment of these debts; or I will, in
whatever other mode he can point out,
as more agreeable or more advantageous
to him, join in giving security to his
creditors.”
“Dear, noble fellow!” cried sir Terence;

“none but an Irishman could
do it.”
Lord Clonbrony, melted to tears,
could not articulate, but held his arms
open to embrace his son.
“But you have not heard my conditions
yet,” said lord Colambre.
“O confound the conditions!” cried
sir Terence.
“What conditions could he ask that
I could refuse at this minute,” said lord
Clonbrony.
“Nor I—was it my heart's blood, and
were I to be hanged for it,” cried sir
Terence, “and what are the conditions?”
“That Mr. Garraghty shall be dismissed
from the agency.”
“And welcome, and glad to get rid
of him—the rogue, the tyrant,” said
lord Clonbrony; “and to be beforehand
with you in your next wish, put Mr.
Burke into his place.”
“I'll write the letter for you to sign,
my lord, this minute,” cried Terry, with

all the pleasure in life.—“No; it's my
lord Colambre should do that, in all
justice.”
“But what's your next condition?
I hope it's no worse,” said lord Clonbrony.
“That you and my mother should
cease to be absentees.”
“Oh murder!” said sir Terence; 
“may be that's not so easy; for there
are two words to that bargain.”
Lord Clonbrony declared, that for his
own part he was ready to return to Ireland
next morning, and to promise to
reside on his estate all the rest of his
days; that there was nothing he desired
more, provided lady Clonbrony would
consent to it; but that he could not
promise for her; that she was as obstinate
as a mule on that point; that he
had often tried, but that there was no
moving her; and that, in short, he
could not promise on her part.”
But it was on this condition, lord
Colambre said, he must insist. Without

this condition was granted, he would
not engage to do any thing.
“Well, we must only see how it will
be when she comes to town; she will
come up from Buxton the day you're of
age to sign some papers,” said lord
Clonbrony; “but,” added he, with a
very dejected look and voice, “if all's
to depend on my lady Clonbrony's consenting
to return to Ireland, I'm as far
from all hope of being at ease as ever.”
“Upon my conscience we're all at sea
again,” said sir Terence.
Lord Colambre was silent: but in his
silence there was such an air of firmness,
that both lord Clonbrony and sir
Terence were convinced entreaties
would on this point be fruitless—lord
Clonbrony sighed deeply.
“But when it's ruin or safety! and
her husband and all belonging to her at
stake—the woman can't persist in being
a mule,” said sir Terence.
“Of whom are you talking?” said
lord Colambre.

“Of whom! O, I beg your lordship's
pardon—I thought I was talking to my
lord—but in other words, as you are
her son, I'm persuaded her ladyship,
your mother, will prove herself a reasonable
woman—when she sees she
can't help it. So, my lord Clonbrony,
cheer up, a great deal may be done by
the fear of Mordicai and an execution,
especially now the prior creditor. Since
there's no reserve between you and I
now, my lord Colambre,” said sir Terence,
“I must tell you all, and how
we shambled on those months, while
you were in Ireland. First, Mordicai
went to law to prove I was in a conspiracy
with your father, pretending to be
prior creditor, to keep him off and out
of his own; which, after a world of
swearing and law, law always takes
time to do justice, that's one comfort— 
the villain proved at last to be true
enough, and so cast us; and I was
forced to be paid off last week. So
there's no prior creditor, or any shield

of pretence, that way—Then his execution
was coming down upon us, and nothing
to stay it till I thought of a
monthly annuity to Mordicai, in the
shape of a wager. So, the morning after
he cast us, I went to him: ‘Mr. Mordicai,’ 
says I, 'you must be plased to
see a man you've beaten so handsomely; 
and though I'm sore, both for myself
and my friend, yet you see I can laugh
still; though an execution is no laughing
matter, and I'm sinsible you've one
in petto in your sleeve for my friend lord
Clonbrony. But I'll lay you a wager of
a hundred guineas in paper, that a marriage
of his son with a certain heiress
before next Lady-day, will set all to
rights, and pay you with a compliment
too.”
“Good Heavens, sir Terence, surely
you said no such thing?”
“I did—but what was it, but a wager,
which is nothing but a dream; and
when lost, as I am as sinsible as you
are that it must be, why what is it after

all but a bonus in a gentlemanlike form
to Mordicai; which I grant you is more
than he deserves, for staying the execution
till you be of age; and even for my
lady Clonbrony's sake, though I know
she hates me like poison, rather than
have her disturbed by an execution, I'd
pay the hundred guineas this minute
out of my own pocket, if I had 'em in
it.”
A thundering knock at the door was
heard at this momeht.
“Never heed it; let 'em thunder,” 
said sir Terence; “whoever it is, they
won't get in; for my lord bid them let
none in for their life. It's necessary for
us to be very particular about the street
door now; and I advise a double chain
for it, and to have the footmen well tutored
to look before they run to a double
rap; for a double rap might be a
double trap.”
“My lady and miss Nugent, my
lord,” said a footman, throwing open the
door.

“My mother! Miss Nugent!” cried
lord Colambre, springing eagerly forward.
“Colambre! Here!” said his mother; 
“but it's all too late now, and
no matter where you are.”
Lady Clonbrony coldly suffered her
son to embrace her, and he, without
considering the coldness of her manner,
scarcely hearing, and not at all
understanding the words she said, fixed
his eyes on his cousin, who, with a
countenance all radiant with affectionate
joy, held out her hand to him.
“Dear cousin, Colambre! What an
unexpected pleasure!”
He seized the hand; but as he was
going to kiss it, the recollection of
St. Omar crossed his mind; he checked
himself, and said something about joy
and pleasure, but his countenance expressed
neither, and miss Nugent, much
surprised by the coldness of his manner,
withdrew her hand, and turning away
left the room.

“Grace! Darling!” called lord
Clonbrony, “whither so fast, before
you've given me a word, or a kiss.”
She came back, and hastily kissed
her uncle, who folded her in his arms; 
“Why must I let you go?—And what
makes you so pale, my dear child?”
“I am a little, a little tired—I will
be with you again soon.”
Her uncle let her go.
“Your famous Buxton baths don't
seem to have agreed with her, by all I
can see,” said lord Clonbrony.
“My lord, the Buxton baths are no
way to blame; but I know what is to
blame, and who is to blame,” said lady
Clonbrony, in atone of displeasure; 
fixing her eyes upon her son—“Yes,
you may well look confounded, Colambre; 
but it is too late now—you
should have known your own mind in
time—I see you have heard it, then— 
but, I am sure, I don't know how; for
it was only decided the day I left Buxton.
The news could hardly travel

faster than I did—Pray how did you
hear it?
“Hear what, ma'am?” said lord
Colambre.—“Why, that miss Broadhurst
is going to be married.”
“O, is that all, ma'am,” said our hero,
much relieved.
“All! Now, lord Colambre, you
reelly are too much for my patience.— 
But I flatter myself you will feel, when
I tell you, that it is your friend, sir
Arthur Berryl, as I always prophesied,
who has carried off the prize from
you.”
“But for the fear of displeasing my
dear mother, I should say, that I do
feel sincere pleasure in this marriage— 
I always wished it: my friend, sir
Arthur, from the first moment, trusted
me with the secret of his attachment; 
he knew that he had my warm good
wishes for his success; he knew that
I thought most highly of the young
lady; but that I never thought of her,
as a wife, for myself.”

“And why did not you? that is the
very thing I complain of,” said lady
Clonbrony.—“But it is all over now— 
You may set your heart at ease, for
they are to be married on thursday; 
and poor Mrs. Broadhurst is ready to
break her heart, for she was set upon a
coronet for her daughter; and you,
ungrateful as you are, you don't know
how she wished you to be the happy
man.—But only conceive, after all
that had passed, miss Broadhurst had
the assurance to expect I would let my
niece be her bridesmaid.—O, I flatly
refused: that is, I told Grace it could
not be; and that there might be no
affront to Mrs. Broadhurst, who did
not deserve it, I pretended Grace
had never mentioned it; but ordered
my carriage, and left Buxton directly.
Grace was hurt, for she is very warm
in her friendships. I am sorry to hurt
Grace. But reelly, I could not let her
be bridesmaid. And that, if you must
know, is what vexed her, and made the

tears come in her eyes, I suppose— 
and I'm sorry for it; but one must keep
up one's dignity a little.—After all,
miss Broadhurst was only a citizen— 
and reelly now, a very odd girl;— 
never did any thing like any body else; 
settled her marriage, at last, in the
oddest way.—Grace, can you tell the
particulars?—I own, I am tired of the
subject; and tired of my journey. My
lord, I shall take leave to dine in my
own room to day,” continued her ladyship,
as she quitted the room.
“I hope her ladyship did not notice
me,” said sir Terence O'Fay, coming
from behind a window curtain.
“Why, Terry, what did you hide
for?” said lord Clonbrony.
“Hide! I didn't hide, nor wouldn't from
any man living, let alone any woman. 
Hide! no; but I just stood looking out
of the window, behind this curtain, that
my poor lady Clonbrony might not be
discomfited and shocked by the sight

of one, whom she can't abide, the very
minute she come home—O, I've some
consideration—it would have put her
out of humour worse with both of you
too; and for that there's no need, as
far as I see. So I'll take myself off to
my coffeehouse to dine, and may be
you may get her down and into spirits
again—But for your lives don't touch
upon Ireland the night, nor till she has
fairly got the better of the marriage.
A propos—there's my wager to Mordicai
gone at a slap—It's I that ought to be
scolding you, my lord Colambre; but
I trust you will do as well yet, not in
point of purse, may be. But I'm not
one of those that think that money's
every thing—though I grant you, in
this world, there's nothing to be had
without it—love excepted,—which
most people don't believe in—but not
I—in particular cases. So I leave you,
with my blessing, and I've a notion, at
this time, that is better than my company
—your most devoted.”

The good-natured sir Terence would
not be persuaded by lord Clonbrony to
stay. Nodding at Lord Colambre, as
he went out of the room, he said,
“I've an eye in going to your heart's
ease too. When I played myself, I
never liked standers by—”
Sir Terence was not deficient in penetration,
but he never could help
boasting of his discoveries.
Lord Colambre was grateful for his
judicious departure; and followed his
equally judicious advice, not to touch
upon Ireland this night.
Lady Clonbrony was full of Buxton,
and he was glad to be relieved from
the necessity of talking; and he indulged
himself in considering what
might be passing in miss Nugent's
mind.—She now appeared in remarkably
good spirits, for her aunt had
given her a hint, that she thought her
out of humour, because she had not
been permitted to be miss Broadhurst's
bridemaid, and she was determined to

exert herself to dispel this notion. This
it was now easy for her to do, because
she had by this time, in her own imagination,
found a plausible excuse for
that coldness in lord Colambre's reception
of her, by which she had at
first been hurt—she had settled it, that
he had taken it for granted she was of
his mother's sentiments respecting miss
Broadhurst's marriage, and that this
idea, and perhaps the apprehension of
her reproaches, had caused his embarrassment
—she knew that she could
easily set this misunderstanding right.
Accordingly, when lady Clonbrony had
talked herself to sleep about Buxton,
and was taking her afternoon's nap, as
it was her custom to do, when she had
neither cards nor company, to keep her
awake, miss Nugent began to explain
her own sentiments, and to give lord
Colambre, as her aunt had desired, an
account of the manner in which miss
Broadhurst's marriage had been settled.
“In the first place,” said she, “let

me assure you that I rejoice in this
marriage; I think your friend, sir Arthur
Berryl, is every way deserving of
my friend, miss Broadhurst; and this
from me,” said she, smiling, “is no
slight eulogium.—I have marked the
rise and progress of their attachment,
and it has been founded on the perception
of such excellent qualities on each
side, that I have no fear for it's permanence.
Sir Arthur Berryl's honourable
conduct, in paying his father's debts,
and his generosity to his mother and
sisters, whose fortunes were left entirely
dependent upon him, first pleased
my friend. It was like what she would
have done herself, and like—in short,
it is what few young men, as she said; 
of the present day, would do. Then
his refraining from all personal expenses,
his going without equipage and
without horses, that he might do what
he felt to be right; whilst it exposed
him continually to the ridicule of
fashionable young men, or to the charge

of avarice, made a very different impression
on miss Broadhurst's mind; 
her esteem and admiration were excited
by these proofs of strength of character,
and of just and good principles.”
“If you go on, you will make me
envious and jealous of my friend,” said
lord Colambre.
“You jealous!—O, it is too late
now—besides, you cannot be jealous,
for you never loved.”
“I never loved miss Broadhurst, I
acknowledge.”
“There was the advantage sir Arthur
Berryl had over you—he loved,
and my friend saw it.”
“She was clear-sighted,” said lord
Colambre.
“She was clear-sighted,” repeated
miss Nugent; “but, if you mean that
she was vain, and apt to fancy people
in love with her, I can assure
you, that you are mistaken. Never
was woman, young or old, more clear-sighted
to the views of those by whom

she was addressed. No flattery, no
fashion, could blind her judgment.”
“She knew how to choose a friend
well, I am sure,” said lord Colambre.
“And a friend for life too, I am sure
you will allow—and she had such numbers,
such strange variety of admirers,
as might have puzzled the choice, and
turned the brain of any inferior person.
Such a succession of lovers as she has
had this summer, ever since you went
to Ireland—they appeared and vanished
like figures in a magic lantern. She
had three noble admirers—rank in three
different forms offered themselves.— 
First came in, hobbling, rank and gout; 
next, rank and gaming; then rank, very
high rank, over head and ears in debt.
All of these were rejected; and, as they
moved off, I thought Mrs. Broadhurst
would have broken her heart. Next
came fashion, with his head, heart, and
soul, in his cravat—he quickly made
his bow, or rather his nod, and walked
off, taking a pinch of snuff. Then

came a man of gallantry, but,” whispered
miss Nugent, “there was a mistress
in the wood;” and my friend could
have nothing to do with that gentleman.”
“Now, if she liked the man,” interrupted
lord Clonbrony, “and I suppose
she did, for all women, but yourself,
Grace, like men of gallantry, miss
Broadhurst was a goose for refusing
him on account of the mistress; because
she might have been bought
up, and settled with a few thousand
pounds.”
“Be that as it may,” said miss Nugent; 
“my friend did not like and
would not accept of the man of gallantry; 
so he retired, and comforted
himself with a copy of verses. Then
came a man of wit—but still it was wit
without worth; and presently came
‘worth without wit.’ She preferred
‘wit and worth united,’ which she fortunately
at last found, lord Colambre,
in your friend, sir Arthur Berryl.”

“Grace, my girl!” said her uncle,
“I'm glad to see you've got up your
spirits again, though you were not to
be bridesmaid. Well, I hope you'll
be bride soon—I'm sure you ought to
be—and you should think of rewarding
that poor Mr. Salisbury, who plagues
me to death, whenever he can catch
hold of me, about you. He must have
our definitive at last, you know, Grace.”
A silence ensued, which neither miss
Nugent nor lord Colambre seemed willing,
or able, to break.
“Very good company, faith, you
three!—One of ye asleep, and the
other two saying nothing, to keep one
awake. Colambre, have you no Dublin
news—Grace, have you no Buxton
scandal? What was it lady Clonbrony
told us you'd tell us, about the oddness
of miss Broadhurst's settling her marriage.
Tell me that, for I love to hear
odd things.”
“Perhaps you will not think it odd,” 
said she. “One evening ... but

I should begin by telling you, that three
of her admirers, beside sir Arthur Berryl,
had followed her to Buxton, and
had been paying their court to her all
the time we were there; and at last
grew impatient for her decision—” 
“Ay,—for her definitive!” said
lord Clonbrony. Miss Nugent was put
out again, but resumed— 
“So one evening, just before the
dancing began, the gentlemen were all
standing round miss Broadhurst, one of
them said, ‘I wish miss Broadhurst
would decide—that whoever she dances
with to night, should be her partner for
life: what a happy man he would be!’
‘But how can I decide?’ said miss
Broadhurst.
‘I wish I had a friend to plead for
me!’ said one of the suitors, looking
at me.
‘Have you no friend of your own?’ 
said miss Broadhurst.
‘Plenty of friends,’ said the gentleman.

‘Plenty!—then you must be a very
happy man,’ replied miss Broadhurst.
‘Come,’ said she, laughing, ‘I will
dance with that man who can convince
me—that he has, near relations excepted,
one true friend in the world!
That man who has made the best friend,
I dare say, will make the best husband!’
“At that moment,” continued miss
Nugent, “I was certain who would be
her choice. The gentlemen all declared
at first, that they had abundance of excellent
friends—the best friends in the
world! but, when miss Broadhurst
cross-examined them, as to what their
friends had done for them, or what they
were willing to do, modern friendship
dwindled into a ridiculously small compass.
I cannot give you the particulars
of the cross-examination, though it was
conducted with great spirit and humour
by miss Broadhurst; but I can tell
you the result—that sir Arthur Berryl,

by incontrovertible facts, and eloquence
warm from the heart, convinced every
body present that he had the best friend
in the world; and miss Broadhurst, as
he finished speaking, gave him her hand,
and he led her off in triumph. ... So
you see, lord Colambre, you were at
last the cause of my friend's marriage!”
She turned to lord Colambre as she
spoke these words, with such an affectionate
smile, and such an expression
of open, inmost tenderness in her whole
countenance, that our hero could hardly
resist the impulse of his passion— 
could hardly restrain himself from falling
at her feet that instant, and declaring
his love.—“But St. Omar! St.
Omar!—It must not be!”
“I must be gone!” said lord Clonbrony,
pulling out his watch. “It is
time to go to my club; and poor Terry
will wonder what has become of me.”
Lord Colambre instantly offered to

accompany his father; much to lord
Clonbrony's, and more to miss Nugent's
surprise.
“What!” said she to herself,—“after
so long an absence, leave me!—Leave
his mother, with whom he always used
to stay—on purpose to avoid me! What
can I have done to displease him? It
is clear, it was not about miss Broadhurst's
marriage he was offended; for he
looked pleased, and like himself, whilst
I was talking of that: but the moment
afterwards, what a constrained, unintelligible
expression of countenance— 
and leaves me to go to a club which he
detests!”
As the gentlemen shut the door on
leaving the room, lady Clonbrony wakened,
and, starting up, exclaimed,
“What's the matter! Are they gone?
Is Colambre gone?”
“Yes, ma'am, with my uncle.”
“Very odd! very odd of him to go
and leave me: he always used to stay
with me—what did he say about me?”

“Nothing, ma'am.”
“Well, then, I have nothing to say
about him, or about any thing, indeed,
for I'm excessively tired and stupid—alone
in Lon'on's as bad as any where
else. Ring the bell, and we'll go to bed
directly—if you have no objection,
Grace.”
Grace made no objection: lady Clonbrony
went to bed, and to sleep in ten
minutes. Miss Nugent went to bed; 
but she lay awake, considering what
could be the cause of her cousin Colambre's
hard unkindness, and of “his
altered eye.” She was openness itself; 
and she determined, that, the
first moment she could speak to him
alone, she would at once ask for an
explanation. With this resolution,
she rose in the morning, and went
down to the breakfast-room, in hopes
of meeting him, as it had formerly
been his custom to be early; and she
expected to find him reading in his
usual place.