

The object, that Lady Jane had in view,
was to prevent Caroline from discouraging
by premature candor a passion,
which she saw rising in the heart of a
young nobleman.
Lord William,&wblank;, who was
“Well pleas'd to 'scape from flattery to wit,”
had always preferred Lady Jane Granville's
company to the society of those
who courted him more, or with less delicacy.
Since Miss Caroline Percy's arrival,
and appearance in town, Lady

Jane had, to do her justice, preserved
with his Lordship exactly the same even
tenor of conduct; whatever her wishes
might be, she had too much proper pride
to compromise her own, or her young
friend's dignity. Moreover, her Ladyship
had sense and knowledge of character
sufficient to perceive, that such a sacrifice,
or the least appearance of a disposition
to make it, would be not only
degrading, but vain: it would, she knew,
for ever disgust and ruin them in the opinion
of a man, who had infinitely more
penetration and feeling, than those who
flattered him were aware that he possessed.
Lord William had excellent abilities,
knowledge, and superior qualities of every
sort, all depressed by excessive timidity,
to such a degree, as to be almost useless
to himself, and to others. Whenever he
was either for the business, or pleasure of
life, to meet or mix with numbers, the
whole man was, as it were, snatched from
himself. He was subject to that night-mare

of the soul, who sits herself upon
the human breast, oppresses the heart,
palsies the will, and raises spectres of
dismay, which the sufferer combats in
vain—that cruel enchantress, who hurls
her spell even upon childhood, and, when
she makes the youth her victim, pronounces,
“Henceforward you shall never appear
in your natural character.—Innocent,
you shall look guilty.—Wise, you shall
look silly.—Never shall you have the use
of your natural faculties.—That which
you wish to say, you shall not say—that
which you wish to do, you shall not do,
—you shall appear reserved, when you
are enthusiastic,—insensible, when your
heart sinks into melting tenderness.—In
the presence of those you most wish to
please, you shall be most awkward,—and
when approached by her you love, you
shall become lifeless as a statue, under the
irresistible spell of mauvaise honte.”
Strange that France should give a name
to that malady of the mind, which she

never knew, or of which she knows less
than any other nation upon the surface
of the civilized globe!
Under the spell of mauvaise honte
poor Lord William&wblank;labored—fast
bound—and bound the faster by all the
efforts made for his relief by the matrons
and yonng damsels, who crowded round
him continually.—They were astonished
that all their charms, and all the encouragement
they held out, failed to free
this young nobleman from his excessive
timidity.—
“What a pity! it was his only fault,
they were sure!”—“Ten thousand pities
he could not be made to speak, they were
certain he had a vast deal to say,”— 
“And he could be so agreeable, they
were confident, if he would.—Most extraordinary
that a man of his rank and
fortune, whom every creature admired,
should be so timid.”
True—but the timid Lord William all
the time esteemed himself more highly,
than these ladies affected to admire him.

—Mixed with his apparent timidity,
there was a secret pride.—Conscious of
the difference between what he was, and
what he appeared to be, he was at once
mortified and provoked, and felt disdain
and disgust for those who pretended to
admire his outward man, or who paid to
his fortune that tribute, which he thought
due to his merit.—With some few, some
very few, by whom he was appreciated,
his pride and his timidity wer equally
at ease, his reserve vanished in an astonishing
manner, and the man came out
of the marble. Of this small number in
his confidence Lady Jane Granville was
one. Even from his boyish years she
had discerned the worth and value of
Lord William,—and he now distinguished
her by his grateful and constant regard.
—But Lady Jane Granville, though
a woman of considerable talents, could
not be a judge of the whole of his mind,
or the extent of his powers,—her talent
was chiefly wit,—her knowledge, knowledge
of the world,—her mind cultivated

but slightly, and for embellishment,— 
his deeply, extensively, and with large
views.—When he became acquainted
with Miss Caroline Percy, he soon found,
that to her all this appeared, and by her
was justly valued.—His assiduity in cultivating
his friend, Lady Jane's acquaintance,
increased; and his taste for the
conversation at her house became so
great, that he was always the first, and
usually the last at her parties.—His
morning visits were frequent and long,— 
he knew, by instinct, the hours when the
two ladies were disengaged, but not always
so exactly the time when he ought
to take leave.—His ear never informed
him when Lady Jane's carriage came to
the door, nor did he always hear the servant
announce it's being in readiness.— 
Her Ladyship might fidget as much as
her politeness would permit without danger
of it's being observed.—His Lordship
never was wakened to the sense of it's being
necessary to stir, till Miss Caroline
Percy, by some strong indication, such as

putting away her drawing, and the books,
or by plainly saying, “We must go out
now,”—made it manifest to him, that he
must depart.—For this Caroline was regularly
reproved afterwards by Lady Jane
—but she never found, that it gave Lord
William any offence; nor did she for
some time observe, that it caused him
much disquietude. He seemed to her to
stay from mere habitual absence of mind,
and unwillingness to remove from a retreat
where he was safe and comfortable,
to some place where he was liable to be
annoyed by his fair persecutors. That he
liked her company and conversation, she
did not affect to deny, nor could she
doubt that he felt for her esteem and regard,—he
expressed both, and he was not
a man to express more than he felt, or
the truth of whose professions could be
suspected. But she thought, that his regard
for her, and for Lady Jane, were
both of the same nature, and equally
free from any mixture of more tender sentiments.—She
thought him a friend, not

a lover.—This was not with Caroline a
mere commonplace phrase.—She believed
this to be true,—and at the time she
believed it, she was right. But constantly
in the society of an amiable, sensible,
and beautiful young woman, a man of
feeling, taste, and understanding, whose
heart is disengaged, usually finds the passage
from friendship to love so easy and
rapid, as to be scarcely perceptible.—And
to this, which generally happens in similar
circumstances, Lord William was peculiarly
liable. For though, from the
crowds who courted his attention, it might
seem, that his liberty of choice was unlimited,
yet, in fact, his power of choosing
was contradicted and reduced to the
few, “whom choice and passion both
approve.” Among these few his fastidious
judgment, and his apprehensions of
domestic disquietude, saw frequently, and
sometimes too justly, objection to the
family connexion of the young lady.— 
Some want of union in it—want of principle,
or train of dissipation, which he


dreaded,—every folly he disliked,—so
that among the numbers of his own rank
who sought his alliance, it was not easy
for him to satisfy himself, even as to connexion.
—Still more difficult to satisfy
him as to Love, “the modern fair one's
jest,” or, what is worse, her affectation.
—His Lordship was well aware, that
among the numbers of young ladies,
who were ready at a moment's warning
to marry him, not one of these would
love him for his own sake.—Now in
common with Marmontel's Alcibiades,
and with most men of rank, who have
any superiority of character, Lord William
had an anxious desire, to be loved
for his own sake,—for though, in the
opinion of most people of the world, and
of some philosophers, the circumstances
of rank and fortune form a part of personal
merit; yet as these are not indissolubly
associated with the individual, his
Lordship rather preferred affection, and
esteem arising from merit, of which he
could not be deprived by any revolution

of fate, or turn of fancy. Whatever
signs of esteem or regard he could obtain
from Miss Caroline Percy, he knew to be
perfectly sincere; if he was ever loved by
her, he knew it would be for his own
sake, and of the constancy of her affection,
if once obtained, the whole tenor
of her character and conduct gave him
the most secure pledge.—Miss Percy's
education, manners, talents, and beauty,
were all such as perfectly suited, and
would do honor, and would grace the
highest rank of life. She had no fortune,
—but that was of no consequence to him
—he was likely to have a princely income
—he had no debts, he had at present all
that satisfied his wishes, and that could
enable him to live married, as well as
single, in a manner that suited his station.
—His friends eager to have him
marry, and almost despairing of his complying,
in this point, with their wishes,
left him entirely at liberty in his choice.
—And his reason and passion now both
determined on that choice, just about the

time when English Clay proposed for
Caroline, and when the conversation
about declarations and refusals had passed
between her and Lady Jane.—That
conversation, instead of changing or
weakening the opinions Caroline then
expressed, had confirmed her in her own
sentiments, by drawing out more fully
the strength of the reasons, and the
honorable nature of the feelings, on which
they were founded.—Some slight circumstances,
such as she could scarcely
state in words, occurred about this time,
which first gave her the idea, that Lord
William—felt for her more than esteem.
—The tender interest he showed one
day when she had a slight indisposition,
—the extreme alarm he expressed one
night, when there happened an embarrassment
between their carriages at the
door of the opera-house, by which Lady
Jane's vis-à-vis, was nearly overturned,— 
an alarm much greater than Caroline
thought the occasion required, was succeeded
by anger against his coachman, so

much more violent and vehement, than
the error or offence justified, or than his
Lordship had ever before been seen to
show ... These things, which in a man
of gallantry might mean nothing, but to
show his politeness, from Lord William
—seemed indicative of something more.— 
Caroline began to see, that the friend
might become a lover, and now, for the
first time, questioned her own heart.— 
She thought highly of Lord William's
abilities and character—She saw, as she
had once said to Lady Jane, “signs
which convinced her, that this volcano
covered with snow, and often enveloped
in clouds, would at some time burst forth
in torrents of fire.”—Little indication as
Lord William now showed to common
observers of being or of becoming an
orator, Caroline perceived in him the
soul of oratory; and she foresaw, that on
some great occasion, from some great
motive, he would at once vanquish his
timidity, and burst forth upon the senate.
She felt convinced that—whether eloquent

or silent, speaking, or acting, in
public or private life, Lord William— 
would in every situation, in every circumstance
of trial, fill and sustain the
character of an upright, honorable, enlightened
English nobleman.—Notwithstanding
that Caroline thought thus
highly of him, Count Altenberg, in her
opinion, far surpassed him in the qualities
they both possessed, and excelled in
many, in which Lord William was deficient—in
manner especially; and manner
goes a great way in Love, even with
people of the best understanding.—Besides
all the advantages of manner, Count
Altenberg had far superior talents, or at
least far superior habits of conversation—he
was altogether as estimable, and more
agreeable than his rival. He also had
had the advantage of finding Caroline's
mind disenganged—he had cultivated her
society in the country, where he had
time and opportunity to develope his
own character and hers.—In one word,
he had made the first impression on

Caroline's heart—and such an impression,
once made on a heart like hers, cannot
be easily effaced. Though there seemed
little chance of his returning to claim his
place in her affections, though she had
made the most laudable efforts to banish
him from her recollection, yet “en pensant
qu'il faut qu'on oublie, on se souvient.”—And
now she found, that not only all
others compared with him were inferior,
and indifferent to her, but that any, whom
she was forced to put in comparison and
competition with Count Altenberg, immediately
sunk in her opinion.
Thus distinctly knowing her own mind,
Caroline was however still in doubt as
to Lord William's, and afraid of mistaking
the nature of his sentiments. She
well remembered Lady Jane's cautions; 
and though she was fully resolved to
spare by her candor the suspense and
pain, which coquetry might create and
prolong, yet it was necessary to be certain
that she read aright, and therefore to
wait for something more decisive, by

which to interpret his meaning.—Lady
Jane wisely forbore all observations on
the subject, and never said or looked a
word, that could recall the memory of
her former debate. With the most scrupulous,
almost haughty delicacy, and the
most consummate prudence, she left
things to take their course, secure of what
the end would be.
One night Lady Jane and Caroline
were to be at a party.—When they
arrived, they described Lord William, in
the midst of a group of the fair and
fashionable, looking as if he was suffering
martyrdom. His eye caught Caroline
as she passed, and his color
changed. The lady next him put up
her glass, to look for the cause of that
change of color—but the glass was put
down again, and no apprehensions excited.
—By degrees Lord William
worked his way towards Caroline—No,
not towards Caroline, but to Lady Jane
Granville.—The company near her
were talking of a proposal, which a gentleman

had lately made for a celebrated
beauty—His suit had been rejected. Some
said, that the lady must have seen that
he was attached to her, and that she had
been to blame, in allowing him so long
to pay her attentions, if she was determined
to refuse him at last—Others defended
the lady, saying, that the gentleman
had never made a distinct declaration,
and that therefore the lady was
quite correct, in not appearing to know
that his attentions meant any thing more
than was avowed—Lord William listened,
perfectly silent, and with an appearance
of some anxiety.—Lady Jane Granville
supported warmly the same side of the
question, which she had taken in a
similar conversation with Caroline.
Miss Percy was appealed to for her
opinion, “Would it not be strange indeed,
if a lady were to reject a gentleman
before she was asked?”
Lord William with increasing anxiety
listened, but dared not look at Caroline,
who with becoming modesty, but with

firmness in what she believed to be
right, answered, “that if a woman
saw that a gentleman loved her, and felt
that she could not return his attachment,
she might, without any rude or premature
rejection, simply by a certain ease
of manner, which every man of sense
knows how to interpret, mark the difference
between esteem and tenderer sentiments; 
and might, by convincing him
that there was no chance of his obtaining
any further interest in her heart, prevent
his ever having the pain of a decided
refusal.”
The discussion ended here. Fresh
company joined them; other subjects
were started—Lord William continued
silent, he did not take any share in any
conversation, but was so absent and absorbed
in his own thoughts, that several
times he was spoken to, without his being
able to give a plausible answer—Then
he stood covered with confusion—confusion
increasing from the sense that it
was observed, and could not be conquered.

—The company moved different
ways, but his Lordship continued fixed
near Caroline—At last the attention
of all near him was happily diverted
and drawn away from him by the appearance
of some new and distinguished
person—He seized the moment, and
summoned courage sufficient to address
some slight question to Caroline—She
answered him with an ease of manner,
which he felt to be unfavorable to his
wishes.—The spell was upon him,
and he could not articulate—a dread
silence might have ensued, but that Lady
Jane happily went on saying something
about pine apple ice.—Lord William
assented implicitly, without knowing
to what, and replied,
“Just so—exactly so”—
to contradictory assertions, and if he
had been asked at this instant, whether
what he was eating was hot or cold, he
could not have been able to decide.— 
Lady Jane composedly took a biscuit,
and enjoyed the passing scene, observing,

that this was “the pleasantest party she
had been at this season.”
Mrs. Crabstock came up, and Lady
Jane, with wit at will, kept the pattern
lady in play by an opportunely recollected
tale of scandal; with ears delighted,
eyes rivetted, stood Mrs. Crabstock,
while Lord William, again relieved from
the fear of observation, breathed once
more, and, partly recovering his senses
through the mist that hung over him,
looked at Caroline, in hopes of drawing
some encouraging omen from her countenance.
—He had come to this party,
determined to say something that should
explain to her his sentiments.—He
thought he could speak to her better in
a crowd than alone.—Now or never!
said he to himself. With desperate effort,
and with an oppressed voice, he
said ... the very thing he did not mean
to say.
“Miss Percy, I never was so inclined
in all my life to quarrel with ease of
manner in any body as in you.”—Then,

correcting himself, and blushing deeply,
he added, “I don't mean that I don't
admire your ease of manner in general— 
but ... in short, it is impossible, I think,
that with your penetration, you can be
in any doubt as to my sentiments.—If I
thought ...”
He stopped short—he felt as if his
life hung upon a thread—as if the first
look, the first sound of her voice, the
next word spoken, must decide his fate.
—He longed, yet feared to see that look,
and to hear that word.
“And I think it is impossible, that,
with your Lordship's penetration, you
should mistake mine,” said Caroline.
There was an ingenuous sweetness in
her look and voice, a fear of giving pain,
yet a resolution to be sincere.—Lord
William felt and understood it all.—He
saw there was no hope.—Caroline heard
from him a deep sigh.—With great and
painful emotion, in the most calm voice,
she could command, but in the kindest
tone, she added,

“For the sentiments of regard and
esteem your Lordship has expressed for
me, believe me, I am truly grateful. ...”
Mrs. Crabstock moved toward them,
and Caroline paused.
“Are you to be at Lady Arrowsmith's
concert to morrow, my Lord?” said Mrs.
Crabstock, who was now at liberty to
ask questions, for even scandal will not
hold curiosity in check for ever.
“Are you to be at Lady Arrowsmith's,
my Lord, to morrow night?” repeated
she, for her first attack was unheard.
“I do not know, indeed,” said he,
starting from his fit of absence.
Mrs. Crabstock persisted. “Were
you at the opera last night, my Lord?”
“I really, Ma'am, do not recollect.”
“Bless me!” cried Mrs. Crabstock.
And “Bless me!” cried Lady Jane
Granville, “we are to be at the Duchess
of Greenwich's ball; Caroline, my dear
—time for us to move.—My Lord, might
I trouble your Lordship to ask if our
carriage is to be had?”

Lord William, before she had completed
the request, obeyed. As they
went down the stair-case, Lady Jane
laughing said, “I am afraid I shall be
as impertinently curious as Mrs. Crabstock—I
was going to ask your Lordship
whether you are engaged to morrow, or
whether you can come to us ... to me?”
“Unhappily,”—the accent on the
word showed it was no expression of
course. “Unhappily I cannot—I am
engaged—I thank your Ladyship.”
Lady Jane looked back at Caroline,
who was a little behind her.
“Though I could not recollect in
time to tell Mrs. Crabstock where I was
last night, or where I am to be to morrow,” 
continued his Lordship, making
an effort to smile, “yet I can satisfy
your Ladyship—I shall be at Tunbridge.”
“Tunbridge!”—cried Lady Jane,
stopping short, and turning to Lord
William, as the light shone full on his
face—“Tunbridge at this season?”

“All seasons are alike to me—all seasons
and their change,” replied Lord
William, scarcely knowing what he answered—the
powers of mind and body
engrossed in suppressing emotion.
They had now reached the bottom of
the stairs; a shawl of Lady Jane's was
not to be found, and while the servants
were searching for it, she and Caroline,
followed by Lord William, went into one
of the supper rooms, which was open.
“To Tunbridge!” repeated Lady Jane.
—“No, my Lord, you must not leave us.”
“What is there to prevent me?” said
Lord William, hastily, almost harshly; 
for, though at the time he felt her kindness,
yet, irresistibly under the power of
his demon, he said the thing he did not
mean; his voice and look expressed the
reverse of what his heart felt.
“Nay, if there is nothing to prevent
your Lordship,” said Lady Jane, walking
away with dignity, “I have only to
wish your Lordship a good journey.”
“I would stay, if I could see any

thing to keep me,” said Lord William— 
impelled, contrary to his better judgment,
to appeal once more to Caroline's countenance.—Then
cursed himself for his
weakness.—
Lady Jane, turning back, saw his
Lordship's look; and now, convinced
that Caroline was to blame for all, reproached
herself for misinterpreting his
words and manner.
“Well, my Lord,” cried she, “you
will not be in such haste to set out for
Tunbridge I am sure, as to go before
you hear from me in the morning.—Perhaps
I may trouble your Lordship with
some commands.”
His Lordship bowed, and said he
should do himself the honor of waiting
her Ladyship's commands. She passed
on quickly towards the hall. Lord William
offered his arm to Caroline.
“Lady Jane is my friend—she will
not think of ceremony, when. ... I
must speak to you, Miss Percy ... and
have but a moment ...”

Caroline walked more slowly.
“I thank you, Madam—Yes, I do
thank you.—Much pain you have given.
—But as little as you could.—Better
now than later.—Like yourself—and
I thank you for preserving the idea of
excellence in my mind in all it's integrity—in
all ... I shall detain you but
a moment ... You are not impatient.”
“No,” said Caroline, in a tremulous
voice, yet, for his sake, as well as for the
sake of her own consistency, trying to
suppress emotion, which she thought he
might misinterpret.
“Fear not—I shall not misinterpret—I
know too well what love is.—Speak
freely of my sentiments to Lady Jane,
when I am gone—her friendship deserves
it from me.”—
He stopped—he was silent—they came
within view of the servants—he walked
quietly to the carriage—assisted her into
it, pressed her hand—
“Farewell—for ever,” he said in a
low voice, and let it go.

The carriage-door was shut.
“Where to, my Lady?”—said the
footman.—The Duchess of Greenwich's,
or home, Caroline?”
“Oh! home, if I may choose,” said
Caroline.
“Home!” said Lady Jane.
And the moment the glass was up,
“Caroline, my dear, tell me this instant,
what is all this between you and Lord
William?—Is it as I hope?—or, is it as
I fear?—speak.”
Caroline could not, she was in tears.
“What have you done?—If you have
said any thing irrevocable, and without
consulting me, I never ... never will
forgive you, Caroline.—Speak at all
events.”
Caroline tried to obey her Ladyship.
“What have you done?—What have
you said?”
“I have said the truth—I have done
—I hope what I ought,” said Caroline,
—“but I have given great pain. ...”
Lady Jane now perceiving by her

voice that she was in sorrow, spoke no
more in anger, but, checking herself,
and changing her tone, said,
“It is not irremediable, my dear.— 
Whatever pain you may have given, you
know the power to give pleasure is still
in your own hands.”
Caroline sighed—“Alas! no, Madam,
it is not.”
“Why so, my love.—He will not
leave town in the morning without my
commands.—And I am at your command.—A
note, a line, a word, will set
all to rights.”
“But that word I cannot say.”
“Then let me say it for you.—Trust
your delicacy to me, I will be dignity
itself.—Can you doubt it?—Believe me,
much as I wish to see you what ... and
where you ought to be in society, I
would not ... there it is, begging Lady
Frances Arlington's pardon, that Mrs.
Falconer and I differ in character essentially,
and de fond en comble.—I would
never yield a point of real delicacy, I

would not descend the thousandth part
of a degree from proper dignity, to make
you—any more than to make myself—a
Princess. Come, let me see you smile
—and now, without reserve, open your
heart, and tell me what you wish to have
done or said.”
“Nothing, my dear Lady Jane.”
“Nothing!” my dear Caroline!— 
“nothing can come of nothing, speak
again.”
“I have no more to say—I have said
all I can say.”
The carriage stopped at their own
door.
“We are all in the dark,” said Lady
Jane; “when I have more light, I shall
be able better to tell what we are about.”
“Now I can see as well as hear,” 
continued she, as her woman met her
with lights.—“Keppel, you may go to
bed, we shall not want you to night.”
“Now, Caroline, take care—remember
your countenance is open to me— 
if not your heart.”

“Both, both are open to you, my
dear friend,” cried Caroline. “And
Lord William, who said you deserved it
from him, desired me to speak as freely
for him, as for myself.”
“He's a noble creature ... There's
the difference between reserve of character,
and reserve of manner—I always
said so.—Go on, my dear.”
Caroline related every thing that had
passed; and Lady Jane, when she had
finished, said,
“A couple of children!—But a couple
of charming children.—Now I, that
have common sense, must set it all to
rights, and turn no prettily into yes.”
“It cannot be done”—said Caroline.
“Pardon me, solemn fair one, it
can.”
“Pardon me, my dear Lady Jane, it
must not be done.”
“Children should not say must,” cried
Lady Jane, in a playful tone; for never
did she feel in more delightful spirits

than this moment, when all her hopes
for Caroline, as she thought, were
realized; “and to complete ‘the pleasing
history,’ no obstacle remained,” she
said, “but the Chinese mother-of-pearl
curtain of etiquette to be withdrawn, by
a dexterous delicate hand, from between
Shuey-Ping-Sin and her lover.” Lady
Jane, late as it was at night, took
up a pen, to write a note to Lord William.
“What are you going to do ... may
I ask, my dear Madam?” cried Caroline.
“My dear Madam, I am going my
own way—let me alone.”
“But if you mean to write for me ...”
“For you!—Not at all—for myself,
I beg to see Lord William in the morning,
to trouble him with my commands.”
“But seriously, my dear Lady Jane,
do not give him unnecessary pain—for
my mind is decided.”
“So every young lady says—It is a

ruled case—for the first three days” 
—Lady Jane wrote on as fast as she
could.
“My dear Lady Jane,” cried Caroline,
stopping her Ladyship's hand—“I
am in earnest.”
“So, then,” cried Lady Jane, impatiently— 
“You will not trust me— 
You will not open your heart to me,
Caroline.”
“I do ... I have trusted you entirely,
my dear friend—My heart ... I opened
to you long ago”—
A dead pause—and blank consternation
in Lady Jane's countenance.—
“But surely ... since then it must
have changed?”
“Not in the least.”
“But it will change ... let Lord William
try to change it.”
Caroline shook her head—“It will
not—I cannot—”
“And you won't do this, when I ask
it as a favor for my friend, my particular
friend?”

“Excuse me, dear, kind Lady Jane,
I know you wish only my happiness,
but this would make me unhappy—It is
the only thing you could ask with which
I would not comply.”
“Then I'll never ask any thing else
while I live from you, Miss Percy,” 
cried Lady Jane, rising and throwing
her pen from her—“You are resolved
to throw your happiness from you—do
so—Wish your happiness!—yes, I have
wished it anxiously—ardently—but now
I have done—You are determined to be
perverse and philosophical—Good night
to you”—
Lady Jane snatched up her candle,
and, in haste, retired—Caroline, sensible
that all her Ladyship's anger at this
moment arose from warm affection, was
the more sorry to have occasioned it,
and to feel that she could not, by yielding,
allay it instantly—-A sleepless
night.—
Early in the morning, Keppel, half- 
dressed and not half awake, came, with

her Ladyship's love and begged to speak
a word to Miss Percy.
“Love!” repeated Caroline, as she
went to Lady Jane's apartment—“how
kind she is!”
“My dear, you have not slept, I see
—nor I either—but I am sure you
have forgiven my hastiness ...” said
Lady Jane, raising herself on her pillow.
Caroline kissed her affectionately.
“And let these tears, my dearest Caroline,” 
continued Lady Jane, “be
converted into tears of joy—for my sake
—for your whole family—for your own
sake, my sweet girl, be advised, and don't
throw away your happiness for life— 
Here's a note from Lord William—he
waits my commands—that's all— 
Let me only desire to see him”—
“On my account? I cannot,” said
Caroline—the tears streaming down her
face, though she spoke calmly.
“Then it is your pride to refuse the

man, for whom every other young woman
is sighing.”
“No, believe me that I do not act
from pride—I feel none—I have no reason
to feel any—”
“No reason to feel pride! Don't you
know ... yes, you know as well as I do,
that this is the man of men—the man on
whom every mother's—every daughter's
eye is fixed—The first unmarried nobleman
now in England—the prize of prizes
... The most excellent man you allow,
and universally allowed to be the most
agreeable.”
“But if he be not so to me,” said
Caroline.
“That can only be because ... you
are conscious of the cause, Caroline ...
It is your own fault.”
“And therefore I said, that I felt I
had no reason to be proud,” said Caroline.
“Then have reason to be proud; 
conquer this weakness, and then you may

have cause to be proud—You pique
yourself on being reasonable; is it reasonable
to leave your affections in the
possession of a man, of whom, in all
human probability, you will never hear
more?”
“Too probable”—said Caroline.
“And will you, you Caroline Percy,
like Lady Angelica Headingham, leave
your heart at the mercy of a foreign adventurer?”
“Oh stop, Ma'am,” cried Caroline,
putting her hand before Lady Jane's
mouth—“don't say that word, any
thing else I could bear—But if you
knew him ... education, character,
manners ... no, you would not be so
unjust—”
“You know ... you told me you
were sensible you ought not to indulge
such a weakness, Caroline.”
“I did—I am sensible of it ... Oh
you see I am ... and my best ... my
very best have I done to drive him from
my memory—And never, till I was

forced to make this comparison, did I
recollect ... did I feel ... —Weak
I may be,” said Caroline, changing from
great agitation to perfect decision—“but
wicked I will not be—I will never marry
one man, and love another—My own
happiness if I sacrifice, mine be the
consequence—but I will never injure the
happiness of another—Do not, Madam,
keep that noble heart, this excellent
Lord William in suspense—What are
your commands?”
“My commands!”—cried Lady
Jane, raising her voice ... trembling
with anger—“Then this is your gratitude
... this your generosity!”
“I must be just—I cannot be generous—”
“And this your affection for all your
friends, all who wish for your happiness?
—You would sacrifice nothing ... nothing— 
no, not the slightest fancy, disgraceful
fancy of your own, to please
them—when you know how ardently
too they wish to see you happily married.”

“To marry to please others, against
my own inclination ... against my own
conscience, must be weakness indeed— 
self-deception—for if my friends wish
my happiness, and I make myself miserable,
how can that please them!— 
Any sacrifice I could make, except that
of principle, I would—But that I
never will make, nor will my friends, nor
do they desire it ... Forgive me, dear
Lady Jane.”
“I never will forgive you,” interrupted
Lady Jane—“Ring!—yes, ring
the bell—And when rung, never expect
my forgiveness.”
It must be done, thought Caroline,
sooner or later—
“My compliments, Keppel to Lord
William,” said Lady Jane, “I have no
commands to trouble him with ... Stay,
I must find something ... that parcel
for Mrs. Baggot, Tunbridge—I must
write ... I cannot write.”
With great difficulty, in the agitation
of her mind and hand, Lady Jane wrote

a few lines, and holding the note up,
looked at Caroline—a last appeal— 
in vain.—
“Take it, Keppel—I'm sorry Lord
William's servant has been kept waiting” 
—cried her Ladyship, and suddenly
closed the curtain.—Caroline retired
softly, hoping that Lady Jane might
sleep, and sleep off her anger—But
no—The morning past—the day past— 
and the sun went down upon her wrath.
At night she would not, she could
not go out any where.—Caroline,
alone with her, endured a terrible tête à 
tête. Lady Jane never spoke, Caroline
tried all she could, by affectionate kindness
of look and voice, and by contrite
gentleness, to sooth her perturbed spirit.
Lady Jane's anger admitted of no
alleviation, her disappointment increased
the more she reflected, and the more she
thought of what others would think, if
they could know it—And that they
did not know, might never know it ...
(for Lady Jane was too honorable to

betray Lord William's secret) ... was
an additional mortification—It was
not till after ninety-six hours, that Caroline
perceived in her Ladyship any
change for the better. The first favorable
symptom was her giving vent
to her natural feelings in the following
broken sentences—
“After all my pains! ... When I
was just thinking of writing to your
father ... When I might have carried
you home in triumph, Lady William
—A duke in all human probability
—A duchess ... absolutely a duchess
you might have been ... And such a
well-informed—such an amiable man!
—every thing your own family could
have wished—And Rosamond!—Ah,
poor Rosamond—Rosamond, you little
know! ... And nobody will ever know—No
creature will ever be a bit the wiser—If
you would have let him even come
to a declaration—properly, decently to
a declaration—Let him attend you in
public once or twice, your declared admirer

... What harm could it possibly
have done him, you, or any body?— 
Then there would have been some credit
at least—and some comfort to me—But
now, at the end of the campaign,
just where we were before—The season
over, and au bout du compte, under Lady
Jane Granville's chaperonage, the beautiful
Miss Caroline Percy has received
one proposal and a quarter!—No,
while I live, I will never forget it.”