

There was a picture of Dagote's,
which was at this moment an object of
fashionable curiosity in Paris. It was
a representation of one of the many charitable
actions of the unfortunate Marie
Antoinette, “then Dauphiness—at that
time full of life, and splendour, and joy,
adorning and cheering the elevated sphere
she just began to move in,”—and yet diffusing
life, and hope, and joy to that
lower sphere, to which the radiance of
the great and happy seldom reaches.
The Dauphiness was at that time the
pride of France, and the darling of Paris;— 
not only worshipped by the court, but
loved by the people. While she was

Dauphiness, and during the commencement
of her reign, every thing, even
disastrous accidents, and the rigour of
the season, served to give her fresh opportunity
of winning the affection, and
exciting the enthusiasm of the people.
When during the festivities on her marriage
hundreds were crushed to death
by the fall of a temporary building, the
sensibility of the Dauphiness, the eagerness
with which she sent all her money
to the lieutenant de police for the families
of those who had perished, conciliated
the people, and turned even the evil presage
to good. Again, during a severe
frost, her munificence to the suffering
poor excited such gratitude, that the
people erected to her honour a vast
pyramid of snow—Frail memorial!— 
“These marks of respect were almost
as transitory as the snowy pyramid.”
Ormond went with Mademoiselle O'Faley
one morning to see the picture of
the Dauphiness, and he had now an opportunity

of seeing a display of French
sensibility, that eagerness to feel and to
excite a sensation; that desire to produce
an effect, to have a scene; that half real
half theatric enthusiasm, by which the
French character is peculiarly distinguished
from the English. He was perfectly
astonished by the quantity of exclamations
he heard at the sight of this
picture; the lifting up of hands and eyes,
the transports, the ecstacies, the tears,
the actual tears that he saw streaming
in despite of rouge—It was real! and
it was not real feeling!—Of one thing
he was clear, that this superfluity of feeling
or exaggeration of expression completely
silenced him, and made him cold
indeed—like one unskilled or dumb he
seemed to stand.
“But are you of marble,” cried Mademoiselle,
“where is your sensibilité 
then?”
“I hope it is safe at the bottom of my
heart,” said Ormond, “but when it is

called for I can not always find it,— 
especially on these public occasions.”
“Ah! but what good all the sensibilité 
in the world do at the bottom of your
heart, where nobody see it?—It is on these
public occasions too you must always
contrive and find it quick at Paris, or
after all you will seem but an Englishman.”
“I must be content to seem and to be
what I am,” said Ormond, in a tone of
playful, but determined resignation.
“Bon!” said a voice near him.—Mademoiselle
went off in impatience to
find some better auditor—she did not
hear the “Bon.”
Ormond turned, and saw near him a
gentleman, whom he had often met at some
of the first houses at Paris. The Abbé 
Morellet, then respected as the most
reasonable of all the wits of France, and
who has since, through all the trying
scenes of the revolution, through the varieties
of unprincipled change, preserved

unaltered the integrity and frankness of
his character—retaining even to his
eighty-seventh year all his characteristic
warmth of heart and clearness of
understanding, le doyen de la littérature
Françoise—the love, respect, and admiration
of every honest heart in France.— 
May he live to receive among all the
other tributes, which his countrymen pay
publicly and privately to his merit,
this record of the impression his kindness
left on grateful English hearts.
Our young hero had often desired to
be acquainted with the abbé,—but the
abbé had really hitherto passed him over
as a mere young man of fashion,—a mere
Milord Anglois, one of the ephemeral
race, who appear in Parisian society,
vanish, and leave no trace behind.—But
now he did him the honour to enter into
conversation with him.—The abbé peculiarly
disliked all affectation of sentiment
and exaggeration;—they were revolting
to his good sense, good taste,

and feeling. Ormond won directly his
good opinion and good will, by having
insisted upon it to Mademoiselle, that
he would not for the sake of fashion or
effect pretend to feel more than he
really did.
“Bah!” said the abbé, “hear all
those women now and all those men— 
they do not know what they are saying— 
they make me sick.—And, besides, I am
afraid these flattering courtiers will do
no good to our young Dauphiness, on
whom so much of the future happiness
or misery of France will depend.—Her
heart is excellent; and they tell me she
announces a strong character;—but what
head of a young beauty and a young
queen will be able to withstand perpetual
flattery? They will lead her wrong,
and then would be the first to desert
her—Trust me, I know Paris.—All this
might change as quickly as the turn of
a weathercock;—but I will not trouble
you with forebodings, perhaps never to

be realized. You see Paris, Monsieur,
at a fortunate time,” continued he,— 
“society is now more agreeable, has
more freedom, more life and variety,
than at any other period that I can remember.”
Ormond replied by a just compliment
to the men of letters, who at this period
added so much to the brilliancy and
pleasure of Parisian society.
“But you have seen nothing of our
men of literature, have you?” said the
abbé.
“Much less than I wish.—I meet
them frequently in society, but as, unfortunately,
I have no pretensions to their
notice, I can only catch a little of their
conversation, when I am fortunate enough
to be near them.”
“Yes,” said the abbé, with his peculiar
look and tone of good-natured irony,
“between the pretty things you are saying
and hearing from—Fear nothing,
I am not going to name any one, but—

every pretty woman in company.—I
grant you it must be difficult to hear
reason in such a situation—as difficult
almost as in the midst of the din of all
the passions at the faro-table. I observe,
however, that you play with astonishing
coolness—there is something still—wanting.— 
Excuse me—but you interest me,
Monsieur—the determination not to play
at all.”
“Beyond a certain sum, I have resolved
never to play,” said Ormond.
“Ah! but the appetite grows—l'appétit
vient en mangeant—the danger is acquiring
the taste—excuse me if I speak
too freely.”
“Not at all—you cannot oblige me
more.—But there is no danger of my
acquiring a taste for play, because I am
determined to lose.”
“Bon!” said the abbé, “that is
the most singular determination I ever
heard; explain that to me then, Monsieur.”

“I have determined to lose a certain
sum—suppose five hundred guineas—I
have won and lost backwards and forwards,
and have been longer about it
than you would conceive to be probable,
but it is not lost yet.—The moment it
is, I shall stop short.—By this means I
have acquired all the advantages of yielding
to the fashionable madness, without
risking my future happiness.”
The abbé was pleased with the idea,
and with the frankness and firmness of
our young hero.
“Really, Monsieur,” said he, “you
must have a strong head; you, le bel
Irlandois, to have prevented it from
turning with all the flattery you have
received at Paris. There is nothing
which gets into the head—worse still— 
into the heart so soon, so dangerously,
as the flattery of pretty women.—And
yet, I declare you seem wonderfully sober,
considering.”
“Ne jurez pas,” said Ormond—“but

at least in one respect I have not quite lost
my senses; I know the value, and feel
the want of a safe, good guide at Paris; 
if I dared to ask such a favour, I should,
since he has expressed some interest for
me, beg to be permitted to cultivate the
acquaintance of M. l'Abbé Morellet.”
“Ah ça—now my head will turn, for
no head can stand the dose of flattery, that
happens to suit the taste. I am particularly
flattered by the idea of being a
safe, good friend; and frankly, if I can
be of any service to you, I will. Is there
any thing I can do for you?”
Ormond thanked him, and told him
that it was his great ambition to become
acquainted with the celebrated men of
literature in Paris,—he said he should
feel extremely obliged, if M. Morellet
would take occasion to introduce him to
any of them they might meet in society.
“We must do better for you,” said the
abbé, “we must shew you our men of
letters;” he concluded by begging Ormond

mond to name a day, when he could do
him the honour to breakfast with him.
“I will promise you Marmontel at least,
for he is just going to be married to my
niece, and of him we shall be secure; and
as to the rest I will promise nothing, but
do as much as I can.”
“The men of letters, about this period,
at Paris,” as the abbé explained
to Ormond, “began to feel their own
power and consequence, and had assumed
a tone of independance, yet tempered
with due respect for rank. Many of
them lived or were connected with men
of rank, by places about the court, by
secretaryships and pensions, obtained
through court influence. Some were
attached by early friendship to certain
great families; had apartments to themselves
in their hotels, where they received
what friends they pleased; and, in short,
lived as if they were at home. Their
company was much sought for by the
great; and they enjoyed good houses,

good tables, carriages, all the conveniences
of life, and all the luxuries of the
rich, without the trouble of an establishment.
Their mornings were their own,
employed in study usually, and they
came down from their studies, and gave
themselves to society for the rest of the
day. While this state of things lasted— 
was the most agreeable period, perhaps,
of French literary society.
The Abbé Morellet's breakfast was
very agreeable, and Ormond saw at his
house, what he had promised him, many
of the literary men at Paris. Voltaire
was not then in France; and Rousseau,
who was always quarrelling with somebody,
and generally with every body,
could not be prevailed upon to come to
this breakfast. Ormond was assured,
that he lost nothing by not seeing him,
or by not hearing his conversation, for it
was by no means equal to his writings; 
his temper was so susceptible and wayward,
that he was not fit for society—

neither capable of enjoying nor of adding
to its pleasures—Ormond heard perhaps
more of Rousseau and Voltaire, and
learnt more of their characters, by the
anecdotes that were related, and the
bon mots that were repeated, than he
could have done if they had been present.
There was great variety of different
characters and talents at this
breakfast; and the abbé amused himself
by making his young friend guess who
the people were before he told their names.
It was happy for Ormond, that he was
acquainted with some of their writings,
(this he owed to Lady Annaly's well
chosen present of French books). He was
fortunate in his first guess—Marivaux's
conversation was so like the style of his
writings, so full of hair breadth distinctions,
subtle exceptions, and metaphysical
refinement and digressions, that Ormond
soon guessed him, and was applauded for
his quickness.—Marmontel he discovered
by his being the only man in the room

who had not mentioned to him any of
“Les Contes Moraux.”—But there was
one person who set all his skill at defiance:
he pronounced that he was no
author—that he was I'ami de la maison— 
he was so indeed wherever he went—but
he was both a man of literature, and a
man of deep science—no less a person
than the great d'Alembert. Ormond
thought d'Alembert and Marmontel were
the two most agreeable men in company.— 
d'Alembert was simple, open-hearted,
unpresuming, and cheerful in
society. Far from being subject to that
absence of mind, with which profound
mathematicians are sometimes reproached,
d'Alembert was present to every
thing that was going forward—every
trifle he enjoyed with the zest of youth,
and the playfulness of childhood.—Ormond
confessed, that he should never
have guessed that he was a great mathematician
and profound calculator.
Marmontel was distinguished for combining

in his conversation, as in his character,
two qualities for which there are
no precise English words, naïveté and
finesse. Whoever is acquainted with
Marmontel's writings must have a perfect
knowledge of what is meant by
both.
It was fortunate for our young hero,
that Marmontel was, at this time, no
longer the dissipated man he had been
during too great a period of his life.—He
had now returned to his early tastes for
simple pleasures and domestic virtues:— 
had formed that attachment, which afterwards
made the happiness of his life.— 
He was just going to be married to the
amiable Mademoiselle Montigny, a niece
of the Abbé Morellet;—she, and her
excellent mother, lived with him; and
Ormond was most agreeably surprised
and touched at the unexpected sight of an
amiable, united, happy family, when he
had only expected to see a meeting of
literati.

The sight of this domestic happiness
reminded him of the Annalys—brought
the image of Florence to his mind.—If
she had been but sincere, how he should
have preferred her to all he had seen.
It came upon him just at the right moment.— 
It contrasted with all the dissipation
he had seen, and it struck him the
more strongly, because it could not possibly
have been prepared as a moral lesson
to make an impression.—He saw the
real, natural course of things—he heard
in a few hours the result of the experience
of a man of great vivacity,
great talents, who had led a life of
pleasure, and who had had opportunities
of seeing and feeling all that it
could possibly afford, at the period of
the greatest luxury and dissipation ever
known in France. No evidence could
be stronger than Marmontel's in favour
of virtue and of domestic life, nor could
any one express it with more grace
and persuasive eloquence.

It did Ormond infinite good.—He
required such a lesson at this juncture,
and he was capable of taking
it—it recalled him to his better self.
The good abbé seemed to see something
of what passed in Ormond's mind, and
became still more interested about him.
“Ah, ça,” said he to Marmontel, as
soon as Ormond was gone, “that young
man is worth something, I thought he
was only le bel Irlandois, but I find he
is much more. We must do what we
can for him, and not let him leave Paris,
as so many do, having seen only the
worst part of our society.”
Marmontel, who had also been pleased
with him, was willing, he said, to do
any thing in his power, but he could
scarcely hope, that they had the means
of drawing, from the double attraction
of the faro table and coquetry,
a young man of that age and figure.
“Fear nothing, or rather hope every
thing,” said the abbé, “his head and his

heart are more in our favour, trust me,
than his age and his figure are against
us.—To begin, my good Marmontel, did
not you see how much he was struck and
edified by your reformation.”
“Ah! if their was another Mademoiselle
de Montigny for him, I should fear
nothing, or rather hope every thing,” said
Marmontel, “but where shall he find
such another in all Paris?”
“In his own country, perhaps, all in
good time,” said the abbé.
“In his own country?—True,” cried
Marmontel “now you recal it to my
mind, how eager he grew in disputing
with Marivaux, upon the distinction
between aimable and amiable.—His description
of an amiable woman, according
to the English taste, was, I recollect,
made con amore; and there was a sigh
at the close which came from the heart,
and which shewed the heart was in England
or Ireland.”
“Wherever his heart is, c'est bien

placé,” said the abbé, “I like him—we
must get him into good company—he is
worthy to be acquainted with your amiable
and aimable Madame de Beauveau,
and Madame de Seran.”
“True,” said Marmontel, “and for
the honour of Paris, we must convince
him that he has taken up false notions,
and that there is such a thing as conjugal
fidelity, and domestic happiness here.”
“Bon. That is peculiarly incumbent
on the author of ‘Les Contes Moraux,’” 
said the abbé.
It happened, fortunately for our hero,
that Madame de Connal was, about this
time, engaged to pass a fortnight at the
country house of Madame de Clairville.— 
During her absence, the good abbé 
had time to put in execution all his benevolent
intentions—he introduced his
young friend to some of the really good
company of Paris—he pointed out to him
at Madame Geoffrin's, Madame de Tençin's,
Madame du Deffand's, and Madame

Trudaine's—the difference between
the society at the house of a rich
farmer general—at the house of one
connected with the court, and with
people in place and political power— 
and the society of mixed rank and literature.— 
The mere passing pictures of
these things, to one who was not to
live in Paris, might not perhaps, except
as a matter of curiosity, be of much
value; but his judicious friend led
Ormond from these to make comparisons
and deductions, which were of use to him
all his life afterward.