

The moment that Mr. Temple reached
his friend's chambers, he threw himself
into a chair.
“What repose! What leisure! What
retirement is here!” cried he— “A man
can think and feel a moment for himself.”
“Not well, I fear, in the midst of the
crackling of these parchments,” said
Alfred, folding up the deeds at which
he had been at work— “And I wonder
you don't complain, as you used to do,
of their musty smell; for my part I
think I am like that good Lawyer, who
acquired a special love for the smell of
old deeds—However, I have now done
my business for this day, and I am your

man for what you please—If you are not
engaged by some of your great people,
we cannot do better than dine together.”
“With all my heart,” said Mr.
Temple.
“And where shall we dine?” said
Alfred.
“Any where you please—But I have
a great deal to say to you, Alfred, don't
think of dining yet.”
“At the old work!” cried Alfred.
“You think of convincing, while I think of dining.”
But, as he spoke, Alfred observed his
friend's agitated countenance, and immediately
becoming serious, he drew a
chair beside Mr. Temple, and said:
“I believe, Temple, you have something
to say, that you are anxious about.
You know, that if there is any thing I
can do, head, hand, and heart are at
your service.”
“Of that I am quite sure, else I
should not come here to open my heart

to you,” replied Mr. Temple. Then he
related all that had just passed between
Lord Oldborough and himself, and ended
by asking Alfred, “whether he
thought there was any chance of success
for his love?”
“You have not told me who the Lady
is,” said Alfred.
“Have not I?—but, surely, you can
guess?”
“I have guessed—but I wish to be
mistaken—Lady Frances Arlington?”
“Quite mistaken—Guess again—and
nearer home.”
“Nearer home!—One of my sisters?—Not
Caroline, I hope?”
“No”—
“Then it must be as I once hoped
... But why did you never mention it
to me before?”
Mr. Temple declared, that he had
thought there was so little chance of
his ever being in circumstances in which
he could marry, especially a woman who

had not a large fortune of her own, that
he had scarcely ventured to avow, even
to himself, his attachment.
“I thought my love would wear itself
out,” added he. “Indeed I did not
known how serious a business it was, till
this sudden proposal was made to me of
leaving England: then I felt, that I should
drag, at every step, a lengthening chain.
In plain prose, I cannot leave England
without knowing my fate. But don't
let me make a fool of myself, Alfred.
No man of sense will do more than hazard
a refusal: that every man ought to
do, or he sacrifices the dignity of the
woman he loves to his own false pride.
I know, that in these days gentlemen
suitors are usually expert in sounding the
relations of the lady they wish to address.
To inquire, whether the lady is engaged
or not, is, I think, prudent and honorable:
but beyond this, I consider it to
be treacherous and base to endeavor,
by any indirect means, to engage relations
to say, what a lover should learn

only from the lady herself. Therefore,
my dear friend, all I ask is, whether
you have reason to believe, that your
sister Rosamond's heart is preengaged; 
or if you think, that there is such a certainty
of my being rejected, as ought, in
common prudence, to prevent my hazarding
the mortification of a refusal?”
Alfred assured his friend, that, to the
best of his belief, Rosamond's heart was
disengaged—
“And,” continued he, “as a witness
is or ought to be prepared to tell his
cause of belief, I will give you mine—Some
time since I was commissioned by
a gentleman, who wished to address her,
to make the previous inquiry, and the
answer was, quite disengaged.—Now as
she did not accept of this gentleman,
there is reason to conclude, that he did
not engage her affections ...”
“Was he rich or poor, may I ask?” 
interrupted Mr. Temple.
“That is a leading question,” said Alfred.

“I do not want you to tell me who the
gentleman was, I know that would not
be a fair question, and I trust I should be
as far from asking, as you from answering
it.—But there are so many rich, as
well as so many poor men in the world,
that in answering to the inquiry, rich or
poor? what city or court man do you
name?.—I want only to draw a general
inference, as to your sister's taste for
wealth.”
“Her taste is assuredly not exclusively
for wealth, for her last admirer was a
gentleman of very large fortune.”
“I am happy, at least in that respect,
in not resembling him,” said Mr. Temple.
“Now for my other question—What
chance ... for myself?”
“Of that, my good friend, you must
judge for yourself.—By your own rule all
you have a right to hear is, that I, Rosamond's
brother ... have no reason
for believing that she has such a repugnance
to you, as would make a refusal

certain.—And that you may not too much
admire my discretion, I must add, that
if I had a mind to tell you more, I could
not. All I know is that Rosamond, as
well as the rest of my family, in their
letters, spoke of you with general approbation,
but I do not believe the idea of
considering you as her lover ever entered
into her head, or theirs.”—
“But now the sooner it enters the better,” 
cried Mr. Temple, “Will you ...
can you ... Have not you business to
do for Lord Oldborough at Clermont-Park?”
“Yes—and I am glad of it, as it gives
me an opportunity of indulging myself in
going with you, my dear Temple ...
I am ready to set out at any moment.”
“God bless you!—The sooner the better
then.—This night in the coach if you
please.—I'll run and take our places,” 
said he, snatching up his hat.
“Better send,”—cried Alfred, stopping
him, “my man can run and take places

in a coach as well as you, though he is
not in love.—Do you stay with me. We
will go to the coffee-house, dine, and be
ready to set off.”
Mr Temple acceded.
“In the mean time,” said Alfred,
“you have relations and connexions of
your own, who should be consulted.”
Temple said he was sure, that all his
relations and connexions would highly
approve of an alliance with the Percy family.— “But
in fact,” added he, “that is
all they will care about the matter. My
relations, though high and mighty people,
have never been of any service to
me; they are too grand, and too happy,
to mind whether a younger brother of a
younger brother sinks or swims; whether
I live in single wretchedness, or double
blessedness.—Not one relation has nature
given, who cares for me half as much as
the friend I have made for myself.”
Sincerely as Alfred was his friend, and
warmly interested for his success, yet he

did not let this friendship interfere with
the justice due to his sister, of leaving her
sole arbitress of a question, which most
concerned her happiness.
“You understand, Temple,” said he,
“before we set out, that my wishes in
your favor are nothing to the purpose.—Much
as I should like to have you for my
brother-in-law, if love and fortune permit,
yet observe, I shall use no influence
with my sister, direct or indirect.—Indeed,
my being conscious of my own attachment
to you will make me peculiarly
delicate and careful not to interfere or bias
her in any degree, by telling my wishes.”
Mr. Temple understood and approved
of this, declaring, that it was precisely
what he desired, and what he should do
by any friend and sister in similar circumstances.
His pride and reason, he said,
would equally revolt from the idea of interference
of friends in his favor.— “Luckily
there is no probability of this,
for I am too poor for any prudent friend

to interfere in my favor.—And were I as
rich as Crœsus, your sister's family I
know practically, as well as theoretically,
would leave her entirely to her own decision.”—
All these preliminary delicacies—but
not false delicacies, settled, the two
friends set out on their journey.—During
the last stage they were lucky enough to
have the coach to themselves, and Mr.
Temple made himself amends for the restraint,
under which he had labored during
the preceding part of the journey,
whilst he had been oppressed by the presence
of men, whose talk was of the
lower concerns of life.—After he had descanted
for some time on the perfections
of his mistress, he ended with expressing
his surprise, that his friend, who had often
of late rallied him upon his being in love,
had not guessed sooner who was the object
of his passion.—
Alfred said, that the idea of Rosamond
had occurred to him, because his friend's
absence of mind might be dated from

the time of his last visit to Clermont-Park; 
but said Alfred, as Lady Frances
Arlington was there, and as I had formerly
fancied, that her Ladyship's wish to
captivate or dazzle you had not been
quite without effect, I was still in doubt,
and thought even your praises of Rosamond's
disposition and temper, compared
with her Ladyship's, might only be ruse
de guerre, or ruse d' amour.
“There was no ruse in the case,” said
Mr. Temple; “I confess, that when I
first emerged from my obscurity into all
the light and life of the world of fashion,
my eyes were dazzled, and before I recovered
the use of them sufficiently to
compare the splendid objects by which I
found myself surrounded, I was wonderfully
struck with the appearance of Lady
Frances Arlington, and did not measure,
as I ought, the immense difference between
Lord Oldborough's secretary, and
the niece of the Duke of Greenwich.—Lady
Frances, from mere gaieté de cœur,
likes to break hearts; and she wished to

add one, however insignificant, to the
number of her conquests.—I, a simple
man of literature, unskilled in the wicked
ways of the fair, was charmed by the
innocent naïveté and frank gayety of Lady
Frances, and all that was
“Strangely wild, or madly gay,
“I call'd it only pretty Fanny's way.”
“Fortunately, just as I was in imminent
danger of exchanging true sighs for
false smiles, I became acquainted with
your sister Rosamond. In the country,
and under circumstances more favorable
for the development of character, than
any which might occur for months or
years in a town life, where all the men
and women are merely actors, I had leisure
to see and mark the difference and
the resemblance between Lady Frances
Arlington's character, and that of your
sister.—They resembled each other in natural
quickness of intellect, and of feeling; 
in wit, sprightliness, and enthusiasm,

they were also to a certain degree
alike.—
I was amused by Lady Frances Arlington's
lively nonsense, till I heard
your sister's lively sense.—Her Ladyship
hazards saying every thing that occurs
to her, and often makes happy hits; 
but your sister's style of wit is far superior,
and far more agreeable, because it
has the grace, elegance, and, above all,
the infinite variety, which literary allusion
supplies. I found myself pleased,
not only with what she said, but with
the trains of ideas, that, by a single word,
she often suggested. Conversing with
her, my mind was kept always active,
without ever being over exerted or fatigued.—I
can look back, and trace the
whole progress of my attachment. I began
in this way, by finding her conversation
most delightful—but soon discovered,
that she was not only more entertaining
and more cultivated, but far more
amiable than my idol, Lady Frances,

because she had never been an idol, and
did not expect to be adored.—Then she
was more interesting, because more capable
of being interested.—Lady Frances
requires much sympathy, but gives little; 
and, for that enthusiasm of temper which
had, at first, charmed me in her Ladyship,
I began to lose my taste, when I
observed that it was always excited by
trifles, and by trifles that concerned herself
more than any one else.—I used to
think her—what every body calls her—a
perfectly natural character, and so,
perhaps, she is—but not the better for
that—since she is what, I am afraid, we
all are naturally—selfish.—Her Ladyship,
if I may use the expression, is enthusiastically
selfish.—Your sister—enthusiastically
generous.—Lady Frances's
manners are caressing, yet, I doubt, whether
she feels affection for any one living,
except just at the moment when they
are ministering to her fancies.—It was
Miss Percy's warm affection for her sister
Caroline, which first touched my heart.

—I saw each in her own family.—The
contrast was striking—In short, by the
joint effect—of contrast and resemblance,
my love for one Lady decreased as fast,
as it increased for the other—and I had
just wit and judgment enough to escape
from snares, that could not have held
me long, to chains that have power to
hold me for ever.”
To this history of the birth and progress
of his love Mr. Temple added
many expressions of his hopes, fears,
and regrets, that he had not five thousand
a year instead of five hundred, to
offer his mistress; he at length became
absolutely silent.—They were within
view of the Hills, and too many feelings
crowded upon his mind, to be expressed
in words.
And now we might reasonably contrive
to fill
“Twelve vast French romances neatly gilt,”
with the history of the following eventful
fortnight—including the first surprise at

the arrival of the travellers—the declaration
of Mr. Temple's love—the astonishment
of Rosamond on discovering, that
she was the object of this passion—of a
passion so generous and ardent—the consequent
and rapid discovery of a hundred
perfections in the gentleman, which had
before escaped her penetration—the
strong peculiar temptation to marry him,
because he had not enough to live upon—the
reaction of generosity on the
other side of the question, which forbade
to ruin her lover's fortune. The fluctuations
of sentiment and imagination, the
delicacies of generosity, gratitude, love,
and finally the decision of common sense,
reason, and prudence.
It was fortunate for Rosamond, not only
that she had prudent friends, but that
they had not made her in the least afraid
of their superior wisdom, so that she had,
from the time she was a child, told them
every idea, as it rose in her vivid imagination,
and every feeling of her susceptible
heart; imprudent as she might appear

in her confidential conversation,
that imprudence never passed from words
to actions.—And now, when she was
called upon in an important event of life,
to decide for herself; she acted with consummate
discretion.
Mr. Temple's character and manners
peculiarly pleased her, and his being a
man of birth and family certainly operated
much in his favor. Her parents
now, as in Mr. Gresham's case, did not
suffer their own tastes or prepossessions
to interfere with her happiness. They
had never urged her to accept of Mr.
Gresham, because he was rich; nor did
they influence her to reject Mr. Temple,
because he was poor; but, without leaning
too much to the worldly or to the
romantic side of the question, they placed
before her all the advantages and disadvantages
of marrying a man of Mr.
Temple's confined circumstances, and
they left her understanding and feelings,
to determine what ought to be done.
Caroline, grateful for the sympathy,

which Rosamond had always shown her,
took the warmest interest in this affair.—Caroline
was the most excellent, indulgent,
yet safe confident; and as a hearer, she was
absolutely indefatigable; Rosamond never
found her too busy, too lazy, or too
sleepy to listen to her—late at night,
early in the morning, or in the most
hurried moment of the day, it was all
the same, Caroline seemed to have nothing
to do, but to hear, think, and feel
for Rosamond.
“My dear Caroline,” cried Rosamond,
“I must marry Mr. Temple at once, on
purpose to pay you for your patience in
listening to me.”
“And how will your marrying him
pay me?”
“Why you know if I marry him next
week, the week afterwards I shall accompany
him on his embassy to that
Court, where I shall see your Count
Altenberg ... I beg your pardon ...
Really, my dear Caroline, I did not think
that name would crimson your face so

deeply.—You have been so completely
intent on my affairs, that I thought you
had forgotten your own.”
Caroline turned the conversation, and
spoke of Mr. Temple, reminding Rosamond,
“that it was absolutely necessary
she should come to some decision, as the
fortnight allowed by Lord Oldborough
had now nearly elapsed. Mr. Temple's
understanding, temper, disposition, and
manners, Rosamond allowed to be excellent—his
conversation was particularly
agreeable.—In short, after searching in
vain for an objection, she was obliged to
confess, that she liked him. Indeed, before
she had allowed this in words, her
mother and sister had made the discovery,
and had seen the struggle in her
mind between love and prudence.—Mr.
Temple's fortune was not sufficient for
them to live upon, and she knew that a
wife in his present circumstances must
be a burden to him; therefore, notwithstanding
all that his passion, and all that
her own partiality could urge, she decidedly

refused his proposal of an immediate
union, nor would she enter into
any engagement, or suffer him to bind
himself by any promise for the future; 
but he obtained permission to correspond
with her during his absence from England,
and with the hope that she was
not quite indifferent to him, he took
leave of her—returned to town—waited
upon Lord Oldborough—accepted of the
embassy, and prepared for his departure
to the continent.
“How I shall like to read his first
letter from abroad!” said Rosamond—looking
at Caroline— “not for my own
sake, or his, my dear, but just that we
may satisfy our curiosity about the person
who must not be named.”
Now that there was an approaching
possibility and probability of hearing of
Count Altenberg, Caroline felt it extremely
difficult to adhere to her resolution
of never thinking of him, especially
as her mind, which had been actively
occupied and deeply interested in her

sister's concerns, was now left to return
upon itself in all the leisure of retirement.—Fortunately
for her, about this
time, she was again called upon for that
sympathy, which she was ever ready to
give to her friends.—She received the
following letter from Mrs. Hungerford.
Letter from Mrs. Hungerford to Miss
Caroline Percy.
“Come, my beloved Caroline, my
dear young friend, friend of my family,
and of all who are most near and dear to
me; come, and enjoy with me and them
that happiness, which your judicious
kindness long since foresaw, and your
prudence promoted.—
“Had you any of that mean spirit of
coquetry, which I see in so many, you
might with charms and talents such as
yours have entangled Mr. Barclay in a
hopeless passion, and have wasted the
best years of his life in a fruitless pursuit.—But
you at once knew your own

mind, convinced him that you knew it,
and restored him to himself. You might
have exhibited him a captive in your
chains—honorable he would have thought
them, and so would any other man of
taste and sense—but you preferred
to the gratification of vanity the certainty
of not wounding the feelings of a
friend, and the consequence is, that you
have in that friend one, who loves and
admires you as warmly as I do—I cannot
say more.—
“My niece, Lady Mary Pembroke,
is at last convinced, that she has it in
her power to make Mr. Barclay permanently
happy. Mr. Barclay has been
obliged to take a considerable length of
time, to convince her of the steadiness of
his attachment. Indeed, her objection—that
he had been charmed by such a
coquet as the lady by whom we first saw
him captivated, appeared to me strong,
and I thought my niece right for adhering
to it, more especially as I believed,
that at the time her affections pleaded

against her reason in his favor, and that,
if she had been convinced long ago, it
would not have been against her will.
“Mr. Barclay has behaved like a man
of sense and honor. Without disguise
he told her of his former attachment to
you.—She instantly made an answer,
which raised her high in my estimation.
She replied, that Mr. Barclay's being detached
from Lady Angelica Headingham
by your superior merit was to her the
strongest argument in his favor. She
must, she said, have felt insecure in the
possession of a heart, which had been
transferred directly from Lady Angelica
to herself, because she was conscious,
that her own disposition was so different
from her Ladyship's; but in succeeding
to the affection, which he had felt for a
woman of your character, she would feel
perfect security, or at least reasonable
hope, that by similar, though certainly
inferior qualities, she might ensure his
happiness and her own.—They are to
be married next week—Lady Mary particularly

wishes that you should be one
of her bride-maids—Come then, my love,
and bring all your Percys.—I shall not
perfectly enjoy my own and my niece's
happiness, till you share it with me—My
daughter Mortimer, insists upon
signing this as well as myself,
Mary-Elizabeth Hungerford,
Kate Mortimer.”
Caroline and all Mrs. Hungerford's
Percys obeyed her summons with alacrity.
Lady Mary Pembroke's marriage
with Mr. Barclay was solemnized under
the happiest auspices, and in the midst
of approving and sympathizing friends.—As
soon as the ceremony was over,
and she had embraced and congratulated
her niece, Mrs. Hungerford
turned to Mrs. Percy, and in alow voice
said,
“If it were not too much for one so
happy as I am, so rich in blessings, to
ask one blessing more, I should ask to

be permitted to live to see the day when
our dear Caroline ...”—Mrs. Hungerford
pressed Mrs. Percy's hand, but
could say no more; the tears rolled down
her cheeks as she looked up to Heaven.—Some
minutes afterwards, following
Caroline with her eyes,
“Look at her, Mr. Percy!” said Mrs.
Hungerford. “Did ever selfish coquet,
in the height of triumph over lover or
rival, enjoy such pleasure, as you see
sparkling at this moment in that dear
girl's countenance?”
The bride and bridegroom set off immediately
for Mr. Barclay's seat in Berkshire.
Lady Florence accompanied her
sister; and Mr. Hungerford, after parting
from both her nieces, entreated that Caroline
might be left with her. “It is a selfish
request I know, my dear, but at my age
I cannot afford to be generous of the society
of those I love.—Allow me to plead
my age, and my ... Well, I will
not say more, since I see it gives you

pain, and since I see you will grant the
prayer of my petition, rather than hear
my claims to your compassion.”
Caroline liked particularly to stay with
Mrs. Hungerford at this time, when
there was not any company at the Castle,
no one but Mrs. Hungerford and her
daughter, so that she had the full and
quiet enjoyment of their society.—At
this time of her life, and in the state of
her mind at this period, no society could
have been more agreeable, soothing, and
useful to Caroline, than that of such a
friend as Mrs. Hungerford. One, who
had not forgotten the passions of youth; 
who could give at once sympathy and
counsel; who was willing to allow to
love it's full and exquisite power to exalt
the happiness of human life, yet appeared
herself, in advanced and serene old
age, a constant example of the falsehood
of the notion, that the enthusiasm of
passion is essential to felicity.—An elegant
and just distinction has been made by a
philosophical writer between delicacy of

passion, and delicacy of taste. One leading
to that ill-governed susceptibility,
which transports the soul to ecstasy, or
reduces it to despair on every adverse or
prosperous change of fortune; the other
enlarging our sphere of happiness, by
directing and increasing our sensibility
to objects of which we may command
the enjoyment, instead of wasting it
upon those over which we have no control.—Mrs.
Hungerford was a striking
example of the advantage of repressing
delicacy of passion, and cultivating delicacy
of taste.
At an advanced age, she showed exquisite
perception of pleasure in every
work of genius; in conversation, no
stroke of wit or humor escaped her quick
intelligence, no shade of sentiment or
politeness was lost upon her; and on
hearing of any trait of generosity or
greatness of soul, her whole countenance
beamed with delight; yet with all this
quickness of feeling she was quite free
from fastidiousness, and from that irritability

about trifles, into which those
who indulge the delicacy of passion in
youth are apt to degenerate in age.— 
Caroline felt, every day, increasing affection
as well as admiration for Mrs.
Hungerford, and found time pass delightfully
in her company. Beside that general
and well chosen acquaintance with
literature, which supplied her with perpetual
resources, she had that knowledge
of life and of the world, which mixes so
well, in conversation, with the knowledge
of books. She had known, intimately,
most of the celebrated people of
the last century, and had store of curious
and interesting anecdotes, which she
produced with so much taste and judgment,
and told so well, as never to
fatigue attention. Caroline found, that
her mind was never passive or dormant
in Mrs. Hungerford's company, she was
always excited to follow some train of
thought, to discuss some interesting
question, or to reflect upon some new
idea. There was, besides, in the whole

tenor of her conversation and remarks,
such a charm of benevolence, such an
indulgence for human nature, with all it's
faults and follies, as left the most pleasing
and encouraging impression on the
mind, and inspired hope and confidence.—Her
anecdotes and her philosophy all
tended to prove, that there is more virtue
than vice, more happiness than
misery, in life; and, above all, that
there is a greater probability that the
world should improve, than that it should
degenerate.—Caroline felt pleased,
continually to find her own favorite opinions
and hopes supported and confirmed
by the experience and judgment
of such a woman as Mrs. Hungerford; 
and there was something gratifying to
her, in being thus distinguished and preferred
by one, who had read so much and
thought so deeply. Mrs. Mortimer's
sprightly conversation and constant
cheerfulness, joined to her fondness for
her mother and for Caroline, and the
peculiar charm of good breeding, added

to all the rest, contributed now to make
Caroline happy at Hungerford-Castle
&wblank;almost as happy as she had ever
been in her life.—
As Mrs. Hungerford had heard nothing
more of Count Altenberg, she
wisely forbore to touch upon the subject,
or ever to mention his name to Caroline; 
and she saw, with satisfaction, the care
with which her young friend turned her
mind from every dangerous recollection.
Sometimes, however, the remembrance
of the Count was unavoidably recalled; 
once, in particular, in turning over the
life of Sir Philip Sidney, there was a
passage copied in his hand, on a slip of
paper, which had accidentally been left
in the book.
“Algernon Sidney, in a letter to his
son, says that, in the whole of his life,
he never knew one man, of what condition
soever, arrive at any degree of reputation
in the world, who made choice
of, or delighted in the company or conversation

of those, who in their qualities
were inferior, or in their parts not much
superior to himself.”
“What have you there, my love?
Something that pleases and interests you
particularly, I see,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
not knowing what it was that Caroline
was reading— “Show it me, my
dear, I am sure I shall like it.”
Caroline, deeply blushing, gave her
the paper,—the moment Mrs. Hungerford
saw the hand writing, she was sorry
she had asked for it. After reading, she
folded it up, and putting it into her
pocket-book, said,
“I knew I should be pleased—It is
an observation that I wish I could write
in letters of gold, for the advantage of all
the young men in the world in whom I
take any interest.”
The energetic warmth with which
Mrs. Hungerford spoke relieved Caroline,
as it seemed to justify the delight
she had involuntarily expressed—even to

her own mind; the sentiment for the
individual seemed now enveloped in general
approbation and benevolence. She
never loved Mrs. Hungerford better than
at this instant.
Mrs. Hungerford observed, that none
of the common sentimental passages,
either in poetry or novels, ever seemed
to affect Caroline; and to the romantic
descriptions of love she was so indifferent,
that it might have appeared to a common
observer, as if she was, and ever would
be, a stranger to the passion.—With
many young ladies Mrs. Hungerford
had remarked, that the description of
one charming man will immediately
awaken the recollection of another. By
the help of the active and plastic powers
of the imagination, any and every hero
of a novel could be made, at pleasure,
to appear the exact resemblance of each
lady's different lover.—Some, indeed,
professed a peculiar and absolute exclusive
attachment, founded on unintelligible
or indescribable merits or graces, but

these ladies, she had found, were, of all
others, most liable to change, and on
further acquaintance with the world, to
discover, on generalising their notions,
similar or superior attractions in new
models of perfection. In Caroline Mrs.
Hungerford saw none of these capricious
fancies; but she perceived, that Count
Altenberg was associated in Caroline's
mind strongly and justly with her
highest ideas of excellence, and that it
was not her imagination but her reason,
which gave him the exalted place he held
in her opinion.
Mrs. Mortimer, though as fond of
Caroline as her mother was, either did
not penetrate so deeply into her character,
or willingly flattered herself, that
a scheme which she had formed might
succeed—A scheme of marrying Caroline
to Captain Hungerford, her younger
brother.—His last letter announced,
that he was returning with the fleet to
England, and he was expected home
immediately.

“Think no more of it, my dear,” 
said Mrs. Hungerford— “I once formed
a wish of this sort for Caroline—her own
prudence ... But—Think no more of
it, much as I should wish to have her
for my daughter, I know it cannot be.”
“I would lay my life upon it, that
my brother Frederick will be charmed
with her; she is all that I have heard
him describe as most amiable, and
her style of beauty exactly what will
enchant him—He will lose his heart
to her, as sure as he has a heart—and a
noble heart it is.”
“If you think so,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
“I should be sorry that Caroline
were here, when he returns to us.”
“Sorry!”
“Yes, my dear, why should I prepare
for his noble heart ... disappointment.”
“Trust to him,” said Mrs. Mortimer,
smiling, “Frederick will make his own
way—in such a heart as Caroline's.”—
Mrs. Hungerford was silent—

“Of Count Altenberg we hear nothing,” 
continued Mrs. Mortimer, “and
if he should not return to this country,
we may hope that, in time, my brother
may deserve and obtain the place, which
the faithless Count will have forfeited in
her affections.”
Mrs. Hungerford was persuaded, on
the contrary, that if Caroline did not
marry Count Altenberg, she would never
marry any other man.
“We shall see, my dear mother,” 
cried Mrs. Mortimer— “My brother, I
hope, will be here in a few days.” 
But before Captain Hungerford arrived,
Caroline was obliged to leave her
friends at Hungerford-Castle.
A letter from her brother Erasmus
informed her, that poor Lady Jane Granville
was ill of a nervous fever, that she
had no companion, no one to attend
her but a maid-servant, and that she
was much in want of some judicious
friend, who could raise her spirits and
tranquillize her mind, which was in a

state of continual agitation about her
law-suit. Caroline, remembering Lady
Jane's former kindness, thought this a
fit opportunity to show her gratitude; 
and happy as she was with her friends
at Hungerford-Castle, she hesitated not
a moment to sacrifice her own pleasure—She
withstood all Mrs. Mortimer's
urgent entreaties to stay “one week,
only one week longer”—Her father
and mother approved of Caroline's determination,
and her brother Alfred carried
her to London.