

At the time of the fire at Percy-Hall,
a painted glass window in the passage
... we should say the gallery ...
leading to the study had been destroyed.
—Old Martha, whose life Caroline had
saved, had a son, who possessed some
talents as a painter, and who had learnt
the art of painting on glass. He had
been early in his life assisted by the
Percy family, and desirous to offer some
small testimony of his gratitude, he begged
permission to paint a new window
for the gallery.—He chose for his subject
the fire, and the moment when Caroline
was assisting his decrepit mother down
the dangerous staircase.—The painting
was finished and put up on Caroline's
birth-day, when she had just attained her
eighteenth year. This was the only circumstance

worth recording, which the biographer
can find noted in the family annals
at this period.—In this dearth of
events may we take the liberty of introducing,
according to the fashion of modern
biography, a few private letters.
They are written by persons, of whom
the reader as yet knows nothing,—Mr.
Percy's second and third sons, Alfred
and Erasmus. Alfred was a barrister; 
Erasmus a physician; they were both at
this time in London, just commencing
their professional career.—Their characters
 ... but let their characters speak
for themselves in their letters, else neither
their letters nor their characters can be
worth attention.
“my dear father,
Pray do not feel disappointed
when I tell you, that I am not getting
on quite so fast as I expected. I assure
you, however, that I have not neglected
any honorable means of bringing myself
into notice.—But it is very difficult for an

honest young man to rise without puffing,
or stooping to low means.
“I stood candidate for the place of
physician to the &wblank; hospital, and
made all the necessary applications to
those who had votes and interest.—Sir
Amyas Courtney and Dr. Frumpton, I
was told, were the leading men,—one a
court, the other a city physician—one
always consulted in nervous complaints— 
the other in desperate cases—both hating
and despising each other—each seizing
this election as an opportunity of plaguing
and mortifying his opponent, and of making
the election for the hospital a mere
struggle for power, and trial of popularity.
—I waited first upon Sir Amyas Courtney,
and was at his house ten times before
I could find him at home. At last
by appointment I went to breakfast with
him. He received me in the most promising
manner,—recollected to have
danced with my mother many years ago
at a ball at Lord Somebody's—professed
the greatest respect for the name of Percy

—asked me various questions about my
great grandfather, which I could not answer
—and paid you more compliments
than I can remember.—Sir Amyas is certainly
the prettiest behaved physician
breathing, with the sweetest assortment
of small talk. He has the happiest art of
speaking a vast deal, and yet saying nothing; 
or seeming to come to the point,
and yet never committing himself.—For
the life of me, I could not get any distinct
answer from him.—He would talk of
every thing but of my object.—Far, far
aloof, for the first twenty minutes after
he had done with my great grandfather,
he kept to politics. Then we were interrupted
by the arrival of a Mr. Gresham,
a rich merchant, who came to look at a
picture which Sir Amyas shows as a true
Titian.—Sir Amyas talked a great deal of
amateur nonsense, and Mr. Gresham, I
thought, a great deal of sense about it.— 
I liked Mr. Gresham, and think he liked
me, but I have not time to say more of
him. Sir Amyas, in the same nambypamby

style, and with the same soft
voice, and sweet smile, talked on of pictures,
and battles, and carnage, and levees,
and drawing-rooms, and balls, and
butterflies.—He has a museum for the
ladies, and he took me to look at it.—Sad
was the hour, and luckless was the day.— 
Among his shells there was one upon
which he peculiarly prided himself, and
which he showed me as an unique. I was,
(I assure you) prudently silent, till he
pressed for my opinion, and then, I could
not avoid confessing, that I suspected it
to be a made shell—made, Caroline knows
how, by the application of acids.—Sir
Amyas's countenance clouded over—and
before the cloud had passed away, as my
ill fortune would have it, my rival candidate,
Dr. Bland called, and was admitted.
—His opinion was immediately asked
about the shell.—He was confident, at
the first glance, that it was an unique,
and was ready to swear that no acid had
ever come near it.—I said no more—but
I had already said too much. Dr. Bland

profited by my error.—He was all obsequiousness
and flattery, admiring and extolling
the nick-nacks on which he knew
that Sir Amyas piqued himself.—I
took my leave—well aware that my election
had been decided by the shell, at
least as far as Sir Amyas's vote could decide.
“I now paid my visit to Dr. Frumpton.
—Do you know who he is, and who he
was, and how he has risen to his present
height?—He was a farrier in a remote
county–he began by persuading the country
people in his neighbourhood, that he
had a specific for the bite of a mad dog.— 
It happened that he cured an old dowager's
favorite waiting maid, who had been
bitten by a cross lap dog, which her servants
pronounced to be mad, that they
might have an excuse for hanging it.— 
The fame of this cure was spread by the
dowager among her numerous acquaintance
in town and country. Then he took
agues—and afterwards scrofula under his
protection; patronised by his old dowager,

and lucky in some of his desperate
quackery, Dr. Frumpton's reputation rapidly
increased, and from different counties
fools came to consult him. His manners
were bearish even to persons of quality
who resorted to his den, but these
brutal manners imposed upon many; 
heightened the idea of his confidence in
himself, and commanded the submission
of the timid.—His tone grew higher and
higher, and he more and more easily bullied
the credulity of man and womankind.
—It seems that either extreme of
soft and polished, or of rough and brutal
manner, can succeed with a physician.— 
Dr. Frumpton's name, and Dr. Frumpton's
wonderful cures, were in every newspaper,
and in every shop window.—No
man ever puffed himself better even in this
puffing age.—His success was viewed
with scornful, yet with jealous eyes, by
the regular bred physicians, and they did
all they could to keep him down,—sir
Amyas Courtney, in particular, who
would never call him any thing but that

farrier, making what noise he could about
Frumpton's practising without a diploma.
—In pure spite Frumpton took to
learning—late as it was he put himself to
school—with virulent zeal he read and
crammed till—Heaven knows how!—he
accomplished getting a diploma—stood all
prescribed examinations, forced himself into
the college of physicians, and has grinned
defiance ever since at Sir Amyas.—
“Frumpton received me with open
arms, and such is the magical deception
of self-love, that his apparent friendliness
towards me made him appear quite agreeable,
and notwithstanding all I had heard
and known of him, I fancied his brutality
was frankness, and his presumption
strength of character.—I gave him credit
especially for a happy instinct for true
merit, and an honorable antipathy to flattery
and meanness.—The manner in
which he pronounced the words, fawning
puppy! applied to my rival young Bland,
pleased me peculiarly—and I had just
exalted Frumpton into a great man, and
an original genius, when he fell flat to

the level, and below the level of common
mortals, in my opinion.—He found that
I had waited upon Sir Amyas Courtney
before I had applied to him—upon which
he frowned a terrible frown, and sat scowling
in silence in his arm chair for some
minutes, pushing and pulling his wig
backwards and forwards on his forehead.
“So, Sir, I suppose you are all for the
polite system of nerves along with Sir
Amyas.—All for nerves, hey?—Nervous
nonsense may do well enough at the court
end, but won't go down at our end of
the world—Nerves won't do for an hospital
physician—no—no, I'll keep nerves
out of the hospital as long as I can, by
the blessing of Heaven—So you may
take your nerves back to Sir Amyas—to
whom you went first—First or last I'll
have nothing to do with nerves, and Sir
Amyas, Sir&wblank;”
“He turned his angry eyes upon me
at this moment, and I believe the astonishment
of my countenance convinced
him of my innocence, for without my

having said one word, he added, in a
softened tone,
“Then why went you to Sir Amyas
first?”
“Because he was nearest to me—he
lives within two streets of my lodgings.”
“Lazy dog!—bad place for lodgings,” 
Frumpton muttered, but regaining his
good humor, he became more warm in
my cause than ever, on hearing the history
of the shell, which he told twenty
times that morning to numerous people,
with variations and exaggerations, such
as made it so different the twentieth time
from the first, that I should hardly have
known it to be my own story—So far so
good.—Dr. Frumpton was my declared
friend, and swore he'd carry me through
thick and thin.—I did not much like the
being indebted for my success to the whim
of such a brutal and ignorant champion,
and I felt mortified rather than pleased at
being preferred, not for my own merit of
any kind, but merely from hatred and
malice against a rival.—However, I settled
that matter with my conscience, and

satisfied myself, that it would be for the
honor of medicine, and the good of mankind,
as well as for my own good, that I
should gain my election.—In this persuasion
I accompanied my patron yesterday,
being the morning before the election,
through the hospital, that he might show
me what he called his summary clinics.— 
Summary, indeed!—When I saw the
way in which this famous physician dealt
with the lives of his poor patients, I really
grew sick, and could scarcely follow him.
—I promised myself, that I would act very
differently, when I should have the care of
them—and whilst I was making myself
this promise, a poor man, who had just
fallen from a scaffold, was brought into
the hospital.—His leg was bruised and
terribly cut, but not broken.—The surgeon
was called.—This surgeon was one
who had practised human farriery formerly
under Dr. Frumpton, and, not liking
the trouble of attending to the poor man,
scarcely looked at him, and said the leg
must come off—the sooner the better.— 
The man, perceiving that I pitied him,

cast such a beseeching look at me, as
made me interpose, imprudently, impertinently,
perhaps,—but I could not resist
it—I forget what I said, but I know the
sense of it was, that I thought the poor
fellow's leg could be saved.—I remember
Dr. Frumpton glared upon me instantly
with eyes of fury, and asked if I dared
to contradict a surgeon in his own hospital.
—They prepared for the operation.
The surgeon whipped on his mittens— 
the poor man who was almost fainting
with loss of blood, cast another piteous
look at me, and said, in an Irish accent,
‘Long life to you! Dear!—and don't
let'm—for what will I be without a leg?
... and my wife and childer!’— 
He fell back in a swoon, and I sprung
between the surgeon and him, insisting,
that, as he had appealed to me, he should
be left to me, and promising that he
should be no expense or trouble to the
hospital—Frumpton stamped, and scarcely
articulate with rage, bade me leave the
hospital; and I made a sign to the laborers,
who had brought in the poor

man, to lift him instantly and carry him
out before me, and this one of them, being
his countryman, immediately did, exclaiming— 
‘Success to your Honor!
and may ye never want a friend!’— 
Frumpton seized me by both shoulders— 
pushed me after them out of the hospital— 
and shut the door upon me &wblank;for
ever.—This morning I hear that Dr.
Bland, (nerves notwithstanding), has been
chosen, and that Dr. Frumpton vows unextinguishable
vengeance against me.— 
The story has been told with as many exaggerations
as that of the shell all over the
city, and always to my disadvantage.—
“I am afraid I have acted in some degree
improperly–and certainly imprudently
—but I have the satisfaction at least
to tell you, that the poor man is doing
well.—I have taken lodgings for him,
and have called in a young surgeon, a
friend of mine, who assures me, that
his leg, in another fortnight, will be
as useful as any leg in London.—Pray
let me hear from you, my dear father,
and say ... if you can, that you think

me right. Thank Caroline for her cordial
letter
Your affectionate son,
E. Percy.”

Alfred Percy to his Father.
“MY DEAR FATHER,
Thank you for the books— 
I have been reading hard lately, for I
have still, alas! leisure enough to read.— 
I cannot expect to be employed, or to
have fees for some time to come.—I am
armed with patience—I am told that I
have got through the worst part of my
profession, the reading of dry law. This
is tiresome enough to be sure. But after
I had toiled on in the dark for some time
through a heap of what I thought rubbish
and confusion, a little light broke in
upon me. Then I discerned valuable materials,
where I had fancied all had been
rubbish—and order where I had imagined
all was confusion.—The law is a mighty
maze, indeed, but not without a plan—faulty
in many points, but with compensations

for those faults in other parts, and
admirable upon the whole, because open
to continual revisal, and capable of perpetual
improvement.
“I had no intention of making this
panegyric on English law. It certainly
is not flattery prepense, for I was going
to blame and not to praise. I think the
courting of attorneys and solicitors is the
worst part of the beginning of my profession:
for this I was not, and I believe
I never shall be, sufficiently prepared.
I give them no dinners, and they neglect
me; yet I hope I pay them proper attention.
To make amends, however, I
have been so fortunate as to form acquaintance
with some gentlemen of the bar,
who possess enlarged minds, and general
knowledge: their conversation is of the
greatest use and pleasure to me. But
many barristers here are men, who live
entirely among themselves, with their
heads in their green bags, and their souls
narrowed to a point. Mere machines for
drawing pleas and rejoinders.

“I remember Burke asserts—(and I
was once, with true professional party-spirit,
angry with him for the assertion)
—that the study of the law has a contractile
power on the mind: I am now
convinced it has, from what I see, and
what I feel; therefore I will do all I can
to counteract this contraction by the
expansive force of literature. I lose no
opportunity of making acquaintance
with literary men, and cultivating their
society. The other day, at Hookham's
Library, I met with a man of considerable
talents—a Mr. Temple—he was
looking for a passage in the life of the
Lord Keeper Guildford, which I happened
to know. This brought us into a
conversation, with which we were mutually
so well pleased, that we agreed to
dine together, for further information— 
and we soon knew all that was to be
known of each other's history.
Temple is of a very good family— 
though the younger son of a younger
brother. He was brought up by his

grandfather, with whom he was a favorite.
Accustomed, from his childhood,
to live with the rich and great, to see a
grand establishment, to be waited upon,
to have servants, horses, carriages at
his command, and always to consider
himself as a part of one of a family who
possessed every thing they could wish
for in life; he says, he almost forgot, or
rather never thought of the time when
he was to have nothing, and when he
should be obliged to provide entirely for
himself. Fortunately for him, his grandfather
having early discerned that he
had considerable talents, determined
that he should have all the advantages
of education, which he thought would
prepare him to shine in parliament.— 
His grandfather, however, died when
Temple was yet scarcely eighteen.—He
had put off writing a codicil to his will,
by which Temple lost the provision intended
for him.—All hopes of being
brought into parliament were over. His
uncle, who succeeded to the estate, had

sons of his own. There were family
jealousies, and young Temple, as having
been a favorite, was disliked.—Promises
were made by other relations, and by
former friends, and by these he was
amused and misled for some time; but
he found he was only wasting his life,
attending upon these great relations.
The unkindness and falsehood of some,
and the haughty neglect of others, hurt
his high spirit, and roused his strong indignation.
—He, in his turn, neglected
and offended, was cast off at last,
or forgotten by most of the fine promisers.
—At which, he says, he has had
reason to rejoice, for this threw him
upon his own resources, and made him
exert his own mind.—He applied, in
earnest, to prepare himself for the profession
for which he was best fitted, and
went to the bar.—Now comes the part
of his history for which he, with reason,
alas! blames himself. He was disgusted,
not so much by the labor, as by the
many disagreeable circumstances, which

necessarily occur in the beginning of a
barrister's course.—He could not bear
the waiting in the courts or on circuit,
without business, without notice. he
thought his merit would never make it's
way, and was provoked by seeing two
or three stupid fellows pushed on by solicitors,
or helped up by judges.—He had
so much knowledge, talent, and eloquence,
that he must in time have made
a great figure, and would, undoubtedly,
have risen to the first dignities, had he
persevered. But he sacrificed himself to
pique and impatience. He quitted the
bar, and the very summer after he had
left it, the illness of a senior counsel on
that circuit afforded an opportunity
where Temple would have been called,
and where he could fully have displayed
his talents. Once distinguished, such a
man would have been always distinguished.
—Alas!—Alas!—He now bitterly
regrets, that he abandoned his profession.
—This imprudence gave his
friends a fair excuse for casting him off

—but he says, their neglect grieves him
not, for he had resolved never more to
trust to their promises, or to stoop to
apply to them for patronage. He has
been these last two years in an obscure
garret writing for bread. He says, however,
that he is sure he is happier, even
in this situation, than are some of his
cousins at this instant, who are struggling
in poverty to be genteel, or to
keep up a family name, and he would
not change places with those who are
in a state of idle and opprobrious dependance.
—I understand ... (remember
this is a secret between ourselves) I
understand that secretary Cunningham
Falconer has found him out, and makes
good use of his pen, but pays him shabily.
Temple is too much of a man of
honour to peach. So Lord Oldborough
knows nothing of the matter; and Cunningham
gets half his business done, and
supplies all his deficiencies by means of
this poor drudging genius.—Perhaps I
have tired you with this history of my

new friend—but he has interested me
extremely—and more, the more I have
seen of him.—He has faults certainly,
perhaps too high a spirit, too much sensibility; 
but he has such strict integrity,
so much generosity of mind, and something
so engaging in his manners, that I
cannot help loving, admiring, and pitying
him.—That last sentiment, however,
I am obliged to conceal, for he
would not bear it.
“I see very little of Erasmus. He
has been in the country this fortnight
with some patient. I long for his return.—Thank
Caroline for observing the
advertisement of the sale of law books.
I shall take advantage of it.—I will make
the inquiries you desire about Buckhurst
Falconer.
Your affectionate son,
Alfred Percy.
“P.S. Yes, my dear Rosamond, I shall
be obliged to you for the flower-roots
for my landlady's daughter.”

Letter from Alfred.
“My dear father, I have made all
possible inquiries about Buckhurst Falconer.
He staid at Cheltenham till
about a month ago with the Hautons,
and I hear attended Miss Hauton every
where: but I do not think there is any
reason to believe the report of his paying
his addresses to her. The public attention
he showed her was, in my opinion,
designed only to pique Caroline, whom,
I'm persuaded, he thinks—(between the
fits of half a dozen other fancies) the
first of women,—as he always calls her.
Rosamond need not waste much pity on
him. He is an out-of-sight-out-of-mind
man. The pleasure of the present moment
is all in all with him.—He has
many good points in his disposition, but
Caroline had penetration enough to see,
that his character would never suit hers; 
and I rejoice, that she gave him a decided refusal.—
“Since he came to town, he has, by

his convivial powers, his good stories,
good songs, and knack of mimickry,
made himself so famous, that he has more
invitations to dinner than he can accept.
He has wit and talents fit for more than
being the buffoon or mocking-bird of a
good dinner and a pleasant party; but
he seems so well contented with this réputation
de salon, that I am afraid his
ambition will not rise to any thing
higher. After leading this idle life, and
enjoying this cheap-earned praise, he
will never submit to the seclusion and
application necessary for the attainment
of the great prizes of professional excellence.
I doubt whether he will even
persevere so far as to be called to the
bar. Though the other day when I
met him in Bond-Street, he assured me,
and bid me assure you, that he is getting
on famously, and eating his terms with
a prodigious appetite. He seemed heartily
glad to see me, and expressed warm
gratitude for your having saved his conscience,

and having prevented his father
from forcing him, as he said, to be a
disgrace to the church.
“Rosamond asks, what sort of girls
the Miss Falconers are, and whether the
Falconers have been civil to me since I
settled in town?—Yes:—pretty well— 
The girls are mere show girls—like a myriad
of others, sing—play—dance, dress,
flirt, and all that.—Georgiana is beautiful
sometimes—Arabella ugly always. I
don't like either of them, and they don't
like me, for I am not an eldest son. The
mother was prodigiously pleased with
me at first, because she mistook me for
Godfrey, or rather she mistook me for
the heir of our branch of the Percys.
I hear that Mrs. Falconer has infinite
address, both as a political and hymeneal
intrigante: but I have not time to
study her. All together the family,
though they live in constant gaiety, do
not give me the idea of being happy
among one another. I have no particular
reason for saying this. I judge

only from the tact on this subject, which
I have acquired from my own happy
experience.
“Love to Rosamond—I am afraid she
will think I have been too severe upon
Buckhurst Falconer. I know he is a
favorite, at least a protégé of hers and of
Godfrey's. Bid her remember I have
acknowledged that he has talents and
generosity: but that which interests Rosamond
in his favor inclines ill-natured
me against him—his being one of Caroline's
suitors. I think he has great assurance
to continue, in spite of all repulse,
to hope, especially as he does
nothing to render himself more worthy
of encouragement. Thank Caroline for
her letter—and assure Rosamond, that,
though I have never noticed it, I was
grateful for her entertaining account of
M. de Tourville's vis. I confess I am
rather late with my acknowledgments,
but the fire at Percy-Hall, and many
events which rapidly succeeded, put
that whole affair out of my head. Moreover,

the story of Euphrosine and Count
Albert was so squeezed under the seal,
that I must beg notes of explanation in
her next. Who the deuse is Euphrosine,
and what does the letter P, for
the rest of the word was torn out, stand
for, and in Count Albert a hero in a
novel, or a real live man?
“I saw a live man yesterday, whom I
did not at all like to see—Sharpe walking
with our good cousin, Sir Robert
Percy, in close conversation. This conjunction,
I fear, bodes us no good.— 
Pray do, pray make another search for
the deed.
“Loves, my dear father, are wasted in
a letter to you; for you never take the
trouble to give them to any one, nor
care for them yourself—at least so you
say.—My frank will not hold a scrap,
which I had penned, in what you call my
invisible hand, for my mother, to whom
I have not written one letter this term.
However, she will not be angry, for she

is never angry with any one—much less
with me.
Your affectionate son,
Alfred Percy.”
Soon after this letter had been received,
and while the picture of his life and
the portraits of his worthy companions
were yet fresh in her view, Buckhurst
Falconer took the unhappy moment to
write to renew his declaration of passionate
attachment to Caroline, and to
beg to be permitted to wait upon her
once more.
From the indignant blush, which
mounted in Caroline's face on reading
his letter, Rosamond saw how unlikely
it was, that this request should be granted.
It came, indeed, at an unlucky
time.—Rosamond could not refrain from
a few words of apology, and looks of
commiseration for Buckhurst; yet she
entirely approved of Caroline's answer
to his letter, and the steady repetition

of her refusal, and even of the strengthened
terms in which it was now expressed.
Rosamond was always prudent
for her friends, when it came to any serious
point where their interests or happiness
were concerned. Her affection
for her friends, and her fear of doing
wrong on such occasions, awakened her
judgment, and so controlled her imagination,
that she then proved herself
uncommonly judicious and discreet.— 
Prudence had not, it is true, been a
part of Rosamond's character in childhood; 
but, in the course of her education,
a considerable portion of it had
been infused by a very careful and skilful
hand. Perhaps it had never completely
assimilated with the original composition:
sometimes the prudence fell to
the bottom, sometimes was shaken to
the top, according to the agitation or
tranquillity of her mind; sometimes it
was so faintly visible, that it's existence
might be doubted by the hasty observer; 
but when put to a proper test it never

failed to appear in full force.—After
any effort of discretion in conduct, Rosamond,
however, often relieved and
amused herself by talking in favor of the
imprudent side of the question.
“You have decided prudently, my
dear Caroline, I acknowledge,” said
she, “But now your letter is fairly
gone; now that it is all over, and that
we are safe, I begin to think you are a
little too prudent for your age.—Bless
me, Caroline, if you are so prudent at
eighteen, what will you be at thirty?
—Beware!—and in the mean time you
will never be a heroine—what a stupid
uninteresting heroine you will make!
You will never get into any entanglements,
never have any adventures; or if
kind fate should, propitious to my prayer,
bring you into some charming difficulties,
even then we could not tremble
for you, or enjoy all the luxury of pity,
because we should always know, that you
would be so well able to extricate yourself,—so
certain to conquer, or,—not

die—but endure.&wblank;Recollect, that
Doctor Johnson, when his learned sock
was off, confessed that he could never be
thoroughly interested for Clarissa, because
he knew that her prudence would
always be equal to every occasion.”—
Mrs. Percy began to question, whether
Johnson had ever expressed this sentiment
seriously: she reprobated the cruelty
of friendly biographers, who publish
every light expression that escapes from
celebrated lips in private conversation; 
she was going to have added a word or
two about the injury done to the public,
to young people especially, by the
spreading such rash dogmas under the
sanction of a great name.
But Rosamond did not give her mother
time to enforce this moral, she went
on rapidly with her own thoughts.
“Caroline, my dear,” continued she,
“you shall not be my heroine—you are
too well proportioned for a heroine; in
mind, I mean—a heroine may, must have a
finely proportioned person, but never a

well-proportioned mind. All her virtues
must be larger than the life—all her passions
those of a tragedy queen.—Produce
... only dare to produce one of
your reasonable wives, mothers, daughters,
or sisters on the theatre, and you
would see them hissed off the stage.— 
Good people are acknowledged to be the
bane of the drama and the novel—I
never wish to see a reasonable woman
on the stage, or an unreasonable woman
off it.—I have the greatest sympathy
and admiration for your true heroine
in a book; but I grant you, that
in real life, in a private room, the tragedy
queen would be too much for me; 
and the novel heroine would be the most
useless, troublesome, affected, haranguing,
egoistical, insufferable being imaginable.—So,
my dear Caroline, I am
content, that you are my sister and my
friend, though I give you up as a heroine.”