

The theatre at Falconer-Court was not
very spacious, but it was elegantly fitted
up, extremely well lighted, and had a
good effect. There was a brilliant audience,
an excellent band of music, and
the whole had a gay and festive appearance.
The Percy family, as they came from
a great distance, were late. The house
was crowded. Mrs. Falconer was obliged
to seat Mrs. Percy and her daughters
with the Lady Arlingtons on a bench
upon the stage. A conspicuous situation,
which had been reserved for their
Ladyships.
Every eye instantly turned upon the
beautiful Caroline. She bore the gaze
of public admiration with a blushing dignity,

which interested every body in her
favor.—Count Altenberg, who had
anxiously expected the moment of her
arrival, was, however, upon his guard.
Knowing that he was watched by Mrs.
Falconer's friends, he was determined
that his secret thoughts should not be
seen.—One involuntary glance he gave,
but immediately withdrew his eye, and
continued his conversation with the gentleman
next to him. After a few moments
had elapsed, he could indulge
himself in looking at Caroline unobserved,
for the gaze of public admiration
is as transient as it is eager. It is surprising
how short a time any face, however
beautiful, engages numbers, who
meet together to be seen.
The audience were now happily full
of themselves, arranging their seats, and
doing civilities to those of their friends
who were worthy of notice.
“Lady Trant! won't your Ladyship
sit in the front row?”
“I'm vastly well, thank you.”

“Lady Kew, I am afraid you won't
see over my head.”
“Oh! I assure you ... perfectly ...
perfectly ...”
“Colonel Spandrill, I'll trouble you ...
my shawl ...”
“Clay, lend me your opera-glass.—How
did you leave all at Bath?”
“I'm so glad that General Petcalf's
gout in his stomach did not carry him
off—for young Petcalf could not have
acted, you know, to night.—Mrs. Harcourt
is trying to catch your eye, Lady
Kew.”
All those who were new to the theatre
at Falconer-Court, or who were not intimate
with the family, were in great
anxiety to inform themselves on one important
point, before the prologue should
begin.—Stretching to those who were,
or had the reputation of being good authorities,
they asked in whispers,
“Do you know if there is to be any
clapping of hands?—Can you tell me

whether it is allowable to say any
thing?”—
It seems, that at some private theatres
loud demonstrations of applause were forbidden.
It was thought more genteel
to approve and admire in silence, thus
to draw the line between professional
actors and actresses, and gentlemen and
lady performers. Upon trial, however,
in some instances, it had been found, that
the difference was sufficiently obvious,
without marking it by any invidious distinction.
Young and old amateurs have
acknowledged, that the silence, however
genteel, was so dreadfully awful, that
they preferred even the noise of vulgar acclamations.
The cup of flattery was found so sweet,
that objections were no longer made to
swallowing it in public.
The overture finished, the prologue,
which was written by Mr. Seebright,
was received with merited applause.
And, after a buz of requests and promises

for copies, the house was silent—the
curtain drew up, and the first appearance
of Zara, in the delicate sentimental
blue satin, was hailed with plaudits,
long and loud—plaudits which were
reiterated at the end of her first speech,
which was, indeed, extremely well recited.
Count Altenberg leaned over the
front of the box, and seemed to listen
with delight; then stood up, and several
times renewed his plaudits, at first, with
an appearance of timidity, afterwards,
with decision and energy. Miss Georgiana
Falconer really played uncommonly
well, so that he could, without
flattery, applaud: and if he did exaggerate
a little in the expression of his admiration,
he deemed it allowable. He
had another object. He was absolutely
determined to see whether or not Caroline
was capable of the mean passions,
which had disgusted him in her rival.
He reflected, that he had seen her only
when she was triumphant; and he was
anxious to know how she would appear

in different circumstances. Of her high
intellectual endowments, he could not
doubt, but temper is not always a blessing
given to the fair, or even to the wise.
It may seem strange that a gallant man
should think of a beauty's temper; and,
probably, if Count Altenberg had considered
Caroline only as a beauty, he
would not have troubled himself to make,
on this point, any severe and dangerous
scrutiny.—
The play went on—Zara sustaining
the interest of the scene. She was but
feebly supported by the sulky Selima,
and the other parts were but ill performed.—The
faults common to unpractised
actors occurred.—One of Osman's
arms never moved, and the other
sawed the air perpetually, as if in pure
despite of Hamlet's prohibition. Then,
in crossing over, Osman was continually
entangled in Zara's robe, or, when standing
still, she was obliged to twitch her
train thrice before she could get it from
beneath his leaden feet.—When confident

that he could repeat a speech fluently,
he was apt to turn his back upon
his mistress, or when he felt himself
called upon to listen to his mistress, he
would regularly turn his back upon the
audience.—But all these are defects permitted
by the license of a private theatre,
allowable by courtesy to gentlemen
actors; and things went on as well as
could be expected.—Osman had not his
part by heart, but still Zara covered all
deficiencies. And Osman did no worse
than other Osmans had done before him,
till he came to the long speech, beginning
with,
“The Sultans, my great ancestors, bequeath'd
“Their empire to me, but their tastes they gavenot.”
Powerful prompting got him through
the first six lines decently enough, till
he came to
... “wasting tenderness in wild profusion,
“I might look down to my surrounded feet,
“And bless contending beauties,”

At this he bungled sadly—his hearing
suddenly failing as well as his memory,
there was a dead stop.—In vain the
prompter, the scene-shifter, the candle-snuffer,
as loud as they could, and much
louder than they ought, reiterated the
next sentence,
“I might speak,
“Serenely slothful.”—
It was plain that Osman could not
speak, nor was he “serene.”—He had
begun, as in dangers great he was wont,
to kick his left ancle-bone rapidly with
his right heel; and through the pomp of
Osman's oriental robes and turban
young Petcalf stood confessed.—He
threw back an angry look at the prompter,—Zara,
terrified, gave up all for lost.—The
two Lady Arlingtons retreated
behind the scenes to laugh. The polite
audience struggled, not to smile. Count
Altenberg at this moment looked at Caroline,
who, instead of joining in the
laugh, showed by her countenance and

manner the most good natured sympathy.
Zara, recovering her presence of mind,
swept across the stage in such a manner,
as to hide from view her kicking Sultan; 
and as she passed, she whispered the
line to him so distinctly, that he caught
the sound, left off kicking, went on with
his speech, and all was well again.
Count Altenberg forgot to join in the
cheering plaudits, he was so much
charmed at that instant by Caroline's
smile.
Fortunately for Zara, and for the audience,
in the next scenes the part of
Lusignan was performed by a gentleman
who had been well used to acting—though
he was not a man of any extraordinary
capacity, yet, from his habit of
the boards, and his being perfect in his
part, he now seemed quite a superior
person. It was found unaccountably
easier to act with this son of labor, than
with any other of the gentlemen performers,

though they were all natural
geniuses.—
The moment Zara appeared with Lusignan,
her powers shone forth—nothing
spoiled the illusion, the attention of the
audience was fixed, their interest was
sustained, their feelings touched. The
exercise of the fan ceased in the front
rows, glasses of lemonade were held untasted,
and nobody consulted the playbill.—Excited
by success, sympathy, and
applause the most flattering, Zara went
on with increasing eclat.
Meanwhile the Percy family, who
were quite intent upon the play, began
to find their situation disagreeable from
some noise behind the scenes. A party
of ladies, among whom was Lady Frances
Arlington, stood whispering so loud close
to Caroline, that their voices were heard
by her more distinctly than those of the
actors. She endeavored not to hear
them, till she perceived that they were
trying to attract her notice.—One of

them gently touched her hair.—She
turned her head, and they pointed to
Lady Frances, who stood half hid between
the side-scenes, holding a little
white dog in her arms.—They were all
affecting to stifle a laugh.
“This,”—whispered Lady Frances,
stroking the dog, “this is Osman—Zara
will call for him presently—I must
keep him ready.”
Caroline showed no curiosity, but the
ladies thinking themselves sure of her
approbation, were eager to explain—
“Don't look back,” said Lady Frances— “Look
at Zara.”—
Caroline did as she was desired.—
“La!” whispered one of the party,
“let her alone, for she is not up to us,
and she'll spoil all.”—
“Hush!”—said Lady Frances. They
put their fingers upon their lips, and Caroline,
her mother and sister, rejoiced that
these ladies were at last silent.—
Lady Frances Arlington, convinced
that Miss Georgiana Falconer had been the

secret cause of the prohibition against her
appearance upon this or any other stage,
had contrived, in revenge, what she
thought an ingenious practical joke—in
fashionable vulgarism, a quiz.—There
was one favorite speech of Zara's, which
Lady Frances knew that Miss Georgiana
had studied with peculiar care, and on the
recital of which she particularly prided
herself. In this speech the heroine repeatedly
pronounces the name of Osman in
tones of tender pathos.—Lady Frances,
who was an excellent mimick, had caught
the actress's manner, and in the course of
the time taken up in preparing for the
play, had, by frequent private rehearsals,
taught her little dog to answer punctually
to the name of Osman.—When pronounced
in Miss Georgiana Falconer's
most emphatic tone and gesture, he was
instructed to leap up on Zara, and on a
repetition of his name, to sit on his hind
legs, hold up his fore paws, and whine in
a manner, which, in defiance of the
powers of the most accomplished actress,

must turn tragedy to farce.—All this had
been kept a profound secret.—Lady Frances,
when she heard the reiterated and loud
plaudits with which Zara was unanimously
honored, had felt half afraid to proceed
in her scheme; but her companions observed,
that it was so well concerted, that
every body would suppose the entrance of
the dog, and his exhibition to be accidental,
while, at the same time, it could
not fail to make the audience laugh, at
the very moment Miss Georgiana Falconer
would wish them to weep.—The
dog had been confined till this critical
moment. The house was now silent in
profound attention.—Zara was in the
midst of her favorite speech.
“Would you learn more, and open all my heart?
Know then, that, spite of this renew'd injustice,
I do not—cannot—wish to love you less:
That, long before you look'd so low as Zara,
She gave her heart to Osman.”—
The dog started and struggled.—Lady
Frances appeared to restrain him, whilst,

in reality, she urged him forwards.—He
ran on the stage, leaped up on Zara—and
at the repetition of his name, sat
down on his hind legs, begged with his
fore paws, and began to whine in such a
manner, that the whole audience were
on the brink of laughter.—Caroline
sprang forward—caught the dog in her
arms, and carried him off the stage.—Count
Altenberg, no longer master of
himself, clapped his hands, and the whole
house resounded with applause.
Miss Georgiana Falconer heard it,
misunderstood the cause, imagined that
she was encored, cast down her eyes, and
as soon as there was silence, advanced,
and recommenced her speech.—Caroline
all the time, kept the little dog quiet by
her caresses,—and Count Altenberg did
not hear one word of the repetition of
Zara's speech.—At the beginning of the
play, when the idea of trying Caroline's
temper had occurred to him, he had felt
some anxiety lest all the high ideas he
had formed, all the bright enchantment

should vanish.—In the first act, he had
begun by joining timidly in the general
applause of Zara, dreading lest Caroline
should not be blessed with that temper,
which could bear the praises of a rival
“with unwounded ear.” But the Count
applauded with more confidence in the
second act, during the third was quite at
his ease, and in the fifth, could not forgive
himself for having supposed it possible,
that Caroline could be liable to any
of the foibles of her sex.
In the mean time Miss Georgiana Falconer,
in high spirits, intoxicated with
vanity, was persuaded that the Count
had returned to his senses; and so little
did she know of his character, or of the
human heart, as to expect that a declaration
of love would soon follow this
public profession of admiration. Such
was the confusion of her ideas, that she
was confident Zara was on the point of
becoming Countess of Altenberg.
After the play was over, and a thousand
compliments had been paid and

received, most of the company called for
their carriages. The house emptied fast:
there remained only a select party, who
were to stay supper. They soon adjourned
to the green room to repeat their tribute
of applause to the actors.—High in
the midst stood Miss Georgiana Falconer,
receiving incense from a crowd of adorers.—As
Count Altenberg approached,
she assumed a languishing air of softness
and sensibility. The Count said all that
could reasonably be expected, but his
compliments did not seem quite to satisfy
the lady. She was in hopes that he was
going to say something more to her taste,
when French Clay pressed forward, which
he did with an air neither French nor
English.—He protested, that he could not
have convceived it possible for the powers
of any actress upon Earth to interest him
for the English Zara, “but you, Madam,” 
said he, “have done the impossible.—And
now I should die content, if I
could see your genius do justice to Zaïre.—How
you would shine in the divine original,

when you could do such wonders
for a miserable translation.”
Several gentlemen, and among others
Mr. Percy, would not allow that the
English translation deserved to be called
miserable.— “The wrong side of the
tapestry we cannot expect should be quite
equal to the right side,” said he; “Voltaire
pointed out a few odd ends here and
there, which disfigured the work, and required
to be cut off; but upon the whole,
if I recollect, he was satisfied with the
piece, and complimented Mr. Hill upon
having preserved the general design, spirit,
and simplicity, of the original.”
“Mere politeness in M. de Voltaire!” 
replied French Clay, “but, in effect,
Zaïre is absolutely incapable of any thing
more than being done into English.—For
example, will any body have the goodness
to tell me,” said he, looking round, and
fixing his look of appeal on Miss Caroline
Percy ... “how would you translate
the famous ‘Zaïre!—vous pleurez!”

“Is not it translated?” said Caroline,
“by ‘Zara! you weep!”—
“Ah! pardonnez-moi!” cried French
Clay, with a shrung meant to be French,
but which English shoulders could not
cleverly execute— “Ah pardonnez! to
my ears now that says nothing.”
“To our feelings it said a great deal
just now,” said Caroline, looking at Zara
in a manner which was lost upon her feelings,
but not upon Count Altenberg's.
“Ah, indubitably I admit,” cried Mr.
Clay, “La beauté est toujours dans son
pays, and tears fortunately need no translation,—but
when we come to words,
you will allow me, Ma'am, that the language
of fine feeling is absolutely untranslateable,
untransfusible.”
Caroline seemed to wish to avoid being
drawn forward to further discussion, but
Mr. Clay repeated, in a tone of soft condescension—
“Your silence flatters me with the
hope, Ma'am, that we agree?”

Caroline could not submit to this interpretation
of her silence, and blushing,
but without being disconcerted, she answered,
that she had always heard, and
believed, it was the test of true feeling,
as of true wit, that it can be easily understood,
and that it's language is universal.
“If I had ever doubted that truth,” 
said Count Altenberg, “I should have
been convinced of it by what I have seen
and heard this night.”
Miss Georgiana Falconer bowed her
head graciously to the Count, and smiled
and sighed. Lady Frances Arlington,
and Rosamond, smiled at the same moment,
for they perceived by the universal
language of the eye,—that what Count
Altenberg said was not intended for the
lady, who took it so decidedly to herself.
This was the second time this night, that
Miss Georgiana Falconer's vanity had
appropriated to herself a compliment, in
which she had no share. Yet, even at
this moment, which, as she conceived,

was a moment of triumph, while she was
encircled by adorers, while the voice of
praise yet vibrated in her ears, she felt
anguish at perceiving the serenity of her
rival's countenance, and however strange
it may appear, actually envied Caroline
for not being envious.
Mrs. Falconer, skilled in every turn of
her daughter's temper, which she was
now obliged to follow and humor, or dexterously
to counteract, less it should ruin
all schemes for her establishment, saw the
cloud gathering on Zara's brow, and immediately
fixed the attetion of the company
upon the beauty of her dress, and
the fine folds of her velvet train. She
commenced lamentations on the difference
between English and French velvets.—French
Clay, as she had foreseen, took
up the word, and talked of velvets till
supper was announced.—
When Mrs. Falconer attended Lady
Trant and Lady Kew to their rooms, a
nocturnal conference was held in Lady
Trant's apartment, where, of course, in

the most confidential manner, their Ladyships
sat talking over the events of the
day, and of some matters too interesting
to be spoken of in general society. They
began to congratulate Mrs. Falconer upon
the impression, which Zara had made
on Count Altenberg.—But the wily mother
repressed their premature felicitations.
She protested “she was positively
certain, that the person in question had
now no thoughts of Georgiana, such as
their Ladyship's partiality to her might
lead them to suppose.—And now, when
the business was over, she might venture
to declare, that nothing could have persuaded
her to let a daughter of hers marry
a foreigner.—She should have been sorry
to give offence to such an amiable and well
informed young nobleman; and she really
rejoiced, that, if her sentiments had
been ... as no doubt, by a person of
his penetration they must have been discovered,
Count Altenberg had taken the
hint without being offended. Indeed she

had felt it a point of conscience to let
the truth be seen time enough, to prevent
his coming to a downright proposal, and
having the mortification of an absolute
refusal.—Other mothers, she knew, might
feel differently about giving a daughter to
a foreigner, and other young ladies might
feel differently from her Georgiana.—Where
there was so great an establishment
in prospect, and rank, and fashion,
and figure, to say nothing of talents, it
could hardly be expected, that such temptations
should be resisted in a certain family,
where it was so very desirable, and
indeed necessary to get a daughter married
without a portion.” Mrs. Falconer
declared, “that on every account she
should rejoice, if things should happen to
turn out so. The present object was
every way worthy, and charming. She
was a young lady for whom, even from
the little she had seen of her, she confessed
she felt uncommonly interested,—putting
relationship out of the question.”

Thus having with able generalship
secured a retreat for herself and for
her daughter, Mrs. Falconer retired to
rest.
Early the next morning, one of Lord
Oldborough's grooms brought a note for
Mr. Percy.—Commissioner Falconer's
confidential servant took the note immediately
up to his master's bed chamber,
to inquire, whether it would be proper to
waken Mr. Percy to give it to him, or to
make the groom wait till Mr. Percy
should come down to breakfast.
The Commissioner sat up in his bed,
rubbed his eyes, read the direction of the
note, many times turned and returned it
and desired to see the man who brought
it.—The groom was shown in.
“How is my Lord's gout?”
“Quite well, Sir—my Lord was out
yesterday in the park,—both a horseback
and a foot.”
“I am very happy to hear it. And
pray did any despatches come last night
from Town, can you tell, Sir?”—

“I really can't particularly say, Sir,—I
was out with the horses.”—
“But about this note?” said the Commissioner.—
The result of the cross examination
that followed gave reason to believe, that
the note contained an invitation to breakfast,
“because he had heard Mr. Rodney,
my Lord's own gentleman, tell the
man whose business it was to attend at
breakfast, that my Lord would breakfast
in his own room, and expected a friend
to breakfast with him.”
“A friend—Hum! Was there no note
to me?—no message?”—
“None, Sir—as I know.”
“Very extraordinary,”—Mr. Falconer
inclined to keep the man till
breakfast time, but he would not be
kept, he had orders to return with an
answer immediately, and he had been on
the fidgets all the time the Commissioner
had been detaining him, for Lord Oldborough's
messengers could not venture
to delay—The note was consequently

delivered to Mr. Percy immediately, and
Mr. Percy went to breakfast at Clermont-Park.
The Commissioner's breakfast
was spoiled by the curiosity this
invitation excited, and he was obliged to
chew green tea for the heart-burn with
great diligence.—Meantime the company
were all talking the play over and over
again, till at last, when even Zara appeared
satiated with the subject, the conversation
diverged a little to other topics.—Unluckily
French Clay usurped so
large a portion of attention, that Count
Altenberg's voice was for some time
scarcely heard—The contrast was striking
between a really well bred polished
foreigner, and a man, who, having kept
bad company abroad, and having formed
himself on a few bad models, presented
an exaggerated imitation of those who
were ridiculous, detested, or unknown,
in good society at Paris; and whom
the nation would utterly disclaim as representatives
of their morals or manners.—At
this period of their acquaintance

with Count Altenberg, every circumstance
which drew out his character,
tastes, and opinions, was interesting to the
Percy family in general, and in particular
to Caroline. The most common-place
and disagreeable characters often
promoted this purpose, and thus afforded
means of amusement, and materials
for reflection.—Towards the end of
breakfast, the newspapers were brought
in—The Commissioner, who had wondered
frequently what could make them
so late, seized upon the government
paper directly, which he pocketed and
retired, after handing other newspapers
to Count Altenberg, and to the Mr.
Clays.—English Clay, setting down his
well sugared cup of tea, leaving a
happily prepared morsel of ham and
bread and butter on his plate, turned his
back upon the ladies, and comfortably
settling himself with his arm over his
chair, and the light full upon London
news, began to read to himself—Count
Altenberg glanced at Continental news, as

unfolded his paper, but instantly turned
to Gazette Extraordinary, which he laid
before Mrs. Falconer. She requested
him, if it was not too much trouble, to
read it aloud— “I hope my foreign accent
will not make it unintelligible,” 
said he, and without further preface, or
considering how he was to appear himself,
he obeyed.—Though he had not a
perfectly English accent, he showed that
he had a thoroughly English heart, by
the joy and pride he took in reading an
account of a great victory.
English Clay turned round upon his
chair, and setting his arms a kimbo, with
the newspaper still fast in his hand, and
his elbow sticking out across Lady Anne
Arlington, sat facing the Count, and
listening to him with a look of surprise—
“Why, d&wblank;m'me, but your'e a good
fellow after all!”—exclaimed he,— “though
you are not an Englishman!”—
“By the mother's side, I am, Sir,”

replied Count Altenberg.— “I may boast
that I am at least half an Englishman.”
“Half, is better than the whole,” said
French Clay, scornfully.—
“By the Lord, I could have sworn,
his mother, or some of his blood, English,” 
cried English Clay— “I beg
your pardon, Ma'am—'fraid I annoy
your Ladyship?” added he, perceiving
that the Lady Anne haughtily retreated
from his offending elbow.—
Then sensible of having committed
himself by his sudden burst of feeling,
he colored all over, took up his tea,
drank as if he wished to hide his face for
ever in the cup,—recovered his head with
mighty effort—turned round again to his
newspaper, and was cold and silent as before.—His
brother meanwhile was, or
affected to be, more intent upon some
eau sucrée, that he was preparing for himself,
than upon the fate of the army and
navy of Spain or England.—Rising
from the breakfast table he went into the

adjoining room, and threw himself at full
length upon a sofa—Lady Frances Arlington,
who detested politics, immediately
followed, and led the way to a work
table, round which the ladies gathered,
and formed themselves in a few minutes
into a committee of dress, all speaking at
once; Count Altenberg went with the
ladies out of the breakfast room, where
English Clay would have been happy to
have remained alone, but being interrupted
by the entrance of the servants,
he could not enjoy peaceable possession,
and he was compelled also to follow:—getting
as far as he could from the female
committee, he took Petcalf into a window
to talk of horses, and commenced a
history of the thousand colts of Regulus,
and of the plates they had won.—
French Clay, rising from the sofa, and
adjusting his cravat at a looking-glass,
carelessly said, addressing himself to
Count Altenberg,— “I think, M. le
Comte, I heard you say something about
public feelings. Now, I do not comprehend

precisely what is meant by public
feelings; for my part I am free to confess,
that I have none.”
“I certainly must have expressed
myself ill,” replied Count Altenberg— “I
should have said love of our country.”
Mrs. Percy, Rosamond, and Caroline,
escaped from the committee of dress,
were now eagerly listening to this conversation.
“And if you had, M. le Comte, I
might en philosophe have been permitted
to ask,” replied French Clay, “what is
love of our country, but a mere prejudice—And
to a person of an emancipated
mind that word says volumes. Assuredly
M. le Comte will allow, and
must feel well, that no prejudice ever
was or can be useful to mankind.”
The Count fully admitted, that utility
is the best human test by which all
sentiment, as well as every thing else,
can be tried; but he observed, “that
Mr. Clay had not yet proved love of our

country to be a useless or pernicious
principle of action. And by his own
argument, if it can be proved to be
useful, it should not be called in the invidious
sense of the word, a prejudice.”
“True—But the labor of the proof
fortunately rests with you, M. le Comte.”
Count Altenberg answered in French,
speaking very rapidly.
“It is a labor saved me fortunately, by
the recorded experience of all history, by
the testimony of the wisest, and the best
in all countries ancient and modern—All
agree in proclaiming love of our country
to be one of the most powerful, most permanent
motives to good and great actions.—The
most expansive elevating principle—elevating
without danger,—expansive
without waste.—The principle to which
the legislator looks for the preservative
against corruption in states;—to which
the moralist turns for the antidote against
selfishness in individuals—Recollect, name
any great character ancient or modern—Is
not love of his country one of his virtues?
—Can

you draw ... Can you conceive
a great character—A great or a
good character?—or even a safe member
of society?—Without it, a man hangs
loose upon society, as your own Burke
says. ...”
“Ah! M. le Comte!” cried Clay,
shrinking with affected horror,— “I repent,
I see what I have brought upon
myself; after Burke will come Cicero,
and after Cicero all Rome, Carthage,
Athens, Lacedemon.—Oh! spare me!
since I was a school boy, I could never
suffer those names;—Ah! M. le Comte,
de grace!—I know I have put myself
in the case to be buried alive under a
load of quotations.”
The Count, with that good humor
which disappoints ridicule, smiled, and
checked his enthusiasm—
“Is there not a kind of enthusiasm,” 
said Mrs. Percy, “which is as necessary
to virtue as to genius?”
French Clay shook his head— “He
was sorry to differ from a lady; as a gallant

man, he knew he was wrong, but as
a philosopher he could not patronise enthusiasm.
It was the business he apprehended
of philosophy to correct and extinguish
enthusiasm.”
“I have heard my brother say,” interposed
Rosamond, “that it is a favorite
maxim of law, that the extreme of justice
is the extreme of injustice—perhaps
this maxim may be applied to philosophy,
as well as to law.”
“Why extinguish enthusiasm?” cried
Caroline. “It is not surely the business
of philosophy to extinguish, but to
direct it. Does not enthusiasm, well
directed, give life and energy to all that
is good and great?”
There was so much life and energy in
Caroline's beautiful countenance, that
French Clay was for a moment silenced
by admiration.
“After all,” resumed he, “there is
one slight circumstance, which persons
of feeling should consider, that the evils
and horrors of war are produced by this

very principle, which some people think
so useful to mankind, this famous love of
our country.”
Count Altenberg asked, whether “wars
had not more frequently arisen from the
unlawful fancies, which princes and conquerors
are apt to take for the territories
of their neighbors, than from the legitimate
love of their own country?”
French Clay, hurried by a smile he
saw on Rosamond's lips, changed his
ground again for the worse, and said,
“he was not speaking of wars, of foreign
conquests, but of defensive wars, where
foolish people, from an absurd love of
their own country, that is, of certain
barren mountains, of a few acres of
snow, or of collections of old houses and
churches, called capital cities, will expose
themselves to fire, flame, and famine, and
will stand to be cut to pieces inch-meal,
rather than to submit to a conqueror,
who might, ten to one, be a more civilized
or cleverer sort of a person than their
own rulers, and under whom they might

enjoy all the luxuries of life—changing
only the name of their country for some
other equally well-sounding name; and
perhaps adopting a few new laws, instead
of what they might have been in
the habit from their childhood of worshipping,
as a wittenagemote, or a diet, or
a constitution.—For my part,” concluded
French Clay,— “I have accustomed
myself to go to the bottom of things. I
have approfondied. I have not suffered
my understanding to be paralysed.—I
have made my own analysis of happiness,
and find that your legislators, and
moralists, and patriots, would juggle me
out of many solid physical comforts, by
engaging me to fight for enthusiasms
which do me no manner of good.”
Count Altenberg's countenance had
flushed with indignation, and cooled
with contempt several times during Mr.
Clay's speech.—Beginning in a low composed
voice, he first answered, whatever
pretence to reason it contained,—In
the analysis of human happiness, he

observed, Mr. Clay had bounded his
to physical comforts—this was reducing
civilized man, below even the savage,
and nearly to the state of brutes—did
Mr. Clay choose to leave out all
intellectual pleasures—all the pleasures
of self complacency, self approbation,
and sympathy? But supposing that he
was content to bound his happiness, inelegant
and low, to such narrow limits,
Count Altenberg observed, he did not
provide for the security, even of that
poor portion. If he was ready to give
up the liberty or the free constitution of
the country in which he resided, ready
to live under tyrants and tyranny,
how could he be secure for a year, a
day, even an hour, of his Epicurean paradise?
Mr. Clay acknowledged, that “in this
point of view, it might be awkward to
live in a conquered country; but if a
man has talents to make himself agreeable
to the powers that be, and money
in his purse, that can never touch him,

chacun pour soi—et honi soit qui mal y
pense.”
“Is it in England?—Oh! can it be
in England, and from an Englishman,
that I hear such sentiments!” exclaimed
Count Altenberg.— “Such I have heard
on the Continent—such we have heard
the precursors of the ruin, disgrace, destruction
of the princes and nations of
Europe.”
Some painful reflections or recollections
seemed to absorb the Count for a few
moments.
“Foi d' honnête homme et de philosophe!” 
French Clay declared, “that for
his own part he cared not who ruled or
how, who was conqueror, or what was
conquered, provided Champagne and
Burgundy were left to him by the conqueror.”
Rosamond “thought it was a pity
Mr. Clay was not married to the lady,
who said she did not care what revolutions
happened, as long as she had her

roast chicken, and her little game at
cards.”
“Happen what will,” continued French
Clay, “I have two hundred thousand
pounds, well counted; as to the rest it
is quite indifferent to me, whether England
be called England or France.—For,” 
concluded he, walking off to the
committee of dress, “after all I have
heard, I recur to my first question, what
is country—or, as people term it, their
native land?” 
“Breathes there the man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself has said,
This is my own, my native land?
Whose heart has ne'er within him burn'd,
As home his footsteps he hath turn'd,
From wandering on a foreign strand?
If such there be, go mark him well,
High though his titles, proud his fame,
Boundless his wealth, as wish can claim,
The wretch, concentred all in self,
Living shall forfeit fair renown,
And doubly dying shall go down,
To the vile dust from whence he sprung.
Unwept, unhonor'd, and unsung.”

These lines came full into Caroline's
recollection whilst French Clay spoke:
as he walked away, a pause ensued—Caroline
asked Count Altenberg, who
seemed well acquainted with English
literature, “if he had ever read Scott's
Lay of the Last Minstrel?”
The Count smiled, and replied,
“Breathes there the man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself has said,’
any of those beautiful lines—?”
Caroline blushed.—
At this moment Mrs. Falconer returned,
and throwing a reconnoitring glance
round the room to see how the company
had disposed of themselves, was well
pleased to observe French Clay leaning
on the back of Georgiana's chair, and
giving her his opinion about some artificial
flowers.—The ladies had been consulting
upon the manner in which the
characters in “Love in a Village,”—or
“the Lord of the Manor,” should be

dressed, and Miss Arabella Falconer had
not yet completely determined on which
piece, or which dress she preferred. She
was glad that the Percys had been kept
from this committee, because, as they
were not to be asked to the entertainment,
it was a subject she could not discuss
before them. Whenever they had approached
the table, the young ladies had
talked only of fashions in general; and
now, as Mrs. Percy and Caroline followed
by Count Altenberg joined them,
Mrs. Falconer put aside a volume of
plays, containing “the Lord of the
Manor, &c.,” and taking up another
book, said something about the immortal
bard to English Clay, who happened to
be near her. He replied,
“I have every edition of Shakspeare,
that ever was printed or published, and
every thing that ever was written about
him, good, bad, or indifferent, at Clay-Hall.—I
made this a principle, and I
think every Englishman should do the
same.—Your Mr. Voltaire,” added this

polite Englishman, turning to Count
Altenberg, “made a fine example of
himself by dashing at our Shakspeare?”
“Undoubtedly, Voltaire showed he
did not understand Shakspeare, and,
therefore, did not do him justice,” replied
Count Altenberg. “Even Voltaire
had some tinge of national prejudice,
as well as other men. It was reserved
for women, to set us in this instance,
as in many others, an example
at once of superior candor, and superior
talent.”
English Clay pulled up his boots, and
with a look of cool contempt, said
“I see you are a lady's man, Monsieur.”—
Count Altenberg replied, “that if a
lady's man means an admirer of the fair
sex, he was proud to feel that he deserved
that compliment; and with much
warmth he pronounced such a panegyric
upon that sex, without whom, ‘le commencement
de la vie est sans secours, le milieu
sans plaisir, et la fin sans consolation,’

that even Lady Anne Arlington raised
her head from the hand on which it reclined,
and every female eye turned upon
him with approbation.
“Oh! what a lover he will make, if
ever he is in love,” cried Lady Frances
Arlington, who never scrupled saying
any thing that came into her head.— “I
beg pardon, I believe I have said something
very shocking.—Georgiana, my
dear, I protest I was not thinking of ...
... But what a disturbance I have made
amongst all your faces, ladies—and gentlemen,” 
repeated her Ladyship, looking
archly at the Count, whose face at this
moment glowed manifestly— “and all
because gentlemen and ladies don't mind
their grammar and their tenses.—Now
don't you recollect—I call upon Mrs.
Falconer, who really has some presence
of ... countenance,—I call upon Mrs.
Falconer, to witness that I said if—And,
pray comprehend me, M. le Comte,
else I must appear excessively rude, I
did not mean to say any thing of the

present or the past, but only of the future.”
The Count recovering his presence of
mind, and presence of countenance, turned
to a little Cupid on the mantle-piece,
and playfully doing homage before it,
repeated,
“Qui que tu sois voici ton maître,
Il l'est, le fut—ou le doit être.”
“Oh! charming, Oh! for a translation,” 
cried Mrs. Falconer, glad to turn
the attention from, Georgiana— “Lady
Frances ... Ladies, some of you ...
Miss Percy, here's my pencil.”
Here they were interrupted by Mr.
Percy's return from Lord Oldborough's.
The Commissioner followed Mr. Percy
into the room, and asked, and was answered
a variety of questions about despatches
from town; trying, but in vain,
to find what had been going forward.
At last he ended with a look of absence,
and a declaration that he was “quite

happy to hear, that Lord Oldborough
had so completely got rid of his gout.”
“Completely,” said Mr. Percy— “And
he desires me to tell you, that it
will be necessary for him to return to
town in a few days.”
“In a few days!” cried the Commissioner.—
“In a few days!” repeated several
voices, in different tones.—
“In a few days!—Gracious Heaven!
and what will become of ‘the Lord of
the Manor!”’ cried Miss Falconer.
“Gently, my Arabella! never raise
your voice so high—you, who are a musician,”—said
Mrs. Falconer— “and so
sweet a voice as you have—in general—Besides,” 
added she, drawing her
apart, “you forget that you should not
speak of ‘the Lord of the Manor,’ before
the Percys, as they are not to be
asked.”
“To be sure.—Pray keep your temper,
Bell, if you can for a minute,”

whispered Miss Georgiana— “you see
they have rung for the carriage,”
Mrs. Falconer began to entreat Mrs.
Percy would not be in a hurry to run
away; but to her great joy the carriage
came to the door.
At parting with Count Altenberg, Mr.
Percy said, that he should do himself the
pleasure of returning the visit, with
which the Count had honored him, and
regretted that they were so soon to lose
his company in this part of the world.— “We,
who live so much retired, shall feel
the loss particularly.”
The Count evidently agitated—only
said, in a low voice— “We are not parting
yet—we shall meet again—I hope—Do
you ever go to London.”—
“Never.”—
“At all events we must meet again”—said
the Count.
The ladies had all collected at the open
windows, to see the departure of the
Percys; but Miss Georgiana Falconer
could learn nothing from the manner in

which the Count handed Caroline into
the carriage.—It did not appear even
that he spoke to her.
On his return, the Miss Falconers, and
the Lady Arlingtons, were of course
talking of those who had just left the
house.—There was at first but one voice
in praise of Caroline's beauty and talents—elegance,
and simplicity of manner.
Mrs. Falconer set the example, Lady
Frances Arlington and Miss Georgiana
Falconer extolled her in the highest
terms, one to provoke, the other, not to
appear provoked.
“La!” said Lady Frances— “how we
may mistake even the people we know
best—Georgiana, can you conceive it? I
never should have guessed, if you had
not told me, that Miss Caroline Percy
was such a favorite of yours.—Do you
know now, so little penetration have I, I
should have thought that you rather disliked
her.”
“You are quite right, my dear Lady
Frances,”—cried Mrs. Falconer.— “I

give you credit for your penetration—entre
nous, Miss Caroline Percy is no favorite
of Georgiana's.”
Georgiana actually opened her eyes
with astonishment, and thought her mother
did not know what she was saying,
and that she certainly did not perceive
that Count Altenberg was in the room.
“Count Altenberg, is this the book
you are looking for?” said the young
lady, pronouncing Count Altenberg's
name very distinctly, to put her mother
on her guard.
Mrs. Falconer continued precisely in
the same tone.— “Georgiana does justice,
I am sure, to Miss Percy's merit
and charms; but the truth is, she does
not like her, and Georgiana has too
much frankness to conceal it; and now
come here, and under the rose I will tell
you the reason.”—In a half whisper, but
perfectly intelligible to every one in the
room, Mrs. Falconer went on— “Georgiana's
favorite brother, Buckhurst ...
did you never hear it? ... In days of

yore, there was an attachment ... Buckhurst,
you know, is very ardent in his attachments—desperately
in love he was
... and no wonder.—But ... at that
time he was nobody ... he was unprovided
for, and the young lady had a good
fortune then ... her father would have
him go to the Bar—against the Commissioner's
wishes. ... You know a young
man will do any thing if he is in love,
and is encouraged. ... I don't know
how the thing went on, or off, but
Buckhurst found himself disappointed at
last, and was so miserable about it!—ready
to break his heart—You would
have pitied him! ... Georgiana was so
sorry for him, that she never could forgive
the young lady ... though I really
don't imagine after all she was to blame.—But
sisters will feel for their brothers.”
Georgiana, charmed to find this amiable
mode of accounting for her dislike
to Caroline, instantly pursued her
mother's hint, and frankly declared, that
she never could conceal either her likings

or dislikings—that Miss Caroline Percy
might have all the merit upon Earth, and
she did not doubt but she had; yet she
never could forgive her for jilting Buckhurst—no,
never! never!—It might
be unjust, but she owned that it was a
prepossession she could not conquer.
“Why, indeed, my dear young lady,
I hardly know how to blame you,” cried
Lady Trant— “for certainly a jilt is not
a very amiable character.”
“Oh, my dear Lady Trant, don't
use such a word ... Georgiana!—Why
will you be so warm, so very unguarded,
where that darling brother is concerned,
you really. ... Oh, my dear Lady
Trant, this must not go farther ... And
positively the word jilt must never be
used again—for I'm confident it is quite
inapplicable.”
“I'd not swear for that,” cried Lady
Trant; “for, now I recollect, at Lady
Angelica Headingham's, what was it we
heard, my dear Lady Kew, about her
coquetting with that Mr. Barclay, who is

now going to be married to Lady Mary
Pembroke, you know ...”
“Oh, yes, I did hear something, I
recollect—but, at the time, I never
minded, because I did not know, then,
who that Miss Caroline Percy was ...
true, true, I recollect it now.—And
all, you know, we heard about her and
Sir James Harcourt ... was there not
something there? ... By all accounts,
it is plain she is not the simple country
beauty she looks. ... Practised! ...
practised! you see.”
Miss Georgiana Falconer's only fear
was, that Count Altenberg might not
hear Lady Kew, who had lowered her
voice to the note of mystery. Mrs. Falconer,
who had accomplished her own
judicious purpose, of accounting for
Georgiana's dislike of Miss Caroline
Percy, was now afraid that her dear
friends would overdo the business; she
made many efforts to stop them, but
once upon the scent of scandal, it was
no easy matter to change the pursuit.

“You seem to have found something
that has caught your attention delightfully,
Count Altenberg,” said Mrs. Falconer,
“How I envy any one who is
completely in a book.—What is it?”
“Johnson's preface to Shakspeare.”
Miss Georgiana Falconer was vexed,
for she recollected, that Miss Caroline
Percy had just been speaking of it with
admiration.
Mrs. Falconer wondered how it could
have happened, that she had never read
it.
Lady Kew perseverved in her story— “Sir
James Harcourt I know, who is
the most polite creature in the whole
world, and who never speaks an ill word
of any body, I assure you, said of Miss
Caroline Percy in my hearing ... what
I shall not repeat. Only this much I
must tell you, Mrs. Falconer ... Mrs.
Falconer!—She won't listen because
the young lady is a relation of her own
... and we are very rude—But truth is
truth, notwithstanding, you know—Well!

well! she may talk of Miss
Percy's beauty and abilities. ... Very
clever she is, I don't dispute, but this I
may say, that Mrs. Falconer must never
praise her to me for simplicity of character.”
“Why no;” said Miss Georgiana— “One
is apt to suppose, that a person,
who has lived all her life in the country,
must, of course, have great simplicity.
But there is a simplicity of character,
and a simplicity of manner, and they
don't always go together. Caroline
Percy's manner is fascinating, because,
you know, it is what one does not meet
with every day in town. ... That was
what struck my poor brother. That
and her great talents, which can make
her whatever she pleases to be. ... But
I am greatly afraid she is not quite the
ingenuous person she looks.”
Count Altenberg changed color, and
was putting down his book suddenly,
when Mrs. Falconer caught it, and stopping
him, asked,


“How far he had read?”
Whilst he was turning over the leaves,
Lady Trant went on, in her turn,
“With all her practice, or her simplicity,
whichever it may be ... far be
it from me to decide which ... I fancy
she has met with her match, and has
been disappointed in her turn.”
“Really!” cried Georgiana eagerly,— “How!
What! When!—Are you
certain?”
“Last summer. ... Oh, I have it
from those who know the gentleman
well.—Only an affair of the heart that
did not end happily. ... But I am told
she was very much in love ... the family
would not hear of it—the mother,
especially, was averse.—So the young
gentleman ended by marrying—exceedingly
well—and the young lady by
wearing the willow, you know, a decent
time.”
“Oh, why did you never tell me this
before?” said Miss Georgiana.
“I protest I never thought of it, till

Lady Kew brought it to my recollection,
by talking of Lady Angelica Headingham,
and Sir James Harcourt, and all
that.”
“But who was the gentleman?”
“That's a secret,” replied Lady
Trant.
“A secret!—A secret!—What is it?
What is it?” cried Lady Frances Arlington,
pressing into the midst of the
party—for she was the most curious person
imaginable.
Then heads joined, and Lady Trant
whispered, and Lady Frances exclaimed
aloud,
“Hungerford!—Colonel Hungerford!”—
“Fie! fie! Lady Frances,” cried
Georgiana—and “Fie! fie! you are a
pretty person to keep a secret”—cried
Lady Trant, “I vow I'll never trust
your Ladyship with a secret again ...
when you publish it in this way.”
“I vow you will,” said Lady Frances— “Why
you all know, in your hearts,

you wish to publish it—else why tell it—especially
to me—But all this time
I am not thinking in the least about the
matter, nor was I, when I said Hungerford—I
was and am thinking of my own
affairs.—What did I do with the letter
I received this morning. ... I had it
here ... no, I hadn't it ... yes, I
had ... Anne! ... Anne! ... Lady
Anne! the Duchess's letter. ... I gave
it to you; what did you do with it?”
“La! it is somewhere ... I suppose,” 
said Lady Anne, raising her head,
and giving a vague look round the
room.—
Lady Frances made every one search
their work boxes, writing boxes, and
ridicules; then went from table to table,
opening and shutting all the drawers.
“Frances! ... If you would not fly
about so!—What can it signify?” 
... expostulated Lady Anne. But in
vain, her sister went on, moving every
thing and every body in the room, displacing
all the cushions of all the chairs

in her progress, and, at last, approached
Lady Anne's sofa, with intent to invade
her repose.
“Ah! Frances!”—cried Lady Anne,
in a deprecating tone, with a gesture of
supplication and anguish in her eyes,
“Do let me rest!”
“Never, till I have the letter.”
With the energy of anger and despair
Lady Anne made an effort to reach the
bell cord—but it missed—the cord swung—Petcalf
ran to catch it, and stumbled
over a stool—English Clay stood still
and laughed—French Clay exclaimed
“Ah! mon Dieu! Cupidon!”
Count Altenberg saved Cupid from
falling, and rang the bell for the lady.
“Sir”—said Lady Anne to the footman— “I
had a letter ... sometime
this morning, in my hand” ...
“Yes, my Lady.”
“I want it.”
“Yes, my Lady.”
“Pray, Sir, tell somebody ... to
tell Pritchard, to tell Flora ... to go

up stairs ... to my dressing-room ...
Sir ... to look every where for't. ...
And let it be brought to my sister, Lady
Frances, if you please, Sir.”
“No, no, Sir, don't do any thing
about the matter, if you please, I will go
myself,” said Lady Frances.
Away the lady ran up stairs, and
down again, with the letter in her
hand.
“Yes! exactly as I thought,” cried
she, “my aunt does say, that Mrs. Hungerford
is to be down to day—I thought
so.”
“Very likely,” said Lady Anne— “I
never thought about it.”
“But, Anne, you must think about it,
for my aunt desires we should go and see
her directly.”
“I can't go,” said Lady Anne,— “I've
a cold—your going will do.”
“Mrs. Falconer, my dear Mrs. Falconer,
will you go with me to morrow
to Hungerford-Castle?” cried Lady Frances,
eagerly.

“Impossible! my dear Lady Frances,
unfortunately quite impossible. The
Hungerfords and we have no connexion—There
was an old family quarrel ...”
“Oh! never mind family quarrels
and connexions—You can go, and I am
sure it will be taken very well—and you
know you only go with me—Oh, positively
you must ... now there's my
good dear Mrs. Falconer ... yes, and
order the carriage this minute for to
morrow early”—said Lady Frances in a
coaxing yet impatient tone.
Mrs. Falconer adhered to it's being
absolutely impossible.
“Then, Anne, you must go.”
No—Anne was impenetrable.
“Then I'll go by myself,” cried Lady
Frances, pettishly, “I'll take Pritchard
with me, in our own carriage, and I'll
speak about it directly—for go I must
and will.”
“Now, Frances, what new fancy is
this for Mrs. Hungerford—I am sure

you used not to care about her,” said
Lady Anne.
“And I dare say I should not care
about her now,” replied Lady Frances,
“but that I'm dying to see an old pair
of shoes she has.”
“An old pair of shoes!” repeated
Lady Anne, with a look of unutterable
disdain.
“An old pair of shoes!” cried Mrs.
Falconer, laughing.
“Yes, a pair of blue damask shoes as
old as Edward the Fourth's time ...
with chains from the toe to the knee, you
know ... or do you know, Count Altenberg
... Miss Percy was describing
them ... She saw Colonel Hungerford
put them on. ... Oh, he must put them
on for me—I'll make him put them on,
chains and all, to morrow.”
“Colonel Hungerford is on his way to
India by this time, said Georgiana Falconer,
drily.
“May I ask,” said Count Altenberg,
taking advantage of the first pause in

the conversation— “May I ask if I understood
rightly, that Mrs. Hungerford,
mother of Colonel Hungerford, lives in
this neighbourhood, and is coming into
the country to morrow?”
“Yes—just so,” said Lady Frances.
“What concern can it be of his?” 
thought Miss Georgiana Falconer, fixing
her eyes upon the Count with alarmed
curiosity.
“I knew Colonel Hungerford abroad;” 
continued the Count, “and have a great
regard for him.”
Lady Kew, Lady Trant, and Miss
Georgiana Falconer exchanged looks.
“I am sorry that he is gone to India,” 
said Mrs. Falconer, in a sentimental
tone, “It would have been so pleasant
to you, to have renewed an acquaintance
with him in England.”
Count Altenberg regretted the absence
of his friend, the Colonel; but, turning
to Lady Frances, he congratulated himself
upon having an opportunity of presenting
his letters of introduction, and

paying his respects to Mrs. Hungerford,
of whom he had heard much from foreigners
who had visited England, and
who had been charmed with her, and
with her daughter, Mrs. Mortimer—his
letters of introduction had been
addressed to her town residence, but
she was not in London, when he was
there.
“No, she was at Pembroke,” said
Lady Kew.
I'm sure I wish she was there still,
thought Miss Georgiana.
“But, after all, Lady Frances, is
the Duchess sure, that Mrs. Hungerford
is actually come to the country?—May
be she is still in town.”
“I shall have the honor of letting
your Ladyship know, for, if Lord Old-borough
will permit, I shall certainly
go, very soon, to pay my respects at
Hungerford-Castle,” said Count Altenberg.
The prescient jealousy of Miss Georgiana
Falconer boded ill of this visit

to Hungerford-Castle—A few days
afterwards, a note was received from
Count Altenberg, returning many
thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Falconer for
the civilities he had received from them,
paying all proper compliments to Zara,
announcing his intention of accepting
an invitation to stay some time at Mrs.
Hungerford's, and taking a polite leave
of the Falconer family.
Here was a death blow to all Georgiana's
hopes!—But we shall not stay to
describe her disappointment, or the art
of her mother in concealing that disappointment; 
nor shall we accompany Mrs.
Falconer to town, to see how her designs
upon the Clays or Petcalf prospered. We
must follow Count Altenberg to Hungerford-Castle.