

One day, when Harry Ormond was
out shooting with Moriarty Carroll, Moriarty
abruptly began with—
“Why then, 'tis what I am thinking,
Master Harry, that king Corny don't
know as much of that White Connal as I
do.”
“What do you know of Mr. Connal,” 
said Harry, loading his piece, “I didn't
know you had ever seen him.”
“Oh, but I did, and no great sight to
see.—Unlike the father, old Connal, of
Glynn, who is the gentleman to the last
every inch, even with the coat dropping
off his back; and the son, with the best
coat in christendom, has not the look of
a gentleman at all, at all!—Nor hasn't
in him, inside no more than outside.”

“You may be mistaken there, as you
have never been within-side of him, Moriarty,” 
said Ormond.
“Oh faith, and if I have not been
within-side of him, I have heard enough
from them that seen him turned inside
out, hot and cold. Sure I went down
there last summer, to his country, to see
a shister of my own, that's married in it; 
and lives just by Connal's Town, as the
man calls that sheep farm of his.”
“Well, let the gentleman call his own
place what he will—”
“Oh! he may call it what he plases
for me, I know what the country calls
him; and, lest your honour should not
ax me, I'll tell you:—they call him
White Connal, the negre.—Think of him
that would stand browbating the butcher
an hour, to bate down the farthing a
pound in the price of the worst bits of
the meat, which he'd bespeak always for
the servants; or stand, he would, I've
seen him with my own eyes, higgling
with the poor child, with the apron

round the neck, that was sent to sell him
the eggs—”
“Hush! Moriarty,” said Ormond,
who did not wish to hear any further
particulars of Mr. Connal's domestic
economy, and he silenced Moriarty, by
pointing to a bird.—But the bird flew
away, and Moriarty returned to his
point.
“I wouldn't be telling the like of any
jantleman, but to shew the nature of
him. The minute after he had screwed
the halfpenny out of the child, he'd
throw down, may-be, fifty guineas in
gould, for the horse he'd fancy for his
own riding: not that he rides better than
the sack going to the mill, nor so well; 
but that he might have it to show, and
say, he was better mounted than any
man at the fair: and the same he'd
throw away more guineas than I could
tell, at the head of a short-horned bull,
or a long-horned bull, or some kind of
a bull from England, may-be, just becaase

he'd think nobody else had one of
the breed in all Ireland but himself.”
“A very good thing, at least, for the
country, to improve the breed of cattle.”
“The country!—'Tis little the man
thinks of the country, that never thought
of any thing but himself, since his mother
sucked him.”
“Suckled him, you mean,” said Harry.
“No matter—I'm no spaker—but I
know that man's character, nevertheless— 
he is rich;—but a very bad character
the poor gives him up and down.”
“Perhaps, because he is rich.”
“Not at all; the poor loves the rich
that helps with the kind heart.—Don't
we all love king Corny to the blacking
of his shoes?—Oh! there's the difference!— 
who could like the man that's
always talking of the craturs, and yet to
save the life of the poorest cratur that's
forced to live under him, wouldn't forbear
to drive, and pound, and process,
for the little con acre, the potato ridge,

the cow's grass, or the trifle for the woman's
peck of flax, was she dying, and sell
the woman's last blanket?—White Connal
is a hard man, and takes all to the
uttermost farthing the law allows.”
“Well, even so, I suppose the law
does not allow him more than his due,” 
said Ormond.
“Oh! begging your pardon, Master
Harry,” said Moriarty, “that's becaase
you are not a lawyer.”
“And are you?” said Harry.
“Only as we all are through the country.— 
And now I'll only just tell you,
Master Harry, how this White Connal
sarved my shister's husband, who was
an under-tenant to him.—See, the case
was this—”
“Oh! don't tell me a long case, for
pity's sake.—I am no lawyer, I shall
not understand a word of it.”
“But then, Sir, through the whole
consarning White Connal, what I'm
thinking of, Master Harry,” said Moriarty,

“is, I'm grieving that a daughter
of our dear king Corny's, and such a
pretty likely girl as Miss Dora—”
“Say no more, Moriarty, for there's
a partridge.”
“Oh! is it so with you?” thought
Moriarty, “that's just what I wanted to
know—and I'll keep your secret;—I
don't forget Peggy Sheridan—and his
goodness.”
Moriarty said not a word more about
White Connal or Miss Dora;—and he and
Harry shot a great many birds this day.
It is astonishing how quickly and how
justly the lower class of people in Ireland
discover and appreciate the characters
of their superiors; especially of the class
just above them in rank.
Ormond hoped that Moriarty had been
prejudiced in his account of White Connal,
and that private feelings had induced
him to exaggerate. Harry was
persuaded of this, because Cornelius
O'Shane had spoken to him of Connal,

and had never represented him to be a
hard man. In fact, O'Shane did not
know him. White Connal had a property
in a distant county, where he resided,
and only came up from time to
time to see his father. O'Shane had
then wondered to see the son grown so
unlike the father; and he attributed the
difference to White Connal's having
turned grazier. The having derogated
from the dignity of an idle gentleman,
and having turned grazier, was his chief
fault in king Corny's eyes: so that the
only point in Connal's character and
conduct, for which he deserved esteem,
was that for which his intended father-in-law
despised him. Connal had early
been taught by his father's example, who
was an idle, decayed, good gentleman, of
the old Irish stock, that genealogies and
old maps of estates in other people's possessions
do not gain quite so much respect
in this world as solid wealth. The
son was determined, therefore, to get

money; but in his horror of his father's
indolence and poverty, he ran into a
contrary extreme—he became not only
industrious, but rapacious.—He was
right to avoid being a stalko, as his
father was; but it was not absolutely
necessary, that all his talk should be of
bullocks, or that his whole soul should
be in gain.
In going lately to Dublin to settle
with a sales-master, he had called on
Dora at her aunt's in Dublin, and he
had been “greatly struck,” as he said,
“with Miss O'Shane; she was as fine a
girl as any in Ireland—turn out who
they would against her; all her points
good. But, better than beauty, she
would be no contemptible fortune:
with her aunt's assistance she would cut
up well; she was certain of all her
father's Black Islands—fine improvable
land, if well managed.”
These considerations had their full
effect; Connal, knowing that the young

lady was his destined bride, had begun
by taking the matter coolly, and resolving
to wait for the properest time to
wed; yet the sight of Dora's charms
had so wrought upon him, that he was
now impatient to conclude the marriage
immediately. Directly after seeing Dora
in Dublin, he had gone home and put
things in order and in train to bear his
absence, while he should pay a visit to
the Black Islands. Business, which
must always be considered before pleasure,
had detained him at home longer
than he had foreseen; but now certain
rumours he heard of gay doings in the
Black Islands, and a letter from his
father, advising him not to delay longer
paying his respects at Corny Castle,
determined him to set out. He
wrote to Mr. O'Shane to announce his
intentions, and begged to have the
answer directed to his father's at
Glynn.
One morning as Miss O'Faley, Mr.

O'Shane, and Ormond, were at breakfast,
Dora, who was usually late, not
having yet appeared, Miss O'Faley saw
a little boy running across the fields
towards the house—
“That boy runs as if he was bringing
news,” said she.
“So he has a right to do,” said
Corny; “if I don't mistake, that's the
post; that is, it is not the post, but a
little special of my own—a messenger I
sent off to catch post.”
“To do what?” said Mademoiselle.
“Why, to catch post,” said Corny,
“I bid him gallop off for the life and
put across (lake understood) to the next
post town, which is Ballynaslugger,
and to put in the letters that were too
late here at that office there; and to
bring back whatever he found with no
delay—but gallop off for the bare life.”
This was an operation which the boy
performed, whenever requisite, at the
imminent hazard of his neck every time,

to say nothing of his chance of drowning.
“Well, catch-post, my little rascal,” 
said king Corny, “what have you for us
the day?”
“I got nothing at all, only a wetting
for myself, plase your honour; and one
bit of a note for your honour, which I
have here for you as dry as the bone in
my breast.”
He produced the bit of a note, which,
king Corny's hands being at that time
too full of the eggs and the kettle to
receive graciously, was laid down on the
corner of the table, from which it fell,
and Miss O'Faley picking it up, and
holding it by one corner, exclaimed—
“Is this what you call dry as a bone
in this country? And mighty clean, too— 
faugh!—When will this entire nation
leave off chewing tobacco, I wonder?
This is what you style clean, too, in this
country?”
“Why, then,” said the boy, looking

close at the letter, “I thought it was
clane enough when I got it—and give it— 
but 'tis not so clane now, sure enough; 
this corner—whatever come over it— 
Would it be the snuff, my lady?”
The mark of Miss O'Faley's thumb
was so visible, and the snuff so palpable,
and the effort to brush it from the wet
paper so disastrous, that Miss O'Faley
let the matter rest where it was. King
Corny put silver into the boy's hand,
bidding him not be too much of a
rogue; the boy, smiling furtively,
twitched the hair on his forehead, bobbed
his head in sign of thanks, and
drawing, not shutting the door after him,
disappeared.
“As sure as I'm Cornelius O'Shane,
this is White Connal in propria persona,” 
said he, opening the note.
“Dora's White Connal?” said Ormond.
“Mon Dieu! Bon Dieu! Ah Dieu!” 
cried Mademoiselle O'Faley.

“Hush! Whisht!” cried the father,
“here's Dora coming.”
Dora came in—“Any letter for me?”
“Aye, darling, one for you.”
“Oh, give it me; I'm always in a
desperate hurry for my letters: Where
is it?”
“No—you need not hold out your
pretty hand; the letter is for you, but
not to you,” said king Corny; “And
now you know; aye, now you guess,
my quick little blusher, who 'tis
from?”
“I guess? not I, indeed; not worth
my guessing,” cried Dora, throwing herself
sideways into a chair. “My tea,
if you please, aunt;” then taking the
cup, without adverting to Harry, who
handed it to her, she began stirring
the tea, as if it and all things shared
her scorn.
Mademoiselle O'Faley now addressed
herself to her niece in French. We
shall in future call her Mademoiselle,

when she speaks in French, and Miss
when she speaks in English.
“Mon chere! mon chat!” said Mademoiselle
O'Faley, “you are quite right
to spare yourself the trouble of guessing; 
for I give it you in two, I give it
you in four, I give it you in eight, and
you would never guess right. Figure to
yourself only, that a man, who has the
audacity to call himself a lover of Miss
O'Shane's, could fold, could seal, could
direct a letter in such a manner as that,
which you here behold.”
Dora, who during this speech had sat
fishing for sugar in her tea-cup, raised
her long eye-lashes, and shot a scornful
glance at the letter, but intercepting a
crossing look of Ormond's, the expression
of her countenance suddenly changed,
and with perfect composure she observed,—
“A man may fold a letter badly, and
be nevertheless a very good man.”
“That nobody can possibly contradict,”

said her father, “and on all occasions
'tis a comfort to be able to say
what no one can contradict.”
“No well-bred person will never contradict
nothing,” said Miss O'Faley—
“But, without contradicting you, my
child,” resumed Miss O'Faley, “I maintain
the impossibility of his being a gentleman,
who folds a letter so.”
“But if folding a letter is all a man
wants of being a gentleman,” said Dora,
“it might be learnt, I should think; it
might be taught—”
“If you were the teacher, Dora, it
might, surely,” said her father.
“But heaven, I trust, will arrange
that better,” said Mademoiselle.
“Whatever heaven arranges must be
best,” said Dora.
“Heaven and your father, if you
please, Dora,” said her father, “put
that and that together like a dutiful
daughter, as you must be.”
“Must!” said Dora, angrily.

“That offensive must slipped out by
mistake, darling; I meant only being
you, you must be all that's dutiful and
good.”
“Oh!” said Dora, “that's another
view of the subject.”
“You have a very imperfect view of
the subject, yet;” said her father, “for
you have both been so taken up with the
manner, that you have never thought of
inquiring into the matter of this letter.”
“And what is the matter?” said
Miss O'Faley.
“Form!” continued the father, addressing
himself to his daughter; “form,
I acknowledge, is one thing, and a great
thing in a daughter's eyes.”
Dora blushed—“But in a father's
eyes, substance is apt to be more.”
Dora raised her cup and saucer together
to her lips at this instant, so that
the substance of the saucer completely
hid her face from her father.
“But,” said Miss O'Faley, “you

have not told us yet what the man
says.”
“He says he will be here whenever
we please.”
“That's never,” said Miss O'Faley— 
“never, I'd give for answer, if my pleasure
is to be consulted.”
“Luckily, there's another person's
pleasure to be consulted here,” said the
father, keeping his eyes fixed upon his
daughter.
“Another cup of tea, aunt, if you
please.”
“Then the sooner the better, I say,” 
continued her father, “for when a disagreeable
thing is to be done—that is,
when a thing that's not quite agreeable
to a young lady, such as marriage—”
Dora took the cup of tea from her
aunt's hand, Harry not interfering.
“I say,” persisted her father, “the
sooner it's done and over, the better.”
Dora saw that Ormond's eyes were
fixed upon her; she suddenly tasted, and

suddenly started back from her scalding
tea; Harry involuntarily uttered some
exclamation of pity; she turned, and
seeing his eyes still fixed upon her, said,
“Very rude to stare at any body so,
Sir.”
“I only thought you had scalded
yourself.”
“You only thought wrong.”
“At any rate, there's no great occasion
to be angry with me, Dora.”
“And who is angry, pray, Mr. Ormond?
What put it in your head that I
was doing you the honour to be angry
with you?”
“The cream! the cream!” cried
Miss O'Faley.
A sudden motion, we must not say an
angry motion, of Dora's elbow, had at
this moment overset the cream ewer,
but Harry set it up again, before its
contents poured on her new riding habit.
“Thank you,” said she, “thank you; 
but,” added she, changing the places of

the cream ewer and cups and saucers
before her, “I'd rather manage my own
affairs, my own way, if you'd let me,
Mr. Ormond—if you'd leave me—I can
take care of myself my own way.”
“I beg your pardon for saving your
habit from destruction, for that is the
only cause of offence that I am conscious
of having given. But I leave you to
your own way, as I am ordered,” said
he, rising from the breakfast-table.
“Sparring! sparring, again, you
two!” said Dora's father, “But Dora, I
wonder whether you and White Connal
were sparring that way when you met.”
“Time enough for that, Sir, after
marriage,” said Dora.
Our hero, who had stood leaning on
the back of his chair, fearing that he
had been too abrupt in what he had
said, cast a lingering look at Dora, as
her father spoke about White Connal,
and as she replied; but there was something
so unfeminine, so unamiable, so

decided and bold, he thought, in the tone
of her voice, as she pronounced the word
marriage, that he then, without reluctance,
and with a feeling of disgust,
quitted the room, and left her “to
manage her own affairs, and to take
her own way.”