

The day after his niece's marriage was
happily effected, Lord Oldborough said
to his secretary, “Now, Mr. Cunningham
Falconer, I have leisure to turn my
mind again to the Tourville papers.”
“I was in hopes, my Lord,”—said
the Secretary (se composant le visage)— 
“I was in hopes that this happy alliance,
which secures the Duke of Greenwich,
would have put your Lordship's
mind completely at ease, and that you
would not have felt it necessary to examine
farther into that mystery.”
“Weak men never foresee adversity
during prosperity, nor prosperity during
adversity,”—replied Lord Oldborough.
“His Majesty has decided immediately
to recal his present envoy at that German
court: a new one will be sent, and the

choice of that Envoy his Majesty is graciously
pleased to leave to me.—You are
a very young man, Mr. Cunningham
Falconer, but you have given me such
written irrefragable proofs of your ability
and information, that I have no scruple
in recommending you to his Majesty, as
a person to whom his interest may be
intrusted, and the zeal and attachment
your family have shown me in actions,
not in words only, have convinced me,
that I cannot choose better for my private
affairs.—Therefore, if the appointment
be agreeable to you, you cannot
too soon make what preparations may
be necessary.”
Cunningham delighted, made his acknowledgments
and thanks for the honor
and the favor conferred upon him, with
all the eloquence in his power.
“I endeavor not to do any thing
hastily, Mr. Cunningham Falconer,” 
said his Lordship. “I frankly tell you,
that I was not at first prepossessed in
your favor, nor did I feel inclined to do

more for you, than that to which I had
been induced by peculiar circumstances.
—Under this prepossession, I, perhaps,
did not for some time do justice to your
talents, but I should be without judgment,
or without candor, if I did not
feel and acknowledge the merit of the
performance which I hold in my hand.”
The performance was a pamphlet in
support of Lord Oldborough's administration,
published in Cunningham's
name, but the greater part of it was
written by his good genius in the garret.
“On this,” said Lord Oldborough,
putting his hand upon it as it lay on the
table, “on this found your just title,
Sir, to my esteem and confidence.”
Would not the truth have burst from
any man of common generosity, honor,
or honesty?—Would not a man who
had any feeling, conscience, or shame,
supposing he could have resolved to keep
his secret, at this instant, have been
ready to sink into the earth with confusion,
under this unmerited praise?—

In availing himself falsely of a title to
esteem and confidence, then fraudulently
of another's talents to obtain favor, honor,
and emolument, would not a blush,
or silence, some awkwardness, or some
hesitation, have betrayed him to eyes
far less penetrating than those of Lord
Oldborough?—Yet nothing of this was
felt by Cunningham,—he made, with a
good grace, all the disqualifying speeches
of a modest author, repeated his thanks
and assurances of grateful attachment
and retired triumphant.—It must be acknowledged,
that he was fit for a diplomatist.
His credentials were forthwith
made out in form, and his instructions,
public and private, furnished. No expense
was spared in fitting him out for
his embassy—his preparations made, his
suite appointed, his liveries finished, his
carriage at the door, he departed in
grand style; and all Commissioner Falconer's
friends, of which, at this time,
he could not fail to have many, poured
in with congratulations on the rapid advancement

of his sons, and on all sides,
exclamations were heard in favor of
friends in power.
“True—very true indeed.—And see
what it is,” said Commissioner Falconer,
turning to Buckhurst,—“see what it is
to have a son so perverse, that he will
not make use of a good friend when he
has one, and who will not accept the
promise of an excellent living when he
can get it!”—
All his friends and acquaintance now
joining in one chorus, told Buckhurst in
courtly terms, that he was a fool, and
Buckhurst began to think they must be
right.—“For here,” said he to himself,
“are my two precious brothers finely
provided for, one an envoy, the other a
Major in esse, and a Lieutenant-colonel
in posse—and I, in esse and in posse,
what?—Nothing—but a good fellow— 
one day with the four-in-hand club, the
next in my chambers, studying the law,
by which I shall never make a penny.— 
And there's Miss Caroline Percy, who

has declined the honor of my hand, no
doubt, merely because I have indulged
a little in good company, instead of immuring
myself with Coke and Black-stone,
Viners and Saunders, Bosanquet
and Schoales, or chaining myself to a
special-pleader's desk, like cousin Alfred,
that galley-slave of the law!—No, no,
I'll not make a galley-slave of myself.— 
Besides, at my mother's, in all that set,
and in the higher circles with Hauton
and the Clays, and those people, whenever
I appear in the character of a poor
barrister, I am scouted,—should never
have got on at all, but for my being a
wit&wblank;a wit!—and have not I wit
enough to make my fortune? as my father
says—What hinders me?—My
conscience only—And why should my
conscience be so cursedly delicate, so
unlike other men's consciences?”—
In this humor, Buckhurst was easily
persuaded by his father to take orders.
The paralytic incumbent of Chipping
Friars had just at this time another

stroke of the palsy, on which Colonel
Hauton congratulated the young deacon
—and, to keep him in patience while
waiting for the third stroke, made him
chaplain to his regiment.—The Clays
also introduced him to their uncle, Bishop
Clay, who had, as they told him,
taken a prodigious fancy to Buckhurst for he
observed that, in carving a partridge, Buckhurst
never touched the wing with a knife; 
but, after nicking the joint, tore it off, so as to
leave adhering to the bone that muscle
obnoxious to every good eater:—the bishop
pronounced him to be— “a capital carver.”—
“What a lucky dog!”—Luckier still
than he, or even his politic father in his
most sanguine schemes could have hoped
or devised: Fortune at this time threw
into Buckhurst's hands unasked, unlooked
for, and in the oddest way imaginable,
a gift of no small value in itself,
and an earnest of her future favors.
At some high festival, Buckhurst was
invited to dine with the Bishop. Now
Bishop Clay was a rubicund, full-blown,
short-necked prelate, with the fear of
apoplexy continually before him, except
when dinner was on the table.—And at
this time, a dinner was on the table,
rich with every dainty of the season

that earth, air, and sea, could provide.
Grace being first said by the chaplain,
the Bishop sat down “richly to enjoy.”— 
But it happened in the first onset, that
a morsel too large for his Lordship's capacious
swallow stuck in his throat.— 
The Bishop grew crimson,—purple,— 
black in the face,—the chaplain started
up, and untied his neckcloth.—The
guests crowded round, one offering water,
another advising bread, another calling for
a raw egg, another thumping his Lordship
on the back.—Buckhurst Falconer
ran for the bellows, and applying the muzzle
directly to the prelate's ear, produced
such a convulsion as expelled the pellet
from the throat with a prodigious explosion,
and sent it to a mighty distance. The
Bishop, recovering his breath and vital
functions, sat up, restored to life, and
dinner—he eat again, and drank to Mr.
Buckhurst Falconer's health, with thanks
for this good service to the church, to
which he prophesied the reverend young
gentleman would, in good time, prove

an honor. And that he might be, in
some measure, the means of accomplishing
his own prophecy, Bishop Clay did,
before he slept, which was immediately
after dinner, present Mr. Buckhurst Falconer
with a living worth £400 a year.
A living which had not fallen into the
Bishop's gift above half a day, and
which, as there were six worthy clergymen
in waiting for it, would necessarily
have been disposed of the next morning.
“Oh! star of patronage, shine ever
thus upon the Falconers!” cried Buckhurst,
when, elevated with wine in honor
of the church, he gave an account to his
father at night of the success of the day.
—“Oh! thou, whose influence has, for
us, arrested Fortune at the top of her
wheel, be ever thus propitious!—Only
make me a dean.—Have you not made
my brother, the dunce, a colonel? and
my brother, the knave, an envoy?&wblank;I
only pray to be a dean—I ask not yet
to be a bishop—You see I have some
conscience left.”

“True,” said his father, laughing.
“Now go to bed, Buckhurst; you may,
for your fortune is up.”
“Ha! my good cousin Percys, where
are you now?—Education, merit, male
and female, where are you now?—Planting
cabbages, and presiding at a day
school—one son plodding in a pleader's
office—another cast in an election for an
hospital physician—a third encountering
a plague in the West Indies.—I give you
joy.—”
No wonder the Commissioner exulted,
for he had not only provided thus rapidly
for his sons, but he had besides happy
expectations for himself.—With Lord
Oldborough he was now in higher favor
and confidence, than he had ever hoped
to be. Lord Oldborough, who was a man
little prone to promise, and who always
did more than he said, had, since the
marriage of his niece, thrown out a hint,
that he was aware of the expense it must
have been to Commissioner and Mrs.
Falconer, to give entertainments continually,

and to keep open house, as they
had done this winter, for his political
friends—no instance of zeal in his Majesty's
service, his Lordship said, he
hoped was ever lost upon him, and,
if he continued in power, he trusted he
should find occasion to show his gratitude.
This from another minister might
mean nothing, but to pay with words; 
from Lord Oldborough the Commissioner
justly deemed it as good as a promissory
note for a lucrative place. Accordingly
he put it in circulation directly
among his creditors, and he no
longer trembled at the expense, at which
he had lived and was living. Both Mrs.
Falconer and he had ever considered a
good cook, and an agreeable house, as
indispensably necessary to those who
would rise in the world; and they laid it
down as a maxim, that, if people wished
to grow rich, they must begin by appearing
so. Upon this plan every thing in
their establishment, table, servants, equipage,
dress, were far more splendid than

their fortune could afford. The immediate
gratification which resulted from
this display, combining with their maxims
of policy, encouraged the whole family
to continue this desperate game.
Whenever the timidity of the Commissioner
had started; when, pressed by his
creditors, he had backed, and had wished
to stop in this course of extravagance; 
his lady, of a more intrepid character,
urged him forward, pleading that
“he had gone too far to recede—that
the poorer they were, the more necessary
to keep up the brilliant appearance
of affluence. How else could her daughters,
after all the sums that had been
risked upon them, hope to be advantageously
established? How otherwise
could they preserve what her friend Lady
Jane Granville so justly styled the patronage
of fashion?
When success proved Mrs. Falconer to
be right—“Now! Commissioner Falconer!
Now!”—how she triumphed, and
how she talked! Her sons all in such

favor! her daughters in such fashion!—No
party without the Miss Falconers!&wblank; 
Miss Falconers must sing—Miss Falconers
must play—Miss Falconers must
dance, or no lady of a house could feel
herself happy, or could think she had
done her duty—No piano, no harp could
draw such crowds as the Miss Falconers.
—It was the ambition among the fashionable
men, to dance with the Miss
Falconers, to flirt with the Miss Falconers.
—“Not merely flirting ma'am,” 
—as Mrs. Falconer said, and took proper
pains should be heard—“but several serious
proposals from very respectable
quarters—however, none yet exactly what
she could resolve to accept for her girls
—she looked high for them, she owned
—she thought she had a right to look
high.—Girls in fashion should not take
the first offers.—They should hold up
their heads—why should they not aspire
to rank, why not to title, as well as to
fortune?”
Poor Petcalf! General Petcalf's son,

had been for some time, as it was well-known,
despérately in love with Miss
Georgiana Falconer; but what chance
had he now!—“However, he was to
be managed,” he was useful sometimes
as a partner, “to whom one may say
one is engaged, when a person one does
not choose to dance with asks for the
honor of one's hand,—useful sometimes
to turn over the leaves of the music-book
—useful always as an attendant in
public places.—Useful in short to be exhibited
as a captive; for one captive
leads to another conquest.”—And Miss
Arabella Falconer too could boast her
conquests, though nobody merely by
looking at her would have guessed it:
but she was a striking exemplification of
the truth of Lady Jane Granville's
maxim, that fashion, like Venus's girdle,
can beautify any girl, let her be ever
so ugly.—
And now the Falconer family having
risen, and succeeded beyond their most
sanguine hopes, by a combination of

lucky circumstances, and by adherence
to their favorite system; we leave them
fortified in their principles, and at the
height of prosperity.