

No less an event than Alfred's marriage,
no event calling less imperatively
upon her feelings, could have recovered
Lady Jane's sympathy for Caroline.
But Alfred Percy, who had been the
restorer of her fortune, her friend in adversity,
what pain it would give him to
find her, at the moment when he might
expect her congratulations, quarrelling
with his sister—that sister, too, who had
left her home, where she was so happy,
and Hungerford Castle, where she was
adored, on purpose to tend Lady Jane
in sickness and obscurity!—
Without being put exactly into these
words, or, perhaps, into any words,
thoughts such as these, with feelings of
gratitude and affection, revived for Caroline
in Lady Jane's mind the moment

she heard of Alfred's intended marriage.—
“Good young man!—Excellent
friend!—Well!—tell me all about it, my
dear.”—
It was the first time, that her Ladyship
had said my dear to Caroline since
the day of the fatal refusal.
Caroline was touched by this word of
reconciliation—and the tears it brought
into her eyes completely overcame Lady
Jane,—who hastily wiped her own.—
“So, my dear Caroline, ... where
were we?—tell me about your brother's
marriage ... when is it to be?— 
How has it been brought about?—the
last I heard of the Leicesters was the
good Dean's death ... I remember
pitying them very much—Were they
not left in straitened circumstances, too?
—Will Alfred have any fortune with
Miss Leicester?—Tell me every thing
... Read me his letters.”—
To go back to Doctor Leicester's
death.—For some months his preferments

were kept in abeyance—Many
were named, or thought of, as likely to
succeed him.—The Deanery was in
the gift of the crown, and, as it was
imagined, that the vicarage was also at
the disposal of government, applications
had poured in, on all sides, for friends,
and friend's friends, to the remotest link
of the supporters of ministry—But— 
to use their own elegant phrase—The
hands of government were tied.—
It seems, that in consequence of some
parliamentary interest, formerly given
opportunely, and in consideration of certain
arrangements in his diocese, to serve
persons whom ministers were obliged to
oblige, a promise had long ago been
given to Bishop Clay,—that his recommendation
to the Deanery should be
accepted on the next vacancy. The
Bishop, who had promised the living to
his sister's husband, now presented it to
Mr. Buckhurst Falconer, with the important
addition of Dr. Leicester's deanery.
To become a dean, was once the

height of Buckhurst's ambition, that, for
which, in a moment of elation, he
prayed, scarcely hoping that his wishes
would ever be fulfilled—yet now that his
wish was accomplished, and that he had
attained this height of his ambition, was
he happy?—No!—far from it; farther
than ever.—How could he be happy—dissatisfied
with his conduct, and detesting
his wife.—In the very act of selling
himself to this beldam,—he abhorred
his own meanness; but he did not know
how much reason he should have to repent,
till the deed was done. It was
done in a hurry, with all the precipitation
of a man, who hates himself for
what he feels forced to do. Unused to
bargain and sale in any way, in marriage
never having thought of it before,
Buckhurst did not take all precautions
necessary, to make his sacrifice answer
his own purpose. He did not fully know,
he could not conceive, the avaricious
temper and habits of his lady, till he was
hers past redemption. Whatever accession

of income he obtained from his marriage
he lived up to; immediately, his
establishment, his expenses surpassed his
revenue.—His wife would not pay or
advance a shilling beyond her stipulated
quota to their domestic expenses.—He
could not bear the parsimonious manner,
in which she would have had him live,
or the shabby style, in which she received
his friends. He was more profuse
in proportion as she was more niggardly,
and whilst she scolded and
grudged every penny she paid, he ran
in debt magnanimously for hundreds.
When the living and the deanery came
into his possession, the second year's
fruits had been eaten before hand.—Money
he must have, and money his wife
would not give—but a litigious proctor
suggested to him a plan for raising it, by
demanding a considerable sum from the
executors of the late Dr. Leicester for
what is called dilapidation. The parsonage-house
seemed to be in good repair; but
to make out charges of dilapidation was

not difficult to those, who understood the
business—and fifteen hundred pounds
were the charge presently made out against
the executors of the late incumbent.—It
was invidious, it was odious for the
new vicar, in the face of his parishioners,
of all those who loved and respected
his predecessor, to begin by making such
a demand.—Especially as it was well
known, that the late Dean had not saved
any of the income of his preferment, but
had disposed of it amongst his parishioners
as a steward for the poor. He had
left his family in narrow circumstances.
They were proud of his virtues, and not
ashamed of the consequences. With dignity
and ease they retrenched their expenses; 
and after having lived as became the family
of a dignitary of the church, on quitting
the parsonage, the widow and her niece
retired to a small habitation suited to
their altered circumstances, and lived
with respectable and respected economy.
—The charge brought against them by
Dean Falconer was an unexpected blow,

It was an extortion, to which Mrs. Leicester
would not submit—could not without
injury to her niece, from whose fortune
the sum claimed, if yielded, must
be deducted.
Alfred Percy, from the first moment of
their distress, from the time of good
Dean Leicester's death, had been assiduous
in his attentions to Mrs. Leicester,
and by the most affectionate letters, and
whenever he could get away from
London by his visits to her and to his
Sophia, had proved the warmth and constancy
of his attachment.—Some months
had now passed, he urged his suit, and
besought Sophia no longer to delay his
happiness. Mrs. Leicester wished, that
her niece should now give herself a protector
and friend, who might console her
for the uncle she had lost.—It was at this
period the dilapidation charge was made.
—Mrs. Leicester laid the whole statement
before Alfred, declaring that for his
sake, as well as for her niece's, she was
resolute to defend herself against injustice.

Alfred could scarcely bring himself
to believe, that Buckhurst Falconer had
acted in the manner represented, with a
rapacity, harshness, and cruelty, so opposite
to his natural disposition—Faults
Alfred well knew that Buckhurst had; 
but they were all, he thought, of quite a
different sort from those, of which he now
stood accused. What was to be done?
—Alfred was extremely averse from
going to law with a man who was his relation,
for whom he had early felt, and
still retained a considerable regard.—Yet
he could not stand by and see the woman
he loved defrauded of nearly half the
small fortune she possessed. On the
other hand, he was employed as a professional
man, and called upon to act. He
determined, however, before he should,
as a last resource, expose the truth and
maintain the right in a court of justice,
previously to try every means of conciliation
in his power. To all his letters
Dean Falconer answered evasively and
unsatisfactorily by referring him to his
proctor or his attorney, into whose hands

he said he had put the business, and
he knew and wished nothing more about
it.—The attorney—Solicitor Sharpe,
was impracticable—The proctor was as
bad.—Alfred resolved to see the Dean
himself.—And this after much difficulty
he at length effected.—He found the
Dean and his lady tête-à-tête.—Their
raised voices suddenly stopped short as
he entered.—The Dean gave an angry
look at his servant as Alfred came into
the room.—
“Your servants,” said Alfred, “told
me, that you were not at home, but I
told them, that I knew Dean Falconer
would be at home to an old friend.”
“You are very good ... (said Buckhurst)
—you do me a great deal of honor,” 
said the Dean.
Two different manners appeared in the
same person, one natural—belonging to
his former, the other assumed, proper,
as he thought, for his present self—or
rather for his present situation.

“Won't you be seated? ... I hope all
our friends ...” ... Mrs. Buckhurst,
or as she was called, Mrs. Dean Falconer,
made divers motions, with a very
ugly chin, and stood as if she thought
there ought to be an introduction.—The
Dean knew it, but being ashamed to introduce
her, determined against it.— 
Alfred stood politely in suspension, waiting
their mutual pleasure.
“Won't you sit down, Sir?” repeated
the Dean.
Down plumped Mrs. Falconer directly,
and taking out her spectacles, as if
to shame her husband, by heightening
the contrast of youth and age, deliberately
put them on; then drawing her
table nearer, settled herself to her work.
Alfred, who saw it to be necessary,
determined to use his best address to
conciliate the lady.
“Mr. Dean, you have never yet done
me the honor to introduce me to Mrs.
Falconer.”

“I thought ... I thought we had
met before ... since—Mrs. Falconer
—Mr. Alfred Percy.”
The lady took off her spectacles, smiled,
and adjusted herself, evidently with
an intention to be more agreeable. Alfred
sat down by her work-table, directed
his conversation to her, and soon talked,
or rather, induced her to talk herself
into fine humor. Presently she retired
to dress for dinner, and “hoped Mr.
Alfred Percy had no intention of running
away—she had a well-aired bed to
offer him.”—
The Dean, though he cordially hated
his lady, was glad for his own sake,
to be relieved from her fits of crossness; 
and was pleased by Alfred's paying attention
to her, as this was a sort of
respect to himself, and what he seldom
met with, from those young men who
had been his companions before his marriage.
—They usually treated his lady
with a neglect or ridicule, which reflected
certainly upon her husband.

Alfred never yet had touched upon his
business, and Buckhurst began to think
this was merely a friendly visit. Upon
Alfred's observing some alteration, which
had been lately made in the room in
which they were sitting, the Dean took
him to see other improvements in the
house; in pointing out these, and all
the conveniencies and elegancies about
the Parsonage, Buckhurst totally forgot
the dilapidation suit; and every thing he
showed and said tended unawares to
prove, that the house was in the most
perfect repair, and best condition possible.
—Gradually, whatever solemnity,
and beneficed pomp, there had at first
appeared in the Dean's manner, wore
off, or was laid aside; and, except his
being somewhat more corpulent and rubicund
than in early years, he appeared
like the original Buckhurst.—His gayety
of heart, indeed, was gone, but some
sparkles of his former spirits remained.
Here,” said he, showing Alfred into
his study.—“Here, as our good friend,

Mr. Blank said when he showed us his
study, ‘Here is where I read all day long—quite
snug—and nobody's a bit the
wiser for it.’”—
The Dean seated himself in his comfortable
arm chair.
“Try that chair, Alfred, excellent
for sleeping in at one's ease.
“To rest the cushion and soft Dean invite.”
“Ah!” said Alfred—“Often have I
sat in this chair with my excellent friend
Dean Leicester!”
The new Dean's countenance suddenly
changed—but endeavoring to pass it off
with a jest, he said, “Ay, poor good
old Leicester, he sleeps for ever—that's
one comfort—to me—if not to you.—But
perceiving that Alfred continued to
look serious.—The Dean added some
more proper reflections in a tone of ecclesiastical
sentiment, and with a sigh of
decorum.—Then rose, for he smelt that
the dilapidation suit was coming.

“Would not you like, Mr. Percy, to
wash your hands before dinner?”
“I thank you, Mr. Dean, I must
detain you a moment to speak to you on
business.”
Black as Erebus grew the face of the
Dean—he had no resource but to listen,
for he knew it would come after dinner,
if it did not come now; and it was as
well to have it alone in the study, where
nobody might be a bit the wiser.
When Alfred had stated the whole of
what he had to say, which he did in as
few, and strong words as possible, appealing
to the justice and feelings of
Buckhurst—to the fears, which the Dean
must have of being exposed, and ultimately
defeated in a court of justice— 
“Mrs. Leicester,”—concluded he— 
“is determined to maintain the suit,
and has employed me to carry it on for
her.”—
“I should very little have expected,” 
said the Dean, “that Mr. Alfred

Percy would have been employed in such
a way against me.”
“Still less should I have expected, that
I could be called upon in such a way
against you,”—replied Alfred—“No
one can feel it more than I do. The
object of my present visit is, to try
whether some accommodation may not
be made, which will relieve us both from
the necessity of going to law, and may
prevent me from being driven to the
performance of this most painful professional
duty.”
“Duty! professional duty!” repeated
Buckhurst—“as if I did not understand
all those cloak-words, and know how
easy it is to put them on and off at
pleasure!”
“To some it may be, but not to me,” 
said Alfred, calmly.
Anger started into Buckhurst's countenance—but
conscious how inefficacious
it would be, and how completely
he had laid himself open—the Dean answered,

“You are the best judge, Sir.—But I
trust ... though I don't pretend to
understand the honor of lawyers—I trust
as a gentleman, you will not take advantage
against me in this suit, of any
thing my openness has shown you about
the Parsonage.”
“You trust rightly, Mr. Dean,”—replied
Alfred, in his turn, with a look
not of anger, but of proud indignation— 
“You trust rightly, Mr. Dean, and as
I should have expected, that one who has
had opportunities of knowing me so well
ought to trust.”
“That's a clear answer,” said Buckhurst— 
“But how could I tell?—so much
jockeying goes on in every profession—how
could I tell, that a lawyer would be
more conscientious than another man?
—But now you assure me of it—I take
it upon your word, and believe it in your
case.—About the accommodation—accommodation
means money, does not it?
—frankly I have not a shilling.—But
Mrs. Falconer is all accommodation—Try

what you can do with her—and by the
way you began, I should hope you
would do a great deal,”—added he,
laughing.
Alfred would not undertake to speak
to his lady, unless the Dean would, in
the first instance, make some sacrifice.
—He represented, that he was not asking
for money, but for a relinquishment of a
claim, which he apprehended not to be
justly due—“And the only use I shall
ever make of what you have shown me
here, is to press upon your feelings, as
I do at this moment, the perception and
conviction of the injustice of that claim,
which I am persuaded your lawyers only
instigated, and that you will abandon.”—
Buckhurst begged him not to be persuaded
of any such thing. The instigation
of an attorney, or of a proctor,
he laughing said, was not in law counted
the instigation of the devil—at law no
man talked of feelings.—In matters of
property judges did not understand them,

whatever figure they might make with a
jury in criminal cases—with an eloquent
advocate's hand on his breast.
Alfred let Buckhurst go on with his
vain wit and gay rhetoric, till he had
nothing more to say, knowing that he
was hiding consciousness of unhandsome
conduct.—Sticking firmly to his point,
Alfred showed that his client, though
gentle, was resolved, and that, without
Buckhurst yielded, law must take it's
course—that though he should never
give any hint, the premises must be
inspected, and disgrace and defeat must
follow.
Forced to be serious, fretted and hurried,
for the half hour bell before dinner
had now rung, and the Dean's stomach
began to know canonical hours, he exclaimed,
“The upshot of the whole business is,
that Mr. Alfred Percy is in love, I understand,
with Miss Sophia Leicester,
and this fifteen hundred pounds, which
be pushes me to the bare wall to relinquish,

is eventually as part of her fortune
to become his.—Would it not have
been as fair to have stated this at once?”
“No—because it would not have
been the truth.”
“No!—You won't deny that you are
in love with Miss Leicester?”—
“I am as much in love, as man can
be, with Miss Leicester,—but her fortune
is nothing to me, for I shall never
touch it.”
“Never touch it—Does the aunt—the
widow—the cunning widow, refuse
consent?”
“Far from it, the aunt is all the
aunt of Miss Leicester should be—all
the widow of Dr. Leicester ought to be.
—But her circumstances are not what
they ought to be, and ... by the liberality
of a friend, who lends me a house,
rent free, and by the resources of my
profession, I am able, better able than
Mrs. Leicester is, to spare fifteen hundred
pounds—therefore, in the recovery of
this money I have no personal interest at

present.—I shall never receive it from
her.”
“Noble! Noble!—just what I could
have done myself—once—what a contrast!—”
Buckhurst laid his head down upon
his arms flat on the table, and remained
for some moments silent—Then, starting
upright,
“I'll never claim a penny from her
—I'll give it all up to you!—I will
if I sell my band for it, by Jove.”
“Oh! what has your father to answer
for, who forced you into the church!” 
thought Alfred.
“My dear Buckhurst,” said he, “my
dear Dean. ...”
“Call me Buckhurst, if you love me.”
“I do love you, it is impossible to
help it, in spite of—”
“All my faults—Say it out—Say it
out—in spite of your conscience,” 
added Buckhurst, trying to laugh:
“Not in spite of my conscience, but in
favor of yours,” said Alfred, against

whose bitter dictates you have been
compelled all your life to act.”
“I have so, but that's over.—What
remains to be done at present? I am
in real distress for five hundred pounds.
Apropos to your being engaged in this
dilapidation suit, you can speak to Mrs.
Falconer about it. Tell her I have given
up the thing:—And see what she will
do.”
Alfred promised he would speak to
Mrs. Falconer.—“ And, Alfred, when
you see your sister Caroline, tell her that
I am not in one sense such a wretch. ...
Quite as ... she thinks me.—But
tell her that I am yet a greater wretch
... infinitely more miserable than she,
I hope, can conceive—beyond redemption
—beyond endurance miserable.”— 
He turned away hastily in an agony of
mind. Alfred shut the door and escaped,
scarcely able to bear his own emotion.
When they met at dinner, Mrs. Dean
Falconer was an altered person—her unseemly
morning costume and well-worn

shawl being cast aside, she appeared in
bloom-colored gossamer gauze, and primrose
ribbons, a would-be-young lady.
Nothing of that curmudgeon look, or
old fairy cast of face and figure, to which
he had that morning been introduced,
but in their place rouge, and smiles, and
all the false brilliancy, which rouge can
give to the eyes, proclaimed a determination
to be charming.
The Dean was silent and scarcely eat
any thing; though the dinner was excellent,
for his lady was skilled in the culinary
department, and in favor of Alfred
had made a more hospitable display than
she usually condescended to make for her
husband's friends. There were no other
guests, except a young lady, companion
to Mrs. Falconer. Alfred was as agreeable
and entertainig as circumstances
permitted; and Mrs. Buckhurst Falconer,
as soon as she got out of the
dining-room, even before she reached
the drawing-room, pronounced him to
be a most polite and accomplished young

man, very different indeed from the common
run, or the usual style of Mr. Dean
Falconer's dashing bachelor beaux, who
in her opinion were little better than
brute bears.
At coffee, when the gentlemen joined
the ladies in the drawing-room, as Alfred
was standing beside Mrs. Falconer, meditating
how and when to speak of the
object of his visit, she cleared the ground
by choosing a topic of conversation, which
at last fairly drove her husband out of
the room. She judiciously, maliciously,
or accidentally began to talk of the proposal,
which she had heard a near relation
of hers had not long since made to a
near relation of Mr. Alfred Percy's— 
Mr. Clay of Clay-Hall, her nephew, had
proposed for Mr. Alfred's sister, Miss Caroline
Percy.—She was really sorry
the match was not to take place, for she
had heard a very high character of the
young lady in every way, and her nephew
was rich enough to do without fortune— 
Not but what that would be very

acceptable to all men—especially young
men, who are now mostly all for money
instead of all for love—Except in the
case of very first rate extraordinary
beauty, which therefore making a woman
a prey just as much one as the other,
might be deemed a misfortune as great,
though hardly quite, Mrs. Buckhurst said,
as she had found a great fortune in her
own particular case. The involution of
meaning in these sentences rendering it
not easy to be understood, the Dean
stood it pretty well, only stirring his coffee,
and observing that it was cold; but when
his lady went on to a string of interrogatories
about Miss Caroline Percy—on
the color of her eyes and hair—size of
her mouth and nose—requiring in short
a complete full length portrait of the
young lady, poor Buckhurst set down
his cup, and pleading business in his
study, left the field open to Alfred.
“Near-sighted glasses! Do you never
use them, Mr. Percy?” said Mrs. Dean
Falconer, as she thought Alfred's eyes

fixed upon her spectacles, which lay on
the table.
“No! he never used them he thanked
her, he was rather far-sighted than short-sighted.” 
She internally commended his
politeness in not taking them up to verify
her assertion, and put them into her
pocket to avoid all future danger.
He saw it was a favorable moment,
and entered at once into his business— 
beginning by observing, that the Dean
was much out of spirits.—The moment
money was touched upon, the curmudgeon
look returned upon the lady,
and for some time Alfred had great difficulty
in making himself heard; she
poured forth such complaints “against
the extravagance of the Dean, with lists
of the debts she had paid, the sums she
had given, and the vow she had made
never to go beyond the weekly allowance
she had at the last settlement agreed to
give her husband.”—
Alfred pleaded strongly the expense of
law, and the certainty, in his opinion, of

ultimate defeat, with the being obliged to
pay all the costs, which would fall upon
the Dean.—The Dean was willing to
withdraw his claim—he had promised to
do so, in the most handsome manner,
and therefore Alfred said, he felt particularly
anxious, that he should not be
distressed for five hundred pounds, a
sum for which he knew Mr. Falconer
was immediately pressed.—He appealed
to Mrs. Falconer's generosity.— 
He had been desired by the Dean to
speak to her on this subject, otherwise he
should not have presumed—and it was as
a professional man, and a near relation,
that he now took the liberty:—This was
the first transaction he had ever had with
her, and he hoped he should leave the
vicarage impressed with a sense of her generosity,
and enabled to do her justice
in the opinion of those, who did not
know her.
“That was very little to her,” she
bluntly said—“She acted only up to her
own notions—She lived only for herself.”

“And for her husband.—Love,” Alfred
Percy said, “he was assured was superior
to money in her opinion.—And
after all, my dear Madam, you set me
the example of frankness, and permit me
to speak to you without reserve.—What
can you, who have no reason, you say,
to be pleased with either of your nephews,
do better with your money, than spend
it while you live, and for yourself, in
securing happiness in the gratitude and
affection of a husband, who, generous
himself, will be peculiarly touched and
attached by generosity.”
The words, Love, generosity, generous,
sounded upon the lady's ear, and she was
unwilling to lose that high opinion, which
she imagined Alfred entertained of her
sentiments and character. Besides, she
was conscious, that he was in fact nearer
the truth, than all the world would have
believed. Avaricious in trifles, and parsimonious
in those every day habits,
which brand the reputation immediately

with the fault of avarice, this woman
was one of those misers, who can be
generous by fits and starts, and who have
been known to give hundreds of pounds,
but never to part with a shilling.
She presented the Dean, her husband,
with an order on her banker for the money
he wanted, and Alfred had the pleasure
of leaving his unhappy friend better, at
least, than he found him.—He rejoiced
in having compromised this business so
successfully, and in thus having prevented
the litigation, ill will, and disgraceful
circumstances, which, without his interference,
must have ensued.
The gratitude of Mrs. Leicester, and
her niece, was delightful.—How much
more gratifying this success, than any
professional victory unmixed with feelings
of benevolence and affection!—The aunt
urged him to accept what he had been
the means of saving, as part of her
niece's fortune, but this he absolutely
refused, and satisfied Mrs. Leicester's

delicacy, by explaining, that he could not,
if he would, now yield to her entreaties,
as he had actually obtained the money
from poor Buckhurst's generous repentance,
upon the express faith, that he had
no private interest in the accommodation.”
“You would not,” said Alfred, “bring
me under the act against raising money
upon false pretences?”
What Alfred lost in money, he gained
in love.—His Sophia's eyes beamed upon
him with delight, and he enjoyed her
smile,
“the dear reward of every virtuous toil.”
—The day was fixed for their marriage,
and at Alfred's suggestion, Mrs. Leicester
consented, painful as it was, in some respects,
to her feelings, that they should
be married by Dean Falconer, in the
parish church.—Alfred knew, that his
parishioners had been violently prejudiced
against the present Dean by the report,

that he was going to law with the
late Dean's family; and Mrs. Leicester's
appearing at his church, and permitting
her niece to be married by him, would
be the most public and effectual method
of putting an end to these reports, and
of conciliating for him the good will of
his parishioners. Mrs. Leicester consented
with the more readiness to what at
first was repugnant to her feelings, upon
reflecting, that acting in this manner
would be exactly consonant to the whole
tenor and principles of her beloved husband's
conduct through life, who had ever
been ready to sacrifice, not only any personal
pique, but every refinement of sentiment,
to his great Christian duty of
promoting peace and good will amongst
men.
Alfred brought his bride to town, and
as soon as they were established in their
own house, or rather in that house which
Mr. Gresham insisted upon their calling
their own, Lady Jane Granville was the
first person to offer her congratulations—

congratulations very different from those
unmeaning compliments, which, in the
fashionable world, her Ladyship had so
often heard upon similar occasions.—Alfred
begged his sister Caroline from Lady
Jane, as he had already obtained his father's
and mother's consent. Lady Jane
was really fond of Caroline's company,
and had forgiven her, as well as she
could; yet her Ladyship had no longer
a hope of being of use to her, and felt
that even if any other offer were to
occur, and—none such as had been
made—could ever more be expected—it
would lead only to fresh disappointment
and altercation; therefore she, with the
less reluctance, relinquished Caroline altogether.—
Caroline's new sister had been, from
the time they were first acquainted, her
chosen friend, and she rejoiced in seeing
all her hopes for her brother's happiness
accomplished by this marriage. He had
long looked forward to this time, when
he could have the comforts of a home,

and the pleasures of domestic society, to
solace him in the midst of his professional
labors. His Sophia was peculiarly calculated
to make his home agreeable: She
had those habits of independent occupation,
which are essential to the wife of a
professional man, who must have many
hours to spend alone, or to pass at least
without the company of her husband.— 
She had also that cheerfulness of temper,
readiness to converse, or to be silent,
which are necessary to a man, whose
mind is alternately engrossed with serious
business, and in want of relaxation after
tiresome exertion.—On his return home
every evening, he was sure to find a smiling
wife, a sympathizing friend, a cheerful
fireside, as delightful to the intellectual
as to the corporeal laborer.—Sophia
had musical talents, her husband was
fond of music.—She did not lay aside the
accomplishments, which had charmed
the lover, but made use of them to please
and attach him she had chosen as her
companion for life.—Her voice, her harp,

her utmost skill, were ready at any moment
for her husband; and she found far
more delight in devoting her talents to
him, than she had ever felt in exhibiting
them to admiring, perhaps, but certainly
indifferent auditors.—This was the
domestic use of accomplishments, which
Caroline loved, to which she had always
been accustomed, and in joining in her
new sister's occupations, and endeavors
to make Alfred's evenings pass pleasantly,
she felt at once as much at home, as
if she had been in the country—for the
mind is it's own place, and domestic
happiness may be naturalized in a capital
city.—
At her brother's house, Caroline had
an opportunity of seeing a society that
was new to her, that of the professional
men of the first eminence, both in law and
medicine, the men of science, and of literature,
with whom Alfred and Erasmus
had been for years assiduously cultivating
acquaintance. They were now happy
to meet at Alfred's house, for they liked

and esteemed him, and they found his
wife and sister sensible, well informed
women, to whom their conversation was
of real amusement and instruction; and
who, in return, knew how to make them
feel at ease in their society, and to enliven
their leisure hours by the happy mixture
of female sprightliness and elegance. Caroline
now saw the literary and scientific
world to the best advantage.—Not the
amateurs, or the mere show people, but
those who, really excelling and feeling
their own superiority, had too much pride,
and too little time to waste upon idle
flattery, or what to them were stupid,
uninteresting parties. Those who refused
to go to Lady Spilsbury's, or to Lady
Angelica Headingham's, or who were
seen there, perhaps, once or twice in
a season as a great favor and honor,
would call three or four evenings every
week at Alfred's, and spend there as
much time as their business would permit.
Thus Caroline found herself placed at

once au courant du jour, as to every thing
literary and scientific, by means of her
two brothers and their friends.—The first
news, the first hints of discoveries, inventions,
and literary projects, she heard
from time to time discussed. Those men
of talents, who she had heard were to be
seen at conversaziones, or of whom she had
had a glimpse in fine society, now appeared
in a new point of view, and to the best
advantage; without those pretensions
and rivalships, with which they sometimes
are afflicted in public; or those
affectations and singularities, which they
often are supposed to assume, to obtain
notoriety among persons inferior to them
in intellect, and superior in fashion.— 
Instead of playing, as they sometimes
did, a false game to amuse the multitude,
they were obliged now to exert their
real skill, and play fair with one another.
Sir James Harrington tells us, that in
his days the courtiers, who played at
divers games in public, had a way of

exciting the admiration and amazement
of the commoner sort of spectators, by
producing heaps of golden counters, and
seeming to stake immense sums, when
all the time they had previously agreed
among one another, that each guinea
should stand for a shilling, or each
hundred guineas for one.—So that in
fact, two modes of calculation were used
for the initiated and uninitiated, and this
esoteric and exoteric practice goes on
continually to this hour, among literary
performers in the intellectual, as well
as among courtiers in the fashionable
world.—
All this, from the conversation which
she now heard behind the scenes,
Caroline had an opportunity of seeing,
and she was much edified and amused; 
beside the pleasure of studying celebrated
characters, and persons of eminent
merit, at their ease and at her own, Caroline
had now opportunities of seeing
most of those objects of rational curiosity,
which with Lady Jane Granville had

been prohibited, as—mauvais ton. With
men of sense she found it was not mauvais
ton, to use her eyes for the purposes
of instruction or entertainment.
When her brothers were too much
engaged to go with her any where she
wished, some of their friends were generally
ready to attend her. With Mrs.
Alfred Percy she saw every thing in the
best manner, in the company of well
informed guides, who were able to point
out what was essential to be observed,
ready to explain, and to illustrate, to
procure for them all those privileges and
advantages as spectators, which common
gazers are denied, but which liberal and
enlightened men are ever not only ready
to allow, but eager to procure for intelligent
unassuming females.
Among the gentlemen of learning, talents,
and eminence in Alfred's own
profession, whom Caroline had the honor
of seeing at her brother's, were Mr.
Friend, the friend of his early years at
the bar; and that great luminary, who

in a higher orbit had cheered and guided
him in his ascent.—It was heartfelt
pleasure to Caroline, to see the manner
in which her brother was considered and
treated by his inferiors, equals, and superiors
in his profession—for each, in his
different way, gave testimony to Alfred's
talents, candor, or generosity. It was
peculiarly gratifying to see him distinguished,
not only by the approbation,
but something more, by the regard of
such a man as the Lord Chief Justice.
It was impossible for a woman like Caroline,
not to be struck with his superiority
of intellect, good breeding, and
character; and equally impossible that
her merit, even had it not been recommended
by so much beauty, should
escape his penetration and benevolence.
He saw the genuine affection she bore
her brother, and was pleased to gratify
her by the praises of Alfred. The Chief
Justice was in a station, and of an age,
where praise can be conferred without
impropriety, and without hurting the

feelings of delicacy or pride.—He knew
how to praise—a difficult art, but he
excelled in it.—As Caroline once, in
speaking of him, said,
“Common compliments, compared to
praise from him, are as common coin,
compared to a medal struck and appropriated
for the occasion.”
About this time Mr. Temple came to
tell his friends, that a ship was actually ordered
to be in readiness to carry him on his
intended embassy; that Mr. Shaw had
recovered; that Cunningham Falconer
had no more excuses or pretences for
delay; despatches, the last Lord Old-borough
said he should ever receive
from him as envoy, had now arrived,
and Temple was to set out immediately.
—So far for his own business; when he
had finished this, he took Alfred aside,
and told him, that with the despatches
from Germany Lord Oldborough had
received a letter from Count Altenberg,
giving an account of alarming revolutionary
symptoms, which had appeared

in the capital, and in the provinces, in
the dominions of his sovereign.—Lord
Oldborough had shown Mr. Temple
what related to public affairs, but had not
put the whole letter into his hands.— 
All that Mr. Temple could judge from
what he read was, that the Count's mind
was most seriously occupied with the
dangerous state of public affairs in his
country—“I should have thought,” 
added Mr. Temple, “that the whole of
this communication was entirely of a
political nature, but that in the last page,
which Lord Oldborough put into my
hand, the catch words at the bottom
were Countess Christina.”
Alfred observed, “that, without the
aid of Rosamond's imagination to supply
something more, nothing could be made
of this.—However, it was a satisfaction
to have had direct news of Count Altenberg.”
The next day Mr. Temple came for
Alfred.—Lord Oldborough desired to
see him.—

“Whatever his business may be, I
am sure it is important and interesting,” 
said Mr. Temple; “by this time I ought
to be well acquainted with Lord Oldborough,
I know the signs of his suppressed
emotion, and I have seldom
seen him put such force upon himself,
to appear calm, and to do the business
of the day, before he should yield his
mind to what pressed on his secret
thoughts—In my opinion you will now
hear more, and all that can be heard,
about Count Altenberg.”—