

“Are you to be at lady Clonbrony's
gala next week?” said lady Langdale to
Mrs. Dareville, whilst they were waiting
for their carriages in the crush-room of
the opera house— 
“O yes! every body's to be there, I
hear,” replied Mrs. Dareville—“Your
ladyship, of course?—” 
“Why I don't know—if I possibly
can—Lady Clonbrony makes it such a
point with me—that I believe I must
look in upon her, for a few minutes.
They are going to a prodigious expense,
on this occasion—Soho tells me the reception
rooms are all to be new furnished,
and in the most magnificent style.”

“At what a famous rate those Clonbronies
are dashing on”—said colonel
Heathcock—“Up to any thing—” 
“Who are they?—these Clonbronies,
that one hears of so much of late?”— 
said her grace of Torcaster—“Irish absentees,
I know—But how do they support
all this enormous expense?”
“The son will have a prodigiously fine
estate when some Mr. Quin dies,” said
Mrs. Dareville.
“Yes, every body, who comes from
Ireland, will have a fine estate, when
somebody dies,” said her grace—“But
what have they at present?”
“Twenty thousand a year, they say” 
—replied Mrs. Dareville.
“Ten thousand, I believe,” cried lady
Langdale—“Make it a rule, you know,
to believe only half the world says.”
“Ten thousand, have they?—possibly,” 
said her grace—“I know nothing
about them—have no acquaintance
among the Irish—Torcaster knows something
of lady Clonbrony; she has fastened

herself, by some means, upon him: but I charge him not to commit me—Positively, I could not for any body—and much less for that sort of person—extend the circle of my acquaintance.”
“Now that is so cruel of your grace,”— said Mrs. Dareville, laughing—“when poor lady Clonbury works so hard, and pays so high, to get into certain circles.”
If you knew all she endures, to look, speak, move, breathe, like an English-woman, you would pity her”—said lady Langdale.
Yes, and you cawnt conceive the peens she teekes to talk of the teebles and cheers, and to thank Q, and, with so much teeste, to speak pure English,” said Mrs. Dareville.
“Pure cockney, you mean,” said lady Langdale.
“But why does lady Clonbury want to pass for English?” said the duchess.
“O! because she is not quite Irish bred and born—only bred, not born”—

said Mrs. Dareville—”And she could not be five minutes in your grace's company before she would tell you, that she was Henglish, born in Hoxfordshire.”
“She must be a vastly amusing personage—I should like to meet her, if one could see and hear her incog,” said the duchess. “And lord Clonbury, what is he?”
“Nothing, nobody,” said Mrs. Dareville, “one never even hears of him.”
“A tribe of daughters, too, I suppose?”
“No, no” said lady Langdale, “daughters would be past all endurance—”
“There's a cousin, though, a Grace Nugent,” said Mrs. Dareville, “that lady Clonbury has with her.”
“Best part of her, too”—saidcolonel Heathcock—“d&wblank;d fine girl!— never saw her look better, that at the opera to night!”
“Fine complexion! as Lady Clonbury says,when she means a high colour”—said lady Langdale.

“Grace Nugent is not a lady's beauty,” said Mrs. Dareville—“Has she any fortune colonel?”
“'Pon honour, don't know”—said the colonel.
“There's a son, somewhere, is not there?” said lady Langdale.
Don't know, 'pon honour”— replied the colonel.
“Yes—at Cambridge—not of age, yet,”— said Mrs Dareville—“Bless me! here is lady Clonbury come back—I though she was gone half an hour ago!—”
“Mamma”—whispered one of lady Langdale's daughters, leaning between her mother and Mrs. Dareville—“who is that gentleman, that passed us, just now?—“
“Which way?—”
“Towards the door—There now, mamma, you can see him—He is speaking to lady Clonbury—to miss Nugent—Now lady Clonbury is introducing him to miss Broadhurst.”

“I see him now,” said lady Langdale, examining him through her glass—“a very gentlemanlike looking young man, indeed—”
“Not an Irishman, I am sure, by his manner”— said her grace.
“Heathcock!” said lady Langdale, “who is miss Broadhurst talking to?”
“Eh! now really —'pon honour—don't know,” replied Heathcock.
“And yet he certainly looks like somebody one certainly should know,” pursued lady Langdale—“though I don't recollect seeing him any where before—”
“Really now!”— was all the satisfaction she could gain from the insensible, immovable colonel. However, her ladyship, after sending a whisper along the line, gained the desired information, that the young gentleman was lord Colambre,son, only son, of lord and lady Clonbury—that he was just come form Cambridge—that he was not yet of age—that he would be of age

within a year; that he would then, after
the death of somebody, come into possession
of a fine estate, by the mother's
side—“and therefore, Cat'rine, my
dear,” said she, turning round to the
daughter, who had first pointed him out,
—“you understand, we should never
talk about other people's affairs—”
“No, mamma, never. I hope to goodness,
mamma, lord Colambre did not
hear what you and Mrs. Dareville were
saying!”
“How could he, child?—He was
quite at the other end of the world.”
“I beg your pardon, ma'am—he was
at my elbow, close behind us—but I
never thought about him till I heard
somebody say—‘My lord—’” 
“Good Heavens!—I hope he didn't
hear.”
“But, for my part, I said nothing,” 
cried lady Langdale.
“And for my part, I said nothing,
but what every body knows!” cried Mrs.
Dareville.

“And for my part, I am guilty only of
hearing,” said the duchess. “Do, pray,
colonel Heathcock, have the goodness to
see what my people are about, and what
chance we have of getting away to
night.”
“The duchess of Torcaster's carriage
stops the way!”—a joyful sound to colonel
Heathcock and to her grace, and
not less agreeable, at this instant, to lady
Langdale, who, the moment she was disembarrassed
of the duchess, pressed
through the crowd to lady Clonbrony,
and, addressing her with smiles and complacency,
was “charmed to have a little
moment to speak to her—could not
sooner get through the crowd—would
certainly do herself the honour to be at
her ladyship's gala on Wednesday.”— 
While lady Langdale spoke, she never
seemed to see or think of any body but
lady Clonbrony, though, all the time,
she was intent upon every motion of lord
Colambre, and, whilst she was obliged to
listen with a face of sympathy to a long

complaint of lady Clonbrony's, about
Mr. Soho's want of taste in ottomans,
she was vexed to perceive, that his lordship
showed no desire to be introduced
to her, or to her daughters; but, on the
contrary, was standing talking to miss
Nugent. His mother, at the end of her
speech, looked round for Colambre— 
called him twice, before he heard—introduced
him to lady Langdale, and to
lady Cat'rine, and lady Anne&wblank;,
and to Mrs. Dareville; to all of whom
he bowed with an air of proud coldness,
which gave them reason to regret, that
their remarks, upon his mother and
his family, had not been made sotto
voce.
“Lady Langdale's carriage stops the
way!”—Lord Colambre made no offer
of his services, notwithstanding a look
from his mother.—Incapable of the
meanness of voluntarily listening to a
conversation not intended for him to
hear, he had, however, been compelled,
by the pressure of the crowd, to remain a

few minutes stationary, where he could
not avoid hearing the remarks of the fashionable
friends—Disdaining dissimulation,
he made no attempt to conceal his
displeasure. Perhaps his vexation was
increased by his consciousness, that there
was some mixture of truth in their sarcasms.
He was sensible, that his mother,
in some points—her manners, for instance
—was obvious to ridicule and satire.
In lady Clonbrony's address there
was a mixture of constraint, affectation,
and indecision, unusual in a person of
her birth, rank, and knowledge of the
world. A natural and unnatural manner
seemed struggling in all her gestures, and
in every syllable, that she articulated— 
a naturally free, familiar, good natured,
precipitate, Irish manner, had been
schooled, and schooled late in life, into
a sober, cold, still, stiff deportment,
which she mistook for English—A
strong, Hibernian accent, she had, with
infinite difficulty, changed into on English
tone—Mistaking reverse of wrong

for right, she caricatured the English
pronunciation; and the extraordinary
precision of her London phraseology betrayed
her not to be a Londoner, as the
man, who strove to pass for an Athenian,
was detected by his Attic dialect. Not
aware of her real danger, lady Clonbrony
was, on the opposite side, in continual
apprehension, every time she
opened her lips, lest some treacherous a
or e, some strong r, some puzzling
aspirate, or non aspirate, some unguarded
note, interrogative or expostulatory,
should betray her to be an Irishwoman.
Mrs. Dareville had, in her mimickry,
perhaps, a little exaggerated, as
to the teebles and chcers, but still the
general likeness of the representation of
lady Clonbrony was strong enough to
strike and vex her son. He had now,
for the first time, an opportunity of judging
of the estimation, in which his mother
and his family were held by certain
leaders of the ton, of whom, in her letters,
she had spoken so much, and into

whose society, or rather into whose parties,
she had been admitted. He saw,
that the renegado cowardice, with which
she denied, abjured, and reviled her
own country, gained nothing but ridicule
and contempt—He loved his mother; 
and, whilst he endeavoured to conceal
her faults and foibles as much as possible
from his own heart, he could not endure
those, who dragged them to light
and ridicule. The next morning, the
first thing, that occurred to lord Colambre's
remembrance, when he awoke,
was the sound of the contemptuous emphasis,
which had been laid on the
words IRISH ABSENTEES!—This led to
recollections of his native country, to
comparisons of past and present scenes,
to future plans of life. Young and careless
as he seemed, lord Colambre was capable
of serious reflection. Of naturally
quick and strong capacity, ardent affections,
impetuous temper, the early years
of his childhood passed at his father's
castle in Ireland, where, from the lowest

servant to the well-dressed dependant of
the family, every body had conspired to
wait upon, to fondle, to flatter, to worship,
this darling of their lord. Yet he
was not spoiled—not rendered selfish.
For, in the midst of this flattery and servility,
some strokes of genuine generous
affection had gone home to his little
heart; and, though unqualified submission
had increased the natural impetuosity
of his temper, and though visions
of his future grandeur had touched his
infant thought, yet, fortunately, before
he acquired any fixed habits of insolence
or tyranny, he was carried far away from
all, that were bound or willing to submit
to his commands, far away from all
signs of hereditary grandeur—plunged
into one of our great public schools— 
into a new world. Forced to struggle,
mind and body, with his equals, his
rivals, the little lord became a spirited
schoolboy, and, in time, a man. Fortunately
for him, science and literature
happened to be the fashion among asset

of clever young men, with whom he was
at Cambridge. His ambition for intellectual
superiority was raised, his views
were enlarged, his tastes and his manners
formed. The sobriety of English good
sense mixed most advantageously with
Irish vivacity—English prudence governed,
but did not extinguish his Irish
enthusiasm. But, in fact, English and
Irish had not been invidiously contrasted
in his mind: he had been so long resident
in England, and so intimately connected
with Englishmen, that he was
not obvious to any of the commonplace
ridicule thrown upon Hibernians; and
he had lived with men, who were
too well informed and liberal to misjudge
or depreciate a sister country— 
He had found, from experience, that,
however reserved the English may be in
manner, they are warm at heart; that,
however averse they may be from forming
new acquaintance, their esteem and
confidence once gained, they make the
most solid friends. He had formed

friendships in England; he was fully
sensible of the superior comforts, refinement,
and information, of English society; 
but his own country was endeared
to him by early association, and a sense
of duty and patriotism attached him to
Ireland—And shall I too be an absentee?
was a question, which resulted
from these reflections—a question, which
he was not yet prepared to answer decidedly.
In the mean time, the first business
of the morning was to execute a
commission for a Cambridge friend. Mr.
Berryl had bought from Mr. Mordicai, a
famous London coachmaker, a curricle,
warranted sound, for which he had paid
a sound price, upon express condition,
that Mr. Mordicai, barring accidents,
should be answerable for all repairs of
the curricle for six months. In three,
both the carriage and body were found to
be good for nothing—the curricle had
been returned to Mr. Mordicai—nothing
had since been heard of it, or from him
—and lord Colambre had undertaken to

pay him and it a visit, and to make all
proper inquiries.—Accordingly, he
went to the coachmaker's; and, obtaining
no satisfaction from the underlings, desired
to see the head of the house. He
was answered, that Mr. Mordicai was not
at home. His lordship had never seen
Mr. Mordicai; but, just then, he saw,
walking across the yard, a man, who
looked something like a Bond Street coxcomb,
but not the least like a gentleman,
who called, in the tone of a master, for
“Mr. Mordicai's barouche!”—It appeared; 
and he was stepping into it, when
lord Colambre took the liberty of stopping
him; and, pointing to the wreck of
Mr. Berryl's curricle, now standing in
the yard, began a statement of his friend's
grievances, and an appeal to common
justice and conscience, which he, unknowing
the nature of the man, with
whom he had to deal, imagined must be
irresistible. Mr. Mordicai stood without
moving a muscle of his dark wooden face
—Indeed, in his face there appeared to

be no muscles, or none which could
move; so that, though he had what are
generally called handsome features, there
was, all together, something unnatural and
shocking in his countenance. When, at
last, his eyes turned, and his lips opened,
this seemed to be done by machinery, and
not by the will of a living creature, or
from the impulse of a rational soul. Lord
Colambre was so much struck with this
strange physiognomy, that he actually
forgot much he had to say of springs and
wheels—But it was no matter—Whatever
he had said, it would have come to
the same thing; and Mordicai would
have answered as he now did— 
“Sir—It was my partner made that
bargain, not myself; and I don't hold
myself bound by it, for he is the sleeping
partner only, and not empowered to
act in the way of business—Had Mr.
Berryl bargained with me, I should have
told him, that he should have looked to
these things before his carriage went out
of our yard.”
The indignation of lord Colambre kindled

at these words—but in vain—To
all that indignation could by word or
look urge against Mordicai, he replied— 
“May be so, sir—the law is open to
your friend—the law is open to all men,
who can pay for it.”
Lord Colambre turned in despair from
the callous coachmaker, and listened to
one of his more compassionate looking
workmen, who was reviewing the disabled
curricle; and, whilst he was waiting
to know the sum of his friend's misfortune,
a fat, jolly, Falstaff looking personage
came into the yard, accosted Mordicai
with a degree of familiarity, which, from
a gentleman, appeared to lord Colambre
to be almost impossible.
“How are you, Mordicai, my good
fellow?” cried he, speaking with a strong
Irish accent.
“Who is this?” whispered lord Colambre
to the foreman, who was examining
the curricle.
“Sir Terence O'Fay, sir—There
must be entire new wheels.”

“Now tell me, my tight fellow,”— 
continued sir Terence, holding Mordicai
fast—“when, in the name of all the
saints, good or bad, in the calendar, do
you reckon to let us sport the suicide?”
Mordicai forcibly drew his mouth into
what he meant for a smile, and answered
—“as soon as possible, sir
Terence.”
Sir Terence, in a tone of jocose, wheedling
expostulation, entreated him to have
the carriage finished out of hand—“Ah,
now! Mordy, my precious! let us have
it by the birthday, and come and dine
with us o'Monday, at the Hibernian Hotel
—there's a rare one—will you?”
Mordicai accepted the invitation, and
promised faithfully, that the suicide
should be finished by the birthday. Sir
Terence shook hands upon this promise,
and, after telling a good story, which
made one of the workmen in the yard— 
an Irishman—grin with delight, walked
off. Mordicai, first waiting till the

knight was out of hearing, called aloud— 
“You grinning rascal! mind, at your
peril, and don't let that there carriage be
touched, d'ye see, till farther orders.”
One of Mr. Mordicai's clerks, with a
huge long feathered pen behind his ear,
observed, that Mr. Mordicai was right in
that caution, for that, to the best of his
comprehension, sir Terence O'Fay and
his principal, too, were over head and
ears in debt.
Mordicai coolly answered, that he was
well aware of that; but that the estate
could afford to dip farther; that, for his
part, he was under no apprehension; he
knew how to look sharp, and to bite before
he was bit. That he knew sir Terence
and his principal were leagued
together to give the creditors the go by,
but that, clever as they both were at
that work, he trusted he was their
match.
“Will you be so good, sir, to finish

making out this estimate for me?” interrupted
lord Colambre.
“Immediately, sir—Sixty-nine pound
four, and the perch—Let us see— 
Mr. Mordicai, ask him, ask Paddy,
about sir Terence”—said the foreman,
pointing back over his shoulder to the
Irish workman, who was at this moment
pretending to be wondrous hard at work.
However, when Mr. Mordicai defied him
to tell him any thing he did not know,
Paddy, parting with an untasted bit of
tobacco, began, and recounted some of
sir Terence O'Fay's exploits in evading
duns, replevying cattle, fighting sheriffs,
bribing subs, managing cants, tricking
custodees, in language so strange, and
with a countenance and gestures so full
of enjoyment of the jest, that, whilst
Mordicai stood for a moment aghast with
astonishment, lord Colambre could not
help laughing, partly at, and partly with,
his countryman. All the yard were in a
roar of laughter, though they did not understand
half of what they heard; but

their risible muscles were acted upon mechanically,
or maliciously, merely by the
sound of the Irish brogue.
Mordicai, waiting till the laugh was
over, dryly observed, that “the law is executed
in another guess sort of way in
England, from what it is in Ireland”— 
therefore, for his part, he desired nothing
better, than to set his wits fairly against
such sharks—That there was a pleasure
in doing up a debtor, which none but a
creditor could know.
“In a moment, sir; if you'll have a
moment's patience, sir, if you please,” 
said the slow foreman to lord Colambre; 
“I must go down the pounds once more,
and then I'll let you have it.”
“I'll tell you what, Smithfield”—continued
Mr. Mordicai, coming close beside
his foreman, and speaking very low,
but with a voice trembling with anger,
for he was piqued by his foreman's doubts
of his capacity to cope with sir Terence
O'Fay—“I'll tell you what, Smithfield,
I'll be cursed, if I don't get every inch

of them into my power—You know
how—”
“You are the best judge, sir,” replied
the foreman; “but I would not undertake
sir Terence; and the question is,
whether the estate will answer the lot of
the debts, and whether you know them
all for certain?—” 
“I do, sir, I tell you—There's Green
—there's Blancham—there's Gray— 
there's Soho—naming several more— 
and, to my knowledge, lord Clonbrony—” 
“Stop, sir,” cried lord Colambre, in a
voice, which made Mordicai, and every
body present, start—“I am his son—” 
“The devil!”—said Mordicai.
“God bless every bone in his body,
then!—he's an Irishman,” cried Paddy
—“and there was the rason my heart
warmed to him from the first minute he
come into the yard, though I did not
know it till now.”
“What, sir! are you my lord Colambre?” 
said Mr. Mordicai, recovering, but

not clearly recovering, his intellects—“I
beg pardon, but I did not know you was
lord Colambre—I thought you told me
you was the friend of Mr. Berryl.”
“I do not see the incompatibility of
the assertion, sir,” replied lord Colambre,
taking from the bewildered foreman's unresisting
hand the account, which he had
been so long furnishing.
“Give me leave, my lord,” said Mordicai
—“I beg your pardon, my lord,
perhaps we can compromise that business
for your friend Mr. Berryl; since he is
your lordship's friend, perhaps we can
contrive to compromise and split the difference.”
To compromise, and split the difference,
Mordicai thought were favourite phrases,
and approved Hibernian modes of doing
business, which would conciliate
this young Irish nobleman, and dissipate
the proud tempest, which had gathered,
and now swelled in his breast.
“No, sir, no!” cried lord Colambre,
holding firm the paper—“I want no favour

from you—I will accept of none for
my friend or for myself.”
“Favour! No, my lord, I should not
presume to offer—But I should wish,
if you'll allow me, to do your friend
justice.”
Lord Colambre, recollecting that he
had no right, in his pride, to fling away
his friend's money, let Mr. Mordicai look
at the account; and, his impetuous temper
in a few moments recovered by good
sense, he considered, that, as his person
was utterly unknown to Mr. Mordicai,
no offence could have been intended to
him, and that, perhaps, in what had been
said, of his father's debts and distress,
there might be more truth, than he was
aware of—Prudently, therefore, controlling
his feelings, and commanding
himself, he suffered Mr. Mordicai to show
him into a parlour, to settle his friend's
business.—In a few minutes, the account
was reduced to a reasonable form, and,
in consideration of the partner's having
made the bargain, by which Mr. Mordicai

felt himself influenced in honour,
though not bound in law, he undertook
to have the curricle made better than new
again, for Mr. Berryl, for twenty guineas.
—Then came awkward apologies to lord
Colambre, which he ill endured.—“Between
ourselves, my lord,” continued
Mordicai— 
But the familiarity of the phrase, “Between
ourselves”—this implication of
equality—lord Colambre could not admit; 
he moved hastily towards the door
and departed.