

Lady Delacour's history, and the manner
in which it was related, excited in
Belinda's mind astonishment—pity—admiration
—and contempt.—Astonishment
at her inconsistency—pity for her misfortunes
—admiration of her talents—and
contempt for her conduct.—To these emotions
succeeded the recollection of the
promise which she had made, not to leave
her in her last illness, at the mercy of an
insolent attendant. This promise Belinda
thought of with terrour—she dreaded
the sight of sufferings, which she knew
must end in death—she dreaded the sight

of that affected gayety, and of that real
levity, which so ill became the condition
of a dying woman.—She trembled at the
idea of being under the guidance of one,
who was so little able to conduct herself; 
and she could not help blaming her aunt
Stanhope severely, for placing her in such
a perilous situation. It was obvious, that
some of lady Delacour's history must have
been known to Mrs. Stanhope; and Belinda,
the more she reflected, the more
she was surprised at her aunt's having
chosen such a chaperon for a young woman
just entering into the world. When
the understanding is suddenly roused and
forced to exert itself, what a multitude of
deductions it makes in a short time.—Belinda
saw things in a new light; and for
the first time in her life she reasoned for
herself upon what she saw and felt.—It
is sometimes safer for young people to see,
than to hear of certain characters.—At
a distance, lady Delacour had appeared
to miss Portman the happiest person in
the world; upon a nearer view, she discovered

that her ladyship was one of the
most miserable of human beings.—To
have married her niece to such a man as
lord Delacour, Mrs. Stanhope would have
thought the most fortunate thing imaginable; 
but it was now obvious to Belinda,
that neither the title of viscountess, nor the
pleasure of spending three fortunes, could
ensure felicity. Lady Delacour confessed,
that in the midst of the utmost luxury and
dissipation, she had been a constant prey
to ennui; that the want of domestic happiness
could never be supplied by that public
admiration, of which she was so ambitious; 
and that the immoderate indulgence
of her vanity had led her, by inevitable
steps, into follies and imprudence,
which had ruined her health, and destroyed
her peace of mind.—“If lady Delacour,
with all the advantages of wealth, rank,
wit and beauty, has not been able to
make herself happy in this life of fashionable
dissipation,” said Belinda to herself,
“why should I follow the same course,
and expect to be more fortunate?”

It is singular that the very means, which
Mrs. Stanhope had taken to make a fine
lady of her niece, tended to produce an
effect diametrically opposite to what might
have been expected.—The result of Belinda's
reflections upon lady Delacour's
history was a resolution to profit by her
bad example; but this resolution it was
more easy to form than to keep.—Her
ladyship, where she wished to please or
to govern, had fascinating manners, and
could alternately use the sarcastic powers
of wit, and the fond tone of persuasion,
to accomplish her purposes.—It was Belinda's
intention, in pursuance of her new
plans of life, to spend, whilst she remained
in London, as little money as
possible upon superfluities and dress.— 
She had, at her own disposal, only 100l.
per annum, the interest of her fortune; 
but beside this, her aunt, who was desirous
that she should go to court, and
make a splendid figure there, had sent her
a draught on her banker for two hundred

guineas. “You will, I trust,” said her
aunt, at the conclusion of her letter,
“repay me when you are established in
the world, as I hope and believe, from
what I hear from lady Delacour of the
power of your charms, you will soon be,
to the entire satisfaction of all your friends.
—Pray do not neglect to mention my
friend Clarence Hervey particularly, when
you write next.—I understand from one
who is well acquainted with him, and
who has actually seen his rent-roll, that he
has a clear 10,000l. year.
Belinda resolved neither to go to court,
nor to touch her aunt's two hundred guineas; 
and she wrote a long letter to her,
in which she explained her feelings and
views at large. In this letter she meant
to have returned Mrs Stanhope's draught,
but her feelings and views changed between
the writing of this epistle, and the
going out of the post.—Mrs. Franks, the
milliner, came in the interim, and brought
home lady Delacour's beautiful dress; it

was not the sight of this, however, which
changed Belinda's mind, but she could
not resist lady Delacour's raillery.
“Why, my dear,” said her ladyship,
after having listened to all miss Portman
could say about her love of independence,
and the necessity of economy to preserve
that independence—“all this is prodigiously
fine—but shall I translate it
into plain English—You were mortally
wounded the other night by some random
reflections of a set of foolish young men
—Clarence Hervey amongst the number
—and instead of punishing them, you
sagely and generously determined to punish
yourself. Then, to convince this
youth that you have not a thought of those
odious nets and cages, that you have no
design whatever upon his heart, and that
he has no manner of influence on yours; 
you very judiciously determine, at the first
hint from him, to change your dress, your
manners, and your character; and thus
to say to him, in as plain terms as possible—

‘You see, sir, a word to the wise is enough
—I understand you disapprove of showy
dress, and coquetry, and therefore, as I
dressed and coquetted only to please you,
now I shall lay aside dress and coquetry,
since I find that they are not to your taste
—and I hope, sir, you like my simplicity!’ 
—Depend upon it, my dear, Clarence
Hervey understands simplicity as well as
you or I do.—All this would be vastly
well, if he did not know that you overheard
that conversation; but as he does
know it, trust me he will attribute any
sudden change in your manners and appearance,
right or wrong, to the motives
I have mentioned.—So don't, novice as
you are! set about to manœuvre for
yourself. Leave all that to your aunt
Stanhope, or to me, and then you know
your conscience will be all the time as
white as—your hands—which, by the by,
Clarence Hervey, the other day, said were
the whitest hands he had ever seen.—Perhaps
all this time you have taken it into

your head, that full dress will not become
you; but I assure you that it will—you
look well in any thing— 
‘But from the hoop's bewitching round,
The very shoe has power to wound.’
So come down to Mrs. Franks, and order
your birthnight dress like a reasonable
creature.”
Like a reasonable creature, miss Portman
followed lady Delacour, and bespoke,
or rather let her ladyship bespeak for
her, fifty guineas worth of elegance and
fashion.—“You must go to the drawing-room
with me next week, and be presented,” 
said lady Delacour, “and then,
as it is the first time, you must be elegantly
dressed—and you must not wear
the same dress on the birthnight.—So
Mrs. Franks let this be finished first, as
fast as you can, and by that time perhaps,
we shall think of something superlatively
charming for the night of nights.”
Mrs. Franks departed, and Belinda
sighed.—“A silver penny for your

thoughts!” cried lady Delacour—“You
are thinking that you are like Camilla,
and I like Mrs. Mitten—novel reading,
as I dare say you have been told by your
governess, as I was told by mine, and she
by hers, I suppose—novel reading for
young ladies is the most dangerous—
“O, Clarence Hervey, I protest!” 
cried lady Delacour, as he at this instant
entered the room.—“Do, pray Clarence,
help me out, for the sake of this young
lady with a moral sentence against novel
reading: but that might go against your
conscience—or your interest, so we'll
spare you.—How I regret that we had not
the charming serpent at the masquerade
the other night!”
The moment her ladyship mentioned
the masquerade, the conversation which
had passed at lady Singleton's, came full
into Clarence Hervey's recollection, and
his embarrassment was evident—not indeed
to Belinda, who had turned away to
look over some new music that lay upon
a stand at the farthest end of the room,

and she found this such a wonderfully
interesting occupation, that she did not
for some minutes hear, or appear to hear,
one word of the conversation which was
going on between Mr. Hervey and lady
Delacour.—At last her ladyship tapped
her upon the shoulder, saying in a playful
tone—“miss Portman, I arrest your attention
at the suit of Clarence Hervey—this
gentleman is passionately fond of music— 
to my curse—for he never sees my harp,
but he worries me with reproaches for
having left off playing upon it.—Now he
has just given me his word, that he will
not reproach me again for a month to
come, if you will favour us with one air.
—I assure you Clarence, that Belinda
touches a harp divinely—she would absolutely
charm.”—“Your ladyship should
not waste such valuable praise,” interrupted
Belinda.—“Do you forget, that
Belinda Portman and her accomplishments
have already been as well advertised
as Packwood's razor strops?”
The manner in which these words were

pronounced, made a great impression
upon Clarence Hervey, and he began to
believe it was possible, that a niece
of the match-making Mrs. Stanhope
might not be “a compound of art and
affectation”—“Though her aunt has advertised
her,” said he to himself, “she seems
to have too much dignity to advertise herself,
and it would be very unjust to blame
her for the faults of another person.—I
will see more of her.”
Some morning visitors were announced,
who for the time suspended Clarence
Hervey's reflexions; the effect of them,
however, immediately appeared, for as
his good opinion of Belinda increased,
his ambition to please her was strongly
excited.—He displayed all his powers of
wit and humour; and not only lady Delacour,
but every body present observed,
“that Mr. Hervey, who was always the
most entertaining man in the world, this
morning surpassed himself, and was absolutely
the most entertaining man in the
universe.” He was mortified notwithstanding,

for he distinctly perceived, that
whilst Belinda joined with ease and dignity
in the general conversation, her manner
towards him was grave and reserved.
—The next morning he called earlier than
usual, but though lady Delacour was always
at home to him, she was then unluckily
dressing to go to court; he inquired
whether miss Portman would accompany
her ladyship, and he learnt from
his friend Marriott, that she was not to
be presented this day, because Mrs. Franks
had not brought home her dress.—Mr.
Hervey called again two hours afterwards
—lady Delacour was gone to court—He
asked for miss Portman—“Not at home” 
—was the mortifying answer, though as he
had passed by the windows, he had heard
the delightful sound of her harp.—He
walked up and down in the square impatiently,
till he saw lady Delacour's carriage
appear.
“The drawing-room has lasted an unconscionable
time this morning,” said he,
as he handed her ladyship out of her

coach.—“Am not I the most virtuous of
virtuous women,” said lady Delacour,
“to go to court such a day as this?”— 
But whispered she, as she went up stairs,
“like all other amazingly good people, I
have amazingly good reasons for being
good.—The queen is soon to give a
charming breakfast at Frogmore, and I
am paying my court with all my might,
in hopes of being asked, for Belinda must
see one of their galas before we leave
town, that I'm determined upon.—But
where is she?”—“Not at home,” said
Clarence, smiling.—“O, not at home is
nonsense, you know.—Shine out, appear,
be found, my lovely Zara!” cried lady
Delacour, opening the library door.— 
“Here she is—what doing I know not— 
studying Hervey's Meditations on the
Tombs I should guess, by the sanctification
of her looks—If you be not totally
above all sublunary considerations, admire
my lilies of the valley—and let me
give you a lecture, not upon heads—or
upon hearts—but on what is of much

more consequence, upon hoops.—Every
body wears hoops, but how few—'tis a
melancholy consideration!—how very few
can manage them.—There's my friend
lady C—in an elegant undress; she
passes for very genteel, but put her into a
hoop and she looks as pitiable a figure— 
as much a prisoner—and as little able to
walk as a child in a go-cart.—She gets on,
I grant you, and so does the poor child,
but getting on you know is not walking.
—O. Clarence, I wish you had seen the
two lady Rs, sticking close to one another; 
their father pushing them on together,
like two decanters in a bottle-coaster
—with such magnificent diamond
labels round their necks!”
Encouraged by Clarence Hervey's
laughter, lady Delacour went on to mimic
what she called the hoop awkwardnesses
of all her acquaintance, and if these could
have failed to divert Belinda, it was impossible,
for her to be serious, when she
heard Clarence Hervey declare, that he
was convinced he could manage a hoop as

well as any woman in England, except
lady Delacour.
“Now here,” said he, “is the purblind
dowager lady Boucher, just at the door,
lady Delacour; she wou'd not know my
face, she wou'd not see my beard, and I
will bet fifty guineas, that I come into a
room in a hoop, and that she does not
find me out by my air—that I do not betray
myself, in short, by my masculine
awkwardness.”
“I hold you to your word, Clarence,” 
cried lady Delacour.—“They have let the
purblind dowager in, I hear her on the
stairs.—Here—through this way you can
go—as you do every thing quicker than
any body else in the world, you will certainly
be full-dressed in a quarter of an
hour, I'll engage to keep the dowager in
scandal for that time.—Go!—Marriott
has old hoops and old finery of mine, and
you have all powerful influence, I know,
with Marriott—So go and use it, and let
us see you in all your glory—though I vow
I tremble for my fifty guineas.”

Lady Delacour kept the dowager in
scandal, according to her engagement, for
a good quarter of an hour; then the
dresses at the drawing-room took up
another quarter; and, at last, the dowager
began to give an account of sundry
wonderful cures that had been performed
to her certain knowledge, by her favourite
concentrated extract or anima of quassia.
—She entered into the history of the
Negro slave named Quassi, who discovered
this medical wood, which he kept
a close secret till Mr. Daghlberg, a magistrate
of Surinam, wormed it out of him,
brought a branch of the tree to Europe,
and communicated it to the great Linnæus
—when Clarence Hervey was announced,
by the title of—“The countess
de Pomenars.”
“An émigrée—a charming woman!”— 
whispered lady Delacour—“she was to have
been at the drawing-room to day, but for
a blunder of mine; ready dressed she was,
and I didn't call for her!—Ah, madame
de Pomenars, I am actually ashamed to

see you,” continued her ladyship, and she
went forward to meet Clarence Hervey,
who really made his entré with very composed
assurance and grace—He managed
his hoop with such skill and dexterity,
that he well deserved the praise of being
a universal genius. The countess de Pomenars
spoke French, and broken English
incomparably well; and she made out
that she was descended from the Pomenars
of the time of madame de Sevigné:
she said that she had in her possession
several original letters of madame de Sevigné's,
and a lock of madame de Grignan's
fine hair.
“I have sometimes fancied—but I believe
it is onlymy fancy,” said lady Delacour,
“that this young lady,” turning to
Belinda, “is not unlike your madame de
Grignan—I have seen a picture of her at
Strawberry-hill.”
Madame de Pomenars, acknowledged
that there was a resemblance—but added,
that it was flattery in the extreme to
madame de Grignan to say so.

“It would be a sin, undoubtedly, to
waste flattery upon the dead, my dear
countess,” said lady Delacour.—“But
here, without flattery to the living, as you
have a lock of madame de Grignan's hair,
you can tell us whether la belle chevelure,
of which madame de Sevigné talked so
much, was any thing to be compared to
my Belinda's.”—As she spoke, lady Delacour,
before Belinda was aware of her
intentions, dextrously let down her beautiful
tresses—and the countess de Pomenars
was so much struck at the sight, that
she was incapable of paying the necessary
compliments—“Nay, touch it,” said lady
Delacour—“it is so fine and so soft.”—
At this dangerous moment her ladyship
artfully let drop the comb; Clarence Hervey
suddenly stooped to pick it up, totally
forgetting his hoop and his character.—He
threw down the music stand with his
hoop—lady Delacour exclaimed, bravissima!
and burst out a laughing.—Clarence
Hervey acknowledged he had lost
his bet—joined in the laugh, and declared

that fifty guineas was too little to pay for
the sight of the finest hair that he had ever
beheld.—“I declare he deserves a lock of
la belle chevelure for that speech, miss Portman,” 
cried lady Delacour, “I'll appeal
to all the world—madame de Pomenars
must have a lock to measure with madame
de Grignan's?—Come, a second rape of
the lock, Belinda.”
Fortunately for Belinda, “the glittering
forfex” was not immediately produced, as
fine ladies do not now, as in former times,
carry any such useless implements about
with them.—
Such was the modest, graceful dignity
of miss Portman's manners, that she
escaped without even the charge of prudery
—She retired to her own apartment
as soon as she could.
“She passes on m ‘imblenched majesty” 
—said lady Delacour.
“She is really a charming woman,” said
Clarence Hervey, in a low voice, to lady
Delacour, drawing her into a recessed
window; he in the same low voice continued

—“Could I obtain a private audience
of a few minutes when your ladyship
is at leisure?—I have”—“I am never
at leisure,” interrupted lady Delacour, “but
if you have any thing particular to say to
me, as I guess you have, by—my skill in
human nature—come here to my concert,
to night, before the rest of the world—wait
patiently in the music room, and perhaps
I may grant you a private audience.—As
you had the grace not to call it a tête-à-tête.
—In the mean time, my dear countess
de Pomenars, had not we better take off
our hoops.”
In the evening, Clarence Hervey was
in the music room a considerable time
before lady Delacour appeared; how patiently
he waited is not known to any one
but himself.—
“Have not I given you time to compose
a charming speech,” said lady Delacour
as she entered the room—“but make
it as short as you can, unless you wish
that miss Portman should hear it, for she
will be down stairs in three minutes.”

“In one word then, my dear lady Delacour,
can you, and will you, make my
peace with miss Portman—I am much
concerned about that foolish razor-strop
dialogue, which she overheard at lady
Singleton's.”—
“You are concerned that she overheard
it—no doubt.”
“No”, said Clarence Hervey, “I am
rejoiced that she overheard it, since it has
been the means of convincing me of my
mistake; but I am concerned that I had
the presumption and injustice to judge of
miss Portman so hastily.—I am convinced,
that though she is a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's,
she has dignity of mind, and simplicity
of character.—Will you, my dear
lady Delacour, tell her so?”
“Stay,” interrupted lady Delacour,
“let me get it by heart—I should have
made a terrible bad messenger of the gods
and goddesses, for I never in my life
could, like Iris, repeat a message in the
same words in which it was delivered to
me.—Let me see—‘Dignity of mind,

and simplicity of character,’ was not it?
May not I say at once, ‘my dear Belinda,
Clarence Hervey desires me to tell you,
that he is convinced you are an angel?’— 
That single word angel is so expressive,
so comprehensive, so comprehensible, it
contains, believe me, all that can be said
or imagined on these occasions, de part
et d' autre.”
“But,” said Mr. Hervey, “perhaps
miss Portman has heard the song of— 
‘What know we of angels,
I meant it in joke.’
“Then you are not in jest, but in
downright-sober earnest?—“Ha!” said
lady Delacour, with an arch look, “I did
not know it was already come to this
with you.”
And her ladyship, turning to her piano
forte, played— 
‘There was a young man in-Ballinacrasy,
Who wanted a wife to make him unasy,
And thus in gentle strains he spoke her,
Arrah will you marry me, my dear Ally Croker.’

“No, no,” exclaimed Clarence, laughing,
“it is not come to that with me yet,
lady Delacour, I promise you; but is not
it possible to say, that a young lady has
dignity of mind, and simplicity of character,
without having or suggesting any
thoughts of marriage.”
“You make a most proper, but not
sufficiently emphatic difference between
having, or suggesting such thoughts,” 
said lady Delacour.—“A gentleman
sometimes finds it for his interest, his
honour, or his pleasure, to suggest what
he would not for the world promise—I
mean perform.”
“A scoundrel,” cried Clarence Hervey,
“not a gentleman, may find it for
his honour, or his interest, or his pleasure,
to promise what he would not perform— 
but I am not a scoundrel—I never made
any promise to man or woman, that I did
not keep faithfully—I am not a swindler
in love.”
“And yet,” said lady Delacour, “you

would have no scruple to trifle or flatter a
woman out of her heart.”
“Cela est selon!” said Clarence smiling,
“a fair exchange you know is no
robbery.—When a fine woman robs me
of my heart, surely lady Delacour could
not expect, that I should make no attempt
upon hers.”—“Is this part of my message
to miss Portman,” said lady Delacour?— 
“As your ladyship pleases,” said Clarence,
“I trust entirely to your ladyship's discretion.”
“Why I really have a great deal of
discretion,” said lady Delacour, “but you
trust too much to it, when you expect
that I should execute, both with propriety
and success, the delicate commission of
telling a young lady who is under my protection,
that a young gentleman who is a
professed admirer of mine, is in love with
her, but has no thoughts, and wishes to
suggést no thoughts of marriage.”
“In love!” exclaimed Clarence Hervey,
“but when did I ever use the expression?

In speaking of miss Portman, I
simply expressed esteem and ad—O,
no and—”
“No additions,” said lady Delacour,
“content yourself with esteem—simply
—and miss Portman is safe, and you too— 
I presume.—Apropos; pray, Clarence,
how do your esteem and admiration— 
(I may go as far as that, may not I?) of
miss Portman agree with your admiration
of lady Delacour.”
“Perfectly well,” replied Clarence,
“for all the world must be sensible, that
Clarence Hervey is a man of too much
taste to compare a country novice in wit
and accomplishments, to lady Delacour.
—He might, as men of genius sometime
do, look forward to the idea of forming a
country novice for a wife.—A man must
marry some time or other—but my hour,
thank Heaven, is not come yet.”
“Thank Heaven!” said lady Delacour,
“for you know, a married man is lost to
the world of fashion and gallantry.”

“Not more so, I should hope, than a
married woman,” said Clarence Hervey.
—Here a loud knocking at the door announced
the arrival of company to the
concert.—“You will make my peace,
you promise me, with miss Portman,” 
cried Clarence, eagerly.
“Yes, I will make your peace, and
you shall see Belinda smile upon you once
more, upon condition,” continued lady
Delacour, speaking very quickly, as if
she was hurried by the sound of people
coming up stairs—“but we”ll talk of that
another time.”
“Nay, nay, my dear lady Delacour,
now, now,” said Clarence, seizing her
hand.—Upon condition! upon what
condition?”
“Upon condition that you do a little
job for me—indeed for Belinda.—She is to
go with me to the birthnight—and she
has often hinted to me, that our horses are
shockingly shabby for people of our condition.
—I know she wishes, that upon
such an occasion—her first appearance at

court, you know—we should go in style.
—Now my dear positive lord has said, he
will not let us have a pair of the handsomest
horses I ever saw, which are at Tattersal's,
and on which Belinda, I know,
has secretly set her heart, as I have openly
in vain.”
“Your ladyship and miss Portman
cannot possibly set your hearts on any
thing in vain—especially on any thing that
it is in the power of Clarence Hervey to
procure. Then,” added he gallantly,
kissing her hand, “may I thus seal my
treaty of peace?”
“What audacity!—don't you see these
people coming in?” cried lady Delacour,
and she withdrew her hand, but with no
great precipation: she was evidently “at
this moment, as in all the past,” neither
afraid nor ashamed, that Mr. Hervey's devotions
to her should be paid in public.
With much address she had satisfied herself
as to his views, with respect to Belinda.
She was convinced that he had no
immediate thoughts of matrimony; but

that if he were condemned to marry, miss
Portman would be his wife.—As this did
not interfere with her plans, lady Delacour
was content.