

Though Clarence Hervey was not
much disposed to see either Virginia or
her father, whilst he was in the state of
perturbation, into which he had been
thrown by his interview with Belinda; 
yet he did not delay to send his servant
home, with a note to Mrs. Ormond, to
say that he would meet Mr. Hartley,
whenever he pleased, at his lawyer's, to
make whatever arrangements might be necessary
for proper settlements.
As he saw no possibility of receding with
honour, he, with becoming resolution, desired
to urge things forward as fast as possible,
and to strengthen in his mind the
sense of the necessity of the sacrifice, that
he was bound to make. His passions were

naturally impetuous; but he had, by persevering
efforts, brought them under the
subjection of his reason. His power over
himself was now to be put to a severe
trial.
As he was going to town, he met lord
Delacour, who was riding in the park:
he was extremely intent upon his own
thoughts, and was anxious to pass unnoticed.
In former times, this would
have been the most feasible thing imaginable; 
for lord Delacour used to detest
the sight of Clarence Hervey, whom he
considered as the successor of colonel
Lawless in his lady's favour; but his opinion
and his feelings had been entirely
changed by the perusal of those letters,
which were perfumed with attar of roses; 
even that perfume had from agreeable
association become agreeable to him. He
now accosted Clarence, with a warmth and
cordiality in his manner, that at any other
moment must have pleased, as much as
it surprised him. But Clarence was not
in a humour to enter into conversation.

“You seem to be in haste, Mr. Hervey,” 
said his lordship, observing his impatience; 
“but, as I know your good
nature, I shall make no scruple to detain
you a quarter of an hour.”
As he spoke, he turned his horse, and
rode with Clarence, who looked as if he
wished that his lordship had been more
scrupulous, and that he had not such a
reputation for good nature.
“You will not refuse me this quarter
of an hour, I am sure,” continued lord
Delacour, “when you hear that, by favouring
me with your attention, you may
perhaps materially serve an old—or rather
a young friend of yours, and one whom, I
once fancied, was a particular favourite—I
mean, miss Belinda Portman.”
At the name of Belinda Portman Clarence
Hervey became all attention: he
assured his lordship, that he was in no
haste; and all his difficulty now was, to
moderate the eagerness of his curiosity.
“We can take a turn or two in the
park, as well as any where,” said his lordship.

“Nobody will overhear us; and
the sooner you know what I have to say,
the better.”
“Certainly,” said Clarence.
The most malevolent person upon earth
could not have tried poor Clarence's patience,
more than good natured lord Delacour
contrived to do, with the best intentions
possible, by his habitual circumlocution.
He descanted at length upon the difficulties,
as the world goes, of meeting
with a confidential friend, whom it is prudent
to trust, in any affair that demands
delicacy, honour, and address. Men of
talents were often, he observed, devoid of
integrity, and men of integrity devoid
of talents. When he had obtained Hervey's
assent to this proposition, he next
paid him sundry handsome, but longwinded
compliments: then he complimented
himself, for having just thought
of Mr. Hervey as the fittest person he
could apply to: then he congratulated
himself upon his good luck, in meeting
with the very man he was just thinking

of. At last, after Clarence had returned
thanks for all his kindness, and had given
assent to all his lordship's truisms, the
substance of the business came out.
Lord Delacour informed Mr. Hervey,
“that he had been lately commissioned,
by lady Delacour, to discover what attractions
drew a Mr. Vincent so constantly to
Mrs. Luttridge's&wblank;”
Here he was going to explain who Mr.
Vincent was; but Clarence assured him,
that he knew perfectly well that he had
been a ward of Mr. Percival's; that he
was a West Indian of large fortune, &c.
“And a lover of miss Portman's—that
is the most material part of the story to
me,” continued lord Delacour; “for otherwise,
you know, Mr. vincent would be no
more to me than any other gentleman. But,
in that point of view—I mean, as a lover
of Belinda Portman, and, I may say, on
the very eve of marriage with her—he is
highly interesting to my lady Delacour,
and to me, and to you, as miss Portman's
wellwisher, doubtless.”

“Doubtless!” was all Mr. Hervey
could reply.
“Now, you must know,” continued
his lordship, “that lady Delacour has, for
a woman, an uncommon share of penetration,
and can put things together in a
wonderful way: in short, it has come to her
—(my lady Delacour's)—knowledge, that,
before miss Portman was at Oakly-park
last summer, and after she left it this
autumn, Mr. Vincent was a constant
visitor at Mrs. Luttridge's, whilst at Harrowgate,
and used to play high (though
unknown to the Percivals of course) at
billiards, with Mr. Luttridge—a man, I
confess, I disliked always, even when I
carried the election for them.—But no
matter: it is not from enmity I speak
now. But it is very well known, that
Luttridge has but a small fortune, and
yet lives as if he had a large one; and all
the young men, who like high play, are
sure to be well received at his house.— 
Now, I hope Mr. Vincent is not well received
on that footing.

“Since my lady Delacour and I have
been such good friends,” continued his
lordship, “I have dropped all connexion
with the Luttridge's, so cannot go there
myself; moreover, I do not wish to be
tempted to lose any more thousands to the
lady: but you never play, and you are not
likely to be tempted to it now; so you
will oblige me and lady Delacour, if you
will go to Luttridge's to night; she is always
charmed to see you, and you will
easily discover how the land lies. Mr.
Vincent is certainly a very agreeable, open-hearted
young man; but, if he game,
God forbid that miss Portman should eves
be his wife!”
“God forbid!” said Clarence Hervey.
“The man,” resumed lord Delacour,
“must, in my opinion, be very superious
indeed, who is deserving of Belinda Portman.
O! Mr. Hervey, you do not— 
you cannot know her merit, as I do. It
is one thing, sir, to see a fine girl in a ballroom,
and another—quite another—to
live in the house with her for months, and

to see her, as I have seen Belinda Portman,
in every-day-life, as one may call it.
Then it is one can judge of the real temper,
manners, and character; and never
woman had so sweet a temper, such charming
manners, such a fair, open, generous,
decided, yet gentle character, as this miss
Portman.”
“Your lordship speaks con amore,” said
Clarence.
“I speak, Mr. Hervey, from the bottom
of my soul,” cried lord Delacour, pulling
in his horse, and stopping short. “I
should be an unfeeling, ungrateful brute,
if I were not sensible of the obligations— 
yes, the obligations—which my lady Delacour
and I have received from Belinda
Portman. Why, sir, she has been the
peacemaker between us&wblank;. But we will
not talk of that now. Let us think of
her affairs. If Mr. Vincent once get into
Mrs. Luttridge's cursed set, there's no
knowing where it will end. I speak from
my own experience, for I really never was
fond of high play; and yet, when I got

into that set, I could not withstand it. I
lost by hundreds and thousands; and so
will he, before he is aware of it, no doubt.
Mrs. Luttridge will look upon him as her
dupe, and make him such. I always— 
but this is between ourselves—suspected,
that I did not lose my last thousand to
her fairly. Now, Hervey, you know the
whole, do try and save Mr. Vincent, for
Belinda Portman's sake.”
Clarence Hervey shook hands with lord
Delacour, with a sentiment of real gratitude
and affection; and assured him, that
his confidence was not misplaced. His
lordship little suspected, that he had been
soliciting him to save his rival; yet his
confidence, as Mr. Hervey assured him,
was not misplaced. Clarence's love was
not of that selfish sort, which, the moment
that it is deprived of hope, sinks to indifference,
or is converted into hatred. Belinda
could not be his; but, in the midst
of the bitterest regret, he was supported
by the consciousness of his own honour
and generosity: he felt a noble species of

delight, in the prospect of promoting the
happiness of the woman, upon whom his
fondest affections had been fixed; and he
rejoiced to feel, that he had sufficient magnanimity
to save a rival from ruin. He
was even determined to make that rival
his friend, notwithstanding the prepossession
which, he clearly perceived, Mr.
Vincent felt against him.
“His jealousy will be extinguished, the
moment he knows my real situation,” said
Clarence to himself. “He will be convinced,
that I have a soul incapable of
envy; and, if he suspect my love for Belinda,
he will respect the strength of mind
with which I can command my passions.
I take it for granted, that Mr. Vincent
must possess a heart and understanding,
such as I should desire in a friend, or he
could never be—what he is to Belinda.”
Full of these generous sentiments, Clarence
waited, with impatience, for the hour
when he might present himself at Mrs.
Luttridge's. He went there so early in
the evening, that he found the drawingroom

quite empty; the company, who
had been invited to dine, had not yet left
the parlour, and the servants had but just
set the card-tables, and lighted the candles.
Mr. Hervey desired, that nobody should
be disturbed by his coming so early; and,
fortunately, Mrs. Luttridge was detained
some minutes by lady Newland's lingering
glass of Madeira. In the mean time,
Clarence executed his design. From his
former observations, and from the hints
that lord Delacour had let fall, he suspected,
that there was sometimes in this
house not only high play, but foul play:
he recollected, that once, when he played
there at billiards, he had perceived that
the table was not perfectly horizontal; 
and it occurred to him that, perhaps, the
E O table might be so contrived, as to
put the fortunes of all who played at it in
the power of the proprietor. Clarence
had sufficient ingenuity to invent the method
by which this might be done; and
he had the infallible means in his possession
of detecting the fraud. The E O table

was in an apartment adjoining to the
drawing-room: he found his way to it; 
and he discovered, beyond a possibility of
doubt, that it was constructed for the purposes
of fraud. His first impulse was, to
tell this immediately to Mr. Vincent, to
put him on his guard; but, upon reflection,
he determined to keep his discovery
to himself, till he was satisfied whether that
gentleman had, or had not, any passion for
play.
“If he have,” thought Clarence, “it is
of the utmost consequence to miss Portman,
that he should early in life receive
a shock, that may leave an indelible impression
upon his mind. To save him a
few hours of remorse, I will not give up
the power of doing him the most essential
service. I will let him go on—if he be so
inclined—to the very verge of ruin and despair; 
I will let him feel all the horrours of
a gamester's fate, before I tell him, that I
have the means to save him. Mrs. Luttridge
must, when I call upon her, refund
whatever he may lose: she will not brave

public shame—she cannot stand a public
prosecution.”
Scarcely had Clarence arranged his
scheme, when he heard the voices of the
ladies, who were coming from the parlour.
Mrs. Luttridge made her appearance,
accompanied by a very pretty, modish,
affected young lady, miss Annabella Luttridge,
her niece. Her little coquettish
airs were lost upon Clarence Hervey, whose
eye was intently fixed upon the door,
watching for the entrance of Mr. Vincent.
He was one of the dinner party, and he
came up stairs soon after the ladies. He
seemed prepared for the sight of Mr. Hervey,
to whom he bowed with a cold,
haughty air; and then addressed himself
to miss Annabella Luttridge, who showed
the most obvious desire to attract his attention.
From all that passed this evening, Mr.
Hervey was led to suspect, notwithstanding
the reasons which made it apparently
improbable, that the fair Annabella was

the secret cause of Mr. Vincent's frequent
visits at her aunt's. It was natural that
Clarence should be disposed to this opinion,
from the circumstances of his own
situation. During three hours, that he
staid at Mrs. Luttridge's, Mr. Vincent
never joined any of the parties at play; 
but, just as he was going away, he heard
some one say—“How comes it, Vincent,
that you've been idle all night?” This
question revived Mr. Hervey's suspicions; 
and, uncertain what report he should make
to lord Delacour, he resolved to defer
making any, till he had farther opportunities
of judging.
When Mr. Hervey asked himself, how
it was possible that the pupil of Mr. Percival
could become a gamester, he forgot
that Mr. Vincent had not been educated
by his guardian; that he had lived in the
West Indies, till he was eighteen; and that
he had only been under the care of Mr.
Percival for a few years, after his habits
and character were in a great measure
formed. The taste for gambling he had

acquired whilst he was a child; but, as it
was then confined to trifles, it had been
passed over, as a thing of no consequence,
a boyish folly, that would never grow up
with him: his father used to see him, day
after day, playing with eagerness, at games
of chance, with his negroes, or with the
sons of neighbouring planters; yet he was
never alarmed; he was too intent upon
making a fortune for his family, to consider
how they would spend it; and he did
not foresee, that this boyish fault might
be the means of his son's losing, in a few
hours, the wealth which he had been years
amassing. When young Vincent came
over to England, Mr. Percival had not
immediate opportunities of discovering this
particular foible in his ward; but he perceived,
that in his mind there was that
presumptuous belief in his special good
fortune, which naturally leads to the love
of gambling. Instead of lecturing him,
his guardian appealed to his understanding,
and took opportunities of showing
him the ruinous effects of high play in real

life. Young Vincent was touched, and,
as he thought, convinced; but his emotion
was stronger than his conviction; his
feelings were always more powerful than
his reason. His detestation of the selfish
character of a gamester was felt and expressed
with enthusiasm and eloquence; 
and his indignation rose afterward, at the
slightest hint that he might ever in future
be tempted, to become what he abhorred.
Unfortunately, he disdained prudence, as
the factitious virtue of inferiour minds: he
thought, that the feelings of a man of
honour were to be his guide, in the first
and last appeal; and for his conduct
through life, as a man and as a gentleman,
he proudly professed to trust to the sublime
instinct of a good heart. His guardian's
doubts of the infallibility, and even
of the existence, of this moral instinct,
wounded Mr. Vincent's pride, instead of
alarming his understanding; and he was
rather eager, than averse, to expose himself
to the danger, that he might prove his
superiority to the temptation.—How different

are the feelings in different sensations!
Yet, often as this has been repeated,
how difficult it is to impress the truth upon
inexperienced, sanguine minds!—Whilst
young Vincent was immediately under his
guardian's eye at Oakly-park, his safety
from vice appeared to him inglorious; he
was impatient to sally forth into the
world, confident rather of his innate than
acquired virtue.
When he first became acquainted with
Mrs. Luttridge at Harrowgate, he knew that
she was a professed gambler, and he despised
the character; yet, without reflecting
on the danger, or perhaps for the pleasure
of convincing Mr. Percival that he
was superiour to it, he continued his visits.
For some time he was a passive spectator.
Billiards, however, was a game of address,
not chance; there was a billiard-table at
Oakly-park, as well as at Mr. Luttridge's,
and he had played with his guardian. Why
then should he not play with Mr. Luttridge?
He did play: his skill was admired; 
he betted, and his bets were successful:

but he did not call this gaming, for the
bets were not to any great amount, and it
was only playing at billiards. Mr. Percival
was delayed in town some weeks longer
than usual, and he knew nothing of the
manner in which his young friend spent his
time. As soon as Mr. Vincent heard of
his arrival at Oakly-park, he left half finished
his game at billiards; and, fortunately
for him, the charms of Belinda made
him forget for some months, that such a
thing as a billiard-table existed. All that
had happened at Mr. Luttridge's passed
from his mind as a dream; and whilst his
heart was agitated by his new passion, he
could scarcely believe, that he had ever been
interested by any other feelings. He was
surprised, when he accidentally recollected
the eagerness, with which he used to amuse
himself in Mr. Luttridge's company; but
he was certain, that all this was past for ever; 
and precisely because he was under the dominion
of one strong passion, he thought he
could never be under the dominion of another.
Thus persisting in his disdain of reason

as a moral guide, Mr. Vincent thought,
acted, and suffered as a man of feeling.
Scarcely had Belinda left Oakly-park for
one week, when the ennui consequent to
violent passion became insupportable; 
and to console himself for her absence, he
flew to the billiard-table. Emotion of
some kind or other was become necessary
to him; he said that not to feel, was not
to live; and soon the suspense, the anxiety,
the hopes, the fears, the perpetual vicissitudes
of a gamester's life, appeared to him
almost as delightful as those of a lover's.
Deceived by these appearances, Mrs. Luttridge
thought that his affection for Belinda
either was, or might be conquered, and
her hopes of obtaining his fortune for her
niece Annabella revived. As Mr. Vincent
could not endure Mrs. Freke, she abstained,
at her friend's particular desire,
from appearing at her house whilst he was
there, and Mrs. Luttridge interested him
much in her own favour, by representing
her indignation at Harriott's conduct to
be such, that it had occasioned a total

breach in their friendship. Mrs. Freke's
sudden departure from Harrowgate confirmed
the probability of this quarrel; yet
these two ladies were secretly leagued together
in a design of breaking off Mr. Vincent's
match with Belinda, against whom
Mrs. Freke had vowed revenge. The anonymous
letter, which she hoped would work
her purpose, produced, however, an effect
totally unexpected upon his generous mind
—he did not guess the writer; but his indignation
against such base accusations
burst forth with a violence that astounded
Mrs. Luttridge: his love for Belinda appeared
ten times more enthusiastic than
before—the moment she was accused, he
felt himself her defender, as well as her
lover. He was dispossessed of the evil
spirit of gambling as if by a miracle; and
the billiard-table, and Mrs. Luttridge, and
miss Annabella vanished from his view.
He breathed nothing but love; he would
ask no permission; he would wait for none
from Belinda; he declared that instant he
would set out in search of her, and he

would tear that infamous letter to atoms
in her presence; he would show her how
impossible suspicion was to his nature.
The first violence of the hurricane Mrs.
Luttridge could not stand, and thought
not of opposing; but whilst his horses and
curricle were getting ready, she took such
an affectionate leave of his dog Juba, and
she protested so much, that she and Annabella
should not know how to live without
poor Juba, that Mr. Vincent, who was excessively
fond of his dog, could not help
sympathizing in their sorrow: reasoning
just as well as they wished, he extended
his belief in their affection for this animal
to friendship, if not love, for his master.
He could not grant Mrs. Luttridge's earnest
supplication to leave the dog behind him,
under her protection; but he promised— 
and laid his hand upon his heart, when he
promised—that Juba should wait upon
Mrs. Luttridge as soon as she went to town.
This appointment being made, miss Annabella
permitted herself to be somewhat
consoled. It would be injustice to omit,

that she did all that could be done by a
cambric handkerchief, to evince delicate
sensibility in this parting scene. Mrs.
Luttridge also deserves her share of praise,
for the manner in which she reproved her
niece “for giving way to her feelings, and
for the address, with which she wished to
Heaven, that poor Annabella had the calm,
philosophic temper, of which miss Portman
was, she understood, a most uncommon
example.”
As Mr. Vincent drove toward London,
he reflected upon these last words; and he
could not help thinking, that if Belinda
had more faults she would be more amiable.
Her affection for him, he feared, would
never be such as what he felt for her—never
sufficiently tender, or ardent, to constitute
his felicity, or to equal his idea of the passion
of love.
These thoughts were however driven
from his mind, and scarcely left a trace behind
them, when he once more saw and
conversed with her. The dignity, sincerity,
and kindness, which she showed the

evening that he put the anonymous letter
into her hands, charmed and touched him; 
and his real feelings and his enthusiasm
conspired to make him believe, that his
whole happiness depended on her smiles.
The confession, which she made to him of
her former attachment to Clarence Hervey,
as it raised in Vincent's mind strong
emotions of jealousy, increased his passion
as much as it piqued his pride, and she appeared
in a new and highly interesting
light, when he discovered that the coldness
of manner, which he had attributed
to want of sensibility, arose probably from
its excess—that her heart should have been
preoccupied, was more tolerable to him
than the belief of her settled indifference.
He was so intent upon these delightful varieties
in his love for Belinda, that it was
not, till he had received a reproachful note
from Mrs. Luttridge, to remind him of his
promised visit from Juba, that he could
prevail upon himself to leave Twickenham,
even for a few hours. Lady Delacour's
hatred or fear of Juba, which he acciden-

tally mentioned to miss Annabella, appeared
to her and to her aunt “the most
extraordinary thing upon Earth;” and when
it was contrasted with their excessive fondness,
it seemed to him indeed unaccountable.
From pure consideration for her ladyship's
nerves, Mrs. Luttridge petitioned
Vincent to leave the dog with her, that
Helena might not be in such imminent
danger from “the animal's monstrous
jaws.”—The petition was granted; and as
the petitioners foresaw, Juba became to
them a most useful auxiliary. Juba's
master called daily to see him, and sometimes
when he came in the morning Mrs.
Luttridge was not at home, so that his visits
were repeated in the evening, and the
evening in London is what, in other places,
is called the night.—Mrs. Luttridge's
nights could not be passed without deep
play. The sight of the E O table at first-shocked
Mr. Vincent: he thought of
Mr. Percival, and he turned away from it:
but to his active social disposition it was
extremely irksome, to stand idle and unintersted,

where all were busy and eager in
one common pursuit; to his generous temper
it seemed ungentlemanlike to stand by,
the silent censor of the rest of the company; 
and when he considered, of how
little importance a few hundreds, or even
thousands, could be to a man of his large
fortune, he could not help feeling, that it
was sordid, selfish, avaricious, to dread
their possible loss; and thus social spirit,
courage, generosity, all conspired to carry
our man of feeling to the gaming-table.
Once there, his ruin was inevitable. Mrs.
Luttridge, whilst she held his doom in her
power, hesitated only whether it would be
more her interest to marry him to her niece,
or to content herself with his fortune. His
passion for Belinda, which she saw had been
by some means or other increased, in spite
of the anonymous letter, gave herlittle hopes
of Annabella's succeeding, even with the assistance
of Juba, and delicate sensibility. So
the aunt, careless of her niece's disappointment,
determined that Mr. Vincent should
be her victim; and sensible that she must

not give him time for reflection, she hurried
him on, till in the course of a few
evenings spent at the E O table, he lost,
not only thousands, but tens of thousands.
—One lucky night, she assured him, would
set all to rights; the run could not always
be against him, and Fortune must change
in his favour, if he tried her with sufficient
perseverance.
The horrour, the agony of mind, which he
endured at this sudden ruin, which seemed
impending over him, the recollection of
Belinda, of Mr. Percival, almost drove him
to distraction—He retreated from the E
O table one night, swearing that he never
would hazard another guinea. But his
ruin was not yet complete—he had thousands
yet to lose, and Mrs. Luttridge
would not thus relinquish her prey. She
persuaded him to try his fortune once more.
She now suffered him to regain courage,
by winning back some of his own fortune.
His mind was relieved from the sense of
immediate danger; he rejoiced to be saved
from the humiliation of confessing his losses

to Mr. Percival and Belinda. The next
day he saw her with unusual pleasure, and
this was the very morning when Clarence
Hervey paid his visit. The imprudence
of lady Delacour, joined perhaps to his
own consciousness, that he had a secret
fault, which ought to lower him in the
esteem of his mistress, made him misinterpret
every thing that passed—his jealousy
was excited in the most sudden and
violent manner. He flew from lady Delacour's
to Mrs. Luttridge's—he was soothed
and flattered by the apparent kindness,
with which he was received by Annabella
and her aunt; but after dinner, when one
of the servants whispered to Mrs. Lutridge,
who sat next to him, that Mr.
Clarence Hervey was above stairs, he gave
such a start, that part of the bumper of wine,
which he was going to drink to her health,
did not escape the fair Annabella's lap. In
the confusion and apologies, which this accident
occasioned, Mrs. Luttridge had time
to consider what might be the cause of the
start, and she combined her suspicions so

quickly and so judiciously, that she guessed
the truth—that he feared to be seen at the
E O table by a person, who might find it
for his interest to tell the truth to Belinda
Portman.—“Mr. Vincent,” said she, in a
low voice, “I have such a terrible headache,
that I am fit for nothing—I am not
up to E O to night, so you must wait for
your revenge till to morrow.”
Mr. Vincent was heartily glad to be relieved
from his engagement, and he endeavoured
to escape Clarence's suspicions,
by devoting his whole time this evening to
Annabella, not in the least apprehensive
that Mr. Hervey would return the next
night. Mr. Vincent was at the E O table
at the usual hour, for he was excessively
anxious to regain what he had lost, not so
much for the sake of the money, which he
could afford to lose, but lest the defalcation
in his fortune should lead Mr. Percival
to the knowledge of the means which
had occasioned it. He could not endure,
after his high vaunts, to see himself humbled
by his rash confidence in himself, and

he secretly vowed, that if he could but reinstate
himself, by one night's good luck,
he would for ever quit the society of gamblers.
A few months before this time, he
would have scorned the idea of concealing
any part of his conduct, any one of his actions,
from his best friend, Mr. Percival; 
but his pride now reconciled him to the
meanness of concealment; and here, the
acuteness of his feelings was to his own
mind an excuse for dissimulation: so fallacious
is moral instinct, unenlightened or
uncontrolled by reason or religion.
Mr. Vincent was disappointed in his
hopes of regaining what he had lost. This
was not the fortunate night, which Mrs.
Luttridge's prognostics had vainly taught
him to expect: he played on, however,
with all the impetuosity of his natural
temper; his judgment forsook him; he
scarcely knew what he said or did; and,
in the course of a few hours, he was
worked up to such a pitch of insanity,
that, in one desperate moment, he betted
nearly all that he was worth in the world—

and lost!—He stood like one stupified— 
the hum of voices scarcely reached his
ear—he saw figures moving before him,
but he did not distinguish who, or what,
they were.
Supper was announced, and the room
emptied fast, whilst he remained motion-less,
leaning on the E O table. He was
roused by Mrs. Luttridge's saying, as she
passed—“Don't you sup to night, Mr.
Hervey?”—Vincent looked up, and saw
Clarence Hervey opposite to him. His
countenance instantly changed, and the
lightning of anger flashed through, the
gloom of despair: he uttered not a syllable; 
but his looks said—“How is this,
sir? Here again to night, to watch me?— 
to enjoy my ruin?—to be ready to carry
the first news of it to Belinda?”
At this last thought, Vincent struck his
closed hand with violence against his forehead; 
and rushing by Mr. Hervey, who in
vain attempted to speak to him, he pressed
into the midst of the crowd on the stairs,
and let himself be carried along with them

into the supper-room. At supper he took
his usual seat between Mrs. Luttridge
and the fair Annabella; and, as if determined
to brave the observing eyes of Clarence
Hervey, who was at the same table,
he affected extravagant gayety; he ate,
drank, talked, and laughed, more than any
of the company. Toward the end of the
supper, his dog, who was an inmate at
Mrs. Luttridge's, licked his hand, to put
him in mind, that he had given him nothing
to eat.
“Drink, Juba!—drink, and never have
done, boy!” cried Vincent, holding a
bumper of wine to the dog's mouth: “he's
the only dog I ever saw taste wine.” Then
snatching up some of the flowers, which
ornamented the table, he swore that Juba
should henceforward be called Anacreon,
and that he deserved to be crowned with
roses by the hand of Beauty. The fair
Annabella instantly took a hot-house rose
from her bosom, and assisted in making
the garland, with which she crowned the
new Anacreon. Insensible to his honours,

the dog, who was extremely hungry, turned
suddenly to Mrs. Luttridge, by whom he
had, till this night, regularly been fed with
the choicest morsels; and, lifting up his
huge paw, laid it, as he had been wont to
do, upon her arm. She shook it off: he,
knowing nothing of the change in his
master's affairs, laid the paw again upon
her arm; and, with that familiarity, to
which he had long been encouraged,
raised his head almost close to the lady's
cheek.
“Down, Juba!—down, sir, down!” 
cried Mrs. Luttridge, in a sharp voice.
“Down, Juba!—down, sir!” repeated
Mr. Vincent, in a tone of bitter feeling,
all his assumed gayety forsaking him at
this instant. “Down, Juba!—down, sir— 
down!—as low as your master!” thought he; 
and, pushing back his chair, he rose from
table, and precipitately left the room.
Little notice was taken of his retreat; 
the chairs closed in; and the gap, which
his vacant place left, was visible but for a

moment: the company were as gay as before; 
the fair Annabella smiled with a
grace as attractive; and Mrs. Luttridge
exulted in the success of her schemes— 
whilst her victim was in the agonies of despair.
Clarence Hervey, who had watched
every change of Vincent's countenance,
saw the agony of soul, with which he rose
from the table, and quitted the room: he
suspected his purpose, and followed him
immediately. But Mr. Vincent had got
out of the house before he could overtake
him: which was he was gone, no one
could tell, for no one had seen him: the
only information he could gain was, that
he might possibly be heard of at Nerot's
Hotel, or at governor Montford's, in
Portland-place. The hotel was but a few
yards from Mrs. Luttridge's. Clarence
went there directly. He asked for Mr.
Vincent. One of the waiters said, that
he was not yet come in; but another called
out—“Mr. Vincent, sir, did you say? I
have just shown him up to his room.”

Which is his room?—I must see him
instantly,” cried Hervey.
“Not to night—you can't see him
now, sir. Mr. Vincent won't let you in,
I can assure you, sir. I went up myself,
three minutes ago, with some letters, that
came whilst he was away, but he would
not let me in. I heard him double-lock
the door, and he swore terribly. I can't
go up again, at this time o'night—for my
life I dare not, sir.”
“Where is his own man?—Has Mr.
Vincent any servant here?—Mr. Vincent's
man!” cried Clarence; “let me see
him!”
“You can't, sir. Mr. Vincent has just
sent his black, the only servant he has
here, out on some message.—Indeed, sir,
there's no use in going up,” continued the
waiter, as Clarence sprang up two or three
stairs at once: “Mr. Vincent has desired
nobody may disturb him. I give you my
word, sir, he'll be very angry; and, besides,
'twould be to no purpose, for he'll not unlock
the door.”

“Is there but one door to the room?” 
said Mr. Hervey; and, as he asked the
question, he pulled a guinea out of his
pocket, and touched the waiter's hand
with it.
“Oh—now I recollect—yes, sir, there's
a private door through a closet—may be,
that mayn't be fastened.”
Clarence put the guinea into the waiter's
hand, who instantly showed him the way
up the back stair-case to the door, that
opened into Mr. Vincent's bed-chamber.
“Leave me now,” whispered he, “and
make no noise.”
The man withdrew; and as Mr. Hervey
went close to the concealed door, to try
if it was fastened, he distinctly heard a
pistol cocked. The door was not fastened:
he pushed it softly open, and saw this unfortunate
man upon his knees, the pistol
at his temple, his eyes looking up to
Heaven. Clarence was in one moment
behind him; and, seizing hold of the
pistol, he snatched it from Vincent's grasp
with so much calm presence of mind and

dexterity, that, although the pistol was
cocked, it did not go off.
“Mr. Hervey!” exclaimed Vincent, starting
up. Astonishment overpowered all
other sensations. But the next instant
his eyes flashed anger. “Is this the conduct
of a gentleman, Mr. Hervey?—of a
man of honour!” cried he, thus to intrude
upon my privacy; to be a spy upon my
action; to triumph in my ruin; to
witness my despair; to rob me of the
only—”
He looked wildly at the pistol, which
Clarence held in his hand; then snatching
up another which lay upon the table, he
continued—“You are my enemy—I know
it—you are my rival—I know it—Belinda
loves you—Nay, affect not to start—this
is no time for dissimulation—Belinda loves
you—you know it—for her sake, for your
own, put me out of the world—put me
out of torture. It shall not be called murder; 
it shall be called a duel. You have
been a spy upon my actions—I demand
satisfaction. If you have one spark of honour

or of courage within you, Mr.
Hervey, show it now—fight me, sir, openly
as man to man, rival to rival, enemy to
enemy—fire.”
“If you fire upon me you will repent
it,” replied Clarence, calmly, “for
I am not your enemy; I am not your
rival.”
“You are,” interrupted Vincent, raising
his voice to the highest pitch of indignation; 
“you are my rival, though you dare
not avow it; the denial is base, false, unmanly.
—O, Belinda, is this the being you
prefer to me? Gamester!—wretch as I
am, my soul never stooped to falsehood; 
treachery I abhor; courage, honour, and a
heart worthy of Belinda, I possess. I beseech
you, sir,” continued he, addressing
himself, in a tremulous tone of contempt
to Mr. Hervey—“I beseech you, sir, to
leave me to my own feelings—and to
myself.”
“You are not yourself at this moment,
and I cannot leave you to such mistaken
feelings,” replied Hervey; “command

yourself for a moment, and hear me: use
your reason, and you will soon be convinced
that I am your friend.”
“My friend!”
“Your friend—For what purpose did
I come here, to snatch this pistol from
your hand? If it were my interest, my
wish, that you were out of the world, why
did I prevent you from destroying yourself?
Do you think that the action of an
enemy? Use your reason.”
“I cannot,” said Vincent, striking his
forehead; “I know not what to think;— 
I am not master of myself—I conjure you,
sir, for your own sake, to leave me.”
“For my own sake!” repeated Hervey,
disdainfully; “I am not thinking of myself; 
nor can any thing you have said provoke
me from my purpose. My purpose
is to save you from ruin, for the sake of a
woman, whom, though I am no longer
your rival, I have loved longer, if not better,
than you have.”
There was something so open in Hervey's
countenance; such a strong expression of

truth in his manner, that it could not be
resisted, and Vincent, in an altered voice,
exclaimed:
“You acknowledge that you have loved
Belinda—and could you cease to love her?
Impossible!—And, loving her, must you
not detest me?”
“No,” said Clarence, holding out his
hand to him; “I wish to be your friend; 
I have not the baseness to wish to deprive
others of happiness, because I cannot enjoy
it myself. In one word, to put you at
ease with me for ever, I have no pretensions,
I can have none, to miss Portman.
I am engaged to another woman— 
in a few days you will hear of my marriage.”
Mr. Vincent threw the pistol from him,
and gave his hand to Hervey.
“Pardon what I said to you just now,” 
cried he; “I knew not what I said—I spoke
in the agony of despair—your purpose is
most generous—but it is in vain—you
came too late—I, am ruined, past all
hope.”

He folded his arms, and his eyes reverted
involuntarily to his pistols. There was a
pause of awful silence.
“The misery that you have this night
experienced,” said Mr. Hervey, “was necessary
to the security of your future happiness.”
“Happiness!” repeated Vincent—“happiness—there
is no happiness left for me.
My doom is fixed—fixed by my own
folly—my own rash headstrong folly. Madman
that I was, what could tempt me to
the gaming table? O! if I could recal
but a few days, a few hours of my existence!—but
remorse is vain; prudence
comes too late. Do you know,” said he,
fixing his eyes upon Hervey, “do you
know that I am a beggar? that I have not
a farthing left upon earth. Go to Belinda; 
tell her so: tell her, that if she had ever
the slightest regard for me, I deserve
it no longer. Teil her to forget, despise,
detest me. Give her joy, that she
has escaped having a gamester for a husband.”

“I will,” said Clarence, “I will, if you
please, tell her what I believe to be true,
that the agony you have felt this night,
the dear-bought experience you have had,
will be for ever a warning.”
“A warning!” interrupted Vincent— 
“O, that it could yet be useful to me!— 
But I tell you, it comes too late—Nothing
can save me.”
“I can,” said Mr. Hervey. “Swear
to me, for Belinda's sake—solemnly swear
to me, that you will never more trust your
happiness and hers to the hazard of a die— 
swear that you will never more, directly or
indirectly, play at any game of chance, and
I will restore to you the fortune, the happiness
that you have lost.”
Mr. Vincent stood, as if suspended between
ecstacy and despair; he dared not
trust his senses: with a servent and solemn
adjuration he made the vow that
was required of him; and Clarence then
revealed to him the secret of the E O
table.

“When she knows that I have it in my
power to expose her to public shame, she
will instantly refund all that she has iniquitously
won from you. Even among
gamblers she would be blasted, for ever,
by this discovery: she knows it, and if she
dared to brave public opinion, we have
then a sure resource in the law—prosecute
her. The laws of honour, as well as the
laws of the land will support the prosecution.
But she will never let the affair go
into a court of justice. I will see her early,
as early as I can to morrow, and put you
out of suspense.”
“Most generous of human beings!” exclaimed
Vincent; “I cannot express to
you what I feel; but your own heart, your
own approbation—”
“Farewel, good night,” interrupted
Clarence, with a benevolent smile; “I see
that I have made a friend; I was determined
that Belinda's husband should be
my friend—I have succeeded beyond my
hopes. And now I will intrude no longer.”

said he, as he closed the door after him.
His sensations, at this instant, were more
delightful, even than those of the man he
had relieved from the depth of despair.
How wisely has Providence made the benevolent
and generous passions the most
pleasurable!