


Characters of silly People, with the
proper Uses for which such are designed. 
One Reason why we chose to end
our first Book as we did with the
last Chapter, was that we are
now obliged to produce two Characters
of a Stamp entirely different from what
we have hitherto dealt in. These Persons
are of that pitiful Order of Mortals, who 

are in Contempt called Good-natured; being
indeed sent into the World by Nature,
with the same Design as Men put little Fish
into a Pike-Pond, in order to be devoured
by that voracious Water-Hero. 
But to proceed with our History, Wild
having shared the Booty in much the same
Manner as before, i. e. taken three Fourths of
it, amounting to eighteen Pence, was now
retiring to rest, in no very happy Mood,
when by Accident he met a young Fellow,
who had formerly been his School-Fellow. 
This Person had a Regard for our Hero,
as he had more than once, for a small Reward,
taken a Fault on himself, for which
the other, who had more Regard for his
Skin than Wild, was to have been whipp'd. 
He therefore accosted Wild in the most
friendly Manner, and invited him home
with him to Breakfast, it being now near
Nine in the Morning, which our Hero,
with no great Difficulty consented to. This
young Man, who was about Wild's Age,
had some Time before set up in the Trade
of a Jeweller, in the Materials or Stock
for which, he had laid out the greatest Part 

of a little Fortune, and had married a very
agreeable Woman for Love, by whom he
then had two Children. As our Reader
is to be more acquainted with this Person,
it may not be improper to open somewhat
of his Character, especially as it will serve
as a Kind of Foil to the noble and GREAT
Disposition of our Hero, and as the one seems
sent into this World as a proper Object on
which the GREAT Talents of the other were
to be displayed with a proper and just Success. 
Mr. Thomas Heartfree then (for that
was his Name) was of an honest and open
Disposition. He was of that Sort of Men,
whom Experience only, and not their own
Natures, must inform that there are such
things as Deceit and Hypocrisy in the
World; and who, consequently, are not at
five and twenty as difficult to be imposed
upon as the oldest and most subtile. He
was possessed of several great Weaknesses of
Mind; being good-natured, friendly, and
generous to a great Excess. He had indeed
too little Regard to common Justice, for he
had forgiven some Debts to his Acquaintance,
only because they could not pay him; 

and had entrusted a Bankrupt on his setting
up a second time, from having been convinced,
that he had dealt in his Bankruptcy
with a fair and honest Heart, and that
it was owing to Misfortune, and not to
Neglect or Imposture. He was withal so
silly a Fellow that he never took the least
Advantage of the Ignorance of his Customers,
and contented himself with very moderate
Gains on his Goods; which he was
the better enabled to do, notwithstanding
his Generosity, because his Life was extremely
temperate, his Expences being solely
confined to the cheerful Entertainment
of his Friends at Home, and now and
then a moderate Glass of Wine, in which
he indulged himself in the Company of
his Wife, who was a mean-spirited, poor,
domestic, low-bred Animal, who confined
herself mostly to the Care of her Family,
placed her Happiness in her Husband and
her Children; followed no expensive Fashions
or Diversions, and indeed rarely
went abroad, unless to return the Visits of a
few plain Neighbours, and twice a Year at
farthest afforded herself in Company with
her Husband the Diversion of a Play, 

where she never sat in a higher Place than
the Pit. 
To this silly Woman did this silly Fellow
introduce the GREAT WILD, informing
her at the same Time of their former Acquaintance,
and the Obligations he had received
from him; for, as it often happens,
that he who confers the Obligation, forgets
the Price paid for it, so it sometimes, but
very seldom, falls out with him who receives
it. This simple Woman no sooner
heard her Husband had been obliged to her
Guest, than her Eyes sparkled on him
with a Benevolence which is an Emanation
from the Heart, and of which GREAT and
noble Minds, whose Hearts never swell
but with an Injury, can have no very adequate
Idea; it is therefore no Wonder that
our Hero should misconstrue as he did, the
poor, innocent, and simple Affection of
Mrs. Heartfree towards her Husband's
Friend, for that great and generous Passion,
which fires the Eyes of a modern Heroine,
when the Colonel is so kind
as to indulge his City Creditor with partaking
of his Table to Day, and of his Bed 

to Morrow. Wild therefore instantly returned
the Compliment, as he understood
it, with his Eyes, and presently after bestowed
many Encomiums on her Beauty, with
which perhaps she, who was a Woman,
though a good one, and misapprehended
the Design, was not displeased any more
than the Husband. 
When Breakfast was ended, and the
Wife retired to her houshold Affairs, Wild,
who had a quick Discernment into the
Weaknesses of Men, and who, besides the
Knowledge of his good (or foolish) Disposition
when a Boy, had now discovered several
Sparks of Goodness, Friendship, and
Generosity in his Friend, began to discourse
over the Accidents which had happened in
their Childhood, and took frequent Occasions
of reminding him of those Favours
which we have before mentioned his having
conferred on him; he then proceeded
to the most vehement Profession of Friendship,
and to the most ardent Expressions of
Joy in this Renewal of their Acquaintance. 
He at last told him with great seeming
Pleasure, that he believed he had an Opportunity 

of serving him by the Recommendation
of a Gentleman to his Custom, who
was then on the Brink of Marriage, and,
if not already engaged, I will, says he,
endeavour to prevail on him to furnish his
Lady with Jewels at your Shop. 
Heartfree was not backward in
Thanks to our Hero, and, after many
earnest Solicitations to Dinner, which were
refused, they parted for the first Time. 
But here, as it occurs to our Memory,
that our Readers may be surprized (an Accident
which sometimes happens in Histories
of this kind) how Mr. Wild the elder,
in his present Capacity, should have been
able to maintain his Son at a reputable
School, as this appears to have been, it
may be necessary to inform him, that Mr.
Wild himself was then a Tradesman in
good Business; but, by Misfortunes in the
World, to wit, Extravagance and Gaming,
he had reduced himself to that honourable
Occupation which we have formerly mentioned. 

Having cleared up this Doubt, we will
now pursue our Hero, who forthwith repaired
to the Count, and having first settled
preliminary Articles concerning Distributions,
he acquainted him with the
Scheme which he had formed against
Heartfree; and after consulting proper
Methods to put it in Execution, they began
to concert Measures for the Enlargement
of the Count; on which the first
and indeed only Point to be considered,
was to raise Money, not to pay his Debts,
for that would have required an immense
Sum, and was contrary to his Inclination,
or Intention, but to procure him Bail; for
as to his Escape, Mr. Snap had taken such
Precautions that it appeared absolutely impossible. 