




Panegyrics on Beauty, with other grave
Matters. 
The Colonel and Booth walked together
to the latter's Lodging; 
for as it was not that Day in the
Week in which all Parts of the Town are
indifferent, Booth could not wait on the Colonel. 
When they arrived in Spring-Garden,
Booth to his great Surprize found no one at
home but his Maid. In truth, Amelia had
accompanied Mrs. Ellison and her Children
to his Lordship's; for as her little Girl
shewed a great Unwillingness to go without 

her, the fond Mother was easily persuaded
to make one of the Company. 
Booth had scarce ushered the Colonel up
to his Apartment, when a Servant from
Mrs. James knocked hastily at the Door. 
The Lady not meeting with her Husband
at her Return home began to despair of
him, and performed every thing which was
decent on the Occasion. An Apothecary
was presently called with Hartshorn and Sal
Volatile, a Doctor was sent for, and Messengers
were dispatched every way, amongst
the rest one was sent to enquire at the Lodgings
of his supposed Antagonist. 
The Servant hearing that his Master was
alive and well above Stairs, ran up eagerly
to acquaint him with the dreadful Situation
in which he left his miserable Lady at home,
and likewise with the Occasion of all her
Distress, saying that his Lady had been at
her Brother's, and had there heard that his
Honour was killed in a Duel by Capt. Booth. 
The Colonel smiled at this Account, and
bid the Servant make haste back to contradict
it. —And then turning to Booth he said,
‘Was there ever such another Fellow as
this Brother of Mine? I thought indeed 

his Behaviour was somewhat odd at the
time. I suppose he overheard me whisper
that I would give you Satisfaction, and
thence concluded we went together with
a Design of Tilting. —D&wblank;n the Fellow,
I begin to grow heartily sick of him, and
wish I could get well rid of him without
cutting his Throat, which I sometimes
apprehend he will insist on my doing, as
a Return for my getting him made a Lieutenant-Colonel.’ 
Whilst these two Gentlemen were commenting
on the Character of the third, Amelia
and her Company returned, and all presently
came up Stairs, not only the Children,
but the two Ladies, laden with Trinkets as
if they had been come from a Fair. Amelia,
who had been highly delighted all the
Morning with the excessive Pleasure which
her Childrtn enjoyed, when she saw Col.
James with her Husband, and perceived the
most manifest Marks of that Reconciliation,
which she knew had been so long and so
earnestly wished by Booth, became so transported
with Joy that her Happiness was
scarce capable of Addition. Exercise had
painted her Face with Vermilion; and the
highest Good-humour had so sweetened 

every Feature, and a vast Flow of Spirits
had so lightened up her bright Eyes, that
she was all a Blaze of Beauty. She seemed
indeed, as Milton sublimely describes
Eve, 

—adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable—
Again, 

Grace was in all her Steps, Heaven in her Eye,
In ev'ry Gesture Dignity and Love.
Or, as Waller sweetly, though less sublimely,
sings. 

Sweetness, Truth, and every Grace,
Which Time and Use are wont to teach,
The Eye may in a Moment reach,
And read distinctly in her Face.
Or to mention one Poet more, and him
of all the sweetest, she seemed to be the
very Person of whom Suckling wrote the
following Lines, where, speaking of Cupid,
he says, 


—All his lovely Looks, his pleasing Fires,
All his sweet Motions, all his taking Smiles,
All that awakes, all that inflames Desires,
All that sweetly commands, all that beguiles,
He does into one Pair of Eyes convey,
And there begs Leave that he himself may stay.
Such was Amelia at this time when she entered
the Room, and having paid her Respects
to the Colonel, she went up to her Husband,
and cried, ‘O my dear! never was any
Creatures so happy as your little Things
have been this whole Morning; and all
owing to my Lord's Goodness; sure never
was any thing so good—natur'd and so generous!’ 
—She then made the Children
produce their Presents, the Value of which
amounted to a pretty large Sum; for there
was a Gold Watch amongst the Trinkets
that cost above twenty Guineas. 
Instead of discovering so much Satisfaction
on this Occasion as Amelia expected,
Booth very gravely answered, ‘And pray,
my dear, how are we to repay all these
Obligations to his Lordship?’ ‘How can
you ask so strange a Question?’ cries
Mrs. Ellison, ‘how little do you know of
the Soul of Generosity (for sure my Cousin 

deserves that Name) when you call a few
little Trinkets given to Children, an Obligation?’ 
‘Indeed, my dear,’ cries Amelia,
‘I would have stopped his Hand, if it
had been possible; nay, I was forced at
last absolutely to refuse, or I believe he
would have laid a hundred Pound out on
the Children: for I never saw any one so
fond of Children, which convinces me he
is one of the best of Men; but I ask your
Pardon, Colonel,’ said she, turning to
him, ‘I should not entertain you with these
Subjects; yet I know you have Goodness
enough to excuse the Folly of a
Mother.’ 
The Colonel made a very low assenting
Bow; and soon after they all sat down
to a small Repast; for the Colonel had
promised Booth to dine with him when
they first came home together; and what
he had since heard from his own House,
gave him still less Inclination than ever to
repair thither. 
But beside both these, there was a third
and stronger Inducement to him to pass the
Day with his Friend; and this was the Desire
of passing it with his Friend's Wife. When
the Colonel had first seen Amelia in France, she 

was but just recovered from a consumptive
Habit, and looked pale and thin; besides
his Engagements with Miss Bath at that
time took total Possession of him, and guarded
his Heart from the Impressions of another
Woman; and when he had dined
with her in Town, the Vexations through
which she had lately passed had somewhat
deadned her Beauty; besides, he was then
engaged, as we have seen, in a very warm
Pursuit of a new Mistress; but now he had
no such Impediment: for though the Reader
hath just before seen his warm Declarations
of a Passion for Miss Mathews; yet it
may be remember'd that he had been in
Possession of her for above a Fortnight; and
one of the happy Properties of this kind of
Passion is, that it can with equal Violence
love half a Dozen, or half a Score, different
Objects at one and the same time. 
But indeed such were the Charms now
displayed by Amelia, of which we endeavoured
above to draw some faint Resemblance,
that perhaps no other Beauty could
have secured him from their Influence; and
here to confess a Truth in his Favour, however
the grave, or rather the hypocritical
Part of Mankind may censure it, I am
firmly persuaded that to withdraw Admiration 

from exquisite Beauty, or to feel no Delight
in gazing at it, is as impossible as to feel
no Warmth from the most scorching Rays of
the Sun. To run away is all that is in our
Power; and yet in the former Case if it
must be allowed we have the Power of running
away, it must be allowed also that it
requires the strongest Resolution to execute
it: for when, as Dryden says, 

All Paradise is opened in a Face,
how natural is the Desire of going thither!
and how difficult to quit the lovely Prospect! 
And yet however difficult this may be,
my young Readers, it is absolutely necessary,
and that immediately too: flatter not
yourselves that Fire will not scorch as well as
warm; and the longer we stay within its
Reach, the more we shall burn. The Admiration
of a beautiful Woman, though the
Wife of our dearest Friend, may at first
perhaps be innocent; but let us not flatter
ourselves it will always remain so; Desire is
sure to succeed; and Wishes, Hopes, Designs,
with a long Train of Mischiefs, tread
close at our Heels. In Affairs of this Kind
we may most properly apply the well-known 

Remark of nemo repente fuit turpissimus. 
It fares indeed with us on this
Occasion, as with the unwary Traveller in
some Parts of Arabia the Desart, whom
the treacherous Sands imperceptibly betray
'till he is overwhelmed and lost. In both
Cases the only Safety is by withdrawing our
Feet the very first Moment we perceive
them sliding. 
This Digression may appear impertinent
to some Readers; we could not however
avoid the Opportunity of offering the above
Hints; since of all Passions there is none
against which we should so strongly fortify
ourselves as this, which is generally called
Love: for no other lays before us, especially
in the tumultuous Days of Youth, such
sweet, such strong, and almost irresistible
Temptations; none hath produced in private
Life such fatal and lamentable Tragedies; 
and what is worst of all, there is none
to whose Poison and Infatuation the best of
Minds are so liable. Ambition scarce ever
produces any Evil, but when it reigns in
cruel and savage Bosoms; and Avarice seldom
flourishes at all but in the basest and
poorest Soil. Love, on the contrary, sprouts
usually up in the richest and noblest Minds; 
but there unless nicely watched, pruned, and 

cultivated, and carefully kept clear of those
vicious Weeds which are too apt to surround
it, it branches forth into Wildness and Disorder,
produces nothing desirable, but choaks
up and kills whatever is good and noble in
the Mind where it so abounds. In short, to
drop the Allegory, not only Tenderness
and Good-nature, but Bravery, Generosity,
and every Virtue are often made the Instruments
of effecting the most atrocious Purposes
of this all-subduing Tyrant. 



Which will not appear, we presume, unnatural
to all married Readers. 
If the Table of poor Booth afforded but
an indifferent Repast to the Colonel's
Hunger, here was most excellent Entertainment
of a much higher kind. The Colonel
began now to wonder within himself at his
not having before discovered such incomparable
Beauty and Excellence. This Wonder
was indeed so natural, that lest it should
arise likewise in the Reader, we thought
proper to give the Solution of it in the preceding
Chapter. 

During the first two Hours, the Colonel
scarce ever had his Eyes off from Amelia; 
for he was taken by Surprize, and his Heart
was gone before he suspected himself to be
in any Danger. His Mind however no
sooner suggested a certain Secret to him,
than it suggested some Degree of Prudence
to him at the same time; and the Knowledge
that he had Thoughts to conceal, and
the Care of concealing them, had Birth at
one and the same Instant. During the Residue
of the Day therefore, he grew more
circumspect, and contented himself with
now and then stealing a Look by chance,
especially as the more than ordinary Gravity
of Booth made him fear that his former
Behaviour had betrayed to Booth's Observation
the great and sudden Liking he had
conceived for his Wife, even before he had
observed it in himself. 
Amelia continued the whole Day in the
highest Spirits, and highest good Humour
imaginable; never once remarking that Appearance
of Discontent in her Husband, of
which the Colonel had taken Notice; so
much more quick-sighted, as we have
somewhere else hinted, is Guilt than Innocence. 
Whether Booth had in reality made 

any such Observations on the Colonel's Behaviour
as he had suspected, we will not undertake
to determine; yet so far may be
material to say, as we can with sufficient
Certainty, that the Change in Booth's Behaviour
that Day, from what was usual with
him, was remarkable enough. None of
his former Vivacity appeared in his Conversation; 
and his Countenance was altered from
being the Picture of Sweetness and good
Humour, not indeed to Sourness or Moroseness,
but to Gravity and Melancholy. 
Tho' the Colonel's Suspicion had the Effect
which we have mentioned on his Behaviour; 
yet it could not persuade him to depart. 
In short, he sat in his Chair as if confined
to it by Enchantment, stealing Looks
now and then, and humouring his growing
Passion, without having Command enough
over his Limbs to carry him out of the
Room, till Decency at last forced him to put
an end to his preposterous Visit. When the
Husband and Wife were left alone together; 
the latter resumed the Subject of her Children,
and gave Booth a particular Narrative
of all that had past at his Lordship's, which
he, tho' something had certainly disconcerted
him, affected to receive with all the
Pleasure he could; and this Affectation, 

however aukwardly he acted his Part, passed
very well on Amelia: for she could not
well conceive a Displeasure, of which she
had not the least Hint of any Cause; and
indeed at a time, when from his Reconciliation
with James, she imagined her Husband
to be entirely and perfectly happy. 
The greatest Part of that Night Booth
past awake; and if during the Residue he
might be said to sleep, he could scarce be said
to enjoy Repose; his Eyes were no sooner
closed, than he was pursued and haunted by
the most frightful and terrifying Dreams,
which threw him into so restless a Condition,
that he soon disturbed his Amelia, and greatly
alarmed her with Apprehensions that he had
been seized by some dreadful Disease, tho'
he had not the least Symptoms of a Fever
by any extraordinary Heat, or any other
Indication, but was rather colder than
usual. 
As Booth assured his Wife that he was
very well, but found no Inclination to sleep,
she likewise bid adieu to her Slumbers, and
attempted to entertain him with her Conversation. 
Upon which his Lordship occurred
as the first Topic; and she repeated
to him all the Stories which she had heard 

from Mrs. Ellison of the Peer's Goodness
to his Sister and his Nephew and Niece. 
‘It is impossible, my dear,’ says she, ‘to
describe their Fondness for their Uncle,
which is to me an incontestable Sign of
a Parent's Goodness.’ —In this Manner
she ran on for several Minutes, concluding
at last that it was pity so very few had
such generous Minds joined to immense
Fortunes. 
Booth instead of making a direct Answer
to what Amelia had said, cried coldly, ‘But
do you think, my dear, it was right to
accept all those expensive Toys which the
Children brought home? And I ask you
again, what Return we are to make for
these Obligations?’ 
‘Indeed, my dear,’ cries Amelia, ‘you
see this Matter in too serious a Light. 
Though I am the last Person in the World
who would lessen his Lordship's Goodness,
(indeed I shall always think we are
both infinitely obliged to him) yet sure
you must allow the Expence to be a mere
Trifle to such a vast Fortune. As for
Return, his own Benevolence, in the Satisfaction
it receives more than repays 

itself, and I am convinced he expects no
other.’ 
‘Very well, my Dear,’ cries Booth, ‘you
shall have it your way; I must confess, I
never yet saw any Reason to blame your
Discernment; and perhaps I have been in
the wrong to give myself so much Uneasiness
on this Account.’ 
‘Uneasiness! Child,’ said Amelia eagerly. 
‘Good Heavens! hath this made you uneasy?’ 
‘I do own it hath,’ answered Booth, ‘and
it hath been the only Cause of breaking
my Repose.’ 
‘Why then I wish,’ cries Amelia, ‘all
the Things had been at the Devil, before
ever the Children had seen them; and
whatever I may think myself, I promise
you they shall never more accept the
Value of a Farthing—If upon this Occasion,
I have been the Cause of your Uneasiness,
you will do me the Justice to
believe that I was totally innocent.’ 
At those Words Booth caught her in his
Arms, and with the tenderest Embrace, 

emphatically repeating the Word Innocent,
cried—‘Heaven forbid I should think otherwise,
O thou art the best of Creatures
that ever blessed a Man.’ 
‘Well but,’ said she smiling—‘Do confess,
my Dear, the Truth; I promise you
I won't blame you nor disesteem you for
it; but is not Pride really at the Bottom
of this Fear of an Obligation?’ 
‘Perhaps it may,’ answered he, ‘or if
you will, you may call it Fear. I own I
am afraid of Obligations, as the worst kind
of Debts; for I have generally observed
those who confer them, expect to be repaid
ten thousand fold.’ 
Here ended all that is material of their
Discourse; and a little time afterwards, they
both fell fast asleep in one another's Arms; 
from which Time Booth had no more Restlessness,
nor any further Perturbation in his
Dreams. 
Their Repose however had been so much
disturbed in the former Part of the Night,
that, as it was very late before they enjoyed
that sweet Sleep I have just mentioned, they
lay a-bed the next Day till Noon, when 

they both rose with the utmost Chearfulness; 
and while Amelia bestirred herself in the Affairs
of her Family, Booth went to visit the
wounded Colonel. 
He found that Gentleman still proceeding
very fast in his Recovery, with which he
was more pleased than he had Reason to be
with his Reception; for the Colonel received
him very coldly indeed, and when Booth
told him he had received perfect Satisfaction
from his Brother, Bath erected his Head,
and answered with a Sneer, ‘Very well, Sir,
if you think these Matters can be so made
up, d&wblank;n me, if it is any Business of
mine. My Dignity hath not been injured.’ 
‘No one, I believe,’ cries Booth, ‘dare
injure it.’ 
‘You believe so!’ said the Colonel, ‘I
think, Sir, you might be assured of it; 
but this, at least, you may be assured of,
that if any Man did, I would tumble
him down the Precipice of Hell, d&wblank;n
me, that you may be assured of.’ 
As Booth found the Colonel in this Disposition,
he had no great Inclination to 

lengthen out his Visit, nor did the Colonel
himself seem to desire it; so he soon returned
back to his Amelia, whom he found performing
the Office of a Cook, with as much
Pleasure as a fine Lady generally enjoys in
dressing herself out for a Ball. 



In which the History looks a little
backwards. 
Before we proceed farther in our
History, we shall recount a short Scene
to our Reader which passed between Amelia
and Mrs. Ellison, whilst Booth was on his Visit
to Col. Bath. We have already observed,
that Amelia had conceived an extraordinary
Affection for Mrs. Bennet, which had still
encreased every time she saw her; she thought
she discovered something wonderfully good
and gentle in her Countenance and Disposition,
and was very desirous of knowing her
whole History. 
She had a very short Interview with that
Lady this Morning in Mrs. Ellison's Apartment. 
As soon therefore as Mrs. Bennet
was gone, Amelia acquainted Mrs. Ellison
with the good Opinion she had conceived 

of her Friend, and likewise with her Curiosity
to know her Story: ‘For there must
be something uncommonly good,’ said
she, ‘in one who can so truly mourn for a
Husband above three Years after his
Death.’ 
‘O,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘to be sure the
World must allow her to have been one
of the best of Wives. And indeed, upon
the whole she is a good Sort of Woman; 
and what I like her the best for is a strong
Resemblance that she bears to yourself in
the Form of her Person, and still more
in her Voice. But for my own Part, I
know nothing remarkable in her Fortune
unless what I have told you, that she was
the Daughter of a Clergyman, had little
or no Fortune, and married a poor Parson
for Love, who left her in the utmost
Distress. If you please, I will shew you
a Letter which she writ to me at that
time, tho' I insist upon your Promise
never to mention it to her; indeed, you
will be the first Person I ever shewed it
to.’ She then opened her Scrutore, and
taking out the Letter delivered it to Amelia,
saying. ‘There, Madam, is, I believe, as
fine a Picture of Distress as can well be
drawn.’ 


‘Dear Madam,
As I have no other Friend on Earth
but yourself, I hope you will pardon my
writing to you at this Season; tho' I do
not know that you can relieve my Distresses,
or if you can, have I any Pretence
to expect that you should. My
poor dear, O Heavens!—my—lies
dead in the House, and after I had procured
sufficient to bury him, a set of
Ruffians have entered my House, seized
all I have, have seized his dear, dear
Corpse, and threaten to deny it Burial. 
For Heaven's Sake, send me, at least,
some Advice; little Tommy stands now by
me crying for Bread, which I have not
to give him. —I can say no more than
that I am, 
‘Your most distressed humble Servant,
M. Bennet.’ 
Amelia read the Letter over twice, and
then returning it, with Tears in her Eyes,
asked how the poor Creature could possibly
get through such Distress. 
‘You may depend upon it, Madam,’ 
said Mrs. Ellison, ‘the Moment I read this 

Account, I posted away immediately to
the Lady. As to the seizing the Body,
that I found was a mere Bugbear; but all
the rest was literally true. I sent immediately
for the same Gentleman, that I
recommended to Mr. Booth, left the Care
of burying the Corpse to him, and brought
my Friend and her little Boy immediately
away to my own House, where she remained
some Months in the most miserable
Condition. I then prevailed with her
to retire into the Country, and procured
her a Lodging with a Friend at St. Edmundsbury,
the Air and Gayety of which
Place by degrees recovered her; and she
returned in about a Twelvemonth to Town,
as well, I think, as she is at present.’ 
‘I am almost afraid to ask,’ cries Amelia; 
‘and yet I long methinks to know what is
become of the poor little Boy.’ 
‘He hath been dead,’ said Mrs. Ellison,
‘a little more than half a Year; and the
Mother lamented him at first almost as
much as she did her Husband; but I
found it indeed rather an easier Matter to
comfort her, tho' I sat up with her near
a Fortnight upon the latter Occasion.’ 

‘You are a good Creature,’ said Amelia,
‘and I love you dearly.’ 
‘Alas! Madam,’ cries she, ‘what could
I have done, if it had not been for the
Goodness of that best of Men, my noble
Cousin! His Lordship no sooner heard
of the Widow's Distress from me, than
he immediately settled 150l. a Year upon
her during her Life.’ 
‘Well! how noble, how generous was
that!’ said Amelia, ‘I declare I begin to
love your Cousin, Mrs. Ellison.’ 
‘And I declare if you do,’ answered she,
‘there is no Love lost, I verily believe; 
if you had heard what I heard him say
Yesterday behind your Back—’ 
‘Why what did he say, Mrs. Ellison?’ 
cries Amelia. 
‘He said,’ answered the other, ‘that you
was the finest Woman his Eyes ever
beheld. —Ah! it is in vain to wish, and
yet, I cannot help wishing too. —O Mrs.
Booth! if you had been a single Woman,
I firmly believe I could have made you 

the happiest in the World. And I sincerely
think, I never saw a Woman who
deserved it more.’ 
‘I am obliged to you, Madam,’ cries
Amelia, ‘for your good Opinion; but I
really look on myself already as the happiest
Woman in the World. Our Circumstances
it is true might have been a
little more fortunate; but, O my dear
Mrs. Ellison, what Fortune can be put
in the Balance with such a Husband as
mine?’ 
‘I am afraid, dear Madam,’ answered
Mrs. Ellison, ‘you would not hold the
Scale fairly. —I acknowledge indeed, Mr.
Booth is a very pretty Gentleman; Heaven
forbid I should endeavour to lessen
him in your Opinion; yet if I was to be
brought to Confession, I could not help
saying, I see where the Superiority lies,
and that the Men have more Reason to
envy Mr. Booth, than the Women have
to envy his Lady.’ 
‘Nay, I will not bear this,’ replied Amelia. 
‘You will forfeit all my Love, if you
have the least disrespectful Opinion of my
Husband. —You do not know him Mrs. 

Ellison, he is the best, the kindest, the
worthiest of all his Sex. I have observed
indeed once or twice before that you have
taken some Dislike to him. I can't conceive
for what Reason. If he hath said or
done any thing to disoblige you, I am
sure I can justly acquit him of Design. 
His extreme Vivacity makes him sometimes
a little too heedless; but, I am
convinced, a more innocent Heart, or one
more void of Offence, was never in a human
Bosom.’ 
‘Nay, if you grow serious,’ cries Mrs.
Ellison, ‘I have done. How is it possible
you should suspect I had taken any Dislike
to a Man, to whom I have always shewn
so perfect a Regard! But to say I think
him, or almost any other Man in the
World worthy of yourself, is not within
my Power with Truth. And since you
force the Confession from me, I declare, I
think such Beauty, such Sense, and such
Goodness united, might aspire without
Vanity to the Arms of any Monarch in
Europe.’ 
‘Alas! my dear Mrs. Ellison,’ answered
Amelia, ‘do you think Happiness and a
Crown so closely united? How many 

miserable Women have lain in the Arms
of Kings? —Indeed, Mrs. Ellison, if I
had all the Merit you compliment me
with, I should think it all fully rewarded
with such a Man as I thank Heaven hath
fallen to my Lot; nor would I, upon my
Soul, exchange that Lot with any Queen
in the Universe.’ 
‘Well, there are enow of our Sex,’ said
Mrs. Ellison, ‘to keep you in Countenance; 
but I shall never forget the Beginning
of a Song of Mr. Congreve's, that my
Husband was so fond of, that he was always
singing it.’ 

Love's but a Frailty of the Mind,
When 'tis not with Ambition join'd.
Love without Interest makes but an unsavory
Dish in my Opinion.’ 
‘And pray how long hath this been your
Opinion?’ said Amelia, smiling. 
‘Ever since I was born,’ answered Mrs.
Ellison, ‘at least, ever since I can remember.’ 

‘And have you never,’ said Amelia,
deviated from this generous way of thinking?’ 
‘Never once,’ answered the other, ‘in
the whole Course of my Life.’ 
‘O Mrs. Ellison! Mrs. Ellison!’ cries
Amelia, ‘why do we ever blame those who
are disingenuous in confessing their Faults,
when we are so often ashamed to own
ourselves in the Right. Some Women
now, in my Situation, would be angry
that you had not made Confidantes of
them; but I never desire to know more of
the Secrets of others, than they are pleased
to entrust me with. You must believe
however, that I should not have given you
these Hints of my knowing all, if I had
disapproved your Choice. On the contrary,
I assure you, I highly approve it. 
The Gentility he wants, it will be easily
in your Power to procure for him; and as
for his good Qualities, I will myself be
bound for them: and I make not the
least Doubt, as you have owned to me
yourself that you have placed your Affections
on him, you will be one of the happiest
Women in the World.’ 

‘Upon my Honour,’ cries Mrs. Ellison,
very gravely, ‘I do not understand one
Word of what you mean.’ 
‘Upon my Honour, you astonish me,’ 
said Amelia, ‘but I have done.’ 
‘Nay then,’ said the other, ‘I insist
upon knowing what you mean.’ 
‘Why what can I mean,’ answered Amelia,
‘but your Marriage with Serjeant Atkinson?’ 
‘With Serjeant Atkinson!’ cries Mrs.
Ellison eagerly, ‘my Marriage with a Serjeant!’ 
‘Well, with Mr. Atkinson then, Captain
Atkinson, if you please; for so I hope to
see him.’ 
‘And have you really no better Opinion
of me,’ said Mrs. Ellison, ‘than to imagine
me capable of such Condescension? 
What have I done, dear Mrs. Booth, to
deserve so low a Place in your Esteem? 
I find indeed, as Solomon says, Women
ought to watch the Door of their Lips. 

How little did I imagine that a little
harmless Freedom in Discourse, could
persuade any one that I could entertain a
serious Intention of disgracing my Family!
for of a very good Family am I
come, I assure you, Madam, tho' I now
let Lodgings. Few of my Lodgers, I
believe, ever came of a better.’ 
‘If I have offended you, Madam,’ said
Amelia, ‘I am very sorry, and ask your
Pardon; but besides what I heard from
yourself, Mr. Booth told me.’ 
‘O yes,’ answered Mrs. Ellison, ‘Mr.
Booth, I know, is a very good Friend of
mine—Indeed, I know you better than
to think it could be your own Suspicion. 
—I am very much obliged to Mr. Booth
truly.’ 
‘Nay,’ cries Amelia, ‘the Serjeant himself
is in fault; for Mr. Booth, I am positive,
only repeated what he had from
him.’ 
‘Impudent Coxcomb!’ cries Mrs. Ellison. 
‘I shall know how to keep such Fellows
at a proper Distance for the future— 
I will tell you, dear Madam, all that 

happened. When I rose in the Morning,
I found the Fellow waiting in the Entry; 
and as you had exprest some Regard for
him as your Foster-Brother, nay, he is a
very genteel Fellow that I must own, I
scolded my Maid for not shewing him
into my little Back-Room; and I then
asked him to walk into the Parlour. 
Could I have imagined he would have
construed such little Civility into an Encouragement? 
‘Nay, I will have Justice done to my
poor Brother too,’ said Amelia. ‘I myself
have seen you give him much greater
Encouragement than that.’ 
‘Well, perhaps I have,’ said Mrs. Ellison. 
‘I have been always too unguarded
in my Speech, and can't answer for all I
have said.’ She then began to change her
Note, and with an affected Laugh turned
all into Ridicule; and soon afterwards the
two Ladies separated, both in apparent good
Humour; and Amelia went about those domestic
Offices, in which Mr. Booth found
her engaged at the End of the preceding
Chapter. 




Containing a very extraordinary Incident. 
In the Afternoon, Mr. Booth with Amelia
and her Children went to refesh themselves
in the Park. The Conversation now
turned on what past in the Morning with
Mrs. Ellison, the latter Part of the Dialogue,
I mean, recorded in the last Chapter. 
Amelia told her Husband, that Mrs. Ellison
so strongly denied all Intentions to marry
the Serjeant, that she had convinced her the
poor Fellow was under an Error, and had
mistaken a little too much Levity for serious
Encouragement; and concluded, by desiring
Booth not to jest with her any more on
that Subject. 
Booth burst into a Laugh, at what his
Wife said. ‘My dear Creature,’ said he,
how easy is thy Honesty and Simplicity
to be imposed on! how little dost thou
guess at the Art and Falsehood of Women! 
I knew a young Lady, who against
her Father's Consent, was married to a
Brother Officer of mine. And as I often
used to walk with her, (for I knew her
Father intimately well) she would of her 

own Accord take frequent Occasions to
ridicule and vilify her Husband (for so he
was at the time) and express great Wonder
and Indignation at the Report which she
allowed to prevail, that she should condescend
ever to look at such a Fellow,
with any other Design than of laughing
at, and despising him. The Marriage
afterwards became publicly owned, and
the Lady was reputably brought to Bed. 
Since which, I have often seen her; nor
hath she ever appeared to be in the least
ashamed of what she had formerly said,
tho' indeed I believe she hates me heartily
for having heard it.’ 
‘But for what Reason,’ cries Amelia,
‘should she deny a Fact, when she must
be so certain of our discovering it, and
that immediately?’ 
‘I can't answer what End she may propose,’ 
said Booth. ‘Sometimes one would
be almost persuaded that there was a Pleasure
in Lying itself. But this I am certain,
that I would believe the honest Serjeant
on his bare Word, sooner than I
would fifty Mrs. Ellisons on Oath. I am
convinced he would not have said what
he did to me, without the strongest Encouragement; 

and, I think, after what
we have been both Witnesses to, it requires
no great Confidence in his Veracity,
to give him an unlimited Credit with regard
to the Lady's Behaviour.’ 
To this Amelia made no Reply; and they
discoursed of other Matters during the Remainder
of a very pleasant Walk. 
When they returned home, Amelia was
surprized to find an Appearance of Disorder
in her Apartment. Several of the Trinkets,
which his Lordship had given the Children,
lay about the Room; and a Suit of her own
Cloaths which she had left in her Drawers,
was now displayed upon the Bed. 
She immediately summoned her little
Girl up Stairs, who, as she plainly perceived
the Moment she came up with a
Candle, had half cried her Eyes out: for
though the Girl had opened the Door to
them, as it was almost dark. she had not
taken any Notice of this Phænomenon in
her Countenance. 
The Girl now fell down upon her Knees,
and cry'd,—‘For Heaven's sake, Madam,
do not be angry with me. Indeed I was 

left alone in the House; and hearing
somebody knock at the Door, I opened
it, I am sure thinking no harm. I did
not know but it might have been you, or
my Master, or Madam Ellison; and immediately
as I did, the Rogue burst in
and ran directly up Stairs, and what he
hath robbed you of I can't tell; but I
am sure I could not help it: for he was
a great swinging Man with a Pistol in
each Hand; and if I had dared to call
out, to be sure he would have killed me. 
I am sure I was never such a Fright in
my born Days, whereof I am hardly
come to myself yet. I believe he is
somewhere about the House yet; for I
never saw him go out.’ 
Amelia discovered some little Alarm at
this Narrative, but much less than many
other Ladies would have shewn: for a
Fright is, I believe, some time laid hold
of as an Opportunity of disclosing several
Charms peculiar to that Occasion. And
which, as Mr. Addison says of certain Virtues, 

—shun the Day, and lie concealed
In the smooth Seasons, and the Calms of Life.

Booth having opened the Window, and
summoned in two Chairmen to his Asistance,
proceeded to search the House; but all to
no purpose; the Thief was flown, though
the poor Girl in her State of Terror had not
seen him escape. 
But now a Circumstance appeared which
greatly surprized both Booth and Amelia; indeed
I believe it will have the same Effect on
the Reader; and this was, that the Thief
had taken nothing with him. He had indeed
tumbled over all Booth and Amelia's
Clothes, and the Childrens Toys, but had
left all behind him. 
Amelia was scarce more pleased than
astonished at this Discovery, and re-examined
the Girl, assuring her of an absolute Pardon,
if she confessed the Truth, but grievously
threatning her if she was found guilty of
the least Falshood. ‘As for a Thief, Child,’ 
says she, ‘that is certainly not true; you
have had somebody with you, to whom
you have been shewing the things; therefore
tell me plainly who it was.’ 
The Girl protested in the solemnest Manner
that she knew not the Person; but as 

to some Circumstances she began to vary a
little from her first Account, particularly as to
the Pistols; concerning which being strictly
examined by Booth she at last cried,—‘To be
sure, Sir, he must have had Pistols about
him.’ And instead of persisting in his having
rushed in upon her, she now confessed,
that he had asked at the Door for her Master
and Mistress; and that at his Desire she
had shewn him up Stairs, where he at first
said he would stay till their Return home; 
‘but indeed,’ cry'd she, ‘I thought no
harm; for he looked like a Gentleman-like
sort of Man. And indeed so I thought
he was for a good while, whereof he sat
down and behaved himself very civilly,
till he saw some of Master's and Miss's
Things upon the Chest of Drawers; 
whereof he cry'd, heyday! what's here?
and then he fell to tumbling about the
things like any mad. Then I thinks,
thinks I to myself to be sure he's a Highwayman,
whereof I did not dare speak to
him: for I knew Madam Ellison and her
Maid was gone out, and what could
such a poor Girl as I do against a great
strong Man? And besides, thinks I, to
be sure he hath got Pistols about him,
though I can't indeed, (that I will not do
for the World,) take my Bible-Oath that 

I saw any; yet to be sure he would have
soon pulled them out, and shot me dead,
if I had ventured to have said any thing
to offend him.’ 
‘I know not what to make of this,’ cries
Booth. ‘The poor Girl I verily believe
speaks to the best of her Knowledge. 
A Thief it could not be; for he hath not
taken the least thing; and it is plain he
had the Girl's Watch in his Hand. —If it
had been a Bailiff, surely he would have
staid till our Return. I can conceive no
other from the Girl's Account, than that
it must have been some Madman.’— 
‘O good Sir,’ said the Girl, ‘now you
mention it, if he was not a Thief, to be sure
he must have been a Madman; for indeed
he looked and behaved himself too, very
much like a Madman: For now I remember
it, he talked to himself, and
said many strange kind of Words, that
I did not understand. Indeed he looked
altogether as I have seen People in Bedlam; 
besides, if he was not a Madman,
what good could it do him to throw the
Things all about the Room, in such a
Manner? And he said something too about
my Master, just before he went down 

Stairs, I was in such a Fright, I can't
remember particularly; but I am sure
they were very ill Words, he said he
would do for him, I am sure he said that,
and other wicked bad Words too, if I
could but think of them.’ 
‘Upon my word,’ said Booth, ‘this is
the most probable Conjecture; but still I
am puzzled to conceive who it should be: 
For I have no Madman to my Knowledge
of my Acquaintance; and it seems, as
the Girl says, he asked for me.’ He then
turned to the Child, and asked her if she
was certain of that Circumstance. 
The poor Maid after a little Hesitation,
answered. ‘Indeed, Sir, I cannot be very
positive; for the Fright he threw me into
afterwards drove every thing almost out
of my Mind.’ 
‘Well, whatever he was,’ cries Amelia,
‘I am glad the Consequence is no worse; 
but let this be a Warning to you, little
Betty, and teach you to take more Care
for the future. If ever you should be
left alone in the House again, be sure to
let no Persons in, without first looking out
at the Window, and seeing who they are. 

I promised not to chide you any more on
this Occasion, and I will keep my Word; 
but it is very plain you desired this Person
to walk up into our Apartment, which
was very wrong in our Absence.’ 
Betty was going to answer—but Amelia
would not let her, saying, ‘don't attempt
to excuse yourself; for I mortally hate a
Liar, and can forgive any Fault sooner
than Falsehood.’ 
The poor Girl then submitted; and now
Amelia with her Assistance began to replace
all things in their Order; and little Emily
hugging her Watch with great Fondness
declared she would never part with it any
more. 
Thus ended this odd Adventure, not entirely
to the Satisfaction of Booth: for, besides
his Curiosity, which when thoroughly
roused is a very troublesome Passion, he had
as is, I believe, usual with all Persons in
his Circumstances, several Doubts and Apprehensions
of he knew not what. Indeed
Fear is never more uneasy, than when it
doth not certainly know its Object: for on
such Occasions the Mind is ever employed
in raising a thousand Bugbears and Fantoms, 

much more dreadful than any Realities, and
like Children, when they tell Tales of Hobgoblins,
seems industrious in terrifying itself. 



Containing some Matters not very unnatural. 
Matters were scarce sooner reduced
into Order and Decency, than
a violent Knocking was heard at the Door,
such indeed as would have persuaded any
one not accustomed to the Sound, that the
Madman was returned in the highest Spring-Tide
of his Fury. 
Instead, however, of so disagreeable an
Appearance, a very fine Lady presently came
into the Room, no other indeed than Mrs.
James herself; for she was resolved to shew
Amelia by the speedy Return of her Visit,
how unjust all her Accusation had been of
any Failure in the Duties of Friendship; 
she had moreover another Reason to accelerate
this Visit, and that was, to congratulate
her Friend on the Event of the Duel
between Colonel Bath and Mr. Booth. 

The Lady had so well profited by Mrs.
Booth's Remonstrance, that she had now no
more of that Stiffness and Formality which
she had worn on a former Occasion. On
the contrary, she now behaved with the utmost
Freedom and Good-Humour, and
made herself so very agreeable, that Amelia
was highly pleased and delighted with her
Company. 
An Incident happened during this Visit,
that may appear to some too inconsiderable in
itself to be recorded; and yet, as it certainly
produced a very strong Consequence in the
Mind of Mr. Booth, we cannot prevail on
ourselves to pass it by. 
Little Emily, who was present in the
Room while Mrs. James was there, as she
stood near that Lady, happened to be playing
with her Watch, which she was so
greatly overjoyed had escaped safe from the
Madman. Mrs. James, who exprest great
Fondness for the Child, desired to see the
Watch, which she commended as the prettiest
of the Kind she had ever seen. 
Amelia caught eager hold of this Opportunity
to spread the Praises of her Benefactor. 

She presently acquainted Mrs. James with
the Donor's Name, and ran on with great
Encomiums on his Lordship's Goodness,
and particularly on his Generosity. To
which Mrs. James answered, ‘O certainly,
Madam, his Lordship hath universally
the Character of being extremely generous
—where he likes.’ 
In uttering these Words, she laid a very
strong Emphasis on the three last Monosyllables,
accompanying them at the same
time with a very sagacious Look, a very
significant Leer, and a great Flirt with her
Fan. 
The greatest Genius the World hath ever
produced, observes in one of his most excellent
Plays, that 

—Trifles light as Air
Are to the jealous Confirmations strong
As Proofs of holy Writ.
That Mr. Booth began to be possessed by
this worst of Fiends admits, I think, no
longer doubt; for at this Speech of Mrs.
James, he immediately turned pale, and
from a high Degree of Chearfulness, was
all on a sudden struck dumb, so that he 

spoke not another Word till Mrs. James
left the Room. 
The Moment that Lady drove from the
Door, Mrs. Ellison came up Stairs. She
entered the Room with a Laugh, and very
plentifully rallied both Booth and Amelia
concerning the Madman, of which she had
received a full Account below Stairs; and
at last asked Amelia, if she could not guess
who it was but without receiving an Answer
went on, saying, ‘for my own part,
I fancy it must be some Lover of yours; 
some Person that hath seen you, and so is
run mad with Love. Indeed, I should
not wonder if all Mankind were to do
the same. La! Mr. Booth, what makes
you grave? why, you are as melancholy
as if you had been robbed in earnest. 
Upon my word, tho' to be serious, it is
a strange Story; and as the Girl tells it,
I know not what to make of it. Perhaps
it might be some Rogue that intended to
rob the House, and his Heart failed him; 
yet even that would be very extraordinary. 
What, did you lose nothing, Madam?’ 
‘Nothing at all,’ answered Amelia. ‘He
did not even take the Child's Watch.’ 

‘Well, Captain,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘I
hope you will take more Care of the
House to-morrow; for your Lady and I
shall leave you alone to the Care of it. 
Here, Madam,’ said she, ‘here is a Present
from my Lord to us; here are two
Tickets for the Masquerade at Ranelagh. 
You will be so charmed with it. It is
the sweetest of all Diversions.’ 
‘May I be damned, Madam,’ cries
Booth, ‘if my Wife shall go thither!’ 
Mrs. Ellison stared at these Words, and
indeed so did Amelia: for they were spoke
with great Vehemence. At length the former
cried out with an Air of Astonishment,
‘Not let your Lady go to Ranelagh, Sir?’ 
‘No, Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘I will not
let my Wife go to Ranelagh.’ 
‘You surprize me,’ cries Mrs. Ellison. 
‘Sure you are not in earnest.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ returned he, ‘I am
seriously in earnest. And what is more,
I am convinced she would of her own accord
refuse to go.’ 

‘Now, Madam,’ said Mrs. Ellison, ‘you
are to answer for yourself; and I will for
your Husband, that if you have a Desire
to go he will not refuse you.’ 
‘I hope, Madam,’ answered Amelia
with great Gravity, ‘I shall never desire
to go to any Place contrary to Mr. Booth's
Inclinations.’ 
‘Did ever Mortal hear the like?’ said
Mrs. Ellison, ‘you are enough to spoil the
best Husband in the Unvierse. Inclinations! 
What is a Woman to be governed
then by her Husband's Inclinations, tho'
they are never so unreasonable?’ 
‘Pardon me, Madam,’ said Amelia, ‘I
will not suppose Mr. Booth's Inclinations
ever can be unreasonable. I am very much
obliged to you for the Offer you have
made me; but I beg you will not mention
it any more: for after what Mr. Booth
hath declared, if Ranelagh was a Heaven
upon Earth, I would refuse to go to it.’ 
‘I thank you, my dear,’ cries Booth,
‘I do not assure you, you oblige me beyond
my Power of Expression by what you
say; but I will endeavour to shew you 

both my Sensibility of such Goodness, and
my lasting Gratitude to it.’ 
‘And pray, Sir,’ cries Mrs. Ellison,
‘what can be your Objection to your Lady's
going to a Place, which I will venture to
say is an reputable as any about Town, and
which is frequented by the best Company?’ 
‘Pardon me, good Mrs. Ellison,’ said
Booth. ‘As my Wife is so good to acquiesce
without knowing my Reasons, I am not,
I think, obliged to assign them to any
other Person. We have no Confessors in
England.’ 
‘Well,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘if I had
been told this, I would not have believed
it. What refuse your Lady an innocent
Diversion, and that too when you have
not the Pretence to say it would cost you
a Farthing?’ 
‘Why will you say any more on this
Subject, dear Madam?’ cries Amelia. 
‘All Diversions are to me Matters of
such Indifference, that the bare Inclinations
of any one for whom I have the
least Value, would at all times turn the 

Balance of mine. I am sure then after
what Mr. Booth hath said’— 
‘My dear,’ cries he, ‘taking her up
hastily, I sincerely ask your Pardon, I
spoke inadvertently and in a Passion—I
never once thought of controuling you— 
nor ever would. —Nay, I said in the same
Breath you would not go; and upon my
Honour I meant nothing more.’ 
‘My dear,’ said she, ‘you have no need
of making any Apology. I am not in
the least offended, and am convinced you
will never deny me what I shall desire.’ 
‘Try him, try him, Madam,’ cries Mrs.
Ellison, ‘I will be judged by all the Women
in Town, if it is possible for a Wife to ask
her Husband any thing more reasonable. 
You can't conceive what a sweet, charming,
elegant, delicious Place it is. —Paradise
itself can hardly be equal to it.’ 
‘I beg you will excuse me, Madam,’ 
said Amelia, ‘nay, I intreat you will ask me
no more: for be assured I must and will
refuse—Do let me desire you to give the
Ticket to poor Mrs. Bennet. I believe it
would greatly oblige her.’— 

‘Pardon me, Madam,’ said Mrs. Ellison. 
‘If you will not accept of it, I am not so
distressed for want of Company as to go
to such a public Place with all sort of
People neither. I am always very glad
to see Mrs. Bennet at my own House; because
I look upon her as a very good sort
of Woman; but I don't chuse to be seen
with such People in public Places.’ 
Amelia exprest some little Indignation at
this last Speech, which she declared to be
entirely beyond her Comprehension; and
soon after Mrs. Ellison, finding all her Efforts
to prevail on Amelia were ineffectual,
took her Leave, giving Mr. Booth two or
three sarcastical Words, and a much more
sarcastical Look at her Departure. 




A Scene, in which some Ladies will possibly
think Amelia's Conduct exceptionable. 
Booth and his Wife being left alone,
a solemn Silence prevailed during a few
Minutes. At last Amelia, who though a
good, was yet a human Creature, said to
her Husband, ‘Pray, my dear, do inform
me, what could put you into so great a
Passion when Mrs. Ellison first offered me
the Tickets for this Masquerade?’ 
‘I had rather you would not ask me,’ 
said Booth. ‘You have obliged me greatly
in your ready Acquiescence with my
Desire, and you will add greatly to the
Obligation by not enquiring the Reason of
it. This you may depend upon, Amelia,
that your Good and Happiness are the
great Objects of all my Wishes, and the
End I propose in all my Actions. This
View alone could tempt me to refuse you
any thing, or to conceal any thing from
you.’ 
‘I will appeal to yourself,’ answered
she, ‘whether this be not using me too much 

like a Child, and whether I can possibly
help being a little offended at it.’ 
‘Not in the least,’ replied he. ‘I use
you only with the Tenderness of a Friend. 
I would only endeavour to conceal that
from you, which I think would give you
Uneasiness if you knew. These are called
the pious Frauds of Friendship.’ 
‘I detest all Fraud,’ says she; ‘and pious
is too good an Epithet to be joined to so
odious a Word. You have often, you
know, tried these Frauds with no better
Effect than to teize and torment me. 
You cannot imagine, my Dear, but that
I must have a violent Desire to know the
Reason of Words, which, I own, I never
expected to have heard. And the more
you have shewn a Reluctance to tell me,
the more eagerly I have longed to know. 
Nor can this be called a vain Curiosity; 
since I seem so much interested in this
Affair. If after all this, you still insist
on keeping the Secret, I will convince
you, I am not ignorant of the Duty of a
Wife, by my Obedience; but I cannot
help telling you at the same time, you
will make me one of the most miserable
of Women.’ 

‘That is,’ cries he, ‘in other Words,
my dear Emily, to say, I will be contented
without the Secret; but I am resolved to
know it nevertheless.’ 
‘Nay, if you say so,’ cries she, ‘I am
convinced you will tell me—Positively,
dear Billy, I must and will know.’ 
‘Why then positively,’ says Booth, ‘I
will tell you. And I think I shall then
shew you, that however well you may
know the Duty of a Wife, I am not always
able to behave like a Husband. In
a word then, my Dear, the Secret is no
more than this; I am unwilling you
should receive any more Presents from
my Lord.’ 
‘Mercy upon me!’ cries she, with all the
Marks of Astonishment—‘what a Masquerade
Ticket’— 
‘Yes, my Dear,’ cries she, ‘that is
perhaps the very worst and most dangerous
of all. Few Men make Presents of
those Tickets to Ladies, without intending
to meet them at the Place. And
what do we know of your Companion. 

To be sincere with you, I have not liked
her Behaviour for some Time. What
might be the Consequence of going with
such a Woman to such a Place, to meet
such a Person, I tremble to think—And
now, my Dear, I have told you my Reason
of refusing her Offer with some little
Vehemence, and, I think, I need explain
myself no farther.’ 
‘You need not indeed, Sir,’ answered
she. ‘Good Heavens! did I ever expect
to hear this! I can appeal to Heaven,
nay, I will appeal to yourself, Mr. Booth,
if I have ever done any thing to deserve
such a Suspicion. If ever any Action of
mine, nay, if ever any Thought had
stained the Innocence of my Soul, I could
be contented.’ 
‘How cruelly do you mistake me,’ said
Booth—‘what Suspicion have I ever shewn?’ 
‘Can you ask it,’ answered she, ‘after
what you have just now declared?’ 
‘If I have declared any Suspicion of
you,’ replied he, ‘or if ever I entertained
a Thought leading that way, may
the worst of Evils that ever afflicted human 

Nature attend me. I know the pure
Innocence of that tender Bosom, I do
know it, my lovely Angel, and adore it. 
The Snares which might be laid for that
Innocence, were alone the Cause of my
Apprehension. I feared what a wicked
and voluptuous Man, resolved to sacrifice
every thing to the Gratification of a sensual
Appetite with the most delicious Repast,
might attempt. If ever I injured the unspotted
Whiteness of thy Virtue in my
Imagination, may Hell’— 
‘Do not terrify me,’ cries she interrupting
him, ‘with such Imprecations. 
O Mr. Booth, Mr. Booth, you must well
know that a Woman's Virtue is always
her sufficient Guard. No Husband without
suspecting that can suspect any Danger
from those Snares you mention—And
why, if you are liable to take such things
into your Head, may not your Suspicions
fall on me, as well as on any other? for
sure nothing was ever more unjust, I will
not say ungrateful, than the Suspicions
which you have bestowed on his Lordship. 
I do solemnly declare, in all the times I
have seen the poor Man, he hath never
once offered the least Forwardness. His
Behaviour hath been polite indeed, but 

rather remarkably distant than otherwise. 
Particularly when we played at Cards together. 
I don't remember he spoke ten
Words to me all the Evening; and when
I was at his House, tho' he shewed the
greatest Fondness imaginable to the Children,
he took so little Notice of me, that
a vain Woman would have been very little
pleased with him. And if he gave them
many Presents, he never offered me one. 
The first indeed which he ever offered me
was that, which you in that kind manner
forced me to refuse.’ 
‘All this may be only the Effect of Art,’ 
said Booth. ‘I am convinced he doth, nay
I am convinced he must like you; and
my good Friend James, who perfectly
well knows the World, told me, that his
Lordship's Character was that of the most
profuse in his Pleasures with Women; 
nay, what said Mrs. James this very Evening,
“his Lordship is extremely generous
—where he likes.” I shall never forget
the Sneer with which she spoke those last
Words.’ 
‘I am convinced they injure him,’ cries
Amelia. ‘As for Mrs. James, she was always
given to be censorious. I remarked 

it in her long ago, as her greatest Fault. 
And for the Colonel, I believe, he may
find Faults enow of this kind in his own
Bosom, without searching after them among
his Neighbours. I am sure he hath
the most impudent Look of all the Men
I know; and I solemnly declare, the very
last time he was here, he put me out of
Countenance more than once.’ 
‘Colonel James,’ answered Booth, ‘may
have his Faults very probably. I do not
look upon him as a Saint, nor do I believe
he desires I should; but what Interest
could he have in abusing this Lord's Character
to me: or why should I question
his Truth, when he assured me that my
Lord had never done an Act of Beneficence
in his Life, but for the Sake of some Woman
whom he lusted after?’ 
‘Then I myself can confute him,’ replied
Amelia: ‘for besides his Services to you,
which for the future I shall wish to forget,
and his Kindness to my little Babes,
how inconsistent is the Character which
James gives of him, with his Lordship's
Behaviour to his own Nephew and Niece,
whose extreme Fondness of their Uncle
sufficiently proclaims his Goodness to them: 

—I need not mention all that I have heard
from Mrs. Ellison, every Word of which
I believe: for I have great Reason to
think, notwithstanding some little Levity,
which to give her her due she sees and
condemns in herself, she is a very good
Sort of Woman.’ 
‘Well, my dear,’ cries Booth, ‘I may
have been deceived, and I heartily hope I
am so; but in Cases of this Nature it is
always good to be on the surest Side: For
as Congreve says, 

‘The wise too jealous are. Fools too secure.’
Here Amelia burst into Tears, upon which
Booth immediately caught her in his Arms,
and endeavoured to comfort her. —Passion
however for a while obstructed her Speech,
and at last she cried,—‘O Mr. Booth, can
I bear to hear the word Jealousy from
your Mouth?’ 
‘Why, my Love,’ said Booth, ‘will you
so fatally misunderstand my Meaning? 
How often shall I protest that it is not of
you, but of him that I was jealous. If
you could look into my Breast, and there 

read all the most secret Thoughts of my
Heart, you would not see one faint Idea
to your Dishonour.’ 
‘I don't misunderstand you, my Dear,’ 
said she, ‘so much as I am afraid you misunderstand
yourself. What is it you fear?
—you mention not Force but Snares. Is
not this to confess, at least, that you have
some doubt of my Understanding? Do
you then really imagine me so weak as to
be cheated of my Virtue? Am I to be
deceived into an Affection for a Man,
before I perceive the least inward Hint of
my Danger? No, Mr. Booth, believe me
a Woman must be a Fool indeed, who
can have in earnest such an Excuse for her
Actions. I have not, I think, any very
high Opinion of my Judgment; but so
far I shall rely upon it, that no Man
breathing could have any such Designs
as you have apprehended, without my
immediately seeing them; and how I
should then act, I hope my whole Conduct
to you hath sufficiently declared.’ 
‘Well, my dear,’ cries Booth, ‘I beg
you will mention it no more, if possible
forget it. I hope, nay I believe, I have
been in the Wrong, pray forgive me.’— 

‘I will, I do forgive you, my dear,’ 
said she. ‘If Forgiveness be a proper
Word for one whom you have rather
made miserable than angry; but let me
entreat you to banish for ever all such
Suspicions from your Mind. I hope Mrs.
Ellison hath not discovered the real Cause
of your Passion; but poor Woman, if
she had, I am convinced it would go no
farther. Oh Heavens! I would not for
the World it should reach his Lordship's
Ears. You would lose the best Friend
that ever Man had. Nay, I would not
for his own Sake. Poor Man! for I really
believe it would affect him greatly,
and I must, I cannot help having an
Esteem for so much Goodness. An Esteem
which by this dear Hand,’ said
she, taking Booth's Hand and kissing it,
‘no Man alive shall ever obtain by making
Love to me.’ 
Booth caught her in his Arms and tenderly
embraced her. After which the Reconciliation
soon became complete; and Booth
in the Contemplation of his Happiness entirely
buried all his jealous Thoughts. 




A Chapter in which there is much Learning. 
The next Morning whilst Booth was
gone to take his Morning-walk, Amelia
went down into Mrs. Ellison's Apartment,
where though she was received with
great Civility, yet she found that Lady was
not at all pleased with Mr. Booth; and
by some Hints which dropt from her in
Conversation, Amelia very greatly apprehended
that Mrs. Ellison had too much
Suspicion of her Husband's real Uneasiness. 
For that Lady declared very openly, she
could not help perceiving what sort of Man
Mr. Booth was; ‘and though I have the
greatest Regard for you, Madam, in the
World,’ said she, ‘yet I think myself in
Honour obliged not to impose on his
Lordship, who, I know very well, hath
conceived his greatest Liking to the Captain,
on my telling him that he was the
best Husband in the World.’ 
Amelia's Fears gave her much Disturbance,
and when her Husband returned,
she acquainted him with them; upon which 

Occasion, as it was natural, she resumed a
little the Topic of their former Discourse,
nor could she help casting, tho' in very
gentle Terms, some slight Blame on Booth,
for having entertained a Suspicion, which
she said, might in its Consequence very
possibly prove their Ruin, and occasion the
Loss of his Lordship's Friendship. 
Booth became highly affected with what
his Wife said, and the more as he had just
received a Note from Col. James, informing
him that the Colonel had heard of a vacant
Company in the Regiment which Booth had
mentioned to him, and that he had been
with his Lordship about it, who had promised
to use his utmost Interest to obtain
him the Command. 
The poor Man now exprest the utmost
Concern for his Yesterday's Behaviour, said,
‘he believed the Devil had taken Possession
of him,’ and concluded with crying out,
‘sure I was born, my dearest Creature, to
be your Torment.’ 
Amelia no sooner saw her Husband's Distress,
than she instantly forebore whatever
might seem likely to aggravate it, and applied
herself with all her Power to comfort 

him. ‘If you will give me leave to offer
my Advice, my dearest Soul,’ said she,
‘I think all might yet be remedied. I
think you know me too well, to suspect
that the Desire of Diversion should induce
me to mention, what I am now going to
propose. And in that Confidence, I will
ask you to let me accept my Lord's and
Mrs. Ellison's Offer, and go to the Masquerade. 
No matter how little while I
stay there: if you desire it, I will not be
an Hour from you. I can make a hundred
Excuses to come home, or tell a
real Truth, and say I am tired with the
Place. The bare going will cure every
Thing.’ 
Amelia had no sooner done speaking, than
Booth immediately approved her Advice,
and readily gave his Consent. He could
not however help saying, ‘that the shorter
her Stay was there, the more agreeable
it would be to him: For you know, my
dear,’ said he, ‘I would never willingly
be a Moment out of your Sight.’ 
In the Afternoon Amelia sent to invite
Mrs. Ellison to a Dish of Tea; and Booth
undertook to laugh off all that had past
Yesterday, in which Attempt, the abundant 

good Humour of that Lady gave him
great Hopes of Success. 
Mrs. Bennet came that Afternoon to
make a Visit, and was almost an Hour
with Booth and Amelia, before the Entry
of Mrs. Ellison. 
Mr. Booth had hitherto rather disliked
this young Lady, and had wondered at the
Pleasure which Amelia declared she took in
her Company. This Afternoon, however,
he changed his Opinion, and liked her almost
as much as his Wife had done. She
did indeed behave at this Time with more
than ordinary Gaiety; and Good-humour
gave a Glow to her Countenance that set
off her Features, which were very pretty,
to the best Advantage, and lessened the
Deadness that had usually appeared in her
Complexion. 
But if Booth was now pleased with Mrs.
Bennet, Amelia was still more pleased with
her than ever. For when their Discourse
turned on Love, Amelia discovered that
her new Friend had all the same Sentiments
on that Subject with herself. In the Course
of their Conversation, Booth gave Mrs.
Bennet a Hint of wishing her a good Husband, 

upon which both the Ladies declaimed
against second Marriages, with equal
Vehemence. 
Upon this Occasion, Booth and his Wife
discovered a Talent in their Visitant, to
which they had been before entirely Strangers,
and for which they both greatly admired
her; and this was that the Lady was
a good Scholar, in which indeed she had
the Advantage of poor Amelia, whose Reading
was confined to English Plays, and
Poetry; besides which, I think, she had conversed
only with the Divinity of the great
and learned Dr. Barrow, and with the Histories
of the excellent Bishop Burnet, almost
the only English Historian that is likely
to be known to Posterity, by whom he
will be most certainly ranked amongst the
greatest Writers of Antiquity. 
Amelia delivered herself on the Subject
of second Marriages with much Eloquence
and great good Sense; but when Mrs. Bennet
came to give her Opinion, she spoke
in the following Manner, ‘I shall not
enter into the Question concerning the
Legality of Bigamy. Our Laws certainly
allow it, and so, I think, doth our
Religion. We are now debating only on 

the Decency of it, and in this Light, I
own myself as strenuous an Advocate against
it, as any Roman Matron would
have been in those Ages of the Commonwealth,
when it was held to be infamous. 
For my own part, how great a Paradox
soever my Opinion may seem, I solemnly
declare, I see but little Difference between
having two Husbands at one time, and at
several times; and of this I am very confident,
that the same Degree of Love for
a first Husband, which preserves a Woman
in the one Case, will preserve her in
the other. There is one Argument, which
I scarce know how to deliver before you,
Sir; but—if a Woman hath lived with
her first Husband without having Children,
I think it unpardonable in her to
carry Barrenness into a second Family. 
On the contrary, if she hath Children by
her first Husband, to give them a second
Father is still more unpardonable.’ 
‘But suppose, Madam,’ cries Booth, interrupting
her, with a Smile, ‘she should
have had Children by her first Husband,
and have lost them.’ 

‘That is a Case,’ answered she, with a
Sigh, ‘which I did not desire to think of,
and, I must own it, the most favourable
Light in which a second Marriage can be
seen. But the Scriptures, as Petrarch observes,
rather suffer them than commend
them; and St. Jerom speaks against them
with the utmost Bitterness.’ ‘I remember,’ 
cries Booth, (‘who was willing either
to shew his Learning, or to draw out
the Lady's,) a very wise Law of Charondas
the famous Lawgiver of Thurium, by
which Men, who married a second time,
were removed from all public Councils:
for it was scarce reasonable to suppose,
that he who was so great a Fool in his
own Family, should be wise in public
Affairs. And tho' second Marriages were
permitted among the Romans, yet they
were at the same time discouraged; and
those Roman Widows who refused them,
were held in high Esteem, and honoured
with what Valerius Maximus calls the Corona
Pudicitiæ. In the noble Family of
Camilli, there was not, in many Ages, a
single Instance of this, which Martial calls
Adultery. 

Quæ toties nubit, non nubit, Adultera Lege est.’ 

‘True, Sir, says Mrs. Bennet, and Virgil
calls this a Violation of Chastity, and
makes Dido speak of it with the utmost
Detestation. 

Sed mihi vel Tellus optem prius ima dehiscat;
Vel Pater omnipotens adigat me Fulmine ad umbras,
Pallentes umbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante, pudor, quam te violo, aut tua Jura resolvo.
Ille meos, primum qui me sibi junxit, amores
Ille habeat semper secum, servetque Sepulchro.’ 
She repeated these Lines with so strong
an Emphasis, that she almost frightned Amelia
out of her Wits, and not a little staggered
Booth, who was himself no contemptible
Scholar—He expressed great Admiration
of the Lady's Learning; upon which
she said it was all the Fortune given her by
her Father, and all the Dower left her by
her Husband; ‘and sometimes,’ said she, ‘I
am inclined to think I enjoy more Pleasure
from it, than if they had bestowed 

on me what the World would in general
call more valuable.’ She then took
Occasion from the Surprize which Booth
had affected to conceive at her repeating
Latin with so good a Grace, to comment
on that great Absurdity, (for so she termed
it,) of excluding Women from Learning; 
for which they were equally qualified with
the Men, and in which so many had made
so notable a Proficiency: for a Proof of
which, she mentioned Madam Dacier, and
many others. 
Tho' both Booth and Amelia outwardly
concurred with her Sentiments, it may be a
Question whether they did not assent rather
out of Complaisance, than from their real
Judgment. 




Containing some unaccountable Behaviour in
Mrs. Ellison. 
Mrs. Ellison made her Entrance at
the End of the preceding Discourse. 
At her first Appearance she put on an unusual
Degree of Formality and Reserve; but
when Amelia had acquainted her that she designed
to accept the Favour intended her,
she soon began to alter the Gravity of her
Muscles, and presently fell in with that
Ridicule which Booth thought proper to
throw on his Yesterday's Behaviour. 
The Conversation now became very lively
and pleasant, in which Booth having mentioned
the Discourse that passed in the last
Chapter, and having greatly complimented
Mrs. Bennet's Speech on that Occasion, Mrs.
Ellison who was as strenuous an Advocate
on the other Side, began to rally that
Lady extremely, declaring it was a certain
Sign she intended to marry again soon. 
‘Married Ladies,’ cries she, ‘I believe,
sometimes think themselves in earnest in
such Declarations, tho' they are oftner perhaps
meant as Compliments to their Husbands; 

but when Widows exclaim loudly
against second Marriages, I would
always lay a Wager, that the Man, if
not the Wedding-day, is absolutely fixed
on.’ 
Mrs. Bennet made very little Answer to
this Sarcasm. Indeed she had scarce opened
her Lips from the Time of Mrs. Ellison's
coming into the Room, and had grown
particularly grave at the Mention of the
Masquerade. Amelia imputed this to her
being left out of the Party, a Matter which
is often no small Mortification to human
Pride, and in a Whisper asked Mrs. Ellison
if she could not procure a third Ticket; to
which she received an absolute Negative. 
During the whole Time of Mrs. Bennet's
Stay, which was above an Hour afterwards,
she remained perfectly silent, and looked
extremely melancholy. This made Amelia
very uneasy, as she concluded she had guest
the Cause of her Vexation. In which Opinion
she was the more confirmed from
certain Looks of no very pleasant Kind,
which Mrs. Bennet now and then cast on
Mrs. Ellison, and the more than ordinary
Concern that appeared in the former Lady's
Countenance, whenever the Masquerade was 

mentioned, and which unfortunately was the
principal Topic of their Discourse: For Mrs.
Ellison gave a very elaborate Description of
the extreme Beauty of the Place, and Elegance
of the Diversion. 
When Mrs. Bennet was departed, Amelia
could not help again solliciting Mrs. Ellison
for another Ticket, declaring she was certain
Mrs. Bennet had a great Inclination to
go with them; but Mrs. Ellison again excused
herself from asking it of his Lordship. 
‘Besides, Madam,’ says she, ‘if I would
go thither with Mrs. Bennet, which, I own
to you, I don't chuse, as she is a Person
whom no Body knows, I very much
doubt whether she herself would like it: 
For she is a Woman of a very unaccountable
Turn. All her Delight lies in
Books; and as for public Diversions, I
have heard her often declare her Abhorrence
of them.’ 
‘What then,’ said Amelia, ‘could occasion
all that Gravity from the Moment
the Masquerade was mentioned?’ 
‘As to that,’ answered the other, ‘there
is no guessing. You have seen her altogether
as grave before now. She hath 

had these Fits of Gravity at times ever
since the Death of her Husband.’ 
‘Poor Creature!’ cries Amelia. ‘I
heartily pity her. For she must certainly
suffer a great deal on these Occasions. 
I declare I have taken a strange Fancy
to her.’ 
‘Perhaps you would not like her so
well, if you knew her thoroughly,’ answered
Mrs. Ellison. ‘She is upon the
whole but of a whimsical Temper; and, if
you will take my Opinion, you should not
cultivate too much Intimacy with her. 
I know you will never mention what I
say; but she is like some Pictures which
please best at a Distance.’ 
Amelia did not seem to agree with these
Sentiments, and she greatly importuned
Mrs. Ellison to be more explicit; but to
no purpose; she continued to give only
dark Hints to Mrs. Bennet's Disadvantge; 
and, if ever she let drop something a little
too harsh, she failed not immediately to
contradict herself, by throwing some gentle
Commendations into the other Scale; so
that her Conduct appeared utterly unaccountable
to Amelia, and upon the whole, 

she knew not whether to conclude Mrs.
Ellison to be a Friend or Enemy to Mrs.
Bennet. 
During this latter Conversation Booth was
not in the Room: For he had been summoned
down stairs by the Serjeant, who
came to him with News from Murphy whom
he had met that Evening, and who had
assured the Serjeant, that if he was desirous
of recovering the Debt, and which he
had before pretended to have on Booth, he
might shortly have an Opportunity; for
that there was to be a very strong Petition
to the Board, the next Time they sat. 
Murphy said further, that he need not fear
having his Money: For that to his certain
Knowledge the Captain had several Things
of great Value, and even his Children had
Gold-Watches. 
This greatly alarmed Booth, and still
more, when the Serjeant reported to him
from Murphy, that all these Things had
been seen in his Possession within a Day
last past. He now plainly perceived, as
he thought, that Murphy himself, or one
of his Emissaries, had been the supposed
Madman; and he now very well accounted
to himself in his own Mind, for all that 

had happened, conceiving that the Design
was to examine into the State of his Effects,
and to try whether it was worth his Creditors
while to plunder him by Law. 
At his Return to his Apartment, he
communicated what he had heard to Amelia
and Mrs. Ellison, not disguising his Apprehensions
of the Enemy's Intentions; 
but Mrs. Ellison endeavoured to laugh him
out of his Fears, calling him faint-hearted,
and assuring him he might depend on her
Lawyer. —‘Till you hear from him,’ said
she, ‘you may rest entirely contented: 
For take my Word for it, no Danger
can happen to you, of which you will not
be timely apprized by him. And as for
the Fellow that had the Impudence to
come into your Room, if he was sent
on such an Errand as you mention, I
heartily wish I had been at home; I
would have secured him safe with a
Constable, and have carried him directly
before Justice Thresher. I know the Justice
is an Enemy to Bailiffs on his own
account.’ 
This heartening Speech a little roused
the Courage of Booth, and somewhat comforted
Amelia, tho' the Spirits of both had 

been too much hurried, to suffer them
either to give or receive much Entertainment
that Evening; which Mrs. Ellison
perceiving soon took her Leave, and left
this unhappy Couple to seek Relief from
Sleep, that powerful Friend to the Distressed,
tho' like other powerful Friends,
he is not always ready to give his Assistance
to those who want it most. 




Containing a very strange Incident. 
When the Husband and Wife were
alone, they again talked over the
News which the Serjeant had brought; on
which Occasion, Amelia did all she could to
conceal her own Fears, and to quiet those
of her Husband. At last she turned the
Conversation to another Subject, and poor
Mrs. Bennet was brought on the Carpet. 
‘I should be sorry,’ cries Amelia, ‘to find
I had conceived an Affection for a bad
Woman; and yet I begin to fear Mrs. Ellison
knows something of her more than
she cares to discover; why else should she
be unwilling to be seen with her in Public? 
Besides, I have observed that Mrs.
Ellison hath been always backward to introduce
her to me, nor would ever bring
her to my Apartment, though I have
often desired her. Nay, she hath given
me frequent Hints not to cultivate the
Acquaintance. What do you think, my
dear? —I should be very sorry to contract
an Intimacy with a wicked Person.’ 

‘Nay, my dear,’ cries Booth, ‘I know
no more of her, nor indeed hardly so
much as yourself. But this I think, that
if Mrs. Ellison knows any Reason why
she should not have introduced Mrs. Bennet
into your Company, she was very
much in the wrong in introducing her
into it.’ 
In Discourses of this kind they past the
Remainder of the Evening. In the Morning
Booth rose early, and going down Stairs
received from little Betty a sealed Note,
which contained the following Words: 

Beware, beware, beware,
For I apprehend a dreadful Snare
Is laid for virtuous Innocence,
Under a Friend's false Pretence.
Booth immediately enquired of the Girl
who brought this Note, and was told it
came by a Chairman, who having delivered
it departed without saying a Word. 
He was extremely staggered at what he
read, and presently referred the Advice to
the same Affair on which he had received
those Hints from Atkinson the preceding 

Evening; but when he came to consider
the Words more maturely, he could not so
well reconcile the two last Lines of this
poetical Epistle, if it may be so called,
with any Danger which the Law gave him
Reason to apprehend. Mr. Murphy and
his Gang could not well be said to attack
either his Innocence or Virtue; nor did they
attack him under any Colour or Pretence
of Friendship. 
After much Deliberation on this Matter,
a very strange Suspicion came into his
Head; and this was, that he was betrayed
by Mrs. Ellison. He had for some time
conceived no very high Opinion of that
good Gentlewoman, and he now began to
suspect that she was bribed to betray him. 
By this means he thought he could best account
for the strange Appearance of the
supposed Madman. And when this Conceit
once had Birth in his Mind, several
Circumstances nourished and improved it. 
Among these were her jocose Behaviour
and Raillery on that Occasion, and her
Attempt to ridicule his Fears from the
Message which the Serjeant had brought
him. 

This Suspicion was indeed preposterous,
and not at all warranted by, or even consistent
with the Character and whole Behaviour
of Mrs. Ellison; but it was the only
one which at that time suggested itself to
his Mind; and however blameable it might
be, it was certainly not unnatural in him
to entertain it: for so great a Torment
is Anxiety to the human Mind, that we
always endeavour to relieve ourselves from
it, by Guesses however doubtful or uncertain; 
on all which Occasions Dislike and
Hatred are the surest Guides to lead our
Suspicion to its Object. 
When Amelia rose to Breakfast, Booth
produced the Note which he had received,
saying, ‘my Dear, you have so often blamed
me for keeping Secrets from you, and I
have so often indeed endeavoured to conceal
Secrets of this Kind from you with
such ill Success, that, I think, I shall
never more attempt it.’ Amelia read the
Letter hastily, and seemed not a little discomposed; 
then turning to Booth with
a very disconsolate Countenance she said,
‘sure Fortune takes a Delight in terrifying
us! what can be the Meaning of this?’ — 
Then fixing her Eyes attentively on the 

Paper, she perused it for some time, till
Booth cried—‘How is it possible, my
Emily, you can read such Stuff patiently! 
The Verses are certainly as bad as ever
were written.’ ‘I was trying, my Dear,’ 
answered she, ‘to recollect the Hand; for
I will take my Oath, I have seen it before,
and that very lately’—and suddenly
she cried out with great Emotion, I remember
it perfectly now—‘It is Mrs.
Bennet's Hand. Mrs. Ellison shewed me
a Letter from her but a Day or two ago. 
It is a very remarkable Hand, and I am
positive it is her's.’ 
‘If it be her's,’ cries Booth, ‘what can
she possibly mean by the latter Part of
her Caution? Sure Mrs. Ellison hath no
Intention to betray us.’ 
‘I know not what she means,’ answered
Amelia, ‘but I am resolved to know immediately; 
for I am certain of the Hand. 
By the greatest Luck in the World, she
told me Yesterday where her Lodgings
were, when she pressed me exceedingly to
come and see her. She lives but a very
few Doors from us, and I will go to her
this Moment.’ 

Booth made not the least Objection to his
Wife's Design. His Curiosity was indeed
as great as her's, and so was his Impatience
to satisfy it, tho' he mentioned not this his
Impatience to Amelia; and perhaps it had
been well for him if he had. 
Amelia therefore presently equipped herself
in her walking Dress, and leaving her
Children to the Care of her Husband, made
all possible Haste to Mrs. Bennet's Lodgings. 
Amelia waited near five Minutes at Mrs.
Bennet's Door, before any one came to open
it; at length a Maid-Servant appeared, who
being asked if Mrs. Bennet was at home,
answered with some Confusion in her Countenance,
that she did not know; ‘but, Madam,’ 
said she, ‘if you will send up your
Name; I will go and see.’ Amelia then
told her Name, and the Wench, after staying
a considerable Time, returned and acquainted
her that Mrs. Bennet was at home. 
She was then ushered into a Parlour, and told
that the Lady would wait on her presently. 
In this Parlour, Amelia cooled her Heels,
as the Phrase is, near a Quarter of an Hour. 
She seemed indeed at this Time, in the 

miserable Situation of one of those poor
Wretches, who make their Morning Visits
to the Great, to solicit Favours, or perhaps
to solicit the Payment of a Debt:
for both are alike treated as Beggars, and
the latter sometimes considered as the more
troublesome Beggars of the two. 
During her Stay here, Amelia observed
the House to be in great Confusion; a great
Bustle was heard above Stairs, and the Maid
ran up and down several Times in a great
Hurry. 
At length Mrs.Bennet herself came in. 
She was greatly disordered in her Looks,
and had, as the Women call it, huddled on
her Cloaths in much Haste; for in truth,
she was in Bed when Amelia first came. Of
this Fact she informed her, as the only
Apology she could make for having caused
her to wait so long for her Company. 
Amelia very readily accepted her Apology,
but asked her with a Smile, if these
early Hours were usual with her. Mrs.
Bennet turned as red as Scarlet at the Question,
and answered, ‘no indeed, dear Madam. 
I am, for the most part, a very 

early Riser; but I happened accidentally
to sit up very late last Night. I am sure
I had little Expectation of your intending
me such a Favour this Morning.’ 
Amelia looking very stedfastly at her,
said. ‘Is it possible, Madam, you should
think such a Note as this would raise no
Curiosity in me?’ She then gave her
the Note, asking her if she did not know
the Hand. 
Mrs. Bennet appeared in the utmost Surprize
and Confusion at this Instant. Indeed
if Amelia had conceived but the slightest
Suspicion before, the Behaviour of the Lady
would have been a sufficient Confirmation to
her of the Truth. She waited not therefore
for an Answer, which indeed the other seemed
in no haste to give; but conjured her in
the most earnest Manner, to explain to her
the Meaning of so extraordinary an Act of
Friendship: ‘For so,’ said she, ‘I esteem
it; being convinced you must have sufficient
Reason for the Warning you have
given me.’ 
Mrs. Bennet after some Hesitation, answered. 
‘I need not, I believe, tell you 

how much I am surprized at what you
have shewn me, and the chief Reason
of my Surprize is; how you came to
discover my Hand. Sure, Madam, you
have not shewn it to Mrs. Ellison.’ 
Amelia declared she had not; but desired
she would question her no farther. ‘What
signifies how I discovered it, since your
Hand it certainly is?’ 
‘I own it is,’ cries Mrs. Bennet, recovering
her Spirits, ‘and since you have
not shewn it to that Woman, I am satisfied. 
I begin to guess now whence you
might have your Information; but no
matter, I wish I had never done any
thing of which I ought be more ashamed. 
—No one can, I think, justly accuse
me of a Crime on that account; and I
thank Heaven, my Shame will never be
directed by the false Opinion of the World. 
—Perhaps it was wrong to shew my Letter; 
but when I consider all Circumstances,
I can forgive it.’ 
‘Since you have guessed the Truth,’ 
said Amelia, ‘I am not obliged to deny
it. She indeed shewed me your Letter; 

but I am sure you have not the
least Reason to be ashamed of it. On
the contrary, your Behaviour on so melancholy
an Occasion was highly Praise-worthy; 
and your bearing up under such
Afflictions, as the Loss of a Husband
in so dreadful a Situation, was truly great
and heroical.’ 
‘So Mrs. Ellison then hath shewn you
my Letter?’ cries Mrs. Bennet eagerly. 
‘Why, did not you guess it yourself?’ 
answered Amelia, ‘otherwise I am sure I
have betrayed my Honour in mentioning it. 
I hope you have not drawn me inadvertent
into any Breach of my Promise. Did
you not assert, and that with an absolute
Certainty, that you knew she had shewn
me your Letter, and that you was not
angry with her for so doing?’ 
‘I am so confused,’ replied Mrs. Bennet,
‘that I scarce know what I say; yes,
yes, I remember I did say so—I wish
I had no greater Reason to be angry with
her than that.’ 
‘For Heaven's sake,’ cries Amelia, ‘do
not delay my Request any longer? What 

you say now greatly increases my Curiosity; 
and my Mind will be on the Rack
till you discover your whole Meaning:
for I am more and more convinced, that
something of the utmost Importance was
the Purport of your Message.’ 
‘Of the utmost Importance indeed,’ cries
Mrs. Bennet, ‘at least you will own my Apprehensions
were sufficiently well founded
—O gracious Heaven, how happy shall I
think myself, if I should have proved
your Preservation! I will indeed explain
my Meaning; but in order to disclose all
my Fears in their just Colours, I must
unfold my whole History to you. Can
you have Patience, Madam, to listen to
the Story of the most unfortunate of Women?’ 
Amelia assured her of the highest Attention; 
and Mrs. Bennet soon after began to
relate what is written in the Seventh Book
of this History. 