




A Continuation of the History of
Isabelle. 
My Brother's great Fondness for
Dorimene made him, and consequently
the whole Family, unhappy
at every the least Indisposition of
hers. She had hitherto been in the main
very healthy; but now she fell into the
Distemper the most shocking of all to see
our Friends in: I know not by what
Name to call it; but it was such a Dejection
on her Spirits, that it made her grow
perfectly childish. She could not speak 

without shedding Tears; nor sit a Moment
without Sighing, as if some terrible
Misfortune had befallen her. You
may imagine the Condition my poor Brother
was in, at seeing her thus suddenly
changed; for from being of the most
chearful Disposition that could be, she was
become perfectly melancholy. He sent
for the most celebrated Physicians in
France, and she, to comply with his Request,
took whatever they ordered: But
all Medicines proved vain, and rather increased,
than abated her Distemper. 
We all three endeavoured to the utmost
of our power to divert and amuse her; 
but sometimes she insisted so strongly on
being left alone, that as we found the
contradicting her made her worse, we were
obliged to comply with her Desire. 
My Brother was so anxious about his
Wife, that when she would not suffer
him to be with her; as he hated to burden
his Friends with his Afflictions, he
used in a manner to escape from us, that
he might be at liberty to indulge his own
uneasy Thoughts, without having any
Witnesses of them. By this means the 

Chevalier Dumont had often an Opportunity
of entertaining me apart. 
He at first treated me with an easy
agreeable Air of Gallantry and Address; 
which, as it seemed to tend to no Consequence
that could give me a serious
Thought, gave me great Pleasure. But
this did not last long; for his Behaviour
was soon turned into that awful Respect,
which seemed to arise from both Esteem
and Fear. Whenever we were together
alone, his Thoughts appeared so fixed,
that as he was fearful of saying too much,
he remained in silence; and when he approached
me, it was with such a Confusion
in his Looks, as plainly indicated the great
Agitation of his Mind. I have observed
him when he has been coming towards
me, suddenly turn back, and hasten away,
as if he was resolved to shun me in spite
of any Inclination he might have to converse
with me: in short, in his Eyes, in
his whole Conduct, I plainly read his Love
and his great Generosity in being thus
fearful of disclosing it. For he thought in
his Circumstances to indulge a Passion for
me, and endeavour to make me sensible
of it, would be but an ill Return to his
Friend for all his Goodness. But this 

Gratitude and Honour, with which his
whole Soul was filled, effected that for
him, which they forbid him to attempt; 
for I caught the Infection, and added Inclination
to the great Esteem his Character
alone had inspired me with before I knew
him: but the great Care we took on both
sides to conceal our Love, made it only
the more visible to every judicious Eye. 
Now Dorimene said, she found herself
something better; and instead of wishing
to be alone, she seemed always inclined to
have us with her. The Marquis de Stainville's
Joy was inexpressible at her least
Appearance of Chearfulness, and for the
present he could think of nothing else. 
Whilst we were in this Situation,
young Vieuville, Dorimene's Brother, having
heard of her ill State of Health, came
to pay her a Visit; he was as handsome
for a Man, as his Sister was for a Woman,
had a remarkable good Understanding,
and a lively Wit; all which rendered him
perfectly agreeable, and I think it would
have been very difficult for any Woman
disengaged in her Affections to have resisted
his Love. Dorimene was so pleased
with her Brother's Company, that her
Distemper abated every day; and her 

fond Husband, seeing how much he contributed
to her Amusement, prevailed
with him to stay there some time. Vieuville,
although he loved his Sister very
well, and would willingly have done any
thing in his power to have served her; 
yet in this Case had another strong Reason
to induce him to yield to the Marquis's
Request: for from the first Day of his
Arrival, the Effect I had on him was very
apparent; he was seized with as sudden
and violent a Passion for me, as the Marquis
had been for his Sister. This was
an unexpected Blow; poor Dumont saw
it, and yet such was the Force of his
unconquerable Virtue, that even the
Thoughts of such a Rival could not provoke
him to be guilty of so great a Breach
of Friendship, as the endeavouring to
gain my Affection, and prevent my being
better married. I was so miserable to
think what he would feel if I took any
notice of Vieuville, that I could hardly
prevail with myself to be commonly civil
to him, but shunned him with the greatest
Assiduity in my power. 
Although my Brother did not at
first seem at all displeased at seeing me resolutely
bent not to hearken to Vieuville, 

and often dropt Words, how little Fortune
should be valued in any tender Engagements; 
insomuch, that I sometimes
fancied he saw and approved Dumont's
Love: yet I was not left at liberty to act
as I pleased in this Case; for Dorimene
said, her Brother's Complaints at my
avoiding him, peirced her Heart so
deeply, that unless I could contrive some
Method of making him easy, it would occasion
her relapsing into all her former
Illness: for that while she saw Vieuville so
miserable, it was impossible for her ever
to recover. She took all Opportunities
of leaving us together; but notwithstanding
his Agreeableness, it was Persecution
to me to hear him talk of Love; nor
could I think of any thing, but what the
Chevalier must necessarily suffer whenever
he knew we were together. I often condemned
myself for not having before confessed
my Love for Dumont to my Brother,
and asked his Consent to have been
for ever joined to his Friend. I had no
Reason to suspect he would not have
granted it; for I had had Experience enough
of him, to know he was not of a Temper
to have made us both unhappy for any
Gratification of his own Vanity: but I
could never bring myself to it, unless 

Dumont had made some open Declaration
of his Love. I knew it was now in
vain; for the Marquis de Stainville was
so excessively fond of his Wife, that to
have given me to another in open Defiance
of her Brother, while she persisted in saying
it would make her miserable, was
utterly impossible for him ever to consent
to. 
DUMONT's great Modesty, and
bad Opinion of himself, blinded him so
far, that he did not even see how much
I preferred him in my Choice to Vieuville. 
He sometimes indeed fancied I saw
his Love, and pitied him; but as it is
usual for most Men to have a good Opinion
of the Woman they like, he only
imputed it to the general Compassion of
my Temper. In short, he could not bear
to be a Witness of my consenting to be
another's; and yet when he looked at my
Lover, or heard his Conversation, he did
not doubt but that must be the Case: He
therefore resolved to quit the Place where
he soon expected to see his Misery compleated. 
He made an Excuse to the Marquis,
that he had a Mind to visit his Mother, 

and with his Consent (for he never pretended
a Right to contradict his Friends,
because they were obliged to him) set out
in three Days. I shall never forget the
Look he gave me when we parted; Good-nature
—Tenderness—and yet a Fear of
Displeasing—were all so mixed, that had
I not seen it, I should have thought it
impossible for any Person in one Moment
to have expressed such various
Thoughts. 
When he was gone, I could not command
myself enough to sit in Company,
but got away by myself into a solitary
Walk, where I might be at liberty to
give a Vent to my Sorrows, and reflect
in what manner I should act to extricate
myself out of these Difficulties. I resolved,
let what would be the Consequence, absolutely
to refuse Vieuville; but then I
feared, if he should persist in his Love,
what my Brother would suffer in his
Wife's continual Importunities. At last
it came into my head to try if he was generous
enough to conquer his own Passion,
rather than be the Cause of my
being unhappy. 

I accordingly took the first Opportunity
that offered of speaking to Vieuville
alone, and told him, as he had often professed
a great Love for me, it was now in his
power to prove whether those Professions
were real, or only the Flights of Youth,
and the Effect of a warm Imagination; 
for that my Happiness and Misery depended
on his Conduct. He began to
swear, “That he would fly to obey my
Commands, and should think it the
greatest Pleasure he was capable of enjoying,
to be honoured with them.” I
desired him to hear me out, and told him,
that for Reasons I could not then inform
him, it was impossible for me ever to
marry him, without making myself the
most wretched of all Mortals; and altho'
it was indeed in my own power to refuse
him, yet in Consideration of his being
Dorimene's Brother, and that the seeing
him uneasy made her so, I intreated it
as the greatest Favour of him, immediately
to leave me, and return to his Father's,
which would be the only Means of
preventing the whole Family from being
miserable. 

He looked some time stedfastly on me,
and then asked, “If I thought his Love
had no stronger a Foundation than
to give me up so easily.” As soon as
he had spoke these few Words, he left
me without waiting for a Reply, with an
Indignation in his Countenance, which
plainly shewed I had not succeeded in my
Scheme; and indeed the Event proved
how much I was mistaken, when I had
flattered myself with the vain Hope of
meeting with any Greatness of Mind from him. 
As he saw the only thing which in the
least staggered my Resolution was, the
Fear of making his Sister uneasy; he went
directly to her, and instead of acting as I
had desired him, he increased his Complaints,
and swore, “He could never
have the least Enjoyment in Life, unless
she could prevail on me to be less
cruel to him.” In short, I was his
present Passion, and he was very careless
what the Consequence of it was to me,
provided he could gratify himself. Had
I before had any Inclination for him, this
would entirely have conquered it; for
the Contrast was so great between his 

Behaviour and that of the generous Dumont,
who visibly sacrificed his own Peace
to his Love for me, and his Friendship
for my Brother, that my Love for the
latter increased equally with my Detestation
of the former. 
As I was sitting in my Chamber, the
next Morning, musing and reflecting on
my own hard Fate; that when I seemed
so near my Happiness, such an Accident
as this should intervene to throw down all
my Hopes, and make me more wretched
than ever; my Brother suddenly entered
the Room, and seeming eager to speak
to me, began by saying “Oh Isabelle— 
Vieuville—” I had not Patience to
let him go on, but interrupted him, crying
out, that I would sacrifice my Life at
any time for his Service; but if he was
come to intercede with me to spend my
whole time with a Man whom I must always
despise, I could not consent to it. 
He replied, that this Accident had thrown
him into a Dilemma, in which he knew
not how to act; that he was going to say,
when I interrupted him, that Vieuville
had destroyed all the fancied Scenes of
Pleasure he once imagined he should enjoy,
in the Love and Unity of his little 

Family, for he saw the Aversion I had to
this Lover; and yet his Dorimene (whose
every Tear pierced his Soul) seemed so
resolute to abandon herself to Despair, if
her Brother was made unhappy, that either
way it was impossible for him to
avoid being miserable. 
I fancied by the Emphasis he laid
on some of his Words, that he knew the
whole Truth, and was therefore resolved
to take this Opportunity of disclosing my
Mind to him; and yet a kind of Shame
withheld my Tongue; and it was with
difficulty, and in broken Accents, I at
last pronounced the Word Dumont. He
stopped me short, and told me there was
no occasion for saying any more, for that
from the very first, he with pleasure saw
our growing Love: That he had always
wished to see me married to the only Man
he really esteemed: That indeed just before
the Arrival of Vieuville, his Wife's
Illness had employed most of his Thoughts; 
besides, he artfully intended to let his
Friend's Passion come to the height, that
he might increase his Happiness, by gratifying
him when he least expected it: You
know, Isabelle, continued he, your Fortune
of itself is enough to make the Man 

you love happy; besides, I always intended
one House should hold us, and my Estate
be in common amongst us: but this Misfortune
of Vieuville's being your Lover,
has disconcerted all my Schemes. I was
quite overwhelmed with my Brother's
Goodness, and almost ready to sacrifice
my self to his Wife's Humour, rather
than he should bear a Moment's Pain. 
However, we separated for that time, and
said we would consider and talk farther of
it another Day. 
But Accident soon delivered us out
of all our Perplexities, for such sort of
Love as Vieuville's is seldom so fixed, but
every new Object is capable of changing
it; and I verily believe he had lately persisted
more, because his Pride was piqued
at being refused, than from any Continuance
of his Inclination towards me. I shall
not dwell long on this Circumstance, but
only tell you, there came a young Lady
one day to dine with Dorimene, who
was really one of the greatest Beauties I
ever saw; Vieuville was in a moment
struck with her Charms, and she presently
made a Conquest of his Heart: she lived
very near us, and soon became as enamoured
of her new Lover, as he could 

possibly be of her. She had a great Fortune,
which was at her own disposal, and
they only defer'd the Celebration of their
Nuptials, till he had an Answer to a Letter
he wrote his Father: He soon carried
his Wife home, and I am certain, he could
not have more Joy in the Possession of
one of the finest Women that ever was
seen, than I had in being rid of his troublesome
Importunities. 
Now all my Hopes began to revive
again, and there seemed to be no Bar to
my Happiness; I pleased my self with the
Thoughts of the Raptures Dumont would
be inspired with, when he found his dear
Stainville approved his Love. It was
not long before my Brother shewed me
a Letter from the Chevalier, which I
found was written in Answer to one from
him just after Vieuville's Marriage and
Departure, which he had acquainted him
with, only as a Piece of News. He expressed
himself with great thankfulness
for his pressing Invitation to return, and
concluded with-saying, he should be with
him the beginning of the next Week. 
When I gave my Brother back his
Letter, Words would have been unnecessary, 

for my Looks sufficiently shewed
how much I thought my self obliged to
him for thus taking care of my Happiness:
we never kept any thing a Secret from
Dorimene, and the Marquis talked before
her of his Intention concerning me and
Dumont, just as if we had been alone. 
But I observed she changed Colour, and
looking at me with an Air quite different
from what she used to have, (for we had
always lived together in great Friendship)
she at last said, “She supposed this was
the reason her Brother had been treated
with such Contempt.” I thought this
might arise from her Pride, because I had
refused Vieuville, and said all I could to
mollify, rather than exasperate her. 
I was now perfectly easy in my Mind; 
I had no manner of Fear, but that my
Brother's Goodness would accomplish all
my Wishes, without my appearing in it. 
At the appointed day Dumont arrived; 
the Mourning was out for his Father, he
was dressed very gay, and his Person appeared
with all the Advantages in which
Nature had adorned him; for altho' he
could not be said to be a regular Beauty,
yet the mixture of Softness and Manliness,
which were displayed in his Countenance, 

joined to his great Genteelness,
justly made him the Object of Admiration. 
When he dismounted, my Brother
received him at the Gate, and Dorimene
and I waited for him in the Parlour: he
made his Compliments to her with great
Respect; but when he came to speak to
me, we were both in such Confusion, we
could not utter our Words. But our
common Friend, the Marquis, on seeing
the same Passion, and the same Resolution
to conceal it, continue in the Chevalier,
would not leave us long in this
anxious Situation; but two Days after
Dumont's Arrival, took him into a Room
by himself, and told him, “He was no
Stranger to his Love for his Sister.” 
On which the other, without giving him
leave to proceed, replied, “He could not
imagine by what Accident he had discovered
it, for he would defy any one
to say he had ever dropped the least
Complaint, notwithstanding all the
Misery he had suffered; nor could
even the daily, nay hourly Sight of a
Person he then thought his successful
Rival, extort from him a Confession,
which his Gratitude to such a 

Friend forbid him ever to make.” 
My Brother begged him to hear him
out, and then said, “My dear Dumont,
I am so far from accusing you, that
had not your Honour been fixed in
my Opinion as stedfastly as possible
before, your Behaviour on this occasion
would have been the most convincing
Proof imaginable, that altho'
our Friendship commenced in our
Youth, yet nothing can ever shake
or remove it. And, by my own Experience,
I am so certain there cannot
be any Enjoyment equal to that of
living with a Person one loves; that
I bless my good Fortune, which has
put it in my power to bestow that
Happiness on my Sister, and on my
Friend. In short, Isabelle shall be
your's, and I shall have the inexpressible
Pleasure of calling you Brother.” 
DUMONT stood for some time like
a Statue, no Words could express his
Thoughts, nor would the Emotions of
his Mind give him leave to speak. The
first Signs he shewed of any remaining
Life was, when Love, Gratitude, and
Joy worked too strongly in his Soul to
be contained, and forced their way in 

gushing Tears. He at last ran and embraced
the Marquis, crying out, “You
must imagine my Thanks, for I cannot
utter them.” 
After a little more Conversation between
the two Friends, my Brother called
me down; and as soon as I entered the
Room, taking me by the Hand, he led
me to the Chevalier, saying, “Here,
my Friend, in Isabelle I make you a
Present which you only are worthy of,
and to your Merit I am obliged for
the great Pleasure I enjoy, in thinking
I have bestowed her, where it is impossible
I should ever have any reason
to repent my Choice.” 
It was no Force upon me to give my
Hand to Dumont; and I did it in such a
manner, that he easily perceived my
Brother had not disposed of me against
my Inclinations. I shall not pretend to
describe the Chevalier's Transports, nor
repeat all he said on this Occasion; it is
sufficient to say, that his whole Behaviour,
and every Word he spoke, was
yet a stronger Proof of both his Gratitude
and Love. 

We now both looked on ourselves as
in the Possession of our utmost Wishes; 
all Obstacles to our Happiness seemed to
be removed, and the Prospect of passing
the rest of my Life with such a Companion,
and such a Friend as the Chevalier
Dumont, indulged me in all the pleasing
Ideas imaginable. Dorimene heard from
her Husband what he had done, seemed
to have forgot my Usage of her Brother,
and congratulated us with more than
usual Softness on the occasion. 
The Marquis was impatient to compleat
his Friend's Happiness, and appointed
a Day for our Marriage. But, in the
mean time, Dorimene was taken so violently
ill of a Fever, that her Life was despaired
of. My Brother's Distraction on this
account, banished from our Minds all
other Thoughts, but how to comfort
him: Dumont had too much Delicacy,
and too sincere a regard for his Friend,
to think it a proper time to talk of Love
while he was in such Affliction. 
This Grief, however, was soon dissipated,
and Joy succeeded by the Recovery
of Dorimene. The Day was again appointed 

for the Celebration of our Nuptials,
when, on a sudden, the whole Face
of Affairs was changed, all Dumont's Joy
and Chearfulness was vanished, a fixed
Melancholy seemed to overspread his
Countenance; and now, instead of embracing
every Opportunity to converse
with me, he shunned me with great Assiduity; 
and if I unavoidably fell in his
way, he fixed his Eyes on mine with
such Horror, as perfectly frightened me. 
He himself, on some trifling Excuse, put
off our Wedding. Dorimene was often
in Tears, and seemed relapsing into her
former Distemper. This indeed we imputed
to the Weakness her Fever had left
upon her; but my Brother too soon caught
the Infection, and his Mind seemed to
labour with some Grief, which he could
neither perfectly stifle, and yet was unwilling
to reveal. I observed he went
abroad more than usual, and I was often
left in the House with only Servants. 
One Evening when I came into my
Chamber, I found a Letter on my Table
in an unknown Hand; but how was I
surprized to read these Words! “Whatever
you do, Isabelle, avoid Dumont; 
for the marrying him will certainly 

prove fatal to you both.” Guess, Ladies,
what I must feel to have all my
Happiness thus suddenly destroyed, and,
in its place, to see this dreadful Scene of
Confusion. Conjectures would have been
endless, I could not bring myself to suspect
the Chevalier's Honour; besides,
what I saw him daily suffer, convinced
me there was something very extraordinary
at the bottom, which it was impossible
for me to fathom. But now, in order
to make you understand the remaining
Part of my Story, I must go back,
and let you into the Cause of this terrible
Alteration in our Family, which I afterwards
learned from the Mouth of the
Person who was the occasion of it. But
this I shall defer till to-morrow: For altho'
my Resolution has hitherto kept up
my Spirits, so as not to interrupt the Narration,
and trouble you with what I feel,
yet am I often so racked with the Remembrance
of past Scenes, that I really grow
faint, and am able to proceed no farther
at present. Isabelle retired for that Evening,
with a Promise of coming to them
again the next Morning. 
She left the whole Company very
anxious to know the Event of all the 

Disorder she had described in her Family: 
Poor David was so affected with it, he
could sleep but little that Night, but
waited with great Impatience till Isabelle
could resume her Story. And as soon as
she had breakfasted the next Day, she
gratified his Curiosity, by proceeding, as
follows: 




The Continuation of the History of
Isabelle. 
I informed you at first, that Dorimene's
having no other Engagement, the
Advantage of the Match, and her Father's
Commands, were the Reasons which induced
her to give her Hand to the Marquis
de Stainville; his excessive Fondness
for her, and making it his whole Study
to promote her Happiness, worked so
strongly on her Mind, that in return she
did every thing in her power to oblige
him, and he flattered himself, that all her
Affections were centered in him; nor indeed
did she ever seem so much inclined
to be pleased with the Admiration of other
Men, as the Custom of France would
even allow her without Censure. But
when the Chevalier Dumont first told us
his Story, she was affected with it to an
incredible degree; whole Days and Nights
passed, and she could fix her Thoughts
on no other Subject. 

The Tenderness he expressed for his
Mother, his justifying his Father, notwithstanding
all he suffered by his Conduct,
with his sincere Friendship for the
Marquis her Husband, worked so strongly
on her Imagination, that she thought
giving way to the highest Esteem for him
would be the greatest Proof imaginable of
her Virtue: but it was not long before
she was undeceived, for she found her Inclination
for the Chevalier was built rather
on what we call Taste, (because we want
a Word to express it by) than any Approbation
of his Conduct. The great
Agitations of her Mind, between her Endeavours
to conquer her Passion, and the
continual Fright she was in, lest by any
Accident she should discover it, threw her
into that lingering Illness which I have
before mentioned. 
The Good-nature of the Chevalier
Dumont, with his Friendship for the Marquis
de Stainville, led him to use his utmost
Endeavours to amuse and divert her; 
besides, there is always a higher Respect
paid by every Man to such Beauty as Dorimene's,
than what other Women meet
with. This, with the Melancholy which 

then possessed him on my account, sometimes
inclined her to flatter herself that
their Passion was reciprocal; but then, in
a moment, the utmost Horror succeeded,
and she resolved rather to die than sacrifice
her Virtue, or be guilty of the least
Treachery to such a Husband. This was
the Reason she so often intreated to be
alone; for every fresh View of Dumont
served only to increase her Agony, and at
that time she heartily wished to fly the
Sight of him for ever. 
All my Brother's assiduous Cares to
please her, only aggravated her Sorrows,
as they continually loaded her with Reproaches,
for not returning such uncommon,
such tender Love. However, while
she remained often alone, and her Resolution
enabled her to deny herself the Pleasure
of seeing the Chevalier, as much as
was possible without being rude, she fancied
whatever she suffered, she should command
herself enough not to transgress the
Bounds of Decency, or the Laws of Virtue. 
But one Evening, when the Marquis
prevailed on her by great Entreaties to
suffer us all to stay with her, hoping by
that means to dissipate her Melancholy, 

and make her more chearful; her watchful
Eyes (altho' we had never any otherwise
than by our Looks disclosed it to
each other) found out the Secret of our
Love. This overset all her Resolutions,
and from that moment her Torment was
so great, whenever she thought we had
an Opportunity of being alone, that she
resolved to pretend an Amendment in her
Health, and put on a Chearfulness, (which
was far from her Heart) in order to make
it probable, that Company was now agreeable
to her, and keep us always in her
Apartment. 
But her Passions were too violent to be
artful, and she could not have continued
this long, had not her Brother's Arrival
given a new Turn to all our Affairs. 
The suddenness of her Recovery, which
the Marquis thought was owing to Vieuville's
lively Conversation, was really the result
of her seeing the Passion I had inspired
him with; she was quite enlivened with the
Imagination that this new Lover would
make me forget Dumont; and thought
her Virtue could stand any Test, but that
of seeing him another's. This was the reason
she appeared so eager for me to marry 

Vieuville; and indeed she spoke Truth,
when she so often declared, that her own
Happiness depended on my returning her
Brother's Love. Dumont's leaving us at
that time still contributed to the fully persuading
her that it would be impossible
for me to resist the Charms of the young
and beautiful Vieuville: My obstinately
refusing him was such a Disappointment
to her Hopes, that at first she could hardly
forbear giving vent to her Passions, and
quarrelling with me on that account; but
after he was irretrievably married, and
she knew it was impossible ever to bring
about that Scheme, Dumont's Absence,
and her own returning Health, enabled her
seriously to set about the conquering her
Passion; which in a little time she thought
she had so effectually got the better of, that
she fancied she could even converse with
the Chevalier with great Indifference. My
Brother's Extacies on her Recovery were
not to be expressed, and he now thought
of nothing but compleating his own Happiness,
by contributing to that of his
Friend's, and letting him experience the
Pleasures that arise from delicate and successful
Love. 

When first Dorimene heard of this Design
she was a little ruffled, and could not
forbear making the Answer I have already
related to you; i. e. that she supposed
this was the reason her Brother was
treated with such Contempt. But however,
she carried her Resolution so far,
that at last she thought she could bear
to see us married with tolerable Patience:
and, when every thing was concluded on,
the Fear lest she should reveal her real
Thoughts, made her force herself to congratulate
us with more Good-humour
than I had seen her shew from the time I
had refused Vieuville. But in that very
Instant Dumont's Look, and the Return
he made to her obliging Compliment, on
the Subject his Soul most delighted in the
Thoughts of, awakened all her former
Passion; and dreadful Experience taught
her, that to his Absence alone she owed
all her boasted Philosophy. 
That very Evening she took to her
Bed, and the violent Agitations of her
Mind threw her into that Fever, which
gave us all so much Affliction, and had
like to have cost her her Life; but she
recovered of that Distemper of her
Body, only to feel that much more terrible
one of her Mind. She began to 

think she had sacrificed enough to Virtue,
in what she had already suffered; 
and when the Idea of Dumont's being going
to be given to another, forced itself
on her Fancy, Rage—and Madness succeeded,
and all the most desperate Actions
appeared as Trifles to her, in comparison
of seeing that fatal Day. Sometimes
she resolved to tell him of her
Love; but then the Sense of Shame
worked so strongly on her, that she abandoned
that Thought, and fancied she
could suffer the utmost Misery, rather
than submit to so infamous an Action. 
The Remembrance of the Marquis de
Stainville's unparallel'd Love for her,
and the Sense of her Duty to him, for a
moment enabled her to form Resolutions
of preferring Death, or, what is yet worse,
a Life of Torment, to the wronging her
Husband. 
But then immediately Dumont's Image
presented itself to her Imagination, soften'd
her a little into a Sense of Pleasure, and
banished every other Thought from her
Mind; but this lasted not long, before
the Idea that he must be another's, spitefully
intruded itself on her Memory,
Horror and Confusion took place of the
pleasing Scenes with which she had just 

before been indulging her Fancy: and
then, instead of thinking on Arguments
to calm her Passion, she turned all her
Endeavours to find out what would best
excuse it; and pleaded to herself, that she
might have been married when first my
Brother saw her; nay, she might have
happened to have been Wife to his best
Friend; and that then, perhaps, he would
have found it as difficult to resist the
Torrent of his Inclinations, as she now
did to subdue her's. The thought of
being his Friend's Wife quite overcame
her, and Sighs––and––Tears were her only
Relief from these agonizing Reflections. 
She endured several of these Conflicts
within her own Bosom, without any
other Consequence attending them, than
the Pain she suffered: But when the Day
was again fixed for our Marriage, her
Passion grew outragious, overleap'd all
Bounds, and Honour,—Virtue—Duty— 
were found but shallow Banks, which
immediately gave way to the overflowing
of the mighty Torrent. Something she
was resolved to do, to prevent my marrying
Dumont, altho' her own—her Husband
—nay, even the Chevalier's Perdition 

should be the Consequence of the
Attempt. 
One Morning, when the Marquis de
Stainville was gone out, and I happened
to be in my own Chamber, she saw Dumont
from her Window walking towards
that very Grotto, where she had at first
beheld him: she stayed till she thought
he was seated there, and then followed
him; but such was the Agitation of her
Mind, that her Limbs had hardly
Strength to carry her. As soon as she
was come near enough for him to see her,
he got up, made her a respectful Bow,
and walked towards her. He began to
talk to her on some indifferent Subject; 
but she did not seem to hear what he said:
on the contrary, she suddenly made a full
Stop, and stared so wildly round her, that
poor Dumont began to be frightened, and
asked her, if she was ill? She made him
no Answer, but fixed her Eyes on the
Ground, as if she had not the Power to
move them; like a Criminal, all pale,–– 
trembling––and confused,––she stood before
him. It was in vain for her to endeavour
to give her Thoughts a Vent, for her
Body was too weak to bear the violent
Combustion of her Mind, and she fainted 

away at his Feet. He immediately
catched her up in his Arms, and called
out for Help; but the House was so far
distant, that before he could be heard, she
came to herself again, and in a weak,
low Voice begged him to carry her to
the Grotto; where, as soon as she was
seated, for want of Strength to speak, she
burst into Tears. The good-natured
Dumont saw her Mind was labouring
with something too big for Utterance, and
intreated her to tell him if she had any
Affliction that he could be so happy as to
remove; for that the Marquis de Stainville's
Lady might command him to the
utmost of his power; nor should he
think his Life too great a Sacrifice, to
serve the Woman, in whom all the Happiness
of his Friend was center'd. 
DORIMENE now had gone so far,
she was resolved, whatever it cost her, to
lay open all her Grief to the Chevalier; 
and after a little Pause replied, “Oh!
take care what you say; for to remove
the Torment I now daily endure, and
ease me of all those Agonies which
work me to Distraction, you must sacrifice
what, perhaps, is dearer to you
than you Life; you must give up 

Isabelle––you must forget the Marquis de
Stainville was ever Friend—And,
Oh! how shall I have Strength to utter
it? my Interest in Dumont must be
on my own account.” —When she had
pronounced these Words, Shame glowed
in Blushes all over her Face, nor did she
dare to look up to see in what manner
they were received. 
DUMONT was struck with Horror
and Amazement at what he had heard, he
could not persuade himself he was awake. 
The Words, “You must give up Isabelle
—and forget the Marquis de Stainville
was ever your Friend,” resounded
in his Ears, and filled him with such
Astonishment, that he had no Force to
answer them, and they both remained for
some time in Silence. At last the Chevalier
threw himself on his Knees before
Dorimene, and said, “He could not pretend
to be ignorant of the Meaning of
her Words, for they were but too
plain; and he could curse himself for
being the Cause (tho' innocently) of her
suffering a Moment's Pain: But, continued
he, I conjure you, Madam, by
all the Ties of Virtue and of Honour,
to collect all your Force, make use of 

that Strength of Reason Nature has
given you, gloriously to conquer this
unfortunate Passion which has seized
you, and which, if indulged, must inevitably
end in the Destruction of us
all. To wrong my Friend—I shudder
at the very Thought of it; and to
forego Isabelle, just when I was on the
point of possessing her for ever, it is
utterly impossible. Oh! Dorimene,
recall those wild Commands, return
again to your own Virtue, and do not
think of sacrificing all your future
Peace, to Hopes so guilty, and so
extravagant.” 
She was all Attention while he was
speaking; but every Argument he used,
and every Word he spoke, did but inflame
her the more, for it was the Pleasure
she received from hearing him talk,
and the seeing him thus humbly supplicating
at her Feet, and not what he said,
that made her listen so attentively to him
in disclosing her Mind. She had got over
the first, and consequently the most difficult
Step. She grew every Minute
more emboldened, and more lost to all
Sense of Shame; and Dumont's unfortunately
mentioning my Name with such 

Tenderness, and such a Resolution not to
forsake me, enraged her to Madness, and
turned her into a perfect Fury. She told
him, “That his Pretence to Virtue and
Faithfulness to his Friend could not
impose on her, for she saw the Consideration
which stuck deepest with him,
was his Love of Isabelle. But, continued
she, I swear by all that's sacred,
the Day you marry her shall be her
last; for with my own Hands I will
destroy her, altho' the Destruction of
Mankind was to be the Consequence of
her Death. Don't imagine I speak in
a Passion what I will not execute, for
my Resolution that Isabelle shall never
live with you as your Wife, is as strong,
and as much fixed, as the Torments I
now feel, and have felt, ever since I
first knew you. Had not I seen your
Affection placed on another, you
had never known my Love; for till
that Misery was added to the rest, I
struggled with my Passion, and was resolved
to conceal it for ever within my
own Bosom: But now you know it; 
and I would advise you to dread the
Rage of a Woman, whose Passions
have got so much the better of her, as
to enable her to break through all the 

strongest Ties imaginable, and sacrifice
every thing that is most dear to
her, to the Impossibility she finds of
resisting her Inclinations. Consider
with yourself, whether or no you can
bear to be the Cause of Isabelle's
Death; for my Resolution is unalterably
fixed, and it is not in the power
of all Mankind to divert my Purpose.” 
As soon as she had spoke these Words,
she got up, and walked hastily from
him. 
But imagine the horrible Situation she
left the Chevalier in. Ten thousand various
Thoughts at once possessed him,
Confusion reigned within his Breast, and
whichever way he turned himself, the
dismal Prospect almost distracted him,
with a Heart bursting with Gratitude towards
his Friend,—filled with the softest
and faithfullest Passion for the Woman he
but an Hour before flattered himself he
was just upon the point of receiving from
the Hands of the Man, who made his
Happiness necessary to his own—with a
Mind which startled at the least thought
of acting against the strictest Rules of
Honour: He suddenly found that the
Passion his Friend's Wife was possessed of 

for him, was too violent to be restrained,
and too dangerous to be dallied with:
he could not perceive any Method to extricate
himself out of the Dilemma he was
thus unexpectedly—unfortunately—involved
in. 
The first thing he resolved on, was,
whatever happened to him, never to disclose
the Secret of Dorimene's Love; but
then to give me up—to abandon all his
Hopes,—and at the same time in appearance
be ungrateful to my Love, and
slight the Marquis's proffered and generous
Kindness, was what he could not bear:
and yet such were his anxious Cares for
my Safety, that he fixed it in his Mind,
rather to suffer all the most dreadful Torments
which human Nature is capable of
feeling, than run the least Venture of my
Life. Sometimes he flattered himself with
the Thoughts that Time and Reason
would turn Dorimene from her horrid Purpose,
and enable her to conquer this unreasonable
Passion. 
This Secret, which I was then a
Stranger to, was the Cause of poor Dumont's
sudden Alteration, and fix'd that 

Melancholy on him, which I could not
then account for. 
DORIMENE, now the Chevalier
was not ignorant of her Love, threw off
all Restraint; she contrived all the Methods
possible of sending the Marquis out
of the way, and only sought the Means
of meeting Dumont alone. It was in vain
for him to seek new Walks and Bye-paths
in the Labyrinths of a Wood just by our
Villa, for her watchful Eyes continually
found him; he still persisted in using new
Arguments to prevail with her to return
her Husband's faithful Love, and change
the dreadful Design her Soul was fraught
with; and she on her side was as obstinately
bent never to give it up, but
with her Life. 
In the mean time Pandolph, who had
formerly been a Servant to my Father,
and now he was old and past his Labour,
was still retained in my Brother's
Family, perceived these Meetings of Dumont
and Dorimene in the Wood, and observed
they generally happened when his
Master was gone out: He was at first
very much surprized at it, but was resolved
to watch them; and sometimes he would 

hide himself near enough to observe they
were earnest in Discourse; but old Age had
taken from him the quick Sense of Hearing,
and he could not make much of what
they said; only he confusedly heard the
words Love—Passion—the Marquis de
Stainville—Isabelle—and by what he could
gather, he fancied he had very convincing
Proofs that there was an Intrigue carrying
on between them. 
This poor Pandolph foolishly imagined,
that officiously to discover to his Master
all he had seen, would be at once the most
faithful Service he could do him, and the
most grateful Return in his power to make
him for his kindness in keeping him in
his Family, now he was unable to take
any Care of himself. He eagerly embraced
the first Opportunity of doing his
Master such a piece of Service, and minutely
told my Brother all that he had
seen and heard: and certainly if any Person
was ever justly the Object of Compassion,
it was the Marquis de Stainville
at that Instant. His Passions were naturally
very violent, and although from the time
the giving way to them had like to have
caused a fatal Accident between him and
his Friend, he had taken great pains to 

keep himself calm, and prevent its being
in the power of any Appearances to make
him suddenly give way to Suspicion: yet
in this Case, the very Name of his beloved
Dorimene joined to the Idea of
Falshood, raised such a Tumult in his
Breast, and filled his Mind with such
Confusion, that all Reason gave way to
the present Horror that possessed his Soul; 
which was greater than Words can describe,
or Fancy paint. 
He threw himself on a Bed like one
distracted; repeated the Names of Dumont
–––and Dorimene, a thousand times; 
then started up, and swore they must be
innocent, that Pandolph had belyed
them, and he would sacrifice him, for
thus disturbing all his Peace, and enraging
him to Madness. But then he recollected
that Dumont had once already on
a frivolous Excuse put off our Marriage,
that his Wife had lately seemed artfully to
contrive to send him out of the way, and
ten thousand Circumstances which had
passed unheeded at the time of their happening; 
such as her sudden and strange Melancholy
a little after the Chevalier's Arrival,
her vast Eagerness to marry me to 

Vieuville, rushed at once into his Memory,
and corresponded so exactly with what
Pandolph had told him, that he began to be
worked into a Belief, it was but too fatally
true: and when he had given his Passion
some Vent, he at last resolved to stifle, if
possible, for the present, any Appearance of
his Jealousy, and ordered the old Man to
continue to observe all their Motions, and
inform him of what he discovered; who,
as soon as he had received his Commands,
left him. 
Such a variety of Thoughts crouded
into the Marquis's Mind the moment he
found himself alone, that his Perplexity
was too great to suffer him to come to
any certain Determination. At last he
concluded, that if the Chevalier again endeavoured
to put off the Marriage, it would
be a convincing Proof of the Truth of his
Suspicions. And just as he had fixed this
Idea in his Thoughts, Dumont unfortunately
entered the Room for that very
Purpose; which was thus to make him
appear guilty in his Friend's Eyes, of the
most monstrous Ingratitude, and the
blackest Treachery imaginable. His
manner of Speaking was something so
confused, and his Mind seemed so disturbed, 

that indeed it was no wonder, as
things then appeared, my Brother's Jealousy
should be increased by his Behaviour. He
had not spoke three Words before the
Marquis, who perceived his Drift, was so
inflamed; that he could hear no more, and
interrupting him, hastily said, “there
was no occasion for any Excuses, for
that he should by no means force him
to marry his Sister against his Inclinations.” 
After which, without waiting
for any Reply, he passed by him; looked
at him with so, fierce an Air, that his
Anger was but too plain, and walked out
of the Chamber. 
Poor Dumont was sensible of his
Friend's Resentment, but did not guess
the true Cause; for he imputed it to the
Indignity the Marquis must unavoidably
think he treated him with, in thus
slighting the generous Offer he made him
of his Sister. But what must such a Heart
as his feel in these unhappy Circumstances! 
For although his whole Soul was
filled with Gratitude, and nothing could
be a greater Torture to him than his
Friend's even thinking he had the least
Cause to complain of him; yet in this Case
he thought it was impossible to undeceive 

him without a Breach of his own Honour,
and destroying all the Marquis's
Happiness, which visibly depended on
the continuing his good Opinion of his
Wife. Sometimes he resolved to fly the
Place where he unfortunately caused so
much Misery, and give up all his future
Hopes of Pleasure in possessing the Woman
he loved, sacrifice all the Joys
of mutual Friendship, and even suffer
my Brother to have an ill Opinion of his
Honour, in hopes by that means to prevent
his being made miserable; but then
the Condition he thought he must leave
me in, at being thus neglected and abandoned
by the Man I had even gone so far
as to confess my Love for, softned his
whole Soul, and all his Resolution was
lost in Tenderness. In short, Love— 
Gratitude—Honour—Friendship––and
every thing that is most valuable in the
Human Mind, contended which should
have the greatest power over him, and by
turns exerted themselves in his generous
Breast. But he was involved in such a
perplexing Labyrinth, that every way he
turned his Thoughts he met with fresh
Difficulties and new Torments. He found
it was impossible for him ever to pretend
another Excuse to delay our Marriage; 
and yet when he considered Dorimene's 

furious Menaces, his Fears for my Safety
would not suffer him to think of it. 
At last it came into his head, that he
must contrive some Method of making
the future delaying it, come from me; 
and for that purpose disguising his Hand
in such a manner, that it could not be
known, he wrote the Note, which I
have already told you I found on my
Table. I knew not what to make of it,
and was filled with Horror when I read
it; however, it had the desired Effect,
for I resolved never to marry the Chevalier
Dumont, till I was acquainted with the
Cause of this sudden, strange Alteration
in our Family, and let into the Secret
why he now tried, by all ways possible,
to shun me. 
I accordingly told my Brother, that
I had changed my Mind, and for the
present, at least, would put off all thoughts
of marrying his Friend. He looked stedfastly
at me, and said, if I knew any reason,
which concerned him, for altering
a Design in which I had appeared so fixed,
it was neither acting like a Sister, nor as
he deserved from me, to conceal it from
him. But before I had time to make him 

any Answer, Dorimene entered the Room,
and put an end to our Discourse. 
I gladly retired, for I was impatient
to be by my self, that I might be at full
liberty to make what Reflections I pleased; 
but when I came to consider, seriously,
my Brother's Words, it was impossible
for me not to find out that they imported
a Suspicion of his Wife and Dumont. 
I presently caught the Infection, and so
many glaring Proofs, of the Justice of that
Suspicion, immediately presented themselves
to my Imagination, that I could
hardly refrain going directly to the Chevalier,
and upbraiding him with his Treachery; 
every new Thought was a fresh Disturber
of my Peace, and helped to rack
my Mind. However, like my Brother,
I resolved, if possible, to wait till I was
quite convinced, before I would mention
what I suspected. 
What I had told my Brother, had a
violent Effect both on him and Dumont; 
for to the former it was the strongest Indication
imaginable, that I had found out
what Pandolph had told him to be true; 
and though the latter had wrote the Letter
himself, which determined me to act 

in that manner, yet such was the Delicacy
of his Love, that he could not forbear
suspecting my Affections were altered; 
and the fear that I was disobliged by his
late Behaviour, was still a greater Torment
than he had yet endured: The
thoughts of losing me for ever, caused too
strong an Agony for even his Mind to
bear, and that Idea appeared so very horrible,
that the Dread of all Consequences
fled before it, and he resolved to secure
himself from that Fear by any means
whatever, (the forfeiture of his Honour
excepted.) 
For this purpose he went the next
Morning into a Chamber, where he knew
the Marquis de Stainville was alone, and
told him he had received a Letter from
his Mother, in which she complained of
an ill State of Health, and begged him,
as the only Comfort she could hope for in
this World, that he would bring his Wife,
as soon as he was married, to see her; for
continued he, I have already informed
her, of the Honour you intend me in
giving me Isabelle. I have never in my
Life disobeyed my Mother, therefore if
you will give me leave to marry your Sister
to-morrow, and carry her immediately 

home for a little time, it will make me
the happiest Man in the World. 
My Brother was at first surprized; but
tho' he did not intend this should really
happen, yet he in appearance assented,
because he had a Purpose to work out of
it. Dumont eagerly embraced him, and
thanked him with Tears in his Eyes, for
thus indulging him in all his Wishes. The
Marquis's struggling Passions made it almost
impossible for him to conceal his
Thoughts, and on some pretence of Business
he soon left the Chevalier by himself. 
Now returning Hope began to cheer
his Spirits, and he fancied by this Scheme
he should secure me from Dorimene's Fury. 
Nay, he even flattered himself, that
Time and his Absence would efface those
Impressions he had made on her unguarded
Heart, and that returning Reason
would bring her to a Sense of her Duty,
and his Friend might still be happy. He
was shocked at perceiving the Marquis's
Coldness to him; but this he imputed to
the Suspicion he lately might reasonably
have, of his neglecting his Sister; and did
not doubt but his future Behaviour to me
would soon regain him his Esteem. 

While he was revolving these things in
his Mind, I accidentally enter'd the Room. 
I started back at the sight of him; for
from the time I had suspected his Honour,
I had avoided all Commerce with
him. But he cried out, “Oh Isabelle— 
don't fly me thus; but condescend to
spend a few Moments in making me
happy by your Conversation.” He
spoke these Words with such an Air of
Tenderness, that in one Instant he renewed
all my former Sentiments for him,
and baffled every Resolution I had formed
not to hearken any more to his Love. I
sat down by him, without knowing what
I did, or where this unseasonable Complaisance
would carry me. He seemed as
much confused as I was, but at last he
told me what he had just concluded with
my Brother. This again roused all my
Resentment; Love gave way to Jealousy,
and I hastily replied, Whatever he had
agreed on with my Brother, I was resolved
never to consent to be his Wife,
unless he could clear up his late unaccountable
Behaviour; and that I thought after
his so long endeavouring to shew his Indifference
to me, I ought to have been
the first Person acquainted with this new
Alteration of his Schemes. He paused a 

moment, continued to fix his Eyes on
mine, with a Look which expressed ten
thousand different Sentiments at once; 
and then cried out, “Oh! don't let Isabelle
doubt my Love: Could you but
know what Torments I have gone
through whilst you had Reason from
Appearances to think me guilty. I
am sure your tender Nature would
pity rather than condemn me. But––Oh!
Dorimene!” —The moment that Name
had broke from his Lips, he started— 
appeared frightned at what he had said,
and flew from me with great precipitation. 
He was no sooner gone than my Brother
succeeded in his Place; but he staid
no longer than while he could say,— 
“Isabelle—hearken no more to the Chevalier
Dumont, resolve not to marry
him; Time shall unfold to you the
Reasons of this Request.” And then
he also fled my Sight as hastily as Dumont
had done the Minute before. 
What a Condition was I in—what
could I think! –––My Brother––Dorimene–– 
Dumont–––all seemed involved in one common
Madness; and I knew not to whom 

to go to disclose my Griefs: However I
was resolved for the present of all things
to avoid the marrying Dumont; and as I
met him again alone that Evening, told
him he must entirely give up that Design
for the present, or he would force me to
take a Resolution never to see him more. 
As soon as my Brother had left Dumont,
he went to his Wife, and told her,
“that to-morrow he was to compleat his
Friend's Happiness, by for ever joining
him to Isabelle.” This he did to
see in what manner she would behave on
such a trying Occasion. 
DORIMENE, who was all Passion,
and who really had but little Art, easily
swallowed the Bait, and told him, “she
thought he ought to consult his own
Honour, and not dispose of his Sister
so rashly, to a Man who had visibly
slighted her.” 
The Marquis was all on fire, to see
in what manner she took it, and could
not forbear saying, “that in all likelihood
her own Inclination might be satisfied
in the Separation of Isabelle from
Dumont.” And he then came directly 

to me, and uttered the Words I have already
repeated to you. 
But so intoxicated was Dorimene with
the Violence of her Passion, that she at
present gave but little Attention to any
thing her Husband said; nor did she need
the Information he had given her concerning
our Marriage: for she so narrowly
watched Dumont, that she was never
ignorant of any one step he took, and by
hearkening at the Door had overheard
all the last Conversation between him and
the Marquis de Stainville. She hid herself
when he quitted the Room; but again
replaced herself within hearing, when I
entered it: But it is impossible to describe
her Rage, when she fancied she heard
him say enough to let me into a Secret
which she had extorted a Promise from
him never to reveal. 
From the time my Brother had first
suspected his Wife, he had never lain at
home; but pretending that Change of Air
was conducive to His Health, said, “he
lay at a Tenant's about two Miles off; 
but indeed he was always within such
a Distance, that Pandolph could bring
him home in ten Minutes.” He set 

him to watch all his Wife's Motions; 
but he hitherto could never give him any
farther account, but that she continued still
at times to meet the Chevalier in the
Wood. 
But this Evening, as soon as he was
gone from the Door, and as Dumont's
uneasy Reflections on what I had said,
together with his Resolution of avoiding
Dorimene, made him resolve to confine
himself to his Chamber: she grew perfectly
past all Sense of Shame, and was
resolved to follow him even thither, rather
than not speak to him that Night,
and inform him that she was not ignorant
of his Purpose, nor should he execute it
without her fulfilling hers. 
The Agitations of my Mind made me
feign Sickness for an Excuse to retire early
into my own Room, so that there was no
Obstacle in her way to obstruct her Designs. 
Every Step she took added new
Horror to her Thoughts, and increased
her Torment; and yet such was the Force
of her irresistible Passion, that she was
led on in spite of all the Remonstrances
of her Reason to the contrary. 

The watchful Pandolph, the moment
he saw her open Dumont's Chamber-door,
ran to inform his Master. The Marquis
flew on the Wings of Rage and Jealousy,
and in less time than could be thought
possible for the Distance of the Place to
allow, he was struck with the sight of Dorimene
drowned in Tears, sitting by the
Chevalier on his Bed. This was no time
for Reason to bear any sway; ten thousand
tumultuous Passions at once possessed
his Soul, and he obeyed the Dictates of
his Rage, by suddenly drawing his Sword
and burying it in the Body of the poor–– 
unhappy––injured Dumont. 
The Action was so quick, that Dorimene
did not perceive her Husband's
fatal Purpose before he had executed it: 
But when she saw Dumont's gushing
Blood, her Horror,––and Despair took
from her all Solicitude for her own Safety; 
and she immediately cryed out, “Oh!
Stainville—what have you done!
you have murdered the faithfullest
Friend that ever Man was blessed with. 
Dumont is innocent—and I am the only
guilty Person; I have persecuted him
with my Love, my furious Threats of 

Isabelle's Life, have caused all the appearance
of his neglecting her; but no
Temptation could make him once
think of wronging his Friend. If any
remaining Rage yet possesses you, point
it at her who only deserves it; but if
Pity succeeds the Fury in your Breast,
let that induce you to shorten my Torments
by ending my Life, and let me
not linger in the Hell, which at this
Instant I feel.” 
The moment she had said enough to
open my Brother's Eyes on Dumont's Innocence,
he turned all his Thoughts on
him, and let his Wife talk on unheeded. 
He threw himself on his Knees at the Chevalier's
Bed-side, and gave him such a
Look, as would have pierced a Heart of
Stone. Dumont in his Eyes read his Repentance,
saw all the inward Terrors that
struggled in his Soul; and reaching out
his Hand to him, said, “My Friend, I
die well pleased, if you are convinced
that even Dorimene's Beauty could not
tempt me to wrong your generous
Friendship. But I grow faint; indulge
me in one last View of my Isabelle.” 
—Stainville started up at the
Word faint, flew to send for a Surgeon–– 

ordered the Servants to force Dorimene,
who was raving like a mad Woman, to
her Chamber; then ran to me, and trembling
with Horror, said, “Come, Isabelle,
view your Lover at his last Gasp,
and behold the guilty Hands which
have executed the dreadful Dictates of
Rage and Jealousy.” 
I followed him, not knowing whether
I trod on Earth or Air, (for we ran
so swiftly, that we seemed to fly) till we
came to the Place where I was to be
shocked with a Spectacle that surpasses all
Imagination, and be only convinced of
Dumont's Fidelity, at a time when I was
just going to lose him for ever. All the
Methods we could try to stop the Blood,
proved ineffectual. I could not speak,
but sat down by him dissolved in Tears,
and almost choaked with my swelling
Grief. 
My Brother continued to beg Forgiveness
of the Chevalier; and, in broken
Accents, told us how Pandolph had raised
his Jealousy, and by what Steps it had
been brought to such a height as to deprive
him of his Reason, and tempt him
to an Action he would now give the 

World to recall, and with pleasure sacrifice
his own Life, could he but prolong
his Friend's for one Hour. Poor Dumont
was so weak he could not speak much; 
but yet he would exert himself to tell me
on what account he himself had written
the fore-mentioned Letter, with the Effect
my Behaviour had on his Mind; and then
cried out, “Oh! Isabelle,—cherish my
Memory! And you, my dear Stainville
—forgive yourself as heartily as I
do: Consider, the Appearances of my
Guilt were so very strong, that it was
impossible for you to avoid this fatal
Jealousy. I am too weak to utter
more; altho' to see you both look on
me with such Tenderness, would make
me wish to prolong this Moment to
Eternity.” Here his Strength fail'd
him, and with his Eyes fix'd on us, and
with the Words Stainville—and Isabelle–– 
lingering on his dying Lips, he expired
in our Arms; and left us, for the present,
almost in the same Condition with himself. 
But he was for ever past all Sense
of his Misfortunes; whilst returning Life
brought us back to the Remembrance of
all our Miseries. My Brother embraced
the dead Body of his Friend, swore he
would never part from it, and at last 

started up, like one distracted, catch'd
hold of his Sword, and cried out, “Thou
fatal Instrument of hellish Jealousy,
which hast made this dreadful Havock
in Dumont's faithful Breast, now end my
Torments, and revenge my Friend.” 
In saying this, he fell on his Sword, whilst
I was vainly running to prevent him. 
The Blow miss'd his Heart; but the Effusion
of Blood was so great, that he instantly
fainted, and I thought him dead. 
In that dreadful Moment a Servant,
who had lived with me from my Infancy,
from the Noise and Hurry which was
in the House upon Dorimene's being carried
by Force into her Apartment, and
the sending for a Surgeon, fearing what
might have happened, was coming to seek
me. She entered the Room just as my
Brother fell on his Sword, saw me fall
down by him, immediately called for
Help; and carried me senseless, and
seemingly dead, from this Scene of Horror. 
I fell from one fainting Fit to another
for the whole Night; and, in every
short Interval, resolved not to survive this
double Loss, as I then apprehended it, of
my Brother and Dumont at once. 

Early in the Morning Dorimene's
Woman came into my Chamber, and
begg'd me, in all the most persuasive Terms
she could think on, to come to see her
Mistress, who appear'd in all the Agonies
of Death, and incessantly called on
my Name. I was so weak I could hardly
walk, and had such an Indignation
against the Woman who had caused this
terrible Catastrophe, that I at first thought
nothing should prevail on me ever to see
her more: But at last, when I was told
she seem'd very eager to impart to me
something of great Importance, I suffered
them to lead me into her Apartment. 
She desired me to sit down but
for a few Moments, for that she had already
revenged me on herself, by swallowing
the very Poison she had before
prepared for me. She then told me the
whole Story of her irresistible Passion, and
concluded with saying, “I don't expect,
Isabelle, you should forgive me; for
it is impossible you should ever forget
the irreparable Injury I have done you: 
But yet give me Leave to say, that,
notwithstanding all you feel, it is impossible
for you, who are innocent, to
have any Idea adequate to my Torments, 

who have the intolerable Load
of Guilt added to all my other Afflictions.” 
The word Guilt fill'd her
with such Horror, that I had no Opportunity
of making her any Reply; for,
from that Instant, she was insensible of
every thing that was said to her, and died
in three Hours. 
The Surgeon that had been sent for
by my Brother, in hopes of his helping
Dumont, came soon enough to give Him
that Assistance, which the poor Chevalier
could not receive. The Wound he had
given himself was not a mortal one, tho'
very dangerous; but the great Difficulty
was to get him to think of suffering Life,
and to quiet the Agony his Mind was in. 
This surpassed the Surgeon's Art; but
Religion did that, which no human Help
could have done. An Ecclesiastick of
uncommon Piety, who had been long my
Brother's Confessor, came to attend him
upon this Occasion. He so strongly represented
to him the Danger his Soul
would be in, if, to the other unfortunate
Effects of his Passion, he added Self-murder:
he so pathetically enforced to
him the Duty of composing his Thoughts,
in order to turn them to Heaven, and of 

assisting his Cure as much as lay in his
own power, that he might live to atone,
by Repentance and Virtue, for the rash
Action he had committed; that these
pious Arguments brought him to a calmer
Temper of Mind; and, being naturally
of a strong Constitution, he was by degrees
entirely recover'd. The Tenderness
he felt for me, contributed also to the
saving his Life; for as soon as I knew
there were any Hopes of him, (which
was not till after I had taken my last
Farewell of his wretched Wife) I flew to
his Chamber, and never left his Bed-side
during his Illness; tho' my Grief for
Dumont was so violent, that nothing less
than my Care for my Brother's Life could
have supported my Spirits under such an
Affliction, or have hindered my following
him to the Grave. And, indeed, the
Day he was buried, I had like to have
died: But it pleased God to preserve me
beyond my own Strength, and to make
me a Means of preserving the unfortunate
Stainville. 
We had some great Friends at Court,
to whom I applied so effectually, setting
forth the strong Appearances by which he
had been deceived, that they obtained his 

Grace of the King; no Friend of Dumont's
having appeared to sollicit against
me: For, in truth, my Brother was so
much an Object of Compassion to all
Men, that none could think of desiring
to punish him more than he had punished
himself. 
I durst not acquaint him with the
tragical End of his Wife, till his Health
seemed to be fully restored; and, even
then, I would have conceal'd from him
the shocking Circumstance of her having
poisoned herself, but he was unluckily
told it by her Servant. This extremely
affected him, and, joined to the Horror
he felt for the Death of Dumont, threw
him into so deep a Melancholy, that he
talked of nothing, but renouncing the
Pardon we had obtain'd for him, delivering
himself up to all the Rigour of the Law,
and dying upon a Scaffold, the better to
expiate the Death of his Friend. But, at
last, the religious Impressions his Mind
had received, got the better of all other
Sentiments: He took a sudden Resolution
to quit the World, and turn Carthusian,
having first made over all his Estate,
in equal Proportions, to me and the Mother
of poor Dumont. 

I would have also gone into a Nunnery,
and resigned the Whole to her; 
but all my Relations were so averse to it,
and begged me so earnestly to continue
among them, that I gave way to their
Sollicitations. One of them, who was
my Aunt by the Mother's Side, had some
of her Husband's Family settled in England: 
She proposed to carry me thither,
that I might remove from the Scene of
my Misfortunes. I went with her; but
my ill Fate pursued me: We had not
been in London a Week, before she caught
the Small-pox and died. Having myself
never had that Distemper, I was obliged
to quit the House she was in, and came
to lodge here. 
As soon as I have settled some Affairs,
which she had in this Country, I shall
return into France, and execute my former
Intention of taking the Veil; a religious
Life being the only Relief to such
Sorrows as mine. 
Here Isabelle ceased, and it was some
time before any of the Company could
make her an Answer: At last David cried
out, “How unhappy am I to meet with
a Person of so much Merit under a 

Sorrow, in which it is impossible for
me to hope to afford her the least Consolation!” 
Cynthia, and the rest of
the Company, thanked Isabelle for informing
them of her Story; and said, if
they had thought what her Griefs were,
they would not have asked her to have
put herself to the pain, her obliging them
must unavoidably have cost her. 
“Alas, replied Isabelle, had my Sorrows
been less piercing, perhaps, I
should not have had Resolution enough
to have related them; but the Excess
of my Affliction has made me so intirely
give up the World, that the
Despair of any future Enjoyments, and
the very Impossibility I find of ever
meeting with any Consolation, has in
some measure calmed me, and prevents
those violent Agitations of the
Mind, which, whatever People may
fancy, are always owing to some latent
Hope of Happiness.” 
This whole Company were so sensible
that Isabelle was in the right, in her Resolutions
of retiring from a World, in
which it was impossible for her to meet
with any thing worth her Regard, after 

what she had lost, that they did not attempt
to dissuade her from it. And as
soon as she had settled her Aunt's Affairs
as she thought necessary, she took her
Leave of them, and returned to France. 
This tragical Story left very melancholy
Impressions on all their Minds, and
was continually the Subject of their Conversation. 
And a Day or two after Isabelle's
Departure, the Weather being fine,
and their Minds in a Humour to enjoy
the being on the Water, they proposed
spending a Day there for their Amusement. 
But these Adventures must be reserved
for another Chapter. 




Containing such a Variety, as makes it
impossible to draw up a Bill of Fare,
but all the Guests are heartily welcome; 
and I am in hopes every one
will find something to please his
Palate. 
The next fine Day was embraced
by David and his Companions, to
execute their Purpose of going upon the
River: And the Water, “ever Friend to
Thought,” with the Dashing of the Oars,
and the quick Change of Prospect, from
where the Houses, at a little distance,
seem, by their Number and Thickness, to
be built on each other, to the Fields and
rural Scenes, naturally threw them into a
Humour to reflect on their past Lives; 
and they fell into a Conversation on the
Miseries of Human Kind, most of which
arise from the Envy and Malignity of
Mankind; from whence arose a Debate
amongst them, which had suffered the
most. The two Gentlemen agreed, that 

Cynthia and Camilla's Sufferings had exceeded
theirs; but David said, “He
thought Camilla's were infinitely beyond
any thing he had ever heard.” 
Lysander replied, “That, indeed, he
could not but own her Afflictions were
in some respects more violent than Cynthia's; 
but then, she had enjoyed
some Pleasures in her Life: for, till
she was Eighteen, she was happy; 
whilst poor Cynthia had been teazed
and vexed ever since she was born: 
And he thought it much worse to live
continually on the Fret, than to meet
with one great Misfortune; for the
Mind generally exerts all its Force,
and rises against things of Consequence,
while it is apt, by the Neglect of what
we think more trifling, to give way,
and be overcome.” Cynthia and Camilla
said, “That, indeed, they had always
thought their own Misfortunes as
great as human Nature could bear,
till they had heard poor Isabelle's
Story.” 
As they were thus engaged in this
Discourse, they perceived, at a little distance
from them, the River was all covered
with Barges, and Boats of various 

Sizes; and, on Enquiry, found the Cause
of it was, to see six Watermen, who were
rowing to Putney for a Coat and Badge. 
Minds, so philosophical as their's, immediately
reflected, how strong a Picture
this Contention of the six Boys is of human
Life; the Eagerness with which each
of them strove to attain this great Reward,
is a lively Representation of the
Toils and Labours Men voluntarily submit
to, for the Gratification of whatever
Passion has the Predominancy over them. 
“But these poor Fellows, said Cynthia,
have in view what they really want,
and justly think of the Value of the
Prize, which will be of real use to
them; whilst most of the things we
see People so eager in the pursuit of,
have no other Good in them, but what,
consists chiefly in Fancy.” 
“Could the ambitious Man succeed
in all his Schemes, if he would seriously
consider the many Toils and
Hazards he has gone through to come
at this beloved Height and Grandeur,
he certainly must conclude, the Trouble
greatly overweighed the Gain: For
the Top of the Pinnacle, to attain
which he has spent all his Time, and 

watched so many anxious Nights, is
so narrow, and has so small a Footing,
that he stands in continual Danger,
and Fear of falling: for thousands
of others, who are just as wise as himself,
and imagine the Place he stands
in the only one they can be happy in,
—are daily leaving their own firm
Footing, climbing and catching to pull
him down, in order to place themselves
in his tottering,—and, in my
Opinion, dreadful Situation. Or when
the avaricious Man has heaped up more
Money than an Arithmetician can easily
count, if he would own his restless
State of Mind to gain yet more,
and the Perturbation of his Thoughts,
for fear of losing what he has attained,
I believe no poor Man in his Senses
would change his Situation with him. 
But I fear I am growing too serious.” — 
On which Valentine replied, “It was impossible
but what she said must be
pleasing to all the Company.” —And
David with a Sigh said, “He wish'd
all the World would imitate these Watermen,
and fairly own when they were
rowing against each other's Interest,
and not treacherously pretend to have
an equal Desire of promoting others 

Good with their own, while they are
under-hand acting to destroy it.” 
As they were talking, on a sudden a
Boat which passed hastily by them splashed
them in such a manner, they were obliged
to get into a House, in order to refresh
and dry themselves; and during their
Stay there, they heard a doleful Crying,
and dismal Lamentation in the next
Chamber; sometimes they thought they
heard the Sound of Blows. —David,
according to his usual Method, could not
be easy, without inquiring what could be
the Cause of this Complaint. —Valentine
and the rest were also desirous to be
informed. —On which they agreed to
go into the Room whence the Noise
came. 
There sate at one Corner of the
Room a middle-aged Woman, who
looked as if she had been very handsome,
but her Eyes were then swelled with crying. 
—By her stood a Man, looking in
the utmost Rage, clinching his Fist at
her, as if he was ready every moment to
strike her down. —Camilla, at David's
Request, presently went up to her, and
desired to know of her what it was that 

had put the Man into such a Passion with
her. The Woman, in the softest Voice,
and mildest Tone imaginable, replied, as
follows: —“You are very good, Madam,
to take so much Notice of the
Miseries of such a poor Wretch as I am; 
—but I really cannot tell what it is that
continually throws my Husband (for
so that Man is) into such violent
Rages and Passions with me. —I
have been married to him ten Years,
and till within this half Year, we always
lived together very happily; but
now I dare not speak a Word, but he
beats and abuses me, and his only Pleasure
seems to be the contradicting me
in every thing he knows I like. — 
What this Usage proceeds from, or
how I have displeased him, I cannot
find out, for I make it my whole Study
to obey him.” 
DAVID immediately turned to the
Man, and begged him not to abuse his
Wife in such a manner. —If he had taken
any thing ill of her, it would be better
to let her know it, and then he did
not doubt, but she would behave otherwise. 
But he could get no other Answer
from the Man, than that he was resolved 

not to be made such a Fool of, as Neighbour
Such-a-one—was by his Wife: for
tho' perhaps he had not so much Sense as
he had in some respects, yet he was not
so great a Fool, as to give way to a silly
Woman's Humours neither, but could tell
how to govern his Wife. Cynthia and
the rest of the Company joined in intreating
the Man to use his Wife better; but
as they found all Endeavours vain, for
that the Man abused her only because he
would not be made a Fool of,—they
left them. 
As they were going home, David
could not help talking of this last Scene; 
and trying if any of the Company could
find out any Reason for this Fellow's Behaviour. 
Camilla said, “She fancied she
guess'd the Cause of it; for she remembered,
when she lived at home with
her Father, a Gentleman who used to
come often to their House, and made
a very good Husband,—from the time
he saw her Father's extravagant Passion
for his Wife, rejoiced in the
Thought that he had found out a
Weakness in him, and therefore took
a Resolution to have a Superiority over
him, at least in one Point, and grew so 

morose,—so sour to his Wife,—that
he contradicted her in every thing she
said, or did; saying,—she should not
make such a Fool of him—as Livia
did of her Husband. —Now, continued
she, I think this Instance something
like this Fellow's Behaviour. On the
other hand, I knew several others who
imitated my Father, and by aukward
Pretences to a Passion they were not
susceptible of, made the most ridiculous
Figures imaginable. I never shall
forget one Man, who was but in a
middling Station in Life, but, however,
in the Country, he and his Wife
often dined and supped at our House; 
they lived together without any Quarrels
or Disputes, and each performed
their separate Business with Cheerfulness
and Good Humour, and they were what
the World calls a happy Couple. But
after my Father brought Livia home,
and behaved to her in the manner before-related,
this Man took it into his
head that he also must be the fond
Husband,—and consequently humoured
his Wife in every thing, till he made
her perfectly miserable;—for she grew
too delicate to be happy,—and was so
whimsical, it was impossible to please 

her. —For I have always observed, it
requires a very good Understanding to
bear great Indulgence, or great Prosperity,
without behaving ill, and being
ridiculous: for grown up People, as
well as Children, when they are too
much humoured,–––cry and are miserable,
because they don't know what
they would have.” 
CYNTHIA smiled at Camilla's Account
of this fond Husband, and said,
“She could easily believe, that a strong
Affectation of Sense, and a Desire to be
thought wise, might lead People into
the most preposterous Actions in the
World: For, continued he, I once knew
a Woman, whose Understanding was full
good enough to conduct her through
all the Parts she had to act in Life,
and who was naturally of so calm a
Disposition, that, while she was young,
I thought her formed to be the happiest
Creature in the World. And
yet this Woman was continually unhappy,
for she accidentally met with
those two Lines of Congreve's in the
Double Dealer: 


“If Happiness in Self-content is plac'd,
“The Wise are wretched, and Fools only bless'd.
“And from that Moment took up a
Resolution of never being contented
with any thing: And I have really
known her when any trifling thing has
gone otherwise than she would have it,
strut about the Room like a Heroine
in a Tragedy, repeating the forementioned
Lines, and then set herself
down perfectly satisfied with her own
Parts, because she found she could
with Art raise an Uneasiness, and Vexation
in her own Mind. –––For as People
who really have Sense, employ their
Time in lowering all Sensations which
they find give them Pain; so Persons
who are so wise, as to think all
Happiness depends on the Reputation
of having an Understanding, often
pay even the Price of continual Fretting,
in order to obtain this their imaginary
Good. And the human Mind is
so framed, that I believe no Person is so
void of Passion, or so perfectly exempt
from being subject to be uneasy at Disappointments,
but by frequently giving 

way to being discomposed at Trifles,
–––they may at last bring themselves to
such a Habitude of teazing and vexing
themselves, as will in the end appear
perfectly natural.” 
VALENTINE hearkened with the
utmost Joy and Attention to every word
Cynthia uttered. Camilla perfectly agreed
with her in her Sentiments, and David
could not forbear expressing a great Uneasiness
that Mankind should think any
thing worthy their serious Regard, but
real Goodness. Nothing more worth remarking
happened to them that Day; 
they spent the Evening in a Conversation
on Isabelle's Misfortunes, which dwelt
strongly on poor David's Mind; and the
next, being very wet Weather, they resolved
to stay at home. 
CYNTHIA, who always employed
her Thoughts in what manner she could
best amuse her Company, proposed the telling
them a Story she knew of two young
Ladies while she was abroad. And as
every Person of this Party delighted in
hearing her talk, and expressed their
great Desire she would relate it, she
without any Ceremony began what will
be seen in the next Chapter. 




Containing some small Hints, that Mens
Characters in the World are not always
suited to their Merit, notwithstanding
the great Penetration and
Candour of Mankind. 
There were two young English
Ladies at Paris, with a married
Lady of their Acquaintance, who were
celebrated for their Beauty throughout the
whole Town; one of them was named
Corinna, and the other Sacharissa: and
notwithstanding they were Sisters, yet
were they as perfectly different in both
Person and Temper, as if they had been
no way related. Corinna was tall,—well
proportioned,—and had a Majesty in her
Person, and a Lustre in her Countenance,
which at once surprized and charmed all
her Beholders. Her Eyes were naturally
full of Fire; and yet she had got such a
Command of them, that she could lower
their Fierceness, and turn them into the
greatest Softness imaginable whenever she 

thought it proper: She spoke in so many
different Turns of Voice, according to
what she had a mind to express, and had
such various Gestures in her Person, that
it might truly be said, in her was found
“Variety in one.” In short, the constant
Flow of Spirits, which the Consciousness
of an unlimited Power of pleasing supplied
her with, enabled her in the most
ample manner to execute that Power. 
SACHARISSA's Person was very
well made,—and in her Countenance was
a great Sweetness;—she spoke but seldom,
—but what she said was always a
Proof of her good Understanding. Her
manner was grave, and reserved,—and
her Behaviour had something of that kind
of Quietness,—and Stillness in it,—which
is often imputed by the Injudicious to a
want of Spirit. —In short, notwithstanding
her Beauty and Good-sense, she wanted
those little ways of setting off her Charms
to the best advantage, which Corinna had
to the greatest perfection; and, quite contrary
to her Sister, from her great Modesty
and fear of displeasing, often lost
Opportuunities of gaining Lovers, which
she otherwise might have had. 

These two Ladies set out in the World
with very different Maxims: Corinna's
whole Delight was in Admiration; she
proposed no other Pleasure, but in first
gaining, and then keeping her Conquests; 
and she laid it down as a certain Rule,
that few Mens Affections were to be kept
by any other Method, than that of sometimes
endeavouring to vex and hurt them:
for that Difficulty and Disappointments in
the Pursuit were the only things that made
any Blessing sweet, and gave a Relish to
all the Enjoyments of Life. 
Her Conversation, when she was only
amongst Women, continually ran on this
Subject; she used to try to prove her Assertion,
by every thing she met with:
if she went into a Room adorned with all
the different Arts invented by Mankind,
such as Painting,––Sculpture,––&c.—she
would always ask her Sister, “whether
she thought if that Room was her own
Property, and she might make use of
it whenever she pleased, it would not
become perfectly indifferent to her; 
the Beauties of it fade in her Eyes,–– 
and all the Pleasure be lost in the
Custom of seeing it?” Nay, she said, 

“—She believed Variety would make
the plainest Building, or the homeliest
Cottage sometimes a more agreeable
Sight.” 
SACHARISSA could not help agreeing
with her in this, and then Corinna
had all she wanted. “Why then, said
she, should we expect Men to go from
the common Rule of Nature in our
favour; and if we will satiate them
with our Kindness, how can we blame
them for the natural Consequence of
it, viz. their being tired of us? — 
Health itself loses its Relish to a Man,
who knows not what it is to be sick,–– 
and Wealth is never so much enjoyed,
as by the Man who has known what
it is to be poor;—all the Pleasures of
Life are heightened by sometimes experiencing
their contrary. –––Even Fewel
burns the stronger for being dashed
with cold Water. —But then indeed
we ought to have Judgment enough
not to throw too much, lest we extinguish
instead of increasing the Flame; 
—we must examine the different
Tempers of Men, and see how much
they will bear, before we attempt the
dealing with them at all.” 

In this manner would she run on for
an Hour together. —On the other hand
Sacharissa had no Levity in her Temper,
and consequently no Vanity in having
Variety of Lovers. The only Pleasure she
proposed in Life, was that of making a
good Wife to the Man she liked, by
which means she did not doubt, but she
should make a good Husband of him; 
and used often to say, “that as she did
not value having many Admirers, she
did not fear, but an honest plain Behaviour,
—would fix the Affections of
one worthy Man. —But if her Sister
was in the right, and no Man was to
be dealt with, but by using Art, and
playing Tricks, she could content herself
very well to live all her Life-time
a single Woman: for she thought the
Love of a Man which was to be kept
that way, was not worth having. Nay,
she resolved to make that Trial of a
Man's Goodness, that whenever she
liked him, she would tell him of it; 
and if he grew cold upon it, she should
think she was happily delivered of such
a Lover.” Corinna laughed—and told
her, “she might tell a Man she liked
him, provided she would but now and 

then be cold enough to him, to give
him a small Suspicion and Fear of
losing her.” 
SACHARISSA was as much talked
of for her Beauty, by those who had only
seen them in publick, as her Sister;— 
but amongst the Men who visited them,
Corinna had almost all the Lovers: she
had six in a Set of English Gentlemen,
who generally kept together the whole
time they were at Paris; whose Characters,
as every two of them were a perfect Contrast
to each other, I will give you before
I go any farther. 
The Gentleman whose Character I
shall begin with, had the Reputation
amongst all his Acquaintance of being
the most artful Man alive; he had very
good Sense, and talked with great Judgment
on every Subject he happened to fall
upon: but he had not learned that most
useful Lesson of reducing his Knowledge
to Practice; and whilst every body was
suspecting him, and guarding against those
very deep Designs—they fancied he was
forming—he who in reality was very credulous,
constantly fell into the Snares
of People who had not half his Understanding. 

—He could not do the most indifferent
Action, but all the wise Heads,
who fancy they prove their Judgments by
being suspicious, saw something couched
under that apparent Simplicity, which
they said was hid from the injudicious and
unwary Eye. —I have really seen People
when they have been repeating some Saying
––or talking of a Transaction of his––– 
Hum—and Ha—for half an Hour, putting
on that Look, which some People
are spightful enough to call dull;—whilst
others are so excessively good-natured, as to
give it the Term of serious,—only to
consider what great Mystery was concealed
under such his Words or Actions. 
The poor Man led a miserable Life
from being thus reputed to have Art: 
That open Generosity of Temper, which
for my part I thought very apparent in
him, was generally esteemed only to be
put on, in order to cover those cunning
Views he had continually before his Eyes–– 
Thus, because he did not talk like a Fool,–– 
he must act like a Villain,––which in my
Opinion is the falsest Conclusion imaginable; 
and as a Proof of it, I will let
you into the Character of a Man, 

who was in every respect perfectly opposite
to the other. 
This Person's Understanding was but
very small; the best things he said were
trite—and such as he had picked up
from others—he had the Reputation in
the World of a very silly Fellow— 
but of one who had no harm in him. — 
Whereas in reality he spent his whole time
in laying Plots which way he might do
the most Mischief. And as things in this
World, even of the greatest Consequence,
sometimes turn on very small Hinges,
and his Capacity was exactly suited to the
Comprehension and Management of Trifles; 
he often succeeded in his pernicious
Schemes better than a Man of Sense,
whose Ideas were more enlarged, and his
Thoughts so much fixed on great Affairs,
that small ones escaped his Notice,
would have done. 
I look upon the difference between a
Man who has a real Understanding, and
one who has a little low Cunning, to be
just as great as that between a Man who
sees clearly, and one who is purblind. 
The Man whom Nature has been so
kind to, as to enable him to extend his 

Views afar off, often employs his Thoughts
and raises his Imagination with a beautiful
distant Prospect, and perhaps he overlooks
the Shrubs and Rubbish that lie
just before him; which notwithstanding is
capable of throwing him down—and
doing him an Injury:—whilst the Man
who is purblind, from the Impossibility he
finds of seeing farther, is in a manner
forced to fix his Eyes on nearer Objects,
and by that means often escapes the Falls,
which those who neglect the little Stumbling-blocks
in their way are subject to. 
In this case I fancy it would be thought
very ridiculous, if the Man who walked
steadily, because he can only see what is
just under his Feet, should swear the
other has no Eyes, because he sometimes
makes a false step, while he is wandering
over, and delighting himself with the
Beauties of the Creation. 
But let Mankind divide Understanding
—or Sense—(or whatever they please
to call it) into ever so many Parts, or
give it ten thousand different Names, that
every one may catch hold of something
to flatter themselves with—and strut— 
and look big—in the fancied Possession
of; I can never believe but the Man 

who has the quickest Apprehension, and
the greatest Comprehension, will always
judge best of every thing he attends to. — 
But the Mind's Eye (as Shakespear calls
it) is not formed to take in many Ideas,
no more than the Body's many Objects at
once; and therefore I should not at all
wonder to see a Man, who was admiring
the Beauties of the rising Sun, and
greedily devouring the various Prospect
of Hills—and Valleys—Woods—and
Water, fall over a Cabbage-stump, which
he thought unworthy his Notice. 
But to return to my Gentleman; I
actually knew several Instances of his deceiving,
and imposing on People in the most
egregious manner, only because they could
not suspect such a Head as his of forming
any Schemes; but if ever there was a visible
Proof that he had done any Mischief,
then the artful Man (tho' perhaps he had
never known any thing of the matter)
had set him on—and it was a thousand
Pities—the poor innocent Creature— 
should thus be made a Tool of another's
Villainy—for he certainly would never
have thought of it himself. I could not
help laughing sometimes, to see how 

much this Man endeavoured at the Reputation
of Art, (foolishly thinking it a
Sign of Sense) without being able to attain
it; while the other, with full as ill
Success, did all he could to get rid of it,
that he might converse with Mankind
without their being afraid of him. 
The third Gentleman of this Community
passed for the best-natured Man in
the World—he never heard of another's
Misfortune, but he shrugged up his
Shoulders—expressing a great deal of
Sorrow for them, altho' he never thought
of them afterwards: the real Truth was,
he had not Tenderness enough in his Disposition
to love any body, and therefore
kept up a continual Chearfulness, as he
never felt the Disappointments—the Torments
of Mind—those People feel who
are ill used by the Person they have set
their Affections on. —He was beloved,
that is, he was liked by all who
conversed with him; for, as he was seldom
vexed, he had that sort of Complaisance,
which makes People ready to
dance—play—or do any thing they are
desired; and I believe such sort of Reasons
as Shakespear puts in Falstaff's 

Mouth, for Prince Harry's loving Pointz * ,
are the Grounds of most of the Friendships
professed in the World, and that
makes them so lasting as they are. Whoever
can accompany another in his Diversions
—and be like him in his Taste of
Pleasures—will be more loved, and
better thought on by him, than a Man
of much more Merit, and from whom he
received many more real Kindnesses, will
be. 

But I now proceed to the Contrast of
this Good-natured Man, whose Reputation
was quite contrary; for whoever mentioned
him, was sure to hear he was the
Worst-natured—most morose—Creature
living—and yet this Man did all the benevolent
Actions that were in his power; 
but he had so much Tenderness in him,
that he was continually hurt—and consequently
out of humour: His Love of
Mankind was the Cause that he appeared
to hate them;—for often, when his Heart
was torn to pieces, and ready to burst, at
either ill Usage from his Friends—or
some particular Misfortune that had befallen
them, which he was incapable of
removing, he cared so little what came
of the World, that he could hear a pitiful
Story without any Emotion, and perhaps
shewed a Carelessness at it, which
made the Relater go away with a fixed
Opinion of his Brutality—and Ill-nature. 
But there is nothing so false as the
Characters which are given to most People; 
and I am afraid this is not owing so
much to Men's Ignorance as their Malignity:
for whenever one Man is envious
of another, he endeavours to take from 

him what he really has, and gives him
something else in the room of it, which
he knows he has not: —He leaves it to
the World to find out his Deficiency in
that Point; if he can but hide from Men's
Eyes whatever it is he envys him for,
he is satisfied. 
The next Character I am to give you,
is that of a Man, who has such strong
Sensations of every thing, that he is
“tremblingly alive all o'er. * ” His Inclinations
hurry him away, and his Resolution
is too weak ever to resist them. 
When he is with any one he loves, and
Tenderness is uppermost, he is melted
into a Softness equal to that of a fond
Mother, with her smiling Infant at her
Breast. On the other hand, if he either
has, or fancies he has the least Cause for
Anger, he is, for the present, perfectly
furious, and values not what he says or
does to the Person he imagines his Enemy; 
but the moment this Passion subsides,
the least Submission entirely blots
the Offence from his Memory. 
He is of a very forgiving Temper; 
but the worst is, he forgives himself with
full as much ease as he does another,––– 

which makes him have too little Guard
over his Actions. He designs no ill, and
wishes to be virtuous; but if any Virtue
interferes with his Inclinations, he is over-born
by the Torrent, and does not deliberate
a Moment which to chuse. 
Confer an Obligation on him, and he
is overwhelmed with Thankfulness,—and
Gratitude;—and this not at all owing to
Dissimulation: for he does not express
half he feels. But this Idea soon gives
place to others, and then do any thing
which is in the least disagreeable to him,
and he immediately sets his Imagination
(which is very strong) to work, to lessen
all you have done for him; and his whole
Mind is possessed by what he thinks your
present ill Behaviour. 
He has often put me in mind of a
Story I once heard of a Fellow, who accidentally
falling into the Thames, and
not knowing how to swim, had like to
have been drowned; when a Gentleman,
who stood by, jumped into the River and
saved him. The Man fell on his Knees,
was ready to adore him for thus delivering
him, and said, he would joyfully sacrifice
the Life he had saved, at any time, 

on his least Command. The next day
the Gentleman met him again, and asked
him how he did after his Fright? When
the Man, instead of being any longer
thankful for his Safety, upbraided him
for pulling him by the Ear in such a manner,
that it had pained him ever since. 
Thus that trifling Inconvenience, in twenty-four
Hours, had intirely swallowed up
the Remembrance that his Life was owing
to it. Just so doth the Gentleman, I am
speaking of, act by all the World. 
He has the greatest Aversion imaginable
to see another in Pain and Uneasiness; 
and therefore, while any one is with him,
he has not Resolution enough to refuse
them any thing, be it ever so unreasonable: 
Importunity makes him uneasy, and
therefore he cannot withstand it. But
when they are absent from him, he gives
himself no trouble what they suffer; let
him not see it,—and he cares not: He
would not interrupt a Moment of his own
Pleasure on any account whatever. —He
never considers what is right or wrong,— 
but pursues the Gratification of every Inclination
with the utmost Vigour; and all
the pains he takes, is not in examining
his Actions, either before or after he has 

done them, but in proving to himself,
that what he likes is best: —And he has
the Art of doing this in such a manner,
that, while People are with him, it is very
difficult to prevent being imposed on by
his fallacious Way of Arguing. And yet
tell him a Story of another's Actions,
and no one can judge better, only I think
rather too rigidly; for, as he doth not
feel their Inclinations, he can see all their
Folly,—and cannot find out any Reason
for their giving way to their Passions. 
He has great Parts, and, when he is in
good Humour, and nothing ruffles him,
is one of the agreeablest Men I ever
knew; but it is in the power of every
the least Disappointment to discompose
and shake his whole Frame, and then he
is much more offensive and disagreeable
than the most insignificant Creature in the
World. He never considers the Consequences
of any thing before he does it. — 
He ruined his Sister by his wrong-placed
Pride: for she had a Lover, who was
greatly her Superior in point of Fortune; 
but there were some Circumstances in his
Affairs, which made it very inconvenient
for him to marry her immediately. The
Brother took it into his head he was designing 

to dishonour his Family, and challenged
him. The Gentleman overcame
him, and gave him his Life;—but resolved
never to speak to his Sister more:
for he said it should not be reported of
him, that he was compelled to marry her. 
The poor young Creature, who had fixed
her Affections on him, had a Slur cast on
her Reputation, and has been miserable
ever since. He is not so ill-natured, but
that seeing her so makes him uneasy; and
therefore the Remedy he takes is not to
see her at all, but to live at a distance
from her: And he comforts himself, that
it was his Love for her made him act in
such a manner. —Had it been another
Man's Case, he would have soon found
out, that it was not Tenderness for a Sister,
but Pride and Vanity, that caused so rash
an Action. 
One thing is very diverting in him,
and has often made me laugh;—for it is
very easy to know whether the last Action
he has done is good or bad,—by what he
himself says: For when Benevolence has
prevailed in his Mind, and he has done
what he thinks right, then he employs all
his Wit and Eloquence to prove the great
Goodness of Human Nature. But when 

giving way to Pride,—Anger,—or any
other Passion, has drove him to be guilty
of any Action, which he cannot perfectly
approve, he then immediately falls on the
great Wickedness of all Mankind, and sets
himself to work to argue every Virtue
out of the World. The Inconsistence of
his Behaviour makes his Character in the
World very various: for People, who
have been Witnesses of some Parts of his
Conduct, take him for the best of Creatures; 
—whilst others, who have known
some other of his Actions, think him the
worst. —It is not to be wondered at, he
should be thus inconsistent with himself,–– 
for he has no fixed Principles to act by: 
He gives way to every Inclination that
happens to be uppermost; and as it is
natural for People to love to justify themselves,
his Conversation turns greatly on
the Irresistibleness of human Passions,— 
and an Endeavour to prove, that all Men
act by them. But People, who have the
Reputation of Wit,–––or Sense,—should
take great care what they say, or do, for
the sake of others, who are apt to be influenced
by their Example, and form their
Sentiments by their Precepts. 

The last of the six Characters I promised
to give you, and the Contrast to
this Gentleman, is a very odd one. –––His
Understanding is very indifferent; but he
has a strong Inclination to be thought both
witty and wise: He envies the other, because
he finds, that, with all his Faults,
his Company is more coveted than his;–– 
and therefore, as he finds he cannot equal
him in Wit, and Entertainment, he fixes
on Wisdom and Discretion,—and exults
in the Superiority he imagines this gives
him; so that instead of being like the
other, hurried into Actions by his own
Inclinations, he deliberates so long, and
weighs so nicely every Circumstance that
may attend whatever is proposed to him,
that he puzzles his Brain,–––and bewilders
himself,––in his own Wisdom,––till he does
not know how to act at all;–––and often,
by that means, loses Opportunities of doing
things that would be very much for
his Advantage, while he is considering
whether he should do them or no. And
it is not only in things of moment he is
thus considerate, but also in the most trifling
Affairs in Life: He will not go even
to a Party of Pleasure, till he has confused
himself so long, whether it will be discreet 

for him to do it, or no,––that he can have
no Enjoyment in it. 
I remember once, while we were at
Paris, this Knot of Gentlemen,—my
Lady,––myself, in the Character of a Toad-Eater,
and some more Ladies, proposed
spending a Week at Versailles: This Gentleman
could not find out whether it
would give him most Pleasure or Pain to
accompany us; and was so long in deliberating,
that at last Monsieur Le Vive
(which was the Name the Gentleman
who was so whimsically guided by his
Passions, always went by, while he was at
Paris) swore he would stay no longer,
and we drove away, leaving him at the
Gate in as thoughtful a Posture, as if he
had been endeavouring to find out the
most difficult Problem in the Mathematicks. 
He pretends to a great Affection for
Le Vive; but I verily believe he hates him
in his Heart: for, when he is absent from
him, his whole Discourse turns on his Indiscretions,
which, indeed, he expresses
great Sorrow for: But, in my Opinion,
he only affects to pity him, for an Excuse
to fix People's Minds on his Faults, and 

to make them see his own imagined Superiority. 
I have known several of these
Friends, who go about lamenting every
wrong thing done by the Person they
falsly pretend a Friendship for; but to me
they cannot give a stronger Proof, that
they hate and envy them. 
For a Man, who is really concerned
for another's Frailties, will keep them as
much as possible even from his own
Thoughts, as well as endeavour to hide
them from the rest of the World: And
whenever I hear one of these Lamenters
cry, “It is pity such-a-one has such Failings; 
for otherwise he would be a
charming Creature;”––and then reckon
them all up, without forgetting one Circumstance: 
I cannot forbear telling them,
that I think this would better become an
Enemy than a Friend. This Man got the
Nick-name of the Balancer, and was the
Diversion of all who knew him. 
Many other silly Fellows, who conversed
with Le Vive, acted quite contrary
to the Balancer, and affected to imitate
him. It was a common thing with him
to say, that People of the greatest Understandings
had generally the strongest Sensations: 

For which Reason, I really knew
two Men, who were naturally of cold
phlegmatick Dispositions, throw themselves
into continual Passions,––in order to prove
their Sense. —They could not come up to
Le Vive in their Conversation, and therefore,
with great Penetration, they found
out an easier way to be like him, and were
so very humble as to imitate him in his
Failings. 
I visited the Wife of one of them,
and was sitting with her one day when he
came in. —She happened accidentally to
say something he did not like; on which
he, in Appearance, threw himself into a
violent Agony,––swore,––and stampt about
the Room like a Madman;—and at last
catched up a great Stick, with which he
broke one of the finest Sets of China I
ever saw. The poor Woman, who was
really frighted, stood staring, and knew
not what to say; but when his Passion
had continued just as long as he thought
necessary to prove his Wisdom,––he grew
calm again;—and then asked his Wife
ten thousand Pardons for what he had
done;––said, he was very sorry he was so
passionate;––but all People acted by their
Passions, and he could not help his Nature; 

––it was a Misfortune often attended
Persons of very good Sense;—and, as an
Instance of it, named Le Vive. I saw
thro' the whole thing, and could hardly
keep my Countenance; but immediately
took my leave, that I might have the
liberty to make my own Reflections,
without being observed; for nothing is so
captious as a Man who is acting a Part,
it being very natural for him to be in a continual
Fear of being found out. 
CORINNA had another Lover, who
was a Frenchman, in a very high Station. 
His Mind was cast much in the same
Mould with hers: ––Vanity was the chief
Motive of all his Actions, and the Gratification
of that Vanity was the sole End
of all his Designs. He delighted in all
manner of fine things;—that is, he was
pleased to call them his own: for the
finest Picture that ever Michael Angelo
drew, would have given him no Pleasure,
unless the World had known he was in
possession of it. –––And what is yet more
strange, the most beautiful Woman was
only preferred to the rest by him, that it
might be said his Charms had made a
Conquest of the Person others sighed for
in vain. It was for this Reason he followed 

Corinna; every new Lover she got,
increased his Affections;–the greater Croud
of Admirers she had, the better he was
pleased; provided she would but shew to
the World, that she only kept them in
her Train, whilst he was permitted to
lead her by the Hand. 
Here Cynthia said she was tired, and
would reserve the Remainder of her Story
till the Afternoon. They spent the Interval,
till she thought proper to begin
again, in general Conversation, and Remarks
on the Characters she had given
them. As soon as Valentine thought she had
rested long enough, to make it agreeable
to her to tell them the rest of the Story,
he begged her to go on with it; and she,
who never wanted to be asked twice to
oblige any of that Company, proceeded as
will be seen in the next Chapter. 




The Continuation of the Story of
Corinna. 
Corinna's manner of dealing
with these various Characters, was really
very diverting. For to the Man of Sense,
who had the Reputation of being an artful
Man, and who always treated her with
very great Respect, yet told her his Love
in a plain unaffected manner, (for he had
not been much used to Gallantry) and always
dealt with every body with Simplicity; 
she softened her Looks to such a
degree, as gave him some distant Hopes
that he might be her Choice. And as a
Coquet was the Character he most despised,
it would have been impossible to
have persuaded him, that she had any sort
of Coquetry in her. She plainly saw how
much his real Character was mistaken; 
and that the other Gentleman, who was
reputed to be perfectly artless, employed
his whole Time and Thoughts in endeavouring
to undermine her by his Cunning. 

To him therefore she was more reserved,
and, by continually counterplotting him,
at last gave him the most consummate
Opinion of her Wisdom: for as he look'd
on Art and Sense to be the same thing, he
thought a Woman, who could equal him
in the former, must be the most extraordinary
Creature in the World. 
The Man whom the World esteemed
to be ill-natured, only because he was capable
of being touched with either, the
Afflictions, or Behaviour of his Friends; she
worked backward and forward in such a
manner, as made him one Moment curse
her,––and the next adore her;—by that
means keeping his Thoughts continually
on the Stretch, and giving him no time
to recollect himself enough to forsake her. 
The thing in the World he valued in a
Woman, was having the same Sensations
with himself; therefore, whenever she
found she had gone far enough to hurt
him thoroughly, she pick'd up some Trifle
he had done, and told him it was the Suspicion
of his slighting her, that had made
her so uneasy she could not command herself: 
By this means he was perfectly convinced
that she had no Fault, but what arose
from the Strength of her Good-nature. 

As to the Gentleman who was always
pleased, she had no great Trouble with
him; and only danced and sung with
him; and he was perfectly satisfied she
was the best-humoured Woman in the
World, which was the Quality he most
admired. 
The Balancer never told her he liked
her in his Life; for he did not dare to go
so far, lest he should not be able afterwards
to disengage himself. He sat whole
Hours, and looked at her with Wonder
and Admiration, considering with himself
whether it would be wise for him to
make Love to her or no. She saw she
had him sure enough; but did not let it
appear to him that she understood his
Looks: She flattered him in his own Way,
asking his Advice about every Trifle, pretending
she was deliberating about things
she never had a serious Thought of; he
therefore believed her a Miracle of Discretion. 
Her hardest Task was how to manage
Le Vive; for the Impetuosity of his Inclinations
would not bear being dallied
with, and she found, with all her Art, it 

was impossible to keep him long, without
consenting to marry him. But as he
was always apt to believe whatever his Inclinations
suggested to him, she contrived
to make him think, that she had no other
Reason for not immediately complying
with his Desire, but Delicacy; for that she
thought a Woman must be a strange Creature,
who did not expect some Gallantry
from a Man, before he could obtain her
Love. And as Le Vive had really a very
delicate Turn in his own Mind, it was
what he most admired in a Woman; and
consequently he was the more charmed
with her, for thinking she had so large a
Share of it. She was obliged to be denied
to all the rest, whenever he came to
see her; for she could not so easily impose
on him as on the others, and the
least Suspicion would have excited him to
the highest degree of Rage. She durst
not play many Tricks with him, only she
would now and then just teaze him
enough to make his Passion return with
the greater Violence. 
As to the vain Man, he easily believed
she preferred him to all Mankind; and it
is incredible the vast Pleasure he took in
reflecting on the Joys he should feel, in 

being reputed to have the handsomest
Wife in all France. The Possession of so
fine a Woman was the least thing in his
Consideration; for if he had been obliged
to have lived a recluse Life with her, all
her Charms would have immediately vanished,
and his Relish would have been
totally lost for them: but whilst his Vanity
was gratified, he thought her possessed
of every Accomplishment any Woman
could be adorned with. Thus Mankind
go farther than Pigmalion in the
Fable; for he, indeed, fell in love with
a Statue, but still kept his Senses enough,
only to pray to the Gods to give her Life
and Motion: —But they, if once a Woman's
Form pleases them, not only wish
her possessed of every thing else, but believe
—and swear—she is so. 
I once visited Corinna, when all her
Lovers happened to be there together. 
I suppose Le Vive was let in by
some Accident she could not avoid. — 
The grave Man of Sense appeared diffident
of himself, and seemed afraid to
speak to her. –––The artful Man sat silent,
and seemed to be laying some very deep
Plot. –––The Man who was so apt to be
hurt by the Behaviour of others, could 

hardly forbear breaking out in Reproaches. 
The gay good-humoured Spark caper'd
and sung,––and was never better pleased in
his Life. —The Balancer attempted to
speak several times, but broke off with
half a Sentence, as not having considered
enough whether he was going to speak
wisely or no. ––––Le Vive had no patience,
and could hardly be civil to her;––but perfectly
stormed at her, and left the Room
in a violent Passion. –––But the vain Man
was all Joy and Rapture; for, on some
particular Civilities she shewed him, he
concluded he was the happy Man. And
indeed, whether the Sympathy there was
in their Minds (for both their Pleasures
lay in gratifying their Vanity) influenced
her, or whether his having a great Fortune
swayed her, I cannot tell; but she
certainly did give him the preference before
all her other Lovers. 
After this meeting of them all together,
as she found it impossible any longer
to keep them all as Danglers, she began to
think seriously of marrying the vain Man. 
She considered, that if she led this Life
much longer, she should get the Reputation
of a finished Coquette, and consequently
lose all her Power; whereas by marrying, 

—she might have the liberty of conversing
with all her Husband's Acquaintance,
without being much censured. — 
Besides, she knew enough of his Temper,
not to be ignorant, that he would bring
her home all the Admirers he could, in
order to indulge himself in the Thoughts
that he had gained the Woman so much
liked by others. —She was very sure she
could not be particularly fond of him, nor
any other Man; and always laid it down
as a Maxim, that it was too much Love
on the Women's side, that was generally
the Cause of their losing their Husband's
Affections. In short, these and several
other Considerations induced her, at last,
to give her Hand to the vain Man. 
They were married three Months before
I came from Paris, and were generally
esteemed a very fond Couple. She
coquettes it just enough to shew him,
that, if he does not take care of his Behaviour,
he is in danger of losing her: — 
And he indulges her in every thing she
can wish, and still keeps up the Lover,
for fear of the Disgrace of her liking any
body else. Sacharissa, with whom I conversed
as often as I could get liberty,
told me, that Corinna often asked her, 

“How long she thought she should
reign thus absolute—in her Husband's
House,—if she made an humble fond
Wife,–––and did not continually shew
him how much he was obliged to her––– 
for chusing him?” I will relate to you
one Scene that passed between them,
Word for Word, as Sacharissa told it
me. 
There was a young Gentleman dined
with them one day, with whom Corinna
was more gay, and went farther in her
Coquettry than usual; insomuch, that
at last her Husband grew quite out of
humour: She perceived it, but did not
at all alter her Behaviour on that account. 
There was a great deal of Company
at the Table, and Corinna was in the
highest Raptures to see the Joy which
sparkled in the Eyes of the Man she took
most notice of; the envious uneasy Looks
of all the others, and her Husband's Discontent. 
This might be called the Wantonness
of Power, and she was resolved
to indulge herself in the full Enjoyment
of it. When the Company were gone,
her Husband sat sullen, and out of humour,
and would not speak one word. 
It was her usual Method, whenever he 

thought proper to be in this Temper, to
let him come to himself again as he
pleased; for she never said any thing to
him, to endeavour to bring him out of it. 
I cannot say I much pitied him, as all his
Uneasiness arose from Vanity; but had
the greatest Tenderness for her been the
Cause of it, she would have acted just in
the same manner: for it was one of her
political Maxims, That whatever Woman
troubled her head whether her Husband
was pleased or no, would find Employment
enough to keep him in Temper;––– 
but if she could have so strong a Resolution
as to hold out, if he either loved
her––or a quiet Life,–––he would certainly
submit in the end; and the Difficulty he
found in being reconciled to her, would
make him afraid of offending her. 
However, this passed on three or four
Days, and neither of them spoke. Corinna
dressed, and went abroad with as
much Chearfulness as usual; till he held
out so long that she began to be frighted,
lest he should be meditating some Design
of parting with her, and by that means
bring a Disgrace upon her. Her Pride
would not suffer her to think of a Submission; 
besides, she knew that Method 

would be totally ineffectual with a Man
of her Husband's Temper. 
SACHARISSA, although she could
not approve her Behaviour, had so much
Good-nature, she would willingly have
assisted her in bringing about a Reconciliation; 
but her Mind was so perfectly
free from all Art, and every Word she
spoke, nay, her very Looks so plainly
shewed her Thoughts, that it was impossible
for her to hit on any Scheme for her
Sister's Advantage. Corinna, after much
Deliberation, as her last Effort, engaged
a Lady of her Acquaintance to invite her
and her Husband to Dinner; where, as
by Accident, they were to meet the Gentleman
who was the first Occasion of their
Quarrel; who, the moment he saw Corinna,
began to behave to her with all the
Assurance a Man, who fancies himself the
Object of Admiration, can be inspired
with. But she had now another Scheme
in view; and as she had before indulged
her own Vanity at the Expence of her
Husband's, she thought it necessary, in
order to bring about her present Designs,
to turn the Man into Ridicule, who, from
her own Behaviour, had fed himself with
the Hopes of obtaining her Favour: ––And 

whilst she play'd him off with all the
Liveliness and Wit she was mistress of,
by the whole Company's plainly perceiving
the great Preference she gave her
Husband, he was by degrees work'd into
Raptures he never felt for her before; and
when they came home, was visibly more
her Slave than ever. 
Thus by following the Maxim she
had lain down from her Youth, of never
shewing too much Love to the Man she
had a mind to govern,—she so far succeeded
in all her Schemes, that if ever
any Dispute arose between them after
this Scene, it was not without the most
servile Submissions on her Husband's side,
and her exerting all the most haughty
Airs she could think on, that he could
ever obtain a Reconciliation with her:
nor did she think herself at all to blame
for such a Conduct, but often asserted,
that notwithstanding all the Complaints
of Women's Levity–––and Coquettry,––– 
yet, that she thought the Man who gives
up all his Ease,–––and sacrifices all his
Time–––to the satisfying a restless Ambition,
and the grasping of Power, was just
on the same footing with the Woman
who makes it her Study to display and 

set off her Charms, in order to gain a
general Admiration;–––that the same
Love of Power was the Motive of both their
Actions; and consequently that she could
not see, if there is so much Folly as is said
to be in the one,–––how the other could be
exempted from the same Imputation. 
But here I will leave her, and go
back to Sacharissa. Her Taste was too
good, altho' she had a great Softness in
her Temper, for her easily to fix her Affections; 
but the Man of Sense, whom I
have already mentioned to you as a Lover
of Corinna's, touched her Heart. –––She
took care to conceal it, because she well
knew Corinna would be uneasy at parting
with one Admirer, altho' her Dislike
to him was ever so great. –––But when Corinna
was married, and this Gentleman
considered her Usage of all her Lovers,––– 
with Sacharissa's modest, and good-natured
Behaviour, he fixed his Love on the
Woman who now appeared so much the
most deserving. The Courtship did not
last long; for as she had made it a Rule
never to conceal her Affections from the
Man she loved, longer than she doubted
of his—Decency was the only thing
considered by her; and they were married 

about a Month before I left Paris. 
—I never saw a greater Prospect of
Happiness in my Life, for their Love
was reciprocal, and they highly esteemed
each other. 
CYNTHIA had the Thanks of the
whole Company for her Relation, particularly
Valentine's, who expressed the
greatest Admiration at her manner of
telling it. They spent the rest of the
Evening in Remarks on Cynthia's Story; 
and David said, he did not think there
could have been such a Character as Corinna's
in the World; that he began to
be in great Anxiety to see a Woman
painted in such a Light; but Sacharissa's
Tenderness and Good-nature had reviv'd
his Spirits, in shewing him the Blessing a
Man possessed, when he could gain the
Affections of a Person whose Heart was
faithful, and whose Mind was replete
with Goodness. In saying this, he fix'd
his Eyes stedfastly on Camilla, till he saw
her blush, and seem out of countenance,
which made him immediately turn the
Discourse: and when they separated to
go to bed, Valentine followed his Sister
into her Room, and seemed almost
choaked for want of Power to utter his
Thoughts. 

CAMILLA was not ignorant what
Subject he wanted to talk on, and immediately
began a Discourse on Cynthia. At
last she brought him to say,—“Oh!
Camilla,—how happy must that Man
be—who can touch the Heart of Cynthia!
—there is no Hopes for your unfortunate
Brother;—for even if she
could condescend to look on me, my
Circumstances are such, I dare not
own my Love to her. —Mr. Simple's
Generosity and Goodness to us, makes
it utterly impossible I should ever think
of loading him with more Burdens. — 
No;—I must for ever banish from
my Thoughts the only Woman who is
capable of raising my Love and Esteem. 
—You may remember in our very
youthful Days,—when I hardly knew
why I liked her, how fond I was of
being with Cynthia;—and notwithstanding
our Separation, I have never
thought of any other Woman with
any great Affection.” He then went
on with Extacies on Cynthia's Wit and
Charms.— 
CAMILLA heard him out, and then
told him, she would do any thing in her 

power to serve him; but advised him, if
possible, to try to conquer his Passion. ––– 
At these Words he turned pale,—and
looked in the utmost Agonies;–––which
his Sister perceiving, she told him, if his
Love was so fixed, that he could not enjoy
himself without Cynthia,–––she hoped,
and did not at all doubt,—but he might
gain her Affections,—for that before
she went abroad, she had observed much
more than a common Complaisance in
her Behaviour towards him; which she
found was rather increased than abated
since this last Meeting; and he must wait
with patience, till Time, perhaps, might
put it in his power to be as happy as he
could wish. 
VALENTINE was vastly comforted
in the Thoughts of Cynthia's approving
his Love, and for that Moment
quite forgot all the Consequences that
might attend indulging his Passion;— 
he begged his Sister to observe all Cynthia's
Words and Actions. ––And then retired
to Rest. —Poor Camilla could
have sighed as well as her Brother;–––but
I don't know how it was; She could not
so easily unfold Griefs of that kind to Valentine,
as he could to her. 




In which our Hero began again to
despair of ever meeting with any
thing but Disappointments. 
Poor David had no Person to tell
his Griefs to: he loved Camilla so
sincerely, that whatever Resolutions he
made to declare it to her, the great Awe
with which he was seized whenever he approached
her, took from him the Power
of speaking. And he was afraid to mention
it to her Brother first, lest she should
be offended, and think he was mean enough
to expect a Compliance from them
both, on account of the Obligations they
owed him. 
Sometimes his Imagination would indulge
him with the Thoughts of the Happiness
he should enjoy, if he could be beloved
by, and lead his Life with Camilla. 
He was sure she had every good Quality
human Nature is capable of possessing. — 
He ran over every Virtue in his own
Mind, and gave them her all, without 

any Exception. —Then he reflected on
every Vice;—and, exulted in the
Thought that she was quite free from
them. Sometimes he was in despair of
ever engaging her to return his Love,––– 
and then in a moment succeeded Hopes
–––and Raptures, and all this without any
intervening Action of her's to give him
the least Reason to believe either one way
or the other. 
In short, both David and Valentine
were afraid of explaining themselves too
far, lest they should disoblige Camilla and
Cynthia; and they, on the other hand,
had no Fear, but that their Lovers meant
no more than they expressed. Miss Johnson's
Behaviour, in spight of himself, would
often force itself on David's Memory; for
that is one of the Curses which attend the
having ever been disappointed in our Opinion
of a Person we have esteemed: It is
an Alloy to all our future Pleasures;—we
cannot help remembering, while we are
indulging ourselves in any new Engagement,
—that once we thought as well of
another,—who, with the same seeming
Innocence deceived us; and we dread the
same thing may happen over again. But
these Thoughts only took place in Camilla's 

Absence: The moment she appeared,
all disagreeable Ideas vanished, and the
most pleasing ones imaginable succeeded. 
VALENTINE and Camilla often
sighed at the Remembrance of their Father's
Usage; but they cautiously hid from
their generous Benefactor, that any uneasy
Thoughts ever intruded on their Minds: 
He fancied them entirely happy,—and
that their Happiness was owing to him. 
None but Minds like David's can imagine
the Pleasure this Consideration gave
him. Cynthia saw through Valentine's
Behaviour; and yet sometimes she could
not help fearing that his Thoughtfulness
might arise from some other Cause than
what she would have it, and her great
Anxiety concerning it, naturally produced
Suspicion. 
As this little Company were sitting
and comparing their present Situation
with that they had formerly been in, they
heard so violent a Rap at the next Door: 
They could not help having Curiosity
enough to run to the Window, and saw
it was occasioned by the Arrival of a gilt
Chariot, in which was a Person, in whose
Looks was plainly to be perceived, that 

he was perfectly satisfied with himself;— 
and, conscious that he made a good
Figure;—that is, he was very well dressed,
and his Equipage such as no Nobleman
would have had any reason to have
been ashamed of. —While the Door was
opening, he happened to cast his Eyes on
Camilla, and fixed them with such Attention,
that as he was entering the House,
his Foot slipt, and he fell down. David,
who was always ready to give Assistance
where it was wanted, ran down stairs to
see if he could be of any service to him. 
The Gentleman had struck his Face against
an Iron at the Side of the Door,
and felt a good deal of Pain; but the
moment he saw David, he begged he
would be so good as to carry him into
the House where he had seen him at a
Window with a young Lady, whom he
was very desirous of speaking to;—because
he had something to tell her, which,
he believed would prove to her advantage. 
—That Consideration was enough
for David, and without any farther Hesitation,
he introduced him into the Room
to Camilla. —The moment she saw
him, it was visible by her Countenance he
was not a perfect Stranger to her; for she
alternately blushed,—turned pale,—and 

seemed to be in the greatest Agitation
of Spirits imaginable. —The Gentleman
begged the liberty of being one half
Hour alone with her; as what he had to
communicate concerned only her, and
was of such a nature, that it required the
utmost Privacy. 
CAMILLA, who did indeed know
him to be my Lord . . . . an intimate
Acquaintance of her Father's, fancied he
had something to say to her from him; 
and that Thought made her so sollicitous
to know what it was, that without thinking
of any farther Consequence, she begged
the rest of the Company to retire a little,
while she heard what my Lord had to
say; which, as they none of them ever refused
her any thing she desired, was immediately
complied with. 
VALENTINE was a Stranger to
this noble Lord, as he was gone abroad,
before he came from his Studies to live
with his Father; however, he thought the
Alteration of Camilla's Countenance at
the sight of him, was owing to the Shame
of seeing a Person she knew whilst she
lived in Reputation with her Father, now
that she was certain he must have heard 

an infamous Story of her. —But David
could not help fearing she felt something
more at the sight of him than merely
Shame. —Miss Johnson forced herself
again on his Memory,—and when he
considered the fine Equipage,—and the
Title of a Lord—he was in the utmost
Consternation what would be the Event
of this Affair. 
This Lord was one of those Men,
who lay it down as a Maxim, that a
Woman, who has lost her Virtue from
Fondness to one Man—is ever afterwards
to be purchased by the best Bidder. —He had
always liked Camilla, but as she lived in
a Station that he could not think of her
on any other Terms than Marriage, and
he knew her Father could not give her as
much Fortune as was necessary to pay
off a Mortgage there was on his Estate, he
had never said any thing to her, farther
than common Gallantry; but when he heard
that she was run away in such an infamous
manner with her Brother, he concluded,
Money would be so acceptable to her,
that he could not fail obtaining her by
that means. He had often enquired privately
after her, but always in vain till he
accidentally saw her at that Window. 

The Moment they were alone, Camilla
inquired with great Eagerness if he
had any thing to say to her from her Father,
—or could tell her any News of him. 
—On which he replied, “That all he
knew of her Father was, that he and
his Wife lived on in the same House in
which she had left them; but his Business
was of another kind, in which he
himself was only concerned.” — 
Then with a heap of those fulsome Compliments, which only prove the strongest
Contempt for the Person they are made
to;—he modestly proposed her living
with him as a Mistress;—said, “she
should command his Fortune * , that he
would get her Brother a Commission
in the Army to go abroad,–––and her
Father should never know by whose
Interest he had obtained it.” 
CAMILLA, whose Virtue was not
of that outragious kind, which breaks out
in a Noise like Thunder on such Occasions, 

very calmly answered him as follows: 
“—My Lord, notwithstanding what
you have heard of me, I am as innocent
now as when you first knew me;–– 
and though Malice has contrived to
make me infamous,–––it never shall
make me guilty;—nor is it in the
power of all your Fortune to bribe me
to do a criminal or a mean Action: and
if your Lordship has no other Business
with me, I must beg Leave to desire
my Brother, and the Man on Earth
I most esteem, to walk in again.” — 
He had too much Confidence in his own
Charms to take an immediate Denial; 
and as to her talking of the Man she
esteemed, he fancied she was grown weary
of her Brother, and had got a new Gallant,
––which he thought looked well on
his side. He used the most pressing Arguments
he could think on, to make her
comply, but all in vain: He imagined
her not calling to her Brother was an Encouragement
to him to proceed; but she
was really afraid to let him know any thing
of the matter, dreading what might be the
Consequence. At last, when my Lord
found all his Promises––and fine Speeches–– 
made no Impression on her, he took his
Leave. 

The moment he was gone, David,
Valentine, and Cynthia flew into the Room,
and found Camilla in the utmost Confusion,
––she knew not which way to act,–– 
had not an Instant to consider,––and could
not resolve whether it was best for her to
inform them of what had passed or no. 
Valentine hastily inquired, “if she had
heard any thing from their Father; for
he said he supposed she must know that
Lord––while she lived at home.” –– 
She replied, “No, she had heard nothing,
but that he lived in the same
Place where they left him.” ––She stammered
––and seemed to wish they would
ask no more Questions; but this put
David on the rack, and he could not forbear
being so inquisitive, that at last she
was forced to tell them the whole Truth,
with the Reserve only of the Lord's Title. 
VALENTINE flew into a violent
Passion, vowed he would find out who
he was, and let him know, no Station
should screen a Man from his Resentment,
who durst affront his Sister. Poor
Cynthia was quite frighted, and urged all
the Reasons she could think on to make
him change his Purpose;–––and Camilla 

told him, he should consider that her unhappy
Circumstances, and her being infamous
had thrown her so low, that a
Man might be more excusable for talking
to her in that Strain than to any other Woman. 
—What she said to pacify Valentine,
made David almost mad, and threw him
so off his Guard, he could not help saying,
“he thought she pleaded very well in the
Defence of her Lover.” On which he left
the Room, and retired to his own Chamber. 
When he was gone, Cynthia employed
all her Thoughts in endeavouring
to calm Valentine. 
Poor Camilla knew not which way
to act: she saw David's Uneasiness; it
was not her Pride which prevented her
following him, and endeavouring to make
him easy. ––But as he had never seriously
declared more than a great Friendship for
her,––she knew not which way to treat so
delicate a Passion as Jealousy, whilst she
must not own she saw it. She sate some
time silent; but at last found the Agitation
of her Mind was so great, it would
be impossible for her to conceal her
Thoughts; and therefore on the Pretence
of Indisposition, retired to her own Chamber,
where she spent the whole Night in 

greater Anxiety than I can express. She
did not feel one pleasing Sensation from
the Idea that the Man who loved her,— 
was in Torment on her account;––but on
the contrary, was melted into Tenderness
and Grief at the Thoughts of every Pang
he felt, and nothing but the most invincible
Regard to Decency could have prevented
her flying to him, and telling him
the whole Truth in order to ease him of
his Pain. 
As to David, the Thoughts of Camilla's
having ever liked another, quite
overcame him; he knew not whether he
was awake,––or in a Dream. ––But notwithstanding
all the raging Passions which
warred in his Mind, he could not but reflect,
that he had nothing to accuse Camilla
of; for that she was under no sort of
Engagement to him, and at full liberty
to like whom she pleased; yet, when
he fancied any other Man was the Object
of her Love,––he could not help thinking
she had not half those Virtues he before
thought her possessed of. ––For an Instant,
he felt a Passion which he had before
never conceived for her, nor indeed for
any other; and which I should not scruple
to call Hatred, had it not been one of 

those abortive Thoughts which are the
first Sallies of our Passions, and which
immediately vanish on Reflection; for as
it was impossible for him to hate a Creature
who had never injured him, that
Consideration absolutely removed what
seemed alone to promise him Comfort,
and he saw Camilla in the same amiable
light in which he had ever beheld her,
with the Addition only of a Despair,
which at once heightened all her Beauties,
and made them fatal to his Repose. 
VALENTINE and Cynthia, from
seeing their Distress, had both endeavoured
to bring them together in the
Evening; but they pleaded ill Health,
and begged to stay in their separate
Apartments. The next Morning they
found such Misery, in not seeing each
other, that they both came to Breakfast
with their Companions: They entered the
Room at different Doors, at the same
Instant, the Wanness of their Looks, (for
it is incredible how much one Night's
Perturbation of Mind will alter People,
who have strong and delicate Sensations)
and the faultring of their Voices, more
strongly pointed out their Thoughts than
the most laboured Eloquence could possibly 

have done. Neither of them could
bring themselves to speak first; for as
David had never made any actual Addresses
to Camilla, it was impossible for
him to charge her with any Crime, or
even to mention the Affair to her, which
gave him so much Uneasiness. She, on
the other hand, (tho' her Mind had been
totally void of Pride—of which she had
very little—or of Modesty—of which
she was the most exact Pattern—) could
not have begun to excuse a Crime of
which she was entirely innocent, to a Man
who neither did—nor had any Right to
censure her. —As for Valentine, he
was in a Dilemma no less perplexing; for
tho' he was sensible of David's Jealousy,
and confident of his Camilla's Innocence,
yet in their present Situation, he could
by no means persuade himself to say any
thing which might have been construed as
a direct Offer of his Sister to a Man to
whom they both were so greatly obliged; 
and who at that time appeared in the
Light of Fortune—(the only Light by
which some People's Eyes can see—) so
highly their Superior. 
As for Cynthia, she knew too much
of the World, and was too well bred, to 

intermeddle officiously in so delicate an
Affair. 
Under these Circumstances were this
little Company, when by lucky Accident,
rather than good Design, did the Author
of all this Mischief unravel the Perplexity
he had occasioned, by means of a Letter
which a Servant now delivered to Camilla. 
She opened it hastily, wondering
what Corner of the Earth could produce
a Correspondent for her at this time. 
David watched her Looks, and observing
she blush'd—and chang'd Colour––– 
was in the utmost Anxiety—in which
she left him no longer than while she read
the Letter; when she sent the Servant out
of the Room, and gave it into his Hand; 
saying, she thought every one in that
Company had a Right to know all that
concerned her, as she was convinced they
were her sincere Friends. –––David read it
aloud to Valentine and Cynthia–––but how
much were they surprized, when they
found the Contents were as follows! 

Madam,
I am really ashamed of my Conduct towards
you yesterday; my Inclination
for you makes it an easy matter for me to be 

convinced of your Innocence–––but I would
have you also clear in the Eyes of the
World; and if you will come home again to
your Father's, I will make it my whole
Study to justify you, and find out the Author
of this vile Report. As soon as that
can be done, if you will consent to it, I
will receive you of your Father as my
Wife. 
I am, Madam,
Your most Obedient,
Humble Servant, &c. 
They all sat for a moment staring at
each other, as in Amazement. Camilla first
broke silence, and looking at David, said,
if they pleased, either Valentine or he should
dictate an Answer to this Letter. David,
instead of being pleased at this, turned
pale–––he remembered he had over-heard
Miss Johnson say, she was in hopes he
would be too much afraid of making her
unhappy, to press her to refuse a good
Offer for him–––and he now began to fear
Camilla had the same way of thinking,
and only said this to pique his Generosity,
to desire her to accept of such a 

Match:––he therefore told her, he thought
she was the best Judge what to answer––– 
for as the Happiness of a reasonable Creature
did by no means depend on Grandeur,
he did not think himself obliged to
persuade her to consent to my Lord ...'s
Proposal. When Camilla found which
way he took what she had said––she pitied
him, because she saw he was uneasy––imputed
it to the Delicacy of his Love for
her–––and acted quite contrary to what
some good-natured Women do, who, when
they see a Man vexed on their account,
take that Opportunity of teazing him. 
She told him, he had perfectly mistaken
her Meaning, as she would immediately
convince him; on which she called for a
Pen and Ink, and wrote the following
Letter. 

My Lord,
I now think myself as much obliged
to you, as I thought the contrary yesterday: 
I have some very strong Reasons,
which make it impossible for me to accept
the Honour you intend me; and as to my
returning to my Father's House, the Usage
I have already met with there, has determined
me never to subject myself to the like
again; which I am certain must always be 

the Case, whilst Livia is Mistress of it. ––– 
I am, my Lord, with the most grateful
Sense of the Favour you designed me, 
Your Lordship's most Obliged,
Obedient Humble Servant,
Camilla. 
It is utterly impossible to describe the
Agitations of David's Mind, while she
was writing–––or his Raptures when he
heard what she had written. –––Valentine
highly approved of her Proceedings; for
as she had kept her Word in informing
him of every thing that passed between
her and David; he was not ignorant how
much he would have suffered had she accepted
of my Lord. –––And Cynthia admired
her Resolution and Greatness of
Mind to so great a degree, she could not
forbear expressing to her Friend, with
what an additional Esteem that one Action
had inspired her. 
They were all surprized what could
have altered my Lord .... so much in one
Day; but his Lordship, when he left
Camilla, could not believe he was awake: 

so impossible it appeared to him, that any
Woman could resist both his Person and
Fortune;–––his Pride was piqued at it–––and
besides, his Inclination was heightened
by the difficulty he found in the gratifying
it. 
He now began to believe all the Stories
he had heard of Camilla were false,
for he was very certain the Woman who
could withstand him must be virtuous. –––In
short, he found himself so uneasy without
her, that he thought if there could be
any Method found of regaining her Reputation,
he could be contented to marry
her–––a strong Proof of the strange Inconsistency
of the human Mind! –––For
whilst there was no other Objection but
her want of Fortune–––and he might have
received her with Honour at her Father's
hands, he could command his Passion; 
but when there was the Addition of many
other Objections to prevent his indulging
it, he was willing to overcome them all–– 
The truth was, while she lived with
her Father, he had never given himself
leave to have the smallest Hopes of her
in one way—and as he thought it imprudent
to think on her in the other, his Desires
were curbed by the apparent Impossibility 

of gratifying them:—but when he
thought her both infamous—and poor––– 
he had made himself so certain of obtaining
her, he could not bear the Disappointment
of being refused;—and
perplexed himself so long about it, that
at last, like Heartfree in the Play of the
Old Batchelor, “He ran into the Danger,
to avoid the Apprehension;” and
wrote the foregoing Letter. 
DAVID now was perfectly easy,
and there was a general Chearfulness
throughout the whole Company for the
Evening;—and when they retired to
Rest, it was with that Calmness which is
always the Companion of Innocence and
Health. The Adventures of the next
Day shall be reserved for another Chapter. 




In which is related the Life of an
Atheist. 
In the Morning they all met, with the
utmost Good-humour; and it being
Sunday, David proposed the going to
Church; for he said he had great reason
to thank his Creator, for giving him so
much Happiness as he had found in that
Company. The other three heartily consented
to it—and said, they were sure
the meeting with him, and the being delivered
from their Afflictions and Distress,
was so signal a Mark of divine Providence,
that they could never be thankful
enough for it. This naturally led Cynthia
to give some Account of the Conversation
she met with in her Journey to
Town. She had mentioned it slightly
before, but now she told them all the ridiculous
Arguments the Atheist made use
of to prove there was no Deity. 

DAVID could not forbear crying
out, “Good God! is it possible there
can be a Creature in the World so much
an Enemy to himself, and to all Mankind,
as to endeavour to take from
Men's Minds the greatest Comfort they
can possibly enjoy!” They all admired
the Clergyman's Behaviour, and David
said, he heartily wished he was acquainted
with him. Now it happened, by great
Accident, that this very Clergyman preached
at the Church they went to; and, as
soon as Cynthia saw him, she informed
her Company who he was. They were all
rejoiced at it, and David was charm'd
with his Discourse, and meditated some
Method, by Cynthia's means, of introducing
himself to him. —When Church
was done, it rained so violently, that no
Coach being to be had, they were forced
to stay; and in the mean time the Clergyman
brought about David's Wish, without
any trouble of his—for he presently
came and spoke to Cynthia— 
she told him that Gentleman longed for
his Acquaintance. David begged the favour
of him to dine with them; he civilly
accepted the Invitation, and they all
went home together. 

CYNTHIA, as soon as she had an
Opportunity, asked him if he had ever
heard any thing of the Atheist; to which
the Clergyman reply'd, that having some
Business that way, he called at the Apothecary's
to inquire what was become of
him—and heard he was dead;—for he
would drink hard in spight of any Persuasions
to the contrary, which, with the
Pain, threw him into a Fever that kill'd
him. But, continued this good Man, I
was moved with Compassion when I heard,
that, as soon as he found he must die,
all his fancied Infidelity vanished into nothing,
and in its room succeeded Horrors
impossible to be described. He begged the
Apothecary to send to a neighbouring
Clergyman, and before them both dictated
the ensuing Account of the Life he had
led, which they writ down, and at my
Request gave me a Copy of it. 
“When I was a young Fellow, I
took a delight in reading all those sort
of Books which best suited my own
Inclinations, by endeavouring to prove
all Pleasure lay in Vice;––and that the
wisest thing a Man could do, was to
give a Loose to all his Passions, and 

take hold of the present Moment for
Pleasure, without depending on uncertain
Futurity. —As I had but little
Money, I got in with a Set of Sharpers,
and, by consenting to play all the Game
with them, was admitted to share some
Part of the Booty. Whenever I had
any Success that way, I immediately
spent it on Wine and Women. —As
to the latter, I had never any sort of
Affection for them, farther than their
Persons,—and consequently was never
much disappointed by any Refusal from
them: for I went from one to another; 
and as I was always certain of succeeding
with some of them, I was very
well satisfied. —Promises cost me nothing; 
––for I was full as liberal of them,
as I was sparing in the Performance: 
And whenever I had by any means
gained a Woman,—as soon as I grew
tired of her, I made no manner of
Scruple of leaving her to Infamy— 
and Poverty,—without any Consideration
what became of her. 
“As soon as I had spent all my Money,
I generally returned to the Gaming-Table. 
But at last my Companions,
whom I only trusted because I could 

not avoid it, on finding out one Evening
that I had defrauded them of their
Share, all combined to disgrace me;— 
and the next time I came, watch'd narrowly,
till they saw me slip some
false Dice out of my Pocket, and discovered
me to the whole Table. It
was in vain for me to protest my Innocence,
and complain of the others, for
I could not be heard; and the Gentleman,
whom I had endeavoured to
cheat, held me till I was stript of all I
had about me, which I had won that
Night, and then kicked me out of the
Room. Besides the Loss,—I had Pride
enough to be hurt to the quick by
such Usage, and yet I had not Courage
enough to resent it. —Thus this Scheme
proved abortive, and I was obliged to
have done with it. 
“I had an Acquaintance, who, when
I was in the utmost Distress, used to
relieve me; but then that was only
enough perhaps to pay some Debt, just
to keep me from a Jail; but was nothing
to what I wanted to squander in
Extravagance. 

“The next Scheme I took into my
head was to follow Women, for their
Money—instead of their Persons:—and
it was a Rule with me, generally to go
amongst those that had but small Fortunes; 
for as to those who had great
ones, I thought I should have my mercenary
Designs found out, if I pursued
them. But by following such as had
but a small matter, they easily concluded
I could have no Views upon
their Money,—and that therefore my
Professions must be sincere: by which
means I got away every Farthing they
were worth,—and then left them to
bemoan their Folly,—hugging myself in
my own Ingenuity. My Method was,
when first I got acquainted with any
one, to pretend that all Fortune was
equal between us; and if ever they
wanted Money, I lent it them, (that is,
when I had it.) Thus I passed upon
them for the most generous Creature in
the World, till I had got from them
what I wanted. But at last I was
catched in my own Snare; for I met
with a Woman, who was cunning
enough to penetrate my Scheme; and
when she had got from me all the Money 

I had, she would never see me
more. —Another Woman, from whom
I had got 500l. in this treacherous
manner,—happened to have a Brother,
who loved her so sincerely, that she
was never afraid to let him know even
her own Indiscretions: —He pulled me
by the Nose in a publick Coffee-house,
and swore,—till I had returned his Sister
every Farthing I owed her, he
would use me in that manner, wherever
he met with me. As it was impossible
for me to raise the Money, I
was forced to lurk about in Corners,
that I might avoid him. These two
Disappointments made me weary of this
Project. 
“The next Scheme I formed was to
go Canting amongst the Men, of the
Value of real Friendship, to try if by
that means I could draw any Person
into my Net, in order to make a Prey
of them. Here too I followed my old
Maxim, of frequenting those Companies
where Fortune had not been lavish
of her Favours; for I always found,
that those People who had but little,
were most ready to part with their
Money. Here I flourished for a small 

time; but as I took care always to
leave the Persons I had fleeced, and converse
no longer with them than I could
gain by them, I soon became very
scandalous: And as I happened to meet
with some Gentlemen, who did not at
all relish such Treatment, I got two or
three good Beatings,—and could shew
my Head no longer in that Neighbourhood. 
“Thus was I both poor—and infamous; 
—and yet I was so bewitched with
the Fancy of my own Wisdom, that
even these Miseries did not open my
Eyes enough, to make me engage in
an honester Way of Life. 
“I took another Lodging, with a
Design of laying some new Plot to get
Money by; and the next Scheme I
pursued was to talk very religiously,
and try what that sort of Hypocrisy
would do. Now I chiefly frequented
old Women,—as I thought keeping
Company with the young ones would
be an Injury to the Character I then
affected. —I got some small matter,
which was given me by People who
were really charitable, to dispose of to 

poor Families, which I made up dismal
Stories on, and this Money I put
in my own Pocket. But this did not
last long; for my Propensity to all
manner of Vice was so strong, it broke
out on all Occasions: And as I could
not forbear my Bottle, which sometimes
brought out Truth in spite of me, I
was soon found out; and then there
was so general an Outcry set up against
me, I was obliged to fly from the Clamour. 
“The next Character I appeared in,
was that of a Moralist; that is, I cried
down all Religion,—calling it Superstition,
—in order to set up Morality. — 
By this means I imposed on several
ignorant People, who were so glad to
catch hold on any thing that they
thought could give them any Reputation
of Sense, that they were quite
happy in this Distinction. There
was a Set of us used to meet every
Night at a Tavern, where, when we
were half drunk, we all displayed out
Parts on the great Beauties of Morality,
—and in Contempt of the Clergy; 
for we were sure we could be very
good—without any of their Teaching. 

And then we raked together all the
Stories which reflected Scandal on their
Order. My Conversation turned chiefly
on the great Meanness of Treachery; 
—and that all Men should have
that Honour in their Dealings towards
each other, that their Words should
be as good as their Bonds. By this
means there was not one of the Company
whose Purse was not intirely at
my Command; and had their Money
lasted, I should not have been found
out a great while: But when I had
drained them all as much as I could,
their seeing me spend what I had got
from them, in my own Extravagance,
whilst I would not return them one
Farthing, even tho' they really wanted
it, opened their Eyes, and they discovered
whence arose all my boasted Morality. 
—They had taken no Security of
me, and had no way to redress themselves; 
but one of them happened accidentally
to be acquainted with a
Tradesman, (in whose debt I was to
the Value of 50l.) to whom he told
the Story; and, just as all I had trick'd
the others of was spent, he arrested
me. 

“Now I knew not what to do: —I
thought the Person I mentioned to
you, who used sometimes to supply
me with Money in my last Necessities,
would grow weary of doing it; and
yet I had no other Refuge but to send
to him. He said, he would pay the
Money, if I would promise to go into
the Country, and live upon a small Income,
which he paid me quarterly; 
otherwise he would let me go to
Jail, and never take any farther notice
of me. —Hard as these Terms appeared,
I was obliged to consent to
them; on which the Gentleman freed
me from my Confinement, gave me
Money enough to go into the Country,
and paid me as usual, to maintain me
there. 
“Now again, if I had not been utterly
abandoned to all the Sentiments
of Humanity, or the true Knowledge
of my own Interest, I had an Opportunity
of recovering my lost Constitution,
which I had racked out in such a
manner,—that tho' in reality I was but
a young Man, I had all the Infirmities
and Diseases incident to old Age. But 

instead of reflecting how much I had
all my Life-time been a Dupe to my
own mistaken Maxims, and deceived
myself, whilst I fancied I was cheating
others; I grew desperate at being
obliged to retire into the Country,— 
left off all my Schemes,—and gave
myself up so intirely to the Bottle, that
I was seldom Master of even that small
Share of Understanding my worn-out
Health and Strength had left me;— 
and began to curse the Author of my
Being, for all those Misfortunes I had
brought upon myself: —Till at last
Ill-humour,—and the Fear of believing
there was a Deity, made me turn
Atheist; or at least my own Desire of
being so, flattered me into a fixed Opinion,
that I was one. —In Drink—and
Debauchery, I spent my Quarter's
Income in a Month, with only a Reserve
of enough to bring me to Town; 
whither I was returning with a Resolution
of doing any thing ever so desperate,
even robbing on the Highway,
rather than deny myself the Indulgence
of any vicious Passion that was uppermost. 
I was travelling to London
when the Misfortune happened to me,
which I believe will bring me to my 

End. I cannot say I ever enjoyed any
real Happiness in my Life; for the
Anxiety about the Success of my
Schemes,—the Fear of being found
out,—and the Disappointment which always
attended me in the End,—joined
to the Envy which continually preyed
on my Heart, at the good Fortune of
others, has made me, ever since I came
into the World, the most wretched of
all Mortals. To this Conduct I owe
my Ruin.” Here he stopt, and was
so tired with having talked so long, that
he insensibly fell into a sound Sleep.” 
The Dinner coming then upon the
Table, the Clergyman deferred the Remainder
of what he had to tell them till
the Afternoon. And here I think it right
to give them time to refresh themselves,
and conclude this Chapter. 




Which proves the great Difference of
those wrong Actions which arise from
violent Passions, and those which have
their Source in the Malignity of a
rancorous Heart. 
The Dinner passed in Observations
on the Atheist's Story; but as soon
as the Company thought the Clergyman
had recruited his Spirits enough to make
it agreeable to him to relate what remained,
they desired him to proceed,
which he immediately complied with. 
The Atheist waked very light-headed,
and raved on nothing but his Brother;— 
talked of his having concealed from them
the main Part of his Story, only from
Shame. But the Apothecary, by applying
proper Remedies, at last brought him
to his Senses, and then begged him, if
there was any thing lay on his Conscience
which he had not yet disclosed, he would
do it: On which he desired him to send 

for the Clergyman again: And as soon as he
came, he told him, he could not be easy
in his Mind till he had discovered to them
the most wicked Part of his Life, which,
from some small Hopes of recovering, he
had not yet disclosed. —“But, continued
he,—since I find it is impossible for me
to live, I will no longer conceal it from
you. 
“Know then,—altho' I was never told
it,—I am sensible the Relief I told you
I often received in my greatest Distresses,
was owing to the best of Brothers: 
—But I, instead of having my
Mind overflowing with Gratitude for
his Goodness,—in my own Thoughts
only despised his Folly;—for when we
were young, from a Desire of engrossing
to myself all my Father was
worth, I contrived, while he lay on his
Death-bed, to burn his real Will, and
forge a new one in my own favour, in
order to cheat my fond—good Brother
of his Share of his Father's Patrimony.” 
Whilst the Clergyman was repeating
this last Incident, David by degrees was
worked up into so great an Agony, and 

so often changed Colour, that the whole
Company fixed their Eyes on him; and
Valentine begged to know what it was
could have caused so sudden an Alteration
in him. “Alas, Sir!” replied David,
with a faultering Voice, and trembling all
over, “the poor Wretch, whose Story I
have just heard, I know, by some Circumstances,
was my own Brother. —I
once fondly loved him;—and, notwithstanding
his Behaviour, cannot hear of
his Misery without the greatest Affliction. 
—I did, indeed, support him
underhand,—and was in hopes to have
heard, while he was yet living, that he
was brought to a Sense of his own Misconduct; 
but had I known, at last,
that he had repented of his past Life,–– 
I would have flown to have seen and
forgiven him before he died. I cannot
forbear paying some Tears to his Memory.” 
—In saying this, he clapp'd
his Handkerchief before his Eyes. 
CAMILLA, who was charmed with
David's Goodness to such a Brother,— 
and yet torn to pieces by seeing him so
affected,—had not power to speak; but
turned so very pale, that Cynthia desired
Valentine to run for a Glass of Water, for 

she was afraid his Sister would faint
away. These Words roused David,— 
and he immediately lost all Thoughts but
for Camilla. His seeming to recover,— 
and the Water they gave her, prevented
her fainting. —Cynthia and Valentine did
all they could to comfort David; and the
Clergyman was very much grieved, that
he had accidentally been the Occasion of
all this Confusion. 
Whilst they were in this Situation,
a Servant came up, and told Camilla there
was an old Gentleman below, who begg'd
to speak with her. She ran down stairs
with such precipitation as amazed them
all;—but they were much more surprized
when they heard her scream out,—as if
some terrible Accident had happened to
her. —They did not lose a moment before
they flew to her Relief: They met an old
Gentleman bringing her up in his Arms,
and crying out, “Oh! give me way,— 
for in finding my Child—I have for
ever lost her: —But, dead or alive,—I
will hold her in my Arms,—and never
part with her more.” 
CYNTHIA and Valentine presently
knew him to be her Father;—and what he
said, convinced David it could be no other. 

They conducted him into a Chamber,
where he gently laid Camilla on the Bed. 
Their present Thoughts were all taken up
in bringing her to herself: —But the moment
she opened her Eyes, she fixed them
on her Father for some time, without
being able to utter her Words. —At last
she burst into a Flood of Tears,—which
gave her some Relief,—and enabled her
to say, “Am I then, at last, so happy–– 
that my Father thinks me worthy his
Regard? —And could you be so good,
Sir, to come to look for me?” — 
Valentine took hold of the first Opportunity
to throw himself at his Father's Feet,
and begged he would condescend to look
on him. —He tenderly raised him,
and embracing him, said, “Oh my Son!–– 
nothing but the Condition I saw your
Sister in, could have prevented my
speaking to you before.” He then
flew from him to Camilla,—and then back
to him again, for the space of some Minutes. 
—At last, in his Extacy, he fell
on his Knees,—and said, “My dearest
Children, if you can forgive me,— 
(for Guilt has render'd me unworthy
of such a Son and Daughter) every
Minute of my future Life shall be employed
to promote your Pleasure–––and 

Happiness.” They both, almost by
force, got him up from the Ground,
and assured him, if he would be so good
to restore them to his Love, having whole
Worlds at their Command could not afford
them half the Comfort. —In
short, to describe this Scene, and all the
Grief which the poor old Gentleman
(who had no Fault, but that of having
been misled by a too violent Passion) and
his Children felt, requires a Shakespear's
Pen;–––therefore I am willing to close it
as soon as possible, being quite unequal
to the Task. —David and Cynthia
felt all the Tenderness and Pleasure of
their Friends;—and the Clergyman rejoiced
in having found a Company where
so much Goodness reigned. He took
his Leave for the present, thinking at this
Juncture he might be troublesome, with
a Promise of returning again in a Day or
two to see them. 
The poor old Gentleman was so much
overcome by the violent Agitation of his
Spirits, that he could hardly bring himself
that Evening to speak one coherent
Sentence. All they could get from him
was, that Livia was dead, and a Promise
to tell them all another time. But his 

Childrens Goodness,—and the Joy of
seeing them after so long a Separation,
was more than he could bear, and almost
deprived him of the Power of Speech. 
To say the truth, this good Man was so
entirely overcome with Extacy at the
Sight and Behaviour of his Children, that
he was that Night incapable of enquiring
what Methods they had taken to procure
Subsistance from the time he had lost
them. But by the little he could gather,
his Heart was inflamed with the warmest
Gratitude to David. 
CAMILLA, seeing how much her
Father was affected, prevailed on him to
retire to Rest. David was now resolved,
as Camilla had found her only surviving
Parent, that very Night to obtain her
Consent to his asking her Father's Approbation
of his Love, and desired the
Liberty of entertaining her one Hour
alone. 
I shall not dwell minutely on this
Part of my Hero's Life, as I have too
much Regard for my Readers to make
them third Persons to Lovers;—and shall
only inform the Curious, that Camilla, on
the Consideration that she had already received 

such strong Proofs of David's sincere
Affection,—thought proper to abate
something of the Ceremonies prescribed to
Lovers,—before they can find out whether
their Mistresses like them,—or no. 
—And as she was convinced every Word
of her's was capable of giving him either
the greatest Pleasure, or the utmost Pain,
—her Tenderness and Softness prevented
her making use of any of that Coquettry
which is very prevalent in some Part of
her Sex. She was not ashamed to own
she loved him, and that if her Father
consented, the greatest Happiness
she could propose in this World was, to
imploy that Life he had so generously
saved, in endeavouring to make him
happy. 
And now, Reader, if you are inclined
to have an adequate Idea of David's
Raptures on that Confession,— 
think what Pretty Miss feels when her
Parents wisely prefer her in their Applause
—to all her Brothers and Sisters; 
—Observe her yet a little older, when she
is pinning on her first Manteau and Petticoat; 
—then follow her to the Ball,
and view her Eyes sparkle, and the convulsive 

Tosses of her Person on the first
Compliment she receives: —But don't
lose sight of her, till you place her in a
Room full of Company, where she hears
her Rival condemned for Indiscretion,— 
and exults in her Loss of Reputation. — 
No matter whether she rivals her in my
Lord &wblank;the Captain,—or the 'Squire,
&c. &c. —For as she is equally desirous
of engrossing the Admiration of all,
—her Enmity is equal towards the Woman
who deprives her of such great Blessings
—which-ever she robs her of. –––Imagine
–––the Joys of an ambitious Man,
who has just supplanted his Enemy,–––and
is got into his Place;—imagine,–––what
a young Lawyer feels the first Cause he
has gained,—or a young Officer the
first time he mounts Guard. –––But imagine
what you will, unless you have experienced
what it is to be both a sincere
and successful Lover, you never can imagine
any thing equal to what David felt. 
The Conversation between him and
Camilla was of the delicatest,––––tenderest
kind; and he told her with the greatest
Joy, that she had delivered him from the
utmost Despair of ever meeting with any 

Happiness in this World: ––For that when
he had the good Fortune to meet with
her,–––his Condition was so unhappy, that
he began seriously to think of getting into
some Corner of the Earth, where he
might never see the Face of a human
Creature: for to be always in the midst of
People, who, by their Behaviour, forc'd him
to despise them,––was to him the greatest of
all Curses. ––“To you therefore, Madam,
said he, I owe that delicate Pleasure of
having my Taste approved by my
Judgment. You know, I made an
Offer to Cynthia, for I never desired to
conceal any thing from you. –––I thought
indeed, that in her I had met with what
I was in search of,–––a Woman I could
esteem. ––––This made me admire her; 
but you alone truly touched my Heart.” 
CAMILLA exulted as much in
having gain'd so generous,–––so good a
Man as David,–––and had now no farther
Thoughts of his Love for Cynthia: But
the mentioning her, put her in mind of
Valentine; and as she was not amongst
that number of People who can be very
happy themselves,–––let their Friends be
ever so miserable, she could not help Sighing
at the Reflection, how difficult it would 

be for Valentine to bring about a Marriage
with Cynthia. 
DAVID immediately guessed the
Cause of her suddenly growing melancholy,
and told her, he should not deserve
the good Opinion she had expressed
of him, if he could enjoy any one Pleasure
in Life, while her Brother was unhappy; 
––that the Death of the poor Creature,
whose Story the Clergyman had related,
––added something to his Income,
and he thought he had enough to make
her and all her Family easy in a private
retired Way of Life; and as to his part, that
was all he desired. Camilla was every
Minute more and more charmed with his
Goodness;––and as she was certain, he
delighted in no other Expence but assisting
his Friends, and that she herself could be
contented in any Way of Life,––provided
every one she lived with was easy; she
thought it more Greatness of Mind to let
David fully satisfy his Darling Passion of
doing good,––and to live lower herself in
order to serve her Brother, than to refuse her
Lover's Offer, under the pretence of thinking
she ought not to burden him, only
that she might have more Opportunities
of indulging herself. 

They went together to see for Valentine
and Cynthia; and found them
both sitting in the most pensive manner,
as if they were quite uneasy: and upon
Inquiry found that Cynthia had fixed a Resolution
on Valentine's begging her Leave,
now he had found his Father,—to ask
his Consent to marry her—of leaving them
the next Day;—for she insisted on it, that
she would not come into a Family to be
any Disadvantage to it. —She owned, if
she had a Fortune, she should think herself
happy in giving it to Valentine;—for
that from her Youth he was the only Man
she had ever thought on:—but in her present
Circumstances she could have no
other Prospect, but to be a Burden to him
as long as she lived,—and was resolved
she would suffer any thing rather than
that should ever be the Case. 
DAVID begged her to consider, that
in Valentine's Happiness she would increase,
instead of diminish that of the
whole Family; in short, they all used so
many Arguments with her, that at last
she found her Resolution began to stagger,
and therefore got up and insisted on going
to bed,––saying, she would consider farther
of it. —Valentine could not but approve 

of Cynthia's Conduct, and the very Method
she took to prevail on him, to get
the better of his Inclination, only increased
it so much the more. David and Camilla
sat up with him some time, for he was
so uneasy he could not presently compose
himself to rest. His Passion for
Cynthia had got so much the better of
him, that it was not in his power to command
it; and yet he could not help
condemning the Thoughts of indulging
himself at the Expence of so great,— 
and good a Friend as David. 
The next Morning, as soon as Valentine
and Camilla heard their Father was
awake, they went to pay their Duty to
him. Excessive was the Joy they felt at
thus having an Opportunity of again renewing
what had been their greatest Pleasure
from their Infancy. The poor old
Gentleman, even the Day he was married
to his beloved Livia, never experienced
half the Raptures the Sight of his long-lost
Children gave him. —As soon as he was
up, and they had all breakfasted together,
Camilla begged her Father, if it would
not be troublesome to him, to relate how
Livia died, and what had happened since
their unfortunate Separation;—saying, he
might speak any thing before all that 

Company; for that Cynthia was no Stranger
to him, and she was sure the Man
who by his Goodness had saved both hers
and her Brother's Life, and been their
only Support, would be always esteemed
by him as his Friend. Her Father, who
was now restored again to his former Self,
followed his usual Method of not delaying
a moment before he complied with
what she desired, and began as follows: 
“I must take shame to myself, that
at my Age, and having two such
Children to be my Comfort, I suffered
an unreasonable Passion to overcome
me—to their disadvantage. Which
way shall I be able to thank the Man
who has preserved them to bless me
again with their Sight? ––From the time
you left me, and I was persuaded of
your Infamy,—I was every day more
and more taken up with my Admiration
of Livia. —She turned and wound
me just according to her own Inclinations; 
—my Thoughts were almost all
swallowed up in the Contemplation of
her Charms,—and my Desires wholly
centered in her Happiness;—and yet
in spite of all my Fondness, a Sigh
would sometimes steal from my Breast, 

when the Idea of my Children forced
itself on my Fancy. I made no scruple
of disclosing whatever I felt to Livia: 
But whenever I spoke of you, she constantly
grew melancholy, took care to
drop Expressions, (and they appeared
to flow from the height of her Love)
as if no Behaviour of hers could fix
my whole Affections;—but that she
found even Undutifulness to me, and
the most abandoned Actions––could not
erase from my Mind, the Persons I
loved so much better than her. —In
short,––it is impossible to describe half
the Arts she made use of,––that I might
never mention or think of you. — 
Fits–––Tears–––and Good-humour–––were
play'd upon me each in their turn,–– 
till I was almost out of my Senses; 
but if ever her Behaviour provoked
me to be the least suspicious of her,
the next Moment her Smiles threw my
Soul into Raptures, and every other
Thought gave way to the Delight and
Joy she inspired me with. 
“All the Money I could get, she
spent in her Extravagance, till at last
I found I could support it no longer,
and was obliged to keep in my own 

House, for fear of my Creditors. I
durst not so much as mention you, for
fear of shocking Livia;—and all
this, I was blind enough to impute to
her great Tenderness for me. But Poverty,
—the continual Fear of seeing
her miserable,—and the horrible
Thought which sometimes forced itself
upon me,—of what could become
of my Children, had such an
Effect on me, that it threw me into
violent Disorders,—and made me
quite unhealthy. —I was in the utmost
Despair, how to support her,––or
myself. 
“Whilst I was in this unhappy Situation,
Livia's Brother died; and as
he had before lost his Wife and Children,
and Livia was his nearest Relation,
in Consideration of my Kindness
to her,—and knowing her extravagant
Temper, he left me in full Possession
of all his Fortune,–––which
amounted to twenty thousand Pounds. 
This was a very seasonable Relief to
me; but yet it was some time before
I could in the least recover my Constitution,
during which time she nursed
me with all the Assiduity of the most 

tender Wife in the World, in hopes
of getting this new Fortune from me. 
She sat up with me whole Nights; and
as she was always with me, her Flattery
at last got such an Ascendant over
me, that I was besotted to her Love,–– 
and forgot I had ever been a Father. 
—Thus getting rid of my most
painful Thought, and in possession of
a plentiful Fortune, I soon grew well
and strong again. —But Livia's Dissimulation
cost her her Life; for the
Delicacy of her Frame could not support
the Fatigue she had undergone
during my Illness, and she fell into a
nervous Fever, of which she died. 
“That Distemper naturally inclines
People to all manner of horrible
Thoughts, and as her Crimes were
such, as greatly heightned all the Terrors
of it; she was at last, by the Perturbation
of her own Mind, forced to
confess to me all the Arts she had used,
to make me have an ill Opinion of you
while you lived with me; and that she
had afterwards falsely accused you of
a Crime, she had no manner of reason
to suspect you of, in order to prevent 

any Means of a Reconciliation
between us. 
“Imagine now, my dear Children–– 
what I felt, when the Consideration of
this Woman's Perfidiousness brought
back to my Memory all your Goodness; 
and when I considered what
Miseries you must have been exposed
to in being abandoned to the wide
World without any Support,––I thought
I should have gone distracted. — 
I asked her, what could have tempted
her thus to ruin the Man who doated
on her,––and whose every Wish was
centered in her Happiness. –––All the
Reason I could get from her was, that
she thought her Interest and yours was
incompatible; for the more I did for
you, the less she could have for herself: 
–That she soon perceived your Discontent
at the Alteration of my Behaviour
to you;––and as she was your
Enemy, she concluded you must be
hers. —This she said made her go
greater Lengths than she at first intended. 
–––Soon after this Confession
she died, and left me in a Condition
impossible to express. –––And as I am
now convinced of your Love and Tenderness 

for me, I will not shock you
with the Repetition of it. 
“The next day while I was revolving
in my Mind what Method I should take
to find you again, my Lord . . . . came
to see me. At first my Servant denied
me, and said I saw no Company; but
he insisted on coming up, saying, he
had something of the greatest Consequence
to impart to me. –––And the
moment he entered the Room, informed
me, that by Accident he had
met with you and Valentine. –––This
sudden Transport of Joy almost deprived
me of my Senses; I asked him
a thousand Questions before I gave him
time to answer one: ––At last, as soon
as he could speak, he told me, he was
convinced by your Behaviour, you
was intirely innocent; and if I would
send for you home, and clear up your
Reputation, he should be very glad to
receive you as his Wife. –––I was quite
astonished at this Discourse, but however
would not stay with him a Minute
longer, than to thank him for his good
News and kind Offer,–––took a Direction
where to find you, and flew once 

more to have the Happiness of embracing
my dear Children. 
“I have but fifteen thousand Pounds
left out of the twenty; divide it between
you: and for the rest of my
Life, all I desire is to see you both
happy.” —And then addressing
himself to David, he said, “Are there any
Words, Sir, capable of expressing the
Gratitude I owe you, for your supporting
so generously these two young
Creatures?” 
DAVID, who had trembled from the
time he had mentioned my Lord . . . now
thought he had an Opportunity to speak; 
and immediately replied, “If, Sir, you
think you have any Obligations to me,
which I assure you I do not, as I am
fully paid by having served Persons of
such worth as Valentine and Camilla;–– 
it is in your power to give me all my
Soul holds dear: ––Consent to my having
a Title to call you Father, by being
joined for ever to Camilla, and the
World cannot produce a Man so happy
as myself.” —Camilla added, that it
was what she wished,—and related in
what manner she had already refused my 

Lord . . .; on which the old Gentleman
immediately joined their Hands, assuring
David, he had rather see his Daughter
married to the Man, whose Actions had
so strongly proved his real Love for her,
than to any Estate or Title in Europe. 
CAMILLA saw Valentine was afraid
to speak, as Cynthia had not yet given him
Permission; and therefore undertook it
herself, as she was resolved to make her
own Happiness compleat by adding that
of her Brother's to it. She told her Father,
that to compleat the general Joy, there
was yet wanting his Consent to her Brother's
taking Cynthia for a Wife. —On
this Valentine fell on his Knees, and said,
his Sister had asked the only thing could
make him happy. –––His Desires were no
sooner known than complied with, by his
now once-more fond Father. 
CYNTHIA, on hearing that he
might be able to live with her in a decent,
though plain Way, thought she had now
no longer any Reason to refuse him the
Happiness of being her Support and Protector,
and inwardly enjoyed the Thought
of the Pleasure a Man of his Temper must
have, in finding it in his power to be so. 

David insisted, that what Fortune was amongst
them might be shared in common; 
and they all joined in intreating the good
old Gentleman to spend the rest of his Days
with them, assuring him, his Will should
be a Law to them all. And now I believe
it is impossible for the most lively Imagination
to form an Idea of greater Happiness
than was enjoyed by this whole
Company. That very Evening the Clergyman
before mentioned came to see them; 
and although he really liked Cynthia, yet
had he so little Selfishness in him, he
heartily congratulated them all on their
Happiness; and the next Morning was
appointed by the Consent of all Parties
for the performing the Ceremony. 




Containing two Weddings, and consequently
the Conclusion of the Book. 
The next Morning, as soon as
Camilla rose, she went into Cynthia's
Chamber—where they mutually
congratulated each other, on the Happiness
they had now so near a Prospect
of enjoying for the rest of their Lives,
after all the Scenes of Misery they had
gone through, in being for ever joined
to the only Men they could really like or
esteem. —Camilla, with a Smile, related
to her Friend what Pain David's
having once liked her had formerly given
her; and Cynthia, according to her usual
obliging manner, replied, that David indeed
did her the honour to esteem her,
and she believed the Condition in which he
first found her raised compassion enough
in a Heart like his—to make him imagine
he loved her: —But, continued she,
with Joy I perceive, that you, my Camilla
—whom for the future I am to 

have the Pleasure of calling Sister—are
the only Person who could truly touch his
Heart. —Camilla blushed, and felt at
that Moment (if possible) more Tenderness
for Cynthia than ever. But before
she had time to make any Answer, a
Message was brought from her Father,
that he desired them both to walk into
another Apartment, where David—Valentine
—and the Clergyman waited
for them. —From thence they proceeded
to the Church, where the Ceremony was
performed. —To attempt to describe David's
—and Valentine's Raptures, is utterly
impossible;—Camilla—and Cynthia— 
without Reluctance, gave their Hands
where their Hearts were already united
with so much Sincerity. 
The old Gentleman wept for Joy,
that all Livia's Deceit—and Cunning— 
and his own extravagant Passion for her,
could not prevent his enjoying the excessive
Happiness of thus blessing his Children,
and having such a Prospect of their
Prosperity. And the Clergyman's real
Goodness made him partake of all their
Pleasures. 

Perhaps it may be here expected I
should give some Description of the Persons
of my favourite Characters; but as
the Writers of Novels and Romances
have already exhausted all the Beauties of
Nature to adorn their Heroes and Heroines,
I shall leave it to my Readers Imagination
to form them just as they like
best: It is their Minds I have taken most
pains to bring them acquainted with, and
from that Acquaintance it will be easy to
judge what Scheme of Life was followed
by this whole Company. 
DAVID's Travels were now at an
end, and he thought himself overpaid in
Camilla's Goodness for all his Troubles
and Disappointments. On the other side,
her Happiness was compleat, in having
it in her power to give David pleasure;— 
in seeing her Brother, instead of the miserable
Condition he was once in—now in
the possession of all he desired;—in having
her Friend for her Companion, and in
her Father's returning—and growing
Fondness. 
VALENTINE and Cynthia had
not a Wish beyond what they enjoyed; 

and the Father had all the Comfort his
Age would admit of, in the dutiful and
affectionate Behaviour of all his Children
towards him. 
Every little Incident in Life was
turned into some delicate Pleasure to the
whole Company, by each of them endeavouring
to make every thing contribute
to the Happiness of the others. The
very Infirmities, which it is impossible for
human Nature to escape, such as Pain— 
Sickness, &c.—were by their Contrivance
not only made supportable, but
fully compensated in the fresh Opportunities
they gave each Individual of testifying
their Tenderness and Care for the whole. 
In short, it is impossible for the most
lively Imagination to form an Idea more
pleasing than what this little Society enjoyed,
in the true Proofs of each other's
Love: And, as strong a Picture as this is
of real Happiness, it is in the power of
every Community to attain it, if every
Member of it would perform the Part allotted
him by Nature, or his Station in
Life, with a sincere Regard to the Interest
and Pleasure of the whole. —Let every
Man, instead of bursting with Rage— 
and Envy—at the Advantages of Nature, 

or Station, another has over him, extend
his Views far enough to consider, that if
he acts his Part well, he deserves as much
Applause—and is as useful a Member of
Society—as any other Man whatever:
for in every Machine, the smallest Parts
conduce as much to the keeping it together,
and to regulate its Motions, as the
greatest. That the Stage is a Picture of
Life, has been observed by almost every
body, especially since Shakespear's Time; and nothing can make the Metaphor more
strong, than the observing every Theatrical
Performance spoiled, by the great
Desire each Performer shews of playing the
Top-part—In the Animal and Vegetable
World there would be full as much
Confusion as there is in human Life,— 
was not every thing kept in its proper
Place: 

Where Order in Variety we see * ;
And where, tho' all Things differ, all agree.
The lowly Hedge, and humble Shrub,
contribute to the varying, and consequently
beautifying the Prospect, as well as the
stately Oak and lofty Pine. Were all
Mankind contented to exert their own 

Faculties for the common Good, neither
envying those who in any respect have a
Superiority over them, nor despising such
as they think their Inferiors; real Happiness
would be attainable, notwithstanding
all that has been said on that Subject:
and the various Humours,—and the
different Understandings with which Human
Nature is supplied, would, instead
of Discord, produce such a Harmony, as
would infallibly make the whole Species
happy.— 
If every Man, who is possessed of
a greater Share of Wit than is common,
—instead of insulting and satirizing
others, would make use of his Talents
for the Use and Pleasure of the Society
to which he happens more particularly
to belong;—and they, instead
of hating him for his superior Parts,— 
would, in return for the Entertainment
he affords them, exert all the Abilities
Nature has given them, for his Use, in
common with themselves; what Happiness
would Mankind enjoy,—and who could
complain of being miserable? —It was this
Care—Tenderness–––and Benevolence to
each other, which made David, and his
amiable Company happy; who, quite contrary 

to the rest of the World, for every
trifling Frailty blamed themselves, whilst
it was the Business of all the rest, to lessen,
instead of aggravating their Faults. 
–––In short, it is this Tenderness and Benevolence,
which alone can give any real
Pleasure, and which I most sincerely wish
to all my Readers. 