




The Arrival of Lady Booby and the
rest at Booby-Hall. 
The Coach and Six, in which
Lady Booby rode, overtook the
other Travellers as they entered
the Parish. She no sooner saw Joseph,
than her Cheeks glow'd with red, and
immediately after became as totally pale. 
She had in her Surprize almost stopt her 

Coach; but recollected herself timely
enough to prevent it. She entered the
Parish amidst the ringing of Bells, and
the Acclamations of the Poor, who were
rejoiced to see their Patroness returned
after so long an Absence, during which
time all her Rents had been drafted to
London, without a Shilling being spent
among them, which tended not a little
to their utter impoverishing; for if the
Court would be severely missed in such
a City as London, how much more must
the Absence of a Person of great Fortune
be felt in a little Country Village, for
whose Inhabitants such a Family finds a
constant Employment and Supply; and
with the Offalls of whose Table the infirm,
aged, and infant Poor are abundantly
fed, with a Generosity which hath
scarce a visible Effect on their Benefactor's
Pockets? 
But if their Interest inspired so publick
a Joy into every Countenance, how
much more forcibly did the Affection
which they bore Parson Adams operate
upon all who beheld his Return. They
flocked about him like dutiful Children
round an indulgent Parent, and vyed
with each other in Demonstrations of
Duty and Love. The Parson on his side
shook every one by the Hand, enquired 

heartily after the Healths of all that were
absent, of their Children and Relations,
and exprest a Satisfaction in his Face,
which nothing but Benevolence made
happy by its Objects could infuse. 
Nor did Joseph and Fanny want a
hearty Welcome from all who saw them. 
In short, no three Persons could be more
kindly received, as indeed none ever
more deserved to be universally beloved. 
ADAMS carried his Fellow-Travellers
home to his House, where he insisted
on their partaking whatever his
Wife, whom with his Children he found
in Health and Joy, could provide. Where
we shall leave them, enjoying perfect
Happiness over a homely Meal, to view
Scenes of greater Splendor but infinitely
less Bliss. 
Our more intelligent Readers will
doubtless suspect by this second Appearance
of Lady Booby on the Stage, that
all was not ended by the Dismission of
Joseph; and to be honest with them,
they are in the right; the Arrow had
pierced deeper than she imagined; 
nor was the Wound so easily to be cured. 
The Removal of the Object soon cooled 

her Rage, but it had a different Effect
on her Love; that departed with his
Person; but this remained lurking in
her Mind with his Image. Restless, interrupted
Slumbers, and confused horrible
Dreams were her Portion the first
Night. In the Morning, Fancy painted
her a more delicious Scene; but to delude,
not delight her: for before she
could reach the promised Happiness, it
vanished, and left her to curse, not bless
the Vision. 
She started from her Sleep, her Imagination
being all on fire with the Phantom,
when her Eyes accidentally glancing
towards the Spot where yesterday
the real Joseph had stood, that little Circumstance
raised his Idea in the liveliest
Colours in her Memory. Each Look,
each Word, each Gesture rushed back on
her Mind with Charms which all his
Coldness could not abate. Nay, she imputed
that to his Youth, his Folly, his
Awe, his Religion, to every thing, but
what would instantly have produced Contempt,
want of Passion for the Sex; or,
that which would have roused her Hatred,
want of Liking to her. 

Reflection then hurried her farther,
and told her she must see this beautiful
Youth no more, nay, suggested to her,
that she herself had dismissed him for no
other Fault, than probably that of too
violent an Awe and Respect for herself; 
and which she ought rather to have esteemed
a Merit, the Effects of which
were besides so easily and surely to
have been removed; she then blamed,
she cursed the hasty Rashness of her Temper; 
her Fury was vented all on herself,
and Joseph appeared innocent in her
Eyes. Her Passion at length grew so violent
that it forced her on seeking Relief,
and now she thought of recalling him: 
But Pride forbad that, Pride which soon
drove all softer Passions from her Soul, and
represented to her the Meanness of him
she was fond of. That Thought soon began
to obscure his Beauties; Contempt
succeeded next, and then Disdain, which
presently introduced her Hatred of the
Creature who had given her so much
Uneasiness. These Enemies of Joseph
had no sooner taken Possession of her
Mind, than they insinuated to her a
thousand things in his Disfavour; every
thing but Dislike of her Person; a
Thought, which as it would have been 

intolerable to her, she checked the moment
it endeavoured to arise. Revenge
came now to her Assistance; and she considered
her Dismission of him stript, and
without a Character, with the utmost Pleasure. 
She rioted in the several kinds of
Misery, which her Imagination suggested
to her, might be his Fate; and with a
Smile composed of Anger, Mirth, and
Scorn, viewed him in the Rags in which
her Fancy had drest him. 
Mrs. Slipslop being summoned, attended
her Mistress, who had now in her
own Opinion totally subdued this Passion. 
Whilst she was dressing, she asked if that
Fellow had been turned away according
to her Orders. Slipslop answered, she had
told her Ladyship so, (as indeed she had)
—“And how did he behave?” replied
the Lady. “Truly Madam,” 
cries Slipslop, “in such a manner that infected
every body who saw him. The
poor Lad had but little Wages to receive:
for he constantly allowed his
Father and Mother half his Income; 
so that when your Ladyship's Livery
was stript off, he had not wherewithal
to buy a Coat, and must have gone
naked, if one of the Footmen had not
incommodated him with one; and whilst 

he was standing in his Shirt, (and to
say truth, he was a lovely Figure) being
told your Ladyship would not give
him a Character, he sighed, and said
he had done nothing willingly to offend; 
that for his part he should always
give your Ladyship a good Character
where-ever he went; and he pray'd
God to bless you; for you was the best
of Ladies, tho' his Enemies had set you
against him: I wish you had not turned
him away; for I believe you have
not a faithfuller Servant in the House.” 
—“How came you then,” replied
the Lady, “to advise me to turn him
away?” “I, Madam,” said Slipslop,
“I am sure you will do me the Justice
to say, I did all in my power to prevent
it; but I saw your Ladyship was
angry; and it is not the business of
us upper Servants to hintorfear on
those occasions.” —“And was it
not you, audacious Wretch,” cried
the Lady, “who made me angry? Was
it not your Tittle-tattle, in which I
believe you belyed the poor Fellow,
which incensed me against him? He
may thank you for all that hath happened; 
and so may I for the Loss of a
good Servant, and one who probably
had more Merit than all of you. Poor 

Fellow! I am charmed with his Goodness
to his Parents. Why did not you
tell me of that, but suffer me to dismiss
so good a Creature without a Character? 
I see the Reason of your whole
Behaviour now as well as your Complaint; 
you was jealous of the Wenches.” 
“I jealous!” said Slipslop, “I assure you
I look upon myself as his Betters; I
am not Meat for a Footman I hope.” 
These Words threw the Lady into a violent
Passion, and she sent Slipslop from her
Presence, who departed tossing her Nose
and crying, “Marry come up! there are
some People more jealous than I, I
believe.” Her Lady affected not to
hear the Words, tho' in reality she did,
and understood them too. Now ensued
a second Conflict, so like the former, that
it might savour of Repetition to relate it
minutely. It may suffice to say, that Lady
Booby found good Reason to doubt whether
she had so absolutely conquered her
Passion, as she had flattered herself; and
in order to accomplish it quite, took a
Resolution more common than wise, to
retire immediately into the Country. The
Reader hath long ago seen the Arrival
of Mrs. Slipslop, whom no Pertness could
make her Mistress resolve to part with; 

lately, that of Mr. Pounce her Fore-runners; 
and lastly, that of the Lady herself. 
The Morning after her Arrival being
Sunday, she went to Church, to the
great Surprize of every body, who wondered
to see her Ladyship, being no
very constant Churchwoman, there so
suddenly upon her Journey. Joseph was
likewise there; and I have heard it was
remarked, that she fixed her Eyes on him
much more than on the Parson; but this
I believe to be only a malicious Rumour. 
When the Prayers were ended Mr. Adams
stood up, and with a loud Voice pronounced:
I publish the Banns of Marriage
between Joseph Andrews and Frances
Goodwill, both of this Parish, &c. Whether
this had any Effect on Lady Booby
or no, who was then in her Pew, which
the Congregation could not see into, I
could never discover: But certain it is,
that in about a quarter of an Hour she
stood up, and directed her Eyes to that
part of the Church where the Women
sat, and persisted in looking that way
during the Remainder of the Sermon, in
so scrutinizing a manner, and with so
angry a Countenance, that most of the
Women were afraid she was offended at
them. 

The moment she returned home, she
sent for Slipslop into her Chamber, and
told her, she wondered what that impudent
Fellow Joseph did in that Parish? 
Upon which Slipslop gave her an Account
of her meeting Adams with him on the
Road, and likewise the Adventure with
Fanny. At the Relation of which, the
Lady often changed her Countenance; and
when she had heard all, she ordered Mr.
Adams into her Presence, to whom she
behaved as the Reader will see in the next
Chapter. 



A Dialogue between Mr. Abraham
Adams and the Lady Booby. 
Mr. Adams was not far off; for he was
drinking her Ladyship's Health
below in a Cup of her Ale. He no
sooner came before her, than she began
in the following manner: “I wonder,
Sir, after the many great Obligations
you have had to this Family,” (with 

all which the Reader hath, in the Course
of this History, been minutely acquainted)
“that you will ungratefully show
any Respect to a Fellow who hath been
turned out of it for his Misdeeds. Nor
is it, I can tell you, Sir, becoming in
a Man of your Character, to run about
the Country with an idle Fellow and
Wench. Indeed, as for the Girl, I
know no harm of her. Slipslop tells
me she was formerly bred up in my
House, and behaved as she ought, till
she hankered after this Fellow, and he
spoiled her. Nay, she may still perhaps
do very well, if he will let her
alone. You are therefore doing a
monstrous thing, in endeavouring to
procure a Match between these two
People, which will be to the Ruin of
them both.”—“Madam,” says Adams,
“if your Ladyship will but hear me
speak, I protest I never heard any
harm of Mr. Joseph Andrews; if I
had, I should have corrected him for
it: For I never have, nor will encourage
the Faults of those under my
Cure. As for the young Woman, I
assure your Ladyship I have as good
an Opinion of her as your Ladyship
yourself, or any other can have. She
is the sweetest-tempered, honestest, 

worthiest, young Creature; indeed as
to her Beauty, I do not commend her
on that account, tho' all Men allow
she is the handsomest Woman, Gentle
or Simple, that ever appeared in the
Parish.” “You are very impertinent,
says she, to talk such fulsome Stuff to
me. It is mighty becoming truly in
a Clergyman to trouble himself about
handsome Women, and you are a delicate
Judge of Beauty, no doubt. A
Man who hath lived all his Life in
such a Parish as this, is a rare Judge
of Beauty. Ridiculous! Beauty indeed,
—a Country Wench a Beauty. 
—I shall be sick whenever I
hear Beauty mentioned again. — 
And so this Wench is to stock the Parish
with Beauties, I hope. —But,
Sir, our Poor is numerous enough already; 
I will have no more Vagabonds
settled here.” “Madam,” says Adams,
“your Ladyship is offended with
me, I protest without any Reason. 
This Couple were desirous to consummate
long ago, and I dissuaded them
from it; nay, I may venture to say,
I believe, I was the sole Cause of their
delaying it.” “Well,” says she,
and you did very wisely and honestly
too, notwithstanding she is the greatest 

Beauty in the Parish.” —“And
now, Madam,” continued he, “I
only perform my Office to Mr. Joseph.” 
—“Pray don't Mister such Fellows
to me,” cries the Lady. “He,” said
the Parson, “with the Consent of
Fanny, before my Face, put in the
Banns.” —“Yes,” answered the
Lady, “I suppose the Slut is forward
enough; Slipslop tells me how her
Head runs on Fellows; that is one of
her Beauties, I suppose. But if they
have put in the Banns, I desire you
will publish them no more without
my Orders.” “Madam,” cries Adams,
“if any one puts in sufficient Caution,
and assigns a proper Reason against
them, I am willing to surcease.” 
—“I tell you a Reason,” says she,
“he is a Vagabond, and he shall not
settle here, and bring a Nest of Beggars
into the Parish; it will make us
but little Amends that they will be
Beauties.” “Madam,” answered Adams,
“with the utmost Submission to
your Ladyship, I have been informed
by Lawyer Scout, that any Person
who serves a Year, gains a Settlement
in the Parish where he serves.” “Lawyer
Scout,” replied the Lady, “is an
impudent Coxcomb; I will have no 

Lawyer Snout interfere with me. I
repeat to you again, I will have no
more Incumbrances brought on us; so
I desire you will proceed no further.” 
“Madam,” returned Adams, “I would
obey your Ladyship in every thing
that is lawful; but surely the Parties
being poor is no Reason against their
marrying. G&wblank;d forbid there should
be any such Law. The Poor have
little Share enough of this World already; 
it would be barbarous indeed
to deny them the common Privileges,
and innocent Enjoyments which Nature
indulges to the animal Creation.” 
“Since you understand yourself no better,” 
cries the Lady, “nor the Respect
due from such as you to a Woman
of my Distinction, than to affront my
Ears by such loose Discourse, I shall
mention but one short Word; It is my
Orders to you, that you publish these
Banns no more; and if you dare, I
will recommend it to your Master, the
Doctor, to discard you from his Service. 
I will, Sir, notwithstanding your
poor Family; and then you and the
greatest Beauty in the Parish may go
and beg together.” “Madam,” answered
Adams, “I know not what
your Ladyship means by the Terms 

Master and Service. I am in the Service
of a Master who will never discard
me for doing my Duty: And if the
Doctor (for indeed I have never been
able to pay for a Licence) thinks proper
to turn me from my Cure, G&wblank; 
will provide me, I hope, another. At
least, my Family as well as myself
have Hands; and he will prosper, I
doubt not, our Endeavours to get
our Bread honestly with them. Whilst
my Conscience is pure, I shall never
fear what Man can do unto me.” — 
“I condemn my Humility,” said the
Lady, “for demeaning myself to converse
with you so long. I shall take
other Measures; for I see you are a
Confederate with them. But the sooner
you leave me, the better; and I shall
give Orders that my Doors may no
longer be open to you.” “Madam,” 
said Adams, “I shall enter into no Person's
Doors against their Will: But I
am assured, when you have enquired
farther into this matter, you will applaud,
not blame my Proceeding; and
so I humbly take my leave;” which
he did with many Bows, or at least many
Attempts at a Bow. 




What past between the Lady and
Lawyer Scout. 
In the Afternoon the Lady sent for
Mr. Scout, whom she attacked most
violently for intermeddling with her Servants,
which he denied, and indeed with
Truth; for he had only asserted accidentally,
and perhaps rightly, that a
Year's Service gained a Settlement; and
so far he owned he might have formerly
informed the Parson, and believed it was
Law. “I am resolved,” said the Lady,
“to have no discarded Servants of mine
settled here; and so, if this be your
Law, I shall send to another Lawyer.” 
Scout said, “If she sent to a hundred
Lawyers, not one nor all of them
could alter the Law. The utmost that
was in the power of a Lawyer, was
to prevent the Law's taking effect; 
and that he himself could do for her
Ladyship as well as any other: And I
believe,” says he, “Madam, your
Ladyship not being conversant in these
Matters hath mistaken a Difference: For
I asserted only, that a Man who served 

a Year was settled. Now there is a
material Difference between being
settled in Law and settled in Fact; 
and as I affirmed generally he was
settled, and Law is preferable to Fact,
my Settlement must be understood in
Law, and not in Fact! And suppose,
Madam, we admit he was settled in
Law, what use will they make of it,
how doth that relate to Fact? He is
not settled in Fact; and if he be not
settled in Fact, he is not an Inhabitant; 
and if he is not an Inhabitant,
he is not of this Parish; and then undoubtedly
he ought not to be published
here; for Mr. Adams hath told
me your Ladyship's Pleasure, and the
Reason, which is a very good one, to
prevent burdening us with the Poor,
we have too many already; and I
think we ought to have an Act to hang
or transport half of them.” “Truly,” 
said the Lady, “they are a grievous
Load, and unless we had an Employment
for them, it would be Charity
to send them where they might have
something to do. At least, I am sure
we ought to prevent the farther Growth
of the Evil, and not let such Beauties
as these produce Children for us to
keep.” —“Beauties indeed! your 

Ladyship is pleased to be merry,”— 
answered Scout. —“Mr. Adams described
her so to me, said the Lady. 
—Pray what sort of Dowdy is it,
Mr. Scout?” —“The ugliest Creature
almost I ever beheld, a poor dirty
Drab, your Ladyship never saw such a
Wretch.” —“Well but, dear
Mr. Scout, let her be what she will,
—these ugly Women will bring Children
you know; so that we must prevent
the Marriage.” —“True, Madam,” 
replied Scout, “for the subsequent
Marriage co-operating with the Law,
will carry Law into Fact. When a
Man is married, he is settled in Fact; 
and then he is not removeable. I will
see Mr. Adams, and I make no doubt
of prevailing with him. His only Objection
is doubtless that he shall lose
his Fee: But that being once made
easy, as it shall be, I am confident no
farther Objection will remain. No, no,
it is impossible: but your Ladyship can't
discommend his Unwillingness to depart
with his Fee. Every Man ought
to have a proper Value for his Fee. 
As to the matter in question, if your
Ladyship pleases to employ me in it,
I will venture to promise you Success. 
The Laws of this Land are not so 

vulgar, to permit a mean Fellow to
contend with one of your Ladyship's
Fortune. We have one sure Card,
which is to carry him before Justice
Trolick, who, upon hearing your Ladyship's
Name, will commit him
without any farther Questions.” — 
“Take what Measures you please, good
Mr. Scout,” answered the Lady, “but
I wish you could rid the Parish of both; 
for Slipslop tells me such Stories of this
Wench, that I abhor the Thoughts
of her; and tho' you say she is such
an ugly Slut, yet you know, dear Mr.
Scout, these forward Creatures who run
after Men, will always find some as
forward as themselves: So that, to
prevent the Increase of Beggars, we
must get rid of her.” —“Your
Ladyship is very much in the right,” 
answered Scout, “but I am afraid the
Law is a little deficient in giving us
any such Power of Prevention; however
the Justice will stretch it as far as
he is able, to oblige your Ladyship. 
To say truth, it is a great Blessing to
the Country that he is in the Commission; 
for he hath taken several
Poor off our hands, that the Law
would never lay hold on. I know some
Justices who make as much of committing 

a Man to Bridewell as his
Lordship at Size would of hanging
him: But it would do a Man good
to see his Worship our Justice commit
a Fellow to Bridewell; he takes
so much pleasure in it: And when
once we ha' un there, we seldom hear
any more o' un. He's either starved
or eat up by Vermin in a Month's
time.” —Here the Arrival of a Visitor
put an end to the Conversation, and Mr.
Scout having undertaken the Cause, and
promised it Success, departed. 
This Scout was one of those Fellows,
who without any Knowledge of the Law,
or being bred to it, take upon them, in
defiance of an Act of Parliament, to act
as Lawyers in the Country, and are called
so. They are the Pests of Society, and
a Scandal to a Profession, to which indeed
they do not belong; and which owes to
such kind of Rascallions the Ill-will
which weak Persons bear towards it. 
With this Fellow, to whom a little before
she would not have condescended to have
spoken, did a certain Passion for Joseph,
and the Jealousy and Disdain of
poor innocent Fanny, betray the Lady
Booby, into a familiar Discourse, in which
she inadvertently confirmed many Hints, 

with which Slipslop, whose Gallant he was,
had pre-acquainted him; and whence he
had taken an Opportunity to assert those
severe Falshoods of little Fanny, which
possibly the Reader might not have been
well able to account for, if we had not
thought proper to give him this Information. 



A short Chapter, but very full of
Matter; particularly the Arrival of
Mr. Booby and his Lady. 
All that Night and the next Day,
the Lady Booby past with the utmost
Anxiety; her Mind was distracted,
and her Soul tossed up and down by many
turbulent and opposite Passions. She
loved, hated, pitied, scorned, admired,
despised the same Person by Fits, which
changed in a very short Interval. On
Tuesday Morning, which happened to be
a Holiday, she went to Church, where,
to her surprize, Mr. Adams published the
Banns again with as audible a Voice as before. 
It was lucky for her, that as there
was no Sermon, she had an immediate 

Opportunity of returning home, to vent
her Rage, which she could not have concealed
from the Congregation five Minutes; 
indeed it was not then very numerous,
the Assembly consisting of no more
than Adams, his Clerk, his Wife, the
Lady, and one of her Servants. At her
Return she met Slipslop, who accosted
her in these Words: —“O Meam,
what doth your Ladyship think? To be
sure Lawyer Scout hath carried Joseph
and Fanny both before the Justice. 
All the Parish are in Tears, and say
they will certainly be hanged: For no
body knows what it is for.” —“I
suppose they deserve it,” says the Lady. 
“What dost thou mention such Wretches
to me?” —“O dear Madam, answer'd
Slipslop, is it not a pity such a graceless
young Man should die a virulent
Death? I hope the Judge will take Commensuration
on his Youth. As for Fanny,
I don't think it signifies much what
becomes of her; and if poor Joseph
hath done any thing, I could venture
to swear she traduced him to it: Few
Men ever come to fragrant Punishment,
but by those nasty Creatures
who are a Scandal to our Sect.” The
Lady was no more pleased at this News,
after a moment's Reflection, than Slipslop 

herself: For tho' she wished Fanny far
enough, she did not desire the Removal
of Joseph, especially with her. She was
puzzled how to act, or what to say on
this Occasion, when a Coach and six
drove into the Court, and a Servant acquainted
her with the Arrival of her Nephew
Booby and his Lady. She ordered
them to be conducted into a Drawing-Room,
whither she presently repaired,
having composed her Countenance as well
as she could; and being a little satisfied
that the Wedding would by these means
be at least interrupted; and that she should
have an Opportunity to execute any Resolution
she might take, for which she
saw herself provided with an excellent Instrument
in Scout. 
The Lady Booby apprehended her
Servant had made a Mistake, when he
had mentioned Mr. Booby's Lady; for
she had never heard of his Marriage:
but how great was her Surprize, when at
her entering the Room, her Nephew presented
his Wife to her, saying, “Madam,
this is that charming Pamela,
of whom I am convinced you have
heard so much.” The Lady received
her with more Civility than he expected; 
indeed with the utmost: For she 

was perfectly polite, nor had any Vice
inconsistent with Good-breeding. They
past some little time in ordinary Discourse,
when a Servant came and whispered
Mr. Booby, who presently told the
Ladies he must desert them a little on
some Business of Consequence; and as
their Discourse during his Absence would
afford little Improvement or Entertainment
to the Reader, we will leave them
for a while to attend Mr. Booby. 



Containing Justice Business; Curious
Precedents of Depositions, and other
Matters necessary to be perused by
all Justices of the Peace and their
Clerks. 
The young Squire and his Lady
were no sooner alighted from their
Coach, than the Servants began to enquire
after Mr. Joseph, from whom they said their
Lady had not heard a Word to her great
Surprize, since he had left Lady Booby's. 
Upon this they were instantly informed 

of what had lately happened,
with which they hastily acquainted their
Master, who took an immediate Resolution
to go himself, and endeavour to restore
his Pamela her Brother, before she
even knew she had lost him. 
The Justice, before whom the Criminals
were carried, and who lived within a
short Mile of the Lady's House, was luckily
Mr. Booby's Acquaintance, by his having an
Estate in his Neighbourhood. Ordering
therefore his Horses to his Coach, he set
out for the Judgment-Seat, and arriv'd
when the Justice had almost finished his
Business. He was conducted into a Hall,
where he was acquainted that his Worship
would wait on him in a moment; for he
had only a Man and Woman to commit
to Bridewell first. As he was now convinced
he had not a Minute to lose, he
insisted on the Servants introducing him
directly to the Room where the Justice
then was executing his Office, as he called
it. Being brought thither, and the first
Compliments being past between the
Squire and his Worship, the former asked
the latter what Crime those two young
People had been guilty of. “No great
Crime,” answered the Justice. “I
have only ordered them to Bridewell 

for a Month.” “But what is their
Crime?” repeated the Squire. “Larceny,
an't please your Honour,” said
Scout. “Ay,” says the Justice, “a
kind of felonious larcenous thing. I
believe I must order them a little
Correction too, a little Stripping and
Whipping.” (Poor Fanny, who had
hitherto supported all with the Thoughts
of her Joseph's Company, trembled at
that Sound; but indeed without reason,
for none but the Devil himself would
have executed such a Sentence on her.) 
“Still,” said the Squire, “I am ignorant
of the Crime, the Fact I mean.” 
“Why, there it is in Peaper,” answered
the Justice, shewing him a Deposition,
which in the Absence of his Clerk he had
writ himself, of which we have with
great difficulty procured an authentick
Copy; and here it follows verbatim et
literatim. 

Z5000289301 2The Depusition of James Scout, Layer,
and Thomas Trotter, Yeoman, taken
befor mee, on of his Magesty's
Justasses of the Piece for Zumersetshire.  2KbBOOKFielding, Henry, 1707-1754The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews, And of his Friend Mr. Abraham Adams. Written in Imitation of The Manner of Cervantes, Author of Don Quixote. In Two Volumes. [etc.]LondonPrinted for A. Millar, [etc.]19961742Literature OnlineZ000028864Cambridge, Chadwyck-Healey, 1996
“These Deponants saith, and
first Thomas Trotter for himself 

saith, that on the &wblank; of this instant
October, being Sabbath-Day, betwin
the Ours of 2 and 4 in the afternoon,
he zeed Joseph Andrews and
Francis Goodwill walk akross a certane
Felde belunging to Layer Scout, and
out of the Path which ledes thru the
said Felde, and there he zede Joseph
Andrews with a Nife cut one Hassel-Twig,
of the value, as he believes, of
3 half pence, or thereabouts; and
he saith, that the said Francis Goodwill
was likewise walking on the Grass out
of the said Path in the said Felde, and
did receive and karry in her Hand the
said Twig, and so was cumfarting,
eading and abatting to the said Joseph
therein. And the said James Scout for
himself says, that he verily believes
the said Twig to be his own proper
Twig, &c.” 
“Jesu!” said the Squire, “would
you commit two Persons to Bridewell
for a Twig?” “Yes,” said the Lawyer,
“and with great Lenity too; for if
we had called it a young Tree they
would have been both hanged.” — 
“Harkee,” (says the Justice, taking
aside the Squire) “I should not have
been so severe on this Occasion, but 

Lady Booby desires to get them out of
the Parish; so Lawyer Scout will give
the Constable Orders to let them run
away, if they please; but it seems they
intend to marry together, and the Lady
hath no other means, as they are
legally settled there, to prevent their
bringing an Incumbrance on her own Parish.” 
“Well,” said the Squire, “I
will take care my Aunt shall be satisfied
in this Point; and likewise I promise
you, Joseph here shall never be any
Incumbrance on her. I shall be oblig'd
to you therefore, if, instead of Bridewell,
you will commit them to my
Custody.” —“O to be sure, Sir, if
you desire it,” answer'd the Justice; 
and without more ado, Joseph and Fanny
were delivered over to Squire Booby, whom
Joseph very well knew; but little ghest
how nearly he was related to him. The
Justice burnt his Mittimus. The Constable
was sent about his Business. The Lawyer
made no Complaint for want of Justice,
and the Prisoners, with exulting
Hearts; gave a thousand Thanks to his
Honour Mr. Booby, who did not intend
their Obligations to him should cease here; 
for ordering his Man to produce a Cloak bag
which he had caused to be brought from
Lady Booby's on purpose, he desired the 

Justice that he might have Joseph with him
into a Room; where ordering his Servant to
take out a Suit of his own Clothes, with
Linnen and other Necessaries, he left Joseph
to dress himself, who not yet knowing the
Cause of all this Civility, excused his accepting
such a Favour, as long as decently
he could. Whilst Joseph was dressing,
the Squire repaired to the Justice, whom
he found talking with Fanny; for during
the Examination she had lopped her Hat
over her Eyes, which were also bathed in
Tears, and had by that means concealed
from his Worship what might perhaps
have rendered the Arrival of Mr. Booby
unnecessary, at least for herself. The
Justice no sooner saw her Countenance
cleared up, and her bright Eyes shining
through her Tears, than he secretly cursed
himself for having once thought of Bridewell
for her. He would willingly have
sent his own Wife thither, to have had Fanny
in her place. And conceiving almost
at the same instant Desires and Schemes
to accomplish them, he employed the
Minutes whilst the Squire was absent with
Joseph, in assuring her how sorry he was
for having treated her so roughly before
he knew her Merit; and told her, that
since Lady Booby was unwilling that she
should settle in her Parish, she was heartily 

welcome to his, where he promised her
his Protection, adding, that he would
take Joseph and her into his own Family,
if she liked it; which Assurance he confirmed
with a Squeeze by the Hand. She
thanked him very kindly, and said, “she
would acquaint Joseph with the Offer,
which he would certainly be glad to
accept; for that Lady Booby was angry
with them both; tho' she did not know
either had done any thing to offend
her: but imputed it to Madam Slipslop,
who had always been her Enemy.” 
The Squire now returned, and prevented
any farther Continuance of this
Conversation; and the Justice out of a
pretended Respect to his Guest, but in
reality from an Apprehension of a Rival; 
(for he knew nothing of his Marriage,) ordered
Fanny into the Kitchin, whither
she gladly retired; nor did the Squire,
who declined the Trouble of explaining
the whole matter, oppose it. 
It would be unnecessary, if I was able,
which indeed I am not, to relate the Conversation
between these two Gentlemen,
which rolled, as I have been informed,
entirely on the Subject of Horse-racing. 
Joseph was soon drest in the plainest Dress 

he could find, which was a blue Coat and
Breeches, with a Gold Edging, and a
red Waistcoat with the same; and as this
Suit, which was rather too large for the
Squire, exactly fitted him; so he became
it so well, and looked so genteel, that no
Person would have doubted its being as
well adapted to his Quality as his Shape; 
nor have suspected, as one might when
my Lord &wblank;, or Sir &wblank;, or Mr.
&wblank; appear in Lace or Embroidery,
that the Taylor's Man wore those Clothes
home on his Back, which he should have
carried under his Arm. 
The Squire now took leave of the
Justice, and calling for Fanny, made her
and Joseph, against their Wills, get into
the Coach with him, which he then ordered
to drive to Lady Booby's. —It
had moved a few Yards only, when the
Squire asked Joseph, if he knew who that
Man was crossing the Field; for, added
he, I never saw one take such Strides before. 
Joseph answered eagerly, “O Sir,
it is Parson Adams.” —“O la, indeed,
and so it is,” said Fanny; “poor
Man he is coming to do what he
could for us. Well, he is the worthiest
best natur'd Creature.” — 
“Ay,” said Joseph, “God bless him; 

for there is not such another in
the Universe.” —“The best
Creature living sure,” cries Fanny. 
“Is he?” says the Squire, “then I am resolved
to have the best Creature living
in my Coach,” and so saying he ordered
it to stop, whilst Joseph at his Request
hollowed to the Parson, who well knowing
his Voice, made all the haste imaginable,
and soon came up with them; he
was desired by the Master, who could
scarce refrain from Laughter at his Figure,
to mount into the Coach, which he with
many Thanks refused, saying he could
walk by its side, and he'd warrant he kept
with it; but he was at length over-prevailed
on. The Squire now acquainted
Joseph with his Marriage; but he might
have spared himself that Labour; for his
Servant, whilst Joseph was dressing, had
performed that Office before. He continued
to express the vast Happiness he
enjoyed in his Sister, and the Value he
had for all who belonged to her. Joseph
made many Bows, and exprest as many
Acknowledgments; and Parson Adams,
who now first perceived Joseph's new Apparel,
burst into Tears with Joy, and
fell to rubbing his Hands and snapping
his Fingers, as if he had been mad. 

They were now arrived at the Lady
Booby's, and the Squire desiring them to
wait a moment in the Court, walked in
to his Aunt, and calling her out from his
Wife, acquainted her with Joseph's Arrival; 
saying, “Madam, as I have married
a virtuous and worthy Woman, I
am resolved to shew a proper Respect,
and own her Relations, and I shall
think myself infinitely obliged to all
mine, who will do the same. It is
true, her Brother hath been your Servant; 
but he is now become my Brother; 
and I have one Happiness, that
neither his Character, his Behaviour or
Appearance give me any reason to be
ashamed of calling him so. In short,
he is now below, drest like a Gentleman,
in which Light I intend he shall
hereafter be seen; and you will oblige
me beyond Expression, if you will admit
him to be of our Party; for I
know it will give great Pleasure to my
Wife, tho' she will not mention it.” 
This was a stroke of Fortune beyond
the Lady Booby's Hopes or Expectation; 
she answered him eagerly, “Nephew,
you know how easily I am prevailed
on to do any thing which Joseph Andrews
desires—Phoo, I mean which 

you desire me, and as he is now your
Relation, I cannot refuse to entertain
him as such.” The Squire told her,
he knew his Obligation to her for her
Compliance, and going three Steps, returned
and told her—he had one more
Favour, which he believed she would easily
grant, as she had accorded him the
former. “There is a young Woman” 
—“Nephew,” says she, “don't let
my Good-nature make you desire, as
is too commonly the Case, to impose
on me. Nor think, because I have
with so much Condescension agreed
to suffer your Brother-in-law to come
to my Table, that I will submit to the
Company of all my own Servants, and
all the dirty Trollops in the Country.” 
“Madam,” answer'd the Squire, “I believe
you never saw this young Creature. 
I never beheld such Sweetness
and Innocence joined with such Beauty,
and withal so genteel.” “Upon my Soul,
I won't admit her,” reply'd the Lady
in a Passion; “the whole World shan't
prevail on me, I resent even the Desire
as an Affront, and—The Squire, who
knew her Inflexibility, interrupted her,
by asking Pardon, and promising not to
mention it more. He then returned to
Joseph, and she to Pamela. He took 

Joseph aside and told him, he would carry
him to his Sister; but could not prevail
as yet for Fanny. Joseph begged that he
might see his Sister alone, and then be
with his Fanny; but the Squire knowing
the Pleasure his Wife would have in her
Brother's Company, would not admit it,
telling Joseph there would be nothing in
so short an Absence from Fanny, whilst
he was assured of her Safety; adding,
he hoped he could not so easily quit a
Sister whom he had not seen so long, and
who so tenderly loved him—Joseph immediately
complied; for indeed no Brother
could love a Sister more; and recommending
Fanny, who rejoiced that she
was not to go before Lady Booby, to the
Care of Mr. Adams, he attended the Squire
up stairs, whilst Fanny repaired with the
Parson to his House, where she was certain
of a kind Reception.” 




Of which you are desired to read no
more than you like. 
The Meeting between Joseph and
Pamela was not without Tears of
Joy on both sides; and their Embraces
were full of Tenderness and Affection. 
They were however regarded with much
more Pleasure by the Nephew than by
the Aunt, to whose Flame they were Fewel
only; and being assisted by the Addition
of Dress, which was indeed not wanted
to set off the lively Colours in which Nature
had drawn Health, Strength, Comeliness,
and Youth. In the Afternoon
Joseph, at their Request, entertained
them with an Account of his Adventures,
nor could Lady Booby conceal her Dissatisfaction
at those Parts in which Fanny
was concerned, especially when Mr. Booby
launched forth into such rapturous
Praises of her Beauty. She said, applying
to her Niece, that she wondered her Nephew,
who had pretended to marry for
Love, should think such a Subject proper
to amuse his Wife with: adding,
that for her part, she should be jealous of
a Husband who spoke so warmly in 

praise of another Woman. Pamela answer'd,
indeed she thought she had cause; 
but it was an Instance of Mr. Booby's
aptness to see more Beauty in Women than
they were Mistresses of. At which Words
both the Women fixed their Eyes on two
Looking-Glasses; and Lady Booby replied
that Men were in the general very ill
Judges of Beauty; and then whilst both
contemplated only their own Faces, they
paid a cross Compliment to each other's
Charms. When the Hour of Rest approached,
which the Lady of the House
deferred as long as decently she could, she
informed Joseph (whom for the future we
shall call Mr. Joseph, he having as good
a Title to that Appellation as many others,
I mean that incontested one of good
Clothes) that she had ordered a Bed to be
provided for him, he declined this Favour
to his utmost; for his Heart had long
been with his Fanny; but she insisted on
his accepting it, alledging that the Parish
had no proper Accommodation for such a
Person, as he was now to esteem himself. 
The Squire and his Lady both joining
with her, Mr. Joseph was at last forced to
give over his Design of visiting Fanny
that Evening, who on her side as impatiently
expected him till Midnight, when
in complacence to Mr. Adams's Family, 

who had sat up two Hours out of Respect
to her, she retired to Bed, but not to sleep; 
the Thoughts of her Love kept her
waking, and his not returning according
to his Promise, filled her with Uneasiness; 
of which however she could not assign
any other Cause than merely that of being
absent from him. 
Mr. Joseph however rose early in the
Morning, and visited her in whom his
Soul delighted. She no sooner heard his
Voice in the Parson's Parlour, than she
leapt from her Bed, and dressing herself
in a few Minutes, went down to him. 
They past two Hours with inexpressible
Happiness together, and then having appointed
Monday, by Mr. Adams's permission,
for their Marriage, Mr. Joseph
returned according to his Promise, to
Breakfast at the Lady Booby's, with whose
Behaviour since the Evening we shall now
acquaint the Reader. 
She was no sooner retired to her Chamber
than she asked Slipslop what she thought
of this wonderful Creature her Nephew
had married. “Madam!” said Slipslop,
not yet sufficiently understanding what Answer
she was to make. “I ask you,” 
answer'd the Lady, “what you think of 

the Dowdy, my Niece I think I am to
call her?” Slipslop, wanting no further
Hint, began to pull her to pieces, and
so miserably defaced her, that it would
have been impossible for any one to have
known the Person. The Lady gave her
all the Assistance she could, and ended
with saying—“I think, Slipslop, you
have done her Justice; but yet, bad as
she is, she is an Angel compared to
this Fanny.” Slipslop then fell on Fanny,
whom she hack'd and hew'd in the like
barbarous manner, concluding with an
Observation that there was always something
in those low-life Creatures which
must eternally distinguish them from their
Betters. “Really,” said the Lady, “I
think there is one Exception to your
Rule, I am certain you must ghess
who I mean”—“Not I, upon my
word, Madam,” said Slipslop—“I mean
a young Fellow; sure you are the dullest
Wretch,” said the Lady—“O la,
I am indeed—Yes truly, Madam, he
is an Accession,” answer'd Slipslop— 
“Ay, is he not, Slipslop?” returned the
Lady. “Is he not so genteel that a Prince
might without a Blush acknowledge
him for his Son. His Behaviour is
such that would not shame the best
Education. He borrows from his Station 

a Condescension in every thing to
his Superiours, yet unattended by that
mean Servility which is called Good-Behaviour
in such Persons. Every thing
he doth hath no mark of the base Motive
of Fear, but visibly shews some
Respect and Gratitude, and carries with
it the Persuasion of Love—And then
for his Virtues; such Piety to his Parents,
such tender Affection to his Sister,
such Integrity in his Friendship,
such Bravery, such Goodness, that if
he had been born a Gentleman, his
Wife would have possest the most invaluable
Blessing.“ —“To be sure,
Ma'am,” says Slipslop. —“But as he
is,” answered the Lady, “if he had a
thousand more good Qualities, it must
render a Woman of Fashion contemptible
even to be suspected of thinking
of him, yes I should despise myself for
such a Thought.” “To be sure, Ma'am,” 
said Slipslop. “And why to
be sure?” reply'd the Lady, “thou
art always one's Echo. Is he not more
worthy of Affection than a dirty Country
Clown, tho he's born of a Family
as old as the Flood, or an idle worthless
Rake, or little puisny Beau of Quality? 
And yet these we must condemn
ourselves to, in order to avoid the 

Censure of the World; to shun the Contempt
of others, we must ally ourselves
to those we despise; we must
prefer Birth, Title and Fortune to real
Merit. It is a Tyranny of Custom,
a Tyranny we must comply with: For
we People of Fashion are the Slaves of
Custom.” —“Marry come up!” 
said Slipslop, who now well knew which
Party to take, “if I was a Woman of
your Ladyship's Fortune and Quality,
I would be a Slave to no body.” — 
“Me,” said the Lady, “I am speaking,
if a young Woman of Fashion who
had seen nothing in the World should
happen to like such a Fellow. —Me
indeed; I hope thou dost not imagine.” 
—“No, Ma'am, to be
sure,” cried Slipslop. —“No!
what no?” cried the Lady. “Thou art
always ready to answer, before thou
hast heard one. So far I must allow
he is a charming Fellow. Me indeed! 
No, Slipslop, all Thoughts of Men are
over with me. —I have lost a Husband,
who—but if I should reflect,
I should run mad. —My future
Ease must depend upon Forgetfulness. 
Slipslop, let me hear some of
thy Nonsense to turn my Thoughts another
way. What dost thou think 

of Mr. Andrews?” “Why I think,” 
says Slipslop, “he is the handsomest most
properest Man I ever saw; and if I
was a Lady of the greatest Degree, it
would be well for some Folks. Your
Ladyship may talk of Custom if you
please; but I am confidous there is no
more Comparison between young Mr.
Andrews, and most of the young
Gentlemen who come to your Ladyship's
House in London; a Parcel
of Whipper-snapper Sparks: I would
sooner marry our old Parson Adams. 
Never tell me what People say, whilst
I am happy in the Arms of him I love. 
Some Folks rail against other Folks,
because other Folks have what some
Folks would be glad of.” —“And
so,” answered the Lady, “if you
was a Woman of Condition, you would
really marry Mr. Andrews.” — 
“Yes, I assure your Ladyship,” replied
Slipslop, “if he would have me.” — 
“Fool, Idiot,” cries the Lady, “if he
would have a Woman of Fashion! Is
that a Question?” “No truly, Madam,” 
said Slipslop, “I believe it
would be none, if Fanny was out of
the way; and I am confidous if I was
in your Ladyship's Place, and liked
Mr. Joseph Andrews, she should not 

stay in the Parish a moment. I am sure
Lawyer Scout would send her packing,
if your Ladyship would but say the
Word.” This last Speech of Slipslop
raised a Tempest in the Mind of her
Mistress. She feared Scout had betrayed
her, or rather that she had betrayed herself. 
After some Silence and a double
Change of her Complexion; first to pale
and then to red, she thus spoke: “I am
astonished at the Liberty you give
your Tongue. Would you insinuate,
that I employed Scout against this
Wench, on the account of the Fellow?” 
“La Ma'am,” said Slipslop,
frighted out of her Wits.” “I assassinate
such a Thing!” “I think you dare
not,” answered the Lady, “I believe
my Conduct may defy Malice itself
to assert so cursed a Slander. If I
had ever discovered any Wantonness,
any Lightness in my Behaviour: If
I had followed the Example of some
whom thou hast I believe seen, in allowing
myself indecent Liberties,
even with a Husband: But the dear
Man who is gone” (here she began to
sob) “was he alive again,” (then she produced
Tears) “could not upbraid me with
any one Act of Tenderness or Passion. 
No, Slipslop, all the time I cohabited 

with him, he never obtained even a
Kiss from me, without my expressing
Reluctance in the granting it. I
am sure he himself never suspected
how much I loved him. —Since
his Death, thou knowest, tho' it is almost
six Weeks (it wants but a Day)
ago, I have not admitted one Visitor,
till this Fool my Nephew arrived. I
have confined myself quite to one Party
of Friends. —And can such a Conduct
as this fear to be arraigned? To
be accused not only of a Passion which
I have always despised; but of fixing
it on such an Object, a Creature so
much beneath my Notice.” — 
“Upon my word, Ma'am,” says Slipslop,” 
“I do not understand your Ladyship,
nor know I any thing of the
matter.” —“I believe indeed
thou dost not understand me. — 
Those are Delicacies which exist only
in superior Minds; thy coarse Ideas
cannot comprehend them. Thou art
a low Creature, of the Andrews Breed,
a Reptile of a lower Order, a Weed
that grows in the common Garden of
the Creation.” —“I assure your
Ladyship,” says Slipslop, whose Passions
were almost of as high an Order as
her Lady's, “I have no more to do 

with Common Garden than other Folks. 
Really, your Ladyship talks of Servants
as if they were not born of the
Christain Specious. Servants have Flesh
and Blood as well as Quality; and
Mr. Andrews himself is a Proof that
they have as good, if not better. 
And for my own Part, I can't perceive
my Dears†  are coarser than other
People's; and I am sure, if Mr. Andrews
was a Dear of mine, I should
not be ashamed of him in company
with Gentlemen; for whoever hath
seen him in his new Clothes, must confess
he looks as much like a Gentleman
as any body. Coarse, quotha! I can't
bear to hear the poor young Fellow
run down neither; for I will say this,
I never heard him say an ill Word of
any body in his Life. I am sure his
Coarseness doth not lie in his Heart; 
for he is the best-natur'd Man in the
World; and as for his Skin, it is no
coarser than other People's, I am sure. 
His Bosom when a Boy was as white
as driven Snow; and where it is not
covered with Hairs, is so still. Ifaukins!
if I was Mrs. Andrews, with a
hundred a Year, I should not envy the
best She who wears a Head. A Woman 

that could not be happy with
such a Man, ought never to be so: 
For if he can't make a Woman happy,
I never yet beheld the Man who could. 
I say again I wish I was a great Lady
for his sake, I believe when I had
made a Gentleman of him, he'd behave
so, that no body should discommend
what I had done; and I fancy
few would venture to tell him he
was no Gentleman to his Face, nor
to mine neither.” At which Words,
taking up the Candles, she asked her
Mistress, who had been some time in
her Bed, if she had any farther Commands; 
who mildly answered she had
none; and telling her, she was a comical
Creature, bid her Good-night. 




Philosophical Reflections, the like not to
be found in any light French Romance. 
Mr. Booby's grave Advice
to Joseph, and Fanny's Encounter
with a Beau. 
Habit, my good Reader, hath so vast
a Prevalence over the human
Mind, that there is scarce any thing too
strange or too strong to be asserted of
it. The Story of the Miser, who from
long accustoming to cheat others, came
at last to cheat himself, and with great
Delight and Triumph, picked his own Pocket
of a Guinea, to convey to his Hoard,
is not impossible or improbable. In like
manner, it fares with the Practisers of Deceit,
who from having long deceived their
Acquaintance, gain at last a Power of deceiving
themselves, and acquire that very
Opinion (however false) of their own Abilities,
Excellencies and Virtues, into which
they have for Years perhaps endeavoured
to betray their Neighbours. Now, Reader,
to apply this Observation to my
present Purpose, thou must know, that
as the Passion generally called Love, exercises
most of the Talents of the Female 

or fair World; so in this they now and
then discover a small Inclination to Deceit; 
for which thou wilt not be angry
with the beautiful Creatures, when thou
hast considered, that at the Age of seven
or something earlier, Miss is instructed
by her Mother, that Master is a very
monstrous kind of Animal, who will, if
she suffers him to come too near her, infallibly
eat her up, and grind her to
pieces. That so far from kissing or toying
with him of her own accord, she
must not admit him to kiss or toy with
her. And lastly, that she must never
have any Affection towards him; for if
she should, all her Friends in Petticoats
would esteem her a Traitress, point at her,
and hunt her out of their Society. These
Impressions being first received, are farther
and deeper inculcated by their School-mistresses
and Companions; so that by
the Age of Ten they have contracted
such a Dread of, and Abhorrence of the
above named Monster, that whenever
they see him, they fly from him as the
innocent Hare doth from the Greyhound. 
Hence to the Age of 14 or 15, they entertain
a mighty Antipathy to Master; they
resolve and frequently profess that they
will never have any Commerce with him,
and entertain fond Hopes of passing their 

Lives out of his reach, of the Possibility
of which they have so visible an Example
in their good Maiden Aunt. But
when they arrive at this Period, and have
now past their second Climacteric, when
their Wisdom grown riper, begins to see a
little farther; and from almost daily falling
in Master's way, to apprehend the great
Difficulty of keeping out of it; and when
they observe him look often at them,
and sometimes very eagerly and earnestly
too, (for the Monster seldom takes
any notice of them till at this Age) they
then begin to think of their Danger; and
as they perceive they cannot easily avoid
him, the wiser Part bethink themselves
of providing by other Means for their Security. 
They endeavour by all the Methods
they can invent to render themselves
so amiable in his Eyes, that he may have
no Inclination to hurt them; in which
they generally succeed so well, that his
Eyes, by frequent languishing, soon lessen
their Idea of his Fierceness, and so far abate
their Fears, that they venture to parley
with him; and when they perceive
him so different from what he hath been
described, all Gentleness, Softness, Kindness,
Tenderness, Fondness, their dreadful
Apprehensions vanish in a moment; 
and now (it being usual with the human 

Mind to skip from one Extreme to
its Opposite, as easily, and almost as suddenly,
as a Bird from one Bough to another;)
Love instantly succeeds to Fear: 
But as it happens to Persons, who have
in their Infancy been thoroughly frightned
with certain no Persons called Ghosts,
that they retain their Dread of those Beings,
after they are convinced that there
are no such things; so these young Ladies,
tho' they no longer apprehend devouring,
cannot so entirely shake off all
that hath been instilled into them; they
still entertain the Idea of that Censure
which was so strongly imprinted on their
tender Minds, to which the Declarations
of Abhorrence they every day hear from
their Companions greatly contribute. To
avoid this Censure therefore, is now their
only care; for which purpose they still pretend
the same Aversion to the Monster: 
And the more they love him, the more ardently
they counterfeit the Antipathy. By
the continual and constant Practice of which
Deceit on others, they at length impose
on themselves, and really believe they
hate what they love. Thus indeed it happened
to Lady Booby, who loved Joseph
long before she knew it; and now loved
him much more than she suspected. She
had indeed, from the time of his Sister's 

Arrival in the Quality of her Niece; and
from the Instant she viewed him in the
Dress and Character of a Gentleman, began
to conceive secretly a Design which
Love, had concealed from herself, 'till
Dream betrayed it to her. 
She had no sooner risen than she sent
for her Nephew; when he came to her,
after many Compliments on his Choice,
she told him, “He might perceive in
her Condescension to admit her own
Servant to her Table, that she looked
on the Family of Andrews as his Relations,
and indeed her's; that as he
had married into such a Family, it
became him to endeavour by all Methods
to raise it as much as possible; 
at length she advised him to use all his
Art to dissuade Joseph from his intended
Match, which would still enlarge
their Relation to Meanness and Poverty; 
concluding, that by a Commission
in the Army, or some other
genteel Employment, he might soon
put young Mr. Andrews on the foot of a
Gentleman; and that being once done.
his Accomplishments might quickly gain
him an Alliance, which would not be
to their Discredit.” 

Her Nephew heartily embraced this
Proposal; and finding Mr. Joseph with
his Wife, at his Return to her Chamber,
he immediately began thus: “My Love
to my dear Pamela, Brother, will extend
to all her Relations; nor shall I
shew them less Respect than if I had
married into the Family of a Duke. 
I hope I have given you some early
Testimonies of this, and shall continue
to give you daily more. You
will excuse me therefore, Brother, if
my Concern for your Interest makes
me mention what may be, perhaps,
disagreeable to you to hear: But I
must insist upon it, that if you have
any Value for my Alliance or my
Friendship, you will decline any
Thoughts of engaging farther with a
Girl, who is, as you are a Relation of
mine, so much beneath you. I know
there may be at first some Difficulty
in your Compliance, but that will daily
diminish; and you will in the end
sincerely thank me for my Advice. I
own, indeed, the Girl is handsome: 
But Beauty alone is a poor Ingredient,
and will make but an uncomfortable
Marriage.” “Sir,” said Joseph,
“I assure you her Beauty is her 

least Perfection; nor do I know a Virtue
which that young Creature is not
possest of.” “As to her Virtues,” 
answered Mr. Booby, “you can be yet
but a slender Judge of them: But if
she had never so many, you will find
her Equal in these among her Superiors
in Birth and Fortune, which
now you are to esteem on a footing
with yourself; at least I will take care
they shall shortly be so, unless you prevent
me by degrading yourself with
such a Match, a Match I have hardly
patience to think of; and which would
break the Hearts of your Parents, who
now rejoice in the Expectation of seeing
you make a Figure in the World.” 
“I know not,” replied Joseph, “that
my Parents have any power over my
Inclinations; nor am I obliged to sacrifice
my Happiness to their Whim
or Ambition: Besides, I shall be very
sorry to see that the unexpected Advancement
of my Sister, should so suddenly
inspire them with this wicked
Pride, and make them despise their
Equals, I am resolved on no account
to quit my dear Fanny, no, tho' I could
raise her as high above her present Station
as you have raised my Sister.” 
Your Sister, as well as myself,” said 

Booby, “are greatly obliged to you for the
Comparison: But, Sir, she is not worthy
to be compared in Beauty to my Pamela; 
nor hath she half her Merit. 
And besides, Sir, as you civilly throw
my Marriage with your Sister in my
Teeth, I must teach you the wide Difference
between us; my Fortune enabled
me to please myself; and it
would have been as overgrown a Folly
in me to have omitted it, as in you to
do it.” “My Fortune enables me to
please myself likewise,” said Joseph; 
“for all my Pleasure is centred in Fanny,
and whilst I have Health, I shall be able
to support her with my Labour in that
Station to which she was born, and with
which she is content.” “Brother,” 
said Pamela, “Mr. Booby advises you
as a Friend; and, no doubt, my Papa
and Mamma will be of his Opinion,
and will have great reason to be
angry with you for destroying what his
Goodness hath done, and throwing
down our Family again, after he hath
raised it. It would become you better,
Brother, to pray for the Assistance of
Grace against such a Passion, than to
indulge.” —“Sure, Sister, you
are not in earnest; I am sure she is
your Equal at least.” —“She 

was my Equal, answered Pamela, but I
am no longer Pamela Andrews, I am
now this Gentleman's Wife, and as
such am above her—I hope I shall
never behave with an unbecoming
Pride; but at the same time I shall
always endeavour to know myself, and
question not the Assistance of Grace to
that purpose.” They were now summoned
to Breakfast, and thus ended their
Discourse for the present, very little to
the Satisfaction of any of the Parties. 
FANNY was now walking in an Avenue
at some distance from the House,
where Joseph had promised to take the
first Opportunity of coming to her. She
had not a Shilling in the World, and had
subsisted ever since her Return entirely on
the Charity of Parson Adams. A young
Gentleman attended by many Servants,
came up to her, and asked her if that was
not the Lady Booby's House before him? 
This indeed he well knew; but had framed
the Question for no other Reason than
to make her look up and discover if her
Face was equal to the Delicacy of her
Shape. He no sooner saw it, than he
was struck with Amazement. He stopt
his Horse, and swore she was the most
beautiful Creature he ever beheld. Then 

instantly alighting, and delivering his Horse
to his Servant, he rapt out half a dozen Oaths
that he would kiss her; to which she at
first submitted, begging he would not be
rude: but he was not satisfied with the
Civility of a Salute, nor even with the
rudest Attack he could make on her Lips,
but caught her in his Arms and endeavoured
to kiss her Breasts, which with all
her Strength she resisted; and as our
Spark was not of the Herculean Race,
with some difficulty prevented. The
young Gentleman being soon out of
breath in the Struggle, quitted her, and
remounting his Horse called one of his
Servants to him, whom he ordered to
stay behind with her, and make her any
Offers whatever, to prevail on her to
return home with him in the Evening; and
to assure her he would take her into Keeping. 
He then rode on with his other Servants,
and arrived at the Lady's House,
to whom he was a distant Relation, and
was come to pay a Visit. 
The trusty Fellow, who was employ'd
in an Office he had been long accustomed
to, discharged his Part with all the Fidelity
and Dexterity imaginable; but to
no purpose. She was entirely deaf to his
Offers, and rejected them with the utmost 

Disdain. At last the Pimp, who had
perhaps more warm Blood about him
than his Master, began to sollicit for himself; 
he told her, tho' he was a Servant,
he was a Man of some Fortune, which he
would make her Mistress of—and this
without any Insult to her Virtue, for that
he would marry her. She answer'd, if
his Master himself, or the greatest Lord
in the Land would marry her, she would
refuse him. At last being weary with Persuasions,
and on fire with Charms which
would have almost kindled a Flame in
the Bosom of an antient Philosopher,
or modern Divine, he fastened his Horse
to the Ground, and attacked her with
much more Force than the Gentleman
had exerted. Poor Fanny would have
been able to resist his Rudeness a very
short time, when the Deity who presides
over chaste Love sent her Joseph to her
Assistance. He no sooner came within
sight, and perceived her struggling with
a Man, than like a Cannon-Ball, or like
Lightning, or any thing that is swifter,
if any thing be, he ran towards her, and
coming up just as the Ravisher had torn
her Handkerchief from her Breast, before
his Lips had touched that Seat of Innocence
and Bliss, he dealt him so lusty a
Blow in that part of his Neck which a 

Rope would have become with the utmost
Propriety, that the Fellow staggered
backwards, and perceiving he had to do
with something rougher than the little,
tender, trembling Hand of Fanny, he
quitted her, and turning about saw his
Rival, with Fire flashing from his Eyes,
again ready to assail him; and indeed before
he could well defend himself or return
the first Blow, he received a second,
which had it fallen on that part of the
Stomach to which it was directed, would
have been probably the last he would have
had any Occasion for; but the Ravisher
lifting up his Hand, drove the Blow upwards
to his Mouth, whence it dislodged
three of his Teeth; and now not conceiving
any extraordinary Affection for the
Beauty of Joseph's Person, nor being extremely
pleased with this method of Salutation,
he collected all his Force, and
aimed a Blow at Joseph's Breast, which
he artfully parry'd with one Fist, so that
it lost its Force entirely in Air. And
stepping one Foot backward, he darted
his Fist so fiercely at his Enemy, that had
he not caught it in his Hand (for he was
a Boxer of no inferiour Fame) it must
have tumbled him on the Ground. And
now the Ravisher meditated another
Blow, which he aimed at that part of the 

Breast where the Heart is lodged, Joseph
did not catch it as before, but so prevented
its Aim, that it fell directly on his Nose,
but with abated Force. Joseph then
moving both Fist and Foot forwards at the
same time, threw his Head so dextrously
into the Stomach of the Ravisher, that he
fell a lifeless Lump on the Field, where
he lay many Minutes breathless and motionless. 
When Fanny saw her Joseph receive a
Blow in his Face, and Blood running in a
Stream from him, she began to tear her
Hair, and invoke all human and divine
Power to his Assistance. She was not,
however, long under this Affliction, before
Joseph having conquered his Enemy,
ran to her, and assured her he was not
hurt; she then instantly fell on her Knees
and thanked G&wblank;, that he had made Joseph
the means of her Rescue, and at the
same time preserved him from being injured
in attempting it. She offered with
her Handkerchief to wipe his Blood from
his Face; but he seeing his Rival attempting
to recover his Legs, turned to him and
asked him if he had enough; to which
the other answer'd he had; for he believed
he had fought with the Devil, instead
of a Man, and loosening his Horse, said 

he should not have attempted the Wench
if he had known she had been so well provided
for. 
FANNY now begged Joseph to return
with her to Parson Adams, and to promise
that he would leave her no more; 
these were Propositions so agreeable to
Joseph, that had he heard them he would
have given an immediate Assent: but
indeed his Eyes were now his only Sense; 
for you may remember, Reader, that the
Ravisher had tore her Handkerchief from
Fanny's Neck, by which he had discovered
such a Sight; that Joseph hath declared
all the Statues he ever beheld were so much
inferiour to it in Beauty, that it was more
capable of converting a Man into a Statue,
than of being imitated by the greatest
Master of that Art. This modest
Creature, whom no Warmth in Summer
could ever induce to expose her Charms
to the wanton Sun, a Modesty to which
perhaps they owed their inconceivable
Whiteness, had stood many Minutes barenecked
in the Presence of Joseph, before
her Apprehension of his Danger, and the
Horror of seeing his Blood would suffer
her once to reflect on what concerned herself; 
till at last, when the Cause of her
Concern had vanished, an Admiration at 

his Silence, together with observing the
fixed Position of his Eyes, produced an
Idea in the lovely Maid, which brought
more Blood into her Face than had flowed
from Joseph's Nostrils. The snowy Hue
of her Bosom was likewise exchanged to
Vermillion at the instant when she clapped
her Handkerchief round her Neck. 
Joseph saw the Uneasiness she suffered, and
immediately removed his Eyes from an
Object, in surveying which he had felt the
greatest Delight which the Organs of Sight
were capable of conveying to his Soul. 
So great was his Fear of offending her,
and so truly did his Passion for her deserve
the noble Name of Love. 
FANNY being recovered from her Confusion,
which was almost equalled by
what Joseph had felt from observing it,
again mention'd her Request; this was
instantly and gladly complied with, and
together they crossed two or three Fields,
which brought them to Mr. Adams. 




A Discourse which happened between
Mr. Adams, Mrs. Adams, Joseph
and Fanny; with some Behaviour
of Mr. Adams, which will be called
by some few Readers, very low,
absurd, and unnatural. 
The Parson and his Wife had just
ended a long Dispute when the Lovers
came to the Door. Indeed this young
Couple had been the Subject of the Dispute; 
for Mrs. Adams was one of those
prudent People who never do any thing
to injure their Families, or perhaps one
of those good Mothers who would even
stretch their Conscience to serve their
Children. She had long entertained hopes
of seeing her eldest Daughter succeed
Mrs. Slipslop, and of making her second
Son an Exciseman by Lady Booby's Interest. 
These were Expectations she could
not endure the Thoughts of quitting, and
was therefore very uneasy to see her Husband
so resolute to oppose the Lady's Intention
in Fanny's Affair. She told him,
“it behoved every Man to take the first
Care of his Family; that he had a Wife
and six Children, the maintaining and 

providing for whom would be Business
enough for him without intermeddling
in other Folks Affairs; that he had always
preached up Submission to Superiours,
and would do ill to give an Example
of the contrary Behaviour in his
own Conduct; that if Lady Booby did
wrong, she must answer for it herself,
and the Sin would not lie at their Door; 
that Fanny had been a Servant, and
bred up in the Lady's own Family,
and consequently she must have known
more of her than they did, and it was
very improbable if she had behaved
herself well, that the Lady would have
been so bitterly her Enemy; that perhaps
he was too much inclined to think
well of her because she was handsome,
but handsome Women were often no
better than they should be; that G&wblank; 
made ugly Women as well as handsome
ones, and that if a Woman had Virtue,
it signified nothing whether she
had Beauty or no.” For all which
Reasons she concluded, he should oblige
the Lady and stop the future Publication
of the Banns: but all these excellent Arguments
had no effect on the Parson, who
persisted in doing his Duty without regarding
the Consequence it might have on
his worldly Interest; he endeavoured to 

answer her as well as he could, to which
she had just finished her Reply; for she
had always the last Word every where but
at Church, when Joseph and Fanny entered
their Kitchin, where the Parson
and his Wife then sat at Breakfast over
some Bacon and Cabbage. There was a
Coldness in the Civility of Mrs. Adams,
which Persons of accurate Speculation
might have observed, but escaped her present
Guests; indeed it was a good deal
covered by the Heartiness of Adams, who
no sooner heard that Fanny had neither eat
nor drank that Morning, than he presented
her a Bone of Bacon which he had just
been gnawing, being the only Remains
of his Provision, and then ran nimbly to
the Tap, and produced a Mug of small
Beer, which he called Ale, however it
was the best in his House. Joseph addressing
himself to the Parson, told him
the Discourse which had past between
Squire Booby, his Sister and himself, concerning
Fanny: he then acquainted him
with the Dangers whence he had rescued
her, and communicated some Apprehensions
on her account. He concluded,
that he should never have an easy Moment
till Fanny was absolutely his, and begged
that he might be suffered to fetch a Licence,
saying, he could easily borrow the 

Money. The Parson answered, that he
had already given his Sentiments concerning
a Licence, and that a very few Days
would make it unnecessary. “Joseph,” 
says he, “I wish this Haste doth not arise
rather from your Impatience than
your Fear: but as it certainly springs
from one of these Causes, I will examine
both. Of each of these therefore in their
Turn; and first, for the first of these,
namely, Impatience. Now, Child, I
must inform you, that if in your purposed
Marriage with this young Woman,
you have no Intention but the Indulgence
of carnal Appetites, you are
guilty of a very heinous Sin. Marriage
was ordained for nobler Purposes, as
you will learn when you hear the Service
provided on that Occasion read to
you. All such brutal Lusts and Affections
are to be greatly subdued, if not
totally eradicated, before the Vessel
can be said to be consecrated to Honour. 
To marry with a View of gratifying
those Inclinations is a Prostitution
of that holy Ceremony, and must entail
a Curse on all who so lightly undertake
it. If, therefore, this Haste
arises from Impatience, you are to correct,
and not give way to it. Now as
to the second Head which I proposed to 

speak to, namely, Fear. It argues a
Diffidence highly criminal of that Power
in which alone we should put our
Trust, seeing we may be well assured
that he is able not only to defeat the
Designs of our Enemies, but even to
turn their Hearts. Instead of taking
therefore any unjustifiable or desperate
means to rid ourselves of Fear, we
should resort to Prayer only on these
Occasions, and we may be then certain
of obtaining what is best for us. 
When any Accident threatens us, we
are not to despair, nor when it overtakes
us, to grieve; we must submit
in all things to the Will of Providence,
and set our Affections so much on nothing
here that we cannot quit it without
Reluctance. You are a young Man,
and can know but little of this World,
I am older, and have seen a great deal. 
All Passions are criminal in their Excess,
and even Love itself, if it is not
subservient to our Duty, may render
us blind to it. Had Abraham so loved
his Son Isaac, as to refuse the Sacrifice
required, is there any of us who would
not condemn him? Joseph, I know,
your many good Qualities, and value
you for them: but as I am to render
an Account of your Soul, which is 

committed to my Cure, I cannot see any
Fault without reminding you of it. 
You are too much inclined to Passion,
Child, and have set your Affections so
absolutely on this young Woman, that
if G&wblank; required her at your hands, I
fear you would reluctantly part with
her. Now believe me, no Christian
ought so to set his Heart on any Person
or Thing in this World, but that whenever
it shall be required or taken from
him in any manner by Divine Providence,
he may be able, peaceably,
quietly, and contentedly to resign it.” 
At which Words one came hastily in and
acquainted Mr. Adams that his youngest
Son was drowned. He stood silent a
moment, and soon began to stamp about
the Room and deplore his Loss with the
bitterest Agony. Joseph, who was overwhelmed
with Concern likewise, recovered
himself sufficiently to endeavour to
comfort the Parson; in which Attempt
he used many Arguments that he had at
several times remember'd out of his own
Discourses both in private and publick,
(for he was a great Enemy to the Passions,
and preached nothing more than the Conquest
of them by Reason and Grace) but
he was not at leisure now to hearken to his
Advice. “Child, Child,” said he, “do 

not go about Impossibilities. Had it
been any other of my Children I could
have born it with patience; but my
little Prattler, the Darling and Comfort
of my old Age—the little
Wretch to be snatched out of Life just
at his Entrance into it; the sweetest,
best-temper'd Boy, who never did a
thing to offend me. It was but this
Morning I gave him his first Lesson
in Quæ Genus. This was the very
Book he learnt, poor Child! it is of
no further use to thee now. He would
have made the best Scholar, and have
been an Ornament to the Church— 
such Parts and such Goodness never
met in one so young. And the handsomest
Lad too,” says Mrs. Adams, recovering
from a Swoon in Fanny's Arms
—“My poor Jacky, shall I never
see thee more?” cries the Parson— 
“Yes, surely,” says Joseph, and in a
better Place, you will meet again never
to part more”—I believe the Parson
did not hear these Words, for he paid
little regard to them, but went on lamenting
whilst the Tears trickled down
into his Bosom. At last he cry'd out,
“Where is my little Darling?” and was
sallying out, when to his great Surprize
and Joy, in which I hope the Reader will 

sympathize, he met his Son in a wet
Condition indeed, but alive, and running
towards him. The Person who brought
the News of his Misfortune, had been a
little too eager, as People sometimes are,
from I believe no very good Principle, to
relate ill News; and seeing him fall into
the River, instead of running to his Assistance,
directly ran to acquaint his Father
of a Fate which he had concluded to
be inevitable, but whence the Child was
relieved by the same poor Pedlar who had
relieved his Father before from a less Distress. 
The Parson's Joy was now as extravagant
as his Grief had been before; 
he kissed and embraced his Son a thousand
times, and danced about the Room
like one frantick; but as soon as he discovered
the Face of his old Friend the
Pedlar, and heard the fresh Obligation he
had to him, what were his Sensations? not
those which two Courtiers feel in one another's
Embraces; not those with which a
great Man receives the vile, treacherous
Engines of his wicked Purposes; not those
with which a worthless younger Brother
wishes his elder Joy of a Son, or a Man
congratulates his Rival on his obtaining a
Mistress, a Place, or an Honour. —No,
Reader, he felt the Ebullition, the
Overflowings of a full, honest, open 

Heart towards the Person who had conferred
a real Obligation, and of which if
thou can'st not conceive an Idea within,
I will not vainly endeavour to assist thee. 
When these Tumults were over, the
Parson taking Joseph aside, proceeded
thus—“No, Joseph, do not give too
much way to thy Passions, if thou dost
expect Happiness.” —The Patience
of Joseph, nor perhaps of Job, could bear
no longer; he interrupted the Parson, saying,
“it was easier to give Advice than
take it, nor did he perceive he
could so entirely conquer himself,
when he apprehended he had lost his
Son, or when he found him recover'd” 
—“Boy,” reply'd Adams, raising
his Voice, “it doth not become green
Heads to advise grey Hairs—Thou
art ignorant of the Tenderness of fatherly
Affection; when thou art a Father
thou wilt be capable then only of
knowing what a Father can feel. No
Man is obliged to Impossibilities, and
the Loss of a Child is one of those
great Trials where our Grief may be allowed
to become immoderate.” “Well,
Sir,” cries Joseph, “and if I love a
Mistress as well as you your Child, surely 

her Loss would grieve me equally.” 
“Yes, but such Love is Foolishness, and
wrong in itself, and ought to be conquered,” 
answered Adams, “it savours
too much of the Flesh.” “Sure, Sir,” 
says Joseph, “it is not sinful to love my
Wife, no not even to doat on her to
Distraction!” “Indeed but it is,” says
Adams. “Every Man ought to love his
Wife, no doubt; we are commanded
so to do; but we ought to love them
with Moderation and Discretion.” — 
“I am afraid I shall be guilty of some
Sin, in spight of all my Endeavours,” 
says Joseph; “for I shall love without
any Moderation, I am sure.” —“You
talk foolishly and childishly,” cries Adams. 
“Indeed,” says Mrs. Adams, who
had listened to the latter part of their Conversation,
“you talk more foolishly yourself. 
I hope, my Dear, you will never
preach any such Doctrine as that Husbands
can love their Wives too well. 
If I knew you had such a Sermon in
the House, I am sure I would burn it; 
and I declare if I had not been convinced
you had loved me as well as you
could, I can answer for myself I should
have hated and despised you. Marry
come up! Fine Doctrine indeed! A
Wife hath a Right to insist on her 

Husband's loving her as much as ever
he can: And he is a sinful Villain
who doth not. Doth he not promise
to love her, and to comfort
her, and to cherish her, and all that? 
I am sure I remember it all, as well
as if I had repeated it over but Yesterday,
and shall never forget it. Besides,
I am certain you do not preach
as you practise; for you have been a
loving and a cherishing Husband to me,
that's the truth on't; and why you
should endeavour to put such wicked
Nonsense into this young Man's Head,
I cannot devise. Don't hearken to him,
Mr. Joseph, be as good a Husband as
you are able, and love your Wife with
all your Body and Soul too.” Here a
violent Rap at the Door put an end to
their Discourse, and produced a Scene
which the Reader will find in the next
Chapter. 




A Visit which the good Lady Booby
and her polite Friend paid to the
Parson. 
The Lady Booby had no sooner had
an Account from the Gentleman of
his meeting a wonderful Beauty near her
House, and perceived the Raptures with
which he spoke of her, than immediately
concluding it must be Fanny, she began
to meditate a Design of bringing them
better acquainted; and to entertain Hopes
that the fine Clothes, Presents and Promises
of this Youth, would prevail on
her to abandon Joseph: She therefore
proposed to her Company a Walk in the
Fields before Dinner, when she led them
towards Mr. Adams's House; and as she
approached it, told them, if they pleased
she would divert them with one of the
most ridiculous Sights they had ever seen,
which was an old foolish Parson, who, she
said laughing, kept a Wife and six Brats
on a Salary of about 20 Pounds a Year; 
adding, that there was not such another
ragged Family in the Parish. They all 

readily agreed to this Visit, and arrived
whilst Mrs. Adams was declaiming, as in
the last Chapter. Beau Didapper, which
was the Name of the young Gentleman
we have seen riding towards Lady Booby's,
with his Cane mimicked the Rap of a
London Footman at the Door. The People
within; namely, Adams, his Wife,
and three Children, Joseph, Fanny, and
the Pedlar, were all thrown into Confusion
by this Knock; but Adams went
directly to the Door, which being opened,
the Lady Booby and her Company
walked in, and were received by the Parson
with about two hundred Bows; and
by his Wife with as many Curt'sies; the
latter telling the Lady, “She was ashamed
to be seen in such a Pickle, and
that her House was in such a Litter: 
But that if she had expected such an
Honour from her Ladyship, she should
have found her in a better manner.” 
The Parson made no Apologies, tho' he
was in his Half-Cassock and a Flannel
Night-Cap. He said, “they were heartily
welcome to his poor Cottage,” 
and turning to Mr. Didapper, cried out,
Non mea renidet in Domo Lacunar: The
Beau answered, “He did not understand
Welch;” at which the Parson stared,
and made no Reply. 

Mr. Didapper, or Beau Didapper, was
a young Gentleman of about four Foot
five Inches in height. He wore his own
Hair, tho' the Scarcity of it might have
given him sufficient Excuse for a Periwig. 
His Face was thin and pale: The Shape
of his Body and Legs none of the best; 
for he had very narrow Shoulders,
and no Calf; and his Gait might more
properly be called hopping than walking. 
The Qualifications of his Mind
were well adapted to his Person. We
shall handle them first negatively. He
was not entirely ignorant: For he could
talk a little French, and sing two or three
Italian Songs: He had lived too much
in the World to be bashful, and too much
at Court to be proud: He seemed not
much inclined to Avarice; for he was
profuse in his Expences: Nor had he all
the Features of Prodigality; for he never
gave a Shilling: —No Hater of
Women; for he always dangled after
them; yet so little subject to Lust, that
he had, among those who knew him best,
the Character of great Moderation in his
Pleasures. No Drinker of Wine; nor
so addicted to Passion, but that a hot
Word or two from an Adversary made
him immediately cool. 

Now, to give him only a Dash or
two on the affirmative Side: “Tho' he
was born to an immense Fortune,
he chose, for the pitiful and dirty Consideration
of a Place of little consequence,
to depend entirely on the Will
of a Fellow, whom they call a Great-Man; 
who treated him with the utmost
Disrespect, and exacted of him
a plenary Obedience to his Commands; 
which he implicitly submitted
to, at the Expence of his Conscience,
his Honour, and his Country; in
which he had himself so very large a
Share.” And to finish his Character,
As he was entirely well satisfied with
his own Person and Parts, so he was
very apt to ridicule and laugh at any
Imperfection in another.” Such was
the little Person or rather Thing that
hopped after Lady Booby into Mr. Adams's
Kitchin. 
The Parson and his Company retreated
from the Chimney-side, where they
had been seated, to give room to the
Lady and hers. Instead of returning any
of the Curt'sies or extraordinary Civility
of Mrs. Adams, the Lady turning to Mr.
Booby, cried out, “Quelle Bête! Quel 

Animal!” And presently after discovering
Fanny (for she did not need the
Circumstance of her standing by Joseph
to assure the Identity of her Person) she
asked the Beau, “Whether he did not
think her a pretty Girl?” —“Begad,
Madam,” answered he, “'tis
the very same I met.” “I did not
imagine,” replied the Lady, “you
had so good a Taste.” “Because
I never liked you, I warrant,” cries
the Beau. “Ridiculous!” said she,
you know you was always my Aversion.” 
“I would never mention Aversion,” 
answered the Beau, “with
that Face* ; dear Lady Booby, wash
your Face before you mention Aversion,
I beseech you.” He then laughed
and turned about to coquette it with
Fanny. 
Mrs. Adams had been all this time
begging and praying the Ladies to sit
down, a Favour which she had at last obtained. 
The little Boy to whom the Accident
had happened, still keeping his
Place by the Fire, was chid by his Mother
for not being more mannerly: But 

Lady Booby took his part, and commending
his Beauty, told the Parson he was his
very Picture. She then seeing a Book
in his Hand, asked, “if he could read?” 
“Yes,” cried Adams, “a little Latin,
Madam, he is just got into Quæ Genus.” 
—“A Fig for quere genius,” answered
she, “let me hear him read a
little English.” —“Lege, Dick,
Lege,” said Adams: But the Boy made
no Answer, till he saw the Parson knit
his Brows; and then cried, “I don't
understand you, Father.” “How,
Boy,” says Adams, “What doth Lego
make in the imperative Mood? 
Legito, doth it not?” “Yes,” answered
Dick. —“And what besides,” 
says the Father. “Lege,” 
quoth the Son, after some hesitation. 
“A good Boy,” says the Father: 
“And now, Child, What is the English
of Lego?” —To which the Boy, after
long puzzling, answered, he could
not tell. “How,” cries Adams in a Passion,
—“What hath the Water washed
away your Learning? Why, what is
Latin for the English Verb read. Consider
before you speak.” —The Child
considered some time, and then the Parson
cried twice or thrice, “Le—, Le—.” 
—Dick answered, “Lego.” — 

“Very well;—and then, what is the
English,” says the Parson, “of the
Verb Lego.” —“To read,” cried
Dick. —“Very well,” said the Parson,
“a good Boy, you can do well, if
you will take pains. —I assure
your Ladyship he is not much above
eight Years old, and is out of his
Propria quæ Maribus already. — 
Come, Dick, read to her Ladyship;” 
—which she again desiring, in order
to give the Beau Time and Opportunity
with Fanny, Dick began as in
the following Chapter. 




The History of two Friends, which
may afford an useful Lesson to all
those Persons, who happen to take up
their Residence in married Families. 
“Leonard and Paul were two
Friends.” —“Pronounce it
Lennard, Child,” cry'd the Parson. 
—“Pray, Mr. Adams,” says Lady
Booby, “let your Son read without Interruption.” 
Dick then proceeded. 
“Lennard and Paul were two Friends,
who having been educated together at
the same School, commenced a Friendship
which they preserved a long time
for each other. It was so deeply fixed
in both their Minds, that a long
Absence, during which they had maintained
no Correspondence, did not eradicate
nor lessen it: But it revived in
all its Force at their first Meeting,
which was not till after fifteen Years
Absence, most of which Time Lennard
had spent in the East-Indi-es.” 
—“Pronounce it short Indies,” says
Adams. —“Pray, Sir, be quiet,” 
says the Lady. —The Boy repeated— 

“in the East-Indies, whilst Paul had served
his King and Country in the Army. 
In which different Services, they had
found such different Success, that Lennard
was now married, and retired
with a Fortune of thirty thousand
Pound; and Paul was arrived to the
Degree of a Lieutenant of Foot; and
was not worth a single Shilling.” 
“The Regiment in which Paul was
stationed, happened to be ordered into
Quarters, within a small distance
from the Estate which Lennard had
purchased; and where he was settled. 
This latter, who was now become a
Country Gentleman and a Justice of
Peace, came to attend the Quarter-Sessions,
in the Town where his old
Friend was quartered, soon after his
Arrival. Some Affair in which a Soldier
was concerned, occasioned Paul
to attend the Justices. Manhood, and
Time, and the Change of Climate had
so much altered Lennard, that Paul
did not immediately recollect the Features
of his old Acquaintance: But it
was otherwise with Lennard. He
knew Paul the moment he saw him; 
nor could he contain himself from
quitting the Bench, and running 

hastily to embrace him. Paul stood at
first a little surprized; but had soon
sufficient Information from his Friend,
whom he no sooner remembred, than
he returned his Embrace with a Passion
which made many of the Spectators
laugh, and gave to some few a
much higher and more agreeable Sensation. 
“Not to detain the Reader with minute
Circumstances, Lennard insisted
on his Friend's returning with him to
his House that Evening; which Request
was complied with, and Leave
for a Month's Absence for Paul, obtained
of the commanding Officer. 
“If it was possible for any Circumstance
to give any addition to the
Happiness which Paul proposed in this
Visit, he received that additional Pleasure,
by finding on his Arrival at his
Friend's House, that his Lady was an
old Acquaintance which he had formerly
contracted at his Quarters; and
who had always appeared to be of a
most agreeable Temper. A Character
she had ever maintained among her
Intimates, being of that number, every 

Individual of which is called quite the
best sort of Woman in the World. 
“But good as this Lady was, she was
still a Woman; that is to say, an Angel
and not an Angel”—“You must mistake,
Child,” cries the Parson, “for
you read Nonsense.” “It is so in the
Book, answered the Son.” Mr. Adams
was then silenc'd by Authority, and Dick
proceeded—“For tho' her Person was of
that kind to which Men attribute the
Name of Angel, yet in her Passions
she was perfectly Woman. Of which a
great degree of Obstinacy was the most
remarkable, and perhaps most pernicious. 
“A day or two past after Paul's Arrival
before any Instances of this appear'd; 
but it was impossible to conceal it long. 
Both she and her Husband soon lost all
Apprehension from their Friend's Presence,
and fell to their Disputes with as
much Vigour as ever. These were still
pursued with the utmost Ardour and Eagerness,
however trifling the Causes were
whence they first arose. Nay, however
incredible it may seem, the little Consequence
of the matter in Debate was frequently
given as a Reason for the Fierceness
of the Contention, as thus: If you 

loved me, sure you would never dispute with
me such a Trifle as this. The Answer to
which is very obvious; for the Argument
would hold equally on both sides and was
constantly retorted with some Addition, as
—I am sure I have much more Reason to say
so, who am in the right. During all these
Disputes, Paul always kept strict Silence,
and preserved an even Countenance without
shewing the least visible Inclination
to either Party. One day, however, when
Madam had left the Room in a violent
Fury, Lennard could not refrain from
referring his Cause to his Friend. Was
ever any thing so unreasonable, says
he, as this Woman? What shall I do
with her? I doat on her to Distraction; 
nor have I any Cause to complain of
more than this Obstinacy in her Temper; 
whatever she asserts she will maintain
against all the Reason and Conviction
in the World. Pray give me your
Advice. —First, says Paul, I
will give my Opinion, which is flatly
that you are in the wrong; for supposing
she is in the wrong, was the Subject
of your Contention anywise material? 
What signified it whether you
was married in a red or yellow Waistcoat?
for that was your Dispute. Now
suppose she was mistaken, as you 

love her you say so tenderly, and I believe
she deserves it, would it not have
been wiser to have yielded, tho' you
certainly knew yourself in the right,
than to give either her or yourself any
Uneasiness? For my own part, if
ever I marry, I am resolved to enter
into an Agreement with my Wife,
that in all Disputes (especially about
Trifles) that Party who is most convinced
they are right, shall always surrender
the Victory: by which means
we shall both be forward to give up the
Cause. I own, said Lennard, my
dear Friend, shaking him by the Hand,
there is great Truth and Reason
in what you say; and I will for the
future endeavour to follow your Advice. 
They soon after broke up the Conversation,
and Lennard going to his
Wife, asked her pardon, and told her his
Friend had convinced him he had been in
the wrong. She immediately began a
vast Encomium on Paul, in which he
seconded her, and both agreed he was the
worthiest and wisest Man upon Earth. 
When next they met, which was at Supper,
tho' she had promised not to mention
what her Husband told her, she could
not forbear casting the kindest and most
affectionare Looks on Paul, and asked 

him with the sweetest Voice, whether
she should help him to some Potted-Woodcock? 
—Potted Partridge, my
Dear, you mean, says the Husband. 
My Dear, says she, I ask your Friend
if he will eat any potted Woodcock; 
and I am sure I must know who potted
it. I think I should know too
who shot them, reply'd the Husband,
and I am convinced I have not seen a
Woodcock this Year; however, tho'
I know I am in the right I submit,
and the potted Partridge is potted
Woodcock, if you desire to have it so. 
It is equal to me, says she, whether it
is one or the other; but you would
persuade one out of one's Senses; to be
sure you are always in the right in your
own Opinion; but your Friend I believe
knows which he is eating. Paul
answered nothing, and the Dispute
continued as usual the greatest part of
the Evening. The next Morning the
Lady accidentally meeting Paul, and
being convinced he was her Friend, and
of her side, accosted him thus: —I am
certain, Sir, you have long since wonder'd
at the Unreasonableness of my Husband. 
He is indeed in other respects a good
sort of Man; but so positive, that no
Woman but one of my complying Temper 

could possibly live with him. 
Why last Night now, was ever any
Creature so unreasonable? —I am
certain you must condemn him— 
Pray answer me, was he not in the
wrong? Paul, after a short Silence,
spoke as follows: I am sorry, Madam,
that as Good-manners obliges me to
answer against my Will, so an Adherence
to Truth forces me to declare
myself of a different Opinion. To be
plain and honest, you was entirely in
the wrong; the Cause I own not worth
disputing, but the Bird was undoubtedly
a Partridge. O Sir, reply'd the
Lady, I cannot possibly help your
Taste—Madam, returned Paul,
that is very little material; for had
it been otherwise, a Husband might
have expected Submission—Indeed! 
Sir, says she, I assure you! — 
Yes, Madam, cry'd he, he might
from a Person of your excellent Understanding; 
and pardon me for saying
such a Condescension would have shewn
a Superiority of Sense even to your
Husband himself—But, dear
Sir, said she, why should I submit
when I am in the right? —For that
very Reason, answer'd he, it would
be the greatest Instance of Affection 

imaginable: for can any thing be a
greater Object of our Compassion than
a Person we love, in the wrong. Ay,
but I should endeavour, said she, to
set him right. Pardon me, Madam,
answered Paul, I will apply to your own
Experience, if you ever found your Arguments
had that effect. The more
our Judgments err, the less we are
willing to own it: for my own part,
I have always observed the Persons who
maintain the worst side in any Contest,
are the warmest. Why, says she,
I must confess there is Truth in what
you say, and I will endeavour to practice
it. The Husband then coming
in, Paul departed. And Lennard approaching
his Wife with an Air of Good-humour,
told her he was sorry for their
foolish Dispute the last Night: but he was
now convinced of his Error. She answered
smiling, she believed she owed his
Condescension to his Complacence; that
she was ashamed to think a Word had
past on so silly an Occasion, especially as
she was satisfy'd she had been mistaken. 
A little Contention followed, but with
the utmost Good-will to each other, and
was concluded by her asserting that Paul
had thoroughly convinced her she had
been in the wrong. Upon which they 

both united in the Praises of their com-Friend. 
“PAUL now past his time with great
Satisfaction; these Disputes being much
less frequent as well as shorter than usual:
but the Devil, or some unlucky Accident
in which perhaps the Devil had no hand,
shortly put an end to his Happiness. He
was now eternally the private Referee of
every Difference; in which after having
perfectly as he thought established the
Doctrine of Submission, he never scrupled
to assure both privately that they were in
the right in every Argument, as before he
had followed the contrary Method. One
day a violent Litigation happened in his
Absence, and both Parties agreed to refer
it to his Decision. The Husband professing
himself sure the Decision would be in his
favour, the Wife answer'd, he might be
mistaken; for she believed his Friend was
convinced how seldom she was to blame
—and that if he knew all. —The
Husband reply'd—My Dear, I
have no desire of any Retrospect, but
I believe if you knew all too, you
would not imagine my Friend so entirely
on your side. Nay, says
she, since you provoke me, I will mention
one Instance. You may remember 

our Dispute about sending Jacky to
School in cold Weather, which Point
I gave up to you from mere Compassion,
knowing myself to be in the right,
and Paul himself told me afterwards,
he thought me so. My Dear, replied
the Husband, I will not scruple your
Veracity; but I assure you solemnly, on
my applying to him, he gave it absolutely
on my side, and said he would
have acted in the same manner. They
then proceeded to produce numberless
other Instances, in all which Paul had,
on Vows of Secrecy, given his Opinion
on both sides. In the Conclusion, both
believing each other, they fell severely
on the Treachery of Paul, and agreed
that he had been the occasion of almost
every Dispute which had fallen out between
them. They then became extremely
loving, and so full of Condescension
on both sides, that they vyed
with each other in censuring their own
Conduct, and jointly vented their Indignation
on Paul, whom the Wife,
fearing a bloody Consequence, earnestly
entreated her Husband to suffer
quietly to depart the next Day, which
was the time fixed for his Return to
Quarters, and then drop his Acquaintance. 

“However ungenerous this Behaviour
in Lennard may be esteemed, his Wife
obtained a Promise from him (tho'
with difficulty) to follow her Advice; 
but they both exprest such unusual Coldness
that day to Paul, that he, who was
quick of Apprehension, taking Lennard
aside, prest him so home, that he at
last discovered the Secret. Paul acknowledged
the Truth, but told him
the Design with which he had done it
—To which the other answered, he
would have acted more friendly to have
let him into the whole Design; for
that he might have assured himself of
his Secrecy. Paul reply'd, with some
Indignation, he had given him a sufficient
Proof how capable he was of
concealing a Secret from his Wife. 
Lennard returned with some Warmth
—He had more reason to upbraid
him, for that he had caused most of the
Quarrels between them by his strange
Conduct, and might (if they had not
discovered the Affair to each other)
have been the Occasion of their Separation. 
Paul then said—But something
now happened, which put a stop
to Dick's Reading, and of which we
shall treat in the next Chapter.” 




In which the History is continued. 
JOSEPH ANDREWS had borne with
great Uneasiness the Impertinence of
Beau Didapper to Fanny, who had been
talking pretty freely to her, and offering
her Settlements; but the Respect to the
Company had restrained him from interfering,
whilst the Beau confined himself
to the Use of his Tongue only; but the
said Beau watching an Opportunity whilst
the Ladies Eyes were disposed another
way, offered a Rudeness to her with his
Hands; which Joseph no sooner perceived
than he presented him with so sound a Box
on the Ear, that it conveyed him several
Paces from where he stood. The Ladies
immediately skreamed out, rose from their
Chairs, and the Beau, as soon as he recovered
himself, drew his Hanger, which
Adams observing, snatched up the Lid of
a Pot in his left Hand, and covering himself
with it as with a Shield, without any
Weapon of Offence in his other Hand,
stept in before Joseph, and exposed himself
to the enraged Beau, who threatened
such Perdition and Destruction, that it
frighted the Women, who were all got in
a huddle together, out of their Wits; even
to hear his Denunciations of Vengeance. 

Joseph was of a different Complexion,
and begged Adams to let his Rival come
on; for he had a good Cudgel in his Hand,
and did not fear him. Fanny now fainted
into Mrs. Adams's Arms, and the whole
Room was in Confusion, when Mr.
Booby passing by Adams, who lay shug
under the Pot-Lid, came up to Didapper,
and insisted on his sheathing the Hanger,
promising he should have Satisfaction; 
which Joseph declared he would give him,
and fight him at any Weapon whatever. 
The Beau now sheathed his Hanger, and
taking out a Pocket-Glass, and vowing
Vengeance all the Time, he re-adjusted his
Hair; the Parson deposited his Shield,
and Joseph running to Fanny, soon
brought her back to Life. Lady Booby
chid Joseph for his Insult on Didapper; 
but he answered he would have attacked
an Army in the same Cause. “What
Cause?” said the Lady. “Madam,” 
answered Joseph, “he was rude to that
young Woman.” —“What,” 
says the Lady, “I suppose he would have
kissed the Wench; and is a Gentleman
to be struck for such an Offer? I must
tell you, Joseph, these Airs do not become
you.” —“Madam,” said
Mr. Booby, “I saw the whole Affair,
and I do not commend my Brother; 

for I cannot perceive why he should
take upon him to be this Girl's Champion.” 
—“I can commend him,” 
says Adams, “he is a brave Lad; and
it becomes any Man to be the Champion
of the Innocent; and he must be
the basest Coward, who would not
vindicate a Woman with whom he is
on the Brink of Marriage.” —“Sir,” 
says Mr. Booby, “my Brother is not a
proper Match for such a young Woman
as this.” —“No,” says Lady
Booby, “nor do you, Mr. Adams, act in
your proper Character, by encouraging
any such Doings; and I am very
much surprized you should concern
yourself in it. I think your Wife and
Family your properer Care.” — 
“Indeed, Madam, your Ladyship says
very true,” answered Mrs. Adams,
“he talks a pack of Nonsense, that the
whole Parish are his Children. I am
sure I don't understand what he means
by it; it would make some Women
suspect he had gone astray: but I acquit
him of that; I can read Scripture
as well as he; and I never
found that the Parson was obliged
to provide for other Folks Children; 
and besides he is but a poor Curate,
and hath little enough, as your Ladyship 

knows, for me and mine.” — 
“You say very well, Mrs. Adams,” 
quoth the Lady Booby, who had not
spoke a Word to her before, “you seem
to be a very sensible Woman; and I
assure you, your Husband is acting a
very foolish Part, and opposing his
own Interest; seeing my Nephew is
violently set against this Match: and
indeed I can't blame him; it is by no
means one suitable to our Family.” In
this manner the Lady proceeded with Mrs.
Adams, whilst the Beau hopped about
the Room, shaking his Head; partly
from Pain, and partly from Anger; and
Pamela was chiding Fanny for her Assurance,
in aiming at such a Match as her
Brother. —Poor Fanny answered
only with her Tears, which had long
since begun to wet her Handkerchief; 
which Joseph perceiving, took her by the
Arm, and wrapping it in his, carried her
off, swearing he would own no Relation
to any one who was an Enemy to her he
lov'd more than all the World. He
went out with Fanny under his left Arm,
brandishing a Cudgel in his right, and
neither Mr. Booby nor the Beau thought
proper to oppose him. Lady Booby and
her Company made a very short stay behind
him; for the Lady's Bell now summoned 

them to dress; for which they had
just time before Dinner. 
ADAMS seemed now very much
dejected, which his Wife perceiving, began
to apply some matrimonial Balsam. 
She told him he had Reason to be concerned; 
for that he had most probably ruined
his Family with his Tricks: But perhaps
he was grieved for the Loss of his
two Children, Joseph and Fanny. His eldest
Daughter went on: —“Indeed Father,
it is very hard to bring Strangers here
to eat your Children's Bread out of their
Mouths. —You have kept them ever
since they came home; and for any thing
I see to the contrary may keep them a
Month longer: Are you obliged to
to give her Meat, tho'f she was never
so handsome? But I don't see she is so
much handsomer than other People. 
If People were to be kept for their
Beauty, she would scarce fare better
than her Neighbours, I believe. — 
As for Mr. Joseph, I have nothing to
say, he is a young Man of honest Principles,
and will pay some time or other
for what he hath: But for the Girl,
—Why doth she not return to
her Place she ran away from? I would
not give such a Vagabond Slut a Halfpenny, 

tho' I had a Million of Money; 
no, tho' she was starving.” “Indeed
but I would,” cries little Dick; “and
Father, rather than poor Fanny shall
be starved, I will give her all this
Bread and Cheese.” —(Offering what
he held in his Hand.) —Adams smiled
on the Boy, and told him he rejoiced to
see he was a Christian; and that if he had
a Halfpenny in his Pocket he would have
given it him; telling him, it was his Duty
to look upon all his Neighbours as his
Brothers and Sisters, and love them accordingly. 
“Yes, Papa,” says he, “I
love her better than my Sisters; for
she is handsomer than any of them.” 
“Is she so, Saucebox,” says the Sister,
giving him a Box on the Ear, which the
Father would probably have resented, had
not Joseph, Fanny, and the Pedlar, at
that Instant, returned together. — 
Adams bid his Wife prepare some Food
for their Dinner; she said, “truly she
could not, she had something else to
do.” Adams rebuked her for disputing
his Commands, and quoted many
Texts of Scripture to prove, that the Husband
is the Head of the Wife, and she is
to submit and obey. The Wife answered,
“it was Blasphemy to talk Scripture out
of Church; that such things were very 

proper to be said in the Pulpit: but
that it was prophane to talk them in
in common Discourse. Joseph told
Mr. Adams he was not come with any
Design to give him or Mrs. Adams
any trouble; but to desire the Favour
of all their Company to the George (an
Alehouse in the Parish,) where he had
bespoke a Piece of Bacon and Greens
for their Dinner.” Mrs. Adams, who
was a very good sort of Woman, only
rather too strict in Œconomicks, readily
accepted this Invitation, as did the Parson
himself by her Example; and away
they all walked together, not omitting
little Dick, to whom Joseph gave a Shilling,
when he heard of his intended Liberality
to Fanny. 




Where the good-natur'd Reader will see
something which will give him no
great Pleasure. 
The Pedlar had been very inquisitive
from the time he had first
heard that the great House in this Parish
belonged to the Lady Booby; and had
learnt that she was the Widow of Sir Thomas,
and that Sir Thomas had bought
Fanny, at about the Age of three or four
Years, of a travelling Woman; and
now their homely but hearty Meal was
ended, he told Fanny, he believed he
could acquaint her with her Parents. The
whole Company, especially she herself,
started at this Offer of the Pedlar's. — 
He then proceeded thus, while they all
lent their strictest Attention: “Tho' I
am now contented with this humble
way of getting my Livelihood, I was
formerly a Gentleman; for so all those of
my Profession are called. In a word,
I was a Drummer in an Irish Regiment
of Foot. Whilst I was in this honourable
Station, I attended an Officer of
our Regiment into England a recruiting. 
In our March from Bristol to
Froome (for since the Decay of the 

Woollen Trade, the clothing Towns
have furnished the Army with a great
number of Recruits) we overtook on
the Road a Woman who seemed to be
about thirty Years old, or thereabouts,
not very handsome; but well enough
for a Soldier. As we came up to her,
she mended her Pace, and falling into
Discourse with our Ladies (for every
Man of the Party, namely, a Serjeant,
two private Men, and a Drum, were
provided with their Woman, except
myself) she continued to travel on
with us. I perceiving she must fall to
my Lot, advanced presently to her,
made Love to her in our military way,
and quickly succeeded to my Wishes. 
We struck a Bargain within a Mile,
and lived together as Man and Wife
to her dying Day.” —“I suppose,” 
says Adams interrupting him,
“you were married with a Licence: For
I don't see how you could contrive to
have the Banns published while you
were marching from Place to Place.” 
—“No, Sir,” said the Pedlar, “we
took a Licence to go to Bed together,
without any Banns.” —“Ay, ay,” 
said the Parson, “ex Necessitate, a Licence
may be allowable enough; but
surely, surely, the other is the more 

regular and eligible Way.” —The
Pedlar proceeded thus, “She returned
with me to our Regiment, and removed
with us from Quarters to Quarters,
till at last, whilst we lay at Galloway,
she fell ill of a Fever, and died. When
she was on her Death-bed she called
me to her, and crying bitterly, declared
she could not depart this World
without discovering a Secret to me,
which she said was the only Sin which
sat heavy on her Heart. She said she
had formerly travelled in a Company
of Gipsies, who had made a Practice of
stealing away Children; that for her
own part, she had been only once
guilty of the Crime; which she said
she lamented more than all the rest of
her Sins, since probably it might
have occasioned the Death of the Parents: 
For, added she, it is almost
impossible to describe the Beauty of
the young Creature, which was about
a Year and half old when I kidnapped
it. We kept her (for she was a Girl)
above two Years in our Company,
when I sold her myself for three Guineas
to Sir Thomas Booby in Somersetshire. 
Now, you know whether there
are any more of that Name in this
County.” —“Yes,” says Adams, 

“there are several Boobys who are Squires; 
but I believe no Baronet now alive,
besides it answers so exactly in every
Point there is no room for Doubt; but
you have forgot to tell us the Parents
from whom the Child was stolen.” 
—“Their Name,” answered the Pedlar,
“was Andrews. They lived about thirty
Miles from the Squire; and she told
me, that I might be sure to find them
out by one Circumstance; for that
they had a Daughter of a very strange
Name Pam&eshort;la  or Pam&ebar;la,  Some pronounced it one way, and some the
other.” Fanny, who had changed Colour
at the first mention of the Name,
now fainted away, Joseph turned pale,
and poor Dicky began to roar; the
Parson fell on his Knees and ejaculated
many Thanksgivings that this Discovery
had been made before the dreadful Sin
of Incest was committed; and the Pedlar
was struck with Amazement, not being
able to account for all this Confusion, the
Cause of which was presently opened by
the Parson's Daughter, who was the only
unconcerned Person; for the Mother was
chaffing Fanny's Temples, and taking the
utmost care of her) and indeed Fanny
was the only Creature whom the Daughter
would not have pitied in her Situation; 

wherein, tho' we compassionate her
ourselves, we shall leave her for a little
while, and pay a short Visit to Lady
Booby. 



The History returning to the Lady
Booby, gives some Account of the
terrible Conflict in her Breast between
Love and Pride; with what happened
on the present Discovery. 
The Lady sat down with her Company
to Dinner: but eat nothing. 
As soon as her Cloth was removed, she
whispered Pamela, that she was taken a
little ill, and desired her to entertain her
Husband and Beau Didapper. She then
went up into her Chamber, sent for Slipslop,
threw herself on the Bed, in the Agonies
of Love, Rage, and Despair; nor
could she conceal these boiling Passions
longer, without bursting. Slipslop now
approached her Bed, and asked how her
Ladyship did; but instead of revealing her
Disorder, as she intended, she entered
into a long Encomium on the Beauty and 

Virtues of Joseph Andrews; ending at
last with expressing her Concern, that so
much Tenderness should be thrown away
on so despicable an Object as Fanny. 
Slipslop well knowing how to humour her
Mistress's Frenzy, proceeded to repeat,
with Exaggeration if possible, all her
Mistress had said, and concluded with a
Wish, that Joseph had been a Gentleman,
and that she could see her Lady in the Arms
of such a Husband. The Lady then started
from the Bed, and taking a Turn or
two cross the Room, cry'd out with a
deep Sigh,—Sure he would make any
Woman happy. —“Your Ladyship,” 
says she, “would be the happiest Woman
in the World with him. —A
fig for Custom and Nonsense. What
vails what People say? Shall I
be afraid of eating Sweetmeats, because
People may say I have a sweet
Tooth? If I had a mind to marry
a Man, all the World should not
hinder me. Your Ladyship hath no
Parents to tutelar your Infections; besides
he is of your Ladyship's Family
now, and as good a Gentleman as any
in the Country; and why should not
a Woman follow her Mind as well as
a Man? Why should not your Ladyship
marry the Brother, as well as your 

Nephew the Sister. I am sure, if it was
a fragrant Crime I would not persuade
your Ladyship to it.” —“But,
dear Slipslop,” answered the Lady, “if
I could prevail on myself to commit
such a Weakness, there is that cursed
Fanny in the way, whom the Idiot,
O how I hate and despise him”— 
“She, a little ugly Mynx,” cries Slipslop,
“leave her to me. —I suppose
your Ladyship hath heard of Joseph's
fitting with one of Mr. Didapper's Servants
about her; and his Master hath
ordered them to carry her away by
force this Evening. I'll take care
they shall not want Assistance. I was
talking with his Gentleman, who was
below just when your Ladyship sent
for me.” —“Go back,” says the
Lady Booby, “this Instant; for I expect
Mr. Didapper will soon be going. 
Do all you can; for I am resolved this
Wench shall not be in our Family; 
I will endeavour to return to the Company; 
but let me know as soon as she
is carried off.” Slipslop went away,
and her Mistress began to arraign her Conduct
in the following Manner: 
“What am I doing? How do I suffer
this Passion to creep imperceptibly 

upon me! How many Days are past
since I could have submitted to ask
myself the Question? —Marry a
Footman! Distraction! Can I afterwards
bear the Eyes of my Acquaintance? 
But I can retire from them; retire
with one in whom I propose more
Happiness than the World without
him can give me! Retire—to feed
continually on Beauties, which my inflamed
Imagination sickens with eagerly
gazing on; to satisfy every Appetite,
every Desire, with their utmost
Wish. —Ha! and do I doat thus
on a Footman! I despise, I detest my
Passion. —Yet why? Is he not generous,
gentle, kind? —Kind to
whom, to the meanest Wretch, a Creature
below my Consideration. Doth
he not? —Yes, he doth prefer
her; curse his Beauties, and the little
low Heart that possesses them; which
can basely descend to this despicable
Wench, and be ungratefully deaf to
all the Honours I do him. —And can
I then love this Monster? No, I will
tear his Image from my Bosom, tread
on him, spurn him. I will have those
pitiful Charms which now I despise,
mangled in my sight; for I will not
suffer the little Jade I hate to riot in 

the Beauties I contemn. No, tho' I
despise him myself; tho' I would spurn
him from my Feet, was he to languish
at them, no other should taste the Happiness
I scorn. Why do I say Happiness? 
To me it would be Misery. 
—To sacrifice my Reputation,
my Character, my Rank in Life, to
the Indulgence of a mean and a vile
Appetite. —How I detest the Thought! 
How much more exquisite is the Pleasure
resulting from the Reflection of
Virtue and Prudence, than the faint
Relish of what flows from Vice and
Folly! Whither did I suffer this improper,
this mad Passion to hurry me,
only by neglecting to summon the
Aids of Reason to my Assistance? Reason,
which hath now set before me
my Desires in their proper Colours,
and immediately helped me to expel
them. Yes, I thank Heaven and my
Pride, I have now perfectly conquered
this unworthy Passion; and if there
was no Obstacle in its way, my Pride
would disdain any Pleasures which
could be the Consequence of so base,
so mean, so vulgar—.” Slipslop
returned at this Instant in a violent
Hurry, and with the utmost Eagerness,
cry'd out,—“O, Madam, I have 

strange News. Tom the Footman is
just come from the George; where it
seems Joseph and the rest of them are a
jinketting; and he says, there is a
strange Man who hath discovered that
Fanny and Joseph are Brother and Sister.” 
—“How, Slipslop,” cries
the Lady in a Surprize. —“I
had not time, Madam,” cries Slipslop,
“to enquire about Particles, but Tom
says, it is most certainly true.” 
This unexpected Account entirely
obliterated all those admirable Reflections
which the supreme Power of Reason had
so wisely made just before. In short,
when Despair, which had more share in
producing the Resolutions of Hatred we
have seen taken, began to retreat, the
Lady hesitated a Moment, and then forgetting
all the Purport of her Soliloquy,
dismissed her Woman again, with Orders
to bid Tom attend her in the Parlour,
whither she now hastened to acquaint
Pamela with the News. Pamela said, she
could not believe it: For she had never
heard that her Mother had lost any Child,
or that she had ever had more than Joseph
and herself. The Lady flew into a
violent Rage with her, and talked of Upstarts
and disowning Relations, who had 

so lately been on a level with her. Pamela
made no answer: But her Husband,
taking up her Cause, severely reprimanded
his Aunt for her Behaviour to his
Wife; he told her, if it had been earlier
in the Evening, she should not have staid
a Moment longer in her House; that he
was convinced, if this young Woman
could be proved her Sister, she would
readily embrace her as such; and he
himself would do the same: He then desired
the Fellow might be sent for, and
the young Woman with him; which Lady
Booby immediately ordered, and thinking
proper to make some Apology to Pamela
for what she had said, it was readily accepted,
and all things reconciled. 
The Pedlar now attended, as did Fanny,
and Joseph who would not quit her; the
Parson likewise was induced, not only by
Curiosity, of which he had no small Portion,
but his Duty, as he apprehended it, to
follow them: for he continued all the way
to exhort them, who were now breaking
their Hearts, to offer up Thanksgivings,
and be joyful for so miraculous an Escape. 
When they arrived at Booby-Hall,
they were presently called into the Parlour, 

where the Pedlar repeated the same
Story he had told before, and insisted on
the Truth of every Circumstance; so that
all who heard him were extremely well
satisfied of the Truth, except Pamela, who
imagined, as she had never heard either
of her Parents mention such an Accident,
that it must be certainly false; and except
the Lady Booby, who suspected the Falshood
of the Story, from her ardent Desire
that it should be true; and Joseph who feared
its Truth, from his earnest Wishes that
it might prove false. 
Mr. Booby now desired them all to suspend
their Curiosity and absolute Belief or
Disbelief, till the next Morning, when
he expected old Mr. Andrews and his Wife
to fetch himself and Pamela home in his
Coach, and then they might be certain of
certainly knowing the Truth or Falshood
of this Relation; in which he said, as
there were many strong Circumstances to
induce their Credit, so he could not perceive
any Interest the Pedlar could have
in inventing it, or in endeavouring to impose
such a Falshood on them. 
The Lady Booby, who was very little
used to such Company, entertained them
all, viz. Her Nephew, his Wife, her 

Brother and Sister, the Beau, and the Parson,
with great Good-humour at her own Table. 
As to the Pedlar, she ordered him to be
made as welcome as possible, by her Servants. 
All the Company in the Parlour,
except the disappointed Lovers, who sat
sullen and silent, were full of Mirth: For
Mr. Booby had prevailed on Joseph to ask
Mr. Didapper's pardon; with which he
was perfectly satisfied. Many Jokes
past between the Beau and the Parson,
chiefly on each other's Dress; these afforded
much Diversion to the Company. 
Pamela chid her Brother Joseph for the
Concern which he exprest at discovering
a new Sister. She said, if he loved Fanny
as he ought, with a pure Affection, he
had no Reason to lament being related
to her. —Upon which Adams began
to discourse on Platonic Love; whence
he made a quick Transition to the Joys
in the next World, and concluded with
strongly asserting that there was no such
thing as Pleasure in this. At which Pamela
and her Husband smiled on one another. 
This happy Pair proposing to retire
(for no other Person gave the least Symptom
of desiring Rest) they all repaired to
several Beds provided for them in the 

same House; nor was Adams himself suffered
to go home, it being a stormy
Night. Fanny indeed often begged she
might go home with the Parson; but her
Stay was so strongly insisted on, that she
at last, by Joseph's Advice, consented. 



Containing several curious Night-Adventures,
in which Mr. Adams fell
into many Hair-breadth' Scapes, partly
owing to his Goodness, and partly
to his Inadvertency. 
About an Hour after they had
all separated (it being now past
three in the Morning) Beau Didapper,
whose Passion for Fanny permitted him
not to close his Eyes, but had employed
his Imagination in Contrivances how
to satisfy his Desires, at last hit on a
Method by which he hoped to effect it. 
He had ordered his Servant to bring him
word where Fanny lay, and had received
his Information; he therefore arose, put 

on his Breeches and Nightgown, and stole
softly along the Gallery which led to her
Apartment; and being come to the Door,
as he imagined it, he opened it with the
least Noise possible, and entered the Chamber. 
A Savour now invaded his Nostrils
which he did not expect in the Room of
so sweet a young Creature, and which
might have probably had no good effect
on a cooler Lover. However, he groped
out the Bed with difficulty; for there was
not a Glimpse of Light, and opening the
Curtains, he whispered in Joseph's Voice
(for he was an excellent Mimick) “Fanny,
my Angel, I am come to inform thee
that I have discovered the Falshood of
the Story we last Night heard. I am
no longer thy Brother, but thy Lover; 
nor will I be delayed the Enjoyment
of thee one Moment longer. You
have sufficient Assurances of my Constancy
not to doubt my marrying you,
and it would be want of Love to deny
me the possession of thy Charms.” — 
So saying, he disencumbered himself
from the little Clothes he had on, and
leaping into Bed, embraced his Angel, as he
conceived her, with great Rapture. If he
was surprized at receiving no Answer, he
was no less pleased to find his Hug returned
with equal Ardour. He remained 

not long in this sweet Confusion; for
both he and his Paramour presently discovered
their mutual Deceit. Indeed it
was no other than the accomplished Slipslop
whom he had engaged; but tho' she
immediately knew the Person whom she
had mistaken for Joseph, he was at a loss
to guess at the Representative of Fanny. 
He had so little seen or taken notice of
this Gentlewoman, that Light itself
would have afforded him no Assistance
in his Conjecture. Beau Didapper no
sooner had perceived his Mistake, than
he attempted to escape from the Bed with
much greater Haste than he had made
to it; but the watchful Slipslop prevented
him. For that prudent Woman being
disappointed of those delicious Offerings
which her Fancy had promised her Pleasure,
resolved to make an immediate Sacrifice
to her Virtue. Indeed she wanted
an Opportunity to heal some Wounds
which her late Conduct had, she feared,
given her Reputation; and as she had a
wonderful Presence of Mind, she conceived
the Person of the unfortunate Beau
to be luckily thrown in her way to restore
her Lady's Opinion of her impregnable
Chastity. At that instant therefore, when
he offered to leap from the Bed, she
caught fast hold of his Shirt, at the same 

time roaring out, “O thou Villain! who
hast attacked my Chastity, and I believe
ruined me in my Sleep; I will
swear a Rape against thee, I will prosecute
thee with the utmost Vengeance.” 
The Beau attempted to get loose, but she
held him fast, and when he struggled,
she cry'd out, “Murther! Murther! 
Rape! Robbery! Ruin!” At which
Words Parson Adams, who lay in the
next Chamber, wakeful and meditating
on the Pedlar's Discovery, jumped out
of Bed, and without staying to put a rag
of Clothes on, hastened into the Apartment
whence the Cries proceeded. He
made directly to the Bed in the dark,
where laying hold of the Beau's Skin (for
Slipslop had torn his Shirt almost off) and
finding his Skin extremely soft, and hearing
him in a low Voice begging Slipslop
to let him go, he no longer doubted but
this was the young Woman in danger of
ravishing, and immediately falling on the
Bed, and laying hold on Slipslop's Chin,
where he found a rough Beard, his Belief
was confirmed; he therefore rescued the
Beau, who presently made his Escape,
and then turning towards Slipslop, receiv'd
such a Cuff on his Chops, that his Wrath
kindling instantly, he offered to return
the Favour so stoutly, that had poor Slipslop 

received the Fist, which in the dark
past by her and fell on the Pillow, she
would most probably have given up the
Ghost. —Adams missing his Blow,
fell directly on Slipslop, who cuffed and
scratched as well as she could; nor was
he behind-hand with her, in his Endeavours,
but happily the Darkness of the
Night befriended her—She then
cry'd she was a Woman; but Adams answered
she was rather the Devil, and if
she was, he would grapple with him; and
being again irritated by another Stroke on
his Chops, he gave her such a Remembrance
in the Guts, that she began to roar
loud enough to be heard all over the
House. Adams then seizing her by the
Hair (for her Double-clout had fallen off
in the Scuffle) pinned her Head down to
the Bolster, and then both called for Lights
together. The Lady Booby, who was as
wakeful as any of her Guests, had been
alarmed from the beginning; and, being
a Woman of a bold Spirit, she slipt on a
Nightgown, Petticoat and Slippers, and
taking a Candle, which always burnt in
her Chamber, in her Hand, she walked
undauntedly to Slipslop's Room; where she
entred just at the instant as Adams had
discovered, by the two Mountains which
Slipslop carried before her, that he was 

concerned with a Female. He then concluded
her to be a Witch, and said he
fancied those Breasts gave suck to a Legion
of Devils. Slipslop seeing Lady Booby enter
the Room, cried, Help! or I am ravished,
with a most audible Voice, and
Adams perceiving the Light, turned hastily
and saw the Lady (as she did him)
just as she came to the Feet of the Bed, nor
did her Modesty, when she found the
naked Condition of Adams, suffer her to
approach farther. —She then began to
revile the Parson as the wickedest of all
Men, and particularly railed at his Impudence
in chusing her House for the Scene
of his Debaucheries, and her own Woman
for the Object of his Bestiality. 
Poor Adams had before discovered the
Countenance of his Bedfellow, and now
first recollecting he was naked, he was
no less confounded than Lady Booby herself,
and immediately whipt under the
Bed-clothes, whence the chaste Slipslop endeavoured
in vain to shut him out. Then
putting forth his Head, on which, by
way of Ornament, he wore a Flannel
Nightcap, he protested his Innocence,
and asked ten thousand Pardons of Mrs.
Slipslop for the Blows he had struck her,
vowing he had mistaken her for a Witch. 
Lady Booby then, casting her Eyes on the 

Ground, observed something sparkle
with great Lustre, which, when she had
taken it up, appeared to be a very fine
pair of Diamond Buttons for the Sleeves. 
A little farther she saw lie the Sleeve itself
of a Shirt with laced Ruffles. “Heyday!” 
says she, “what is the meaning
of this? —“O, Madam,” says
Slipslop, “I don't know what hath happened,
I have been so terrified. Here
may have been a dozen Men in the
Room.” “To whom belongs this
laced Shirt and Jewels?” says the Lady
—“Undoubtedly,” cries the Parson,
“to the young Gentleman whom I mistook
for a Woman on coming into the
Room, whence proceeded all the subsequent
Mistakes; for if I had suspected
him for a Man, I would have seized
him had he been another Hercules, tho'
indeed he seems rather to resemble Hylas.” 
He then gave an Account of the
Reason of his rising from Bed, and the
rest, till the Lady came into the Room; at
which, and the Figures of Slipslop and her
Gallant, whose Heads only were visible
at the opposite Corners of the Bed, she
could not refrain from Laughter, nor did
Slipslop persist in accusing the Parson of
any Motions towards a Rape. The Lady
therefore desired him to return to his Bed 

as soon as she was departed, and then ordering
Slipslop to rise and attend her in her
own Room, she returned herself thither. 
When she was gone, Adams renewed his
Petitions for Pardon to Mrs. Slipslop, who
with a most Christian Temper not only forgave,
but began to move with much Curtesy
towards him, which he taking as a
Hint to be gone, immediately quitted the
Bed, and made the best of his way towards
his own; but unluckily instead of
turning to the right, he turned to the left,
and went to the Apartment where Fanny,
who (as the Reader may remember) had
not slept a wink the preceding Night, and
who was so hagged out with what had happen'd
to her in the Day, that notwithstanding
all Thoughts of her Joseph, she was
fallen into so profound a Sleep, that all the
Noise in the adjoining Room had not
been able to disturb her. Adams groped
out the Bed, and turning the Clothes
down softly, a Custom Mrs. Adams had
long accustomed him to, crept in, and
deposited his Carcase on the Bedpost, a
Place which that good Woman had always
assigned him. 
As the Cat or Lapdog of some lovely
Nymph for whom ten thousand Lovers
languish, lies quietly by the side of the 

charming Maid, and ignorant of the
Scene of Delight on which they repose,
meditates the future Capture of a Mouse,
or Surprizal of a Plate of Bread and
Butter: so Adams, lay by the side of
Fanny, ignorant of the Paradise to which
he was so near, nor could the Emanation
of Sweets which flowed from her Breath,
overpower the Fumes of Tobacco which
played in the Parson's Nostrils. And now
Sleep had not overtaken the good Man,
when Joseph, who had secretly appointed
Fanny to come to her at the break of Day,
rapped softly at the Chamber-Door, which
when he had repeated twice, Adams cry'd
Come in, whoever you are. Joseph thought
he had mistaken the Door, tho' she had
given him the most exact Directions; 
however, knowing his Friend's Voice, he
opened it, and saw some female Vestments
lying on a Chair. Fanny waking
at the same instant, and stretching out
her Hand on Adams's Beard, she cry'd
out,—“O Heavens! where am I?” 
“Bless me! where am I?” said the Parson. 
Then Fanny skreamed, Adams leapt
out of Bed, and Joseph stood, as the Tragedian
calls it, like the Statue of Surprize. 
“How came she into my Room?” cry'd
Adams. “How came you into hers? cry'd
Joseph, in an Astonishment. “I know 

nothing of the matter,” answered Adams,
“but that she is a Vestal for me. 
As I am a Christian, I know not whether
she is a Man or Woman. He is an Infidel
who doth not believe in Witchcraft. 
They as surely exist now as in the Days
of Saul. My Clothes are bewitched away
too, and Fanny's brought into their
place.” For he still insisted he was in
his own Apartment; but Fanny denied it
vehemently, and said his attempting to persuade
Joseph of such a Falshood, convinced
her of his wicked Designs. How! said
Joseph, in a Rage, “Hath he offered any
Rudeness to you?” —She answered,
she could not accuse him of more
than villainously stealing to Bed to her,
which she thought Rudeness sufficient,
and what no Man would do without a
wicked Intention. Joseph's great Opinion
of Adams was not easily to be staggered,
and when he heard from Fanny that
no Harm had happened, he grew a little
cooler; yet still he was confounded, and
as he knew the House, and that the Women's
Apartments were on this side Mrs.
Slipslop's Room, and the Men's on the
other, he was convinced that he was in
Fanny's Chamber. Assuring Adams, therefore,
of this Truth, he begged him to give 

some Account how he came there. Adams
then, standing in his Shirt, which did not
offend Fanny as the Curtains of the Bed
were drawn, related all that had happened,
and when he had ended, Joseph told
him, it was plain he had mistaken, by
turning to the right instead of the left. 
“Odso!” cries Adams, “that's true, as
sure as Sixpence, you have hit on the
very thing.” He then traversed the
Room, rubbing his Hands, and begged
Fanny's pardon, assuring her he did not
know whether she was Man or Woman. 
That innocent Creature firmly believing
all he said, told him, she was no longer
angry, and begged Joseph to conduct him
into his own Apartment, where he should
stay himself, till she had put her Clothes
on. Joseph and Adams accordingly departed,
and the latter soon was convinced
of the Mistake he had committed; however,
whilst he was dressing himself, he
often asserted he believed in the Power of
Witchcraft notwithstanding, and did not
see how a Christian could deny it. 




The Arrival of Gaffar and Gammar
Andrews, with another Person, not
much expected; and a perfect Solution
of the Difficulties raised by the
Pedlar. 
As soon as Fanny was drest, Joseph
returned to her, and they had a
long Conversation together, the Conclusion
of which was, that if they found themselves
to be really Brother and Sister,
they vowed a perpetual Celibacy, and to
live together all their Days, and indulge
a Platonick Friendship for each other. 
The Company were all very merry at
Breakfast, and Joseph and Fanny rather
more cheerful than the preceding Night. 
The Lady Booby produced the Diamond
Button, which the Beau most readily owned,
and alledged that he was very subject
to walk in his Sleep. Indeed he was far
from being ashamed of his Amour, and
rather endeavoured to insinuate that more
than was really true had past between
him and the fair Slipslop. 

Their Tea was scarce over, when
News came of the Arrival of old Mr.
Andrews and his Wife. They were immediately
introduced and kindly received
by the Lady Booby, whose Heart went
now pit-a-pat, as did those of Joseph and
Fanny. They felt perhaps little less Anxiety
in this Interval than Œdipus himself
whilst his Fate was revealing. 
Mr. Booby first open'd the Cause, by
informing the old Gentleman that he had
a Child in the Company more than he
knew of, and taking Fanny by the Hand,
told him, this was that Daughter of his
who had been stolen away by Gypsies in
her Infancy. Mr. Andrews, after expressing
some Astonishment, assured his Honour
that he had never lost a Daughter by
Gypsies, nor ever had any other Children
than Joseph and Pamela. These
Words were a Cordial to the two Lovers; 
but had a different effect on Lady
Booby. She ordered the Pedlar to be called,
who recounted his Story as he had
done before. —At the end of which,
old Mrs. Andrews running to Fanny, embraced
her, crying out, She is, she is my
Child. The Company were all amazed
at this Disagreement between the Man 

and his Wife; and the Blood had now forsaken
the Cheeks of the Lovers, when
the old Woman turning to her Husband,
who was more surprized than all the rest,
and having a little recovered her own Spirits,
delivered herself as follows. “You
may remember, my Dear, when you
went a Serjeant to Gibraltar you left
me big with Child, you staid abroad
you know upwards of three Years. In
your Absence I was brought to bed, I
verily believe of this Daughter, whom
I am sure I have reason to remember,
for I suckled her at this very Breast till
the Day she was stolen from me. One
Afternoon, when the Child was about
a Year, or a Year and half old, or thereabouts,
two Gipsy Women came to
the Door, and offered to tell my Fortune. 
One of them had a Child in her
Lap; I shewed them my Hand, and
desired to know if you was ever to
come home again, which I remember
as well as if it was but yesterday, they
faithfully promised me you should— 
I left the Girl in the Cradle, and went
to draw them a Cup of Liquor, the
best I had; when I returned with the
Pot (I am sure I was not absent longer
than whilst I am telling it to you) the
Women were gone. I was afraid they 

had stolen something, and looked and
looked, but to no purpose, and Heaven
knows I had very little for them to
steal. At last hearing the Child cry
in the Cradle, I went to take it up
—but O the living! how was I
surprized to find, instead of my own
Girl that I had put into the Cradle,
who was as fine a fat thriving Child as
you shall see in a Summer's Day, a
poor sickly Boy, that did not seem to
have an Hour to live. I ran out, pulling
my Hair off, and crying like any
mad after the Women, but never could
hear a Word of them from that Day to
this. When I came back, the poor
Infant (which is our Joseph there, as
stout as he now stands) lifted up its Eyes
upon me so piteously, that to be sure,
notwithstanding my Passion, I could
not find in my heart to do it any mischief. 
A Neighbour of mine happening
to come in at the same time, and
hearing the Case, advised me to take
care of this poor Child, and G&wblank; would
perhaps one day restore me my own. 
Upon which I took the Child up, and
suckled it to be sure all the World as if
it had been born of my own natural Body. 
And as true as I am alive, in a little
time I loved the Boy all to nothing as 

if it had been my own Girl. —Well,
as I was saying, Times growing very
hard, I having two Children, and nothing
but my own Work, which was
little enough, G&wblank; knows, to maintain
them, was obliged to ask Relief of the
Parish; but instead of giving it me,
they removed me, by Justices Warrants,
fifteen Miles to the Place where
I now live, where I had not been long
settled before you came home. Joseph
(for that was the Name I gave him myself
—the Lord knows whether he
was baptized or no, or by what Name)
Joseph, I say, seemed to me to be about
five Years old when you returned; 
for I believe he is two or three Years
older than our Daughter here; (for I
am thoroughly convinced she is the
same) and when you saw him you said
he was a chopping Boy, without ever
minding his Age; and so I seeing you
did not suspect any thing of the matter,
thought I might e'en as well keep it to
myself, for fear you should not love
him as well as I did. And all this is
veritably true, and I will take my Oath
of it before any Justice in the Kingdom.” 
The Pedlar, who had been summoned
by the Order of Lady Booby, listened with 

the utmost Attention to Gammar Andrews's
Story, and when she had finished,
asked her if the supposititious Child had no
Mark on its Breast? To which she answered,
“Yes, he had as fine a Strawberry
as ever grew in a Garden.” This
Joseph acknowledged, and unbuttoning
his Coat, at the Intercession of the Company,
shewed to them. “Well,” says
Gaffar Andrews, who was a comical sly
old Fellow, and very likely desired to
have no more Children than he could
keep, “you have proved, I think, very
plainly that this Boy doth not belong to
us; but how are you certain that the
Girl is ours?” The Parson then brought
the Pedlar forward, and desired him to
repeat the Story which he had communicated
to him the preceding Day at the
Alehouse; which he complied with, and
related what the Reader, as well as Mr.
Adams, hath seen before. He then confirmed,
from his Wife's Report, all the
Circumstances of the Exchange, and of
the Strawberry on Joseph's Breast. At
the Repetition of the Word Strawberry,
Adams, who had seen it without any Emotion,
started, and cry'd, Bless me!
something comes into my Head. But before
he had time to bring any thing out, a Servant
called him forth. When he was 

gone, the Pedlar assured Joseph, that his
Parents were Persons of much greater
Circumstances than those he had hitherto
mistaken for such; for that he had been
stolen from a Gentleman's House, by
those whom they call Gypsies, and had
been kept by them during a whole Year,
when looking on him as in a dying Condition,
they had exchanged him for the
other healthier Child, in the manner before
related. He said, as to the Name of
his Father, his Wife had either never
known or forgot it; but that she had acquainted
him he lived about forty Miles
from the Place where the Exchange had
been made, and which way, promising
to spare no Pains in endeavouring with
him to discover the Place. 
But Fortune, which seldom doth good
or ill, or makes Men happy or miserable
by halves, resolved to spare him this Labour. 
The Reader may please to recollect,
that Mr. Wilson had intended a
Journey to the West, in which he was
to pass through Mr. Adams's Parish, and
had promised to call on him. He was
now arrived at the Lady Booby's Gates for
that purpose, being directed thither from
the Parson's House, and had sent in the
Servant whom we have above seen call 

Mr. Adams forth. This had no sooner
mentioned the Discovery of a stolen Child,
and had uttered the word Strawberry,
than Mr. Wilson, with Wildness in his
Looks, and the utmost Eagerness in his
Words, begged to be shewed into the
Room, where he entred without the
least Regard to any of the Company but
Joseph, and embracing him with a Complexion
all pale and trembling, desired
to see the Mark on his Breast; the Parson
followed him capering, rubbing his Hands,
and crying out, Hic est quem quæris, inventus
est, &c. Joseph complied with the
Request of Mr. Wilson, who no sooner
saw the Mark, than abandoning himself
to the most extravagant Rapture of Passion,
he embraced Joseph, with inexpressible
Extasy, and cried out in Tears of
Joy, I have discovered my Son, I have
him again in my Arms. Joseph was not
sufficiently apprized yet, to taste the same
Delight with his Father, (for so in reality
he was;) however, he returned some
Warmth to his Embraces: But he no
sooner perceived from his Father's Account,
the Agreement of every Circumstance,
of Person, Time, and Place, than
he threw himself at his Feet, and embracing
his Knees, with Tears begged his 

Blessing, which was given with much
Affection, and received with such Respect,
mixed with such Tenderness on
both sides, that it affected all present: 
But none so much as Lady Booby, who
left the Room in an Agony, which was
but too much perceived, and not very
charitably accounted for by some of the
Company. 



Being the last. In which this true History
is brought to a happy Conclusion. 
Fanny was very little behind her Joseph,
in the Duty she exprest towards
her Parents; and the Joy she evidenced
in discovering them. Gammar Andrews
kiss'd her, and said she was heartily glad
to see her: But for her part she could
never love any one better than Joseph. 
Gaffar Andrews testified no remarkable
Emotion, he blessed and kissed her, but
complained bitterly, that he wanted his
Pipe, not having had a Whiff that
Morning. 

Mr. Booby, who knew nothing of his
Aunt's Fondness, imputed her abrupt Departure
to her Pride, and Disdain of the
Family into which he was married; he
was therefore desirous to be gone with
the utmost Celerity: And now, having
congratulated Mr. Wilson and Joseph on
the Discovery, he saluted Fanny, called
her Sister, and introduced her as such to
Pamela, who behaved with great Decency
on the Occasion. 
He now sent a Message to his Aunt,
who returned, that she wished him a
good Journey; but was too disordered
to see any Company: He therefore prepared
to set out, having invited Mr. Wilson
to his House, and Pamela and Joseph
both so insisted on his complying, that
he at last consented, having first obtained
a Messenger from Mr. Booby, to acquaint
his Wife with the News; which, as he
knew it would render her completely
happy, he could not prevail on himself
to delay a moment in acquainting her
with. 
The Company were ranged in this
manner. The two old People with their
two Daughters rode in the Coach, the 

Squire, Mr. Wilson, Joseph, Parson Adams,
and the Pedlar proceeded on
Horseback. 
In their way Joseph informed his Father
of his intended Match with Fanny; 
to which, tho' he expressed some Reluctance
at first, on the Eagerness of his Son's
Instances he consented, saying if she was
so good a Creature as she appeared, and
he described her, he thought the Disadvantages
of Birth and Fortune might be
compensated. He however insisted on
the Match being deferred till he had seen
his Mother; in which Joseph perceiving
him positive, with great Duty obeyed
him, to the great delight of Parson
Adams, who by these means saw an Opportunity
of fulfilling the Church Forms,
and marrying his Parishioners without a
Licence. 
Mr. Adams greatly exulting on this
Occasion, (for such Ceremonies were
Matters of no small moment with him)
accidentally gave Spurs to his Horse,
which the generous Beast disdaining,
for he was high of Mettle, and had been
used to more expert Riders than the
Gentleman who at present bestrode him:
for whose Horsemanship he had perhaps 

some Contempt, immediately ran away
full speed, and played so many antic
Tricks, that he tumbled the Parson from
his Back; which Joseph perceiving, came
to his Relief. This Accident afforded
infinite Merriment to the Servants, and
no less frighted poor Fanny, who beheld
him as he past by the Coach; but the
Mirth of the one, and Terror of the other
were soon determined, when the Parson
declared he had received no Damage. 
The Horse having freed himself from
his unworthy Rider, as he probably
thought him, proceeded to make the best
of his way; but was stopped by a Gentleman
and his Servants, who were travelling
the opposite way; and were now
at a little distance from the Coach. They
soon met; and as one of the Servants delivered
Adams his Horse, his Master hailed
him, and Adams looking up, presently
recollected he was the Justice of Peace
before whom he and Fanny had made
their Appearance. The Parson presently
saluted him very kindly; and the Justice
informed him, that he had found the
Fellow who attempted to swear against
him and the young Woman the very next
day, and had committed him to Salisbury 

Goal, where he was charged with
many Robberies. 
Many Compliments having past between
the Parson and Justice, the latter
proceeded on his Journey, and the former
having with some disdain refused Joseph's
Offer of changing Horses; and declared
he was as able a Horseman as any
in the Kingdom, re-mounted his Beast; 
and now the Company again proceeded,
and happily arrived at their Journey's
End, Mr. Adams by good Luck, rather
than by good Riding, escaping a second
Fall. 
The Company arriving at Mr. Booby's
House, were all received by him in the
most courteous, and entertained in the
most splendid manner, after the Custom
of the old English Hospitality, which is
still preserved in some very few Families
in the remote Parts of England. They
all past that Day with the utmost Satisfaction; 
it being perhaps impossible to
find any Set of People more solidly and
sincerely happy. Joseph and Fanny found
means to be alone upwards of two Hours,
which were the shortest but the sweetest
imaginable. 

In the Morning, Mr. Wilson proposed to
his Son to make a Visit with him to his Mother; 
which, notwithstanding his dutiful
Inclinations, and a longing Desire he had
to see her, a little concerned him as he
must be obliged to leave his Fanny: But
the Goodness of Mr. Booby relieved him; 
for he proposed to send his own Coach
and six for Mrs. Wilson, whom Pamela
so very earnestly invited, that Mr. Wilson
at length agreed with the Entreaties of
Mr. Booby and Joseph, and suffered the
Coach to go empty for his Wife. 
On Saturday Night the Coach return'd
with Mrs. Wilson, who added one more
to this happy Assembly. The Reader
may imagine much better and quicker
too than I can describe, the many Embraces
and Tears of Joy which succeeded
her Arrival. It is sufficient to say, she
was easily prevailed with to follow her
Husband's Example, in consenting to the
Match. 
On Sunday Mr. Adams performed the
Service at the Squire's Parish Church,
the Curate of which very kindly exchanged
Duty, and rode twenty Miles to the Lady
Booby's Parish, so to do; being particularly 

charged not to omit publishing
the Banns, being the third and last Time. 
At length the happy Day arrived,
which was to put Joseph in the possession
of all his Wishes. He arose and drest
himself in a neat, but plain Suit of Mr.
Booby's, which exactly fitted him; for
he refused all Finery; as did Fanny
likewise, who could be prevailed on
by Pamela to attire herself in nothing
richer than a white Dimity Night-Gown. 
Her Shift indeed, which Pamela presented
her, was of the finest Kind, and had
an Edging of Lace round the Bosom; she
likewise equipped her with a Pair of fine
white Thread Stockings, which were all
she would accept; for she wore one of
her own short round-ear'd Caps, and over
it a little Straw Hat, lined with Cherry-coloured
Silk, and tied with a Cherry-coloured
Ribbon. In this Dress she came
forth from her Chamber, blushing, and
breathing Sweets; and was by Joseph,
whose Eyes sparkled Fire, led to Church,
the whole Family attending, where Mr.
Adams performed the Ceremony; at
which nothing was so remarkable, as the
extraordinary and unaffected Modesty of
Fanny, unless the true Christian Piety of
Adams, who publickly rebuked Mr. Booby 

and Pamela for laughing in so sacred a
Place, and so solemn an Occasion. Our
Parson would have done no less to the
highest Prince on Earth: For tho' he
paid all Submission and Deference to his
Superiors in other Matters, where the
least Spice of Religion intervened, he immediately
lost all Respect of Persons. It
was his Maxim, That he was a Servant
of the Highest, and could not, without
departing from his Duty, give up the
least Article of his Honour, or of his
Cause, to the greatest earthly Potentate. 
Indeed he always asserted, that Mr. Adams
at Church with his Surplice on, and
Mr. Adams without that Ornament, in
any other place, were two very different
Persons. 
When the Church Rites were over,
Joseph led his blooming Bride back to
Mr. Booby's (for the Distance was so
very little, they did not think proper to
use a Coach) the whole Company attended
them likewise on foot; and now a
most magnificent Entertainment was provided,
at which Parson Adams demonstrated
an Appetite surprizing, as well as surpassing
every one present. Indeed the only
Persons who betrayed any Deficiency on
this Occasion, were those on whose account 

the Feast was provided. They pampered
their Imaginations with the much
more exquisite Repast which the Approach
of Night promised them; the
Thoughts of which filled both their
Minds, tho' with different Sensations; 
the one all Desire, while the other had
her Wishes tempered with Fears. 
At length, after a Day past with the
utmost Merriment, corrected by the
strictest Decency; in which, however,
Parson Adams, being well filled with Ale
and Pudding, had given a Loose to more
Facetiousness than was usual to him: The
happy, the blest Moment arrived, when
Fanny retired with her Mother, her Mother-in-law,
and her Sister. She was soon
undrest; for she had no Jewels to deposite
in their Caskets, nor fine Laces to
sold with the nicest Exactness. Undressing
to her was properly discovering, not
putting off Ornaments: For as all her
Charms were the Gifts of Nature, she
could divest herself of none. How, Reader,
shall I give thee an adequate Idea
of this lovely young Creature; the Bloom
of Roses and Lillies might a little illustrate
her Complexion, or their Smell her
Sweetness: but to comprehend her entirely,
conceive Youth, Health, Bloom, 

Beauty, Neatness, and Innocence in her
Bridal-Bed; conceive all these in their
utmost Perfection, and you may place
the charming Fanny's Picture before your
Eyes. 
JOSEPH no sooner heard she was
in Bed, than he fled with the utmost
Eagerness to her. A Minute carried him
into her Arms, where we shall leave this
happy Couple to enjoy the private Rewards
of their Constancy; Rewards so
great and sweet, that I apprehend Joseph
neither envied the noblest Duke, nor
Fanny the finest Duchess that Night. 
The third Day, Mr. Wilson and his
Wife, with their Son and Daughter returned
home; where they now live together
in a State of Bliss scarce ever equalled. 
Mr. Booby hath with unprecedented
Generosity given Fanny a Fortune
of two thousand Pound, which Joseph
hath laid out in a little Estate in the same
Parish with his Father, which he now
occupies, (his Father having stock'd it for
him;) and Fanny presides, with most excellent
Management in his Dairy; where,
however, she is not at present very able
to bustle much, being, as Mr. Wilson informs 

me in his last Letter, extremely
big with her first Child. 
Mr. Booby hath presented Mr. Adams
with a Living of one hundred and thirty
Pounds a Year. He at first refused it,
resolving not to quit his Parishioners,
with whom he hath lived so long: But
on recollecting he might keep a Curate
at this Living, he hath been lately inducted
into it. 
The Pedlar, besides several handsome
Presents both from Mr. Wilson and Mr.
Booby, is, by the latter's Interest, made an
Excise-man; a Trust which he discharges
with such Justice, that he is greatly beloved
in his Neighbourhood. 
As for the Lady Booby, she returned
to London in a few days, where a young
Captain of Dragoons, together with eternal
Parties at Cards, soon obliterated the
Memory of Joseph. 
JOSEPH remains blest with his
Fanny, whom he doats on with the utmost
Tenderness, which is all returned
on her side. The Happiness of this
Couple is a perpetual Fountain of Pleasure
to their fond Parents; and what is 

particularly remarkable, he declares he
will imitate them in their Retirement; 
nor will be prevailed on by any Booksellers,
or their Authors, to make his Appearance
in High-Life. 