


An Adventure where Wild, in the
Division of the Booty, exhibits an astonishing
Instance of Greatness. 
The Count was one Night very successful
at the Hazard-Table, where
Wild, who was just returned from his Travels, 

was then present; as was likewise a
young Gentleman whose Name was Bob
Bagshot, an Acquaintance of Mr. Wild's,
and of whom he entertained a great Opinion; 
taking therefore Mr. Bagshot aside, he
advised him to provide himself (if he had
them not about him) with a Case of Pistols,
and to attack the Count, in his Way
home, promising to plant himself near
with the same Arms, as a Corps de Reserve,
and to come up on Occasion. This was
accordingly executed, and the Count obliged
to surrender to savage Force what he
had in so genteel and civil a Manner taken
at Play. 
And as it is a wise and philosophical
Observation, that one Misfortune never
comes alone, the Count had hardly passed
the Examination of Mr. Bagshot, when he
fell into the Hands of Mr. Snap, who, in
Company with Mr. Wild the elder, and
one or two more Gentlemen, being it seems
thereto well warranted, laid hold of the
unfortunate Count, and conveyed him back
to the same House from which, by the 

Assistance of his good Friend he had formerly
escaped. 
Mr. Wild and Mr. Bagshot went together
to the Tavern, where Mr. Bagshot,
generously (as he thought) offered to share
the Booty, and having divided the Money
into two unequal Heaps, and added a golden
Snuff-Box to the lesser Heap, he desired
Mr. Wild to take his Choice. 
Mr. Wild immediately conveyed the larger
Share of the Ready into his Pocket,
according to an excellent Maxim of his: 
“First secure what Share you can, before you
wrangle for the rest:” And then, turning
to his Companion, he asked him, with
a stern Countenance, whether he intended
to keep all that Sum to himself? Mr. Bagshot
answered, with some Surprize, that he
thought Mr. Wild had no Reason to complain; 
for it was surely fair, at least on his
Part, to content himself with an equal
Share of the Booty, who had taken
the whole. I grant you took it, replied
Wild, “but, pray who proposed
or counselled the taking it? Can you
say, that you have done more than executed 

my Scheme, and might not I, if
I had pleased, have employed another?
since you well know there was not a
Gentleman in the Room but would have
taken the Money, if he had known
how conveniently and safely to do it. 
That is very true (returned Bagshot) but
did not I execute the Scheme, did not I
run the whole Risque? Should not I
have suffered the whole Punishment if
I had been taken, and is not the Labourer
worthy of his Hire? Doubtless (says
Jonathan) he is so, and your Hire I
shall not refuse you, which is all
that the Labourer is entituled to, or ever
enjoys. I remember when I was at
School to have heard some Verses, which
for the Excellence of their Doctrine,
made an Impression on me, purporting
that the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts
of the Field, work not for themselves. 
It is true, the Farmer allows Fodder to
his Oxen, and Pasture to his Sheep; 
but it is for his own Service, not theirs. 
In the same Manner the Plowman, the
Shepherd, the Weaver, the Builder and
the Soldier, work not for themselves but 

others; they are contented with a poor
Pittance (the Labourer's Hire) and permit
us the Great to enjoy the Fruits
of their Labours. Aristotle, as my
Master told us, hath plainly proved, in the
first Book of his Politicks, that the low,
mean, useful Part of Mankind, are born
Slaves to the Wills, and for the Use of
their Superiors, as well as the Cattle. It
is well said of us, the higher Order of
Mortals, that we are born only to devour
the Fruits of the Earth; and it may
be as well said of the lower Class, that
they are born only to produce them for
us. Is not the Battle gained by the Sweat
and Danger of the common Soldier, is
not the Honour and Fruit of the Victory
the General's who laid the Scheme? Is
not the House built by the Labour of the
Carpenter, and the Bricklayer? Is it
not built for the Profit only of the Architect,
and for the Use of the Inhabitant,
who could not easily have placed
one Brick upon another? Is not the
Cloth, the Silk, wrought into its Form,
and variegated with all the Beauty of
Colours, by those who are forced to 

content themselves with the coarsest and
vilest Part of their Work, while the Profit
and Enjoyment of their Labours fall
to the Share of others. Cast your Eye
abroad, and see who is it lives in the
most magnificent Buildings, feasts his
Palate with the most luxurious Dainties,
his Eyes with the most beautiful Sculptures
and delicate Paintings, and cloathes
himself in the finest and richest Apparel; 
and tell me if all these do not fall
to his Lot, who had not any the least
Share in producing all these Conveniencies,
nor the least Ability so to do? Why
then should the State of a Prig differ
from all others? Or why should you,
who are the Labourer only, the Executor
of my Scheme, expect a Share in the
Profit. Be advised, therefore, deliver the
whole Booty to me, and trust to my
Bounty for your Reward.” Mr. Bagshot
was some Time silent, and looked like a
Man Thunder-struck: But at last recovering
himself from his Surprize, he thus began. 
“If you think, Mr. Wild, by the
Force of your Arguments to get the
Money out of my Pocket, you are greatly 

mistaken. What is all this Stuff to me? 
D&wblank;n me, I am a Man of Honour,
and tho' I can't talk as well as you, by
G&wblank; you shall not make a Fool of me
and if you take me for one, I must
tell you, you are a Rascal.” At which
Words, he laid his Hand to his Sword. 
Wild, perceiving the little Success the great
Strength of his Arguments had met with,
and the hasty Temper of his Friend, gave
over his Design for the present, and told
Bagshot, he was only in Jest. But this
Coolness had rather the Effect of Oil than
Water thrown on the Flames of the other,
who replied, in a Rage, “D&wblank;n me, I
don't like such Jests; I see you are a pitiful
Rascal, and a Scoundrel.” Wild,
with a Philosophy worthy of great Admiration,
returned. “As for your Abuse,
I have no Regard to it; but to convince
you, I am not afraid of you, let
us lay the whole Booty on the Table,
and let the Conqueror take it all.” And
having so said, he drew out his shining
Sword, whose glittering so dazzled the
Eyes of Bagshot, that in a Tone entirely
altered, he said, “No, he was contented 

with what he had already; that it was
mighty ridiculous in them to quarrel
among themselves; that they had common
Enemies enough abroad, against
whom they should unite their common
Force; that if he had mistaken Wild,
he was sorry for it, and as for a Jest, he
could take a Jest as well as another.” 
Wild, who had a wonderful Knack of discovering
and applying to the Passions of
Men, beginning now to have a little Insight
into his Friend, and to conceive what
Arguments would make the quickest Impression
on him, cried out in a loud Voice,
“That he had bullied him into drawing his
Sword, and since it was out, he would
not put it up without Satisfaction. 
What Satisfaction would you have, (answered
the other) your Money or the
Sword, said Wild. Why lookye Mr.
Wild (said Bagshot) if you want to borrow
a little of my Part, since I know
you to be a Man of Honour, I don't
care if I lend you: —For tho' I am not
afraid of any Man living, yet rather than
break with a Friend, and as it may be
necessary for your Occasions.” —Wild, 

who often declared that he looked upon
borrowing to be as good a Way of taking as
any, and as he called it, the genteelest Kind
of Sneaking-Budge, putting up his Sword,
and shaking his Friend by the Hand, told
him, he had hit the Nail on the Head; it
was really his present Necessity only that
prevailed with him against his Will; for
that his Honour was concerned to pay a
considerable Sum the next Morning. Upon
which, contenting himself with one Half
of Bagshot's Share, so that he had three
Parts in four of the whole, he took leave
of his Companion, and retired to rest. 