

Contains some part of the history of the furious stranger, as told by herself. 
The company, to whom Jenny had now related the dangers she had escaped, were very impatient to know the whole of this adventure; and perceiving the person chiefly concerned in it was recover'd enough to be able to satisfy their curiosity, began almost all at once to ask what had induced her to attempt such an act of barbarity; but that unfortunate creature had not the power, for a considerable time, of making any other answer than a torrent of tears, which gush'd from her eyes with such rapidity as drew compassion even from Jenny herself. 
The violence of that passion however, which so long had stopp'd the passage of her words, having found this vent, she entreated their pardon for the disturbance she had caused, and thanked the charitable relief that had been offer'd her, in terms so polite as made every one see she was not of the lowest rank in life. 
Then turning to Jenny,—‘But it is you, madam, I have most offended, said she; Oh! had I perpetrated the horrid deed, Heaven sure must have decreed some new and yet unpractised torture for a crime like mine:’ —Here she ceased to give way to some sighs, which were just then forcing themselves from her afflicted bosom,—after which,—‘Yet, that Heaven to whom I now appeal, cry'd she, is witness for me, as well as my own conscious soul, that I was clear of all malice, all premeditated design against you: —When I drew that cursed knife, I meant not to hurt your innocence, but to do justice to myself on the villian that was with you: —Some demon in that instant sure, turn'd my erring arm from its intended mark to save his brother fiend.’ 
‘Who is this fiend,—this villian you are speaking of? cry'd lady Speck with some emotion.’ —‘Oh! there is no name so foul,—so black as he deserves, reply'd the other;—but if you would paint a wretch, in whom all vices, all corruptions meet as in their center,—then call him Celandine.’ 
‘Oh! ladies, continued she, in the extremest agonies, Why will you suffer such a serpent near you? —Where-ever he comes he brings destruction with him, and bitterness of heart with everlasting infamy, are the legacies he leaves behind!’ 
It is probable she would have run on with these exclamations much longer, if mr. Lovegrove had not reminded her, that as the person was not there, she would do better to inform the company of the cause of her complaint against him; ‘For, said he, you neither can be justified nor he condemn'd in our opinion, without your letting us into the secret of his crime.’ 
‘Alass! answer'd she, bursting again into tears, neither his crime nor my shame are secrets to the world; and as I am before persons of so much honour and goodness, I have reason to hope that a perfect knowledge of those unfortunate circumstances which brought on my undoing, will entitle me rather to compassion than at all add to the contempt the late behaviour I have been guilty of must have excited.’ 
The ladies then, as well as mr. Lovegrove, assured her, that she could no way so well attone for the confusion she had given them, as by making them a faithful narrative of the motives which had induced her to it. 
On this she endeavour'd to compose herself as much as posible, and after a pause of a few minutes, in order to recollect the passages she was about to relate, began to do as she was desired, in these or the like terms: 

‘I Will not detain your attention, said this afflicted woman, with any impertinent particulars concerning a wretch so unworthy as myself; but beg you will afford a patient hearing of such as are absolutely necessary for the better understanding my unhappy story.’ 
‘I was the only daughter of a gentleman, who, being a younger son, had no other dependance than a post in one of the public offices; as he lived up to the height of his income, I was left at his decease, which happen'd when I was about seventeen years of age, with no other portion than a genteel education, some houshold furniture, and a few jewels. I had lost my mother in my infancy, so that I was altogether an orphan;—my father's brother, though possess'd of a large estate, declin'd taking any care of me; and I know not what would have become of me, if an aunt, by my mother's side, had not been so good to admit me into her family into those temptations to which a maid of my years, and accounted not ugly, was liable to be exposed. 
‘I had not lived quite two years with this kind relation, before some business brought frequently to her house a gentleman call'd mr. M&wblank;, who you must doubtless have heard of, as he makes a pretty considerable figure in the law;—he took a great fancy to me at first sight, which afterwards grew up into a passion;—in fine, he loved me upon the most honourable terms; ask'd leave of my aunt to make his addresses to me; the match was too advantageous for a girl in my circumstances to be refus'd; she press'd me to it, and as neither his person nor conversation were disagreeable to me, I consented, and in a short time became his wife. 
‘Few women, I believe, can boast of more happiness than I enjoy'd during the first seven or eight months of our marriage; my husband seem'd to have no other study than that of obliging me; he was continually forming some new schemes of delight and entertainment for me; he never heard of any ornament of dress or furniture, in use with the beau monde, but he bought and brought it home to me; he could scarce bear losing the sight of me a moment; and indeed, gave me more of his company than could well be spared from his avocation. 
‘But the extremes of any thing are seldom lasting; this exuberance of transported love, this frenzy of passion, if I may call it so, vanish'd by very swift degrees; as sudden coldness almost at once succeeded, he treated me civilly, 'tis true, retrench'd no part of my expences, denied me nothing that I ask'd; but yet I found a mighty difference between this and his former behaviour? ah, how dangerous it is for men to begin with demonstrations of a fondness which they cannot perserve in; I was young, vain, inconsiderate; I expected the same assiduity to please, the same raptures as at first, and could not brook the disappointment. 
‘I complain'd of this change of my condition to a female friend of more years and experience than myself; at first she laugh'd at me, and told me that nothing was more common, and that she had often wonder'd mr. M&wblank;held out the honey-moon so long. 
‘This putting me beyond all patience,’ “Do not be so much out of humour, said she; your cause is but the same with other women, and I believe I can direct you to a course that will infallibly retrieve all; it is the nature of mankind, continued she, to be rampant in the pursuit of their wishes, but languid in the full possession of them; you must give your husband room to apprehend he is not so secure of your heart as he has imagined; toy with some pretty fellow before his face, send often for him, and affect to be uneasy till you see him; this will rouse your husband if any thing will do it; jealousy new points the darts of love, and whets the edge of satiated desire, according to the poet: 
They dearly prize, what they once fear to lose.
‘I greedily swallow'd this false doctrine, continued mrs. M&wblank;with a deep sigh, and immediately resolv'd on making the experiment: Celandine, whose person I have no occasion to give a particular description of, as you all know him, seemed form'd by nature for the purpose I intended. 
‘He came frequently to our house, my husband always treated him with the extremest respect, as indeed he had good reason to do, being indebted for his first setting out in the world, in the handsome manner he did, to the father of Celandine, whom both his parents had served, the one in quality of a steward, the other of house-keeper; the favours conferr'd on mr. M&wblank;, even from his infancy by that old gentleman, were such as made many people suspect there was a nearer affinity between them than was for my mother-in-law's honour to acknowledge; be that, however, as it may, it is not my business to inspect into the faults of others, but bewail my own. 
‘I had hitherto behaved towards my husband's young patron, for so he always call'd him, with the reserve becoming the married woman; but now, according to the pernicious advice I had received, I put on the most light airs before him; and look'd and talk'd in such a manner as might have made a man, of much less vanity than he is endued with, imagine me to be most passionately in love with him. 
‘Whether my husband had really too much indifference for me to regard any thing I did, or whether he thought the extraordinary civilities I shew'd to his friend were merely to oblige him, I cannot be certain; all I can say is, that he took not the least notice of this change in my conduct, nor could I perceive any alteration in his carriage to me upon it. 
‘But Celandine, who thought me all devoted to him, was not of a humour to lose any part of the triumph of his new conquest; he assiduously watch'd every opportunity of being alone with me, return'd the pretended advances I had made him with all the ardour of a man transported with them; till at last my heart became susceptible of the guilty flame, and what I had so fatally affected grew into reality; in fine, I loved him, was too weak to resist the dictates of my passion, and became a prey to the worst monster that ever wore the shape of man.’ 

Here mrs. M&wblank;became unable to proceed, she was not so entirely lost to all sense of honour and virtue as not to feel an extreme shock at the remembrance of what she was about to repeat; shame and confussion overwhelm'd her heart, and threw her into a second fainting, from which she was not without some difficulty recover'd. 
