

With no other Companions than her
own disturb'd Meditations, and one
Man, whom Don Myrtano's Servant-Maid
had provided for her as a
Guide, did the sorrowful Idalia quit
the House of her Beloved. They
had not travell'd many Hours, before
she found herself in a Place suited, as it were, by Nature
to her present Disposition: It was a Forest,
wild and desolate; the trackless Paths discover'd not
that any human Feet had ever trod them. ––––No
Fields of Corn, no Vines, no Olives here were planted; 
no limpid Streams, no cool refreshing Rivulets
appeared to charm the Eye with gay delightful
Prospects, and with their pleasing Murmurs sooth
the list'ning Ear; but sapless Trees, whose wind-bent,
Leafless Twigs hung quivering to oppose the Traveller's 

Passage, and rank and unwholsome Weeds
unfit for Use, hemm'd in the Borders of some stagnate
Brooks, which here and there, by Length of
Time, the falling Rains had made, composed a sad
unbless'd Variety, and spread an Area of nought but
Horror. The deep Resvery she was in, which the
melancholy Solitude of every Thing about her had
indulg'd, prevented her from taking any notice how
improbable it was that this should be a Road, especially
such a one as that of consequence must be,
which led to Verona, than which no Town in Italy
was more frequented: But they were not enter'd into
it above some two or three hundred Paces, before
the Man, appointed to conduct her, stopping his
Horse, obliged her to do so too; and looking on her
with a Countenance between stern and troubled,
Madam, said he, what think you of this Place? Does
it not seem cut out for Rapes and Murders, and every
Act of Horror? These Words, and the Manner in
which they were spoke, was sufficient to rouze
Idalia from that Lethargy of Thought she had been
in, and wake her into Terror, Cou'd I believe my
Life were an Offence, reply'd she, or were I conscious
of any Action which shou'd excite Revenge, I might,
indeed, suspect that I shou'd find it here. ––––Innocence,
resum'd he, is not always a Protection. ––––You have,
perhaps, incur'd more Displeasure than you are sensible
of;––––for what Cause, is not my Business to examine,
but I have received a Reward to put an End to your
Misfortunes by this–––– With these last Words he shew'd
her a Dagger, which he had wore conceal'd under
his Riding-Coat. As much as Idalia had threaten'd
to do a Violence on herself, as much as she thought
Life a Burden, ruin'd in her Fortune and Reputation,
disappointed in her Love, and depriv'd of every Thing
the World calls dear, the Imagination she was so
near Death, made her Soul shake with Agonies unfelt
before: She burst into a Flood of Tears, and throwing
herself at his Feet, conjur'd him to spare her, in
Terms so soft, so moving, so perswasive, that the 

Heart which had deny'd, must have been more than
savage: The most harden'd and accustom'd Murderer
must have relented at such a pity-moving Object, and
dropp'd the Dagger, if not turn'd the Point against
himself, for having thus alarm'd her. ––––What then
became of him whose Sentiments, however he appear'd
at present, were full of Honour, and scorn'd
so base, so barbarous a Deed. Tears started from
his Eyes, and his whole Frame seem'd convuls'd with
inward Tremblings, Rise, Madam, rise, (said he, as
soon as he had Power to speak,) and, if you can, forgive
the Terror I have caus'd, and for which I am
ready to expire with Grief and Penitence. ––––But, to
convince you, I never had a Thought to execute the
bloody Purpose I presum'd to threaten, I have provided
you a Place where you may remain in Safety, which
'tis impossible you can do at Verona. The blooming
Colour which had so lately forsook the Cheeks of
the afrighted Fair, return'd, at this Assurance, with
all its wonted Beauty; and looking more earnestly
than she had done before on the Person whose Behaviour
had given her such different Emotions, she could
easily perceive, tho' his Garb was mean, his Air, and the
Address with which he pronounced these last Words,
were far from that of a Ruffian. She imagin'd also,
that she saw something in his Face which was not
unknown to her; but when or how she had been
acquainted with it, was out of her Power to recollect. 
After she had testified the Sense she had of his
obliging Offer by some Expressions of Gratitude,
she desired to be inform'd of what he knew concerning
the Inhumanity intended against her, and
who they were that persecuted her with such a causeless
Malice. To which, after a little Pause, he replied
in this Manner: 'Tis easy for you, Madam, said he,
to guess that Ardella had her Share in the abhorr'd
Design, because you know very well that it was by her
I was appointed your Conducter; and I shall make no
Scruple to confess that it was from her Mouth I received 

my Orders to dispatch you, and from her Hand my
Hire, which was, indeed, a Sum too great for a Creature
of her Station to bestow, and, if she had not told
me, that by performing her Injunction I should oblige a
powerful Friend, would have made me know it must
be to a Person of the highest Rank I owed it. 'Twould
be impossible to represent the Consternation Idalia
was in at hearing these Words: An Imagination
came immediately into her Head more dreadful to
her than the Death she had escaped; and listing up
her Eyes, streaming a second Time with Tears, O
too well, (cried she,) too well I understand you! Myrtano's
Servant could not reach the Price of such an
Undertaking; but Mytano's self might well afford it. ––– 
Oh! 'tis he,––––'tis he, (pursu'd she, in an Agony
which was not far off Distraction,) the false, ungrateful,
perjur'd Man! Conscious of Guilt, and taught
by my Behaviour how much I scorn'd to aid his brutal
Raptures, the Passion he avow'd is turn'd to Hate! –––– 
Engaged to another, and unable to perform what Honour
did require, my Death alone could silence my Upbraidings! 
Cruel Reward for Love! Inhuman Policy! ––– 
Barbarous Myrtano!–––– 
In these and many more the like Complainings did
she pour out the Anguish of her Soul, without any
Regard of the Person who was witness of them; 
nor would he interrupt her, being willing to be let
into the whole Affair betwen her and Myrtano, till
perceiving she was silent, Tho' for many Reasons,
Madam, said he, Don Myrtano is the Man in the
World I least esteem, yet I cannot suffer you to continue
in this Opinion, without being guilty of an Injustice I
could not answer to myself. ––––Myrtano, Madam, I
dare swear, is perfectly innocent of any Design against
your Life:––––What he may have form'd against your
Honour, yourself is the best Judge. 
He said no more, waiting to hear in what Manner
she would reply; but tho' the Alteration of her
Looks and Gestures sufficiently testified the Effect his
Words had wrought in her, she forbore to speak how 

much she rejoic'd to find Myrtano guiltless of the
Crime she had just now suspected him of, and probably
imagining he might also be so of every Thing
he had been accus'd of, conjur'd her kind Informer
to acquaint her if there were any Thing of Truth in
the Report, that he was to be marry'd to the Niece
of Count Miramont; which he assuring her that there
was, and that the Nuptials were to be solemniz'd so
suddenly, that all the necessary Preparations for the
Magnificence of it were as good as finish'd, made her
again relapse into her former Violence of Temper. ––– 
Then he is a Traytor still, (cry'd she, transported at
once with Grief and Indignation,) and is guilty of a
worse Crime than conspiring against my Life could
be:––––My Peace of Mind, my everlasting Quiet he has
destroy'd,–––expos'd,–––betray'd me to a Rival's Scorn!––– 
's Death! to pretend Courtship to me, at the very Time
he was solliciting another,–––the same insinuating Looks,––– 
the same dissembled Tenderness,–––the same undoing Vows
address'd to both at once! –––Was ever Man so base? 
She had run on with a great deal more of the same
Nature, if he had not put a Stop to her, by telling
her, That whatever Reason she had to condemn Myrtano,
his intended Bride had certainly an equal Share,
who lov'd as much, and was as much deceiv'd:–––– 
Nay, infinitely more, (added he) in my Opinion, since,
had not her Quality been too great for him to hazard
such a Breach, you had doubtless had the Preference
in all Things; as well as in his Affections. Notwithstanding
the solemn Vow Idalia had made never to
see him more, she could not be told any Thing which
flatter'd the Tenderness she had for him, without
feeling a secret Pleasure; and having enter'd into a
Discourse of the Lady design'd to be his Wife, she
ask'd a thousand Questions concerning her Wit, Beauty,
and Humour; for this envy'd Fair having been brought
up from her Infancy at Rome with her Uncle Count
Miramont, and but lately come to Venice, she had
never happen'd to see her; but her jealous Curiosity
receiv'd but little Satisfaction in this Point, there appear'd 

in the Person she enquir'd of, a great Unwillingness
to make any Answers to such Interrogatories; 
and to put an End to them, he reminded her,
that if she design'd to go to that little Asylum he had
provided for her, it was high Time to begin their
Journey, it being a good many Miles distant from
the Place they now were in. She readily acquiesc'd,
and that Evening about Sun-set arriv'd at a neat, but
small Dwelling, such as the Poet describes to be the
Abode of Baucis and Philemon: A good old Man and
Woman, pretty near the same Age, came forth to
welcome her, and, while her Guide was employ'd in
taking Care of his Horses, conducted her in, and
shew'd her to a Chamber, which, tho' it could boast
no Finery, was extremely clean and decent, and had
every Thing in it fit to charm a contemplative Mind. 
The Windows were cover'd with Fillarée and Jessamine,
only where here and there Spaces were cut to
give the Eye a most delightful Prospect o'er distant
Meadows, Fields, and Vineyards; a sweet Confusion
without fill'd the whole rural Scene, and fed extensive
Thought with all the Charms of Nature:–––Within, a
vast Variety of collected Books, and choicest Maps,
brought to the View the spacious Universe, improving
Reason with the Aids of Art. 
IDALIA, whose Wishes at this Time were dead
to all the noisy Splendor of a Town, seem'd perfectly
pleas'd with it, and told her Hosts she should
think it the greatest Blessing Life could now afford
her, to be permitted to spend the Remainder of her
Days with them in that agreeable Retirement. While
she was speaking, he who had brought her there,
came into the Room, and took upon him to answer
what she had been saying in this Manner: I am highly
satisfy'd, Madam, said he, that there is any Thing
which can make you wish a Confinement here, so long
as is necessary for your Safety; but can never consent,
that after that Time you should deprive the World of
its most valuable Ornament:–––No, no, (continued he
very respectfully,) you must again shine out the Star 

of Venice, ador'd by all who gaze upon you, and resume
that native Lustre which the Baseness of Mankind has
for a while eclips'd, but never can extinguish. ––––O
talk of it no more, (interrupted she,) I never will return
to Venice. What! to see the History of my Misfortunes
writ in the Smiles of every Face that meets
me!––––to endure the stinging Satire, the Reflections
which all the Friends of Ferdinand and Henriquez will
throw upon me!––––and that worst Curse, the Scorn of
that too happy hated she, who soon, you say, Myrtano
must call Wife! ––––O no! I cannot bear it!––––ruin'd
in all my Hopes, and past the Power of even Heaven
itself to make my Woes less terrible, I'll hide 'em ever
from the unpitying World, and die alone unknown, and
unlamented. Were your Condition so desperate as you
imagine, (resum'd he,) I know not if I should perswade
you to return; but there may be, perhaps, a Way
found out to bring you to your Father's Arms with as
much Honour as when you left them, and raise you
above the Rage or the Disdain of all whom you call
Enemies. Oh! forbear, (said she, unwilling to give
way to a Hope of any Thing which seem'd so much
an Impossibility,) forbear, obliging Stranger! to turn
my Thoughts back on the Scene of my past Happiness,
or sooth Imagination with such idle Flattery of what's
to come. ––––Can e'er the Days of Innocence return? –––– 
Can my polluted Honour e'er be cleans'd from the vile
Stain it bears? ––––Can I again appear a Virgin? –––– 
Racking Reflections! ––––Why do you rouze them in
me? ––––Why, after such Proofs of Generosity and Pity,
do you alarm Remembrance with these dread Ideas, to
make Thought sick, the Light grow hateful to me, and
that Life you gave scarce worth my Thanks. Far be
it from me, (answer'd he, bowing,) to renew the Memory
of what may be distasteful; but I would fain
perswade you to believe, that Heaven, which has so
miraculously preserv'd your Life, will also make it
happy. ––––Surprising Things by a Hand unseen are often
brought to pass: When you left Myrtano's House, you
little suspected that the Person appointed for your Guide, 

was design'd to be your Murderer: Nor did they, who
brib'd me to that execrable Deed, imagine how distant
my Thoughts were from such an Undertaking:––––Why
then should you not hope, that by some Turn of
Fate, as strange and unexpected, you may again be
bless'd. ––––Oh! 'tis impossible! (cry'd the uneasy Idalia.)
Suppose (resum'd the other hastily) your Beauty,
in spite of all has happen'd, should charm a Man
whose Quality and Fortune you could have no Objections
to, the Title of his Wife would silence Calumny,
restore your Fame, and make you thought
as happy as he'd be truly bless'd. If such an Offer
(reply'd she, in a haughty Air) ever should occur,
he must have more than Quality and Fortune to recommend
him to my Esteem: Fallen as I am, I would
be lower yet, rather than sell my Liberty for sordid
Interest, and the World's Opinion. ––––No, no, tho'
lost to all besides, I still am Mistress of myself,––––my
own unconquerable Will! ––––Idalia can be by nought but
Inclination subdued; and that, alas! (pursued she, softening
her Voice,) is lavish'd all on the too-lovely, false
Myrtano. ––––'Tis therefore in Solitude alone I can have
Peace;––––remov'd from the tumultuous World, its
short liv'd Pleasures, and its lasting Cares, I'll languish
out a dull, insipid, tranquil Life, and sink by
unperceiv'd Degrees into the Grave. And have you
no Reluctance, (resum'd he,) no soft Regret for all
the racking Griefs your noble Father's Heart endures,
while ignorant where you are? 'Twas my Design,
(answer'd she,) to have writ to him from Verona;
but as I am disappointed of the Journey I intended
thither, I have not now Conveniency. If that (cry'd
he, in a Tone which express'd a Zealousness to
serve her) will be any way conducive to your Satisfaction,
I offer myself to be the Messenger. ––––Prepare a
Letter, and it shall be faithfully deliver'd; and whatever
other Trust you would repose in me, depend on
the Execution of with the same Assurance as tho' you
saw it done. 

The prodigious Obligations Idalia had receiv'd from
him, made her scrupulous of adding to the Number,
by giving him any future Troubles; which he
perceiving, protested that the highest Recompence she
could make for what he had done, was to permit him
to continue to do her all the good Offices in his
Power: But she, whose Disposition was utterly averse
to receiving Favours, especially at a Time when she
consider'd herself not in a Condition to return them,
would very feign have declin'd making any farther Use
of him, telling him she would stay at that House but
till she was a little recover'd from the Fatigue she had
been in, and then either pursue her Journey to Verona,
or go to some other Place where there was a Monastery,
being absolutely determin'd to become a Nun. 
But this last Resolution seem d to alarm him much
more than every Thing she had said before:––––And
after a little Pause, he let her know that this was not
the Way to recompence the Civilities he had done her. ––– 
If you look on any Thing that I have done (said he)
as an Obligation, you would permit me to receive my
Thanks from Don Bernardo; perhaps it may be in his
Power to make me ample Reparation for that little
Loss of Time 'twill take me up to go to Venice. –––– 
This Expression, and some others to the same purpose,
won her to do as he desire: She consented to
write, because her Father should requite the Obligations
she had received: But when she was about to
do it, never was she at such a Loss in what Manner
she should begin, or whether she should conceal or
discover the Misfortunes she had met with. At last,
after many blottings-out, and tearing, she made a
shift to write these few Lines. 

To Don Bernardo.
I doubt not, most Honoured Seignior, but at the Receipt
of this, you will expect to be satisfied at full,
of the Reasons which have depriv'd you of a Daughter; 

––––but it is not the least of my Misfortunes that
they are of such a Nature, that the disclosing them
would add to their Severity. ––––Pardon then, I beseech
you, that I conceal them even from you,––––and with
the same Indulgence I have formerly found, continue to
think of me. ––––I never can be happy enough to see
you more, being determin'd to forsake the World. As to
my Choice of a Monastery, and what Order I should
take, I leave to your Management, as I shall some
Part of my History to be related to you by the Bearer
of this, to whom I am not only indebted for my Life,
but also this Opportunity of entreating your Blessing,
and avowing myself ever 
Your most Obedient,
tho' Unhappy Daughter,
Idalia. 
P. S. My Deliverer informs me it is in Don Bernardo's
Power to more than recompence the Obligations he has
heap'd upon Idalia:––––If so. I know he need no more
than to acquaint you in what Manner to engage your
grateful Assent. 

With this Letter, she gave to him that was to
carry it a Ring from her Finger, entreating him to
accept of that as an Acknowledgment of her Gratitude,
which he received with an Extacy of Joy, a
Transport impossible to be conceal'd, and far above
what the intrinsick Value of it, meerly as a Ring
(had it been worth a thousand Times more than it
was) could have raised in the most covetous Mind. 
She observ'd it with a Surprise as visible to him, as
was the Rapture he had been in to her; and unwilling
she should infer any further from it than he
thought proper to declare, I am extremely glad, Madam,
said he, of this Testimony, which, to those who
employed me, will appear an infallible one, that I 

have murdered you; and by that Means, perhaps, engage
an Addition to the Reward I have already receiv'd. 
These last Words were utter'd so awkwardly,
and were so little of a Piece with the rest of his Behaviour,
that it rather increas'd than diminish'd the
Consternation she was in. There pass'd not much
more between them; he seem'd in haste to be gone,
and only recommending her to the Care of the People
of the House, and assuring her, that in a very
few Days he would return with an Answer to her
Letter, took his Leave. 
The Emotions she was in, when left at Liberty
to consider on what had befallen her since she came
from Vicenza, were at once pleasing and vexatious:
Her Deliverance from so imminent a Danger, commanded
her most thankful Acknowledgments; but
then the Confirmation of the Falshood of Myrtano
made her almost wish for Death:––––To reflect on
the Behaviour of this unknown Person, led her into
such a mazy Labyrinth of Thought, that she could
neither get out, nor in the least assure herself where
it would end. ––––There appeared something so contradictory
in his Words and Actions, that it was
impossible for her to form any Judgment of him. –––– 
His Garb was the meanest that could be; but yet
there was an undescribable Somewhat in his Air,
which spoke him accustomed to wear better. –––– 
The Reward he told her he had receiv'd to murder
her, would have made her believe he must be of the
lowest Rank of Life; but then the noble Detestation
which sparkled in his Eyes at mentioning it, declar'd
him far above even pretending to enter into
such Measures, without some Reason for it, which,
at present, she could not penetrate into:––––But the
most shocking Consideration of all was, that she
saw, by his Manner of receiving the Ring,––––by
some unguarded Words and Sighs, which, in spite of
the Care he took to suppress them, burst with Vehemence
from his troubled Breast, that her Beauty
had had the same Effect on him, it was ordinary for 

it to cause in others; and as vain and proud of giving
Pain, as she had ever been, could not look on
this Conquest without the utmost Disquiet: If he
was of that inferior Degree he spoke himself, nothing
could be more galling than the Thoughts of
being belov'd by such a one; and if he were a Man
of that Quality, which some Part of his Behaviour
denoted, she had Reason enough to fear she had fled
from Vicenza for no other End than to give an Opportunity
to one to act what she had done a Violence
on her own Inclination to avoid from another. 
How wretched is my Fate! (said she to herself.) Have
I, to preserve my Honour free from any second Stain, broke
thro' the soft Enchantments of my Passion, and tore
my very Heart-Strings, when I resolved to quit the
dear, the lov'd Myrtano's House; and am now in the
Power of a Stranger, one who looks on me with the
same Desires,–––the same wild Vehemence of Longing! ––– 
One, who, for ought I know, has brought me hither only
to do what Ferdinand has done, and what Myrtano
would! ––––The more she deliberated, the more she
found the Probability of this Conjecture, and, at last,
confirm'd herself in the Reality of it so much, that
she grew the most terrified Creature that ever was. 
More Days had pass'd since the Departure of the
Stranger than she expected he would be absent; in
which Time she had used her utmost Endeavour to
discover who he was, by the old Man and Woman
of the House; but they, faithful to the Trust repos'd
in them, would not reveal the least Tittle, either of
his Name or Family; and this Secrecy did not a little
contribute to fix her in that Opinion she before had
entertain'd, That she was placed there in order to
be the Sacrifice to his Passion as soon as he should
return; and put her on a thousand Inventions how
to avoid it: But, alas! what would the most subtle
working Wit, back'd by the firmest Resolution, avail
in a Circumstance such as hers? She was in a Place
which she neither knew the Name of, nor in what
Part of the Country it stood, and under the Care of 

People, who she easily perceiv'd, tho' they waited on
her with all possible Obedience, had a strict Eye on
her Behaviour: For saying to them one Day, with
an Intention of sounding them, that if she had a
Conveniency, she would go to Verona, and wait there
till either the Stranger should return, or she should
hear from her Father by some other Way; they
told her they could not consent she should leave them,
till they had Permission from the Person who had
brought her there. This was sufficient to make her
know there was no Possibility of escaping by their
Means; but being fully bent some Way or other to
do it, she never left racking her Brains, till she had
found a Stratagem; which, tho' she could not promise
herself she should succeed in, would be of no
Prejudice to her if it should fail. She told her old
Landlord, that finding herself a little indispos'd, she
believ'd it would be of infinite Service to her Health
if she walk'd out in a Morning and Evening to take
the Air, as she observ'd he did: But, said she, I do
not care to venture in the Dress I have been us'd to
appear in, lest any Passengers happening to travel this
Way, should discover me: It would therefore be the greatest
Obligation you could confer on me, if you would provide
me with a Habit, whereby I might be disguis'd, and
by that Means have the Freedom ef ranging thro' those
delightful Groves and Meadows, the Prospect of which
appears so tempting from my Windows. The old
Trustee look'd on his Wife all the Time Idalia had
been speaking, as tho' it was from her Approbation
he was to form his Answer; who, as soon as she
perceiv'd the other had concluded what she had to
say, gave it in this Manner: I do not think, (said
she) that our Friend would thank us, if we should
deny a Request so far from unreasonable. ––––The Air,
indeed may do the Lady good, and the whimsical Merriment
of Men, who, at this Time of Year, come in
great Numbers to gather Mulberry-Leaves for their
Silk-Worms, divert her Melancholy:––––I would have
you, by all Means, provide her with a Dress such as 

our Country Maids are used to wear, and she may
pass, and partake of all our rural Pleasures the Time
she stays here, without any Danger of Suspicion. The
heart of Idalia leap'd in her Breast at this ready Assent
of the Woman's, which was immediately follow'd
by her Husband's; and in a few Hours this Court
Beauty was transform'd into a plain Country Lass; and
though no Dress could render her any other than the
most lovely Woman in the World, yet so great was
her Desire to be taken for what she represented, that
she mimick'd the Simplicity of their Blushes, and Way
of Curt'sying so artfully, that those who were most
acquainted with her might have talk'd to her some
Time before they discover'd the Deceit. 
Having carry'd on her Plot thus far, the next
Thing she had to do, was to counterfeit a Chearfulness,
and appear so highly satisfy'd with her Condition,
that her Guardians might not imagine she had
any Wishes to exchange it, and be less watchful over
her; for wherever she went, they had continually
attended her. But her Artifice deceiv'd them so well,
that by degrees they grew more remiss, and at
length would leave her to the Privilege of meditating,
as sometimes she took a Book out with her, or diverting
herself with talking or listening to the comical
Discourses of the Country Fellows employ'd in
tying the Vines, and gathering Mulberry-Leaves. She
would not take her Flight the first Opportunity she
had, because she did not know but they might have
left her only to make trial what she would do, and
be near enough to prevent her going, in case she
should attempt it: But one Day, having neither of them
within hearing, she enquir'd, as tho' without Design,
what Towns were in the Neighbourhood of that
Place; and was inform'd, that she was about forty
Miles from any, but that the nearest was Vorseny. It
was no small Grief to her to hear she was so remote,
not believing she could be able to travel so far on
Foot: However, nothing being so dreadful to her
as the Apprehensions what might befal her, if she tarry'd 

where she was, she resolved to run all other Hazards
to escape that; and looking on it as a particular
Mark of the Care Providence had of her, in delaying
the Stranger's Return so much longer than was expected,
she thought it would be no other than running
wilfully into a Misfortune, to neglect making
use of the smallest Means that should offer to take
her from it. The very next Time therefore that she
found herself free from the Observation of her two
Attendants, she walk'd as fast as her Strength would
permit, directed by the Sun, thro' that Part of the
Country which she had been told led her to Vorseny. 
She came at length to a great Road, where she saw
Numbers of poor People of both Sexes driving Asses
before them, loaded with these Leaves, which they
had gather'd in the Morning, and were carrying to
the Merchants. It was no small Consolation to the
fair Wanderer to have something of her own Species
to converse with, having till now met with no other
Company in her Pilgrimage than the Dumb Kind. ––– 
But being ask'd by some of them, whither she was
going, and how it happen'd that such a fair young
Maid undertook so great a Journey alone, and on
Foot, she was at the greatest Loss in the World what
Answer to make; till at last, bethinking herself what
would be most suitable to the Capacities of those who
enquir'd, and best disguise the Truth, she told them,
That having a very severe Mother-in-Law, she had
fled from her ill Usage, and was going to seek a Service
at Vorseny. The good People pity'd her extremely; 
and perceiving she was ready to faint with Weariness,
contriv'd a Way to set her on one of their Beasts, by
taking off its Burden of Leaves, and dividing it into
as many Parcels as there were Asses, added a little to
every one. By this Means she got safe to the Town; 
and thanking her Fellow-Travellers for their Kindness,
there took Leave of them. She went into a common
Inn; being in no danger of being known in
that Place, especially in the Garb she was in. The
Fatigue she had undergone, made it necessary she 

should for some Time repose herself: But, alas! the
Disorders of her Mind would suffer her to take but
little Rest, the various Adventures she had run thro'
since that fatal Time of going to meet the perfidious
Florez, the Grief her Absence and Disgrace had
brought on her unhappy Father,––––the Death of
Henriquez,––––her own eternal Ruin by the Violence
of Ferdinand,––––the Agonies she had, and ever must
endure for the Falshood of the lovely Myrtano,––––the
the Terror she had been in from the discover'd Passion
of the Unknown,––––and the racking Perplexity
where, or in what manner she should linger out the
Residue of her unhappy Days, came all at once into
her Thoughts, and threw her into a Condition little
different from Madness. 
Some Weeks pass'd before she could get leave of
her Confusion to resolve on any Thing, till the little
Stock of Money she had about her being pretty near exhausted,
she began to consider that this was not a
Place to continue in; and remembring that a young
Lady, formerly an Intimate of her's, having on some
Discontent forsook the World, was at a Convent of
Benedictines at Naples, she promis'd herself a good deal
of Satisfaction in her Company, if by any Means she
could reach thither: But it was so prodigious a Distance
by Land, that it would require infinitely more
to defray the Expence of such a Journey, than she
was Mistress of. She therefore thought it the best
Way to go first to Ancona; which being a great Sea-Port
Town, she did not doubt meeting with a Vessel
there bound for the Place she desir'd. Every
Thing answer'd her Expectations; and nothing of any
Moment happening till she was got on Board, I shall
omit the Repetition of any Particulars of her little
Journey, or the Uneasiness she was in while she staid
at Ancona, which she was oblig'd to do, the Ship she
had agreed to go in not being ready to sail in above
a Month, and when it was, detain'd almost as long
by adverse Winds. 

The Power of Beauty is the same in all Degrees; 
the plain Country Habit which disguis'd the Daughter
of a Grandée, could not deprive Idalia of her
wonted Charms: She appear'd so lovely in the Eyes
of Rickamboll, the Captain of the Ship, that from the
first Moment he beheld her, he thought of nothing
but the Means to possess her. He conceal'd his Intentions,
however, till she was come on Board; but he no
sooner had her in his Power, than he let her know he
would make use of it for the Gratification of his Passion,
if she consented not to yield to his Perswasions. 
What was now the Anguish, the Fear, the Horror,
which seiz'd the Soul of this unhappy Lady? 
All that was pass'd appear'd a Blessing to her present
State; confin'd within a little wooden World, whose
proud Sovereign was absolute, and from the Fierceness
of whose Nature she had no room to hope that
Prayers or Tears would be of Force to melt him! ––– 
Here was no Possibility of escaping but by immediate
Death; and what she suffer'd in the Apprehension of
his Brutality, is not to be discribed by Words; so I
shall only say, it was such as could be equalled by nothing
but his barbarous Insensibility of it. Trembling,
fainting, and almost dying with her Fears, she was
on her Knees in her Cabin imploring Heaven's Protection,
when the Monster, resolved to perpetrate his
horrid Wishes, came in to know her last Resolve. 
Perceiving his Intent, she would fain have flatter'd
him into a Belief there was a Possibility of gaining
her by gentle Means, and entreated him but to have
Patience till they came on Shore: But he, who understood
no more of Love than the brutal Part,
burning to enjoy her, and not suspecting her to be
of any higher Station than what her Habit represented,
thought to make use of any further Ceremony
would be an Indignity to himself, and by his Actions.
as well as Words, let her see he was not to be moved. 
In vain she endeavour'd to set forth the Baseness of
the Deed;––––in vain she wept, entreated, threaten'd; 
the Villain harden'd in such Crimes, but laugh'd at 

her Despair, and she was just on the Point of being
reduced to a Condition, such as, if she had lived after
it, would have made her for ever hateful to herself,
when Heaven, by the most unexpected Means, sent her
a Deliverance. The Oaths and Curses, with which
the boisterous Rickamboll had endeavour'd to Silence
her Shrieks, on a sudden were out-done by a confused
and superior Roar on Deck; and immediately
after a Discharge of Guns went off so loud, the
Ship seem'd shatter'd with the Noise! ––––A General
Voice cry'd, Where's our Captain? and three or four
of the affrighted Sailors burst into the Cabin, bawling
out in their rude Fashion, That they were undone; a
Barbary Corsair had clapp'd his grappling Irons on
Board, and Death or Captivity was all they could
expect. ––––'s Death! could you not avoid him? Had
you no Warning? said Rickamball, starting from his
amorous Combat: But he shall find no Cowards here. 
With these Words he run out of the Cabin, follow'd
by the rest of the Men, leaving the distress'd Idalia in
a Dilemma, to which Party she should wish Success. 
If Rickamboll was victorious, she had no hope of
escaping the Ill his wild Desires threaten'd her with,
and Slavery itself seem'd far less dreadful to her:–––– 
But then the Thoughts of being in the Power of Infidels,
who, 'twas highly probable, might be inspired
with the same Wishes, and would make no Scruple
to use a Christian Captive as they pleased, frighted
her almost to Death. ––––The Apprehensions of what
she expected would ensue, whatever was the Issue of
the Fight, drown'd all the Terrors of the present Danger,
which, whoever has been Witness of one of
these Sea-Skirmishes, may easily comprehend: But it
lasted not long, the Number of the Infidels was infinitely
superior to the Christians, and by the Death
of Rickamboll, and some of the stoutest of his Men,
the rest of them, with the Ship, became an easy
Prize. Idalia; all this while at her Devotions, was
ignorant of what had happen'd, till she saw a Stranger
of a most graceful Mein, attended by several Followers, 

come down the Stairs, and enter the Cabin where
she was. Abdomar (for that was the Name of this
Conqueror) had been formerly a Prisoner at Florence,
and spoke very good Italian; which was no inconsiderable
Piece of good Fortune to this fair Captive,
for the obliging Terms he accosted her with (in spite
of the Meanness of her Habit) dissipated, immediately,
great part of her Fears; and reading in her Tears
and Tremblings the Agony she was in, Be of Comfort,
lovely Maid, said he, you are fallen into the
Power of one, who scorns to take an ungenerous Advantage
of it,––––one who has it not in his Nature
willingly to offend any of your Sex, much less one to
whom Heaven has been so particularly bountiful in
bestowing all that can command Respect. ––––Your Lot, perhaps, (continued he, perceiving she was still in some Disorder) may become more glorious by this
Captivity, than Freedom could offer you the Means to
make it;–––the most angelick, softest, kindest, best that
ever was call'd Woman, will by her Tenderness and Indulgence,
make you forget whatever may have been
dear to you, and oblige you to place your whole Felicity,
as it will be your Honour to be near her. –––Nothing
in Idalia's present Circumstance could have afforded
her a Consolation adequate to these last Words: To
hear he was a Lover, and that he was accompanied
by his Adored, entirely set her free from those Apprehensions
which of late had been so afflicting to
her. And as soon as he had given Orders for securing
the other Prisoners under Hatches, suffer'd herself to
be conducted by him into that Ship of which he was
Commander, with all the Chearfulness imaginable; 
as thinking, in being deliver'd from the brutal Attempt
of Rickamboll, she had been deliver'd from the
most terrible Misery that could befall her. Abdomar
led her immediately into a Cabin, adorn'd with the
choicest Curiosities which Art could produce in all
the various Climates of the habitable World; the
Floor was cover'd with the most rich, as well as most
beautiful Tapestry that ever was seen; the Ground was 

Silver, on which were so dextrously interwoven all
manner of fine Flowers, that they seem'd more the
Handy-work of Nature than of human Skill; the
Windows, which without were fenced from the
dashing of the Waves with Chrystal in the manner
of half Globes, within were chequer'd with green
and gold Twist, each Square being join'd with precious
Stones: Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, Chrysolites,
and Saphirs, with their various colour'd Lustre,
spread such a dazzling Glory round the Room, that it
even pain'd the Eye to look upon it: The greatest
Magnificence that ever Idalia had beheld in Venice,
than which no City in the World can boast of more,
was so infinitely short of what now met her Eyes,
that she had longer and more heedfully regarded it,
had not a greater, and yet surpassing Wonder appear'd
to attract her Admiration; it was the charming Bellraizia,
Mistress of Abdomar, who, rising from a
Couch of Crimsom Taffety embroider'd with Gold
and Pearl, stepp'd forward to meet and congratulate
her Lover on his Victory. She spoke to him in the
Language of their own Country, but there was something
so sweet, so soft, so engaging in her Voice,
that render'd it an Impossibility to hear her, without
feeling some Part of that Pleasure which the looking on
her did in a greater abundance bestow. To the most
lovely and enchanting Form that Nature ever made,
there was also added all the Embelishments of Art:––– 
Had she been in a Court where it was the sole Business
of all about her to study what would most become
her, she cou'd not have been dress'd with greater
Elegance: Her Hair, which was whiter, and more shining
than Silver, and hung down in Tresses below her
Waste, was only kept from falling o'er her Face by a Fillet
of Diamonds; but as the greatest Art is to appear artless,
this seeming Negligence had in it something so
infinitely beyond the formal Ornaments of the Europeans,
that whoever would desire to please, must covet
to look like this lovely Barbarian. On the Middle of
the Fillet there was fix'd a sort of a little Tree of 

Gold, on the Branches of which hung Jewels of a
prodigious Largeness, but such a Heighth above her
Head, that (the Sprigs on which they were fasten'd
being shaded by some loose Hair, which flew out as
tho' disdainful of Restraint) made it seem to the Eye
as tho' they were self-poiz'd, and form'd a Constellation
like Araidne's Crown. On her slender and fine
proportion'd Body, she had a close Jacket of Gold
Stuff; but the Sleeves were large, and tied up before
almost as high as her Shoulders, with small Sky-coloured
Ribband mixed with Silver, and discover'd, as
much as Decency would permit, her lovely Arms,
which were encompass'd with Bracelets of several
sorts of Jewels. In fine, her whole Appearance, her
Face, her Shape, her Hair, her Habit, was surpassing
what the most extensive Imagination can figure out,
and forc'd Idalia (who was not over quick-sighted
to the Perfections of her own Sex) whether she would
or no, to confess within herself, that she had never
seen any Thing so beautiful! so glorious! 
After some little Discourse between the two
Lovers, Abdomar presenting Idailia, said in Italian,
What other Prizes my late Conquest has made me
Master of, I thought unworthy of Bellraizia's Notice; 
but this fair Maid, if she appear the same in your
Eyes, as at first Sight she did to mine, may merit to
attend you. The charming Infidel answered these
Words in Terms infinitely obliging to Idalia; but
afterwards enquiring her Name, Family, whither
she had designed to go, and for what Reason so
young a Maid had undertaken a Voyage, unaccompanied
by any Friends or Relations, and other Particulars
of her Life, the new-made Slave could make
no other Reply than with her Tears; which the
other perceiving, and knowing well by Experience
to what Extreams Love can transport the Heart that
owns his Power, and imagining by her Mein, and
something of a grand Look about her, which no
Disguise could rob her of, that she was of a Quality
superior to what she was willing to confess, 

would press her no farther at that Time; but desiring
her to be as easy with her Fate as possible, and assuring
her she should find nothing of Severity in her
Servitude, commanded some of her other Slaves to
place her in a Cabin, and leave her to that Repose
which, 'twas probable, after the late Fright the
Danger of the Fight had put her in, she might stand
need of. 
In spite of the various Reflections this unhappy
Fair had on this sudden and prodigious Alteration of
her own Affairs, she could not forbear forgetting
them a while, to contemplate on those of the Lady
whom she must now call Mistress. It appeared so
odd that a Woman, such as the Looks and Habit of
Bellraizia spoke her to be, should be the willing Partaker
of Dangers, Fatigues, and Horrors, such as were
inseparable from the Profession of Abdomar, that she
could not but think there was something very extraordinary
in the Adventure: But her Surprise was
very much heighten'd, when the next Morning she
was summoned with the rest of the Slaves (who at
several Times had been taken by Abdomar) to rise
and attend the Princess; and she could not forbear asking
the Person who brought her this Command some
Questions concerning this Affair, but could learn no
more from him, than that Bellraizia was of the
Royal Blood of Barbary; and that for the Love of
Abdomar, who was also of a high Extraction, tho'
banish'd for some Misdemeanor, she had forsook her
Country, aud chose to live a Rover on that uncertain
Element, despising all the Dangers of it for his sake. 
This Information threw the poor Idalia into Anxieties
much worse than her Captivity had inflicted on
her;–––the Passion she had for Myrtano, which her
late Frights had silenced for a while, now rouz'd it
self within her Soul, and told her how happy might
she have been, had he been true;––––how joyfully
she could have embraced Bellraizia's Fate, had Myrtano,
like Abdomar, been just. Oh! had that lovely
Youth (cry'd she to herself) returned my Passion with 

an equal Ardour, what is it I would not have endured?
–––what Dangers could I not have dar'd?–––what
Sufferings could I not with Joy have born to keep him
mine? Pain would have been unfelt, Want lose its
Sting, and even Death a Blessing for his sake! ––––My
humble Wishes aspired no higher than to be wretched
with Myrtano,–––yet that the cruel Heavens deny! ––– 
Miserable Idalia! where,––––where will thy Sorrows
end! The violent Agitations of her Soul oppress'd her
here so strongly, that unable to repel their Force, she
fell on the Bed she was sitting on entirely motionless; 
nor recovered she, till being a second time sent
for by Bellraizia, and found in that Condition, all
Means that could be invented were made use of for her
Relief; and so extremely concerned was her generous
Conqueror, and his admir'd Mistress, that they both
join'd in giving her a thousand Assurances of their
Pity, and a Grant of whatever was in either of their
Powers, to remedy the Misfortunes she labour'd under:
If it be Captivity alone that makes you wretched,
said Bellraizia, I dare promise you a Release as well
from that Compassion which is natural to the noble
Abdomar, as from the ready Compliance I have ever
found in him to any Request of mine; be therefore comforted,
for be assured whatever Pleasure I might take
in retaining a Person whose Conversation I think so desirable
as yours, I would not for the Universe have my Soul
loaded with the Guilt of rendering you unhappy. Idalia
answered these obliging Expressions in Terms full
of Gratitude, and Respect; and the other taking an
Opportunity of Abdomar's being gone out of the
Cabin on some Business which called him on Deck,
entreated her, if it were not too great a Secret, to relate
the Particulars of her Life. This was not a Task
so easy to be perform'd as she imagined; there were
some Passages which were an Offence to her Modesty
to remember, much more to repeat; and others,
which the Description of would add to her Affliction,
by suffering again in Idea what she had before in Reality:
However, the Obligations she had to Bellraizia, 

and the Impossibility there was of denying any thing
to a Person who asked with so good a Grace, surmounted
all these Scruples, and she recounted to her
both who she was, how she had been betray'd from
her Father's House by the Perfidiousness of Florez,
the Violence that had been offered to her by Don
Ferdinand, the unhappy Quarrel between him and
Henriquez, their Deaths, her Passion for Myrtano,
the Terrors she had endur'd in the Apprehension of a
second Violation from him, and afterwards the unknown
Person appointed for her Guide, and this last
of Rickamboll, from which the Victory of Abdomar
had so fortunately deliver'd her. 
This Story, had it been told by any other Person,
and stripp'd of all those grief-attracting Illustrations
which heightened each unlucky Accident in Idalia's
Description, was in itself too moving not to excite
the tenderest Compassion in the Soul of her who
heard it. Abdomar at his Return found them both
drown'd in Tears; which enquiring the Reason of,
That (reply'd the Charmer of his Soul) which when
you are acquainted with, will very near bring you into
our Condition; your beautiful Prisoner's Misfortunes,–––– 
she has been giving me an Account so full of Wonder,
that when you hear it, as with her Leave some other
Time you shall, I know you will join in my Belief, that
Heaven designs her for some extraordinary Event. The
afflicted Idalia would have made some Return to
these Words, but was too much overcome by her
Disorders, and entreated the Liberty of retiring to
the Cabin appointed for her. The obliging Bellraizia
would needs accompany her, and was so assiduous
in her Endeavours to asswage her Sorrow, that
the other, if in reality she found no Consolation,
thought herself bound in Gratitude and Complaisance
to seem as if she did. As they were talking, she happen'd
to let fall some Words which discover'd a Desire
of knowing the Adventures of a Lady, whom
she esteemed so infinitely happy in the Society of
the Man she loved. 'Tis a general Observation (said 

she) that those Things we place our chief Felicity in,
are the farthest from our Reach, it being the Sport of
adverse Fate, to wound us in the tenderest Part: But
you, Madam, and the noble Abdomar, are a blest Exception
to that Rule, and having all in one another,
can know no second Wish. Tis true, replied Bellraizia,
we are at last as happy as Love can make us; but
did you know the Toils, the Dangers, the Endurings we
have had,––––the unintermitting Cares, incessant Fears,
and little Hopes, which, in the Race of Passion, both
accompany'd, you'd be surpris'd that either of us liv'd
to reach the Goal: And because I know not but it may
alleviate a Despair I see is beginning to take Root in
you, to hear that there are no Misfortunes so great but
heaven can relieve us from, I shall, if you desire it,
let you into the most secret History of mine. Idalia immediately
told her there was not a Possibility of her
conferring a greater Obligation;–––that it was a Favour
she had been ambitious of since the first Moment
she was brought before her; and that having now so
favourable an Opportunity of their being alone, begg'd
she would make use of it for that Purpose. To
which Bellraizia willingly complying, began to entain
her with what she desired, in this Manner: 
The History of Abdomar and Bellraizia.
In the little Time, said she, you have been in our
Ship, you may, perhaps, have heard of what
Country I am a Native, and doubtless are surpris'd
to see my Complexion so different from others born
in the same Climate; but to ease you of that Wonder,
I must let you know the first of my Family
that settled in Barbary was a Renegado Christian, a
Florentine, nearly ally'd to the Great Duke of Tuscany,
and General of his Forces; who, quitting his Service
on some Disgust, brought his Family to Barbary,
renounc'd his Religion, and was promoted. A
sudden War breaking out, he signalizd himself by 

many remarkable Actions, and at his Return was made
Governor of a Province, in which Post he dy'd. 
Great Revolutions afterwards happening, a Son of his
was advanc'd to the Dignity of Bassaw; and in Length
of Time, and, to them, an auspicious Turn of Fortune,
a Descendant of his to the Crown, under an annual
Tribute to the Emperor of Morocco, my Father's Brother
is at present King, and the fifth Monarch of our
Race. I make you not this Relation as a Boast of
my Pedigree, but as it is necessary, to render other
Occurrences plain to your Observation; for had my
Birth been meaner, my Lot had been more bless'd; 
Grandeur has only given me an adequate Portion of
Inquietudes; and Fate, by placing me in so elevated a
State, had no other Design in it, than to make me
more remarkably unhappy. My Uncle having but one
Daughter, oblig'd my Father to let me be bred with
her at Court, for a Companion in all her Diversions; 
and with our Years there grew so tender a Friendship
between us, as is very rarely to be found in Persons
of the same Sex: Neither of us had a Desire, tho' never
so violent, that we could not resign for the Gratification
of the other: If Joy or Sorrow sat on the Face
of either, you might be certain to find it in the other's
also. Thus, bless'd with that Tranquillity which is
always inseparable to those who are possess'd of Innocence
and Freedom, did we live, till Love!––––that
sweet destructive Passion! that luscious Poisoner of the
Calm of Life! chang'd that felicitous State for Cares,
Inquietudes, and unceasing Perturbations! 
The King of Fez had a Son esteem'd the Wonder
of his Age: His Martial Exploits had justly made him
famous over all that Quarter of the World; nor was
his soft Address, and elegant Behaviour, less charming
to his Friends, than his undaunted Fierceness was
dreadful to his Enemies. ––––I know not what ill Star
inclin'd him to make a Visit at our Court; but he
had no sooner arriv'd there, and cast his Eyes on me,
than he became enamour'd. I, who at that Time
had a Heart entirely unprepossess'd, and was not without 

some Share of that Vanity by which most of
our Sex, more or less, are sway'd, could not listen to
the Declarations he made me, without an adequate
Proportion of Pride and Pleasure, for being capable
of inspiring a Prince so every way agreeable with a
Passion such as he profess'd. My Uncle, who truly
lov'd me, extremely approv'd of the Proposals he
made, and my Father thought himself so much honour'd
by them, that he laid the strictest Command
on me to treat Mulyzeden (for that was his Name)
as a Prince, to whose Professions of Love I was infinitely
oblig'd. Never was Lover indulg'd, on all
Sides, with so many Opportunities of expressing his
Passion, yet was he not contented: He was always
complaining, that not all the Sollicitations he made
were effectual to inspire me with Sentiments such as
he wish'd:––––He tormented himself with a Belief,
that the Deference I paid him, was wholly owing to
his Quality, and the Commands my Uncle and Father
had given me:––––He never saw me without
telling me he found it impossible to make me love
him; but one Day he seem'd so uneasy, and indeed
so desperate at my Insensibility, as he call'd it, that
I thought he was distracted. For my Part, I believ'd
I lov'd him: I had never seen a Man whose Merits
I could think equal to those he was master of;––– 
was perfectly pleas'd when in his Company; and on
the strictest Examination into my own Heart, could
find in it not the least Scruple at becoming his Wife,
which Title I had consented to wear, as soon as the
necessary Preparations to confer it on me could be got
ready. ––––I did not fail to acquaint him with the most
favourable of my Inclinations; but all I could say,
was insufficient to give him the Consolation I wish'd:––– 
He still accus'd me of Coldness. Nor indeed is it to
be wonder'd at, that he did so: For, alas! he perceiv'd
nothing in me of those tender Languors,–––– 
those melting Softnesses,––––those pleasing Pains,–––– 
those thrilling Ardours,––––those mingled Hopes and
Fears, which still accompany Desire, and are never 

at an End, till sure Possession cuts them off,––––those
thousand, thousand, nameless Consequences of eager
Passion, which he felt, and could easily distinguish,
and which I since have too powerfully experienc'd! ––– 
But at that Time, I was utterly ignorant what it was
he meant whene'er he nam'd them to me, and began
to think him unreasonable to ask greater Proofs
of my Affection, than what I imagin'd was in the
Power of any Woman to give. ––––Perceiving I grew
angry at these kind of Discourses, he at length forbore
them; but in doing so, put so great a Constraint
on his Inclinations, as, could I have had any Notion
of what I now am certain he suffer'd, would have
made me endure almost as much thro' Pity, as he did
from an Agitation more violent. But not to tire you
with the Particulars of our Behaviour till the Day appointed
for the Celebration of our Nuptials was arriv'd,
which had not been so long delay'd, but for
the expected coming of a young Noblemen of Fez,
one who from his Infancy had been brought up with
Mulyzeden, as I had with the Princess my Cousin,
and so firmly united were they in Friendship, that
fearing Marriage might some Time or other occasion
a Slack'ning, if not a total Breach of that Bond which
both desir'd should be indissoluble, each had taken an
Oath never to wed, but with the Approbation of the
other. Mulyzeden had so sacred a Regard to his Promise
in this Affair, that as soon as he had obtain'd
mine and my Parent's Consent to make me his, he
dispatch'd a Messenger to Fez with an Account of the
Progress he had made, and entreating the Presence of
this dear Favourite. The other was not neglectful of
the Duty he ow'd to his Prince and Friend, but set
out for Barbary the Moment he was recover'd of
some slight Wounds, which had been the Cause of his
staying behind him, as to avoid marrying a Lady
whom his Father had provided for him, was of Mulyzeden's
coming away. It was Evening when he
came to Court, and being engag'd with the Princess,
I saw him not that Night. I had observ'd an unusual 

Melancholy in that young Princess; but she complaining
of a little Indisposition in her Head, made
me impute it to that, and prevented my taking so
much Notice of it, as otherwise I should have done; 
but the News of the Prince's Favourite's Arrival being
blaz'd about the Court, she sent for me immediately. 
I found her on the Bed in such an Agony
of Grief, that I should but lessen it in an Endeavour
to represent it. ––––It was a good while before she was
able to speak to me, tho' she attempted it several
Times, and it was with the utmost Difficulty she at
last brought out these Words:––––Pity me! pity me, Bellraizia! 
–––Dearest Cousin, pity me! –––She would have
proceeded, but the struggling Passions of her Soul
stopp'd her Utterance, and Sighs, accompany'd with
a Torrent of Tears, had alone the Power of informing
me she labour'd under some very great Affliction. 
The Surprise I was in to see her in this Manner, did
not hinder me from endeavouring to console her; but
when I entreated her to reveal what 'twas disturb'd
her, she seem'd possess'd with an Addition of Disquiet. 
Press me no more, (said she, with a Countenance
which, without the Help of Words, sufficiently
express'd the Distress of her Soul,) the Misfortune I
am fallen under, nor Earth, nor Heaven can relieve
me from:––––Why then should I afflict you with the
Knowledge of it? The Accent in which she spoke this,
touch'd me to the Heart: I tenderly lov'd her, and
could not bear to see her thus, and be ignorant of the
Cause: I fell on my Knees by the Bedside, and kissing
her Hand, and bathing it in my Tears, which now
fell fast as her's, conjur'd her by all the Friendship she
had favour'd me with, to let me into the cruel Secret
of her Sorrows. ––––I cannot,––––must not,––––dare not
tell you, answer'd she. O Heavens! interrupted I,
what can have happen'd to Zatilda, (for that was her
Name,) that Bellraizia must not know? Nay, (continu'd
I,) I think you said you dare not speak it;––––and
I have just Cause to fear you doubt my Truth, if longer
you refuse to give me leave to join with you in your 

Complainings. No, no, (resum'd she, hastily,) you
have no Cause to mourn. ––––Fate is about to give you
all you can desire; therefore I'll not detain you from
the dear Presence of the Prince who adores you, and
whom justly you esteem:––––I sent for you, but to take
my last Farewell, for be assur'd I'll not out-live this
Night: No, (pursu'd she, raising her Eyes to Heaven,
as tho' she meant to accuse the Gods for her
Misfortunes,) no, I ne'er will live to see To-morrow's
hated Dawn,––––this Night shall put an End to curs'd
Zatilda's Misery and Shame. It would be impossible
for me to express either my Confusion at the first
Part of her Discourse, or the Agonies I felt at the
Resolution which she clos'd it with:––––The sudden
Tremblings which seiz'd her, and the visible Alteration
in her Countenance when she nam'd the Prince,
gave me some little faint Idea, that it was he who
had been so fatal to her Repose, and in so surprising a
Juncture was not Mistress of Presence enough of Mind
to be able to resolve in what Manner I should reply. 
––––While I was pausing, she had been endeavouring
to recollect herself; and perhaps believing she
had said too much, was willing to break off any farther
Conversation,––––I see, cry'd she, I see (with an
Infinity of Concern for having occasion'd it) how nearly
the Despair you find me in has touch'd you. Pardon it,
I beseech you, my dear Bellraizia! 'tis the last Trouble
you will ever receive from the unfortunate Zatilda:–––– 
Remember me, I conjure you, (added she, tenderly pressing
my Hand;) and when you are possess'd of all your
Soul is fond of in Mulyzeden's Court, think he cannot
love you more than I have done! ––––And then, (perceiving
I was silent, for indeed I had not yet the
Power of Speech, so much had Amazement lock'd
up all my Senses,) Go, (continu'd she,) I will no
longer afflict you with the Sight of Woe, it is not in
your Power to remedy: Go, go, and be bless'd with Mulyzeden! 
The Hesitation with which she still pronounc'd
that Name, confirm'd me that my Conjectures
had but too real a Foundation; and at last 

getting leave from the Whirl of Thought which that
Belief had at the first involv'd me in, It is not in
Nature, (answer'd I,) for Bellraizia to know what Felicity
is, when Zatilda refuses to be Partaker of it; that
Prince you speak of, deserving as he is, had never the
Power to rival you in my Affections;––––nor shall my
Uncle, my Father, his ardent Passion, or my own Vow,
oblige me to become his Wife, if you approve not of it. 
She would by some faint Arguments have perswaded
me to believe, there was nothing she more desir'd
than to see me Princess of Fez; but she was so little
accustom'd to Hypocrisy, that I easily distinguish'd
her Heart was far from assenting to what her Tongue
had utter'd, and that all the Pains she took, was but
to disguise a Truth her Modesty could not suffer her
to wish disclos'd. But I, who was not able to bear
to see, much less to leave her in this Anxiety, press'd
her so home, that at length I wrested the Secret from
her Breast, and found it as I imagin'd. I had several
Messages from Mulyzeden, while I was employ'd in
comforting her, to let me know, That this long-expected
Friend was now arriv'd, and that they both
waited at my Appartment; but I still sent Excuses,
and at last a plain Denial, that I would not be seen
that Night. The King being told of his Daughter's
Indisposition, came also into her Chamber; and seeing
me there, told me the Prince of Fez depended
on the Performance of my Promise of marrying him
the next Day. To which I answer'd, That with his
Majesty's Permission, I would defer it till the Princess
Zatilda should be enough recover'd to be Witness
of the Ceremony. He seem'd oblig'd to the Concern
I express'd for her, and told me, That if my Father
and the Prince would be so content, he would not
oppose what I desir'd. Zatilda look'd on me while
I was speaking in this Manner to her Father, with a
Mixture of Astonishment and Joy, but durst not express
any Part of what she thought before him, lest
the Secret should be as liable to his Suspicion, as she
knew it had been to mine: But the Moment he had 

left the Room, demanded of me impatiently what it
was I meant, by requesting to delay the Marriage. I
mean, said I, by protracting, to shift it off entirely. ––– 
How! (cry'd she, with a Voice which express'd the
highest Transport,) is it then possible you do not love
him? Not half enough to make you unhappy, (reply'd
I.) To repeat the thousand Acknowledgments, the
Kisses, the Embraces, she gave me at this Declaration,
would but tire you; it shall suffice to say the Night
was taken up with them, and the Study what Means
should be made use of to disappoint Mulyzeden of his
Hopes of me, and turn the Course of his Affections
where they were with more Zeal desir'd. We had a
thousand Inventions, but none seem'd plausible enough
to be approv'd, and the enamour'd Princess was oblig'd
to content herself with the repeated Assurances, that
neither Force nor Entreaty should prevail on me to
make her miserable by my yielding to be his Wife,
and leave to Time and Chance to work for her, in
changing the Sentiments he had for me to her Advantage. 
When Morning came, I left her in a much better
Condition of Repose than that in which I had
found her, and retired to my own Appartment not a
little satisfy'd to have an Opportunity of reflecting on
what I had done. The Advantage I propos'd to myself
in being the Wife of a Prince so accomplish'd as
Mulyzeden, was too great for me to think of quitting
without some Concern; and the Promise which
my Love to Zatilda had oblig'd me to make her of
doing so, I foresaw would be very difficult for me to
make good: I very well knew, that my Father would
fly into the utmost Extremity of Rage against me,
when once he should find an Intention in me to oppose
his Inclinations. Besides, I could not help having
some little Commiseration for a Prince who lov'd me
with so high a Degree of Passion, that the Loss of
me might probably deprive him of his Life. As I
was revolving on this Manner, my Page brought me
Word he waited for Admittance: I was sensible he 

must have heard of the Petition I had made the King
the Night before, for delaying the Nuptials till Zatilda's
Recovery, and expected he would reproach the
little Regard I shew'd for him, with as much Vehemence
as his Respect would give him Leave, but as
that would be the most plausible, nay, indeed, the
only Pretence I could make, I resolv'd to have Recourse
to no other. I found I was not mistaken:
The Moment he enter'd the Room, I read in his Eyes
the Discontent of his Soul; and tho' he approach'd
me with the most perfect Humility, yet there was
something in his Air which told me, before he spoke,
that he thought himself ill treated. I had little to say
in Vindication of what I had done, since if I had really
been possess'd of that Warmth of Passion he had endeavour'd
to inspire, and which I had often feign'd
to make him easy, no Consideration would have been
of force to have engag'd me to break the Promise I
had made of being his, the very Moment that his
Friend was arrived. Besides, the Princess's Indisposition
was look'd upon so slight, that (as Lovers are
always industrious to torment themselves) he imagin'd
it was by my Desire she only counterfeited it,
on purpose to give me an Excuse for delaying what
I had no Inclination to perform. He express'd himself
on this Head in Terms so moving, and complain'd
of my Indifference, and the cruel Pleasure I took in
making him unhappy, that tho' I was farther from a
Passion for him, than, till I knew what 'twas to love
in Reality, I was sensible of myself, yet I had a
Softness in my Soul which gave me Agonies inexpressible,
for being oblig'd by a so severe a Necessity
to reduce him to such Despair: But to palliate the Matter
as well as I could, I told him, As he was not ignorant
of the Friendship which was between my
Cousin and myself, he ought not to wonder I deny'd
to receive what Fortune's Smiles would bestow on
me, while she was unable to taste any Joy;––––I assur'd
him she was in a much worse Condition than
was generally believ'd; and finding nothing else would 

be of force to perswade him to Moderation, was
oblig'd to renew the Vows I had before made him,
of being his for ever, as soon as she was restor'd to
her former Health. Unhappy Prince! he little suspected
the Equivocation of these Words, which when I spoke,
I knew wou'd be but little to his Advantage; for I
resolved she should continue to feign herself as she was,
till something should happen to give a Turn to this
Affair. He appear'd a little more satisfy'd than he had
been, however; and when he was so, told me, the
young Nobleman being now arriv'd, attended my
Permission to kiss my Hands. I, who had as much
Curiosity to see a Person I had heard so much of, as
the Chagrin I was in would allow room for, desir'd
he might be immediately introduc'd:–––But, O Gods!
with what Emotions did my Bosom swell when first
I cast my Eyes upon him! –––I will not go about to
represent what 'twas I felt,–––'twould be impossible! ––– 
But you, lovely Idalia! who have so much experienc'd
what Passion is, may guess. –––Besides, in my fond
Judgment, whoever has seen the graceful Form of
Abdomar, for it was no other, cannot he surpris'd to
hear the Effect it wrought on me. How mean, methought,
did Mulyzeden seem! how little in comparison
with his charming Friend! The Disorder I had
been in, while talking to the Prince, serv'd to screen
that additional one which seiz'd me at the Sight of
the adorable Stranger, from the Observation of them
both; for the former took it for no other than what
was occasion'd by Reflection on what had been said
to me; and the latter, as he has since told me, for a
Look that was natural to me: He found enough in it,
however, to think agreeable; and 'tis certain, that
at this first View, the God of soft Desires fix'd his
Arrows in both our Hearts at once: But, alas! I was
not so happy to imagine I had made any Impression
on him, and Love was scarce a Moment older than
Despair. –––It was now that I began to pity poor Zatilda's
Case, for having entertain'd a Passion for a
Prince, who seem'd so little in a Capacity of returning 

it, much more than was in my Power to
do before I felt the same. It is not to be express'd,
it is not to be imagin'd, what I endur'd while they
were present; but (much for my Ease, who long'd
for an Opportunity of indulging the new Sentiments
I was possess'd with) they stay'd not long, perhaps
thinking a Morning Visit might be troublesome, especially
to a Person who, that they might do so, had
inform'd them she took but little Repose the Night
before. But, Oh! how little do they know their
Passion's Force, who think to conquer it, by reflecting
on the Difficulties that are likely to oppose it! ––––All
that might be inflicted on me from the Indignation
of my Royal Uncle, my Father, or the just Resentment
of the injur'd Mulyzeden, seem'd light to me,
if by my Sufferings I cou'd purchase the least Share
in his Affections, who was now dearer to me than
the whole World besides. ––––But the most, and indeed
the only dreadful Consideration was, That should
he ever guess at the Inclinations I had for him, he
would be so far from thinking himself obliged to
them, that he would rather hate me for the Ingratitude
I was guilty of to a Prince he so infinitely
loved. I thought myself now in a much worse Condition
than Zatilda was, because I had not only the
Weight of my own Troubles to support, but was
also loaded with those my ill Fate oblig'd me to inflict
on Mulyzeden, whom, tho' it was not my Destiny
to love, I could not but have a very tender Regard
for. And sure, never was a Soul so torn as mine:
I saw the two Persons, for whom I had the greatest
Friendship, about to be reduced to the last Degree of
Misery on my Account; the one because I did not
love him, and the other because I was beloved; while
I myself vainly struggled with the Violence of a Passion
which I had then no more Hopes of being successful
in, than I had of being able to overcome it. 
Confus'd and wild with these different Agitations,
my Brain grew giddy, and Apprehension such a Torment,
that I cou'd no longer bear it: I flew to Zatilda's 

Appartment, and found some little Ease in
pouring out my Discontents on the Bosom of that
faithful Friend. She, who besides the Kindness she
ever had for me, thought herself so infinitely oblig'd
to me, for the Promise I had made of resigning my
Right in Mulyzeden to her, did all she cou'd to give
me Consolation; but tho' she truly commiserated my
unhappy State, yet I cou'd easily perceive she was not
so much dissatisfy'd, as she pretended, at the Relation
I made her how much I was influenc'd by the
Charms of Abdomar. Nor indeed was it natural to
believe she shou'd, since this new Passion was a more
convincing Assurance that I would never be the Wife
of Mulyzeden, than all the Vows I had made. It
afforded, however, but a very small Portion of Contentment
to either of us to know we were not Rivals
in the same Affections, since such indissoluble
Difficulties appear'd to oppose both our Wishes, as
left us not the least room to hope either would be
able to obtain them. 
For several Days Zatilda, as we had agreed, still
keeping her Chamber: Her Indisposition was a tolerable
Excuse for my putting off the Nuptials; but
the Physicians appointed to attend her, giving in
their Verdict that she was in Reality afflicted with
no other Disease than Melancholy, not only my Father
and Mulyzeden, who, for different Reasons, had
all this while been sufficiently impatient, but also the
King began to exert his Authority, and told me,
That neither my Daughter's, nor his own ill Humour,
should any longer be a Pretence for affronting a Prince,
whose Alliance was an Honour to all our Family. 
Judge what a Blow this was!–––what a Crush to our
Resolutions! ––––Zatilda, as soon as she was informed
of it, cried out, I am undone!––––in spite of all you
have promised me, in spite of your own distant Inclinations,
you will be forc'd to be the Prince's Wife! I
was no less distracted, for Death would now have been
less dreadful to me than Mulyzeden's Bed; yet, by
what Means I should avoid it, without a plain Denial, 

and boldly daring the Rage of all those who had
the Power over me, I could not, for the Soul of me,
imagine. But Passion, when it is violent like mine,
is never unaccompanied by Courage: I resolved rather
to defy all Dangers, than yield to an Embrace,
which even the Idea of was now grown odious, or make
my dear Zatilda wretched, by utterly depriving her
of even a Possibility of ever being otherwise. We
pass'd our Hours for the most part together, not only
because to talk of our mutual Misfortunes was all
the Consolation that either of us enjoy'd, but also because
I would avoid the Presence of Mulyzeden as
much as possible; not but he sometimes visited her,
but then he always sent to desire to know if he
might have Permission, and I took care to retire into
another Room, and by that Means escap'd the Persecution
it was to me to hear his Complaints. This
I did so often, and he being told by some of the Attendants
that I was there, tho' he had not the Liberty
of seeing me, that one Day he took an effectual Method
to prevent me from concealing myself as I had
done, without being guilty of a Rudeness unbecoming
my Character:––––He sent a Gentleman with his
Duty to the two Princesses, who he knew were together,
entreating the Favour of them to continue so,
and allow of his Presence, having something to communicate
to them both. My Cousin and I look'd on
one another, while this Message was delivering, with
a good deal of Surprise; but it being her Place to
answer, she did in these Words: Let your Prince know,
said she, that I should take it ill if he should have so
indifferent an Opinion of my Judgment, as not to assure
himself of Welcome here, whenever he has a Leisure
Hour to afford us his Conversation. ––––As for my Cousin,
he is doubtless satisfied in her Inclinations. ––––Madam,
(interrupted I, affecting a gay Air,) if he is not,
I know of no Person on Earth so proper to complain to
as yourself, who, on all Occasions, are so much his
Friend. I spoke this, because I knew that tho' he
extremely respected her before, yet, since my deterring 

the Marriage, he had conceiv'd a secret Spite
against her, as imagining, tho' for what Reason he
could not dive into, she had been the Cause. And
then addressing myself to the Person he had sent, told
him, he might inform his Master, he had seen me
with the Princess, where I design'd to remain some
Time, and should be very well pleased if he would
come and join Company with us; which he assuring
us he would do immediately, withdrew. 
Both Zatilda and myself were of Opinion, that
the Business he had to communicate was no other
than the old Story of my Unkindness, and growing
more presuming, on the Part which the King seem'd
to take in his Interest, sent in this particular Manner
on purpose to oblige me to give him Audience, which
of late, as I have already told you, I had avoided as
much as possible. Zatilda was beginning to consider
in what Manner she should answer him, in case he
should desire her, as she imagin'd he would, to interest
herself in this Affair, when he enter'd the Room: 
After the first Civilities were over, Madam, said he
to me, I have Reason to believe that Fortune having
began her Persecutions to me in your cruel Coldness,
designs to continue them in depriving me of every Thing
which could afford me Consolation: Abdomar, that
Friend, whom next to the adorable Bellraizia had the
greatest Share in my Heart, of late avoids my Presence,
shuns my Caresses, and when I ask the Cause, replies
not but with Sighs. This Morning, pressing with all
the Earnestness of Friendship, to which I joyn'd Commands,
to know what had occasion'd this so sudden
Change, after a thousand Evasions, which he found
were vain, he told me with an Accent which spoke at
once Despair, and Grief, and Horror, his Life was
mine, but not this Secret. I thought this Answer as
far from Justice, as it was from Kindness, and let him
know I had not been guilty of those Reserves to
him, which, between Souls united, as I had believed
ours, were treasonable to the Laws of Friendship. 
Our Tempers, both too liable to Passion, a few hot 

Words enflam'd, and he departed from my Chamber. 
This Usage, tho' it much troubles me, I could forgive
from Abdomar, but he, it seems, is not so reconcileable. 
About an Hour since he sent a Letter
by his Page, which please to judge his Meaning of. 
In speaking these Words, he delivered me the Paper,
which, at his Desire, I read aloud. The Contents of
it struck me too deeply not to be fix'd in my Remembrance,
and were in this Manner: 

To Prince Mulyzeden.
My Presence being no way serviceable to you in
Barbary, and the Repose of my future Life
calling me with the utmost Expedition to Fez, I humbly
entreat your Permission to return thither. I know better
what is owing to my Duty, and the Obligations you
have heaped upon me, than to oppose your Will; but
hope the same Goodness, to which I already stand so
far engaged, will influence you not to command my stay,
since my immediate Departure is absolutely necessary
to prevent me from being 
The most Miserable of your Slaves,
Abdomar. 

The Concern which this unexpected Shock gave
me, and which was impossible for me wholly to conceal,
was not a little obliging to the unsuspecting
Mulyzeden, who imagin'd it sprung only on his Account,
especially when I told him, That I thought it
the highest Piece of Ingratitude imaginable; and that
he would be blam'd by the whole World for his too
great Condescension, if he granted the Request he made:
What, said I, has he found so disobliging in the Court of
Barbary, that should make him so impatient to remove
from it? Or what Engagements can he have left behind
him in Fez equal to those he has to his Prince, who has 

bought his utmost Services at a Price so noble as his
Friendship. Zatilda join'd in all I said on this Score; 
but Mulyzeden, who, in spite of his Resentment, had
the most tender Friendship for him imaginable, tho'
he could not but approve of our Reasons, could not
be influenced by them so far as to force his Stay, if
Perswasions would not win him. After a long Conversation
he told me, he had a Favour to entreat of
me, the Grant of which would infinitely oblige him; 
which having assur'd him I would, if in my Power,
he inform'd me, That he believ'd it would not be improper
if I seemed a little interested in this Affair,
and took upon me to enquire of Abdomar the Reasons
of his Desire to leave us. Perhaps, said he, his
Complaisance for a Princess of your Accomplishments may
influence him to reveal more than I have been able to
draw from him. You may believe I did not hesitate
much to promise what he desir'd: I was not a little
satisfied to have an Opportunity of conversing so
freely with Abdomar; and beginning to know what
Jealousy inflicts, fancying it could be no other Reason
than the Calls of Love, which made him regardless
of every Thing beside, presently flatter'd myself
with a secret Hope I should be able to discover something
by his Words or Gestures which would give
me Colour for opposing his Return. –––I granted the
Request which Mulyzeden made me with a Willingness
which seem'd to banish Part of his Chagrin; and
telling me he would send no Answer to Abdomar
till I had first spoke to him, took his Leave with a
Satisfaction much greater than I had seen in his
Countenance since the Time of my first putting off
the Marriage: But when his Absence had given me
an Opportunity, how did I indulge Despair and Jealousy!
how did I reproach Zatilda for accusing her
ill Fate, since my own appeared by such infinite Degrees
more dreadful! tho' as every one looks on
their own Misfortunes through a magnifying Glass,
she could not be brought to yield me the Pre-eminence. 
Good part of the Night was pass'd in this 

kind of Conversation, and the Remainder in contemplating
on the Intricacy of this Affair, which, indeed,
from the Beginning, promis'd nothing but Confusion. 
For my part, it had been many Nights since
I knew what it was to sleep in Tranquillity, but having
this added to my other Disquiets, of losing, in
all Probabability, for ever the Sight of all I wish'd
to look on, fill'd me with such mortal Agonies, as
the most elegant Description of would make appear
but mean in comparison of what in reality they
were. Tir'd with my uneasy Bed, I rose much earlier
than was my Custom; and because I would avoid
the Morning Salutations which the Court thought it
their Duty to pay me, and which, with all other
Formalities of State, were now grown troublesome,
I went into the Palace-Garden without any Attendants,
leaving Orders with them not to tell Prince
Mulyzeden, my Father, or any other Person, were I
was. It was not a Time for the Walks to be frequented,
and I rambled up and down without being
accosted by any one, till growing a little weary, I
went into a Grotto, which was order'd so, as to
have many little Appartments in it, which run winding
one out of another like a Labyrinth, and might entertain
several Companies without being known by
each other to be there. I was scarce set down, before
I heard a murmuring Sound of Voices, that
seemed earnest in Discourse; but whose they were,
or what was the Subject of their Conversation, I
was not able to distinguish. It is impossible for any
one to be less inquisitive into the Affairs of others
than I am at all Times, but especially then, when I
was so much taken up, and perplex'd with my own:
I sat for some Moments without so much as a
Thought what they might be, till one of them raising
his Voice somewhat higher than he had done,
I heard the Name of Abdomar repeated. That Sound,
indeed, was sufficient to rouze me from a Lethargy,
had I been in one. I left the Place I was in, and
drawing nearer as softly as I could, soon found it was 

no other than he, whom Prince Mulyzeden had
drawn thither on purpose to engage him to disclose the
Secret he had been so desirous of knowing; for presently
I heard him speak these Words: Say no more,
Abdomar, (said he,) say no more: I am now convinced
that all the Friendship thou ever pretendest to me, was
but to flatter me;––––the Names of Prince, Patron,
Friend, but Words of Course, and had no other Meaning
than to please me with the Sound. Sir, I conjure
you do not rend my Soul (replied Abdomar) with such
unjust Suspicions; by Heaven, by all that we adore
above, or love below, your Friendship is the only Pride,
the only Joy, the only Hope, I have on Earth; and
when I forfeit that, I must be curs'd beyond my Enemies
extremest Malice. Why then (resum'd the Prince)
dost thou conceal this Secret from me? No, I never will
believe thou lovest me, till I obtain this Proof. –––I know
too well thy honest generous Nature to imagine it can
be ought thou would'st be asham'd to own; but if it
were, to me thou might'st disclose it. –––Humanity is
liable to Failings, and if some stealing Vice has unawares
crept into thy unguarded Wishes, I shall not censure
it with such Severity as thou thyself would'st do,
having far more, and greater of my own. ––––O Sir,
forbear, (cry'd the other,) you are too God-like good,–––– 
your wond'rous Condescension to an unworthy Slave makes
me more hateful to myself. –––Believe it, my most honour'd
Prince, the Crime you would discover, is of so
black a Kind, you cou'd not know it without Detestation:
This once favour'd Abdomar, by you and by all
Mankind must be contemn'd, abhorr'd; and if there were
a Punishment more terrible, that, that wou'd be inflicted
on me. Thy Words (interrupted Mulyzeden) amazing
as they are, can never make me think thou could'st be
guilty of a Crime I cou'd not pardon. Hadst thou conspir'd
against my Life, half this Penitence would more
than wash the Stain:––––But I will no farther press
thee, keep still the Secret in thy burden'd Breast, but
let me keep thee with me: Do not leave me, and I will
ask no more. O unjust Gods! (cry'd Abdomar, in a 

Voice that testified the utmost Horror) why am I
made this Wretch?––––why doom'd to bear more than
a mortal Sufferance can sustain?––––why am I forc'd,
against my Inclinations, to wrong such Royal Goodness? ––– 
Strike, strike me dead with your avenging Thunders! ––– 
Lightnings blast me! ––––Earth open wide, and swallow
me at once! ––––Snatch, snatch me, Fiends, and bear me
quick to Hell! ––––There's not a Devil there so damn'd
as I! –––But hold, (continu'd he,) these Coward-like Complaints
avail not to eraze my foul Ingratitude, my horrid
Perjury:–––I have the Means myself to end my Tortures,
and chastise my Crimes. Thus, thus, my Prince,
I will revenge you on your worst of Foes. 
With these Words, as I was afterwards inform'd,
he drew a Dagger from his Side, and was about to
plunge it in his Breast; but Mulyzeden, who, by the
Beginning of those Exclamations, guess'd they would
not cease without some Act of Desperation, was quick
enough to prevent him; and wresting from him the
fatal Weapon, spoke in a low and melancholy Accent,
yet loud enough for me to understand what he said,
in this Manner: It is enough, Abdomar, it is enough; 
I need no more to make me guess at your Misfortune; 
––––I am too well assur'd of your Honour to
believe you wou'd injure a Prince who loves you, by
any Act in which your Will had part:––––No, no,
the Crime which has occasion'd this Despair, is an involuntary
one. –––There are no Rules, alas! to limit Love,
and I must learn to be insensible of Bellraizia's Charms
myself, before I refuse my Pity to another, who has felt
their Influence. Tho' I listen'd with all the Attention
I was able, I cou'd not hear one Word after this for
the Space of several Minutes; and when I did, it was
in such broken Sentences, that had I not heard the
Beginning of their Conversation, I cou'd have form'd
no positive Judgment to what the latter Part of it
tended, till Mulyzeden, who I found was about to
leave him, spoke as he went out of the Grotto in
this Manner: Well, Abdomar, said he, I shall no more
disturb you in the Enjoyment of a Solitude which you 

prefer to the Society of a Prince who loves you; only
remember this, That there is a mighty Difference between
Crimes enforced by a compulsive Fate, and those
which we are guilty of meerly thro' the Obstinacy of our
own Will: The unhappy Passion you lament, is not your
Fault, but your Mistortune; but if you offer to lay
violent Hands on your own Life, you not only anticipate
the Decrees of Heaven, but injure me in the most
tender Part, by depriving me of a Subject I esteem the
most capable of serving me, and commit a Sin unpardonable
both by the Gods and me. By good Luck for
me, who should have been strangely confus'd, had either
the Prince or Abdomar known I had been Witness
of this Discourse, the former went from the
Grotto through another Passage, which led to a lower
Garden, leaving that I was in entirely free for me to
retire, which I did, with all the Expedition I could,
fearing lest Abdomar, who I found still continu'd where
he was, should come out hastily and discover me. I
walk'd a Turn or two in a fine green Alley adjoining
to it, ruminating on what had past:––––I cannot but
say, it was with an Infinity of Transport that I was
eas'd of those Rackings of Jealousy which I had endured
since I heard of his Impatience to return to
Fez, and that so contrary to my Hopes and Expectations,
he felt the same tumultuous Emotions
which Desire creates, as had invaded me from the first
Moment Mulyzeden brought him to my Presence; 
but then the Goodness, the Generosity of that unhappy
Prince, injur'd by those in whom he most confided,
reproach'd me with Ingratitude and Falshood:
The Sense of his Sufferings so truly touch'd me, that
methought I could have done a Violence to my own
Passion to have made him happy. –––But then my
Friendship to Zatilda, or I fancy'd it was that (because
I was asham'd to own even to myself that Love
had so far influenc'd me) which check'd the Growth
of such an Inclination before I scarce could feel it
rising in me. But to which of these two Motives it was
my future Behaviour was owing, I will leave Idalia to
the liberty of judging. 

I had not long indulg'd my Meditations, before I
saw close by me the Person who took up the greatest
Part of them: The half-distracted Abdomar, with
Head declin'd, and folded Arms, had left the Grotto,
and was coming down the Walk in which I was; 
the Confusion of both our Thoughts had prevented
us from seeing one another till we were very near. 
The Start he gave at discovering me, sufficiently assured
me he met me not with design, as did his
offering, after he had made me a low Bow, to turn
away into another Walk: But my Love inspired me,
at that Time, with a Boldness which I have a thousand
Times since wondered at; and presently remembring
the Request Mulyzeden had made me the Day
before, resolved to make that my Excuse for entertaining
the Man, for a Moment of whose Conversation
I could almost have hazarded my Life: And
calling after him,––––My Lord, said I, you do very
wisely in shunning the Presence of a Princess you are
about so highly to disoblige. How! Madam, (cry'd the
surpris'd Abdomar, endeavouring as much as possible
to throw of his Chagrin,) were there a Possibility of
my being guilty of a Crime like that, I should deserve
far worse than is in the Power of a Goodness so divine
as yours to inflict;––––but since you have tax'd me with
it, permit me to entreat the Cause. The Cause is plain,
(resum'd I, counterfeiting a Gaiety which was far
from my Humour;) if Prince Mulyzeden has not
wrong'd you in his Report, you grow weary of us, and
are impatient to return to Fez. The short Time I have
been here (reply'd he gravely) has shewn me so much
to admire, that if there were a perfect Heaven to be
found on Earth, it is in the Court of Barbary I should
seek it; and 'tis so much my Misfortune, that I am oblig'd
by an indispensible Necessity to leave it, that I much
doubt it never will be in my Power to eraze the Melancholy
it occasions. Did you in reality think (said I)
what your Complaisance obliges you to say, no Considerations
would be of force to take you from a Prince who 

cannot be happy when you are not with him. Abdomar
did not immediately make any Answer to these Words; 
and I, who strictly observ'd all his Motions, perceiv'd
this Pause was occasion'd by the Suppression of some
Sighs which, endeavouring to vent themselves, had
well nigh suffocated him; but having at last got the
Victory over them, I am so little capable of being
serviceable to my Prince, Madam, (said he,) on any
Score, that without being guilty of an Injustice to himself,
he cannot regret my Absence;––––tho' if it were
otherwise, he will soon be put in Possession of a Blessing
which will leave no room for any second Wish: Whate'er
this World can boast, cannot be worth one Thought
from him, who has all Heaven in the Divine Bellraizia! 
But till that Day, at least (answer'd I, smiling)
you ought not to forsake him, and who can tell how
long a Space of Time may be between this Instant now,
and that? You look with Wonder in your Countenance
(continu'd I, perceiving him surpris'd;) but knowing
you so strictly devoted to your Prince, I long have wish'd
to discourse you on this Theme, and should be more oblig'd
than Words can thank you for, would you endeavour
to divert his Thoughts from one who cannot love
him, nor but with Horror unconceivable can ever yield
to be his Wife. ––––Not Love him, Madam! (interrupted
he.) Grant Heaven my Ears deceive me!–––– 
not love a Prince who has all the Perfections that Man
can boast!––––a Prince who dies for you! and to whom
you have given so many Assurances you would reward
his Passion! ––––'Twas by my Father's and the King's
Commands, (resum'd I;) for know, my Heart had never
part in what I said, nor shall their Power oblige
me longer to disguise the Truth: I cannot love, and
therefore will not consent to––––Hold, Princess! (cry'd
the generous Abdomar, transported with Grief and
Amazement,) I conjure you by the Gods recal that rash
Resolve, which else too late Consideration will enforce
you to repent:––––Where, in the Race of Man, can there
be sound a Worth like Mulyzeden's? The strictest Honour. 

Justice, Truth, and Goodness, are the Ingredients of his
Godlike Soul! Then for his Form, O Princess! is it not
noble? ––––What a manly Majesty dwells in his Air? 
What Sweetness in his Smiles? ––––And with all this, a
Love so true, so perfect, and so pure, that which the
Bless'd above regard each other with, is scarce so free
from Taint. Had I not been Witness of the Conversation
which had lately pass'd between him and Mulyzeden,
I should not have been surpris'd to hear him
plead in this Manner; but knowing him his Rival,
the Generosity of his Soul fill'd me with a Wonder
equal to my Love; and I must confess, tho' it was
before at the greatest Height I then believ'd it could
arrive, I felt from this Moment an Addition: But
resolved to try him farther yet, I own the Merits of
Prince Mulyzeden, (said I coldly;) but if you have ever
been acquainted with that Passion, you well know that it is
not without Reason that the God of it is painted blind. 
Ah! Madam, (interrupted he,) can you confess the least
Knowledge what it is to love, yet seem insensible of it
for Mulyzeden's Charms? But thus, (continu'd he
with an Accent which express'd the utmost Earnestness,
and falling on his Knees,) thus, most adorable
Bellraizia! let me entreat you to consider well, e'er you
resolve to make my Prince unhappy;––––think what a
Breach of Honour and of Justice it would be to throw
him from those high-rais'd Hopes to which your Promises
have exalted him;–––think he cannot out live the cruel
Certainty of your Unkindness; and if not Love, let Pity
move you never to let this fatal Knowledge reach his
Ear;–––for me, not all the Tortures which the Damn'd
endure should force me to reveal it. ––––Nor,––––nor
needst thou, Traytor! (cry'd a Voice behind me,) my
Eyes and Ears have but too well inform'd themselves,
and urge me thus to Vengeance. With the hearing these
Words, I saw the Person who spoke them was no
other than Prince Mulyzeden, who, returning to the
Palace, had been Witness of the Posture Abdomar was
in; and drawing nearer as fast as he could, heard his 

last Words; which unhappily misconstruing, transported
him so far as to make him draw his Sword, before
the other had Time to put himself in any Posture of
Defence, had he design'd it; but he attempted it not,
and making bare his Breast when the Prince run fiercely
at him, had certainly bury'd the Weapon in his Heart,
had I not interpos'd. Frighted and confus'd as I was,
I sent forth a Shriek which might have reach'd a much
greater Distance, than it was to the Centinels which
were placed at the Garden Gates, and stepping between
them,––––Check this rash Sally of an ungovern'd
and a causless Fury, (cry'd I to the Prince,) or thro'
Bellraizia give the Wound. You do well, Madam, answer'd
he, to defend the Man who has declar'd a Passion
for you, I wish you had that Charity for all who
love you. Your Words (resum'd I) are too mysterious
for me to comprehend the Meaning of, and all I can gather
either from them, or your Behaviour, is to me
affrontive, and to your Friend injurious. By this Time,
there was a Crowd of Courtiers and Soldiers about
us, and my Father, who happen'd to be just entring
the Garden when I call'd out, came up among the
rest: He had heard what I said to the Prince, and
casting a furious Look at me, was about to speak,
when Mulyzeden prevented him, by saying, Sir, I desire
you, whose Authority can justify the Act, as the
Story I have to tell you will my Accusation, to order
that Traytor (pointing to Abdomar) into close Confinement,
till a worse Punishment is inflicting on him. 
My Father immediately making a Sign to some of
the Guard, they took him away, which he submitted
to with all the Resignation imaginable. I durst
not utter the least Word of that Indignation my Soul
was full of to Mulyzeden, because of my Father's Presence; 
but he walking away with the Prince, who
was impatient to disburden his Bosom of the Anguish
he was possess'd of, I went to Zatilda's Appartment
to communicate to her this Adventure, and
ask her Advice which way I should proceed; but I 

had scarce Time to recount it to her, before I receiv'd
a Message from the King to retire to my own Side,
and not to stir from thence without Permission. –––– 
Both the Princess and myself were extremely startled
at this unexpected Mission; but the Person who
brought it not leaving the Chamber till I went with
him, neither of us had Opportunity to express what
we thought. 
After I was conducted to my Appartment, I
found it was my Prison; the Persons who waited on
me were order'd to admit no Persons without a particular
Licence, nor deliver any Letter or Message for
me without other Orders than my own. Incens'd to
the greatest Vehemence my Temper could be rais'd
to, at hearing this Command, I entreated to see my
Father; but was told his Rage against me was too
violent to permit me to come into his Presence, till
he could bear it with more Calmness.–––– 
As the charming Bellraizia was in this Part of her
Story, she was interrupted by the sudden Rising of a
Storm, which express the utmost Fury of the warring
Elements: At first with distant Roar the whistling
Winds but threaten'd Danger, but soon the dreadful
Noise came nearer; from every Quarter of the angry
Heavens the Tempest seem'd to blow, and demanded
the Pilot's utmost Skill and Care: But soon there was
no use of either; the horrible Hurricane baffled the
Sailor's Art, and those who were adventurous enough
to aim at stemming it, paid dearly for their vain Attempt. 
––––At length, Masts, Cables, Rudder, all that
could be defensive, being lost, the Ship was tost about
at Pleasure of the mounting Waves, which sometimes
bore it almost to the Skies, and sometimes dash'd it
down so low, that those that were aboard had little
Hope of rising. ––––A vast Variety of Horror might
here be seen and heard, Numbers of distracted Wretches
unfit either to live or die, but frighted at the Apprehensions
of Death's near Approach, ran up and
down confus'd, some cursing, some crying. ––––No 

Calm appeared but in the Faces of Abdomar, and
his Bellraizia, and they appear'd undaunted but for
each other's Fate, and seem'd to comfort themselves,
that since they must die, they should die together. 
As for Idalia, not all the Misfortunes she had endur'd,
or the little Probability there was that Life should
afford her any great Portion of Felicity, could enable
her to support the Terror of this dreadful Hour; 
for it was not much more from the beginning of
the Storm to the Time in which the Ship, bulging
against a Rock, was dash'd to Pieces Most of the
Mariners, as expert as they were in swimming, perished
in this watry Desolation; but Idalia, reserv'd
to know more and greater Ills than yet she had endur'd,
was miraculously preserv'd: In her Fright she
had catch'd fast hold of one of the Beams which
ribb'd the Side of the Ship, which being in the
dreadful Crack torn off, she clinging round it, was
plunged at once among the Waves. Who that had
been Witness of this Scene would ever have believed
they should have seen her alive on Shore? Yet it so
pleas'd Providence, that the Storm, as though it had
done the Work it was rais'd for, ceas'd immediately
after, and the Piece of Timber lightly floating bore
her to the Wreck of another Ship, which, like that
she had been in, had suffer'd. ––––The broken Carcass
lay tossing up and down, and stopp'd her further Progress. 
They were so near the Shore, that some People
(as 'tis common for those who live by the Seaside)
coming out in Boats either to enrich them selves by
the Ruins of those who have perished, or to afford their
Help to those who are in a Condition of receiving
it, spy'd afar off with Wonder this little Log, which
they discern'd bore something living on it, and made
up to it with all the Speed their Oars enabled them:
They arrived just Time enough to prevent Idalia and
her Supporter from sinking, as else they must inevitably
have done, suck'd into the Whirlpool which that
unwieldy Wreck had made, and it was with all the 

Difficulty in the World, and danger to themselves,
that they saved her. She was more dead than alive
when they got her into the Boat; but rowing back
again as soon as they could, one of the Men, who
happened to be of a charitable and compassionate
Disposition, carry'd her in his Arms to a little Cottage
he had just by the Sea-side. ––––He had a Wife,
whose Humanity and Goodness was much beyond
what could be expected from People of their Station; 
she undress'd her, laid her on a Bed, and us'd the
utmost of her Endeavours to bring her to herself,
which at length she was successful in; and Idalia
lifting up her Eyes, began to enquire where she was,
and what happen'd; for she was capable of remembring
nothing, since that dreadful Burst which tore
her from her Company: Which when she had been
inform'd of, and that in all Probability there was not
a Person sav'd but herself, she was in the greatest
Concern imaginable for the unhappy Fate of Abdomar
and Bellraizia. 
She continued some Days too weak to travel; 
and after she was in a Condition, could not resolve
in what Manner: Her Beauty had led her into so
many Dangers, that she resolved for the future to disguise
her Sex till she should arrive at a Place of Safety; 
and persisting in her Design of going to Naples,
thought her best Way would be through Rome, being
now not above thirty Miles from thence. She had a
String of Diamonds in her Hair the Day she left her Father's
House, and on her putting on the Habit of a
Country Girl to escape from the House where the
unknown Person had plac'd her, she had ty'd it round
her Arm under her Sleeve; this she gave to her good
old Host to sell, knowing it would be sufficient to
pay him for his Trouble, and defray the Expences of
her Journey. 
The poor Fellow honestly discharg'd the Trust reposed
in him, and brought her seven hundred Crowns; 
some part of which she dispos'd of in making him and 

his Wife a grateful Retribution for their Kindness; 
and some of it she laid out in furnishing herself with
Men's Clothes; the rest she kept to supply her in her
Travels. But what befel her in them, and the Continuance
of the Adventures of Abdomar and Bellraizia
(who had not perished as she imagined) must be left
for the next Part; which shall be the last, and fully
conclude the History of this unhappy Wanderer. 
