

Contains a farther confirmation of the position advanc'd in the preceding chapter, and also some other particulars exciting the curiosity of the reader. 
Lady Speck assumed a countenance as serene as possible to entertain, with her usual politeness, the persons who came to visit her; but in spite of all her endeavours to appear entirely easy, she could not keep herself from darting such ill-natur'd glances on Jenny, whenever she look'd towards her, as must have been taken notice of by that young lady, if she had not been too much engros'd by her own thoughts to be capable of penetrating into those of another. 
The company stay'd so late, that the instant they were gone the ladies retir'd to their respective chambers; Jenny, who had her mind no less employed than lady Speck, with the adventures of the day, was equally pleased to be alone and indulge meditation on what had pass'd. 
The history of mrs. M&wblank;&wblank; had dwelt very much upon her mind; but what made the most deep impression, was that part of it wherein she related the first motive which occasion'd her fall at once from happiness and from virtue, and consequently drew on her all those dreadful misfortunes with which at present she was encompass'd. 
I believe the reader will easily remember, as the thing is of a pretty particular nature, how that unhappy woman in order to revive those ardors of affection in her husband, which she imagin'd were beginning to decay, had recourse to the dangerous stratagem of giving him a rival; and also how by coquetting with Celandine, and treating him with a shew of liking, the counterfeited flame kindled by degrees into a real one, and ended at length in her utter ruin and confusion. 
The notions Jenny had of honour and generosity were too refin'd and delicate, not to make her look with the utmost contempt on all kinds of artifice, on what pretences soever they were put in practice:—this conduct of mrs. M&wblank;'s, though considering what ensued, the least guilty part of her character, seem'd 
to her so highly criminal, as well as weak and mean, that she could not help thinking it worthy of all the punishments it met with. 
‘How is it possible, cried she within herself, that a woman who truly loves virtue can be capable of putting on an appearance so much the reverse of it? What if at that time she had no intentions of gratifying the amorous inclinations of the man she sported with, to encourage them in him was a manifest violation, not only of modesty but likewise of religion, honour, and those solemn obligations she had enter'd into. 
‘Besides, continued she, this wretched creature seems not to want sense enough to know the heinousness of the fault she was guilty of, even in this first step to perdition;—yet she run boldly into it, and absolv'd herself on account of the good end she propos'd by it,—to regain the affections of her husband:—Oh! how ridiculous was such an attempt for doing so; as if any man of common reason would love his wife the better for suspecting she was about to commit the worst and most shameful action a woman can be guilty of! 
‘I have seen some young ladies, went she still on, that have made use of these little tricks to inspire jealousy in their lovers; either to make trial of their constancy, or shew their own power by giving pain; this is certainly silly as well as cruel; but what is no more than vanity and folly in them, is downright wickedness in a married woman.’ 
Thus did she pass some time in censuring the conduct of mrs. M&wblank;&wblank;; but as she was of that happy turn of mind, to convert every thing which she either saw or heard of to her own advantage, and to make fresh improvements in herself by the misbehaviours of others, her reflections carried her yet farther, and remembrance presented her with an incident which happen'd long before she had the power of judging, but which she had heard much discourse of in her extreme youth,—it was this: 
A person of great distinction happen'd to be married to a lady very young and beautiful; she was a celebrated wit without being wise, and had the most romantick turn of mind;—fancying herself a Statyra, she expected her husband should approach her with the obsequiousness of 
an Oroondates;—he was little versed in histories of this nature; and though he loved her very well, treated her as mere woman;—the epithets of angel and goddess were strangers to his mouth; and those he usually saluted her with were plain madam, or my dear;—this disgusted her even in the first days of their marriage,—she look'd on such a behaviour as an indignity to her charms;—her heart reproach'd the indelicacy of his manners, and half despised him for his want of taste; nor did her tongue restrain itself from testifying how much she was disatisfy'd at every thing he said or did. 
The fashion in which he found himself used by her gave him some disquiet at first, but it lasted not long;—though a man of sense, he was naturally indolent to an excess;—he loved his ease too well to part with it on any consideration whatever;—he never thought any thing worth attempting the pursuit of, which was likely to be attended with difficulty;—and as he had never taken the pains to examine what it was that his wife expected from him, so he would have been equally negligent in gratifying her humour, if he had been better acquainted with it. 
Their way of living together grew every day still worse and worse; as her haughty sulleness increased, his carelessness of it increased in proportion;—all the love they once had for each other turn'd into a mutual indifference, or rather a mutual aversion;—she sought the food for her vanity among those who were of a disposition to indulge it; and she found not a few to whom the glory of pleasing a lady of her beauty, birth, and accomplishments did not seem well worth all the flatteries they could address her with; the husband, in the mean time, made himself not wretched on account of the gallantries she received, but fled for consolation to the arms of a more obliging and endearing fair. 
They continued to live together, however, in the same house; but slept not in the same bed, nor eat at the same table, except for decency sake, when company was there; before whom they always behaved to each other with the greatest good manners and politeness imaginable. 
But this was a constraint which neither of them could long support,—they parted by consent;—after which her amours became 
the general topic of conversation; till shunned by all her kindred, despised by her acquaintance, and slighted by those for whose sake she had sacrificed her reputation, she became sensible of her follies, and sought a reconciliation with her husband; but all her endeavours for that purpose being in vain, she hated a place where she no longer had either friends or admirers, and went a voluntary exile into foreign parts, where grief and remorse soon put an end to her life. 
This incident threw Jenny into the most serious contemplations on the human system;—the many observations she had made, convinc'd her that vanity was in a more or less degree inherent to the whole species; and that men as well as women were not exempt from it: and immediately recollecting some passages she had seen which demonstrated this truth, ‘Good God, cried she, how can any one be so fond of this idol frame, this poor machine, liable to be wither'd by every inclement blast that issues from the firmament! Let the proud of heart read Gulliver's Voyages to the Houghims, and some other pieces of the same excellent author, and they will see and be ashamed to admire a 
body which requires such means to be sustain'd. —No, continu'd she, it is the mind which ought to be the chief object of our attention; it is there alone we are either beautiful or deform'd; and the pains we take to ornament and embellish that nobler part of us will not be thrown away.’ 
She was so taken up with these philosophic reflections, that she went not to bed till the beams of Aurora darting through the window curtains, reminded her how much she had lost of the time commonly alotted for repose. 
It was somewhat more late than ordinary when she rose the next morning;—on her coming down stairs she found the ladies already in the room where they always breakfasted; and guessing, by some circumstances, that she had made them wait, was beginning to apologize for her tardiness. 
‘Indeed, my dear, cried miss Wingman interrupting her, we were afraid you were not well, and were just going to send to your chamber: —But pray, continued she very gaily, let me examine your countenance, and see if that will tell me whether you are quite 
got over the fright that terrible woman put you into yesterday.’ 
Jenny was about to make some answer; but lady Speck, who could not forgive her for the part she bore in that adventure, took up the word before the other had time to open her mouth, ‘The fright was of little consequence,’ said she with an air which had something of derision in it, ‘as she was deliver'd from the danger before she could have any apprehensions of it;—but, there were other particulars that happen'd afterwards, which perhaps were of a yet more disagreeable nature, and might make a deeper impression.’ 
These words, and the tone in which they were spoke, gave Jenny an infinity of surprise, but without pausing to form any conjecture on the matter, ‘You will pardon me, madam, cried she innocently, if I am not able to comprehend your ladyship's meaning;—I know of no accident that happen'd afterwards; or indeed, in which I had the least concern.’ 
‘How weak is it, reply'd lady Speck, in people to endeavour to conceal a passion, which in spite of all they can 
do will break out in every look and gesture! I pity you from my soul, and had I sooner known the situation of your heart, would have contiv'd some way or other to have prevented mrs. M&wblank;&wblank; from being quite so open in her narrative;—it must certainly be a very great shock to you to hear some passages she related;—but, alass, I was intirely ignorant that Celandine loved you, or that you loved Celandine; and little suspected that it was for his sake you so resolutely rejected the offers of sir Robert Manley.’ 
‘I should be sorry, madam, reply'd Jenny very disdainfully, that your ladyship, or any one else, should have so contemptible an opinion of my judgment. —I know but little of the gentlemen, yet know enough to make a just distinction between them; and were my hand and heart at my disposal should not hesitate one moment to which of them I should give the preference.’ 
‘How cunning now you think you are, said lady Speck with an affected laugh,—you speak the truth but avoid mentioning the name: I will however 
do it for you, and answer in somewhat like the poet's words: 
Tis Celandine your heart would leap to meet,
While Manley lay expiring at your feet.’
Scarce had Jenny the power to restrain her passion within the bounds of decency, on finding lady Spech persisted in so injurious an accusation;—scorn and anger overwhelm'd her soul,—tears gush'd from her eyes,—and rising hastily from her seat,—‘I will not imagine, madam, said she, that you are really in earnest in supposing such a thing; but the jest is of such a nature as I do not think it becomes me to hear the continunace of.’ 
In speaking these words she was about to quit the room; but miss Wingman, who had been a good deal astonish'd at what her sister had said, ran and pulled her back;—but all her persuasions would have been ineffectual to have detain'd her, if lady Speck, having vented her ill humour; and now repenting she had gone so far, had not added her intreaties. 
‘My dear creature, cried she, I had not the least design to affront you; I only meant to rally you a little on your staying at home, when so fine a day called every body to the walks.’ —‘I should have deserved it, madam, answer'd she, if I had deny'd myself the pleasure of attending your ladyship on any other motive than what I really did;—but I assure you I wrote no less than five letters, as your own man can witness, whom, my own being out of the way, I took the liberty to send with them to the post-office.’ 
‘I believe it, said lady Speck, I believe it, and heartily ask your pardon.’ —She was going to add something more by way of reparation for the vexation she had given to that young lady, when she was prevented by her woman, who having been sent to a milliner's for some things she wanted, came running into the room with a countenance as confus'd and wild as if she had met some spectre or apparition in her way: 
‘Oh madam! cried she to her lady, I have the strangest thing to tell you,—the oddest accident;—to be sure I was never so much surprised in all my life.’ 
‘Prithee at what, demanded lady Speck? —Lord, madam, return'd she, I could not have thought such a thing of two such civil well-behaved gentlemen. —What gentlemen, said lady Speck? explain the mystery at once, and do not keep us in suspence by your unseasonable exclamations. 
‘Lord, madam, replied she, your ladyship will wonder when you know all as well as I;—for my part I was so confounded that I scarce know which way I got home. —Just as I was stepping into the milliner's,—bless me, I shall never forget it; but I will tell your ladyship as fast as I can: —Just as I was going into the shop, as I was saying, I heard a great noise in the street, and the sound of several men's voices crying out,—Bring them along,—bring them along,—I turn'd about, as any one would do,—out of mere curiosity,—and,—would your ladyship believe it possible? —who should I see but mr. Lovegrove and mr. Celandine in the hands of I know not how many rough fellows, and followed by a huge croud of all sorts of people. —I fancy they had been fighting, for both their swords were drawn and carried by one of the men that had hold of mr. Lovegrove; 
I cannot directly say how that matter was; but there was a strange confused noise among the mob;—one cried it was a sad thing such broils should happen;—and another that it would be a great prejudice to the town: and all I could hear distinctly was, that they were going to carry the gentlemen before a justice of peace.’ 
All the ladies were very much concern'd at hearing this intelligence; but lady Speck seem'd the most affected with it; nor did the others at all wonder at her being so, as mr. Lovegrove was her declared admirer, and was allow'd by all that knew him to deserve more of her favour than he had as yet experienced. 
They were all extremely impatient to know both the occasion and the consequence of this affair; and lady Speck's woman either having not enquir'd, or not been able to learn to what magistrate the gentlemen were carried, footmen were immediately dispatch'd to every quarter of the town, in hopes of bringing home that information, which the reader shall presently be made acquainted with. 
