


Contains only some few particulars which
followed the reconciliation. 

Though this reconciliation was not
altogether sincere on the side of mr.
Munden, yet being made in the presence
of sir Ralph and lady Trusty, it kept him
from giving any flagrant demonstrations
at present, that it was not so, and he continued
to live with his amiable wife in the
most seeming good harmony for some
time. 
She, on her part, performed, with the
utmost exactitude all she had promised to
him, and though she could not be said to
feel for him all that warmth of affection,
which renders the discharge of our duty
so great a pleasure to ourselves, yet her
good nature and good sense well supplied
that deficiency, and left him no room to
accuse her of the least failure in what
might be expected from the best of wives. 
During this interval of tranquility, she
lost the society of two persons, the tenderness
of whose friendship for her she had 

experienced in a thousand instances:
—mr. Francis Thoughtless, who had stayed
so long in town, merely through the
indulgence of his commanding officer,
was now obliged to repair to his regiment
then quartered at Leeds in Yorkshire, and
sir Ralph Trusty having finished his affairs
in town, his lady returned with him to
their country seat. 
Thus was she almost at once deprived
of the only two persons, to whom she
could impart her mind without reserve,
or on whose advice she could depend in
any exigence whatever; for as to her elder
brother, he was too eager in the pursuit
of his pleasures, and too much absorb'd in
them, to be truly sollicitous for any thing
that did not immediately relate to them; 
—she saw him but seldom, and when she
did so, there was a certain distance in his
behaviour towards her, which would not
permit her to talk to him with that freedom
she could have wished to do. 
She had not, however, any fresh motive
to regret their departure on this account; 
—mr. Munden continued to behave
to her in much the same manner as
he had done since the breach had been
made up between them;—he was, ined,
very much abroad, but as she was 

far from being passionately fond of him,
and only desired he would treat her civilly
when with her, the little she enjoyed of
his company was no manner of affliction
to her. 
She still retained some part of that gaiety
and love of a variety of conversation,
which had always been a predominant
propensity in her nature, and though in all
her excursions, and the liberties she took,
she carefully avoided every thing that
might taint her virtue, or even cast a blemish
on her reputation, yet were they
such, as a husband, who had loved with
more ardency, would not, perhaps, have
been very easy under:
—on his part also,
the late hours he came home at,—the
messages and letters, which were daily
brought to him by porters, might have
given much disquiet to a wife, not defended
from jealousy by so great a share of
indifference;—but in this they were perfectly
agreed,—neither offered to interfere
with the amusements of the other, nor
even pretended to enquire into the nature
of them. 
Though this was a mode of living together,
which was far from being capable
of producing that happiness, for which
the state of marriage was ordained; yet 

was it perfectly easy to persons who had
so little real affection for each other, and
however blamable in the eyes of the truly
discreet, escaped the censure of the generality
of mankind, by its being so frequently
practised. 
But I shall not expatiate on their present
manner of behaviour to each other,
since it was not of any long continuance,
but proceed to the recital of a little adventure,
which, tho' it may seem trifling
to the reader in the repetition, will hereafter
be found of some consequence. 
It was a mighty custom with lady Mellasin
and miss Flora, when they had nothing
of more consequence to entertain
them, to go among the shops, and amuse
themselves with enquiring after new fashions,
and looking over that variety of
merchandize, which is daily brought to
this great mart of vanity and luxury. 
Mrs. Munden, while in a virgin state,
and a boarder at mr. Goodman's, used frequently
to accompany those ladies, when
bent on such sort of rambles, and she still
was fond enough of satisfying her curiosity
this way, at such times as she found
nothing else to do, or was not in a humour
to give, or receive visits. 

Happening one day to pass by the well-furnished 
shop of an eminent mercer, and
seeing several silks lye spread upon the
counter, she was tempted to step in, and
examine them more nearly. A great
number of others were also taken from
the shelves, and laid before her; but she
not seeming to approve any of them, the
mercer told her he had some curious pieces
out of the loom that morning of a quite
new pattern, which he had sent his man
with to a lady of quality, and expected he
would be back in a few minutes, so intreated
she would be pleased either to stay
a little, or give him directions where she
might be waited upon. 
Mrs. Munden complied with the former
of these requests, and the rather because,
while they were talking, she heard
from a parlour behind the shop a harpsichord
very finely touched, accompanied
with a female voice, which sung in the
most harmonious accents, part of this air,
composed by the celebrated signior Bononcini: 

“M'insegna l'amor l'inganno,
“Mi togl'al cor, l'affanno,
 “Mi da l'ardir amor,
 “Mi da l'ardir amor.”


The attention mrs. Munden gave to
the musick, preventing her from speaking,
the mercer said he was sorry she was
obliged to wait so long;—“I rather
ought to thank you sir, for detaining
me, since I have here an entertainment
more elegant than I could have expected
elsewhere.” 
“The lady sings and plays well indeed,
madam,” said he; “she is a
customer of mine, and sometimes does
my wife the favour of passing an hour
with her.” 
The lady still continued playing, and
mrs. Munden expressing a more than ordinary
pleasure in hearing her, the complaisant
mercer asked her to walk into the
parlour; to which she replied, she would
gladly accept his offer, provided it would
be no intrusion; he assured her it would
not be accounted so in the least, and with
these words conducted her into the room. 
A few words served to introduce her to
his wife, who being a very genteel, pretty
sort of a woman, received her with great
civility; but the fair musician was no
sooner told the effect her accents had produced
on mrs Munden, than tho' she was 

a foreigner, and spoke very broken english,
she returned the compliment made her
by that lady on the occasion, in a manner
so perfectly free, and withal so noble,
as discovered her to have been bred among,
and accustomed to converse with persons
in the highest stations in life. 
Vain as mrs. Munden was of her perfections,
she was always ready to acknowledge,
and admire those she found in others
of her sex. There was something in this
lady that attracted her in a peculiar manner; 
she took as much delight in hearing
her talk, as she had done in hearing her
sing; she longed to be of the number of
her acquaintance, and made her several
overtures that way, which the other either
did not, or would not seem to understand. 
The mercer's man returning with the
silks his master had mentioned, mrs.
Munden thought, after the obliging entertainment
she had received, she could do
no less than become a purchaser of something; 
accordingly she bought a piece of
silk for a night-gown, though at that time
she had not the least occasion for it, nor
on her coming into the shop had any intention
to increase her wardrobe. 

Having now no longer a pretence to
stay, she gave the mercer directions where
to send home the silk, and then took her
leave; but could not do it without telling
the lady, that she should think herself
extremely happy in having the opportunity
of a much longer conversation with
her. 
On her speaking in this manner, the
other appeared in very great confusion; 
but having, after a pretty long pause, a little
recovered herself, “It is an honour,
madam,” said she, “I would be extremely
ambitious of, and had certainly
taken the liberty to request it of you,
if there were not a cruel peculiarity in
in my fate, which deprives me of all
hopes of that, and many other blessings
I could wish to enjoy. 
Mrs. Munden was so much surprized at
these words, that she could only reply,
she was sorry a lady, who appeared so deserving,
should be denied any thing she
thought worthy of deserving. 
It might well indeed seem a little
strange, that a lady so young, beautiful,
and accomplished, should have any motive
to induce her to speak in the terms 

she had done. Mrs. Munden had a good
deal of curiosity in her composition, she
thought there was something extraordinarily
mysterious in the circumstances of
this stranger, and was very desirous of
penetrating into the secret. 
About an hour after she came home,
the mercer's man brought home the silk:
she enquired of him the name, condition,
and place of abode of the young lady
she had seen at his master's, but received
not the least information from him to any
of the questions she had put to him. He
told her, that though she often bought
things at their shop, yet his master always
carried them home himself, and he was
intirely ignorant of every thing relating
to her. 
This a little vexed her, because she
doubted not but that if she once found
out her name, quality, and where she
lived, her invention would supply her
with the means of making a more particular
discovery. She resolved, therefore,
on going again to the shop, under the
pretence of buying something, and asking
the mercer himself, who she could not
imagine would have any interest in concealing
what she desired to know. 

Some company coming in, prevented
her from going that afternoon; but she
went the next morning after breakfast. 
The mercer not happening to be at home,
she was more than once tempted by her
impatience to ask for his wife, and as
often restrained by the reflection, that
such a thing might be looked upon as a
piece of impertinence in a person so much
a stranger: she left the house without
speaking to any body but the man she had
seen the day before. 
Her curiosity, however, would not perhaps
have suffered her to stop here, if
something of more moment had not fallen
out to engage her attention, and put the
other out of her head for the present. 
The nobleman on whom mr. Munden
depended for the gift so often mentioned
in this history, had been a long time out
of town, and was but lately returned. 
He had heard in the country that mr.
Munden was married, and that his wife
was very beautiful and accomplished. 
On mr. munden's going to pay his
compliments to him on his arrival,—“I
congratulate you,” said he;”—I am
told you are married, and have got one 

of the prettiest and most amiable women
in London for a wife.” 
“As to beauty my lord,” replied he,
“there is no certain standard for it, and
I am intirely of the poet's mind, that 

“'Tis in no face, but in the lover's eye.” 

“But whatever she is,” continued he,
“I am afraid she would be too vain if
she knew the honour your lordship does
her, in making this favourable mention
of her.” 
“Not at all,” rejoined the peer,
“but I shall not take her character from
common same;—you must give me
leave to be a judge of the perfections
I have heard so much talk of; besides,
pursued he, “I have a mind to see what
sort of a house you keep;—I think I
will come some day, and take a dinner
with you.” 
It is not to be doubted, but that mr.
Munden omitted nothing that might assure
his lordship, that it was an honour
that he was extremely ambitious of, and
should be equally proud of receiving, 

though he durst not have presumed to
have asked it. 
The very next day being appointed for
this grand visit, he went home to his wife,
transported with the gracious behaviour
of his patron towards him. He threw a
large parcel of guineas into her lap, and
charged her to spare nothing that might
entertain their noble guest in a manner
befitting his high rank, aud the favours
he expected one day to receive from him. 
Mr. Munden could not have given
any commands that would be more pleasing
to his fair wife. —Feasting and
grand company were her delight. She
set about making the necessary preparations
with the greatest alacrity imaginable; 
and it must be acknowledged, that considering
the shortness of the time, she had
sufficient to have employed the most able
and experienced housewife. 
