

The day of trial arrived—The trial
came on about three o'clock in the evening.
The court was uncommonly
crowded. The friends of Mr. Percy,
the adherents of Sir Robert, appeared
on opposite sides of the galleries. Sir
Robert's adherents boasting loud of his
certainty of success, and spreading all
manner of false and abusive reports of
Alfred and Mr. Percy, whose friends,
mean time, preserved a dignified silence
—-Neither Godfrey nor Count Altenberg
had arrived in England; among
the spectators, the only person of Mr.
Percy's family who was present was
Erasmus, who, being pointed out as the
son of the Mr. Percy that was in prison,
interested every body in his favor by his
excellent countenance and gentleman-like

demeanor, all which were contrasted
with the dark inauspicious physiognomy
of Sir Robert, who sat opposite
to him, and who was never tranquil one
second—but was continually throwing
notes to his counsel, beckoning or whispering
to his attorney—while convulsive
twitches of face and head—snuff-taking
—and handkerchief spread frequently to
conceal the expression of his countenance,
betrayed the malignant flurry of
his spirits. One of his counsel was so
much provoked by his interference, that,
in consequence of some suggestion, he
replied,
“If Sir Robert Percy cannot trust
his counsel, let him plead his own
cause.”
Alfred conducted his father's cause in
the most judicious and temperate manner.
An attempt had been made by Sir
Robert, to prejudice the public against
Mr. Percy, by representing him as the
descendant of a younger brother, who
was endeavoring to dispossess the heir of

the elder branch of the family of that
estate, which belonged to him by right of
inheritance. Alfred's first care was to
put the court and the jury in full possession
of the facts. He stated that,—- 
“His father, Lewis Percy, plaintiff in
this cause, and Robert Percy, Bart.
defendant, both descended from Sir
John Percy, who was their grandfather.
Sir John outlived both his sons, who left
him two grandsons, Robert was the son
of his eldest, and Lewis of his youngest
son.—-Sir John had two estates, one
of them paternal, which went in the
ordinary course of descent to the representative
of the eldest son, being the
present Sir Robert Percy. Sir John's
other estate, in Hampshire, which came
to him by his wife, he conveyed, a short
time before his death, to his youngest
grandson, the present Lewis Percy, who
had held undisturbed possession of it for
many years.—-But, in process of time,
Sir Robert Percy ruined himself by play,
and having frequent intercourse with

Sharpe, the solicitor, upon some great
emergency, inquired whether it was not
possible to shake the title of his cousin
Mr. Percy's estate. He suggested, that
the conveyance might not be forthcoming; 
but Sir Robert assured him, that
both his grandfather and the present Mr.
Percy were men of business, and that
there was little likelihood either that the
deeds should be lost, or that there should
be any flaw in the title.—Afterwards a
fire broke out at Percy-Hall, which consumed
that wing of the house, in which
were Mr. Percy's papers.—The papers
were all saved except this need of conveyance.
Mr. Sharpe accidentally overhearing
the exclamation of Miss Percy,
when she thought she had recovered the
deed, was apprised of the loss, and conveyed
the intelligence to Sir Robert.
He immediately commenced a suit
against his cousin, and had finally succeeded
in obtaining a verdict in his own
favor, and possession of the Hampshire
estate—At the time when Mr. Percy

delivered up possession and quitted
Percy-Hall, in consideration of the extensive
improvements which he had
made, and in consideration of his giving
up to Sir Robert, plate, furniture, wine,
horses, and equipages, Sir Robert had
promised to forego whatever claim he
might have upon Mr. Percy, for the
rents which he had received during the
time he had held the estate—But, afterwards,
Sir Robert repented of having
made this agreement, broke his promise,
took out a writ against his cousin for the
mesne rates, had him arrested for the
debt, and thrown into prison.—-Unable
to pay the immense sum claimed
from him, and determined not to involve
his friends by accepting of their security,
Mr. Percy had little probability of ever
being released, till, by fortunate circumstances,
which it is needless here to
recapitulate, the lost conveyance was
recovered; Sir Robert, apprised by him
of the recovery of this deed, still persisted
in holding possession of the Hampshire

estate, and in detaining his cousin
in prison for the mesne rates. The present
action was in consequence brought
by Mr. Percy for the recovery of his
liberty, and his property.”—
Not one word of invective, of eloquence,
of ornament, or of any attempt
at pathos, did our barrister mix with
this statement. It was his object to put
the jury, and the court, clearly in possession
of facts, which, unadorned, he
knew would appear stronger, than if encumbered
by any flowers of oratory.
Having produced the deed, conveying
the Hampshire estate to his father, Alfred
called evidence to prove the signature of
Sir John Percy, and the hand writing of
the witnesses. He further proved, that
this conveyance had been formerly seen
among his father's papers at Percy-Hall; 
showed it had been recently recovered
from Mr. Falconer's box of papers, and
explained how it had been put there by
mistake, and he supported this fact by
the evidence of Commissioner Falconer.

—Alfred rested his cause on these proofs,
and waited, anxious to know what defence
the defendant was prepared to make.
To his astonishment and consternation,
Sir Robert's counsel produced another
deed of Sir John Percy's, revoking the
deed by which Sir John had made over
his Hampshire estate to his younger
grandson, Mr. Percy, it appearing by a
clause in the original deed, that a power
for this purpose had been therein reserved.
This deed of revocation was handed to the
judge, and to the jury, that it might be
examined.—The two deeds were carefully
compared. The nicest inspection
could not discover any difference in the
signature, or seal. When Mr. Friend
examined them, he was in dismay!—The
instrument appeared perfect. Whilst the
jury were examining the deeds, Mr.
Friend and Alfred had a moment to consult
together.
“We are undone,” whispered Mr.
Friend, “if they establish this deed of
revocation, it sets us aside for ever.”

Neither Mr. Friend, nor Alfred, had
any doubt of it's being a forgery, but
those who had plunged thus desperately
in guilt would probably be provided with
perjury sufficient to support their iniquity.
“If we had been prepared!” said Mr.
Friend, “but how could we be prepared
for such a stroke? Even now, if we had
time, we could summon witnesses who
would discredit theirs, but. ...”
“Do not despair,” said Alfred, “still
we have a chance, that their own witnesses
may cross each other, or contradict
themselves. Falsehood, with all it's
caution, is seldom confident.”
The trial proceeded. Alfred, in the
midst of the fears and sighs of his
friends, and of the triumphant smiles,
and anticipating congratulations of his
enemies, continued to keep both his temper
and his understanding cool. His
attention was fixed upon the evidence
produced, regardless of the various suggestions

whispered, or written to him by
ignorant or learned advisers.
William Clerke, the only surviving
witness to the deed of revocation produced
by Sir Robert, was the person, on
whose evidence the cause principally
rested. He was now summoned to appear,
and room was made for him. He
was upwards of eighty years of age; he
came slowly into court, and stood supporting
himself upon his staff, his head
covered with thin gray hairs, his countenance
placid and smiling, and his whole
appearance so respectable, so venerable,
as to prepossess immediately the jury
and the court in his favor.
Alfred Percy could scarcely believe it
possible, that such a man as this could
be the person suborned to support a forgery.—After
being sworn, he was desired
to sit down, which he did, bowing respectfully
to the court. Sir Robert Percy's
counsel proceeded to examine him
as to the points they desired to establish.

“Your name, Sir, is William Clerke,
is it not?”
“My name is William Clerke,”—answered
the old man, in a feeble voice.
“Did you ever see this paper before?” 
showing him the deed.
“I did—I was present when Sir John
Percy signed it,—he bid me witness it,
that is, write my name at the bottom,
which I did, and then he said, ‘take
notice, William Clerke, this is a deed,
revoking the deed by which I made over
my Hampshire estate to my youngest
grandson, Lewis Percy.’”
The witness was going on, but the
counsel interrupted.—
“You saw Sir John Percy sign this
deed?—you are sure of that?”
“I am sure of that.”
“Is this Sir John Percy's signature?”
“It is,—The very same I saw him
write, and here is my own name, that he
bid me write just there.”
“You can swear, that this is your
handwriting.”

“I can, I do.”—
“Do you recollect what time Sir John
Percy signed this deed?”
“Yes; about three or four days before
his death.”
“Very well, that is all we want of
you, Mr. Clerke.”
Alfred Percy desired, that Clerke
should be detained in court, that he
might cross-examine him.—The defendants
went on, produced their evidence,
examined all their witnesses, and established
all they desired.
Then it came to Alfred's turn to cross-examine
the witnesses, that had been
produced by his adversary.—When William
Clerke reappeared, Alfred, regarding
him stedfastly, the old man's countenance
changed a little,—but still he
looked prepared to stand a cross-examination.—In
spite of his efforts he trembled.
“Oh! you are trembling on the brink
of the grave!” said Alfred, addressing
him in a low, solemn tone,—“Pause and

reflect, whilst you are allowed a moment's
time for reflection.—A few years
must be all you have to spend in this
world.—A few moments may take you to
another,—to appear before a higher
tribunal—before that judge, who knows
our hearts, who sees into yours at this
instant.”
The staff in the old man's hand shook
violently.
Sir Robert Percy's counsel interrupted—said
that the witness should not be
intimidated, and appealed to the court.
But Alfred, observing that the judge was
silent, proceeded.—
“You know, that you are upon your oath
—this is probably the last oath ... possibly
the last words you may ever utter
... Look that they be true,—You know,
that men have been struck dead whilst
uttering falsehoods.—You are upon your
oath—Did you see Sir John Percy sign
this deed?”
The old man attempted in vain to articulate.

“Give him time to recollect!”—cried
the counsel on the opposite side,—“Give
him leave to see the writing now he has
his spectacles.”—-
He looked at the writing twice,—his
head and hands shaking, so that he could
not fix his spectacles.—The question was
repeated by the judge. The old man
grew pale as death. Sir Robert Percy,
just opposite to him, cleared his throat to
catch the witness's attention, then darted
at him such a look as only he could give.
“Did I see Sir John Percy sign this
deed?”—repeated William Clerke,— 
“yes, I did.”
“You hear, my Lord, you hear,” 
cried Sir Robert's counsel,—“The witness
says he did.—There is no occasion
farther to intimidate this poor old man.
He is not used to speak before such an
audience.—There is no need of eloquence,
all we want is truth.—The evidence is full,
distinct, and positive.—My Lord, with
your Lordship's leave, I fancy we may
dismiss him.”

They were going to hurry him away,
but Alfred Percy said, that, with the
permission of the Court, he must cross-examine
that witness farther, as the whole
event of the trial depended upon the degree
of credit, that might be given to his
evidence.
By this time the old man had somewhat
recovered himself; he saw, that
his age, and reverend appearance, still
prepossessed the jury in his favor, and
from their looks, and from the whispers
near him, he learned that his tremor and
hesitation had not created any suspicion
of guilt, but had been attributed rather
to the sensibility of virtue, and the weakness
of age. And now that the momentary
emotion, which eloquence had produced
on his mind had subsided, it turned
to it's former state.—He recollected
the bribe that had been promised him.—He
was aware, that he had already sworn
what, if he contradicted, might subject
him to be prosecuted for perjury. He now
stood obstinately resolved to persevere in

his iniquity. The first falsehoods pronounced,
and believed, as he hoped, by
the jury, the next would be easy.
“Your name is William Clerke, and
this,” said Alfred (pointing to the witness's
signature), is your hand writing?”
“Yes, I say it is.”—
“You can write then?”—(putting a
pen into his hand, be so good as to write
a few words in the presence of the Court.
—He took the pen, but after making
some fruitless attemps, replied,
“I am too old to write. ... I have
not been able to write my name these
many years—Indeed! Sir, indeed! you
are too hard upon one like me.—God
knows,”—said he looking up to Heaven,
some thought with feeling, some suspected
with hypocrisy.—God knows,
Sir! I speak the truth, and nothing but
the truth.—Have you any more questions
to put to me.—I am ready to tell
all I know.—What interest have I to
conceal any thing,” continued he, his

voice gaining strength and confidence as
he went on repeating the lesson which
he had been taught.
“It was long, a long while ago,” he
said, “since it had all happened; but thank
Heaven, his memory had been spared
him, and he remembered all that had
passed, the same as if it was but yesterday.—He
recollected how Sir John
looked, where he sat, what he said when
he signed this deed.—And, moreover, he
had often before heard of a dislike Sir.
John had taken to his younger grandson
... ay, to that young gentleman's
father,”—looking at Alfred—“And I
was very sorry to hear it—very sorry
there should be any dispute in the family,
for I loved them all,” said he,
wiping his eyes—“Ay, I loved 'em all,
and all alike, from the time they were
in their cradles.—I remember too, once,
Sir John said to me, William Clerke,
says he, you are a faithful lad ... for I
was a lad once. ...”
Alfred had judiciously allowed the

witness to go on as far as he pleased
with his story; in the expectation, that
some exaggeration and contradiction
would appear, but the judge now interrupted
the old man, observing, that this
was nothing to the purpose—that he
must not take up the time of the court
with idle tales, but that if he had any
thing more to give in evidence respecting
the deed, he should relate it.
The judge was thought to be severe—and
the old man, after glancing his eye
on the jury, bowed with an air of resignation,
and an appearance of difficulty,
which excited their compassion.
“We may let him go now, my lord,
may not we?” said Sir Robert Percy's
counsel.
“With the permission of his Lordship,
I will ask one other question,”—said
Alfred.
Now, it should be observed, that
after the first examination of this witness,
Alfred had heard him say to Mr.
Sharpe—-

“They forgot to bring out what I
had to say about the seal.”
To which Sharpe had replied—-“Enough
without it.”—
Alfred had examined the seal, and
had observed that there was something
underneath it—through a small hole in
the parchment he saw something between
the parchment and the sealing
wax.
“You were present, I think you say,
Mr. Clerke, not only when this deed was
signed, but when it was sealed?”—
“I was, Sir,”—cried Clerke, eager to
bring out this part of the evidence, as it
had been prepared for him.—“I surely
was, and I remember it particularly,
because of a little remarkable circumstance
... Sir John, God bless him!
... I think I see him now. ... My
Lord, under this seal,”—continued the
old man, addressing himself to the judge,
and putting his shrivelled finger upon
the seal. “Under this very seal, Sir

John put a sixpence. ... And he called
upon me to observe him doing it. ...
For, my Lord, it is my opinion, he
thought then of what might come to
pass, he had a sort of a foreboding of this
day.—-And now, my Lord, order them
if you please, to break the seal.—Break
it before them all.—And if there is not
the sixpence under it, why this deed is
not Sir John's ... and this is none of my
writing, and,” cried he, lifting up his
hands and eyes, “I am a liar, and perjured.”
There was a profound silence.—The
seal was broken.—The sixpence appeared.
—It was handed in triumph, by Sir Robert
Percy's counsel, to the jury and to
the judge. There seemed to be no longer
a doubt remaining in the minds of the
jury—and a murmur of congratulations
among the partisans of Sir Robert seemed
to anticipate the verdict.
“'Tis all over I fear!” whispered
Friend to Alfred—“ Alfred, you have

done all that could be done.—But they
have sworn through every thing.—It is
over with us.”
“Not yet,” said Alfred, who all this
time had kept silence with the utmost
patience and calmness. Every eye turned
upon him, some from pity, some from
curiosity, to see how he bore his defeat.
At length, when there was silence, he
begged to be permitted to look at the
sixpence. The judge ordered that it
should be shown to him. He held it to
the light to examine the date of the coin; 
he discovered a faint impression of the
head of George the Third on the sixpence,
and, upon closer inspection, he
made out the date, and showed clearly,
that it was a coin of the reign of George
the Third.—Now the date of the forged
deed was in the reign of George the Second,
in which reign Sir John Percy
died, so that there was an absolute impossibility,
that this sixpence could have
been put under the seal of the deed by
Sir John.

By what slight circumstances are the
most deep-laid villanies sometimes discovered!—-
The moment Alfred stated this fact,
the counsel on the opposite side took
the sixpence, examined it, threw down
his brief, and left the court.—-People
looked at each other in astonishment.
The judge ordered, that William Clerke
should be detained, that he might be
prosecuted by the crown for perjury.
The old man fell back senseless.—Mr.
Sharpe and Sir Robert Percy pushed
their way together out of court, and all
who had till now appeared as their friends
disclaimed them. No farther evidence
was offered, so that here the trial closed.
The judge gave a short, impressive charge
to the jury, who, without withdrawing,
instantly gave their verdict in favor of the
plaintiff, Lewis Percy,—a verdict that
was received with loud acclamations,
which, not even respect to the court
could restrain.
Alfred hastily shook hands with his

friends, and in the midst of universal
applause and congratulations hurried
away to carry the good news to his
father.—The pleasure of gaining a thousand
estates, a thousand victories, could
not equal the delight he felt at this moment; 
for how much are all the triumphs
of interest or ambition inferior to the
warm joy of affection!
Erasmus and Mr. Temple accompanied
Alfred to the King's Bench. The
gaoler knew and liked Alfred Percy,
was interested for the whole family, and
as he saw the joyful event in his countenance,
the doors of the prison flew
open before him.—He reached his father's
room.
“Stop, my dear Son! before you
speak, let me assure you, that I am
prepared for the worst, and that whatever
may be the event, I am convinced
that you have done all which ability,
energy, and affection could do, to restore
me to liberty and fortune.—Now
speak.”—

“Joy, dear mother! he is free.—Liberty,
fortune restored!”—-
His mother, his sisters, embraced Alfred,
in quick succession, with tears of
delight.—For some moments a spectator
might have imagined that they beheld a
family in deep affliction. But soon
through these tears appeared on the
countenance of each individual the radiance
of joy—smiles of affection—tenderness—gratitude,
and every delightful,
benignant feeling of the human heart.
“Has any body sent to Mrs. Hungerford,
to Lady Jane Granville,” said
Mr. Percy.
“Yes, yes, messengers were sent off
the moment the verdict was given,” 
said Erasmus—“ I took care of that.”
“Thank you, my dear Erasmus—always
kind—-Rosamond, remember
your promise to Mr. Temple.—He has
a right to this hand, and let me give it
to him—No, he shall receive it from his
friend Alfred.—-Caroline, my love, you
and your husband will meet in perfect

happiness, and the sacrifice you have
made for your father will make you
dearer to such a husband.—I had hopes,
my love,” continued Mr. Percy, turning
to Mrs. Percy, “that Godfrey would
have been here by this time—but it is
best as it is, we have that pleasure still
in store.—And now, my beloved children,
after having returned thanks to
Providence, let me here, in the midst of
all of you, to whom I owe my happiness,
sit down quietly for a few minutes, and
enjoy ‘the sober certainty of waking
bliss.’”