

One morning when Ormond wakened,
the first thing that he heard was, that a
person from Ireland was below, who
was very impatient to see him. It was
Patrickson, Sir Ulick O'Shane's confidential
man of business.
“What news from Castle Hermitage?” 
cried Ormond, starting up in his
bed, surprised at the sight of Patrickson.
“The best that can be—never saw
Sir Ulick in such heart—he has a share
of the loan, and—” 
“And what news of the Annalys?” 
interrupted Ormond.
“I know nothing about them at all,

Sir,” said Patrickson, who was a methodical
man of business, and whose
head was always intent upon what
he called the main chance.—“I have
been in Dublin, and heard no country
news.”
“But have you no letter for me? and
what brings you over so suddenly to
Paris?”
“I have a letter for you somewhere
here Sir—only I have so many 'tis hard to
find,” said Patrickson, looking carefully
over a parcel of letters in his pocket-book,
but with such a drawling slowness of
manner, as put Ormond quite out of patience.— 
Patrickson laid the letters on
the bed one by one. “That's not it— 
and that's not it—that's for Monsieur un
tel, Marchand, Rue&wblank;.—That packet's
from the Hamburgh merchants—What
brings me over?—Why, Sir, I have business
enough, Heaven knows.”
Patrickson was employed not only by
Sir Ulick O'Shane, but by many Dublin

merchants and bankers, to settle business
for them with different houses on
the Continent. Ormond, without listening
to the various digressions he made concerning
the persons of mercantile consequence,
to whom the letters were addressed,
or from whom they were answers,
pounced upon the letter in Sir Ulick's
hand writing directed to himself, and
tore it open eagerly, to see if there was
any news of the Annalys.—None, they
were still in Devonshire.—The letter
was merely a few lines on business—Sir
Ulick had now the opportunity he had
foreseen, of laying out Ormond's money
in the loan, most advantageously for
him, but there had been an omission in
the drawing up of his power of attorney,
which had been drawn in such a
hurry on Ormond's leaving home.—It
gave power only to sell out of the three
per cents, whereas a great deal of Ormond's
money was in the four per cents.
Another power, Patrickson said, was necessary,

and he had brought one for him
to sign.—Patrickson in his slow manner
descanted upon the folly of signing
papers in a hurry, just when people were
getting into carriages, which was always
the way with young gentlemen, he said.— 
He took care that Ormond should do
nothing in a hurry now; for he put on
his spectacles, and read the power,
sparing him not a syllable of the law
forms and repetitions. Ormond wrote a
few kind lines to Sir Ulick, and earnestly
besought him to find out something
more about the Annalys.—If Miss
Annaly were married, it must have appeared
in the papers.—What delayed the
marriage? Was Colonel Albemarle dismissed
or accepted? Where was he?— 
Ormond said he would be content, if
Sir Ulick could obtain an answer to that
single plain question.
All the time Ormond was writing, Patrickson
never stirred his forefinger from
the spot, where the signature was to be

written at the bottom of the power of
attorney.
“Pray,” said Ormond, looking up
from the paper he was going to sign— 
“Pray, Patrickson, are you really and
truly an Irishman?”
“By the father's side I apprehend,
Sir,—but my mother was English.— 
Stay, Sir, if you please, I must witness
it.”
“Witness away,” said Ormond; and
after having signed this paper, empowering
Sir Ulick to sell £30,000 out of
the four per cents, Ormond lay down,
and, wishing him a good journey, settled
himself to sleep; while Patrickson,
packing up his papers, deliberately
said, “he hoped to be in London in
short,—but that he should go by Havre
de Grace, and that he should be happy
to execute any commands for Mr. Ormond
there or in Dublin.”—More he
would have said, but finding Ormond by
this time past reply, he left the room on

tip-toe. The next morning Madame de
Connal returned from the country, and
sent Ormond word, that she should expect
him at her assembly that night.
Every body complimented Madame de
Connal upon the improvement, which
the country air had made in her beauty.— 
Even her husband was struck
with it, and paid her his compliments
on the occasion,—but she stood conversing
so long with Ormond, that the
faro players grew impatient—she led him
to the table, but evidently had little interest
herself in the game.—He played
at first with more than his usual success— 
but late at night his fortune suddenly
changed, he lost—lost—till at last he
stopped, and rising from the table, said
he had no more money, and he could
play no longer.—Connal, who was not
one of the players, but merely looking on,
offered to lend him any sum he pleased.
“Here's a rouleau—here are two rouleaus,
what will you have?” said Connal.

Ormond declined playing any more— 
he said, “that he had lost the sum he
had resolved to lose, and there he would
stop.” Connal did not urge him, but
laughing said, “that a resolution to lose
at play was the most extraordinary he
had ever heard.”
“And yet you see I have kept it,” said
Ormond.
“Then I hope you will next make a
resolution to win,” said Connal, “and
no doubt you will keep that as well.
I prophecy that you will—and you
will give fortune fair play to-morrow
night.”
Ormond simply repeated, that he
should play no more.—Madame de Connal
soon afterwards rose from the table,
and went to talk to Mr. Ormond. She
said, “she was concerned for his loss at
play this night.” He answered, as he
felt, “that it was a matter of no consequence
to him, that he had done exactly
what he had determined; that in the

course of the whole time he had been
losing this money, he had had a great deal
of amusement in society, had seen a
vast deal of human nature and manners,
which he could not otherwise have seen,
and that he thought his money exceedingly
well employed.”
“But you shall not lose your money,” 
said Dora, “when next you play, it
shall be on my account, as well as your
own—you know this is not only a compliment
but a solid advantage, Mr. Ormond.— 
The bank has certain advantages— 
and it is fair that you should share
them.—I must explain to you,” continued
Madame de Connal, “they are
all busy about their own affairs, and we
may speak in English at our ease. I
must explain to you, that a good portion
of my fortune has been settled, so as to
be at my own disposal, my aunt, you
know, has also a good fortune, we are
partners, and put a considerable sum
into the faro bank—We find it answers

well.—You see how handsomely we live.— 
Mr. Connal has his own share.—We
have nothing to do with that.—If you
would take my advice,” continued she,
speaking in a very persuasive tone,
“instead of forswearing play, as you
seem inclined to do at the first reverse of
fortune, you would join forces with us; 
you cannot imagine, that I would advise
you to any thing, that I was not persuaded
would be advantageous to you— 
you little know how much I am interested.”— 
She checked herself, blushed,
hesitated—and hurried on, “you have
no ties in Ireland—you seem to like
Paris? where can you spend your time
more agreeably?”
“More agreeably no where upon
earth,” cried Ormond. Her manner,
tone, and look at this moment were so
flattering, so bewitching, that he was
scarcely master of himself. They went
to the boudoir—the company had risen
from the faro-table, and, one after another,

had most of them departed. Connal
was gone—only a few remained in
a distant apartment, listening to some
music. It was late. Ormond had never
till this evening stayed later than the generality
of the company, but he had now
an excuse to himself, something that he
had long wished to have an opportunity
of saying to Dora, when she should be
quite alone;—it was a word of advice
about le Comte de Belle-Chasse—her intimacy
with him was beginning to be
talked of. She had been invited to a bal
paré at the Spanish embassador's for the
ensuing night—but she had more inclination
to go to a balmasqué, as Ormond
had heard her declare. Now certain persons
had whispered, that it was to meet
the Comte de Belle-Chasse that she intended
to go to this ball; and Ormond
feared, that such whispers might be injurious
to her reputation. It was difficult
to him to speak, because the counsels of
the friend might be mistaken for the jealous

fears of a lover. With some embarrassment
he delicately, timidly, hinted
his apprehensions.
Dora, though naturally of a temper
apt to take alarm at the touch of blame,
and offence at the tone of advice, now in
the most graceful manner thanked her
friend for his counsel, said she was flattered,
gratified, by the interest it shewed
in her happiness—and she immediately
yielded her will, her fantaisie, to his better
judgement. This compliance, and
the look with which it was accompanied,
convinced him of the absolute power he
possessed over her heart. He was enchanted
with Dora, she never looked so
beautiful; never before, not even in the
first days of his early youth, had he felt her
beauty so attractive.
“Dear Madame de Connal, dear
Dora!” he exclaimed.
“Call me Dora,” said she, “I wish
ever to be Dora to Harry Ormond.— 
Oh! Harry, my first, my best, my only

friend, I have enjoyed but little real happiness
since we parted.”
Tears filled her fine eyes—no longer
knowing where he was—Harry Ormond
found himself at her feet. But while he
held and kissed in transport the beautiful
hand, which was but feebly withdrawn,
he seemed to be suddenly shocked by the
sight of one of the rings on her finger.
“My wedding ring,” said Dora, with
a sigh. “Unfortunate marriage!”
That was not the ring on which Ormond's
eyes were fixed.
“Dora, whose grey hair is this?”
“My father's,” said Dora, in a tremulous
voice.
“Your father!” cried Ormond, starting
up.
The full recollection of that fond father,
that generous benefactor, that confiding
friend, rushed upon his heart.
“And is this the return I make!—Oh,
if he could see us at this instant!”
“And if he could,” cried Dora, “oh!

how he would admire and love you, Ormond,
and how he would—” 
Her voice failed, and with a sudden
motion she hid her face with both her
hands.
“He would see you, Dora, without a
guide, protector, friend; surrounded with
admirers, among profligate men, and women
still more profligate, yet he would
see you have preserved a reputation of
which your father would be proud.”
“My father, oh! my poor father,” 
cried Dora—“Oh! generous, dear, ever
generous Ormond!
Bursting into tears—alternate passions
seizing her—at one moment, the thoughts
of her father, the next of her lover, possessed
her imagination.
At this instant the noise of some one
approaching recalled them both to their
senses. They were found in earnest conversation
about a party of pleasure that
was to be arranged for the next day.
Madame de Connal made Ormond promise,

that he would come the next morning,
and settle every thing with M. de
Connal for their intended expedition into
the country.
The next day, as Ormond was returning
to Madame de Connal's, with the
firm intention of adhering to the honourable
line of conduct he had traced out for
himself—just as he was crossing the Pont
Neuf, some one ran full against him.
Surprised at what happens so seldom in
the streets of Paris, where all meet, pass,
or cross in crowds with magical celerity
and address, he looked back, and at the
same instant the person who had passed
looked back also. An apparition in
broad day-light could not have surprised
Ormond more than the sight of this person.— 
“Could it be—could it possibly be
Moriarty Carroll, on the Pont Neuf in
Paris?”
“By the blessing, then, it's the man
himself—Master Harry!—though I didn't
know him through the French disguise.

Oh! master, then I've been tried and
cast, and all but hanged—sentenced to
Botany—transported any way—for a robbery
I didn't commit, since I saw you last.
But your honour's uneasy, and it's not
proper I know to be stopping a jantleman
in the street; but I have a word to say
that will bear no delay, not a minute.’
Ormond's surprise and curiosity increased— 
he desired Moriarty to follow
him.
“And now Moriarty what is it you
have to say?”
“It is a long story then, please your
honour.—I was transported to Botany,
though innocent. But first and foremost
for what consarns your honour first.”
“First,” said Ormond, “if you were
transported, how came you here?”
“Because I was not transported, plase
your honour, only sentenced—for I escaped
from Kilmainham, where I was
sent to be put on board the tender; but I
got on board of an American ship, by the

help of a friend—and this ship being
knocked against the rocks, I come safe
ashore in this country on one of the sticks
of the vessel; so when I knowed it was
France I was in, and recollected Miss
Dora that was married in Paris, I thought
if I could just make my way any hows
to Paris, she'd befrind me in case of
need.”
“But, dear master,” said Moriarty,
interrupting, “it's a folly to talk—I'll
not tell you a word more of myself till you
hear the news I have for you. The worst
news I have to tell you is, there is great
fear of the breaking of Sir Ulick's bank!”
“The breaking of Sir Ulick's bank?
I heard from him to-day.”
“May be you did, but the captain
of the American ship in which I came
was complaining of his having been kept
two hours at that bank, where they were
paying large sums in small notes, and
where there was the greatest run upon
the house that ever was seen.”
Ormond instantly saw his danger—he

recollected the power of attorney he had
signed the preceding day. But Patrickson
was to go by Havre de Grace—that
would delay him.—It was possible that
Ormond by setting out instantly might
get to London time enough to save his
property. He went directly and ordered
post horses. He had no debts at Paris,
nothing but to pay for his stables and
lodging. He had a faithful servant,
whom he could leave behind, to make all
necessary arrangements.
“You are right, jewel, to be in a
hurry,” said Carroll. “But sure you
won't leave poor Moriarty behind ye here,
in distress, when he has no friend in the
wide world but yourself.”
“Tell me, in the first place, Moriarty,
are you innocent?”
“Upon my conscience, master, I am
perfectly innocent as the child unborn,
both of the murder and the robbery. If
your honour will give me leave, I'll tell
you the whole story.”
“That will be a long affair, Moriarty,

if you talk out of the face as you used to
do—I will, however, find an opportunity
to hear it all. But, in the mean time,
stay where you are till I return.”
Ormond went instantly to O'Connal's,
to inform him of what had happened.
His astonishment was obviously mixed
with disappointment. But to do him justice,
besides the interest which he really
had in the preservation of the fortune, he
felt some personal regard for Ormond
himself.
“What shall we do without you?” said
he. “I assure you, Madame and I have
never been so happy together since the
first month after our marriage, as we
have been since you came to Paris.”
Connal was somewhat consoled by
hearing Ormond say, that if he was time
enough in London to save his fortune, he
proposed returning immediately to Paris,
intending to make the tour of Switzerland
and Italy.
Connal had no doubt that they should
yet be able to fix him at Paris.

Madame de Connal and Mademoiselle
were out, Connal did not know where
they were gone. Ormond was glad to
tear himself away with as few adieus as
possible. He got into his travelling carriage,
put his servant on the box, and
took Moriarty with him in the carriage,
that he might relate his history at leisure.
“Plase your honour,” said Moriarty,
“Mr. Marcus never missed any opportunity
of shewing me ill will; the supercargo
of the ship that was cast away,
when you were with Sir Herbert Annaly,
God rest his soul, came down to
the sea-side to look for some of the things
that he had lost. The day after he came,
early in the morning, his horse, and
bridle, and saddle, and a surtoo coat, was
found in a lane, near the place where
we lived, and the supercargo was never
heard any more of. Suspicion fell upon
many,—the country rung with the noise
that was made about this murder,—and
at last I was taken up for it, because

people had seen me buy cattle at the
fair, and the people would not believe
it was with money your honour sent
me by the good parson—for the parson
was gone out of the country, and I had
nobody to stand my friend; for Mr. Marcus
was on the grand jury, and the sheriff
was his friend, and Sir Ulick was in
Dublin, at the Bank. Howsomdever,
after a long trial, which lasted the whole
day, a 'cute lawyer on my side found
out, that there was no proof that any
body had been murdered, and that a
man might lose his horse, his saddle,
and his bridle, and his big coat, without
being kilt: so that the judge ordered
the jury to let me off for the murder.
Then they tried me for the robbery; and
sure enough that went again me: for
a pair of silver mounted pistols, with
a man's name engraved upon them, was
found in my house. They knew the man's
name by the letters in the big coat.— 
The judge asked me, what I had to say

for myself—‘My Lard,’ says I, ‘those
pistols were brought into my house about
a fortnight ago, by a little boy, one little
Tommy Dunshaughlin, who found them
in a punk-horn, at the edge of a boghole.’
“The jidge favoured me more than
the jury—for he asked how old the boy
was, and whether I could produce him?
The little fellow was brought into court,
and it was surprising how clear he told
his story.—The jidge listened to the
child, young as he was. But M'Crule
was on the jury, and said that he knew
the child to be as cunning as any in
Ireland, and that he would not believe
a word that came out of his mouth.
So the short and the long of it was, I
was condemned to be transported.
“It would have done you good, if
you’d heard the cry in the court, when
sentence was given, for I was loved
in the country. Poor Peggy and Sheelah!— 
But I'll not be troubling your

honour's tender heart with our parting.
I was transmuted to Dublin, to be put
on board the tender, and lodged in Kilmainham,
waiting for the ship that was
to go to Botany. I had not been long
there, when another prisoner was brought
to the same room with me.—He was
a handsome looking man, about thirty
years of age,—of the most penetrating
eye, and determined countenance, that
I ever saw. He appeared to be worn
down with ill health, and his limbs much
swelled: notwithstanding which, he had
strong hand-cuffs on his wrists, and he
seemed to be guarded with uncommon
care. He begged the turnkey to lay
him down upon the miserable iron bed
that was in the cell; and he begged him,
for God's sake, to let him have a jug
of water by his bed-side, and to leave
him to his fate.
“I could not help pitying this poor
creature; I went to him, and offered
him any assistance in my power. He

answered me shortly—‘What are you
here for?’—I told him.—‘Well,’ says
he, ‘whether you are guilty or not, is
your affair, not mine; but answer me at
once.—Are you a good man?—Can you
go through with a thing?—and are you
steel to the back bone?’—‘I am,’ said
I.—‘Then,’ said he, ‘you are a lucky
man—for he that is talking to you is
Michael Dunne, who knows how to make
his way out of any jail in Ireland.’ 
Saying this, he sprung with great activity
from the bed.—‘It is my cue,’ 
said he, ‘to be sick and weak, whenever
the turnkey comes in, to put him
off his guard—for they have all orders
to watch me strictly; because as how,
do you see, I broke out of the jail of
Trim; and when they catched me, they
took me before his honour the police
magistrate, who did all he could to get
out of me, the way which I made my
escape.’ ‘Well,’ says the magistrate,
‘I'll put you in a place where you can't

get out—till you're sent to Botany.’— 
‘Plase your worship,’ says I, ‘if there's
no offence in saying it, there's no such
place in Ireland.’—‘No such place as
what?’—‘No such place as will hold
Michael Dunne.’—‘What do you think
of Kilmainham?’ says he.—‘I think it's
a fine jail—and it will be no asy matter
to get out of it—but it is not impossible.’— 
‘Well, Mr. Dunne,’ said the magistrate,
‘I have heard of your fame, and
that you have secrets of your own for
getting out. Now if you'll tell me how
you got out of the jail of Trim, I'll make
your confinement at Kilmainham as asy
as may be, so as to keep you safe; and
if you do not, you must be ironed, and
I will have sentinels from an English
regiment, who shall be continually changed— 
so that you can't get any of them
to help you.’—‘Plase your worship,’ 
said Dunne, ‘that's very hard usage— 
but I know as how, that you are going
to build new jails all over Ireland, and

that you'd be glad to know the best way
to make them secure.—If your worship
will promise me, that if I get out of
Kilmainham, and if I tell you how I
do it, that you'll get me a free pardon,
I'll try hard but what before three
months are over, I'll be a prisoner at
large.’—‘That's more than I can promise
you,’ said the magistrate, ‘but if
you will disclose to me the best means
of keeping other people in, I will endeavour
to keep you from Botany Bay.’— 
‘Now, Sir,’ says Dunne, ‘I know your
worship to be a man of honour, and that
your own honour regards yourself, and
not me; so that if I was ten times as
bad as I am, you'd keep your promise
with me, as well as if I was the best
gentleman in Ireland.—So that now,
Mr. Moriarty,’ said Dunne, ‘do you
see, if I get out. I shall be safe; and if
you get out along with me, you have
nothing to do but to go over to America.
And if you are a married man, and

tired of your wife, you'll get rid of her.
If you are not tired of her, and you have
any substance, she may sell it and follow
you.’
“There was something, Master Harry,
about this man, that made me have
great confidence in him—and I was
ready to follow his advice. Whenever
the turnkey was coming, he was groaning
and moaning on the bed. At other
times he made me keep bathing his
wrists with cold water, so that in three
or four days they were not half the size
they were at first. This change he kept
carefully from the jailor. I observed
that he frequently asked what day of
the month it was, but that he never
made any attempt to speak to the sentinels; 
nor did he seem to make any
preparation, or to lay any scheme for
getting out.—I held my tongue, and
waited qui'tely. At last, he took out of
his pocket a little flageolet, and began to
play upon it. He asked me if I could

play, I said I could a little, but very
badly. I don't care how bad it is,
if you can play at all. He got off the
bed where he was lying, and with the
utmost ease, pulled his hands out of his
hand-cuffs. Besides the swelling of his
wrists having gone down, he had some
method of getting rid of his thumb,
that I never could understand. Says
I, ‘Mr. Dunne, the jailor will miss the
fetters.’ ‘No,’ said he, ‘for I will put
them on again,’—and so he did, with
great ease.—‘Now,’ said he, ‘it is time
to begin our work.’
“He took off one of his shoes, and taking
out the in-sole, he shewed me a hole,— 
that was cut where the heel was, in
which there was a little small flat bottle,
which he told me was the most precious
thing in life. And under the rest of the
sole, there were a number of saws, made
of watch spring, that lay quite flat and
snug under his foot. The next time the
turnkey came in, he begged, for the love

of God, to have a pipe and some tobacco,
which was accordingly granted to him.
What the pipes and tobacco were for, I
could not then guess, but they were found
to be useful.—He now made a paste of
some of the bread of his allowance, with
which he made a cup round the bottom
of one of the bars of the window; into
this cup, he poured some of the contents
of the little bottle, which was, I
believe, oil of vitriol; in a little time, this
made a bad smell, and it was then I
found the use of the pipe and tobacco,
for the smell of the tobacco quite
bothered the smell of the vitriol.— 
When he thought he had softened the
iron bar sufficiently, he began to work
away with the saws, and he soon taught
me how to use them; so that we kept
working on continually, no matter how
little we did at a time; but as we
were constantly at it—what I thought
never could be done, was finished in
three or four days. The use of the

flageolet was to drown the noise of
the filing; for when one filed, the other
piped.
“When the bar was cut through,
he fitted the parts nicely together,
and covered them over with rust.—He
proceeded in the same manner, to cut
out another bar; so that we had a free
opening out of the window. Our cell
was at the very top of the jail, so
that even to look down to the ground
was terrible.
“Under various pretences, we had
got an unusual quantity of blankets on
our beds; these he examined with the
utmost care, as upon their strength our
lives were to depend. We calculated
with great coolness, the breadth of the
strips into which he might cut the
blankets, so as to reach from the window
to the ground; allowing for the
knots by which they were to be joined,
and for other knots that were to
hinder the hands and feet from slipping.

“‘Now,’ said he, ‘Mr. Moriarty,
all this is quite easy, and requires nothing
but a determined heart and a
sound head: but the difficulty is to
baffle the sentinel that is below, and
who is walking backward and forward
continually, day and night, under the
window; and there is another, you see,
in a sentry-box, at the door of the
yard: and, for all I know, there may
be another sentinel at the other side
of the wall. Now these men were
never on the same duty; I have friends
enough out of doors, who have money
enough, and would have talked rason
to them: but as these sentinels are
changed every day, no good can be got
of them: but stay till to-morrow night,
and we'll try what we can do.’
I was determined to follow him.— 
The next night, the moment that we
were locked in for the night, we set
to work to cut the blankets into slips,
and tied them together with the utmost

care and assiduity. We put this rope
round one of the fixed bars of the
window; and, pulling at each knot,
we satisfied ourselves that every part
was sufficiently strong. Dunne looked
frequently out of the window, with the
utmost anxiety—it was a moonlight
night.
“‘The moon,’ said he, ‘will be
down in an hour and a half.’
“In a little while we heard the noise
of several girls' singing at a distance
from the windows, and we could see, as
they approached, that they were dancing,
and making free with the sentinels: I
saw that they were provided with bottles
of spirits, with which they pledged
the deluded soldiers. By degrees the
sentinels forgot their duty; and, by
the assistance of some laudanum contained
in some of the spirits, they were
left senseless on the ground. The whole
of this plan, and the very night and
hour, had been arranged by Dunne

with his associates, before he was put
into Kilmainham. The success of this
scheme, which was totally unexpected
by me, gave me, I suppose, plase your
honour, fresh courage. He, very honourably,
gave me the choice of to
go down first or to follow him. I was
ashamed not to go first:—after I
had got out of the window, and had
fairly hold of the rope, my fear
diminished, and I went cautiously
down to the bottom.—Here I waited
for Dunne, and we both of us silently
stole along in the dark, for the
moon had gone in, and did not meet
with the least obstruction. Our out of
doors assistants had the prudence to get
entirely out of sight. Dunne led me
to a hiding place in a safe part of the
town, and committed me to the care
of a sea-faring man, who promised to
get me on board an American ship.
“‘As for my part,’ said Dunne, ‘I

will go in the morning, boldly, to the
magistrate, and claim his promise.’
“He did so—and the magistrate,
with good sense, and good faith, kept his
promise, and obtained a pardon for
Dunne.
“I wrote to Peggy, to get aboard
an American ship.—I was cast away on
the coast of France—made my way to
the first religious house that I could hear
of, where I luckily found an Irishman,
who saved me from starvation, and who
sent me on from convent to convent, till
I got to Paris, where your honour met me
on that bridge, just when I was looking
for Miss Dora's house. And that's all
I've got to tell,” concluded Moriarty,
“and all true.”
No adventures, of any sort, happened
to our hero, in the course of his journey.
The wind was fair for England, when
he reached Calais:—he had a good passage,
with all the expedition that good
horses, good roads, good money, and civil

words insure in England:—he pursued
his way:—he arrived in the shortest
time possible in London.
He came to town in the morning, before
the usual hour when the banks are
open.—Leaving orders with his servant,
on whose punctuality he thought he
could depend to waken him at the proper
hour, he lay down overcome with fatigue
and slept—yes—slept soundly.