

In the mean time, lady Clonbrony had
been occupied with thoughts very different
from those, which passed in the
mind of her son. Though she had never
completely recovered from her rheumatic
pains, she had become inordinately
impatient of confinement to her own
house, and weary of those dull evenings
at home, which had, in her son's absence,
become insupportable. She told
over her visiting tickets regularly twice a
day, and gave to every card of invitation
a heartfelt sigh. Miss Pratt alarmed
her ladyship, by bringing intelligence
of some parties given by persons
of consequence, to which she was not
invited. She feared, that she should be
forgotten in the world, well knowing how
soon the world forgets those they do not

see every day and every where. How
miserable is the fine lady's lot, who cannot
forget the world, and who is forgot
by the world in a moment! How much
more miserable still is the condition of a
would-be-fine lady, working her way up
in the world with care and pains! By
her, every the slightest failure of attention,
from persons of rank and fashion,
is marked and felt with jealous anxiety,
and with a sense of mortification the
most acute—an invitation omitted is a
matter of the most serious consequence,
not only as it regards the present, but
the future; for if she be not invited by
lady A, it will lower her in the eyes of
lady B, and of all the ladies of the
alphabet. It will form a precedent of
the most dangerous and inevitable application.
If she has nine invitations,
and the tenth be wanting, the nine have
no power to make her happy. This was
precisely lady Clonbrony's case—there
was to be a party at lady St. James's,
for which lady Clonbrony had no card.

“So ungrateful! so monstrons, of
lady St. James!—What! was the gala
so soon forgotten, and all the marked
attentions paid that night to lady St.
James!—attentions, you know, Pratt,
which were looked upon with a jealous
eye, and made me enemies enough, I am
told, in another quarter!—Of all people,
I did not expect to be slighted by
lady St. James!”
Miss Pratt, who was ever ready to undertake
the defence of any person, who
had a title, pleaded, in mitigation of
censure, that perhaps lady St. James
might not be aware, that her ladyship
was yet well enough to venture out.
“O! my dear miss Pratt! that cannot
be the thing; for, in spite of my
rheumatism, which really was bad enough
last Sunday, I went on purpose to the
Royal Chapel, to show myself in the
closet, and knelt close to her ladyship
—And, my dear, we curtsied, and she
congratulated me, after church, upon my
being abroad again, and was so happy

to see me look so well, and all that— 
O! it is something very extraordinary,
and unaccountable!”
“But, I dare say, a card will come
yet,” said miss Pratt.
Upon this hint, lady Clonbrony's hope
revived; and, staying her anger, she
began to consider how she could manage
to get herself invited. Refreshing tickets
were left next morning at lady St. James's,
with their corners properly turned up; 
to do the thing better, separate tickets
for herself and for miss Nugent were
left for each member of the family; and
her civil messages, left with the footman,
extended to the utmost possibility of remainder.
It had occurred to her ladyship,
that, for miss somebody, the companion,
of whom she had never in her
life thought before, she had omitted to
leave a card last time, and she now left
a note of explanation; she farther, with
her rheumatic head and arm out of the
coach window, sat, the wind blowing
keen upon her, explaining to the porter

and the footman, to discover whether
her former tickets had gone safely up to
lady St. James; and, on the present occasion,
to make assurance doubly sure,
she slid handsome expedition money into
the servant's hand—“Sir, you will be
sure to remember”—“O certainly! your
ladyship.”
She well knew what dire offence has
frequently been taken, what sad disasters
have occurred, in the fashionable world,
from the neglect of a porter in delivering,
or of a footman in carrying up one
of those talismanic cards.—But, in spite
of all her manœuvres, no invitation to
the party arrived next day. Pratt was
next set to work. Miss Pratt was a
most convenient go-between, who, in
consequence of doing a thousand little
services, to which few others of her rank
in life would stoop, had obtained the
entrée to a number of great houses, and
was behind the scenes in many fashionable
families. Pratt could find out, and
Pratt could hint, and Pratt could manage

to get things done cleverly—and hints
were given, in all directions, to work
round to lady St. James. But still they
did not take effect. At last, Pratt suggested,
that, perhaps, though every thing
else had failed, dried salmon might be
tried with success. Lord Clonbrony had
just had some uncommonly good from
Ireland, which Pratt knew lady St. James
would like to have at her supper, because
a certain personage, whom she
would not name, was particularly fond
of it—Wheel within wheel, in the fine
world, as well as in the political world!
—Bribes for all occasions, and for all
ranks!—The timely present was sent,
accepted with many thanks, and understood
as it was meant. Per favour of
this propitiatory offering, and of a promise
of half a dozen pair of real Limerick
gloves to miss Pratt—a promise,
which Pratt clearly comprehended to be
a conditional promise—the grand object
was at length accomplished. The very
day before the party was to take place,

came cards of invitation to lady Clonbrony
and to miss Nugent, with lady
St. James's apologies; her ladyship was
concerned to find, that, by some negligence
of her servants, these cards were
not sent in proper time. “How slight
an apology will do from some people,” 
thought miss Nugent; “how eager to forgive,
when it is for our interest or our
pleasure; how well people act the being
deceived, even when all parties know,
that they see the whole truth; and how
low pride will stoop, to gain it's object!”
Ashamed of the whole transaction,
miss Nugent earnestly wished, that a refusal
should be sent, and reminded her
aunt of her rheumatism; but rheumatism
and all other objections were overruled
—lady Clonbrony would go. It was
just when this affair was thus, in her
opinion, successfully settled, that lord
Colambre came in, with a countenance
of unusual seriousness, his mind full of

the melancholy scenes he had witnessed
in his friend's family.
“What is the matter, Colambre?”
He related what had passed; he described
the brutal conduct of Mordicai; 
the anguish of the mother and sisters; 
the distress of Mr. Berryl. Tears rolled
down miss Nugent's cheeks—Lady Clonbrony
declared it was very shocking; 
listened with attention to all the particulars; 
but never failed to correct her son,
whenever he said Mr. Berryl.
“Sir Arthur Berryl, you mean.”
She was, however, really touched with
compassion, when he spoke of lady Berryl's
destitute condition; and her son
was going on to repeat what Merdicai
had said to him, but lady Clonbrony interrupted— 
“O! my dear Colambre! don't repeat
that detestable man's impertinent speeches
to me—If there is any thing really
about business, speak to your father— 
At any rate, don't tell us of it now,

because I've a hundred things to do,” 
said her ladyship, hurrying out of the
room—“Grace, Grace Nugent! I
want you!”
Lord Colambre sighed deeply.
“Don't despair,” said miss Nugent, as
she followed to obey her aunt's summons
—“Don't despair, don't attempt to speak
to her again till to morrow morning— 
Her head is now full of lady St. James's
party—When it is emptied of that, you
will have a better chance—Never despair.”
“Never, while you encourage me to
hope—that any good can be done.”
Lady Clonbrony was particularly glad,
that she had carried her point about this
party at lady St. James's; because, from
the first private intimation, that the
duchess of Torcaster was to be there, her
ladyship flattered herself, that the longdesired
introduction might then be accomplished.
But of this hope lady St.
James had likewise received intimation

from the double-dealing miss Pratt; and
a warning note was dispatched to the
duchess to let her grace know, that circumstances
had occurred, which had rendered
it impossible not to ask the Clonbronies.
An excuse, of course, for not
going to this party, was sent by the duchess
—Her grace did not like large parties
—she would have the pleasure of accepting
lady St. James's invitation for her
select party, on Wednesday the 10th.
Into these select parties, lady Clonbrony
had never been admitted. In return for
her great entertainments, she was invited
to great entertainments, to large parties; 
but farther she could never penetrate.
At lady St. James's, and with her set,
lady Clonbrony suffered a different kind
of mortification from that, which lady
Langdale and Mrs. Dareville made her
endure. She was safe from the witty
raillery, the sly inuendo, the insolent mimicry; 
but she was kept at a cold,
impassable distance, by ceremony—“So

far shalt thou go, and no farther,” was
expressed in every look, in every word,
and in a thousand different ways.
By the most punctilious respect and
nice regard to precedency, even by words
of courtesy—“Your ladyship does me
honour,” &c.—lady St. James contrived
to mortify, and to mark the difference between
those, with whom she was, and with
whom she was not, upon terms of intimacy
and equality. Thus the ancient grandees
of Spain drew a line of demarcation between
themselves and the newly created
nobility.—Whenever or wherever they
met, they treated the new nobles with the
utmost respect, never addressed them but
with all their titles, with low bows, and
with all the appearance of being, with the
most perfect consideration, any thing but
their equals; whilst towards one another,
the grandees laid aside their state, and,
omitting their titles, it was, “Alealá— 
Medina—Sidonia—Infantado,” and a
freedom and familiarity, which marked
equality. Entrenched in etiquette in this

manner, and mocked with marks of respect,
it was impossible either to intrude
or to complain of being excluded.
At supper, at lady St. James's, lady
Clonbrony's present was pronounced by
some gentleman to be remarkably high
flavoured. This observation turned the
conversation to Irish commodities and
Ireland. Lady Clonbrony, possessed by
the idea, that it was disadvantageous to
appear as an Irishwoman, or as a favourer
of Ireland, began to be embarrassed by
lady St. James's repeated thanks—Had
it been in her power to offer any thing
else, with propriety, she would not have
thought of sending her ladyship any
thing from Ireland. Vexed by the questions,
that were asked her about her
country, lady Clonbrony, as usual, denied
it to be her country, and went on to
depreciate and abuse every thing Irish; 
to declare, that there was no possibility
of living in Ireland; and that, for her
own part, she was resolved never to return
thither. Lady St. James, preserving

perfect silence, let her go on. Lady
Clonbrony, imagining that this silence
arose from coincidence of opinion, proceeded,
with all the eloquence she possessed,
which was very little, repeating
the same exclamations, and reiterating
her vow of perpetual expatriation; till at
last, an elderly lady, who was a stranger
to her, and whom she had till this moment
scarcely noticed, took up the defence
of Ireland with much warmth and energy; 
the eloquence with which she spoke,
and the respect, with which she was
heard, astonished lady Clonbrony.
“Who is she?” whispered her ladyship.
“Does not your ladyship know lady
Oranmore—the Irish lady Oranmore?”
“Lord bless me!—what have I said!
—what have I done!—O! why did
not you give me a hint, lady St. James?”
“I was not aware, that your ladyship
was not acquainted with lady Oranmore,” 
replied lady St. James, unmoved by her
distress.

Every body sympathised with lady
Oranmore, and admired the honest zeal,
with which she abided by her country,
and defended it against unjust aspersions
and affected execrations. Every one present
enjoyed lady Clonbrony's confusion,
except miss Nugent, who sat with her
eyes bowed down by penetrative shame,
during the whole of this scene; she
was glad, that lord Colambre was not
witness to it, and comforted herself with
the hope, that, upon the whole, lady
Clonbrony would be benefited by the pain
she had felt. This instance might convince
her, that it was not necessary to
deny her country to be received in any
company in England; and that those,
who have the courage and steadiness to
be themselves, and to support what they
feel and believe to be the truth, must
command respect. Miss Nugent hoped,
that, in consequence of this conviction,
lady Clonbrony would lay aside the little
affectations, by which her manners were
painfully constrained and ridiculous; and

above all, she hoped, that what lady
Oranmore had said of Ireland might dispose
her aunt to listen with patience to
all lord Colambre might urge in favour of
returning to her home.—But miss Nugent
hoped in vain. Lady Clonbrony never
in her life generalised any observations,
or drew any but a partial conclusion
from the most striking facts.
“Lord! my dear Grace!” said she, as
soon as they were seated in their carriage
—“What a scrape I got into to night at
supper, and what disgrace I came to!— 
And all this because I did not know lady
Oranmore—Now you see the inconceivable
disadvantage of not knowing every
body—Every body of a certain rank, of
course, I mean.”
Miss Nugent endeavoured to slide in
her own moral on the occasion, but it
would not do.
“Yes, my dear, lady Oranmore may
talk in that kind of style of Ireland, because,
on the other hand, she is so highly
connected in England, and, besides, she

is an old lady, and may take liberties; in
short, she is lady Oranmore, and that's
enough.”
The next morning, when they all met
at breakfast, lady Clonbrony complained
bitterly of her increased rheumatism, of
the disagreeable, stupid party they had
had the preceding night, and of the necessity
of going to another formal party
that night, the next, and the next, and, in
the true fine lady style, deplored her situation,
and the impossibility of avoiding
those things,
“Which felt they curse, yet covet still to feel.”
Miss Nugent determined to retire, as
soon as she could, from the breakfast
room, to leave lord Colambre an opportunity
of talking over his family affairs at
full liberty. She knew, by the seriousness
of his countenance, that his mind
was intent upon doing so, and she hoped,
that his influence, with his father and
mother would not be exerted in vain.
But, just as she was rising from the
breakfast table, in came sir Terence

O'Fay, and, seating himself quite at his
ease, in spite of lady Clonbrony's repulsive
looks, his awe of lord Colambre
having now worn off— 
“I'm tired,” said he, “and have a
right to be tired; for it's no small walk
I've taken for the good of this noble
family this morning—And, miss Nugent,
before I say more, I'll take a cup of ta
from you, if you please—” 
Lady Clonbrony rose, with great stateliness,
and walked to the farthest end of
the room, where she established herself
at her writing table, and began to write
notes.
Sir Terence wiped his forehead deliberately— 
“Then I've had a fine run—Miss Nugent,
I believe you never saw me run;— 
but I can run, I promise you, when it's to
serve a friend—And, my lord—(turning
to lord Clonbrony)—what do you think.
I run for this morning—to buy a bargain
—and of what?—a bargain of a bad
debt—a debt of yours, which I bargained

for, and up just in time—and Mordicai's
ready to hang himself this minute— 
For what do you think but that rascal
was bringing upon you—but an execution?
—he was.”
“An execution!” repeated every body
present, except lord Colambre.
“And how has this been prevented,
sir?” said lord Colambre.
“O! let me alone for that,” said sir
Terence. “I got a hint from my little
friend, Paddy Brady, who would not be
paid for it either, though he's as poor as
a rat. Well! as soon as I got the hint,
I dropped the thing I had in my hand,
which was the Dublin Evening, and ran
for the bare life—for there wasn't a coach
—in my slippers, as I was, to get into the
prior creditor's shoes, who is the little
solicitor, that lives in Crutched Friars,
which Mordicai never dreamt of, luckily; 
so he was very genteel, though he was
taken on a sudden, and from his breakfast,
which an Englishman don't like
particularly—I popped him a douceur of

a draught, at thirty-one days, on Garraghty,
the agent; of which he must get
notice; but I won't descant on the law
before the ladies—he handed me over
his debt and execution, and he made me
prior creditor in a trice. Then I took
coach in state, the first I met, and away
with me to Long Acre—saw Mordicai.
—‘Sir,’ says I, ‘I hear you're meditating
an execution on a friend of mine.’—‘Am
I,’ said the rascal, ‘who told you so?’— 
‘No matter,’ said I—‘But I just called
in to let you know there's no use in life
of your execution; for there's a prior
creditor with his execution, to be satisfied
first.’ So he made a great many black
faces, and said a great deal, which I never
listened to, but came off here clean to
tell you all the story.”
“Not one word of which do I understand,” 
said lady Clonbrony.
“Then, my dear, you are very ungrateful,” 
said lord Clonbrony.
Lord Colambre said nothing, for he
wished to learn more of sir Terence

O'Fay's character, of the state of his father's affairs, and of the family methods of proceeding in matters of business.
“Faith! Terry, I know I'm very thankful to you—But an execution's an ugly thing—and I hope there's no danger—”
“Never fear!” said sir Terence—“Havn't I been at my wits' end for myself of my friends ever since I come to man's estate—to years of discretion I should say, for the dense a foot of estate have I—But use has sharpened my wits pretty well for your service; so never be in dread, my good lord; for look ye!” cried the reckless knight, sticking his arms akimbo—“look ye here! in sir Terence O'Fay stands a host, that desires no better than to encounter, single witted, all the duns in the united kingdoms, Mordicai the jew inclusive.”
“Ah! that's the devil, that Mordicai,” said lord Clonbury—“that's the only man on Earth I dread.”

“Why he is only a coachmaker, is not he?” said lady Clonbrony—“I can't think how you can talk, my lord, of dreading such a low man—Tell him, if he's troublesome, we won't bespeak any more carriages; and I'm sure, I wish you would not be so silly, my lord, to employ him any more, when you know he disappointed me the last birthday about the landau, which I have not got yet.”
“Nonsense, my dear,” said lord Clonbrony, “you don't know what you are talking of—Terry, I say, even a friendly execution is an ugly thing.”
“Phoo! phoo!—an ugly thing!—So is a fit of the gout—But one's all the better for it after. 'Tis just a renewal of life, my lord, for which one must pay a bit of a fine, you know. Take patience, and leave me to manage all properly—You know I'm used to these things—Only you recollect, if you please, how I managed my friend lord &wblank; it's bad to be mentioning names—but lord everybody

knows-who—Didn't I bring him
through cleverly, when there was that
rascally attempt to seize the family plate?
I had notice, and what did I do, but
broke open a partition between that lord's
house and my lodgings, which I had
taken next door; and so, when the sheriff's
officers were searching below on the
ground floor, I just shoved the plate easy
through to my bedchamber at a moment's
warning, and then bid the gentlemen
walk in, for they couldn't set a foot in
my Paradise, the devils!—So they stood
looking at it through the wall, and cursing
me, and I holding both my sides
with laughter at their fallen faces.”
Sir Terence and lord Clonbrony laughed
in concert.
“This is a good story,” said miss Nugent,
smiling; “but surely, sir Terence,
such things are never done in real life?”
“Done! ay, are they; and I could
tell you a hundred better strokes, my dear
miss Nugent.”
“Grace!” cried lady Clonbrony,” do

pray have the goodness to seal and send
these notes; for really,” whispered she,
as her niece came to the table, I cawnt
stea, I cawnt bear that man's vice, his accent
grows horrider and horrider!—” 
Her ladyship rose, and left the room.
“Why, then,” continued sir Terence,
following up miss Nugent to the table,
where she was sealing letters—“I must
tell you how I sarved that same man, on
another occasion, and got the victory too.”
No general officer could talk of his
victories, or fight his battles o'er again,
with more complacency, than sir Terence
O'Fay recounted his civil exploits.
“Now I'll tell miss Nugent. There
was a footman in the family, not an
Irishman, but one of your powdered English
scoundrels, that ladies are so fond of
having hanging to the backs of their carriages; 
one Fleming he was, that turned
spy, and traitor, and informer, went privately,
and gave notice to the creditors,
where the plate was hid in the thickness
of the chimney—but if he did, what

happened?—Why, I had my counterspy,
an honest little Irish boy, in the creditor's
shop, that I had secured with a
little douceur of usquebaugh; and he outwitted,
as was natural, the English lying
valet, and gave us notice just in the nick,
and I got ready for their reception; and,
miss Nugent, I only wish you'd seen the
excellent sport we had, letting them follow
the scent they got; and, when they
were sure of their game, what did they
find?—Ha! ha! ha!—dragged out, after
a world of labour, a heavy box of— 
a load of brick-bats; not an item of my
friend's plate, that was all snug in the coal- 
hole, where them dunces never thought
of looking it—Ha! ha! ha!”
“But come, Terry,” cried lord Clonbrony,
“I'll pull down your pride.— 
How finely, another time, your job of
the false ceiling answered, in the hall— 
I've heard that story, and have been told
how the sheriff's fellow thrust his bayonet
up through your false plaster, and
down came tumbling the family plate—

Hey! Terry?—That hit cost your
friend, lord every-body-knows who, more
than your head's worth, Terry.”
“I ask your pardon, my lord, it nener
cost him a farthing.”
“When he paid 7000l. for the plate,
to redeem it?”
“Well! and did not I make up for
that, at the races of—? The creditors
learned that my lord's horse, Naboclish,
was to run at—races; and, as
the sheriff's officer knew he dare not
touch him on the race ground, what does
he do, but he comes down, early in the
morning, on the mail coach, and walks
straight down to the livery stables—He
had an exact description of the stables, and
the stall, and the horse's body clothes— 
“I was there, seeing the horse taken
care of; and, knowing the cut of the fellow's
jib, what does I do, but whips the
body clothes off Naboclish, and claps
them upon a garrone, that the priest
would not ride— 
“In comes the bailiff—‘Good morrow

to you, sir,’ says I, leading out of
the stable my lord's horse with an ould
saddle and bridle on— 
“‘Tim Neal,’ says I, to the groom,
who was rubbing down the garrone's
heels, ‘mind your hits to day, and wee'l
wet the plate to night’—‘Not so fast,
neither,’ says the bailiff—‘Here's my
writ for seizing the horse’— 
“‘Och,’ says I, ‘you wouldn't be so
cruel’— 
“‘That's all my eye,’ says he, seizing
the garrone, while I mounted Naboclish,
and rode him off deliberately
to—” 
“Ha! ha! ha!—That was neat, I
grant you, Terry,” said lord Clonbrony
—“But what a dolt of a born ignoramus
must that sheriff's fellow have been,
not to know Naboclish when he saw
him!—”
“But, stay my lord—stay, miss Nugent
—I have more for you,” following
her wherever she moved—“I did not
let him off so, even—At the cant, I bid

and bid against them for the pretended
Naboclish, till I left him on their hands
for 500 guineas—Ha! ha! ha!—Was
not that famous?—”
“But,” said miss Nugent, “I cannot
believe you are in earnest, sir Terence
—Surely this would be—” 
“What?—out with it, my dear miss
Nugent.”
“I am afraid of offending you—” 
“You can't, my dear, I defy you—say
the word, that came to the tongue's end,
it's always the best.”
“I was going to say, swindling,” said
the young lady, colouring deeply— 
“O! you was going to say wrong,
then!—It's not called swindling, amongst
gentlemen, who know the world—it's
only jockeying—fine sport—and very
honourable, to help a friend, at a dead
lift—Any thing to get a friend out of
a present pressing difficulty—” 
“And when the present difficulty is
over, do your friends never think of the
future?”

“The future! leave the future to posterity,” 
said sir Terence—“I'm counsel
only for the present, and when the evil
comes it's time enough to think of it—I
can't bring the guns of my wits to bear,
till the enemy's alongside of me, or
within sight of me, at the least—And
besides, there never was a good commander
yet, by sea or land, that would tell
his little expedients beforehand, or before
the very day of battle.”
“It must be a sad thing,” said miss
Nugent, sighing deeply, “to be reduced
to live by little expedients—daily expedients
—” 
Lord Colambre struck his forehead,
but said nothing.
“But if you are beating your brains
about your own affairs, my lord Colambre,
my dear,” said sir Terence, “there's
an easy way of settling your family affairs
at once; and, since you don't like little
daily expedients, miss Nugent, there's one
great expedient, and an expedient for
life, that will settle it all to your satisfaction

—and ours—I hinted it delicately
to you before, but, between friends,
delicacy is impertinent—So I tell you,
in plain English, you've nothing to do,
but go and propose yourself, just as you
stand, to the heiress miss B&wblank;, that
desires no better—” 
“Sir,”—cried lord Colambre, stepping
forward, red with sudden anger—Miss
Nugent laid her hand upon his arm— 
“O! my lord!”
“Sir Terence O'Fay,” continued lord
Colambre, in a moderated tone, “you
are wrong to mention that young lady's
name in such a manner—” 
“Why then I said only miss B&wblank;,
and there are a whole hive of bees. But
I'll engage she'd thank me for what I
suggested, and think herself the queen
bee, if my expedient was adopted by
you.”
“Sir Terence,” said his lordship, smiling,
“If my father thinks proper, that
you should manage his affairs, and devise
expedients for him, I have nothing to say

on that point; but I must beg you will
not trouble yourself to suggest expedients
for me, and that you will have the goodness
to leave me to settle my own affairs.”
Sir Terence made a low bow, and was
silent for five seconds; then, turning to
lord Clonbrony, who looked much more
abashed than he did— 
“By the wise one! my good lord, I
believe there are some men—noblemen,
too—that don't know their friends from
their enemies—It's my firm persuasion
now, that, if I had served you, as I
served my friend I was talking of; your
son there would, ten to one, think I had
done him an injury, by saving the family
plate.”
“I certainly should, sir. The family
plate, sir, is not the first object in my
mind,” replied lord Colambre; “family
honour—Nay, miss Nugent, I must
speak,” continued his lordship; perceiving,
by her countenance, that she was
alarmed.

“Never fear, miss Nugent dear,” said
sir Terence, “I'm as cool as a cucumber
—“Faith then! my lord Colambre, I
agree with you, that family honour's a
mighty fine thing, only troublesome to
one's self and one's friends, and expensive
to keep up, with all the other expenses
and debts a gentleman has nowadays
—So I, that am under no natural
obligations to it by birth or otherwise,
have just stood by through life, and asked
myself, before I would volunteer being
bound to it, what could this same family
honour do for a man in this world And,
first and foremost, I never remember to
see family honour stand a man in much
stead in a court of law—never saw family
honour stand against an execution,
or a custodiam, or an injunction even.
—'Tis a rare thing, this same family
honour, and a very fine thing; but I never
knew it yet, at a pinch, pay for a pair
of boots even,” added sir Terence, drawing
up his own, with much complacency.
At this moment, sir Terence was called

out of the room, by one, who wanted to
speak to him on particular business&wblank; 
“My dear father,” cried lord Colambre,
“do not follow him; stay, for one
moment, and hear your son, your true
friend.”
Miss Nugent went out of the room,
that she might leave the father and son
at liberty— 
“Hear your natural friend for one
moment,” cried lord Colambre. “Let me
beseech you, father, not to have recourse
to any of these paltry expedients, but
trust your son with the state of your affairs,
and we shall find some honourable
means—” 
“Yes, yes, yes, very true; when you're
of age, Colambre, we'll talk of it; but
nothing can be done till then. We shall
get on, we shall get through, very well,
till then, with Terry's assistance—And I
must beg you will not say a word more
against Terry—I can't bear it—I can't
hear it—I can't do without him. Pray
don't detain me—I can say no more—

except,” added he, returning to his usual
concluding sentence, “that there need,
at all events, be none of this, if people
would but live upon their own estates,
and kill their own mutton.” He stole
out of the room, glad to escape, however
shabbily, from present explanation and
present pain. There are persons without
resource, who, in difficulties, return
always to the same point, and usually to
the same words.
While lord Colambre was walking up
and down the room, much vexed and
disappointed, at finding that he could
make no impression on his father's mind,
nor obtain his confidence, as to his family
affairs, lady Clonbrony's woman,
Mrs. Petito, knocked at the door, with a
message from her lady, to beg, if lord Colambre
was by himself, he would go to
her dressing room, as she wished to have
a conference with him—He obeyed her
summons.
“Sit down, my dear Colambre—”

And she began precisely with her old
sentence— 
“With the fortune I brought your father,
and with my lord's estate, I cawnt
understand the meaning of all these pecuniary
difficulties; and all that strange
creature sir Terence says is algebra to
me, who speak English—And I am particularly
sorry he was let in this morning
—but he's such a brute, that he does not
think any thing of forcing one's door,
and he tells my footman he does not
mind not at home a pinch of snuff. Now
what can you do with a man, who could
say that sort of thing, you know—the
world's at an end.”
“I wish my father had nothing to do
with him, ma'am, as much as you can
wish it,” said lord Colambre; “but I
have said all, that a son can with propriety
say, and without effect.”
“What particularly provokes me
against him,” continued lady Clonbrony,
“is what I have just heard from Grace,

who was really hurt by it, too, for she is
the warmest friend in the world—I allude
to the creature's indelicate way of
touching upon a tender pint, and mentioning
an amiable young heiress's name
—My dear Colambre, I trust you have
given me credit for my inviolable silence,
all this time, upon the pint nearest my
heart. I am rejoiced to hear you was so
warm when she was mentioned inadvertently
by that brute, and I trust you now
see the advantages of the projected union
in as strong and agreeable a pint of view
as I do, my own Colambre; and I should
leave things to themselves, and let you
prolong the dees of courtship as you
please, only for what I now hear, incidentally,
from my lord and the brute,
about pecuniary embarrassments and the
necessity of something being done before
next winter. And indeed I think now,
in propriety, the proposal cannot be delayed
much longer; for the world begins
to talk of the thing as done; and even
Mrs. Broadhurst, I know, had no doubt,

that, if this contretemps about the poor
Berryls had not occurred, your proposal
would have been made before the end of
last week.”
Our hero was not a man to make a
proposal, because Mrs. Broadhurst expected
it, or to marry because the world
said he was going to be married. He
steadily said, that, from the first moment
the subject had been mentioned, he had
explained himself distinctly; that the
young lady's friends could not, therefore,
be under any doubt, as to his intentions; 
that, if they had voluntarily deceived
themselves, or exposed the lady in situations,
from which the world was led to
make false conclusions, he was not answerable
—he felt his conscience at ease
—entirely so, as he was convinced, that
the young lady herself, for whose merit,
talents, independence, and generosity of
character, he professed high respect,
esteem, and admiration, had no doubts,
either of the extent or the nature of his
regard.

“Regard, respect, esteem, admiration
—Why, my dearest Colambre! this is
saying all I want; satisfies me, and I am
sure would satisfy Mrs. Broadhurst and
miss Broadhurst too!”
“No doubt it will, ma'am; but not if I
aspired to the honour of miss Broadhurst's
hand, or professed myself her
lover.”
“My dear, you are mistaken; miss
Broadhurst is too sensible a girl, a vast
deal, to look for love, and a dying lover,
and all that sort of stuff; I am persuaded
—indeed I have it from good, from the
best authority—that the young lady— 
you know one must be delicate in these
cases, where a young lady of such fortune,
and no despicable family, too, is
concerned—therefore I cannot speak
quite plainly—but I say I have it from
the best authority, that you would be
preferred to any other suitor, and, in
short, that—” 
“I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting

you,” cried lord Colambre, colouring
a good deal—“But you must
excuse me, if I say, that the only authority,
on which I could believe this, is
one, from which, I am morally certain, I
shall never hear it—from miss Broadhurst
herself.”
“Lord child! if you would only ask
her the question, she would tell you it is
truth, I dare say.”
“But as I have no curiosity on the
subject, ma'am—” 
“Lord bless me! I thought every body
had curiosity—But still, without curiosity,
I am sure it would gratify you,
when you did hear it; and can't you just
put the simple question?”
“Impossible!”
“Impossible!—now that is so very
provoking, when the thing is all but
done. Well, take your own time; all I will
ask of you then is, to let things go on as
they are going—smoothly and pleasantly; 
and I'll not press you farther on

the subject at present—Let things go on
smoothly, that's all I ask, and say nothing.”
“I wish I could oblige you, mother; 
but I cannot do this. Since you tell me,
that the world and miss Broadhurst's
friends have already misunderstood my
intentions, it becomes necessary, in justice
to the young lady and to myself,
that I should make all farther doubt impossible
—I shall, therefore, put an end
to it at once, by leaving town to morrow.”
Lady Clonbrony, breathless for a moment
with surprise, exclaimed—“Bless
me! leave town to morrow! Just at the
beginning of the season!—Impossible!
—I never saw such a precipitate, rash
young man—But stay only a few
weeks, Colambre; the physicians advise
Buxton for my rheumatism, and you shall
take us to Buxton early in the season— 
you cannot refuse me that—Why, if
miss Broadhurst was a dragon, you
could not be in a greater hurry to run

away from her—What are you afraid
of?”
“Of doing what is wrong—the only
thing, I trust, of which I shall ever be
afraid.”
Lady Clonbrony tried persuasion and
argument—such argument as she could
use—but all in vain—lord Colambre
was firm in his resolution; at last, she
came to tears; and her son, in much agitation,
said— 
“I cannot bear this, mother!—I
would do any thing you ask, that I could
do with honour; but this is impossible.”
“Why impossible?—I will take all
blame upon myself; and you are sure,
that miss Broadhurst does not misunderstand
you, and you esteem her, and admire
her, and all that; and all I ask is,
that you'll go on as you are, and see more
of her; and how do you know but you
may fall in love with her, as you call it,
to morrow?”
“Because, madam, since you press me

so far, my affections are engaged to another
person.—Do not look so dreadfully
shocked, my dear mother—I have told
you truly, that I think myself too young,
much too young, yet to marry. In the
circumstances, in which I know my family
are, it is probable that I shall not
for some years be able to marry as I wish.
You may depend upon it, that I shall
not take any step, I shall not even declare
my attachment to the object of my
affection, without your knowledge; and,
far from being inclined to follow headlong
my own passions—strong as they
are—be assured, that the honour of my
family, your happiness, my mother, my
father's, are my first objects—I shall never
think of my own, till these are secured.”
Of the conclusion of this speech, lady
Clonbrony heard only the sound of the
words; from the moment her son had
pronounced, that his affections were engaged,
she had been running over in her

head every probable and improbable person
she could think of; at last, suddenly
starting up, she opened one of the folding
doors into the next apartment, and
called— 
“Grace!—Grace Nugent!—put down
your pencil, Grace, this minute, and come
here!”
Miss Nugent obeyed with her usual
alacrity, and the moment she entered the
room, lady Clonbrony, fixing her eyes full
upon her, said— 
“There's your cousin Colambre tells
me his affections are engaged.”
“Yes, to miss Broadhurst, no doubt,” 
said miss Nugent, smiling, with a simplicity
and openness of countenance, which
assured lady Clonbrony, that all was safe
in that quarter;—a suspicion, which had
darted into her mind was dispelled.
“No doubt—Ay, do you hear that
no doubt, Colambre?—Grace, you see,
has no doubt; nobody has any doubt but
yourself, Colambre.”

“And are your affections engaged, and
not to miss Broadhurst?” said miss Nugent,
approaching lord Colambre.
“There now! you see how you surprise
and disappoint every body, Colambre.”
“I am sorry, that miss Nugent should
be disappointed,” said lord Colambre.
“But because I am disappointed, pray
do not call me miss Nugent, or turn
away from me, as if you were displeased.”
“It must, then, be some Cambridgeshire
lady,” said lady Clonbrony. “I am sure
I am very sorry he ever went to Cambridge,
Oxford I advised—one of the
miss Berryls, I presume, who have nothing
—I'll have nothing more to do
with those Berryls—There was the reason
of the son's vast intimacy—Grace,
you may give up all thoughts of sir Arthur.”
“I have no thoughts to give up,
ma'am,” said miss Nugent, smiling.
“Miss Broadhurst,” continued she, going
on eagerly with what she was saying to

Lord Colambre—“miss Broadhurst is
my friend, a friend I love and admire; 
but you will allow, that I strictly kept
my promise, never to praise her to you,
till you should begin to praise her to me.
Now recollect, last night, you did praise
her to me, so—justly,—that I thought
you liked her, I confess; so that it is natural
I should feel a little disappointed.
Now you know the whole of my mind; I
have no intention to encroach on your
confidence; therefore, there is no occasion
to look so embarrassed. I give you
my word, I will never speak to you again
upon the subject,” said she, holding out
her hand to him, provided you will
never again call me miss Nugent. “Am I
not your own cousin Grace?—Do not
be displeased with her.”
“You are my own dear cousin Grace; 
and nothing can be farther from my
mind, than any thought of being displeased
with her; especially just at this
moment, when I am going away, probably,
for a considerable time—”

“Away!—when?—where?—” 
“To morrow morning, for Ireland—” 
“Ireland! of all places,” cried lady
Clonbrony—“What upon Earth puts it
into your head to go to Ireland?—You
do very well to go out of the way of falling
in love ridiculously, since that is the
reason of your going; but what put Ireland
into your head, child?”
“I will not presume to ask my mother,
what put Ireland out of her head,” said
lord Colambre, smiling—“but she will
recollect, that it is my native country.”
“That was your father's fault, not
mine,” said lady Clonbrony—“for I
wished to have been confined in England; 
but he would have it to say, that his son and
heir was born at Clonbrony Castle—and
there was a great argument between him
and my uncle, and something about the
prince of Wales and Caernarvon Castle
was thrown in, and that turned the
scale, much against my will; for it was
my wish, that my son should be an
Englishman born—like myself. But,

after all, I don't see, that having the misfortune
to be born in a country should
tie one to it in any sort of way—and I
should have hoped your English edication,
Colambre, would have given you too liberal
idears for that—So I reelly don't
see why you should go to Ireland merely
because it's your native country.”
“Not merely because it is my native
country—but I wish to go thither—I desire
to become acquainted with it—because
it is the country, in which my father's
property lies, and from which we
draw our subsistence.”
“Subsistence! Lord bless me! what a
word!—fitter for a pauper than a nobleman
—subsistence! Then, if you are
going to look after your father's property,
I hope you will make the agents do their
duty, and send us remittances. And
pray how long do you mean to stay?”
“Till I am of age, madam, if you have
no objection. I will spend the ensuing
months in travelling in Ireland, and I will
return here by the time I am of age, unless

you and my father should, before that
time, be in Ireland.”
“Not the least chance of that, if I can
prevent it, I promise you,” said lady
Clonbrony.
Lord Colambre and miss Nugent
sighed.
“And I am sure I shall take it very
unkindly of you, Colambre, if you go and
turn out a partizan for Ireland, after all,
like Grace Nugent.”
“A partizan! no;—I hope not a partizan,
but a friend,” said miss Nugent.
“Nonsense, child!—I hate to hear
people, women especially, and young
ladies particularly, talk of being friends
to this country or that country. What
can they know about countries? Better
think of being friends to themselves, and
friends to their friends—” 
“I was wrong,” said miss Nugent, “to
call myself a friend to Ireland; I meant
to say, that Ireland had been a friend to
me; that I found Irish friends, when I
had no other; an Irish home, when I

had no other; that my earliest and happiest
years, under your kind care, had
been spent there; and that I can never
forget that, my dear aunt—I hope you
do not wish that I should.”
“Heaven forbid, my sweet Grace!” 
said lady Clonbrony, touched by her
voice and manner—“Heaven forbid! I
don't wish you to do or be any thing
but what you are; for I am convinced
there's nothing I could ask, you would
not do for me; and, I can tell you, there's
few things you could ask, love, I would
not do for you.”
A wish was instantly expressed in the
eyes of her niece.
Lady Clonbrony, though not usually
quick at interpreting the wishes of others,
understood and answered, before she ventured
to make her request in words.
“Ask any thing but that, Grace—Return
to Clonbrony, while I am able to
live in London, that I never can or will
do for you, or any body!”—looking at
her son in all the pride of obstinacy—“so

there is an end of the matter. Go you
where you please, Colambre; and I shall
stay where I please:—I suppose, as
your mother, I have a right to say this
much?”
Her son, with the utmost respect,
assured her, that he had no design to infringe
upon her undoubted liberty of
judging for herself; that he had never
interfered, except so far as to tell her circumstances
of her affairs, with which she
seemed to be totally unacquainted, and of
which it might be dangerous to her to
continue in ignorance.
“Don't talk to me about affairs,” cried
she, drawing her hand away from her
son—“Talk to my lord, or my lord's
agents, since you are going to Ireland,
about business—I know nothing about
business; but this I know, I shall stay in
England, and be in London, every season,
as long as I can afford it; and, when
I cannot afford to live here, I hope I shall
not live any where.—That's my notion
of life; and that's my determination.

once for all; for, if none of the rest of
the Clonbrony family have any, I thank
Heaven I have some spirit.” Saying this,
with her most stately manner she walked
out of the room. Lord Colambre instantly
followed her; for, after the resolution
and the promise he had made, he
did not dare to trust himself at this moment
with miss Nugent.
There was to be a concert this night
at lady Clonbrony's, at which Mrs. and
miss Broadhurst were, of course, expected.
That they might not be quite
unprepared for the event of her son's
going to Ireland, lady Clonbrony wrote
a note to Mrs. Broadhurst, begging her
to come half an hour earlier than the
time mentioned in the cards, “that she
might talk over something particular,
that had just occurred.”
What passed at this cabinet council,
as it seems to have had no immediate influence
on affairs, we need not record.
Suffice it to observe, that a great deal
was said, and nothing done. Miss Broadhurst,

however, was not a young lady,
who could be easily deceived, even where
her passions were concerned. The moment
her mother told her of lord Colambre's
intended departure, she saw the
whole truth. She had a strong mind— 
was capable of drawing aside, at once,
the curtain of self delusion, and looking
steadily at the skeleton of truth—she
had a generous, perhaps because a strong
mind; for, surrounded, as she had been
from her childhood, by every means of
self indulgence, which wealth and flattery
could bestow, she had discovered
early, what few persons in her situation
discover till late in life, that selfish gratifications
may render us incapable of
other happiness, but can never, of themselves,
make us happy. Despising flatterers,
she had determined to make herself
friends—to make them in the only
possible way—by deserving them. Her
father made his immense fortune by the
power and habit of constant, bold, and
just calculation. The power and habit,

which she had learned from him, she
applied on a far larger scale; with him,
it was confined to speculations for the
acquisition of money; with her, it extended
to the attainment of happiness.
He was calculating and mercenary—she
was estimative and generous.
Miss Nugent was dressing for the concert,
or, rather, was sitting half dressed
before her glass, reflecting, when miss
Broadhurst came into her room—Miss
Nugent immediately sent her maid out of
the room.
“Grace,” said miss Broadhurst; looking
at Grace, with an air of open, deliberate
composure—“you and I are
thinking of the same thing—of the same
person.”
“Yes, of lord Colambre;” said miss
Nugent, ingenuously and sorrowfully.
“Then I can put your mind at ease,
at once, my dear friend, by assuring you,
that I shall think of him no more—That
I have thought of him, I do not deny— 
I have thought, that if, notwithstanding

the difference in our ages, and other differences,
he had preferred me, I should
have preferred him to any person, who
has ever yet addressed me. On our first
acquaintance, I clearly saw, that he was
not disposed to pay court to my fortune; 
and I had also then coolness of judgment
sufficient to perceive, that it was
not probable he should fall in love with
my person. But I was too proud in my
humility, too strong in my honesty, too
brave, too ignorant; in short, I knew
nothing of the matter. We are all of
us, more or less, subject to the delusions
of vanity, or hope, or love—I—even
I!—who thought myself so clear sighted,
did not know how, with one flutter
of his wings, Cupid can set the whole
atmosphere in motion; change the proportions,
size, colour, value, of every
object; lead us into a mirage, and leave
us in a dismal desert.”
“My dearest friend!”—said miss
Nugent, in a tone of true sympathy.
“But none but a coward, or a fool,

would sit down in the desert, and weep,
instead of trying to make his way back,
before the storm rises, obliterates the
track, and overwhelms every thing. Poetry
apart, my dear Grace! you may be
assured, that I shall think no more of
lord Colambre.”
“I believe you are right—But I am
sorry, very sorry, it must be so.”
“O! spare me your sorrow!”
“My sorrow is for lord Colambre,” 
said miss Nugent. “Where will he
find such a wife?—Not in miss Berryl,
I am sure—pretty as she is—a mere
fine lady!—Is it possible, that lord
Colambre! lord Colambre! should prefer
such a girl—lord Colambre!”
Miss Broadhurst looked at her friend
as she spoke, and saw truth in her eyes; 
saw, that she had no suspicion, that she
was herself the person beloved.
“Tell me, Grace, are you sorry, that
lord Colambre is going away?”
“No! I am glad. I was sorry when
I first heard it; but now I am glad, very

glad; it may save him from a marriage
unworthy of him, restore him to himself,
and reserve him for&wblank;, the only
woman I ever saw, who is suited to him,
who is equal to him, who would value
and love him, as he deserves to be valued
and loved.”
“Stop, my dear; if you mean me, I
am not, and I never can be, that woman.
Therefore, as you are my friend,
and wish my happiness, as I sincerely
believe you do, never, I conjure you,
present such an idea before my mind
again—it is out of my mind, I hope,
for ever.—It is important to me, that
you should know and believe this.—At
least I will preserve my friends. Now
let this subject never be mentioned or
alluded to again between us, my dear— 
We have subjects enough of conversation,
we need not have recourse to pernicious
sentimental gossipings. There is
a great difference between wanting a confidante,
and treating a friend with confidence.
My confidence you possess; all

that ought, all that is to be known of
my mind, you know, and—Now I
will leave you in peace to dress for the
concert.”
“O! don't go! you don't interrupt
me—I shall be dressed in a few minutes; 
stay with me, and you may be
assured, that neither now, nor at any
other time, shall I ever speak to you on
the subject you desire me to avoid—I
entirely agree with you about confidantes
and sentimental gossipings—I love you
for not loving them.”
A thundering knock at the door announced
the arrival of company.
“Think no more of love, but as much
as you please of friendship—dress yourself
as fast as you can,” said miss Broadhurst
—“Dress, dress is the order of the
day.”
“Order of the day and order of the
night, and all for people I don't care for
in the least,” said Grace—“So life
passes!”
“Dear me, miss Nugent,” cried Petito,

lady Clonbrony's woman, coming in
with a face of alarm—“Not dressed
yet!—My lady is gone down, and Mrs
Broadhurst, and my lady Pococke's
come, and the honourable Mrs. Trembleham; 
and signor, the Italian singing
gentleman, has been walking up and
down the apartments there by himself,
disconsolate, this half hour, and I wondering
all the time nobody rang for me.
—but my lady dressed, Lord knows how!
without any body—O, merciful! miss
Nugent, if you could stand still for one
single particle of a second.—So then I
thought of stepping in to miss Nugent; 
for the young ladies are talking so fast,
says I to myself, at the door, they will
never know how time goes, unless I give
'em a hint.—But now my lady is below,
there's no need, to be sure, to be nervous,
so we may take the thing quietly, without
being in a flustrum.—Dear ladies, is not
this now a very sudden motion of our
young lord's for Ireland?—Lud a mercy!
miss Nugent, I'm sure your motions is

sudden enough; and your dress behind
is all, I'm sure, I can't tell how.—” 
“O! never mind,” said the young lady,
escaping from her, “it will do very well,
thank you, Petito.”
“It will do very well, never mind”— 
repeated Petito, muttering to herself, as
she looked after the ladies, whilst they
ran down stairs—“I can't abide to dress
any young lady, who says never mind,
and it will do very well—That, and her
never talking to one confidantially, or
trusting one with the least bit of her secrets,
is the thing I can't put up with
from miss Nugent; and miss Broadhurst
holding the pins to me, as much as to
say, do your business, Petito, and don't
talk—Now, that's so impertinent, as
if one wasn't the same flesh and blood,
and had not as good a right to talk of
every thing, and hear of every thing, as
themselves. And Mrs. Broadhurst, too,
cabinet-councilling with my lady, and
pursing up her city mouth, when I come
in, and turning off the discourse to snuff,

forsooth; as if I was an ignoramus, to
think they closetted themselves to talk of
snuff. Now, I think a lady of quality's
woman has as good a right to be trusted
with her lady's secrets, as with her jewels; 
and if my lady Clonbrony was a real
lady of quality, she'd know that, and
consider the one as much my paraphernalia
as the other.—So I shall tell my
lady to night, as I always do, when she
vexes me, that I never lived in an Irish
family before, and don't know the ways
of it—then she'll tell me she was born
in Hoxfordshire—then I shall say, with
my saucy look, ‘O! was you my lady—I
always forget that you was an Englishwoman:’ 
then may-be she'll say, ‘Forget!
—you forget yourself strangely, Petito.’ 
—Then I shall say, with a great deal
of dignity, ‘If your ladyship thinks so,
my lady, I'd better go.’—And I'd desire
no better, than that she would take
me at my word; for my lady Dashfort's
is a much better place, I'm told, and she's
dying to have me, I know.”

And having formed this resolution,
Petito concluded her apparently interminable
soliloquy, and went with my lord's
gentleman into the antichamber, to hear
the concert, and give her judgment on
every thing: as she peeped in, through
the vista of heads, into the Apollo saloon
—for to night the Alhambra was transformed
into the Apollo saloon—she saw,
that whilst the company, rank behind
rank, in close semicircles, had crowded
round the performers, to hear a favourite
singer, miss Broadhurst and lord Colambre
were standing in the outer semicircle,
talking to one another earnestly. Now
would Petito have given up her reversionary
chance of the three nearly new
gowns she expected from lady Clonbrony,
in case she stayed; or, in case she went,
the reversionary chance of any dress of
lady Dashfort's, except her scarlet velvet,
merely to hear what miss Broadhurst and
lord Colambre were saying. Alas! she
could only see their lips move; and of
what they were talking, whether of music

or love, and whether the match was
to be on or off, she could only conjecture.
But the diplomatic style having now descended
to waiting maids, Mrs. Petito
talked to her friends, in the antichamber,
with as mysterious and consequential an
air and tone as a chargê d'affaires, or as
the lady of a chargé d'affaires, could have
assumed. She spoke of her private belief; 
of the impression left upon her
mind; and her confidantial reasons for
thinking as she did; of her “having
had it from the fountain's head;” and of
“her fear of any committal of her authorities.”
Notwithstanding all these authorities,
lord Colambre left London next day, and
pursued his way to Ireland, determined,
that he would see and judge of that
country for himself, and decide, whether
his mother's dislike to residing there was
founded on caprice or reasonable causes.
In the mean time, it was reported, in
London, that his lordship was gone to
Ireland to make out the title to some

estate, which would be necessary for his
marriage settlement with the great heiress,
miss Broadhurst. Whether Mrs. Petito
or sir Terence O'Fay had the greater
share in raising and spreading this report,
it would be difficult to determine; 
but it is certain, however or by whomsoever
raised, it was most useful to lord
Clonbrony, by keeping his creditors
quiet.”