



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
[In answer to his Letters lxxix. lxxxii.] 

Edgware, Monday, July 24. 
What pains thou takest to persuade thyself,
that the Lady's ill health is owing to the vile
Arrest, and to the Implacableness of her Friends! 
Both primarily (if they were) to be laid at thy door. 
What poor excuses will good heads make for the evils
they are put upon by bad hearts! —But 'tis no wonder,
that he who can sit down premeditatedly to do a bad 

action, will content himself with a bad excuse: And
yet, what fools must he suppose the rest of the world
to be, if he imagines them as easy to be imposed upon,
as he can impose upon himself? 
In vain dost thou impute to pride or wilfulness the
necessity to which thou hast reduced this Lady of
parting with her cloaths: For can she do otherwise,
and be the noble-minded creature she is? 
Her implacable friends have refused her the current
cash she left behind her; and wished, as her Sister
wrote to her, to see her reduced to want: Probably
therefore they will not be sorry that she is reduced to
such streights; and will take it for a justification from
Heaven of their wicked hard-heartedness. Thou
canst not suppose she would take supplies from thee: 
To take them from me would, in her opinion, be
taking them from thee. Miss Howe's Mother is an
avaritious woman; and, perhaps, the Daughter can
do nothing of that sort unknown to her; and, if she
could, is too noble a girl to deny it, if charged. And
then Miss Harlowe is firmly of opinion, that she shall
never want nor wear the things she disposes of. 
Having heard nothing from town that obliges me
to go thither, I shall gratify poor Belton with my
company till to-morrow, or perhaps till Wednesday: 
For the unhappy man is more and more loth to part
with me. I shall soon set out for Epsom, to endeavour
to serve him there, and reinstate him in his own
house. Poor fellow! he is most horribly low-spirited; 
mopes about; and nothing diverts him. I pity him
at my heart; but can do him no good. —What consolation
can I give him, either from his past life, or
from his future prospects? 
Our friendships and intimacies, Lovelace, are only
calculated for strong life and health. When sickness
comes, we look round us, and upon one another, like
frighted birds, at the sight of a kite ready to souse upon 

them. Then, with all our bravery, what miserable
wretches are we! 
Thou tellest me, that thou seest Reformation is
coming swiftly upon me. I hope it is. I see so much
difference in the behaviour of this admirable woman
in her illness, and that of poor Belton in his, that it
is plain to me, the Sinner is the real Coward, and
the Saint the true Hero; and, sooner or later, we
shall all find it to be so, if we are not cut off suddenly. 
The Lady shut herself up at Six o'clock yesterday
afternoon; and intends not to see company till Seven
or Eight this; not even her Nurse—Imposing upon
herself a severe Fast. And why? It is her Birthday! 
—Blooming—yet declining in her very blossom! 
—Every Birth-day till This, no doubt happy! — 
What must be her reflections! —What ought to be
thine! 
What sport dost thou make with my aspirations,
and my prostrations, as thou callest them; and with
my dropping of the Bank Note behind her chair! I had
too much awe of her at the time, and too much apprehended
her displeasure at the offer, to make it with
the grace that would better have become my intention. 
But the action, if aukward, was modest. Indeed,
the fitter subject for ridicule with thee; who canst no
more taste the beauty and delicacy of modest Obligingness,
than of modest Love. For the same may
be said of inviolable Respect, that the poet says of unfeigned
Affection. 

 I speak, I know not what!—
Speak ever so; and if I answer you
I know not what, it shews the more of Love.
Love is a child that talks in broken language;
Yet then it speaks most plain.—
The like may be pleaded in behalf of the modest
Respect which made the humble offerer afraid to 

invade the awful eye, or the revered hand; but aukwardly
to drop its Incense beside the Altar it should
have been laid upon. But how should that Soul,
which could treat delicacy itself brutally, know anything
of this? 
But I am still more amazed at thy courage, to think
of throwing thyself in the way of Miss Howe, and
Miss Arabella Harlowe! —Thou wilt not dare, surely,
to carry this thought into execution! 
As to my dress, and thy dress, I have only to say,
That the sum total of thy observation is this: That
my outside is the worst of me; and thine the best of
thee: And what gettest thou by the comparison? Do
thou reform the one, and I'll try to mend the other. 
I challenge thee to begin. 
Mrs. Lovick gave me, at my request, the copy of
a Meditation she shewed me, which was extracted by
the Lady from the Scriptures, while under Arrest at
Rowland's, as appears by the date. The Lady is not
to know that I have taken a Copy. 
You and I always admired the noble simplicity, and
natural Ease and Dignity of Style, which are the distinguishing
characteristics of these books, whenever
any passages from them, by way of quotation in the
works of other authors, popt upon us. And once I
remember you, even you, observed, that those passages
always appeared to you like a rich vein of golden ore,
which runs thro' baser metals; embellishing the work
they were brought to authenticate. 
Try, Lovelace, if thou canst relish a Divine Beauty. 
I think it must strike transient (if not permanent) remorse
into thy heart. Thou boastest of thy ingenuousness: 
Let this be the test of it; and whether thou
canst be serious on a subject so deep, the occasion of
it resulting from thyself. 

MEDITATION.
Saturday, July 15.
O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my
calamity laid in the balance together! 
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the
sea: Therefore my words are swallowed up! 
For the arrows of the Almighty are within me; the
poison whereof drinketh up my Spirit. The terrors of
God do set themselves in array against me. 
When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise? When
will the night be gone? And I am full of tossings to and
fro, unto the dawning of the day. 
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and
are spent without hope—Mine eye shall no more see
good. 
Wherefore is light given to her that is in misery; and
life unto the bitter in soul? 
Who longeth for death; but it cometh not; and diggeth
for it more than for hid treasures? 
Why is light given to one whose way is hid; and
whom God hath hedged in? 
For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon
me! 
I was not in safety; neither had I rest; neither was
I quiet: Yet trouble came. 
But behold God is mighty, and despiseth not any. 
He giveth Right to the Poor—And if they be bound
in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then be
sheweth them their work and their transgressions— 
I have a little leisure, and am in a scribbling vein:
Indulge me, Lovelace, a few reflections on these Sacred
Books. 
We are taught to read the Bible, when children,
and as a Rudiment only; and, as far as I know, this
may be the reason, why we think ourselves above it, 

when at a maturer age. For you know, that our parents,
as well as we, wisely rate our proficiency by the
books we are advanced to, and not by our understanding
of those we have passed through. But, in my
Uncle's illness, I had the curiosity, in some of my
dull hours (lighting upon one in his closet) to dip into
it: And then I found, where ever I turned, that there
were admirable things in it. I have borrowed one,
on receiving from Mrs. Lovick the above Meditation; 
for I had a mind to compare the passages contained in
it by the book, hardly believing they could be so exceedingly
apposite as I find they are. And one time
or other, it is very likely, that I shall make a resolution
to give the whole Bible a perusal, by way of
course, as I may say. 
This, mean time, I will venture to repeat, is certain,
that the style is that truly easy, simple, and
natural one, which we should admire in other authors
excessively. Then all the world join in an opinion of
the antiquity, and authenticity too, of the Book; and
the learned are fond of strengthening their different
arguments by its sanctions. Indeed, I was so much
taken with it at my Uncle's, that I was half ashamed
that it appeared so new to me. And yet, I cannot
but say, that I have some of the Old Testament history,
as it is called, in my head: But, perhaps,
am more obliged for it to Josephus, than to the Bible
itself. 
Odd enough, with all our pride of learning, that
we chuse to derive the little we know from the undercurrents,
perhaps muddy ones too, when the clear,
the pellucid fountain-head is much nearer at hand, and
easier to be come at—Slighted the more, possibly, for
that very reason! 
But man is a pragmatical foolish creature; and the
more we look into him, the more we must despise
him. —Lords of the Creation! —Who can forbear indignant
laughter! When we see not one of the individuals 

of that creation (his perpetually excentric self
excepted) but acts within its own natural and original
appointments: And all the time, proud and vain as
the conceited wretch is of fancied and self-dependent
excellence, he is obliged not only for the ornaments,
for the necessaries of life (that is to say, for food
as well as raiment) to all the other creatures; strutting
with their blood and spirits in his veins, and with their
plumage on his back: For what has he of his own,
but a very mischievous, monkey-like, bad nature? 
Yet thinks himself at liberty to kick, and cuff, and
elbow out every worthier creature: And when he
has none of the animal creation to hunt down and
abuse, will make use of his power, his strength, or
his wealth, to oppress the less powerful and weaker of
his own species! 
When you and I meet next, let us enter more
largely into this subject: And, I dare say, we shall
take it by turns, in imitation of the two Sages of antiquity,
to laugh and to weep at the thoughts of what
miserable yet conceited beings Men in general, but we
Libertines in particular, are. 
I fell upon a piece at Dorrell's this very evening,
intituled, The sacred Classics, written by one Blackwall. 
I took it home with me; and had not read a dozen
pages, when I was convinced, that I ought to be
ashamed of myself to think, how greatly I have admired
less noble and less natural beauties in Pagan authors; 
while I have known nothing of this all-excelling
collection of beauties, the Bible! By my faith, Lovelace,
I shall for the future have a better opinion of the
good sense and taste of half a score Parsons whom I
have fallen in with in my time, and despised for magnifying,
as I thought they did, the language and the
sentiments to be found in it, in preference to all the
antient poets and philosophers. And this is now a
convincing proof to me, and shames as much an Infidel's 

presumption as his ignorance, that those who
know least, are the greatest scoffers. A pretty pack
of would-be wits of us, who censure without knowlege,
laugh without reason, and are most noisy and
loud against things we know least of! 