



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday, July 23. 
The Letter accompanying This being upon a
very peculiar subject, I would not embarrass it,
as I may say, with any other. And yet having some
further matters upon my mind, which will want your
excuse for directing them to you, I hope the following
lines will have that excuse. 
My good Mrs. Norton, so long ago as in a Letter
dated the 3d of this month (a) , hinted to me, that my
relations took amiss some severe things you were pleased,
in love to me, to say of them. Mrs. Norton
mentioned it with that respectful love which she bears
to my dearest friend: But wished, for my sake, that
you would rein in a vivacity, which, on most other
occasions, so charmingly becomes you. This was
her sense. You know that I am warranted to speak
and write freer to my Anna Howe, than Mrs. Norton
would do. 
I durst not mention it to you at that time, because
appearances were so strong against me, on Mr. Lovelace's
getting me again into his power (after my escape 

to Hamstead) as made you very angry with me when
you answered mine on my second escape. And, soon
afterwards, I was put under that barbarous Arrest; 
so that I could not well touch upon that subject till
now. 
Now, therefore, my dearest Miss Howe, let me
repeat my earnest request (for This is not the first
time by several that I have been obliged to chide you
on this occasion), That you will spare my parents,
and other relations, in all your conversations about
me. —Indeed, I wish they had thought fit to take other
measures with me: But who shall judge for them? — 
The event has justified them, and condemned me. — 
They expected nothing good of this vile man; he
has not, therefore, deceived them: But they expected
other things from me; and I have. And they have
the more reason to be set against me, if (as my Aunt
Hervey wrote (a)  formerly) they intended not to force
my inclinations, in favour of Mr. Solmes; and if they
believe, that my going off was the effect of choice
and premeditation. 
I have no desire to be received to favour by them: 
For why should I sit down to wish for what I have
no reason to expect? —Besides, I could not look them
in the face, if they would receive me. Indeed I could
not. All I have to hope for, is, first, that my Father
will absolve me from his heavy malediction: And
next, for a Last Blessing. The obtaining of these favours
are needful to my peace of mind. 
I have written to my Sister; but have only mentioned
the absolution. 
I am afraid, I shall receive a very harsh Answer
from her: My fault, in the eyes of my family, is of so
enormous a nature, that my first application will
hardly be encouraged. Then they know not (nor
perhaps will believe) that I am so very ill as I am. So
that, were I actually to die before they could have 

time to take the necessary informations, you must not
blame them too severely. You must call it a Fatality. 
I know not what you must call it: For,
alas! I have made them as miserable as I am myself. 
And yet sometimes I think, that, were they chearfully
to pronounce me forgiven, I know not whether
my concern for having offended them would not be
augmented: Since I imagine, that nothing can be
more wounding to a spirit not ungenerous, than a
generous forgiveness. 
I hope your Mother will permit our correspondence
for one month more, altho' I do not take her advice
as to having this man. Only for one month. I will
not desire it longer. When Catastrophes are winding-up,
what changes (changes that make one's heart
shudder to think of) may one short month produce! — 
But if she will not—why then, my dear, it becomes
us both to acquiesce. 
You can't think what my apprehensions would
have been, had I known Mr. Hickman was to have
had a meeting (on such a questioning occasion as must
have been his errand from you) with that haughty and
uncontroulable man. 
You give me hope of a visit from Mr. Hickman: 
Let him expect to see me greatly altered. I know he
loves me: For he loves every one whom you love. 
A painful interview, I doubt! But I shall be glad to
see a man, whom you will one day, and that on an
early day, I hope, make happy; and whose gentle
Manners, and unbounded Love for you, will make
you so, if it be not your own fault. 
I am, my dearest, kindest Friend, the sweet Companion
of my happy hours, the Friend ever dearest and
nearest to my fond heart, 
Your equally obliged and faithful
Clarissa Harlowe. 