


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Monday, May 8. 
My Lord and I have had another little—Tiff,
shall I call it? It came not up to a quarrel. 
Married people would have enough to do, if they
were to trouble their friends every time they misunderstood
one another. And now a word or two of
other people: Not always scribbling of ourselves. 
We have just heard, that our cousin Everard has
added another fool of our Sex to the number of the
weak ones who disgrace it: A sorry fellow! He has
been seen with her, by one whom he would not
know, at Cuper's Gardens; dressed like a Sea-officer,
and skulking, like a thief, into the privatest walks of
the place. When he is tired of the poor wretch, he
will want to accommodate with us by promises of penitence
and reformation, as once or twice before. 
Rakes are not only odious, but they are despicable
fellows. You will the more clearly see this, when I
assure you, from those who know, that this silly creature
our cousin is looked upon, among his brother
Libertines, and Smarts, as a man of first consideration! 
He has also been seen, in a gayer habit, at a certain
Gaming-table, near Covent-Garden; where he
did not content himself with being an idle spectator. 
Colonel Winwood, our informant, shook his head,
but made no other answer, to some of our enquiries. 
May he suffer! say I. —A sorry fellow!— 
Preparations are going on, all so-fast at Windsor. 

We are all invited. God grant that Miss Mansfield
may be as happy a Lady W. as we all conclude she
will be! But I never was fond of matches between
sober young women, and battered old rakes. Much
good may do the adventurers, drawn in by gewgaw
and title! —Poor things! —But convenience, when
that's the motive, whatever foolish girls think, will
hold out its comforts, while a gratified Love quickly
evaporates. 
Beauchamp, who is acquainted with the Mansfields,
is entrusted by my brother, in his absence,
with the management of the Law-affairs. He hopes,
lie says, to give a good account of them. The base
steward of the uncle Calvert, who lived as a husband
with the woman who had been forced upon his superannuated
master in a doting fit, has been brought, by
the death of one of the children born in Mr. Calvert's
life-time, and by the precarious health of the
posthumous one, to make overtures of accommodation. 
A new hearing of the cause between them
and the Keelings, is granted; and great things are expected
from it, in their favour, from some new lights
thrown in upon that suit. The Keelings are frighted
out of their wits, it seems; and are applying to Sir
John Lambton, a disinterested neighbour, to offer
himself as a mediator between them. The Mansfields
will so soon be related to us, that I make no
apology for interesting you in their affairs. 
Be sure you chide me for my whimsical behaviour
to Lord G. I know you will. But don't blame my
heart: My head only is wrong. 
* *
A little more from fresh informations of this sorry
varlet Everard. I wished him to suffer; but I wished
him not to be so very great a sufferer as it seems he is. 
Sharpers have bit his head off, quite close to his
shoulders: They have not left it him to carry under
his arm, as the honest patron of France did his. 

They lend it him, however, now-and-then, to repent
with, and curse himself. The creature he attended
to Cuper's Gardens, instead of a country Innocent,
as he expected her to be, comes out to be a cast
mistress, experienced in all the arts of such, and acting
under the secret influences of a man of quality; 
who, wanting to get rid of her, supports her in a
prosecution commenced against him (poor devil!) for
performance of covenants. He was extremely mortified,
on finding my brother gone abroad: He intends
to apply to him for his pity and help. Sorry fellow! 
He boasted to us, on our expectation of our brother's
arrival from abroad, that he would enter his cousin
Charles into the ways of the town. Now he wants
to avail himself against the practices of the sons of
that town by his cousin's character and consequence. 
A combination of sharpers, it seems, had long set
him as a man of fortune: But, on his taking refuge
with my brother, gave over, for a time, their designs
upon him, till he threw himself again in their way. 
The worthless fellow had been often liberal of his
promises of marriage to young creatures of more innocence
than this; and thinks it very hard that he
should be prosecuted for a crime which he had so frequently
committed, with impunity. Can you pity
him? I cannot, I assure you. The man who can
betray and ruin an innocent woman, who loves him,
ought to be abhorred by men. Would he scraple to
betray and ruin them, if he were not afraid of the
Law? —Yet there are women, who can forgive such
wretches, and herd with them.— 
My aunt Eleanor is arrived: A good, plump, bonnyfaced
old virgin. She has chosen her apartment. At
present we are most prodigiously civil to each other:
But already I suspect she likes Lord G. better than I
would have her. She will perhaps, if a party should
be formed against your poor Charlotte, make one of
it. 

Will you think it time thrown away, to read a
further account of what is come to hand about the
wretches who lately, in the double sense of the word,
were overtaken between St. Denis and Paris? 
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, it seems, still keeps his
chamber: He is thought not to be out of danger from
some inward hurt, which often makes him bring up
blood in quantities. He is miserably oppressed by lowness
of spirits; and when he is a little better in that
respect, his impatience makes his friends apprehensive
for his head. But has he intellects strong enough to
give apprehensions of that nature? Fool and madman
we often join as terms of reproach; but I believe,
fools seldom run really mad. 
Merceda is in a still more dangerous way. Besides
his bruises, and a fractured skull, he has, it seems, a
wound in his thigh, which, in the delirium he was
thrown into by the fracture, was not duly attended to; 
and which, but for his valiant struggles against the
knife which gave the wound, was designed for a still
greater mischief. His recovery is despaired of; and
the poor wretch is continually offering up vows of penitence
and reformation, if his life may be spared. 
Bagenhall was the person who had seduced, by promises
of marriage, and fled for it, the manufacturer's
daughter of Abbeville. He was overtaken by his pursuers
at Douay. The incensed father, and friends of
the young woman, would not be otherwise pacified
than by his performing his promise; which, with infinite
reluctance, he complied with, principally thro'
the threats of the brother, who is noted for his fierceness
and resolution; and who once made the sorry
creature feel an argument which greatly terrified him. 
Bagenhall is at present at Abbeville, living as well as
he can with his new wife, cursing his fate, no doubt,
in secret. He is obliged to appear fond of her before
her brother and father; the latter being also a sour
man, a Gascon, always boasting of his family, and 

valuing himself upon a de, affixed by himself to his
name, and jealous of indignity offered to it. The
fierce brother is resolved to accompany his sister to
England, when Bagenhall goes thither, in order, as
he declares, to secure to her good usage, and see her
owned and visited by all Bagenhall's friends and relations. 
And thus much of these fine gentlemen. 
How different a man is Beauchamp! But it is injuring
him, to think of those wretches and him at the
same time. He certainly has an eye to Emily, but
behaves with great prudence towards her: Yet everybody
but she sees his regard for her: Nobody but her
guardian runs in her head; and the more, as she really
thinks it is a glory to love him, because of his goodness. 
Every-body, she says, has the same admiration
of him, that she has. 
Mrs. Reeves desires me to acquaint you, that Miss
Clements having, by the death of her mother and
aunt, come into a pretty fortune, is addressed to by a
Yorkshire gentleman of easy circumstances, and is
preparing to go down thither to reside; but that she
intends to write to you before she goes, and to beg
you to favour her with now-and-then a Letter. 
I think Miss Clements is a good fort of young
woman: But I imagined she would have been one of
those Nuns at large, who need not make vows of living
and dying Aunt Eleanors, or Lady Gertrudes; 
all three of them good honest souls! chaste, pious,
and plain. It is a charming situation, when a woman
is arrived at such a height of perfection, as to be above
giving or receiving temptation. Sweet innocents! 
They have my reverence, if not my love. How
would they be affronted, if I were to say pity! —I
think only of my two good Aunts, at the present
writing. Miss Clements, you know, is a youngish
woman; and I respect her much. One would not
jest upon the unsightliness of person, or plainness of
feature: But think you she will not be one of those, 

who twenty years hence may put in a boast of her
quondam beauty? 
How I run on! I think I ought to be ashamed of
myself. 
‘Very true, Charlotte.’ 
And so it is, Harriet. I have done—Adieu! — 
Lord G. will be silly again, I doubt; but I am prepared. 
I wish he had half my patience. 
‘Be quiet, Lord G.! What a fool you are!’ — 
The man, my dear, under pretence of being friends,
run his sharp nose in my eye. No bearing his fondness:
It is worse than insolence. How my eye waters! 
—I can tell him—But I will tell him, and not
you.—Adieu, once more. 
Charlotte G. 

