


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Wedn. Night, March 1. 
Mr. Fowler set out yesterday for Gloucestershire,
where he has an estate. He
proposes to go from thence to Caermarthen,
to the worthy Sir Rowland. He
paid a visit to Mr. Reeves, and desired
him to present to me his best wishes and respects. He
declared, that he could not possibly take leave of me,
though he doubted not but I would receive him with
goodness, as he called it. But it was that which cut
him to the heart: So kind, and so cruel, he said, he
could not bear it. 
I hope, poor Mr. Fowler will be more happy than
I could make him. Methinks, I could have been 

half-glad to have seen him before he went: and yet
but half-glad; for, had he shewn much concern, I
should have been pained. 
Take now, my dear, an account of what passed
this day at St. James's Square. 
There were at Sir Charles Grandison's, besides Lord
and Lady L. the young Lord G. one of Miss Grandison's
humble Servants; Mr. Everard Grandison; Miss
Emily Jervois, a young Lady of about fourteen, a
ward of Sir Charles; and Dr. Bartlett, a Divine; of
whom more by-and-by. 
Sir Charles conducted us into the drawing-room,
adjoining to the dining-room; where only were his
two Sisters. They received my cousins and me with
looks of love. 
I will tell you, said Sir Charles, your company, before
I present them to you. Lord L. is a good man. 
I honour him as such; and love him as my Sister's
Husband. 
Lady L. bowed, and looked round her, as if she
took pride in her Brother's approbation of her Lord. 
Mr. Everard Grandison, proceeded he, is a sprightly
man. He is prepared to admire you, Miss Byron. 
You will not believe, perhaps, half the handsome things
he will say to you; but yet, will be the only person
who hears them, that will not. 
Lord G. is a modest young man: He is genteel,
well-bred; but is so much in love with a certain young
lady, that he does not appear with that dignity in
her eye [Why blushes my Charlotte?] that otherwise
perhaps he might. 
Are not you, Sir Charles, a modest man? 
No comparisons, Charlotte. Where there is a double
prepossession; no comparisons! —But Lord G. Miss
Byron, is a good kind of young man. You'll not
dislike him, though my Sister is pleased to think— 
No comparisons, Sir Charles. 
That's fair, Charlotte. I will leave Lord G. to the 

judgment of Miss Byron. Ladies can better account
for the approbation and dislikes of ladies, than we
men can. 
Dr. Bartlett you'll also see. He is learned, prudent,
humble. You'll read his heart in his countenance, the
moment he smiles upon you. Your Grandpapa, Madam,
had fine curling silver hair, had he not? The
moment I heard that you owed obligation to your
Grandfather's care and delight in you, I figured to
myself, that he was just such a man, habit excepted:
Your Grandfather was not a Clergyman, I think. 
When I have friends whom I have a strong desire to
please, I always endeavour to treat them with Dr.
Bartlett's company. He has but one fault; he speaks
too little: But were he to speak much, every one
else would wish to be silent. 
My ward Emily Jervois is an amiable girl. Her
Father was a good man; but not happy in his nuptials. 
He bequeathed to my care, on his death-bed,
at Florence, this his only child. My Sister loves her. 
I love her for her own sake, as well as for her Father's. 
She has a great fortune: And I have had the
happiness to recover large sums, which her Father gave
over for lost. He was an Italian merchant; and
driven out of England by the unhappy temper of his
Wife. I have had some trouble with her; and, if she
be living, expect more. 
Unhappy temper of his Wife, Sir Charles! You are
very mild in your account of one of the most abandoned
of women. 
Well, but, Charlotte, I am only giving brief hints
of Emily's story, to procure for her an interest in
Miss Byron's favour, and to make their first acquaintance
easy to each other. Emily wants no prepossession
in Miss Byron's favour. She will be very ready herself
to tell her whole story to Miss Byron. Meantime,
let us not say all that is just to say of the Mother,
when we are speaking of the Daughter. 

I stand corrected, Sir Charles. 
Emily, Madam (turning to me) is not constantly
resident with us in town. She is fond of being everywhere
with my Charlotte. 
And where you are, Sir Charles, said Miss Grandison. 
Mr. Reeves whispered a question to Sir Charles,
which was seconded by my eyes; for I guessed what
it was: Whether he had heard any thing further of Sir
Hargrave? 
Don't be anxious, said Sir Charles. All must be
well. People, long used to error, don't, without reluctance,
submit to new methods of proceeding. All
must be well. 
Sir Charles stepping out, brought in with him Miss
Jervois. The Gentlemen seem engaged in conversation,
said he. But I know the impatience of this
young lady to pay her respects to Miss Byron. 
He presented her to us: This dear girl is my
Emily. Allow me, Madam, whenever Miss Grandison
shall be absent, to claim for her the benefit of
your instruction, and your general countenance, as
she shall appear worthy of it. 
There are not many men, my Lucy, who can make
a compliment to one lady, without robbing, or, at
least, depreciating another. How often have you and
I observed, that a polite Brother is a black swan? 
I saluted the young lady, and told her, I should
be fond of embracing every opportunity that should
offer, to commend myself to her favour. 
Miss Emily Jervois is a lovely girl. She is tall,
genteel, and has a fine complexion; and, tho' pitted
with the small-pox, is pretty. The sweetness of her
manners, as expressed in her aspect, gives her great
advantage. I was sure, the moment I saw her, that
her greatest delight is to please. 
She made me two or three pretty compliments; 

and, had not Sir Charles commended her to me, I
should have been highly taken with her. 
Mr. Grandison entered: Upon my honour, Sir
Charles, I can stay no longer, said he: To know
that the finest woman in England is under the same
roof with me; yet to be so long detained from paying
my respects to her—I can't bear it. And in a very
gallant manner, as he seemed to intend, he paid his
compliments, first to me, and then to my two Cousins:
—And whispering, yet loud enough to be heard,
to Miss Grandison, swore by his soul, that report fell
short of my perfections—and I can't tell what. 
Did I not tell you, that you would say so, Sir? said
Miss Grandison. 
I did not like the gentleman the better for what I
had heard of him: But, perhaps, should have been
less indifferent to his compliment, had I not before
been acquainted with Mr. Greville, Mr. Fenwick,
and Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. The men of this cast,
I think, seem all alike. Poor creatures! how from my
heart—But, indeed, now that I have the honour to
know these two Sisters, I despise myself. 
Sir Charles addressing himself to my Cousins and
me, Now, said he, that my Cousin Grandison has
found an opportunity to introduce himself; and that I
have presented my Ward to you; we will, if you
please, see how Lord L. Lord G. and Dr. Bartlett,
are engaged. 
He led my Cousin Reeves into the dining-room. 
Lord L. addressed us with great politeness. 
After Sir Charles had presented the Doctor to my
Cousins, he respectfully took my hand: Were there
fifty Ladies here, my good Dr. Bartlett, whom you
had never seen before, you would, I am sure, from
the character you have had of Miss Byron, be under
no difficulty of reading that character in this young
Lady's face. Miss Byron, behold, in Dr. Bartlett,
another Grandfather! 

I reverence, said I, good Dr. Bartlett. I borrow
Sir Charles's thought: The character he has given
you, Sir, is stamped in your countenance. I should
have venerated you where-ever I had seen you. 
The gentleman has such a truly venerable aspect,
my Lucy, I could not help saying this. 
Sir Charles's goodness, Madam, said he, as it ever
did, prevents my wishes. I rejoice to see, and to congratulate,
a new Sister, restored, as I will call it in the
language of Miss Grandison, to the best of families. 
Just then came in a servant, and whispered to Sir
Charles: Shew the gentleman, said Sir Charles, into
the drawing-room, next the Study. 
Mr. Grandison came up to me, and said many silly
things. I thought them so at that time. 
Mr. Reeves soon after was sent for out by Sir
Charles. I did not like his looks on his return. 
Dinner being ready to be served, and Sir Charles,
who was still with the gentleman, summoned to it,
he desired we would walk down, and he would wait
upon us by the time we were seated. 
Some new trouble, thought I, of which I am the
cause, I doubt. 
Presently came in Sir Charles, unaffectedly smiling
and serene. —God bless you, Sir, thought I! —His
looks pleased me better than my Cousin's. 
But, my dear, there is something going forward,
that I cannot get out of my Cousin. I hoped I should,
when I got home. The Gentleman to whom Sir
Charles was called out, was certainly that Bagenhall. 
Mr. Reeves cannot deny that. I guessed it was, by
Sir Charles's sending in for Mr. Reeves. It must be
about me. 
We had several charming conversations. Sir Charles
was extremely entertaining. So unassuming, so lively,
so modest, it was delightful to see the attention
paid to him by the servants as they waited at table. 

They watched every look of his. I never saw love
and reverence so agreeably mingled in servants faces in
my life. And his commands were delivered to them
with so much gentleness of voice and aspect, that one
could not but conclude in favour of both, that they
were the best of Servants to the best of Masters. 
Mr. Grandison was very gallant in his speeches to
me; but very uncivil with his eyes. 
Lord L. said but little; but what he did say, deservedly
gained attention. 
Every-body reverenced Dr. Bartlett, and was attentive
when he spoke; and would, I dare say, on his own
account, had not the Master of the house, by the regard
he paid him, engaged every one's veneration for
him. Many of the questions which Sir Charles put
to him, as if to inform himself, it was evident he could
himself have answered: Yet he put them with an air
of teachableness, if I may so express myself; and received
the Doctor's answers to them with as much satisfaction,
as if he were then newly enlightened by
them. —Ah, my Lucy! you imagine, I dare say, that
this admirable man lost nothing in my eyes, by this
his polite condescension. Reserve, and a politeness
that had dignity in it, shewed that the fine Gentleman
and the Clergyman were not separated in Dr.
Bartlett. —Pity they should be in any of the function! 
Sir Charles gave Lord G. an opportunity to shine,
by leading the discourse into circumstances and details,
which Lord G. could best recount. My Lord has
been a traveller. He is a connoisseur in Antiquities,
and in those parts of nice Knowlege, as I, a woman,
call it, with which the Royal Society here, and the
learned and polite of other nations, entertain themselves. 
Lord G. appeared to advantage, as Sir Charles managed
it, under the awful eye of Miss Grandison. Upon
my word, Lucy, she makes very free with him. I
whisper'd her, that she did—A very Miss Howe, said I. 

To a very Mr. Hickman, re-whispered she. —But
here's the difference: I am not determined to have
Lord G. Miss Howe yielded to her Mother's recommendation,
and intended to marry Mr. Hickman,
even when she used him worst. One time or
other (archly continued she the whisper, holding up
her spread hand, and with a countenance of admiration)
my Lord G. is to shew us his collection of Butterflies,
and other gaudy insects: Will you make
one?— 
Of the gaudy insects! whispered I.— 
Fie, Harriet! —One of the party, you know, I
must mean. Let me tell you, I never saw a collection
of these various insects, that I did not the more admire
the Maker of them, and of all us insects, whatever I
thought of the collectors of the minute ones. —Another
word with you, Harriet—These little playful
studies may do well enough with persons who do not
want to be more than indifferent to us: But do you
think a Lover ought to take high delight in the painted
wings of a Butterfly, when a fine Lady has made herself
all over Butterfly to attract him? —Eyes off, Sir
Charles!—for he looked, tho' smilingly, yet earnestly,
at us, as we whisper'd behind the Countess's chair; 
who heard what was said, and was pleased with it. 

