


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Friday, Mar. 17. 
I Send you inclosed (to be returned by the first
opportunity) Sir Charles's Letter to his sister, acquainting
her with the happy conclusion of the affair
between Captain Anderson and her. Her brother, as 

you will see, acquits her not of precipitation. If he
did, it would have been an impeachment of his justice. 
O the dear Charlotte! how her pride is piqued at the
meanness of the man! But no more of this subject,
as the Letter is before you. 
And now, my dear and honoured friends, let me
return you a thousand thanks for the great pacquet of
my Letters, just sent me, with a most indulgent one
from my aunt, and another from my uncle. 
I have already put into the two Ladies hands, and
my Lord's, without reserve, all the Letters that reach
to the masquerade affair, from the time of my setting
out for London; and when they have read those, I
have promised them more. This confidence has
greatly obliged them; and they are employed, with
no small earnestness, in perusing them. 
This gives me an opportunity of pursuing my own
devices—And what, besides scribbling, do you think
one of them is—A kind of persecution of Dr. Bartlett; 
by which, however, I suspect, that I myself am
the greatest sufferer. He is an excellent man; and I
make no difficulty of going to him in his closet; encouraged
by his assurances of welcome. 
Let me stop to say, my Lucy, that when I approach
this good man in his retirement, surrounded by his
books, his table generally covered with those on pious
subjects, I, in my heart, congratulate the saint, and
inheritor of future glory; and in that great view, am
the more desirous to cultivate his friendship. 
And what do you think is our subject? Sir Charles,
I suppose, you guess—And so it is, either in the middle
or latter end of the few conversations we have yet
had time to hold: But, I do assure you, we begin
with the sublimest; tho' I must say, to my shame,
that it has not so much of my heart, at present, as
once it had, and I hope again it will one day have— 
The great and glorious truths of Christianity, are this
subject; which yet, from this good Dr. Bartlett, 

warms my heart, as often as he enters into it. But
this very subject, sublime as it is, brings on the other,
as of consequence: For Sir Charles Grandison, without
making an ostentatious pretension to religion, is
the very Christian in practice, that these doctrines teach
a man to be. Must not then the doctrines introduce
the mention of a man who endeavours humbly to
imitate the Divine example? It was upon good
grounds he once said, That as he must one day die,
it was matter of no moment to him, whether it were
to-morrow, or forty years hence. 
The Ladies had referred me to the Doctor himself
for a more satisfactory account than they had given
me, how Sir Charles and he first came acquainted. I
told him so, and asked his indulgence to me in this
enquiry. 
He took it kindly. He had, he said, the history of it
written down. His nephew, whom he often employs
as his amanuensis, should make me out, from that
little history, an account of it, which I might shew, he
was pleased to say, to such of my select friends, as I
entrusted with the knowlege of my own heart. 
I shall impatiently expect the abstract of this little
history; and the more, as the Doctor tells me, there
will be included some particulars of Sir Charles's behaviour
abroad in his younger life, and of Mr. Beauchamp,
whom the Doctor speaks of with love, as his
patron's dearest friend, and whom he calls a second
Sir Charles Grandison. 
* *
See, my Lucy, the reward of frankness of heart. 
My communicativeness has been already encouraged
with the perusal of two Letters from the same excellent
man to Doctor Bartlett; to whom, from early days
(as I shall be soon more particularly informed) he has
given an account of all his conduct and movements. 
The Doctor drew himself in, however, by reading
to Lord L. and the Ladies, and me, a paragraph or 

two out of one of them: And he has even allowed
me to give my grandmamma and aunt a sight of
them. Return them, Lucy, with the other Letter,
by the very next post. He says, he can deny me nothing. 
I wish I may not be too bold with him—As
for Miss Grandison, she vows, that she will not let
the good man rest till she gets him to communicate
what he shall not absolutely declare to be a secret, to
us three sisters, and my Lord L. If the first man,
she says, could not resist one woman, how will the
Doctor deal with three, not one of them behind-hand
with the first in curiosity? And all loving him, and
whom he professes to esteem? You see, Lucy, that
Miss Grandison has pretty well got up her spirits
again. 
* *
Just now Miss Grandison has related to me a conversation
that passed between my Lord and Lady L.
herself, and Doctor Bartlett: In which the subject
was their brother and me. The Ladies and my Lord
are entirely in my interests, and regardful of my
punctilio. They roundly told the Doctor, That, being
extremely earnest to have their brother marry,
they knew not the person living, whom they wished
to call his wife preferably to Miss Byron; could they
be sure, that I was absolutely disengaged. Now,
Doctor, said Miss Grandison, tell us frankly, What
is your opinion of our choice for a more than nominal sister? 
I will make no apologies, Lucy, for repeating all
that was repeated to me of this conversation. 
Lord L. Ay, my good Doctor Bartlett, let us have
your free opinion. 
Dr. B. Miss Byron (I pronounce upon knowlege,
for she has more than once since I have been down,
done me the honour of entering into very free and
serious conversations with me) is one of the most excellent
of women. 

And then he went on, praising me for ingenuousness,
seriousness, chearfulness, and for other good
qualities, which his partiality found out in me: And
added, Would to heaven that she were neither more
nor less than Lady Grandison! 
God bless him! thought I—Don't you join, my
Lucy, to say, at this place, you, who love me so
dearly, God bless you, Doctor Bartlett? 
Lady L. Well, but, Doctor, you say that Miss Byron
talks freely with you; cannot you gather from
her, whether she is inclined to marriage? Whether
she is absolutely disengaged? Lady D. made a proposal
to her for Lord D.; and insisted on an answer to
this very question: That matter is gone off. As our
guest, we would not have Miss Byron think us impertinent. 
She is very delicate. And as she is so
amiably frank-hearted, those things she chooses not to
mention of her own accord, one would not, you know,
officiously put to her. 
This was a little too much affected. Don't you
think so, Lucy? The Doctor, it is evident by his
answer, did. 
Dr. B. It is not likely that such a subject can arise
between Miss Byron and me: And it is strange, methinks,
that Ladies calling each other sisters, should
not be absolutely mistresses of this question. 
Lord L. Very right, Doctor Bartlett. But Ladies
will, in these points, take a compass before they explain
themselves. A man of Doctor Bartlett's penetration
and uprightness, Ladies, should not be treated
with distance. We are of opinion, Doctor, that
Miss Byron, supposing that she is absolutely disengaged,
could make no difficulty to prefer my brother
to all the men in the world. What think you? 
Dr. B. I have no doubt of it: She thinks herself
under obligation to him. She is goodness itself. She
must love goodness. Sir Charles's person, his vivacity,
his address, his understanding—What woman would 

not prefer him to all the men she ever saw? He has
met with admirers among the Sex in every nation in
which he has set his foot [Ah! Lucy!]. You, Ladies,
must have seen, forgive me (bowing to each)
that Miss Byron has a more than grateful respect for
your brother. 
Miss Gr. We think so, Doctor; and wanted to
know if you did: And so, as my Lord says, fetched
a little compass about; which we should not have
done to you. But you say, That my brother has had
numbers of admirers—Pray, Doctor, is there any
one Lady (We imagine there is) that he has preferred
to another, in the different nations he has travelled
through? 
Lord L. Ay, Doctor, we want to know this; and
if you thought there were not, we should make no
scruple to explain ourselves, as well to Miss Byron, as
to my brother. 
Don't you long to know what answer the Doctor
returned to this, Lucy? I was out of breath with
impatience, when Miss Grandison repeated it to me. 
The Doctor hesitated—And at last said; I wish
with all my heart, Miss Byron could be Lady Grandison. 
Miss Gr. Could be? —Could be, said each. 
And could be? said the fool to Miss Grandison,
when she repeated it, her heart quite sunk. 
Dr. B. (smiling) You hinted, Ladies, that you are
not sure, that Miss Byron is absolutely disengaged. 
But, to be open and above-board, I have reason to
believe, that your brother would be concerned, if he
knew it, that you should think of putting such a
question as this to any-body but himself. Why don't
you? He once complained to me, that he was afraid
his sisters looked upon him as a reserved man; and
condescended to call upon me to put him right, if I
thought his appearance such as would give you
grounds for the surmise. There are two or three 

affairs of intricacy that he is engaged in, and particularly
one, that hangs in suspense; and he would not
be fond, I believe, of mentioning it, till he can do it
with certainty: But else, Ladies, there is not a more
frank-hearted man in the world, than your brother. 
See, Lucy, how cautious we ought to be in passing
judgment on the actions of others, especially on those
of good men, when we want to fasten blame upon
them; perhaps with a low view (envying their superior
worth) to bring them down to our own level! — 
For are we not all apt to measure the merits of others
by our own standard, and to give praise or dispraise to
actions or sentiments, as they square with our own? 
Lord L. Perhaps, Doctor Bartlett, you don't think
yourself at liberty to answer, whether these particular
affairs are of such a nature, as will interfere with the
hopes we have of bringing to effect a marriage between
my brother and Miss Byron? 
Dr. B. I had rather refer to Sir Charles himself on
this subject. If any man in the world deserves from
prudence and integrity of heart to be happy in this
life, that man is Sir Charles Grandison. But he is
not quite happy. 
Ah, Lucy! —The Doctor proceeded. Your brother,
Ladies, has often said to me, That there was
hardly a man living who had a more sincere value for
the Sex than he had; who had been more distinguished
by the favour of worthy women; yet who had paid
dearer for that distinction than he had done. 
Lady. L. Paid dearer! Good Heaven! 
Miss Gr. How could that be? 
Lord L. I always abroad heard the Ladies reckon
upon Sir Charles, as their own man. His vivacity, his
personal accomplishments, his politeness, his generosity,
his bravery! —Every woman who spoke of
him, put him down for a man of gallantry. And
is he not a truly gallant man? —I never mentioned it 

before—But a Lady Olivia, of Florence was much
talked of, when I was in that city, as being in love
with the handsome Englishman, as our brother was
commonly called there— 
Lady Olivia! Lady Olivia! repeated each sister; 
and why did not your Lordship?— 
Why? Because, tho' she was in love with him, he
had no thoughts of her. And, as the Doctor says, she
is but one of those who admired him where-ever he set
his foot. 
Bless me, thought I, what a black swan is a good
man! —Why (as I have often thought, to the credit
of our Sex) will not all the men be good? 
Lady L. My Lord, you must tell us more of this
Lady Olivia. 
Lord L. I know very little more of her. She was
reputed to be a woman of high quality and fortune,
and great spirit. I once saw her. She is a fine figure
of a woman. Dr. Bartlett can, no doubt, give you
an account of her. 
Miss Gr. Ah, Doctor! What an history could
you give us of our brother, if you pleased! —But as
there is no likelihood that this Lady will be anything
to my brother, let us return to our first subject. 
Lady L. By all means. Pray, Dr. Bartlett, do you
know what my brother's opinion is of Miss Byron? 
Dr. B. The highest that man can have of woman. 
Lady L. As we are so very desirous to see my brother
happily married, and think he never could have
a woman so likely to make him happy, would you advise
us to propose the alliance to him? We would
not to her, unless we thought there were room to hope
for his approbation, and that in a very high degree. 
Dr. B. I am under some concern, my dear Ladies,
to be thought to know more of your brother's heart,
than sisters do whom he loves so dearly, and who
equally love him. I beseech you, give me not so 

much more consequence with him than you imagine
you have yourselves. I shall be afraid, if you do,
that the favour I wish to stand in with you, is owing
more to your brother's distinction of me, than to
your own hearts. 
Lord L. I see not why we may not talk to my brother
directly on this head. Whence is it, that we are
all three insensibly drawn in, by each other's example,
to this distance between him and us? —It is not his
fault. Did we ever ask him a question, that he did
not directly answer, and that without shewing the
least affectation or reserve? 
Miss Gr. He came over to us all at once so perfect,
after an eight or nine years absence, with so much
power, and such a will, to do us good, that we were
awed into a kind of reverence for him. 
Lady L. Too great obligations from one side, will
indeed create distance on the other. Grateful hearts
will always retain a sense of favours heaped upon
them. 
Dr. B. You would give pain to his noble heart,
did he think, that you put such a value upon what
he has done. I do assure you, that he thinks he has
hardly performed his duty, by his sisters. And, as
occasions may still offer, you will find he thinks so. 
But let me beg of you to treat him without reserve or
diffidence; and that you would put to him all those
questions which you would wish to be answered. You
will find him, I dare say, very candid, and very explicit. 
Miss Gr. That shall be my task, when I next see
him. But, dear Doctor Bartlett, if you love us, communicate
to us all that is proper for us to see, of the
correspondence that passes between him and you. 
The Doctor, it seems, bowed; but answered not. 
So you see, Lucy, upon the whole, that I have no
great reason to build so much, as my uncle, in his last
Letter, imagines I do, on the interest of these Ladies
and my Lord L. with their brother. Two or three 

intricate affairs on his hands: One of them still in suspense;
of which, for that reason, he makes a secret:
He is not quite happy: Greatly distinguished by the favour
of worthy women: Who would wonder at that? 
—But has paid dear for the distinction! —What can
one say? What can one think? He once said himself,
That his life was a various life; and that some
unhappy things had befallen him. If the prudence of
such a man could not shield him from misfortune,
who can be exempted from it? —And from worthy
women too! —That's the wonder! —But is this
Olivia one of the worthy women? —I fansy he
must despise us all. I fansy he will never think of
incumbering himself with one of a Sex, that has
made him pay so dear for the general distinction he
has met with from it. As to his politeness to us; a
man may afford to shew politeness to those he has resolved
to keep at distance. 
But, ah, Lucy! —There must be one happy woman,
whom he wishes not to keep at distance. This
is the affair, that hangs in suspense; and of which,
therefore, he chooses to say nothing. 
* *
I Have had the pleasure of a visit from my godfather
Deane. He dined with us this day in his way
to town. The Ladies, Dr. Bartlett, and my Lord L.
are charmed with him. Yet I had pain mingled with
my pleasure. He took me aside, and charged me so
home—He was too inquisitive. I never knew him to
be so very urgent to know my heart. But I was
frank: Very frank: I should hardly have been excuseable,
if I had not, to so good a man, and so dear
a friend. Yet he scarce knew how to be satisfied with
my frankness. 
He will have it, that I look thinner and paler than I
used to do. That may very well be. My very soul,
at times—I know not how I am—Sir Charles is in
suspense too, from somebody abroad. From my heart I 

pity him. Had he but some faults: some great blemishes; 
I fansy I should be easier about him. But to
hear nothing of him, but what is so greatly praise-worthy,
and my heart so delighted with acts of beneficence
—And now, my godfather Deane, at this visit,
running on in his praises, and commending, instead
of blaming me, for my presumptuous thoughts; nay,
exalting me, and telling me, That I deserve him—that
I deserve Sir Charles Grandison! —Why did he not
chide me? Why did he not dissuade me? —Neither
fortune nor merit answerable! —A man who knows so
well what to do with fortune! —The Indies, my dear,
ought to be his! What a king would he make! 
Power could not corrupt such a mind as his. Cæsar,
said Dr. Bartlett, speaking of him before Mr. Deane
and all of us, was not quicker to destroy, than Sir
Charles Grandison is to relieve. Emily's eyes, at the
time, ran over with joy at the expression; and, drying
them, she looked proudly round on us all, as if she
had said. This is my guardian! 
But what do you think, Lucy? My godfather
will have it, that he sees a young passion in Miss Jervois
for her guardian! —God forbid! —A young Love
may be conquered, I believe; but who shall caution
the innocent girl? She must have a sweet pleasure in
it, creeping, stealing, upon her. How can so unexperienced
an heart, the object so meritorious, resist or
reject the indulgence? But, O my Emily! sweet
girl! do not let your Love get the better of your gratitude,
lest it make you unhappy! and, what would
be still more affecting to a worthy heart, make the
generous object of a passion that cannot be gratified,
unhappy; and for that very reason; because he cannot
reward it! See you not already, that, with all his
goodness, he is not quite happy? He is a sufferer
from worthy women! —O my Emily, do not you add
to the infelicity of a man, who can make but 

one woman happy; yet wishes to befriend all the
world—But, hush! selfish adviser! Should not Harriet
Byron have thought of this in time? —Yet she
knew not, that he had any previous engagements:
And may death lay his cold hand upon her heart, before
she become an additional disturbance to his! He
knows not, I hope he guesses not, tho' Dr. Bartlett
has found me out as well as the sisters, that I am captivated,
heart and soul, by his merits. May he never
know it, if the knowlege of it would give him the
shadow of uneasiness! 
I owned to Mr. Deane, that my Lord L. and the
Ladies were warmly interested in my favour. Thank
God for that! he said. All must happen to his wish. 
Nay, he would have it, that Sir Charles's goodness
would be rewarded in having such a wife: But what
wife can do more than her duty to any husband who
is not absolutely a savage? How then can all I could
do, reward such a man as this? 
But, Lucy, don't you blush for me, on reading this
last page of my writing? You may, since I blush
myself on re-perusing it. For shame, Harriet Byron,
put a period to this Letter! —I will; nor subscribe to
it so much as the initials of my name. 

