



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday Afternoon, Aug. 3. 
I am just now agreeably surprised by the following
Letter, delivered into my hands by a messenger
from the Lady. The Letter she mentions, as inclosed
(a) , I have returned, without taking a copy of
it. The contents of it will soon be communicated
to you, I presume, by other hands. They are an
absolute Rejection of thee—Poor Lovelace!— 


To John Belford, Esq;
Aug. 3. 
Sir,
You have frequently offered to oblige me in anything
that shall be within your power: And I
have such an opinion of you, as to be willing to hope,
that at the times you made these offers, you meant
more than mere compliment. 
I have therefore two requests to make to you: The
first I will now mention; the other, if this shall be
complied with, otherwise not. 
It behoves me to leave behind me such an account
as may clear up my conduct to several of my friends
who will not at present concern themselves about me: 
And Miss Howe, and her Mother, are very solicicitous
that I will do so. 
I am apprehensive that I shall not have time to do
this; and you will not wonder that I have less and
less inclination to set about such a painful task; especially
as I find myself unable to look back with patience
on what I have suffered; and shall be too
much discomposed by the retrospection, were I
obliged to make it, to proceed with the requisite temper
in a task of still greater importance which I have
before me. 
It is very evident to me that your wicked friend
has given you, from time to time, a circumstantial
account of all his behaviour to me, and devices against
me; and you have more than once assured me, that
he has done my character all the justice I could wish
for, both by writing and speech. 
Now, Sir, if I may have a fair, a faithful Specimen
from his Letters or Accounts to you, written
upon some of the most interesting occasions, I shall
be able to judge, whether there will or will not be a
necessity for me, for my Honour's sake, to enter
upon the solicited task. 

You may be assured, from my inclosed Answer to
the Letter which Miss Montague has honoured me
with (and which you'll be pleased to return me as
soon as read) that it is impossible for me ever to think
of your friend in the way I am importuned to think
of him: He cannot therefore receive any detriment
from the requested Specimen: And I give you my
honour, that no use shall be made of it to his prejudice,
in Law, or otherwise. And that it may not,
after I am no more, I assure you, that it is a main
part of my view that the passages you shall oblige me
with shall be always in your own power, and not in
that of any other person. 
If, Sir, you think fit to comply with my request,
the passages I would wish to be transcribed (making
neither better nor worse of the matter) are those which
he has written to you, on or about the 7th and 8th
of June, when I was alarmed by the wicked pretence
of a Fire; and what he has written from Sunday
June 11. to the 19th. And in doing this you will
much oblige 
Your humble Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 
Now, Lovelace, Since there are no hopes for thee
of her returning favour—Since some praise may lie
for thy ingenuousness, having never offered [as more
diminutive-minded Libertines would have done] to palliate
thy crimes, by aspersing the Lady, or her Sex— 
Since she may be made easier by it—Since thou must
fare better from thine own pen, than from hers— 
And, finally, Since thy actions have manifested, that
thy Letters are not the most guilty part of what she
knows of thee—I see not why I may not oblige her,
upon her honour, and under the restrictions, and for
the reasons she has given; and this without breach of
the confidence due to friendly communications; especially,
as I might have added, Since thou gloriest in 

thy pen, and in thy wickedness, and canst not be
ashamed. 
But, be this as it may, she will be obliged before
thy remonstrances or clamours against it can come: 
So, pr'ythee now, make the best of it, and rave not; 
except for the sake of a pretence against me, and to
exercise thy talent of execration: —And, if thou
likest to do so for these reasons, rave and welcome. 
I long to know what the second request is: But this
I know, that if it be any-thing less than cutting thy
throat, or endangering my own neck, I will certainly
comply; and be proud of having it in my power to
oblige her. 
And now I am actually going to be busy in the Extracts. 