



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
[In Answer to Letters xxiv.–xxx. inclusive] 

Tuesday, April 18. 
You have a most implacable family. Another
visit from your Uncle Antony has not only
confirmed my Mother an enemy to our correspondence,
but has almost put her upon treading in their
steps.— 
But, to other subjects: 
You plead generously for Mr. Hickman. Perhaps,
with regard to him, I may have done, as I have often
done in singing—Begun a note or key too high; and
yet, rather than begin again, proceed, tho' I strain my
voice, or spoil my tune. But this is evident, the
man is the more observant for it; and you have 

taught me, that the spirit which is the humbler for
ill usage, will be insolent upon better. So, good and
grave Mr. Hickman, keep your distance a little
longer, I beseech you. You have erected an altar to
me; and I hope you will not refuse to bow to it. 
But you ask me, If I would treat Mr. Lovelace,
were he to be in Mr. Hickman's place, as I do Mr.
Hickman? Why really, my dear, I believe I should
not. —I have been very sagely considering this point
of behaviour (in general) on both sides in courtship; 
and I will very candidly tell you the result. I have
concluded, that politeness, even to excess, is necessary
on the mens part, to bring us to listen to their
first addresses, in order to induce us to bow our necks
to a yoke so unequal. But, upon my conscience, I
very much doubt whether a little intermingled insolence
is not requisite from them, to keep up that interest,
when once it has got footing. Men must not let
us see, that we can make fools of them. And I think,
that smooth Love; that is to say, a passion without
rubs; in other words, a passion without passion; is
like a sleepy stream that is hardly seen to give motion
to a straw. So that, sometimes to make us fear, and
even, for a short space, to hate the wretch, is productive
of the contrary extreme. 
If this be so, Lovelace, than whom no man was
ever more polite and obsequious at the beginning, has
hit the very point. For his turbulence since, his readiness
to offend, and his equal readiness to humble
himself (as he is known to be a man of sense, and of
courage too) must keep a woman's passion alive; 
and at last, tire her into a non-resistance that shall
make her as passive as a tyrant-husband would wish
her to be. 
I verily think, that the different behaviour of our
two heroes to their heroines makes out this doctrine
to demonstration. I am so much accustomed, for my
own part, to Hickman's whining, creeping, submissive 

courtship, that I now expect nothing but whine
and cringe from him; and am so little moved with his
nonsense, that I am frequently forced to go to my
harpsichord, to keep me awake, and to silence his
humdrum. Whereas Lovelace keeps up the Ball with
a witness, and all his address and conversation is one
continual game at Raquet. 
Your frequent Quarrels and Reconciliations verify
this observation: And I really believe, that, could
Hickman have kept my attention alive after the Lovelace-manner,
only that he had preserved his morals, I
should have married the man by this time. But then
he must have set out accordingly. For now he can
never, never recover himself, that's certain; but must
be a Dangler to the end of the Courtship-chapter; 
and, what is still worse for him, a Passive to the end
of his life. 
Poor Hickman! perhaps you'll say. 
I have been called your Echo—Poor Hickman!
say I. 
You wonder, my dear, that Mr. Lovelace took
not notice to you over-night of the Letters of Lady
Betty, and his Cousin. I don't like his keeping such
a material and relative circumstance, as I may call
it, one moment from you. By his communicating
the contents of them to you next day, when you was
angry with him, it looks as if he with-held them
for occasional pacifiers; and if so, must he not have
had a forethought that he might give you cause for
anger? Of all the circumstances that have happened
since you have been with him, I think I like this the
least. This alone, my dear, small as it might look
to an indifferent eye, in mine warrants all your caution. 
Yet I think, that Mrs. Greme's Letter to her Sister
Sorlings; his repeated motions for Hannah's attendance; 
and for that of one of the widow Sorlings's
daughters; and, above all, for that of Mrs. Norton; 
are agreeable counterbalances. Were it not for these 

circumstances, I should have said a great deal more of
the other. Yet what a foolish fellow, to let you
know over-night that he had such Letters! —I can't
tell what to make of him. 
I am pleased with the Contents of these Ladies Letters. 
And the more, as I have caused the family to
be again sounded, and find that they are all as desirous
as ever of your alliance. 
&dotup;They really are (every one of them) your very
great admirers. And, as for Lord M. he is so
much pleased with you, and with the confidence, as
he calls it, which you have reposed in his Nephew,
that he vows he will disinherit him, if he reward it
not as he ought. You must take care, that you
lose not both families. 
&dotup;I hear Mrs. Norton is enjoined, as she values the
favour of the other family, not to correspond either
with you, or with me. —Poor creatures! —But they
are your—Yet they are not your Relations, neither,
I believe. Had you had any other Nurse, I should
have concluded you had been changed. I suffer by
their low malice—Excuse me therefore. 
&dotup;You really hold this man to his good behaviour
with more spirit than I thought you mistress of; 
especially when I judged of you by that Meekness
which you always contended for, as the proper distinction
of the female character; and by the Love,
which (think as you please) you certainly have for
him. You may rather be proud of than angry at
the imputation; since you are the only woman I
ever knew, read, or heard of, whose Love was so
much governed by her Prudence. But once the indifference
of the Husband takes place of the ardor of
the Lover, it will be your turn: And, if I am not
mistaken, this man, who is the only self-admirer I
ever knew, who was not a coxcomb, will rather in
his day expect homage than pay it. 
&dotup;Your handsome Husbands, my dear, make a 

Wife's heart ake very often: And tho' you are as
fine a person of a woman, at the least, as he is of
a man; he will take too much delight in himself to
think himself more indebted to your favour, than
you are to his distinction and preference of you. 
But no man, take your finer mind with your very
fine person, can deserve you. So you must be contented,
should your merit be under-rated; since that
must be so, marry whom you will. Perhaps you
will think I indulge these sort of reflections against
your Narcissus's of men, to keep my Mother's choice
for me of Hickman in countenance with myself— 
I don't know but there is something in it; at least,
enough to have given birth to the reflection.&dotup; 
I think there can be no objection to your going to
London. There, as in the centre, you will be in the
way of hearing from every-body, and sending to anybody. 
And then you will put all his sincerity to the
test, as to his promised absence, and such-like. 
But indeed, my dear, I think you have nothing
for it but Marriage. You may try (that you may say
you have tried) what your Relations can be brought
to: But the moment they refuse your proposals, submit
to the yoke, and make the best of it. He will be
a savage indeed, if he makes you speak out. Yet,
it is my opinion, that you must bend a little; for he
cannot bear to be thought slightly of. 
This was one of his speeches once; I believe designed
for me—‘A woman who means one day to
favour her Lover with her hand, should shew the
world, for her own sake, that she distinguishes him
from the common herd.’ 
Shall I give you another fine Sentence of his, and
in the true Libertine stile, as he spoke it, throwing
out his challenging hand? —‘D&wblank;n him, if he would
marry the first princess on earth, if he but thought
she balanced a minute in her choice of Him, or of
an Emperor.’ 

All the world, in short, expect you to have this
man. They think, that you left your Father's house
for this very purpose. The longer the Ceremony is
delayed, the worse appearance it will have in the
world's eye. And it will not be the fault of some of
your Relations, if a slur be not thrown upon your
reputation, while you continue unmarried. Your
Uncle Antony in particular, speaks rough and vile
things, grounded upon the morals of his Brother-Orson. 
But hitherto your admirable character has antidoted
the poison; the detractor is despised, and every
one's indignation raised against him. 
I have written thro' many interruptions: And you
will see the first sheet creased and rumpled, occasioned
by putting it into my bosom, on my Mother's sudden
coming upon me. We have had one very pretty debate,
I will assure you; but it is not worth while to
trouble you with the particulars. —But upon my word
—No matter tho'— 
Your Hannah cannot attend you. The poor girl
left her place about a fortnight ago, on account of
a rheumatic disorder, which has confined her to her
room ever since. She burst into tears, when Kitty
carried to her your desire of having her with you; and
called herself doubly unhappy, that she could not wait
upon a mistress whom she so dearly loved. 
Had my Mother answered my wishes, I should
have been sorry Mr. Lovelace had been the first proposer
of my Kitty for your attendant, till Hannah
could come. To be altogether among strangers, and
a stranger to attend you every time you remove, is
a very disagreeable thing. But your considerateness
and bounty will make you faithful ones where-ever
you go. 
You must take your own way: But if you suffer
any inconvenience, either as to cloaths or money, that
it is in my power to remedy, I will never forgive you. 
My Mother (if that be your objection) need not know
any-thing of the matter. 

&dotup;We have all our Defects: We have often regretted
the particular Fault, which, tho' in venerable
characters, we must have been blind not to see. 
&dotup;I remember what you once said to me; and the
caution was good: Let us, my Nancy, were your
words; let us, who have not the same failing as
those we censure, guard against other and greater in
ourselves. Nevertheless I must needs tell you, that
my Mother has vexed me a little very lately, by some
instances of her jealous narrowness. I will mention
one of them, tho' I did not intend it. She wanted
to borrow Thirty Guineas of me; only while she
got a Note changed. I said, I could lend her but Eight
or Ten. Eight or Ten would not do: She thought
I was much richer. I could have told her, I was
much cunninger than to let her know my Stock; 
which, on a Review, I find Ninety-five Guineas; 
and all of them most heartily at your service. 
&dotup;I believe your Uncle Tony put her upon this wise
project; for she was out of cash in an hour after
he left her. If he did, you will judge that they
intend to distress you. If it will provoke you to
demand your own in a legal way, I wish they
would; since their putting you upon that course
will justify the necessity of your leaving them. And
as it is not for your credit to own, that you were
tricked away contrary to your intention, this would
afford a reason for your going off, that I should
make very good use of. You'll see, that I approve
of Lovelace's advice upon this subject. I am not
willing to allow the weight to your answer to him
on that head, which perhaps ought to be allowed
it (a) . 
&dotup;You must be the less surprised at the inventions
of this man, because of his uncommon talents. 
Whatever he had turned his head to, he would
have excelled in; or been (or done things) extraordinary. 

He is said to be revengeful: A very bad
quality! I believe indeed he is a devil in everything
but his foot. —This therefore is my repeated
advice—Provoke him not too much against yourself: 
But unchain him, and let him loose upon your
Sister's vile Betty, and your Brother's Joseph Leman. 
This is resenting low: But I know to whom
I write, or else I would go a good deal higher, I'll
assure you.&dotup; 
Your next, I suppose, will be from London. Pray
direct it, and your future Letters, till further notice,
to Mr. Hickman, at his own house. He is entirely devoted
to you. Don't take so heavily my Mother's partiality
and prejudices. I hope I am past a Baby. 
Heaven preserve you, and make you as happy as I
think you deserve to be, prays 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 