


Not going to Chapel this Morning, the Reason
of which I told you, I bestowed the Time,
from the Hour of my Beloved's rising, to Breakfast,
in Prayer and Thanksgiving, in my Closet; and now
I begin to be quite easy, chearful and free in my
Spirits; and the rather, as I find myself encouraged
by the Tranquility, Serenity, and pleasing Vivacity
in the Temper and Behaviour of my beloved Spouse; 
who thereby shews he does not repent of his Goodness
to me. 
I attended him to Breakfast, and drank my Chocolate
with great Pleasure, and eat two Bits of Toast; 
and he seemed quite pleased with me, and said, 
Now does my Dearest begin to look upon me with
an Air of Serenity and Satisfaction: It shall be always,
added he, my Delight to give you Occasion for
this sweet becoming Aspect of Confidence and Pleasure
in me. —My Heart, dear Sir, said I, is quite
easy, and has lost all its foolish Tumults, which
combating with my Gratitude, gave an ingrateful
Appearance to my Behaviour: But now your
Goodness, Sir, has enabled it to get the better of its
uneasy Apprehensions, and my Heart is all of one
Piece, and devoted to you, and grateful Tranquillity. 
And could I be so happy as to see you and
my good Lady Davers reconciled, I have nothing
in this World to wish for more, but the Continuance
of your Favour. He said, I wish this Reconciliation,
my Dearest, as well as you; and I do
assure you, more for your sake than my own: And
if she would behave tolerably, I would make the
Terms easier to her for that Reason. 
He said, I will lay down one Rule for you, my
Pamela, to observe in your Dress; and I will tell
you every thing I like or dislike, as it occurs to me; 
and I would have you do the same, on your Part,
that nothing may lie upon either of our Minds that
shall occasion the least Reservedness. 
I have often observed, in marry'd Folks, that, in
a little while, the Lady grows careless in her Dress; 
which, to me, looks as if she would take no Pains
to secure the Affection she had gained, and shews
a Slight to her Husband, that she had not to her
Lover: Now, you must know, this has always given
me great Offence; and I should not forgive it, even
in my Pamela; tho' she would have this Excuse for
herself, that thousands could not make, That she
looks lovely in every thing. So, my Dear, I shall
expect of you always, to be dress'd by Dinner-time, 
except something extraordinary happens; and this,
whether you are to go abroad, or stay at home. 
For this, my Love, will continue to you that sweet
Ease in your Dress and Behaviour, which you are
so happy a Mistress of; and whoever I bring home
with me to my Table, you will be in Readiness to
receive them; and will not want to make those
foolish Apologies, to unexpected Visitors, that carry
with them a Reflection on the Conduct of those
who make them; and besides, will convince me,
that you think yourself obliged to appear as graceful
to your Husband, as you would to Persons less
familiar to your Sight. 
This, dear Sir, said I, is a most obliging Injunction; 
and I most heartily thank you for it, and will
always take care to obey it.––– Why, my Dear, said
he, you may better do this than half your Sex: Because
they too generally act in such a manner, as if
they seem'd to think it the Privilege of Birth and
Fortune, to turn Day into Night, and Night into
Day, and are seldom stirring till 'tis time to sit down
to Dinner; and so all the good old Family Rules are
revers'd; for they breakfast when they should dine; 
dine, when they should sup; and sup, when they
should go to-bed; and, by the Help of dear Quadrille,
sometimes go to-bed when they should rise.––– 
In any thing but these, my Dear, continued he,
I expect you to be a Lady. And my good Mother
was one of this old-fashion'd Cut, tho', in all other
respects, as worthy a Lady as any in the Kingdom. 
And so you have not been used to the new Way,
and may the easier practise the other. 
Dear Sir, said I, pray give me more of your
sweet Injunctions. Why then, continued he, I shall, in
the usual Course, and generally, if not hinder'd by
Company, like to go to-bed with my Dearest, by 
Eleven; and if I don't, shan't hinder you. I ordinarily
now rise by Six, in Summer. I will allow
you to lie half an Hour after me, or so. 
Then you'll have some time at your own Dispose,
till you give me your Company to breakfast; which
may be always so, as that we may have done at a
little after Nine. 
Then will you have several Hours, again, at your
Disposal, till Two o'Clock, when I shall like to sit
down at Table. 
You will then have several useful Hours more to
employ yourself in, as you shall best like; and I would
generally go to Supper by Eight; and when we are
resolved to stick to these old-fashion'd Rules, as
near as we can, we shall make our Visitors conform
to them too, and expect them from us, and suit
themselves accordingly: For I have always observ'd,
that it is in every one's Power to prescribe Rules to
himself. It is only standing a few ridiculous Jests
at first, and that too from such, generally, as are not
the most worthy to be minded; and, after a while,
they will say, It signifies nothing to ask him: He
will have his own Way. There is no putting him
out of his Byass. He is a regular Piece of Clockwork,
will they joke, and all that: And why, my
Dear, should we not be so? For Man is as frail a
Piece of Machinery, as any Clockwork whatever; 
and, by Irregularity, is as subject to be disorder'd. 
Then, my Dear, continued the charming Man,
when they see they are received, at my Times, with
an open Countenance and chearful Heart; when
they see Plenty and Variety at my Board, and meet
a kind and hearty Welcome from us both, they
will not offer to break in upon my Conditions, nor
grudge me my regular Hours: And as most of these
People have nothing to do, except to rise in a Morning,
they may as well come to Breakfast with us, 
at half an Hour after Eight, in Summer, as at Ten
or Eleven. To Dinner at Two, as at Four, Five,
or Six; and to Supper at Eight, as at Ten or Eleven. 
And then our Servants too will know, generally, the
Times of their Business, and the Hours of their
Leisure or Recess; and we, as well as they, shall
reap the Benefit of this Regularity. And who
knows, my Dear, but we may revive the good old
Fashion in our Neighbourhood, by this means?––– 
At least, it will be doing our own Parts towards it; 
and answering the good Lesson I learned at School,
Every one mend one. And the worst that will happen
will be, that when some of my Brother Rakes, such
as those we were broke in upon, so unwelcomly, last
Thursday, are got out of the Way, if that can ever
be, and fall to considering whom they shall go to
dine with in their Rambles, they will only say, We
must not go to him; for his Dinner-time is over; 
and so they'll reserve me for another time, when
they happen to suit it better; or, perhaps, they
will take a Supper and a Bed with me instead of it. 
Now, my Dearest, continued the kind Man, you see
here are more of my Injunctions, as you call them; 
and tho' I will not be so set, as to quarrel if they are
not always exactly comply'd with; yet, as I know you
won't think them unreasonable, I shall be glad they
may as often as they can; and you will give your
Orders accordingly, to your Mrs. Jervis, who is a good
Woman, and will take Pleasure in obeying you. 
O dearest, dear Sir, said I, have you no more of
your sweet Injunctions to honour me with? They
oblige and improve me at the same time! —What
a happy Lot is mine!––– God Almighty reward your
Goodness to me! 
Why, let me see, my Dearest, said he. —But I
think of no more at present. For it would be needless
to say, how much I value you for your Sweetness 
of Temper, and that open Chearfulness of
Countenance which adorns you, when nothing has
given my Fairest Apprehensions for her Virtue: A
Sweetness, and a Chearfulness, that prepossesses in
your Favour, at first Sight, the Mind of every one
that beholds you. —I need not, I hope, say, that
I would have you diligently preserve this sweet Appearance: 
Let no thwarting Accident, no cross
Fortune, (for we must not expect to be exempt
from such, happy as we now are in each other!)
deprive this sweet Face of this its principal Grace: 
And when any thing unpleasing happens, in a quarter
of an Hour, at farthest, begin to mistrust yourself,
and apply to your Glass; and if you see a Gloom
arising, or arisen, banish it instantly, smooth your
dear Countenance, resume your former Composure; 
and then, my Dearest, whose Heart must always be
seen in her Face, and cannot be a Hypocrite, will
find this a means to smooth her Passions also; and if
the Occasion be too strong for so sudden a Conquest,
she will know how to do it more effectually,
by repairing to her Closet, and begging that gracious
Assistance, which has never yet failed her: And
so shall I, my Dear, who, as you once, but too
justly, observ'd, have been too much indulged by my
good Mother, have an Example from you, as well
as a Pleasure in you which will hardly ever be palled. 
One thing, continued he, I have frequently observed,
at the Houses of other Gentlemen, That
when we have unexpectedly visited, or broke in upon
the Family Order, laid down by their Ladies; and
especially if any of us have lain under the Suspicion
of having occasionally seduced our marry'd Companion
into bad Hours, or given indifferent Examples,
the poor Gentleman has been oddly affected at our
coming; tho' the good Breeding of the Lady has
made her just keep up Appearances. He has looked 
so conscious; has been so afraid, as it were, to disoblige; 
has made so many Excuses for some of us,
before we have been accused, as has always shewn
me how unwelcome we have been; and how much
he is obliged to compound with his Lady for a tolerable
Reception of us; and, perhaps, she too, in
Proportion to the honest Man's Concern to court
her Smiles, has been more reserv'd, stiff and formal; 
and has behav'd with an Indifference, and
Slight, that has often made me wish myself out of
her House; for too plainly have I seen, that it was
not his. 
This, my Dear, you will judge by my Description,
has afforded me Subject for Animadversion upon the
marry'd Life; for a Man may not (tho', in the main,
he is willing to flatter himself, that he is Master of
his House, and will assert himself upon great Occasions,
when his Prerogative is strongly invaded) be
always willing to contend; and such Women as
those I have described, are always ready to take the
Field, and are worse Enemies than the old Parthians,
who annoy most, when they seem to retreat; and
never fail to return to the Charge again, and carry
on the offensive War, till they have tired out Resistance,
and made the Husband willing, like a vanquish'd
Enemy, to compound for small Matters, in
order to preserve something. At least, the poor Man
does not care to let his Friends see his Case, and so
will not provoke a Fire to break out, that, he sees,
(and so do his Friends too) the meek Lady has much
ado to smother; and which, very possibly, burns
with a most comfortable Ardour, after we are gone. 
You smile, my Pamela, said he, at this whimsical
Picture; and I am sure, I never shall have Reason
to include you in these disagreeable Out-lines; but
yet I will say, that I expect from you, whoever
comes to my House, that you accustom yourself to 
one even, uniform Complaisance: That no Frown
take place on your Brow: That however ill or
well provided we may be for their Reception, you
shew no Flutter or Discomposure: That whoever
you may have in your Company at the Time, you
signify not, by the least reserved Look, that the
Stranger is come upon you unseasonably, or at a
Time you wished not. But be facetious, kind, obliging
to all; and if to any one more than another,
to such as have the least Reason to expect it from
you, or who are most inferior at the Table; for
thus will you, my Pamela, chear the doubting Mind,
quiet the uneasy Heart, and diffuse Ease, Pleasure,
and Tranquillity around my Board. 
And be sure, my Dear, continued he, let no little
Accidents ruffle your Temper. I shall never forget
once, that I was at Lady Arthur's; and a Footman
happen'd to stumble, and let fall a fine China Dish,
and broke it all to pieces: It was grievous to see
the Uneasiness it gave the poor Lady. And she
was so sincere in it, that she suffer'd it to spread all
over the Company, and it was a pretty large one
too; and not a Person in it, but turn'd either her
Consoler, or fell into Stories of the like Misfortunes; 
and so we all became, for the rest of the Evening,
nothing but blundering Footmen, and careless Servants,
or were turn'd into broken Jars, Plates,
Glasses, Tea-cups, and such-like brittle Substances. 
And it affected me so much, that when I came
home, I went to-bed, and dreamt, that Robin, with
the Handle of his Whip, broke the Fore glass of
my Chariot; and I was so sollicitous, methought, to
keep the good Lady in Countenance for her Anger,
that I broke his Head in Revenge, and stabb'd
one of my Coach-horses. And all the Comfort I
had when it was done, methought, was, that I had
not exposed myself before Company; and there were 
no Sufferers but guilty Robin, and one innocent
Coach-horse; for when my Hand was in, I might
as reasonably have killed the other three. 
I was exceedingly diverted with these facetious
Hints, and the pleasant manner in which he gave
them; and I promis'd to improve by the excellent
Lessons contain'd in them. 
I then went up and dressed myself, as like a Bride
as I could, in my best Cloaths, and, on Enquiry,
finding my dearest Master was gone to walk in the
Garden, I went to find him out. He was reading in
the little Alcove; and I said, Sir, am I licens'd to
intrude upon you, without your Commands? —No,
my Dear, said he, because you cannot intrude. I
am so wholly yours, that where-ever I am, you
have not only a Right to join me; but you do me
a very acceptable Favour at the same time. 
I have, Sir, said I, obey'd your first kind Injunction,
as to dressing myself before Dinner; but,
may-be, you are busy, Sir? He put up the Paper he
was reading, and said, I can have no Business or
Pleasure of equal Value to your Company, my
Dear. What was you going to say? —Only, Sir,
to know, if you have any more kind Injunctions to
give me? —I could hear you talk a whole Day together. 
—You are very obliging, Pamela, said he; 
but you are so perfectly what I wish, that I might
have spar'd those I gave you; but I was willing you
should have a Taste of my Freedom with you, to
put you upon the like with me. For I am confident
there can be no Friendship lasting without Freedom,
and without communicating to one another
even the little Caprices, if my Pamela can have any
such, which may be most affecting to us. 
Now, my Dear, said he, be so kind to find some
Fault with me, and tell me what you would wish
me to do, to appear more agreeable to you. O, 
Sir, said I, and I could have kissed him, but for
Shame, (To be sure I shall grow a sad fond Hussy!) 
I have not one single thing to wish for; no, not
one!––– He saluted me very kindly, and said, he
should be sorry if I had, and forbore to speak it. Do
you think, my dear Sir, said I, that your Pamela
has no Conscience? Do you think, that because you
so kindly oblige her, and delight in obliging her,
that he must rack her Invention for Trials of your
Goodness, and knows not when she is happy!––– O
my dearest Sir, added I, less than one half of the Favours
you have so generously conferred upon me,
would have exceeded my utmost Wishes! 
My dear Angel, said he, and kissed me again, I
shall be troublesome to you with my Kisses, if you
continue thus sweetly obliging, in your Actions and
Expressions. O Sir, said I, I have been thinking,
as I was dressing myself, what an excellent Example
you have given me of the Lessons you teach
me. For here, Sir, you are most charmingly dress'd
yourself, as you have commanded me, before
Dinner. 
Then, Sir, when you command me, at your
Table, to chear the doubting Mind, and comfort
the uneasy Heart, and to behave most kindly to
those who have least Reason to expect it, and are
most inferior; how sweetly, in every Instance that
could possibly occur, have you done this yourself,
by your poor, unworthy Pamela, till you have diffused,
in your own dear Words, Ease, Pleasure and
Tranquillity around my glad Heart. 
Then again, Sir, when you bid me not be disturbed
by little Accidents, or by Strangers coming
in upon me unexpectedly, how noble an Instance
did you give me of this; when, on our dear Wedding
day, the coming of Sir Charles Hargrave, and
the other two Gentlemen, (for which you was quite 
unprovided, and hinder'd our Happiness of dining
together on that chosen Day) did not so disturb you,
but that you entertamed the Gentlemen pleasantly,
and parted with them civilly and kindly! —What
charming Instances are these, I have been recollecting
with Pleasure, of your pursuing the Doctrine
you deliver! 
My Dear, said he, these Observations are very
kind in you, and much to my Advantage: But if I
do not always, (for I fear these were too much Accidents)
so well pursue the Doctrines I lay down, my
Pamela must not expect that my Imperfections will
be a Plea for her Non-observance of my Lessons, as
you call them; for, I doubt, I shall never be half so
perfect as you; and so I cannot permit you to fall
back in your Goodness, tho' I may find myself
unable to advance, as I ought, in my Duty. 
I hope, Sir, said I, by God's Grace, I never shall. 
I believe it, said he; but I only mention this, knowing
my own Defects, lest my future Lessons should
not be so well warranted by my Practice, as in the
Instances you have kindly recollected. 
He was pleased to take Notice of my Dress, and
spanning my Waste with his Hands, said, What
a sweet Shape is here! It would make one regret to
lose it; and yet, my beloved Pamela, I shall think
nothing but that Loss wanting, to complete my Happiness! 
—I put my bold Hand before his Mouth,
and said, Hush, hush! O fie, Sir! —The freest thing
you have ever yet said, since I have been yours!––– 
He kissed my Hand, and said, Such an innocent Wish,
my Dearest, may be permitted me, because it is
the End of the Institution.––– But say, Would such
a Case be unwelcome to my Pamela? —I will say,
Sir, said I, and hid my blushing Face on his Bosom,
that your Wishes, in every thing, shall be
mine; but pray, Sir, say no more! —He kindly saluted 
me, and thanked me, and changed the Subject.––– 
I was not too free, I hope. 
Thus we talked, till we heard the Coaches; and
then he said, Stay here, in the Garden, my Dear,
and I'll bring the Company to you. And when he
was gone, I passing by the Back-door, kneeled down
against it, and blessed God for not permitting my
then so much desired Escape. I went to the Pond,
and kneeled down on the mossy Bank, and again
blessed God there, for his Mercy in my Escape from
myself, my then worst Enemy, tho' I thought I had
none but Enemies, and no Friend near me. And
so I ought to do in almost every Step of this Garden,
and every Room in this House!––– And I was
bending my Steps to the dear little Chapel to make
my Acknowledgment there; but I saw the Company
coming towards me. 
Miss Darnford said, So, Miss! how do you do
now? O, you look so easy, so sweetly, so pleased,
that I know you'll let me dance at your Wedding; 
for I shall long to be there. Lady Jones was pleased
to say, I look'd like an Angel. And Mrs. Peters said,
I improved upon them every time they saw me. 
Lady Darnford was also pleased to make me a fine
Compliment, and said, I looked freer and easier
every time she saw me. Dear-heart! I wish, thinks
I, you would spare these Compliments; for I shall
have some Joke, I doubt, passed upon me by-and-by,
that will make me suffer for all these fine things. 
Mr. Peters said, softly, God bless you, dear Daughter! 
—But not so much as my Wife knows it. —Sir
Simon came in last, and took me by the Hand, and
said, Squire B. by your Leave. And kissed my Hand
five or six times, as if he was mad; and held it with
both his, and made a very free Jest, by way of Compliment,
in his Way. Well, I think a young Rake is
hardly tolerable; but an old Rake, and an old Beau, are 
two very sad Things! —And all this before Daughters
Women-grown! —I whisper'd my Dearest, a little
after, and said, I fear I shall suffer much from Sir
Simon's rude Jokes, by-and-by, when you reveal the
Matter! —'Tis his way, my Dear, said he; you
must now grow above these things. —Miss Nanny
Darnford said to me, with a sort of half-grave, ironical
Air,—Well, Miss, if I may judge by your
easy Deportment now, to what it was when I last
saw you, I hope you will let my Sister, if you won't
me, see the happy Knot ty'd! For she is quite
wild about it. —I curcheed, and only said, You are
all very good to me, Ladies.––– Mr. Peters's Niece
said, Well, Miss, I hope, before we part, we shall
be told the happy Day. My good Master heard her,
and said, You shall, you shall, Madam! —That's
pure! said Miss Darnford. 
He took me aside, and said, softly, Shall I lead
them to the Alcove, and tell them there, or stay till
we go in to Dinner? —Neither, Sir, I think, said I; 
I fear I shan't stand it.––– Nay, said he, they must
know it; I would not have invited them else.––– Why
then, Sir, said I, let it alone till they are going away. 
––– Then, reply'd he, you must pull off your Ring. 
No, no, Sir, said I, that I must not.––– Well, said
he, do you tell Miss Darnford of it yourself.––– Indeed,
Sir, answer'd I, I cannot. 
Mrs. Jewkes came officiously to ask my Master,
just then, if she should bring a Glass of Rhenish and
Sugar before Dinner for the Gentlemen and Ladies; 
and he said, That's well thought of; bring it, Mrs.
Jewkes. 
And she came, with Nan attending her, with two
Bottles and Glasses, and a Salver; and must needs,
making a low Curchee, offer first to me, saying,
Will your Ladyship begin? I colour'd like Scarlet,
and said, No;––– my Master, to be sure! 
But they all took the Hint; and Miss Darnford
said, I'll be hang'd if they have not stole a Wedding. 
Said Mrs. Peters, It must be certainly so! 
Ah! Mr. Peters. 
I'll assure you, said he, I have not marry'd them. 
Where were you, said she, and Mr. Williams, last
Thursday Morning? Said Sir Simon, Let me alone,
let me alone; if any thing has been stolen, I'll find
it out; I'm a Justice of the Peace, you know. And
so he took me by the Hand, and said, Come, Madam,
answer me, by the Oath you have taken; Are
you marry'd or not? 
My Master smiled to see me look so like a Fool; 
and I said, Pray, Sir Simon!––– Ay, ay, said he, I
thought you did not look so smirking upon us for
nothing.––– Well then, Pamela, said my Master, since
your Blushes discover you, don't be ashamed, but
confess the Truth! 
Now, said Miss Darnford, I am quite angry. And
said Lady Darnford, I am quite pleas'd; let me give
you Joy, dear Madam, if it be so. And so they all
said, and saluted me round.––– I was vexed it was
before Mrs. Jewkes; for she shook her fat Sides,
and seem'd highly pleas'd to be a Means of discovering it. 
Nobody, said my Master, wishes me Joy. No,
said Lady Jones, very obligingly, nobody need; for
with such a peerless Spouse, you want no good
Wishes! —And he saluted them; and when he came
last to me, said, before them all, Now, my sweet
Bride, my Pamela, let me conclude with you; for
here I began to love, and here I desire to end loving,
but not till my Life ends. 
This was sweetly said, and taken great Notice of; 
and it was doing Credit to his own generous Choice,
and vastly more than I merited. 
But I was forced to stand a many more Jokes
afterwards. For Sir Simon said, several times,
Come, come, Madam, now you are become one
of us, I shall be a little less scrupulous than I have
been, I'll assure you. 
When we came in to Dinner, I made no Difficulty
of what all offer'd me, the Upper-end of the
Table; and perform'd the Honours of it with pretty
tolerable Presence of Mind, considering. And, with
much ado, my good Benefactor promising to be
down again before Winter, we got off the Ball; 
but appointed Tuesday Evening, at Lady Darnford's,
to take Leave of all this good Company, who promised
to be there, my Master designing to set out
on Wednesday Morning for Bedfordshire. 
We had Prayers in the little Chapel, in the Afternoon; 
but they all wished for the good Clerk again,
with great Encomiums upon you, my dear Father; 
and the Company staid Supper also, and departed
exceeding well satisfied, and with abundance of
Wishes for the Continuance of our mutual Happiness; 
and my Master desired Mr. Peters to answer
for him to the Ringers, at the Town, if they should
hear of it, till our Return into this Country, and
that then he would be bountiful to them; because
he would not publickly declare it till he had first
done so in Bedfordshire. 