



Thursday Morning, Six o'Clock. 


Our Breakfast Conversation Yesterday, (at
which only Mrs. Worden, my Lady's Woman,
and my Polly attended) was so whimsically
particular, (tho' I doubt some of it, at least, will
appear too trifling) that I cannot help acquainting
my dear Miss Darnford with it, who is desirous of
knowing all that relates to Lady Davers's Conduct
towards me. 
You must know then, that I have the Honour to
stand very high in the Graces of Lord Davers, who
on every Occasion is pleased to call me his good Sister,
his dear Sister, and sometimes his charming Sister,
and he tells me, he will not be out of my Company
for an Hour together, while he stays here, if he can
help it. 
My Lady seems to relish this very well in the
main, tho' she cannot quite so readily, yet, frame
her Mouth to the Sound of the Word Sister, as my
Lord does; of which this that follows is one Instance. 

His Lordship had called me by that tender Name
twice before, and saying, I will drink another Dish,
I think, my good Sister; my Lady said, Your Lordship
has got a Word by the End, that you seem
mighty fond of: I have taken Notice, that you have
called Pamela, Sister, Sister, Sister, no less than
Three times in a Quarter of an Hour. 
My Lord looked a little serious: I shall one Day or
other, said he, be allow'd to chuse my own Words
and Phrases, I hope: Your Sister, Mr. B. added
he, often questions whether I am at Age or not,
tho' the House of Peers made no Scruple of admitting
me among them some Years ago. 
Mr. B. said, severely, but with a smiling Air, 'Tis
well she has such a Gentleman as your Lordship for
a Husband, whose affectionate Indulgence overlooks
all her saucy Sallies. I am sure, when you took her
out of our Family into your own, we all thought
ourselves bound to pray for you. 
I thought this a great Trial of my Lady's Patience:
But it was from Mr. B. And she said, with a half-pleasant,
half-serious Air, How now, Confidence! 
—None but my Brother could have said this, whose
violent Spirit was always much more intolerable than
mine: But I can tell you, Mr. B. I was always
thought very good-humour'd, and obliging to every
body, till your Impudence came from College,
and from your Travels; and then, I own, your provoking
Ways made me now-and-then a little out of
the Way. 
Well, well, Sister, we'll have no more of this
Subject, only let us see, that my Lord Davers
wants not his proper Authority with you, altho' you
used to keep me in Awe formerly. 
Keep you in Awe! —That nobody could ever do
yet, Boy or Man.––– But, my Lord, I beg your Pardon; 
for this Brother will make Mischief betwixt 

us, if he can. –––I only took Notice of the Word
Sister so often us'd, which looked more like Affectation
than Affection. 
Perhaps, Lady Davers, said my Lord gravely, I
have two Reasons for using the Word so frequently. 
I'd be glad to hear them, said the dear taunting
Lady; for I don't doubt they're mighty good ones. 
What are they, my Lord? 
One is, Because I love, and am fond of my new
Relation: The other, That you are so sparing of the
Epithet, that I call her so for us both. 
Your Lordship says well, rejoin'd my dear Mr. B.
smiling; and Lady Davers can give two Reasons
why she does not. 
Well, said my Lady, now we are in for't, let us
hear your two Reasons likewise: I doubt not they're
wise ones too. 
If they are yours, Lady Davers, they must be so:
One is, That every Condescension of a proud Lady,
to speak in her own Dialect, comes as hard and
as difficult, as a Favour from the House of Austria
to the petty Princes of Germany. The second, Because
of your Sex, (excuse me, my Lady Countess)
who having once made Scruples, think it inconsistent
with themselves to be over-hasty to alter their
own Conduct, chusing rather to persist in an Error,
than own it to be one. 
This proceeded from the dear Gentleman's Impatience
to see me in the least slighted by my Lady:
And I said to Lord Davers, to soften Matters, Never,
my Lord, were Brother and Sister so loving in Earnest,
and yet so satirical upon each other in Jest, as
my good Lady and Mr. B. But your Lordship knows
their Way. 
My Lady frown'd at her Brother, but turn'd it off
with an Air: I love the Mistress of this House, said
she, very well; and am quite reconcil'd to her: But 

methinks there is such a hissing Sound in the Word
Sister, that I cannot abide it. 'Tis a true English
Word, and a Word I have not been used to, having
never had a Sis-s-s-ter before, as you know. Speaking
the first Syllable of the Word with an emphatical
Hiss. 
Mr. B. said, Observe you not, Lady Davers,
that you used a Word (to avoid that) which had
twice the Hissing in it that Sister had;–––and that was,
Mis-s-s-tress, with two other hissing Words to accompany
it, of this-s-s Hous-s-s-e: But what childish
Follies does not Pride make one stoop to! Excuse,
my Lady, (to the Countess) such poor low Conversation
as we are dwindled into. 
O! Sir, said her Ladyship, the Conversation is
very agreeable; and I think, Lady Davers, you're
fairly caught. 
Well, said my Lady, then help me, good Sister,
there's for you! to a little Sugar. Will that please
you, Sir? 
I am always pleas'd, reply'd her Brother, smiling,
when Lady Davers acts up to her own Character,
and the good Sense she is Mistress of. 
Ay, ay, return'd she, my good Brother, like other
wise Men, takes it for granted, that it is a Mark of
good Sense to approve of whatever he does.–––– 
And so, for this one Time, I am a very sensible body
with him.––– And I'll leave off, while I have his good
Word. Only one thing I must say to you, my Dear,
turning to me, That tho' I call you Pamela, and
Pamela, as I please, I do assure you, I love you as
well as if I called you Sister, Sister, as Lord Davers
does, at every Word. 
Your Ladyship gives me great Pleasure, said I, in
this kind Assurance; and I don't doubt but I shall
have the Honour of being called by that tender
Name, if I can be so happy as to deserve it; and 

I'll lose no Opportunity that shall be afforded me, to
shew how sincerely I will endeavour to do so. 
She was pleased to rise from her Seat: Give me a
Kiss, my dear Girl; you deserve every thing: And
permit me to say Pamela sometimes, as the Word
occurs; for I am not used to speak in Print, and I
will call you Sister when I think of it, and love you
as well as ever Sister loved another. 
These proud and passionate Folks, said my dear
Mr. B. how good they can be, when they reflect
a little on what becomes their Characters! 
So then, said my Lady, I am to have no Merit of
my own, I see, do what I will. This is not quite so
generous in my Brother. 
Why, you saucy Sister, said he, excuse me, Lord
Davers, what Merit would you have? Can People
merit by doing their Duty? And is it so great a Praise
that you think fit to own for a Sister, so deserving a
Girl as this, whom I take Pride in calling my Wife? 
Thou art what thou always wast, return'd my
Lady; and were I in this my imputed Pride to want
an Excuse, I know not the Creature living that ought
so soon to make one for me as you. 
I do excuse you, said he, for that very Reason, if
you please: But it little becomes either your Pride,
or mine, to do any thing that wants Excuse. 
Mighty moral! mighty grave, truly! Pamela, Friend,
Sister,–––there's for you! thou art a happy Girl to have
made such a Reformation in thy honest Man's way
of Thinking as well as Acting. But now we are
upon this Topick, and none but Friends about us, I
am resolved to be even with thee, Brother. Jackey,
if you are not for another Dish, I wish you'd withdraw. 
Polly Barlow, we don't want you. Beck,
you may stay. Mr. H. obey'd; and Polly went
out: For you must know, Miss, that my Lady Davers
will have none of the Men-Fellows, as she 

calls them, to attend upon us at Tea. And I cannot
say but I think her intirely in the right, for several
Reasons that might be given. 
When they were withdrawn, my Lady repeated,
Now we are upon this Topick of Reclaiming and
Reformation, tell me, thou bold Wretch; for you
know I have seen all your Rogueries in Pamela's
Papers; tell me, if ever Rake but thyself made such
an Attempt as thou didst, on this dear good Girl,
in Presence of a virtuous Woman, as Mrs. Jervis
always was noted to be? As to the other vile Creature
Jewkes, 'tis less Wonder, altho' in that thou
hadst the Impudence of him who set thee to Work:
But to make thy Attempt before Mrs. Jervis, and
in spite of her Struggles and Reproaches, was the
very Stretch of shameless Wickedness. 
The dear Gentleman seemed a little disconcerted,
and said, Surely, surely, Lady Davers, this is going
too far! Look at Pamela's blushing Face, and down-cast
Eye, and wonder at yourself for this Question
as much as you do at me for the Actions you speak
of. 
The Countess said to me, My dear Mrs. B. I
wonder not at this sweet Confusion on so affecting
a Question; but, indeed, since it has come in so naturally,
I must say, Mr. B. that we have all, and my
Daughters too, wonder'd at this, more than any Part
of your Attempts; because, Sir, we thought you
one of the most civiliz'd Gentlemen in England,
and that you could not but wish to have saved Appearances
a little. 
Tho' this, said Mr. B. is to you, my Pamela, the
Renewal of Griefs; yet hold up your dear Face.––– 
You may––––the Triumph was yours––––the Shame
and the Blushes ought to be mine. ––––And I will
humour my saucy Sister in all she would have me
say. 

Nay, said Lady Davers, you know the Question; 
I cannot put it stronger. 
That's very true, reply'd he. ––––But what would
you have me say? Do you expect I should give you
a Reason for an Attempt that appears to you so very
shocking? 
Nay, Sir, said the Countess, don't say Appears to
Lady Davers; for (excuse me) it will appear so to
every one who hears of it. 
I think my Brother is too hardly used, said Lord
Davers: He has made all the Amends he could
make; and you, my Sister, who were the Person offended,
forgive him now, I hope; don't you? 
I could not answer; for I was quite confounded; 
and made a Motion to withdraw: But Mr. B. said,
Don't go, my Dear: Tho' I ought to be asham'd
of an Action set before me in so full a Glare, in
Presence of Lord Davers and the Countess; –––– yet
I will not have you stir, because I forget how you
represented it, and you must tell me. 
Indeed, Sir, I cannot, said I: Pray, my dear
Ladies, pray, my good Lord, and dear Sir, don't
thus renew my Griefs, as you were pleased justly to
phrase it. 
I have the Representation of that Scene in my
Pocket, said my Lady; for I was resolved, as I told
Lady Betty, to shame the wicked Wretch with it,
the first Opportunity I had; and I'll read it to you; 
or, rather, you shall read it yourself, Boldface! if you
can. 
So she pulled those Leaves out of her Pocket,
wrapp'd up carefully in a Paper. ––––Here, I believe,
he who could act thus, must read it; and, to spare
Pamela's Confusion, read it to yourself; for we all
know how it was. 
I think, said he, taking the Papers, I can say something
that will abate the Heinousness of this heavy 

Charge, or else I should not stand thus at the insolent
Bar of my Sister, answering her Interrogatories. 
I send you, my dear Miss, a Transcript of the
Charge, as follows: —To be sure, you'll say, he
was a very wicked Gentleman. 
[See Vol. I. p. 74, & seq.] 
Mr. B. read this to himself, and said, This is a
dark Affair, as it is here stated; and I can't say, but
Pamela, and Mrs. Jervis too, had a great deal of
Reason to apprehend the worst: But surely Readers
of it, who were less Parties in the supposed Attempt,
and who were not determined at all Events to condemn
me, might have made a more favourable Construction
for me, than you, Lady Davers, have done,
in the strong Light in which you have set this heinous
Matter before us. 
However, since my Lady Countess, and Lord
Davers, seem to expect, that I shall particularly answer
to this black Charge, I will, at a proper Time,
if it will be agreeable, give you a brief History of my
passion for this dear Girl, how it commenc'd, and
increas'd, and my own Struggles with it: And this
will introduce, with some little Advantage to myself
perhaps, what I have to say, as to this supposed Attempt; 
and at the same time inable you the better to
account for some Facts which you have read in my
pretty Accuser's Papers. 
This pleased every one, and they begg'd him to
begin then: But he said, It was Time we should
think of Dressing, the Morning being far advanc'd; 
and if no Company came in, he would give them, in
the Afternoon, the Particulars they desired to hear. 
The three Gentlemen rode out, and returned just
Time enough to dress before Dinner; and my Lady
and the Countess also took an Airing in the Chariot. 
Just as they returned, Compliments came from several
of the neighbouring Ladies to our noble Guests, 

on their Arrival in these Parts; and, to as many as
sent, Lady Davers desir'd their Companies for Tomorrow
in the Afternoon, to drink Tea: But Mr. B.
having fallen in with some of the Gentlemen likewise,
he told me, we should have most of our visiting
Neighbours at Dinner, and desired Mrs. Jervis
might prepare accordingly for them. 
After Dinner Mr. H. took a Ride out, attended
with Mr. Colbrand, of whom he is very fond, ever
since he frighten'd Lady Davers's Footmen at the
Hall, threatening*  to chine them, if they offer'd to
stop his Lady; for, he says, he loves a Man of Courage; 
very probably knowing his own Defects that
way; for my Lady now-and-then calls him a Chicken-hearted
Fellow. And then Lord and Lady Davers,
and the Countess, reviv'd the Subject of the
Morning; and Mr. B. was pleased to begin in the
Manner I shall mention by-and-by. For here I am
obliged to break off. 
Now, my dear Miss, I will proceed. 
‘I need not, said the dear Gentleman, observe to
any body who knows what Love is, (or rather that
violent Passion which we mad young Fellows are
apt to miscal Love) what mean Things it puts us
upon; how it unmans, and levels with the Dust,
the proudest Spirit. In the Sequel of my Story
you will observe several Instances of this Truth. 
‘I began very early to take Notice of this lovely
Girl, even when she was hardly Thirteen Years
old; for her Charms increased every Day, not
only in my Eye, but in the Eyes of every one
who beheld her. My Mother, as you, Lady Davers,
know, took the greatest Delight in her, always
calling her, her Pamela, her good Child: And 

her Waiting-maid, and her Cabinet of Rarities,
were her Boasts, and equally shewn to every Visitor:
For, besides the Beauty of her Figure, and
the genteel Air of her Person, the dear Girl had a
surprising Memory, a Solidity of Judgment above
her Years, and a Docility so unequal'd, that she
took all Parts of Learning, which her Lady, as
fond of instructing her, as she of improving by Instruction,
crouded upon her; insomuch that she
had Masters to teach her to dance, to sing, and to
play on the Spinnet, whom she every Day surpris'd
by the Readiness wherewith she took every thing. 
‘I remember once, my Mother praising her Girl
before me, and my Aunt B. (who is since dead)
I could not but take Notice to her of her Fondness
for her, and said, What do you design, Madam,
to do with, or do for, this Pamela of yours? 
The Accomplishments you give her will do her
more Hurt than Good: For they will set her so
much above her Degree, that what you intend as
a Kindness may prove her Ruin. 
‘My Aunt join'd with me, and spoke in a still
stronger Manner against giving her such an Education. 
–––And added, as I well remember, Surely,
Sister, you do wrong. One would think, if one
knew not my Nephew's discreet Pride, that you
design her for something more than your own
Waiting-maid. 
‘Ah! Sister, said the old Lady, there is no Fear
of what you hint at: His Family Pride, and stately
Temper, will secure my Son: He has too much
of his Father in him. ––––And as for Pamela, you
know not the Girl. She has always in her Thoughts,
and in her Mouth too, her Father's mean Condition; 
and I shall do nothing for them, at least at
present, tho' they are honest Folks, and deserve
well, because I will keep the Girl humble. 

‘But what can I do with the little Baggage? continued
my Mother: She conquers every thing so
fast, and has such a Thirst after Knowlege, and
the more she knows, I verily think, the humbler
she is, that I cannot help letting go, as my Son,
when a little Boy, used to do to his Kite, as fast as
she pulls; and to what Height she'll soar I can't tell. 
‘I intended, proceeded the good Lady, at first,
only to make her Mistress of some fine Needleworks,
to qualify her, as she has a Delicacy in her
Person that makes it a Pity she should ever be put
to hard Work, for a genteel Place: But she masters
that so fast, that now, as my Daughter is
marry'd, and gone from me, I am desirous to qualify
her to divert and entertain me in my thoughtful
Hours: And were you, Sister, to know what
she is capable of, and how diverting her innocent
Prattle is to me, and her natural Simplicity, which
I encourage her to preserve amidst all she learns,
you would not, nor my Son neither, wonder at
the Pleasure I take in her. –––Shall I call her in? 
‘I don't want, said I, to have the Girl called in:
If you, Madam, are diverted with her, that's
enough! —To be sure Pamela is a better Companion
for a Lady than a Monkey or a Harlequin:
But I fear you'll set her above herself, and make her
vain and pert; and that at last, in order to support
her Pride, she may fall into Temptations that
may be fatal to herself, and others too. 
‘I'm glad to hear this from my Son, said the good
Lady. But the Moment I see my Favour puffs her
up, I shall take other Measures. 
‘Well, thought I to myself, I want only to
conceal my Views from your penetrating Eye,
my good Mother; and I shall one Day take as
much Delight in your Girl, and her Accomplishments,
as you now do: So, go on, and improve 

her as fast as you will. I'll only now-and-then
talk against her, to blind you; and doubt not that
all you bestow upon her, will qualify her the better
for my Purpose. —Only, thought I, fly swiftly
on, two or three more tardy Years, and I'll nip this
Bud by the Time it begins to open, and place it in
my Bosom for a Year or two at least; for so long,
if the Girl behaves worthy of her Education,
I doubt not, she'll be new to me. Excuse me,
Ladies; excuse me, Lord Davers: If I am not
ingenuous, I had better be silent.’ 
I will as little as possible, my dear Miss, interrupt
this affecting Narration, by mentioning my own
alternate Blushes, Confusions, and Exclamations,
as the naughty Gentleman went on; nor the
Censures and many Out-upon-you's of the attentive
Ladies, and Fie Brothers of Lord Davers;
nor yet with Apologies for the Praises on
myself, so frequently intermingled–––contenting
myself to give you, as near as I can recol
lect, the very Sentences of the dear Relator
And as to our intermingled Exclaimings and
Observations, you may suppose what they were
occasionally. 
‘So, continued Mr. B. I went on dropping Hints
against her now-and-then; and whenever I met
her, in the Passages about the House, or in the
Garden, avoiding to look at her, or to speak to
her, as she pass'd me, court'sying, and putting on
a thousand bewitching Airs of Obligingness and
Reverence; while I (who thought that the best
way to demolish the Influence of such an Education
would be to avoid alarming her Fears on one
hand, or to familiarize myself to her on the other,
till I came to strike the Blow) looked haughty and
reserved, and passed by her with a stiff Nod, at most. 
Or, if I spoke, How does your Lady this Morning, 

Girl? —I hope she rested well last Night: Then,
cover'd with Blushes, and court'sying at every
Word, as if she thought herself unworthy of answering
my Questions, she'd trip away in a kind of
Hurry and Confusion, as soon as she had spoken. 
And once I heard her say to Mrs. Jervis, Dear Sirs,
my young Master spoke to me, and called me by
my Name, saying, How slept your Lady last
Night, Pamela! Was not that very good, Mrs.
Jervis! was it not? —Ay, thought I, I'm in the
right way, I find: This will do in proper Time. 
Go on, my dear Mother, improving as fast as you
will: I'll engage to pull down in Three Hours what
you'll be building up in as many Years, in spite of
all the Lessons you can teach her. 
‘'Tis enough for me, that I am establishing with
you, Ladies, and with you, my Lord, a higher
Reputation for my Pamela (I am but too sensible
I can make none for myself) in the Relation I am
now giving you. Every one but my Mother, who,
however, had no high Opinion of her Son's Virtue,
used to look upon me as a Rake; and I got the
Name, not very much to my Credit, you'll say, as
well Abroad as in England, of the sober Rake;––– 
some would say the genteel Rake; nay, for that
Matter, some pretty Hearts, that have smarted for
their good Opinion, have called me the handsome
Rake. —But whatever other Epithet I was distinguished
by, it all concluded in Rake or Libertine;
nor was I very much offended at the Character; 
for, thought I, if a Lady knows this, and will come
into my Company, half the Ceremony between us
is over; and if she calls me so, I shall have an excellent
Excuse to punish her Freedom, by greater
of my own. 
‘So I dress'd, grew more and more confident,
and became as insolent withal, as if, tho' I had not 

Lady Davers's Wit and Virtue, I had all her Spirlt
(excuse me, Lady Davers); and having a pretty
bold Heart, which rather put me upon courting
than avoiding a Danger or Difficulty, I had but too
much my Way with every body; and many a menac'd
Complaint have I look'd down with a haughty
Air, and a Promptitude, like that of Colbrand's to
your Footmen at the Hall, to clap my Hand to my
Side: Which was of the greater Service to my
bold Enterprizes, as two or three Gentlemen had
found I knew how to be in Earnest. 
‘Ha! said my Lady, thou wast ever an impudent
Fellow; and many a vile Roguery have I kept
from my poor Mother! —Yet, to my Knowlege,
she thought you no Saint. 
‘Ay, poor Lady, continued he, she used now-and-then
to catechise me; and was sure I was
not so good as I ought to be:—For, Son, she
would cry, these late Hours, these all-night Works,
and to come home so sober, cannot be right! 
—I am not sure, if I were to know all, (and yet
I'm afraid of inquiring after your Ways) whether
I should not have Reason to wish you were brought
home in Wine, rather than to come home so
sober, and so late, as you do. 
‘Once, I remember, in the Summer-time, I came
home about Six in the Morning, and met the good
Lady unexpectedly by the Garden Back-Door, of
which I had a Key to let myself in at all Hours. 
I started, and would have avoided her, as soon as
I saw her: But she called me to her; and then I
approached her with an Air, What brings you,
Madam, into the Garden at so early an Hour? said
I, turning my Face from her; for I had a few
Scratches on my Forehead, ––– with a Thorn, or
so, ––– that I feared she would be more inquisitive
about than I cared for. 

‘And what makes you, said she, so early here
Billy? –––What a rakish
Figure dost thou make! 
–––One time or other these Courses will yield you
but little Comfort, on Reflection: Would to God
thou wast but happily marry'd! 
‘So, Madam, said I, the old Wish! ––––I'm not
so bad as you think me: ––––I hope I have not merited
so great a Punishment. 
‘These Hints I give, not as Matter of Glory, but
Shame: Yet I ought to tell you all the Truth, or
nothing. Mean time, thought I, (for I used, as I
mentioned in the Morning, to have some Compunction
for my vile Practices, when cool Reflection,
brought on by Satiety, had taken hold of
me) I wish this sweet Girl were grown to Years
of Susceptibility, that I might reform this wicked
Course of Life, and not prowl about, disturbing
honest Folks Peace, and indangering myself. And
as I had by a certain very daring and wicked Attempt,
in which however I did not succeed, set a
Hornet's Nest about my Ears, which I began to
apprehend would sting me to Death; having once
escap'd an Ambush, by dint of mere good Luck; 
I thought it was better to remove the Seat of my
Warfare into another Kingdom, and to be a little
more discreet for the future in my Amours. So I
went to France a second time, as you know, Sister; 
and passed a Twelvemonth there in the best of
Company, and with some Improvement both to
my Morals and Understanding, and had very few
Sallies, considering my Love of Intrigue, and the
ample Means I had to prosecute successfully all the
Desires of my Heart. 
‘When I return'd, several Matches were propos'd
to me, and my good Mother often requested
me to make her so happy, as she call'd it, as to see
me marry'd before she dy'd: But I could not indure 

the Thoughts of that State; for I never saw
a Lady whose Temper and Education I liked, or
with whom I thought I could live tolerably*  . She used in vain therefore to plead Family Reasons to
me: Like most young Fellows, I was too much a
Self-lover, to pay so great a Regard to Posterity; 
and, to say Truth, had very little Solicitude at that
time, whether my Name were continued or not,
in my own Descendants. However, upon my
Return, I look'd upon my Mother's Pamela with
no small Pleasure, and I found her so much improv'd,
as well in Person as Behaviour, that I had
the less Inducement either to renew my intriguing
Life, or to think of a marry'd State. 
‘Yet, as my Mother had all her Eyes about her,
as the Phrase is, I affected great Shyness, both before
her, and to the Girl; for I doubted not, my
very Looks would be watched by them both; and
what the one discover'd, would not be a Secret to
the other; and laying myself open to too early a
Suspicion, I thought would but ice the Girl over,
and make my Mother more watchful. 
‘So I used to come into my Mother's Apartments,
and go out, without taking the least Notice
of her, but putting on stiff Airs; and as she
always withdrew when I came in, I never made
any Pretence to keep her there. 
‘Once indeed, my Mother said, on my looking
after her, when her Back was turn'd, My dear Son,
I don't like your Eye following my Girl so intently. 
Only I know that sparkling Lustre natural to it, or
I should have some Fear for my Pamela, as she
grows older.–––– 
‘I look after her, said I! ––––My Eyes sparkle at
such a Girl as that! No indeed! —She may be your 

Favourite, as a Waiting-maid; but I see nothing
but clumsy Court'sies, and aukward Airs about
her. A little Rustick Affectation of Innocence,
that to such as cannot see into her, may pass well
enough. 
‘Nay, my Dear, reply'd my Mother, don't say
that, of all things. She has no Affectation, I am
sure. 
‘Yes, she has, in my Eye, Madam; and I'll tell
you how it comes about: You have taught her to
assume the Airs of a Gentlewoman, to dance, and
to enter a Room with a Grace; and yet bid her
keep her low Birth and Family in View: And between
the one Character, which she wants to get
into, and the other she dares not get out of, she
trips up and down mincingly, and knows not how
to set her Feet: So 'tis the same in every Gesture; 
her Arms she knows not whether to swim with, or
hold before her; nor whether to hold her Head
up, or down; and so does neither, but hangs it
on one Side; a little aukward Piece of One-and-t'other,
I think her. —And indeed, Madam, you'd
do the Girl more Kindness to put her into your
Dairy, than to keep her about your Person; for
she'll be utterly spoil'd, I doubt, for any useful
Purpose. 
‘Ah! Son! said she, I fear by your Description,
you have minded her too much in one Sense, tho'
not enough in another. 'Tis not my Intention to
recommend her to your Notice, of all Men:— 
And I doubt not, if it please God I live, and she
continues to be a good Girl; but she will make a Man
of some middling, genteel Business very happy. 
‘Pamela came in just then, with an Air so natural,
and yet so humble, and so much above herself,
that I was forc'd to turn my Head from her, lest my
Mother should watch my Eye again, and lest I 

should be inclin'd to do her that Justice, which my
Heart, assented to, but which my Lips had just
before deny'd her. 
‘All my Difficulty, in Apprehension, was, my
good Mother: The Effect of whose Lessons to
her Girl, I was not, however, so much afraid of,
as her Vigilance. For, thought I, I see by the Delicacy
of her Person, the Brilliancy of her Eye, and
the sweet Apprehensiveness that plays about every
Feature of her Face, that she must have Tinder
enough in her Constitution, to catch a well-struck
Spark; and I'll warrant I shall know how to set her
in a Blaze, in a few Months more. 
‘Yet I wanted, as I pass'd, to catch her Attention
too: I expected her to turn after me, and look
so, as to shew a beginning Liking towards me; for,
you must know, I had a great Opinion of my Person
and Air, which had been fortunately distinguish'd
by Ladies, whom, of course, my Vanity
made me allow to be very good Judges of these
outward Advantages. 
‘I'll give your Ladyship an Instance of this my
Vanity, in a Catch I made extempore, to a Lady
whom I had been urging to give me some Proofs
of a Love, that, I had the Confidence to tell her,
I was sure she had in her Heart for me: She was a
lively Lady; and laughing, said, Whoever admir'd
me, it must be for my Confidence, and nothing
else: But urging her farther, Why, said she, brazen
Man, (for she'd call Names, like Lady Davers)
what would you have me say? I would love you,
if I could ––– But ––– Here interrupting her, and putting
on a free Air, I half said, and half sung, 

‘You'd love me, you say, if you cou'd!
 ‘Why, thou mak'st me a very odd Creature!
‘I pr'ythee survey me again;
 ‘What can'st thou object to my Feature?


‘This shew'd my Vanity: And I answer'd for
the Lady, 

‘Why nothing!—Very well!—Then I'm sure you'll admit,
That the Choice I have made, is a Sign of my Wit!

‘But, to my great Disappointment, Pamela never,
by any favourable Glance, gave the least Incouragement
to my Vanity. Well, thought I, this
Girl has certainly nothing ethereal in her Mould:
All unanimated Clay! —But the Dancing and
Singing Airs my Mother is teaching her, will make
her better qualify'd in time, and another Year will
ripen her into my Arms, no doubt of it. Let me
only go on in my present way, and make her
fear me: That will inhance in her Mind, every
Favour I shall afterwards vouchsafe to shew her; 
and never question, old humdrum Virtue, thought
I, but the Tempter without, and the Tempter
within, will be too many for the perversest Nicety
that ever the Sex boasted. 
‘Yet, tho' I could not once attract her Eye towards
me, she never fail'd to draw mine after her,
whenever she went by me, or where-ever I saw
her, except, as I said, in my Mother's Presence; 
and particularly, when she had passed me, and could
not see me look at her, without turning her Head,
as I expected so often from her in vain. 
‘You will wonder, Lord Davers, who, I suppose,
was once in Love, or you'd never have marry'd
such an hostile Spirit, as my Sister's there' ––––– 
Go on, Sauce-box, said she, I won't interrupt you. 
‘You will wonder, how I could behave so coolly
as to escape all Discovery so long from a Lady so
watchful as my Mother; and from the Apprehensiveness
of the Girl; for, high or low, every 

Individual of the Sex is quick as Lightning to
Imaginations of this Kind: And besides, well says
the Poet; 

Men without Love, have oft so cunning grown,
 That something like it, they have shown;
But none who had it, e'er seem'd to have none.
Love's of a strangely open, simple Kind,
 Can no Arts or Disguises find;
But thinks none sees it, 'cause itself is blind.

‘But, to say nothing of her tender Years, and
that my Love was not of this bashful Sort, I was
not absolutely determin'd, so great was my Pride,
that I ought to think her worthy of being my
Mistress, when I had not much Reason, as I
thought, to despair of prevailing upon Persons of
higher Birth (were I disposed to try) to live with
me upon my own Terms. My Pride therefore
kept my Passion at Bay, as I may say: So far was
I from imagining I should ever be brought to
what has since happen'd! But to proceed: 
‘Hitherto my Mind was taken up with the Beauties
of her Person only. My Eye had drawn my
Heart after it, without giving myself any Trouble
about that Sense and Judgment which my Mother
was always praising in her Pamela, as exceeding
her Years, and Opportunities: But an Occasion
happen'd, slight in itself, but which took the
Head into the Party, and made me think of her,
young as she was, with a Distinction, that before I
had not had for her. The Occasion was this: 
‘Being with my Mother in her Closet, who was
talking to me on the old Subject, Matrimony, I
saw Pamela's Common-place Book, as I may call
it: In which, by her Lady's Direction, from time
to time, she had transcribed from the Bible, and
other good Books, such Passages as made most Impression 

upon her, as she read. A Method, I take
it, my Dear, turning to me, that was of great
Service to you, as it initiated you into Writing
with that Freedom and Ease, which shine in your
saucy Letters and Journals; and to which my present
Fetters are not a little owing: Just as Pedlars
catch Monkeys in the Baboon Kingdoms, provoking
the attentive Fools, by their own Example,
to put on Shoes and Stockens, till the Apes of
Imitation, trying to do the like, intangle their Feet,
and so cannot escape upon the Boughs of the Tree
of Liberty, on which before they were wont to hop
and skip about, and play a thousand puggish Tricks. 
‘I observ'd the Girl wrote a pretty Hand, and very
swift and free; and affixed her Points, or Stops,
with so much Judgment, (her Years consider'd) that
I began to have an high Opinion of her Understanding. 
Some Observations likewise upon several
of the Passages were so just and solid, that I
could not help being tacitly surprised at them. 
‘My Mother watched my Eye, and was silent: I
seemed not to observe that she did; and after a
while, laid down the Book, shutting it, with great
Indifference, and talking of another Subject. 
‘Upon this, my Mother said, Don't you think
Pamela writes a pretty Hand, Mr. B.? 
‘I did not mind it much, said I, with a careless
Air. This is her Writing, is it? Taking the Book
and opening it again, at a Place of Scripture. The
Girl is mighty pious! said I. 
‘I wish you were so, Child. 
‘I wish so too, Madam, if it would please you. 
‘I wish so, for your own sake, Child. 
‘So do I, Madam; and down I laid the Book
again, very carelesly. 
‘Look once more in it, said she, and see if you
can't open it upon some Place, that may strike you. 

‘I open'd it at, Train up a Child in the Way it
should go, &c. I fansy, said I, when I was at
Pamela's Age, I was pretty near as good as she. 
‘Never, never, said my Mother: I am sure I
took great Pains with you; but, alas! to very little
Purpose. You had always a violent headstrong
Will! 
‘Some Allowances for Boys and Girls, I hope,
Madam: But you see I am as good for a Man as
my Sister for a Woman. 
‘No indeed you are not, I do assure you. 
‘I am sorry for that, Madam: You give me a sad
Opinion of myself.— 
‘Brazen Wretch! said my Lady: But go on: 
‘Turn to one of the Girl's Observations on some
Text, said my Mother. 
‘I did; and was pleased with it more than I would
own. The Girl's well enough, said I, for what
she is; but let's see what she'll be a few Years
hence. There will be the Trial. 
‘She'll be always good, I doubt not. 
‘So much the better for her. —But can't we talk
of any other Subject than this foolish Girl? You
complain how seldom I attend you, Madam; and
indeed, when you are always talking of Matrimony,
or of this low-born raw Girl, it must needs lessen
the Pleasure of approaching you. 
‘But now, as I hinted to you, Ladies, and my
Lord, I had a still higher Opinion of Pamela; and
esteem'd her more worthy of my Attempts: For,
thought I, the Girl has good Sense, and it will be
some Pleasure to watch by what Gradations she
may be made to rise into Love, and into a higher
Life, than that to which she was born. And so I
began to think she would be worthy in time of
being my Mistress, which till now, as I said before,
I had been a little scrupulous about. 

‘I took a little Tour soon after this, in Company
of a few Friends, with whom I had contracted an
Intimacy abroad, into Scotland and Ireland, they
having a Curiosity to see those Countries; and we
spent Six or Eight Months on this Expedition; and
when I had landed them in France, I returned
home, and found my good Mother in a very indifferent
State of Health; but her Pamela arrived
to a Height of Beauty and Perfection, that exceeded
all my Expectations. I was so much taken
with her Charms the first time I saw her, after my
Return, which was in the Garden, with a Book in
her Hand, just come out of a little Summer-house,
that I then thought of obliging her to go back
again, in order to begin a Parley with her: But
while I was resolving, she tript away, with her
Court'sies and Reverences, and was out of my
Sight before I could determine. 
‘I was resolved, however, not to be long without
her; and Mrs. Jewkes having been recommended
to me a little before, by a Brother-Rake,
as a Woman of try'd Fidelity, I ask'd her, If she
would be faithful, if I should have Occasion to
commit a pretty Girl to her Care? 
‘She hoped, she said, it would be with the Lady's
own Consent, and she should make no Scruple of
obeying me. 
‘So I thought I would way-lay the Girl, and
carry her first to a little Village in Northamptonshire,
to an Acquaintance of Mrs. Jewkes's. And
when I had brought her to be easy and pacify'd a
little, I design'd that Jewkes should attend her
to*  Lincolnshire: For I knew, there was no
coming at her here, under my Mother's Wing, by
her own Consent; and that, to offer Terms to 

her, would be to blow up my Project all at once. 
Besides, I was sensible, that Mrs. Jervis would
stand in the way of my Proceedings, as well as
my Mother. 
‘The Method I had contriv'd, was quite easy, as
I imagin'd, and such as could not have failed to
answer my Purpose, as to carrying her off; and I
doubted not of making her well satisfy'd in her
good Fortune very quickly; for, having a Notion
of her affectionate Duty to her Parents, I was not
displeased, that I could make the Terms very easy
and happy to them all. 
‘What most stood in my way, was my Mother's
Fondness for her: But, on the Supposition, that I
had got her Favourite into my Hands, which appeared
to me, as I said, a Task very easy to be conquered,
I had actually form'd a Letter for her to transcribe,
acknowleging a Love-Affair, and laying her
Withdrawing herself so privately, to the implicit
Obedience she ow'd to her Husband's Commands,
to whom she was marry'd that Morning, and who,
being a young Gentleman of a genteel Family,
and dependent on his Friends, was desirous of keeping
it all a profound Secret; and begging, on that
Account, her Lady not to divulge it, so much as
to Mrs. Jervis. 
‘And to prepare for this, and make her Escape
the more probable, when Matters were ripe for
my Plot, I came in one Night, and examined all
the Servants, and Mrs. Jervis, the latter in my Mother's
Hearing, about a genteel young Man, whom
I pretended to find with a Pillion on the Horse he
rode upon, waiting about the Back Door of the
Garden, for some body to come to him; and who
rode off, when I came up to the Door, as fast as
he could. 

‘Nobody knew any thing of the Matter, and
were much surprised at what I told them: But
I begg'd Pamela might be watched, and that no
one would say any thing to her about it. 
‘My Mother said, She had two Reasons not to
speak of it to Pamela; one, to oblige me; the
other and chief, because it would break the poor
innocent Girl's Heart, to be suspected. Poor
dear Child! said she, where can she go, to be so
happy as with me? Would it not be inevitable
Ruin to her to leave me? There is nobody comes
after her: She receives no Letters, but now-and-then
one from her Father and Mother, and them
she shews me. 
‘Well, reply'd I, I hope she can have no Design; 
'twould be strange if she had formed any to leave
so good a Mistress: But you can't be sure all the
Letters she receives, are from her Father; and her
shewing to you, Madam, those he writes, looks like
a Cloak to others she may receive from another
Hand. But it can be no Harm, said I, to have an
Eye upon her. You don't know, Madam, what
Tricks there are in the World. 
‘Not I, indeed; but only this I know, that the
Girl shall be under no Restraint, if she is resolv'd
to leave me, well as I love her. 
‘Mrs. Jervis said, She would have an Eye upon
Pamela, in Obedience to my Command; but she
was sure there was no need; nor would she so much
wound the poor Child's Peace, as to mention the
Matter to her. 
‘This I suffered to blow off, and seem'd to my
Mother to have so good an Opinion of her Pamela,
that I was sorry, as I told her, I had had such a Surmise:
Saying, that tho' the Fellow and the Pillion
were an odd Circumstance, yet, I dared to say,
there could be nothing in it; for I doubted not, 

the Girl's Duty and Gratitude would hinder her
from doing a foolish or rash thing. 
‘This my Mother heard with Pleasure; altho' my
Motive for it was but to lay her Pamela on the
thicker to her, when she was to be told she had
escaped. 
‘She said, She was glad I was not an Enemy to
the poor Child. Pamela has no Friend but me, continued
the good Lady; and if I don't provide for
her, I shall have done her more Harm than Good,
(as you and your Aunt B. have often said) in the
Accomplishments I have given her: And yet the
poor Girl, I see that, added she, would not be
afraid to turn her Hand to any thing, for the sake
of an honest Livelihood, were she put to it; which,
if it please God to spare me, and she continues
good, she never shall be. 
‘I wonder not, Pamela, at your Tears on this
Occasion. Your Lady was an excellent Woman,
and deserv'd this Tribute to her Memory. All my
Pleasure now is, that she knew not half my wicked
Pranks, and that I did not vex her worthy
Heart in the Prosecution of this Scheme; which
would have given me a severe Sting; inasmuch as
I might have apprehended, with too much Reason,
that I had shortened her Days by the Knowlege
of the one and the other. 
‘I had thus in Readiness every thing necessary
for the Execution of my Project: But my Mother's
ill State of Health gave me too much Concern, to
permit me to proceed. And, now-and-then, as
my frequent Attendance on her in her Illness gave
me an Opportunity of observing more and more of
the Girl, and her affectionate Duty, and continual
Tears, (finding her frequently on her Knees praying
for her Mistress) I was moved to pity her: And
often did I, while those Scenes of my Mother's 

Illness and Decline were before me, resolve to
conquer, if possible, my guilty Passion, as those
Scenes taught me, while their Impressions held
upon me, justly to call it; and I was much concerned
I found it a more difficult Task than I imagin'd:
For, till now, I thought it principally owing
to my usual enterprising Temper, and a Love
of Intrigue; and that I had nothing to do but to
resolve against it, and to subdue it. 
‘But I found I was greatly mistaken; for I had
insensibly brought myself to admire her in every
thing she said or did; and there was so much
Gracefulness, Humility and Innocence in her
whole Behaviour, and I saw so many melting
Scenes between her Lady and her, that I found
I could not master my Esteem for her. 
‘My Mother's Illness increasing beyond Hopes
of Recovery, and having settled all her greater
Affairs, she talked to me of her Servants: I asked
her, What she would have done for Pamela and
Mrs. Jervis? 
‘Make Mrs. Jervis, my dear Son, said she, as
happy as you can: She is a Gentlewoman born,
you know; let her always be treated as such: But,
for your own sake, don't make her independent; 
for then you'll want a faithful Manager. Yet, if
you marry, and your Lady should not value her as
she deserves, allow her a Competency for the rest
of her Life, and let her live as she pleases. 
‘As for my Pamela, I hope you will be her Protector; 
I hope you will! —She is a good Girl: I
love her next to you and your dear Sister. She is
just arrived at a trying Time of Life. I don't
know what to say for her. What I had design'd
was, that if any Man of a genteel Calling should
offer, I would have given her a little pretty Portion,
had God spared my Life till then. But if she 

should be made independent, some idle Fellow
perhaps might snap her up; for she is very pretty:
Or, if she should carry what you give her to her
poor Parents, as her Duty would lead her to do,
they are so unhappily involv'd, that a little Matter
would be nothing to them, and the poor Girl
might be to seek again. Perhaps Lady Davers
will take her. But I wish she was not so pretty! 
She will be likely to be the Bird for which some
wicked Fowler will spread his Snares; or, it may
be, every Lady will not chuse to have such a
Waiting-maid. You are a young Gentleman, and,
I am sorry to say it, not better than I wish you to
be –––– Tho' I hope my Pamela would not be in
Danger from her Master, who owes to all his Servants
Protection, as much as a King does to his
Subjects. Yet I don't know how to wish her to stay
with you, ––– for your own Reputation's sake, my
dear Son; –––– for the World will censure as it lists. 
–––Would to God! said she, the dear Girl had the
Small Pox in a mortifying manner: She'd be lovely
enough in the Genteelness of her Person, and
the Beauty of her Mind; and more out of Danger
of suffering from the transient Beauties of Countenance! 
Yet I think, added she, she might be
safe and happy under Mrs. Jervis's Care; and if
you marry, and your Lady parts with Mrs. Jervis,
let'em go together, and live as they like. –––I think
that will be the best for both. –––And you have a
generous Spirit enough: I will not direct you in
the Quantum. But, my dear Son, remember,
that I am the less concerned, that I have not done
for the poor Girl myself, because I depend upon
you: The Manner how fitly to provide for her,
has made me defer it till now, that I have so
much more important Concerns on my Hands; 
Life and Strength ebbing so fast, that I am hardly 

fit for any thing, or to wish for any thing, but to
receive the last releasing Stroke.’ 
Here the dear Gentleman stopp'd, being under
some Concern himself, and we in much more. 
At last he resum'd the Subject: 
‘You will too naturally think, my Lord, and you
my good Ladies, that the Mind must be truly diabolical,
that could break thro' the Regards due to
the solemn Injunctions and Recommendations of
a dying Parent. They did hold me a good while
indeed; and, as fast as I had any Emotions of a
contrary Nature rise in my Breast, I endeavoured
for some time to suppress them, and to think and
act as I ought: But the dear bewitching Girl
every Day rose in her Charms upon me: And,
finding she still continued the Use of her Pen and
Ink, I could not help entertaining a Jealousy, that she
was writing to somebody who stood well in her
Opinion; and my Love for her, and my own Spirit
of Intrigue, made it a Sweetheart of course. 
And I could not help watching her Motions; and
seeing her once putting a Letter she had just folded
up, into her Bosom, at my Entrance into my Mother's
Dressing-room, I made no doubt of detecting
her, and her Correspondent; and so I took the
Letter from her*  Stays, she trembling and court'sying
with a sweet Confusion; and highly pleased I
was, to find it contained nothing but Innocence and
Duty to the deceased Mistress, and the loving Parents,
expressing her Joy, that in the midst of her
Grief for losing the one, she was not obliged to
return to be a Burden to the other: And I gave
it her again, with Words of Incouragement, and
went down much better satisfied, than I had been,
with her Correspondents. 

‘But when I reflected on the innocent Simplicity
of her Style, I was still more in Love with her,
and form'd a Stratagem, and succeeded in it, to
come at her other Letters,*  which I sent forward,
after I had read them, all but three or four, which
I kept back, when my Plot began to ripen for Execution; 
altho' the little Slut was most abominably
free upon my Character to her Father and Mother. 
‘You will censure me, no doubt, that my Mother's
Injunctions made not a more lasting Impression
upon me. But really I struggled hard with myself to
give them their due Force; and the dear Girl, as
I said, every Day grew lovelier and more accomplish'd. 
Her Letters were but so many Links to
the Chains she had bound me in; and tho' once I
had resolv'd to part with her†  to Lady Davers,
and you, my Lady, had an Intention to take her, I
could not for my Life give her up; and thinking at
that time more honourably of the State of a Mistress
than I have done since, I could not persuade
myself, (since I intended to do as handsomely by her,
as ever Man did to a Lady in that Circumstance)
but that I should do better for her than my Mother
had wished me to do, and so more than answer all
her Injunctions, as to the providing for her: And I
could not imagine I should have met with a Resistance
from her, that I had seldom encountered from
Persons much her Superiors as to Descent; and
was amaz'd at it; for it confounded me in all the
Notions I had of her Sex, which, like a true Libertine,
I supposed wanted nothing but Importunity
and Opportunity, a bold Attempter, and a Mind
not ungenerous. 

‘Sometimes I admired her for her Virtue; at other
times, impetuous in my Temper, and unus'd to
Controul, I could have beat her. She well, I remember,
describes the Tumults of my Soul, when
she repeats what once passed between us, in Words
like these: “*  Take the little Witch from me,
Mrs. Jervis. –––I can neither bear nor forbear her.
––– But stay–––you shan't go—Yet begone! —No,
come back again.” ;–––‘She thought I was mad, I
remember she says in her Papers. Indeed I was
little less. 
‘She says, “I took her Arm, and grip'd it black
and blue, to bring her back again; and then sat
down and look'd at her as silly as such a poor Girl
as she!” 
‘Well did the dear Slut describe the Passion I
struggled with; and no one can conceive how
much my Pride made me despise myself at times,
for the little Actions my Love for her put me upon,
and yet to find that Love increasing every Day, as
her Charms and her Resistance increased. 
‘I have caught myself in a raging Fit, sometimes,
vowing I would have her; and at others, jealous,
that, to secure herself from my Attempts, she would
throw herself into the Arms of some Menial or
Inferior, that otherwise she would not have thought
of. 
‘Sometimes I soothed her, sometimes threatened
her; but never was such Courage, when she apprehended
her Virtue was in Danger, mix'd with
so much Humility, when her Fears gave way to
her Hopes of a juster Treatment. 
‘Then I would think it impossible, (so slight an
Opinion had I of Woman's Virtue) that such a
Girl as this, Cottage-born, who owed every thing 

to my Family, and had an absolute Dependence
on my Pleasure; myself not despicable in Person or
Mind, as I supposed; she unprejudic'd in any
Man's Favour; at an Age susceptible of Impressions; 
and a Frame and Constitution not Ice nor
Snow: Surely, thought I, all this Frost must be
owing to the Want of Fire in my Attempts to thaw
it: I used to dare more, and succeed better. Shall
such a Girl as this awe me by her rigid Virtue? No,
she shall not. 
‘Then I would resolve to be more in Earnest. 
Yet my Love was a Traitor to me: That was more
faithful to her than to we; it had more Honour in
it at Bottom, than I had designed it should have. 
Aw'd by her unaffected Innocence, and a Virtue I
had never before encounter'd so uniform and immoveable,
the Moment I saw her, I was half disarmed; 
and I courted her Consent to that, which
tho' I was not likely to obtain, yet it went against
me to think of extorting by Violence. Yet Marriage
was never in my Thoughts; I scorn'd so
much as to promise it. 
‘What numberless mean Things did not this unmanly
Passion subject me to? —I used to watch
for her Letters, tho' mere Prittle-prattle and Chit-chat,
receiv'd them with burning lmpatience, and
read them with Delight, tho' myself was accused
in them, and stigmatiz'd as I deserv'd. 
‘I would listen meanly at her Chamber-door; try
to overhear her little Conversations; in vain attempted
to suborn Mrs. Jervis to my Purposes,
inconsistently talking of Honour, when no one
Step I took, or Action I attempted, shewed any
thing like it; lost my Dignity among my Servants; 
made a Party in her Favour against me, of every
body, but whom my Money corrupted, and that
hardly sufficient to keep my Partisans steady to my 

Interest; so greatly did the Virtue of the Servants
triumph over the Vice of the Master, when attracted
by such an Example! 
‘I have been very tedious, Ladies, and my Lord
Davers, in my Narration: But I am come within
View of the Point for which I now am upon my
Trial at your dread Tribunal (bowing to us all): 
‘After several Endeavours of a smooth and a
rough Nature, in which my Devil constantly fail'd
me, and her good Angel prevail'd, I had talk'd to
Mrs. Jervis to induce the Girl (to whom, in hopes
of frightening her, I had given Warning, but
which she rejoiced to take, to my great Disappointment)
to desire to stay*  and suspecting Mrs.
Jervis play'd me Booty, and rather confirm'd her
in her Coyness, and her Desire of leaving me, I
was mean enough to conceal myself in the Closet
in Mrs. Jervis's Room, in order to hear their private
Conversation: But really not designing to
make any other Use of my Concealment, than to
teize her a little, if she should say any thing I did
not like; which would give me a Pretence to treat
her with greater Freedoms than I had ever yet
done, and would be an Introduction to take off
from her unprecedented Apprehensiveness another
Time: And I had the less Scruple as to Mrs. Jervis's
Presence, because she knew as bad of me as
she could know, from Pamela's Apprehensions,
as well as her own; and would find me, if I kept
within any decent Bounds, better than either of
them expected. But I had no Design of proceeding
to Extremities, altho' I had little Hope of impressing
her by Gentleness. 
‘So, like a benighted Traveller, who had strayed
out of his Knowlege, and, despairing to find 

his Way, threw the Reins upon his Horse's Neck,
to be guided at its uncertain Direction, I resolv'd
to take my Chance for the Issue which the Adventure
should produce. 
‘But the dear Prattler, not knowing I was there,
as she undress'd herself, began such a bewitching
Chit-chat with Mrs. Jervis, who, I found, but
ill kept my Secret, that I never was at such a Loss
in my Life what to resolve upon. One while I
wish'd myself, unknown to them, out of the Closet
into which my inconsiderate Passion had meanly
led me; another time I was incens'd at the Freedom
with which I heard myself treated: But then
rightly considering, that I had no Business to hearken
to their private Conversation, and that it was
such as became them, while I ought to have been
asham'd to give Occasion for it, I excus'd them
both, and admir'd still more and more the dear
Prattler. 
‘In this Suspense, the undesigned Rustling of
my Night-gown, from changing my Posture as I
stood, giving Alarm to the watchful Pamela, she
in a Fright came towards the Closet to see who was
there; so that I could be no longer conceal'd. 
‘What could I then do, but bolt out upon the
apprehensive Charmer, and having so done, and
she running to the Bed, screaming to Mrs. Jervis,
would not any Man have follow'd her thither, detected
as I was? But yet I said, If she forbore her
Screaming, I would do her no Harm; but if not,
she should take the Consequence. 
‘I found by their Exclamations, that this would
pass with both for an Attempt of the worst
Kind; but really I had no such Intentions as they
feared. –––When, indeed, I found myself detected; 
when the dear frighten'd Girl ran to the Bed; 
when Mrs. Jervis threw herself about her; when 

they would not cease their hideous Squallings; 
when I was charg'd by Mrs. Jervis with the worst
Designs; it was enough to make me go farther than
I designed; and could I have prevailed upon Mrs.
Jervis to go up and quiet the Maids, who were
rising, as I heard by the Noise they made over-head,
upon the others Screamings, I believe, had Pamela
kept out of her Fit, I should have been a little freer
with her, than ever I had been: But as it was, I
had no Thought but of making as honourable a
Retreat as I could, and to save myself from being
expos'd to my whole Family; and I was not guilty
of any Freedoms, that her Modesty, unaffrighted,
could reproach itself with having suffered; and
the dear Creature's fainting Fits gave me almost as
great Apprehensions, as I could give her. 
‘Thus, Ladies, and my Lord, have I tediously,
and little enough to my own Reputation, given you
a Character of myself, and told you more against
myself, than any one Person could accuse me of. 
Whatever redounds to the Credit of my Pamela,
redounds in Part to my own; and so I have the
less Regret to accuse myself, since it exalts her. 
But as to a form'd Intention to hide myself in the
Closet, in order to attempt the Girl by Violence,
and in the Presence of a good Woman, as Mrs.
Jervis is, which you impute to me, indeed, bad as
I was, I was not so vile, so abandon'd as that. 
‘Love, as I said before, subjects its inconsiderate
Votaries to innumerable Meannesses, and unlawful
Passion to many more. I could not live without
this dear Girl. I hated the Thoughts of Matrimony
with any body, and to be brought to the
Stake by my Mother's Waiting-maid, forbid it,
Pride! thought I; forbid it, Example! forbid it, all
my past Sneers, and constant Ridicule, both on the
Estate, and on those who descended to Inequalities 

in it! and, lastly, forbid it, my Family Spirit, so
visible in Lady Davers, as well as myself; to whose
Insults, and those of all the World, I shall be obnoxious,
if I make such a Step! 
‘All this tends to demonstrate the Strength of my
Passion: I could not conquer my Love; so I conquer'd
a Pride, which every one thought unconquerable; 
and since I could not make an innocent
Heart vicious, I had the Happiness to follow so
good an Example; and, I thank God, a vicious
Heart is become virtuous, as I hope, at least morally
so; and I have the Pleasure of rejoicing in the
Change, and hope I shall still more and more rejoice
in it; for I really look back with Contempt
upon my past Follies; and it is now a greater
Wonder to me, how I could act as I did, than
that I should detest those Actions, which made me
a Curse, instead of a Benefit, to Society. Indeed I
am not yet so pious as my Pamela: but that is to
come; and it is one good Sign, that I can truly
say, I delight in every Instance of her Piety and Virtue: And now I will conclude my tedious Narration
with the Poet; 

Our Passions gone, and Reason in her Throne,
Amaz'd, we see the Mischiefs we have done:
After a Tempest, when the Winds are laid,
The calm Sea wonders at the Wrecks it made.’

Thus ended my dear Mr. B. his affecting Relation; 
which in the Course of it gave me a thousand
different Emotions; and made me often pray for
him, (as I constantly do) that God will intirely convert
a Heart so generous and worthy, as his is on most
Occasions. And if I can but find him not deviate,
when we go to London, I shall have great Hopes,
that nothing will affect his Morals again. 

I have just read over again the foregoing Account
of himself. As near as I remember, (and my Memory
is the best Faculty I have) it is pretty exact; only he
was fuller of beautiful Similitudes, and spoke in a
more flowery Style, as I may say. Yet don't you
think, Miss, (if I have not done Injustice to his Spirit)
that the Beginning of it, especially, is in the saucy
Air of a Man too much alive to such Notions? For
so the Ladies observed in his Narration. —Is it very
like the Style of a true Penitent? —But indeed he
went on better, and concluded best of all. 
But don't you observe what a dear good Lady I
had? Blessings, a thousand Blessings, on her beloved
Memory! Were I to live to see my Childrens Children,
they should be all taught to lisp her Praises,
before they could speak. My Gratitude should
always be renew'd in their Mouths; and God, and
my dear Father and Mother, my Lady, and my
Master that was, my best Friend that is, but principally,
as most due, the First, who inspired all the
rest, should have their Morning, their Noon-tide,
and their Evening Praises, as long as I lived!— 
I will only observe further, as to this my Third
Conversation piece, That my Lord Davers offer'd
to extenuate some Parts of his dear Brother-in-law's
Conduct, which he did not himself vindicate; and
Mr. B. was pleased to observe, that my Lord was
always very candid to him, and kind in his Allowances
for the Sallies of an ungovernable Youth. 
Upon which my Lady said, a little tartly, Yes, and
for a very good Reason, I doubt not: For who
cares to condemn himself? 
Nay, said my Lord, pleasantly, don't put us upon
a Foot neither: For what Sallies I made, before I
knew your Ladyship, were but like those of a Fox,
who now-and-then runs away with a straggling Pullet,
when nobody sees him: Whereas those of my Brother 

were like the Invasions of a Lion, breaking into
every Man's Fold, and driving the Shepherds, as well
as the Sheep, before him. –––Ay, said my Lady, but I
can look around me, and have Reason perhaps to
think the invading Lion has come off, little as he
deserv'd it, better than the creeping Fox, who, with
all his Cunning, sometimes suffers for his pilfering
Theft. 
O Miss, these Gentlemen are strange Creatures! ––– 
What can they think of themselves? for they say,
there is not one virtuous Man in five! —But I hope
for our Sex's sake, as well as for the World's sake,
all is not true that evil Fame reports; for, you know,
every Man-trespasser must find or make a Woman-trespasser! 
—And if so, what a World is this! — 
And how must the Innocent suffer from the Guilty! ––– 
Yet, how much better is it to suffer one's self, than
to be the Cause of another's Suffering? 
I long to hear of you. And must shorten my future
Accounts, or I shall do nothing but write, and
tire you into the Bargain, tho' I cannot my dear
Father and Mother. I am, my dear Miss, 
Always Yours,
P.B. 

