



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday, April 20. 
He begins with communicating to him the Letter he
wrote to Mr. Doleman, to procure suitable Lodgings
in Town, and which he sent away by the Lady's
approbation: And then gives him a copy of the
Answer to it (See p. 178.): Upon which he thus
expresses himself: 
Thou knowest the Widow; thou knowest her
Nieces; thou knowest the Lodgings: And didst thou
ever read a Letter more artfully couched, than this of
Tom Doleman? Every possible objection anticipated! 
Every accident provided against! Every tittle of it plotproof 
Who could forbear smiling, to see my Charmer,
like a farcical Dean and Chapter, chuse what was before
chosen for her; and sagaciously (as they go in form
to prayers, that Heaven would direct their choice)
pondering upon the different proposals, as if she would
make me believe, she had a mind for some other? The
dear sly rogue looking upon me, too, with a view to
discover some emotion in me. Emotions I had; but
I can tell her, that they lay deeper than her eye could
reach, tho' it had been a Sun-beam. 
No confidence in me, Fair-one! None at all, 'tis
plain. Thou wilt not, if I were inclined to change my
views, encourage me by a generous reliance on my
honour! —And shall it be said, that I, a Master of
Arts in Love, shall be overmatched by so unpractised
a novice? 
But to see the Charmer so far satisfied with my contrivance,
as to borrow my friend's Letter, in order to
satisfy Miss Howe likewise!— 
Silly little rogues! to walk out into by-paths on the
strength of their own judgments! —When nothing but 

experience can enable them to disappoint us, and teach
them grandmother-wisdom! When they have it indeed,
then may they sit down, like so many Cassandra's, and
preach caution to others; who will as little mind them,
as they did their instructresses, whenever a fine handsome
confident young fellow, such a one as thou knowest
who, comes cross them. 
But, Belford, didst thou not mind that sly rogue
Doleman's naming Dover street for the Widow's place
of abode? —What dost think could be meant by that? 
—'Tis impossible thou shouldst guess. So, not to puzzle
thee about it, Suppose the widow Sinclair's in Dover-street
should be enquired after by some officious person,
in order to come at characters [Miss Howe is as sly as
the devil, and as busy to the full]; and neither such a
name, nor such a house, can be found in that Street,
nor a house to answer the description; then will not
the keenest hunter in England be at a fault? 
But how wilt thou do, methinks thou askest, to
hinder the Lady from resenting the fallacy, and mistrusting
thee the more on that account, when she finds
it out to be in another Street? 
Pho! never mind that: Either I shall have a way
for it; or we shall thoroughly understand one another
by that time; or, if we don't, she'll know enough of
me, not to wonder at such a peccadillo. 
But how wilt thou hinder the Lady from apprising
her friend of the real name? 
She must first know it herself, monkey, must she
not? 
Well, but, how wilt thou do to hinder her from
knowing the Street, and her friend from directing Letters
thither; which will be the same thing as if the
name were known? 
Let me alone for that too. 
If thou further objectest, that Tom Doleman is too
great a dunce to write such a Letter in answer to mine; 
—Canst thou not imagine, that, in order to save honest 

Tom all this trouble, I, who know the town so well,
could send him a copy of what he should write, and
leave him nothing to do, but transcribe? 
What now sayst thou to me, Belford? 
And suppose I had designed this task of enquiry for
thee; and suppose the Lady excepted against thee for no
other reason in the world, but because of my value for
thee? What sayst thou to the Lady, Jack? 
This it is to have leisure upon my hands! —What a
matchless plotter thy friend —Stand by, and let me
swell! —I am already as big as an elephant; and ten
times wiser! —Mightier too by far! Have I not reason
to snuff the moon with my proboscis? —Lord help thee
for a poor, for a very poor creature! —Wonder not,
that I despise thee heartily; since the man who is disposed
immoderately to exalt himself, cannot do it but
by despising every-body else in proportion. 
I shall make good use of the Dolemanic hint of being
married. But I will not tell thee All at once. Nor,
indeed, have I thoroughly digested that part of my
plot. When a General must regulate himself by the
motions of a watchful Adversary, how can he say beforehand
what he will, or what he will not, do? 
Widow Sinclair! —Didst thou not say, Lovelace?— 
Ay, Sinclair, Jack! —Remember the name! 
Sinclair, I repeat. She has no other. And her
features being broad, and full-blown, I will suppose her
to be of Highland extraction; as her husband the
Colonel [Mind that too] was a Scot, as brave, as honest. 
I never forget the Minutiæ in my contrivances. In
all matters that admit of doubt, the minutiæ closely attended
to, and provided for, are of more service than
a thousand oaths, vows, and protestations made to supply
the neglect of them, especially when jealousy has
made its way in the working mind. 
Thou wouldst wonder if thou knewest one half of 

my providences. To give thee but one—I have already
been so good as to send up a list of books to be procured
for the Lady's closet, mostly at second-hand. 
And thou knowest, that the women there are all well
read. But I will not anticipate—Besides, it looks as
if I were afraid of leaving any-thing to my old friend
Chance; which has many a time been an excellent
Second to me; and ought not to be affronted or despised; 
especially by one, who has the Art of making
unpromising incidents turn out in his favour. 