



Dear Mother,
I broke off abruptly my last Letter; for I
fear'd he was coming; and so it happen'd. 
I put the Letter into my Bosom, and took up
my Work, which lay by me; but I had so
little of the Artful, as he call'd it, that I look'd
as confus'd, as if I had been doing some great
Harm. 
Sit still, Pamela, said he, and mind your
Work, for all me. —You don't tell me I am
welcome home after my Journey to Lincolnshire. 
It would be hard, Sir, said I, if you
was not always welcome to your Honour's own
House. 

I would have gone; but he said, Don't
run away, I tell you. I have a Word or two
to say to you. Good Sirs, how my Heart went
pit-a-pat! When I was a little kind to you, said
he, in the Summer-house, and you carry'd
yourself so foolishly upon it, as if I had intended
to do you great Harm, did I not tell you,
you should take no Notice of what pass'd, to
any Creature? And yet you have made a
common Talk of the Matter, not considering
either my Reputation, or your own. —I made
a common Talk of it, Sir! said I: I have nobody
to talk to, hardly. 
He interrupted me, and said, Hardly! you
little Equivocator! what do you mean by
hardly? Let me ask you, Have you not told
Mrs. Jervis for one? Pray your Honour, said
I, all in Agitation, let me go down; for 'tis
not for me to hold an Argument with your
Honour. Equivocator, again! said he, and
took my Hand, what do you talk of an Argument? 
Is it holding an Argument with me,
to answer a plain Question? Answer me what
I ask'd. O good Sir, said I, let me beg you
will not urge me further, for fear I forget myself
again, and be saucy. 
Answer me then, I bid you, says he, Have
you not told Mrs. Jervis? It will be saucy
in you, if you don't answer me directly to what
I ask. Sir, said I, and fain would have pull'd
my Hand away, perhaps I should be for answering
you by another Question, and that would 

not become me. What is it you would say?
replies he; speak out. 
Then, Sir, said I, why should your Honour
be so angry I should tell Mrs. Jervis, or any body
else, what pass'd, if you intended no Harm? 
Well said, pretty Innocent and Artless!
as Mrs. Jervis calls you, said he; and is it thus
you taunt and retort upon me, insolent as you
are! But still I will be answered directly to my
Question. Why then, Sir, said I, I will not tell
a Lye for the World: I did tell Mrs. Jervis;
for my Heart was almost broken; but I open'd
not my Mouth to any other. Very well, Bold-face,
said he, and Equivocator again! You did
not open your Mouth to any other; but did
you not write to some other? Why now, and
please your Honour, said I, (for I was quite courageous
just then) you could not have ask'd me
this Question, if you had not taken from me my
Letter to my Father and Mother, in which I own
I had broken my Mind freely to them, and ask'd
their Advice, and poured forth my Griefs! 
And so I am to be exposed, am I, said he,
in my own House, and out of my House, to
the whole World, by such a Saucebox as you? 
No, good Sir, said I, and I hope your Honour
won't be angry with me; it is not I that expose
you, if I say nothing but the Truth. So,
taunting again! Assurance as you are! said he:
I will not be thus talk'd to! 
Pray, Sir, said I, of whom can a poor
Girl take Advice, if it must not be of her Father
and Mother, and such a good Woman as 

Mrs. Jervis, who, for her Sex-sake, should
give it me when asked? Insolence! said he,
and stamp'd with his Foot, Am I to be question'd
thus by such an one as you? I fell down
on my Knees, and said, For Heaven's sake,
your Honour, pity a poor Creature, that knows
nothing of her Duty, but how to cherish
her Virtue and good Name: I have nothing
else to trust to; and tho' poor and friendless
here, yet I have always been taught to value
Honesty above my Life. Here's ado with your
Honesty, said he, foolish Girl! Is it not one
Part of Honesty, to be dutiful and grateful to
your Master, do you think? Indeed, Sir, said
I, it is impossible I should be ungrateful to
your Honour, or disobedient, or deserve the
Names of Bold face and Insolent, which you
call me, but when your Commands are contrary
to that first Duty, which shall ever be the
Principle of my Life! 
He seem'd to be mov'd, and rose up, and
walk'd into the great Chamber two or three
Turns, leaving me on my Knees; and I threw
my Apron over my Face, and laid my Head on
a Chair, and cry'd as if my Heart would break,
having no Power to stir. 
At last he came in again, but, alas! with Mischief
in his Heart! and raising me up, he said,
Rise, Pamela, rise; you are your own Enemy. 
Your perverse Folly will be your Ruin: I tell
you this, that I am very much displeased with
the Freedoms you have taken with my Name
to my House-keeper, as also to your Father 

and Mother; and you may as well have real
Cause to take these Freedoms with me, as to
make my Name suffer for imaginary ones. And
saying so, he offer'd to take me on his Knee,
with some Force. O how I was terrify'd! I
said, like as I had read in a Book a Night or
two before, Angels and Saints, and all the
Host of Heaven, defend me! And may I never
survive one Moment, that fatal one in
which I shall forfeit my Innocence! Pretty
Fool! said he, how will you forfeit your Innocence,
if you are obliged to yield to a Force
you cannot withstand? Be easy, said he; for
let the worst happen that can, you'll have the
Merit, and I the Blame; and it will be a good
Subject for Letters to your Father and Mother,
and a Tale into the Bargain for Mrs. Jervis. 
He by Force kissed my Neck and Lips, and
said, Who ever blamed Lucretia? All the
Shame lay on the Ravisher only: And I am content
to take all the Blame upon me; as I have
already borne too great a Share for what I have
deserved. May I, said I, Lucretia like, justify
myself with my Death, if I am us'd barbarously? 
O my good Girl! said he, tauntingly, you are
well read, I see; and we shall make out between
us, before we have done, a pretty Story
in Romance, I warrant ye. 
He then put his Hand in my Bosom, and
Indignation gave me double Strength, and I
got loose from him by a sudden Spring, and
ran out of the Room; and the next Chamber
being open, I made shift to get into it, and 

threw-to the Door, and it locked after me; but
he followed me so close, he got hold of my
Gown, and tore a Piece off, which hung without
the Door; for the Key was on the Inside. 
I just remember I got into the Room; for
I knew nothing further of the Matter till afterwards,
because I fell into a Fit with my Terror; 
and there I lay, till he, as I suppose, looking
through the Key-hole, 'spy'd me upon the
Floor, stretch'd out at Length, on my Face; 
and then he call'd Mrs. Jervis to me, who,
by his Assistance, bursting open the Door, he
went away, seeing me coming to myself; and
bid her say nothing of the Matter, if she was
wise. 
Poor Mrs. Jervis thought it was worse, and
cry'd over me like as if she was my Mother; 
and I was two Hours before I came to myself; 
and just as I got a little up on my Feet, he
coming in, I fainted away again with the Terror; 
and so he withdrew: But he staid in the
next Room, to let nobody come near us, that
his foul Proceedings might not be known. 
Mrs. Jervis gave me her Smelling-bottle,
and had cut my Laces, and sat me in a great
Chair, and he call'd her to him: How is the
Girl? said he: I never saw such a Fool in my
Life. I did nothing at all to her. Mrs. Jervis
could not speak for crying. So he said,
She has told you, it seems, that I was kind to
her in the Summer-house, altho' I'll assure you,
I was quite innocent then as well as now, 

and I desire you to keep this Matter to yourself,
and let me not be nam'd in it. 
O, Sir, said she, for your Honour's sake,
and for Christ's sake—But he would not hear
her, and said—For your own sake, I tell you,
Mrs. Jervis, say not a Word more. I have
done her no Harm. And I won't have her
stay in my House; prating, perverse Fool, as
she is! But since she is so apt to fall into Fits,
or at least pretend to do so, prepare her to
see me To-morrow after Dinner, in my Mother's
Closet, and do you be with her, and you
shall hear what passes between us. 
And so he went out in a Pet, and order'd
his Chariot and Four to be got ready, and
went a visiting somewhere. 
Mrs. Jervis then came to me, and I told
her all that had happened, and said I was resolved
not to stay in the House: And she
replying, he seem'd to threaten as much; I
said, I am glad of that; then I shall be easy. 
So she told me all he had said to her, as above. 
Mrs. Jervis is very loth I should go; and
yet, poor Woman! she begins to be afraid
for herself; but would not have me ruin'd
for the World. She says, To be sure he
means no Good; but may-be, now he sees
me so resolute, he will give over all Attempts: 
And that I shall better know what to do after
To-morrow, when I am to appear before a
very bad Judge, I doubt. 
O how I dread this To-morrow's Appearance! 
But be as assured, my dear Parents, of 

the Honesty of your poor Child, as I am of your
Prayers for 
Your dutiful Daughter. 
O this frightful To-morrow! how I dread it! 

