



Mr. Belford. In Coutinuation. 

The Colonel tells me, That he has written to
Mr. John Harlowe, by his servant, ‘That they
might spare themselves the trouble of debating about
a Reconciliation; for that his dear Cousin would
probably be no more, before they could resolve.’ 
He asked me after his Cousin's means of subsisting; 
and whether she had accepted of any favour from me: 
He was sure, he said, she would not from you. 
I acquainted him with the truth of her parting with
some of her apparel. 
This wrung his heart; and bitterly did he exclaim
as well against you, as against her implacable relations. 
He wished he had not come to England at all, or
had come sooner; and hoped I would apprise him of
the whole mournful Story, at a proper season. He
added, that he had thoughts when he came over, of
fixing here for the remainder of his days: But now,
as it was impossible his Cousin could recover, he would
go abroad again, and resettle himself at Florence or
Leghorn. 
* * *
The Lady has been giving orders, with great presence
of mind, about her body; directing her nurse
and the maid of the house to put her into her coffin
as soon as she is cold. Mr. Belford, she said, would
know the rest by her Will. 
* * *
She has just now given from her bosom, where
she always wore it, a miniature picture set in gold of
Miss Howe: She gave it to Mrs. Lovick, desiring her
to fold it up in white paper, and direct it, To Charles
Hickman, Esq, and to give it to me, when she was
departed, for that gentleman. 

She looked upon the picture, before she gave it her
—Sweet and ever-amiable Friend—Companion—Sister
—Lover! said she—And kissed it four several times,
once at each tender appellation. 
* * *
Your other servant is come. —Well may you be
impatient! —Well may you! —But do you think I can
leave off in the middle of a conversation, to run and
set down what offers, and send it away piecemeal as I
write? —If I could, must I not lose one half, while I
put down the other? 
This event is nearly as interesting to me as it is to
you. If you are more grieved than I, there can be
but one reason for it; and that's at your heart! —I
had rather lose all the friends I have in the world (yourself
in the number) than this divine Lady; and shall
be unhappy whenever I think of her sufferings, and of
her merit; tho' I have nothing to reproach myself by
reason of the former. 
I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon
you, as to express my own grief; tho' your conscience,
I suppose, will make you think otherwise. 
Your poor fellow, who says, that he begs for his
life in desiring to be dispatched back with a Letter,
tears this from me—Else perhaps (for I am just sent
for down) a quarter of an hour would make you—not
easy indeed—but certain—And that, in a state like
yours, to a mind like yours, is a relief. 
Thursday Afternoon, 4 o'Clock. 