



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dear Lady,
We are just return'd from accompanying the
worthy Miss Darnford as far as Bedford, in
her Way home, where her Papa and Mamma met 

her in a Coach and Four. Sir Simon put on his
pleasant Airs, and schooled Mr. B. for persuading
his Daughter to stay so long from him; me for putting
her upon asking to stay longer; and Miss for
being persuaded by us. 
I think he is worse than ever, in his way of Talk,
and for my Rebukes to him; for he ran on a deal
of Stuff about me, and my late Circumstance; and
would have it, that I am so much improv'd, that I
ought to make a Court'sy to Mr. B. once an Hour. 
He said, when I was angry at him, and his Lady
blam'd him, that it was all pure Revenge for my
Letter*  , and for keeping Miss so long from him. 
We tarry'd two Days together at Bedford; for we
knew not how to part; and then we took a most
affectionate Leave of each other. 
We struck out of the Road a little, to make a
Visit to the dear House, where we tarry'd one Night; 
and next Morning, before any body could come to
congratulate us, (designing to be incog.) we proceeded
on our Journey to London, and found my
dearest, dear Boy, in charming Health. 
What a new Pleasure has God Almighty's Goodness
bestow'd upon me; which, after every little Absence,
rises upon me, in a true maternal Tenderness,
every Step I move toward the dear little Blessing! ––– 
Yet, sometimes, I think your dear Brother is not so
fond of him, as I wish him to be. He says, 'tis
time enough for him to mind him, when he can
retum his Notice, and be grateful! ––––A negligent
Word, i'n't it, Madam? –––Considering––– 
My dear Father came to Town, to accompany
my good Mother down to Kent, and they set out
three or four Days after your Ladyship left us. It
is impossible to describe the Joy with which his 

worthy Heart overflow'd, when he congratulated us
on the happy Event. And as he had been apprehensive
for his Daughter's Safety, judge, my Lady,
what his Transports must be, to see us all safe and
well, and happy, and a Son given to dear Mr. B. by
his greatly honoured Daughter. 
I was in the Nursery when he came. So was my
Mother. Miss Darnford also was there. And Mr. B.
who was in his Closet at his Arrival, after having
received his most respectful Congratulations himself,
brought him up (tho' he has not been there
since: indeed he han't!): Pamela, said the dear Gentleman!
see who's here. 
I sprung to him, and kneeled for his kind Blessing:
O my Father! said I, see! pointing to the dear Baby
at the Nurse's Breast, how God Almighty has answer'd
all our Prayers! 
He dropp'd down on his reverend Knees by me,
clasping me in his indulgent Arms: O my Daughter! 
—O my blessed Daughter! –––And do I once
more see you! And see you safe and well! –––I do! 
I do! –––Blessed be thy Name, O gracious God, for
these thy Mercies! 
While we were thus joined, happy Father, and
happy Daughter, in one Thanksgiving Prayer, the
sweet Baby having fallen asleep, the Nurse had put
it into the Cradle; and when my Father rose from
me, he went to my Mother, God bless my dear
Betty, said he: I long'd to see you, after this Separation. 
Here's Joy! Here's Pleasure! O how happy
are we! And taking her Hand, he kneeled down on
one Side the Cradle, and my Mother on the other,
both looking at the dear Baby, with Eyes running
over; and, Hand in Hand, he prayed, in the most
fervent manner, for a Blessing upon the dear Infant; 
and that God Almighty would make him an Honour
to his Father's Family, and to his Mother's Virtue 

that was his kind Word,) and that, in the Words of
Scripture, be might grow on, and be in Favour both
with the Lord, and with Men!––– 
They both rose, and Mr. B. taking my Hand,
and Miss Darnford's; (your Ladyship may guess how
we were moved! for Miss is a sweet-natur'd Lady,
you know, Madam) My dear Pamela! How these
kind, these grateful Hearts affect me!––– Do you
often, my dear Miss Darnford, see Scenes wrought
up by the Poets to this moving Height? –––Here we
behold and admire that noble Simplicity, in which
Nature always triumphs over her Hand-maid Art! —And which makes a Scene of Joy as affecting to a
noble Mind, as that of the deepest Distress! Else, how
could it display its Force thus sweetly on your lovely
Cheek! And he saluted the dear Miss, and me too! 
Mr. B. has just put into my Hands Mr. Locke's
Treatise on Education, and he commands me to
give him my Thoughts upon it in Writing. He
has a very high Regard for this Author, and tells me,
That my Tenderness for Billy will make me think some
of the first Advice given in it, a little harsh, perhaps; 
but altho' he has not read it through, only having
dipp'd into it here and there, he believes, from the
Name of the Author, I cannot have a better Directory:
And my Opinion of it, after I have well
considered it, will inform him, he says, of my own
Capacity and Prudence, and how far he may rely
upon both in the Point of a first Education. 
I ask'd, If I might not be excus'd Writing, only
making my Observations here and there, to himself,
as I found Occasion? But he says, I shall myself
better consider it, and be more a Mistress of the
Subject, and he shall the better attend to my Reasonings,
when they are put into Writing: And surely,
my Dear, said he, you may, in such an important
Point as this, as well oblige me with a little of your
Penmanship, as our other dear Friends. 

After this, your Ladyship will judge, I had not
another Word to say. He cuts one to the Heart,
when he speaks so seriously. 
I have look'd a little into it. It is a Book quite
accommodated to my Case, being written to a Gentle-Gentleman,
the Author's Friend, for the Regulation of
his Conduct towards his Children. But how shall I do,
Madam, if in such a fam'd and renowned Author, I
see already some few things, that I think want clearing
up? Won't it look like intolerable Vanity, in
such a one as me, to find fault with such a Genius
as Mr. Locke's? 
But I will consider of the Matter thoroughly,
before I set Pen to Paper; for, altho' he writes in a
very familiar and intelligible Style, perhaps I may
not understand him at once reading. 
But I must, on this Occasion, give your Ladyship
the Particulars of a short Conversation between your
dear Brother and me; which, however, perhaps, will
not be to my Advantage, because it will shew you
what a teizing Body I can be, if I am indulged. –––But Mr. B. will not spoil me neither in that way:
No fear of that, I dare say! –––Your Ladyship will see
this in the very Dialogue I shall give you. 
Thus it was. I had been reading in Mr. Locke's
Book, and Mr. B. asked me, How I lik'd it? Exceedingly
well, Sir. But I have a Proposal to make,
which, if you will be pleased to comply with, will
give me a charming Opportunity of understanding
Mr. Locke. 
What is your Proposal, my Dear? I see it is some
very particular one, by that sweet Earnestness in your
Look. 
Why so it is, reply'd I: And I must know, whether
you are in a high good Humour with me, before
I make it. I think you look grave upon me; 
and my Proposal will not then do, I'm sure. 

You have all the amusing Ways of your Sex, my
dear Pamela. But tell me what you would say: You
know I don't love Suspense. 
May be you're busy, Sir. Perhaps I break
in upon you. I believe you were going into your
Closet. 
True Woman!––––said he; how you love to
put one upon the Tenters! Yet, my Life for yours,
by your Parade, what I just now thought important,
is some pretty Trifle. –––Speak it at once, or I'll be
angry with you; and tapp'd my Cheek. 
Well, I wish I had not come just now! –––I see
you are not in a quite good Humour enough for
my Proposal. ––––So, pray, Sir, excuse me, till Tomorrow. 
He took my Hand, and led me to his Closet,
calling me his pretty Impertinent; and then urging
me, I said—You know, Sir, I have not been us'd
to the Company of Children. Your dear Billy will
not make me fit, for a long time, to judge of any
Part of Education. I can learn of the charming
Boy nothing but the Baby Conduct: But now, if
you would permit me to take into the House some
little Master of three or four Years old, or Miss of
five or six, I should watch over all their little Ways; 
and now reading a Chapter in the Child, and now a
Chapter in the Book, I shall be inabled to look forward,
and with Advantage, into the Subject; and
to go thro' all the Parts of Education tolerably,
for one of my Capacity; for, Sir, I can, by my
own Defects, and what I have wished to mend, know
how to judge of, and supply that Part of Life, which
carries one up to Eleven or Twelve Years of Age,
which was mine, when my Lady took me. 
A pretty Thought, Pamela! But tell me, Who will
part with their Child, think you? Would you do it,
if it were your own Case, altho' you were ever so 

well assur'd of the Advantages your Little-one would
reap by it? —For, don't you consider, my Dear,
that the Child ought to be wholly subjected to your
Authority? That its Father or Mother ought seldom
to see it; because it should think itself absolutely dependent
upon you? –––And where, my Dear, will
you meet with Parents so resign'd? –––Besides, one
would have the Child descended of genteel Parents,
and not such as could do nothing for it; otherwise
the Turn of Mind and Education you would give
it, might do it more Harm than Good. 
All this is true, Sir, very true. But would you
have no other Objection, if one could find a genteelly
descended young Master? And would you
join to persuade his Papa to give me up this Power,
only from three Months to three Months, as I liked,
and the Child liked, and as the Papa approved of
my Proceedings? 
This is so reasonable, with these last Conditions,
Pamela, that I should be pleased with your Notion,
if it could be put in Practice, because the Child
would be benefited by your Instruction, and you
would be improved in an Art, that I could wish to
see you an Adept in. 
But, perhaps, Sir, you had rather it were a Miss,
than a Master! 
I had, my Dear, if a Miss could be found, whose
Parents would give her up to you: But I suppose
you have some Master in your Head, by your puting
it upon that Sex at first. 
Let me see, Sir, You say you are in a good Humour! 
Let me see, if you be! –––Looking boldly in
his Face. 
He saluted me: What now would the pretty Fool
be at? 
Only, Sir, that you have nothing to do, but to
speak the Word, and there is a Miss whose Papa, and 

Mamma too, I am sure, would consent to give up to
me, for my own Instruction, as well as for her sake; 
and if, to speak in the Scripture Phrase, I have found
Grace in your Sight, kind Sir, speak this Word to the
dear Miss's Papa. 
And have you thus come over with me, Pamela! ––– 
Go, I am half angry with you, for leading me on in
this manner against myself. This looks so artful, that
I won't love you!; Dear Sir! –––And dear Madam!
too! Begone, I say! –––You have surpris'd me by
Art, when your Talent is Nature, and you should
keep to that! 
I was sadly balk'd and vex'd, and had neither Power
to go nor stay! –––At last, seeing I had put him into
a kind of Flutter, as now he had put me, I moved
my unwilling Feet towards the Door. –––He took a
Turn about the Closet mean time. –––Yet stay, said
he, there is something so generous in your Art, that,
on Recollection, I cannot part with you. 
He took Notice of the starting Tear–––I am to
blame! –––You had surpris'd me so, that my hasty
Temper got the better of my Consideration. Let
me kiss away this pearly Fugitive. Forgive me, my
dearest Love! What Brutes are such passionate
Wretches as me, when compar'd to such Angels as
my Pamela! I see, at once now, all the Force, and
all the Merit of your amiable Generosity: And to
make you amends for this my Hastiness and inconsiderate
Harshness, I will cooly consider of this
Matter, and will either satisfy you by my Compliance,
or by the Reasons I will give for the contrary. 
But say, my Pamela; can you forgive my Hastiness? –––Can I, Sir! Yes, indeed, clasping my Arms
about him; and bid me Go, and Begone, twenty
times a Day, if I am to be thus kindly called back
to you, thus nobly, and condescendingly treated, in
the same Breath almost! –––I see, dear Sir, continued 

I, that I must be in Fault, if ever you are lastingly
displeased with me. –––For as soon as you turn yourself
about, your Anger vanishes, and you make me
rich Amends for speaking a few harsh Words. Only
one thing, dear Sir, let me add, If I have dealt artfully
with you, impute it to my Fear of offending
you, thro' the Nature of my Petition, and not
thro' Design. And that I took the Example of the
Prophet, to King David, in the Parable of the Ewe-Lamb. 
I remember it, my Dear–––and you have well
pointed your Parable, and had nothing to do, but
to say, Thou art the Man! 
I am called upon by my dear Benefactor for a
little Airing; and he suffers me only to conclude
this long Letter, knowing to whom I have the Honour
to write, this being Post-day. And so I am
obliged, with greater Abruptness than I had design'd,
to mention thankfully your Ladyship's Goodness to
me; particularly in that kind, kind Letter*  , which
your dear Brother shew'd me this Morning, and not
before––––I believe, for fear I should be so much
oppress'd by the Sense of your Ladyship's unmerited
Goodness to me, had he shew'd it me before your
Departure from us, that I should not be able to
look up to you; heaping Favours and Blessings upon
me, as you hourly were besides. What a happy,
happy Creature am I! —But my Gratitude runs me
into Length; and sorry I am, that I cannot have
time just now to indulge it. 
But yet I am apt sometimes to doubt, whether I
ought to think myself so very happy; and whether
it is not an Argument of a mean Spirit; because I
am under Obligations, unreturnable Obligations, to
every living Soul, as well as to your Ladyship; and 

yet can rejoice in them; as if it was such a glorious
Thing to be obliged, when it is not in one's Power
to oblige again. 
Is there nothing, my dear Lord and Lady Davers,
is there nothing, my dear Countess, and my good
Lord C. that I can do, to shew, at least, that I have a
Will, and am not an ingrateful, and a sordid Creature? 
And yet, if you give me Power to do any thing
that will have the Appearance of a Return, even
that Power will be laying a fresh Obligation upon
me–––Which, however, I should be very proud of,
because I should thereby convince you, by something
more than Words, how much I am (most particularly
to yourself, my dearest Lady Davers, (my Sister,
my Friend, my Patroness) 
Your most obliged, and faithful Servant,
P. B. 
Your dear Brother joins in respectful Thankfulfulness
to his Four noble Gossips. And I made
my Billy, by his Lips, subscribe his. I hope so
to direct his earliest Notions, as to make him
sensible of his dutiful Obligations to such noble
and good God-papa's and Mamma's. 

