



Dear Father and Mother,
I Shall write on, as long as I stay, tho' I should
have nothing but Sillinesses to write; for I know
you divert yourselves at Nights with what I write, 

because it is mine. John tells me how much you
long for my coming; but he says, he told you, he
hop'd something would happen to hinder it. 
I am glad you did not tell him the Occasion of
my coming away; for if they should guess, it were
better so, than to have it from you or me: Besides,
I really am concern'd that my poor Master
should cast such a Thought upon such a Creature
as me; for besides the Disgrace, it has quite turn'd
his Temper; and I begin to think he likes me, and
can't help it; and yet strives to conquer it, and so
finds no way but to be cross to me. 
Don't think me presumptuous and conceited; for
it is more my Concern than my Pride, to see such
a Gentleman so demean himself, and lessen the Regard
he used to have in the Eyes of all his Servants
on my Account. —But I am to tell you of my new
Dress to Day. 
And so, when I had din'd, up Stairs I went, and
lock'd myself into my little Room. There I trick'd
myself up as well as I could in my new Garb, and
put on my round-ear'd ordinary Cap; but with a
green Knot however, and my homespun Gown
and Petticoat, and plain-leather Shoes; but yet they
are what they call Spanish Leather, and my ordinary
Hose, ordinary I mean to what I have been lately
used to; tho' I shall think good Yarn may do very
well for every Day, when I come home. A plain
Muslin Tucker I put on, and my black Silk Necklace,
instead of the French Necklace my Lady gave
me, and put the Ear-rings out of my Ears; and when
I was quite 'quip'd, I took my Straw Hat in my
Hand, with its two blue Strings, and look'd about
me in the Glass, as proud as any thing. —To say
Truth, I never lik'd myself so well in my Life. 
O the Pleasure of descending with Ease, Innocence
and Resignation! —Indeed there is nothing 

like it! An humble Mind, I plainly see, cannot
meet with any very shocking Disappointment, let
Fortune's Wheel turn round as it will. 
So I went down to look for Mrs. Jervis, to see
how she lik'd me. 
I met, as I was upon the Stairs, our Rachel, who
is the House-maid, and she made me a low Curchee,
and I found did not know me. So I smil'd, and
went to the House-keeper's Parlour. And there sat
good Mrs. Jervis at Work, making a Shift: And,
would you believe it? she did not know me at first; 
but rose up, and pull'd off her Spectacles; and said,
Do you want me, forsooth? I could not help laughing,
and said, Hey-day! Mrs. Jervis, what! don't you
know me? ––––She stood all in Amaze, and look'd
at me from Top to Toe; Why you surprise me, said
she; what! Pamela! Thus metamorphos'd! How
carne this about? As it happen'd, in stept my Master,
and my Back being to him, he thought it was
a Stranger speaking to Mrs. Jervis, and withdrew
again; and did not hear her ask if his Honour had any
Commands with her? ––––She turn'd me about and
about, and I shew'd her all my Dress, to my Underpetticoat; 
and she said, sitting down, Why I am all
in Amaze! I must sit down. What can all this
mean? I told her, I had no Cloaths suitable to my
Condition when I return'd to my Father's; and so
it was better to begin here, as I was soon to go
away, that all my Fellow-servants might see, I knew
how to suit myself to the State I was returning to. 
Well, said she, I never knew the like of thee. But
this sad Preparation for going away (for now I see
you are quite in Earnest) is what I know not how to
get over. O my dear Pamela, how can I part with
you! 
My Master rung in the back Parlour, and so I
withdrew, and Mrs. Jervis went to attend him. It 

seems he said to her, I was coming in to let you
know that I shall go to Lincolnshire, and may-be to my Sister Davers's, and be absent some Weeks. 
But, pray, what pretty neat Damsel was that with you? 
She says, she smil'd, and ask'd if his Honour did
not know who it was? No, said he, I never saw
her before. Farmer Nichols, or Farmer Brady, have
neither of them such a tight prim Lass for a Daughter; 
have they? —Tho' I did not see her Face neither,
said he. If your Honour won't be angry, said she,
I will introduce her into your Presence; for I think,
says she, she out-does our Pamela. 
Now I did not thank her for this, as I told her
afterwards (for it brought a great deal of Trouble
upon me, as well as Crossness, as you shall hear). 
That can't be, he was pleased to say. But if you
can find an Excuse for it, let her come in. 
At that she stept to me, and told me, I must go
in with her to my Master; but, said she, for Goodness
sake, let him find you out; for he don't know
you. Good Sirs! Mrs. Jervis, said I, how could
you serve me so? Besides, it looks too free both in
me, and to him. I tell you, said she, you shall come
in; and pray don't reveal yourself till he finds you
out. 
So I went in, foolish as I was; tho' I must have
been seen by him another time, if I had not then. 
And she would make me take my Straw-hat in my
Hand. 
I dropt a low Curchee, but said never a Word. 
I dare say, he knew me as soon as he saw my Face; 
but was as cunning as Lucifer. He came up to me,
and took me by the Hand, and said, Whose pretty
Maiden are you? —I dare say you are Pamela's Sister,
you are so like her. So neat, so clean, so
pretty! Why, Child, you far surpass your Sister
Pamela! 

I was all Confusion, and would have spoken; but
he took me about the Neck; Why, said he, you
are very pretty, Child; I would not be so free with
your Sister, you may believe; but I must kiss you. 
O Sir, said I, I am Pamela, indeed I am: Indeed
I am Pamela, her own self! 
He kissed me for all I could do; and said, Impossible!
you are a lovelier Girl by half than Pamela;
and sure I may be innocently free with you, tho' I
would not do her so much Favour. 
This was a sad Bite upon me indeed, and what I
could not expect; and Mrs. Jervis look'd like a
Fool as much as I, for her Officiousness. —At last I
got away, and ran out of the Parlour, most sadly
vex'd, as you may well think. 
He talk'd a good deal to Mrs. Jervis, and at last
order'd me to come in to him. Come in, said he,
you little Villain! for so he call'd me; good Sirs!
what a Name was there! Who is it you put your
Tricks upon? I was resolved never to honour your
Unworthiness, said he, with so much Notice again; 
and so you must disguise yourself, to attract me, and
yet pretend, like an Hypocrite as you are— 
I was out of Patience, then; Hold, good Sir, said
I; don't impute Disguise and Hypocrisy to me, above
all things; for I hate them both, mean as I am. I
have put on no Disguise. ––––What a-plague, said he,
for that was his Word, do you mean then by this
Dress? ––––Why, and please your Honour, said I,
I mean one of the honestest things in the World. 
I have been in Disguise indeed ever since my good
Lady, your Mother, took me from my poor Parents. 
I came to her Ladyship so poor and mean, that these
Cloaths I have on, are a princely Suit, to those I
had then. And her Goodness heap'd upon me rich
Cloaths, and other Bounties: And as I am now returning
to my poor Parents again so soon, I cannot 

wear those good things without being whooted at; 
and so have bought what will be more suitable to my
Degree, and be a good Holiday Suit too, when I get
home. 
He then took me in his Arms, and presently push'd
me from him. Mrs. Jervis, said he, take the little
Witch from me; I can neither bear, nor forbear
her! (Strange Words these!) ––––But stay, you
shan't go! ––––Yet begone! ––––No, come back
again. 
I thought he was mad, for my Share; for he knew
not what he would have. But I was going however,
and he stept after me, and took hold of my Arm,
and brought me in again: I am sure he made my
Arm black and blue; for the Marks are upon it still. 
Sir, Sir, said I, pray have Mercy; I will, I will
come in! 
He sat down, and look'd at me, and look'd as silly
as such a poor Girl as I, I thought afterwards. –––– 
At last, he said, Well, Mrs. Jervis, as I was telling
you, you may suffer her to stay a little longer, till I
see if my Sister Davers will have her; if, mean time,
she humble herself, and ask this as a Favour, and
is sorry for her Pertness, and the Liberty she has
taken with my Character, out of the House and in
the House. Your Honour indeed told me so, said
Mrs. Jervis; but I never found her inclinable to
think herself in Fault. Pride and Perverseness, said
he, with a Vengeance! Yet this is your Doating-piece! 
––––Well, for once I'll submit myself, to tell
you, Hussy, said he to me, you may stay a Fortnight
longer, till I see my Sister Davers: Do you
hear what I say to you, Statue! can you neither
speak, nor be thankful? —Your Honour frights me
so, said I, that I can hardly speak: But I will venture
to say, that I have only to beg, as a Favour,
that I may go to my Father and Mother. —Why; 

Fool, says he, won't you like to go to wait on my
Sister Davers? Sir, said I, I was once fond of that
Honour; but you was pleased to say, I might be
in Danger from her Ladyship's Nephew, or he from
me? ––– D&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;d Impertinence! said he; do you hear,
Mrs. Jervis, do you hear, how she retorts upon me? 
Was ever such matchless Assurance! –––– 
I then fell a weeping; for Mrs. Jervis said, Fie,
Pamela, fie! –––And I said, My Lot is very hard
indeed! I am sure I would hurt nobody; and I have
been, it seems, guilty of Indiscretions, which have
cost me my Place, and my Master's Favour, and so
have been turn'd away. And when the Time is
come, that I should return to my poor Parents, I
am not suffer'd to go quietly. Good your Honour,
what have I done, that I must be used worse than
if I had robb'd you! ––––Robb'd me! said he, why so
you have, Hussy; you have robb'd me. Who! I! 
Sir, said I, have I robb'd you? Why then you are
a Justice of Peace, and may send me to Gaol, if
you please, and bring me to a Tryal for my Life! 
If you can prove that I have robb'd you, I am sure
I ought to die! 
Now I was quite ignorant of his Meaning; tho'
I did not like it when it was afterwards explain'd,
neither; and, well, thought I, what will this come
to at last, if poor Pamela is thought a Thief! Then I
thought, in an Instant, how I should shew my Face
to my honest poor Parents, if I was but suspected. 
But, Sir, said I, let me ask you but one Question,
and pray don't let me be call'd Names for it; for
I don't mean disrespectfully; Why, if I have done
amiss, am I not left to be discharged by your Housekeeper,
as the other Maids have been? And if Jane,
or Rachel, or Hannah, were to offend, would your
Honour stoop to take Notice of them? And why
should you so demean yourself to take Notice of 

me? Pray, Sir, if I have not been worse than others,
why should I suffer more than others? and why
should I not be turn'd away, and there's an End of
it? For indeed I am not of Consequence enough
for my Master to concern himself and be angry
about such a Creature as me. 
Do you hear, Mrs. Jervis, cry'd he again, how
pertly I am interrogated by this sawcy Slut? Why,
Sauce-box, says he, did not my good Mother desire
me to take care of you? and have you not been
always distinguish'd by me, above a common Servant?
and does your Ingratitude upbraid me for
this? 
I said something mutteringly, and he vow'd he
would hear it. I begg'd Excuse; but he insisted
upon it. Why then, said I, if your Honour must
know, I said, That my good Lady did not desire
your Care to extend to the Summer-house and her
Dressing-room. 
Well, this was a little sawcy, you'll say! ––––And
He flew into such a Passion, that I was forced to run
for it; and Mrs. Jervis said, It was happy I got out
of his way. 
Why, what makes him provoke one so, then? 
–––I'm almost sorry for it; but I would be glad to get
away at any rate. For I begin to be fearful now. 
Just now Mr. Jonathan sent me these line––– 
(Lord bless me! what shall I do?) 
“Dear Mrs. Pamela, Take care of yourself; for
Rachel heard my Master say to Mrs. Jervis, who,
she believes, was pleading for you, Say no more,
Mrs. Jervis; for by G&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; I will have her! Burn
this instantly.” 
O pray for your poor Daughter! I am called to
go to-bed by Mrs. Jervis, for it is past Eleven; and
I am sure she shall hear of it; for all this is owing
to her, tho' she did not mean any Harm. But I have 

been, and am, in a strange Fluster; and I suppose
too, she'll say, I have been full-pert. 
O my dear Father and Mother, Power and Riches
never want Advocates! But, poor Gentlewoman! she
cannot live without him. And he has been very
good to her. 
So, Good-night. May-be I shall send this in the
Morning; but may-be not; so won't conclude; tho'
yet I must say, I am 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 

