


My generous Master has given me, this
Morning, a most considerate, but yet,
from the Nature of it, melancholy Instance of
his great Regard for my Unworthiness, which
I never could have wished, hoped for, or even
thought of. 
He took a Walk with me, after Breakfast, into
the Garden; and a little Shower falling, he led
me for Shelter into the little Summer-house, in
the private Garden, where he formerly gave me
Apprehensions; and sitting down by me, he
said, I have now finished all that lies on my
Mind, my Dear, and am very easy: For have 

you not wonder'd, that I have so much imploy'd
myself in my Library? Been so much at home,
and yet not in your Company? —No, Sir,
said I, I have never been so impertinent, as to
wonder at any thing you please to imploy yourself
about; nor would give way to a Curiosity
that should be troublesome to you: And besides,
I know your large Possessions, and the Method
you take of looking yourself into your Affairs,
must needs take up so much of your Time, that I
ought to be very careful how I intrude upon you. 
Well, said he, but I'll tell you what has
been my last Work: I have taken it into my
Consideration, that, at present, my Line is almost
extinct; and the chief Part of my maternal
Estate, in case I die without Issue, will go
to another Line, and great Part of my personal,
will fall into such Hands, as I shall not care
my Pamela should lie at the Mercy of. I have
therefore, as human Life is uncertain, made
such a Disposition of my Affairs, as will make
you absolutely independent and happy; as will
secure to you the Power of doing a great deal
of Good, and living as a Person ought to do,
who is my Relict; and shall put it out of any
body's Power to molest your Father and Mother,
in the Provision I design them, for the
Remainder of their Days: And I have finish'd
all, this very Morning, except to naming
Trustees for you; and if you have any body
you would confide in more than another, I
would have you speak. 
I was so touch'd with this mournful Instance
of his excessive Goodness to me, and the 

Thoughts necessarily flowing from the solemn
Occasion, that I was unable to speak, and at
last reliev'd my Mind by a violent Fit of weeping; 
and could only say, clasping my Arms
around the dear generous Gentleman, How
shall I support this! So very cruel, yet so very
kind! 
Don't, my Dear, said he, be concern'd at
what gives me Pleasure. I am not the nearer
my End, for having made this Disposition; but
I think, the putting off these material Points,
when so many Accidents every Day happen, and
Life is so precarious, is one of the most inexcusable
Things in the World. And there are
many important Points to be thought of, when
Life is drawing to its utmost Verge; and the
Mind may be so agitated and unfit, that it is a
most sad thing to put off, to that Time, any of
those Concerns, which more especially require
a considerate and composed Frame of Temper,
and perfect Health and Vigour to give Directions
about. My poor Friend, Mr. Carlton, who
died in my Arms so lately, and had a Mind disturb'd
by worldly Considerations on one side, a
Weakness of Body, thro' the Violence of his
Distemper, on another, and the Concerns of
still as much more Moment, as the Soul is to
the Body, on a third, made so great an Impression
upon me then, that I was the more impatient
to come to this House, where were most of my
Writings, in order to make the Disposition I
have now perfected: And since it is grievous to
my dear Girl, I will myself think of such Trustees,
as shall be most for her Benefit. I have only 

therefore to assure you, my Dear, that in this
Instance, as I will do in any other I can think of,
I have studied to make you quite easy, free, and
independent. And because I shall avoid all Occasions,
for the future, which may discompose
you, I have but one Request to make; which
is, That if it please God, for my Sins, to separate
me from my dearest Pamela, you will only
resolve not to marry one Person; for I would
not be such an Herod, as to restrain you from
a Change of Condition with any other, however
reluctantly I may think of any other Person's
succeeding me in your Esteem. 
I could not answer, and thought my Heart
would have burst. And he continued, To conclude
at once, a Subject that is so grievous
to you, I will tell you, my Pamela, that this
Person is Mr. Williams. And now I will acquaint
you with my Motive for this Request; 
which is wholly owing to my Niceness, and to
no Dislike I have for him, or Apprehension of
any Likelihood, that it will be so: But, methinks,
it would reflect a little upon my Pamela, if she
was to give way to such a Conduct, as if she
had married a Man for his Estate, when she had
rather have had another, had it not been for
that; and that now, the World will say, she
is at Liberty to pursue her Inclination, the Parson
is the Man! —And I cannot bear even
the most distant Apprehension, that I had not
the Preference with you of any Man living, let
me have been what I would; as I have shewn
my dear Life, that I have preferr'd her to all her
Sex, of whatever Degree. 

I could not speak, might I have had the
World: And he took me in his Arms, and said,
I have now spoken all my Mind, and expect no
Answer; and I see you too much mov'd to give
me one. —Only forgive me the Mention, since
I have told you my Motive; which as much affects
your Reputation, as my Niceness; and
offer not at an Answer;—only say, You forgive
me. And I hope I have not one discomposing
thing to say to my Dearest, for the rest of
my Life; which, I pray God, for both our sakes,
to lengthen for many happy Years. 
Grief still choaked up the Passage of my
Words; and he said, The Shower is over, my
Dear; let us walk out again. —He led me out,
and I would have spoken; but he said, I will
not hear my dear Creature say any thing: To
hearken to your Assurance of complying with
my Request, would look as if I doubted you,
and wanted it. I am confident I needed only to
speak my Mind, to be observed by you; and I
shall never more think on the Subject, if you
don't remind me of it. He then most sweetly
chang'd the Discourse. 
Don't you with Pleasure, my Dear, said
he, take in the delightful Fragrance, that
this sweet Shower has given to these Banks
of Flowers? Your Presence is so inlivening
to me, that I could almost fansy, that what
we owe to the Shower is owing to that: And
all Nature, methinks, blooms around me,
when I have my Pamela by my Side. You are
a Poetess, my Dear; and I will give you a few
Lines, that I made myself on such an Occasion 

as this I am speaking of, the Presence of a sweet
Companion, and the fresh Verdure, that, after a
Shower succeeding a long Drought, shew'd itself
throughout all vegetable Nature. And then,
in a sweet and easy Accent, with his Arms
about me as we walk'd, he sung me the following
Verses; of which he afterwards favour'd me
with a Copy: 


I.
All Nature blooms when you appear;
The Fields their richest Liv'ries wear;
Oaks, Elms, and Pines, blest with your View;
Shoot out fresh Greens, and bud anew;
 The varying Seasons you supply;
 And when you're gone, they fade and die.


II.
Sweet Philonel, in mournful strains,
To you appeals, to you complains.
The tow'ring Lark, on rising Wing,
Warbles to you, your Praise does sing;
 He cuts the yielding Air, and flies
 To Heav'n, to type your future Joys.


III.
The purple Violet, damask Rose,
Each, to delight your Senses, blows.
The Lilies ope', as you appear;
And all the Beauties of the Year
 Diffuse their Odours at your Feet,
 Who give to ev'ry Flow'r its Sweet.


IV.
For Flow'rs and Women are ally'd;
Both Nature's Glory, and her Pride!
Of ev'ry fragrant Sweet possest,
They bloom but for the Fair-one's Breast;
 And to the swelling Bosom borne,
 Each other mutually adorn.


Thus sweetly did he palliate the Woes, which
the Generosity of his Actions, mix'd with the Solemness
of the Occasion, and the strange Request
he had vouchsafed to make me, had occasion'd. 
And all he would permit me to say, was, That
I was not displeased with him! —Displeased
with you, dearest Sir! said I: Let me thus testify
my Obligations, and the Force all your Commands
shall have upon me. And I took the
Liberty to clasp my Arms about his Neck, and
kissed him. 
But yet my Mind was pained at times, and
has been to this Hour. —God grant that I may
never see the dreadful Moment, that shall shut
up the precious Life of this excellently generous
Benefactor of mine! And—but I cannot bear
to suppose—I cannot say more on such a deep
Subject. 
Oh! what a poor thing is human Life in its
best Enjoyments! Subjected to imaginary Evils,
when it has no real ones to disturb it; and that
can be made as effectually unhappy by its Apprehensions
of remote Contingencies, as if it was
struggling with the Pangs of a present Distress! 
This, duly reflected upon, methinks, should convince 

every one, that this World is not a Place
for the immortal Mind to be confined to; and
that there must be an Hereafter, where the whole
Soul shall be satisfy'd. 
But I shall get out of my Depth: My shallow
Mind cannot comprehend, as it ought, these
weighty Subjects: Let me, therefore, only pray,
That after having made a grateful Use of God's
Mercies here, I may, with my dear Benefactor,
rejoice in that happy State, where is no Mixture,
no Unsatisfiedness; and where all is Joy, and
Peace, and Love, for evermore. 
I said, when we sat at Supper, The charming
Taste, you gave me, Sir, of your poetical
Fancy, makes me sure you have more Favours
of this Kind, to delight me with, if you please; 
and may I beg to be indulged on this agreeable
Head? —Hitherto, said he, my Life has been
too much a Life of Gaiety and Action, to be
busied so innocently. Some little Essays I have
now-and-then attempted; but very few have I
completed. Indeed I had not Patience, nor
Attention enough, to hold me long to any one
thing. Now-and-then, perhaps, I shall occasionally
shew you what I have essay'd: But I never
could please myself in this way. 
