



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Monday Night, Aug. 28. 
I doubt you will be all impatience, that you have not
heard from me since mine of Thursday last. You would
be still more so, if you knew that I had by me a letter
ready-written. 

I went early yesterday morning to Epsom; and found
every thing disposed according to the directions I had left
on Friday; and at night the solemn office was performed. 
Tourville was there; and behaved very decently, and
with greater concern than I thought he would ever have
expressed for any body. 
Thomasine, they told me, in a kind of disguise, was
in an obscure pew, out of curiosity (for it seems she was
far from shewing any tokens of grief) to see the last office
performed for the man whose heart she had so largely contributed
to break. 
I was obliged to stay till this afternoon, to settle several
necessary matters, and to direct inventories to be taken
in order for appraisement; for every thing is to be turned
into money, by his will. I presented his sister with the
too guineas the poor man left me as his executor, and
desired her to continue in the house, and take the direction
of every thing, till I could hear from his nephew at Antigua,
who is heir at law. He had left her but 50l. altho'
he knew her indigence; and that it was owing to a vile
husband, and not to herself, that she was indigent. 
The poor man left about 200l. in money, and 200l.
in two East-India bonds; and I will contrive, if I can, to
make up the poor woman's 50l. and my 100 guineas, 200l.
to her; and then she will have some little matter coming
in certain, which I will oblige her to keep out of the
hands of son, who has compleated that ruin which his
father had very near effected. 
I gave Tourville his 20l. and will send you and Mowbray
yours by the first order. And so much for poor Belton's
affairs till I see you. 
I got to town in the evening, and went directly to
Smith's. I found Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith in the
back-shop, and I saw they had been both in tears. They
rejoiced to see me, however, and told me, that the doctor
and Mr. Goddard were but just gone; as was also the
worthy clergyman, who often comes to pray by her; and
all three were of opinion, that she would hardly live to
see the entrance of another week. I was not so much surprised
as grieved; for I had feared as much when I left
her on Saturday. 

I sent up my compliments; and she returned, that she
would take it for a favour if I would call upon her in the
morning, by eight o'clock. Mrs. Lovick told me, That
she had fainted away on Saturday, while she was writing,
as she had done likewise the day before; and having received
benefit then by a little turn in a chair, she was carried
abroad again. She returned somewhat better; and
wrote till late; yet had a pretty good night; and went to
Covent-garden church in the morning: But came home so
ill, that she was obliged to lie down. 
When she arose, seeing how much grieved Mrs. Lovick
and Mrs. Smith were for her, she made apologies for the
trouble she gave them—You were happy, said she, before
I came hither. It was a cruel thing in me to come among
honest strangers, and to be sick, and die with you. 
When they touched upon the irreconcileableness of her
friends, she said, She had ill offices done her to them, and
they did not know how ill she was, nor would they believe
any thing she should write. But yet she could not
but sometimes think it a little hard, that she should have
so many near and dear friends living, and not one to look
upon her—No old servant, no old friend, she said, to be
permitted to come near her, without being sure of incurring
displeasure; and to have such a great work to go
thro' by herself, a young creature as she was, and to have
every thing to think of as to her temporal matters, and to
order, to her very interrment! No dear mother, said she,
to pray by me and bless me! —No kind sister to sooth and
comfort me! —But come, said she, how do I know but all
is for the best—If I can but make a right use of the dispensation? —Pray for me, Mrs. Lovick—Pray for me, Mrs.
Smith, that I may—I have great need of your prayers. — 
This cruel man has discomposed me. His persecutions
have given me a pain just here—putting her hand to her
heart. What a step has he made me take to avoid him! — 
Who can touch pitch, and not be defiled? He has made a
bad spirit take possession of me, I think—Broken in upon
all my duties. And will not yet, I doubt, let me be at rest. 
Indeed he is very cruel. —But, this is one of my trials, I
believe. By God's grace I shall be easier to-morrow, and
especially if I have no more of his tormentings, and if I can
can get a tolerable night. And I will fit up till eleven, that
I may. 

She said, That tho' this was so heavy a day with her,
she was at other times, within these few days past especially,
blessed with bright hours; and particularly, that she
had now-and-then such joyful assurances (which she
hoped were not presumptuous ones) that God would receive
her to his mercy, that she could hardly contain herself,
and was ready to think herself above this earth while
she was in it: And what, inferred she to Mrs. Lovick, must
be the state itself, the very aspirations after which, have
often cast a beamy light thro' the thickest darkness, and
when I have been at the lowest ebb, have dispelled the
black clouds of despondency? —As I hope they soon will
this spirit of repining. 
She had a pretty good night, it seems, and this morning
went in a chair to St. Dunstan's church. 
The chairmen told Mrs. Smith, that after prayers (for
she did not return till between nine and ten) they carried
her to a house in Fleet-street, where they never waited on
her before. And where dost think this was? —Why, to
an Undertaker's! Good God! what a woman is this! She
went into the back-shop, and talked with the master of it
about half an hour, and came from him with great serenity; 
he waiting upon her to her chair with a respectful
countenance, but full of curiosity and seriousness. 
'Tis evident, that she then went to bespeak her house
that she talked of (a) . —As soon as you can, Sir, were her
words to him as she got into the chair. Mrs. Smith told
me this with the same surprize, and grief, that I heard it. 
She was so ill in the afternoon, having got cold either
at St. Dunstan's or at chapel, that she sent for the clergyman
to pray by her; and the women, unknown to her,
sent both for Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard: Who were just
gone, as I told you, when I came to pay my respects to
her this evening. 
And thus I have recounted from the good women what passed to this night since my absence. 
I long for to-morrow, that I may see her: And yet 'tis
such a melancholy longing, as I never experienced, and
know not how to describe. 
Tuesday, Aug. 29. 
I was at Smith's at half an hour after seven. They 

told me, that the lady was gone in a chair to St. Dunstan's; 
but was better than she had been in either of the
two preceding days; and said to Mrs Lovick and Mrs.
Smith, as she went into the chair, I have a good deal to
answer for to you, my good friends, for my vapourish
conversation of last night. 
If, Mrs. Lovick, said she smiling, I have no new matters
to discompose me, I believe my spirits will hold out
purely. 
She returned immediately after prayers. 
Mr. Belford, said she, as she entered the back-shop where
I was, and upon my approaching her, I am very glad to
see you. You have been performing for your poor friend a
kind last office. 'Tis not long ago, since you did the same
for a near relation. Is it not a little hard upon you, that
these troubles should fall so thick to your lot? But they
are charitable offices: And it is a praise to your humanity,
that poor dying people know not where to choose so well. 
I told her I was sorry to hear she had been so ill since I
had the honour to attend her; but rejoiced to find, that
now she seemed a good deal better. 
It will be sometimes better, and sometimes worse, replied
she, with poor creatures, when they are balancing
between life and death. But no more of these matters just
now. I hope, Sir, you'll breakfast with me. I was quite
vapourish yesterday. I had a very bad spirit upon me. 
Had I not, Mrs. Smith? But I hope I shall be no more so. 
And to-day I am perfectly serene. This day rises upon
me as if it would be a bright one. 
She desired me to walk up, and invited Mr. Smith and
his wife, and Mrs. Lovick also, to breakfast with her. I
was better pleased with her liveliness than with her looks. 
The good people retiring after breakfast, the following conversation passed between us. 
Pray, Sir, let me ask you, said she, if you think I may
promise myself that I shall be no more molested by your
friend? 
I hesitated: For how could I answer for such a man? 
What shall I do, if he comes again? —You see how
I am. —I cannot fly from him now—If he has any pity
left for the poor creature whom he has thus reduced, let him 

not come. —But have you heard from him lately? And
will have come? 
I hope not, Madam; I have not heard from him since
Thursday last, that he went out of town, rejoicing in the
hopes your letter gave him of a reconciliation between
your friends and you, and that he might in good time see
you at your father's; and he is gone down to give all his
friends joy of the news, and is in high spirits upon it. 
Alas for me! I shall surely have him come up to
persecute me again! As soon as he discovers that That was
only a stratagem to keep him away, he will come up; and
who knows but even now he is upon the road? I thought
I was so bad, that I should have been out of his and every
body's way before now; for I expected not, that this contrivance
would serve me above two or three days; and by
this time he must have found out, that I am not so happy
as to have any hope of a reconciliation with my family; 
and then he will come, if it be only in revenge for what
he will think a deceit. 
I believe I looked surprised to hear her confess that
her letter was a stratagem only; for she said, You wonder,
Mr. Belford, I observe, that I could be guilty of such an
artifice. I doubt it is not right: But how could I see a man
who had so mortally injured me; yet, pretending sorrow
for his crimes, and wanting to see me, could behave with
so much shocking levity as he did to the honest people of
the house? Yet, 'tis strange too, that neither you nor he
found out my meaning on perusal of my letter. You have
seen what I wrote, no doubt? 
I have, Madam. And then I began to account for it,
as an innocent artifice. 
Thus far indeed, Sir, it is innocent, that I meant him
no hurt, and had a right to the effect I hoped for from it; 
and he had none to invade me. But have you, Sir, that
letter of his, in which he gives you (as I suppose he does)
the copy of mine? 
I have, Madam. And pulled it out of my letter case: 
But hesitating—Nay, Sir, said she, be pleased to read my
letter to yourself—I desire not to see his—and see if you
can be longer a stranger to a meaning so obvious. 
I read it to myself—Indeed, Madam, I can find nothing
but that you are going down to Harlowe-place to be reconciled 

to your father and other friends: And Mr. Lovelace
presumed that a letter from your sister, which he saw
brought when he was at Mr. Smith's, gave you the welcome
news of it. 
She then explained all to me, and that, as I may say, in six
words—A religious meaning is couched under it, and that's
the reason that neither you nor I could find it out. 
Read but for my father's house, Heaven, said she, and
for the interposition of my dear blessed friend, suppose the
Mediation of my Saviour; which I humbly rely upon; and
all the rest of the letter will be accounted for. 
I read it so, and stood astonished for a minute at her invention, her piety, her charity, and at thine and my own
stupidity, to be thus taken in. 
And now, thou vile Lovelace, what hast thou to do,
(the lady all consistent with herself, and no hopes left for
thee) but to hang, down, or shoot thyself, for an outwitted
triumpher? 
My surprize being a little over, she proceeded: As to
the letter that came from my sister while your friend was
here, you will soon see, Sir, that it is the cruelest letter she
ever wrote me. 
And then she expressed a deep concern for what might
be the consequence of Col. Morden's intended visit to you; 
and besought me, that if now, or at any time hereafter, I
had opportunity to prevent any further mischief, without
detriment or danger to myself, I would do it. 
I assured her of the most particular attention to this
and to all her commands; and that in a manner so agreeable
to her, that she invoked at blessing upon me for my
goodness, as she called it, to a desolate creature who suffered
under the worst of orphanage; those were her words. 
She then went back to her first subject, her uneasiness
for fear of your molesting her again; and sid, If you have
any influence over him, Mr. Belford, prevail upon him,
that he will give me the assurance, that the short remainder
of my time shall be all my own. I have need of it. 
Indeed I have. Why will he wish to interrupt me in my
duty? Has he not punished me enough for my preference
of him to all his sex? Has he not destroyed my fame and
my fortune? And will not his causeless vengeance upon 

me be complete, unless he ruins my soul too? —Excuse
me, Sir, this vehemence! But indeed it greatly imports
me, to know that I shall be no more disturbed by him. 
And yet, with all this aversion, I would sooner give away
to his visit, tho' I were to expire the moment I saw him,
than to be the cause of any fatal misunderstanding between
you and him. 
I assured her, that I would make such a representation
of the matter to you, and of the state of her health, that I
would undertake to answer for you, that you would not
attempt to come near her. 
And for this reason, Lovelace, do I lay the whole matter
before you, and desire you will authorize me, as soon
as this and mine of Saturday last come to your hands, to
dissipate her fears. 
This gave her a little satisfaction; and then she said,
that had I not told her I could promise for you, she was determined, ill as she is, to remove somewhere out of my
knowlege as well as out of yours. And yet, to have been
obliged to leave people I am but just got acquainted with,
said the poor lady, and to have died among perfect strangers,
would have completed my hardships. 
This conversation, I found, as well from the length,
as the nature of it, had fatigued her; and seeing her
change colour once or twice, I made that my excuse, and took leave of her: Desiring her permission to attend her
in the evening; and so often as possible; for I could not
help telling her, that every time I saw her, I more and
more considered her as a beatified spirit; and as one sent
from heaven to draw me after her out of the miry gulph
in which I had been so long immersed. 
And laugh at me, if thou wilt; but it is true, that every
time I approach her, I cannot but look upon her, as one
just entering into a companionship with saints and angels. 
This thought so wholly possessed me; that I could not help
begging, as I went away, her prayers and her blessing; 
and that with the reverence due to an angel, and with an
earnestness like That, which expecting intimates manifest,
when they seek to make an interest with a person, who is
just exalted into a prime degree of power, by the favour
of his prince. 
In the evening, she was so low and weak, that I took 

my leave of her, in less than a quarter of an hour. I
went directly home. Where, to the pleasure and wonder
of my cousin and her family, I now pass many honest
evenings: Which they impute to your being out of town. 
I shall dispatch my packet to-morrow morning early
by my own servant, to make you amends for the suspence
I must have kept you in: You'll thank me for that, I hope; 
but will not, I am sure, for sending your servant back
without a letter. 
I long for the particulars of the conversation between
you and Mrs. Morden: The lady, as I have hinted, is full
of apprehensions about it. Send me back this packet when
perused, for I have not had either time or patience to take
a copy of it. —And I beseech you enable me to make good
my engagements to the poor lady that you will not invade
her again. 