



Mrs. Norton, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers of Thursday, August 24. See p. 226.] 

Thursday, Aug. 31. 
I had written sooner, my dearest young Lady, but
that I have been endeavouring ever since the receipt
of your last Letter, to obtain a private audience of your
Mother, in hopes of leave to communicate it to her. 
But last night I was surprised by an invitation to breakfast
at Harlowe-Place this morning: And the chariot
came early to fetch me: An honour I did not expect. 
When I came, I found there was to be a meeting of
all your family with Colonel Morden at Harlowe-Place; 
and it was proposed by your Mother, and consented to,
that I should be present. Your Cousin, I understand,
had with difficulty brought this meeting to bear; for
your Brother had before industriously avoided all conversation
with him on the affecting subject; urging,
That it was not necessary to talk to Mr. Morden upon
it, who, being a remoter relation than themselves, had
no business to make himself a judge of their conduct to
their Daughter, their Niece, and their Sister; especially
as he had declared himself in her favour; adding, That
he should hardly have patience to be questioned by Mr.
Morden on that head. 
I was in hopes that your Mother would have given
me an opportunity of talking with her alone before the
company met; but she seemed studiously to avoid it: I
dare say, however, not with her inclination. 

I was ordered in just before Mr. Morden came; and
was bid to sit down—Which I did in the window. 
The Colonel, when he came, began the discourse,
by renewing, as he called it, his solicitations in your
favour. He set before them your penitence; your ill
health; your virtue, tho' once betrayed, and basely
used: He then re'd to them Mr. Lovelace's Letter, a
most contrite one indeed (a) ; and your high-souled answer
(b) ; for that was what he justly called it; and he
treated as it deserved Mr. Brand's officious information
(of which I had before heard he had made them ashamed)
by representations founded upon enquiries made by Mr.
Alston (c) , whom he had procured to go up on purpose
to acquaint himself with your manner of life, and what
was meant by the visits of that Mr. Belford. 
He then told them, That he had the day before
waited upon Miss Howe, and had been shewn a Letter
from you to her (d) , and permitted to take some memorandums
from it, in which you appeared, both by
hand-writing, and the contents, to be so very ill, that
it seemed doubtful to him, if it were possible for you to
get over it. And when he re'd to them that passage,
where you ask Miss Howe, ‘What can be done for you
now, were your friends to be ever so favourable? and
wish, for their sakes, more than for your own, that
they would still relent;’ and then say, ‘You are very
ill—You must drop your pen—And ask excuse for your
crooked writing; and take, as it were, a last farewel of
Miss Howe: Adieu, my dear, adieu,’ are your words; 
O my child! my child! said your Mamma, weeping,
and clasping her hands. 
Dear Madam, said your Brother, be so good as to
think you have more children than this ungrateful one. 
Yet your Sister seemed affected. 
Your Uncle Harlowe wiping his eyes, O Cousin,
said he, if one thought the poor girl was really so ill— 

She must, said your Uncle Antony. This is written
to her private friend. God forbid she should be quite
lost! 
Your Uncle Harlowe wished they did not carry their
resentments too far. 
I begged for God's sake, wringing my hands, and
with a bended knee, that they would permit me to go
up to you; engaging to give them a faithful account of
the way you were in. But I was chidden by your Brother; 
and this occasioned some angry words between
him and Mr. Morden. 
I believe, Sir, I believe, Madam, said your Sister to
her Father and Mother, we need not trouble my Cousin
to read any more. It does but grieve and disturb you. 
My Sister Clary seems to be ill: I think, if Mrs. Norton
were permitted to go up to her, it would be right. 
Wickedly as she has acted, if she be truly penitent— 
Here she stopt; and every one being silent, I stood
up once more, and besought them to let me go: And
then I offered to read a passage or two in your Letter to
me of the 24th. But I was taken up again by your Brother; 
and this occasioned still higher words between the
Colonel and him. 
Your Mother, hoping to gain upon your inflexible
Brother, and to divert the anger of the two gentlemen
from each other, proposed that the Colonel should proceed
in reading the minutes he had taken from your
Letter. 
He accordingly re'd, ‘Of your resuming your pen: 
That you thought you had taken your last farewel; 
and the rest of that very affecting passage, in which
you are obliged to break off more than once, and afterwards
to take an Airing in a chair.’ Your Brother
and Sister were affected at this; and he had recourse to
his snuff-box. And where you comfort Miss Howe,
and say, ‘You shall be happy;’ It is more, said he,
than she will let any-body else be. 
Your Sister called you Sweet soul; but with a low 

voice: Then grew hard-hearted again; yet said, Nobody
could help being affected by your pathetic grief— 
but that it was your talent. 
The Colonel then went on to the good effect your
Airing had upon you; to your good wishes to Miss
Howe and Mr. Hickman; and to your concluding sentence,
That when the happy life you wish to her comes
to be wound up, she may be as calm and as easy at
quitting it, as you hope in God you shall be. Your
Mother could not stand this; but retired to a corner of
the room, and sobbed, and wept. Your Father for a
few minutes could not speak, tho' he seemed inclined to
say something. 
Your Uncles were also both affected: —But your
Brother went round to each; and again reminded your
Mother, that she had other children: What was there,
he said, in what was read, but the result of the talent
you had of moving the passions? And he blamed them
for chusing to hear re'd what they knew their abused
indulgence could not be proof against. 
This set Mr. Morden up again: Fie upon you,
Cousin Harlowe! said he—I see plainly to whom it is
owing that all relationship and ties of blood with regard
to this sweet sufferer are laid aside. Such rigours as these
make it difficult for a sliding virtue ever to recover itself. 
Your Brother pretended the honour of the family; 
and declared, that no child ought to be forgiven who
abandoned the most indulgent of parents against warning,
against the light of knowlege, as you had done. 
But, Sir and Ladies, said I, rising from my seat in
the window, and humbly turning round to each, If I
may be permitted to speak, my dear Miss asks only for
a Blessing. She does not beg to be received to favour: 
She is very ill, and asks only for a Last Blessing. 
Come, come, goody Norton [I need not tell you
who said this] you are up again with your Lamentables! 
—A good woman, as you are, to forgive so readily a 

crime that has been as disgraceful to your part in her
education, as to her family, is a weakness that would
induce one to suspect your virtue, if you were to be
encountered by a temptation properly adapted. 
By some such charitable Logic, said Mr. Morden, as
this, is my Cousin Arabella captivated, I doubt not. 
If to be uncharitable and unforgiving, is to give a proof
of virtue, You, Mr. James Harlowe, are the most
virtuous young man in the world. 
I knew how it would be, replied your Brother in a
passion, if I met Mr. Morden upon this business. I
would have declined it: But you, Sir, to his Father,
would not permit me so to do. 
But, Sir, turning to the Colonel, in no other presence— 
Then, Cousin James, interrupted the other gentleman,
that which is your protection, it seems, is mine. 
I am not used to bear defiances thus—You are my
Cousin, Sir—and the Son and Nephew of persons as
dear as near to me—There he paused— 
Are we, said your Father, to be made still more unhappy
among ourselves, when the villain lives that ought
to be the object of every one's resentment who has either
a value for the family or for this ungrateful girl? 
That's the man, said your Cousin, whom last Monday,
as you know, I went purposely to make the object
of mine. But what could I say, when I found him so
willing to repair his crime? —And I give it as my opinion,
and have written accordingly to my poor Cousin,
that it is best for all round, that his offer should be accepted: 
And let me tell you— 
Tell me nothing, said your Father, quite enraged,
of that very vile fellow! I have a riveted hatred to him. 
I would rather see the rebel die an hundred deaths, were
it possible, than that she should give such a villain as
him a relation to my family. 
Well, but, there is no room to think, said your Mother,
that she will give us such a relation, my dear. 

The poor girl will lessen, I fear, the number of our
relations; not encrease it. If she be so ill as we are
told she is, let us send Mrs. Norton up to her—That's
the least we can do—Let us take her, however, out of
the hands of that Belford. 
Both your Uncles supported this motion; the latter
part of it especially. 
Your Brother observed, in his ill-natured way, what
a fine piece of consistency it was, in you, to refuse the
vile injurer, and the amends he offered; yet to throw
yourself upon the protection of his fast friend. 
Miss Harlowe was apprehensive, she said, that you
would leave all you could leave to that pert creature Miss
Howe [So she called her] if you should die. 
O do not, do not suppose that, my Bella, said your
poor Mother. I cannot think of parting with my
Clary—With all her faults, she is my child—Her reasons
for her conduct are not heard. It would break my
heart to lose her. —I think, my dear, to your Father,
none so fit as I to go up, if you will give me leave: 
And Mrs. Norton shall accompany me. 
This was a sweet motion; and your Father paused
upon it. Mr. Morden offered his service to escort her. 
Your Uncles seemed to approve of it: But your Brother
dashed all. I hope, Sir, said he, to his Father; 
I hope, Madam, to his Mother; that you will not endeavour
to recover a faulty Daughter, by losing an unculpable
Son. I do declare, that if ever my Sister Clary
darkens these doors again, I never will. I will set out,
Madam, the same hour you go to London (on such an
errand) to Edinburgh; and there I will reside; and try
to forget that I have relations in England so near and so
dear as you are now all to me. 
Good God! said the Colonel, What a declaration is
this! —And suppose, Sir, and suppose, Madam [turning
to your Father and Mother] this should be the case,
Whether is it better, think you, that you should lose
or ever such a Daughter as my Cousin Clary, or that 

your Son should go to Edinburgh, and reside there upon
an Estate which will be the better for his residence upon
it?— 
Your Brother's passionate behaviour hereupon is hardly
to be described. He resented it, as promoting an alienation
of the affection of the family to him. And to
such a height were resentments carried, every one
siding with him, that the Colonel, with hands and eyes
lifted up, cried out, What hearts of flint am I related
to! —O Cousin Harlowe, to your Father, Are you resolved
to have but one Daughter? Are you, Madam,
to be taught by a Son who has no bowels to forget that
you are a Mother? 
The Colonel turned from them to draw out his handkerchief,
and could not for a minute speak. The eyes
of every one, but the hard-hearted Brother, caught tears
from his. 
But then turning to them (with the more indignation,
as it seemed, as he had been obliged to shew a humanity,
which, however, no brave heart should be ashamed of)
I leave ye all, said he, fit company for one another. I
will never open my lips to any of you more upon this
subject. I will instantly make my Will, and in me
shall the dear creature have the Father, Uncle, Brother,
she has lost. I will prevail upon her to take the
Tour of France and Italy with me; nor shall she return
till ye know the value of such a Daughter. 
And saying this, he hurried out of the room, went
into the Court-yard, and ordered his Horse. 
Mr. Antony Harlowe went to him there, just as he
was mounting; and said, He hoped he should find him
cooler in the evening (for he till then had lodged at his
house); and that then they would converse calmly; and
every one, mean time, would weigh all matters well— 
But the angry gentleman said, Cousin Harlowe, I shall
endeavour to discharge the obligations I owe to your
civility, since I have been in England: But I have been
so treated by that hot-headed young man (who, as far 

as I know, has done more to ruin his Sister than Lovelace
himself, and this with the approbation of you all)
that I will not again enter into your doors, or theirs. 
My servants shall have orders whither to bring what belongs
to me from your house. I will see my dear Cousin
Clary as soon as I can. And so God bless you all together! 
—Only this one word to your Nephew, if you
please, That he wants to be taught the difference between
Courage and Bluster; and it is happy for him,
perhaps, that I am his kinsman; tho' I am sorry he is
mine. 
I wondered to hear your Uncle, on his return to
them all, repeat this; because of the consequences it
may be attended with, tho' I hope it will not have bad
ones: Yet it was considered as a sort of challenge, and
so it confirmed every-body in your Brother's favour; 
and Miss Harlowe forgot not to inveigh against that
error which had brought on all these evils. 
I took the liberty again, but with fear and trembling,
to desire leave to attend you. 
Before any other person could answer, your Brother
said, I suppose you look upon yourself, Mrs. Norton,
to be your own Mistress. Pray do you want our consents
and courtship to go up? —If I may speak my mind,
you and my Sister Clary are the fittest to be together. — 
Yet I wish you would not trouble your head about our
family-matters, till you are desired to do so. 
But don't you know, Brother, said Miss Harlowe,
that the error of any branch of a family splits that family
into two parties, and makes not only every common
friend and acquaintance, but even servants, judges over
both? —This is one of the blessed effects of my Sister
Clary's fault! 
There never was a creature so criminal, said your
Father, looking with displeasure at me, who had not
some weak heads to pity and side with her. 
I wept. Your Mother was so good as to take me by
the hand: Come, good woman, said she, come along 

with me. You have too much reason to be afflicted
with what afflicts Us, to want additions to your grief. 
But, my dearest young Lady, I was more touched
for your sake than for my own: For I have been low
in the world for a great number of years; and, of consequence,
must have been accustomed to snubs and rebuffs
from the affluent. But I hope, that patience is
written as legibly on my forehead, as haughtiness on
that of any of my obligers. 
Your Mother led me to her chamber; and there we
sat and wept together for several minutes, without
being able to speak either of us one word to the other. 
At last she broke silence; asking me, If you were really
and indeed so ill, as it was said you were? 
I answered in the affirmative; and would have shewn
her your last Letter; but she declined seeing it. 
I would fain have procured from her the favour of a
line to you, with her Blessing. I asked, What was intended
by your Brother and Sister? Would nothing satisfy
them but your final reprobation? —I insinuated,
how easy it would be, did not your duty and humility
govern you, to make yourself independent as to circumstances; 
but that nothing but a Blessing, a last Blessing,
was requested by you. And many other things I urged
in your behalf. The following brief repetition of what
she was pleased to say in answer to my pleas, will give
you a notion of it all; and of the present situation of
things. 
She said, ‘She was very unhappy! —She had lost the
little authority she once had over her other children,
thro' one child's failing; and all influence over Mr.
Harlowe and his Brothers. Your Father, she said,
had besought her to leave it to him to take his own
methods with you; and (as she valued him) to take
no step in your favour unknown to him and your
Uncles: Yet she owned, that they were too much
governed by your Brother. They would, however 

give way in time, she knew, to a Reconciliation: 
They designed no other; for they all still loved you. 
‘Your Brother and Sister, she owned, were very
jealous of your coming into favour again: Yet, could
but Mr. Morden have kept his temper, and stood
her Son's first sallies, who (having always had the
family-grandeur in view) had carried his resentment
so high, that he knew not how to descend, the conferences,
so abruptly broken off just now, would have
ended more happily; for that she had reason to think,
that a few concessions on your part, with regard to
your Grandfather's Estate, and your Cousin's engaging
for your submission as from proper motives,
would have softened them all. 
‘Mr. Brand's account of your intimacy with the
friend of the obnoxious man, she said, had, for the
time, very unhappy effects; for before that she had
gained some ground: But afterwards dared not, nor
indeed had inclination, to open her lips in your behalf. 
Your continued intimacy with that Mr. Belford
was wholly unaccountable, and as wholly inexcuseable. 
‘What made the wished-for Reconciliation, she said,
more difficult, was, first, that you yourself acknowledged
yourself dishonoured (and it was too well known,
that it was your own fault that you ever were in the
power of so great a profligate); of consequence, that
their and your disgrace could not be greater than it
was: Yet, that you refused to prosecute the wretch. 
Next, that the pardon and blessing hoped for must
probably be attended with your Marriage to the man
they hate, and who hates them as much: Very disagreeable
circumstances, she said, I must allow, to
found a Reconciliation upon. 
‘As to her own part, she must needs say, That if
there were any hope that Mr. Lovelace would become
a reformed man, the Letter her Cousin Morden had
re'd to them from him to you, and the justice (as she 

hoped it was) he did your character, tho' to his own
condemnation (his family and fortunes being unexceptionable)
and all his relations earnest to be related
to you, were arguments that would have weight with
her, could they have any with your Father and Uncles.’ 
To my plea of your illness, ‘She could not but flatter
herself, she answered, that it was from lowness of
spirits, and temporary dejection. A young creature,
she said, so very considerate as you naturally were, and
fallen so low, must have enough of that. Should they
lose you, which God forbid! the scene would then
indeed be sadly changed; for then those who now
most resented, would be most grieved; all your fine
qualities would rise to their remembrance, and your
unhappy error would be quite forgotten. 
‘She wished you would put yourself into your Cousin's
protection entirely, and have nothing more to
say to Mr. Belford.’ 
And I would recommend it to your most serious consideration,
my dear Miss Clary, whether now, as your
Cousin (who is your Trustee for your Grandfather's
Estate) is come, you should not give over all thoughts
of Mr. Lovelace's intimate friend for your Executor; 
more especially, as that gentleman's interfering in the
concerns of your family, should the sad event take place
(which my heart akes but to think of) might be attended
with those consequences which you are so desirous,
in other cases, to obviate and prevent. And
suppose, my dear young Lady, you were to write one
Letter more to each of your Uncles, to let them know
how ill you are? —And to ask their advice, and offer to
be governed by it, in relation to the disposition of your
Estate and Effects? Methinks I wish you would. 
I find they will send you up a large part of what has
been received from that Estate, since it was yours; together
with your current cash, which you left behind
you: And this by your Cousin Morden, for fear you 

should have contracted debts which may make you uneasy. 
They seem to expect, that you will wish to live at
your Grandfather's house, in a private manner, if your
Cousin prevail not upon you to go abroad for a year or
two. 
Friday Morning. 
Betty was with me just now. She tells me, that
your Cousin Morden is so much displeased with them
all, that he has refused to lodge any more at your Uncle
Antony's; and has even taken up with inconvenient
lodgings, till he is provided with others to his mind. 
This very much concerns them; and they repent their
violent treatment of him: And the more, as he is resolved,
he says, to make you his sole Executrix, and
Heir to all his fortune. 
What noble fortunes still, my dearest young Lady,
await you! I am thoroughly convinced, if it please
God to preserve your life and your health, that everybody
will soon be reconciled to you, and that you will
see many happy days. 
Your Mother wished me not to attend you as yet,
because she hopes that I may give myself that pleasure
soon with every-body's good liking, and even at their
desire. Your Cousin Morden's reconciliation with them,
which they are very desirous of, I am ready to hope,
will include theirs with you. 
But if that should happen which I so much dread,
and I not with you, I should never forgive myself. Let
me, therefore, my dearest young Lady, desire you to
command my attendance, if you find any danger, and
if you wish me peace of mind; and no consideration
shall with-hold me. 
I hear, that Miss Howe has obtained leave from her
Mother to see you; and intends next week to go to
town for that purpose; and (as it is believed) to buy
cloaths for her approaching Nuptials. 
Mr. Hickman's Mother-in-law is lately dead. Her 

jointure of 600l. a year is fallen in to him; and she has,
moreover, as an acknowlegement of his good behaviour
to her, left him all she was worth, which was very considerable,
a few legacies excepted to her own relations. 
These good men are uniformly good: Indeed could
not else be good; and never fare the worse for being so. 
All the world agrees, he will make that fine young Lady
an excellent Husband: And I am sorry they are not as
much agreed in her making him an excellent Wife. But
I hope a woman of her principles would not encourage
his address, if, whether she at present love him or not,
she thought she could not love him; or if she preferred
any other man to him. 
Mr. Pocock undertakes to deliver This; but fears it
will be Saturday night first, if not Sunday morning. 
May the Almighty protect and bless you! —I long to
see you—My dearest young Lady, I long to see you; 
and to fold you once more to my fond heart. I dare to
say, happy days are coming. Be but chearful. Give
way to hope. 
Whether for This world, or the Other, you must be
happy. Wish to live, however, were it only because
you are so well fitted in mind to make every one happy
who has the honour to know you. What signifies this
transitory eclipse? You are as near perfection, by all I
have heard, as any creature in this world can be: For
here is your glory—You are brightened and purified, as
I may say, by your sufferings! —How I long to hear
your whole sad, yet instructive Story, from your own lips! 
For Miss Howe's sake, who, in her new engagements,
will so much want you; for your Cousin Morden's
sake, for your Mother's sake, if I must go no farther
in your family; and yet I can say, for all their
sakes; and for my sake, my dearest Miss Clary; let
your resumed and accustomed magnanimity bear you up. 
You have many things to do, which I know not the
person who will do, if you leave us. 
Join your prayers then to mine, that God will spare 

you to a world that wants You and your Example; and,
altho' your days may seem to have been numbered, who
knows, but that, with the good King Hezekiah, you
may have them prolonged? Which God grant, if it be
his blessed will, to the prayers of 
Your Judith Norton. 