



Mr. Antony Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Reply to hers to her Uncle Harlowe, of
Thursday, Aug. 10.] 

Aug. 12. 
Unhappy girl!
As your Uncle Harlowe chuses not to answer your
pert Letter to him; and as mine written to you
before (a) , was written as if it were in the spirit of prophecy,
as you have found to your sorrow; and as you
are now making yourself worse than you are in your 

health, and better than you are in your penitence, as
we are very well assured, in order to move compassion; 
which you do not deserve, having had so much warning: 
For all these reasons, I take up my pen once
more; tho' I had told your Brother, at his going to
Edinburgh, that I would not write to you, even were
you to write to me, without letting him know. So
indeed had we all; for he prognosticated what would
happen, as to your applying to us, when you knew
not how to help it. 
Brother John has hurt your niceness, it seems, by
asking you a plain question, which your Mother's
heart is too full of grief to let her ask; and modesty
will not let your Sister ask, tho' but the consequence
of your actions—And yet it must be answered, before
you'll obtain from your Father and Mother, and us,
the notice you hope for, I can tell you that. 
You lived several guilty weeks with one of the
vilest fellows that ever drew breath, at bed, as well
as board, no doubt (for is not his character known?); 
and pray don't be ashamed to be asked after what
may naturally come of such free living. This modesty
indeed would have become you for Eighteen
years of your life—You'll be pleased to mark that— 
But makes no good-figure compared with your behaviour
since the beginning of April last. So pray don't
take it up, and wipe your mouth upon it, as if nothing
had happened. 
But, may-be, I likewise am too shocking to your
niceness! —O, girl, girl! your modesty had better
been shewn at the right time and place! —Every-body
but you believed what the Rake was: But you would
believe nothing bad of him—What think you now? 
Your folly has ruined all our peace. And who knows
where it may yet end? —Your poor Father but yesterday
shewed me this text: With bitter grief he shewed it
me, poor man! And do you lay it to your heart: 
‘A Father waketh for his Daughter, when no man 

knoweth; and the care for her taketh away his sleep
—When she is young, lest she pass away the flower
of her age [and you know what proposals were made
to you at different times]: And, being married, lest
she should be hated: In her virginity, lest she
should be defiled, and gotten with child in her Father's
house [I don't make the words, mind that]: 
And, having an husband, lest she should misbehave
herself.’ And what follows? ‘Keep a sure watch
over a shameless Daughter [Yet no watch could hold
you!] lest she make thee a laughing-stock to thine
enemies [as you have made us all to this cursed Lovelace],
and a bye-word in the city, and a reproach
among the people, and make thee ashamed before
the multitude.’ Ecclus. xlii. 9, 10, &c. 
Now will you wish you had not written pertly. 
Your Sister's Severities! —Never, girl, say that is
severe, that is deserved. You know the meaning of
words. No-body better. Would to the Lord you
had acted up but to one half of what you know! 
Then had we not been disappointed and grieved, as we
all have been: And no-body more than him who was 
Your Loving Uncle,
Antony Harlowe. 
This will be with you to-morrow. Perhaps you
may be suffered to have some part of your Estate,
after you have smarted a little more. Your
pertly-answered Uncle John, who is your Trustee,
will not have you be destitute. But we hope all
is not true that we hear of you. —Only take care,
I advise you, that, bad as you have acted, you
act not still worse, if it be possible to act worse.
Improve upon the hint. 