



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

In this Letter the Lady acquaints Miss Howe with
Mr. Brand's Report; with her Sister's Proposals
either that she will go abroad, or prosecute
Mr. Lovelace. She complains of the severe Letters
of her Uncle Antony and her Sister; but in
milder terms than they deserved. 
She sends her Dr. Lewen's Letter, and the Copy of
her Answer to it. 
She tells her of the difficulties she had been under to
avoid seeing Mr. Lovelace. She gives her the
contents of the Letter she wrote to him to divert
him from his proposed visit: She is afraid, she
says, that it is a step that is not strictly right, if
Allegory or Metaphor be not allowable to one in her
circumstances. 
She informs her of her Cousin Morden's arrival and
readiness to take her part with her relations; of
his designed interview with Mr. Lovelace; and
tells her what her apprehensions are upon it. 
She gives her the purport of the conversation between
her Aunt Hervey and Mrs. Norton. And
then adds: 
But were they ever so favourably inclined to me 

now, what can they do for me? I wish, and that for
their sakes more than for my own, that they would
yet relent—But I am very ill—I must drop my Pen
—A sudden Faintness overspreads my heart—Excuse
my crooked writing! —Adieu, my dear!—Adieu! 
Three o'clock, Friday. 
Once more, I resume my pen. I thought I had
taken my last farewel of you. I never was so very
oddly affected: Something that seemed totally to overwhelm
my faculties—I don't know how to describe
it—I believe I do amiss in writing so much, and taking
too much upon me: But an active mind, tho'
clouded by bodily illness, cannot be idle. 
I'll see if the Air, and a discontinued attention,
will help me. But if it will not, don't be concerned
for me, my dear. I shall be happy. Nay,
I am more so already, than of late I thought I could
ever be in this life. —Yet how this body clings! —How
it incumbers! 
Seven o'clock. 
I could not send this Letter away with so melancholy
an ending, as you would have thought it. So I
deferred closing it, till I saw how I should be on my
return from my Airing: And now I must say, I am
quite another thing: So alert!—that I could proceed
with as much spirit as I began, and add more preachment
to your lively subject, if I had not written more
than enough upon it already. 
I wish you would let me give you and Mr. Hickman
joy. Do, my dear. I should take some to myself,
if you would. 
My respectful compliments to all your friends, as
well to those I have the honour to know, as to those
I do not know. 
* *
I have just now been surprised with a Letter from
one whom I long ago gave up all thoughts of hearing 

from. From Mr. Wyerley. I will inclose it. You'll
be surprised at it, as much as I was. This seems to
be a man whom I might have reclaimed. But I could
not love him. Yet I hope I never treated him with
arrogance. Indeed, my dear, if I am not too partial
to myself, I think I refused him with more gentleness,
than you retain somebody else. And this recollection
gives me less pain than I should have had in the other
case, on receiving this instance of a generosity that affects
me. I will also inclose the rough draught of my
Answer, as soon as I have transcribed it. 
If I begin another sheet, I shall write to the end
of it: Wherefore I will only add, my prayers for your
honour and prosperity, and for a long, long, happy
life; and that, when it comes to be wound up, you
may be as calm and as easy at quitting it, as I hope
in God I shall be. I am, and will be, to the latest
moment, 
Your truly affectionate and obliged Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 