



My dear Father and Mother,
I Write again, tho', may-be, I shall bring it to you
in my Pocket myself. For I shall have no Writing,
nor Writing-time, I hope, when I come to you. 
This is Wednesday Morning, and I shall, I hope, set
out to you To-morrow Morning; but I have had
more Trials, and more Vexation; but of another
Complexion too a little, tho' all from the same
Quarter. 

Yesterday my Master, after he came from Hunting,
sent for me. I went with great Terror; for I
expected he would storm, and be in a fine Passion
with me for my Freedom of Speech before: So I
was resolv'd to begin first, with Submission, to disarm
his Anger; and I fell upon my Knees as soon
as I saw him; and I said, For God's Sake, good Sir,
and for the Sake of my dear good Lady your Mother,
who recommended me to you with her last Words,
let me beg you to forgive me all my Faults, as you
hope to be forgiven yourself: And only grant me
this Favour, the last I have to ask you, that you will
let me depart your House with Peace and Quietness
of Mind, that I may take such a Leave of my dear
Fellow-servants as befits me; and that my Heart be
not quite broken. 
He took me up, in a kinder Manner, than ever
I had known from him; and he said, Shut the Door,
Pamela, and come to me in my Closet: I want
to have a little serious Talk with you. How can I,
Sir, said I, how can I? and wrung my Hands! O
pray, Sir, let me go out of your Presence, I beseech
you. By the God that made me, said he, I'll do you
no Harm. Shut the Parlour Door, and come to me
in my Library. 
He then went into his Closet, which is his Library,
and full of rich Pictures besides, a noble
Apartment, tho' called a Closet, and next the private
Garden, into which it has a Door that opens. 
I shut the Parlour Door, as he bid me; but stood
at it irresolute. Place some Confidence in me surely,
said he, you may, when I have spoken thus solemnly. 
So I crept towards him with trembling Feet, and my
Heart throbbing thro' my Handkerchief. Come in,
said he, when I bid you. I did so. Pray, Sir, said
I, pity and spare me. I will, said he, as I hope to be
sav'd. He sat down upon a rich Settee; and took 

hold of my Hand, and said, Don't doubt me, Pamela. 
From this Moment I will no more consider
you as my Servant; and I desire you'll not use
me with Ingratitude for the Kindness I am going to
express towards you. This a little embolden'd me; 
and he said, holding both my Hands in his, You
have too much Wit and good Sense not to discover
that I, in spite of my Heart, and all the Pride of it,
cannot but love you. Yes, look up to me, my sweetfac'd
Girl! I must say I love you; and have put
on a Behaviour to you, that was much against my
Heart, in hopes to frighten you to my Purposes. You
see I own it ingenuously; and don't play your Sex
upon me for it. 
I was unable to speak, and he saw me too much
oppress'd with Confusion to go on in that Strain; and
he said, Well, Pamela, let me know in what Situation
of Life is your Father; I know he is a poor
Man; but is he as low and as honest as he was when
my Mother took you? 
Then I could speak a little; and with a down
Look, (and I felt my Face glow like Fire) I said,
Yes, Sir, as poor and as honest too; and that is my
Pride. Says he, I will do something for him, if it
be not your Fault, and make all your Family happy. 
Ah! Sir, said I, he is happier already than ever he
can be, if his Daughter's Innocence is to be the Price
of your Favour. And I beg you will not speak to
me on the only Side that can wound me. I have no
Design of that sort, said he. O Sir, said I, tell me
not so, tell me not so! —'Tis easy, said he, for me to be
the Making of your Father, without injuring you. 
Well, Sir, said I, if this can be done, let me know
how; and all I can do with Innocence shall be the
Study and Practice of my Life. —But Oh! what can
such a poor Creature as I do, and do my Duty? –––Said
he, I would have you stay a Week or Fortnight only, 

and behave yourself with Kindness to me: I stoop
to beg it of you, and you shall see all shall turn out
beyond your Expectation. I see, said he, you are going
to answer otherwise than I would have you; 
and I begin to be vex'd I should thus meanly sue; 
and so I will say, that your Behaviour before honest
Longman, when I used you as I did, and you could
so well have vindicated yourself, has quite charm'd
me. And tho' I am not pleased with all you said
Yesterday while I was in the Closet, yet you have
mov'd me more to admire you than before; and I
am awaken'd to see more Worthiness in you than
ever I saw in any Lady in the World. All the Servants,
from the highest to the lowest, doat upon
you, instead of envying you; and look upon you in
so superior a Light, as speaks what you ought to be. 
I have seen more of your Letters than you imagine,
(This surpriz'd me!) and am quite overcome with
your charming manner of Writing, so free, so easy,
and so much above your Sex; and all put together,
makes me, as I tell you, love you to Extravagance. 
Now, Pamela, when I have stoop'd so low as to
acknowledge all this, oblige me only to stay another
Week or Fortnight, to give me Time to bring about
some certain Affairs; and you shall see how much
you shall find your Account in it. 
I trembled to find my poor Heart giving way! ––– 
O good Sir, said I, pray your Honour, spare a poor
Maiden, that cannot look up to you, and speak. My
Heart is full! And why should you wish to undo
me! –––Only oblige me, said he, to stay a Fortnight
longer, and John shall carry word to your Father,
that I will see him in the Time, either here or at
the Swan in his Village. O my Heart will burst,
said I! but, on my bended Knees, I beg you, Sir,
to let me go to-morrow, as I design'd! And don't
offer to tempt a poor Creature, whose whole Will 

would be to do yours, if my Virtue and my Duty
would permit. –––They will, they shall permit it, said
he; for I intend no Injury to you, God is my Witness! 
–––– Impossible, said I; I cannot, Sir, believe
you after what has pass'd! How many Ways are there
to undo poor Creatures! Good God, protect me
this one time, and send me but to my dear Father's
Cot in Safety! ––––Strange, damn'd Fate! says he,
that when I speak so solemnly, I can't be believ'd! ––– 
What should I believe, Sir? said I; what can I believe?
What have you said, but that I am to stay
a Fortnight longer? and what then is to become of
me! ––––My Pride of Birth and Fortune, (damn
them both! said he, since they cannot obtain Credit
with you, but must add to your Suspicions) will
not let me stoop at once; and I ask you but for a
Fortnight's Stay, that after this Declaration, I may
pacify those proud Demands upon me. 
O how my Heart throbbed! and I begun, for I
did not know what I did, to say the Lord's Prayer. 
None of your Beads to me, Pamela, said he, thou
art a perfect Nun, I think. 
But I said aloud, with my Eyes listed up to Heaven,
Lead me not into Temptation. But deliver me
from Evil, O my good God! ––––He hugg'd me in
his Arms, and said, Well, my dear Girl, then you
stay this Fortnight, and you shall see what I will do
for you. –––I'll leave you a Moment, and walk into
the next Room, to give you Time to think of it,
that you shall see I have no Design upon you. Well,
this, I thought, did not look amiss. 
He went out, and I was tortur'd with twenty different
Thoughts in a Minute; sometimes I thought,
that to stay a Week or Fortnight longer in this
House to obey him, while Mrs. Jervis was with me,
could do no great Harm: But then, thinks I, how 

do I know what I may be able to do? I have withstood
his Anger; but may I not relent at his Kindness? 
–––How shall I stand that! –––Well, I hope,
thought I, by the same protecting Grace in which I
will always confide! –––But then, what has he promised? 
–––Why he will make my poor Father and
Mother's Life comfortable. O, said I to myself,
that is a rich Thought; but let me not dwell upon
it, for fear I should indulge it to my Ruin. –––What
can he do for me, poor Girl as I am! –––What can
his Greatness stoop to! He talks, thought I, of his
Pride of Heart, and Pride of Condition; O these
are in his Head, and in his Heart too, or he would
not confess them to me at such an Instant. Well
then, thought I, this can be only to seduce me! ––– 
He has promis'd nothing. –––But I am to see what
he will do, if I stay a Fortnight; and this Fortnight,
thought I again, is no such great Matter; and I shall
see, in a few Days, how he carries it. –––But then,
when I again reflected upon the Distance between
us, and his now open Declaration of Love, as he
called it, and that after this he would talk with me
on that Subject more plainly than ever, and I should
be less arm'd, may be, to withstand him; and then
I bethought myself, why, if he meant no Dishonour,
he should not speak before Mrs. Jervis; and the
odious frightful Closet came again into my Head, and
my narrow Escape upon it; and how easy it might
be for him to send Mrs. Jervis and the Maids out
of the way; and so that all the Mischief he design'd
me might be brought about in less than that Time; 
I resolved to go away, and trust all to Providence,
and nothing to myself. And O how ought I to
bless God for this Resolution! as you shall hear. 
But just as I have writ to this Place, John sends
me word, that he is going this Minute your way; 

and so I will send so far as I have written, and hope,
by to morrow Night, to ask your Blessings, at your
own poor, but happy Abode, and tell you the rest
by word of Mouth; and so I rest, till then, and for
ever, 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

