



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

The next Letter is of such a nature, that, I dare
say, these proud Rogues would not have had
it fall into my hands for the world (a) . 
I see by it to what her displeasure with me, in relation
to my proposals, was owing. They were not
summed up, it seems, with the warmth, with the
ardor, which she had expected. 
This whole Letter was transcribed by Dorcas, to
whose lot it fell. Thou shalt have copies of them all
at full length shortly. 
Men of our cast, this little devil says, she fansies,
cannot have the Ardors that honest men have. Miss
Howe has very pretty fancies, Jack. Charming girl! 
Would to heaven I knew whether my Fair-one answers
her as freely as she writes! 'Twould vex a
man's heart, that this virago should have come honestly
by her fancies. 
Who knows but I may have half a dozen creatures
to get off my hands, before I engage for life? –––Yet, lest
this should mean me a compliment, as if I would reform,
she adds her belief, that she must not expect me
to be honest on this side my grand climacteric. She has
an high opinion of her Sex, to think they can charm 

so long a man so well acquainted with their Identicalness. 
He to suggest delays, she says, from a compliment to
be made to Lord M.! –––Yes, I, my dear–––Because a
man has not been accustomed to be dutiful, must he
never be dutiful? –––In so important a case as this too!
the hearts of his whole family engaged in it? You did
indeed, says she, want an interposing friend–––But were
I to have been in your situation, I would have torn
his eyes out, and left it to his heart to furnish the reason
for it. See! See! What sayest thou to this,
Jack? 
Villain–––Fellow that he is! follow. And for what? 
Only for wishing that the next day were to be my
happy one; and for being dutiful to my nearest relation. 
It is the cruellest of fates, she says, for a woman to
be forced to have a man whom her heart despises. –––That
is what I wanted to be sure of. –––I was afraid, that my
Beloved was too conscious of her talents; of her superiority! 
–––I was afraid that she indeed despised me––– 
And I cannot bear to think she does. But, Belford,
I do not intend that this Lady shall be bound down by
so cruel a fate. Let me perish, if I marry a woman
who has given her most intimate friend reason to say,
she despises me! –––A Lovelace to be despised, Jack! 
His clenched fist to his forehead on your leaving him
in just displeasure–––that is, when she was not satisfied
with my Ardors, if it please ye! –––I remember the
motion: But her back was towards me at the time (a) . 
Are these watchful Ladies all Eye? –––But observe what
follows; I wish it had been a poll-ax, and in the hands
of his worst enemy.––– 
I will have patience, Jack; I will have patience! 
My day is at hand. —Then will I steel my heart with
these remembrances. 

But here is a scheme to be thought of, in order to
get my fair prize out of my hands, in case I give her reason
to suspect me. 
This indeed alarms me. Now the contention becomes
arduous. Now wilt thou not wonder, if I let
loose my plotting genius upon them both. I will not
be out-Norris'd, Belford. 
But once more, she has no notion, she says, that I
can or dare to mean her dishonour. But then the man
is a fool–––that's all. –––I should indeed be a fool, to
proceed as I do, and mean matrimony! However,
since you are thrown upon a fool, says she, marry the
fool, at the first opportunity; and tho' I doubt that this
man will be the most unmanageable of fools, as all witty
and vain fools are, take him as a punishment, since you
cannot as a reward—Is there any bearing this, Belford? 
&dotup;But such men as myself, are the men that women
do not naturally hate. –––True as the gospel, Jack! ––– 
The truth is out at last. Have I not always told
thee so? Sweet creatures and true Christians these
young girls! They love their enemies. But Rakes
in their hearts all of them! Like turns to Like; 
that's the thing. Were I not well assured of the
truth of this observation of the vixen, I should
have thought it worth while, if not to be a good
man, to be more of an hypocrite, than I found it
needful to be.&dotup; 
But in the Letter I came at to-day, while she was
at church, her scheme is further opened; and a cursed
one it is. 
Mr. Lovelace then transcribes from his short-hand
notes, that part of Miss Howe's Letter, which
relates to the design of engaging Mrs. Townsend
(in case of necessity) to give her protection till Colonel
Morden come (a) : And repeats his vows of
revenge; especially for these words; that should 

he attempt any-thing that would make him obnoxious
to the Laws of Society, she might have
a fair riddance of him, either by flight or the
gallows; no matter which. 
He then adds;—'Tis my pride, to subdue girls who
know too much to doubt their knowlege; and to convince
them, that they know too little, to defend
themselves from the inconveniencies of knowing too
much. 
How passion drives a man on! proceeds he. –––I have
written a prodigious quantity in a very few hours! 
Now my resentments are warm, I will see, and perhaps
will punish, this proud, this double-armed Beauty. 
I have sent to tell her, that I must be admitted to sup
with her. We have neither of us dined. She refused
to drink Tea in the afternoon: And I believe neither
of us will have much stomach to our supper. 