



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday, Eleven o'Clock, April 5. 
I must write as I have opportunity; making use of
my concealed stores: For my pens and ink (all of
each that they could find) are taken from me; as I
shall tell you more particularly by-and-by. 
About an hour ago, I deposited my long Letter to
you; as also, in the usual place, a billet to Mr. Lovelace,
lest his impatience should put him upon some
rashness; signifying, in four lines, ‘That the Interview
was over; and that I hoped my steady refusal
of Mr. Solmes would discourage any further applications
to me in his favour.’ 
Altho' I was unable (through the fatigue I had undergone,
and by reason of sitting up all night, to write
to you; which made me lie longer than ordinary this
morning) to deposit my Letter to you sooner; yet I
hope you will have it in such good time, as that you
will be able to send me an Answer to it this night, or
in the morning early; which, if ever so short, will
inform me, whether I may depend upon your Mother's
indulgence or not. This it behoves me to know as
soon as possible; for they are resolved to hurry me 

away on Saturday next at farthest; perhaps tomorrow. 
I will now inform you of all that happened previous
to their taking away my pen and ink, as well as of the
manner in which that act of violence was committed; 
and this as briefly as I can. 
My Aunt, who (as well as Mr. Solmes, and my
two Uncles) lives here, I think, came up to me, and
said, She would fain have me hear what Mr. Solmes
had to say of Mr. Lovelace—Only that I might be apprised
of some things, that would convince me what
a vile man he is, and what a wretched Husband he
must make. I might give them what degree of credit
I pleased; and take them with abatement for Mr.
Solmes's interestedness, if I thought fit. But it might
be of use to me, were it but to question Mr. Lovelace
indirectly upon some of them, that related to myself. 
I was indifferent, I said, about what he could say of
me; as I was sure it could not be to my disadvantage; 
and as he had no reason to impute to me the forwardness
which my unkind friends had so causlesly taxed
me with. 
She said, That he gave himself high airs on account
of his family; and spoke as despicably of ours as if an
alliance with us were beneath him. 
I replied, That he was a very unworthy man, if it
were true, to speak slightingly of a family, which
was as good as his own, 'bating that it was not allied
to the Peerage: That the dignity itself, I thought,
conveyed more shame than honour to descendents, who
had not merit to adorn, as well as to be adorned by it: 
That my Brother's absurd pride, indeed, which made
him every-where declare, he would never marry but
to Quality, gave a disgraceful preference against ours: 
But that were I to be assured, that Mr. Lovelace was
capable of so mean a pride as to insult us or value himself
on such an accidental advantage, I should think as
despicably of his sense, as every-body else did of his
morals. 

She insisted upon it, that he had taken such liberties; 
and offered to give some instances, which, she said,
would surprise me. 
I answered, That were it ever so certain that Mr.
Lovelace had taken such liberties, it would be but
common justice (so much hated as he was by all our family,
and so much inveighed against in all companies
by them) to enquire into the provocation he had to say
what was imputed to him; and whether the value some
of my friends put upon the riches they possess (throwing
perhaps contempt upon every other advantage, and
even discrediting their own pretensions to family, in
order to depreciate his) might not provoke him to like
contempts. Upon the whole, Madam, said I, can
you say, that the inveteracy lies not as much on our
side, as on his? Can he say any-thing of us more disrespectful
than we say of him? —And as to the suggestion,
so often repeated, that he will make a bad
Husband, is it possible for him to use a Wife worse
than I am used; particularly by my Brother and Sister? 
Ah, Niece! ah, my dear! how firmly has this
wicked man attached you! 
Perhaps not, Madam. But really great care should
be taken by Fathers and Mothers, when they would
have their Daughters of their minds in these particulars,
not to say things that shall necessitate the
child, in honour and generosity, to take part with the
man her friends are averse to. But, waving all this,
as I have offered to renounce him for ever, I see not
why he should be mentioned to me, nor why I should
be wished to hear any-thing about him. 
Well, but still, my dear, there can be no harm to
let Mr. Solmes tell you what Mr. Lovelace has said of
you. Severely as you have treated Mr. Solmes, he is
fond of attending you once more: He begs to be heard
on this head. 
If it be proper for me to hear it, Madam— 
It is, eagerly interrupted she, very proper. 

Has what he has said of me, Madam, convinced you
of Mr. Lovelace's baseness? 
It has, my dear: And that you ought to abhor him
for it. 
Then, dear Madam, be pleased to let me hear it
from your mouth: There is no need that I should see
Mr. Solmes, when it will have double the weight from
you. What, Madam, has the man dared to say of me? 
My Aunt was quite at a loss. 
At last, Well, said she, I see how you are attached. 
I am sorry for it, Miss. For I do assure you, it will
signify nothing. You must be Mrs. Solmes; and
that in a very few days. 
If consent of heart, and assent of voice, be necessary
to a Marriage, I am sure I never can, nor ever
will, be married to Mr. Solmes. And what will any
of my relations be answerable for, if they force my
hand into his, and hold it there till the service be read; 
I perhaps insensible, and in fits, all the time! 
What a romantic picture of a forced Marriage have
you drawn, Niece! Some people would say, you
have given a fine description of your own obstinacy,
child. 
My Brother and Sister would: But you, Madam,
distinguish, I am sure, between obstinacy and aversion. 
Supposed aversion may owe its rise to real obstinacy,
my dear. 
I know my own heart, Madam. I wish you did. 
Well, but see Mr. Solmes once more, Niece. It
will oblige, and make for you, more than you imagine. 
What should I see him for, Madam? —Is the man
fond of hearing me declare my aversion to him? —Is
he desirous of having me more and more incense my
friends against myself? —O my cunning, my ambitious
Brother! 
Ah, my dear!—with a look of pity, as if she understood 

the meaning of my exclamation—But must
That necessarily be the case? 
It must, Madam, if they will take offence at me
for declaring my stedfast detestation of Mr. Solmes,
as a Husband. 
Mr. Solmes is to be pitied, said she. He adores
you. He longs to see you once more. He loves you
the better for your cruel usage of him yesterday. He
is in raptures about you. 
Ugly creature, thought I! —He in raptures! 
What a cruel wretch must He be, said I, who can
enjoy the distress to which he so largely contributes! 
—But I see, I see, Madam, that I am considered as
an animal to be baited, to make sport for my Brother
and Sister, and Mr. Solmes. They are all, all of
them, wanton in their cruelty. —I, Madam, see the
man!—the man so incapable of pity! —Indeed I will
not see him, if I can help it. —Indeed I will not. 
What a construction does your lively wit put upon
the admiration Mr. Solmes expresses of you! —Passionate
as you were yesterday, and contemptuously as you
treated him, he dotes upon you for the very severity
by which he suffers. He is not so ungenerous a man
as you think him: Nor has he an unfeeling heart. — 
Let me prevail upon you, my dear (as your Father
and Mother expect it of you) to see him once more,
and hear what he has to say to you. 
How can I consent to see him again, when yesterday's
Interview was interpreted by you, Madam, as
well as by every other, as an encouragement to him? 
When I myself declared, that if I saw him a second
time by my own consent, it might be so taken? And
when I am determined never to encourage him? 
You might spare your reflections upon me, Miss. 
I have no thanks either from one side or the other. 
And away she flung. 
Dearest Madam! said I, following her to the
door— 

But she would not hear me further; and her sudden
breaking from me occasioned a hurry to some mean
listener; as the slipping of a foot from the landing-place
on the stairs discovered to me. 
I had scarcely recovered myself from this attack,
when up came Betty—Miss, said she, your company
is desired below-stairs in your own parlour. 
By whom, Betty? 
How can I tell, Miss? —Perhaps by your Sister; 
perhaps by your Brother—I know they won't come
up-stairs to your apartment again. 
Is Mr. Solmes gone, Betty? 
I believe he is, Miss—Would you have him sent
for back? said the bold creature. 
Down I went: And to whom should I be sent for,
but to my Brother and Mr. Solmes? The latter standing
sneaking behind the door, so that I saw him not,
till I was mockingly led by the hand into the room by
my Brother. And then I started as if I had beheld a
ghost. 
You are to sit down, Clary. 
And what then, Brother? 
Why then, you are to put off that scornful look,
and hear what Mr. Solmes has to say to you. 
Sent for down to be baited again; thought I? 
Madam, said Mr. Solmes, as if in haste to speak,
lest he should not have opportunity given him [and
indeed he judged right] Mr. Lovelace is a declared
Marriage-hater, and has a design upon your honour,
if ever— 
Base accuser! said I, in a passion, snatching my
hand from my Brother, who was insolently motioning
to give it to Mr. Solmes; he has not!—he dares
not! —But you have, if endeavouring to force a free
mind be to dishonour it! 
O thou violent creature! said my Brother—But not
gone yet—for I was rushing away. 

What mean you, Sir, [struggling vehemently to
get away] to detain me thus against my will? 
You shall not go, Violence; clasping his unbrotherly
arms about me. 
Then let not Mr. Solmes stay. —Why hold you me
thus? He shall not, for your own sake, if I can help
it, see how barbarously a Brother can treat a Sister
who deserves not evil treatment. 
And I struggled so vehemently to get from him,
that he was forced to quit my hand; which he did
with these words—Begone then, Fury! —How strong
is will! —There is no holding her. 
And up I flew to my chamber, and locked myself
in, trembling, and out of breath. 
In less than a quarter of an hour, up came Betty. 
I let her in upon her tapping, and asking (half out of
breath too) for admittance. 
The Lord have mercy upon us! said she. —What
a confusion of a house is This! [hurrying up and down,
fanning herself with her handkerchief] Such angry
Masters and Mistresses! —Such an obstinate young
Lady! —Such an humble Lover! —Such enraged Uncles! 
—Such—O dear!—dear! What a topsy-turvy
house is This! —And all for what, trow? —Only because
a young Lady may be happy, and will not? — 
Only because a young Lady will have a Husband, and
will not have a Husband? What hurly-burlies are
here, where all used to be peace and quietness! 
Thus she ran on to herself; while I sat as patiently
as I could (being assured that her errand was not designed
to be a welcome one to me) to observe when
her soliloquy would end. 
At last, turning to me—I must do as I am bid. I
can't help it—Don't be angry with me, Miss. But I
must carry down your pen and ink: And that, this
moment. 
By whose order? 
By your Papa's and Mamma's. 

How shall I know that? 
She offered to go to my closet: I stept in before
her: Touch it, if you dare. 
Up came my Cousin Dolly—Madam! —Madam!
said the poor weeping good-natured creature, in broken
sentences—You must—indeed you must—deliver to
Betty—or to me—your pen and ink. 
Must I, my sweet Cousin? Then I will to you; 
but not to this bold body. And so I gave my standish
to her. 
I am sorry, very sorry, said Miss, to be the messenger: 
But your Papa will not have you in the same
house with him: He is resolved you shall be carried
away to-morrow, or Saturday at farthest. And therefore
your pen and ink are taken away, that you may
give no-body notice of it. 
And away went the dear girl, very sorrowful, carrying
down with her my standish, and all its furniture,
and a little parcel of pens beside, which having been
seen when the great search was made, she was bid to
ask for. As it happened, I had not diminished it,
having hid half a dozen crow-quills in as many different
places. It was lucky; for I doubt not they
had numbered how many were in the parcel. 
Betty ran on, telling me, that my Mother was
now as much incensed against me, as any-body— 
That my doom was fixed—That my violent behaviour
had not left one plead for me—That Mr.
Solmes bit his lip, and muttered, and seemed to have
more in his head, than could come out at his mouth; 
that was her phrase. 
And yet she also hinted to me, that the cruel wretch
took pleasure in seeing me; altho' so much to my disgust
—And so wanted to see me again. Must he not
be a savage, my dear? 
The wench went on—That my Uncle Harlowe
said, That now he gave me up. —That he pitied Mr.
Solmes—Yet hoped he would not think of This to 

my detriment hereafter: That my Uncle Antony was
of opinion, That I ought to smart for it: And, for
her part—And then, as one of the family, she gave
her opinion of the same side. 
As I have no other way of hearing any-thing that
is said or intended below, I bear sometimes more patiently
than I otherwise should do with her impertinence. 
And indeed she seems to be in all my Brother's and
Sister's counsels. 
Miss Hervey came up again, and demanded an half-pint
ink-bottle which they had seen in my closet. 
I gave it her without hesitation. 
If they have no suspicion of my being able to write,
they will perhaps let me stay longer than otherwise
they would. 
This, my dear, is now my situation. 
All my dependence, all my hopes, are in your Mother's
favour. But for That, I know not what I
might do: For who can tell what will come next? 