


Now let me give you an Account of what
pass'd last Night; for I had no Power to
write, nor yet Opportunity, till now. 

This vile Woman held my Master till half
an Hour after Seven; and he came hither about
Five in the Afternoon. And then I heard his
Voice on the Stairs, as he was coming up to
me. It was about his Supper; for he said, I
shall chuse a boil'd Chicken, with Butter and
Parsley. —And up he came! 
He put on a stern and majestick Air; and he
can look very majestick when he pleases. Well,
perverse Pamela, ungrateful Runaway, said
he, for my first Salutation! —You do well,
don't you, to give me all this Trouble and Vexation? 
I could not speak; but throwing myself
on the Floor, hid my Face, and was ready to
die with Grief and Apprehension. —He said,
Well may you hide your Face! well may you
be asham'd to see me, vile forward one, as you
are! —I sobb'd, and wept, but could not
speak. And he let me lie, and went to the
Door, and call'd Mrs. Jewkes. —There, said
he, take up that fallen Angel! –––Once I
thought her as innocent as an Angel of Light. 
But now I have no Patience with her. The little
Hypocrite prostrates herself thus, in hopes
to move my Weakness in her Favour, and that
I'll raise her from the Floor myself. But I shall
not touch her: No, said he, cruel Gentleman
as he was! let such Fellows as Williams be
taken in by her artful Wiles! I know her now,
and see, she is for any Fool's Turn, that will be
caught by her. 

I sighed, as if my Heart would break! 
—And Mrs. Jewkes lifted me up upon my Knees; 
for I trembled so, I could not stand. Come,
said she, Mrs. Pamela, learn to know your best
Friend! confess your Behaviour, and beg his
Honour's Forgiveness of all your Faults. I
was ready to faint; and he said, She is Mistress
of Arts, I'll assure you; and will mimick a Fit,
ten to one, in a Minute. 
I was struck to the Heart at this; but could
not speak presently; only lifted up my Eyes to
Heaven! —And at last made shift to say–––God
forgive you, Sir! —He seem'd in a great Passion,
and walk'd up and down the Room, casting
sometimes an Eye upon me, and seeming as if
he would have spoken, but check'd himself— 
And at last he said, When she has acted this her
first Part over, perhaps I will see her again, and
she shall soon know what she has to trust to. 
And so he went out of the Room: And I
was quite sick at Heart! —Surely, said I, I am
the wickedest Creature that ever breath'd! 
Well, said the Impertinent, not so wicked as
that neither; but I am glad you begin to see
your Faults. Nothing like being humble! — 
Come, I'll stand your Friend, and plead for
you, if you'll promise to be more dutiful for
the future: Come, come, added the Wretch,
this may be all made up by to-morrow Morning,
if you are not a Fool. —Begone, hideous
Woman! said I; and let not my Afflictions be
added to by thy inexorable Cruelty, and unwomanly
Wickedness. 

She gave me a Push, and went way in a
violent Passion. And it seems, she made a
Story of this; and said, I had such a Spirit,
there was no bearing it. 
I laid me down on the Floor, and had no
Power to stir, till the Clock struck Nine; and then
the wicked Woman came up again. You must
come down-stairs, said she, to my Master; that
is, if you please, Spirit! —Said I, I believe I
cannot stand. Then, said she, I'll send up
Mons. Colbrand to carry you down. 
I got up, as well as I could, and trembled
all the way down-stairs. And she went before
me into the Parlour; and a new Servant, that
he had waiting on him instead of John, withdrew
as soon as I came in. And, by-the-way,
he had a new Coachman too, which looked as
if Bedfordshire Robin was turn'd away. 
I thought, said he, when I came down,
you should have sat at Table with me, when I
had not Company; but when I find you cannot
forget your Original, but must prefer my Menials
to me, I call you down to wait on me,
while I sup, that I may have some Talk with
you, and throw away as little Time as possible
upon you. 
Sir, said I, you do me Honour to wait upon
you:—And I never shall, I hope, forget my
Original. But I was forced to stand behind his
Chair, that I might hold by it. Fill me, said
he, a Glass of that Burgundy. I went to do it; 
but my Hand shook so, that I could not hold
the Plate with the Glass in it, and spilt some of 

the Wine. So Mrs. Jewkes pour'd it for me,
and I carried it as well as I could; and made a
low Court'sy. He took it, and said, Stand behind
me, out of my Sight. 
Why, Mrs. Jewkes, said he, you tell me,
she remains very sullen still, and eats nothing. 
No, said she, not so much as to keep Life and
Soul together. —And is always crying, you
say, too? Yes, Sir, answer'd she, I think she
is, for one thing or another. Ay, said he,
your young Wenches will feed upon their
Tears; and their Obstinacy will serve them for
Meat and Drink. I think I never saw her look
better, tho', in my Life! —But I suppose she
lives upon Love. This sweet Mr. Williams,
and her little villainous Plots together, have
kept her alive and well, to be sure: For Mischief,
Love, and Contradiction, are the natural
Aliments of a Woman. 
Poor I was forced to hear all this, and be
silent; and indeed my Heart was too full to
speak. 
And so you say, said he, that she had another
Project, but Yesterday, to get away. She denies
it herself, said she; but it had all the Appearance
of one. I'm sure she made me in a fearful
Pucker about it. And I am glad your Honour
is come, with all my Heart; and I hope, whatever
be your Honour's Intention concerning
her, you will not be long about it; for you'll
find her as slippery as an Eel, I'll assure you! 
Sir, said I, and clasp'd his Knees with my
Arms, not knowing what I did, and falling on 

my Knees, Have Mercy on me, and hear me,
concerning that wicked Woman's Usage of
me— 
He cruelly interrupted me, and said, I am
satisfy'd she has done her Duty: It signifies nothing
what you say against Mrs. Jewkes. That
you are here, little Hypocrite as you are, pleading
your Cause before me, is owing to her Care
of you; else you had been with the Parson. 
—Wicked Girl! said he, to tempt a Man to undo
himself, as you have done him, at a Time when
I was on the Point of making him happy for
his Life! 
I rose, but said, with a deep Sigh, I have
done! —I have done! —I have a strange Tribunal
to plead before. The poor Sheep, in the
Fable, had such an one; when it was try'd before
the Vultur, on the Accusation of the Wolf! 
So, Mrs. Jewkes, said he, you are the
Wolf, I the Vultur, and this the poor harmless
Lamb, on her Trial before us—Oh! you don't
know how well this Innocent is read in Reflection. 
She has Wit at Will, when she has a
mind to display her own romantick Innocence,
at the Price of other People's Characters. 
Well, said the aggravating Creature, this
is nothing to what she has call'd me; I have
been a Jezebel, a London Prostitute, and what
not? —But I am contented with her ill Names,
now I see it is her Fashion, and she can call
your Honour a Vultur. 
Said I, I had no Thought of comparing
my Master—And was going to say on: But 

he said, Don't prate, Girl! —No, said she, it
don't become you, I'm sure. 
Well, said I, since I must not speak, I
will hold my Peace: But there is a righteous
Judge, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts!
and to Him I appeal. 
See there! said he: Now this meek, good
Creature is praying for Fire from Heaven upon
us! O she can curse most heartily, in the Spirit
of Christian Meekness, I'll assure you! 
—Come, Saucy-face, give me another Glass of
Wine! 
So I did, as well as I could; but wept so,
that he said, I suppose I shall have some of your
Tears in my Wine! 
When he had supp'd, he stood up, and said,
O how happy for you it is, that you can, at
Will, make your speaking Eyes overflow in this
manner, without losing any of their Brilliancy! 
You have been told, I suppose, that you are
most beautiful in your Tears! —Did you ever,
said he to her, (who all this while was standing
in one Corner of the Parlour) see a more charming
Creature than this? Is it to be wonder'd at,
that I demean myself thus to take Notice of
her! –––See, said he, and took the Glass with one
Hand, and turn'd me round with the other,
What a Shape! what a Neck! what a Hand!
and what a Bloom in that lovely Face! —But
who can describe the Tricks and Artifices, that
lie lurking in her little, plotting, guileful Heart! 
'Tis no Wonder the poor Parson was infatuated
with her! —I blame him less than I do her; 

for who could expect such Artifice in so young
a Sorceress! 
I went to the further Part of the Room,
and held my Face against the Wainscot; and,
in spite of all I could do to refrain crying, sobb'd,
as if my Heart would break. He said, I am
surpris'd, Mrs. Jewkes, at the Mistake of the
Letters you tell me of! But, you see, I am not
afraid any body should read what I write. I
don't carry on private Correspondencies, and
reveal every Secret that comes to my Knowledge,
and then corrupt People to carry my
Letters, against their Duty, and all good Conscience. 
Come hither, Hussy, said he; you and I
have a dreadful Reckoning to make. —Why
don't you come, when I bid you? —Fie upon
it! Mrs. Pamela, said she: What! not stir,
when his Honour commands you to come to
him! —Who knows but his Goodness will
forgive you? 
He came to me, (for I had no Power to stir)
and put his Arms about my Neck, and would
kiss me; and said, Well, Mrs. Jewkes, if it
were not for the Thought of this cursed Parson,
I believe in my Heart, so great is my Weakness,
that I could yet forgive this intriguing little
Slut, and take her to my Bosom. 
O, said the Sycophant, you are very good,
Sir, very forgiving indeed! —But come, added
the profligate Wretch, I hope you will be so
good, as to take her to your Bosom; and that, 

by to-morrow Morning, you'll bring her to a
better Sense of her Duty! 
Could any thing, in Womanhood, be so
vile? I had no Patience: But yet Grief and Indignation
choaked up the Passage of my Words; 
and I could only stammer out a passionate Exclamation
to Heaven, to protect my Innocence: 
But the Word was the Subject of their Ridicule. 
Was ever poor Creature worse beset! 
He said, as if he had been considering whether
he could forgive me or not, No, I cannot
yet forgive her neither–––She has given me great
Disturbance; has brought great Discredit upon
me, both abroad and at home; has corrupted
all my Servants at the other House; has despised
my honourable Views and Intentions to her,
and sought to run away with this ingrateful
Parson—And surely I ought not to forgive all
this! —Yet, with all this wretched Grimace,
he kissed me again, and would have put his
Hand in my Bosom; but I struggled, and said,
I would die before I would be used thus. — 
Consider, Pamela, said he, in a threat'ning Tone,
consider where you are! and don't play the Fool: 
If you do, a more dreadful Fate awaits you
than you expect. But, take her up-stairs, Mrs.
Jewkes, and I'll send a few Lines to her to
consider of; and let me have your Answer,
Pamela, in the Morning. Till then you have
to resolve: And after that, your Doom is fix'd. 
—So I went up-stairs, and gave myself up to
Grief, and Expectation of what he would send: 
But yet I was glad of this Night's Reprieve! 

He sent me, however, nothing at all. And
about Twelve o'Clock, Mrs. Jewkes and Nan
came up, as the Night before, to be my Bed-fellows; 
and I would go to-bed with some of my
Cloaths on, which they mutter'd at sadly; and
Mrs. Jewkes rail'd at me particularly: Indeed I
would have sat up all Night, for Fear, if she
would have let me. For I had but very little
Rest that Night, apprehending this Woman
would let my Master in. She did nothing but
praise him, and blame me; but I answer'd her
as little as I could. 
He has Sir Simon Tell-tale, alias Darnford,
to dine with him To-day, whose Family sent to
welcome him into the Country; and it seems,
the old Knight wants to see me; so I suppose I
shall be sent for, as Samson was, to make Sport
for him—Here I am, and must bear it all! 
