



Dear Mother,
Well, I will now proceed with my sad
Story. 

And so, after I had dry'd my Eyes, I went
in, and began to ruminate with myself what I
had best to do. Sometimes I thought I would
leave the House, and go to the next Town, and
wait an Opportunity to get to you; but then I
was at a Loss to resolve whether to take away
the Things he had given me or no, and how
to take them away: Sometimes I thought to
leave them behind me, and only go with the
Cloaths on my Back; but then I had two Miles
and a half, and a Bye-way to the Town; and
being pretty well dress'd, I might come to some
Harm, almost as bad as what I would run away
from; and then, may-be, thought I, it will be
reported, I have stolen something, and so was
forc'd to run away; and to carry a bad Name
back with me to my dear Parents, would be
a sad thing indeed! —O how I wish'd for
my grey Russet again, and my poor honest
Dress, with which you fitted me out, (and
hard enough too it was for you to do it!) for
going to this Place, when I was not Twelve
Years old, in my good Lady's Days! Sometimes
I thought of telling Mrs. Jervis, and
taking her Advice, and only fear'd his Command
to be secret; for, thought I, he may be
ashamed of his Actions, and never attempt the
like again: And as poor Mrs. Jervis depended
upon him, thro' Misfortunes that had attended
her, I thought it would be a sad thing to bring
his Displeasure upon her for my sake. 
In this Quandary, now considering, now
crying, and not knowing what to do, I pass'd 

the Time in my Chamber till Evening; when
desiring to be excus'd going to Supper, Mrs.
Jervis came up to me, and said, Why must
I sup without you, Pamela? Come, I see you
are troubled at something; tell me what is the
Matter. 
I begg'd I might be permitted to lie with
her on Nights; for I was afraid of Spirits, and
they would not hurt such a good Person as she. 
That was a silly Excuse, she said; for why was
you not afraid of Spirits before? —(Indeed I
did not think of that) But you shall be my
Bed-fellow with all my Heart, added she, let
your Reason be what it will; only come down
to Supper. I begg'd to be excus'd; for, said I,
I have been crying so, that it will be taken
Notice of by my Fellow-servants; and I will
hide nothing from you, Mrs. Jervis, when we
are alone. 
She was so good to indulge me; but made
haste to come up to-bed; and told the Servants,
that I should lie with her, because she could
not rest well, and would get me to read her
to sleep; for she knew I lov'd Reading, she
said. 
When we were alone, I told her all that
had passed; for I thought, though he had bid
me not, yet if he should come to know I had
told, it would be no worse; for to keep a
Secret of such a Nature, would be, as I apprehended,
to deprive myself of the good
Advice which I never wanted more; and might
encourage him to think I did not resent it as I 

ought, and would keep worse Secrets, and so
make him do worse by me. Was I right, my
dear Mother? 
Mrs. Jervis could not help mingling Tears
with my Tears; for I cry'd all the Time I was
telling her the Story, and begg'd her to advise
me what to do; and I shew'd her my dear Father's
two Letters, and she prais'd the Honesty
and Inditing of them, and said pleasing Things
to me of you both. But she begg'd I would not
think of leaving my Service; For, says she, in all
Likelihood, you behaved so virtuously, that he
will be asham'd of what he has done, and never
offer the like to you again: Though, my dear
Pamela, said she, I fear more for your Prettiness
than for any thing else; because the best
Man in the Land might love you; so she was
pleased to say. She wish'd it was in her Power
to live independent; then she would take a
little private House, and I should live with her
like her Daughter. 
And so, as you order'd me to take her Advice,
I resolved to tarry to see how things
went, except he was to turn me away; altho',
in your first Letter, you order'd me to come
away the Moment I had any Reason to be apprehensive. 
So, dear Father and Mother, it is
not Disobedience, I hope, that I stay; for I
could not expect a Blessing, or the good Fruits
of your Prayers for me, if I was disobedient. 
All the next Day I was very sad, and began
my long Letter. He saw me writing, and said
(as I mention'd) to Mrs. Jervis, That Girl is 

always scribbling; methinks she might find
something else to do; or to that purpose. And
when I had finish'd my Letter, I put it under
the Toilet, in my late Lady's Dressing-room,
whither nobody comes but myself and Mrs. Jervis,
besides my Master; but when I came up again
to seal it, to my great Concern, it was gone; 
and Mrs. Jervis knew nothing of it; and nobody
knew of my Master's having been near the
Place in the Time; so I have been sadly troubled
about it: But Mrs. Jervis, as well as I, thinks
he has it, some how or other; and he appears
cross and angry, and seems to shun me, as
much as he said I did him. It had better be so
than worse! 
But he has order'd Mrs. Jervis to bid me
not pass so much Time in writing; which is a
poor Matter for such a Gentleman as he to take
Notice of, as I am not idle other-ways, if he
did not resent what he thought I wrote upon. 
And this has no very good Look. 
But I am a good deal easier since I lie
with Mrs. Jervis; tho' after all, the Fears I
live in on one Side, and his Frowning and Displeasure
at what I do on the other, make me
more miserable than enough. 
O that I had never left my little Bed in
the Lost, to be thus exposed to Temptations
on one hand, or Disgusts on the other! How
happy was I a while ago! How contrary now! 
—Pity and pray for 
Your afflicted Pamela. 

