



Dear Father and Mother,
My Master has been very kind since my last; 
for he has given me a Suit of my late Lady's
Cloaths, and half a Dozen of her Shifts, and
Six fine Handkerchiefs, and Three of her Cambrick
Aprons, and Four Holland ones. The
Cloaths are fine Silk, and too rich and too
good for me, to be sure. I wish it was no
Affront to him to make Money of them, and
send it to you: it would do me more good. 
You will be full of Fears, I warrant now,
of some Design upon me, till I tell you, that
he was with Mrs. Jervis when he gave them
me; and he gave her a Mort of good Things
at the same time, and bid her wear them in
Remembrance of her good Friend, my Lady,
his Mother. And when he gave me these fine
Things, he said, These, Pamela, are for you; 
have them made fit for you, when your Mourning
is laid by, and wear them for your good
Mistress's sake. Mrs. Jervis gives you a very
good Word; and I would have you continue
to behave as prudently as you have done hitherto,
and every body will be your Friend. 

I was so surpris'd at his Goodness, that I
could not tell what to say. I curt'sy'd to him,
and to Mrs. Jervis for her good Word; and
said, I wish'd I might be deserving of his Favour,
and her Kindness: And nothing should be wanting
in me, to the best of my Knowledge. 
O how amiable a Thing is doing Good! — 
It is all I envy great Folks for! 
I always thought my young Master a fine
Gentleman, as every body says he is: But he
gave these good Things to us both with such a
Graciousness, as I thought he look'd like an
Angel. 
Mrs. Jervis says, he ask'd her, If I kept
the Men at a Distance; for, he said, I was
very pretty; and to be drawn in to have any
of them, might be my Ruin, and make me
poor and miserable betimes. She never is wanting
to give me a good Word, and took Occasion
to launch out in my Praise, she says. But
I hope she said no more than I shall try to
deserve, tho' I mayn't at present. I am sure I
will always love her next to you and my dear
Mother. So I rest 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter. 

