



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, March 14. 
I now send you copies of my letters to my uncles: 
With their answers. Be pleased to return the
latter, by the first deposite. I leave them for you, to
make remarks upon. I shall make none. 

To John Harlowe, Esq;
Sat. March 11. 
Allow me, my honoured Second Papa, as in
my happy days you taught me to call you, to
implore your interest with my papa, to engage him
to dispense with a command, which, if insisted upon,
will deprive me of my free-will, and make me miserable
for my whole life. 
For my whole life! let me repeat: Is that a small
point, my dear uncle, to give up? Am not I to live
with the man? Is any-body else? Shall I not therefore
be allow'd to judge for myself, whether I can,
or can-not live happily, with him? 
Should it be ever so un-happily, will it be prudence
to complain, or appeal? If it were, to whom could
I appeal with effect against a husband? And would 

not the invincible and avow'd dislike I have for him
at setting out, justify, as it might seem, any ill usage
from him, in that state; were I to be ever so observant
of him? And if I were to be at all so, it must
be from Fear, not Love.— 
Once more, let me repeat, That this is not a
small point to give up: And that it is for life. Why,
I pray you, good Sir, should I be made miserable for
life? Why should I be deprived of all comfort, but
that which the hope, that it would be a very short
one, would afford me? 
Marriage is a very solemn engagement, enough to
make a young creature's heart ake, with the best prospects,
when she thinks seriously of it! —To be
given up to a strange man; To be ingrafted into a
strange family; To give up her very name, as a
mark of her becoming his absolute and dependent
property: To be obliged to prefer this strange man,
to father, mother,—to every body: —And his humours
to all her own—Or to contend, perhaps, in
breach of a vow'd duty, for every innocent instance
of free-will: To go no whither: To make acquaintance: 
To give up acquaintance: —To renounce
even the strictest friendships perhaps; all at his pleasure,
whether she think it reasonable to do so or
not: —Surely, Sir, a young creature ought not to
be obliged to make all these sacrifices, but for such a
man as she can approve. —If she is, how sad must be
the case! —How miserable the life, if to be called
life! 
I wish I could obey you all. What a pleasure
would it be to me, if I could! Marry first, and Love
will come after, was said by one of my dearest friends! 
But, 'tis a shocking assertion! A thousand things
may happen to make that state but barely tolerable,
where it is entered into with mutual affection: What
must it then be, where the husband can have no confidence
in the love of his wife; but has reason rather 

to question it, from the preference he himself believes
she would have given to somebody else, had she been
at her own option? What doubt, what jealousies,
what want of tenderness, what unfavourable prepossessions,
will there be, in a matrimony thus circumstanced? 
How will every look, every action, even
the most innocent, be liable to misconstruction? — 
While, on the other hand, an indifference, a carelessness
to oblige, may take place; and Fear only can
constrain even an appearance of what ought to be the
real effect of undisguised Love? 
Think seriously of these things, dear good Sir, and
represent them to my papa, in that strong light which
the subject will bear; but in which my sex, and my
tender years and inexperience, will not permit me to
paint it; and use your powerful interest, that your
poor niece may not be consigned to a misery so
durable. 
I have offer'd to engage not to marry at all, if that
condition may be accepted. What a disgrace is it to
me to be thus sequester'd from company, thus banish'd
my papa's and mamma's presence, thus slighted
and deserted by you, Sir, and my other kind uncle! 
And to be hinder'd from attending at that public
worship, which, were I out of the way of my duty,
would be most likely to reduce me into the right path
again! —Is this the way, Sir, can it be thought, to
be taken with a free and open spirit? —May not this
strange method rather harden than convince? —I cannot
bear to live in disgrace thus: The very servants,
so lately permitted to be under my own direction,
hardly daring to speak to me; my own servant discarded
with high marks of undeserved suspicion and
displeasure, and my sister's maid set over me. 
The matter may be too far push'd: Indeed it may: 
And then, perhaps, every one will be sorry for their
parts in it. 
May I be suffered to mention an expedient?— If 

I am to be watch'd, banish'd, and confin'd; Suppose,
Sir, it were to be at your house? —Then the neighbouring
gentry will the less wonder, that the person
of whom they used to think so favourably, appeared
not at church here; and that she received not their
visits. 
I hope, there can be no objection to This. You
used to love to have me with you, Sir, when all went
happily with me: And will you not now permit me,
in my troubles, the favour of your house, till all this
displeasure be overblown? —Upon my word, Sir, I
will not stir out of doors, if you require the contrary
of me: Nor will I see any body, but whom you'll
allow me to see; provided you will not bring Mr.
Solmes to persecute me there. 
Procure, then, this favour for me; if you cannot
procure the still greater, that of a happy reconciliation; 
which nevertheless I presume to hope for, if
you will be so good as to plead for me: And you will
then add to those favours, and to that indulgence,
which have bound me, and then will for ever bind me,
to be 
Your dutiful and obliged Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 

The Answer.
Sunday night. 
My dear Niece,
It grieves me to be forced to deny you any thing
you ask. Yet it must be so; for unless you can
bring your mind to oblige us in this one point, in
which our promises and honour were engaged before
we believed there could be so sturdy an opposition,
you must never expect to be what you have
been to us all. 
In short, niece, we are an embattel'd phalanx; your
reading makes you a stranger to nothing, but what
you should be most acquainted with—So you will see 

by that expression, that we are not to be pierced by
your persuasions, and invincible persistence. We have
agreed all to be moved, or none; and not to comply
without one another: So you know your destiny; 
and have nothing to do but to yield to it. 
Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in
obliging when you can be obliged again: —But give
up an inclination, and there is some merit in That. 
As to your expedient: You shall not come to my
house, Miss Clary; tho' this is a prayer I little
thought I ever should have deny'd you: For were
you to keep your word as to seeing no-body but whom
we please, yet can you write to somebody else, and
receive letters from him: This we too well know
you can, and have done—More is the shame and the
pity! 
You offer to live single, Miss—We wish you marry'd: 
But because you mayn't have the man your
heart is set upon, why, truly, you'll have no-body
we shall recommend: And as we know, that some
how or other you correspond with him, or at least
did, as long as you could; and as he defies us all,
and would not dare to do it, if he were not sure of you
in spite of us all (which is not a little vexatious to us,
you must think); we are resolv'd to frustrate him,
and triumph over him, rather than he over us: That's
one word for all. So expect not any advocateship from
me: I will not plead for you; and that's enough. 
From 
Your displeased Uncle,
John Harlowe. 
P. S. For the rest, I refer to my brother Antony. 

To Antony Harlowe, Esq;.
Saturday, March 11. 
Honoured Sir,
As you have thought fit to favour Mr. Solmes with
your particular recommendation, and was very 

earnest in his behalf, ranking him (as you told me,
upon introducing him to me) amongst your select
friends; and expecting my regards to him accordingly; 
I beg your patience, while I offer a few things, out
of many that I could offer, to your serious consideration,
on occasion of his address to me, if I am to
use that word. 
I am charged with prepossession in another person's
favour: You will be pleased, Sir, to consider, that,
till my brother returned from Scotland, that other
person was not discouraged, nor was I forbid to receive
his visits: And is it such a crime in me, if I
should prefer an acquaintance of Twelve months to one
of Two? —I believe it will not be pretended, that in
birth, education, or personal endowments, a comparison
can be made between the two. And only let
me ask you, Sir, if the one would have been thought
of for me, had he not made such offers, as, upon my
word, I think, I ought not in justice to accept, nor
he to propose: Offers, which if he had not made, I dare
say, my papa would not have required them of him. 
But the one, it seems, has many faults: —Is the
other fault-less? —The principal thing objected to Mr.
Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) is, that he is
immoral in his Loves: —Is not the other in his Hatreds? 
—Nay, as I may say, in his Loves too (the object only
differing), if the love of money be the root of all evil? 
But, Sir, if I am prepossessed, what has Mr. Solmes
to hope for? —Why should he persevere? What must
I think of the man who would wish me to be his
against my inclination? —And is it not a very harsh
thing for my friends to desire to see me marry'd to
one I cannot love, when they will not be persuaded
but that there is one I do love? 
Treated as I am, now is the time for me to speak
out, or never. —Let me review what it is Mr. Solmes
depends upon on this occasion. Does he believe, that
the disgrace which I suffer on his account, will give 

him a merit with me? Does he think to win my
esteem, thro' my uncles sternness to me; by my brother's
contemptuous usage; by my sister's unkindness; 
by being deny'd to visit, or be visited; and to correspond
with my chosen friend, altho' a person of unexceptionable
honour and prudence, and of my own
sex; my servant to be torn from me, and another servant
set over me; to be confined, like a prisoner, to
narrow and disgraceful limits, in order avowedly to
mortify me, and to break my spirit; to be turn'd
out of that family-management which I loved, and
had the greater pleasure in it, because it was an ease,
as I thought, to my mamma, and what my sister
chose not; and yet, tho' time hangs heavy upon my
hands, to be so put out of my course, that I have as
little inclination as liberty to pursue any of the choice
delights of my life—Are these steps necessary to reduce
me to a standard so low, as to make me a fit wife for
this man? —Yet these are all he can have to trust to— 
And if his reliance is on these measures, I would have
him to know, that he mistakes meekness and gentleness
of disposition for servility and baseness of heart. 
I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent
of his mind, and my mind be considered: What are
his qualities, by which he would hope to win my
esteem? —Dear, dear Sir, if I am to be compelled,
let it be in favour of a man that can read and write— 
That can teach me something: For what a husband
must that man make, who can do nothing but command; 
and needs himself the instruction he should
be qualified to give? 
I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little
reading; of my writing; as of late I have more than
once been told I am—But, Sir, the more unequal the
proposed match, if so: The better opinion I have of
myself, the worse I must have of him; and the more
unfit are we for each other. 
Indeed, Sir, I must say, I thought my friends had 

put a higher value upon me. My brother pretended
once, that it was owing to such value, that Mr. Lovelace's
address was prohibited. —Can this be; and such
a man as Mr. Solmes be intended for me? 
As to his proposed settlements, I hope I shall not
incur your greater displeasure, if I say what all who
know me have reason to think, and some have upbraided
me for, that I despise those motives. Dear,
dear Sir, what are settlements to one who has as much
of her own as she wishes for? —Who has more in her
own power, as a single person, than it is probable
she would be permitted to have at her disposal, as a
wife! —Whose expences and ambition are moderate; 
and, if she had superfluities, would rather dispense
them to the necessitous, than lay them by her useless? 
If then such narrow motives have so little weight with
me for my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain
view of family-aggrandizement, and that in the
person of my brother and his descendants, be thought
sufficient to influence me? 
Has the behaviour of that brother to me of late, or
his consideration for the family (which had so little
weight with him, that he could choose to hazard a life
so justly precious as an only son's, rather than not gratify
passions which he is above attempting to subdue, and,
give me leave to say, has been too much indulged in, either
for his own good, or the peace of any-body related
to him; Has his behaviour, I say) deserved of me in
particular, that I should make a sacrifice of my temporal
(and, who knows? of my eternal) happiness, to
promote a plan, that, if I might be permitted to examine
it, I will venture to engage to demonstrate it to
be, if not absurd, very precarious, and what must
depend upon improbable contingencies? 
I am afraid you will condemn my warmth: But
does not the occasion require it? To the want of a
greater degree of earnestness in my opposition, it seems,
it is owing, that such advances have been made, as 

have been made. Then, dear Sir, allow something,
I beseech you, for a spirit raised and imbittered by
disgraces, which (knowing my own heart) I am confident
to say, are unmerited. 
But why have I said so much, in answer to the
supposed charge of prepossession, when I have declared
to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do to you, that if it
be not insisted upon that I shall marry any other person,
particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into
any engagements never to have the other, nor any man
else, without their consents; that is to say, without
the consents of my Father and Mother, and of you
my Uncle, and my eldest Uncle, and my cousin Morden,
as he is one of the trustees for my grandfather's
bounty to me. —As to my Brother indeed, I cannot
say, that his treatment of me has been, of late, so
brotherly, as to intitle him to more than civility from
me: And for this, give me leave to add, he would
be very much my debtor. 
If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my dislike
to Mr. Solmes, that the charge of prepossession may
not be supposed to influence me against him, I do declare
solemnly, That, were there no such man as Mr.
Lovelace in the world, I would not have him. It is
necessary, in some one of my letters to my dear
friends, that I should write so clearly as to put this
out of all doubt: And to whom can I better address
myself, with an explicitness that can admit of no mistake,
than to a gentleman who professes the highest
regard for plain-dealing and sincerity? 
Let me then, for these reasons, be still more particular
in some of my exceptions to him. 
Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world indeed)
to have a very narrow mind, and no great capacity: 
He is coarse and indelicate; as rough in his manners
as in his person: He is not only narrow, but covetous: 
Being possessed of great wealth, he enjoys it not; 
nor has the spirit to communicate to a distress of any 

kind. Does not his own sister live unhappily, for
want of a little of his superfluities? And suffers he not
his aged uncle, the brother of his own mother, to
owe to the generosity of strangers the poor subsistence
he picks up from half-a-dozen families? —You know,
Sir, my open, free, communicative temper: How
unhappy must I be, circumscribed in his narrow,
selfish circle? out of which, being with-held by this
diabolical parsimony, he dare no more stir, than a
conjurer out of his; nor would let me. 
Such a man as this, love! —Yes, perhaps he may,
my grandfather's estate; which he has told several
persons (and could not resist hinting it to me, with
that sort of pleasure which a low mind takes, when it
intimates its own interest as a sufficient motive for it
to expect another's favour) lies so extremely convenient
for him, that it would double the value of a
considerable part of his own. That estate, and an
alliance which would do credit to his obscurity and
narrowness, may make him think he can love, and
induce him to believe he does: But, at most, it is
but a second-place Love. Riches were, are, and always
will be, his predominant passion. His were left
him by a miser, on this very account: And I must
be obliged to forego all the choice delights of my life,
and be as mean as he, or else be quite unhappy! Pardon,
Sir, this severity of expression! —One is apt to
say more than one would, of a person one dislikes,
when more is said in his favour than he can possibly
deserve; and when he is urged to my acceptance
with so much vehemence, that there is no choice
left me. 
Whether these things be perfectly so, or not, while
I think they are, it is impossible I should ever look
upon him in the light he is offered to me. Nay,
were he to be proved ten times better than I have represented
him, and sincerely think him; yet would
he be still ten times more disagreeable to me than 

any other man I know in the world. Let me therefore
beseech you, Sir, to become an advocate for
your niece, that she may not be made a victim of, to
a man so highly disgustful to her. 
You, and my other uncle, can do a great deal for
me, if you please, with my papa. Be persuaded, Sir,
that it is not obstinacy I am governed by: It is aversion; 
an aversion I cannot overcome: For, if I have
but endeavoured to reason with myself (out of regard
to the duty I owe to my papa's will), my heart has
recoiled, and I have been averse to myself, for offering
but to argue with myself, in behalf of a man who,
in the light he appears to me, has no one merit; and
who, knowing this aversion, could not persevere as
he does, if he had the spirit of a man, and a gentleman. 
If, Sir, you can think the contents of this letter
reasonable, I beseech you to support them with your
interest: If not—I shall be most unhappy! —Nevertheless,
it is but just in me so to write, as that Mr.
Solmes may know what he has to trust to. 
Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and suffer it
to have weight with you; and you will for ever oblige 
Your dutiful and affectionate Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 

Mr. Antony Harlowe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Niece Clary,
You had better not write to us, or to any of us. 
To me, particularly, you had better never to
have set pen to paper, on the subject whereupon you
have written. He that is first in his own cause, saith
the wise man, seemeth just: But his neighbour cometh,
and searcheth him. And so, in this respect, will I be
your neighbour; for I will search your heart to the
bottom; that is to say, if your letter be written from 

your heart. Yet do I know what a task I have undertaken,
because of the knack you are noted for at
writing: But in defence of a father's authority, in
behalf of the good, and honour, and prosperity of a
family one comes of, what a hard thing would it be,
if one could not beat down all the arguments a rebel
child (how loth I am to write down that word of Miss
Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her obstinacy? 
In the first place, don't you declare (and that contrary
to your declarations to your mother) that you
prefer the man we all hate, and who hates us as bad? 
—Then what a character have you given of a worthy
gentleman! I wonder you dare write so freely of a
man we all respect. But possibly it may be for that
very reason. 
How you begin your letter! —Because I value Mr.
Solmes as my friend, you treat him the worse—That's
the plain Dunstable of the matter, Miss! —I am not
such a fool but I can see That. —And so a noted whore-monger
is to be chosen before a man who is a money-lover! 
Let me tell you, niece, this little becomes so
nice a one as you have been always reckon'd. Who,
think you, does most injustice, a prodigal man, or
a saving man? —The one saves his own money; the
other spends other people's: But your favourite is a
sinner in grain, and upon record. 
The devil's in your sex! God forgive me for saying
so—The nicest of them will prefer a vile rake and
Wh&wblank; I suppose I must not repeat the word: — 
The Word will offend when the Vicious denominated
by that word will be chosen! —I had not been a
bachelor to this time, if I had not seen such a mass
of contradictions in you all. —Such gnat-strainers and
camel-swallowers, as venerable Holy Writ has it. What
names will perverseness call things by—A prudent
man, who intends to be just to every-body, is a covetous
man! —While a vile, profligate rake is christen'd 

with the appellation of a gallant man, and a
polite man, I'll warrant you! 
It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so
much regard for you as he professes; but for two
reasons. And what are these? —Why out of spite to
all of us—one of them: The other, because of your
independent fortune. I wish your good grandfather
had not left what he did so much in your own power,
as I may say. But little did he imagine his beloved grand-daughter would have turned upon all her friends
as she has done! 
What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepossess'd! 
Hey-day! Is this you, cousin Clary! —Has he
then nothing to hope for from your father's, and mother's,
and our recommendations? —No nothing at
all, it seems! —O brave! —I should think that this,
with a dutiful child, as we took you to be, was enough. 
Depending on this your duty, we proceeded: And
now there is no help for it: For we won't be balked: 
Neither shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you
that. 
If your estate is convenient for him, what then? 
Does that, pert cousin, make it out that he does not
love you? He had need to expect some good with you,
that has so little good to hope for from you; mind that. 
But pray, is not this estate our estate, as we may
say? Have we not all an interest in it, and a prior
right, if right were to have taken place? And was it
more than a good old man's dotage, God rest his soul!
that gave it you before us all? —Well then, ought we
not to have a choice who shall have it in marriage
with you? And would you have the conscience to
wish us to let a vile fellow who hates us all, run
away with it? —You bid me weigh what you write: 
Do you weigh this, girl: And it will appear we have
more to say for ourselves than you were aware of. 
As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank 

yourself for That: It may be over when you will: 
So I reckon nothing upon that: You was not banish'd
and confin'd till all intreaty and fair speeches were
try'd with you: Mind that. And Mr. Solmes can't
help your obstinacy: —Let that be observ'd too. 
As to being visited, and visiting, you never was
fond of either: So that's a grievance put into the scale
to make weight. —As to disgrace, that's as bad to us
as to you: So fine a young creature! —So much as
we used to brag of you! —And too, besides, this is all
in your power, as the rest. —But your heart recoils,
when you would persuade yourself to obey your parents
—Finely describ'd, i'n't it! —Too truly described,
I own, as you go on. I know, that you may love
him if you will. —I had a good mind to bid you hate
him; then, perhaps, you'd like him the better: 
For I have always found a most horrid romantic perverseness
in your sex. To do and to love what you should
not, is meat, drink, and vesture, to you all. 
I am absolutely of your brother's mind, That reading
and writing, tho' not too much for the wits of you
young girls, are too much for your judgments. — 
You say, you may be conceited, cousin; you may be
vain! —And so you are, to despise this gentleman as
you do. He can read and write as well as most gentlemen,
I can tell you that. Who told you Mr. Solmes
can't read and write? But you must have a husband
who can learn you something! —I wish you knew but
your duty as well as you do your talents—That, niece,
you have of late to learn; and Mr. Solmes will therefore
find something to instruct you in. I won't shew
him this letter of yours, tho' you seem to desire it,
lest it should provoke him to be too severe a school-master,
when you are his'n. 
But now I think of it, suppose you are readier at
your pen than he—You will make the more useful
wife to him; won't you? For who so good an oeconomist
as you? —And you may keep all his accompts,
and save yourselves a steward. —And, let me tell you, 

this is a fine advantage in a family: For those stewards
are often sad dogs, and creep into a man's estate, before
he knows where he is; and not seldom is he
forced to pay them interest for his own money. I
know not why a good wife should be above these
things. —'Tis better than lying abed half the day, and
junketing and card-playing all the night, and making
yourselves wholly useless to every good purpose in
your own families, as is now the fashion among ye— 
The duce take ye all that do so, say I! —Only that,
thank my stars, I am a bachelor! —Then this is a province
you are admirably vers'd in: You grieve that it
is taken from you here, you know. So here, Miss,
with Mr. Solmes you will have something to keep account
of, for the sake of you and your children: With
t'other, perhaps, you'll have an account to keep, too— 
But an account of what will go over the left shoulder:
only of what he squanders, what he borrows, and what
he owes, and never will pay. Come, come, cousin,
you know nothing of the world; a man's a man, and
you may have many partners in a handsome man,
and costly ones too, who may lavish away all you
save. Mr. Solmes therefore for my money, and I
hope for yours! 
But Mr. Solmes is a coarse man, he is not delicate
enough for your niceness, because I suppose he dresses
not like a fop and a coxcomb, and because he lays
not himself out in complimental nonsense, the poison
of female minds. He is a man of sense, I can tell you. 
No man talks more to the purpose to us: —But you
fly him so, that he has no opportunity given him, to
express it to you: And a man who loves, if he have
ever so much sense, looks like a fool; especially when
he is despised, and treated as you treated him the last
time he was in your company. 
As to his sister; she threw herself away, (as you
want to do) against his full warning: For he told her
what she had to trust to, if she married where she did 

marry. And he was as good as his word; and so an
honest man ought: Offences against warning ought
to be smarted for. Take care This be not your case. 
Mind that. 
His uncle deserves no favour from him, for he would
have circumvented him, and got Sir Oliver to leave to
himself the estate he had always designed for him his
nephew; and brought him up in the hope of it. Too
ready forgiveness does but encourage offences: That's
your good father's maxim: And there would not be
so many headstrong daughters as there are, if this
maxim were kept in mind. —Punishments are of service
to offenders; Rewards should be only to the meriting: 
And I think the former are to be dealt out
rigorously, in wilful cases. 
As to his love; he shews it but too much for your
deservings, as they have been of late; let me tell you
That: And This is his misfortune; and may in time
perhaps be yours. 
As to his parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical
—a very free word in your mouth, let me tell
ye—Little reason have you of all people for this, on
whom he proposes, of his own accord, to settle all
he has in the world: A proof, let him love riches as
he will, that he loves you better. But that you may
be without excuse on this score, we will tie him up
to your own terms, and oblige him, by the marriage
articles, to allow you a very handsome quarterly sum,
to do what you please with. And this has been told
you before; and I have said it to Mrs. Howe, that good
and worthy lady, before her proud daughter, that
you might hear of it again. 
To contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace,
you offer never to have him without our consents: 
And what is This saying, but that you will
hope on for our consents, and to wheedle and tire us
out: Then he will always be in expectation, while
you are single: And we are to live on at this rate 

(are we?), vexed by you, and continually watchful
about you; and as continually exposed to his insolence
and threats. Remember last Sunday, girl! — 
What might have happen'd, had your brother and he
met? —Moreover, you can't do with such a spirit as
his, as you can with worthy Mr. Solmes: The one
you make tremble; the other will make you quake. 
Mind that: And you will not be able to help yourself. 
And remember, that if there should be any misunderstanding
between one of them and you, we should
all interpose; and with effect, no doubt: But with
the other, it would be self-do self-have, and who
would either care or dare to put in a word for you? 
Nor let the supposition of matrimonial differences
frighten you: Honey-moon lasts not now-a-days
above a fortnight; and Dunmow flitch, as I have
been informed, was never claimed; tho' some say
once it was. Marriage is a queer state, child, whether
pair'd by the parties or by their friends. Out of
three brothers of us, you know, there was but one had
courage to marry. And why was it, do you think? 
We were wise by other people's experience. 
Don't despise money so much; you may come to
know the value of it: That is a piece of instruction
that you are to learn; and which, according to your
own notions, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you. 
I do indeed condemn your warmth. I won't allow
for disgraces you bring upon yourself. If I thought
them unmerited, I would be your advocate. But it
was always my notion, that children should not dispute
their parents authority. When your grandfather
left his estate to you, tho' his three sons, and a grandson,
and your elder sister were in being, we all acquiesced: 
And why? Because it was our father's doing. 
Do you imitate that example: If you will not,
those who set it you have the more reason to hold
you inexcusable. Mind that, Cousin. 
You mention your brother too scornfully: And, in 

your letter to him, are very disrespectful, as well as
in your sister's, to her. He is your brother; a third
older than yourself: And a man: And while you can
pay so much regard to one man of a twelve month's
acquaintance only, pray be so good as not to forget
what is due to a brother, who (next to us three brothers)
is the head of the family; and on whom the
name depends: As upon your dutiful compliance depends
the success of the noblest plan that ever was
laid down for the honour of the family you are come
of. And pray now let me ask you, If the honour of
That will not be an honour to you? —If you don't
think so, the more unworthy you. You shall see the
plan, if you promise not to be prejudiced against it,
right or wrong. If you are not besotted to that man,
I am sure you will like it. If you are, were Mr.
Solmes an angel, it would signify nothing: For the
devil is Love, and Love is the devil, when it gets into
any of your heads. Many examples have I seen
of that. 
If there were no such man as Lovelace in the world,
you would not have Mr. Solmes. —You would not,
Miss! —Very pretty, truly! —We see how your
spirit is imbitter'd indeed. —Wonder not, since it is
come to your will nots, that those who have authority
over you, say, You shall have the other. And I am
one. Mind that. And if it behoves You to speak
out, Miss, it behoves US not to speak in. What's
sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander: Take that
in your thought too. 
I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes has the spirit
of a man, and a gentleman. I would admonish you
therefore not to provoke it. He pities you as much
as he loves you. He says, He will convince you of
his love by deeds, since he is not permitted by you
to express it by words. And all his dependance is
upon your generosity hereafter. We hope he may
depend upon That: We encourage him to think he 

may. And this heartens him up. So that you may
lay his constancy at your parents and your uncles
doors; and This will be another mark of your duty,
you know. 
You must be sensible, that you reflect upon your
parents, and all of us, when you tell me you cannot
in justice accept of the settlements proposed to you. 
This reflection we should have wonder'd at from you
once; but now we don't. 
There are many other very censurable passages in
this free letter of yours; but we must place them to
the account of your imbittered spirit: I am glad you
mention'd that word, because we should have been at
a loss what to have call'd it: —Much rather have had
reason to give it a better name. 
I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, tho'
my niece, one of the finest young gentlewomen I
ever saw. But, upon my conscience, I think you
ought to obey your parents, and oblige me, and my
brother John: For you know very well, that we
have nothing but your good at heart; consistently, indeed,
with the good and honour of all of us. What
must we think of any one of it, who would not promote
the good of the whole? and who would set
one part of it against another? —Which God forbid,
say I! —You see I am for the good of all. What
shall I get by it, let things go as they will? Do I
want any thing of any body for my own sake? Does
my brother John? —Well, then, cousin Clary, What
would you be at, as I may say? 
O but, You can't love Mr. Solmes! —But, I say,
you know not what you can do. You encourage
yourself in your dislike. You permit your heart (little
did I think it was such a froward one) to recoil. Take
it to task, niece; drive it on as fast as it recoils (we
do so in all our sea-fights, and land-fights too, by
our sailors and soldiers, or we should not conquer); 
and we are all sure you will overcome it. And 

why? Because you ought. So we think, whatever
you think: And whose thoughts are to be preferred? 
You may be wittier than we; but, if you are wiser,
we have lived some of us, let me tell you, to very
little purpose thirty or forty years longer than you. 
I have written as long as letter as yours. I may not
write in so lively, or so polite a style as my niece: 
But I think I have all the argument on my side: And
you will vastly oblige me, if you will shew me, by
your compliance with all our desires, that you think
so too. If you do not, you must not expect an advocate,
or even a friend, in me, dearly as I love you. 
For then I shall be sorry to be called 
Tuesday, Two in the morning. 
Your Uncle,
Anthony Harlowe. 
Postscript.
You must send me no more letters: But a compliable
one you may send. But I need not have forbid
you; for I am sure, this, by fair argument, is
unanswerable: I know it is. I have written day and
night, I may say, ever since Sunday morning, only
church-time, or the like of that: But this is the last,
I can tell you, from 
A. H. 