



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

An angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has
passed between my Sister and me. Did you think
I could scold, my dear? 
She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see
Mr. Solmes—Let loose upon me, I think! —No intention
on their parts, to conciliate! It seems evident
that I am given up to my Brother and her, by general
consent. 
I will do justice to every-thing she said against me,
which carried any force with it. As I ask for your
approbation or disapprobation of my conduct, upon
the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign
of a very bad cause, if I endeavoured to mislead my
judge. 
She began with representing to me the danger I
had been in, had my Father come up, as he would
have done had he not been hindered—by Mr. Solmes,
among the rest. She reflected upon my Norton, as
if she encouraged me in my perverseness. She ridiculed
me for my supposed esteem for Mr. Lovelace. — 
Was surprised that the witty, the prudent, nay, the
dutiful and pi—ous [so she sneeringly pronounced the
word] Clarissa Harlowe, should be so strangely fond
of a profligate man, that her Parents were forced to
lock her up, in order to hinder her from running into
his arms. ‘Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how
you now keep your account of the disposition of
your time? How many hours in the twenty-four do
you devote to your Needle? How many to your 

Prayers? How many to Letter-writing? And how
many to Love? —I doubt, I doubt, my little dear,
was her arch expression, The latter article is like
Aaron's rod, and swallows up all the rest! —Tell
me; is it not so?’ 
To these I answered, That it was a double mortification
to me to owe my safety from the effects of my
Father's indignation to a man I could never thank for
any-thing. I vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with
a warmth that was due to her merit. —With equal
warmth I resented her reflections upon me on Mr.
Lovelace's account. As to the disposition of my time
in the twenty-four hours, I told her it would better
have become her to pity a Sister in distress, than to
exult over her—Especially, when I could too justly
attribute to the disposition of some of her wakeful
hours no small part of that distress. 
She raved extremely at this last hint: But reminded
me of the gentle treatment of all my friends, my
Mother's in particular, before it came to This: She
said, that I had discovered a spirit they never had expected: 
That, if they had thought me such a championess,
they would hardly have ventured to engage
with me: But that now, the short and the long
was, that the matter had gone too far to be given
up: 
That it was become a contention between duty
and wilfulness; Whether a Parent's authority were
to yield to a Daughter's obstinacy, or the contrary: 
That I must therefore bend or break, that was all,
child. 
I told her, that I wished the subject were of such
a nature, that I could return her pleasantry with equal
lightness of heart: But that, if Mr. Solmes had such
merit in every-body's eyes, in hers particularly, why
might he not be a Brother to me, rather than a
Husband? 
O child, says she, methinks you are as pleasant to
the full as I am: I begin to have some hopes of you 

now. But do you think I will rob my Sister of her
humble servant? Had he first addressed himself to me,
proceeded she, something might have been said: But
to take my younger Sister's refusal! No, no, child; 
it is not come to that neither! Besides, That would
be to leave the door open in your heart for you know
who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. 
In short [and then she changed both her tone,
and her looks] had I been as forward as somebody,
to throw myself into the arms of one of the greatest
profligates in England, who had endeavoured to support
his claim to me thro' the blood of my Brother,
then might all my family join together to save me from
such a wretch, and to marry me as fast as they could,
to some worthy man, who might opportunely offer
himself. And now, Clary, all's out, and make the
most of it. 
Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it
did, to justify my reply. —Alas! for my poor Sister!
said I—The man was not always so great a profligate. 
How true is the observation, That unrequited Love
turns to deepest Hate! 
I thought she would have beat me. But I proceeded
—I have heard often of my Brother's danger,
and my Brother's murderer. When so little ceremony
is made with me, why should I not speak out? 
—Did he not seek to kill the other, if he could have
done it? Would my Brother have given Lovelace his
life, had it been in his power? —The aggressor should
not complain. —And, as to opportune offers, would to
Heaven some one had offered opportunely to somebody! 
It is not my fault, Bella, the opportune gentleman
don't come! 
Could you, my dear, have shewn more spirit? I
expected to feel the weight of her hand. She did
come up to me, with it held up: Then, speechless
with passion, ran down half way of the stairs, and
came up again. 

When she could speak—God give me patience
with you! 
Amen, said I: But you see, Bella, how ill you bear
the retort you provoke. Will you forgive me; and
let me find a Sister in you, as I am sorry, if you have
reason to think me unsisterly in what I have said? 
Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; 
considering my gentleness as a triumph of
temper over her. She was resolved, she said, to let
every-body know how I took the wicked Lovelace's
part against my Brother. 
I wished, I told her, I could make the plea for
myself, which she might for herself; to wit, That
my anger was more inexcuseable than my judgment. 
But I presumed she had some other view in coming to
me, than she had hitherto acquainted me with. Let
me, said I, but know (after all that has passed) if you
have any-thing to propose that I can comply with; 
any-thing that can make my only Sister once more my
friend? 
I had before, upon her ridiculing me on my supposed
character of meekness, said, that, altho' I wished
to be thought meek, I would not be abject; altho'
humble, not mean: And here, in a sneering way, she
cautioned me on that head. 
I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable
than her anger. But I wished she would let me
know the end of a visit that had hitherto (between us)
been so unsisterly. 
She desired to be informed, in the name of everybody,
was her word, what I was determined upon? 
And whether to comply or not? —One word for all: 
My friends were not to have patience with so perverse
a creature for ever. 
This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break
with the man they were all so determined against: 
Upon condition, however, that neither Mr. Solmes,
nor any other, were urged to me with the force of a
command. 

And what was this, more than I had offered before? 
What, but ringing my changes upon the same
bells, and neither receding nor advancing one tittle? 
If I knew what other proposals I could make, I
told her, that would be acceptable to them all, and
free me from the address of a man so disagreeable to
me, I would make them. I had indeed before offered,
never to marry without my Father's consent— 
She interrupted me, That was because I depended
upon my whining tricks to bring my Father and Mother
to what I pleased. 
A poor dependence! I said: —She knew those who
would make that dependence vain— 
And I should have brought them to my own beck,
very probably, and my Uncle Harlowe too, as also
my Aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden their
sight, and thereby hindered from playing my pug's
tricks before them. 
At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me to
whom I am obliged, that my Father and Mother, and
every-body else, treat me thus harshly. But surely
you make them all very weak. Indifferent persons,
judging of us two from what you say, would either
think me a very artful creature, or you a very spiteful
one— 
You are indeed a very artful one, for that matter,
interrupted she in a passion: One of the artfullest I
ever knew! And then followed an accusation so low!
so unsisterly! —That I half-bewitched people by my
insinuating address: That nobody could be valued or
respected, but must stand like cyphers where-ever I
came. How often, said she, have I and my Brother
been talking upon a subject, and had every-body's
attention, till you came in, with your bewitching meek
pride, and humble significance? And then have we
either been stopped by references to Miss Clary's opinion,
forsooth; or been forced to stop ourselves, or
must have talked on unattended to by every-body. 

She paused. Dear Bella, proceed! 
She indeed seemed only gathering breath. 
And so I will, said she—Did you not bewitch my
Grandfather? Could any-thing be pleasing to him,
that you did not say or do? How did he use to hang,
till he slabbered again, poor doting old man! on your
silver tongue! Yet what did you say, that we could
not have said? What did you do, that we did not
endeavour to do? —And what was all this for? Why,
truly, his Last Will shewed what effect your smooth
obligingness had upon him! —To leave the acquired
part of his Estate from the next heirs, his own Sons,
to a grandchild; to his youngest grandchild! a Daughter
too! —To leave the family-pictures from his Sons
to you, because you could tiddle about them, and,
tho' you now neglect their examples, could wipe and
clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate
too, in such quantities, of two or three generations
standing, must not be changed, because his precious
child (a) , humouring his old fal lal taste, admired
it, to make it all her own. 
This was too low to move me: O my poor
Sister! said I: Not to be able, or at least willing, to
distinguish between Art and Nature! If I did oblige,
I was happy in it: I looked for no further reward: 
My mind is above Art, from the dirty motives you
mention. I wish with all my heart my Grandfather
had not thus distinguished me: He saw my Brother
likely to be amply provided for out of the family, as
well as in it: He desired that you might have the
greater share of my Father's favour for it; and no
doubt but you both will. You know, Bella, that the
Estate my Grandfather bequeathed me was not half
the real Estate he left. 
What's all that to an Estate in possession, and left 

you with such distinctions, as gave you a reputation
of greater value than the Estate itself? 
Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your Envy, I
doubt! —But have I not given up that possession in
the best manner I could— 
Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that best
manner. Specious little witch! she called me: Your
best manner, so full of art and design, had never been
seen thro', if you, with your blandishing ways, had
not been put out of sight, and reduced to positive
declarations! —Hindered from playing your little,
whining tricks; curling, like a serpent, about your
Mamma; and making her cry to deny you any-thing
your little obstinate heart was set upon!— 
Obstinate heart, Bella! 
Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up
any-thing? Had you not the Art to make them think
all was right you asked, tho' my Brother and I were
frequently refused favours of no greater import? 
I know not, Bella, that I ever asked any-thing unfit
to be granted. I seldom asked favours for myself, but
for others. 
I was a reflecting creature for this. 
All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I
cannot go so far back into our childish follies. Little
did I think of how long standing this your late-shewn
antipathy is. 
I was a reflecter again! Such a saucy meekness; such
a best manner; and such venom in words! —O Clary! Clary! Thou wert always a two-faced girl! 
Nobody thought I had two faces, when I gave up
All into my Father's management; taking from his
bounty, as before, all my little pocket-money, without
a shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring it— 
Yes, cunning creature! —And that was another of
your fetches! —For did it not engage my fond Father
(as no doubt you thought it would) to tell you, that,
since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he 

would keep entire, for your use, all the produce of
the Estate left you, and be but your Steward in it; 
and that you should be entitled to the same allowances
as before? Another of your hook-in's, Clary! —So
that all your extravagancies have been supported
gratis. 
My extravagancies, Bella! —But did my Father
ever give me any-thing he did not give you? 
Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I
should have had the conscience to ask. But I have
still the greater part to shew! But you! What have
you to shew! —I dare say, not fifty pieces in the
world! 
Indeed I have not! 
I believe you! —Your Mamma Norton, I suppose— 
But mum for that!— 
Unworthy Bella! —The good woman, altho' low
in circumstance, is great in mind! Much greater than
those who would impute meanness to a soul incapable
of it. 
What then have you done with the sums given you
from infancy to squander? —Let me ask you [affecting
archness] Has, has, has Lovelace, has your Rake, put
it out at interest for you? 
O that my Sister would not make me blush for
her! It is, however, out at interest! —And I hope it
will bring me interest upon interest! —Better than to
lie useless in my cabinet. 
She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she
should suppose I was aiming to carry the County— 
Popularity! A croud to follow me with their blessings
as I went to and from church, and nobody else to be
regarded, were agreeable things. House-top proclamations! 
I hid not my light under a bushel, she would
say that for me. But was it not a little hard upon
me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday? —And to
be hindered from my charitable ostentations? 
This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so 

largely contributed to my confinement. —But go on. 
You'll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot wish to
be able to return this usage. —Poor Bella! And I believe
I smiled a little too contemptuously for a Sister
to a Sister. 
None of your saucy contempts [rising in her voice]: 
None of your poor Bella's, with that air of superiority
in a younger Sister! 
Well then, rich Bella! courtesying—that will please
you better—And it is due likewise to the hoards you
boast of. 
Look-ye, Clary, holdiog up her hand, if you are
not a little more abject in your meekness, a little more
mean in your humility, and treat me with the respect
due to an elder Sister—you shall find— 
Not that you will treat me worse than you have
done, Bella! —That cannot be; unless you were, to
let fall your uplifted hand upon me—And that would
less become you to do, than me to bear. 
Good, meek creature! —But you were upon your
overtures just now! —I shall surprise every-body by
tarrying so long. They will think some good may
be done with you—And supper will be ready. 
A tear would stray down my cheek—How happy
have I been, said I, sighing, in the supper-time conversations,
with all my dear friends in my eye round
their hospitable board! 
I met only with insult for this—Bella has not a
feeling heart. The highest joy in this life she is not
capable of: But then she saves herself many griefs, by
her impenetrableness—Yet, for ten times the pain
that such a sensibility is attended with, would I not
part with the pleasure it brings with it. 
She asked me, upon my turning from her, If she
should say any-thing below of my compliances? 
You may say, That I will do every-thing they
would have me to do, if they will free me from Mr.
Solmes's address. 

This is all you desire at present, creeper on! insinuator! 
[What words she has!] But will not t'other
man flame out, and roar most horribly, upon the
snatching from his paws a prey he thought himself
sure of? 
I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall
never come to a point. I shall not matter his roaring,
as you call it. I will promise him, that, if I ever
marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married. 
And if he be not satisfied with such a condescension,
I shall think he ought: And I will give any
assurances, that I will neither correspond with him,
nor see him. Surely this will do. 
But I suppose then you will have no objection to
see and converse, on a civil foot, with Mr. Solmes— 
as your Father's friend, or so? 
No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment
whenever he comes. I would no more converse with
the one, than correspond with the other. That would
be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on
a belief, that I broke with him, to have Mr. Solmes. 
And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a
controul over you, that you are not to be civil to your
Father's friends, at his own house, for fear of incensing
him! 
—When this comes to be represented, be so good
as to tell me, what is it you expect from it? 
Every-thing, I said, or nothing, as she was pleased
to represent it. —Be so good as to give it your interest,
Bella: And say further, ‘That I will by any
means I can, in the Law or otherwise, make over
to my Father, to my Uncles, or even to my Brother,
all I am entitled to by my Grandfather's Will,
as a security for the performance of my promises. 
And as I shall have no reason to expect any favour
from my Father, if I break them, I shall not be
worth any-body's having. And further still, unkindly
as my Brother has used me, I will go down
to Scotland privately, as his housekeeper [I now see 

I may be spared here] if he will promise to treat
me no worse than he would do an hired one. —Or
I will go to Florence, to my Cousin Morden, if
his stay in Italy will admit of it. In either case, it
may be given out, that I am gone to the other; or
to the world's end. I care not whither it is said I
am gone, or do go.’ 
Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty
proposal in writing? 
Yes, with all my heart. And I stept to my closet,
and wrote to the purpose I have mentioned; and,
moreover, the following lines to my Brother. 

&dotup;My dear Brother,
I hope I have made such proposals to my Sister, as
will be accepted. I am sure they will, if you please
to give them your sanction. Let me beg of you for
God's sake, that you will. I think myself very
unhappy in having incurred your displeasure. No
Sister can love a Brother better than I love you. 
Pray do not put the worst, but the best constructions
upon my proposals, when you have them reported
to you. Indeed I mean the best. I have so subterfuges,
no arts, no intentions, but to keep to the
Letter of them. You shall yourself draw up every-thing
into writing, as strong as you can; and I will
sign it: And what the Law will not do to enforce
it, my Resolution and my Will shall: So that I
shall be worth nobody's address, that has not my
Papa's consent: Nor shall any person, nor any consideration,
induce me to revoke it. You can do
more than any-body to reconcile my Parents and
Uncles to me. Let me owe this desirable favour
to your brotherly interposition, and you will for
ever oblige 
&dotup;Your afflicted Sister,
&dotup;Cl. Harlowe.&dotup; 

And how do you think Bella employed herself while
I was writing? —Why, playing gently upon my harpsichord: 
And humming to it, to shew her unconcernedness. 
When I approached her with what I had written,
she arose with an air of levity—Why, Love, you have
not written already! —You have, I protest! —O what
a ready penwoman! —And may I read it? 
&dotup;If you please. And let me beseech you, my dear
Bella, to back these proposals with your good offices: 
And [folding my uplifted hands; tears, I believe,
standing in my eyes] I will love you as never Sister
loved another. 
&dotup;Thou art a strange creature, said she; there is no
withstanding thee.&dotup; 
She took the Proposals and Letter; and having
read them, burst into an affected Laugh: How wise-ones
may be taken in! —Then you did not know, that
I was jesting with you all this time! —And so you
would have me carry down this pretty piece of nonsense? 
Don't let me be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness,
Bella. I hope it is but seeming. There can
be no wit in such jesting as this. 
The folly of the creature! —How natural is it for
people, when they set their hearts upon any-thing, to
think every-body must see with their eyes! —Pray,
dear child, what becomes of your Father's authority
here? —Who stoops here, the Parent, or the Child? — 
How does this square with the engagements actually
agreed upon between your Father and Mr. Solmes? 
What security, that your Rake will not follow you to
the world's end? —&dotup;Nevertheless, that you may not
think that I stand in the way of a Reconciliation on
such fine terms as these, I will be your messenger
this once, and hear what my Papa will say to it; 
altho' beforehand I can tell you, these proposals
will not answer the principal end. 

&dotup;So down she went. But, it seems, my Aunt
Hervey and my Uncle Harlowe were gone away: 
And as they have all engaged to act in concert, messengers
were dispatched to my Uncle and Aunt to
desire them to be there to breakfast in the morning. 
&dotup;Monday Night, 11 o' Clock. 
&dotup;I am afraid I shall not be thought worthy— 
&dotup;Just as I began to fear I should not be thought
worthy of an Answer, Betty rapped at my door,
and said, If I were not in bed, she had a Letter for
me. I had but just done writing the above dialogue,
and stept to the door, with the pen in my hand— 
Always writing, Miss! said the bold wench: It is
admirable how you can get away what you write— 
But the Fairies, they say, are always at hand to
help Lovers. —She retired in so much haste, that had
I been disposed, I could not take the notice of this
insolence which it deserved. 
&dotup;I inclose my Brother's Letter. He was resolved
to let me see, that I should have nothing to expect
from his kindness. But surely he will not be permitted
to carry every point. The assembling of my
friends to-morrow is a good sign: And I will hope
something from that, and from proposals so reasonable. 
And now I will try if any repose will fall to
my lot for the remainder of this night.&dotup; 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
[Inclosed in the preceding.]
&dotup;Your proposals will be considered by your
Father and Mother, and all your Friends, to-morrow
morning. What trouble does your shameful
forwardness give us all!&dotup; I wonder you have the
courage to write to me, upon whom you are so continually
emptying your whole female quiver. I have
no patience with you, for reflecting upon me as the 

aggressor in a quarrel which owed its beginning to my
consideration for you. 
You have made such confessions in a villain's favour,
as ought to cause all your relations to renounce
you for ever. For my part, I will not believe any woman
in the world, who promises against her avowed inclination. 
To put it out of your power to ruin yourself
is the only way left to prevent your ruin. I did not
intend to write; but your too-kind Sister has prevailed
upon me. As to your going into Scotland, that day
of grace is over. —Nor would I advise, that you should
go to grandfather-up your Cousin Morden. Besides,
that worthy gentleman might be involved in some
fatal dispute, upon your account; and then be called
the aggressor. 
A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to
propose to hide yourself from your Rake, and to have
falshoods told, to conceal you! —Your confinement,
at this rate, is the happiest thing that could befal you. 
Your Bravo's behaviour at church, looking out for
you, is a sufficient indication of his power over you,
had you not so shamelesly acknowleged it. 
One word for all—Your Parents and Uncles may
do as they will: But if, for the honour of the family,
I cannot carry this point, I will retire to Scotland,
and never see the face of any one of it more. 
Ja. Harlowe. 
There's a Brother! —There's flaming duty to a
Father, and Mother, and Uncles! —But he sees himself
valued, and made of consequence; and he gives
himself airs accordingly! —&dotup;Nevertheless, as I said
above, I will hope better things from those who
have not the interest my Brother has to keep open
these unhappy differences.&dotup; 