



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sunday Night, July 16. 
What a cursed piece of work hast thou made
of it, with the most excellent of women! 
Thou mayest be in earnest, or in jest, as thou wilt; 
but the poor Lady will not be long either thy sport,
or the sport of fortune! 
I will give thee an account of a Scene that wants
but her affecting pen to represent it justly; and it
would wring all the black blood out of thy callous
heart. 
Thou only, who art the author of her calamities,
shouldst have attended her in her prison. I am unequal
to such a task: Nor know I any other man but
would. 
This last act, however unintended by thee, yet a
consequence of thy general orders, and too likely to
thought agreeable to thee, by those who know thy
oher villainies by her, has finished thy barbarous 

work. And I advise thee to trumpet forth everywhere,
how much in earnest thou art to marry her,
whether true or not. 
Thou mayest safely do it. She will not live to put
thee to the trial; and it will a little palliate for thy
enormous usage of her, and be a means to make mankind,
who know not what I know of the matter, herd
a little longer with thee, and forbear to hunt thee to
thy fellow-savages in the Libyan wilds and deserts. 
Your messenger found me at Edgware, expecting
to dinner with me several friends, whom I had invited
three days before. I sent apologies to them, as
in a case of life and death; and speeded to town to
the wicked woman's: For how knew I but shocking
attempts might be made upon her by the cursed
wretches; perhaps by your connivance, in order to
mortify her into your measures? 
Little knows the public what villainies are committed
by vile wretches, in these abominable houses, upon innocent
creatures drawn into their snares. 
Finding the Lady not there, I posted away to the
Officer's, altho' Sally told me, that she had been just
come from thence; and that she had refused to see her,
or (as she sent down word) any-body else; being resolved
to have the remainder of that Sunday to herself,
as it might, perhaps, be the last she should ever see. 
I had the same thing told me, when I got thither. 
I sent up to let her know, that I came with a commission
to set her at liberty. I was afraid of sending
up the name of a man known to be your friend. She
absolutely refused to see any man, however, for that
day, or to answer further to any-thing said from me. 
Having therefore informed myself of all that the
Officer, and is wife, and servant, could acquaint me
with, as well in relation to the horrid Arrest, as to
her behaviour, and the womens to her; and her ill
state of health; I went back to Sinclair's, as I will
still call her, and heard the three womens story: 

From all which, I am enabled to give you the following
shocking particulars: Which may serve till I can
see the unhappy Lady herself to-morrow, if then I
gain admittance to her. You will find, that I have
been very minute in my enquiries. 
Your villain it was that set the poor Lady, and had
the impudence to appear, and abet the Sheriff's Officers
in the cursed transaction. He thought, no doubt,
that he was doing the most acceptable service to his
blessed master. They had got a Chair; the head
ready up, as soon as Service was over. And as she
came out of the Church, at the door fronting Bedford
street, the Officers, stepping to her, whispered,
that they had an Action against her. 
She was terrified, trembled, and turned pale. 
Action! said she. What is that? —I have committed
no bad action! —Lord bless me! Men, what
mean you? 
That you are our prisoner, Madam. 
Prisoner, Sirs! —What—How—Why—What
have I done? 
You must go with us. Be pleased, Madam, to step
into this chair. 
With you! —With men! —Must go with men! —I
am not used to go with strange men! —Indeed you
must excuse me! 
We can't excuse you: We are Sheriff's Officers. 
We have a Writ against you. You must go with us,
and you shall know at whose Suit. 
Suit! said the charming innocent; I don't know
what you mean. Pray, men, don't lay hands upon
me; they offering to put her into the chair. I am
not used to be thus treated—I have done nothing to
deserve it. 
She then spied thy villain—O thou wretch, said
she, where is thy vile master? —Am I again to be
his prisoner? Help, good people! 
A croud had before begun to gather. 

My master is in the country, Madam, many miles
off. If you please to go with these men, they will
treat you civilly. 
The people were most of them struck with compassion. 
A fine young creature! —A thousand pities!
cried some. While some few threw out vile and
shocking reflections! But a gentleman interposed, and
demanded to see the fellows authority. 
They shewed it. Is your name Clarissa Harlowe,
Madam? said he. 
Yes, yes, indeed, ready to sink, my name was
Clarissa Harlowe: —But it is now Wretchedness! — 
Lord be merciful to me! what is to come next? 
You must go with these men, Madam, said the
gentleman: They have authority for what they do. 
He pitied her, and retired. 
Indeed you must, said one chairman. 
Indeed you must, said the other. 
Can nobody, joined in another gentleman, be applied
to, who will see that so fine a creature is not ill used? 
Thy villain answered, Orders were given particularly
for that. She had rich relations. She need but
ask and have. She would only be carried to the
Officer's house, till matters could be made up. The
people she had lodged with, loved her: But she had
left her lodgings privately. 
O! had she those tricks already? cried one or two. 
She heard not this—But said—Well, if I must go,
I must—I cannot resist—But I will not be carried to
the Woman's! —I will rather die at your feet, than
be carried to the Woman's. 
You won't be carried there, Madam, cried thy
fellow. 
Only to my house, Madam, said one of the Officers. 
Where is that? 
In High-Holborn, Madam. 
I know not where High-Holborn is: But any-where,
except to the Woman's. —But am I to go
with Men only? 

Looking about her, and seeing the three passages,
to wit, that leading to Henrietta-street, that to Kingstreet,
and the fore-right one, to Bedford-street,
crouded, she started—Any-where—Any-where, said
she, but to the Woman's! And stepping into the
chair, threw herself on the seat, in the utmost distress
and confusion—Carry me, carry me out of sight— 
Cover me—Cover me up—for ever—were her
words. 
Thy villain drew the curtains: She had not power: 
And they went away with her through a vast croud of
people. 
Here I must rest. I can write no more at present. 
Only, Lovelace, remember, All this was to a Clarissa!!! 
* * *
The unhappy Lady fainted away when she was
taken out of the chair at the Officer's house. 
Several people followed the chair to the very house,
which is in a wretched Court. Sally was there; and
satisfied some of the enquirers, that the young gentlewoman
would be exceedingly well used: And they
soon dispersed. 
Dorcas was also there; but came not in her sight. 
Sally, as a favour, offered to carry her to her former
lodgings: But she declared, they should carry her thither
a corpse, if they did. 
Very gentle usage the women boast of: So would
a vultur, could it speak, with the entrails of its prey
upon its rapacious talons. Of this you'll judge, from
what I have to recite. 
She asked, What was meant by this usage of her? 
People told me, said she, that I must go with the
men: —That they had authority to take me: So I
submitted. But now, what is to be the end of this
disgraceful violence? 
The end, said the vile Sally Martin, is, for honest
people to come at their own. 

Bless me! have I taken away any-thing that belongs
to those who have obtained this power over me? 
—I have left very valuable things behind me; but
have taken nothing away that is not my own. 
And who do you think, Miss Harlowe; for I understand,
said the cursed creature, you are not married; 
who do you think is to pay for your Board and
your Lodgings; such handsome Lodgings! for so long
a time as you were at Mrs. Sinclair's? 
Lord have mercy upon me! Miss Martin (I think
you are Miss Martin)! —And is this the cause of such
a disgraceful insult upon me in the open streets? 
And cause enough, Miss Harlowe (fond of gratifying
her jealous revenge, by calling her Miss)—One
hundred and fifty guineas, or pounds, is no small sum
to lose—And by a young creature, who would have
bilked her lodgings. 
You amaze me, Miss Martin! —What language do
you talk in? —Bilk my lodgings! —What is that? 
She stood astonished, and silent for a few moments. 
But recovering herself, and turning from her to
the window, she wrung her hands [The cursed Sally
shewed me how!]; and listing them up—Now,
Lovelace! Now indeed do I think I ought to forgive
thee! —But who shall forgive Clarissa Harlowe! — 
O my Sister! —O my Brother! —Tender mercies
were your cruelties to this! 
After a pause, her handkerchief drying up her
falling tears, she turned to Sally: Now, have I nothing
to do but acquiesce—Only let me say, That if
this Aunt of yours, This Mrs. Sinclair, or This
Man, This Mr. Lovelace, come near me; or if I
am carried to the horrid house (for that I suppose is
the design of this new outrage); God be merciful to
the poor Clarissa Harlowe! —Look to the consequence! 
—Look, I charge you, to the consequence! 
The vile wretch told her, It was not designed to 

carry her any-whither against her will: But, if it
were, they should take care not to be frighted again
by a penknife. 
She cast up her eyes to Heaven, and was silent— 
And went to the farthest corner of the room, and,
sitting down, threw her handkerchief over her face. 
Sally asked her several questions; but not answering
her, she told her, she would wait upon her by-and-by,
when she had found her speech. 
She ordered the people to press her to eat and
drink. She must be fasting—Nothing but her prayers
and tears, poor thing! were the merciless devil's
words, as she owned to me. —Dost think I did not
curse her? 
She went away; and, after her own dinner, returned. 
The unhappy Lady, by this devil's account of her,
then seemed either mortified into meekness, or to have
made a resolution not to be provoked by the insults of
this cursed creature. 
Sally enquired, in her presence, whether she had
eat or drank any-thing; and being told by the woman,
that she could not prevail upon her to taste a
morsel, or drink a drop, she said, This is wrong,
Miss Harlowe! Very wrong! —Your Religion, I
think, should teach you, that starving yourself is
Self-murder. 
She answered not. 
The wretch owned, she was resolved to make her
speak. 
She asked, If Mabell should attend her, till it were
seen what her friends would do for her, in discharge
of the debt? Mabell, said she, has not yet earned the
cloaths you were so good as to give her. 
Am I not worth an answer, Miss Harlowe? 
I would answer you (said the sweet Sufferer, without
any emotion) if I knew how. 
I have ordered pen, ink, and paper, to be brought 

you Miss Harlowe. There they are. I know you
love writing. You may write to whom you please. 
Your friend Miss Howe will expect to hear from you. 
I have no friend, said she. I deserve none. 
Rowland, for that is the Officer's name, told her,
She had friends enow to pay the debt, if she would
write. 
She would trouble nobody; she had no friends; 
was all they could get from her, while Sally staid: 
But yet spoken with a patience of spirit, as if she enjoyed
her griefs. 
The insolent creature went away, ordering them in
the Lady's hearing to be very civil to her, and to let
her want for nothing. Now had she, she owned, the
triumph of her heart over this haughty Beauty, who
kept them all at such distance in their own house! 
What thinkest thou, Lovelace, of this! This wretch's
triumph was over a Clarissa! 
About Six in the Evening, Rowland's wife pressed
her to drink Tea. She said, She had rather have a
glass of water; for her tongue was ready to cleave to
the roof of her mouth. 
The woman brought her a glass, and some bread
and butter. She tried to taste the latter; but could
not swallow it: But eagerly drank the water; lifting
up her eyes in thankfulness for that!!! 
The divine Clarissa, Lovelace—reduced to rejoice for
a cup of cold water!—By whom reduced! 
About nine o'clock she asked, If any-body were to
be her bedfellow? 
Their maid, if she pleased; or, as she was so weak
and ill, the girl should sit up with her, if she chose
she should. 
She chose to be alone both night and day, she said. 
But might she not be trusted with the keys of the
room where she was to lie down; for she should not
put off her cloaths! 
That, they told her, could not be. 

She was afraid not, she said. —But indeed she would
not get away, if she could. 
They told me, that they had but one bed, besides
that they lay in themselves (which they would fain have
had her accept of) and besides that their maid lay in,
in a garret, which they called a hole of a garret: And
that that one bed was the prisoner's bed; which they
made several apologies to me about. I suppose it is
shocking enough. 
But the Lady would not lie in theirs. Was she not a
prisoner, she said? —Let her have the prisoners room. 
Yet they owned that she started, when she was conducted
thither. But recovering herself, Very well,
said she—Why should not all be of a piece? —Why
should not my wretchedness be complete? 
She found fault, that all the fastenings were on the
outside, and none within; and said, She could not
trust herself in a room, where others could come in
at their pleasure, and she not go out. She had not
been used to it!!! 
Dear, dear Soul!—My tears flow as I write. — 
Indeed, Lovelace, she had not been used to such treatment! 
They assured her, that it was as much their duty
to protect her from other persons insults, as from
escaping herself. 
Then they were people of more honour, she said,
than she had of late been used so. 
She asked, If they knew Mr. Lovelace? 
No, was their answer. 
Have you heard of him? 
No. 
Well then, you may be good sort of folks in your
way. 
Pause here a moment, Lovelace!—and reflect—I
must. 
* * *
Again they asked her, If they should send any
word to her lodgings? 

These are my lodgings now; are they not?—was
all her answer. 
She sat up in a chair all night, the back against the
door; having, it seems, thrust a broken piece of a
poker thro' the staples where a bolt had been on the
inside. 
* * *
Next morning Sally and Polly both went to visit
her. 
She had begged of Sally the day before, that she
might not see Mrs. Sinclair, nor Dorcas, nor the
broken-toothed servant, called William. 
Polly would have ingratiated herself with her; and
pretended to be concerned for her misfortunes. But
she took no more notice of her than of the other. 
They asked, If she had any commands? —If she
had, she only need to mention what they were, and
she should be obeyed. 
None at all, she said. 
How did she like the people of the house? Were
they civil to her? 
Pretty well, considering she had no money to give
them. 
Would she accept of any money? They could put
it to her account. 
She would contract no debts. 
Had she any money about her? 
She meekly put her hand in her pocket, and pulled
out half a guinea, and a little silver. Yes, I have a
little. —But here should be fees paid, I believe. 
Should there not? I have heard of entrance-money to
compound for not being stript. But these people are
very civil people, I fansy; for they have not offered
to take away my cloaths. 
They have orders to be civil to you. 
It is very kind. 
But we two will bail you, Miss, if you will go back
with us to Mrs. Sinclair's. 

Not for the world! 
Hers are very handsome apartments. 
The fitter for those who own them! 
These are very sad ones. 
The fitter for me! 
You may be very happy yet, Miss, if you will. 
I hope I shall. 
If you refuse to eat or drink, we will give bail, and
take you with us. 
Then I will try to eat and drink. Any-thing but
go with you. 
Will you not send to your new lodgings? The
people will be frighted. 
So they will, if I send. So they will, if they know
where I am. 
But have you no things to send for from thence? 
There is what will pay for their lodgings and trouble: 
I shall not lessen their security. 
But perhaps Letters or Messages may be left for you
there. 
I have very few friends; and to those I have, I
will spare the mortification of knowing what has befallen
me. 
We are surprised at your indifference, Miss Harlowe. 
Will you not write to nay of your friends? 
No. 
Why, you don't think of tarrying here always? 
I shall not live always. 
Do you think you are to stay here as long as you
live? 
That's as it shall please God, and those who have
brought me hither. 
Should you like to be at liberty? 
I am miserable! —What is Liberty to the miserable,
but to be more miserable! 
How miserable, Miss? —You may make yourself
as happy as you please. 
I hope you are both happy. 

We are. 
May you be more and more happy! 
But we wish you to be so too. 
I never shall be of your opinion, I believe, as to
what happiness is. 
What do you take our opinion of happiness to be? 
To live at Mrs. Sinclair's. 
Perhaps, said Sally, we were once as squeamish and
narrow-minded as you. 
How came it over with you? 
Because we saw the ridiculousness of Prudery. 
Do you come hither to persuade me to hate Prudery,
as you call it, as much as you do? 
We came to offer our service to you. 
It is out of your power to serve me. 
Perhaps not. 
It is not in my inclination to trouble you. 
You may be worse offered. 
Perhaps I may. 
You are mighty short, Miss. 
As I wish your visit to be, Ladies. 
They owned to me, that they cracked their fans,
and laughed. 
Adieu, perverse Beauty! 
Your servant, Ladies. 
Adieu, Haughty-airs! 
You see me humbled— 
As you deserve, Miss Harlowe. Pride will have
a fall. 
Better fall, with what you call pride, than stand
with meanness. 
Who does! 
I had once a better opinion of you, Miss Horton! — 
Indeed you should not insult the miserable. 
Neither should the miserable, said Sally, insult
people for their civility. 
I should be sorry if I did. 
Mrs. Sinclair shall attend you by-and-by, to know
if you have any commands for her. 

I have no wish for any liberty, but that of refusing
to see her, and one more person. 
What we came for, was to know if you had any
proposals to make for your enlargement? 
Then, it seems, the Officer put in. You have very
good friends, Madam, I understand. Is it not better
that you make it up? Charges will run high. A hundred
and fifty guineas are easier paid than two hundred. 
Let these Ladies bail you, and go along with them; 
or write to your friends to make it up. 
Sally said, There is a gentleman who saw you taken,
and was so much moved for you, Miss Harlowe, that
he would gladly advance the money for you, and leave
you to pay it when you can. 
See, Lovelace, what cursed devils these are! This
is the way, we know, that many an innocent heart
is thrown upon Keeping, and then upon the Town. 
But for these wretches thus to go to work with such
an Angel as this! —How glad would have been the
devilish Sally, to have had the least handle to report
to thee a listening ear, or patient spirit, upon this
hint! 
Sir, said she, with high indignation, to the Officer,
did not you say last night, that it was as much your
business to protect me from the insults of others, as
from escaping? —Cannot I be permitted to see whom
I please; and to refuse admittance to those I like
not? 
You creditors, Madam, will expect to see you. 
Not, if I declare I will not treat with them. 
Then, Madam, you will be sent to prison. 
Prison, friend! —What dost thou call thy house! 
Not a prison, Madam. 
Why these iron-barred windows then? Why these
double locks, and bolts all on the Outside, none on
the In? 
And down she dropt into her chair, and they
could not get another word from her. She threw her 

handkerchief over her face, as once before, which
was soon wet with tears; and grievously, they own,
she sobbed. 
Gentle treatment, Lovelace! —Perhaps thou, as well
as these wretches, wilt think it so! 
Sally then ordered a dinner, and said, They would
soon be back again, and see that she eat and drank,
as a good Christian should, comporting herself to her
condition, and making the best of it. 
What has not this charming Creature suffered,
what has she not gone thro', in these last three months,
that I know of! —Who would think such a delicately
framed person could have sustained what she
has sustained? We sometimes talk of Bravery, of
Courage, of Fortitude! —Here they are in perfection! 
—Such Bravoes as Thou and I should never have been
able to support ourselves under half the persecutions,
the disappointments, and contumelies, that she has
met with; but, like Cowards, should have slid out of
the world, basely, by some back-door; that is to say,
by a Sword, by a Pistol, by a Halter, or Knife! — 
But here is a fine-principled woman, who, by dint of
this noble consideration, as I imagine [What else can
support her?] —That she has not deserved the evils she
contends with; and that this world is designed but as a
transitory State of Probation; and that she is travelling
to another, and better; puts up with all the hardships
of the journey; and is not to be diverted from her
course by the attacks of thieves and robbers, or any
other terrors and difficulties; being assured of an ample
Reward at the end of it. 
If thou thinkest this reflection uncharacteristic from
a companion and friend of thine, imaginest thou, that
I profited nothing by my long attendance on my Uncle
in his dying state; and from the pious reflections of
the good Clergyman, who, day by day, at the poor
man's own request, visited and prayed by him? —And
could I have another such instance as this, to bring all
these reflections home to me? 

Then who can write of good persons, and of good
subjects, and be capable of admiring them, and not be
made serious for the time? And hence may we gather,
what a benefit to the morals of men the keeping of
good company must be; while those who keep only
bad, must necessarily more and more harden, and be
hardened. 
* * *
'Tis twelve of the clock, Sunday night—I can think
of nothing but of this excellent creature. Her distresses
fill my head and my heart. I was drowsy for a quarter
of an hour; but the fit is gone off. And I will
continue the melancholy subject from the information
of these wretches. Enough, I dare say, will arise
in the visit I shall make, if admitted to-morrow, to
send by thy servant, as to the way I am likely to find
her in. 
After the women had left her, she complained of her
head and her heart; and seemed terrified with apprehensions
of being carried once more to Sinclair's. 
Refusing any-thing for breakfast, Mrs. Rowland
came up to her, and told her (as these wretches owned
they had ordered her, for fear she should starve herself)
That she must and should have Tea, and bread
and butter: And that, as she had friends who could
support her, if she wrote to them, it was a wrong
thing, both for herself and them, to starve herself
thus. 
If it be for your own sakes, said she, that is another
thing: Let coffee, or tea, or chocolate, or what you
will, be got: And put down a chicken to my account
every day, if you please, and eat it yourselves. I
will taste it, if I can. I would do nothing to hinder
you. I have friends will pay you liberally, when they
know I am gone. 
They wondered, they told her, at her strange composure
in such distresses. 
They were nothing, she said, to what she had suffered 

already from the vilest of all men. The disgrace
of seizing her in the street; multitudes of people
about her; shocking imputations wounding her ears; 
had indeed been very affecting to her. But that was
over. —Every-thing soon would! —And she should be
still more composed, were it not for the apprehensions
of seeing one man, and one woman; and being tricked
or forced back to the vilest house in the world. 
Then were it not better to give way to the two gentlewomens
offer to bail her? —They could tell her, it
was a very kind proffer; and what was not to be met
with every day. 
She believed so. 
The Ladies might, possibly, dispense with her
going back to the house to which she had such an antipathy. 
Then the compassionate gentleman, who
was inclined to make it up with her creditors on her
own bond—it was strange to them she hearkened not
to so generous a proposal. 
Did the two Ladies tell you who the gentleman
was? —Or, Did they say any more on that subject? 
Yes, they did; and hinted to me, said the woman,
that you had nothing to do, but to receive a visit from
the gentleman, and the money, they believed, would
be laid down on your own Bond or Note. 
She was startled. 
I charge you, said she, as you will answer it one day
to my friends, that you bring no gentleman into my
company. I charge you don't. If you do, you
know not what may be the consequence. 
They apprehended no bad consequence, they said,
in doing their duty: And if she knew not her own
good, her friends would thank them for taking any
innocent steps to serve her, tho' against her will. 
Don't push me upon extremities, man! —Don't
make me desperate, woman! —I have no small difficulty,
notwithstanding the seeming composure you
just now took notice of, to bear, as I ought to bear, 

the evils I suffer. But if you bring a man or men to
me, be the pretence what it will— 
She stopt there, and looked so earnestly, and so
wildly, they said, that they did not know but she
would do some harm to herself, if they disobeyed her; 
and that would be a sad thing in their house, and
might be their ruin. They therefore promised, that
no man should be brought to her, but by her own
consent. 
Mrs. Rowland prevailed on her to drink a dish of
tea, and taste some bread and butter, about eleven on
Saturday morning: Which she probably did, to have
an excuse not to dine with the women when they returned. 
But she would not quit her prison-room, as she called
it, to go into their parlour. 
“Unbarred windows, and a lightsomer apartment,
she said, had too chearful an appearance for her
mind.” 
A shower falling, as she spoke, What, said she,
looking up, do the Elements weep for me? 
At another time, “The light of the Sun was irksome
to her. The Sun seemed to shine in to mock
her woes. 
“Methought, added she, the Sun darting in, and
gilding these iron bars, plays upon me, like the two
women, who came to insult my haggard looks, by
the word Beauty; and my dejected heart, by the
word Haughty-airs!” 
Sally came again at dinner-time, to see how she fared,
as she told her; and that she did not starve herself: 
And, as she wanted to have some talk with her, if she
gave her leave, she would dine with her. 
I cannot eat. 
You must try, Miss Harlowe. 
And, dinner being ready just then, she offered her
hand, and desired her to walk down. 
No; she would not stir out of her prison-room. 

These sullen airs won't do, Miss Harlowe: Indeed
they won't. 
She was silent. 
You will have harder usage than any you have ever
yet known, I can tell you, if you come not into some
humour to make matters up. 
She was still silent. 
Come, Miss, walk down to dinner. Let me entreat
you, do. Miss Horton is below: She was once
your favourite. 
She waited for an answer: But received none. 
We came to make some proposals to you, for your
good; tho' you affronted us so lately. And we
would not let Mrs. Sinclair come in person, because
we thought to oblige you. 
That is indeed obliging. 
Come, give me your hand, Miss Harlowe: You
are obliged to me, I can tell you That: And let us
go down to Miss Horton. 
Excuse me: I will not stir out of this room. 
Would you have me and Miss Horton dine in this
filthy bed-room? 
It is not a bed-room to me. I have not been in
bed; nor will, while I am here. 
And yet you care not, as I see, to leave the house. 
—And so you won't go down, Miss Harlowe? 
I won't, except I am forced to it. 
Well, well, let it alone. I sha'n't ask Miss Horton
to dine in this room, I assure you. I will send up
a plate. 
And away the little saucy toad fluttered down. 
When they had dined, up they came together. 
Well, Miss, you would not eat any-thing, it
seems? —Very pretty sullen airs these! —No wonder
the honest gentleman had such a hand with you. 
She only held up her hands and eyes; the tears
trickling down her cheeks. 

Insolent devils! —How much more cruel and insulting
are bad women, even than bad men! 
Methinks, Miss, said Sally, you are a little soily,
to what we have seen you. Pity such a nice Lady
should not have changes of apparel! Why won't you
send to your lodgings for linen, at least? 
I am not nice now. 
Miss looks well and clean in any-thing, said Polly. 
But, dear Madam, why won't you send to your
lodgings? Were it but in kindness to the people? 
They must have a concern about you. And your
Miss Howe will wonder what's become of you; for,
no doubt, you correspond. 
She turned from them, and, to herself, said, Too
much! Too much! —She tossed her handkerchief, wet
before with her tears, from her, and held her apron
to her eyes. 
Don't weep, Miss! said the vile Polly. 
Yet do, cried the viler Sally, if it be a relief. 
Nothing, as Mr. Lovelace once told me, dries sooner
than tears. For once I too wept mightily. 
I could not bear the recital of this with patience. 
Yet I cursed them not so much as I should have done,
had I not had a mind to get from them all the particulars
of their gentle treatment: And this for two
reasons; the one, that I might stab thee to the heart
with the repetition; the other, that I might know
upon what terms I am likely to see the unhappy Lady
to-morrow. 
Well, but, Miss Harlowe, cried Sally, do you
think these forlorn airs pretty? You are a good
Christian, child. Mrs. Rowland tells me, she has
got you a Bible-book—O there it lies! —I make no
doubt, but you have doubled down the useful places,
as honest Matt. Prior says. 
Then rising, and taking it up—Ay, so you have— 
The Book of Job! One opens naturally here, I
see—My mamma made me a fine bible-scholar. — 

Ecclesiasticus too! —That's Apocrypha, as they call
it—You see, Miss Horton, I know something of the
book. 
They proposed once more to bail her, and to go
home with them. A motion which she received with
the same indignation as before. 
Sally told her, That she had written in a very favourable
manner, in her behalf, to you; and that she
every hour expected an answer; and made no doubt,
that you would come up with the messenger, and generously
pay the whole debt, and ask her pardon for
neglecting it. 
This disturbed her so much, that they feared she
would have fallen into fits. She could not bear your
name, she said. She hoped, she should never see you
more: And were you to intrude yourself, dreadful
consequences might follow. 
Surely, they said, she would be glad to be released
from her confinement. 
Indeed she should, now they had begun to alarm
her with his name, who was the author of all her
woes: And who, she now saw plainly, gave way to
this new outrage, in order to bring her to his own
infamous terms. 
Why then, they asked, would she not write to her
friends, to pay Mrs. Sinclair's demand? 
Because she hoped she should not long trouble anybody; 
and because she knew, that the payment of
the money, if she were able to pay it, was not
what was aimed at. 
Sally owned, that she told her, That, truly, she
had thought herself as well descended, and as well educated,
as herself, tho' not entitled to such considerable
fortunes. And had the impudence to insist upon it
to me to be truth. 
She had the insolence to add, to the Lady, That
she had as much reason as she, to expect Mr. Lovelace
would marry her; he having contracted to do so 

before he knew Miss Clarissa Harlowe: And that she
had it under his hand and seal too—or else he had not
obtained his end: Therefore it was not likely she
should be so officious as to do his work against herself,
if she thought Mr. Lovelace had designs upon
her, like what she presumed to hint at: That, for her
part, her only view was, to procure liberty to a young
gentlewoman, who made those things grievous to her,
which would not be made such a rout about by anybody
else—and to procure the payment of a just debt
to her friend Mrs. Sinclair. 
She besought them to leave her. She wanted not
these instances, she said, to convince her of the company
she was in: And told them, that, to get rid of
such visitors, and of the still worse she was apprehensive
of, she would write to one friend to raise the
money for her; tho' it would be death for her to do
so; because that friend could not do it without her
Mother, in whose eye it would give a selfish appearance
to a friendship that was above all sordid alloys. 
They advised her to write out of hand. 
But how much must I write for? What is the sum? 
Should I not have had a bill delivered me? God
knows, I took not your lodgings. But he that could
treat me as he has done, could do this! 
Don't speak against Mr. Lovelace, Miss Harlowe. 
He is a man I greatly esteem [Cursed toad!]. And,
'bating that he will take his advantage, where he can,
of Us silly credulous women, he is a man of honour. 
She lifted up her hands and eyes, instead of speaking: 
And well she might! For any words she could
have used, could not have expressed the anguish she
must feel, on being comprehended in the US. 
She must write for one hundred and fifty guineas,
at least: Two hundred, if she were short of money,
might as well be written for. 
Mrs. Sinclair, she said, had all her cloaths. Let
them be sold, fairly sold, and the money go as far as 

it would go. She had also a few other valuables; but
no money (none at all) but the poor half guinea, and
the little silver they had seen. She would give Bond
to pay all that her apparel, and the other matters she
had, would fall short of. She had great effects belonging
to her of right. Her bond would, and must,
be paid, were it for a thousand pounds. But her
cloaths she should never want. She believed, if not
too much undervalued, those, and her few valuables,
would answer every-thing. She wished for no surplus,
but to discharge the last expences; and forty shillings
would do as well for those as forty pounds. “Let
my Ruin, said she, lifting up her eyes, be LARGE! 
Let it be COMPLETE, in this life! —For a composition,
let it be COMPLETE”—And there she stopped. 
The wretches could not help wishing to me for the
opportunity of making such a purchase for their own
wear. How I cursed them! and, in my heart, thee! 
—But too probable, thought I, that this vile Sally
Martin may hope [Tho' thou art incapable of it] that
her Lovelace, as she has the assurance, behind thy
back, to call thee, may present her with some of the
poor Lady's spoils! 
Will not Mrs. Sinclair, proceeded she, think my
cloaths a security, till they can be sold? They are very
good cloaths. A suit or two but just put on, as it
were; never worn. They cost much more than is
demanded of me. My Father loved to see me fine. — 
All shall go. But let me have the particulars of her
demand. I suppose I must pay for my destroyer [that
was her well-adapted word!] and his servants, as well
as for myself. —I am content to do so—Indeed I am
content to do so—I am above wishing, that any-body,
who could thus act, should be so much as expostulated
with, as to the justice and equity of this payment. If
I have but enough to pay the demand, I shall be satisfied; 
and will leave the baseness of such an action
as this, as an aggravation of a guilt which I thought
could not be aggravated. 

I own, Lovelace, I have malice in this particularity,
in order to sting thee to the heart. And, let me ask
thee, What now thou canst think of thy barbarity,
thy unprecedented barbarity, in having reduced a
person of her rank, fortune, talents, and virtue, so
low? 
The wretched women, it must be owned, act but
in their profession; a profession thou hast been the
principal means of reducing these two to act in. And
they know what thy designs have been, and how far
prosecuted. It is, in their opinions, using her gently,
that they have forborn to bring to her the woman so
justly odious to her; and that they have not threatened
her with the introducing to her strange men: Nor yet
brought into her company their Spirit-breakers, and
Humbling-drones (fellows not allowed to carry stings)
to trace and force her back to their detested house; and,
when there, into all their measures. 
Till I came, they thought thou wouldst not be displeased
at any-thing she suffered, that could help to
mortify her into a state of shame and disgrace; and
bring her to comply with thy views, when thou
shouldst come to release her from these wretches, as
from a greater evil than cohabiting with thee. 
When thou considerest these things, thou wilt make
no difficulty of believing, that this their own account
of their behaviour to this admirable woman has been
far short of their insults: And the less, when I tell
thee, that, all together, their usage had such effects
upon her, that they left her in violent hysterics; ordering
an Apothecary to be sent for, if she should continue
in them, and be worse; and particularly (as
they had done from the first) that they kept out of her
way any edged or pointed instrument; especially a
penknife; which, pretending to mend a pen, they
said, she might ask for. 
At twelve Saturday night, Rowland sent to tell 

them, that she was so ill, that he knew not what might
be the issue; and wished her out of his house. 
And this made them as heartily wish to hear from
you. For their messenger, to their great surprize,
was not then returned from M. Hall. And they
were sure he must have reached that place by Friday
night. 
Early on Sunday morning, both devils went to see
how she did. They had such an account of her weakness,
lowness, and anguish, that they forbore (out of
compassion, they said, finding their visits so disagreeable
to her) to see her. But their apprehension of
what might be the issue was, no doubt, their principal
consideration: Nothing else could have softened such
flinty bosoms. 
They sent for the Apothecary Rowland had had to
her, and gave him, and Rowland, and his wife and
maid, strict orders, many times repeated, for the utmost
care to be taken of her—No doubt, with an
Old-Bailey forecast. And they sent up to let her
know what orders they had given: But that, understanding
she had taken something to compose herself,
they would not disturb her. 
She had scrupled, it seems, to admit the Apothecary's
visit over-night, because he was a MAN. 
Nor could she be prevailed upon to see him, till they
pleaded their own safety to her. 
They went again, from church [Lord, Bob, these
creatures go to church!]: But she sent them down
word, that she must have all the remainder of the day
to herself. 
When I first came, and told them of thy execrations
for what they had done, and joined my own to them,
they were astonished. The Mother said, she had
thought she had known Mr. Lovelace better; and expected
thanks, and not curses. 
While I was them, came back halting and
cursing, most horribly, their messenger; by reason 

of the ill-usage he had received from you, instead of
the reward he had been taught to expect for the supposed
good news that he carried down. —A pretty
fellow! art thou not, to abuse people for the consequences
of thy own faults? 
&dotup;Dorcas, whose acquaintance this fellow is, and
who recommended him for the journey, had conditioned
with him, it seems, for a share in the expected
bounty from you. Had she been to have had her
share made good, I wish thou hadst broken every
bone in his skin.&dotup; 
Under what shocking disadvantages, and with this
addition to them, that I am thy Friend and Intimate,
am I to make a visit to this unhappy Lady to-morrow
morning! In thy name too! —Enough to be refused,
that I am of a Sex, to which, for thy sake, she has so
justifiable an aversion: Nor, having such a tyrant of
a Father, and such an implacable Brother, has she
reason to make an exception in favour of any of it on
their accounts. 
It is Three o'clock. I will close here; and take a
little rest: What I have written will be a proper preparative for what shall offer by-and by. 
Thy servant is not to return without a Letter, he
tells me; and that thou expectest him back in the
morning. Thou hast fellows enough where thou art,
at thy command. If I find any difficulty in seeing the
Lady, thy messenger shall post away with this. — 
Let him look to broken bones, and other consequences,
if what he carries answer not thy expectation. 
But, if I am admitted, thou shalt have this and the
result of my audience both together. In the former
case, thou mayest send another servant to wait the
next advices, from 
J. Belford. 