



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Febr. 27. 
What odd heads some people have! —Miss
Clarissa Harlowe to be sacrificed in marriage
to Mr. Roger Solmes! Astonishing! 
I must not, you say, give my advice in favour of
this man! —You now half-convince me, my dear,
that you are ally'd to the family that could think of
so preposterous a match, or you could never have
had the least notion of my advising in his favour. 
Ask me for his picture: You know I have a good
hand at drawing an ugly likeness. But I'll see a little
farther first: For who knows what may happen; 
since matters are in such a train; and since you have
not the courage to oppose so overwhelming a torrent. 
You ask me to help you to a little of my spirit. 
Are you in earnest? But it will not now, I doubt,
do you service. —It will not sit naturally upon you. 
You are your mamma's girl, think what you will,
and have violent spirits to contend with. Alas! my
dear, you should have borrowed some of mine a
little sooner;—that is to say, before you had given
the management of your estate into the hands of those
who think they have a prior claim to it. What, tho' 

a father's? —Has not that father two elder children? 
—And do they not both bear his stamp and image,
more than you do? —Pray, my dear, call me not to
account for this free question; lest your application of
my meaning prove to be as severe as that. 
Now I have launch'd out a little, indulge me one
word more in the same strain: I will be decent, I promise
you. —I think you might have known, that
Avarice and Envy are two passions that are not to
be satisfy'd, the one by giving, the other by the envied
person's continuing to deserve and excel. —Fuel,
fuel both, all the world over, to flames insatiate and
devouring. 
But since you ask for my opinion, you must tell
me all you know or surmise of their inducements. 
And if you will not forbid me to make extracts from
your letters, for the entertainment of my cousin in the
little island, who longs to hear more of your affairs,
it will be very obliging. 
But you are so tender of some people, who have no
tenderness for any body but themselves, that I must
conjure you to speak out. Remember, that a friendship
like ours admits of no reserves. You may trust
my impartiality: It would be an affront to your own
judgment, if you did not: For do you not ask my
advice? And have you not taught me, that friendship
should never give a bias against justice? —Justify
them therefore, if you can. Let us see if there be any
sense, whether sufficient reason or not, in their choice. 
At present, I cannot (and yet I know a good deal of
your family) have any conception, how all of them,
your mamma in particular, and your aunt Hervey, can
join with the rest against judgments given. As to
some of the others, I cannot wonder at any thing
they do, or attempt to do, where Self is concern'd. 
You ask, Why may not your brother be first engag'd
in wedlock? —I'll tell you why: His temper and
his arrogance are too well known to induce women he 

would aspire to, to receive his addresses, notwithstanding
his great independent acquisitions, and still
greater prospects. Let me tell you, my dear, those
acquisitions have given him more pride, than reputation. 
To me he is the most intolerable creature that
I ever saw. The treatment you blame, he merited
from one whom he would have addressed with the air
of a person intending to confer, rather than hoping to
receive a favour. I ever loved to mortify proud and
insolent spirits. What, think you, makes me bear
Hickman near me, but that the man is humble, and
knows his distance? 
As to your question, Why your elder sister may
not be first provided for? I answer, Because she must
have no man, but who has a great and clear estate; 
that's one thing. Another is, Because she has a
younger sister: —Pray, my dear, be so good as to tell
me, what man of a great and clear estate would think
of that elder sister, while the younger were single? 
You are all too rich to be happy, child. For must
not each of you, by the constitutions of your family,
marry to be still richer? People who know in what
their main excellence consists are not to be blam'd (are
they?) for cultivating and improving what they think
most valuable? Is true happiness any part of your family-view? 
—So far from it, that none of your family, but
yourself, could be happy were they not rich. So let
them fret on, grumble and grudge, and accumulate; 
and wondering what ails them that they have not happiness
when they have riches, think the cause is want
of more; and so go on heaping up, till death, as greedy
an accumulator as themselves, gathers them into his
garner! 
Well then once more, I say, do you, my dear, tell
me what you know of their avowed and general motives; 
and I will tell you more than you will tell me of
their failings! Your aunt Hervey, you say, (a)  has told
you: —Why, as I hinted above, must I ask you to let 

me know them; when you condescend to ask my advice
on the occasion? 
That they prohibit your corresponding with me, is
a wisdom I neither wonder at, nor blame them for: 
Since it is an evidence to me, that they know their
own folly: And if they do, is it strange that they
should be afraid to trust another's judgment upon it? 
I am glad you have found out a way to correspond
with me. I approve it much. I shall more, if this
first tryal of it proves successful. But should it not,
and should it fall into their hands, it would not concern
me, but for your sake. 
We had heard before you wrote, that all was not right
between your relations and you, at your coming home: 
That Mrs. Solmes visited you, and that with a prospect
of success. But I concluded, the mistake lay in the person; 
and that his address was to Miss Arabella: And indeed
had she been as good-natur'd as your plump ones
generally are, I should have thought her too good for
him by half: —Thought I, this must be the thing; and
my beloved friend is sent for to advise and assist in her
nuptial preparations. Who knows, said I to my mamma,
but that, when the man has thrown aside his yellow,
full-buckled peruke, and his broad-brimm'd beaver,
both of which I suppose were Sir Oliver's Best of
long standing, he may cut a tolerable figure dangling
to church with Miss Bell! —The woman, as she observes,
should excel the man in features: And where
can she match so well for a foil? 
I indulged this surmize against rumour, because I
could not believe, that the absurdest people in England
could be so very absurd, as to think of this man
for you. 
We heard moreover, that you received no visitors: 
I could assign no reason for this; except that the preparations
for your sister were to be private, and the
ceremony sudden: Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph
were with me to inquire what I knew of this; and of 

your not being at church, either morning or afternoon,
the Sunday after your return from us; to the disappointment
of a little hundred of your admirers, to use
their words. It was easy for me to guess the reason to
be what you confirm: —Their apprehensions that
Lovelace would be there, and attempt to wait on you
home. 
My mamma takes very kindly your compliments in
your letter to her. Her words upon reading it were; 
‘Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an admirable young lady: 
Where-ever she goes, she confers a favour: Whomever
she leaves, she fills with regret.’ —And then a
little comparative reflection; ‘O my Nancy, that you
had a little of her sweet obligingness!’ 
No matter. The praise was yours. You are me; 
and I enjoy'd it. The more enjoy'd it, because—shall
I tell you the truth? —Because I think myself as well
as I am—Were it but for this reason; That had I
twenty brother James's, and twenty sister Bell's, not
one of them, nor all of them join'd together, would
dare to treat me, as yours presume to treat you. The
person who will bear much shall have much to bear,
all the world thro': 'Tis your own sentiment, grounded
upon the strongest instance that can be given in your
own family; tho' you have so little improv'd by it. 
The result is this, That I am fitter for this world
than you: You for the next than me;—that's the difference. 
—But long, long, for my sake, and for hundreds
of sakes, may it be, before you quit us for company
more congenial, and more worthy of you!— 
I communicated to my mamma the account you
give of your strange reception; also what a horrid
wretch they have found out for you; and the compulsory
treatment they give you. It only set her on
magnifying her lenity to me, on my tyrannical behaviour,
as she will call it (mothers must have their way,
you know), to the man she so warmly recommends,
against whom, it seems, there can be no just exception; 

and expatiating upon the complaisance I owe her for
her indulgence. So I believe I must communicate to
her nothing farther,—especially as I know she would
condemn the correspondence between us, and That
between you and Lovelace, as a clandestine and undutiful
thing: For duty implicit is her cry. And moreover
she lends a pretty open ear to the preachments of
that starch old bachelor your uncle Antony; and for
an example to her daughter, would be more careful
how she takes your part, be the cause ever so just. 
Yet is not this right policy neither. For people who
will allow nothing, will be granted nothing: In other
words, those who aim at carrying too many points
will not be able to carry any. 
But can you divine, my dear, what that old preachment-making
plump-hearted soul, your uncle Antony,
means, by his frequent amblings hither? —There is
such smirking and smiling between my mamma and
him! Such mutual praises of œconomy; and ‘That is
my way!’—and ‘This I do!’—and ‘I am glad it
has your approbation, Sir!’—and ‘You look into
every thing, Madam!’ —‘Nothing would be done,
if I did not!’ —Such exclamations against servants: 
Such exaltings of self! —And dear-heart, and good-lack!
—and 'las-a-day! —And now and then their conversation
sinking into a whispering accent, if I come
cross them! —I'll tell you, my dear, I don't above
half like it. 
Only that these old bachelors usually take as many
years to resolve upon matrimony, as they can reasonably
expect to live; or I should be ready to fire
upon his visits; and recommend Mr. Hickman, as a
much properer man, to my mamma's acceptance: 
For what he wants in years, he makes up in gravity: 
And if you will not chide me, I will say, That there
is a primness in both, especially when the man has
presumed too much with me upon my mamma's favour
for him, and is under discipline on that account, as 

makes them seem near of kin: And then in contemplation
of my sauciness, and what they both bear from
it, they sigh away!—and seem so mightily to compassionate
each other, that if Pity be but one remove
from Love, I am in no danger, while they both are in
a great deal, and don't know it. 
Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with
your grave airs: So in for the lamb, as the saying is,
in for the sheep; and do you yourself look about you: 
For I'll have a pull with you, by way of being aforehand. 
Hannibal, we read, always advised to attack
the Romans upon their own territories. 
You are pleased to say, and upon your word too! — 
That your regards (a mighty quaint word for affections)
are not so much engag'd, as some of your friends
suppose, to another person. What need you give one
to imagine, my dear, that the last month or two has
been a period extremely favourable to that other person!
—whom it has made an obliger of the niece for
his patience with the uncles. 
But, to pass that by,—So much engag'd! —How
much, my dear? Shall I infer? Some of your friends
suppose a great deal. —You seem to own a little. 
Don't be angry. It is all fair: Because you have
not acknowledg'd to me That little. People, I have
heard you say, who affect secrets always excite curiosity. 
But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon
your averrment, as if recollection had given you a
doubt. —You know not yourself, if they be [so much
engag'd]. Was it necessary to say This, to me?— 
and to say it upon your word too? —But you know
best. —Yet you don't neither, I believe. For a beginning
Love is acted by a subtile spirit; and oftentimes
discovers itself to a bystander, when the person
possess'd (why should I not call it possess'd?) knows
not it has such a demon. 
But further you, say, what PREFERABLE favour 

you may have for him, to any other person, is owing
more to the usage he has received, and for your sake
borne, than to any personal consideration. 
This is generously said. It is in character. But,
O my friend, depend upon it, you are in danger. 
Depend upon it, whether you know it or not, you
are a little in for't. Your native generosity and greatness
of mind indanger you: All your friends, by fighting
against him with impolitic violence, fight for him. 
And Lovelace, my life for yours, notwithstanding
all his veneration and assiduities, has seen further than
that veneration and those assiduities (so well calculated
to your meridian) will let him own he has seen. — 
Has seen, in short, that his work is doing for him more
effectually than he could do it for himself. And have
you not before now said, That nothing is so penetrating
as the vanity of a lover; since it makes the
person who has it frequently see in his own favour
what is not; and hardly ever fail of observing what is. 
And who says Lovelace wants vanity? 
In short, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from
the easiness of his heart and behaviour, that he has
seen more than I have seen; more than you think
could be seen;—more than I believe you yourself
know, or else you would have let me know it. 
Already, in order to restrain him from resenting the
indignities he has received, and which are daily offer'd
him, he has prevailed upon you to correspond with
him privately. I know he has nothing to boast of
from what you have written. But is not his inducing
you to receive his letters, and to answer them, a great
point gain'd? —By your insisting, that he should keep
this correspondence private, it appears, that there is
one secret, that you do not wish the world should
know: And he is master of that secret. He is indeed
himself, as I may say, that secret! —What an intimacy
does this beget for the lover! —How is it distancing
the parent!— 

Yet who, as things are situated, can blame you? — 
Your condescension has no doubt hitherto prevented
great mischiefs: It must be continued, for the same
reasons, while the cause remains. You are drawn
in by a perverse fate, against inclination: But custom,
with such laudable purposes, will reconcile the inconveniency,
and make an inclination. —And I would
advise you (as you would wish to manage, on an occasion
so critical with that prudence which governs all
your actions) not to be afraid of entering upon a close
examination into the true springs and grounds of this
your generosity to that happy man. 
It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that,
on inquiry, it will come out to be LOVE. —Don't
start, my dear! —Has not your man himself had natural
philosophy enough to observe already to your
aunt Hervey, that Love takes the deepest root in the
steadiest minds? The duce take his sly penetration, I
was going to say; for this was six or seven weeks ago. 
I have been tinctured, you know. Nor, on the
coolest reflection, could I account how, and when,
the jaundice began: But had been over head and ears,
as the saying is, but for some of that advice from you,
which I now return you. Yet my man was not half
so—So what, my dear? —To be sure Lovelace is a
charming fellow. —And were he only—But I will not
make you glow, as you read! —Upon my word, I
won't. —Yet, my dear, don't you find at your heart
somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, throb, as
you read just here? —If you do, don't be asham'd to
own it. —It is your generosity, my love! that's all. — 
But, as the Roman augur said, Cæsar, beware of the
ides of March! 
Adieu, my dearest friend, and forgive; and very
speedily, by the new-sound expedient, tell me, that
you forgive 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 