


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Friday, One o'Clock, Mar. 3. 
Sir Charles has just sent the impatiently-expected
Paper, transcribed by the short-hand writer from
his minutes of the conversation that passed on Sir
Charles's intrepid visit at Sir Hargrave's. Intrepid, I
call it: But had I known of it, as Mr. Reeves did,
before the event, in some measure, justified the rashness,
I should have called it rash, and been for proposing
to send Peace-officers to Cavendish-Square, or
taking some method to know whether he were safe
in his person; especially when three o' clock approached; 
and his dinner-time is earlier than that of
most other people of fashion. 
Mr. Reeves has been so good as to undertake to
transcribe this long paper for me, that I may have time
to give you an account of three particular visits which
I have received. I asked Mr. Reeves, If it were not a
strange way of proceeding in this Bagenhall to have
his short-hand writer, and now turned listener, always
with him? He answered, It was not an usual way; 
but, in cases of this nature, where murder, and a tryal,
were expected to follow the rashness, in a court of
justice, he thought it carried with it, tho' a face of
premeditation, yet a look of fairness; and there was
no doubt but the man had been in bad scrapes before
now, and was willing to use every precaution for the
future. 



On Thursday morning, March the 2d, 17.. I Henry
Cotes, according to notice given me the preceding
evening, went to the house of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen,
Baronet, in Cavendish Square, about half an
hour after eight in the morning, in order to take 

minutes, in short-hand, of a conversation that was
expected to be held between the said Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, and Sir Charles Grandison, Baronet, upon
a debate between the said Gentlemen; on which I
had once before attended James Bagenhall, Esquire,
at the house of the said Sir Charles Grandison in
St. James's Square; and from which consequences
were apprehended, that might make an exact account
of what passed, of great importance. 
I was admitted, about nine o' clock, into the withdrawing-room; 
where were present the said Sir
Hargrave, the said James Bagenhall, Solomon Merceda,
Esquire, and John Jordan, Esquire. And they
were in full conversation about the reception that
was to be given to the said Sir Charles Grandison; 
which not being a part of my orders or business, I
had no command to take down; but the contrary. 
And that I might, with the less interruption, take minutes
of the expected conversation, I was ordered to
place myself in a large closet adjoining to the said
withdrawing-room, from which it was separated by
a thin wainscot-partition: But, lest the said Sir
Charles should object to the taking of the said minutes,
I was directed to conceal myself there till
called forth; but to take the said minutes fairly and
truly, as, upon occasion, I would make oath to the
truth thereof. 
About half an hour after nine o' clock, I heard Mr.
Bagenhall, with an oath, that denoted, by the voice,
eagerness and surprize, say, Sir Charles was come. 
And immediately a footman enter'd, and said, “Sir
Charles Grandison!” 
Then three or four of the Gentlemen spoke together
pretty loud and high: But what they said I thought
not in my orders to note down. But this is not
improper to note: Sir Hargrave said, Give me that
pair of pistols, and let him follow me into the garden. 
By G&wblank; he shall take one. 

No, no! I heard Mr. Merceda say; who being a foreigner,
I knew his voice from the rest—No, no! 
That must not be. 
And another voice, I believe by the lisp, it was Mr.
Jordan's, say, Let us, Sir Hargrave, hear what a
man so gallant has to say for himself. Occasions
may arise afterwards. 
Mr. Bagenhall, whose voice I well knew, said, D&wblank;n
his blood, if an hair of Sir Charles Grandison's head
should be hurt on this visit. 
Do I, d&wblank;n ye all, said Sir Hargrave, offer any thing
unfair, when I would give him the choice of the
pistols? 
What! in your own garden! A pretty story, whichsoever
drops! said Mr. Merceda. The devil's in
it, if he may not be forced now to give you the satisfaction
of a gentleman elsewhere! 
Desire Sir Charles (D&wblank;n his blood, said Sir Hargrave)
to come in. And then [as I saw through a knothole,
that I just then, hunting for a crack in the
wainscot-partition, discovered] Sir Charles entered; 
and I saw, that he looked very sedate and chearful; 
and he had his sword by his side, though in a
morning-dress. And then the conversation began,
as follows: 
Sir Charles. Your Servant, Sir Hargrave. Mr.
Bagenhall, yours. Your Servant,
Gentlemen. 
Mr. Bagenhall. Yours, Sir Charles. You are a
man of your word. This gentleman is Mr. Jordan,
Sir Charles. This gentleman is Mr. Merceda. 
Sir Ch. Mr. Merceda! —I have heard of Mr. Merceda. 
—I have been very free, Sir Hargrave, to invite
myself to breakfast with you. 
Sir Hargrave. Yes, by G&wblank;. And so you have
before now. Have you any-body with you, Sir? —If
you have, let them walk in. 
Sir Ch. Nobody, Sir. 

Sir Har. These are gentlemen, Sir. They are
men of honour. They are my friends. 
Sir Ch. They look like gentlemen. I suppose
every man a man of honour, till I find him otherwise. 
Sir Har. But don't think I have them here to intimidate— 
Sir Ch. Intimidate, Sir Hargrave! I know not what
it is to be intimidated. You say, the gentlemen are
your friends. I come with a view to increase, and
not diminish, the number of your friends. 
Sir Har. “Increase the number of my friends!” 
—What! with one who robbed me of the only woman
on earth that is worth having! And who, but for
the unmanly advantage taken of me, had been my
wife before the day was over, Sir! And yet to refuse
me the satisfaction of a gentleman, Sir! —But I hope
you are now come— 
Sir Ch. To breakfast with you, Sir Hargrave— 
Don't be warm. I am determined, if possible, not to
be provoked—But I must not be ill-treated. 
Sir Har. Why, then, Sir, take one of those two
pistols. My chariot shall carry us— 
Sir Ch. No-where, Sir Hargrave. What has hitherto
passed between us, was owing to accident. It
is not my way to recriminate. To your own heart,
however, I appeal: That must convince you, that the
method you took to gain the Lady, rendered you unworthy
of her. I took no unmanly advantage of you. 
That I refused to meet you in the way you have demanded,
gives me a title to call myself your best
friend— 
Sir Har. “My best friend,” Sir!— 
Sir Ch. Yes, Sir. If either the preservation of
your own life, or the saving you a long regret for taking
that of another, as the chance might have been,
deserves your consideration. In short, it depends upon
yourself, Sir Hargrave, to let me know whether 

you were guilty of a bad action from mad and violent
passion, or from design, and a natural byass, if I may
so call it, to violence; which alone can lead you to
think of justifying one bad action by another. 
Sir Har. Then, Sir, account me a man of natural
violence, if you please. Who shall value the opinion
of a man that has disgracefully—G&wblank; d&wblank; you, Sir— 
Do you see—what marks I shall carry to my grave— 
Sir Ch. Were I as violent as you, Sir Hargrave,
you might carry those marks to your grave, and not
wear them long. —Let us breakfast, Sir. That will
give you time to cool. Were I even to do, as you
would have me, you will best find your account in being
cool. You cannot think I would take such an
advantage of you, as your passion would give me. 
Mr. Bag. Nobly said, by Heaven! —Let us breakfast,
Sir Hargrave. Then you will be cooler. Then
will you be fitter to discuss this point, or any other. 
Mr. Merceda. Very right. You have a noble
enemy, Sir Hargrave. 
Sir Ch. I am no man's enemy, Mr. Merceda. Sir
Hargrave should consider, that, in the occasion for all
this, he was to blame; and that all my part in the affair
was owing to accident, not malice. 
Mr. Jordan. I doubt not, Sir Charles, but you are
ready to ask pardon of Sir Hargrave, for your part— 
Sir Ch. Ask pardon, Sir! —No! —I think I ought
to have done just as I did. Were it to do again, I
should do it, whoever were the man. 
Sir Har. See there! See there! —Mr. Bagenhall,
Mr. Merceda, Mr. Jordan! See there! Hear that! 
—Who can have patience! 
Sir Ch. I can tell you who ought to have patience,
Sir Hargrave. I should have a very mean opinion of
any man here, called upon as I was, if he had not
done just as I did: And a still meaner than I have of
you, Sir Hargrave, had you, in the like case, refused 

the same assistance to a woman in distress. But I will
not repeat what I have written. 
Sir Har. If you are a man, Sir Charles Grandison,
take your choice of one of those pistols, G&wblank; 
d&wblank;n you. I insist upon it. 
And I saw thro' the knot-hole, that Sir Hargrave
arose in passion. 
Sir Ch. As I am a man, Sir Hargrave, I will not. 
It might look to an angry man like an insult, which
I am above intending, were I to say, that I have given,
on our first interview, proofs that I want not courage. 
I give you now, as I think, the highest I can give, in
refusing your challenge. A personal insult I know how
to repel. I know how to defend myself—But, as I
said, I will not repeat any-thing I have written. 
Mr. Mer. But, Sir Charles, you have threatened a
man of honour in what you have written, if we take
you right, with a weapon that ought to be used only to
a scoundrel; yet refuse— 
Sir Ch. The man, Sir, that shall take it into his
head to insult me, may do it with the greater safety,
tho' perhaps not with impunity, as he may be assured
I will not kill him for it, if I can help it. I can play
with my weapons, Sir (it may look like boasting); 
but will not play with any man's life, nor consent to
make a sport of my own. 
Sir Har. D&wblank;n your coolness, Sir! —I cannot
bear— 
Sir Ch. Curse not your safety, Sir Hargrave. 
Mr. Jor. Indeed, Sir Charles, I could not bear
such an air of superiority— 
Sir Ch. It is more than an air, Mr. Jordan. The
man who can think of justifying one violent action
by another, must give a real superiority against himself. 
Let Sir Hargrave confess his fault—I have put him in
the way of doing it, with all the credit to himself that
a man can have who has committed a fault—and I offer
him my hand. 

Sir Har. Damnable insult! —What! own a fault
to a man who, without any provocation, has dashed
my teeth down my throat; and, as you see—Gentlemen
—say, Can I, ought I, now, to have patience? 
Sir Ch. I intended not to do you any of this mischief,
Sir Hargrave. I drew not my sword, to return
a pass made by yours—Actually received a raking on
my shoulder from a sword that was aimed at my heart. 
I sought nothing but to hinder you from doing that
mischief to me, which I was resolved not to do to you. 
This, Sir Hargrave, This, gentlemen, was the state
of the case; and the cause such, as no man of honour
could refuse engaging in. —And now, Sir, I meet
you, upon my own invitation, in your own house,
unattended, and alone, to shew you, that I have the
same disposition as I had from the first, to avoid doing
you injury: And this it is, gentlemen, that gives me
a superiority to Sir Hargrave, which he may lessen, by
behaving as I, in his case, would behave to him. 
Mr. Bag. By G&wblank; this is nobly said. 
Mr. Jor. I own, Sir Hargrave, that I would sooner
veil to such a Man as this than to a King on his throne. 
Sir Har. D&wblank;n me, if I forgive him, with these
marks about me. —I insist upon your taking one of
these pistols, Sir. —Gentlemen, my friends, he boasts
of his advantages: He may have some from his cursed
coolness: He can have none any other way. Bear
witness, I forgive him, if he lodges a brace of bullets
in my heart—Take one of those pistols, Sir. They
are equally loaded—Bear witness, if I die, that I have
provoked my fate. But I will die like a man of honour. 
Sir Ch. To die like a man of honour, Sir Hargrave,
you must have lived like one. You should be
sure of your cause. But these pistols are too ready a
mischief. Were I to meet you in your own way, Sir
Hargrave, I should not expect, that a man so enraged
would fire his over my head, as I should be willing to 

do mine over over his. Life I would not put upon
the perhaps involuntary twitch of a finger. 
Sir Har. Well then, The sword. You came,
tho' undressed, with your sword on. 
Sir Ch. I did; and for the reason I gave to Mr.
Bagenhall. I draw it not, however, but in my own
defence. 
Sir Har. (rising from his seat) Will you favour
me with your company into my own garden? Only
you and I, Sir Charles. Let the gentlemen my
friends stay here. They shall only look out of the
windows, if they please—Only to that grass-plot, Sir
(pointing as I saw)—If you fall, I shall have the worst
of it, from the looks of the matter, killing a man in
my own garden: If I fall, you will have the evidence
of my friends to bring you off. 
Sir Ch. I need not look at the place, Sir Hargrave. 
And since, gentlemen, it is allowed, that the pistols
may be dismissed; and since, by their lying loaded on
the table, they seem but to stimulate to mischief; you
will all excuse me, and you, Sir Hargrave, will forgive
me— 
And so saying, he arose, with great tranquillity, as
I saw; and taking the pistols, lifted up the sash that
was next to that at which Sir Hargrave stood, and discharged
them both out of the window. 
By the report, the writer is sure they were well
loaded. 
In ran a croud of servants, men and women, in dismay. 
The writer sat still in the closet, knowing the
matter to be no worse. One of the men cried out,
This is the murderer! And they all (not seeing their
master, as I suppose, at the window beyond Sir
Charles, and who afterwards owned himself too much
surprised to stir or speak) were for making up to Sir
Charles. 
Sir Charles then retiring, put his hand upon his 

sword: But mildly said, My friends, your master is
safe. Take care I hurt not any of you. 
Sir Har. I am safe—Begone, scoundrels! 
Mr. Bag. Begone! Quit the room. Sir Hargrave
is safe. 
Mr. Mer., Mr. Jor. Begone! Begone! 
The servants, as I saw, crouded out as fast as they
came in. 
Sir Charles, then stepping towards Sir Hargrave,
said, You will, some time hence, Sir, think the discharge
of those pistols much happier than if they had
been put to the use designed when they were loaded. 
I offer you my hand: It is an offer that is not to be
twice refused. If you have malice to me, I have none
to you. I invited myself to breakfast with you. You
and your friends shall be welcome to dine with me. 
My time is near expired (looking at his watch)—for
Sir Hargrave seemed too irresolute either to accept or
refuse his hand. 
Mr. Jor. I am astonished! —Why, Sir Charles,
what a tranquillity must you have within you! The
devil take me, Sir Hargrave, if you shall not make up
matters with such a noble adversary. 
Mr. Mer. He has won me to his side. By the
great God of Heaven, I had rather have Sir Charles
Grandison for my friend than the greatest Prince on
earth! 
Mr. Bag. Did I not tell you, gentlemen? —D&wblank;n
me, if I have not hitherto lived to nothing but to
my shame! I had rather be Sir Charles Grandison in
this one past hour, than the Great Mogul all my
life. 
Sir Hargrave even sobbed, as I could hear by his
voice, like a child. —D&wblank;n my heart, said he, in broken
sentences—And must I thus put up—And must I
be thus overcome? By G&wblank;, By G&wblank;, Grandison,
you must, you must, walk down with me into the 

garden. I have something to propose to you; and it
will be in your own choice either to compromise, or
to give me the satisfaction of a gentleman: But you
must retire with me into the garden. 
Sir Ch. With all my heart, Sir Hargrave. 
And taking off his sword, he laid it on the table. 
Sir Har. And must I do so too? —D&wblank;n me, if I
do! —Take up your sword, Sir. 
Sir Ch. I will, to oblige you, Sir Hargrave. It
will be always in my choice to draw it, or not. 
Sir Har. D&wblank;n me, if I can live to be thus treated! 
—Where the devil have you been till now? —But
you must go down with me into the garden. 
Sir Ch. Shew me the way, Sir Hargrave. 
They all interposed: But Sir Charles said, Pray,
gentlemen, let Sir Hargrave have his way. We will
attend you presently. 
The writer then came out, by the gentlemens
leave, who staid behind, at the windows. They
expressed their admiration of Sir Charles. And
Mr. Merceda and Mr. Bagenhall (the writer
mentions it to their honour) reproached each
other, as if they had no notion of what was
great and noble in man till now. 
Sir Charles and Sir Hargrave soon appeared in
sight; walking, and as conversing earnestly. The
subject, it seems, was, some proposals made by Sir
Hargrave about the Lady, which Sir Charles would
not comply with. And when they came to the grassplot,
Sir Hargrave threw open his coat and waistcoat,
and drew; and seemed, by his motions, to insist upon
Sir Charles's drawing likewise. Sir Charles had his
sword in one hand; but it was undrawn: the other
was stuck in his side: his frock was open. Sir Hargrave
seemed still to insist upon his drawing, and put
himself into a fencing attitude. Sir Charles then
calmly stepping towards him, put down Sir Hargrave's
sword with his hand, and put his left-arm under Sir 

Hargrave's sword-arm. Sir Hargrave lifted up the
other arm passionately: But Sir Charles, who was on
his guard, immediately laid hold of the other arm,
and seemed to say something mildly to him; and letting
go his left-hand, led him towards the house; his
drawn sword still in his hand. Sir Hargrave seemed
to expostulate, and to resist being led, tho' but faintly,
and as a man overcome with Sir Charles's behaviour; 
and they both came up together, Sir Charles's arm
still within his sword-arm—[The writer retired to his
first place]. D&wblank;n me, said Sir Hargrave, as he enter'd
the room, this man, this Sir Charles, is the
devil He has made a mere infant of me. Yet, he
tells me, he will not be my friend neither, in the
point my heart is set upon. He threw his sword upon
the floor. This only I will say, as I said below, Be
my friend in that one point, and I will forgive you
with all my soul. 
Sir Ch. The Lady is, must be, her own mistress,
Sir Hargrave. I have acquired no title to any influence
over her. She is an excellent woman. She
would be a jewel in the crown of a prince. But you
must allow me to say, She must not be terrified. I do
assure you, that her life has been once in danger
already: all the care and kindness of my sister and
a physician could hardly restore her. 
Sir Har. The most inflexible man, devil I should
say, I ever saw in my life! But you have no objection
to my seeing her. She shall see (yet how can I forgive
you that?) what I have suffered in my person
for her sake. If she will not be mine, these marks
shall be hers, not yours. And tho' I will not terrify
her, I will see if she has no pardon, no pity for me. 
She knows, she very well knows, that I was the most
honourable of men to her, when she was in my
power. By all that's sacred, I intended only to make
her Lady Pollexfen. I saw she had as many lovers as
visitors, and I could not bear it. —You, Sir Charles, 

will stand my friend, and if money and love will purchase
her, she shall yet be mine. 
Sir Ch. I promise you no friendship in this case,
Sir Hargrave. All her relations leave her, it seems,
to her own discretion; and who shall offer to lead her
choice? What I said below, when you would have
made that a condition, I repeat—I think she ought
not to be yours; nor ought you, either for your own
sake or hers, to desire it. Come, come, Sir Hargrave,
consider the matter better. Think of some other woman,
if you are disposed to marry. Your figure— 
Sir Har. Yes, by G. I make a pretty figure now,
don't I? 
Sir Ch. Your fortune, will make you happier in
marriage with any other woman, after what has happen'd,
than this can make you. For my own part,
let me tell you, Sir Hargrave, I would not marry the
greatest princess on earth, if I thought she did not
love me above all other men, whether I deserved her
love or not. 
Sir Har. And you have no view to yourself in the
advice you give? —Tell me that—I insist upon your
telling me that. 
Sir Ch. Whenever I pretend to give advice, I
should abhor myself, if I did not wholly consider the
good of the person who consulted me; and if I had
any retrospection to myself, which might in the least
affect that person. 
The breakfast was then brought in. This that follows
was the conversation that passed at and after
breakfast. 
Mr. Bag. See what a Christian can do, Merceda. 
After this, will you remain a Jew? 
Mr. Mer. Let me see such another Christian, and I
will give you an answer. You, Bagenhall, I hope,
will not think yourself intitled to boast of your Christianity? 

Mr. Bag. Too true! We have been both of us
sad dogs. 
Sir Har. And I have been the most innocent man
of the three; and yet, that's the devil of it, am the
greatest sufferer. Curse me, if I can bear to look at
myself in the glass! 
Mr. Jor. You should be above all that, Sir Hargrave. 
And let me tell you, you need not be ashamed
to be overcome, as you are overcome. You really
appear to me a greater, and not a less, man, than you
did before, by your compromising with such a noble
adversary. 
Sir Har. That's some comfort, Jordan. But,
d&wblank;n me, Sir Charles, I will see the lady: And you
shall introduce me to her, too. 
Sir Ch. That cannot be—What! Shall I introduce
a gentleman to a lady, whom I think he ought
no more to see, than she should see him? If I thought
you would go, I might, if she requested it, be there,
lest, from what she has suffer'd already, she should be
too much terrified. 
Sir Har. What, Sir! You would not turn Quixote
again? 
Sir Ch. No need, Sir Hargrave. You would not
again be the giant who should run away with the
lady. 
The gentlemen laughed. 
Sir Har. By G&wblank;, Sir, you have carried your
matters very triumphantly. 
Sir Ch. I mean not triumph, Sir Hargrave. But
where either truth or justice is concerned, I hope I
shall never palliate. 
Mr. Bag. Curse me, if I believe there is such another
man in the world! 
Sir Ch. I am sorry to hear you say that, Mr. Bagenhall. 
Occasion calls not out every man equally. 
Sir Har. Why did I not strike him? D&wblank;n me,
that must have provoked you to fight. 

Sir Ch. Provok'd, in that case, I should have been,
Sir Hargrave. I told you, that I would not bear to be
insulted. But, so warranted to take other methods, I
should not have used my sword. The case has happened
to me before now: But I would be upon friendly
terms with you, Sir Hargrave. 
Sir Har. Curse me, if I can bear my own littleness! 
Sir Ch. When you give this matter your cool attention,
you will find reason to rejoice, that an enterprize
begun in violence, and carried on so far as
you carried it, concluded not worse. Every opportunity
you will have for exerting your good qualities,
or for repenting of your bad, will contribute to your
satisfaction to the end of your natural life. You could
not have been happy, had you prevailed over me. 
Think you, that a murderer ever was an happy man? 
I am the more serious, because I would have you
think of this affair. It might have been a very serious
one. 
Sir Har. You know, Sir Charles, that I would
have compromised with you below. But not one
point— 
Sir Ch. Compromise, Sir Hargrave! —As I told
you, I had no quarrel with you: You proposed conditions,
which I thought should not be complied with. I
aimed not to carry any point. Self-defence, I told
you, was the whole of my system. 
Mr. Bag. You have given some hints, Sir Charles,
that you have not been unused to affairs of this kind. 
Sir Ch. I have before now met a challenger; but
it was when I could not avoid it; and with the resolution
of standing only on my own defence, and in
the hope of making an enemy a friend. Had I— 
Mr. Bag. What poor toads, Merceda, are we! 
Mr. Mer. Be silent, Bagenhall; Sir Charles had
not done speaking. Pray, Sir Charles— 
Sir Ch. I was going to say, that had I ever premeditatedly 

given way to a challenge, that I could have
declined, I should have considered the acceptance of
it as the greatest blot of my life. I am naturally choleric; 
yet, in this article, I hope I have pretty much
subdued myself. In the affair between Sir Hargrave
and me, I have the pleasure to reflect, that passion,
which I hold to be my most dangerous enemy, has not
had, in any one moment, an ascendency over me. 
Sir Har. No, by my soul! And how should it? 
You came off too triumphantly: You were not hurt:
You have no marks to shew. May I be cursed, if, in
forgiving you, which yet I know not how to do, I do
not think myself the greater hero! 
Sir Ch. I will not contest that point with you, Sir
Hargrave. There is no doubt but the man, who can
subdue his passion, and forgive a real injury, is an
hero. Only remember, Sir, that it was not owing to
your virtue that I was not hurt; and that it was not
my intention to hurt you. 
Mr. Jor. I am charmed with your sentiments, Sir
Charles. You must allow me the honour of your acquaintance. 
We all acknowlege duelling to be criminal:
But no one has the courage to break through a
bad custom. 
Sir Ch. The empty, the false glory, that men have
to be thought brave, and the apprehension of being
deemed cowards among men, and among women too,
very few men aim to get above. 
Mr. Jor. But you, Sir Charles, have shewn that
reputation and conscience are entirely reconcileable. 
Mr. Bag. You have, by Heaven! And I beg of
you, Sir, to allow me to claim your further acquaintance. 
You may save a soul by it. —Merceda, what
say you? 
Mr. Mer. Say! What a devil can I say? But the
doctrine would have been nothing without the example. 

Sir Har. And all this at my expence! —But, Sir
Charles, I must, I will have Miss Byron. 
Mr. Jor. I think every thing impertinent, that hinders
me from asking questions for my information and
instruction, of a man so capable of giving both, on a
subject of this importance. Allow me, Sir Charles, to
ask a few questions, in order to confirm me quite your
proselyte. 
Sir Ch. [taking out his watch, as I saw] Time
wears. Let my servant be called in. The weather is
cold. I directed him to attend before the door. 
It was immediately order'd, with apologies. 
Sir Ch. Ask me, Mr. Jordan, what questions you
please. 
Mr. Jor. You have been challenged more than
once, I presume. 
Sir Ch. I am not a quarrelsome man: But as it
was early known that I made it a principle not to engage
in a duel, I was the more subjected, I have reason
to think, for that, to inconveniencies of this nature. 
Mr. Jor. Had you always, Sir Charles, that magnanimity,
that intrepidity, that steadiness, I know not
what to call it, which we have seen and admire in
you? 
Sir Ch. I have always considered Spirit as the distinction
of a man. My father was a man of spirit. 
I never fear'd man, since I could write man. As I
never sought danger, or went out of my way to meet
it, I looked upon it when it came, as an unavoidable
evil, and as a call upon me for fortitude. And hence
I hardly ever wanted that presence of mind in it, which
a man ought to shew; and which sometimes, indeed,
was the means of extricating me from it. 
Sir Har. An instance of which this morning, I suppose
you think, has produced. 
Sir Ch. I had not that in my head. In Italy, indeed,
I should hardly have acted as in the instance you 

hint at. But in England, and, Sir Hargrave, I was
willing to think, in Cavendish Square, I could not but
conclude myself safe. I know my own heart. I
wish'd you no evil, Sir. I was calm. I expected to
meet you full of fire, full of resentment: But it is
hard, thought I (as some extraordinary step seems necessary
to be taken) if I cannot content myself with
that superiority (excuse me, Sir Hargrave) which my
calmness, and Sir Hargrave's passion, must give me
over him, or any man. My sword was in my power. 
Had I even apprehended assassination, the house of an
English gentleman could not have been the place for
it: And where a confidence was reposed. But one
particular instance, I own, I had in my thought, when
I said what I did. 
All the gentlemen besought him to give it. 
Sir Charles. In the raging of the war, now, so
seasonably for all the powers at variance, concluded,
I was passing through a wood in Germany, in my
way to Manheim. My servant, at some distance
before me, was endeavouring to find out the right
road, there being more than one. He rode back affrighted,
and told me he had heard a loud cry of murder,
succeeded by groans, which grew fainter and
fainter, as those of a dying person; and besought me
to make the best of my way back. As I was thinking
to do so (tho' my way lay through the wood, and I
had got more than half-way in it) I beheld six Pandours
issue from that inner part of the wood, into
which, in all probability, they had dragged some unhappy
passenger; for I saw an horse bridled and saddled,
without a rider, grazing by the road-side. They
were well armed. I saw no way to escape. They probably
knew every avenue in and out of the wood: I did not. 
They stopped when they came within two musquet-shots
of me, as if they had waited to see which way I took. 
Two of them had dead poultry slung across their
shoulders, which shewed them to be common plunderers. 

I took a resolution to ride up to them. I bid
my servant, if he saw me attacked, make the best of
his way for his own security, while they were employed
either in rifling or murdering me; but, if they suffered
me to pass, to follow me. He had no portmanteau
to tempt them. That, and my other baggage,
I had caused to be sent by water to Manheim. — 
I am an Englishman, gentlemen, said I (judging, if
Austrians, as I supposed they were, that plea would
not disavail me): I am doubtful of my way. Here is
a purse; holding it out. As soldiers, you must be
gentlemen: It is at your service, if one or two of
you will be so kind as to escorte and guide me through
this wood. They looked upon one another: I was
loth they should have time to deliberate—I am upon
business of great consequence. Pray direct me the
nearest way to Manheim. Take these florins. 
At last, one that seemed of authority among them,
held out his hand; and, taking the purse, said something
in Sclavonian; and two of them, with their
pieces slung on their shoulders, and their sabres drawn,
led me out of the wood in safety; but hoped, at parting,
my farther generosity. I found a few more florins
for them; and they rode back into the wood; I
suppose to their fellows; and glad I was to come off
so well. Had I either seemed afraid of them, or endeavoured
to escape, probably I had been lost. Two
persons were afterwards found murdered in the wood; 
one of them, perhaps, the unhappy man whom my
servant had heard cry out, and groan. 
Mr. Jor. I feel now very sensibly, Sir Charles,
your danger and escape. Your fortitude indeed was
then of service to you. 
Sir Har. But, Sir Charles, methinks I shall be
easier in myself, if you give me one instance of your
making, before now, an enemy a friend. Have you
one in point? 

Sir Ch. Stories of this nature come very ill from a
man's own mouth. 
Sir Har. I must have it, Sir Charles. A brother-sufferer
will better reconcile me to myself. 
Sir Ch. If you will not excuse me then, I will tell
you the story. 
Mr. Jord. Pray, Sir— 
Sir Ch. I had a misunderstanding at Venice with a
young gentleman of the place. He was about twenty-two. 
I was a year younger— 
Mr. Bag. At the Carnival, I suppose! —About a
Lady, Sir Charles? 
Sir Ch. He was the only son of a noble Venetian
family, who had great expectations from him. He
was a youth of genius. Another noble family at Urbino,
to which he was to be allied in marriage, had
also an interest in his welfare. We had made a friendship
together at Padua. I was at Venice by his invitation,
and stood well with all his family. He took offence
against me, at the instigation of a designing relation
of his; to own the truth, a Lady, as you suppose,
Mr. Bagenhall, his Sister. He would not allow
me to defend my innocence to the face of the accuser; 
nor yet to appeal to his Father, who was a person
of temper as well as sense. On the contrary, he upbraided
me in a manner that I could hardly bear. I
was resolved to quit Venice; and took leave of his
whole family, the Lady excepted, who would not be
seen by me. The Father and Mother parted with me
with regret. The young gentleman had so managed,
that I could not with honour appeal to them; and, at
taking leave of him in their presence, under pretence
of a recommendatory letter, he gave into my hand a
written challenge. The answer I returned, after protesting
my innocence, was to this effect: “I am setting
out for Verona in a few hours. You know my
principles; and I hope will better consider of the
matter. I never, while I am master of my temper, 

will give myself so much cause of repentance to the
last hour of my life, as I should have, were I to
draw my sword, to the irreparable injury of any
man's family; or to run the same risque of injuring
my own, and of incurring the final perdition of us
both!” 
Mr. Mer. This answer rather provoked than satisfied,
I suppose. 
Sir Ch. Provocation was not my intention. I designed
only to remind him of the obligations we were
both under to our respective families, and to throw in
an hint of a still superior consideration. It was likely
to have more force in that Roman Catholic country
than, I am sorry to say it, it would in this Protestant
one. 
Sir Har. How, how, Sir Charles, did it end? 
Sir Ch. I went to Verona. He followed me thither; 
and endeavoured to provoke me to draw. Why
should I draw? said I. Will the decision by the
sword be certainly that of justice? You are in a passion. 
You have no reason to doubt either my skill,
or my courage [On such an occasion, Gentlemen,
and with such a view, a man may perhaps be allowed
to give himself a little consequence]: And solemnly
once more do I avow my innocence; and desire to be
brought face to face with my accusers. 
He raved the more for my calmness. I turned from
him, with intent to leave him. He thought fit to
offer me a personal insult—I now, methinks, blush to
tell it—He gave me a box on the ear, to provoke me
to draw.— 
Mr. Mer. And did you draw, Sir? 
Mr. Bag. To be sure, you then drew? 
Mr. Jord. Pray, Sir Charles, let us know. You
could not then help drawing? This was a provocation
that would justify a Saint. 
Sir Ch. He had forgot, in that passionate moment, 

that he was a gentleman. I did not remember that I
was one. But I had no occasion to draw. 
Sir Har. What a plague—You did not cane
him? 
Sir Ch. He got well after a fortnight's lying-by. 
Sir Har. Damnation! 
Sir Ch. I put him into possession of the lodgings I
had taken for myself, and into proper and safe hands. 
He was indeed unable for a day or two to direct for
himself. I sent for his friends. His servant did me
justice as to the provocation. Then it was, that I was
obliged, in a letter, to acquaint the Father of a discovery
I had made, which the Son had refused to hear; 
which, with the Lady's confession, convinced them all
of my innocence. His Father acknowleged my moderation; 
as the young gentleman himself did, desiring
a renewal of friendship: But as I thought the
affair had gone too far for a cordial reconciliation, and
knew that he would not want instigators to urge him
to resent an indignity, which he had, however, brought
upon himself, by a greater offered to me, I took leave
of him and his friends, and revisited some of the German
courts; that of Vienna in particular, where I resided
some time. 
In the mean while the young Gentleman married. 
His Lady, of the Altieri family, is an excellent woman. 
He had a great fortune with her. Soon after
his nuptials, he let me know, that, as he doubted not,
if I had drawn my sword, I should, from his violence at
the time, have had his life in my power, he could not
but acknowlege that he owed all his acquisitions, and
the best of wives, as well as the happiness of both families,
with that life, to me. 
I apply not this instance: But, Sir Hargrave, as I
hope to see you married, and happy, though it can
never be, I think, to Miss Byron, such generous acknowlegements
as misbecome not an Italian, I shall
then hope from an Englishman. 

Sir Har. And had your Italian any marks left
him, Sir? —Depend upon it, I shall never look into
a glass, but I shall curse you to the very pit! 
Sir Ch. Well, Sir Hargrave: This only I will add; 
That be as sensible as you will, and as I am, of the
happy issue of this untoward affair, I will never expect
a compliment from you, that shall tend to your abasement. 
Mr. Jord. Your hand, Sir Hargrave, to Sir
Charles— 
Sir Har. What! without terms? —Curse me, if
I do! —But let him bring Miss Byron in his hand to
me (that is the least he can do): Then may I thank
him for my wife. 
Sir Charles made some smiling answer: But the
writer heard it not. 
Sir Charles would then have taken leave: But all
the Gentlemen, Sir Hargrave among the rest, were
earnest with him to stay a little longer. 
Mr. Jor. My conversion must be perfected, Sir
Charles. This is a subject that concerns us all. We
shall remember every tittle of the conversation; and
think of it when we do not see you. —Let me beg of
you to acquaint me, how you came to differ from all
other men of honour in your practice, as well as in
your notions, upon this subject? 
Sir Ch. I will answer your question, Mr. Jordan, as
briefly as I can. 
My Father, Sir, was a man of spirit. He had
high notions of honour, and he inspired me early with
the same. I had not passed my twelfth year, when he
gave me a master to teach me, what is called, the science
of defence. I was fond of the practice, and soon
obtained such a skill in the weapons, as pleased both
my Father and Master. I had strength of body beyond
my years: The exercise added to it. I had agility; 
it added to my agility: And the praises given me by 

my Father and Master, so heighten'd my courage, that
I was almost inclined to wish for a subject to exercise it
upon. My Mother was an excellent woman: She
had instilled into my earliest youth, almost from infancy,
notions of moral rectitude, and the first principles
of Christianity; now rather ridiculed than inculcated
in our youth of condition. She was ready
sometimes to tremble at the consequences, which she
thought might follow from the attention which I paid
(thus encouraged and applauded) to this practice; and
was continually reading lectures to me upon true
magnanimity, and upon the law of kindness, benevolence,
and forgiveness of injuries. Had I not lost
her so soon as I did, I should have been a more perfect
scholar than I am in these noble doctrines. As she
knew me to be naturally hasty, and very sensible of
affronts; and as she had observed, as she told me,
that, even in the delight she had brought me to take in
doing good, I shewed an over readiness, even to rashness,
which she thought might lead me into errors,
that would more than overbalance the good I aimed to
do; she redoubled her efforts to keep me right: And
on this particular acquirement of a skill in the management
of the weapons, she frequently enforced upon
mean observation of Mr. Locke's; “That young
men, in their warm blood, are often forward to think
they have in vain learned to fence, if they never
shew their skill in a duel.” 
This observation, insisted upon, and inculcated, as
she knew how, was very seasonable at that time of
danger. And she never forgot to urge upon me, that
the science I was learning, was a science properly
called of defence, and not of offence; at the same time
endeavouring to caution me against the low company
into which a dexterity at my weapons might lead me,
as well as against the diversions themselves exhibited at
the infamous places where those brutal people resorted: 

Infamous even by name (a)  as well as in the
nature of them. 
From her instructions, I had an early notion, that
it was much more noble to forgive an injury than to
resent it; and to give a life than to take it. My Father
(I honour his memory!) was a man of gaiety, of
munificence. He had great qualities. But my Mother
was my oracle. And he was always so just to
her merit, as to command me to consider her as such; 
and the rather, he used to say, as she distinguished
well between the false glory and the true; and would
not have her boy a coward. 
Mr. Mer. A good beginning, by my life! 
Mr. Jord. Pray proceed, Sir Charles. I am all
attention. 
Sir Har. Ay, ay, we all listen. 
Mr. Bag. Curse him that speaks next, to interrupt
you. 
Sir Ch. But what indelibly impressed upon my
heart my Mother's lessons, was an occurrence, which,
and the consequences of it, I shall ever deplore. My
Father, having taken leave of my Mother, on a proposed
absence of a few days, was, in an hour after,
brought home, as it was thought, mortally wounded in
a duel. My Mother's surprize on this occasion threw
her into fits, from which she never after was wholly
free. And these, and the dangerous way he continued
in for some time, brought her into an ill state of
health; broke, in short, her constitution; so that, in
less than a twelvemonth, my Father, to his inexpressible
anguish of mind (continually reproaching himself
on the occasion) lost the best of Wives, and my
Sisters and I the best of Mothers and Instructors. 
My concern for my Father, on whom I was an
hourly attendant throughout the whole time of his
confinement; and my being by that means a witness
of what both he and my Mother suffered; completed 

my abhorrence of the vile practice of duelling. I
went on, however, in endeavouring to make myself
a master of the science, as it is called; and, among
the other weapons, of the staff; the better to enable
me to avoid drawing my sword, and to impower me,
if called to the occasion, to give, and not take, a life; 
and the rather, as the custom was so general, that a
young man of spirit and fortune, at one time or other,
could hardly expect to escape a provocation of this
sort. 
My Father once had a view, at the persuasion of
my Mother's Brother, who was a general of note and
interest in the Imperial service, and who was very fond
of a military life, and of me, to make a soldier of me,
tho' an only son; and I wanted not, when a boy, a
turn that way: But the disgust I had conceived, on
the above occasion, against duelling, and the consideration
of the absurd alternative which the gentlemen
of our army are under, either to accept a challenge,
contrary to laws divine and human, or to be broke,
if they do not (though a soldier is the least master of
himself, or of his own life, of any man in the community)
made me think the English service, tho' that
of my country, the least eligible of all services. And
for a man, who was born to so considerable a stake in
it, to devote himself to another, as my Uncle had
done, from principles which I approved not, I could
not but hesitate on the proposal, young as I was. As
it soon became a maxim with me, not to engage, even
in a national cause, without examining the justice of
it, it will be the less wonder'd at, that I could not
think of any foreign service. 
Mr. Bag. Then you have never seen service, Sir
Charles? 
Sir Ch. Yes, I made one campaign as a volunteer,
notwithstanding what I have said. I was then
in the midst of marching armies, and could not tell
how to abate the ardor those martial movements had 

raised in my breast. But, unless my country were to
be unjustly invaded by a foreign enemy, I think I
would not, on any consideration, be drawn into the
field again. 
Mr. Jord. But you lead from the point, Mr. Bagenhall:
Sir Charles was going to say somewhat more
on the subject of duelling. 
Sir Ch. When I was thus unhappily deprived of
my Mother, my Father, in order to abate my grief
[I was very much grieved] was pleased to consent
to my going abroad, in order to make the
Grand Tour, as it is called; having first visited all the
British dominions in Europe, Gibraltar and Minorca
excepted. I then supposing I might fall into circumstances
that might affect the principles my Mother
had been so careful to instil into me, and to which my
Father's danger, and her death, had added force, it
was natural for me to look into history, for the rise
and progress of a custom so much and so justly my
aversion; and which was so contrary to all laws divine
and human, and particularly to that true heroism
which Christianity enjoins, when it recommends meekness,
moderation, and humility, as the glory of the
human nature. But I am running into length. 
Again Sir Charles took out his watch. They were
clamorous for him to proceed. 
When I found, continued he, that this unchristian
custom owed its rise to the barbarous northern nations,
who had, however, some plea to make in excuse,
which we have not, as they were governed by partiticular
lords, and were not united under one head or
government, to which, as to a last resort, persons supposing
themselves aggrieved, might appeal for legal
redress; and that these barbarous nations were truly
barbarous, and enemies to all politeness; my reasoning
on this occasion added new force to prejudices so
well founded. 

The gentlemen seemed afraid, that Sir Charles had
done speaking. They begged he would go on. 
I then had recourse, proceeded he, to the histories
of nations famous for their courage. That of the
Romans, who by that quality obtained the empire of
the world, was my first subject. I found not any
traces in their history, which could countenance the
savage custom. When a dispute happen'd, the challenge
from both parties generally was, “That each
should appear at the head of the army the next engagement,
and give proofs of his intrepidity against
the common foe.” The instance of the Horatii
and Curiatii, which was a public, a national combat,
as I may call it, affords not an exception to my observation. 
And yet even that, in the early ages of
Rome, stands condemned by a better example. For
we read, that Tullus challenged Albanus, general of
the Albans, to put the cause of the two nations upon
the valour of each captain's arm, for the sake of
sparing a greater effusion of blood. But what was the
answer of Albanus, tho' the inducement to the challenge
was so plausible? “That the cause was a public,
not a private one; and the decision lay upon the
two cities of Alba and Rome.” 
Many ages afterwards, Augustus received a challenge
from Mark Antony. Who, gentlemen, thought
of branding as a coward that Prince, on his answering,
“That, if Antony were weary of his life, he might
find many other ways to end it than by his sword?” 
Metellus, before that, challenged by Sertorius, answer'd
with his pen, not his sword, “That it was not
for a captain to die the death of a common soldier.” 
The very Turks know nothing of this savage custom:
And they are a nation that raised themselves
by their bravery from the most obscure beginnings in
to one of the greatest empires on the globe, as at this
day. They take occasion to exalt themselves above 

Christians, in this very instance; and think it a scandal
upon Mussulmans to quarrel, and endeavour to
wreak their private vengeance on one another. 
All the Christian doctrines, as I have hinted, are in
point against it. But it is dreadful to reflect, that
the man who would endeavour to support his arguments
against this infamous practice of duelling, by
the Laws of Christianity, tho' the most excellent of all
Laws [Excuse me, Mr. Merceda, your own are included
in them] would subject himself to the ridicule
of persons who call themselves Christians. I have
mentioned therefore Heathens and Mahometans; 
tho' in this company, perhaps—But I hope I need not,
however, remind any-body here, that that one doctrine
of returning good for evil, is a nobler and more heroic
doctrine than either of those people, or your own,
Mr. Merceda, ever knew. 
Mr. Jord. You have shewn it, Sir Charles, by example,
by practice, to be so. I never saw an hero till
now. 
Sir Ch. One modern instance, however, of a challenge
refused, I recollect, and which may be given, by way of
inference, at least, to the advantage of my argument. 
The army of the famous Mareschal Turenne, in revenge
for injuries more than hostile, as was pretended,
had committed terrible depredations in the Palatinate. 
The Elector, incensed at the unsoldierly destruction,
challenged the Mareschal to a single combat. 
The Mareschal's answer was to this effect:
“That if the trust which the King his master had reposed
in him, would permit him to accept of his
challenge, he would not refuse it; but, on the contrary,
would deem it an honour to measure his
arms with those of so illustrious a Prince: But that,
for the sake of his master's service, he must be excused.” 
Now, tho' I think the Mareschal might have returned
a still better answer (tho' this was not a bad 

one for a military man); yet where we can, as Christians
and as Men, plead the Divine Laws, and have
not, when we meet, as private subjects, the Mareschal's,
nor even the Goths excuse, I think the example
worthy consideration. 
And if, gentlemen, I have argued before now, or
should I hereafter argue, as follows, to a challenger,
shall I deserve either to be branded or insulted? 
“Of what use are the Laws of society, if magistracy
may be thus defied? Were I to accept of
your challenge, and were you to prevail against me,
who is to challenge you; and if you fall, who him
by whose sword you perish? Where, in short, is
the evil to stop? But I will not meet you: My
system is self-defence, and self-defence only. Put
me upon that, and I question not but you will have
cause to repent it. A premeditated revenge is that
which I will not meet you to gratify. I will not
dare to risque the rushing into my Maker's presence
from the consequences of an act, which cannot, in
the man that falls, admit of repentance, and leaves
for the survivor's portion nothing but bitter remorse. 
I fear not any more the reproaches of men,
than your insults on this occasion. Be the latter
offered to me at your peril. It is perhaps as happy
for you as for myself, that I have a fear of an higher
nature. Be the event what it will, the test you
would provoke me to, can decide nothing as to the
justice of the cause on either side. Already you
will find me disposed to do you the justice you pretend
to seek. For your own sake, therefore, consider
better of the matter; since it is not impossible,
but, were we to meet, and both survive, you may
exchange, what you will think, a real disgrace for
an imaginary one.” 
And thus, gentlemen, have I almost syllogistically
argued with myself on this subject: 

Courage is a virtue; 
Passion is a vice: 
Passion, therefore, cannot be Courage. 
Does it not then behove every man of true honour
to shew, that reason has a greater share than
resentment in the boldness of his resolves? 
And what, by any degree, is so reasonable as a regard
to our duty? 
You called upon me, gentlemen, to communicate
my notions on this important subject. I have the
more willingly obeyed you, as I hope Sir Hargrave,
on the occasion that brought us to this not unhappy
breakfasting, will be the better satisfied that it has so
ended; and as, if you are so good as to adopt them,
they may be of service to others of your friends, in
case of debates among them. Indeed, for my own
sake, I have always been ready to communicate my
notions on this head, in hopes sometimes to be spared
provocation; for, as I have owned, I am passionate:
I have pride: And am often afraid of myself; and the
more, because I am not naturally, I will presume to
say, a timid man. 
Mr. Bag. 'Fore God, Sir Hargrave, somebody
has escaped a scouring, as the saying is. 
Mr. Mer. Ay, by my life, Sir Hargrave, you had
like to have caught a Tartar. 
Sir Ch. The race is not always to the swift, gentlemen. 
Sir Hargrave's passion would, doubtless, have
laid him under disadvantage. Defence is guarded:
Offence exposes itself. 
Mr. Bag. But, Sir Charles, you despise no man,
I am sure, for differing from you in opinion. I am a
Catholic— 
Sir Ch. A Roman Catholic—No religion teaches
a man evil. I honour every man who lives up to what
he professes. 
Mr. Bag. But that is not the case with me, I
doubt. 

Mr. Mer. That is out of doubt, Bagenhall. 
Mr. Jord. The truth is, Mr. Bagenhall has found
his conveniencies in changing. He was brought up a
Protestant. These dispensations, Mr. Bagenhall!— 
Mr. Mer. Ay, and they were often an argument
in Bagenhall's mouth, for making me his proselyte. 
Sir Ch. Mr. Bagenhall, I perceive, is rather of the
religion of the Court, than of that of the Church, of
Rome. 
Mr. Bag. But what I mean, by telling you I am
a Catholic, is this: I have read the opinion of some
of our famous Casuists, that, in some cases, a private
man may become his own avenger, and challenge an
enemy into the field. 
Sir Ch. Bannes and Cajetan, you mean; one a
Spaniard, the other an Italian. But the highest authority
of your Church is full against them in this point. 
The Council of Trent treats the combatants who fall,
as self-murderers, and denies them Christian burial. 
It brands them, and all those who by their presence
countenance and abet this shocking and unchristian
practice, with perpetual infamy; and condemns them
to the loss of goods and estates. And furthermore, it
deprives, ipso jure, all those sovereign princes, who
suffer such acts of violence to be perpetrated with impunity
in the lands and cities which they hold of the
Church, of all the territories so held. I need not add
to this, that Lewis the XIV th's edict against duelling
was the greatest glory of his reign. And permit me
to conclude with observing, that the base arts of poisoning,
by the means of treacherous agents, and the
cowardly practice of assassination by bravoes hired on
purpose to wreak a private revenge, so frequent in Italy,
are natural branches of this old Gothic tree. And
yet (as I have before hinted) the barbarous northern
nations had pleas to make in behalf of duelling, from
their polity, which we have not from ours; Christianity
out of the question. 

The gentlemen said, they would very seriously reflect
upon all that had passed in this uncommon conversation. 
Sir Har. Well, but, Sir Charles, I must recur to
my old note—Miss Byron—She must be mine. And
I hope you will not stand in my way. 
Sir Ch. The Lady is her own mistress. I shall be
glad to see any and all of you, gentlemen, at St.
James's Square. 
Mr. Bag. One thing I believe it is proper to mention
to Sir Charles Grandison. You know, Sir, that
I brought a young man to your house, to take minutes
of the conversation that passed between you and
me there, in apprehension of consequences. In like
apprehensions, I prevailed upon Sir Hargrave— 
Sir Har. And now, Bagenhall, I could curse you
for it. The affair—confound it!—that I meant to be
recorded for my own justification, has turned out to
his honour. Now am I down in black and white, for
a tame—fool. —Is it not so? 
Mr. Jord. By no means. If you think so, Sir
Hargrave, you have but ill profited by Sir Charles's
noble sentiments. 
Sir Ch. How is this, Mr. Bagenhall? 
Mr. Bag. I prevailed upon Sir Hargrave to have
the same young man, who is honest, discreet, and one
of the swiftest short-hand writers of the age, to take
a faithful account of every-thing that has passed; and
he is in that closet. 
Sir Ch. I must say, this is very extraordinary—But
as I always speak what I think, if I am not afraid of
my own recollection, I need not of any man's minutes. 
Mr. Bag. You need not in this case, Sir Charles. 
Nothing has passed, as Sir Hargrave observes, but
what makes for your honour. We that set him to
work, have more need to be afraid than you. We 

bid him be honest, and not spare any of us. We
little thought matters would have ended so amicably. 
Mr. Jord. Thank God they have! 
Mr. Mer. A very happy ending, I think! 
Sir. Har. Not except Miss Byron consents to wipe
out these marks. 
Mr. Bag. Mr. Cotes, your task is over. Pray step
in with what you have done. 
The writer obeyed. Mr. Bagenhall asked, If the
minutes should be read? Sir Hargrave swore No; 
except, as he said, he had made a better figure in
the debate. Sir Charles told them, he could not
stay to hear them: But that, as they were written,
and as he had been allowed before a copy of
what passed between him and Mr. Bagenhall, he
should be glad to have one now; and the rather, as
Sir Hargrave should have an instance, after he had
perused it, of his readiness to condemn himself, if
he found he had been wanting either to his own
character, or to that of any man present. 
They consented, that I should send Sir Charles the
first fair copy. Sir Charles then took his leave. 
The gentlemen all stood silent for several minutes,
when they returned from attending him to the door,
looking upon one another as if each expected the
other to speak: But when they spoke, it was all
in praise of Sir Charles, as the most modest, the
most polite, the bravest, and noblest of men. Yet
his maxims, they said, were confoundedly strange; 
impracticable for such sorry dogs as them (that was
their phrase) to practise. 
But Sir Hargrave seemed greatly disturbed and dejected. 
He could not, he said, support himself under
the consciousness of his own inferiority. But what
could I do? said he. The devil could not have
made him fight. Plague take him! he beat me out
of my play. 

And yet, said Mr. Merceda, a tilting-bout seems no
more to him than a game at pushpin. 
You would have thought so, said Sir Hargrave, had
you observed with what a sleight, and with what unconcernedness,
he pushed down my drawn sword
with his hand (tho' he would grant me nothing)
and took me under the arm, and led me in to you,
as tho' he had taken me prisoner. The devil has
long, continued he, owed me a shame: But who
would have thought he had so much power over Sir
Charles Grandison, as to get him to pay it me? 
But, however, I never will be easy till Miss Byron
is Lady Pollexfen. 
I take leave, honoured Sir, to observe, that a few things
are noted in this copy, which, to avoid giving
offence, will not be in that I shall write for the
gentlemen. I was ordered to shew it to Mr. Bagenhall,
before you had it; but, for this reason, I
shall excuse myself, as having not remember'd that
command. 
This, therefore, is a true copy of all that passed, taken
to the best of the ability of, Sir, give me leave to
subscribe, 
Your very great admirer,
and most humble servant,
Henry Cotes. 


Continuation of Miss Byron's Letter.
What a pacquet, including the short-hand writer's
paper, transcribed by my cousin Reeves,
shall I send you this time! I will not swell it by reflections
on that paper; that would be endless; but
hasten to give you some account of the visits I mentioned. 
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen came, without any notice,
about nine o'clock. 

My heart sunk, when his chair stopt at the door,
and I was told who was in it. 
He was shewn into the great parlour. My cousin
Reeves's soon attended him. He made great apologies
to them (and so Mr. Reeves said he ought) for the disturbance
he had given them. 
He laid all to Love—Prostituted name! made to
cover all acts of violence, indiscretion, folly, in both
sexes! 
I was in my own apartment. Mrs. Reeves came
up to me. She found me in terror; and went down
and told him so; and begged, that he would not insist
upon seeing me. 
The whole intent of this visit, he said, was to beg
me to forgive him. It was probable, that I should
have the same emotion upon his first visit at any other
time; and he entreated the favour of seeing me. He
had a right, he said, to see me: He was a sufferer for
my sake. They saw, he told them, that he was not
the man he had been; and as he had been denied, and
been brought to deny himself, the satisfaction due to a
gentleman, from a man whom he had never offended,
he insisted on having the opportunity given him of seeing
me, and receiving my forgiveness, as what would
consolidate his reconciliation with Sir Charles Grandison. 
There was no resisting this plea. 
And down I trembled; I can hardly say walked. 
Notwithstanding all my little reasoning with myself,
to behave with the dignity of an injured person; yet
the moment I saw him approach me, at my entrance
into the parlour, I ran to Mr. Reeves, and caught
hold of his arm, with looks, I doubt not, of terror. 
Had Sir Charles Grandison been there, I suppose I
should have run to him in the same manner. 
Ever-dear and adorable goodness! (were his words,
coming to me) how sweet is this terror, and how just! 

I have forgiven worse injuries, pointing to his mouth. 
I meant nothing but honour to you. 
Honour, Sir! Cruelty, Sir! Barbarity, Sir! How
can you wish to see the creature whom you so wickedly
treated? 
I appeal to yourself, Madam, if I offered the least
indecency! —For all I have suffered by my mad enterprize,
what but disgrace— 
Disgrace, Sir, was your portion, Sir (half out of
breath)—What would you, Sir? —Why this visit? 
What am I to do? 
I hardly knew what I said; and still I held Mr.
Reeves's arm. 
Forgive me, Madam: That is what you are to do:
Pardon me: On my knee I beg your pardon. And
he dropt down on one knee. 
Kneel not to me, Sir—Pray do not kneel—You
bruised, you hurt, you terrified me, Sir—And, Lord
bless me! I was in danger of being your wife, Sir! 
Was not this last part of my answer a very odd one? 
But the memory of what I suffered at the time, and
of the narrow escape I had, left me not the least presence
of mind, on his address to me, kneeling. 
He arose. In danger of being my wife, Madam! 
Only that the method I took was wrong, Madam! 
Miss Byron, you see, is in terror, Sir Hargrave. — 
Sit down, my love (taking my hand, and leading me
to the fire-side) How you tremble, my dear! —You
see, Sir Hargrave, the terror my cousin is in—You
see— 
I do—I do; and am sorry for the occasion. —We
will all sit down. Compose yourself, dear Miss Byron
—And (holding up his clasped hands to me) I
beseech you, forgive me. 
Well, Sir, I forgive you—I forgive you, Sir. 
Were you not in so much disorder, Madam— 
Were it to be seasonable now—I would tell you what
I have further to beg. I would— 

Speak, Sir, now; and never let me— 
Suffer an interruption, Madam—I am too apprehensive
of that word never. You must allow of my
address. I ask you not any favour, but as I shall behave
myself in future. 
Yes, yes, Sir, your behaviour—But, Sir, were
you to become the best man in the world, this, this,
is the last time that I ever— 
Dear Miss Byron! And then he pleaded his passion; 
his fortune; his sufferings. —A wretch! [Yet
I had now-and-then a little pity for his disfigured
mouth and lip]—His resolutions to be governed by me
in every act of his life—The settlement of one half of
his estate upon me. —The odious wretch mentioned
children, my dear—younger children. He ran on in
such a manner as if he had been drawing up marriage-articles
all the way hither. 
Upon my absolutely renouncing him, he asked me,
If Sir Charles Grandison had not made an impression
on my heart? 
What, Lucy, could make me inwardly fret at this
question? I could hardly have patience to reply. I
now see, my dear, that I have indeed a great deal of
pride. 
Surely, Sir Hargrave, I am not accountable to
you— 
You are not, Madam: But I must insist upon an
answer to this question. If Sir Charles Grandison has
made an application to you for favour, I can have no
hope. 
Sir Charles Grandison, Sir, is absolutely disinterested. 
Sir Charles Grandison has made—There I
stopt; I could not help it. 
No application to my cousin, I assure you, Sir
Hargrave, said Mr. Reeves. He is the noblest of
men. Had he any such thoughts, I dare say, he would
be under difficulties to break his mind, lest such a 

declaration should be thought to lessen the merit of
his protection. 
A good thought of Mr. Reeves. And who knows,
my Lucy, but there may be some foundation for it? 
Protection! D&wblank;n it! —But I am the easier upon
this assurance. Let me tell you, Mr. Reeves, that,
had I not found him to be a wonder of a man, matters
should not have ended as they seem at present to
have done. 
But, Sir Hargrave, said Mrs. Reeves, permit me
to say, as I know Miss Byron's mind, that there cannot
be the least room to imagine that Miss Byron— 
Dear Mrs. Reeves, forgive me. But I cannot receive
a denial from any other mouth than hers. Is
there no room for a sincere penitent to hope for mercy
from a sweetness so angelic, and who is absolutely disengaged? 
You have had mine already, Sir Hargrave, said I. 
I am amaz'd, that, knowing my mind before your
wicked insult upon me, you should have any expectation
of this kind after it. 
He again vowed his passion, and such stuff. 
I think, Lucy, I never shall be able, for the future,
to hear with patience any man talk of love, of passion,
and such nonsense. 
Let me summarily add, for I am tired of the subject,
that he said an hundred impertinent things, sillier
than any of those said by Mr. Grandison, in my praise
[indeed every-thing of this nature now appears silly to
me]—He insisted upon a preference to Mr. Greville,
Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Orme. —He resolved not to despair,
as his sufferings for my sake had given him (as
he said he presumed to hope) some merit in his own
opinion, if not in mine; and as his forgiveness of the
man who had injured him, ought, he thought, to have
some weight in his favour. 
He took leave of my cousins and me in a very respectful 

manner. I wish him no harm. But I hope
I shall never see him again. 
And now, Lucy, with the end of this very disagreeable
visit, I will conclude my letter; and shall have
another long one ready for the next post. 

