



My dear Miss,
One more Letter, and I have done for a great
while; because I hope your Presence will put
an End to the Occasion. I shall now tell you of my
second Visit to the Dairy-house, where we went to
Breakfast, in the Chariot and Four, because of the
Distance, which is Ten pretty long Miles. 
I transcrib'd for you, from Letters written formerly
to my dear Parents, an*  Account of my former
Dairy-house Visit, and what the People were,
and whom I saw there; and altho' I besought you to
keep that Affair to yourself, as too touching a Point
to the Reputation of my Mr. B. to be known but
to you only, and even to destroy it, when you had
perused it; yet, I make no doubt, you remember
the Story, and so I need not repeat any Part of that
Account. 
When we arrived there, we found at the Door,
expecting us, (for they heard the Chariot-wheels at a
Distance) my pretty Miss Goodwin, accompanied by
two other Misses, who had earned their Ride, and 

attended by the Governess's Daughter, a discreet
young Gentlewoman. As soon as I stepp'd out, Miss
ran into my Arms with great Eagerness, and I as tenderly
embraced her, and leading her into the Parlour,
asked her abundance of Questions about her
Work, and her Lessons; and among the rest, If she
had merited this Distinction of the Chaise and Dairy-house
Breakfast, or if it were owing to her Uncle's
Favour, and to that of her Governess? The young
Gentlewoman assur'd me it was to both, and shew'd
me Miss's Needleworks, and Penmanship, and the
Child was highly pleased with my Commendations. 
I took a good deal of Notice of the other two
Misses, for their Schoolfellow's sake, and made each
of them a Present of some little Toys; and my Miss,
of a Number of pretty Trinkets, with which she was
highly delighted, and I told her, that I would wait
upon her Governess, when I came from London into
the Country again, and see in what Order she kept
her little Matters; for, above all things, I loved
pretty housewifely Misses; and then, I would bring
her more. 
Mr. B. observ'd, with no small Satisfaction, the
Child's Behaviour, which is very pretty, and appeared
as fond of her, as if he had been more than her
Uncle, and yet seemed under some Restraint, lest it
should be taken, that he was. Such Power has
secret Guilt, poor dear Gentleman! to lessen and
restrain a Pleasure, that would, in a happier Light,
have been so laudable to have manifested! But how
commendable is this his Love to the dear Child,
compar'd to that of most wicked Libertines, who
have no Delight, but in destroying Innocence; and
care not what becomes of the unhappy Infant, or
of the still more unhappy Mother! 
I am going to let you into a charming Scene,
resulting from this Perplexity of the dear Gentleman! 

A Scene that has afforded me high Delight ever
since; and always will, when I think of it: But I
will lead to it, as gradually as it happen'd. 
The Child was very fond of her Uncle, and told
him, She loved him dearly, and always would love
and honour him, for giving her such a good Aunt. 
—You talked, Madam, said she, when I saw you
before, that I should come and live with you— 
Will you let me, Madam? Indeed I will be very
good, and do every thing you bid me, and mind
my Book, and my Needle; indeed I will. 
Ask your Uncle, my dearest Miss, said I; I should
like your pretty Company of all things. 
She went to Mr. B. and said, Shall I, Sir, go and
live with my Aunt? Pray let me, when you come
from London again. 
You have a very good Governess, Miss, said he; 
and she can't part with you. 
Yes, but she can, Sir; she has a great many
Misses, and can spare me well enough; and if you
please to let me ride in your Coach sometimes, I
can go and visit my Governess, and beg a Holiday
for the Misses, now-and-then, when I am almost a
Woman, and then all the Misses will love me. 
Don't the Misses love you now, Miss Goodwin?
said he. Yes, they love me well-enough, for matter
of that; but they'll love me better, when I can
beg them a Holiday. Do, dear Sir, let me go home
to my new Aunt, next time you come into the
Country. 
I was much pleased with the dear Child's Earnestness; 
and permitted her to have her full Argument
with her beloved Uncle; but was much moved,
and he himself was under some Concern, when the
dear Miss said,—But you should, in Pity, let me
live with you, Sir; for I have no Papa, nor Mamma
neither: They are so far off! —But I will love 

you both as if you were my own Papa and Mamma; 
so, dear now, my good Uncle, promise the poor
Girl that has never a Papa nor Mamma!— 
I withdrew to the Door: It will rain, I believe,
said I, and looked up. And, indeed, I had almost a
Shower in my Eye; and had I kept my Place, could
not have refrained shewing how much I was
affected. 
Mr. B. as I said, was a little mov'd; but for fear
the young Gentlewoman should take notice of it,
How! my Dear, said he, No Papa and Mamma! — 
Did they not send you a pretty Black Boy to wait
upon you, a while ago? Have you forgot that? — 
That's true, reply'd Miss: But what's a Black Boy to
living with my new Aunt? —That's better a great
deal than a Black Boy! Indeed it is. 
Well, your Aunt and I will consider of it, when
we come from London. Be a good Girl, mean time,
and do as your Governess would have you, and then
you don't know what we may do for you! Well
then, Miss Bett, said she to her young Governess,
let me be set two Tasks instead of one, and I will
learn all I can, to deserve to go to my Aunt. 
In this manner the little Prattler diverted herself. 
And as we returned from them, the Scene I hinted
at, open'd as follows: 
Mr. B. was pleased to say, What a poor Figure
does the proudest Mind make, my dear Pamela,
under the Sense of a concealed Guilt, in Company
of the Innocent who know it, and those who do
not! Even the casual Expression of a Baby shall
strike back Shame upon a guilty Heart, and make
one unable to look up without Confusion. I blush'd
for myself, continued he, to see how you was affected
for me, and yet withdrew, to avoid reproaching me
so much as with your Eye; for then, the whole
Power of Innocence, triumphing over my Guilt, 

how like a Fool I look'd! Surely I made a most
contemptible Figure, Pamela! —Did you not disdain
me, at that Moment? 
Dearest Sir! how can you speak such a Word? 
A Word I cannot repeat after you! For at that very
Time, I beheld you with the more Reverence, for
seeing your noble Heart touch'd with a Sense of
your Error; and it was such an Earnest to me of the
happiest Change I could ever wish for, and in so
young a Gentleman, that it was one half Joy for that,
and the other half Concern at the little Charmer's
accidental Plea, to her best and nearest Friend, for
coming home to her new Aunt, that affected me so
sensibly as you saw. 
You must not talk to me of the Child's coming
home, after this Visit, Pamela; for how, at this
rate, shall I stand the Reproaches of my own Mind,
were I to see the little Prater every Day before me,
and to think of what her poor Mamma has suffered
on my Account! 'Tis enough, that in you, my Dear,
I have an hourly Reproach before me, for my Attempts
on your Virtue; and I have nothing to
boast, but that I gave way to your Triumphs: And
what then is my Boast? 
What is your Boast, dearest Sir? You have every
thing to boast, that is worthy of being boasted of: 
—Brought up to an affluent Fortune, uncontroulable
in your Will, your Passions unbridled; God
has touched your truly noble Heart, and you have
seen your Error, at a Time of Life, when others are
rushing into Vices, in the midst of which, perhaps,
they are cut off. 
You act generously, and with a laudable Affection,
to a deserving Baby, which some would have left
friendless to the wide World, and have made more
miserable, perhaps, than they had made the very
miserable Mother: And you have the Comfort to 

think, that thro' God's Goodness, this Mother is not
unhappy; and that there is not a lost Soul, any more
than a lost Body, to lay to your Charge. 
You have inspirited, by your generous Example,
and inabled, by your splendid Fortune, another Person,
whom you have made the happiest Creature in
the World, to do more Good, if she may say so without
Vanity, than Twenty wicked Libertines have
done Mischief; besides making every one, that approaches
you, easy and happy, with the Bounty of
your own Hands. 
You are the best of Husbands, the best of Landlords,
the best of Masters, the best of Friends; and
with all these Excellencies, and a Mind, as I hope,
continually improving, and more and more affected
with the Sense of its past Mistakes, will you ask,
dear Sir, What is your Boast? 
O my dearest, dear Mr. B. and then I press'd his
Hand with my Lips, whatever you are to yourself,
when you give way to Reflections so hopeful, you
are the Glory and the Boast of your grateful Pamela! 
And permit me to add, Tears standing in my Eyes,
and holding his Hand between mine, That I never
beheld you in my Life, in a more amiable Light,
than when I saw your manly Countenance manifesting
the Struggle your Heart labour'd with, as it
seem'd to me, between Grace and Consciousness. 
O Sir! this was a Sight of Joy, of true Joy! to one
who loves you for your dear Soul's sake, more than
for that of your Person; and who looks forward to
a Companionship with you, beyond the Term of
this transitory Life! 
The dear Gentleman look'd down sometimes, and
sometimes upon me, without offering to interrupt
me; and when I had done speaking, I began to fear,
by his Silence, that I had offended him, remembering, 

just then, one of his former*  Cautions to me,
not to throw a Gloom, by my Over-seriousness,
upon his innocent Injoyments; and I said, putting
my Arms round his Arm, as I sat, my fearful Eye
watching his, I fear, Sir, I have been too serious! 
I have perhaps broken one of your Injunctions! Have
cast a Gloominess over your Mind! And if I have,
dear Sir, forgive me! 
He clasped his Arm around me: O my beloved
Pamela, said he; thou dear Augmenter of my Honour!
and Confirmer of all my better Purposes!
how shall I acknowlege (for reward I never can)
your inexpressible Goodness to me? I see every Day
more and more, my dear Love, what Confidence
I may repose in your Generosity and Discretion! 
You want no Forgiveness; and my Silence was
owing to much better Motives, than to those you
were apprehensive of. 
Judge ye, my honoured Parents, and you, my dear
Miss, the Joy that overspread my Heart, incouraged
in a manner so agreeable to all my Wishes. O Sir,
Sir! said I, after a short Pause, your Goodness had
struck me dumb for a Moment; but my Silence
could hold but for that Moment: For had I been
naturally dumb, and never spoken before, my Joy
for this your Kindness, and the future Hope you
raise in my Breast, would have unbarr'd the Doors
of my Speech, or my Heart would have been made
vocal, had my Tongue remained silent. 
Forgive me, my dearest Miss, these flighty Expressions: 
I know they are above myself, and perhaps
out of Nature; but so, in a manner, was your
Friend, when she spoke them. If ever it be your
Lot to marry such a Gentleman as Mr. B. one who
is capable of generous and noble Sentiments, and 

yet has not been so good as you wish him to be; 
whenever it shall happen, that the Divine Grace,
and your Example, shall touch his Heart, and awaken
his better Faculties, you'll then know a Joy like
this which I have described; which will not only
exalt your Heart and Speech, but, upon Reflection,
will irradiate many a gloomy Apprehension, that, at
times, will cast a Shadow over the brightest and
happiest Prospects. 
The Chariot brought us home sooner than I wished,
and Mr. B. handed me into the Parlour. Here,
Mrs. Jervis, said he, meeting her in the Passage,
receive your Angel-Lady. I must take a little Tour
without you, Pamela; for I have had too much of
your dear Company, and must leave you, to descend
again into myself; for you have raised me to such
a Pitch, that it is with Pain I bear it. 
He kissed my Hand, and went into his Chariot
again; for it was but half an Hour after Twelve,
and said, he would be back by Two, at Dinner. 
He left Mrs. Jervis wondering at his Words, and
at the solemn Air with which he utter'd them. But
when I told that good Friend the Occasion, I had a
new Joy in the Pleasure and Gratulations of the dear
good Woman, on what had passed. 
Were I, my dear Friends, to recount to you every
Conversation that gives me Delight, when we are
alone, (my Miss Darnford) as well as when we are
in Company, I should do nothing but write. Imagine
the rest from what I have (but as so many
Specimens of my Felicity) informed you of, and
then think, if there can possibly be a happier Creature
on Earth, than I am at present. 
My next Letter will be from London, and to you,
my honoured Parents (for to you, my dear Miss, I
shall not write again, expecting to see you soon). 
But I must now write seldomer, because I am to 

renew my Correspondence with Lady Davers; with
whom I cannot be so free, as I have been with
Miss Darnford; and so I doubt, my dear Father
and Mother, you cannot have the Particulars of that
Correspondence; for I shall never find Time to
transcribe. But every Opportunity that offers, you
may assure yourself, shall be laid hold of, by 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 

Excuse me, dear Miss, a second Subscription; for
you need not be told, how much I am, and ever
shall be, 
Your affectiouate
P. B. 
