



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. In Answer to the Six last Letters. 


“Where she had it, I can't tell; but I
think I never met with the Fellow of
her in my Life, at any Age;” are, as I remember,
my Brother's Words, speaking of his
Pamela, in the*  early Part of your Papers. 
In Truth, thou'rt a surprising Creature; and 

every Letter we have from you, we have new
Subjects to admire you for. —Do you think,
Lady Betty, said I, when I had read to the End of
the Subject about Mrs. Jervis, I will not soon
set out to hit this charming Girl a Box of the
Ear or two? 
For what, Lady Davers? said she. 
For what! reply'd I. —Why, don't you
see how many Slaps of the Face the bold Slut
hits me? —I'll Lady-Airs her! I will! —I'll
teach her to reproach me, and so many of her
Betters, with her Cottage Excellencies, and Improvements
that shame our Education. 
Why, you dear charming Pamela, did you
only excel me in Words, I could forgive you; 
for there may be a Knack, and a Volubility, as
to Words, that a natural Talent may supply; 
but to be thus out-done in Thought and in Deed,
Who can bear it? and in so young an Insulter too! 
Well, Pamela, look to it, when I see you:
You shall feel the Weight of my Hand, or— 
the Pressure of my Lip, one or t'other, depend
on it, very quickly: For here, instead of my
stooping, as I had thought it would be, to call
you Sister, I shall be forced to think, in a little
while, that you ought not to own me as yours,
till I am nearer your Standard. 
But to come to Business: I will summarily
take Notice of the following Particulars in all
your obliging Letters, in order to convince you
of my Friendship, by the Freedom of my Observations
on the Subjects you touch upon. 

First, then, I am highly pleased with what
you write of the Advantages you received from
the Favour of my dear Mother; and as you
know many Things of her by your Attendance
upon her, in the last Three or Four Years of her
Life, I must desire you will give me, as Opportunity
shall offer, all you can recollect in relation
to the honoured Lady, and of her Behaviour
and Kindness to you, and with a Retrospect
to your own early Beginnings, the Dawnings
of this your bright Day of Excellence: And
this, not only I, but the Countess, and Lady
Betty, with whom I am going over your Papers
again, and her sister Lady Jenny, request of
you. 
2. I am much pleased with your Kentish
Account; tho' we wished you had been more
particular in some Parts of it; for we are greatly
taken with your Descriptions, and your Conversation-pieces:
Yet I own, your honest Father's
Letters, and yours, a good deal supply
that Defect, as our Pleasure in reading your
Relations makes us call it. Your Parents are
honest discreet Folks, I see that: I have a Value
for them: and you're the prudentest Creature I
ever knew, in all your Ways; particularly in
the Advice you give them about your more distant
Relations, and to aim at nothing beyond
their natural Sphere. —Every Tittle is right,
and as it should be. On these Accounts it is,
that all the World will allow, that you, and
your Parents too, merit the Fortune you have
met with. 

3. I am highly delighted with the Account
you give me of my Brother's breaking to you
the Affair of Sally Godfrey, and your Conduct
upon it. 'Tis a sweet Story, as he brought
it in, and as you relate it. The Wretch has
been very just in his Account of it. But don't
you think he was a sad young Fellow! Well
may you be thankful for your Escape! Well may
you! —Your Behaviour was what I admire; 
and so we do all; but none of us think we
could have imitated it in all its Parts. We are
in Love with your charitable Reflections in favour
of the poor Lady; and the more, as she
certainly deserved them; and a better Mother
too, than she had, and a faithfuller Lover, than
she met with. 
4. You have exactly hit his Temper, in your
declared Love of Miss. I see, Child, you know
your Man; and never fear but you'll hold him,
if you can go on thus to act, and out-do your
Sex. But I should think you might as well not
insist upon having Miss with you; for the Girl
may be pert, perhaps insolent (you know who is
her Father); you'd not care to check her, for
several Reasons, and this may make you uneasy; 
for, if you did, he might take it amiss, let your
Motives be ever so good: So I think you'd better
see her now-and-then at the Dairy-house, or at
School, than have her with you. —But this I
leave to your own Discretion, and his good Pleasure,
to determine upon; for in the latter it
must rest, let you, or I, or any body, say what
we will. 

5. You have fully, and to our Satisfaction,
answer'd our Obiections to your Behaviour to
Mrs. Jewkes. We had not consider'd your
Circumstances quite so thoroughly as we ought
to have done. You are a charming Girl, and
all your Motives are so just, that we shall be a
little more cautious for the future how we censure
you. We are particularly pleased with the
Triumphs of your Innocence over his and her
Guilt; and agree that they are the rightest and
best-to-be-defended Motives for Pride that ever
were set before us. 
In short, I say with the Countess, This good
Girl is not without her Pride; but it is the Pride
that becomes, and can only attend, the innocent
heart; and I'll warrant, said her Ladyship,
nobody will become her Station so well, as one
who is capable of so worthy a Pride as this. 
But what a Curtain-Lecture hadst thou,
Pamela! A noble one, dost thou call it! — 
Why, what a Wretch hast thou got, to expect
thou shouldst never expostulate against his lordly
Will, even when in the wrong, till thou hast
obey'd it, and of consequence join'd in the Evil
he imposes! He says, indeed, in small Points; 
but I suppose he is to judge which are and which
are not small. 
Thus, I remember, my Brother himself took
Notice once of a Proposal in the House of Commons,
to grant the Crown a very great Sum to
answer Civil-List Deficiencies, which being opposed
by the Minority, the Minister found out
an Expedient, that they might give the Money 

first, and examine into the Merits of the Demand
afterwards. So we read, that, in some
Countries, an accused Person is put to Death,
and then try'd; and all he has to hope for while
he lives, is, that his Relations, and his own
Family, will be released from Obloquy, if an
Acquittal ensues. 
Much Good may such a Husband do you,
says Lady Betty! —Every body will admire
you; but no one will have Reason to envy you
upon those Principles. Yet, I don't know how
it is, but this is evident, that, at present, there
is not a happier Couple in the World than you
Two are. 
6. I am pleased with your Promise of sending
me what you think I shall like to see, out
of those Papers you chuse not to shew me collectedly: 
This is very obliging. You're a good
Girl, and I love you dearly. 
7. We have all smiled at your Paradox,
Pamela, that his marrying you was an Instance
of his Pride. The Thought, tho', is pretty
enough, and ingenious; but whether it will
hold or not, I won't just now examine. 
8. Your Observation on the Forget and
Forgive, we are much pleased with; and think
you have distinguished well on that Head. 
9. You are a very good Girl for sending me
a Copy of Miss Darnford's Letter. She is a
charming young Lady. I always had a great
Opinion of her Merit; her Letter abundantly
confirms me in it. I hope you'll communicate
to me every Letter that passes between you: 

And pray send me, in your next, a Copy of
your Answer to her Letter; I must insist upon
it, I think. 
10. I am glad with all my Heart to hear of
poor Jewkes's Reformation. Your Example carries
all before it. But pray oblige me with your
Answer to her Letter. Don't think me unreasonable. 
'Tis all for your sake: You must needs
know that, or you know nothing. For I think
you deserve all Miss Darnford says of you; and
that's a great deal too. 
Pray—have you shewn Jewkes's Letter
to your good Friend? —Lady Betty wants to
know, (if you have) what he could say to it?
for, she says, it cuts him to the Quick; and I
think so too, if he takes it as he ought: But, as
you say, he's above loving Virtue for Virtue's
sake, I warrant him. He likes it in a Wife, because
'tis a Husband's Security against the Law
of Retaliation. There's a great deal in that, I
can tell you. I once heard the Wretch hold an
Argument, That Women had no Souls. I ask'd
him, If he were to marry, whether he'd have his
Wife act as if she believ'd this Doctrine to be
good? That were another thing, he said: He
was for having his Wife think she had, he must
own: Such a Belief could do her no Harm. Ah! 
Pamela, for Theory and Practice too, I doubt,
never was such a Rake, for one not quite a
Town Debauchee! 
11. Your Manner of Acting by Mrs. Jervis,
with so handsome a Regard to my Brother's
Interest, her Behaviour upon it, and your Relation 

of the Whole, and of his generous Spirit
in approving, reproving, and improving your
prudent Generosity, make no inconsiderable Figure
in your Papers. And Lady Betty says, Hang
him, he has some excellent Qualities too! — 
It is impossible not to think well of him; and
his good Actions go a great way towards atoning
for his bad. But you, Pamela, have the
Glory of all! We desire particularly, that you
will never omit any of those moving Scenes,
which you so well describe, be the Occasion
what it will: For they are Nature, and that's
your Excellence. Keep to that; for one more
learned, I verily think, could not write as you
do, nor instruct, and delight, and move, all at
once, so very ingagingly. 
12. I am glad you are learning French: Thou
art a happy Girl in thy Teacher, and he is a
happy Man in his Scholar. We are pleased with
the pretty Account you give us of his Method
of Instructing and Rewarding. 'Twould be
strange, if you did not learn any Language
quickly under such Methods, and with such Encouragements,
from the Man you love, were
your Genius less apt than it is. But we wish'd
you had inlarged on that Subject: For such
Fondness of Men to their Wives, who have been
any time marry'd, is so rare, and so unexpected
from my Brother, that we thought you should
have written a Side upon that Subject at least. 
What a bewitching Girl art thou! What
an Exemplar to Wives now, as well as thou wast
before to Maidens! Thou canst tame Lions, I 

dare say, if thou'dst try! —Reclaim a Rake in
the Meridian of his Libertinism, and make such
a one as my Brother not only marry thee, but
love thee better at several Months End, than he
did the first Day, if possible! Wonderful Girl! 
Yet usest thou no Arts but honest ones, such as
Prudence directs, Nature points out, and such
as make Duty delightful, even commanding
most, when thou seemest most to submit. 
It must be owned indeed, that thou hast no
brutal Mind to deal with: Bad as he is, it must
be said, that thou hast a sensible and a generous
Heart to work upon; one who takes no Glory
in the blind Submission of a Slave; but, like
a true British Monarch, delights to reign in
a free, rather than in an abject Mind. Yet is
he jealous as a Tyrant of his Prerogative: But
you have found the way to lay that watchful
Dragon asleep, and so possess the golden Fruits
of Content and true Pleasure, the due Reward
of your matchless Conduct. 
Now, my dear Pamela, I think I have taken
Notice of the most material Articles in your
Letters, and have no more to say to you; but,
Write on, and oblige us; and mind to send me
the Copy of your Letter to Miss Darnford, of
that you wrote to poor penitent Jewkes, and
every Article I have written about, and all that
comes into your Head, or that passes, and you'll
oblige 
Yours, &c.
B. Davers. 

