


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Lord L. returned from his travels about the
time that Mrs. Farnborough was taken ill. He
had brought some presents to Sir Thomas from his
son, who took all opportunities to send him over curiosities,
some of considerable value; which served at
the same time to shew his oeconomy, and his duty. 
He forgot not, in this way, his sisters, tho' his accompanying
letters were short, and merely polite, and
such as required no other answer than thanks: Only
they could discover by them, that he had warm wishes
to be allowed to return to England; but such a submission
to his father's pleasure, as entirely to give up
his own. 
Sir Thomas seemed fond of Lord L. And, setting
out, on Mrs. Farnborough's death, for Grandison-hall,
gave him an invitation to visit him there; for he
would listen with pleasure, an hour together, to him,
or to any one, who would talk, and give him some
account of his son. How predominant must those
passions, those habits, be in his heart, which could take
place of a love so laudably paternal! 
In pursuance of this invitation, Lord L. attended 

him at the Hall; and there fell in love with the eldest
of the young ladies. He revealed his passion to her. 
She referred herself wholly to her father. Sir Thomas
could not be blind to their mutual affection. 
Every-body saw it. Lord L.'s passion was of the ardent
kind; and he was too honest to wish to conceal
it. But yet Sir Thomas would not see it. He behaved,
however, with great freedom and civility to
my Lord; so that the heart of the young lady was insensibly
engaged; but he avoided several opportunities
which the lover had lain in wait for, to open his mind,
and make proposals. 
At last, my Lord desired an audience of Sir Thomas,
as upon a subject of the last importance. The
Baronet, after some little delays, and not without
some inauspicious reluctance, granted it: And then
my Lord revealed his passion to him. 
Sir Thomas asked him, if he had made it known to
his daughter? And yet must have seen, on an hundred
occasions, at breakfast, at dinner, at tea, at supper,
how matters stood with both the lovers, if Miss Grandison's
pleasant account of the matter may be depended
upon. 
Lord L. owned he had; and that he had asked her
leave to make proposals to her father, to whom she
wholly referred herself. 
Sir Thomas seemed uneasy; and oddly answer'd, he
was sorry for it: He wish'd his Lordship had not put
such notions in the girl's head. Both his daughters
would now be set a romancing, he supposed. They
were, till now, modest young creatures, he said. 
Young women should not too soon be set to look
out of themselves for happiness—He had known many
quiet and orderly girls set a madding by the notice
of men. He did not know what business young
fellows had to find out qualifications in other mens
daughters, that the parents of those daughters had not
given themselves leisure to discover. A daughter, of 

his, he hoped, had not encouraged such discoveries. 
It was to him but as yesterday, when they were crowing
in the arms of their nurses; and now, he supposed,
they would be set a crowing after wedlock. 
What an odd father was Sir Thomas, my Lucy! 
—His own life, it is evident, had passed away very
pleasantly. 
Indeed he could hardly bear to think, he added, of
either of his daughters as marriageable yet. They have
not been nursed in the town hot-beds, my Lord. They
are sober country-girls, and good housewives. I love
not that girls should marry before they have done
growing. A young wife makes a vapourish mother. 
I forget their age—But twenty-six or twenty-eight is
time enough for a woman, either for the sake of modesty
or discretion, to marry. 
We may like gay men for hushands, my dear: Some
of us do: But, at this rate, those daughters must be very
good girls, who can make their best courtesies to their
mothers, and thank them for their fancies; or the fathers
must be more attentive to their growth than Sir
Thomas was to that of his daughters. —What have I
said? —I am here afraid of my uncle. 
My Lord was surprised; and well he might. Sir
Thomas had forgot, as Lady L. observed, that he himself
thought Miss W. was not too young at seventeen,
to be Lady Grandison. 
My Lord was a modest man: He was begging (as
it may be called) the young woman, whom of all the
women in the world he loved best, of her father, who
was a man that knew the world, and had long made
a considerable figure in it, and who, for reasons which
would have held with him, had he lived to see her
forty, had no mind to part with her. Yet my Lord
pleaded his passion, her great and good qualities, as
acknowleged by himself; and modestly hinted at the
unexceptionableness of his own character, and the favour
he stood in with his son; not saying the least 

word of his birth and alliances, which some lovers,
of his rank, would not have forgot: And, it seems,
he was right in forbearing to make these accidents a
plea; for Sir Thomas valued himself upon his ancestry; 
and used to say, that his progenitor, in James
the First's time, disgraced it by accepting of the title
of Baronet. 
Sir Thomas allowed something to the plea of his
standing well with his son: Let me tell you, my
Lord, said he, that I shall take no step in a family-affair
of this consequence, without consulting with
my son; and the rather, as he is far from expecting
so much of my consideration for him. He is the pride
of my life. 
My Lord desired, that his suit might be put upon
the issue of his son's approbation. 
But pray, my Lord, what fortune do you expect with
my girl? Well as you love her, I suppose the return
of her love for yours, which you seem not to doubt,
will not be enough. Can the poor girl be a Countess
without a confounded parcel of dross fasten'd to her
petticoat, to make her weight in the other scale? 
My circumstances, said my honest Lord L. permit
me not, in discretion, to make that compliment to my
love, which my heart would with transport make,
were they better: But I will lay them faithfully before
you, and be determined by your generosity. 
I could not but expect, from a young man of your
Lordship's good-sense, such an answer as this: And
yet I must tell you, that we fathers, who know the
world, expect to make some advantage of a knowlege
that has cost us so much. I should not dislike a little
more romancing in love, from a man that asks for my
daughter, tho' I care not how little of it is shewn by
my son to another man's. Every father thinks thus,
my Lord; but is not so honest as to own it. 
I am sure, Sir Thomas, that you would not think a
man worthy of your daughter, who had no regard to 

any-thing, but the gratification of his own wishes; 
who could think, for the sake of that, of involving
a young lady in difficulties, which she never knew in
her father's house. 
Why, this, my Lord, is well said. You and I may
afford to make handsome compliments to one another,
while compliments only are expected. I have a good
share of health: I have not quitted the world so entirely,
nor think I ought, as to look upon myself as
the necessary tool of my children, to promote their
happiness at the expence of my own. My Lord, I
have still a strong relish for the pleasures of this world. 
My daughters may be women grown: Your Lordship
seems to have found out, that they are; and has persuaded
one of them, that she is; and the other will be
ready to think she is not three years behind her. This
is an inconvenience which you have brought upon me. 
And as I would be glad to live a little longer for myself,
I wish you to withdraw your suit; and leave me
to do as well as I can with my daughters. I propose
to carry them to town next winter. They shall there
look about them, and see whom they could like, and
who could like them, that they may not be liable to
after-repentance, for having taken the first man that
offer'd. 
My Lord told Sir Thomas, that he hoped there
could not be reason to imagine, that any-thing could
possibly arise from his address, that should be incompatible
with the happiness of a father—And was going
on in the same reasonable strain; but Sir Thomas interrupted
him— 
You must not, my Lord, suppose I can be a stranger
to whatever may be urged by a young man on this
subject. You say you are in love: Caroline is a girl
that any-body may love: But I have not a mind she
should marry so soon. I know the inconvenience of
early marriages. A man's children treading upon his
heels, and shouldering him with their shoulders: In 

short, my Lord, I have an aversion to be called a
grandfather, before I am a grey father [Sir Thomas
was not put to it to try to overcome this aversion]. 
Girls will start up, and look up, and parents cannot
help it: But what father, in the vigour of his days,
would not wish to help it? I am not fond of their
partnership in my substance. Why should I divide my
fortune with novices, when, making the handsome
allowances to them, that I do make, it is not too much
for myself? My son should be their example. He is
within a year as old as my eldest girl. On his future
alliances I build, and hope to add by them to the consequence
of all my family [Ah! Lucy!]. Girls are
said to be sooner women than boys are men. Let us
see that they are so by their discretion, as well as by stature. 
—Let them stay— 
And here Sir Thomas abruptly broke off the conversation
for that time; to the great distress of Lord L.
who had reason to regret, that he had a man of wit,
rather than a man of reason, to contend with. 
Sir Thomas went directly into his closet, and sent
for his two daughters; and, tho' not ill-naturedly,
raillied them both so much on their own discoveries, as
he wickedly phrased it, and on admitting Lord L. into
the secret, that neither of them could hold up their
heads, for two or three days, in his presence: But,
out of it, Miss Caroline Grandison found that she was
in love; and the more for Lord L.'s generous attachment,
and Sir Thomas's not so generous discouragement. 
My Lord wrote over to young Mr. Grandison, to
favour his address. Lady L. permitted me to copy the
following answer to his application. 

My Lord,
I Have the honour of your Lordship's letter of
the 17th. Never brother loved his sisters better
than I do mine. As the natural effects of that love, 

I receive with pleasure the notification of your great
regard for my elder sister. As to myself, I cannot have
one objection: But what am I in this case? She is
wholly my father's. I also am his. The consideration
he gives me in this instance, confounds me: It binds
me to him in double duty. It would look like taking
advantage of it, were I so much as to offer my humble
opinion, unless he were pleased to command it from
me. If he does, assure yourself, my Lord, that (my
sister's inclination in your Lordship's favour presupposed)
my voice shall be warmly given, as you wish,
I am, my Lord, with equal affection and esteem, 
Your Lordship's faithful and obedient Servant. 

Both sisters rejoiced at the perusal of this affectionate
letter; for they were afraid, that the unnatural
prohibition of correspondence between them and their
brother had estranged his affections from them. 
The particulars of one more conversation I will
give you, between my Lord and Sir Thomas, on this
important subject; for you must believe, Lord L. could
not permit a matter of such consequence to his own
happiness to go easily off; especially as neither of the
two daughters were able to stand their father's continual
raillery, which had banished from the cautious eyes,
and apprehensive countenances, of both ladies, all indications
of love, tho' it reigned with the more absolute
power in the heart of Miss Caroline, for that concealment. 
In this conversation, my Lord began with a little
more spirit than he finished the former. The Countess
lent me my Lord's minutes of it; which he took for
her to see, and to judge of all that passed at the
time. 
On my Lord's lively, but respectful, address to Sir
Thomas on the occasion, the Baronet went directly
into the circumstances of my Lord, and his expectations. 

Lord L. told him frankly, that he paid interest for
15,000l. for sisters fortunes; three of whom were
living, and single: That he believed two of them
would soon be advantageously married; and he should
wish to pay them their portions on the day; and was
contriving to do so, by increasing the incumbrance
that his father had left upon the finest part of his estate,
to the amount of 5,000l.; which, and his sisters fortunes,
were all that lay upon a clear estate of 5,000l. a
year. After he had thus opened himself, he referred
the whole to Sir Thomas's consideration. 
My advice, my Lord, is this, said the Baronet; 
That you should by no means think of marriage till
you are clear of the world. You will have 10,000l.
to pay directly: You will have the interest of 10,000l.
more to pay: And you men of title, on your marriages,
whether you like ostentation or not, must be
ostentatious. Your equipages, your houses, your furniture
—A certain increase of expence. —By no means,
my Lord L. think of marriage till you are quite clear
of the world, unless you could meet with some rich
widow or heiress, who could do the business at once. 
Lord L. could only, at first, urge his passion [He
durst not his daughter's affection, and the happiness of
both, which were at stake]. Sir Thomas opposed
discretion to that plea. Poor passion, Lucy, would be
ashamed to see the sun, if discretion were always to be
attended to in treaties of this kind. 
Afterwards he told Sir Thomas, that he would accept
the Lady upon his own terms. He besought his
consent to their nuptials. He would wait his own
time and pleasure. He would be content, if he gave
not Miss Caroline a single shilling. 
Sir Thomas was fretful—And so, lover-like, you
would involve the girl you profess to love, in difficulties. 
I will ask her, if she wants for any-thing with
me, that a modest girl can wish for? But, to be serious,
it is a plaguy thing for a man to be obliged, by the officious 

love, as it is called, of a pretender to his daughters,
to open his affairs, and expose his circumstances,
to strangers. I wish, my Lord, that you had let my
girls alone. I wish you had not found them out in
their country-retirement. I should have carried them
to town, as I told you, in a few months. Women
so brought up, so qualified, and handsome girls, are
such rarities in this age, and men worth having are so
affrighted at the luxury and expensiveness of the modern
women, that I doubted not but the characters of
my girls would have made their fortunes, with very
little of my help. They have family, my Lord, to
value themselves upon, tho' but spinsters. And let me
tell you, since I shall be thought a more unnatural man
than I am, if I do not obey the present demand upon
me to open my circumstances, I owe my son a great
deal more than 30,000l. 
I don't understand you, Sir Thomas. 
Why, thus, my Lord, I explain myself: My father
left me what is called rich. I lessen'd the ready money
which he had got together for a purchase he lived
not to complete, a great deal. That I looked upon as
a deodand: So was not answerable for it: And as I
was not married, my son had no right in it. When
I was married, and he was given me— 
Forgive me, Sir Thomas: Your son a right—And
had not your other children— 
No, my Lord: They were girls—And as to them,
had I increased my fortune by penuriousness, instead of
living like a man, I was determined as to their fortunes— 
But, as I was saying, when Lady Grandison died, I
think (tho' every father does not; nor should I, were
he not the best of sons, and did he expect it) the produce
of her jointure, which is very considerable, should
have been my son's. As to what I annually allowed
him, that it was my duty to allow him, as my son, and 

for my own credit, had his mother not brought me a
shilling. —Then, my Lord, I have been obliged to take
up money upon my Irish estate; which being a family-estate,
my son ought to have had come clear to him. 
You see, my Lord, how I expose myself. 
You have a generous way of thinking, Sir Thomas,
as to your son. But a man of your spirit would despise
me, if I did not say, that— 
I have not so generous a way of thinking for my
daughters—I will save your Lordship the trouble of
speaking out, because it is more agreeable from myself
than it would be for any other man to do it. But
to this I answer, that the late Earl of L. your Lordship's
father, had one son and three daughters—I have one
son, and two. He was an Earl—I am but a simple
Baronet—If 5,000l. apiece is enough for an Earl's
daughters, half the sum ought to do for a Baronet's. 
Your fortune, Sir Thomas—And in England, where
estates— 
And where living, my Lord, will be five times more
expensive to you than it need to be, if you can content
yourself to live where your estate lies. —As for me, I
have lived nobly—But had I been as rich as my father
left me, 5,000l. should have done with a daughter, I
assure you. You, my Lord, have your notions: I have
mine. Money and a girl you expect from me: I ask
nothing of you. As matters stand, if my girls will keep
(and I hope they will) I intend to make as good a bargain
for them, and with them, as I can. Not near 5000l.
apiece must they expect from me. I will not rob my
son more than I have done. —See, here is a letter from
him. It is in answer to one I had written, on the refusal
of a wretch to lend me, upon my Irish estate, a
sum that I wanted to answer a debt of honour, which
I had contracted at Newmarket, unless my son (tho' it
is an estate in fee) would join in the security. Does not
such a son as this deserve every-thing? 

I obtained a sight of this letter; and here is a copy. 

Honoured Sir,
I Could almost say I am sorry that so superior a spirit
as yours should vouchsafe to comply with Mr.
O.'s disagreeable and unnecessary demand. But, at
least, let me ask, Why, Sir, did you condescend to
write to me on the occasion, as if for my consent? 
Why did you not send me the deeds, ready to sign? 
Let me beg of you, ever-dear and ever-honour'd Sir,
that you will not suffer any difficulties, that I can join
to remove, to oppress your heart with doubts for one
moment. Are you not my father? —And did you not
give me a mother, whose memory is my glory? That
I am, under God, is owing to you. That I am what
I am, to your indulgence. Leave me not any-thing! 
You have given me an education, and I derive from
you a spirit, that, by God's blessing on my duty to you,
will enable me to make my own fortune: And, in
that case, the foundation of it will be yours; and you
will be entitled, for that foundation, to my warmest
gratitude. Permit me, Sir, to add, that, be my income
ever so small, I am resolved to live within it. And
let me beseech you to remit me but one half of your
present bounty. My reputation is established; and I
will engage not to discredit my father. All I have
ever aimed at, is, to be in condition rather to lay,
than to receive, an obligation. That your goodness has
always enabled me to do: And I am rich, thro' your
munificence; richer, in your favour. 
Have you any thoughts, Sir, of commanding me to
attend you at Paris, or at the Hague; according to the
hopes you gave me in your last? —I will not, if you
do me this honour, press for a return with you to my
native country: But I long to throw myself at your
feet; and, where-ever the opportunity of that happiness
shall be given me, to assure you personally of the inviolable
duty of 
Your Charles Grandison. 


Must not such a letter as this, Lucy, have stung to
the heart a man of Sir Thomas Grandison's pride? If
not, what was his pride? —Sir Thomas had as good an
education as his son: Yet could not live within the
compass of an income of upwards of 7,000l. a year. 
His son called himself rich with 800l. or 1,000l. a
year; and tho' abroad, in foreign countries, desired
but half that allowance, that he might contribute, by
the other half, to lessen the difficulties in which his father
had involved himself by his extravagance. 
His father, Lady L. says, was affected with it. He
wept: He blessed his son; and resolved, for his sake,
to be more cautious in his wagerings than he had hitherto
been. Policy, therefore, would have justified
the young gentleman's chearful compliance, had he
not been guided by superior motives. O my dear! the
Christian Religion is a blessed religion! How does honest
policy, as well as true greatness of mind, recommend
that noble doctrine of returning good for evil! 

