



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. Afternoon. 
By your last date of Ten, in your letter of this
day, you could not long have deposited it, before
Robin took it. He rode hard, and brought it to me
just as I had risen from table. 
You may justly blame me for sending my messenger
empty-handed, your situation consider'd; and
yet that very situation [so critical!] is partly the reason
for it: For indeed I knew not what to write, fit
to send you. 
I had been inquiring privately, how to procure you
a conveyance from Harlowe-Place, and yet not appear
in it; knowing, that to oblige in the fact, and 

to disoblige in the manner, is but obliging by halves: 
My mamma being, moreover, very suspicious, and
very uneasy; made more so by daily visits from your
uncle Antony, who tells her, that now every-thing is
upon the point of being determined, and hopes, that
her daughter will not so interfere, as to discourage
your compliance with their wills. This I came at by a
way that I cannot take notice of, or both should hear
of it, in a manner neither would like: And, without
that, my mamma and I have had almost hourly bickerings. 
I found more difficulty than I expected, as the
time was confined, and secresy required, in procuring
you a vehicle; and as you so earnestly forbid me to
accompany you in your enterprize. Had you not obliged
me to keep measures with my mamma, I could
have managed it with ease. I could even have taken
our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put
two horses extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; 
and I could have sent it back from London, and nobody
the wiser as to the lodgings we might have
taken. 
I wish to the Lord, you had permitted This! Indeed
I think you are two punctilious a great deal for
your situation. Would you expect to enjoy yourself
with your usual placidness, and not be ruffled, in an
hurricane which every moment threatens to blow your
house down? 
Had your distress sprung from yourself, that would
have been another thing. But when all the world
knows where to lay the fault, this alters the case. 
How can you say I am happy, when my mamma,
to her power, is as much an abettor of their wickedness
to my dearest friend, as your aunt, or any-body
else? —And this thro' the instigation of that odd-headed
and foolish uncle of yours, who [sorry creature
that he is] keeps her up to resolutions, which are unworthy
of her, for an example to me, and please you. 

Is not this case enough for me to ground a resentment
upon, sufficient to justify me for accompanying
you; the friendship between us so well known? 
Indeed, my dear, the importance of the case consider'd,
I must repeat, That you are too nice. Don't
they already think, that your standing-out is owing a
good deal to my advice? Have they not prohibited
our correspondence upon that very surmize? And
have I, but on your account, reason to value what
they think? 
Besides, what discredit have I to fear by such a
step? What detriment? Would Hickman, do you
believe, refuse me upon it? —If he did, should I be
sorry for that? —Who is it, that has a Soul, who
would not be affected by such an instance of female
friendship? 
But I should vex and disorder my mamma! —Well,
that is something! But not more than she vexes and
disorders me, on her being made an implement by
such a sorry creature, who ambles hither every day
in spite to my dearest friend. —Woe be to both, if it
be for a double end! —Chide me, if you will: I don't
care. 
I say, and I insist upon it, such a step would ennoble
your friend: And if still you will permit it, I will
take the office out of Lovelace's hands; and, tomorrow
evening, or on Monday, before his time of
appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or
chaise: And then, my dear, if we get off as I wish,
will we make terms, and what terms we please, with
them All. My mamma will be glad to receive her
daughter again, I warrant ye: And Hickman will cry
for joy on my return; or he shall for sorrow. 
But you are so very earnestly angry with me for
proposing such a step, and have always so much to
say for your side of any question, that I am afraid to
urge it farther. —Only be so good as to encourage me
to resume it, if, upon farther consideration, and upon 

weighing matters well [and in this light, Whether best
to go off with me, or with Lovelace], you can get over
your punctilious regard for my reputation. A woman
going off with a woman is not so discreditable a
thing, surely! and with no view, but to avoid the
fellows! —I say, only be so good as to consider this
point; and if you can get over your scruples, on my
account, do. And so I will have done with this argument
for the present; and apply myself to some of
the passages in yours. 
A time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to
read your affecting narratives, without that impatience
and bitterness, which now boils over in my
heart, and would flow to my pen, were I to enter
into the particulars of what you write. And, indeed,
I am afraid of giving you my advice at all, or of telling
you what I should do in your case [supposing you
will still refuse my offer]; finding too, what you have
been brought, or rather driven, to, without it; lest
any evil should follow it: In which case, I should never
forgive myself. And this consideration has added
to my difficulties in writing to you, now you are
upon such a crisis, and yet refuse the only method— 
But I said, I would not for the present touch any
more that string. Yet, one word more, chide me,
if you please: If any harm betide you, I shall for ever
blame my mamma—Indeed I shall—And perhaps,
yourself, if you do not accept of my offer. 
But one thing, in your present situation, and prospects,
let me advise: It is this, That if you do go away
with Mr. Lovelace, you take the first opportunity to
permit the ceremony to pass. Why should you not,
when every-body will know by whose assistance, and
in whose company, you leave your father's house, go
whithersoever you will? —You may, indeed, keep
him at distance, until settlements are drawn, and
such-like matters are adjusted to your mind. But
even These are matters of less consideration in your 

particular case, than they would be in that of most
others: Because, be his other faults what they will, nobody
thinks him an ungenerous man: Because the possession
of your estate must be given up to you, as soon
as your cousin Morden comes; who, as your Trustee,
will see it done; and done upon proper terms: Because
there is no want of fortune on his side: Because
all his family value you, and are extremely desirous
that you should be their relation: Because he makes
no scruple of accepting you without conditions. You
see how he has always defy'd your relations [I, for
my own part, can forgive him for that fault: Nor
know I, if it be not a noble one]. And I dare say,
he had rather call you his, without a shilling, than be
under obligation to those whom he has full as little
reason to love, as they have to love him. You have
heard, that his own relations cannot make his proud
spirit submit to owe any favour to them. 
For all these reasons, I think, you may the less
stand upon previous settlements. It is therefore my
absolute opinion, that, if you do go off with him
[And in that case you must let him be judge, when
he can leave you with safety, you'll observe That],
you should not postpone the ceremony. 
Give this matter your most serious consideration. 
Punctilio is out of doors the moment you are out of
your father's house. I know how justly severe you
have been upon those inexcusable creatures, whose
giddiness, and even want of decency, have made
them, in the same hour, as I may say, leap from a
parent's window to a husband's bed—But, considering
Lovelace's character, I repeat my opinion, that
your Reputation in the eye of the world requires, that
no delay be made in this point, when once you are in
his power. 
I need not, I am sure, make a stronger plea to
you. 
You say, in excuse for my mamma (what my fervent 

love for my friend very ill brooks), That we
ought not to blame any-one for not doing what she
has an option to do, or to let alone. This, in cases
of friendship, would admit of very strict discussion. 
If the thing requested be of greater consequence, or
even of equal, to the person sought to, and it were, as
the old phrase has it, to take a thorn out of one's friend's
foot, to put it into our own, something might be said. — 
Nay, it would be, I will venture to say, a selfish thing,
in us to ask a favour of a friend, which would subject
That friend to the same or equal inconvenience,
as That from which we wanted to be relieved. The
requester would, in this case, teach his friend, by
his own selfish example, with much better reason, to
deny him, and despise a friendship so merely nominal. 
But if, by a less inconvenience to ourselves, we could
relieve our friend from a greater, the refusal of such
a favour makes the refuser unworthy of the name of
Friend: Nor would I admit such a one, not even
into the outermost fold of my heart. 
I am well aware, that this is your opinion of friendship,
as well as mine: For I owe the distinction to
you, upon a certain occasion; and it saved me from
a very great inconvenience, as you must needs remember. 
But you was always for making excuses
for other people, in cases wherein you would not have
allowed of one for yourself. 
I must own, that were these excuses for a friend's
indifference, or denial, made by any-body but you, in
a case of such vast importance to herself, and of so
comparative a small one to those whose protection she
would be thought to wish for; I, who am for ever,
as you have often remarked, endeavouring to trace
effects to their causes, should be ready to suspect, that
there was a latent, un-owned inclination, which balancing,
or preponderating rather, made the issue of
the alternative (however important) sit more lightly
upon the excuser's mind than she cared to own. 

You will understand me, my dear. But if you
do not, it may be as well for me; for I am afraid I
shall have it from you, for but starting such a notion,
or giving a hint, which, perhaps, as you did once in
another case, you will reprimandingly call, ‘Not
being able to forego the ostentation of sagacity, tho'
at the expence of that tenderness which is due to
friendship and charity.’ 
What signifies owwning a fault, without mending it,
you'll say? —Very true, my dear. But you know I
ever was a saucy creature! —Ever stood in need of
great allowances. —And I know, likewise, that I ever
had them from my dear Clarissa Harlowe. Nor do I
doubt them now: For you know how much I love
you! —If it be possible, more than myself I love you! 
Believe me, my dear! And, in consequence of that
belief, you will be able to judge, how much I am
affected by your present distressful and critical situation; 
which will not suffer me to pass by, without a
censure, even that philosophy of temper in your own
cause, which you have not in another's, and which
all that know you, ever admired you for. 
From this critical and distressful situation, it shall
be my hourly prayers, that you may be delivered
without blemish to that fair fame, which has hitherto,
like your heart, been unspotted. 
With This prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 
I hurry'd myself in writing This; and I hurry
Robin away with it, that in a Situation so very
critical, you may have all the time possible to
consider what I have written, upon two points
so very important. I will repeat them in a very
few words: 
‘Whether you choose not rather to go off with
one of your own Sex; with your Anna Howe— 

than with one of the other; with Mr. Lovelace?’ 
And if not, 
‘Whether you should not marry him as soon as
possible?’ 
