


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 
[With the two preceding Letters.] 


Selby-house, Sat. Oct. 7.
Well did you observe, my dear, that we may
be very differently affected by the same event,
when judged of at a distance, and near. May I, in
the present situation, presume to say near? Mr. Deane
has entered into the particulars of my fortune with
Sir Charles. The Letter was not shewn me before it
went; and I was not permitted to see the copy of it
till your brother's answer came; and then they shewed
me both. 
O my dear Mr. Deane! my ever-kind uncle and
aunt Selby! Was not your Harriet Byron too much
obliged to you before? —As to your brother, What,
my love, shall I do with my pride? I did not know I
had so much of that bad quality. My poverty, my
dear, has added to my pride. Were my fortune superior
to that of your brother, I am sure I should not
be so proud as I now, on this occasion, find I am. 
How generously does he decline accepting the goodness
that was offered to give me more consideration
with him (as kindly intended by them)! What can I
say to him, but that his heart, still prouder than my
own, and more generous than that of any other person
breathing, will not permit me to owe uncommon
obligations to any but himself? 
He desires that I may not know any-thing of this
transaction: But they thought the communication
would give me pleasure. However, they wish me not
to take notice to him, when he visits Selby-house,
that they have communicated it to me. If I did, I
should think myself obliged to manifest a gratitude
that would embarrass me, in my present situation, and 

seem to setter the freedom of my will. Millions of
obligations should not bribe me to give up even a corner
of my heart, to a man to whom I could not give
the whole. Your brother, my dear, is in possession of
the whole. 
You know that I hate affectation: But must I not
have great abatements in my prospects of happiness,
because of Lady Clementina? And must they not be
still greater, should she be unhappy, should she repent
of the resolution she so nobly took, for his saying,
that whatever be the contents of his next Letters from
Italy, they can make no alteration with regard to the
treaty begun with us? —Dear, dear Clementina! most
excellent of women! Can I bear to stand in the way
of your happiness? —I cannot—My life, any more
than yours, may not be a long one; and I will not
sully the whiteness of it (Pardon my vanity; I presume
to call it so, on retrospecting it, regarding my
intentions only) by giving way to an act of injustice,
tho' it were to obtain for me the whole heart of the
man I love. 
Yet think you, my dear, that I am not mortified? 
‘How can I look round upon my congratulating
friends, in one of the most solemn events of my
life, with that modest confidence which the sense of
laying an obligation on a favoured object’ (You
know in whose generous words I express myself)
‘gives to diffident merit?’ O my Charlotte! I am
afraid of your brother! How shall I look up to him,
when I next see him? —But I will give way to this
new guest, my pride. What other way have I? — 
Will you forgive me, if I try to look upon your brother's
generosity to me and my friends, in declining so
greatly their offers, as a bribe to make me sit down
satisfied with half, nay, not half, a heart? —And now
will you not say, that I am proud indeed? But his is
the most delicate of human minds: And shall not the
woman pretend to some delicacy who has looked up to
him? 

I thought of writing but a few lines in the cover of
the two Letters. I hope I should not incur displeasure
from any-body here, were they to know I send them
to you for your perusal. But let only Lord G. your
other Self, and Lord and Lady L. read them, and return
them by the next post. I know you four will
pity the poor and proud girl, who is so inexpressibly
obliged almost to every one she knows; but who, believe
her, proud as she is, never will be ashamed to
own her obligations to you, and to Lady L. 
Witness,
Harriet Byron. 

