



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Well, but now my heart is a little at ease, I will
condescend to take some brief notice of some
other passages in thy letters. 
I find, I am to thank thee, that the dear creature has
avoided my visit. Things are now in so good a train,
that I must forgive thee; else, shouldest thou have heard
more of this new instance of disloyalty to thy general. 
Thou art continually giving thyself high praise, by
way of opposition, as I may say, to others; gently and
artfully blaming thyself, for qualities, thou wouldest at 

the same time have to be thought, and which generally
are thought, praise-worthy. 
Thus, in the airs thou assumest about thy servants, thou
wouldst pass for a mighty humane mortal, and that at
the expence of Mowbray and me; whom thou representest
as kings and emperors to our menials. Yet art
thou always unhappy in thy attempts of this kind, and
never canst make us, who know thee, believe That to be
a virtue in thee, which is but the effect of constitutional
phlegm and absurdity. 
Knowest thou not, that some men have a native dignity
in their manner, that makes them more regarded by
a look, than either thou canst be in thy low style, or
Mowbray in his high? 
I am fit to be a prince, I can tell thee; for I reward
well, and I punish seasonably and properly; and I am
generally as well served as any man. 
The art of governing these under-bred varlets, lies
more in the dignity of looks than in words, and thou art
a sorry fellow, to think humanity consists in acting by
thy servants, as men must act who are not able to pay
them their wages; or had made them masters of secrets,
which if divulged, would lay them at the mercy of such
wretches. 
Now to me, who never did any thing I was ashamed
to own, and who have more ingenuity than ever man
had; who can call a villainy by its right name, tho'
practised by myself, and (by my own readiness to reproach
myself) anticipate all reproach from others; who
am not such a hypocrite, as to wish the world to think
me other or better than I am: It is my part, to look a
servant into his duty, if I can: Nor will I keep one,
who knows not how to take me by a nod, or a wink; 
and who, when I smile, shall not be all transport; when
I frown, all terror. If, indeed, I am out of the way a
little, I always take care to reward the varlets for bearing
patiently my displeasure. But this I hardly ever am,
but when a fellow is egregiously stupid in any plain points
of duty, or will be wiser than his master; and when he
shall tell me, that he thought acting contrary to my orders,
was the way to serve me best. 

One time or other, I will enter the lists with thee upon
thy conduct and mine to servants; and I will convince
thee, that what thou wouldst have pass for humanity, if
it be indiscriminately practised to all tempers, will perpetually
subject thee to the evils thou complainest of; and
justly too; and that he only is fit to be a master of servants,
who can command their attention as much by a
nod, as if he were to pr'ythee a fellow to do his duty, on
one hand, or to talk of flaying, and horsewhipping, like
Mowbray, on the other: For the servant who being used
to expect thy creeping style, will always be master of his
master; and he who deserves to be treated as the other,
is not fit to be any man's servant; nor would I keep such
a fellow to rub my horse's heels. 
I shall be the readier to enter the lists with thee upon
this argument, because I have presumption enough to think,
that we have not in any of our dramatic poets, that I can
at present call to mind, one character of a servant of either
sex, that is justly hit off. So absurdly wise some, and so
sottishly foolish others; and both sometimes in the same
person. Foils drawn from the lees or dregs of the people
to set off the characters of their masters and mistresses; nay,
sometimes, which is still more absurd, introduced with
more wit than the poet has to bestow upon their principals. 
—Mere flints and steels to strike fire with—Or, to vary
the metaphor, to serve for whetstones to wit, which otherwise
could not be made apparent: —Or for engines to be
made use of like the machinery of the ancient poets (or the
still more unnatural Soliloquy) to help on a sorry plot, or
to bring about a necessary eclaircissement, to save the poet
the trouble of thinking deeply for a better way to wind up
his bottoms. 
Of this I am persuaded, (whatever my practice be to
my own servants) that thou wilt be benefited by my theory,
when we come to controvert the point. For then I shall
convince thee, that the dramatic as well as natural characteristics
of a good servant, ought to be fidelity, common
sense, chearful obedience, and silent respect: That wit in
his station, except to his companions, would be sawciness: 
That he should never presume to give his advice: 
That if he ventured to expostulate upon any unreasonable 

command, or such a one as appeared to him to be so, he
should do it with humility and respect, and take a proper
season for it. But such lessons do most of the dramatic
performances I have seen give, where servants are introduced
as characters essential to the play, or to act very significant
or long parts in it (which, of itself, I think a
fault); such lessons, I say, do they give to the footmens
gallery, that I have not wondered we have so few modest
or good men-servants among those who often attend their
masters or mistresses to plays. Then how miserably evident
must that poet's conscious want of genius be, who
can stoop to raise or give force to a clap by the indiscriminative
roar of the party-coloured gallery! 
But this subject I will suspend to a better opportunity; 
that is to say, to the happy one, when my nuptials with
my Clarissa will oblige me to increase the number of my
servants, and of consequence to enter more nicely into
their qualifications. 
* *
Although I have the highest opinion that man can
have, of the generosity of my dear Miss Harlowe, yet I
cannot for the heart of me account for this agreeable
change in her temper, but one way. Faith and troth,
Belford, I verily believe, laying all circumstances together,
that the dear creature unexpectedly finds herself in
the way I have so ardently wished her to be in; and that
this makes her, at last, incline to favour me, that she may
set the better face upon her gestation, when at her father's. 
If this be the case, all her failing away, and her fainting
fits, are charmingly accounted for. Nor is it surprising,
that such a sweet novice in these matters should not know
to what to attribute her frequent indispositions. If this
should be the case, how shall I laugh at thee! and (when
I am sure of her) at the dear novice herself, that all her
grievous distresses shall end in a man-child: which I shall
love better than all the Cherubims and Seraphims that may
come after; though there were to be as many of them as
I beheld in my dream; in which a vast expanse of ceiling
was stuck as full of them as it could hold. 
I shall be afraid to open thy next, lest it bring me the
account of poor Belton's death. Yet, as there are no 

hopes of his recovery—But what should I say, unless the
poor man were better fitted—But thy heavy sermon shall
not affect me too much neither. 
I inclose thy papers: And do thou transcribe them for
me, or return them; for, there are some things in them,
which, at a proper season, a mortal man should not avoid
attending to: And thou seemest to have entered deeply
into the shocking subject—But here I will end, lest I
grow too serious. 
* *
Thy servant called here about an hour ago, to know
if I had any commands: I therefore hope that thou wilt
have this early in the morning. And if thou canst let me
hear from thee, do. I'll stretch an hour or two in expectation
of it. Yet I must be at Lord M.'s to-morrow night,
if possible, though ever so late. 
Thy fellow tells me the poor man is much as he was
when Mowbray left him. 
Wouldst thou think, that this varlet Mowbray is sorry,
that I am so near being happy with Miss Harlowe. And,
'egad, Jack, I know not what to say to it, now the fruit
seems to be within my reach. But, let what will come,
I'll stand to't: For I find I can't live without her. 