



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

Tuesday Afternoon, Aug. 29. 
I went back in this part of our conversation to the
day that I was obliged to come down to attend my
Lord, in the dangerous illness which some feared would
have been his last. 
I told the Colonel, ‘What earnest Letters I had
written to a particular friend, to engage him to prevail
upon the Lady not to slip a day that had been
proposed for the private celebration of our nuptials; 
and of my Letters (a)  written to herself on that subject;’ 
for I had stept to my closet, and fetched
down all the Letters and Draughts and Copies of
Letters relating to this affair. 
I read to him ‘several passages in the Copies of
those Letters, which thou wilt remember make not
a little to my honour.’ And I told him, ‘That
I wished I had kept Copies of those to my friend
on the same occasion; by which he would have
seen how much in earnest I was in my professions
to her, although she would not answer one of
them.’ And thou mayst remember, that one of
those four Letters accounted to herself, why I was
desirous she should remain where I had left her (b) . 
I then proceeded to give him an account ‘of the
visit made by Lady Sarah and Lady Betty to Lord M.
and me, in order to induce me to do her justice: 
Of my readiness to comply with their desires; and
of their high opinion of her merit: Of the visit
made to Miss Howe by my Cousins Montague, in
the name of us all, to engage her interest with her
friend in my behalf: Of my conversation with 

Miss Howe, at a private Assembly, to whom I gave
the same assurances, and besought her interest with
her friend.’ 
I then read the Copy of the Letter (tho' so much to
my disadvantage) which was written to her by Miss
Charlotte Montague, Aug. 1. (a)  entreating her alliance
in the names of all our family. 
This made him ready to think, that his fair Cousin
carried her resentment against me too far. He did
not imagine, he said, that either myself or our family
had been so much in earnest. 
So thou seest, Belford, that it is but glossing over
one part of a Story, and omitting another, that will
make a bad cause a good one at any time. What an
admirable Lawyer should I have made! And what a
poor hand would this charming creature, with all her
innocence, have made of it in a Court of Justice
against a man who had so much to say and to shew for
himself! 
I then hinted at the generous annual tender which
Lord M. and his Sisters made to his fair Cousin, in
apprehension that she might suffer by her friends implacableness. 
And this also the Colonel highly applauded, and
was pleased to lament the unhappy misunderstanding
between the two families, which had made the Harlowes
less fond of an alliance with a family of so much
honour as this instance shewed ours to be. 
I then told him, ‘That having, by my friend
[meaning thee] who was admitted into her presence
(and who had always been an admirer of her virtues,
and had given me such advice from time to
time in relation to her as I wished I had followed)
been assured, that a visit from me would be very
disagreeable to her, I once more resolved to try
what a Letter would do; and that, accordingly,
on the 7th of August I wrote her one.’ 

‘This, Colonel, is the Copy of it. I was then
out of humour with my Lord M. and the Ladies of
my family. You will therefore read it to yourself (a) .’ 
This Letter gave him high satisfaction. You write
here, Mr. Lovelace, from your heart. 'Tis a Letter
full of penitence and acknowlegement. Your request
is reasonable—To be forgiven only as you shall appear
to deserve it after a time of probation, which you leave
to her to fix. Pray, Sir, did she return an Answer
to this Letter? 
She did, but with reluctance, I own, and not till I
had declared by my friend, that if I could not procure
one, I would go up to town, and throw myself
at her feet. 
I wish I might be permitted to see it, Sir, or to
hear such parts of it read, as you shall think proper. 
Turning over my papers, Here it is, Sir (b) . I
will make no scruple to put it into your hands. 
This is very obliging, Mr. Lovelace. 
He read it. My charming Cousin! —How strong
her resentments! —Yet how charitable her wishes! 
Good Heaven! that such an excellent creature—But,
Mr. Lovelace, it is to your regret, as much as to
mine, I doubt not— 
Interrupting him, I swore that it was. 
So it ought, said he. Nor do I wonder that it
should be so. I shall tell you by-and-by, proceeded
he, how much she suffers with her friends by false
and villainous reports. But, Sir, will you permit
me to take with me these two Letters? I shall make
use of them to the advantage of you both. 
I told him, I would oblige him with all my heart. 
And this he took very kindly (as he had reason); and
put them in his pocket-book, promising to return
them in a few days. 
I then told him, ‘That upon his her refusal, I 

took upon myself to go to town, in hopes to move
her in my favour; and that, tho' I went without
giving her notice of my intention, yet had she got
some notion of my coming, and so contrived to be
out of the way: And at last, when she found I was
fully determined at all events to see her, before I
went abroad (which I shall do, said I, if I cannot
prevail upon her) she sent me the Letter I have already
mentioned to you, desiring me to suspend my
purposed visit: And that for a reason which amazes and
confounds me; because I don't find there is anything
in it: And yet I never knew her once dispense
with her word; for she always made it a
maxim, that it was not lawful to do evil, that good
might come of it: And yet in this Letter, for no
reason in the world but to avoid seeing me (to gratify
an humour only) has she sent me out of town,
depending upon the assurance she had given me.’ 
Col. This is indeed surprising. But I cannot believe
that my Cousin, for such an end only, or indeed
for any end, according to the character I hear of her,
should stoop to make use of such an artifice. 
Lovel. This, Colonel, is the thing that astonishes
me; and yet, see here! —This is the Letter she wrote
me—Nay, Sir, 'tis her own hand. 
Col. I see it is; and a charming hand it is. 
Lovel. You observe, Colonel, that all her hopes of
Reconciliation with her parents are from you. You
are her dear blessed friend! She always talked of you
with delight. 
Col. Would to Heaven I had come to England before
she left Harlowe-Place! —Nothing of this had
then happened. Not a man of those whom I have
heard that her friends proposed for her, should have
had her. Nor you, Mr. Lovelace, unless I had found
you to be the man every one who sees you, must wish
you to be: And if you had been that man, no one
living should I have preferred to you for such an excellence. 

My Lord and I both joined in the wish: And 'faith
I wished it most cordially. 
The Colonel read the Letter twice over, and then
returned it to me. 'Tis all a mystery, said he. I can
make nothing of it. For, alas! her friends are as
averse to a Reconciliation as ever. 
Lord M. I could not have thought it. But don't
you think there is something very favourable to my
Nephew in this Letter—Something that looks as if the
Lady would comply at last? 
Col. Let me die if I know what to make of it. This
Letter is very different from her preceding one! — 
You returned an Answer to it, Mr. Lovelace? 
Lovel. An Answer, Colonel! No doubt of it. And
an Answer full of transport. I told her, ‘I would
directly set out for Lord M's, in obedience to her
will. I told her, that I would consent to anything
she should command, in order to promote
this happy Reconciliation. I told her, that it should
be my hourly study to the end of my life, to deserve
a goodness so transcendent.’ But I cannot
forbear saying, that I am not a little shocked and surprised,
if nothing more be meant by it than to get
me into the country without seeing her. 
Col. That can't be the thing, depend upon it, Sir. 
There must be more in it than That. For were that
all, she must think you would soon be undeceived,
and that you would then most probably resume your
intention—Unless, indeed, she depended upon seeing
me in the interim, as she knew I was arrived. But
I own, I know not what to make of it. Only that
she does me a great deal of honour, if it be me that
she calls her blessed friend, whom she always loved and
honoured. Indeed, I ever loved her: And if I die
unmarried, and without children, shall be as kind to
her, as her grandfather was: And the rather, as I
fear that there is too much of envy and self-love in
the resentments her Brother and Sister endeavour to 

keep up in her Father and Mother against her. But
I shall know better how to judge of This, when my
Cousin James comes from Edinburgh; and he is every
hour expected. 
But let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, What is the
name of your friend, who is admitted so easily into
my Cousin's presence? Is it not Belford, pray? 
Lovel. It is, Sir; and Mr. Belford's a man of honour; 
and a great admirer of your fair Cousin. 
Was I right, as to the first, Jack? The last I have
such strong proof of, that it makes me question the
first; since she would not have been out of the way
of my intended visit but for thee. 
Col. Are you sure, Sir, that Mr. Belford is a man
of honour? 
Lovel. I can swear for him, Colonel. What makes
you put this question? 
Col. Only this: That an officious pragmatical novice
has been sent up to enquire into my Cousin's life
and conversation: And, would you believe it? the frequent
visits of this gentleman have been interpreted basely
to her disreputation. —Read that Letter, Mr. Lovelace; 
and you will be shocked at every part of it. 
This cursed Letter, no doubt, is from the young
Levite, whom thou, Jack, describedst, as making
enquiry of Mrs. Smith about Miss Harlowe's character
and visitors (a) . 
I believe I was a quarter of an hour in reading it: 
For I made it, tho' not a short one, six times as long
as it is, by the additions of oaths and curses to every
pedantic line. Lord M. too helped to lengthen it,
by the like execrations. And thou, Jack, wilt have
as much reason to curse it, as we. 
You cannot but see, said the Colonel, when I had
done reading it, that this fellow has been officious in
his malevolence; for what he says is mere hearsay,
and that hearsay conjectural scandal without fact, or 

the appearance of fact, to support it; so that an unprejudiced
eye, upon the face of the Letter, would
condemn the writer of it, as I did, and acquit my
Cousin. But yet, such is the spirit by which the rest
of my relations are governed, that they run away with
the belief of the worst it insinuates, and the dear creature
has had shocking Letters upon it; the pedant's
hints are taken; and a voyage to one of the Colonies
has been proposed to her, as the only way to avoid
Mr. Belford and you. I have not seen these Letters
indeed; but they took a pride in repeating some of
their contents, which must have cut the poor Soul to
the heart; and these, joined to her former sufferings
—What have you not, Mr. Lovelace, to answer
for? 
Lovel. Who the devil could have expected such
consequences as these? Who could have believed
there could be Parents so implacable? Brother and
Sister so envious? And, give me leave to say, a Lady
so immoveably fixed against the only means that could
be taken to put all right with every-body? —And what
now can be done? 
Lord M. I have great hopes, that Col. Morden
may yet prevail upon his Cousin. And by her last
Letter, it runs in my mind, that she has some thoughts
of forgiving all that's past. Do you think, Colonel,
if there should not be such a thing as a Reconciliation
going forward at present, that her Letter may not
imply, that if we could bring such a thing to bear with
her friends, she would be reconciled to Mr. Lovelace? 
Col. Such an artifice would better become the Italian
subtlety than the English simplicity. Your Lordship
has been in Italy, I presume? 
Lovel. My Lord has read Boccacio, perhaps; and
that's as well, as to the hint he gives, which may be
borrowed from one of that author's stories. But Miss
Clarissa Harlowe is above all artifice. She must have
some meaning I cannot fathom. 

Col. Well, my Lord, I can only say, That I will
make some use of the Letters Mr. Lovelace has obliged
me with: And after I have had some talk with my
Cousin James, who is hourly expected; and when I
have dispatched two or three affairs that press upon
me; I will pay my respects to my dear Cousin; and
shall then be able to form a better judgment of
things. Mean time I will write to her; for I have
sent to enquire about her, and find she wants consolation. 
Lovel. If you favour me, Colonel, with the damn'd
Letter of that fellow Brand for a day or two, you
will oblige me. 
Col. I will. But remember, the man is a Parson,
Mr. Lovelace; an innocent one too, they say. Else
I had been at him before now. And these College
Novices, who think they know every-thing in their
Cloisters, and that all Learning lies in Books, make
dismal figures when they come into the world among
Men and Women. 
Lord M. Brand! Brand! It should have been
Firebrand, I think in my conscience! 
Thus ended this doughty conference. 
I cannot say, Jack, but I am greatly taken with
Col. Morden. He is brave and generous, and knows
the world; and then his contempt of the Parsons is a
certain sign that he is one of Us. 
We parted with great civility: Lord M. (not a
little pleased that we did, and as greatly taken with
the Colonel) repeated his wish, after the Colonel was
gone, that he had arrived in time to save the Lady; 
if that would have done it. 
I wish so too. For by my Soul, Jack, I am every
day more and more uneasy about her. But I hope
she is not so ill as I am told she is. 
I have made Charlotte transcribe the Letter of this
Firebrand, as my Lord calls him; and will inclose
her Copy of it. All thy phlegm I know will be roused
into vengeance when thou readest it. 

I know not what to advise as to shewing it to the
Lady. Yet, perhaps, she will be able to reap more
satisfaction than concern from it, knowing her own
innocence; in that it will give her to hope that her
friends treatment of her is owing as much to misrepresentation
as to their own natural implacableness. Such
a mind as hers, I know, would be glad to find out
the shadow of a reason for the shocking Letters the
Colonel says they have sent her, and for their proposal
to her of going to some one of the Colonies
[Confound them all—But if I begin to curse, I shall
never have done]—Then it may put her upon such a
defence as she might be glad of an opportunity to
make, and to shame them for their monstrous credulity
—But this I leave to thy own fat-headed prudence
—Only it vexes me to the heart, that even Scandal
and Calumny should dare to surmise the bare possibility
of any man's sharing the favours of a woman,
whom now methinks I could worship with a veneration
due only to a Divinity. 
Charlotte and her Sister could not help weeping at
the base aspersion: When, when, said Patty, lifting
up her hands, will this sweet Lady's Sufferings be at
an end? —O Cousin Lovelace!— 
And thus am I blamed for every one's faults! — 
When her brutal Father curses her, it is I. I upbraid
her with her severe Mother. The implacableness
of her stupid Uncles is all mine. The virulence
of her Brother, and the spite and envy of her Sister,
are entirely owing to me. The Letter of this rascal
Brand is of my writing—O Jack, what a wretch is
thy Lovelace! 
* *
Returned without a Letter! —This damn'd fellow
Will. is returned without a Letter! —Yet the
rascal tells me that he hears you have been writing to
me these two days! 
Plague confound thee, who must know my impatience,
and the reason for it! 

To send a man and horse on purpose; as I did! 
My imagination chained to the belly of the beast, in
order to keep pace with him! —Now he is got to this
place; Now to that; Now to London; Now to
thee! 
Now [a Letter given him] whip and spur upon the
return. This town just entered, not staying to bait: 
That village passed by: Leaves the wind behind him; 
in a foaming sweat man and horse. 
And in this way did he actually enter Lord M's
Court-yard. 
The reverberating pavement brought me down— 
The Letter, Will! The Letter, Dog! —The Letter,
Sirrah! 
No Letter, Sir! —Then wildly staring round me,
fists clenched, and grinning like a Maniac, Confound
thee for a dog, and him that sent thee without one! 
—This moment out of my sight, of I'll scatter thy
stupid brains thro' the air. I snatched from his holsters
a pistol, while the rascal threw himself from the
foaming beast, and ran to avoid the fate which I
wished with all my soul thou hadst been within the
reach of me to have met with. 
But, to be as meek as a lamb to one who has me
at his mercy, and can wring and torture my Soul as
he pleases, What canst thou mean to send back my
varlet without a Letter? —I will send away by day-dawn
another fellow upon another beast for what thou
hast written; and I charge thee on thy allegiance,
that thou dispatch him not back empty-handed. 
POSTSCRIPT.
&dotup;Charlotte, in a whim of delicacy, is displeased
that I send the inclosed Letter to you—That her
hand-writing, forsooth! should go into the hands
of a single man! 
&dotup;There's encouragement for thee, Belford! This
is a certain sign that thou may'st have her if thou 

wilt. And yet, till she had given me this unerring
demonstration of her glancing towards thee, I could
not have thought it. Indeed I have often in pleasantry
told her, that I would bring such an affair to
bear. But I never intended it; because she really
is a dainty girl. And thou art such a clumsy fellow
in thy person, that I should as soon have wished her
a Rhinoceros for an husband, as thee. But, poor
little dears! they must stay till their time's come! 
They won't have this man, and they won't have
that man, from Seventeen to Twenty-five: But
then, afraid, as the saying is, that God has forgot
them, and finding their bloom departing, they are
glad of whom they can get, and verify the Fable of
the Parson and the Pears.&dotup; 