



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 2. 
Just as I had sealed up the inclosed, comes a
Letter to my Beloved, in a cover to me, directed
to Lord M's. From whom, thinkest thou? —From
Mrs. Howe!— 
And what the contents? 
How should I know, unless the dear creature had 

communicated them to me? But a very cruel Letter
I believe it is, by the effect it had upon her. The
tears ran down her cheeks as she read it; and her
colour changed several times. No end of her persecutions,
I think! 
‘What a cruelty in my fate!’ said the sweet lamenter. 
—‘Now the only comfort of my life must be
given up!’ 
Miss Howe's correspondence, no doubt. 
But should she be so much grieved at this? This
correspondence was prohibited before, and that, to
the Daughter, in the strongest terms: But yet carried
on by both; altho' a brace of impeccables, an't
please ye. Could they expect, that a Mother would
not vindicate her authority? —And finding her prohibition
ineffectual with her perverse Daughter, was
it not reasonable to suppose she would try what effect
it would have upon her Daughter's friend? —And
now I believe the end will be effectually answered: 
For my Beloved, I dare say, will make a point of
conscience of it. 
I hate cruelty, especially in women; and should
have been more concerned for this instance of it in
Mrs. Howe, had I not had a stronger instance of the
same in my Beloved to Miss Partington; for how did
she know, since she was so much afraid for herself,
whom Dorcas might let in to that innocent and less
watchful young Lady? But nevertheless I must needs
own, that I am not very sorry for this prohibition, let
it originally come from the Harlowes, or from whom
it will; because I make no doubt, that it is owing to
Miss Howe, in a great measure, that my Beloved is so
much upon her guard, and thinks so hardly of me. 
And who can tell, as characters here are so tender,
and some disguises so flimsy, what consequences might
follow this undutiful correspondence? —I say, therefore,
I am not sorry for it: Now will she not have
any-body to compare notes with: Any-body to alarm 

her: And I may be saved the guilt and disobligation
of inspecting into a correspondence that has long made
me uneasy. 
How every-thing works for me! —Why will this
charming Creature make such contrivances necessary,
as will encrease my trouble, and my guilt too, as some
would account it? But why, rather I should ask, will
she fight against her Stars? 