


Mrs. Selby, To Miss Byron (a). 



Selby-house, Sunday, Mar. 5. 
My dearest Child,
We are all extremely affected with your present situation. 
Such apparent struggles betwixt your natural
openness of heart, and the confessions of a young, 

of a new passion, and that so laudably founded, and
so visibly encreasing—O my Love, you must not affect
reserves. They will sit very aukwardly upon a
young woman, who never knew what affectation and
concealment were. 
You have laid me under a difficulty with respect to
Lady D. She is to be with me on Saturday next. I
have not written to her, tho' you desired I would; 
since, in truth, we all think, that her proposals deserve
consideration; and because we are afraid, that a
greater happiness will never be yours and ours. It is
impossible, my dear, to imagine, that such a man
as Sir Charles Grandison should not have seen the
woman whom he could love, before he saw you; or
whom he had not been engaged to love by his gratitude,
as I may call it, for her love. Has not his sister
talk'd of half a score ladies, who would break their
hearts for him, were he to marry? —And may not this
be the reason why he does not? 
You see what an amiable openness of heart there is
in the countess of D. You see, that your own frankness
is a particular recommendation of you to her. I
had told her, that you were disengaged in your affections:
By your own disclaiming to her the proposed
relation, you have given reason to so wise a lady to
think it otherwise; or that you are not so much above
affectation, as she had hoped you were. And tho' we
were grieved to read how much you were pushed by
Miss Grandison (a) , yet Lady D. will undoubtedly
make the same observations and inferences, that Miss
Grandison did. And what would you have me do?
since you cannot give a stronger instance of your affections
being engaged, than by declining such a proposal
as Lady D. made, before you have conversed
with, or even seen Lord D. And it becomes not
your character nor mine, either to equivocate, or to
say the thing that is not. 

Lady L. you think (and indeed so it appears) hinted
to Lady D. that Sir Charles stands not in the way
of Lord D.'s application. I see not therefore, that
there can be any room to hope from that quarter. 
Nor will your fortune, I doubt, be thought considerable
enough. And as Sir Charles is not engaged by
affection, and is generous and munificent, there is
hardly room to imagine, but that, in prudence, fortune
will have some weight with him. At least, on
our side, that ought to be supposed, and to make a
part of our first proposals, were a treaty to be begun. 
Your grandmamma will write to you with her own
hand. I refer myself wholly to her. Her wisdom,
and her tenderness for you, we all know. She and I
have talked of every-thing. Your uncle will not railly
you, as he has done. We still continue resolved not
to prescribe to your inclinations. We are afraid therefore
of advising you as to this new proposal. But your
grandmamma is very much pleased that I have not
written, as you would have had me, a letter of absolute
refusal to the countess. 
Your uncle has been enquiring into the state of Sir
Charles Grandison's affairs. We have heard so many
good things of him, that I have desired Mr. Selby to
make no further enquiries, unless we could have some
hopes of calling him ours. But do you, my dear,
nevertheless, omit nothing that comes to your knowlege,
that may let us know in him what a good man is,
and should be. 
His magnanimity in refusing to engage in a duel,
yet acquitting himself so honourably, as to leave no
doubt about his courage, is an example, of itself, of
a more than human rectitude of thinking and acting. 
How would your grandfather have cherished such a
young man! We every one of us admire and revere
him at the same time; and congratulate you, my
dear, and his sisters, on the happy issue of the affair
between him and that vile Sir Hargrave. 

You will let me know your mind as to the affair of
Lord D.; and that by the next post: Be not rash. Be
not hasty. I am afraid I push'd your delicacy too much
in my former. Your uncle says, that you are at
times not so frank in directly owning your passion, as
from your natural openness of heart he expected you
would be, when a worthy object had attracted you:
And he triumphs over us, in the imagination, that he
has at last detected you of affectation in some little
degree. We all see, and own, your struggle between
virgin-modesty and openness of heart, as apparent in
many passages of your letters; and we lay part of
your reserve to the apprehensions you must have of his
raillery: But after you have declared, “That you
had rather converse but one hour in a week with
Sir Charles Grandison” (and his sister you put in:
And sisters are good convenient people sometimes to a
bashful or beginning lover, of our sex) “than be the
wife of any man you have ever seen or known; and
that, mean as the word pity sounds, you would rather
have his pity than the love of any other man,” 
—Upon my word, my dear, you need not be backward
to speak quite out. Excuse me, my child. 
I have just now read the inclosed. Had I known
your grandmamma could have written so long a letter,
I might have spared much of mine. Hers is worthy
of her. We all subscribe to it; but yet will be determined
by your next, as to the steps to be taken in
relation to the proposal of Lady D. But if you love,
be not ashamed to own it to us. The man is Sir
Charles Grandison. 
With all our blessings and prayers for you, I bid
you, my dear Love, Adieu. 
Marianna Selby. 

