



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sat. Aug. 26. 
On Thursday afternoon I assisted at the opening of
poor Belton's Will, in which he has left me his
sole Executor, and bequeathed me a Legacy of an
hundred guineas; which I shall present to his unfortunate
Sister, to whom he has not been so kind as I
think he ought to have been. He has also left Twenty
pounds apiece to Mowbray, Tourville, Thyself,
and Me, for a ring to be worn in remembrance of
him. 
After I had given some particular orders about the
preparations to be made for his funeral, I went to
town; but having made it late before I got in on
Thursday night, and being fatigued for want of rest
several nights before, and low in my spirits [I could
not help it, Lovelace!] I contented myself to send
my compliments to the innocent Sufferer, to enquire
after her health. 
My servant saw Mrs. Smith, who told him, She was
very glad I was come to town; for that the Lady was
worse than she had yet been. 

It is impossible to account for the contents of her
Letter to you; or to reconcile those contents to the
facts I have to communicate. 
I was at Smith's by Seven Yesterday (Friday) morning; 
and found that the Lady was just gone in a chair
to St. Dunstan's to prayers: She was too ill to get out
by Six to Covent Garden Church; and was forced to
be supported to her Chair by Mrs. Lovick. They
would have persuaded her against going; but she said
she knew not but it would be her last opportunity. 
Mrs. Lovick, dreading that she would be taken worse
at church, walked thither before her. 
Mrs. Smith told me, She was so ill on Wednesday
night, that she had desired to receive the Sacrament; 
and accordingly it was administred to her, by the
Parson of the parish: Whom she besought to take
all opportunities of assisting her in her solemn Preparation. 
This the gentleman promised: And called in the
morning to enquire after her health; and was admitted
at the first word. He staid with her about
half an hour; and when he came down, with his
face turned aside, and a faltering accent, ‘Mrs.
Smith, said he, you have an Angel in your house. 
—I will attend her again in the evening, as she
desires, and as often as I think it will be agreeable
to her.’ 
Her encreased weakness she attributed to the fatigues
she had undergone by your means; and to a
Letter she had received from her Sister, which she
answered the same day. 
Mrs. Smith told me, that two different persons had
called there, one on Thursday morning, one in the
evening, to enquire after her state of health; and
seemed as if commissioned from her relations for that
purpose; but asked not to see her, only were very
inquisitive after her visitors (particularly, it seems,
after me: What could they mean by that?) after her 

way of life, and expences; and one of them enquired
after her manner of supporting them; to the
latter of which, Mrs. Smith said, she had answered,
as the truth was, that she had been obliged to sell
some of her cloaths, and was actually about parting
with more; at which the enquirist (a grave old farmer-looking
man) held up his hands, and said, Good
God!—this will be sad, sad news to somebody! I
believe I must not mention it. But Mrs. Smith says,
She desired he would, let him come from whom he
would. He shook his head, and said, If she died,
the flower of the world would be gone, and the family
she belonged to, would be no more than a common
family (a) . I was pleased with the man's expression. 
You may be curious to know how she passed her
time, when she was obliged to leave her lodging to
avoid you. 
Mrs. Smith tells me, ‘That she was very ill when
she went out on Monday morning, and sighed as
if her heart would break as she came down stairs,
and as she went through the shop into the coach,
her Nurse with her, as you had informed me before: 
That she ordered the coachman (whom she
hired for the day) to drive any-whither, so it was
into the Air: He accordingly drove her to Hamstead,
and thence to Highgate. There at the Bowling-green
House, she alighted, extremely ill, and
having breakfasted, ordered the coachman to drive
very slowly any-whither. He crept along to Muswell-hill,
and put up at a public house there; 
where she employed herself two hours in writing,
tho' exceedingly weak and low; till the dinner she
had ordered was brought in: She endeavoured to
eat; but could not: Her appetite was gone, quite
gone, she said. And then she wrote on for three 

hours more: After which, being heavy, she dozed
a little in an elbow-chair. When she awoke, she
ordered the coachman to drive her very slowly to
town, to the house of a friend of Mrs. Lovick; 
whom, as agreed upon, she met there: But, being
extremely ill, she would venture home at a late
hour, altho' she heard from the widow, that you
had been there; and had reason to be shocked at
your behaviour. She said, She found there was
no avoiding you: She was apprehensive she should
not live many hours, and it was not impossible but
the shock the sight of you must give her, would
determine her fate in your presence. 
‘She accordingly went home. She heard the relation
of your astonishing vagaries, with hands and
eyes often lifted up; and with these words intermingled,
Shocking creature! Incorrigible wretch!
and, Will nothing make him serious? And not
being able to bear the thoughts of an interview with
a man so hardened, she took to her usual chair early
in the morning, and was carried to the Temple-stairs,
whither she had ordered her Nurse before
her, to get a pair of oars in readiness (for her fatigues
the day before, made her unable to bear a
coach); and then she was rowed to Chelsea, where
she breakfasted; and after rowing about, put in at
the Swan at Brentford-Aight, where she dined; 
and would have written, but had no conveniency
either of tolerable pens, or ink, or private room; 
and then proceeding to Richmond, they rowed her
back to Mortlake; where she put in, and drank
Tea at a house her waterman recommended to her. 
She wrote there for an hour; and returned to the
Temple; and, when she landed, made one of the
watermen get her a chair, and so was carried to the
widow's friend, as the night before; where she
again met the widow, who informed her, that you
had been after her twice that day. 

‘Mrs. Lovick gave her there her Sister's Letter (a) ; 
and she was so much affected with the contents of
it, that she was twice very nigh fainting away; 
and wept bitterly, as Mrs. Lovick told Mrs. Smith; 
dropping some warmer expressions than ever they
had heard proceed from her lips, in relation to her
friends; calling them cruel, and complaining of ill
offices done her, and of vile reports raised against
her. 
‘While she was thus disturbed, Mrs. Smith came
to her, and told her, that you had been there a
third time, and was just gone (at half an hour after
Nine) having left word, how civil and respectful you
would be; but that you was determined to see her
at all events. 
‘She said, It was hard she could not be permitted
to die in peace: That her lot was a severe one: 
That she began to be afraid she should not forbear
repining, and to think her punishment greater than
her fault: But recalling herself immediately, she
comforted herself that her life would be short, and
with the assurance of a better.’ 
By what I have mentioned, you will conclude with
me, that the Letter brought her by Mrs. Lovick (the
superscription of which you saw to be written in her
Sister's hand) could not be the Letter on the contents
of which she grounded that she wrote to you, on her
return home. And yet neither Mrs. Lovick, nor
Mrs. Smith, nor the servant of the latter, know of
any other brought her. But as the women assured
me, that she actually did write to you, I was eased
of a suspicion which I had begun to entertain, that
you (for some purpose I could not guess at) had forged
the Letter from her of which you sent me a copy. 
On Wednesday morning, when she received your
Letter in answer to hers, she said, Necessity may well
be called the Mother of Invention—But Calamity is 

the Test of Integrity. —I hope I have not taken an
inexcuseable step—And there she stopt a minute or
two; and then said, I shall now, perhaps, be allowed
to die in peace. 
I staid till she came in. She was glad to see me; 
but, being very weak, said, She must sit down before
she could go up stairs: And so went into the backshop; 
leaning upon Mrs. Lovick: And when she had sat
down, ‘I am glad to see you, Mr. Belford, said she; 
I must say so—let mis-reporters say what they will.’ 
I wondered at this expression (a) ; but would not
interrupt her. 
Oh! Sir, said she, I have been grievously harassed. 
Your friend, who would not let me live with reputation,
will not permit me to die in peace. You see
how I am. Is there not a great alteration in me within
this week? But 'tis all for the better. Yet were I
to wish for life, I must say, that your friend, your
barbarous friend, has hurt me greatly. 
She was so very weak, so short-breathed, and her
words and actions so very moving, that I was forced
to walk from her; the two Women and her Nurse
turning away their faces also weeping. 
I have had, Madam, said I, since I saw you, a
most shocking scene before my eyes for days together. 
My poor friend Belton is no more. He quitted the
world yesterday morning in such dreadful agonies,
that the impression they have left upon me, have so
weakened my mind— 
I was loth to have her think, that my grief was
owing to the weak state I saw her in, for fear of di-spiriting
her. 
That is only, Mr. Belford, interrupted she, in order
to strengthen it, if a proper use be made of the
impression. But I should be glad, since you are so
humanely affected with the solemn circumstance, that
you could have written an account of it to your gay 

friend, in the style and manner you are master of. 
Who knows, as it would have come from an Associate
and of an Associate, how it might have affected him? 
That I had done; I told her, in such a manner as
had, I believed, some effect upon you. 
His behaviour in this honest family so lately, said
she, and his cruel pursuit of me, give but little hope
that any-thing serious or solemn will affect him. 
We had some talk about Belton's dying behaviour,
and I gave her several particulars of the poor man's
impatience and despair; to which she was very attentive; 
and made fine observations upon the subject of
Procrastination. 
A Letter and Packet were brought her by a man
on horseback from Miss Howe, while we were talking. 
She retired up-stairs to read it; and while I was in
discourse with Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, the
Doctor and Apothecary both came in together. They
confirmed to me my fears, as to the dangerous way
she is in. They had both been apprised of the new
instances of implacableness in her friends, and of your
persecutions: And the Doctor said, He would not
for the world be either the unforgiving Father of that
Lady, or the man who had brought her to this distress. 
Her heart's broken: She'll die, said he: There is no
saving her. But how, were I either the one or the
other of the people I have named, I should support
myself afterwards, I cannot tell. 
When she was told we were all three together, she
desired us to walk up. She arose to receive us, and
after answering two or three general questions relating
to her health, she addressed herself to us, to the following
effect. 
As I may not, said she, see you three gentlemen
together again, let me take this opportunity to acknowlege
my obligations to you all. I am inexpressibly obliged
to You, Sir, and to You, Sir [courtesying to
the Doctor and to Mr. Goddard] for your more than 

friendly, your paternal care and concern for me. Humanity
in your profession, I dare say, is far from being
a rare qualification, because you are Gentlemen
by your profession: But so much kindness, so much
humanity, did never desolate creature meet with, as
I have met with from you both. But indeed I have
always observed, that where a person relies upon Providence,
it never fails to raise up a new friend for
every old one that falls off. 
This gentleman [bowing to me] who, some people
think, should have been one of the last I should have
thought of for my Executor—is nevertheless (such is
the strange turn that things have taken!) the only one
I can chuse; and therefore I have chosen him for that
charitable office, and he has been so good as to accept
of it: For, rich as I may boast myself to be, I am
rather so in right, than in fact, at this present. I
repeat therefore my humble thanks to you all three,
and beg of God to return to You and Yours [looking
to each] an hundred-fold, the kindness and favour
you have shewn me; and that it may be in the power
of You and of Yours, to the end of time, to confer benefits,
rather than to be obliged to receive them. This
is a godlike power, gentlemen: I once rejoiced in it
in some little degree; and much more in the prospect
I had of its being enlarged to me; tho' I have had
the mortification to experience the reverse, and to be
obliged almost to every-body I have seen or met with: 
—But all, originally, thro' my own fault; so I ought
to bear the punishment without repining: And I hope
I do. —Forgive these impertinencies: A grateful heart,
that wants the power it wishes for, to express itself
suitably to its own impulses, will be at a loss what
properly to dictate to the tongue; and yet, unable
to restrain its overflowings, will force the tongue to
say weak and silly things, rather than appear ungratefully
silent. Once more then, I thank ye all three
for your kindness to me: And God Almighty make
you that amends which at present I cannot! 

She retired from us to her closet with her eyes full; 
and left us looking upon one another. 
We had hardly recovered ourselves, when she, quite
easy, chearful, and smiling, returned to us. Doctor,
said she (seeing we had been moved) you will excuse me
for the concern I give you; and so will You, Mr. Goddard,
and You, Mr. Belford; for 'tis a concern that
only generous natures can shew; and to such natures
sweet is the pain, if I may so say, that attends such a
concern. But as I have some few preparations still to
make, and would not (though in ease of Mr. Belford's
future cares, which is, and ought to be, part
of my study) undertake more than it is likely I
shall have time lent me to perform, I would beg of
you to give me your opinions [You see my way of
living; and you may be assured, that I will do nothing
wilfully to shorten my life] how long it may possibly
be, before I may hope to be released from all my
troubles. 
They both hesitated, and looked upon each other. 
Don't be afraid to answer me, said, she, each sweet
hand pressing upon the arm of each gentleman, with
that mingled freedom and reserve, which virgin modesty,
mixed with conscious dignity, can only express,
and with a look serenely earnest, Tell me how long
you think I may hold it? And believe me, gentlemen,
the shorter you tell me my time is likely to be,
the more comfort you will give me. 
With what pleasing woe, said the Doctor, do you
fill the minds of those who have the happiness to converse
with you, and see the happy frame you are in! 
What you have undergone within a few days past, has
much hurt you: And should you have fresh troubles
of those kinds, I could not be answerable for your
holding it—And there he paused. 
How long, Doctor? —I believe I shall have a little
more ruffling—I am afraid I shall—But there can happen
only one thing that I shall not be tolerably easy
under—How long then, Sir?— 

He was silent. 
A fortnight, Sir? 
He was still silent. 
Ten days? —A week? —How long, Sir? with
smiling earnestness. 
If I must speak, Madam, If you have not better
treatment than you have lately met with, I am afraid
—There again he stopt. 
Afraid of what, Doctor? Don't be afraid—How
long, Sir? 
That a fortnight or three weeks may deprive the
world of the finest flower in it. 
A fortnight or three weeks yet, Doctor! —But,
God's will be done! I shall, however, by this means,
have full time, if I have but strength and intellect, to
do all that is now upon my mind to do. And so, Sirs,
I can but once more thank you [turning to each of
us] for all your goodness to me; and, having Letters
to write, will take up no more of your time—Only,
Doctor, be pleased to order me some more of those
drops: They chear me a little, when I am low; and
putting a fee into his unwilling hand—You know the
terms, Sir! —Then, turning to Mr. Goddard, You'll
be so good, Sir, as to look in upon me to-night or
to-morrow, as you have opportunity: And you,
Mr. Belford, I know, will be desirous to set out to
prepare for the last office for your late friend: So I
wish you a good journey, and hope to see you when
that is performed. 
She then retired, with a chearful and serene air. 
The two gentlemen went away together. I went
down to the women, and, enquiring, found, that
Mrs. Lovick was this day to bring her twenty guineas
more, for some other of her apparel. 
The widow told me, that she had taken the liberty
to expostulate with her, upon the occasion she had for
raising this money, to such great disadvantage; and
it produced the following short and affecting conversation
between them. 

None of my friends will wear any-thing of mine,
said she. I shall leave a great many good things behind
me. —And as to what I want the money for— 
don't be surprised: —But suppose I want it to purchase
a house? 
You are all mystery, Madam. I don't comprehend
you. 
Why, then, Mrs. Lovick, I will explain myself. 
—I have a man, not a woman, for my Executor: 
And think you that I will leave to his care any-thing
that concerns my own person? —Now, Mrs. Lovick,
smiling, do you comprehend me? 
Mrs. Lovick wept. 
O fie! proceeded the Lady, drying up her tears
with her own handkerchief, and giving her a kiss— 
Why this kind weakness for one, with whom you
have been so little a while acquainted? Dear, good
Mrs. Lovick, don't be concerned for me on a prospect
with which I have occasion to be pleased; but
go to-morrow to your friends, and bring me the money
they have agreed to give you. 
Thus, Lovelace, it is plain, that she means to bespeak
her last house! Here's presence of mind; here's
tranquillity of heart, on the most affecting occasion! 
—This is magnanimity indeed! —Couldst thou, or
could I, with all our boisterous bravery, and offensive
false courage, act thus? —Poor Belton! how unlike
was thy behaviour! 
Mrs. Lovick tells me, that the Lady spoke of a
Letter she had received from her favourite divine
Dr. Lewen, in the time of my absence; and of an
Answer she had returned to it. But Mrs. Lovick
knows not the contents of either. 
When thou receivest the Letter I am now writeing,
thou wilt see what will soon be the end of all thy
injuries to this divine Lady. I say, when thou receivest
it; for I will delay it for some little time, lest thou
shouldst take it into thy head (under pretence of resenting 

the disappointment her Letter must give thee)
to molest her again. 
This Letter having detained me by its length, I shall
not now set out for Epsom till to-morrow. 
I should have mentioned, that the Lady explained
to me what the one thing was, that she was afraid
might happen to ruffle her. It was the apprehension
of what may result from a visit which Col. Morden,
as she is informed, designs to make you. 