



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
[In Answer to Letter xci.] 

Uxbridge, Tuesday Morn. between 4 and 5. 
And can it be, that this admirable creature will
so soon leave this cursed world? For cursed I
shall think it, and more cursed myself, when she is
gone. O Jack! thou, who canst sit so cool, and,
like Addison's Angel, direct, and even enjoy, the
Storm, that tears up my happiness by the roots, blame
me not for my impatience, however unreasonable! If
thou knewest, that already I feel the torments of the
damned, in the remorse that wrings my heart, on
looking back upon my past actions by her, thou wouldst
not be the devil thou art, to halloo on a worrying conscience,
which, without thy merciless aggravations,
is altogether intolerable. 
I know not what I write, nor what I would write. 
When the company that used to delight me is as uneasy
to me as my reflections are painful, and I can
neither help nor divert myself, must not every servant
about me partake in a perturbation so sincere? 
Shall I give thee a faint picture of the horrible uneasiness
with which my mind struggles? And faint indeed 

it must be; for nothing but outrageous madness
can exceed it; and that only in the apprehension of
others; since, as to the sufferer, it is certain, that
actual distraction (take it out of its lucid intervals)
must be an infinitely more happy state than the state
of suspense and anxiety, which often brings it on. 
Forbidden to attend the dear creature, yet longing
to see her, I would give the world to be admitted once
more to her beloved presence. I ride towards London
three or four times a day, resolving pro and con. twenty
times in two or three miles; and at last ride back; 
and, in view of Uxbridge, loathing even the kind
friend and hospitable house, turn my horse's head again
towards the town, and resolve to gratify my humour,
let her take it as she will; but, at the very entrance
of it, after infinite canvasings, once more alter my
mind, dreading to offend and shock her, lest, by that
means, I should curtail a life so precious. 
Yesterday, in particular, to give you an idea of
the strength of that impatience, which I cannot avoid
suffering to break out upon my servants, I had no
sooner dispatched Will. than I took horse to meet him
on his return. 
In order to give him time, I loitered about on the
road, riding up this Lane to the one highway, down
that to the other, just as my horse pointed; all the
way cursing my very being; and tho' so lately looking
down upon all the world, wishing to change conditions
with the poorest beggar that cried to me for
charity as I rode by him—and throwing him money,
in hopes to obtain by his prayers the blessing my heart
pants after. 
After I had sauntered-about an hour or two (which
seemed three or four tedious ones) fearing I had slipt
the fellow, I enquired at every turnpike, whether a
servant in such a livery had not passed thro' in his return
from London, on a full gallop; for woe had been to
the dog, had I met him on a sluggish trot! And lest 

I should miss him at one end of Kensington, as he
might take either the Acton or Hamersmith road; or
at the other, as he might come thro' the Park, or
not; how many score times did I ride backwards and
forwards from the Palace to the Gore, making myself
the subject of observation to all passengers, whether on
horseback or on foot; who, no doubt, wondered to
see a well-dressed and well-mounted man, sometimes
ambling, sometimes prancing (as the beast had more
fire than his master) backwards and forwards in so
short a compass! 
Yet all this time, tho' longing to espy the fellow,
did I dread to meet him, lest he should be charged with
fatal tidings. 
When at distance I saw any man galloping towards
me, my resemblance-forming fancy immediately made
it to be him; and then my heart bounded to my mouth,
as if it would have choaked me. But when the person's
nearer approach undeceived me, how did I curse
the varlet's delay, and thee by turns! And how ready
was I to draw my pistol at the stranger, for having the
impudence to gallop; which none but my messenger,
I thought, had either right or reason to do! For all
the business of the world I am ready to imagine should
stand still on an occasion so melancholy and so interesting
to me. Nay, for this week past, I could cut the
throat of any man or woman I see laugh, while I am
in such dejection of mind. 
I am now convinced that the wretches who fly from
a heavy scene labour under ten times more distress in
the intermediate suspense and apprehension, than they
could have, were they present at it, and to see and
know the worst: So capable is fancy or imagination,
the more immediate offspring of the soul, to outgo
fact, let the subject be either joyous or grievous. 
And hence, as I conceive, it is, that all pleasures
are greater in the expectation, or in the reflection, than
in fruition; as all pains, which press heavy upon both
parts of that unequal union by which frail mortality 

holds its precarious tenure, are ever most acute in the
time of suffering: For how easy sit upon the reflection
the heaviest misfortunes, when surmounted! —But
most easy, I confess, those in which Body has more
concern than Soul. This, however, is a point of philosophy
I have neither time nor head just now to weigh: 
So take it as it falls from a madman's pen. 
Woe be to either of the wretches who shall bring
me the fatal news that she is no more! For it is but
too likely that a shriek-owl so hated will never whoot
or scream again; unless the shock, that will probably
disorder my whole frame on so sad an occasion (by unsteadying
my hand) shall divert my aim from his head,
heart, or bowels, if it turn not against my own. 
But, surely, she will not, she cannot yet die! 
Such a matchless excellence, 

—whose mind
Contains a world, and seems for all things fram'd,
could not be lent to be so soon demanded back again! 
But may it not be, that thou, Belford, art in a
plot with the dear creature (who will not let me attend
her to convince myself) in order to work up my
soul to the deepest remorse; and that, when she is
convinced of the sincerity of my penitence, and when
my mind is made such wax, as to be fit to take what
impression she pleases to give it, she will then raise me
up with the joyful tidings of her returning health and
acceptance of me! 
What would I give to have it so! And when the
happiness of hundreds, as well as the peace and reconciliation
of several eminent families, depend upon her
restoration and happiness, why should it not be so? 
But let me presume it will. Let me indulge my
former hope, however improbable. —I will; and enjoy
it too. And let me tell thee how ecstatic my delight
would be on the unravelling of such a plot as this! 
Do, dear Belford, let it be so! —And, O my 

dearest, and ever-dear Clarissa, keep me no longer
in this cruel suspense; in which I suffer a thousand
times more than ever I made thee suffer. Nor fear
thou that I will resent, or recede, on an eclaircissement
so desirable: For I will adore thee for ever, and,
without reproaching thee for the pangs thou hast tortured
me with, confess thee as much my superior in
noble and generous contrivances, as thou art in virtue
and honour! 
But, once more—Should the worst happen—say
not what that worst is—and I am gone from this hated
Island—Gone for ever—And may eternal—But I am
crazed already—and will therefore conclude myself, 
Thine more than my own,
(And no great compliment neither)
R. L. 