


The Editor thinks proper to conclude in this
Place, that he may not be thought to deserve
a Suspicion, that the Extent of the Work was to be
measured but by the Patience of its Readers. But
he thinks it necessary, in order to elucidate the
Whole, to subjoin a brief Note of the following
Facts: 
That Mr. B. (after the Affair which took Date
at the Masquerade, and so happily concluded) continued
to be one of the best and most exemplary of
Men, an Honour to his Country, both in his publick
and private Capacity; having, at the Instances
of some of his Friends, in very elevated Stations,
accepted of an honourable Imployment abroad in
the Service of the State; which he discharged in
such a manner, as might be expected from his
Qualifications, and Knowlege of the World: And
on his Return, after an Absence of Three Years, resisting
all the Temptations of Ambition, devoted
himself to his privater Duties, and joined with his
excellent Lady, in every pious Wish of her Heart:
Adorning the married Life with all the Warmth of
an elegant Tenderness: Beloved by his Tenants,
respected by his Neighbours, rever'd by his Children, 

and almost ador'd by the Poor, in every County
where his Estates gave him Interest, as well for his
own bountiful Temper, as for the Charities which
he permitted to be dispensed, with so liberal a
Hand, by his Lady. 
That she made him the Father of Seven fine
Children, Five Sons, and Two Daughters, all
adorned and accomplished by Nature, to be the
Joy and Delight of such Parents; being educated,
in every respect, by the Rules of their inimitable
Mother, laid down in that Book, which she mentions
to have been written by her for the Revisal
and Correction of her Consort; the Contents of
which may be gather'd from her Remarks upon
Mr. Locke's Treatise of Education, in her Letters
to Mr. B. and in those to Lady G. 
That Miss Goodwin, at the Age of Eighteen,
was married to a young Gentleman of fine Parts,
and great Sobriety and Virtue: And that both she
and her Spouse, in every material Part of their Conduct,
and in their Behaviour to one another, emulated
the great and good Examples set them by
Mr. and Mrs. B. 
That Lord Davers dying Two Years before
this Marriage, his Lady went to reside at the Hall
in Lincolnshire, the Place of her Birth, that she
might enjoy the Company and Conversation of her
excellent Sister; who, for Conveniency of the Chapel,
and Advantage of Room and Situation, had
prevail'd upon Mr. B. to make That the chief
Place of his Residence; and there the noble Lady
lived long (in the strictest Friendship with the
happy Pair) an honourable Relict of her affectionate
Lord. 

That the worthy Mr. Andrews, and his
Wife, lived together in the sweet Tranquillity, set
forth in their Letters, for the Space of Twelve
Years, at the Kentish Farm; where the good old
Gentlewoman then died first, full of Years and Comfort,
her dutiful Daughter performing the last pious
Offices to so beloved and so loving a Parent: Her
Husband surviving her about a Year only. 
That Lady G. Miss Darnford that was, after
a happy Marriage of several Years, died in Chilbed
of her Fourth Child; to the inexpressible Concern
of her affectionate Consort, and of her dear Friend
Mrs. B. 
That Lord H. after having suffer'd great Dishonour
by the ill Courses of his Wife, and great Devastations
in his Estate, thro' her former Debts, and
continued Extravagance, (intimidated and dispirited
by her perpetual Insults, and those of her gaming
Brother, who with his bullying Friends terrify'd
him into all their Measures) threw himself upon
the Protection of Mr. B. who, by his Spirit and
Prudence, saved him from utter Ruin, punish'd his
Wife's Accomplices, and obliged her to accept of
a separate Maintenance; and then, taking his Affairs
into his own Management, in due Course of Time
intirely re-establish'd them: And after some Years,
his Wife dying, he became wiser by his past Sufferings,
and married a second, of Lady Davers's Recommendation; 
who, by her Prudence and Virtue,
made him happy for the Remainder of his Days. 
That Mr. Longman lived to a great Age in
the worthy Family, much esteemed by every one,
having trained up a diligent Youth, whom he had
recommended to ease him in his Business, and who, 

answering Expectation, succeeded him in it, after
his Death. 
That, dying rich, out of his great Love and
Gratitude to the honourable Family, in whose Service
he had acquired most of his Fortune, and in
Disgust to his nearest Relations, who had perversely
disobliged him, he bequeathed to Three of them
One hundred Pounds apiece, and left all the rest to
his honoured Principal Mr. B.: Who, as soon as he
came to know it, being at that Time abroad, directed
his Lady to call together the Relations of the
old Gentleman; and, after touching them to the
Heart with a just and effectual Reproof, and finding
them fill'd with due Sense of their Demerit, which
had been the Cause of their suffering, then to divide
the Whole, which had been left him, among them,
in greater Proportions, as they were more nearly
related: An Action worthy of so generous and
ennobled a Spirit; and which procured him the
Prayers and Blessings not only of the Benefited, but
of all who heard of it. For it is easy to imagine,
how chearfully, and how gracefully, his benevolent
Lady discharged a Command so well suited to
her natural Generosity. 
