



I am now come to SUNDAY. 

Well, here is a sad Thing! I am deny'd
by this barbarous Woman to go to Church,
as I had built upon I might. And she has huff'd
poor Mr. Williams all to-pieces, for pleading
for me. I find he is to be forbid the House, if
she pleases. Poor Gentleman! all his Dependence
is upon my Master, who has a very good
Living for him, if the Incumbent die; and he has
kept his Bed these Four Months, of old Age
and Dropsy. 

He pays me great Respect, and I see pities
me; and would perhaps assist my Escape from
these Dangers: But I have nobody to plead for
me; and why should I wish to ruin a poor
Gentleman, by engaging him against his Interest? 
Yet one would do any thing to preserve
one's Innocence; and Providence would, perhaps,
make it up to him! 
O judge (but how shall you see what I
write!) of my distracted Condition, to be reduced
to such a Pass as to desire to lay Traps for
Mankind! —But he wants sadly to say something
to me, as he whisperingly hinted. 
The Wretch (I think I will always call her
the Wretch henceforth) abuses me more and
more. I was but talking to one of the Maids
just now, indeed a little to tamper with her by
degrees; and she popp'd upon us, and said— 
Nay, Madam, don't offer to tempt poor innocent
Country Maidens from doing their Duty. 
You wanted, I hear, she should take a Walk
with you. But I charge you, Nan, never stir
with her, nor obey her, without letting me
know it, in the smallest Trifles. —I say, walk
with you! and where would you go, I tro'? 
Why, barbarous Mrs. Jewkes, said I, only
to look a little up the Elm-walk, since you
would not let me go to Church. 
Nan, said she, to shew me how much they
were all in her Power, pull off Madam's Shoes,
and bring them to me. I have taken care of
her others. —Indeed she shan't, said I. 

—Nay, said Nan, but I must, if my Mistress bids
me; so pray, Madam, don't hinder me. And
so, indeed, (would you believe it?) she took my
Shoes off, and left me barefoot: And, for my
Share, I have been so frighten'd at this, that I
have not Power even to relieve my Mind by
my Tears: I am quite stupify'd, to be sure! — 
Here I was forced to leave off. 
Now I will give you a Picture of this Wretch! 
She is a broad, squat, pursy, fat Thing, quite
ugly, if any thing human can be so call'd; about
Forty Years old. She has a huge Hand, and an
Arm as thick as my Waist, I believe. Her
Nose is flat and crooked, and her Brows grow
down over her Eyes; a dead, spiteful, grey,
goggling Eye, to be sure she has. And her
Face is flat and broad; and as to Colour, looks
like as if it had been pickled a Month in Saltpetre: 
I dare say she drinks:—She has a
hoarse, man-like Voice, and is as thick as she's
long; and yet looks so deadly strong, that I
am afraid she would dash me at her Foot in an
Instant, if I was to vex her. —So that with
a Heart more ugly than her Face, she frightens
me sadly; and I am undone, to be sure, if
God does not protect me; for she is very, very
wicked—indeed she is. 
This is poor helpless Spite in me:—But
the Picture is too near the Truth notwithstanding. 
She sends me a Message just now, that I
shall have my Shoes again, if I will accept of
her Company to walk with me in the Garden. 
—To waddle with me, rather, thought I. 

Well, 'tis not my Business to quarrel with
her downright, I shall be watch'd the narrower,
if I do; and so I will go with the hated Wrerch. 
—O for my dear Mrs. Jervis! or rather to
be safe with my dear Father and Mother! 
Oh! I am out of my Wits for Joy! Just as
I have got my Shoes on, I am told John, honest
John, is come on Horseback! —A Blessing on
his faithful Heart! What Joy is this! But I'll
tell you more by-and-by. I must not let her
know I am so glad to see this dear, blessed
John! Alas! but he looks sad, as I see him
out of the Window! What can be the Matter! 
—I hope my dear Parents are well, and Mrs.
Jervis, and Mr. Longman, and every body,
my naughty Master not excepted;—for I wish
him to live, and repent of all his Wickedness to
poor me. 
O dear Heart! what a World do we live
in! —I am now come to take up my Pen
again: But I am in a sad Taking truly! Another
puzzling Trial! to be sure! 
Here was John, as I said; and the poor
Man came to me, with Mrs. Jewkes, who
whisper'd, that I would say nothing about the
Shoes, for my own sake, as she said. The
poor Man saw my Distress, by my red Eyes,
and my haggard Looks, I suppose; for I have
had a sad Time of it, you must needs think; 
and tho' he would have hid it, if he could, yet
his own Eyes ran over. Oh Mrs. Pamela! said 

he; Oh Mrs. Pamela! —Well, honest Fellow-servant,
said I, I cannot help it at present: 
I am oblig'd to your Honesty and Kindness, to
be sure; and then he wept more. Said I, (for
my Heart was ready to break to see his
Grief; for it is a touching thing to see a Man
cry) Tell me the worst! Is my Master coming? 
No, no, said he, and sobb'd. —Well, said I,
is there any News of my poor Father and
Mother? How do they do? —I hope, well,
said he, I know nothing to the contrary: There
is no Mishap, I hope, to Mrs. Jervis, or Mr.
Longman, or my Fellow-servants! No—said
he, poor Man! with a long N–––o, as if his
Heart would burst. Well, thank God then!
said I. 
The Man's a Fool, said Mrs. Jewkes, I
think; what ado is here! why, sure thou'rt in
Love, John. Dost thou not see young Madam
is well? What ails thee, Man? Nothing at all,
said he; but I am such a Fool, as to cry for Joy
to see good Mrs. Pamela: But I have a Letter
for you. 
I took it, and saw it was from my Master; 
so I put it in my Pocket. Mrs. Jewkes, said
I, you need not, I hope, see this. No, no,
said she, I see whose it is, well enough; or else
may-be, I must have insisted on reading it. 
And here is one for you, Mrs. Jewkes, said
he; but yours, said he to me, requires an Answer,
which I must carry back early in the Morning; 
or To-night, if I can. 

You have no more, John, said Mrs. Jewkes,
for Mrs. Pamela, have you? No, said he, I
have not; but every body's kind Love and Service. 
Ay, to us both, to be sure, said she. 
John, said I, I will read the Letter; and pray
take care of yourself, for you are a good Man. 
God bless you; and I rejoice to see you, and
hear from you all. But I long'd to say more; 
only that nasty Mrs. Jewkes— 
So I went up, and lock'd myself in my Closet,
and open'd the Letter; and this is a Copy
of it: 

“My dearest Pamela,
I send purposely to you on an Affair that
concerns you very much, and me somewhat,
but chiefly for your sake. I an conscious,
that I have proceeded by you in such
a manner as may justly alarm your Fears, and
give Concern to your honest Friends: And
all my Pleasure is, that I can and will make
you amends for the Disturbance I have given
you. As I promis'd, I sent to your Father
the Day after your Departure, that he might
not be too much concern'd for you; and assur'd
him of my Honour to you; and made an
Excuse, such an one as ought to have satisfy'd
him, for your not coming to him. But this
was not sufficient, it seems; for he, poor
Man! came to me next Morning, and set my
Family almost in an Uproar about you. 
“O my dear Girl, what Trouble has not
your Obstinacy given me, and yourself too! 

I had no way to pacify him, but to promise,
that he should see a Letter written from
you to Mrs. Jervis, to satisfy him you are
well. 
“Now all my Care in this Case is for your
aged Parents, lest they should be touch'd
with too fatal a Grief; and for you, whose
Duty and Affection for them I know to be
so strong and laudable: For this Reason I
beg you will write a few Lines to them, and
let me prescribe the Form; which I have
done, putting myself as near as I can in your
Place, and expressing your Sense, with a
Warmth that I doubt will have too much
possess'd you. 
“After what is done, and which cannot
now be help'd, but which, I assure you, shall
turn out honourably for you, I expect not
to be refus'd; because I cannot possibly have
any View in it, but to satisfy your Parents; 
which is more your Concern than mine;
and so I must beg you will not alter one Tittle
of the underneath. If you do, it will be
impossible for me to send it, or that it should
answer the good End I propose by it. 
“I have promis'd, that I will not approach
you without your Leave: If I find you
easy, and not attempting to dispute or avoid
your present Lot, I will keep to my Word,
although 'tis a Difficulty upon me. Nor
shall your Restraint last long: For I will
assure you, that I am resolv'd very soon to 

convince you of my good Intentions, and
with what Ardor I am 
“Yours, &c.” 

The Letter he prescrib'd for me was this: 

“Dear Mrs. Jervis,
I have, instead of being driven, by Robin,
to my dear Father's, been carry'd off,
to where I have no Liberty to tell. However,
at present, I am not us'd hardly; and
I write to beg you to let my dear Father
and Mother, whose Hearts must be well-nigh
broken, know that I am well; and that I
am, and, by the Grace of God, ever will
be, their honest as well as dutiful Daughter,
and 
“Your obliged Friend. 
“I must neither send Date nor Place; but
have most solemn Assurances of honourable
Usage.” 

I knew not what to do on this most strange
Request and Occasion. But my Heart bled so
much for you, my dear Father, who had taken
the Pains to go yourself, and inquire after your
poor Daughter, as well as for my dear Mother,
that I resolv'd to write, and pretty much in the
above*  Form, that it might be sent to pacify
you, till I could let you, some-how or other,
know the true State of the Matter. And I 

wrote thus to my strange wicked Master himself: 

“Sir,
If you knew but the Anguish of my Mind,
and how much I suffer by your dreadful
Usage of me, you would surely pity me, and
consent to my Deliverance. What have I
done, that I should be the only Mark of your
Cruelty? I can have no Hope, no Desire of
living left me, because I cannot have the
least Dependence, after what has pass'd, upon
your solemn Assurances. —It is impossible,
they should be consistent with the dishonourable
Methods you take. 
“Nothing but your Promise of not seeing
me here in my deplorable Bondage, can
give me the least Ray of Hope. 
“Don't, I beseech you, drive the poor
distressed Pamela upon a Rock, that may be
the Destruction both of her Soul and Body! 
You don't know, Sir, how dreadfully I
dare, weak as I am of Mind and Intellect,
when my Virtue is in Danger. And O!
hasten my Deliverance, that a poor unworthy
Creature, below the Notice of such a
Gentleman as you, may not be made the
Sport of a high Condition, for no Reason
in the World, but because she is not able to
defend herself, nor has a Friend that can right
her. 
“I have, Sir, in part to shew my Obedience
to you, but indeed, I own, more to 

give Ease to the Minds of my poor distressed
Parents, whose Poverty, one would think,
should screen them from Violences of this sort,
as well as their poor Daughter, follow'd
pretty much the Form you have prescrib'd for
me, in the Letter to Mrs. Jervis; and the
Alterations I have made, (for I could not
help a few) are of such a Nature, as, tho'
they shew my Concern a little, yet must
answer the End you are pleas'd to say you
propose by this Letter. 
“For God's sake, good Sir, pity my lowly
Condition, and my present great Misery; 
and let me join with all the rest of your Servants
to bless that Goodness which you have
extended to every one, but the poor, afflicted,
heart-broken 
“Pamela.” 

I thought, when I had written this Letter,
and that which he had prescrib'd, it would
look like placing a Confidence in Mrs. Jewkes,
to shew them to her; and I shew'd her at the
same time my Master's Letter to me; for I believ'd,
the Value he express'd for me, would
give me Credit with one who profess'd in every
thing to serve him, right or wrong; tho' I had
so little Reason, I fear, to pride myself in it: 
And I was not mistaken; for it has seem'd to
influence her not a little, and she is at present
mighty obliging, and runs over in my Praises; 
but is the less to be minded, because she praises
as much the Author of all my Miseries, and 

his honourable Intentions, as she calls them; for
I see, that she is capable of thinking, as I fear
he does, that every thing that makes for his
wicked Will, is honourable, tho' to the Ruin
of the Innocent. Pray God I may find it otherwise! 
Tho', I hope, whatever the wicked Gentleman
may intend, that I shall be at least rid
of her impertinent bold way of Talk, when
she seems to think, from his Letter, that he
means honourably. 
