


My Master sent me a Message just now, that
he was so much better, that he would take
a Turn after Breakfast, in the Chariot, and would
have me give him my Company. I hope I shall
know how to be humble, and comport myself
as I should do, under all these Favours. 
Mrs. Jewkes is one of the most obliging
Creatures in the World; and I have such Respects
shewn me by every one, as if I was as great
as Lady Davers. —But now, if this should all 

end in the Sham-marriage. —It cannot be, I
hope. Yet the Pride of Greatness and Ancestry,
and such-like, is so strongly set out in Lady
Davers's Letter, that I cannot flatter myself to
be so happy as all these desirable Appearances
make for me. Should I be now deceiv'd, I
should be worse off than ever. But I shall see
what Light this new Honour will procure me! 
—So I'll get ready. But I won't, I think,
change my Garb. Should I do it, it would
look as if I would be nearer on a Level with
him: And yet, should I not, it may be thought
a Disgrace to him? but I will, I think, open
the Portmanteau, and, for the first time, since
I came hither, put on my best Silk Night-gown. 
But then, that will be making myself a sort
of Right to the Cloaths I had renounc'd; and I
am not quite sure I shall have no other Crosses
to encounter. So I will go as I am; for tho'
ordinary, I am as clean as a Penny, tho' I say it. 
So I'll e'en go as I am, except he orders otherwise. 
Yet Mrs. Jewkes says, I ought to dress as fine
as I can. —But I say, I think not. As my Master
is up, and at Breakfast, I will venture down
to ask him, how he will have me be. 
Well, he is kinder and kinder, and, thank
God, purely recover'd! —How charmingly he
looks, to what he did Yesterday! Blessed be
God for it! 
He arose and came to me, and took me by
the Hand, and would set me down by him; and
he said, My charming Girl seem'd going to speak. 

What would you say? —Sir, said I, (a little
asham'd) I think it is too great an Honour to go
into the Chariot with you. No, my dear Pamela,
said he; the Pleasure of your Company
will be greater than the Honour of mine; and so
say no more on that Head. 
But, Sir, said I, I shall disgrace you to go
thus. You will grace a Prince, my Fair-one,
said the good, kind, kind Gentleman! in that
Dress, or any you shall chuse: And you look so
pretty, that if you shall not catch Cold, in that
round-ear'd Cap, you shall go just as you are. 
But, Sir, said I, then you'll be pleased to go a
By-way, that it mayn't be seen you do so much
Honour to your poor Servant. O my good
Girl, said he, I doubt you are afraid of yourself
being talk'd of more than me. For I hope, by
degrees, to take off the World's Wonder, and
teach them to expect what is to follow, as a Due
to my Pamela. 
O The dear good Man! There's for you, my
dear Father and Mother! —Did I not do well
now to come back! O could I get rid of my Fears
of this Sham-marriage, (for all this is not yet inconsistent
with that frightful Scheme) I should
be too happy! 
So I came up, with great Pleasure, for my
Gloves; and now wait his kind Command
Dear, dear Sir! said I to myself, as if I was
speaking to him, for God's sake let me have no
more Trials and Reverses; for I could not bear
them now, I verily think. 

At last the welcome Message came, that my
Master was ready; and so I went down as fast as
I could; and he, before all the Servants, handed
me in, as if I was a Lady: and then came in
himself. Mrs. Jewkes begg'd he would take
care he did not catch Cold, as he had been ill. 
And I had the Pride to hear his new Coachman
say, to one of his Fellow-servants, They are a
charming Pair, I am sure! 'tis pity they should
be parted! —O my dear Father and Mother,
I fear your Girl will grow as proud as any thing! 
And especially you will think I have Reason to
guard against it, when you read the kind Particulars
I am going to relate. 
He order'd Dinner to be ready by Two; and
Abraham, who succeeds John, went behind
the Coach. He bid Robin drive gently, and
told me, he wanted to talk to me about his
Sister Davers, and other Matters. Indeed at
first setting out, he kissed me a little too often,
that he did; and I was afraid of Robin's looking
back, thro' the Fore-glass, and People seeing us
as they passed; but he was exceedingly kind to
me, in his Words, as well. At last, he said, 
You have, I doubt not, read over and over,
my Sister's saucy Letter; and find, as I told you,
that you are no more obliged to her than I am. 
You see she intimates, that some People had been
with her; and who should they be, but the officious
Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Longman, and Jonathan!
and so that has made me take the Measures
I did, in dismissing them my Service.— 



I see, said he, you are going to speak on their
Behalfs; but your Time is not come to do that,
if ever I shall permit it. 
My Sister, says he, I have been beforehand
with; for I have renounced her. I am sure I
have been a kind Brother to her, and gave her
to the Value of 3000l. more than her Share
came to by my Father's Will, when I enter'd
upon my Estate. And the Woman, surely, was
beside herself with Passion and Insolence, when
she wrote me such a Letter; for well she knew
I would not bear it. But you must know, Pamela,
that she is much incensed, that I will give
no Ear to a Proposal of hers, of a Daughter of
my Lord—who, said he, neither in Person, or
Mind, or Acquirements, even with all her Opportunities,
is to be named in a Day with my
Pamela. But yet you see the Plea, my Girl,
which I made to you before, of the Pride of Condition,
and the World's Censure, which, I own,
sticks a little too close with me still. For a Woman
shines not forth to the Publick as a Man; 
and the World sees not your Excellencies and
Perfections; if it did, I should intirely stand
acquitted by the severest Censurers. But it
will be taken in the Lump; that here is Mr.
B&wblank;, with such and such an Estate, has married
his Mother's Waiting-maid; not considering
there is not a Lady in the Kingdom that
can outdo her, or better support the Condition
to which she will be raised, if I should marry
her. And, said he, putting his Arm round me,
and again kissing me, I pity my dear Girl too, 

for her Part in this Censure; for here will she
have to combat the Pride and Slights of the
neighbouring Gentry all around us. Sister Davers,
you see, will never be reconciled to you. 
The other Ladies will not visit you; and you
will, with a Merit superior to them all, be treated
as if unworthy their Notice. Should I now
marry my Pamela, how will my Girl relish all
this? Won't these be cutting things to my
Fair-one? For, as to me, I shall have nothing
to do, but, with a good Estate in Possession, to
brazen out the Matter, of my former Pleasantry
on this Subject, with my Companions of
the Chace, the Green, and the Assemblée; stand
their rude Jests for once or twice, and my Fortune
will create me always Respect enough, I
warrant you. But, I say, what will my poor
Girl do, as to her Part, with her own Sex? For
some Company you must keep. My Station
will not admit it to be with my Servants; and
the Ladies will fly your Acquaintance; and still,
tho' my Wife, will treat you as my Mother's
Waiting-maid. —What says my Girl to this? 
You may well guess, my dear Father and
Mother, how transporting these kind, these
generous and condescending Sentiments were
to me! —I thought I had the Harmony of the
Spheres all around me; and every Word that
dropp'd from his Lips was as sweet as the Honey
of Hybla to me. —Oh! Sir, said I, how inexpreslibly
kind and good is all this! Your poor
Servant has a much greater Struggle than this to
go thro', a more knotty Difficulty to overcome. 

What is that? said he, a little impatiently:
I will not forgive your Doubts now! —No,
Sir, said I, I cannot doubt; but it is, how I
shall support, how I shall deserve, your Goodness
to me! —Dear Girl! said he, and hugg'd
me to his Breast, I was afraid you would
have made me angry again; but that I would
not be, because I see you have a grateful Heart; 
and this your kind and chearful Return, after
such cruel Usage as you had experienced in my
House, enough to make you detest the Place,
has made me resolve to bear any thing in you,
but Doubts of my Honour, at a time when I am
pouring out my Soul, with a true and affectionate
Ardour, before you. 
But, good Sir, said I, my greatest Concern
will be for the rude Jests you will have yourself
to encounter with, for thus stooping beneath
yourself. For as to me, considering my lowly
Estate, and little Merit, even the Slights and
Reflections of the Ladies, will be an Honour to
me: And I shall have the Pride to place more
than half their Ill-will, to their Envy at my Happiness. 
And if I can, by the most chearful
Duty, and resigned Obedience, have the Pleasure
to be agreeable to you, I shall think myself
but too happy, let the World say what it will 
He said, You are very good, my dearest Girl
But how will you bestow your Time, when you
will have no Visits to receive or pay? No Parties
of Pleasure to join in? No Card-tables to employ
your Winter Evenings, and even, as the
Taste is, half the Day, Summer and Winter? 

And you have often play'd with my Mother
too, and so know how to perform a Part there,
as well as in the other Diversions: And I'll assure
you, my Girl, I shall not desire you to live without
such Amusements as my Wife might expect,
were I to marry a Lady of the first Quality. 
O, Sir, said I, you are all Goodness! How
shall I bear it! —But do you think, Sir, in such
a Family as yours, a Person whom you shall honour
with the Name of Mistress of it, will not
find useful Employments for her Time, without
looking abroad for any others? 
In the first place, Sir, if you will give me
Leave, I will myself look into such Parts of the
Family-Oeconomy, as may not be beneath the
Rank to which I shall have the Favour of being
exalted, if any such there can be; and this, I
hope, without incurring the Ill-will of any honest
Servant. 
Then, Sir, I will ease you of as much of
your Family-Accounts, as I possibly can, when
I have convinced you, that I am to be trusted
with them; and, you know, Sir, my late good
Lady made me her Treasurer, her Almoner,
and every thing. 
Then, Sir, if I must needs be visiting or
visited, and the Ladies won't honour me so
much, or even if they would now-and then, I
will visit, if your Goodness will allow me so
to do, the sick Poor in the Neighbourhood
around you; and administer to their Wants
and Necessities, in such small Matters, as may
not be hurtful to your Estate, but comfortable 

to them; and entail upon you their Blessings,
and their Prayers for your dear Health and Welfare. 
Then I will assist your Housekeeper, as I
used to do, in the making Jelleys, Comfits,
Sweetmeats, Marmalades, Cordials; and to pot,
and candy, and preserve, for the Uses of the
Family; and to make myself all the fine Linen
of it, for yourself and me. 
Then, Sir, if you will sometimes indulge
me with your Company, I will take an Airing
in your Chariot now-and-then: And when you
shall return home from your Diversions on the
Green, or from the Chace, or where-ever you
shall please to go, I shall have the Pleasure of
receiving you with Duty, and a chearful Delight; 
and, in your Absence count the Moments,
till you return and you will, may-be; 
fill up some Part of my Time, the sweetest by
far, with your agreeable Conversation, for an
Hour, or two now-and-then; and be indulgent
to the impertinent Overflowings of my grateful
Heart, for all your Goodness to me. 
The Breakfasting-time, the Preparation for
Dinner, and sometimes to entertain your chosen
Friends, and the Company you shall bring
home with you, Gentlemen, if not Ladies,
and the Supperings, will fill up a great Part of
the Day, in a very necessary manner. 
And, may-be, Sir, now-and-then a good-humour'd
Lady will drop in; and, I hope, if
they do, I shall so behave myself, as not to add
to the Disgrace you will have brought upon 

yourself: for indeed, I will be very circumspect,
and try to be as discreet as I can; and as humble
too, as shall be consistent with your Honour. 
Cards, 'tis true, I can play at, in all the
usual Games that our Sex delight in; but this
I am not fond of; nor shall ever desire to play,
unless to induce such Ladies, as you may wish
to see, not to abandon your House, for want of
an Amusement they are accustom'd to. 
Musick, which my good Lady taught me,
will fill up some Intervals, if I should have
any. 
And then, Sir, you know, I love Reading
and Scribbling; and tho' all the latter will be
employ'd in the Family-Accounts, between the
Servants and me, and me and your good Self; 
yet Reading, at proper Times, will be a Pleasure
to me, which I shall be unwilling to give
up for the best Company in the World, except
yours. And, O Sir! that will help to polish
my Mind, and make me worthier of your
Company and Conversation; and with the
Explanations you will give me, of what I shall
not understand, will be a sweet Employment,
and Improvement too. 
But one thing, Sir, I ought not to forget,
because it is the chief; my Duty to God will,
I hope, always employ some good Portion of
my Time, with Thanks for his superlative
Goodness to me; and to pray for you and myself:
For you, Sir, for a Blessing on you, for
your great Goodness to such an unworthy Creature:
For myself, that I may be enabled to discharge 

my Duty to you, and be found grateful
for all the Blessings I shall receive at the Hands
of Providence, by means of your Generosity
and Condescension. 
With all this, Sir, said I, can you think I
shall be at a Loss to pass my Time? But, as I
know, that every Slight to me, if I come to be
so happy, will be, in some measure, a Slight to
you, I will beg of you, Sir, not to let me go
very fine in Dress; but appear only so, as that
you may not be asham'd of it, after the Honour
I shall have of being call'd by your worthy
Name: For well I know, Sir, that nothing so
much excites the Envy of my own Sex, as seeing
a Person set above them in Appearance, and in
Dress. And that would bring down upon me
an hundred saucy Things, and low-born Brats,
and I can't tell what! 
There I stopp'd; for I had prattled a great
deal; and he said, clasping me to him, Why
stops my dear Pamela? —Why does she not
proceed? I could dwell upon your Words all
the Day long; and you shall be the Directress
of your own Pleasures, and your own Time,
so sweetly do you chuse to employ it: And thus
shall I find some of my own bad Actions aton'd
for by your exemplary Goodness, and God will
bless me for your sake. 
O, said he, what Pleasure you give me in
this sweet Foretaste of my Happiness! I will
now defy the saucy, busy Censurers of the
World; and bid them know your Excellence,
and my Happiness, before they, with unhallow'd 

Lips, presume to judge of my Actions, and
your Merit! —And, let me tell you, my Pamela,
that I can add my Hopes of a still more
pleasing Amusement, and what your bashful
Modesty would not permit you to hint; and
which I will no otherwise touch upon, lest it
should seem, to your Nicety, to detract from
the present Purity of my good Intentions, than
to say, I hope to have superadded to all these,
such an Employment, as will give me a View of
perpetuating my happy Prospects, and my Family
at the same time; of which I am almost
the only one, in a direct Line. 
I blush'd, I believe; yet could not be
displeased at the decent and charming Manner
with which he insinuated this distant Hope: 
And Oh! judge for me, how my Heart was affected
with all these things! 
He was pleased to add another charming
Reflection, which shew'd me the noble Sincerity
of his kind Professions. I do own to you, my
Pamela, said he, that I love you with a purer
Flame than ever I knew in my whole Life! A
Flame, to which I was a Stranger, and which
commenced for you in the Garden; tho' you,
unkindly, by your unseasonable Doubts, nipp'd
the opening Bud, while it was too tender to bear
the cold Blasts of Slight or Negligence. And
I know more sincere Joy and Satisfaction in
this sweet Hour's Conversation with you, than
all the guilty Tumults of my former Passion
ever did, or (had even my Attempts succeeded)
ever could have afforded me. 

O Sir! said I, expect not Words from
your poor Servant, equal to these most generous
Professions. Both the Means, and the
Will, I now see, are given to you, to lay me
under an everlasting Obligation. How happy
shall I be, if, tho' I cannot be worthy of all
this Goodness and Condescension, I can prove
myself not intirely unworthy of it! But I can
only answer for a grateful Heart; and if ever
I give you Cause wilfully (and you will generously
allow for involuntary Imperfections) to
be disgusted with me, may I be an Out-cast
from your House and Favour, and as much repudiated,
as if the Law had divorced me from
you! 
But, Sir, continued I, tho' I was so unseasonable
as I was in the Garden, you would, I
flatter myself, had you then heard me, have
pardon'd my Imprudence, and own'd I had
some Cause to fear, and to wish to be with my
poor Father and Mother; and this I the rather
say, that you should not think me capable of
returning Insolence for your Goodness; or appearing
foolishly ungrateful to you, when you
was so kind to me. 
Indeed, Pamela, said he, you gave me
great Uneasiness; for I love you too well not
to be jealous of the least Appearance of your
Indifference to me, or Preference of any other
Person, not excepting your Parents themselves. 
This made me resolve not to hear you; for I
had not got over my Reluctance to Marriage; 
and a little Weight, you know, turns the 

Scale, when it hangs in an equal Balance. 
But yet, you see, that tho' I could part with
you, while my Anger held, yet the Regard I
had then newly profess'd for your Virtue, made
me resolve not to offer to violate it; and you
have seen likewise, that the painful Struggle I
underwent when I began to reflect, and to read
your moving Journal, between my Desire to
recal you, and my Doubt whether you would
return, (tho' yet I resolved not to force you to
it) had like to have cost me a severe Illness: But
your kind and chearful Return has dispell'd all
my Fears, and given me Hope, that I am not
indifferent to you; and you see how your Presence
has chas'd away my Illness. 
I bless God for it, said I; but since you
are so good as to encourage me, and will not
despise my Weakness, I will acknowledge, that
I suffer'd more than I could have imagined, till
I experienced it, in being banish'd your Presence
in so much Anger; and the more still
was I affected, when you answer'd the wicked
Mrs. Jewkes so generously in my Favour, at
my leaving your House: For this, Sir, awaken'd
all my Reverence for you; and you saw I could
not forbear, not knowing what I did, to break
boldly in upon you, and acknowledge your
Goodness on my Knees. 'Tis true, my dear
Pamela, said he, we have sufficiently tortur'd
one another; and the only Comfort that can
result from it, will be, reflecting upon the Matter
coolly and with Pleasure, when all these
Storms are overblown, (as I hope they now are) 

and we sit together secur'd in each other's good
Opinion, recounting the uncommon Gradations,
by which we have ascended to the Summit
of that Felicity, which I hope we shall
shortly arrive at. 
Mean time, said the good Gentleman, let
me hear what my dear Girl would have said in
her Justification, could I have trusted myself
with her, as to her Fears, and the Reason of
her wishing herself from me, at a Time that I
had begun to shew my Fondness for her, in a
manner that I thought would have been agreeable
to her and Virtue. 
I pulled out of my Pocket the Gypsey
Letter; but I said, before I shew'd it to him, I
have this Letter, Sir, to shew you, as what, I
believe, you will allow, must have given me
the greatest Disturbance: But first, as I know
not who is the Writer, and it seems to be in
a disguis'd Hand, I would beg it as a Favour,
that if you guess who it is, which I cannot, it
may not turn to their Prejudice, because it was
written very probably with no other View than
to serve me. 
He took it, and read it. And it being sign'd
Somebody, he said, Yes, this is indeed from
Somebody; and, disguis'd as the Hand is, I
know the Writer: Don't you see by the Setness
of some of these Letters, and a little Secretary
Cut here and there, especially in that c, and
that r, that it is the Hand of a Person bred in
the Law-way? Why, Pamela, said he, 'tis old
Longman's Hand: An officious Rascal as he is! 

—But I have done with him. O Sir, said I,
it would be too insolent in me to offer (so much
am I myself overwhelm'd with your Goodness)
to defend any body that you are angry with; 
yet, Sir, so far as they have incurr'd your Displeasure
for my sake, and for no other want of
Duty or Respect, I could wish—But I dare
not say more— 
But, said he, as to the Letter, and the Information
it contains: —Let me know, Pamela,
when you receiv'd this? On the Friday,
Sir, said I, that you were gone to the Wedding
at Stamford. —How could it be convey'd to
you, said he, unknown to Mrs. Jewkes, when
I gave her such a strict Charge to attend you,
and you had promis'd me, that you would not
throw yourself in the way of such Intelligence? 
For, said he, when I went to Stamford, I knew
from a private Intimation given me, that there
would be an Attempt made to see you, or give
you a Letter, by somebody, if not to get you
away; but was not certain from what Quarter,
whether from my Sister Davers, Mrs. Jervis,
Mr. Longman, or John Arnold, or your Father; 
and as I was then but struggling with myself, whether
to give way to my honourable Inclinations,
or to free you, and let you go to your Father, that
I might avoid the Danger I found myself in of
the former (for I had absolutely resolved never
to wound again even your Ears with any Proposals
of a contrary Nature); that was the Reason
I desir'd you to permit Mrs. Jewkes to be
so much on her Guard till I came back, when 

I thought I should have decided this disputed
Point within myself, between my Pride and my
Inclinations. 
This, good Sir, said I, accounts well to
me, for your Conduct in that Case, and for
what you said to me and Mrs. Jewkes on that
Occasion; and I see more and more how much
I may depend upon your Honour and Goodness
to me. —But I will tell you all the Truth. 
And then I recounted to him the whole Affair
of the Gypsey, and how the Letter was put
among the loose Grass, &c. And he said, the
Man who thinks a Thousand Dragons sufficient
to watch a Woman, when her Inclination takes
a contrary Bent, will find all too little; and she
will engage the Stones in the Street, or the
Grass in the Field, to act for her, and help on
her Correspondence. If the Mind, said he, be
not engaged, I see there is hardly any Confinement
sufficient for the Body; and you have
told me a very pretty Story; and, as you never
gave me any Reason to question your Veracity,
even in your severest Trials, I make no doubt
of the Truth of what you have now mention'd: 
And I will, in my Turn, give you such a Proof
of mine, that you shall find it carry Conviction
with it. 
You must know then, my Pamela, that I
had actually form'd such a Project, so well inform'd
was this old rascally Somebody; and the
Time was fix'd, for the very Person describ'd in
this Letter, to be here; and I had thought he
should have read some Part of the Ceremony 

(as little as was possible, to deceive you) in my
Chamber; and so I hop'd to have you mine
upon Terms that then would have been much
more agreeable to me than real Matrimony. 
And I did not in haste intend you the Mortification
of being undeceived; so that we might
have liv'd for Years, perhaps, very lovingly together; 
and I had at the same time been at Liberty
to confirm or abrogate it, as I pleas'd. 
O sir, said I, I am out of Breath with the
Thoughts of my Danger. But what good Angel
prevented the Execution of this deep-laid
Design? 
Why, your good Angel, Pamela, said he:
for when I began to consider, that it would
have made you miserable, and me not happy; 
that if you should have a dear Little-one, it
would be out of my own Power to legitimate it,
if I should wish it to inherit my Estate; and
that, as I am the last of my Family, and most
of what I possess must descend to a strange Line,
and disagreeable and unworthy Persons; notwithstanding
that I might, in this Case, have
Issue of my own Body: When I further consider'd
your untainted Virtue, what Dangers and
Trials you had undergone by my Means, and
what a World of Troubles I had involv'd you in,
only because you were beautiful and virtuous,
which had excited all my Passion for you; and reflected
also upon your try'd Prudence and Truth; 
I, tho' I doubted not effecting this my last Plot,
resolv'd to overcome myself; and (however I
might suffer in struggling with my Affection for 

you) to part with you, rather than to betray you
under so black a Veil. Besides, said he, I remember
how much I had exclaim'd against, and censur'd
an Action of this kind, that had been attributed
to one of the first Men of the Law, and of
the Kingdom, as he after wards became; and that
it was but treading in a Path that another had
mark'd out for me; and, as I was assur'd, with no
great Satisfaction to himself, when he came to
reflect; my foolish Pride was a little piqu'd with
this, because I lov'd to be, if I went out of the
way, my own Original, as I may call it: On all
these Considerations it was, that I rejected this
Project, and sent word to the Person, that I had
better consider'd of the Matter, and would not
have him come, till he heard farther from me: 
And, in this Suspense, I suppose, some of your
Confederates, Pamela, (for we have been a Couple
of Plotters, tho' your Virtue and Merit have
procur'd you faithful Friends and Partisans, which
my Money and Promises could hardly do) one
way or other got Knowledge of it, and gave you
this Notice; but perhaps it would have come too
late, had not your white Angel got the better
of my black one, and inspir'd me with Resolutions
to abandon the Project just as it was to
have been put in Execution. But yet I own,
that, from these Appearances, you were but
too well justified in your Fears, on this odd way
of coming at this Intelligence; and I have only
one thing to blame you for, that tho' I was resolv'd
not to hear you in your own Defence,
yet, as you have so ready a Talent at your Pen, 

you might have clear'd your Part of this
Matter up to me by a Line or two; and when
I had known what seeming good Grounds you
had for pouring cold Water on a young Flame,
that was just then rising to an honourable Expansion,
I should not have imputed it, as I was
apt to do, to unseasonable Insult for my Tenderness
to you, on one hand; to perverse Nicety,
on the other, or, to (what I was most alarm'd
by, and concern'd for) Prepossession for some
other Person. And this would have sav'd us
both much Fatigue, I of Mind, you of Body. 
And indeed, Sir, said I, of Mind too; and
I could not better manifest this, than by the
Chearfulness with which I obey'd your Recalling
me to your Presence. 
Ay, that, my dear Pamela, said he and,
clasp'd me in his Arms, was the kind, the inexpressibly
kind Action, that has rivetted my Affections
to you, and obliges me, in this free and
unreserv'd manner, to pour out my whole Soul
into your Bosom. 
I said, I had the less Merit in this my Return,
because I was driven by an irresistible Impulse to
it, and could not help it if I would. 
This, said he, (and honour'd me by kissing
my Hand) is engaging indeed; if I may hope,
that my Pamela's gentle Inclination for her
Persecutor, was the strongest Motive to her Return; 
and I so much value a voluntary Love, in
the Person I would wish for my Wife, that I
would have even Prudence and Interest, hardly
nam'd, in Comparison with it: And can you 

return me sincerely the honest Compliment I
now make you? —In the Choice I have made,
it is impossible I should have any View to my
Interest. Love, true Love, is the only Motive
by which I am induc'd: And were I not what I
am, could you give me the Preference to any
other Person you know in the World, notwithstanding
what has passed between us? —Why,
said I, should your so much obliged Pamela
refuse to answer this kind Question? Cruel, as
I have thought you, and dangerous as your Views
to my Honesty have been; you, Sir, are the only
Person living that ever was more than indifferent
to me; and before I knew this to be what I blush
now to call it, I could not hate you, or wish you
ill, tho', from my Soul, the Attempts you made,
were shocking and most distasteful to me. 
I am satisfy'd, my Pamela, said he: Nor do I
want to see those Papers that you have kindly
written for to your Father; tho' I still wish to
see them too, for the sake of the sweet Manner
in which you relate what has passed; and to have
before me the whole Series of your Sufferings,
that I may learn what Degree of Kindness may
be sufficient to recompense you for them. 
In this manner, my dear Father and Mother,
did your happy Daughter find herself bless'd by
her generous Master! An ample Recompence
for all her Sufferings, did I think this sweet
Conversation only. A hundred tender Things
he express'd besides, which tho 'they never can
escape my Memory, yet would be too tedious to 

write down. O how I blessed God, and, I hope,
ever shall, for all his gracious Favours to his unworthy
Handmaid! What a happy Change is this! 
And who knows but my kind, my generous
Master may put it in my Power, when he shall
see me not quite unworthy of it, to be a Means,
without injuring him, to dispense around me,
to many Persons, the happy Influences of the
Condition, to which I shall be, by his kind Favour,
exalted? Doubly blessed shall I be, in particular,
if I can return the hundredth Part of the
Obligations I owe to such honest good Parents,
to whose pious Instructions and Examples, under
God, I owe all my present Happiness, and future
Prospects. —O the Joy that fills my Mind on
these proud Hopes! on these delightful Prospects! 
—It is too mighty for me; and I must fit down
to ponder all these Things, and to admire and
bless the Goodness of that Providence, which
has, thro' so many intricate Mazes, made me
tread the Paths of Innocence, and so amply
rewarded me, for what it has itself enabled me
to do! All Glory to God alone be ever given
for it, by your poor enraptur'd Daughter!— 
I will now continue my most pleasing
Relation. 
As the Chariot was returning home from
this sweet Airing, he said, From all that has
pass'd between us, in this pleasing Turn, my
Pamela will see, and will believe, that the Trials
of her Virtue are all over from me: But perhaps 

there will be some few yet to come of her
Patience and Humility. For I have at the earnest
Importunity of Lady Darnford, and her Daughters,
promised them a Sight of my beloved Girl: 
And so I intend to have their whole Family, and
Lady Jones, and Mrs. Peters's Family, to dine
with me once in a few Days. And since I
believe you would hardly chuse, at present, to
grace the Table on the Occasion, till you can
do it in your own Right, I should be glad you
would not refuse coming down to us, if I should
desire it; for I would preface our Nuptials, said
the dear Gentleman! O what a sweet Word was
that!—with their good Opinion of your Merits; 
and to see you, and your sweet Manner,
will be enough for that purpose; and so, by
degrees, prepare my Neighbours for what is to
follow: And they already have your Character
from me, and are disposed to admire you. 
Sir, said I, after all that has passed, I should be
unworthy, if I could not say, that I can have no
Will but yours: and however auk wardly I shall
behave in such Company, weighed down with
the Sense of your Obligations on one side, and
my own Unworthiness, with their Observations,
on the other, I will not scruple to obey you. 
I am oblig'd to you, Pamela, said he; and
pray be only dress'd as you are; for since they
know your Condition, and I have told them
the Story of your present Dress, and how you
came by it, one of the young Ladies begs it as
a Favour, that they may see you just as you are: 
And I am the rather pleased it should be so, be 

cause they will perceive you owe nothing to
Dress, but make a much better Figure with your
own native Stock of Loveliness, than the greatest
Ladies, array'd in the most splendid Attire, and
adorn'd with the most glittering Jewels. 
O sir, said I, your Goodness beholds your
poor Servant in a Light greatly beyond her
Merit! But it must not be expected, that others,
Ladies especially, will look upon me with your
favourable Eyes: But, nevertheless I should be
best pleased to wear always this humble Garb,
till you, for your own sake, shall order it otherwise: 
For, oh! Sir, said I, I hope it will be
always my Pride to glory most in your Goodness; 
and it will be a Pleasure to me to shew
every one, that, with respect to my Happiness
in this Life, I am intirely the Work of your
Bounty; and to let the World see from what a
lowly Original you have raised me to Honours,
that the greatest Ladies would rejoice in. 
Admirable Pamela, said he, excellent
Girl! —Surely thy Sentiments are superior to
those of all thy Sex! —I might have addressed
an hundred fine Ladies; but never, surely, could
have had Reason to admire one as I do you. 
As, my dear Father and Mother, I repeat
these generous Sayings, only because they are
the Effect of my Master's Goodness, being far
from presuming to think I deserve one of them; 
so I hope you will not attribute it to my Vanity; 
for, I do assure you, I think I ought rather to
be more humble, as I am more obliged: For it
must be always a Sign of a Poor Condition to 

receive Obligations one cannot repay; as it is
of a rich Mind, when it can confer them, without
expecting or needing a Return. It is, on one
side, the State of the human Creature, compared,
on the other, to the Creator; and so, with due
Deference, may his Beneficence be said to be Godlike,
and that is the highest that can be said. 
The Chariot brought us home at near the
Hour of Two; and, blessed be God, my Master
is pure and well and chearful; and that makes
me hope he does not repent him of his generous
Treatment of me. He handed me out of the
Chariot, and to the Parlour, with the same
Goodness, that he shewed, when he put me into
it, before several of the Servants. Mrs. Jewkes
came to inquire how he did. Quite well, Mrs.
Jewkes, said he, quite well; I thank God, and
this good Girl, for it! —I am glad of it, said
she; but I hope you are not the worse for my
Care, and my Doctoring of you! —No, but
the better, Mrs. Jewkes, said he; you have much
obliged me by both. 
Then he said, Mrs. Jewkes, you and I have
used this good Girl very hardly. —I was afraid
Sir, said she, I should be the Subject of her
Complaints. —I assure you, reply'd he, she has
not open'd her Lips about you. We have had
quite a different Subject to talk of; and I hope
she will forgive us both: you especially she
must; because you have done nothing but by
my Orders. But I only mean, that the necessary
Consequence of those Orders has been very 

grievous to my Pamela: And now comes our
Part to make her Amends, if we can. 
Sir, said she, I always said to Madam, (as
she called me) that you was very good, and very
forgiving. No, said he, I have been stark
naught, and it is she, I hope, will be very forgiving. 
But all this Preamble is to tell you,
Mrs. Jewkes, that now I desire you'll study to
oblige her, as much as (to obey me) you was
forced to disoblige her before. And you'll remember,
that in every thing she is to be her
own Mistress. 
Yes, said she, and mine too, I suppose, Sir? 
Ay, said the generous Gentleman, I believe it
will be so in a little Time. —Then, said she,
I know how it will go with me! And so put her
Handkerchief to her Eyes. —Pamela, said my
Master, comfort poor Mrs. Jewkes. 
This was very generous, already to seem to
put her into my Power; and I took her by the
Hand, and said, I shall never take upon me,
Mrs. Jewkes, to make a bad Use of any Opportunities
that may be put into my Hands, by
my generous Master; nor shall I ever wish to do
you any Disservice, if I might: For I shall consider,
that what you have done, was in Obedience
to a Will, which it will become me also to
submit to; and so, if the Effects of our Obedience
may be different, yet as they proceed
from one Cause, that must be always reverenc'd
by me. 
See there, Mrs. Jewkes, said my Master,
we are both in generous Hands; and indeed, if 

Pamela did not pardon you, I should think she
but half forgave me, because you acted by my
Instructions. —Well, said she, God bless you
both together, since it must be so; and I will
double my Diligence to oblige my Lady, as I
find she will soon be. 
O my dear Father and Mother, now pray
for me on another score! for fear I should grow
too proud, and be giddy and foolish with all
these promising Things, so soothing to the
Vanity of my Years and Sex. But even to this
Hour can I pray, that God would remove from
me all these delightful Prospects, if they are
likely so to corrupt my Mind, as to make me
proud, and vain, and not acknowledge, with
thankful Humility, the blessed Providence,
which has so visibly conducted me thro' the
dangerous Paths I have trod to this happy Moment. 
My Master was pleased to say, that he thought
I might as well dine with him, since he was
alone. But I begg'd he would excuse me, for
fear, as I said, such Excess of Goodness and
Condescension, all at once, should turn my Head; 
and that he would by slower Degrees bring on
my Happiness, lest I should not know how to
bear it. 
Persons who doubt themselves, reply'd
he, seldom do amiss. And if there was any
Fear of what you say, you could not have had
it in your Thoughts: For none but the Presumptuous, 

the Conceited, and the Thoughtless,
err capitally. But nevertheless, added he,
I have such an Opinion of your Prudence, that
I shall generally think what you do right,
because it is you that do it. 
Sir, said I, your kind Expressions shall not
be thrown away upon me, if I can help it; for
they will task me with the Care of endeavouring
to deserve your good Opinion, and your Approbation,
as the best Rule of my Conduct. 
Being then about to go up-stairs, Permit
me, Sir, said I, (looking about me with some
Confusion, to see that nobody was there) thus
on my Knees to thank you, as I often wanted
to do in the Chariot, for all your Goodness to
me, which shall never, I hope, be cast away
upon me. And so I had the Boldness to kiss
his Hand. 
I wonder since, how I came to be so forward. 
But what could I do? —My poor
grateful Heart was like a too full River, which
overflows its Banks; and it carried away my
Fear and my Shamefacedness, as that does all
before it on the Surface of its Waters! 
He clasp'd me in his Arms, with Transport,
and condescendingly kneel'd by me,
and kissing me, said, O my dear obliging good
Girl, on my Knees, as you on yours, I vow
to you everlasting Truth and Fidelity; and
may God but bless us both with half the Pleasures
that seem to lie before us, and we shall
have no Reason to envy the Felicity of the
greatest Princes! O Sir, said I, how shall I 

support so much Goodness! —I am poor, indeed,
in every thing, compar'd to you! and
how far, very far, do you, in every generous
Way, leave me behind you! 
He raised me, and as I bent towards the
Door, led me to the Stairs Foot, and, saluting
me there again, left me to go up to my Closet,
where I threw myself on my Knees in Raptures
of Joy, and blessed that gracious God, who
had thus changed my Distress to Happiness, and
so abundantly rewarded me for all the Sufferings
I had passed thro'. —And Oh! how light,
how very light, do all those Sufferings now appear,
which then my repining Mind made so
grievous to me! —Hence, in every State of
Life, and in all the Changes and Chances of it,
for the future, will I trust in Providence, who
knows what is best for us, and frequently turns
the very Evils we most dread, to be the Causes
of our Happiness, and of our Deliverance from
greater. —My Experiences young as I am,
as to this great Point of Reliance on God, are
strong, tho' my Judgment in general may be
weak and uninformed; but you'll excuse these
Reflections, because they are your beloved
Daughter's; and, so far as they are not amiss,
derive themselves from the Benefit of yours and
my late good Lady's Examples and Instructions. 
I have written a vast deal in a little time: 
And shall only say, to conclude this delightful
Wednesday, That in the Afternoon my good Master
was so well, that he rode out on Horseback, 

and came home about Nine at Night; and then
stepp'd up to me, and seeing me with Pen and
Ink before me in my Closet, said, I come only to
tell you I am very well, my Pamela; and since
I have a Letter or two to write, I will leave
you to proceed in yours, as I suppose that was
your Employment (for I had put by my Papers
at his coming up); and so he saluted me, bid
me Good-night, and went down; and I finish'd up
to this Place before I went to-bed. Mrs. Jewkes
told me, if it was more agreeable to me, she
would lie in another Room; but I said, No,
thank you, Mrs. Jewkes; pray let me have
your Company. And she made me a fine
Court'sy, and thank'd me. —How Times are
alter'd!— 
