


I am visited by Freeman, with whom I appear
in public, and am carressed—I
am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose
presence I quit in a passion—Narcissa is
carried off by her brother—I intend to
pursue him, and am dissuaded by my friend
—I engage in play, and lose all my
money—set out for London—try
my fortune at the gaming-table, without
success—receive a letter from Narcissa
—bilk my taylor. 
While I entertained myself with these
reflections, the news of this duel being
communicated by some unknown channel, spread
all over the town. —I was visited by Freeman,
who testified his surprize at finding me, having
been told, that Lord Quiverwit being dead of
his wounds, I had absconded, in order to avoid
the cognizance of the law. I asked if people
guessed the occasion of the quarrel; and understanding
it was attributed to his lordship's resentment
of my reply in the Long-room, confirmed
that conjecture, glad to find Narcissa unsuspected. 
—My friend, after I had assured him
that my antagonist was in no danger, wished me
joy of the event, than which, he said, nothing
could happen more opportunely to support the
idea he had given of my character, to his friends, 

among whom he had been very assiduous in my
behalf. 
On the strength of this assurance, I went with
him to the coffee-house, where I was saluted by
a great many of those very persons, who shunned
me the preceeding day. —And I found every
body making merry with the story of Melinda's
French gallant. —While I remained in this place,
I received a message from Lord Quiverwit, desiring,
if I was not engaged, to see me at his
house. 
Thither I immediately repaired, and was conducted
to an apartment where I was received
by his lordship in bed. —Being left by ourselves,
he thanked me in very polite terms, for having
used the advantage fortune had given me over
him, with such moderation; and asked pardon
for any offence his resentment might have
prompted him to commit. —“I would willingly,
(said he) make you my friend; but as it is
impossible for me to divest myself of my
passion for Narcissa, I am too well convinced
of your sentiments, to think we shall ever
agree on that subject. I took the liberty,
therefore, of sending for you, in order to own
candidly, that I cannot help opposing your
success with that young lady; though at
the same time, I promise to regulate my opposition
by the dictates of justice and honour: 
This, however, I think proper to advertise you
of, that she has no independant fortune, and if
you should even succeed in your addresses, you
would have the mortification to see her reduced
to indigence, unless you have wherewithal
to support her—And I am credibly informed
of your incapacity that way. —Nay, 

I will confess, that, urged by this consideration,
I have actually sent notice to her brother, of
the progress I suspect you have made in her
affection, and desired him to take his precautions
accordingly.” —Alarmed and provoked
at this information, I told his lordship,
that I did not see how he could reconcile that
piece of conduct with his profession of open
dealing, and flung away from him in a passion. 
As I walked homeward, in hopes of hearing
from my mistress as usual by means of Miss
Williams, I was surprized with the waving of a
handkerchief, from the window of a coach and
fix that passed by me at full speed; and upon
further observation, I saw a servant on horse-back
riding after it, who, I knew by his livery, belonged
to the Squire. —Thunderstruck with this
discovery, the knowledge of my misfortune
rushed all at once upon my reflection! I guessed
immediately that the signal was made by the
dear hand of Narcissa, who being hurried away
in consequence of Lord Quiverwit's message to
her brother, had no other method of relating
her distress, and imploring my assistance. — 
Frantick with this conjecture, I run to my
lodging, snatched my pistols, and ordered Strap
to get post-horses, with such incoherence of
speech and disorder, that the poor valet, terrified
with the suspicion of another duel, instead of
providing what I desired, went forthwith to
Freeman, who being informed of my behaviour,
came streight to my apartment, and
conjured me so pathetically to acquaint him
with the cause of my uneasiness, that I
could not refuse to tell him my happiness was
fled with Narcissa, and that I must retrieve 

her or perish. He represented the madness of
such an undertaking, and endeavoured to divert
me from it with great strength of friendship and
reason: But all his arguments would have been
ineffectual, had he not put me in mind of the
dependance I ought to have on the love of Narcissa,
and attachment of her maid, which could
not fail of finding opportunities enow to advertise
me of their situation; and at the same time,
demonstrated the injury my charmer's reputation
must suffer from my precipitate retreat. I was
convinced and composed by these considerations: 
I appeared in publick with an air of tranquility,
was well received by the best company in town,
and my misfortune taking air, condoled accordingly; 
while I had the satisfaction of seeing
Melinda so universally discountenanced, that she
was fain to return to London, in order to avoid
the scoffs and censure of the ladies at Bath. — 
But though the hope of hearing from the darling
of my soul supported my spirits a little while,
I began to be very uneasy, when at the end of
several weeks, I found that expectation disappointed. 
—In short, melancholy and despondence
took possession of my soul; and repining at that
providence, which by acting the stepmother towards
me, kept me from the fruition of my
wishes, I determined, in a fit of despair, to
risk all I had at the gaming table, with a view of
acquiring a fortune sufficient to render me independant
for life; or of plunging myself into
such a state of misery, as would effectually crush
every ambitious hope that now tortured my
imagination. 
Actuated by this fatal resolution, I engaged in
play, and after some turns of fortune, found myself, 

at the end of three days, worth a thousand
pounds; but it was not my intention to stop
there, for which cause I kept Strap ignorant of
my success, and continued my career, until I
was reduced to five guineas, which I would have
hazarded also, had I not been ashamed to fall
from a bett of two hundred pounds to such a
petty sum. 
Having thus executed my scheme, I went
home, amazed to find myself so much at ease,
and informed my friend Strap of my mischance,
with such calmness, that he imagining I joked,
affected to receive the tidings with great equanimity. 
—But both he and I found ourselves mistaken
very soon. —I had misinterpreted my own stupidity
into deliberate resignation, and he had reason to
believe me in earnest, when he saw me next
morning agitated with the most violent despair,
which he endeavoured to alleviate with all the
consolation in his power. 
In one of my lucid intervals, however, I
charged him to take a place in the stage coach
for London; and in the mean time, pay'd my
debts in Bath, which amounted to thirty shillings
only. —Without taking leave of my friends I
embarked, Strap having the good fortune to find
a return horse, and arrived in town, without
having met with any thing remarkable on the
road; save that, while we crossed Bagshot Heath,
I was seized with a sort of inclination to retrieve
my fortune, by laying passengers under contribution,
in some such place. —My thoughts were so
circumstanced at this time, that I should have
digested the crime of robbery, so righteously had
I concerted my plan, and ventured my life in the 

execution, had I not been deterred by reflecting
upon the infamy that attends detection. 
The apartment I formerly lived in being unengaged,
I took possession of it, and next day
went in quest of Banter, who received me with
open arms, in expectation of having his bond discharged
to his liking: —But when he understood
what had happened, his countenance changed
of a sudden, and he told me, with a dryness of
displeasure peculiar to himself, that if he was in
my place, he would put it out of fortune's power
to play him such another trick, and be avenged
of his own indiscretion at once. —When I desired
him to explain his meaning, he pointed to his
neck, raised himself on his tip-toes, and was
going away without any further ceremony, when
I put him in mind of my indigence, and demanded
the five guineas I had formerly lent him. 
“Five guineas! (cried he) Zounds! had you
acted with common prudence you might have
had twenty thousand in your pocket by this
time. —I depended upon five hundred from
you, as much as if I had had notes for it in
the bank; and by all the rules of equity, you
are indebted to me for that sum.” —I was neither
pleased nor convinced by this computation,
and insisted on my right with such determined
obstinacy, that he was fain to alter his tone,
and appease my clamour, by assuring me, that
he was not master of five shillings. —Society in
distress, generally promotes good understanding
among people; from being a dun, I descended
to be a client, and asked his advice about repairing
my losses. —He counselled me to have recourse
again to the gaming table, where I had succeeded 

so well before, and to put myself in a condition,
by selling my watch. —I followed his directions,
and having accommodated him with a few
pieces, went to the place, where I lost every
shilling. 
I returned to my lodgings full of desperate resolution,
and having made Strap acquainted with
my fate, ordered him to pawn my sword immediately,
that I might be enabled to make another
effort. —This affectionate creature no
sooner understood my purpose, than seized with
insuppressible sorrow at the prospect of my misery,
he burst into tears, and asked what I proposed
to do after the small sum he could raise on
the sword should be spent: “On my own account
(said he) I am quite unconcerned; for
while God spares me health and these ten fingers,
I can earn a comfortable subsistence any where; 
but what must become of you, who have less
humility to stoop, and more appetites to gratify.” 
—Here I interrupted him, by saying, with
a gloomy aspect, I could never want a resource while
I had a loaded pistol in possession. —Stupified with
horror, at this dreadful insinuation, he stood
mute for some time, and then broke out into
“God of his infinite mercy enable you to withstand
that temptation of the devil!—consider
your immortal soul—there's no repentance
in the grave! —O Lord! that ever it should
come to this—Are we not enjoined to resign
ourselves to the will of heaven?—where is
your patience? —Durum patientia frango— 
you are but a young man—there may be many
good things in store for you—accidit in puncto,
quid non speratur in anno—remember your 

uncle, Mr. Bowling; perhaps he is now on his
voyage homeward, pleasing himself with the
hopes of finding and relieving you—nay, peradventure
he is already arrived, the ship was
expected about this time.” —A ray of hope
shot athwart the darkness of my soul, at this
suggestion; I thanked my friend for his seasonable
recollection, and after having promised to take
no resolution till his return, dismissed him to
Wapping for intelligence. 
In his absence I was visited by Banter, who
being informed of my bad luck at play, told me,
that fort ne would probably be one day weary of
persecuting me, “In the mean time, (said he)
here's a letter for you, which I received just now
inclosed in one from Freeman.” —I snatched
it with eagerness, and knowing the superscription
to be of Narcissa's hand-writing, kissed it with
transport, and having opened it, read 

“It is with great difficulty, that I have stolen
from the observation of those spies who
are set over me, this opportunity of telling
you, that I was suddenly carried away from
Bath, by my brother, who was informed of
our correspondence by Lord Quiverwit, whom,
I since understand, you have wounded in
a duel on my account. —As I am fully
convinced of your honour and love, I hope
I shall never hear of such desperate proofs
of either for the future. —I am so strictly
watched, that it will be impossible for you to
see me, until my brother's suspicion shall
abate, or heaven contrive some other unforeseen 

event in our behalf. —In the mean time,
you may depend on the constancy and affection
of 
“Your own
Narcissa.” 
“P.S. Miss Williams, who is my fellow prisoner,
desires to be remembered to you
—We are both in good health, and only
in pain for you, especially, as it will be
impracticable for you to convey any message
or letter to the place of our confinement
—for which reason, pray
desist from the attempt, that by miscarrying
must prolong our captivity. 
“N&wblank;.” 
This kind letter afforded me great consolation: 
I communicated it to Banter, and at the
same time, shewed him her picture: He approved
her beauty and good sense, and could
not help owning, that my neglect of Miss Snapper
was excusable, when such a fine creature
engrossed my attention. 
I began to be reconciled to my fate, and imagined,
that if I could contrive means of subsisting
until my uncle should arrive, in case he was
not already at home, that he would enable me
to do something effectual in behalf of my love
and fortune—I therefore consulted Banter
about a present supply, who no sooner understood
that I had credit with a taylor, than he
advised me to take off two or three suits of 

rich cloaths and convert them into cash, by selling
them at half price to a salesman in Monmouth-street. 
—I was a little startled at his proposal,
which I thought savoured a little of fraud; 
but he rendered it palatable, by observing, that in
a few months, I might be in a condition to do
every body justice; and in the mean time, I was
acquitted by the honesty of my intention—I
suffered myself to be persuaded by his salvo,
by which my necessity, rather than my judgment,
was convinced; and when I found there were
no accounts of the ship in which my uncle embarked,
actually put the scheme in practice, and
raised by it, five and twenty guineas, paying him
for his advice with the odd five. 