


DEAR KNIGHT,
I BELIEVE, there is something mischievous
in my disposition, for nothing diverts me so much
as to see certain characters tormented with false
terrors. —We last night lodged at the house of
sir Thomas Bullford, an old friend of my uncle,
a jolly fellow, of moderate intellects, who, in
spite of the gout, which had lamed him, is resolved
to be merry to the last; and mirth he has
a particular nack in extracting from his guests, let
their humour be never so caustic or refractory. — 
Besides our company, there was in the house a
fat-headed justice of the peace, called Frogmore,
and a country practioner in surgery, who seemed
to be our landlord's chief companion and confidant. 
—We found the knight sitting on a couch,
with his cruches by his side, and his feet supported
on cushions; but he received us with a hearty
welcome, and seemed greatly rejoiced at our arrival. 
—After tea we were entertained with a sonata
on the harpsichord by lady Bullford, who 

sung and played to admiration; but sir Thomas
seemed to be a little asinine in the article of ears,
though he affected to be in raptures; and begged
his wife to favour us with an arietta of her own
composing. —This arietta, however, she no sooner
began to perform, than he and the justice fell
asleep; but the moment she ceased playing, the
knight waked snorting, and exclaimed, “O cara!
what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk
any more of your Pargolesi and your Corelli?” 
—At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one
cheek, and leered with one eye at the doctor and
me, who sat on his left hand. —He concluded
the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he could
command at all times extempore. —Notwithstanding
his disorder, he did not do penance at supper,
nor did he ever refuse his glass when the toast went
round, but rather encouraged a quick circulation,
both by precept and example. 
I soon perceived the doctor had made himself
very necessary to the baronet. —He was the whetstone
of his wit, the but of his satire, and his
operator in certain experiments of humour, which
were occasionally tried upon strangers —Justice
Frogmore was an excellent subject for this species
of philosophy; sleek and corpulent, solemn and
shallow, he had studied Burn with uncommon application,
but he studied nothing so much as the
art of living (that is, eating) well. —This fat buck
had often offorded good sport to our landlord; and
he was frequently started with tolerable success, in
the course of this evening; but the baronet's appetite
for redicule seemed to be chiefly exited by
the appearance, address, and conversation of Lismahago,
whom he attempted in all the different
modes of exposition; but he put me in mind of a
contest that I once saw betwixt a young hound and 

and old hedge-hog —The dog turned him over and
over, and bounced, and barked, and mumbled; 
but as often as he attempted to bite, he felt a
prickle in his jaws, and recoiled in manifest confusion: 
—The captain, when left to himself, will
not fail to turn his ludicrous side to the company,
but if any man attempts to force him into that
attitude, he becomes stubborn as a mule, and unmanageable
as an elephant unbroke. 
Divers tolerable jokes were cracked upon the
justice who eat a most unconscionable supper, and,
among other things, a large plate of broiled mushrooms,
which he had no sooner swallowed than
the doctor observed, with great gravity, that they
were of the kind called champignons, which in some
constitutions had a poisonous effect —Mr. Frogmore,
startled at this remark, asked, in some confusion,
why he had not been so kind as to give him
that notice sooner. —He answered, that he took it
for granted, by his eating them so heartily, that
he was used to the dish; but as he seemed to be
under some apprehension, he prescribed a bumper
of plague water, which the justice drank off immediately,
and retired to rest, not without marks
of terror and disquiet. 
At midnight we were shewn to our different
chambers, and in half an hour, I was fast asleep
in bed; but about three o'clock in the morning I
was waked with a dismal cry of Fire! and starting
up, ran to the window in my shirt. —The night
was dark and stormy; and a number of people
half-dressed ran backwards and forwards thro' the
court-yard, with links and lanterns, seemingly
in the utmost hurry and trepidation. —Slipping on
my cloaths in a twinkling, I ran down stairs, and,
upon inquiry, found the fire was confined to a backstair,
which led to a detached apartment where 

Lismahago lay. —By this time, the lieutenant was
alarmed by a bawling at his window, which was in
the second story, but he could not find his cloaths
in the dark, and his room-door was locked on the
outside —The servants called to him, that the
house had been robbed; that, without all doubt,
the villians had taken away his cloaths, fastened
the door, and set the house on fire, for the staircase
was in flames. —In this dilemma the poor lieutenant
ran about the room naked like a squirrel in
a cage, poping out his head at the window between
whiles, and imploring assistance. —At
length the knight in person was brought out in
his chair, attended by my uncle and all the family,
including our aunt Tabitha, who screamed,
and cried, and tore her hair, as if she had been
distracted. —Sir Thomas had already ordered his
people to bring a long ladder, which was applied
to the captain's window and now he exhorted him
earnestly to descend. —There was no need of
much rhetoric to persuade Lismahago, who forthwith
made his exit by the window, roaring all the
time to the people below to hold fast the ladder. 
Notwithstanding the gravity of the occasion, it
was impossible to behold this scene without being
seized with an inclination to laugh. The rueful
aspect of the lieutenant in his shirt with a quilted
night-cap fastened under his chin, and his long
lank limbs and posteriors, exposed to the wind,
made a very picturesque appearance, when illumined
by the links and torches which the servants held
up to light him in his descent. —All the company
stood round the ladder, except the knight, who sat
in his chair, exclaiming from time to time, “Lord
have mercy upon us!—save the gentleman's
life!—mind your footing, dear captain!—softly!
—stand fast!—clasp the ladder with both 

hands!—there!—well done, my dear boy! — 
O bravo—an old soldier for ever!—bring a
blanket—bring a warm blanket to comfort his
poor carcase—warm the bed in the green room
—give me your hand, dear captain —I'm rejoiced
to see thee safe and found with all my
heart.” Lismahago was received at the foot of
the ladder by his inamorata, who snatching a
blanket from one of the maids, wrapped it about
his body; two men-servants took him under the
arms, and a female conducted him to the green
room, still accompanied by Mrs. Tabitha, who
saw him fairly put to bed. —During this whole
transaction, he spoke not a syllable, but looked
exceeding grim, sometimes at one, sometimes at
another of the spectators, who now adjourned in
a body to the parlour where we had supped, every
one surveying another with marks of astonishment
and curiosity. 
The knight being seated in an easy chair, seized
my uncle by the hand, and bursting into a long
and loud laugh, “Matt, (cried he) crown me
with oak, or ivy, or laurel, or parsley, or what
you will, and acknowledge this to be a coup de
maitre in the way of waggery—ha, ha, ha! — 
Such a camisicata, scagliata, befata!—O, che
roba! —O, what a subject! —O, what caricatura! 
—O, for a Rosa, a Rembrandt, a Schalken! 
—Zooks, I'll give a hundred guineas to
have it painted!—what a fine descent from the
cross, or ascent to the gallows!—what lights
and shadows—what a groupe below! what
expression above!—what an aspect!—did you
mind the aspect?—ha, ha, ha!—and the limbs,
and the muscles—every toe denoted terror— 
ha, ha, ha!—then the blanket! —O, what
costume! St. Andrew! St. Lazarus! St. Barrabas! 

—ha, ha, ha!” “After all then, (cried
Mr. Bramble very gravely) this was no more
than a false alarm. —We have been frightened
out of our beds, and almost out of our senses,
for the joke's sake.” “Aye, and such a joke!
(cried our landlord) such a farce! such a denouement!
such a catastrophe!” 
“Have a little patience (replied our 'squire); 
we are not yet come to the catastrophe; and pray
God it may not turn out a tragedy instead of a
farce. —The captain is one of those saturnine
subjects, who have no idea of humour. —He
never laughs in his own person; nor can he
bear that other people should laugh at his expence. 
—Besides, if the subject had been properly
chosen, the joke was too severe in all
conscience.” “'Sdeath! (cried the knight) I
could not have bated him an ace had he been my
own father; and as for the subject, such another
does not present itself once in half a century.” 
Here Mrs. Tabitha interposing, and bridling up,
declared, she did not see that Mr. Lismahago was
a fitter subject for ridicule than the knight himself; 
and that she was very much afraid, he would very
soon find he had mistaken his man —The baronet
was a good deal disconcerted by this intimation,
saying, that he must be a Goth and a barbarian,
if he did not enter into the spirit of such a happy
and humorous contrivance. —He begged, however
that Mr. Bramble and his sister would bring
him to reason; and this request was reinforced by
lady Bullford, who did not fail to read the baronet
a lecture upon this indiscretion, which lecture
he received with submission on one side of his face,
and a leer upon the other. 
We now went to bed for the second time; and
before I got up, my uncle had visited Lismahago 

in the green room, and used such arguments with
him, that when we met in the parlour he seemed
to be quite appeased. —He received the knight's
apology with a good grace, and even professed
himself pleased at finding he had contributed to
the diversion of the company. —Sir Thomas shook
him by the hand, laughing heartily; and then desired
a pinch of snuff, in token of perfect reconciliation. 
—The lieutenant, putting his hand in his
waistcoat pocket, pulled out, instead of his own
Scotch mull, a very fine gold snuff box, which he
no sooner perceived than he said, “Here is a small
mistake.” “No mistake at all (cried the baronet):
a fair exchange is no robbery. —Oblige
me so far, captain, as to let me keep your mull
as a memorial.” “Sir, (said the lieutenant)
the mull is much at your service; but this machine
I can by no means retain. —It looks like
compounding a sort of felony in the code of honour. 
—Besides, I don't know but there may be
another joke in this conveyance; and I don't
find myself disposed to be brought upon the
stage again. —I won't presume to make free with
your pockets, but I beg you will put it up again
with your own hand.” —So saying, with a certain
austerity of aspect, he presented the snuff-box
to the knight, who received it in some confusion,
and restored the mull, which he would by no
means keep, except on the terms of exchange. 
This transaction was like to give a grave cast to
the conversation, when my uncle took notice that
Mr. Justice Frogmore had not made his appearance
either at the night-alarm, or now at the general
rendezvous. —The baronet hearing Frogmore
mentioned, “Odso! (cried he) I had forgot the
justice. —Pr'ythee, doctor, go and bring him
out of his kennel.” —Then laughing till his 

sides were well shaken, he said he would shew the
captain, that he was not the only person of the drama
exhibited for the entertainment of the company. 
As to the night-scene, it could not affect the
justice, who had been purposely lodged in the farther
end of the house, remote from the noise, and
lulled with a dose of opium into the bargain. In
a few minutes, Mr. Justice was led into the parlour
in his night-cap and loose morning gown, rolling
his head from side to side, and groaning piteously
all the way. —“Jesu! neighbour Frogmore,
(exclaimed the baronet) what is the matter?
—you look as if you was not a man for this
world. —Set him down softly on the couch— 
poor gentleman! —Lord have mercy upon us! 
—What makes him so pale, and yellow, and
bloated?” “Oh, sir Thomas! (cried the
justice) I doubt 'tis all over with me —Those
mushrooms I eat at your table have done my
business—ah! oh! hey!” “Now the Lord
forbid! (said the other)—what! man, have a
good heart. —How does thy stomach feel?— 
hah?” 
To this interrogation he made no reply, but
throwing aside his night gown, discovered that his
waistcoat would not meet upon his belly by five
good inches at least. “Heaven protect us all!
(cried sir Thomas)—what a melancholy spectacle! —never did I see a man so suddenly
swelled, but when he was either just dead, or just
dying. —Doctor, can'st thou do nothing for
this poor object?” “I don't think the case is
quite desperate (said the surgeon), but I would
advise Mr. Frogmore to settle his affairs with
all expedition; the parson may come and pray
by him, while I prepare a clyster and an emetic
draught.” The justice, rolling his languid 

eyes, ejaculated with great fervency, “Lord
have mercy upon us! Christ have mercy upon
us!” —Then he begged the surgeon, in the
name of God, to dispatch —“As for my wordly
affairs (said he) they are all settled but one
mortgage, which must be left to my heirs— 
but my poor soul! my poor soul! what will
become of my poor soul?—miserable sinner that
I am!” “Nay, pr'ythee my dear boy, compose
thyself (resumed the knight); consider the
mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st not
have any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience,
or the devil's in't.” “Name not the
devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I have
more sins to answer for than the world dreams
of. —Ah! friend, I have been sly—sly—damn'd
sly! —Send for the parson without loss of time,
and put me to bed for I am posting to eternity.” 
—He was accordingly raised from the
couch, and supported by two servants, who led
him back to his room; but before he quitted the
parlour, he entreated the good company to assist
him with their prayers. —He added, “Take
warning by me who am suddenly cut off in my
prime, like a flower of the field; and God forgive
you, sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous
tresh to be eaten at your table.” 
He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than
the baronet abandoned himself to a violent fit of
laughing, in which he was joined by the greatest
part of the company; but we could hardly prevent
the good lady from going to undeceive the
patient, by discovering, that while he slept his
waistcoat had been straitened by the contrivance
of the surgeon; and that the disorder in his stomach
and bowels was occasioned by some animonial
wine, which he had taken over night, under 

the denomination of plague-water. —She seemed
to think that his apprehension might put an end
to his life; the knight swore he was no such chicken,
but a tough old rogue, that would live long
enough to plague all his neighbours. Upon enquiry,
we found his character did not entitle him
to much compassion or respect, and therefore we let
our landlord's humour take its course. —A clyster
was actually administered by an old woman of the
family who had been sir Thomas's nurse, and the
patient took a draught made with oxymel of squills
to forward the operation of the antimonial wine,
which had been retarded by the opiate of the preceding
night. He was visited by the vicar, who
read prayers, and began to take an account of the
state of his soul, when those medicines produced
their effect; so that the parson was obliged to hold
his nose while he poured forth spiritual consolation
from his mouth. The same expedient was used
by the knight and me, who, with the doctor, entered
the chamber at this juncture, and found
Frogmore enthroned on an easy-chair, under
the pressure of a double evacuation. The short
intervals betwixt every heave he employed in crying
for mercy, confessing his sins, or asking the
vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered,
in a solemn snuffling tone, that heightened the ridicule
of the scene. The emetic having done its
office, the doctor interfered, and ordered the patient
to be put in bed again. When he examined
the egista, and felt his pulse, he declared that
much of the virus was discharged, and, giving
him a composing draught, assured him he had
good hopes of his recovery. —This welcome hint
he received with the tears of joy in his eyes, protesting,
that if he should recover, he would always
think himself indebted for his life to the great skill 

and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he
squeezed with great fervor; and thus he was left
to his repose. 
We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be
witness of his resuscitation but my uncle insisted
upon our departing before noon, that we might
reach this town before it should be dark. —In the
mean time, lady Bullford conducted us into the
garden to see a fish-pond just finished, which Mr.
Bramble censured as being too near the parlour,
where the knight now fat by himself, dozing in an-elbow
chair after the fatigues of his morning atchievement. 
—In this situation he reclined, with
his feet wrapped in flannel, and supported in a line
with his body, when the door flying open with a
violent shock lieutenant Lismahago rushed into
the room with horror in his looks, exclaiming,
“A mad dog! a mad dog!” and throwing up
the window sash, leaped into the garden. —Sir
Thomas, waked by this tremendous exclamation,
started up and forgetting his gout, followed the
lieutenant's example by a kind of instinctive impulse. 
—He not only bolted thro' the window
like an arrow from a bow, but ran up to his middle
in the pond before he gave the least sign of recollection. 
Then the captain began to bawl,
“Lord have mercy upon us!—pray take care of
the gentleman!—for God's sake mind your
footing, my dear boy!—get warm blankets— 
comfort his poor carcase—warm the bed in the
green room.” 
Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phenomenon,
and the rest of the company gazed in
silent astonishment, while the servants hastened to
assist their master, who suffered himself to be carried
back into the parlour without speaking a
word. —Being instantly accommodated with dry 

clothes and flannels, comforted with a cordial, and
replaced in statu quo, one of the maids was ordered
to chafe, his lower extremities, an operation in
consequence of which his senses seemed to return
and his good humour to revive. —As we had followed
him into the room, he looked at every individual
in his turn, with a certain ludicrous expression
in his countenance, but fixed his eye in
particular upon Lismahago, who presented him
with a pinch of snuff, and when he took it in silence,
“Sir Thomas Bullford, (said he) I am
much obliged to you for all your favours, and
some of them I have endeavoured to repay in
your own coin.” “Give me thy hand (cried
the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot
and lot; and even left a ballance in my hands,
for which, in presence of this company, I promise
to be accountable.” —So saying, he laughed
very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation
which had been exacted at his own expence; 
but lady Bullford looked very grave; and
in all probability thought the lieutenant had carried
his resentment too far, considering that her
husband was valetudinary—but, according to the
proverb, he that will play at bowls must expect to
meet with rubbers. 
I have seen a tame bear, very diverting when
properly managed, become a very dangerous wild
beast when teized for the entertainment of the spectators. 
—As for Lismahago, he seemed to think
the fright and the cold bath would have a good
effect upon his patient's constitution; but the doctor
hinted some apprehension that the gouty matter
might, by such a sudden shock, be repelled
from the extremities and thrown upon some of the
more vital parts of the machine. —I should be very
sorry to see this prognostic verified upon our facetious 

landlord, who told Mrs. Tabitha at parting,
that he hoped she would remember him in
the distribution of the bride's favours, as he had
taken so much pains to put the captain's parts and
mettle to the proof. —After all, I am afraid our
'squire will appear to be the greatest sufferer by the
baronet's wit; for his constitution is by no means
calculated for night-alarms. —He has yawned and
shivered all day, and gone to bed without supper; 
so that, as we have got into good quarters, I imagine
we shall make a halt to-morrow; in which
case, you will have at least one day's respite from
the persecution of 
J. Melford. 
Oct. 3. 