


To Mr. Henry Davis, Bookseller, in London.
Abergavenny, Aug. 4. 
RESPECTED SIR,
I have received your esteemed favour
of the 13th ultimo, whereby
it appeareth, that you have perused
those same Letters, the which were
delivered unto you by my friend the
reverend Mr. Hugo Behn; and I am
pleased to find you think they may be
printed with a good prospect of success; 
in as much as the objections you mention,
I humbly conceive, are such as may
be redargued, if not entirely removed — 
And, first, in the first place, as touching
what prosecutions may arise from
printing the private correspondence of
persons still living, give me leave, with
all due submission, to observe, that the
Letters in question were not written
and sent under the seal of secrecy; that
they have no tendency to the mala
fama, or prejudice of any person whatsoever; 
but rather to the information 

and edification of Mankind: so that it
becometh a sort of duty to promulgate
them in usum publicum. Besides I have
consulted Mr. Davy Higgins, an eminent
attorney of this place, who, after
due inspection and consideration, declareth,
That he doth not think the said
Letters contain any matter which will
be held actionable in the eye of the law. 
Finally, if you and I should come to a
right understanding, I do declare in verbo
sacerdotis, that in case of any such prosecution,
I will take the whole upon my
own shoulders, even quoad fine and imprisonment,
though, I must confess, I
should not care to undergo flagellation:
Tam ad turpitudinem, quam ad amaritudinem
pœna spectans–––Secondly, concerning
the personal resentment of Mr.
Justice Lismahago, I may say, non flocci
factio–––I would not willingly vilipend
any Christian, if, peradventure, he deserveth
that epithet: albeit, I am much
surprised that more care is not taken to
exclude from the commission all such
vagrant foreigners as may be justly suspected
of disaffection to our happy constitution,
in church and state––God forbid
that I should be so uncharitable, 

as to affirm positively, that the said Lismahago
is no better than a Jesuit in
disguise; but this I will assert and maintain,
totis viribus, that, from the day he
qualified, he has never been once seen
intra templi parietes, that is to say,
within the parish church. 
Thirdly, with respect to what passed
at Mr. Kendal's table, when the said
Lismahago was so brutal in his reprehensions,
I must inform you, my good
sir, that I was obliged to retire, not by
fear arising from his minatory reproaches,
which, as I said above, I value not
of a rush; but from the sudden effect
produced by a barbel's row, which I had
eaten at dinner, not knowing, that the
said row is at certain seasons violently
cathartic, as Galen observeth in his
chapter &grp;&gre;&grr;&gri; &gri;&grc;&grq;&gru;&grst;. 
Fourthly, and lastly, with reference
to the manner in which I got possession
of these Letters, it is a circumstance
that concerns my own conscience only; 
sufficeth it to say, I have fully satisfied
the parties in whose custody they were; 
and, by this time, I hope I have also satisfied
you in such ways, that the last
hand may be put to our agreement, and 

the work proceed with all convenient
expedition; in which hope I rest, 
respected sir,
your very humble servant,
Jonathan Dustwich. 
P. S. I propose, Deo Volente, to have the
pleasure of seeing you in the great
city, towards All-hallow-tide, when
I shall be glad to treat with you
concerning a parcel of MS. sermons,
of a certain clergyman deceased; a
cake of the right leaven, for the
present taste of the public. Verbum
sapienti, &c. 
J. D. 


To the Revd. Mr. Jonathan Dustwich, at &wblank;
Sir,
I Received yours in course of post, and
shall be glad to treat with you for
the MS. which I have delivered to your
friend Mr. Behn; but can by no means
comply with the terms proposed. Those
things are so uncertain—Writing is all
a lottery—I have been a loser by the
works of the greatest men of the age— 
I could mention particulars, and name
names; but don't choose it—The taste
of the town is so changeable. Then
there have been so many letters upon
travels lately published—What between
Smollett's, Sharp's, Derrick's, Thickness's,
Baltimore's, and Baretti's, together
with Shandy's Sentimental Travels,
the public seems to be cloyed with
that kind of entertainment—Nevertheless,
I will, if you please, run the risque
of printing and publishing, and you shall
have half the profits of the impression— 
You need not take the trouble to bring 

up your sermons on my account—No
body reads sermons but Methodists and
Dissenters—Besides, for my own part,
I am quite a stranger to that sort of
reading; and the two persons, whose
judgment I depended upon in these
matters, are out of the way; one is gone
abroad, carpenter of a man of war; and
the other has been silly enough to abscond,
in order to avoid a prosecution
for blasphemy—I'm a great loser by his
going off—He has left a manual of devotion
half finished on my hands, after
having received money for the whole
copy—He was the soundest divine, and
had the most orthodox pen of all my
people; and I never knew his judgment
fail, but in flying from his bread and
butter on this occasion. 
By owning you was not put in bodily
fear by Lismahago, you preclude yourself
from the benefit of a good plea, over
and above the advantage of binding him
over. In the late war, I inserted in my
evening paper, a paragraph that came
by the post, reflecting upon the behaviour
of a certain regiment in battle. 
An officer of said regiment came to my
shop, and, in the presence of my wife 

and journeyman, threatened to cut off
my ears —As I exhibited marks of bodily
fears, more ways than one, to the
conviction of the bye-standers, I bound
him over; my action lay, and I recovered. 
As for flagellation, you have nothing
to fear, and nothing to hope, on
that head—There has been but one
printer flogged at the cart's tail these
thirty years; that was Charles Watson; 
and he assured me it was no more than
a flea-bite. C&wblank; S&wblank; has been threatened
several times by the House of
L&wblank;; but it came to nothing. If an information
should be moved for, and
granted against you, as the editor of
those Letters, I hope you will have
honesty and wit enough to appear and
take your trial—If you should be sentenced
to the pillory, your fortune is
made—As times go, that's a sure step to
honour and preferment. I shall think
myself happy if I can lend you a lift; 
and am, very sincerely, 
yours,
Henry Davis 
London, Aug. 10th. 

Please my kind service to your neighbour,
my cousin Madoc. —I have sent
an Almanack and Court-kalendar,
directed for him at Mr. Sutton's
bookseller, in Gloucester, carriage
paid, which he will please to accept
as a small token of my regard. My
wife, who is very fond of toasted
cheese, presents her compliments to
him, and begs to know if there's any
of that kind, which he was so good
as to send us last Christmas, to be sold
in London. 
H. D. 