


He inquires into the situation of this young lady
with whom he is enamoured; elopes from school; 
is found by the lieutenant, reconveyed to Winchester,
and sends a letter with a copy of verses
to his mistress. 
He was transported with pleasure at this invitation,
which he assured her he should
not neglect; and after a little more conversation
on general topics, took his leave of the charming
Emilia and her prudent mamma, who had
perceived the first emotions of Mr. Pickle's passion
for her daughter, and been at some pains to
inquire about his family and fortune. 
Neither was Peregrine less inquisitive about
the situation and pedigree of his new mistress,
who, he learned, was the only daughter of a
field-officer, who died before he had it in his
power to make suitable provision for his children; 
that the widow lived in a frugal, though decent
manner, on the pension, assisted by the bounty
of her relations; that the son carried arms as volunteer
in the company which his father had
commanded; and that Emilia had been educated
in London, at the expence of a rich uncle, who
was seized with the whim of marrying at the age
of fifty-five; in consequence of which, his niece
had returned to her mother, without any visible
dependance, except on her own conduct and qualifications. 

This account, though it could not diminish
his affection, nevertheless alarmed his pride; for
his warm imagination had exaggerated all his
own prospects; and he began to fear, that his
passion for Emilia might be thought to derogate
from the dignity of his situation. The struggle
between his interest and love produced a perplexity
which had an evident effect upon his behaviour; 
he became pensive, solitary and peevish,
avoided all publick diversions, and grew so remarkably
negligent in his dress, that he was
scarce distinguishable by his own acquaintance. 
This contention of thoughts continued several
weeks, at the end of which the charms of Emilia
triumphed over every other consideration; 
and having received a supply of money from the
commodore, who acted towards him with great
generosity, he ordered Pipes to put up some
linnen, and other necessaries, in a sort of knapsack
which he could conveniently carry, and
thus attended set out early one morning on foot
for the village where his charmer lived, at which
he arrived before two o'clock in the afternoon; 
having chosen this method of travelling, that his
rout might not be so easily discovered, as it must
have been, had he hired horses, or taken a place
in the stage-coach. 
The first thing he did was to secure a convenient
lodging at the inn where he dined; then
he shifted himself, and according to the direction
he had received, went to the house of Mrs.
Gauntlet in a transport of joyous expectation. 
As he approached the gate his agitation increased,
he knocked with impatience and concern, the
door opened, and he had actually asked if Mrs.
Gauntlet was at home, before he perceived that the 

portress was no other than his dear Emilia. She
was not without emotion at the unexpected sight
of her lover, who instantly recognizing his charmer,
obeyed the irresistible impulse of his love, and
caught the fair creature in his arms. Nor did
she seem offended at this forwardness of bahaviour,
which might have displeased another of a
less open disposition, or less used to the freedom
of a sensible education; but her natural frankness
had been encouraged and improved by the
easy and familiar intercourse in which she had
been bred; and therefore, instead of reprimanding
him with a severity of look, she with great
good humour rallied him upon his assurance,
which, she observed, was undoubtedly the effect
of his own conscious merit, and conducted him
into a parlour, where he found her mother, who
in very polite terms expressed her satisfaction at
seeing him within her house. 
Having drank tea together, Miss Emy proposed
an evening walk, which they enjoyed
through a variety of little copses and lawns, watered
by a most romantic stream, that quite enchanted
the imagination of Peregrine. 
It was late before they returned from this
agreeable excursion, and when our lover wished
the ladies good night, Mrs. Gauntlet insisted upon
his staying to supper, and treated him with
particular demonstrations of regard and affection. 
As her œconomy was not encumbered with an
unnecessary number of domestics, her own presence
was often required in different parts of the house,
so that the young gentleman was supplied with
frequent opportunities of promoting his suit, by
all the tender oaths and insinuations that his passion
could suggest. He protested, that her idea 

had taken such entire possession of his heart, that
finding himself unable to support her absence one
day longer, he had quitted his studies, and left
his governor by stealth, that he might visit the
object of his adoration, and be blessed in her
company for a few days without interruption. 
She listened to his addresses with such affability
as denoted approbation and delight, and gently
chid him as a thoughtless truant, but carefully
avoided the confession of a mutual flame; because
she discerned, in the midst of all his tenderness,
a levity of pride which she durst not
venture to trust with such a declaration. Perhaps
she was confirmed in this caution by her mother,
who very wisely, in her civilities to him,
maintained a sort of ceremonious distance, which
she thought not only requisite for the honour and
interest of her family, but likewise for her own
exculpation, should she ever be taxed with having
encouraged or abetted him in the imprudent
sallies of his youth: Yet notwithstanding this affected
reserve, he was treated with such distinction
both by one and t'other, that he was ravished
with his situation, and became more and more
enamoured every day. 
While he remained under the influence of this
sweet intoxication, his absence produced great
disturbance at Winchester. Mr. Jolter was grievously
afflicted at his abrupt departure, which
alarmed him the more, as it happened after a
long fit of melancholy which he had perceived in
his pupil. He communicated his apprehensions
to the master of the school, who advised him
to apprize the commodore of his nephew's disappearance,
and in the mean time inquire at all
the inns in town, whether he had hired horses, 

or any sort of carriage, for his conveyance, or
was not met with on the road by any person who
could give an account of the direction in which
he travelled. 
This scrutiny, though performed with great diligence
and minuteness, was altogether ineffectual; 
they could obtain no intelligence of the runaway. 
Mr. Trunnion was well nigh distracted at the
news of his flight; he raved with great fury at
the imprudence of Peregrine, whom in his first
transports he damned as an ungrateful deserter; 
then he cursed Hatchway and Pipes, who he
swore had foundered the lad by their pernicious
counsels; and, lastly, transferred his execrations
upon Jolter, because he had not kept a better
look-out: finally, he made an apostrophe to that
son of a bitch the gout, which for the present
disabled him from searching for his nephew in
person. That he might not, however, neglect
any means in his power, he immediately dispatched
expresses to all the sea-port towns on that
coast, that he might be prevented from leaving
the kingdom; and the lieutenant, at his own desire,
was sent across the country, in quest of this
young fugitive. 
Four days had he unsuccessfully carried on his
inquiries with great accuracy, when resolving to
return by Winchester, where he hoped to meet
with some hints of intelligence, by which he
might profit in his future search, he struck off
the common road, to take the benefit of a nearer
cut; and finding himself benighted near a village,
took up his lodging at the first inn to which
his horse directed him. Having bespoke something
for supper, and retired to his chamber,
where he amused himself with a pipe, he heard 

a confused noise of rustic jollity, which being all
of a sudden interrupted, after a short pause his
ear was saluted by the voice of Pipes, who, at
the sollicitation of the company, began to entertain
them with a song. 
Hatchway instantly recognized the well-known
sound, in which indeed he could not possibly be
mistaken, as nothing in nature bore the least resemblance
to it; he threw his pipe into the
chimney, and snatching up one of his pistols, ran
immediately to the apartment from whence the
voice issued: he no sooner entered, than distinguishing
his old ship-mate in a crowd of country
peasants, he in a moment sprung upon him, and
clapping his pistol to his breast, exclaimed,
“Damn you, Pipes, you're a dead man, if you
don't immediately produce young master.” 
This menacing application had a much greater
effect upon the company than upon Tom, who
looking at the lieutenant with great tranquillity,
replied, “Why so I can, Master Hatchway.” 
“What! safe and sound?” cried the other. 
“As a roach,” answered Pipes, so much to the
satisfaction of his friend Jack, that he shook him
by the hand, and desired him to proceed with
his song. This being performed, and the reckoning
discharged, the two friends adjourned to
the other room, where the lieutenant was informed
of the manner in which the young gentleman
had made his elopement from college, as
well as of the other particulars of his present situation,
as far as they had fallen within the sphere
of his comprehension. 
While they sat thus conferring together, Peregrine
having taken his leave of his mistress for
the night, came home, and was not a little surprised, 

when Hatchway entering his chamber in
his sea attitude, thrust out his hand by way of
salutation. His old pupil received him as usual,
with great cordiality, and expressed his astonishment
at meeting him in that place; but when
he understood the cause and intention of his arrival,
he started with concern; and his visage
glowing with indignation, told him he was old
enough to be judge of his own conduct, and
when he should see it convenient, would return
of himself; but those who thought he was to be
compelled to his duty, would find themselves
egregiously mistaken. 
The lieutenant assured him, that for his own
part he had no intention to offer him the least
violence; but, at the same time, he represented
to him the danger of incensing the commodore,
who was already almost distracted on account of
his absence: and in short, conveyed his arguments,
which were equally obvious and valid, in
such expressions of friendship and respect, that
Peregrine yielded to his remonstrances, and promised
to accompany him next day to Winchester. 
Hatchway, overjoyed at the success of his negociation,
went immediately to the hostler and bespoke
a post-chaise for Mr. Pickle and his man, with
whom he afterwards indulged himself in a double
cann of rumbo, and when the night was pretty
far advanced, left the lover to his repose, or rather
to the thorns of his own meditation; for he
slept not one moment, being incessantly tortured
with the prospect of parting from his divine Emilia,
who had now acquired the most absolute empire
over his soul. One minute he proposed to
depart early in the morning, without seeing this
enchantress, in whose bewitching presence he 

durst not trust his own resolution. Then the
thoughts of leaving her in such an abrupt and
disrespectful manner, interposed in favour of his
love and honour. This war of sentiments kept
him all night upon the rack, and it was time to
rise before he had determined to visit his charmer,
and candidly impart the motives that induced him
to leave her. 
He accordingly repaired to her mother's house
with a heavy heart, being attended to the gate
by Hatchway, who did not choose to leave him
alone; and being admitted, found Emilia just
risen, and in his opinion, more beautiful than
ever. 
Alarmed at his early visit, and the gloom that
overspread his countenance, she stood in silent
expectation of hearing some melancholy tidings; 
and it was not till after a considerable pause, that
he collected resolution enough to tell her he was
come to take his leave. Though she strove to
conceal her sorrow, nature was not to be suppressed; 
every feature of her countenance saddened
in a moment, and it was not without the
utmost difficulty that she kept her lovely eyes
from overflowing. He saw the situation of her
thoughts, and in order to alleviate her concern,
assured her he should find means to see her again
in a very few weeks; mean while he communicated
his reasons for departing, in which she readily
acquiesced; and having mutually consoled
each other, their transports of grief subsided, and
before Mrs. Gauntlet came down stairs they were
in a condition to behave with great decency and
resignation. 
This good lady expressed her concern when
she learnt his resolution, saying, she hoped his 

occasions and inclinations would permit him to
favour them with his agreeable company another
time. 
The lieutenant, who began to be uneasy at
Peregrine's stay, knocked at the door, and being
introduced by his friend, had the honour of
breakfasting with the ladies; on which occasion
his heart received such a rude shock from the
charms of Emilia, that he afterwards made a merit
with his friend of having constrained himself
so far, as to forbear commencing his professed
rival. 
At length they bad adieu to their kind entertainers,
and in less than an hour setting out from
the inn, arrived about two o'clock in Winchester,
where Mr. Jolter was overwhelmed with joy at
their appearance. 
The nature of this adventure being unknown
to all except those who could be depended upon,
every body who inquired about the cause of Peregrine's
absence, was told that he had been with
a relation in the country, and the master condescended
to overlook his indiscretion; so that
Hatchway seeing every thing settled to the satisfaction
of his friend, returned to the garrison,
and gave the commodore an account of his expedition. 
The old gentleman was very much startled
when he heard there was a lady in the case, and
very emphatically observed, that a man had better
be sucked into the gulph of Florida than once
get into the indraught of woman; because in one
case, he may with good pilotage bring out his vessel
safe between the Bahama's and the Indian
shore; but in the other there is no outlet at all,
and it is in vain to strive against the current; so 

that of course he must be embayed, and run chuck
upon a lee-shore. He resolved, therefore, to lay
the state of the case before Mr. Gamaliel Pickle,
and concert such measures with him as should be
thought likeliest to detach his son from the pursuit
of an idle amour, which could not fail of interfering
in a dangerous manner with the plan of
his education. 
In the mean time, Perry's ideas were totally
engrossed by his amiable mistress, who, whether
he slept or waked, was still present in his imagination,
which produced the following stanza's in
her praise. 

I.
Adieu, ye streams that smoothly flow,
Ye vernal airs that softly blow,
Ye plains by blooming spring array'd,
Ye birds that warble thro' the shade.
II.
Unhurt from you my soul could fly,
Nor drop one tear, nor heave one sigh,
But forc'd from Celia's charms to part,
All joy deserts my drooping heart.
III.
O! fairer than the rosy morn,
When flowers the dewy fields adorn;
Unsullied as the genial ray,
That warms the balmy breeze of May.
IV.
Thy charms divinely bright appear,
And add new splendor to the year;
Improve the day with fresh delight,
And gild with joy the dreary night!

This juvenile production was inclosed in a very
tender billet to Emilia, and committed to the
charge of Pipes, who was ordered to set out for
Mrs. Gauntlet's habitation with a present of venison,
and a compliment to the ladies; and directed
to take some opportunity of delivering the
letter to miss, without the knowledge of her
mamma. 