


The doctor exults in his victory. They set out for
Rotterdam, where they are entertained by two
Dutch gentlemen in a yacht, which is overturned
in the Maes, to the manifest hazard of the
painter's life. They spend the evening with their
entertainers, and next day visit a cabinet of curiosities. 
Tom was accordingly ordered to minister
to his occasions; and the conqueror, elated
with his success, which he in a great measure attributed
to his manner of attack, and the hymn
which he howled, told Peregrine, that he was
now convinced of the truth of what Pindar sung
in these words, &GROr;&grs;&grs;&gra; &grd;&greg; &grm;&grhg; &grp;&gre;&grf;&gria;&grl;&grh;&grk;&gre; &grZ;&gre;&grug;&grst;, &gras;&grt;&gru;&grz;&gro;&grn;&grt;&gra;&gri; 

&grb;&gro;&graa;&grn; &grP;&gri;&gre;&grr;&gria;&grd;&grw;&grn; &gras;&grida;&gro;&grn;&grt;&gra;; for he had no sooner begun to
repeat the mellifluent strains of that divine poet,
than the wretch his antagonist was confounded,
and his nerves unstrung. 
On their return to the inn, he expatiated on
the prudence and tranquillity of his own behaviour,
and ascribed the consternation of Pallet to
the remembrance of some crime that lay heavy
upon his conscience: for, in his opinion, a man
of virtue and common sense could not possibly be
afraid of death, which is not only the peaceful
harbour that receives him shattered on the tempestuous
sea of life, but also the eternal seal of
his fame and glory, which it is no longer in his
power to forfeit and forego. He lamented his
fate, in being doomed to live in such degenerate
days, when war is become a mercenary trade; 
and ardently wished, that the day would come,
when he should have such an opportunity of signalizing
his courage in the cause of liberty, as
that of Marathon, where an handful of Athenians,
fighting for their freedom, defeated the
whole strength of the Persian empire. “Would
to heaven! (said he) my muse were blessed with
an occasion to emulate that glorious testimony
on the trophy in Cyprus, erected by Cimon, for
two great victories gained on the same day over
the Persians by sea and land; in which it is very
remarkable, that the greatness of the occasion
has raised the manner of expression above the
usual simplicity and modesty of all other ancient
inscriptions.” He then repeated it with all the
pomp of declamation, and signified his hope, that
the French would one day invade us with such an
army as that which Xerxes led into Greece, that 

it might be in his power to devote himself, like
Leonidas, to the freedom of his country. 
This memorable combat being thus determined,
and every thing that was remarkable in
Antwerp surveyed, they sent their baggage down
the Scheld to Rotterdam, and set out for the
same place in a post-waggon, which that same
evening brought them in safety to the banks of
the Maeze. They put up at an English house
of entertainment, remarkable for the modesty
and moderation of the landlord; and next morning
the doctor went in person, to deliver letters
of recommendation to two Dutch gentlemen,
from one of his acquaintance at Paris. Neither
of them happened to be at home when he called; 
so that he left a message at their lodgings, with
his address; and in the afternoon they waited upon
the company, and after many hospitable professions,
one of the two invited them to spend
the evening at his house. 
Mean while, they had provided a pleasure-yacht,
in which they proposed to treat them with
an excursion upon the Maeze. This being almost
the only diversion that place affords, our
young gentleman relished the proposal; and notwithstanding
the remonstrances of Mr. Jolter,
who declined the voyage on account of the roughness
of the weather, they went on board without
hesitation, and found a collation prepared in
the cabin. While they tacked to and fro in
the river, under the impulse of a mackerel breeze,
the physician expressed his satisfaction, and Pallet
was ravished with the entertainment. But the
wind increasing, to the unspeakable joy of the
Dutchmen, who had now an opportunity of
shewing their dexterity in the management of the 

vessel, the guests found it inconvenient to stand
upon deck, and impossible to sit below, on account
of the clouds of tobacco-smoke which
rolled from the pipes of their entertainers, in such
volumes as annoyed them even to the hazard of
suffocation. This fumigation, together with the
extraordinary motion of the ship, began to affect
the head and stomach of the painter, who begg'd
earnestly to be set on shore: but the Dutch gentlemen,
who had no idea of his sufferings, to
which they had always been utter strangers, insisted,
with surprising obstinacy of regard, upon
his staying until he should see an instance of the
skill of their mariners; and bringing him on deck,
commanded the men to carry the vessel's leegunwale
under water. This nicety of navigation
they instantly performed, to the admiration of
Pickle, the discomposure of the doctor, and terror
of Pallet, who blessed himself from the courtesy
of a Dutchman, and prayed to heaven for his
deliverance. 
While the Hollanders enjoyed the reputation
of this feat, and the distress of the painter at the
same time, the yacht was overtaken by a sudden
squall, that overset her in a moment, and flung
every man overboard into the Maeze, before
they could have the least warning of their fate,
much less, time to provide against the accident. 
Peregrine, who was an expert swimmer, reached
the shore in safety; the physician, in he agonies
of despair, laid fast hold on the trunk-breeches
of one of the men, who dragged him to the
other side; the entertainers landed at the bomb-keys,
smoking their pipes all the way with great
deliberation; and the poor painter must have
gone to the bottom, had not he been encountered 

by the cable of a ship, that lay at anchor
near the scene of their disaster. Though his
senses had forsaken him, his hands fastened by
instinct on this providential occurrence, which
he held with such a convulsive grasp, that when
a boat was sent out to bring him on shore, it was
with the utmost difficulty that his fingers were
disengaged. He was carried into a house, deprived
of the use of speech, and bereft of all
sensation; and being suspended by the heels, a
vast quantity of water ran out of his mouth. 
This evacuation being made, he began to utter
dreadful groans, which gradually increased to a
continued roar; and after he had regained the use
of his senses, underwent a delirium that lasted
several hours. As for the treaters, they never
dreamed of expressing the least concern to Pickle
or the physician for what had happened, because
it was an accident so common, as to pass without
notice; but they were very much surprized
to find, upon inquiry, that Pallet could not
swim, it being as natural for a Dutchman, as a
deal-board, to float upon the surface. 
Leaving the care of the vessel to the seaman,
the company retired to their respective lodgings,
in order to shift their cloaths; and in the evening
our travellers were conducted to the house of
their new friend, who, with a view of making
his invitation the more agreeable, had assembled
to the number of twenty or thirty Englishmen,
of all ranks and degrees, from the merchant to
the periwig-maker's prentice. 
In the midst of this congregation stood a
chasing-dish with live-coals, for the convenience
of lighting their pipes, and every individual was
accommodated with a spitting-box. There was 

not a mouth in the apartment unfurnished with
a tube, so that they resembled a convocation of
Chimeras breathing fire and smoke; and our
gentlemen were fain to imitate their example in
their own defence. It is not to be supposed that
the conversation was either very sprightly or polite; 
the whole entertainment was of the Dutch
cast, that is, frowzy and phlegmatic: and our
adventurer, as he returned to his lodging, tortured
with the head-ach, and disgusted with
every circumstance of his treatment, cursed the
hour in which the doctor had saddled them with
such troublesome companions. 
Next morning, by eight o'clock, these polite
Hollanders returned the visit, and after breakfast,
attended their English friends to the house of a
person that possessed a very curious cabinet of
curiosities, to which they had secured our company's
admission. The owner of this collection
was a cheesemonger, who received them in a
woollen night-cap, with straps buttoned under
his chin. As he understood no language but his
own, he told them, by the canal of one of their
conductors, that he did not make a practice of
shewing his curiosities; but understanding that
they were Englishmen, and recommended to his
friends, he was content to submit them to their
perusal. So saying, he led them up a dark stair,
into a small room, decorated with a few paltry
figures in plaister of Paris, two or three miserable
landschapes, the skins of an otter, seal, and
some fishes stuffed; and in one corner stood a
glass-case, furnished with newts, frogs, lizzards
and serpents, preserved in spirits; a human fœtus,
a calf with two heads, and about two dozen of
butterflies pinned upon paper. 

The virtuoso having exhibited these particulars,
eyed the strangers with a look solliciting admiration
and applause; and as he could not perceive
any symptom of either in their gestures or countenances,
withdrew a curtain, and displayed a
wainscot chest of drawers, in which, he gave
them to understand, was something that would
agreeably amuse the imagination. Our travellers,
regaled with this notice, imagined that they
would be entertained with the sight of some curious
medals, or other productions of antiquity; 
but how were they disappointed, when they saw
nothing but a variety of shells, disposed in whimsical
figures, in each drawer! After he had detained
them full two hours with a tedious commentary
upon the shape, size and colour of each
department, he, with a supercilious simper, desired
that the English gentlemen would frankly
and candidly declare, whether his cabinet, or
that of mynheer Sloane, at London, was the most
valuable. When this request was signified in
English to the company, the painter instantly exclaimed,
“By the Lard! they are not to be
named of a day. And as for that matter, I
would not give one corner of Saltero's coffee-house,
at Chelsea, for all the trash he hath
shewn.” Peregrine, unwilling to mortify any
person who had done his endeavour to please
him, observed, that what they had seen was very
curious and entertaining; but that no private
collection in Europe was equal to that of Sir
Hans Sloane, which, exclusive of presents, had
cost an hundred thousand pounds. The two conductors
were confounded at this asseveration,
which being communicated to the cheesemonger,
he shook his head with a significant grin; and 

tho' he did not choose to express his incredulity
in words, gave our hero to understand, that he
did not much depend upon his veracity. 
From the house of this Dutch naturalist, they
were dragged all round the city, by the painful
civility of their attendants, who did not quit them
till the evening was well advanced, and then not
till after they had promised to be with them before
ten o'clock next day, in order to conduct
them to a country-house, situated in a pleasant
village on the other side of the river. 
Pickle was already so much fatigued with their
hospitality, that, for the first time of his life, he
suffered a dejection of spirits; and resolved, at
any rate, to avoid the threatened persecution of
to-morrow: with this view, he ordered his servants
to pack up some cloaths and linnen in a
portmanteau; and in the morning embarked,
with his governor, in the Treckskuyt, for the
Hague, wither he pretended to be called by
some urgent occasion, leaving his fellow-travellers
to make his apology to their friends; and
assuring them, that he would not proceed for
Amsterdam, without their society. He arrived at
the Hague in the forenoon, and dined at an ordinary
frequented by officers and people of fashion; 
where being informed, that the princess would see
company in the evening, he dressed himself in a
rich suit of the Parisian cut, and went to court,
without any introduction. A person of his appearance
could not fail to attract the notice of
such as small circle. The prince himself understanding
he was an Englishman and a stranger,
went up to him, without ceremony; and having
welcomed him to the place, converted with him,
for some minutes, on the common topics of discourse. 