


o mary Jones! mary Jones!
I have met with so many axidents, surprisals,
and terrifications, that I am in a parfeck fantigo, and
believe I shall never be my own self again. Last
week I was dragged out of a river like a drowned
rat, and lost a bran-new night-cap, with a sulfur
stay-hook, that cost me a good half-a-crown, and
an odd shoe of green gallow monkey; besides wetting
my cloaths and taring my smuck, and an ugly
gash made in the back part of my thy, by the
stump of a tree—to be sure Mr. Clinker tuck me
out of the cox; but he left me on my back in the
water, to go to the 'squire; and I mought have had
a watry grave, if a millar had not brought me to
the dry land —But, O! what choppings and
changes girl —The player man that came after
miss Liddy, and frightened me with a beard at
Bristol Well, is now matthewmurphy'd into a fine
young gentleman, son and hare of 'squire Dollison 
—We are all together in the same house, and all
parties have agreed to the match, and in a fortnite
the surrymony will be performed. 
But this is not the only wedding we are to have 
—Mistriss is resolved to have the same frolick, in
the naam of God! Last Sunday in the parish
crutch, if my own ars may be trusted, the clark
called the banes of marridge betwixt Opaniah
Lashmeheygo, and Tapitha Brample, spinster; he
mought as well have called her inkle-weaver, for
she never spun an hank of yarn in her life—young
'squire Dollison and miss Liddy made the second
kipple; and there might have been a turd, but
times are changed with Mr. Clinker —O Molly! 

what do'st think? Mr. Clinker is found to be a
pye-blow of our own 'squire, and his rite naam is
Mr. Mattew Loyd (thof God he nose how that can
be); and he is not out of livery, and wares ruffles
—but I knew him when he was out at elbows, and
had not a rag to kiver his pistereroes; so he need
not hold his head so high —He is for certain very
umble and compleasant, and purtests as how he
has the same regard as before; but that he is
no longer his own master, and cannot portend to
marry without the 'squire's consent —He says we
must wait with patience, and trust to Providence,
and such nonsense —But if so be as how his regard
be the same, why stand shilly shally? Why not
strike while the iron is hot, and speak to the 'squire
without loss of time? —What subjection can the
'squire make to our coming together? —Thof my
father wan't a gentleman, my mother was an honest
woman —I did n't come on the wrong side of the
blanket, girl —My parent, were married according
to the rights of holy mother crutch, in the
face of men and angels —Mark that, Mary Jones. 
Mr. Clinker (Loyd I would say) had best look
to his tacle —There be other chaps in the market,
as the saying is —What would he say if I should
except the foot and sarvice of the young 'squire's
valley? Mr. Machappy is a gentleman born, and
has been a broad in the wars —He has a world of
buck larning, and speak French, and Ditch, and
Scotch, and all manner of outlandish lingoes; to be
sure he's a little the worse for the ware, and is
much given to drink; but then he's good-tempered
in his liquor, and a prudent woman mought wind
him about her finger —But I have no thoughts of
him, I'll assure you —I scorn for to do, or to say,
or to think any thing that mought give unbreech
to Mr. Loyd, without furder occasion —But then I
have such vapours, Molly—I sit and cry by myself, 

and take ass of etida, and smill to burnt fathers,
and kindal-snuffs; and I pray constantly for grease,
that I may have a glimpse of the new-light, to
shew me the way through this wretched veil of
tares —And yet, I want for nothing in this family
of love, where every sole is so kind and so courteous
that wan would think they are so many saints in
haven. Dear Molly, I recommend myself to your
prayers, being with my sarvice to Saul, 
Your ever loving,
and discounselled friend,
Win. Jenkins. 
Oct. 14 