


DEAR PHILIPS,
A FEW days ago we were terribly alarmed by
my uncle's fainting at the ball—He has been
ever since cursing his own folly, for going thither
at the request of an impertinent woman. 
He declares, he will sooner visit a house infected
with the plague, than trust himself in such a
nauseous spital for the future, for he swears the 

accident was occasioned by the stench of the
crowd; and that he would never desire a stronger
proof of our being made of very gross materials,
than our having withstood the annoyance, by
which he was so much discomposed. For my
part, I am very thankful for the coarseness of my
organs, being in no danger of ever falling a sacrifice
to the delicacy of my nose. Mr. Bramble
is extravagantly delicate in all his sensations, both
of soul and body. I was infomed by Dr. Lewis,
that he once fought a duel with an officer of the
horse guards, for turning aside to the Park wall,
on a necessary occasion, when he was passing
with a lady under his protection. His blood rises
at every instance of insolence and cruelty, even
where he himself is no way concerned; and ingratitude
makes his teeth chatter. On the other
hand, the recital of a generous, humane, or grateful
action, never fails to draw from him tears of
approbation, which he is often greatly distressed o
conceal. 
Yesterday one Paunceford gave tea, on particular
invitation—This man, after having been
long buffeted by adversity, went abroad; and
Fortune, resolved to make him amends for her
former coyness, set him all at once up to the very
ears in affluence. He has now emerged from obscurity,
and blazes out in all the tinsel of the
times. I don't find that he is charged with any
practices that the law deems dishonest, or that
his wealth has made him arrogant and inaccessible; 
on the contrary, he takes great pains to appear
affable and gracious. But they say, he is remarkable
for shrinking from his former friendships,
which were generally too plain and homespun
to appear amidst his present brilliant connexions; 
and that he seems uneasy at the sight of
some old benefactors, whom a man of honour 

would take pleasure to acknowledge—Be that as
it may, he had so effectually engaged the company
at Bath, that when I went with my uncle
to the coffee-house in the evening, there was not
a soul in the room but one person, seemingly in
years, who sat by the fire, reading one of the
papers. Mr. Bramble, taking his station close by
him, “There is such a crowd and confusion of
chairs in the passage to Simpson's, (said he)
that we could hardly get along—I wish
those minions of fortune would fall upon more
laudable ways of spending their money— 
I suppose, Sir, you like this kind of entertainment
as little as I do?” “I can't say, I have
any great relish for such entertainments,” answered
the other, without taking his eyes off
the paper— “Mr. Serle, (resumed my uncle) I
beg pardon for interrupting you; but I can't
resist the curiosity I have to know if you received
a card on this occasion?” 
The man seemed surprised at this address, and
made some pause as doubtful what answer he
should make. “I know my curiosity is impertinent,
added my uncle, but I have a particular
reason for asking the favour.” “If that be
the case, (replied Mr. Serle) I shall gratify you
without hesitation, by owning, that I have had
no card. But, give me leave, Sir, to ask in
my turn, what reason you think I have to expect
such an invitation from the gentleman who
gives tea?” “I have my own reasons; (cried
Mr. Bramble, with some emotion) and am convinced
more than ever, that this Paunceford is
a contemptible fellow.” “Sir, (said the other,
laying down the paper) I have not the honour
to know you, but your discourse is a little mysterious,
and seems to require some explanation. 
The person you are pleased to treat so cavalierly, 

is a gentleman of some consequence in
the community; and, for aught you know, I
may also have my particular reasons for defending
his character—” “If I was not convinced
of the contrary, (observed the other) I
should not have gone so far—” “Let me tell
you, Sir, (said the stranger, raising his voice)
you have gone too far, in hazarding such reflections—” 
Here he was interrupted by my uncle; who
asked peevishly, if he was Don Quixote enough,
at this time of day, to throw down his gauntler
as champion for a man who had treated him with
such ungrateful neglect. “For my part, (added
he) I shall never quarrel with you again upon
this subject; and what I have said now, has
been suggested as much by my regard for you,
as by my contempt of him—” Mr. Serle, then
pulling off his spectacles, eyed my uncle very earnestly,
saying, in a mitigated tone, “Surely I am
much obliged—Ah, Mr. Bramble! I now recollect
your features, though I have not seen
you these many years.” “We might have
been less strangers to one another, (answered
the 'squire) if our corespondence had not been
interrupted, in consequence of a misunderstanding,
occasioned by this very—, but no matter
—Mr. Serle, I esteem your character; and
my friendship, such as it is, you may freely
command.” “The offer is too agreeable to be
declined (said he); I embrace it very cordially; 
and, as the first fruits of it, request that you
will change this subject, which, with me, is a
matter of peculiar delicacy.” 
My uncle owned he was in the right, and the
discourse took a more general turn. Mr. Serle
passed the evening with us at our lodgings; and
appeared to be intelligent, and even entertaining; 

but his disposition was rather of a melancholy
hue. My uncle says he is a man of uncommon
parts, and unquestioned probity: that his fortune,
which was originally small, has been greatly hurt
by a romantic spirit of generosity, which he has
often displayed, even at the expence of his discretion,
in favour of worthless individuals—That
he had rescued Paunceford from the lowest distress,
when he was bankrupt, both in means and reputation
—That he had espoused his interests with a
degree of enthusiasm, broke, with several friends
and even drawn his sword against my uncle, who
had particular reasons for questioning the moral
character of the said Paunceford: that, without
Serle's countenance and assistance, the other never
could have embraced the opportunity, which has
raised him to this pinnacle of wealth: that Paunceford,
in the first transports of his success, had
written, from abroad, letters to different correspondents,
owning his obligations to Mr. Serle, in
the warmest terms of acknowledgment, and declaring
he considered himself only as a factor for
the occasions of his best friend: that, without
doubt, he had made declarations of the same nature
to his benefactor himself, though this last
was always silent and reserved on the subject; but
for some years, those tropes and figures of rhetoric
had been disused: that upon his return to
England, he had been lavish in his caresses to Mr.
Serle, invited him to his house, and pressed him
to make it his own: that he had overwhelmed him
with general professions, and affected to express
the warmest regard for him, in company of their
common acquaintance; so that every body believed
his gratitude was as liberal as his fortune; 
and some went so far as to congratulate Mr. Serle
on both. 
All this time Paunceford carefully and artfully 

avoided particular discussions with his old patron,
who had too much spirit to drop the most distant
hint of balancing the account of obligation: that,
nevertheless, a man of his feelings could not but
resent this shocking return for all his kindness; 
and, therefore, he withdrew himself from the
connexion, without coming to the least explanation,
or speaking a syllable on the subject to any
living soul; so that now their correspondence is reduced
to a slight salute with the hat, when they
chance to meet in any public place; an accident
that rarely happens, for their walks lie different
ways. Mr. Paunceford lives in a palace, feeds
upon dainties, is arrayed in sumptuous apparel,
appears in all the pomp of equipage, and passes,
his time among the nobles of the land. Serle
lodges in Stall-street, up two pair of stairs backwards,
walks a-foot in a bath rug, eats for twelve
shillings a week, and drinks water as a preservative
against the gout and gravel—Mark the vicissitude. 
Paunceford once resided in a garret; where
he subsisted upon sheep's trotters and cow-heel,
from which commons he was translated to the table
of Serle, that even abounded with good cheer; 
until want of oeconomy and retention, reduced
him to a slender annuity in his decline of years,
that scarce affords the bare necessaries of life— 
Paunceford, however, does him the honour to
speak of him still, with uncommon regard; and to
declare what pleasure it would give him to contribute
in any shape to his convenience: “But you
know, (he never fails to add) he's a shy kind
of a man—And then such a perfect phillosopher,
that he looks upon all superfluities with the most
sovereign contempt.” 
Having given you this sketch of 'squire Paunceford,
I need not make any comment on his character,
but leave it at the mercy of your own reflection; 

from which, I dare say, it will meet with as
little quarter as it has found with Yours always, 
J. Melford. 
Bath, May 10. 