


He is insulted by his tutor, whom he lampoons; 
makes considerable progress in polite literature; 
and in an excursion to Windsor meets with Emilia
by accident, and is very coldly received. 
Among those who suffered by his craft
and infidelity was Mr. Jumble his own tutor,
who could not at all digest the mortifying
affront he had received, and was resolved to be
revenged on the insulting author. With this
view he watched the conduct of Mr. Pickle with
the utmost rancour of vigilance, and let slip no
opportunity of treating him with disrespect, which
he knew the disposition of his pupil could less
brook than any other severity it was in his power
to exercise. 
Peregrine had been several mornings absent
from chapel; and as Mr. Jumble never failed
to question him in a very peremptory stile about
his non-attendance, he invented some very plausible
excuses; but, at length, his ingenuity was
exhausted; he received a very galling rebuke for
his profligacy of morals, and that he might feel
it the more sensibly, was ordered, by way of
exercise, to compose a paraphrase in English
verse, upon these two lines in Virgil, 

Vane ligur, frustraque animis elate superbis,
Necquicquam, patrias, tentasti lubricus, artes.
The imposition of this invidious theme had
all the desired effect upon Peregrine, who not
only considered it as a piece of unmannerly abuse 

levelled against his own conduct, but also as a
retrospective insult on the memory of his grandfather,
who (as he had been informed) was in
his life-time more noted for his cunning than
candour in trade. 
Exasperated at this instance of the pedant's
audacity, he had well nigh (in his first transports)
taken corporal satisfaction on the spot; 
but foreseeing the troublesome consequences that
would attend such a flagrant outrage against the
laws of the university, he checked his indignation,
and resolved to revenge the injury in a
more cool and contemptuous manner. Thus
determined, he set on foot an inquiry into the
particulars of Jumble's parentage and education,
and learnt that the father of this insolent tutor
was a bricklayer, and that his mother sold pies,
and that the son, at different periods of his youth,
had amused himself in both occupations, before
he converted his views to the study of learning. 
Fraught with this intelligence, he composed the
following ballad in doggerel rhymes, and next
day presented it as a gloss upon the text which the
tutor had chosen. 


I.
Come, listen ye students of ev'ry degree,
I sing of a wit and a tutor perdie,
A statesman profound, a critick immense,
In short, a meer jumble of learning and sense;
And yet of his talents, tho' laudably vain,
His own family arts he could never attain.

II.
His father intending his fortune to build,
In his youth would have taught him the trowel to wield,

But the mortar of discipline never would stick,
For his skull was secur'd by a facing of brick,
And with all his endeavours of patience and pain,
The skill of his fire he could never attain.

III.
His mother an housewife neat, artful and wise,
Renown'd for her delicate biscuit and pies,
Soon alter'd his studies, by flatt'ring his taste,
From the raising of walls to the rearing of paste;
But all her instructions were fruitless and vain,
The pye-making myst'ry he ne'er could attain.

IV.
Yet true to his race, in his labours was seen
A jumble of both their professions, I ween;
For, obliged to his own understanding to trust,
His pies seem'd of brick, and his houses of crust.
Then, good Mr. Tutor, pray be not so vain,
Since your family arts you could never attain.
This impudent production was the most effectual
vengeance he could have taken on his tutor,
who had all the supercilious arrogance and ridiculous
pride of a low-born pedant. Instead of
overlooking this petulant piece of satire with that
temper and decency of disdain that became a person
of his gravity and station, he no sooner cast
his eye over the performance, than the blood rushed
into his countenance, which immediately after
exhibited a ghastly pale colour, and with a quivering
lip he told his pupil that he was an impertinent
jackanapes, and he would take care that
he should be expelled from the university, for
having presumed to write and deliver such a licentious
and scurrilous libel. Peregrine answered with 

great resolution, that when the provocation he
had received should be known, he was persuaded
that he should be acquitted by the opinion of all
impartial people; and that he was ready to submit
the whole to the decision of the master. 
This arbitration he proposed, because he knew
the master and Jumble were at variance; and for
that reason the tutor durst not venture to put the
cause on such an issue. Nay, when this reference
was mentioned, Jumble, who was naturally jealous,
suspected that Peregrine had a promise of
protection before he undertook to commit such
an outrageous insult; and this notion had such an
effect upon him, that he resolved to devour his
vexation, and wait for a more proper opportunity
of gratifying his hate. Mean while copies of the
ballad were distributed among the students, who
sung it under the very nose of Mr. Jumble, to the
tune of a Cobler there was, &c. and the triumph
of our hero was compleat. Neither was his whole
time devoted to the riotous extravagancies of
youth. He enjoyed many lucid intervals, during
which he contracted a more intimate acquaintance
with the classicks, applied himself to the reading
of history, improved his taste for painting and
musick, in which he made some progress; and
above all things, cultivated the study of natural
philosophy. It was generally after a course of
close attention to some of these arts and sciences,
that his disposition broke out into those irregularities
and wild sallies of a luxuriant imagination,
for which he became so remarkable; and he was
perhaps the only young man in Oxford, who at
the same time maintained an intimate and friendly
intercourse with the most unthinking, as well as
with the most sedate students at the university. 

It is not to be supposed that a young man of
Peregrine's vanity, inexperience and profusion,
could suit his expence to his allowance, liberal as
it was; for he was not one of those fortunate people
who are born œconomists, and knew not the
art of with-holding his purse when he saw his
companion in difficulty: thus naturally generous
and expensive, he squandered away his money, and
made a most splendid appearance upon the receipt
of his quarterly appointment; but long before the
third month was elapsed, his finances were consumed,
and as he could not stoop to ask an extraordinary
supply, was too proud to borrow, and
too haughty to run in debt with tradesmen, he
devoted those periods of poverty to the prosecution
of his studies, and shone forth again at the
revolution of quarter day. 
In one of these irruptions he and some of his
companions went to Windsor, in order to see the
royal apartments in the castle, whither they repaired
in the afternoon, and as Peregrine stood
contemplating the picture of Hercules and Omphale,
one of his fellow-students whispered in his
ear, “Z&wblank;ds! Pickle, there are two fine girls.” 
He turned instantly about, and in one of them
recognized his almost forgotten Emilia: her appearance
acted upon his imagination like a spark of
fire that falls among gun-powder; that passion
which had lain dormant for the space of two years
flashed up in a moment, and he was seized with
an universal trepidation. She perceived and partook
of his emotion; for their souls, like unisons,
vibrated with the same impulse. However, she
called her pride and resentment to her aid, and
found resolution enough to retire from such a dangerous
scene. Alarmed at her retreat, he recollected 

all his assurance, and impelled by love
which he could no longer resist, followed her into
the next room, where in the most disconcerted
manner he accosted her with “Your humble servant,
Miss Gauntlet;” To which salutation she
replied, with an affectation of indifference that did
not, however, conceal her agitation, “Your servant,
Sir;” and immediately extending her finger
towards the picture of Duns Scotus, which is
fixed over one of the doors, asked her companion
in a strange sort of giggling tone, if she did not
think he looked like a conjurer. Peregrine nettled
into spirits by this reception, answered for
the other lady, “that it was an easy matter to be
a conjurer in those times, when the simplicity of
the age assisted his divination; but were he, or
Merlin himself to rise from the dead now, when
such deceit and dissimulation prevail, they would
not be able to earn their bread by the profession.” 
“—O! Sir, said she, (turning full upon him) without
doubt they would adopt new maxims; 'tis
no disparagement in this enlightened age for one
to alter one's opinion.” “No sure, Madam, replied
the youth with some precipitation, provided
the change be for the better;” “and should it
happen otherwise, retorted the nymph with a
flirt of her fan, inconstancy will never want
countenance from the practice of mankind.” 
“True, Madam, resumed our hero, fixing his
eyes upon her, examples of levity are every where
to be met with.” “O Lord, Sir, cried Emilia,
tossing her head, you'll scarce ever find a fop
without it.” By this time his companion seeing
him engaged with one of the ladies, entered
into conversation with the other; and in order to
favour his friend's gallantry, conducted her into 

the next apartment, on pretence of entertaining
her with the sight of a remarkable piece of painting. 
Peregrine laying hold on this opportunity of
being alone with the object of his love, assumed
a most seducing tenderness of look, and heaving
a profound sigh, asked if she had utterly discarded
him from her remembrance. Reddening at this
pathetic question, which recalled the memory of
the imagined slight he had put upon her, she answered
in great confusion, “Sir, I believe I once
had the pleasure of seeing you at a ball in Windchester.” 
“Miss Emilia, said he, very gravely,
will you be so candid as to tell me what misbehaviour
of mine you are pleased to punish, by restricting
your remembrance to that single occasion?” 
“Mr. Pickle, she replied in the same
tone, it is neither my province nor inclination to
judge your conduct; and therefore you misapply
your question when you ask such an explanation
of me.” “At least, resumed our lover, give
me the melancholy satisfaction to know for what
offence of my committing you refused to take the
least notice of that letter which I had the honour
to write from Winchester by your own express
permission.” “Your letter, said Miss with great
vivacity, neither required, nor in my opinion,
deserved an answer; and to be free with you,
Mr. Pickle, it was but a shallow artifice to rid
yourself of a correspondence you had deigned to
sollicit.” Peregrine confounded at this repartee,
replied that howsoever he might have failed in
point of elegance or discretion, he was sure he
had not been deficient in expressions of respect
and devotion for those charms which it was his
pride to adore: “As for the verses, said he, I 

own they were unworthy of the theme, but I
flattered myself that they would have merited your
acceptance, though not your approbation, and
been considered not so much as the proof of my
genius, as the genuine effusion of my love.” 
“Verses? cried Emilia with an air of astonishment,
what verses? I really don't understand
you.” The young gentleman was thunderstruck
at this exclamation, to which, after a long pause,
he answered, “I begin to suspect, and heartily
wish it may appear that we have misunderstood
each other from the beginning. Pray, Miss
Gauntlet, did not you find a copy of verses inclosed
in that unfortunate letter?” “Truly, Sir,
(said the lady) I am not so much of a connoiseur
as to distinguish whether that facetious production
which you merrily stile an unfortunate letter was
composed in verse or prose; but, methinks, the
jest is a little too stale to be brought upon the carpet
again.” So saying, she tripped away to her
companion, and left her lover in a most tumultuous
suspence. He now perceived that her neglect
of his addresses when he was at Winchester, must
have been owing to some mystery which he could
not comprehend; and she began to suspect and to
hope that the letter which she received was spurious,
though she could not conceive how that
could possibly happen, as it had been delivered to
her by the hands of his own servant. 
However, she resolved to leave the task of unravelling
the affair, to him who, she knew,
would infallibly exert himself for his own as well
as her satisfaction. She was not deceived in her
opinion; he went up to her again at the staircase,
and as they were unprovided with a male
attendant, insisted upon squiring the ladies to their 

lodgings. Emilia saw his drift, which was no
other than to know where she lived; and though
she approved of his finesse, thought it was incumbent
upon her for the support of her own dignity
to decline his civility: she therefore thanked him
for his polite offer, but would by no means consent
to his giving himself such unnecessary trouble,
especially as they had a very little way to walk. 
He was not repulsed by this refusal, the nature of
which he perfectly understood; nor was she sorry
to see him persevere in his determination; he
therefore accompanied them in their return, and
made divers efforts to speak with Emilia in particular:
but she had a spice of the coquette in her
disposition, and being determined to whet his impatience,
artfully baffled all his endeavours, by
keeping her companion continually engaged in the
conversation, which turned upon the venerable
appearance and imperial situation of the place. 
Thus tantalized, he lounged with them to the
door of the house in which they lodged, when his
mistress perceiving by the countenance of her
comrade, that she was on the point of desiring
him to walk in, checked her intention with a
frown, then turning to Mr. Pickle, dropped him
a very formal curt'sey, seized the other young
lady by the arm, and saying “Come, cousin Sophy,” 
vanished in a moment. 