


He introduces his new friends to Mr. Jolter, with
whom the doctor enters into a dispute upon government,
which had well nigh terminated in
open war. 
Mean while, he not only made them acquainted
with every thing worth seeing in
town, but attended them in their excursions to
all the king's houses within a day's journey of
Paris; and in the course of these parties, treated
them with an elegant dinner at his own apartments,
where a dispute arose between the doctor
and Mr. Jolter, which had well nigh terminated
in an irreconcileable animosity. These gentlemen,
with an equal share of pride, pedantry and saturnine
disposition, were by the accidents of education
and company, diametrically opposite in political
maxims; the one, as we have already observed,
being a bigotted high churchman, and the 

other a rank republican. It was an article of the
governor's creed, that the people could not be
happy, nor the earth yield its fruits in abundance,
under a restricted clergy and limited government:
whereas, in the doctor's opinion, it was an eternal
truth, that no constitution was so perfect as
the democracy, and that no country could flourish,
but under the administration of the mob. 
These considerations being premised, no wonder
that they happened to disagree in the freedom
of an unreserved conversation, especially as their
entertainer took all opportunities of encouraging
and inflaming the contention. The first source
of their difference was an unlucky remark of the
painter, who observed that the partridge of which
he was then eating, had the finest relish of any
he had ever tasted. His friend owned that the
birds were the best of the kind he had seen in
France; but affirmed that they were neither so
plump nor delicious as those that were caught in
England. The governor considering this observation
as the effect of prejudice and inexperience,
said with a sarcastical smile, “I believe, sir, you
are very well disposed to find every thing here inferior
to the productions of your own country.” 
“True, sir, (answered the physician with a certain
solemnity of aspect) and not without good
reason I hope.” “And pray, (resumed the
tutor) why may not the partridges of France be
as good as those of England?” “For a very
plain reason, replied the other, because they are
not so well fed. The iron hand of oppression is
extended to all animals within the French dominions,
even to the beasts of the field and the fowls
of the air. Kunessin ownoisi te pasi.” “Egad!
cried the painter, that is a truth not to be controverted: 

for my own part, I am none of your
tit-bits, one would think, but yet there's a freshness
in the English complexion, a ginseekeye, I
think you call it, so inviting to a hungry Frenchman,
that I have caught several in the very act
of viewing me with an eye of extreme appetite,
as I passed; and as for their curs, or rather their
wolves, (for by jingo they are more liker the one
than t'other) whenever I set eyes on one of 'em,
Aha! your humble servant Mr. son of a bitch, I
am upon my guard in an instant. The doctor
can testify that their very horses, or more properly
their live carrion that drew our chaise, used
to reach back their long necks and smell at us,
as a couple of delicious morsels.” This sally of
Mr. Pallet, which was received with a general
laugh of approbation, would, in all probability,
have stifled the dispute in embrio, had not Mr.
Jolter with a self-applauding simper, ironically
complimented the strangers on their talking like
true Englishmen. The doctor affronted at the
insinuation, told him with some warmth, that he
was mistaken in his conjecture, his affections and
ideas being confined to no particular country; for
he considered himself as a citizen of the world. 
He owned himself more attached to England than
to any other kingdom, but this preference was
the effect of reflexion, and not of prejudice; because
the British constitution approached nearer
than any other, to that perfection of government,
the democracy of Athens, which he hoped one
day to see revived: he mentioned the death of
Charles the first, and the expulsion of his son, with
raptures of applause, inveighed with great acrimony
against the kingly name; and in order to
sanction his opinion, repeated forty or fifty lines 

from one of the Philippicks of Demosthenes. Jolter
hearing him speak so disrespectfully of the
higher powers, glowed with indignation. He
said his doctrines were detestable and destructive
of all right, order and society; that monarchy
was of divine institution, therefore indefeasible by
any human power; and of consequence those
events in the English history, which he had so
liberally commended, were no other than flagrant
instances of sacrilege, perfidy, and sedition; 
that the democracy of Athens was a most absurd
constitution, productive of anarchy and mischief,
which must always happen when the government
of a nation depends upon the caprice of the ignorant
hair-brained vulgar: that it was in the
power of the most profligate member of the common-wealth,
provided he was endowed with eloquence,
to ruin the most deserving, by a desperate
exertion of his talents upon the populace,
who had been often persuaded to act in the most
ungrateful and imprudent manner, against the
greatest patriots that their country had produced:
and finally, he averred, that the liberal arts and
sciences had never flourished so much in a republick,
as under the encouragement and protection
of absolute power; witness the Augustan age, and
the reign of Lewis the fourteenth: nor was it to
be supposed that genius and merit could ever be so
amply recompensed by the individuals, or distracted
councils of a common-wealth, as by the generosity
and magnificence of one, who had the whole
treasures at his own command. 
Peregrine, who was pleased to find the contest
grow warm, observed that there seemed to be a
good deal of truth in what Mr. Jolter advanced; 
and the painter, whose opinion began to waver, 

looked with a face of expectation at his friend,
who modelling his features into an expression of
exulting disdain, asked of his antagonist, if he
did not think that very power of rewarding merit,
enabled an absolute prince to indulge himself
in the most arbitrary licence over the lives and
fortunes of his people? Before the governor had
time to answer this question, Pallet broke forth
into an exclamation of “By the Lord! that is
certainly fact, egad! that was a home thrust, doctor.” 
When Mr. Jolter chastising this shallow
intruder with a contempt'ous look, affirmed that
though supreme power furnished a good prince
with the means of exerting his virtues, it would
not support a tyrant in the exercise of cruelty and
oppression; because in all nations, the genius of
the people must be consulted by their governors,
and the burthen proportioned to the shoulders on
which it is laid, “Else, what follows?” said the
physician, “The consequence is plain, replied
the governor, insurrection, revolt, and his own
destruction: for it is not to be supposed that the
subjects of any nation would be so abject and pusilanimous,
as to neglect the means which heaven
hath put in their power for their own preservation.” 
“Gadzooks! you're in the right, sir,
cried Pallet, that I grant you must be confessed:
doctor, I'm afraid we have got into the wrong
box.” This son of Pæan, however, far from
being of his friend's opinion, observed with an air
of triumph, that he would not only demonstrate
the sophistry of the gentleman's last allegation,
by argument and facts, but even confute him with
his own words. Jolter's eyes kindling at this
presumptuous declaration, he told his antagonist,
while his lip quivered with resentment, that if his 

arguments were no better than his breeding, he
was sure he would make very few converts to
his opinion; and the doctor, with all the insolence
of triumph, advised him to beware of disputes for
the future, until he should have made himself
more master of his subject. 
Peregrine both wished and hoped to see the disputants
proceed to arguments of more weight and
conviction; and the painter dreading the same
issue, interposed with the usual exclamation of
“For God's sake, gentlemen!” when the governor
rose from table in great dudgeon, and left the
room, muttering some ejaculation, of which the
word coxcomb only could be distinctly heard. 
The physician being thus left master of the field
of battle, was complimented on his victory by
Peregrine, and so elevated by his success, that
he declaimed a full hour on the absurdity of Jolter's
proposition, and the beauty of the democratic
administration; canvassed the whole scheme
of Plato's republic, with many quotations from
that ideal author; touching the &grt;&gro; &grk;&gra;&grl;&gro;&grn;: from
thence he made a transition to the moral sense of
Shaftsbury, and concluded his harangue with the
greatest part of that frothy writer's rhapsody,
which he repeated with all the violence of enthusiastic
agitation; to the unspeakable satisfaction of
his entertainer, and the unutterable admiration
of Pallet, who looked upon him as something
supernatural and divine. So intoxicated was this
vain young man with the ironical praises of
Pickle, that he forthwith shook off all reserve, and
having professed a friendship for our hero, whose
taste and learning he did not fail to extol, intimated
in plain terms, that he was the only person 

in these latter ages, who professed that sublime
genius, that portion of the divinity or &grt;&gri; &grq;&gre;&gri;&gro;&grn;,
which immortalized the Grecian poets; that as
Pythagoras affirmed the spirit of Euphorbus had
transmigrated into his body, he, the doctor, was
strangely possessed with the opinion that he himself
was inspired by the soul of Pindar; because,
making allowance for the difference of languages,
in which they wrote, there was a surprising affinity
between his own works and those of that celebrated
Theban; and as a confirmation of this truth,
he immediately produced a sample of each, which
though in spirit and versification, as different as
the Odes of Horace and our present laureat, Peregrine
did not scruple to pronounce altogether
congenial; notwithstanding the violence he by
this sentence offered to his own conscience, and a
certain alarm of his pride, that was weak enough
to be disturbed by the physician's ridiculous vanity
and presumption, which not contented with
displaying his importance in the world of taste and
polite literature, manifested itself in arrogating
certain material discoveries in the province of physick,
which could not fail to advance him to the
highest pinnacle of that profession, considering
the recommendation of his other talents, together
with a liberal fortune which he inherited from his
father. 