


Further proceedings of the college. 
This affair was no sooner discussed, than
another gentleman exhibited a complaint,
signifying, that he had undertaken to translate into
English, a certain celebrated author, who had
been cruelly mangled by former attempts; and
that, soon as his design took air, the proprietors
of those miserable translations had endeavoured
to prejudice his work, by industrious insinuations,
contrary to truth and fair dealing, importing,
that he did not understand one word of the language
which he pretended to translate. This
being a case that nearly concerned the greatest
part of the audience, it was taken into serious
deliberation: some observed, that it was not only
a malicious effort against the plaintiff, but also a
spiteful advertisement to the public, tending to
promote an inquiry into the abilities of all other
translator, few of whom (it was well known)
were so qualified, as to stand the test of such examination. 
Others said, that over and above
this consideration, which ought to have its due
weight with the college, there was a necessity
for concerting measures to humble the presumption
of booksellers, who had, from time immemorial,
taken all opportunities to oppress and enslave
their authors; not only by limiting men of
genius to the wages of a journeyman taylor,
without even allowing them one sabbath in the
week, but also in taking such advantages of their
necessities, as were inconsistent with justice and
humanity. “For example, (said one of the 

members) after I myself had acquired a little reputation
with the town, I was caressed by one of
those tyrants who professed a friendship for me,
and even supplied me with money, according to
the exigencies of my situation; so that I looked
upon him as the mirrour of disinterested benevolence; 
and had he known my disposition, and
treated me accordingly, I should have writ for
him upon his own terms. After had used his
friendship in this manner for some time, I happened
to have occasion for a small sum of money,
and with great confidence made another application
to my good friend; when all of a sudden he
put a stop to his generosity, refused to accommodate
me in the most abrupt and mortifying
style; and though I was at that time pretty far
advanced in a work for his benefit, which was
a sufficient security for what I owed him, he
roundly asked, how I proposed to pay the money
which I had already borrowed. Thus was I
used like a young whore just come upon the
town, whom the bawd allows to run into her
debt, that she may have it in her power to oppress
her at pleasure; and if the sufferer complains,
she is treated like the most ungrateful
wretch upon earth; and that too with such appearance
of reason, as may easily mislead an unconcerned
spectator. “You unthankful drab! (she
will say) didn't I take you into my house when
you hadn't a shift to your back, a petticoat to
your tail, nor a morsel of bread to put into your
belly? Ha'n't I cloathed you from head to foot
like a gentlewoman, supported you with board,
lodging, and all necessaries, till your own extravagance
hath brought you into distress; and
now you have the impudence, you nasty, stinking 

brimstone bungaway! to say you are hardly dealt
with, when I demand no more than my own.” 
Thus the whore and the author are equally oppressed,
and even left without the melancholy
privilege of complaining; so that they are fain to
subscribe to such terms as their creditors shall
please to impose. 
This illustration operated so powerfully upon
the conviction and resentment of the whole college,
that revenge was universally denounced
against those who had aggrieved the plaintiff; and
after some debate, it was agreed, that he should
make a new translation of some other saleable
book, in opposition to a former version belonging
to the delinquents, and print it in such a small
size, as would enable him to undersell their property; 
and that this new translation should be
recommended and introduced into the world,
with the whole art and influence of the society. 
This affair being settled to the satisfaction of
all present, an author of some character stood
up, and craved the advice and assistance of his
fellows, in punishing a certain nobleman of great
pretensions to taste, who, in consequence of a
production which this gentleman had ushered into
the world, with universal applause, not only desired,
but even eagerly courted his acquaintance. 
“He invited me to his house (said he) where I
was overwhelmed with civility and professions of
friendship. He insisted upon my treating him
as an intimate, and calling upon him at all hours,
without ceremony; he made me promise to breakfast
with him at least three times a week: In
short, I looked upon myself as very fortunate,
in meeting with such advances from a man of his
interest and reputation, who had it in his power 

to befriend me effectually in my passage through
life; and, that I might not give him any cause
to think I neglected his friendship, I went to his
house in two days, with a view of drinking chocolate,
according to appointment: but he had
been so much fatigued with dancing at an assembly
over night, that his valet de chambre would not
venture to wake him so early; and I left my
compliments to his lordship, with a performance
in manuscript, which he had expressed a most
eager desire to peruse. I repeated my visit next
morning, that his impatience to see me might
not have some violent effect upon his constitution; 
and received a message from his minister,
signifying, that he had been highly entertained
with the manuscript I had left, a great part of
which he had read, but was at present so busy in
contriving a proper dress for a private masquerade,
which would be given that same evening, that he
could not have the pleasure of my company at breakfast. 
This was a feasible excuse, which I admitted
accordingly, and in a day or two appeared again,
when his lordship was particularly engaged. This
might possibly be the case; and therefore I returned
the fourth time, in hopes of finding him
more at leisure; but he had gone out about half
an hour before my arrival, and left my performance
with his valet de chambre, who assured
me, that his lord had perused it with infinite pleasure. 
Perhaps might have retired very well
satisfied with this declaration, had not I, in my
passage through the hall, heard one of the footmen,
upon the top of the stair-case, pronounce
with an audible voice, “Will your lordship
please to be at home, when he calls?” It is not
to be supposed that I was pleased at this discovery, 

which I no sooner made, than turning to my
conductor, “I find, (said I) his lordship is disposed
to be abroad to more people than me this
morning.” The fellow (though a valet de chambre)
blushed at this observation; and I withdrew,
not a little irritated at the silly peer's disingenuity,
and fully resolved to spare him my visits
for the future. It was not long after this
occasion, that I happened to meet him in the
park, and being naturally civil, I could not pass
him without a salutation of the hat, which he
returned in the most distant manner, though we
were both solitary, and not a soul within view; 
and when that very performance, which he had
applauded so warmly, was lately published by subscription,
he did not bespeak so much as one
copy. I have often reflected with wonder upon
this ridiculous inconsistency in the man's conduct,
which looks like the result of a settled design to
render himself odious and contemptible. I never
courted his patronage, nor indeed thought of his
name, until he made interest for my acquaintance; 
and if he was disappointed in my conversation,
why did he press me so much to further connexion?” 
“The case is very clear, (cried the chairman,
interrupting him) he is one of those coxcombs
who set up for taste, and value themselves
upon knowing all men of genius, whom
they would be thought to assist in their productions. 
I will lay an even bet with any man,
that his lordship, on the strength of that slender
interview, together with the opportunity of having
seen your performance in manuscript, has already
hinted to every company in which he is
conversant, that you solicited his assistance in retouching 

the piece, which you have now offered
to the publick, and that he was pleased to favour
you with his advice, but found you obstinately
bigotted to your own opinion, in some points relating
to those very passages which have not met
with the approbation of the town. And as for his
caresses, there was nothing at all extraordinary
in his behaviour. By that time you have lived
to my age, you will not be surprized to see a
courtier's promise and performance of a different
complexion: not but that I would willingly act
as an auxiliary to your resentment, if I thought
it was possible to make him repent of his pitiful
dissimulation; but, if I guess aright, the person
you mean, has long ago conquered all sense of
probity and shame, and therefore is effectually
shielded against the revenge of an author.” 
The opinion of the president was sanctioned
by the concurrence of all the members; and all
other complaints and memorials being deferred
till another sitting, the college proceeded to an
exercise of wit, which was generally performed
once every fortnight, with a view to promote the
expectoration of genius. The subject was occasionally
chosen by the chairman, who opened
the game with some shrewd remark naturally
arising from the conversation; and then the ball
was tossed about from one corner of the room
to the other, according to the motions of the
spirit. 
That the reader may have a just idea of this
sport, and of the abilities of those who carried
it on, I shall repeat the sallies of this evening,
according to the order and succession in which
they escaped. One of the members observing 

that Mr. Metaphor was absent, was told by the
person who sat next to him, that the poet had
foul weather at home, and could not stir abroad. 
“What! (said the president, interposing, with
the signal upon his countenance) is he wind-bound
in port?” “Wine-bound, I suppose,” 
(cried another.) “Hooped with wine! a strange
metaphor!” (said a third.) “Not if he has
got into a hogshead,” (answered a fourth.) “The
hogshead will sooner get into him, (replied a
fifth) it must be a tun or an ocean.” “No
wonder then, if he should be overwhelmed,” 
(said a sixth.) “If she should, (cried a seventh)
he will cast up when his gall breaks.” “That
must be very soon, (roared an eighth) for it has
been long ready to burst.” “No, no, (observed
a ninth) he'll stick fast at the bottom,
take my word for it; he has a natural alacrity
in sinking.” “And yet, (remarked a tenth) I
have seen him in the clouds.” “Then was he
cloudy, I suppose, (cried the eleventh.) “So
dark, (replied the other) that his meaning could
not be perceived.” “For all that, (said the
twelfth) he is easily seen through.” “You
talk, (answered a thirteenth) as if his head was
made of glass.” “No, no, (cried a fourteenth)
his head is made of more durable stuff; it will
bend before it breaks.” “Yet I have seen it
broken,” (resumed the president.) “Did you
perceive any wit come out at the hole?” (said
another.) “His wit (replied the chairman) is
too subtile to be perceived.” 
A third mouth was just opened, when the
exercise was suddenly interrupted by the dreadful
cry of fire, which issued from the kitchen, 

and involved the whole college in confusion. 
Every man endeavouring to be the first in making
his exit, the door and passage were blocked
up; each individual was pummelled by the person
that happened to be behind him. This communication
produced noise and exclamation; 
clouds of smoke rolled upwards into the apartment,
and terror sat on every brow; when Peregrine
seeing no prospect of retreating by the
door, opened one of the windows, and fairly
leapt into the street, where he found a crowd of
people assembled to contribute their assistance in
extinguishing the flames. Several members of
the college followed his example, and happily
accomplished their escape: the chairman himself
being unwilling to use the same expedient, stood
trembling on the brink of descent, dubious of his
own agility, and dreading the consequence of
such a leap, when a chair happening to pass, he
laid hold on the opportunity, and by an exertion
of his muscles pitched upon the top of the carriage,
which was immediately overturned in the
kennel, to the grievous annoyance of the fare,
which happened to be a certain effeminate beau,
in full dress, on his way to a private assembly. 
This phantom of a man, hearing the noise
overhead, and feeling the shock of being overthrown,
at the same time, thought that some
whole tenement had fallen upon the chair, and,
in the terror of being crushed to pieces, uttered
a scream which the populace supposed to proceed
from the mouth of a woman; and therefore
went to his assistance, while the chairmen, instead
of ministring to his occasions, no sooner recollected
themselves, than they ran in pursuit of
their overthrower, who being accustomed to 

escapes from bailiffs, dived into a dark alley, and
vanishing in a trice, was not visible to any living
soul, until he appeared next day on Tower-hill. 
The humane part of the mob, who bestirred
themselves for the relief of the supposed lady, no
sooner perceived their mistake, in the appearance
of the beau, who stared around him with horror
and affright, than their compassion was changed
into mirth, and they began to pass a great many
unsavoury jokes upon his misfortune, which
they now discovered no inclination to alleviate; 
and he found himself very uncomfortably beset,
when Pickle pitying his situation, interposed in
his behalf, and prevailed upon the chairmen to
carry him into the house of an apothecary in the
neighbourhood, to whom his mischance proved
a very advantageous accident; for the fright
operated so violently upon his nerves, that he
was seized with a delirium, and lay a whole fortnight,
deprived of his senses; during which period
he was not neglected in point of medicines,
food and attendance, but royally regaled, as appeared
by the contents of his landlord's bill. 
Our adventurer having seen this unfortunate
beau safely housed, returned to the scene of the
other calamity, which, as it was no other than
a foul vent, soon yielded to the endeavours of
the family, and was happily overcome, without
any other bad consequence than that of alarming
the neighbours, disturbing the college, and disordering
the brain of beau. 
Eager to be acquainted with the particular
constitutions of a society which seemed to open
upon him by degrees, Mr. Pickle did not fail to
appear at the next meeting, when several petitions
were laid before the board, in behalf of 

those members who were confined in the prisons
of the Fleet, Marshalsea, and King's bench. As
those unhappy authors expected nothing from
their brethren but advice and good offices, which
did not concern the purse, their memorials were
considered with great care and humanity; and,
upon this occasion, Peregrine had it in his power
to manifest his importance to the community; 
for he happened to be acquainted with the creditor
of one of the prisoners, and knew that gentleman's
severity was owing to his resentment at the
behaviour of the debtor, who had lampooned
him in print, because he refused to comply with
a fresh demand, after he had lent him money to
the amount of a considerable sum. Our young
gentleman therefore understanding that the author
was penitent, and disposed to make a reasonable
submission, promised to employ his influence
with the creditor towards an accommodation; 
and, in a few days, actually obtained
his release. 
These social duties being discharged, the conversation
took a general turn, and several new
productions were freely criticised; those especially
which belonged to authors who were either
unconnected with, or unknown to the college. 
Nor did the profession of stage-playing escape the
cognizance of the assembly: a deputation of the
most judicious members being sent weekly to
each theatre, with a view of making remarks
upon the performance of the actors. The two
censors for the preceding week were accordingly
called upon to give in their report; and the
plays which they had reviewed were the Fair Penitent
and the Revenge. The person who had 

examined the former of these tragedies, owned
that he had made no material observations upon
the principal performers: he said he was, upon
the whole, very well entertained, tho' he had,
at first, mistaken Lothario, by his dress, for a
puppet-shew man, hired for the entertainment of
the guests at Calista's wedding; and was afterwards
a little surprised at his unreasonable demand,
when, in challenging Horatio to single
combat, he desired such an unweildy antagonist
to meet him a whole mile among rocks; an expedition
which could not be performed without
imminent danger of broken bones. 
Peregrine imagining that this remark proceeded
from his ignorance of the play, observed that
the critick might possibly be misled by the words
of the defiance, which run thus: 

West of the town a mile, among the rocks,
Two hours ere noon to-morrow I expect thee.
“Sir (answered the censor) I am not acquainted
with the text, else I should have placed my
observation to the account of the author, instead
of the actor, who made a full stop at the word
town, and then pronounced—a mile among the
rocks, without the least pause of distinction. Perhaps,
indeed, in the researches of his great penetration,
he may have discovered that this is the
genuine pointing of the poet, and that Lothario
had actually a design upon the shins of Altamont's
friend: in which case he is to be commended
for this, among his other improvements
in the art of acting; yet I cannot approve of his
refinements in the mystery of dying hard; his
fall, and the circumstances of his death, in the 

character of this gay libertine, being, in my opinion,
a lively representation of a tinker oppressed
with gin, who staggers against a post, tumbles
into the kennel, while his hammer and saucepan
drop from his hands, makes divers convulsive
efforts to rise, and finding himself unable to get
up, with many intervening hiccups, addresses
himself to the surrounding mob.” 
“I confess (replied Pickle) the action of that
same player is not free from unnatural violence
and ridiculous gesticulation: a kind of false fire
in which he finds his account with the audience,
who never fail to honour it with particular marks
of applause; but I think the simile of the tinker
is too severe, and rather one of those grotesque
comparisons which may subject the most grave
and solemn incidents to ridicule, than a fair and
candid illustration of the fact: as for the perversion
of the author's sense, by an impropriety in
the declamation, it so commonly occurs, even
in the most celebrated actors, that one would
think it was an obstacle not to be surmounted:
the delightful lullaby of the stage is an established
recitative, which seems to have been composed
on the supposition that the sentence is always
concluded at the end of the line; and when the
last word happens to begin a new period, the
sense of the whole must suffer accordingly. I
have heard the Æsopus of the age, who values
himself upon accurate speaking, commit innumerable
blunders of this kind, one of which I, at
present, recollect, in a passage of a late play,
which he repeated in this manner: 

To beg protection for the men who lie,—
Trembling behind their ramparts.

Thus he brought the poor Romans under the
imputation of falshood as well as fear; for, according
to his pause, they told lies, as well as
trembled behind their ramparts.” 
“These are no other than petty oversights:
(said the second censor) that gentleman (take him
all in all) is certainly the most compleat and unblemished
performer that ever appeared on our
stage, notwithstanding the blind adoration which
is paid to his rival. I went two nights ago, with
an express design to criticize his action: I could
find no room for censure, but infinite subject for
admiration and applause. In Pierre he is great,
in Othello excellent, but in Zanga beyond all
imitation. Over and above the distinctness of
pronunciation, the dignity of attitude and expression
of face, his gestures are so just and significant,
that a man, tho' utterly bereft of the sense
of hearing, might, by seeing him only, understand
the meaning of every word he speaks! 
Sure nothing can be more exquisite than his
manner of telling Isabella how Alonzo behaved
when he found the incendiary letter which she
had dropt by the Moor's direction; and when,
to crown his vengeance, he discovers himself to
be the contriver of all the mischief that had happened,
he manifests a perfect master piece of
action, in pronouncing these four little mono-syllables,
Know then, 'twas—I. 
Peregrine having eyed the critick some minutes,
“I fancy (said he) your praise must be
ironical, because, in the very two situations you
mention, I think I have seen that player out-herod
Herod, or, in other words, exceed all his
other extravagances. The intention of the author 

is, that the Moor should communicate to
his confidante a piece of information contained in
a few lines, which, doubtless, ought to be repeated
with an air of eagerness and satisfaction,
not with the ridiculous grimace of a monkey, to
which, methought, his action bore an intimate
resemblance, in uttering this plain sentence: 

—he took it up;
But scarce was it unfolded to his sight,
When he, as if an arrow pierc'd his eye,
Started, and trembling dropt it on the ground.
In pronouncing the first two words, this egregious
actor stoops down, and seems to take up
something from the stage,then proceeding to repeat
what follows, mimicks the manner of unfolding
a letter; when he mentions the simile of
an arrow piercing the eye, he darts his forefinger
towards that organ, then recoils with great violence
when the word started is expressed; and
when he comes to trembling dropt it on the ground,
he throws all his limbs into a tremulous motion,
and shakes the imaginary paper from his hand. 
The latter part of the description is carried on
with the same minute gesticulation, while he says, 

Pale and aghast a while my victim stood,
Disguised a sigh or two, and puff'd them from him;
Then rubb'd his brow, and took it up again.
The player's countenance assumes a wild stare, he
sighs twice most piteously, as if he were on the
point of suffocation, scrubs his forehead, and
bending his body, apes the action of snatching an
object from the floor. Nor is this dexterity of
dumb shew omitted, when he concludes his intimation
in these three lines: 


At first, he look'd as if he meant to read it;
But, check'd by rising fears, he crush'd it thus,
And thrust it, like an adder, in his bosom.
Here the judicious performer imitates the confusion
and concern of Alonzo, seems to cast his
eyes upon something, from which they are immediately
withdrawn, with horror and precipitation,
then shutting his fist with a violent squeeze, as if
he intended to make immediate application to
Isabella's nose, he rams it in his own bosom, with
all the horror and agitation of a thief taken in the
manner. Were the player debarred the use of
speech, and obliged to act to the eyes only of the
audience, this mimickry might be a necessary
conveyance of his meaning; but when he is at
liberty to signify his ideas by language, nothing
can be more trivial, forced, unnatural and antick,
than this superfluous mummery. Not that
I would exclude from the representation the graces
of action, without which the choicest sentiments,
cloathed in the most exquisite expression, would
appear unanimated and insipid; but these are as
different from this ridiculous burlesque, as is the
demeanor of a Tully in the rostrum, from the
tricks of a Jack-pudding on a mountebank's stage
and for the truth of what I alledge, I appeal to
the observation of any person who has considered
the elegance of attitude and propriety of gesture,
as they are universally acknowledged in the real
characters of life. Indeed I have known as Gascon,
whose limbs were as eloquent as his tongue
he never mentioned the word sleep without reclining
his head upon his hand; when he had occasion
to talk of an horse, he always started up
and trotted across the room, except when he 

was so situated that he could not stir without incommoding
the company, and in that case he contented
himself with neighing aloud: if a dog happened
to be the subject of his conversation, he
wagged his tail, and grinned in a most significant
manner; and one day he expressed his desire of
going backwards with such natural imitation of
his purpose, that every body in the room firmly
believed he had actually overshot himself, and
fortified their nostrils accordingly. Yet no man
ever looked upon this virtuoso to be the standard
of propriety in point of speaking and deportment. 
For my own part, I confess the player in question
would, by dint of these qualifications, make a
very good figure in the character of Pantaloon's
lacquey, in the entertainment of Perseus and Andromeda,
and perhaps might acquire some reputation,
by turning the Revenge into a pantomime; 
in which cause, I would advise him to come upon
the stage, provided with an handful of flour, in
order to besmear his face, when he pronounces
pale and aghast, &c. and methinks he ought to
illustrate the adder with an hideous hiss. But
let us now come to the other situation, in which
this modern Æsopus is supposed to distinguish
himself so much, I mean that same eclaircissement
comprehended in Know then 'twas—I. His
manner, I own, may be altered since I was present
at the representation of that performance; 
but certain I am, when I beheld him in that critical
conjuncture, his behaviour appeared to me
so uncouth, that I really imagined he was visited
by some epileptic distemper; for he stood tottering
and gasping for the space of two minutes, like
a man suddenly struck with the palsy; and after
various distorsions and side-shakings, as if he had 

got fleas in his doublet, heaved up from his lungs
the letter I, like a huge anchor from foul
ground.” 
This criticism was acceptable to the majority
of the college, who had no great veneration for
the player in question; and his admirer, without
making any reply, asked in a whisper, of the
gentleman who sat next to him, if Pickle had not
offered some production to the stage, and met
with a repulse. This question was not conveyed
so softly, but that it reached the ears of our adventurer,
who seemed disposed to make some answer,
when he was prevented by the interposition
of another member, who begged the opinion and
advice of the community, touching a pastoral
which he had just composed. Before he had
time to produce the performance to the inspection
of the society, the chairman observed,
with a splenetic air, that he ought to have employed
his time in some more profitable amusement,
than a species of writing in which he had
formerly met with so little success. 
“True it is (replied the author) my last production
of this kind was not very favourably received; 
a circumstance intirely owing to the nature
of the subject, which did not at all interest
the passions of the heart: but here, my dear Sir,
the case is otherwise; this pastoral I composed
upon the death of my own grandmother, who
was a woman, in all respects, worthy of the
tears I have shed over her tomb; and this small
composition is the genuine offspring of unfeigned
sorrow: the blots which are still visible on the
paper, indicate the grief with which I wrote it. 
Lachrymæ fecêre lituras. And sure he must have 

a flinty heart who can hear it read with an unmoistened
eye.” 
“If that be the case (said the president) I
wish you would spare us the affliction of hearing
it rehears'd: all of us, I believe, have real
grievances of our own; so that we need not hunt
after imaginary sorrows.” The poet, notwithstanding
this discouragement, begg'd hard that he
might exhibit a specimen of his performance; and
being restricted to a few lines, he repeated the
following stanzas, with the most rueful emphasis. 

Where wast thou, wittol Ward, when hapless fate
From these weak arms mine aged grannam tore:
These pious arms essay'd too late,
To drive the dismal phantom from the door.
Could not thy healing drop, illustrious quack,
Could not thy salutary pill prolong her days,
For whom, so oft, to Marybone, alack!
Thy sorrels dragg'd thee thro' the worst of ways?
Oil-dropping Twick'nham did not then detain
Thy steps, tho' tended by the Cambrian maids;
Nor the sweet environs of Drury-lane;
Nor dusty Pimlico's embow'ring shades;
Nor Whitehall, by the river's bank,
Beset with rowers dank;
Nor where th' Exchange pours forth its tawny sons;
Nor where to mix with offal, soil and blood,
Steep Snowhill rolls the sable flood;
Nor where the Mint's contaminated kennel runs:
Ill doth it now beseem,
That thou should'st doze and dream,
When death in mortal armour came,
And struck with ruthless dart the gentle dame.

Her lib'ral hand and sympathising breast,
The brute creation kindly bless'd:
Where'er she trod grimalkin purr'd around,
The squeaking pigs her bounty own'd;
Nor to the waddling duck or gabbling goose,
Did she glad sustenance refuse;
The strutting cock she daily fed,
And turky with his snout so red;
Of chickens careful as the pious hen,
Nor did she overlook the tomtit or the wren;
While redbreast hopp'd before her in the hall,
As if she common mother were of all.
For my distracted mind,
What comfort can I find?
O best of grannams! thou art dead and gone,
And I am left behind to weep and moan,
To sing thy dirge in sad funereal lay,
Ah! woe is me! alack! and well-a-day!
These interjections at the close of this pathetic
elegy, were not pronounced without the sobs and
tears of the author, who looked wishfully around
him for applause, and having wiped his eyes,
asked the chairman's opinion of what he had
read. That cynical gentleman, who had no
great devotion for the Arcadian, answered with
a most equivocal aspect, “Sad, very sad! sad
enough to draw tears from the eyes of a bumbailiff.” 
But as the performance was submitted
to the criticism of the whole society, the epic
poet stood up, and thus communicated his sentiments. 
“Without entering upon a minute inquiry into
the poetical merits of particular images, I must
in general observe, that the stanzas are so irregular 

in point of measure, as well as in the number
of the lines, that they cannot be comprehended
under any species of the ancient versification. 
Then there are many dark allusions in
the Antistrophe, which no reader can possibly understand,
together with a catalogue of the names
of places, for which the author seems to have
rambled strangely from his subject, more studious
of making a silly parade of his skill in poetical
geography, than of interesting the passions of
the heart. Indeed, one would be apt to conclude
from this circumstance, that his grief was
mere affectation, did not he blubber so piteously
in the last verse. I could have wished, that more
dignity had been preserved in the stanza which
describes the old gentlewoman's benevolence,
and that the last line had been altogether omitted,
because it conjures up a most ridiculous image of
her having actually hatched that same poultry,
which she is said to have tended with such maternal
care.” 
To these animadversions the censured bard replied,
that the verse, in being irregular, the more
nearly resembled the natural exclamations of real
affliction, and that such irregularity had not only
been excused, but even considered as a beauty
in many modern productions. He owned, that
the allusions might be obscure to some readers,
and therefore he intended to explain them in
notes, at the bottom of the page. As to the
topical descriptions which the critic had censured
so severely, he said they were inserted to amuse
and relieve the imagination of the reader, that he
might not be too much affected with the Pathos
of the subject; and with regard to the line, 


As if she common mother were of all,
far from carrying that ludicrous implication he
had mentioned, it certainly conveyed the most
amiable and parental idea of the deceased; and
he did not doubt, that he should find his own
opinion confirmed by that of the public, in a very
comfortable sale of the work. 
“So, after all this profession of filial tenderness,
(cried the epic bard) the world will have some
reason to say, you wanted to make a job of your
grandmother's death.” “Perhaps (answered the
other) I shall make a present of the copy to my
bookseller.” “If you desire to be thought altogether
disinterested in the affair, (resumed the
critic) you ought to print a few copies at your
own expence, and distribute them gratis among
your friends; by these means, you will have as
good a chance to see your own talents admired,
and the memory of your grandame immortalized,
as if you had sold the property of the piece for a
thousand pounds.” 
This proposal seemed to disconcert the elegiac
writer; when the chairman interposing, “Pshaw!
(said he) why the devil should he be more delicate
in that respect, than those people who sit at
the head of taste? In every single circumstance
to which you have objected, he has expressly
imitated, not to say copied, the celebrated production
of the universal patron.” “What!
(replied the other) you mean the famous Gosling
Scrag Esq; son and heir of Sir Marmaduke Scrag,
who seats himself in the chair of judgment, and
gives sentence upon the authors of the age. I
should be glad to know, upon what pretensions 

to genius this preheminence is founded. Do a
few flimsy odes, barren epistles, pointless epigrams,
and the superstitious suggestions of an half-witted
enthusiast, intitle him to that eminent rank he
maintains in the world of letters? or did he acquire
the reputation of a wit, by a repetition of
trite invectives against a minister, conveyed in a
theatrical cadence, accompanied with the most
ridiculous gestures, before he believed it was his
interest to desert his master, and renounce his
party? For my own part, I never perused any
of his performances, I never saw him open his
mouth in public, I never heard him speak in
private conversation, without recollecting and applying
these two lines in Pope's Dunciad, 

Dulness delighted, ey'd the lively dunce,
Remembring she herself was pertness once.
Yet this antick piece of futility will decide dogmatically
upon the merits of every new work; 
and if the author has not previously scratched
himself into his favour, will pronounce upon it,
with all the insolence and contempt of supercilious
presumption. Nor is the levity of his head
less provoking than his arrogance and self-conceit; 
the very performance which he yesterday applauded,
will he to-morrow condemn through
mere caprice; and that which he yesterday mentioned
in terms of disdain, will he to-morrow
extol to the skies, provided the author will
humble himself so far, as to adore his superior
genius, and meanly beg his protection. Never
did he befriend a man of poetical merit, who did
not court and retain his favour by such slavish
prostitution, except one author, lately deceased; 

and even he extended his complaisance too far,
in complimental lines, which the warmth of his
gratitude inspired, though he would never submit
to the tame criticisms of his patron, or offer such
an outrage to his own judgment, as to adopt the
alterations which he proposed.” 
“One would imagine, (said the chairman)
that you had made an unsuccessful application to
his patronage; but, notwithstanding all this eloquent
declamation, the truth of which I shall
not pretend to invalidate, I do aver, that Gosling
Scrag Esq; is at this day the best milch-cow that
any author ever stroaked: for, over and above
his vanity, which lays him open to the necessities
of all writers who can tickle, though never so
awkwardly, he possesses such a comfortable share
of simplicity, or rather lack of penetration, as
cannot fail to turn to account with those who
practise upon it. Let a scribbler (for example)
creep into his notice by the most abject veneration,
implore his judgment upon some performance,
assume a look of awful admiration at his
remarks, receive and read his emendations with
pretended extasy, exert himself officiously about
his person, make interest to be employed in
running upon his errands, bawl for him upon all
occasions in common conversation, prose and
rhime, sit in presence of this great man, with
an apparent sense of his own nothingness, and
when he opens his mouth, listen with a foolish
face of praise; happy! if he has an opportunity
to feed him with the soft pap of dedication, or
by affecting an idiotical ignorance of the manners
of life, to insinuate himself into his opinion, as
a person absolutely detached from all worldly pursuits; 
like a sly brother of the quill, who, in 

going out, dropped a bank note upon the floor
of his apartment, in such a manner, as that it
could not escape the notice of Gosling, who viewing
it accordingly, “Heavens! (said he, with
his hands and eyes lifted up) what philosophical
contempt must that man have for the pleasures
of wealth!” Yes, I insist upon it, these are
arts which will never fail to engage the friendship
of Mr. Scrag, which will be sooner or later
manifested in some warm sine-cure, ample subscription,
post or reversion; and I advise Mr.
Spondy to give him the refusal of this same pastoral:
who knows but he may have the good
fortune of being listed in the number of his beef-eaters; 
in which case he may, in process of
time, be provided for in the customs or church; 
when he is inclined to marry his own cook-wench,
his gracious patron may condescend to
give the bride away; and finally settle him in his
old age, as a trading Westminster-justice.” 
Mr. Spondy thanked the president for his
wholesome counsel, which he assured him should
not be neglected; and the evening being far advanced,
the assembly broke up, without any other
remarkable occurrence. 