


I get up, and crawl into a barn, where I am
in danger of perishing thro' the fear of the
country people—their inhumanity—I
am succoured by a reputed witch—her
story—her advice—she recommends
me as a valet to a single lady, whose character
she explains. 
But as I lay ruminating, my passion insensibly
abated; I considered my situation in quite
another light from that in which it appeared to
me at first, and the result of my deliberation
was to get up if I could, and crawl to the next
inhabited place for assistance. —With some difficulty
I got upon my legs, and having examined
my body, found I had received no other injury
than two large contused wounds, one on the 

fore and another on the hinder part of my head; 
which seemed to be occasioned by the same weapon; 
namely, the butt-end of a pistol. I looked
towards the sea, but could discern no remains of
the ship; which made me conclude she had gone
to pieces, and that those who remained in her
had perished: But, as I afterwards learned, the
gunner, who had more sagacity than Crampley,
observing that it was flood when we left her,
and that she would possibly float at high-water,
made no noise about getting on shore, but continued
on deck, in hopes of bringing her safe into
some barbour, after the commander had deserted
her, for which he expected, no doubt, to
be handsomely rewarded. —This he accordingly
performed, and was promised great things by the
admiralty for saving his Majesty's ship; but I
never heard he reaped the fruits of his expectation. 
—As for my own part, I directed my course
towards a small cottage I perceived, and in the
road picked up a sea-man's old jacket, which I
suppose the thief who dressed himself in my
cloaths, had thrown away; this was a very comfortable
acquisition to me, who was almost stiff
with cold: I therefore put it on, and as my natural
heat revived, my wounds, which had left
off bleeding, burst out afresh; so that finding myself
excessively exhausted, I was about to lie
down in the fields, when I discovered a barn on
my left hand, within a few yards of me; thither
I made shift to stagger, and finding the door
open, went in, but saw no body; upon which I
threw myself upon a truss of straw, hoping to be
soon relieved by some person or other. —I had not
lain here many minutes, when I saw a countryman
come in with a pitch-fork in his hand, 

which he was upon the point of thrusting into
the straw that concealed me, and in all probability
would have done my business, had I not uttered
a dreadful groan, after having essayed in
vain to speak. —This melancholy note alarmed
the clown, who started back, and discovering
a body all besmeared with blood, stood trembling,
with the pitch-fork extended before him, his hair
erect, his eyes staring, his nostrils dilated, and
his mouth wide open. —At another time, I should
have been much diverted with this figure, which
preserved the same attitude very near a quarter
of an hour, during which time I made many unsuccessful
efforts to implore his compassion and
assistance; but my tongue failed me, and my
language was only a repetition of groans: At
length an old man arrived, who seeing the other
in such a posture, cried, “Mercy upon en! the
leaad's bewitch'd!—why dick, beest thou besayd
thyself?” —Dick, without moving his
eyes from the object that terrified him, replied,
“O vather! vather! here be either the devil
or a dead mon: I doan't know which o'en,
but a groans woundily.” —The father, whose
eye-sight was none of the best, pulled out his spectacles,
and having applied them to his nose, reconnoitred
me over his son's shoulder: But no
sooner did he behold me, than he was seized
with a fit of shaking, even more violent than
Dick's, and with a broken accent addressed me thus: 
“In the name of the Vather, Zun, and Holy Ghosty,
I charge you an you been Satan to begone to the
Red-Zea; but an you be a moordered mon,
speak, that you may have a christom burial.” 
—As I was not in a condition to satisfy him in this
particular, he repeated his conjuration to no purpose; 

and they continued a good while in the
agonies of fear. —At length the father proposed,
that the son should draw nearer and take a more
distinct view of the apparition; but Dick was of
opinion that his father should advance first, as
being an old man past his labour, and if he received
any mischief, the loss would be the smaller; 
whereas he himself might escape, and be useful
in his generation. —This prudential reason had
no effect upon the senior, who still kept Dick
between me and him. —In the mean time I endeavoured
to raise one hand as a signal of distress,
but had only strength sufficient to cause a rustling
among the straw, which discomposed the young
peasant so much, that he sprung out at the door,
and overthrew his father in his flight. —The old
gentleman would not spend time in getting up,
but crawled backwards like a crab, with great
speed, till he had got over the threshold, mumbling
exorcisms all the way. —I was exceedingly
mortified to find myself in danger of perishing
through the ignorance and cowardice of these
clowns; and felt my spirits decay apace, when
an old woman entered the barn, followed by the
two fugitives, and with great intrepidity advanced
to the place where I lay, saying, “If it
be the devil I fearen not, and for a dead mon
a can do us no harm.” —When she saw my
condition, she cried “Here be no devil, but in
youren fool's head. —Here be a poor miserable
wretch, bleeding to death, and if he dies, we
must be at the charge of burying him; therefore
Dick, go vetch the old wheel-barrow
and puten in, and carry him to good-man
Hodge's back-door, he is more eable than we
to lay out money upon poor vagrants.” — 

Her advice was taken, and immediately put in
execution: I was rolled to the other farmer's
door, where I was tumbled out like a heap of
dung; would certainly have fallen a prey
to the hogs, if my groans had not disturbed the
family, and brought some of them out to view
my situation. —But Hodge resembled the Jew
more than the good Samaritan, and ordered me
to be carried to the house of the parson, whose
business it was to practise as well as to preach
charity: observing that it was sufficient for him
to pay his quota toward the maintenance of the
poor belonging to his own parish. —When I was
set down at the vicar's gate, he fell into a mighty
passion, and threatned to excommunicate him
who sent as well as those who brought me, unless
they would move me immediately to another
place. —About this time I fainted with the
fatigue I had undergone, and afterwards understood
that I was bandied from door to door
through a whole village, no body having humanity
enough to administer the least relief to me,
until an old woman, who was suspected of witchcraft
by the neighbourhood, hearing of my distress,
received me into her house, and having dressed
my wounds, brought me to myself with cordials
of her own preparing. —I was treated with great
care and tenderness by this grave matron, who,
after I had recovered some strength, desired to
know the particulars of my last disaster. — 
This piece of satisfaction I could not refuse to
one who had saved my life, therefore related all my
adventures without exaggeration or reserve. She
seemed surprised at the vicissitudes I had undergone,
and drew a happy presage of my future
life, from my past sufferings, then launched out 

into the praise of adversity with so much ardour
and good sense, that I concluded she was a person
who had seen better days, and conceived
a longing desire to hear her story. —She perceived
my drift by some words I dropped, and
smiling, told me, there was nothing either entertaining
or extraordinary in the course of her fortune; 
but however, she would communicate it
to me, in consideration of the confidence I had
reposed in her. —“It is of little consequence
(said she) to tell the names of my parents,
who are dead many years ago: let it suffice to
assure you, they were wealthy, and had no
other child than me, so that I was looked
upon as heiress to a considerable estate, and
tiezed with addresses on that account. Among
the number of my admirers, there was a
young gentleman of no fortune, whose sole
dependence was on his promotion in the army,
in which at that time he bore a lieutenant's
commission. —I conceived an affection
for this amiable officer, which in a short time
encreased to a violent passion, and, without
entering into minute circumstances, married him
privately. —We had not enjoyed one another
long, in stolen interviews, when he was ordered
with his regiment to Flanders; but before
he set out, it was agreed between us,
that he should declare our marriage to my father
by letter, and implore his pardon for the
step we had taken without his approbation. — 
This was done while I was abroad visiting,
and just as I was about to return home, I
received a letter from my father, importing,
that since I had acted so undutifully and meanly,
as to marry a beggar, without his privity 

or consent, to the disgrace of his family, as
well as the disappointment of his hopes, he
renounced me to the miserable fate I had
entailed upon myself, and charged me never
to set foot within his doors again. —This
rigid sentence was confirmed by my mother,
who, in a postscript, gave me to understand
that her sentiments were exactly conformable to
those of my father, and that I might save
myself the trouble of making any applications,
for her resolution was unalterable. —Thunderstruck
with my evil fortune, I called a coach
and drove to my husband's lodgings, where I
found him waiting the event of his letter. — 
Though he could easily divine by my looks,
the issue of his declaration, he read with great
steadiness the epistle I had received; and with
a smile full of tenderness, which I shall never
forget, embraced me, saying, I believe the
good lady your mother might have spared herself
the trouble of the last part of her postscript. — 
Well, my dear Betty, you must lay aside all
thoughts of a coach, till I can procure the command
of a regiment. —This unconcerned
behaviour, while it enabled me to support my
reverse of fortune, at the same time endeared
him to me the more, by convincing me of
his disinterested views in espousing me. — 
I was next day boarded in company with the
wife of another officer, who had long been
friend and confident of my husband, at a village
not far from London, where they parted
with us in the most melting manner, went to
Flanders, and were killed in sight of one
another at the battle of the Wood. —Why
should I tire you with a description of our unutterable 

sorrow at the fatal news of this event,
the remembrance of which now fills my aged
eyes with tears! When our grief subsided a
little, and reflection came to our aid, we
found ourselves deserted by the whole world,
and in danger of perishing for want: Whereupon
we made application for the pension, and
were put upon the list. Then vowing eternal
friendship, fold our jewels and superfluous
cloaths, retired to this place (which is in the
county of Sussex) bought this little house,
where we lived may years in a solitary manner,
indulging our mutual sorrow, 'till it pleased
heaven to call away my companion, two years
ago; since which time I have lingered out an
unhappy being, in hopes of a speedy dissolution,
when I promise myself the eternal reward
of all my cares. —In the mean time,
(continued she) I must inform you of the
character I bear among my neighbours. — 
My conversation being different from that of
the inhabitants of the village, my recluse way
of life, my skill in curing distempers, which
I acquired from books since I settled here,
and lastly, my age, have made the common
people look upon me as something preternatural,
and I am actually at this hour believed
to be a witch. The parson of the parish,
whose acquaintance I have not been at
much pains to cultivate, taking umbrage at
my supposed disrespect, has contributed not a
little towards the confirmation of this opinion,
by dropping certain hints to my prejudice,
among the vulgar, who are also very much
scandalized at my entertaining this poor tabby 

cat with the collar about her neck, which
was a favourite of my deceased companion.” 
The whole behaviour of this venerable person,
was so primitive, innocent, sensible, and
humane, that I contracted a filial respect for her,
and begged her advice with regard to my future
conduct, as soon as I was in a condition to act
for myself. —She dissuaded me from a design I
had formed of travelling to London in hopes of
retrieving my cloaths and pay, by returning to
my ship, which by this time, I read in a newspaper,
was safely arrived in the river Thames: 
“Because (said she) you run the hazard of being
treated not only as a deserter, in quitting the sloop,
but also as a mutineer in assaulting your commanding
officer, to the malice of whose revenge
you will moreover be exposed.” —She
then promised to recommend me as a servant to
a single lady of her acquaintance, who lived
in the neighbourhood with her nephew, who
was a young fox-hunter of great fortune, where
I might be very happy, provided I could bear
with the disposition and manners of my mistress,
which were somewhat whimsical and particular. 
—But above all things, she counselled me to
conceal my story, the knowledge of which would
effectually poison my entertainment; for it was
a maxim among most people of condition, that
no gentleman in distress ought to be admitted
into a family, as a domestick, lest he become
proud, lazy, and insolent. —I was fain to embrace
this humble proposal, because my affairs
were desperate; and in a few days was hired by
this lady, to serve in quality of her footman; being
represented by my hostess, as a young man,
who having been sent to sea by his relations 

against his inclinations, was shipwrecked and robbed,
which had encreased his disgust to that way
of life so much, that he rather chose to go to
service on shore than enter himself on board of
any other ship. —Before I took possession of my
new place, she gave me a sketch of my mistress's
character, that I might know better how to regulate
my conduct. “Your lady (said she) is a
maiden of forty years, not so remarkable for
her beauty as her learning and taste, which is
famous all over the county. —Indeed she is
a perfect female virtuosi, and so eager after the
pursuit of knowledge, that she neglects her
person even to a degree of sluttishness; this
negligence, together with her contempt for
the male part of the creation, gives her nephew
no great concern, as by that means, he will
probably keep her fortune, which is considerable,
in the family. He therefore permits
her to live in her own way, which is something
extraordinary, and gratifies her in all
her whimsical desires. —Her apartment is at
some distance from the other inhabited parts
of the house; and consists of a dining-room,
bed-chamber and study: She keeps a cook-maid,
waiting-woman, and footman of her
own, and seldom eats or converses with any
of the family, but her niece, who is a very
lovely creature, and humours her aunt often to
the prejudice of her own health, by sitting up
with her whole nights together; for your
mistress is too much of a philosopher to be
swayed by the customs of the world, and never
sleeps or eats as other people do. — 
Among other odd notions, she professes the
principles of Rosicrucius, and believes the earth, 

air, and sea are inhabited by invisible beings,
with whom it is possible for the human species
to entertain correspondence and intimacy, on
the easy condition of living chaste. —As she
hopes one day to be admitted into an acquaintance
of this kind, she no sooner heard of me
and my cat, than she paid me a visit, with
a view, as she has since owned, to be introduced
to my familiar; and was greatly mortified
to find herself disappointed in her expectation. 
Being by this visionary turn of
mind, abstracted as it were from the world,
she cannot advert to the common occurrences
of life; and therefore is frequently so
absent as to commit very strange mistakes
and extravagancies, which you will do well
to rectify and repair, as your prudence shall
suggest.” 