


DEAR MADAM,
HAVING no mother of my own, I hope you
will give me leave to disburthen my poor heart to
you, who have always acted the part of a kind
parent to me, ever since I was put under your care. 
—Indeed, and indeed, my worthy governess may
believe me, when I assure her, that I never harboured
a thought that was otherwise than virtuous; 
and, if God will give me grace, I shall never behave
so as to cast a reflection on the care you have taken
in my education. I confess I have given just cause
of offence by my want of prudence and experience. 
I ought not to have listened to what the young man
said; and it was my duty to have told you all that
passed, but I was ashamed to mention it; and then
he behaved so modest and respectful, and seemed to
be so melancholy and timorous, that I could not
find in my heart to do any thing that should make
him miserable and desperate. As for familiarities,
I do declare, I never once allowed him the favour
of a salute; and as to the few letters that passed
between us, they are all in my uncle's hands, and
I hope they contain nothing contrary to innocence
and honour. —I am still persuaded that he is not
what he appears to be: but time will discover— 
mean while I will endeavour to forget a connexion,
which is so displeasing to my family. I have cried
without ceasing, and have not tasted any thing but
tea, since I was harried away from you; nor did I
once close my eyes for three nights running. —My
aunt continues to chide me severely when we are
by ourselves; but I hope to soften her in time,
by humility and submission. —My uncle, who was 

so dreadfully passionate in the beginning, has been
moved by my tears and distress; and is now all
tenderness and compassion; and my brother is reconciled
to me, on my promise to break off all
correspondence with that unfortunate youth: but,
notwithstanding all their indulgence, I shall have
no peace of mind till I know my dear and ever
honoured governess has forgiven her poor, disconsolate,
forlorn, 
Affectionate humble servant,
till death,
Lydia Melford. 
Clifton, April 6. 