


I AM astonished, that Dr. Lewis should take
upon him to give away Alderney, without my privity
and concurrants—What signifies my brother's
order? My brother is little better than Noncompush. 
He would give away the shirt off his back,
and the teeth out of his head; nay, as for that
matter, he would have ruinated the family with
his riciculous charities, if it had not been for my
four quarters—What between his willfulness and
his waste, his trumps, and his frenzy, I lead the
life of an indented slave. Alderney gave four gallons
a-day, ever since the calf was sent to market. 
There is so much milk out of my dairy, and the
press must stand still: but I won't loose a cheese
paring; and the milk shall be made good, if the
sarvents should go without butter. If they must
needs have butter, let them make it of sheep's
milk; but then my wool will suffer for want of
grace; so that I must be a looser on all sides— 
Well, patience is like a stout Welsh poney; it
bears a great deal, and trots a great way; but it
will tire at the long run. Before its long, perhaps
I may shew Matt, that I was not born to be the
household drudge to my dying day—Gwyn rites
from Crickhowel, that the price of flannel is fallen
three-farthings an ell; and that's another good
penny out of my pocket—When I go to market to
sell, my commodity stinks; but when I want to
buy the commonest thing, the owner pricks it up
under my nose; and it can't be had for love nor
money—I think every thing runs cross at Brambleton-hall
—You say the gander has broke the eggs, 

which is a phinumenon I don't understand; for
when the fox carried off the old goose last year, he
took her place, and hatched the eggs, and partected
the goslings like a tender parent—Then you tell
me the thunder has soured two barrels of beer in the
seller. But how the thunder should get there,
when the seller was double-locked, I can't comprehend. 
Howsomever, I won't have the beer thrown
out, till I see it with my own eyes. Perhaps, it
will recover—At least it will serve for vinegar to
the sarvents. You may leave off the fires in my
brother's chamber and mine, as it is unsartain when
we return. —I hope, Gwyllim, you'll take care
there is no waste; and have an eye to the maids,
and keep them to their spinning. I think they may
go very well without beer in hot weather—It serves
only to inflame the blood and set them a-gog after
the men. Water will make them fair, and keep
them cool and tamperit. Don't forget to put up in
the portmantel, that comes with Williams, along
with my riding-habit, hat, and feather, the viol of
purl water, and the tincktur for my stomach; being
as how I am much troubled with flutterencies. 
This is all at present, from, 
Yours,
Tabitha Bramble. 
Bath, April 26. 