


Mrs. Grizzle exerts herself in finding a proper
match for her brother; who is accordingly introduced
to the young lady whom he marries in due
season. 
I have been the more circumstantial in opening
the character of Trunnion, because he bears
a considerable share in the course of these memoirs; 
but, now it is high time to resume the
consideration of Mrs. Grizzle, who, since her
arrival in the country, had been engrossed by a
double care, namely, that of finding a suitable
match for her brother, and a comfortable yoke-fellow
for herself. 
Neither was this aim the result of any sinister
or frail suggestion, but the pure dictates of
that laudable ambition, which prompted her to
the preservation of the family name. Nay, so
disinterested was she in this pursuit, that, postponing
her nearest concern, or at least leaving
her own fate to the silent operation of her charms,
she laboured with such indefatigable zeal in behalf
of her brother, that before they had been three
months settled in the country, the general topick
of conversation in the neighbourhood, was an intended
match between the rich Mr. Pickle and
the fair miss Appleby, daughter of a gentleman
who lived in the next parish, and who, though
he had but little fortune to bestow upon his children,
had to (use his own phrase) replenished
their veins with some of the best blood in the
county. 

This young lady, whose character and disposition
Mrs. Grizzle had investigated to her own
satisfaction, was destined for the spouse of Mr.
Pickle, and an overture accordingly made to her
father, who being overjoyed at the proposal, gave
his consent without hesitation, and even recommended
the immediate execution of the project
with such eagerness, as seemed to indicate either
a suspicion of Mr. Pickle's constancy, or a diffidence
of his own daughter's complexion, which,
perhaps, he thought too sanguine, to keep much
longer cool. The previous point being thus settled,
our merchant, at the instigation of Mrs.
Grizzle, went to visit his future father-in-law,
and was introduced to the daughter, with whom
he had, that same afternoon, an opportunity of
being alone. What passed in that interview, I
never could learn, though from the character of
the suitor, the reader may justly conclude that
she was not much teized with the impertinence
of his addresses. He was not, I believe, the less
welcome for that reason; certain it is, she made
no objection to his taciturnity, and when her father
communicated his resolution, acquiesced
with the most pious resignation. But, Mrs. Grizzle,
in order to give the lady a more favourable
idea of his intellects than what his conversation
could possibly inspire, was resolved to dictate a
letter, which her brother should transcribe and
transmit to his mistress, as the produce of his own
understanding; and had actually composed a very
tender billet for this purpose; yet her intention
was intirely frustrated by the misapprehension of
the lover himself, who, in consequence of his sister's
repeated admonitions, anticipated her scheme,
by writing for himself, and dispatching the letter 

one afternoon, while Mrs. Grizzle was visiting
at the parson's. 
Neither was this step the effect of his vanity or
precipitation; but having been often assured by
his sister, that it was absolutely necessary for him
to make a declaration of his love in writing, he
took this opportunity of acting in conformity to
her advice, when his imagination was unengaged
or undisturbed by any other suggestion, without
suspecting in the least, that she intended to save
him the trouble of exercising his own genius. 
Left, therefore, as he imagined, to his own inventions,
he sat down and produced the following
morceau, which was transmitted to miss Appleby,
before his sister and counsellor had the least intimation
of the affair. 

Miss Sally Appleby,
Madam,
Understanding you have a parcel of heart,
warranted sound, to be disposed of, shall
be willing to treat for said commodity, on reasonable
terms; doubt not, shall agree for same; shall
wait of you for further information, when and
where you shall appoint. This the needful from 
Yours, &c.
Gam. Pickle. 
This laconic epistle, simple and unadorned as
it was, met with as cordial a reception from the
person to whom it was addressed, as if it had
been couched in the most elegant terms that delicacy
of passion and cultivated genius could supply:
nay, I believe, was the more welcome, on 

account of its mercantile plainness; because
when an advantageous match is in view, a sensible
woman often considers the flowery professions
and rapturous exclamations of love, as ensnaring
ambiguities, or at best impertinent preliminaries,
that retard the treaty they are designed to promote:
whereas Mr. Pickle removed all disagreeable
uncertainty, by descending at once to the most
interesting particular. 
She had no sooner, as a dutiful child, communicated
this billet-doux to her father, than he as a
careful parent visited Mr. Pickle, and in presence of
Mrs. Grizzle, demanded a formal explanation of
his sentiments with regard to his daughter Sally. 
Mr. Gamaliel, without any ceremony, assured
him he had a respect for the young woman, and
with his good leave, would take her for better for
worse; and Mr. Appleby, after having expressed
his satisfaction that he had fixed his affections in
his family, and comforted the lover with the assurance
of his being agreeable to the young lady,
they forthwith proceeded to the articles of the
marriage-settlement, which being discussed and
determined, a lawyer was ordered to engross
them; the wedding cloaths were bought, and in
short, a day was appointed for the celebration of
their nuptials, to which every body of any fashion
in the neighbourhood was invited. Among
these commodore Trunnion and Mr. Hatchway
were not forgotten, being the sole companions
of the bridegroom, with whom, by this time,
they had contracted a sort of intimacy at their
nocturnal rendezvous. 
They had received a previous intimation of
what was on the anvil, from the landlord, before
Mr. Pickle thought proper to declare himself; in 

consequence of which, the topick of the one eyed
commander's discourse at their meeting for several
evenings before, had been the folly and plague
of matrimony; on which he held forth with
great vehemence of abuse, levelled at the fair sex,
whom he represented as devils incarnate sent
from hell, to torment mankind; and in particular,
inveighed against old maids, for whom he
seemed to entertain a singular aversion; while
his friend Jack confirmed the truth of all
his allegations, and gratified his own malignant
vein at the same time, by clenching every
sentence with a sly joke upon the married state,
built upon some allusion to a ship or sea-faring
life. He compared a woman to a great gun loaded
with fire, brimstone and noise, which being violently
heated, will bounce and fly, and play the
devil, if you don't take special care of her breechings. 
He said she was like a hurricane that never
blows from one quarter, but veers about to
all points of the compass: he likened her to a
painted galley curiously rigged, with a leak in her
hold, which her husband would never be able to
stop. He observed that her inclinations were like
the Bay of Biscay; for why? because you may
heave your deep sea lead long enough, without
ever reaching the bottom. That he who comes
to an anchor on a wife, may find himself moored
in damned foul ground, and after all, can't for
his blood slip his cable; and that for his own part,
thof he might make short trips for pastime, he
would never embark in woman on the voyage of
life, because he was afraid of foundering in the
first foul weather. 
In all probability, these insinuations made some
impression on the mind of Mr. Pickle, who was 

not very much inclined to run great risks of any
kind; but the injunctions and importunities of
his sister, who was bent upon the match, over-balanced
the opinion of his sea friends, who
finding him determined to marry, notwithstanding
all the hints of caution they had thrown out,
resolved to accept his invitation, and honoured
his nuptials with their presence accordingly. 