

The Servant of Turpius, who had
escap'd the Hands of Asiaticus,
returning after he and Clarinthia
were gone, found the Body of
his Master which was not quite dead; 
wherefore he did all he could to restore
him to Life, which soon prov'd effectual. 
When he was throughly come to himself,
he commanded the Servant to keep the
Secret, and feign an Imerment, as if he
had been really dead; and in the mean
Time absconded, taking Measures to make
his Friends use all Endeavours to take and
apprehend Asiaticus, as the Murderer of
Turpius and Ravisher of Clarinthia; but he,
as before specify'd, secur'd himself from
their Malice. 
As soon as Turpius was able to stir abroad,
he resolv'd to go into Sicily, being inform'd
by the said Servant, (who kept Correspondence
with Valerius) that Clarinthia was 
there with Asbella. He resolv'd to conclude
the Marriage between her and Valerius, and
put them in Possession of his Lordships in
Italy, whilst he should spend the Remainder
of his Days with his belov'd Asbella in
Sicily. 
But when he came there, he found not
Carinthia, she being escap'd the preceding
Day, which very much afflicted him; and
making Reflections by little and little, he
began to mistrust Asbella and Valerius, supposing
they had made her away, nor wou'd
believe all they could assert to the contrary. 
Wherefore he resolv'd to go to Rome, and
there take Measures contrary to what he
had design'd before. Whether Asbella perceiving
or suspecting, she thought it best to
assure herself and her Son of his Estate before
she parted with his Person, and therefore
kept him within the Confines of the Castle. 
This Proceeding enrag'd him to the highest
Degree, and confirm'd him in the Opinion
he had of their Cruelty towards Clarinthia. 
But then again, in his Anger and Despair,
he would say to himself, I ought not to impute
this Crime to them. It is myself,
Horror of Nature as I am, it is I that am
the Author of her Loss, miserable abominable
Monster! a Burden to the Earth,
unworthy of Heaven, and afraid of Hell. 
O Clarinthia, Clarinthia, beautiful Clarinthia!
the perfect Pourtrait of thy bright and 
vertuous Mother, thy Loss is irreparable,
and thy untimely Death a Misery insupportable. 
O Wretch that I was! to give
myself to the Embraces of a Prostitute,
and break my Marriage-Vows to the best
and fairest of her Sex, and then project
an incestuous Marriage betwixt my only
lawful Offspring and the Son of my Lewdness; 
and, as if these had been but petty
Crimes, attempt the most detestable in
Nature, on the Chastity of my own Child,
that now I am justly the Object of Heaven's
Vengeance, and a Prey to this lewd
Woman's Tyranny. I am without Power
or Friend to help or to deliver me; I have
nothing but Horror and Lamentation to
accompany me, and inward Regret to torment
me. Thus he spent his Hours in
Complaints and Anxiety of Mind; and,
for an Augmentation of his Affliction, Asbella
incessantly importun'd him to make
a Settlement of his Estate on Valerius, at
the same Time assuring him of his Liberty; 
which at last so provok'd him, that with
Difficulty he restrain'd himself from doing
her Violence; but turning himself to go
from her, his Tongue disburden'd the
Anxiety of his Mind in most violent Maledictions. 
Curs'd Woman! (said he) may
the Pestilence and filthy Maladies seize
thee, 'till thou be scorn'd and loath'd by
all the World; may all Misery and Misfortune 
accompany thee, the Devils and
Despair pursue and overtake thee, Hell
and Damnation meet thee, and a thousand
other Curses attend thee to all Eternity. 
Thus did this unhappy Lord add Crimes
to his Afflictions, and Sin to his Sorrows,
by his Rage and Impatience. Asbella, on
the other Side, with an hypocritical Complaisance,
pretended to soften and compassionate
his Sufferings, saving, My Lord,
what have I done, thus to be the Object of
your Anger and Reproach? Or rather, what
have I not done, that might contribute to
your Satisfaction? Did I not waste my
Youth in your Love, and prostrate mine
Honour to your Embraces? Was I not always
faithful and constant to you, a true
Friend and Confident of all your most secret
Thoughts? And above all, though a
Lady born to great Riches, yet as subject
and obedient to all your Desires and Commands,
as if I had been dependent on your
Bounty. It is very hard, that I shou'd
now be the Object of your Anger, for no
other Cause but endeavouring to make
you happy, by keeping you within the
Reach of my Embraces. Had Queen Dido
done so by her Trojan Hero, Despair and
Death had not been her only Refuge. My
Lord, continu'd she, be not cruel to your
self and me, but endeavour to compose
your Spirits, and calm those Storms, 
which Mistakes have rais'd in your Breast; 
in order to which, I will fetch you a little
Cordial, that may moderate your Fury, by
procuring you some gentle Slumbers. So,
going to her Closet, she brought him a
certain Draught, which she desir'd him to
take as a Cordial to restore his Quiet. Yes,
said he, I doubt not but it will be an assur'd
Remedy of all my Misfortunes in
this World, by sending me to the next. 
I question not its Efficacy, being it comes
from thy Hand, Serpent as thou art; however
I will take it, to be deliver'd from thy
Tyranny. But as he began to drink thereof,
his Mind chang'd; wherefore taking the
Cup from his Mouth, he threw it and the
Poison therein full in her Face. In the
mean time Valerius came in, and was surpriz'd
at all this Disorder; for Turpius began
to be sensible of the Strength of the
Poison, though he had taken but very little; 
and it had already seiz'd Asbella's
Brain, that she lay raving on the Floor
like a miserable Wretch, such as her own
Crimes had made her, a sad Spectacle of
the Vengeance of Heaven. 
Valerius, as Duty oblig'd him, took all
possible Care of them both, and got the
best Physicians to their Aid, by whose Care
and Skill they escaped Death, though they
labour'd under long Sickness, and became
much disfigur'd; for Asbella became deaf 
and blind, and lost all her Teeth; Turpius
lost his Teeth, Hair, and Nails. Thus just
Heaven takes care to punish human Crimes,
and teach us cur Duty by our Sufferings. 
Asbella's Eyes, that gave Way to loose
Glances and alluring Looks, are now only
Blindness and Deformity; and her Ears,
that were open to the soft Whispers of
unlawful Love, are now shut from all
Conversation, and deharr'd of the Employment
for which they were created; and
Turpius, whose handsome Person and graceful
Mein had deluded not only Asbella, but
divers others, was now a miserable Spectacle
of Deformity. However, in this Condition,
Valerius thought it necessary to keep
Turpius in his Apartment, 'till Time should
a little restore him to his proper Figure; 
but withal, supposing Air necessary for his
Recovery, put him into that Lodging
where Clarinthia had been, for the Benefit
of the adjacent Balcony. As Turpius was
here walking one Day, with his Heart oppress'd
with Sorrow, and his Head with
Madness and Despair, the only Companions
his wicked Life had provided to entertain
him in his Solitude and Misfortune, he saw
a little Vessel sailing so near the Castle,
that he could call and becken to the Sailors,
who approaching near, he threw himself
over the Banisters into the Sea. The
Ship's Crew took him up with all Speed half 
dead with the Plunge; nevertheless, he
soon came to himself, and as soon knew
the Master of the Ship to be his ancient
Enemy Mecos: And Mecos in a little Time
remember'd Turpius, notwithstanding the
great Change his late Sickness had made in
him. Their first Surprize being over, Turpius
said, Without Doubt the Gods have
brought me to receive Punishment from
thy Hands, without which their Justice
could not be perfect. I confess my Crimes
have deserv'd the most rigorous Chastisement
which thou my greatest Enemy,
canst inflict; then here take thy full Revenge:
So opening his Breast, begg'd Mecos
to sheath his Sword in his Heart. No,
reply'd Mecos, though thou deservest Death,
yet I will not be thine Executioner, being
a Wretch more wicked than thy self; and
as Wolves and Serpents agree amongst themselves,
it is but natural for thou and I to
live in good Intelligence; therefore tell me
whither thou would'st go, and I will conduct
thee, or what other Service I can render. 
Alas, reply'd Turpius. I scarce know
how to thank thee for thy kind Offer, nor
what Use to make of it; for I am a
wretched Monster, the Odium of Mankind. 
However, if you will put me on Shore
near the House of Publius Scipio, it is all I
desire. That is the Place, reply'd Mecos, 
to which I am bound, therefore we will go
together. 
In short, these two Persons arriv'd, without
any Obstacle, to the said Place, where
they found all this Company of happy
Friends and Lovers, and amongst them
Clarinthia, which was a joyful Surprize to
her Father; and though he was extremely
chang'd, she knew him; and, falling at
his Feet, begg'd him to pardon her if she
had done any Thing to offend him. Rise,
rise, my dear Child, said Turpius, for it is
I, thy guilty Father, which ought to be in
that Posture, begging Pardon of the Gods,
and all the World, and in particular of
thee, my dear Clarinthia: Thou hast done
nothing to displease me; thou hast been all
Vertue and Obedience; thy bright Soul is
all Perfection and Purity; then pity and
pardon this thy unhappy Father: Then
both embracing, testify'd their mutual Tenderness
in a Shower of Tears, 'till Publius,
Asiaticus, and others of the Company, interrupted
them with their Welcomes and
kind Addresses to Turpius. 
In the mean Time, Exilius and Scipiana,
regarding Mecos a little stedfastly, knew
him to be the Pyrate that had taken and
sold them into Ægypt, and he likewise
knew them; and casting himself at their
Feet, begg'd Pardon for what was past, 
assuring them of a true and sincere Repentance; 
and that it was that hearty and unfeign'd
Sorrow, which had brought him to
offer himself a Sacrifice to the just Anger
of my Lord Publius Scipio. At which my
Lord Publius turning towards him, said, I
know not wherein thou hast offended me,
so as to deserve either Punishment or Pardon. 
But looking more attentively on
him, he remember'd him to be his old Acquaintance
Mecos; whereupon he desir'd
him to relate what had befallen him since
he left Rome, and how he came reduc'd to
this Condition. 
The History of Mecos.
You know, said Mecos, that I was
heretofore one of the richest of
the Roman Nobility, 'till mine and my
Wife's lewd Lives dissipated what the
Care and Wisdom of our Ancestors had
accumulated. With Shame I may speak
it, I think I was one of the greatest Debauchees
of my Time, nor was my Wife
on her Part less culpable. Amongst several
Gallants which she entertain'd, Turpius,
who pass'd for one of the most infamous of
all the Sons of Luxury, was one of her 
greatest Favourites; and notwithstanding
that I often forbad her to see or speak with
him, yet so little did she regard my Prohibition,
that she would be with him at
Theatres, Balls, Masques, and all other Diversions,
whilst I did the same with other
Ladies. Thus we led a Life disagreeable
to the Gods and our Friends; and though
the Diminution of my Estate call'd loud for
a Retrenchment of my Expences, I was
deaf to all, and thought to supply my Extravagance
by wrecking my poor Tenants,
inhancing their Rents, 'till their utmost
Endeavours cou'd not supply their Necessities,
much less my Luxuries. Tho' my
Stewards represented to me their Industry,
or Distress, how they pass'd their Days in
Labour, and their Nights in Care, neither
drinking the Fruit of their Vines, nor eating
the best of their Corn; their Cloaths,
the Offal of their Flocks, coarsly wrought
up by the Labour of their Hands; yet all
not capable to help them through those
Oppressions I laid upon them. My Severity
minded not the Widows Tears, nor Orphans
Cries; the Sighs of Husbands groaning in
Prisons, and the Petitions of Wives supplicating
on their Behalf, penetrated not; I
consider'd no-body's Wants but my own,
and thought my self in Necessity, if I had
not an Affluence even to Riot and Luxury; 
that by Degrees my Lordships became abandon'd,
few caring to be my Tenants; 
that for want of annual Revenues I was
forc'd to sell the Lands, 'till my Affairs
sell to such Extremity as were past Retrieve. 
I went into the Country amongst
my Lordships, where I found nothing but
Misery and Ruin, which caus'd me to return
sooner than my Family expected; 
and going directly into my Chamber, I
found Turpius in Bed with my Wife. This
enraging Sight I could not bear, but ran up
on him with the utmost Violence; but he
being nimble escap'd, and all my Fury fell
upon her, for with my Sword I kill'd her
in her Bed. This Accident, join'd to the
other distress'd Circumstances, made me
betake my self to Flight, partly to avoid
the Vengeance of her Friends, but chiefly
the more insupportable Punishment of that
Poverty my Extravagance had brought upon
me. I took my Son with me, believing
him to be my own, he being born before
my Wife betook herself to that lewd Life; 
but my little Daughter I left to the Hazard
of Fortune. As I pass'd through a little
Street behind the Garden of Publius Scipio,
the Back-gate being open, and the little
Scipio playing there, and his Attendance
at a Distance from him, I took him up under
my Cloak, and carry'd him away. The 
Child went pleas'd and smiling, as knowing
me very well, being one that frequented
his Father's House. I knowing he
would be a good Booty in Africa, went directly
thither, and there sold him to Amilcar,
a Cartbaginian Lord, who gave him to
his Son Hannibal, where I suppose he remains
to this Day in Quality of a Page. 
At these Words Ismenus interrupted him,
saying, that he was mistaken, forasmuch as
Hannibal had no Roman, Bond nor Freeman,
except himself: Whereupon Publius looking
upon him with Attention, beheld in him
the lovely Features of his beauteous Mother; 
and said, if this be my Son, the
lovely Scipio which I lost, he has an Eagle
spread on his Breast. True reply'd Mecos,
the lovely Boy I sold had that Mark; 
whereupon Ismenus opening his Breast,
shew'd them the Eagle. This Discovery
was no less grateful, than surprizing to all
the Company, but chiefly to Publius, who
receiv'd and embrac'd him with all the tender
Caresses of an overjoy'd Father; and all
the Company, by his Example, express'd
their Joy and Satisfaction, according to
their different Relation they had to this
lovely Object of their Endearments. After
the first Efforts of their Kindness, they
began to reflect on several Passages; how
Emelia had taken the Picture of Asiaticus 
to have been the Pourtraiture of Ismenus,
which, no doubt, resembled him very much,
it having been drawn when Asiaticus was
of his Age; and likewise how Exilius took
him for Scipiana, when dress'd in Woman's
Cloaths, at their meeting in the Cave; for
'tis certain, never did Brother and Sister
more resemble each other than did these; 
to wit, Asiaticus, Ismenus, and Scipiana. After
a little Time was pass'd on these Reflections,
Mecos, at the Desire of Publius, return'd
to his Story. 
Having (said Mecos) vended my pretty
Merchandize at Carthage, I went for Eygpt,
where I plac'd my Son in an Academy of
good Education, at Alexandria, and betook
my self to Pyracy, taking upon me the
Name of Marinus. In this wicked Occupation
I throve so well, that in a little
Time I became Master of a Fleet of these
rapacious Wretches, they all owning me
for their Admiral. Amongst many other
Prizes which my wicked Hands took, it
was my Fortune to light on this noble
Couple, Exilius and Scipiana, whose Adventures
I suppose you have had at large from
themselves. My Son, whom I told you I
left at Alexandria, made so good Proficiency
in his Studies and Exercises, that he
made himself an accomplish'd Gentleman; 
so that by Degrees, with the Help of 
Friends, he got to be Captain in the King's
Guard, in the Place of Exilius, after he was
put in Prison. But the Gods was pleas'd
to punish all my Crimes in the Person of
my Son; for he had enjoy'd this Honour
but a very small Time, when passing one
Evening in the Street, he was assassinated
in his Chariot; but before he dy'd, he engag'd
me to quit this wicked Way of Living,
and to go ask Pardon of Publius Scipio, and
inform him of the Adventures of his
Daughter, and where I had left his Son. 
And now, my Lord, behold me at your
Feet, not only as a Criminal, but a real
Penitent, asking Pardon both of you and
Heaven with all Sincerity and Submission. 
I am always ready (reply'd Publius) to
pardon my Enemies; and I will not only
forgive, but gratify thee; for as you have
render'd me a Son, so I will present you
with a Daughter, whom you left to the
Risk of Fortune; she is here with me, the
Governess of my Family. For when the
Senate dispos'd of your Estate for the Payment
of your Debts, my Wife, who was
all Vertue and Goodness, took your Daughter
Home to her, giving her a noble Education:
Thus did her Bounty towards thy
Child inhance the Odium of thy Wickedness
towards hers. But may the Gods pardon 
thee freely, as I do. Then calling
Artemesia, presented her to Mecos, saying,
behold in her your own Figure; you have
no Cause to doubt her being your own
Child, she bears so great Resemblance to
your Lordship. At which Mecos embrac'd
her with much Joy and Tenderness, as also
the rest of the Company presented their
Congratulations with great Satisfaction,
which was interrupted by the coming in
of Dinner. 