

Next morning this happy Company
rose early, and walk'd out
into the Grove, to adore the Goddess
Aurora, the Patroness of
that Place and Family; who, as aforesaid,
had a Chapel in that Grove, adjacent to
the House. When they had perform'd
their Sacrifice by way of Thanksgiving,
for the safe and unexpected Return of Asiaticus,
they went to divert themselves in
a cool Walk, during the fresh of the Morning; 
and being in the great middle Ally,
they met Marcellus and his Company, who
were coming to present themselves to Publius
Scipio. 
Now, Reader, if thou hast ever been
sensible of Love, that most generous and
pleasing of all Passions, that dear Delight
of Human Souls, the Ease of Care&sacute;, and
Accomplishment of Felicity, thou mayst
perhaps have some Conjecture or Idea of 
this happy Meeting, and some Guess at
what Transports seiz'd the Hearts of this
illustrious Company. The Gods themselves,
no Doubt, were ravish'd to behold
these Joys, which rival'd even the Happiness
of their Heaven, Asiaticus embracing
his dear Clarinthia, Exilius at the Feet of
his charming Scipiana, Marcellus making
his tender Complaints to his amiable Clelia,
every one in a pleasing Surprize, every one
amaz'd at his own Happiness; which Happiness
was doubled by the Participation of
their Friend's Felicity, and each one happy
in Excess. 
The first Efforts of these Transports being
over, they began to understand and
reflect on their several Mistakes, which
had in some Degree caus'd, or, at least, augmented
their Misfortunes. Clarinthia, in
not having known the Stranger Lysander,
(till now) to be the noble Asiaticus, or rather
the lovely Scipio, for under that Name,
in their tender Years, were their Hearts
united, which no Change of Place or Fortune
had Power to separate. Exilius was
surpriz'd to see Scipiana not marry'd to the
King of Egypt, (as he concluded) but totally
divorc'd from him, not only in Person
but Affections: But above all, Marcellus
had the greatest Difficulty to obtain Belief
from Clelia of his Innocence. However, 
out of Respect to the Company, they deferr'd
their Dispute 'till a fitter Opportunity. 
Then seating themselves, Clarinthia and
Scipiana were both impatient to know the
Adventures of Asiaticus, and how he had
escap'd those Deaths which hast cost them
so many Tears; what Countries or Regions
had been happy in his Presence, whilst
they lamented his Absence; what Conquests
his Arms had made, and how often
captivated by the Eyes of the Fair; what
Diversions and what Sufferings. In all
which he gratify'd their Desires, as follows. 
The History of Asiaticus.
I must beg Leave of the Company, (said
Asiaticus) to retrograde my Discourse to
the Time of my Childhood, which I cannot
pass over in Silence, it being the happiest
of my Days; for then it was that
the fair Clarinthia and I became united in
our Inclinations, not to say Affections, on
which is founded my whole Life's Felicity. 
Then it was, that I esteem'd every
Thing that she lik'd, and she approv'd
whatsoever I commended; and this according
to the Dictates of our natural Innocence; 
for we had never study'd the
Documents of Complaisance, nor knew we
how to flatter any Body's Fancy, and disoblige
our own. Our Words were as unstudy'd
as our Looks, both were without
Artifice; we neither knew how to feign a
Sigh, in a fit Season, nor constrain it
when ready to take Birth; but free as
Air, and soft as the Breezes of Zephirus,
when he ushers in the Spring. Our Smiles
were the Off-spring of our Thoughts, and
our Vows were unsophisticated Truths. 
Thus we sung the wild Notes of our Love,
unconstrain'd by present Cares, or future
Fears, and with as pleasing Harmony, (at
least to ourselves) as if we had been long
Students, or even Graduates in Cupid's
Schools. But, alas! how short and transitory
is human Happiness! I was had away
to Athens, there to make my Studies
amongst the rigid and austere Philosophers,
whose Doctrine and Practice is directly opposite
to this soft Passion: But notwithstanding
all their sage Instructions, I forgot
not the Lectures I had read in Clarinthia's
fair Eyes, nor the Documents I had
receiv'd from her innocent Smiles, but had
no Means or Opportunity to testify this
my Constancy; for all Intercourse of that
Kind was prohibited, and our Masters so vigilant
over us, that it was impossible to
steal any Occasion of Correspondence during 
my Residence there; and afterwards
my being engag'd in the publick Affairs,
and Clarinthia's being in the Country under
the too vigilant Eyes of her Father
and Valerius, was the Cause that I never
saw or heard from her, 'till her distress'd
Cries call'd me to her Rescue. You may
remember, dear Sister, (said he to Scipiana)
that I left you at the Side of a Forest, to
go succour a distress'd Person, which prov'd
to be this fair Lady, (bowing to Clarinthia)
and having slain the Wretch that offer'd
her the Outrage, I cover'd his dead Body
with my Cloak, which was the Reason
that Fidelius believ'd it to be me which
there lay slain, and accordingly misinform'd
you; whilst I, in the mean Time,
was gone with Clarinthia to a certain Retreat
of an Hermit in those Woods, where
the Wound I had, detain'd me some Days,
notwithstanding Clarinthia's being carry'd
away, which at first this holy Hermit did
not let me know; and afterwards his Kindness
constrain'd me, 'till I was in a Condition
to leave him without Danger, concealing
me faithfully and effectually, notwithstanding
all the Search and Enquiry
that was made after me, as the Murderer
of Turpius and the Ravisher of Clarinthia. 
As soon as I could get Leave of this holy
Man, and the Chyrurgeon whom he employ'd,
I dispatch'd to go after Clarinthia, 
whose Beauty had now made such an Impression,
as I knew could never be effac'd; 
and indeed nothing but her Charms could
have remov'd me from my good Hermit,
whose excellent Conversation and holy
Way of living begot in me a very great
Contempt for the Things of this Life. I
chang'd my Name and disguis'd my Person,
thereby to avoid the Malice of Turpius's
Friends, and the Kindness of my
own; both which I knew would obstruct
my Enterprize, though by different Methods. 
After I had made all proper and diligent
Enquiry in those Parts, without Effect,
I remember'd that Turpius had some
Relations at Carthage, which made me resolve
to go thither, thinking Clarinthia
might be retir'd there, to avoid the present
Shock of the Senate's Displeasure. 
Thus passing by the Coast of Sicily, we
saw a Man on Shore, who call'd and becken'd
to us to take him in; which we endeavour'd
to do, but the Water was so
shallow, and our little Boat toss'd, that
we could not possibly get near him; wherefore
he stripp'd himself, and came swiming
to us. 'Tis certain, said Scipiana, (interrupting
him) it was this Man's Cloaths
in which Cordiala array'd herself: But pardon,
Brother, my interrupting you, and
be pleas'd to proceed. This Man, said 
Asiaticus, prov'd to be my good Servant
Fidelius, whose Presence much rejoyc'd me; 
but the Information of your being lost,
beame an inexpressible Affliction. His Arrival
being in the Evening, we sail'd not
that Night, but lay there at Anchor, near
the Coast of Sicily. Next Morning it was,
that, by the wonderful Providence of the
Gods, we found Clarinthia, in whose charming
Conversation I pass'd that Day, in the
most vertuous Transports that ever the
God of Love bestow'd on faithful Votaries:
For there it was that she was pleas'd to assure
me of her everlasting Love, and promis'd
to use her Interest with the Senate
to confirm the Donation. But, ah! the
Mutability of human Happiness, a cruel
Storm arose, which wreck'd our Vessel, and
separated the most faithful of all Lovers. 
I was driven by the Violence of the Waves
against a Rock, on which there was a Tree,
whose Branches bow'd down to the Sea, by
which I was caught by the Hair, and by
that Means secur'd from Drowning. Here
I hung many Hours, 'till, the Storm ceasing,
some poor Fishermen came and deliver'd
me from that miserable Dependance. 
At first I was destitute of all Sense; but
when I came to myself, how did I accuse
my cruel Stars, that had preserv'd my Life
without leaving me Hopes of Clarinthia's
Safety. Passing on, we saw one riding on a 
Piece of the Mast, who had escap'd the
Wreck, whom taking up, we found to be
Fidelius. He inform'd me how this Piece
of the Mast had stuck amongst those Boughs
which bow'd down from the Rock, 'till the
Storm ceas'd, and the Wind veer'd about to
another Point, and help'd his wooden Horse
out of that Entanglement. He also inform'd
me how he had dispos'd Clarinthia
on a Plank, and committed her to the Sea; 
which Means of Escape had so little Appearance
of Safety, that I abandon'd my
self to Despair, and would have leap'd into
the Sea, there to have sought an Eternity
with my Clarinthia, but that Fidelius
and the Fisher-men with-held me, and by
Constraint brought me safe a-shore in Numidia. 
Here we search'd all Towns, Ports,
and Passages, in Hopes to find or hear of
her alive or dead; but all in vain, insomuch,
that I became absorp'd in the Gulph
of Grief and Despair. 
Being in the great Numidian Forest, I
desir'd Fidelius to leave me, and return to
his Friends and native Country, and not
waste his Youth with a Wretch like me,
whom am resolv'd (said I) to spend the Remainder
of my woful Days amongst the
wild Inhabitants of this vast Forest. Leave
then, Fidelius, this thy unhappy Master; 
and may the Gods reward thy Vertue and
Fidelity. Fut Fidelius was deaf to these 
my Perswasions, and vow'd he would never
leave me, whatever he suffer'd with
me; and that he should deem himself happier
in those Woods to enjoy my Presence,
than in a Palace without me; to which
Resolution he was ty'd by Inclination as
well as Duty. To which I return'd many
Arguments fit to perswade on such an
Occasion, but he remain'd inflexible; that
in the End I became angry, and told him
that his Kindness was troublesome; and
therefore charg'd him, on Obedience, to
leave me, or expect to be the Object of
my high Displeasure: At which, the poor
Youth open'd his Breast, and told me, that
since he was become troublesome, he neither
desir'd nor deserv'd to live: Therefore,
said he, in Recompence of past Services,
which sometimes were agreeable to
you, honour me so far as to let me die
by your Hands: At which I embrac'd him,
telling him, his Love and Generosity
oblig'd me to love him as a Friend or Brother,
and as such he should remain with
me, and no longer in Quality of a Servant; 
so charg'd him from thenceforth to
lay aside all such Distinction, and behave
himself to me as his Friend and Equal. 
Thus we took up our Being in those Woods,
wandering all Day by the Sea-side, and at
Night repos'd our selves on our Mother-Earth, 
one of us being oblig'd to watch 
whilst the other slept, for fear of the wild
Beasts, with which those Woods abound. 
One Morning early our Ears were saluted
with the Noise of Hunting; to which
we listen'd not long, ere we saw a Panther
pursu'd by a Lady a Horseback; but the
Horse making a false Step, threw the Lady; 
the Panther, perceiving his Advantage,
turn'd upon her; but she with admirable
Agility getting against a Tree,
with her Spear defended her beauteous
Person to Admiration. But I saw she could
not long maintain the Combat; wherefore
I ran to her Assistance, and soon dispatch'd
the Beast; for which Service she return'd
me innumerable Thanks and Acknowledgments. 
In the mean Time, there hasted
to us all the Company of Hunters, who
by their Carriage towards her, soon made
me understand she was the Princess Galecia,
the Queen's Daughter. She was pleas'd
(with much Goodness) to invite me along
with her, nor would accept of any Excuse
or Denial. When we came to Court, she
presented me to her Mother, the Queen-Regent, 
(for the King was in Minority)
and told her Majesty the great Danger she
had been in, and how deliver'd by me. 
The Queen reciev'd me with much Courtesy,
and oblig'd me to stay at Court, to
rest and recreate my self, which I did out
of Obedince to her Majesty; for, alas! 
my poor Heart was not susceptible of any
Delight or Satisfaction, tho' the Court
abounded with all Manner of Divertisements
that might gratify the young King
or the Princess. But chiefly Hunting was
there very much used, for the Pleasure of
the Princess, who delighted in that robust
Recreation. Nor had this dangerous Accident
at all discourag'd her, but she would
persue a Panther, Leopard, Wolf, or wild
Boar, with as much Courage and Vigour,
as any about her. She was a Lady of a
masculine Spirit, and undervalu'd the little
Delicacies of her Sex, making the Study
of Philosophy and the Laws of her
Country her chief Business, in which she
was pleas'd sometimes to entertain me very
learnedly. Her Person was extreamly
agreeable; for though she was very tall of
Stature, and somewhat of an African Complexion,
nevertheless the exact Symmetry
of Parts, and fine Features, render'd her
equal to the most compleat European Beauty; 
and as an Addition to these Perfections,
she was of a Disposition sweet and compassionate,
which eecited her to examine
the Cause of that Melancholy with which
she saw me oppress'd; and when I had
discover'd to her my Affliction, and related
my Grief in the Loss of my Clarinthia,
she endeavour'd to consolate me with all
the discreet and salutary Arguments proper 
on such an Occasion. She being thus
become not only my Friend, but my particular
Confident, she gave me several Opportunities
to entertain her on this Subject,
which occasion'd Envy in all the Court,
and not only so, but Jealousy in her Lover,
Boccus, Prince of Mauritania, who
was then in the Numidian Court, in Persuance
of that Marriage with her, already
agreed on between those two Crowns. But
this heroick Temper of hers, which rais'd
her Thoughts above the usual Pitch of her
Sex, made her scorn to be a Subject of
Cupid's Empire, or to comply with feminine
Formalities; but had rather lead an
Army in the Field, and endure the Fatigues
and Danger of War, than enjoy the
Happiness of lazy Peace and Court-Pastimes. 
Moreover, she had a great Unwillingness
to leave Numidia, a Country
nearer Europe, and consequently more polish'd
and adorn'd with European Customs
than Mauritania, which lies farther distant
from that Fountain of Riches, Learning,
and good Manners. These Considerations
made her protract the Marriage as
long as she could possibly; which, join'd
with the Kindness and Esteem with which
she treated me, gave Occasion to that Suspicion
in the Prince her Lover, as aforemention'd. 
Nor was he the only Person
so concern'd; but the Queen also found 
great Cause of Discontent, her Majesty having
contracted some Thoughts towards
me, more tender than consisted with her
Quiet; which she testify'd on all Occasions
that Modesty and her Royal Dignity
would permit, couch'd in double or ambiguous
Terms, such as might pass for
Love, Friendship, or Esteem. Against
which I clos'd the Eyes of my Understanding,
and would never comprehend the real
Meaning, as long as I could find any Shadow
or Pretext for Ignorance, or a different
Interpretation. 
Now it was that the War between Lybia
and Numidia broke out; and I, who
thought no Place so suitable to my Inclinations
and Misfortunes as the Army,
dispos'd my self to go as a private Person. 
But the Queen, beyond my Expectation,
confer'd on me the Honour of General, in
Consideration that Romans are expert, brave,
and fortunate; but I understood since, that
the Princess had given her some secret
Information of my Character and Quality,
and her Majesty no Doubt acquainted some
of the Grandees of her Council, otherwise
one could hardly suppose, that so
great a Trust could have been given into
the Hands of a Stranger, without Name,
Title, or Quality, and that not only by
the Queen's Donation, but by the Consent 
and Approbation of the whole Council. 
I will not repeat to you the Number of
our Forces, or Manner of our Marches,
Exercises, or particular Actions, that being
a Discourse little agreeable to the Ladies. 
But in short, it was our good Fortune
to overcome our Enemies, and to
bring Home to the Queen a compleat Victory; 
for which she not only loaded me
with Honours and Acknowledgments, but
took her Opportunity to discover to me in
plain Terms her particular Inclinations,
telling me that I was a compleat Victor,
not only over her Enemies, but over her
Heart; and though she had made all the
Resistance that Reason and Grandeur could
help her to, yet she found herself conquer'd
by the irresistible Forces of my Vertue
and heroick Actions; and since (said
she) I find all my Oppositions invalid, and
my Power nothing but Weakness, when
in Competition with my European Conqueror,
it is but just I render you the Honours
of a glorious Triumph, which you
shall receive in being the Copartner of
my Crown and Dignity. In this, no Doubt,
she thought she offer'd what I would accept
with Transport, for in Reality the
Offer was truly glorious; for setting aside
her Riches and Royalty, her beauteous
Person and interior Endowments were a 
Present for a most celebrated Hero; and
might justly command the Adorations of
the greatest Monarchs of the Universe:
But I, who was devoted and given to the
Memory of my Clarinthia, was in Mind
and Person nothing but Insensibility and
Despair. I remain'd confounded, and ignorant
what to say; grant I could not; to
refuse was ridiculous and ungrateful, or
rather cruel to my self, rendering me a
Monster of Nature; for what human Being
but my self could refuse Beauty and Grandeur,
which so advantageously courted my
Acceptance: I wish'd my self dead or annihilated,
any Thing or nothing, to be out
of that Dilemma: But as I was about to
reply I know not what, propitious Fortune
brought to my Deliverance the King
and Princess, which put a Period to my
Confusion. 
This Adventure gave me great Inquietude,
that I should be the unhappy Person
that Fortune forc'd to be ungrateful to
so generous a Benefactrix, unpolish'd to so
great a Queen, and worst of all disobliging
to Galecia's Mother, and in all opposite
to the greatest Honour I could hope
for on this side Heaven. A thousand Things
I resolv'd, and with the next Gust of
Thought dissolv'd 'em all; a thousand
Things I vow'd, and with the next Breath
renounc'd 'em all; Thought supplanting 
Thought, 'till my Understanding was
grown barren, and incapable of any rational
Production. Thus revolving many
Things in my Mind, I could fix on nothing
so suitable to my Inclination, as
stealing away from Court; but then again
I look'd on that as not only an ungrateful
Breach of Hospitality with the Queen,
but of Friendship with the Princess. As
I was in these Thoughts, walking in a
private Alley in the Garden, the Princess
enter'd; so I essay'd to withdraw, out of
Respect to her Highness; but she was
pleas'd to command my Stay, and falling
into Discourse with me on Things indifferent,
at last I took my Opportunity to let
her know my Design of leaving the Court,
and to search out some unknown Solitude,
there for ever to lament the Loss of my
Clarinthia. She told me she could not disapprove
my Resolution, it being so much
her own Inclination: For (said she) tho'
I have no such Loss as yours to lament,
yet I could wish for ever to be exempt
from all human Society, to spend my Days
in Study and Contemplation, and praising
of the Powers divine. To which, I reply'd,
that such a Life in her would not
be laudable, hardly excusable; forasmuch
as she was sent into the World for a general
Good, and therefore could not deprive
Mankind of such a Happiness given 
them by the Gods, without a manifest Injustice; 
therefore begg'd her speedily to
oblige the Queen in the Marriage of Prince
Boccus, and so make two Kingdoms happy. 
You ought (said she) to return these
Arguments upon your self, who are much
more capable of rendering Service to the
Publick; therefore cannot, without a Crime,
withdraw your self into your propos'd Solitude. 
I am sensible, (reply'd I) that
my Capacity is very weak; but if I could
any Way serve the Princess Galecia, I
should think my self most happy; and I
beg your Highness to believe, that my
Life, and all that I am, is perfectly at
your Devotion; nor is any Thing capable
to give me the least Satisfaction, if not
consonant to your Commands. At these
Words, the Prince Boccus came up to us,
and being prepossess'd with Jealousy, and
beside the Language of his Country being
gross and unpolish'd, not us'd to such little
extended Civilities of Speech, he concluded
what I said to proceed from an amorous
Inclination. So drawing his Sword,
said, that now he knew the Cause of her
Indifferency, he would free himself from
the Obstacle of his Happiness, by my speedy
Death, and so ran upon me with great
Fury: But I defended my self with as
much Nimbleness, as he assaulted with Violence,
both of us forgetting our Respects due 
to the Princess, whose Royal Presence
ought to have restrain'd us: But this generous
and courageous Lady, without Noise
or Terror, stepp'd between us, and with her
own Person put a Stop to our Fury, reproaching
Boccus for having made such an
Assault on an innocent Stranger, and at
the same Time on her Honour, in not only
breaking all Respect due to her Sex
and Quality, but believing her to entertain
a secret Amour; a Thing she detested,
as being below the Dignity of a private
Gentlewoman, much more a Person of her
Rank, and quite contradictory to her frank
generous Humour. But the transported
Boccus, instead of owning his Fault, and
asking Pardon, persisted in his Jealousy,
and utter'd some insolent Expressions; 
whereat the Princess quite enrag'd, stepp'd
suddenly to me, and ere I was aware, pulled
out my Sword, and therewithal ran
Boccus quite thorough the Body. After this
rash Action, Tenderness oblig'd her to do
what Fear could not; for seeing him fall
by her Hand, she cry'd out most distractedly; 
at which the Guards and Prince
Boccus's Servants came, and finding my
Sword to have perform'd the Fact, though
in Galecia's Hand, they seiz'd and hurry'd
me away to Prison; where, after two or
three Days, News was brought me, that
Boccus was dead of his Wound, and had 
constantly affirm'd me to be his Murderer. 
On the other Side, the generous Princess
attested, that it was she herself that had
done it, for which she was exceeding sorry,
though he deserv'd no less for his Temerity. 
The dead Body was carry'd into
his own Country, to be interr'd and lamented
by the King his Father, who resented
it most bitterly, and sent to the
Queen, to deliver his Son's Murderer into
his Hands, or to expect his utmost Force
to revenge his Death. This Embassy much
disturb'd the Queen, being very unwilling
to have the King of Mauritania make War
upon her on this Occasion; and as unwilling
to deliver me up to his Revenge, tho'
no Doubt but she believ'd me to be the
Actor of this Tragedy, and that it was
Love that made the Princess take it upon
herself, for my Security; yet she seem'd
to think me innocent, thereby to make herself
appear just in protecting me. Now,
the Queen not only fear'd the Power of
the King of Mauritania, but her own Subjects,
who malign'd and envy'd the Honours
she heap'd upon me, not only as being
a Stranger without Rank or Quality,
but a Roman, which entitles a Man to the
Hatred of the Universe; for though the
World esteems and imitates our Learning,
Laws, and Manners, yet our growing-Glories
make us the Object of Envy and Emulation; 
and every one would hate a
Roman, though they knew not why. In
short, the Queen was extreamly embarrass'd,
and push'd on by Clamours, nevertheless,
she could not resolve to give me
up into the Hands of such an enrag'd Enemy
as the King of Mauritania. Thus
we see how diversly Things are represented
to the World; the Queen, who believ'd
me guilty, represented me innocent; Boccus,
who knew me innocent, had represented
me guilty; the Princess, who was
the only Person capable to give a true Information,
was believ'd on no Side; which
shews, that Men credit what they fancy,
and by Degrees think they know what
they have only by Hear-say, and then
act according to this mistaken Knowledge,
mistaken Information, and mistaken Fancy. 
By this Means the Numidians began
to be in divers Divisions, and many Heart-burnings
arose amongst them, that the
Queen was nonplus'd what to do. In the
midst of these Difficulties, after divers Debates
with herself, she sent the King of
Mauritania Word, that she much lamented
the Death of his Son, which she counted a
Loss to herself little inferiour to his; and
that she most earnestly desir'd to revenge
his Death on his Murderer, but Justice
oblig'd her to protect the Stanger Lysander,
as not being culpable; and for an Assurance 
of the Sincerity of this her Assertion,
she would, if he pleas'd, send her
two Children, the young Prince Gala and
the Princess Galecia, as Hostages to his Majesty,
'till she could better inform herself
of the Business. Thus was this poor Lady,
tho' a Queen, become subject to her
Passion, or rather such a Slave to her Folly,
as to overlook her Honour, Interest,
and her People's Happiness, in exposing
her Children, whose Safety ought to have
been her principal Care and most tender
Concern; and this for me a Stranger, not
worth her Consideration: All which she
frequently represented to me in those Visits
she made me in Prison. Moreover alledging,
that her Childrens Absence would
make the Throne and Palace more spacious
and secure for her and me. These Offers
were not at all pleasing to me; but such
was the Juncture of Affairs, that I knew
not how to receive or reject them, as hating
to dissemble the Truth, and fearing to
exasperate her against Galecia; therefore
compos'd my Answers as cunningly and
dubiously as possible; which gave her very
little Hopes or Satisfaction, and only confirm'd
her Suspicion of her Daughter's being
her Rival. 
Now, the Princess having Intelligence
of what Answer the Queen had sent to
the King of Mauritania, and how she and 
the King her Brother were in Danger of
being sent Hostages to that King, she
thought Duty to the King her Brother, as
well as Respect to the Memory of her dead
Father, oblig'd her to endeavour to prevent
it, if possible. Wherefore she assembled
in her Apartment one Night those
Nobles whom she knew to have been most
affectionate to her Father, and there discours'd
with them touching this Matter,
asking them if they thought it reasonable
or just, that the young King and herself
should be put into the Hands of a Stranger
and enrag'd Enemy? Or whether they
thought their Laws and Liberties, Lives
and Estates, could be safe, when the Keys
of the Kingdom should be thus in the
Hands of a foreign King? As for myself,
(continu'd she) I deserve to be the Object
of that King's Revenge, who have been
the Cause of his Sorrow, in the Death of
his Son, whose only Fault was loving me
too well, of which I am now most sensible,
and too late repent my Rashness; and
for a Reparation of my Crime, I resolve to
consecrate myself a perpetual Virgin, for
the Sake of Prince Boccus; and shall be
willing to undergo what soever Punishment
the King his Father shall think I deserve:
But for the King, my Brother, I see no
Reason that he should be involv'd in my
Punishment, who is innocent of my Crime: 
Therefore, my Lords, I beg you to consider
what is to be done in this Case, for
the Security of the King, the Laws, and
yourselves; with several other Words to
the same Effect. At which the Lords were
most sensibly touch'd, and unanimously
profess'd they were willing to hazard their
Lives, and all they had, for the Service
of the King, and Safety of their Laws and
Country. To this End, several Methods
were propos'd, but none seem'd so likely
as the securing the Queen's Person, and
putting the Government into the Hands of
the Council, 'till the King should be of
Years to act himself. But this Method
did not please the Princess, in Regard of
her Duty to her Mother, and the Danger
of unhinging the Government, and instead
of making Things better, perhaps
worse; and in thus preserving the young
King from the Hands of the King of Mauritania,
he might be cast into the Hands
of his own Subjects, whose Ambition perhaps
might not be so easily bounded, as
their Allegiance broken; well knowing
how dangerous it is for a King to part with
the Reins of Government. These, and
divers other Considerations, made the Princess
oppose those Measures propos'd by the
Lords; so, without resolving on anything,
they separated, each one repairing to their
own Lodging. Now, this Meeting was 
not so secretly carry'd, but that the Queen
had speedy Intelligence; wherefore, next
Morning, the Princess, and divers of the
Lords were apprehended and imprison'd; 
of all which the Queen fail'd not to advertise
me in my Confinement. I constantly
apply'd all the perswasive Arguments
I could think on, in Behalf of the
Princess; all which serv'd but to confirm
her Jealousy, and irritate her Anger. Thus
the best Intentions, when perverted, produce
the worst Effects; as the strongest
Wine makes the keenest Vinegar. The
Queen looking upon her as a powerful
Rival, as well as a rebellious Daughter,
resolv'd that nothing should save her Life; 
however, was unresolv'd what Measures to
take, sometimes thinking to send her to the
King of Mauritania, to avoid the Clamours
that would be made in Numidia; but then
again, she thought her Beauty, Youth, and
Eloquence, would so far gain upon him,
as to make him of her Party: Beside, she
was desirous to make her an Example to
the rest of her Subjects, to deter them
from such treasonable Conspiracies and rebellious
Practices. In short, it was determin'd
she should suffer in Numidia. To
this End, the Queen order'd a Scaffold to
be erected adjacent to her own Apartment,
upon which she came and seated herself in
a Chair of State prepar'd for that Purpose; 
the Scaffold, as also her Person, were dress'd
in black Velvet. Hither was brought the
Princess, dress'd in a long Robe of white
Sattin, which represented Cynthia in a Cloud,
engaging the Spectators to long for her appearing
again in Splendour. The Queen
first made a short Speech to the People,
minding them what Happiness they had
enjoy'd under her Reign, and that it was
for their Sakes and Securities that she thus
acted against the Dictates of Nature, in
exposing to the Hand of Justice the Child
of her Bowels, and her only Daughter; 
with other Things to that Purpose. Then
turning her Speech to Galecia, told her,
that her Quality exempting her from all
Compeers, she was forc'd herself (according
to the Custom of that Country) to become
her Judge; and not only so, but her Accuser
likewise, her Crime being against
her and the State. Thou knowest, Galecia,
what an indulgent Mother I have been to
thee on all Occasions; in particular, how
willing I was to smother and conceal thy
Crime, touching the Death of Prince Boccus,
and was desirous it should be thought
the Stranger Lysander, and have for that
Cause detain'd him in Prison ever since:
These and all other Benefits thou hast rewarded
with the highest Ingratitude, in
conspiring against my Life, and contriving
the Subversion of the Government, for 
which thou knowest thou deservest to die; 
therefore if thou hast ought to say in thy
Defence, thou hast Liberty to speak. 'Tis
true, reply'd the Princess, touching the
Death of Prince Boccus, I am most culpable,
and deserve to suffer for having rashly
slain a vertuous Prince, my faithful Lover; 
but to have conspir'd against your Majesty's
Life, I utterly renounce; or to have
design'd any Thing against the Government,
farther than to secure it for the
King my Brother; and if that can make
me guilty, I must confess I am a great
Criminal, and have nothing to say in my
Defence. Whereupon the Queen proceeded
to pronounce on her the Sentence of
Death, commanding the Captain of the
Guard to see it executed. Her Majesty retir'd
into her Apartment. Now a little
before she went on the Tribunal of Justice,
she had writ to me thus: 

Lysander,
This is to advertise you, that I ascend
the Tribunal of Justice: If you have a
Desire to testify your Love, or (as you call it)
your Friendship to Galecia, you have now an
Opportunity, in saving her, and making your
self happy in my Crown and Person; which if
you persist to refuse, I shall not only remove
Galecia, the Rival of my Love, but Gala,
the Rival of my Empire; and as I thus punish 
those who oppose my Power, so will I also take
Revenge on those who slight my Love; and
thereby demonstrate how dangerous it is, either
to affront or scorn a Queen. 

It is strange to see what Extravagancies
we are subject to, if we follow the Career
of our own Passions. Justly may the Philosophers
affirm it to be a greater Victory
to conquer our selves, than to overcome
the Universe; as is manifest by the Mistakes
this Lady committed, when she suffer'd
herself to be guided by Passion, to
the Ruin of herself, Children, and Empire,
for me, an unhappy Wretch, that could
gratify her in nothing but my Pity. 
At the Receipt of this Billet, I was both
surpriz'd and afflicted; nor knew I what
Answer to return. Sometimes I resolv'd to
sacrifice myself to her Inclinations, thereby
to save the Life of the most excellent
Princess Galecia. But then again I thought
on my Clarinthia, and those Vows I had
made to her of everlasting Love, and the
Promise I had made to the Gods of a continual
single Life in Memory of my dear
Clarinthia. How will thy lovely Shade
(said I) behold me in the Arms of another? 
Thy pure Spirit will hate my Falsehood,
and blush at my Perjury. The Gods
will avenge themselves and thee, of these
my broken Vows. O Lysander! O Asiaticus! 

O Scipio! Dishonour will brand thee,
and brand all these three noble Names; 
brand thee with Falshood to thy Love,
broken Vows, Infidelity to the Gods, and unworthy
slighting the Memory of the Dead. 
Whilst I was thus arguing with myself,
Fidelius put me in Mind that the Queen's
Messenger stay'd; whereupon, in the Midst
of many confus'd Thoughts, I writ to the
Queen to this Effect: 

Madam,
If you proceed in these Cruelties you propose
towards the King and Princess, I hope you
will add some Policy to your Passion, and secure
yourself of me the same Way, lest by
some Means or other I make my Escape into
my own Country; from whence, at the Head
of twenty Legions, I shall come and receive
the Favours your Majesty is pleas'd to offer,
that being the only Way the Romans accept
of Crowns; which shall be observ'd by your Servant, 
Lysander. 

These rough Lines came to the Queen's
Hands just as she was about to go on her
Tribunal of Justice; which serv'd only to
exasperate and prompt her on to pronounce
Sentence of Death against the Princess. I
cannot but reflect how indiscreet this Way
of Writing was in me, especially in such 
Circumstances as Fortune had reduc'd the
Princess and myself, it being more like an
unpolish'd African, or some Libian Forester,
than an European, and a Roman Gentleman; 
for as Truth ought never to be
disguis'd with Falshood, no more ought she
to appear with a Nakedness, even to Immodesty
or Rudeness. But to return. 
The Queen being retir'd into her Apartment,
as I told you, the Princess made an
Harangue to the People, wherein she own'd
her Guilt touching the Death of Prince
Boccus, and asserted her Innocence concerning
the Conspiracy against the Queen's
Life. Then turning to one of her Pages,
she hid him go to her Brother, to whom
she recommended him, hoping he would
be well receiv'd, forasmuch as she fell a
Sacrifice to his Safety, endeavouring to preserve
his Life, Liberty, and Kingly Dignity. 
The Captain of the Guard told her,
that in Consideration that she had but few
Minutes to live, she might employ them
better than in such reflecting Speeches:
To which the Princess reply'd, That his Insolence
made him deserve to have fewer
Minutes to live than she. 'Tis true, Madam,
reply'd one behind him, stabbing
him, he deserv'd not to live, who durst
undertake so bloody a Charge, as seeing his
King's Sister executed without Law or
Reason. The Princess was amaz'd at these 
Words, and the unexpected Action of the
Captain's Death. Looking about, she saw
the Guards dead on the Scaffold, and the
Throng below much dispers'd, and those
that remain'd, fighting towards the Queen's
Apartment, together with a great and confused
Noise on every Side; of all which
she knew not what Construction to make,
whether a general Revolt, or that an Enemy
had enter'd the City, putting all to
the Sword. In this Astonishment she enter'd
the Queen's Lodgings, which she found
full of Guards, and the Queen fallen,
wounded by the Hands of some of them; 
all which fill'd her with Astonishment and
Horror. As she was in this Confusion,
commanding Care to be taken of the Queen,
a Person in bloody Armour enter'd, and
casting himself at her Feet, told her, she
was now at Liberty, and her Life in Safety; 
which, said he, by the Assistance of
the Gods, I have effected, as also the Establishment
of your Brother's Crown. Valiant
Sir, reply'd the Princess, the Obligation
is above my Power to requite; But as
far as in my Brother lies, I know he will
own it to the Half of his Kingdom. 
Madam, reply'd he, it is yourself only
that is capable to make the Recompence; 
I seek not Riches nor Titles; 'tis only your
divine Person, the illustrious Princess Galecia,
can satisfy my Ambition. I perceive, 
Sir, reply'd the Princess, you are one
whose hard Fortune it is to be in the Number
of my Lovers: Alas! the World knows
I am vow'd to the Memory of Prince Boccus,
whom I unhappily slew; and therefore,
for his Sake, am resolv'd to spend
the rest of my Days in a woful Solitude; otherwise,
whatever your Quality be, your
Service merits more than you demand. If
you have vow'd yourself to Boccus, reply'd
the Stranger, then here perform your Obligation; 
for behold it is Boccus that now
lies at your Feet, begging Pardon for all
the Troubles you have undergone for his
Sake. Then disarming his Head, the Princess
knew him to be Boccus, but could hardly
credit her Senses. The first Efforts of
her Surprize being past, Grief supply'd its
Place; for the Queen's Soul fled out at that
Wound she had receiv'd. As they took
Order for disposing of her dead Body, they
found my Letter, which was fallen out of
her Hand, (for she was perusing it just as
she receiv'd her Death's Wound;) by which
they perceiv'd my Integrity and her Cruelty,
which help'd to abate Galecia's Resentment
of her Death, and moderate her
Sorrow. 
They dispos'd all Things in the Palace,
and amongst the Soldiers, with what Expedition
they could, proclaiming in the
Street, Long Life and Health to King Gala. 
After which, they came and took me out
of Prison, Boccus generously begging Pardon
of me for his rash and false Suspicions,
and, upon our Request, inform d us how he
had accomplish'd all this great Affair with
so much Secresy and Success; which he related
as follows: 
When I found myself like to recover
(said Boccus) of the Wound I had receiv'd
from the Princess, to gratify my Malice
against Lysander, I made it be given out,
that I was dead; and accordingly caus'd a
Herse to be convey'd into my own Country,
concluding, that either the Queen or my
Father would revenge my Death on Lysander,
and make him fall shamefully by the
Hand of Justice. In the mean Time, I conceal'd
myself between the Confines of Mauritania
and Numidia, whither my Servants
and Spies brought me Intelligence of all
that pass'd in both Countries and Courts. 
When I understood the Imprisonment of
Galecia, and the Danger she was in, I resolv'd
to attempt her Delivery with the Hazard
of my Life. I communicated my Design
to some of the Captains, and other Officers
of the Guard, whom I had made my
Friends whilst I resided in the Court of Numidia; 
who were very ready to comply
with me in an Enterprize so just and honourable,
as the saving the Life of the Princess,
and divers noble Numidians, who were in 
Danger. We contriv'd, that just before the
Execution of the Princess, when Peoples
Hearts were agitated with Pity towards
her, Anger towards the Queen, and Fear
of their own Safeties, &c. so less capable
to examine or resist, our Party was to seize
on those who had the Charge of her Death,
and at the same Time we had a Party of
our own who guarded the Palace within,
who were to seize and secure all for the
King; but they exceeded their Commission
in the Death of the Queen, for that we
never design'd. Thus we accomplish'd the
Delivery of this most excellent Princess,
whose gracious Acceptance has render'd me
more than happy. The King, Princess,
and all the Numidian Nobility present,
render'd him their grateful Acknowledgments,
and promis'd a speedy Preparation
for the celebrating the Nuptials between
him and the Princess. 
After the Funeral Rites for the Queen,
and the Affairs of State and Court were a
little settled, and the Messengers return'd
from Mauritania, who brought with them
the Assurance of the great Satisfaction that
King took in the Knowledge of all these
Things, in paticular in this his Marriage. 
I say, Things being all thus dispos'd, the
Marriage was celebrated with much Ceremony
and Magnificence; which would be
too tedious to describe: But were such as 
shews, the Africans are not at all behind
the Europeans in any Kind of Pomp or Expence. 
When the Time prescrib'd for the End
of these magnificent Entertainments came,
and the Princes were dispos'd for their Departure
into Mauritania, the young King,
and many of the Numidian Nobles, accompany'd
them; among the rest, the Prince
was pleas'd to oblige me to go along with
'em, as a Sharer of their Happiness, who
had been a Partner in their Misfortunes. 
Being arriv'd in Mauritania, we found
most sumptuous Entertainment; our whole
Passage through the Country was one continual
Triumph; but when we came to the
Palace, we found it prepar'd with unspeakable
Riches and Divertisements, which lasted
many Days. But as all the Glories
of this World are passant, and all its Felicities
transitory, so it was in these Delights; 
as they had their Beginning, so
their Period approach'd, that the young
King and his Numidians must return; which
was a sensible Affliction to the Princess,
not only the parting with her Brother,
but fearing least, in Time, Prince Boccus,
and the King his Father, might reflect on
her past rash Action; but besides this, the
Mauritanians had taken so firm a Belief of
the Death of the Prince, that notwithstanding
his appearing there in Person, a 
great Party would not believe him living,
but that it was an Imposture, and a Juggle
of the King, and others, in Opposition
to some other Princes of the Blood Royal. 
This Conceit was so push'd on by those
Princes whose Interest it was that the
King should have no Son, that the greater
Part of Mauritania either believ'd or pretended
to believe this real Prince to be an
Impostor; by which one sees how easy
it is to impose upon a Populace, who are
generally ready to receive any Notion,
though never so ridiculous, if it does but
diminish the Power of their Superiors; and
this was the State in which we left Mauritania. 
The Kings of Numidia and Mauritania
were both graciously pleas'd to invite
me to remain with either of them; 
but my Resolutions being fix'd upon Retirement,
I deny'd myself that Happiness. 
When I took my Leave of the Princess, she
took a rich Jewel off her Arm, and bound
it about mine, commanding me, that if
ever I saw Clarinthia, to present her with
it as a Token from her. This was an Honour
extreamly acceptable and agreeable
to me; nevertheless I wish it had been
omitted in Consideration of herself, lest it
might kindle again some conceal'd Sparks
of Jealousy in the Prince her Husband, or
the Court of Mauritania. But the Princess
follow'd her generous frank Humour, without 
reflecting on the Consequence, which
indeed is the Mistake of the greatest Part
of Mankind, and shews how justly Prudence
has a Rank amongst the Cardinal
Vertues; for without it the best of Actions
are misplac'd, mistaken, and misunderstood; 
so that instead of answering their
Ends, become disobliging, dangerous, and
prejudicial. However, I hope nothing of
this Kind attended the Princess, upon this
Testimony of Friendship towards me, who
was hidding an everlasting Farewel to her
and all human Kind. 
Being parted from the Court of Mauritania,
I directed my Course towards Mount
Atlas, resolving to seek a wretched Retreat
under some of his Sons, and there to
wear away the Remainder of my Days in
Silence and Solitude. Here being arriv'd,
I happen'd into the most pleasant Valley
the Earth can pretend to be Mistress of. 
It runs along between two Hills, whose
gentle Rise delights the View; and though
in some Places they are more stupendious,
yet not so as to disoblige the Eye with
any rude Assent, or disagreeable Sterility; 
for they are well garnish'd with Intervals
of Woods, Corn, and some Pasturage. But
the Valley is so pleasant and fertile, as if
Baccbus, Ceres, and Flora, had made that
Place their Treasury, from whence they
might replenish the World. Long Rows 
of Vines, Palms, and Orange-Trees, great
Plenty of Figs, Dates, and all Sorts of
delicious Fruit; under which grew all Sorts
of pleasant Flowers and beautiful Plants,
in such perfect Orders, as if Nature kept
here her Court, to entertain the Epicures of
the Universe. Nor was the Smell, Taste,
and Sight only gratify'd, but the Ear was
also ravish'd with the melodious Musick
of the winged Inhabitants, whose shrill
Trebles were soften'd by the Murmur of a
gentle Brook passing nimbly over the Pebles; 
also a soft Wind breathing thro' the
Trees, made the Musick most harmonious,
that all Things consider'd, I thought this
Place must needs be the terrestrial Retreat
of some Divinity. And what confirm'd
me in this Opinion, I was so wrapt up in
Contemplation, that my Thoughts were
uncapable of any earthly Consideration. 
With what Scorn and Contempt did I reflect
on those Honours, Victories, and Triumphs
with which Fortune and my Friends
had grac'd me withal! The Glories of my
Country, and the Honours of my Family,
were all despicable Trifles; Feasting, Company,
and Divertisement, I look'd upon as
impertinent Incumberances, and a Clog to
Freedom, at least to Devotion. Methought
I experienc'd the Philosopher's Maxim,
and was never less alone, than when here
alone, where one might so freely correspond 
with Heaven, I thought myself interiorly
united to the Gods; I look'd down
upon all moral Vertues, as Steps by which
I had ascended to this Happiness of Mind; 
I almost bless'd those Misfortunes that had
thus brought me to know the Feebleness
and Instability of all earthly Persuits and
Acquests, and chiefly that I had truly learnt
to know and contemn myself, and, for the
Love of the Gods, long'd to be freed from
this mortal Being. 
As I thus walk'd, entertaining my
Thoughts, I observ'd a little Foot-Path
which extended itself to no Town, Wood,
Walk, or Spring, but at both Ends the
Grass and Flowers grew in their proper
Vigor, as at their first Creation. Whilst
I look'd on this with a little Astonishment,
I saw some Leaves wafted about
with the Wind, whereon was writ Words
in Greek and Oriental Characters, which
my Curiosity oblig'd me to gather; in doing
which, I discover'd behind a Bush the
Mouth of a Cave, into which I enter'd; 
and passing a few Steps, I saw a Woman,
kneeling before a Kind of an Altar, which
was decently dress'd with the native Ornaments
of that Place. Her Person was
comely, or rather beautiful; which her
Habit seem'd rather to disguise, than imbellish; 
but to be sure she design'd it for
Necessity, not Ornament, being rudely 
made of Beasts Skins, nevertheless something
appear'd in her that denoted a Mind
rich in this extraordinary Poverty, a Soul
elevated above this World's Grandeur, and
her extended Capacity comprehending a
vast Eternity of Time and Infinity of
Place, whilst her Person was contain'd in
the narrow Bounds of this her little Cave. 
As I approach'd towards her, she rose and
saluted me in these Words: 

Welcome, brave Hero, to this course Retreat,
Thou who excell'st whatever Rome call'd great;
Great as thou art, yet others of thy Name
Shall thee transcend in martial Acts and Fame.
Two shall their Names from Africa receive,
As Asia did to thee thy Glories give.
And this great House of Scipio's shall last,
'Till Rome herself be into Bondage cast;
For he who shall thy great Attempts compleat,
Deservedly shall gain the Name of *  Great.
Lo! he the Heiress of your House shall take,
But after Fortune shall this Chief forsake:
For as his Conquest ranges through the East,
Until his Feet Euphrates Banks have prest;
So shall his Rival in the West and North,
Gain equal Glories with as equal Worth.
Now these great Souls, whose Greatness shall surpass
All Glories to succeed, and all that ever was,

Shall neither Equal nor Superior brook;
Such is Man's Pride, when by the Gods forsook;
They both will run the Hazard of one Day,
And stake their Fortunes at Pharsalia:
But as a Game that's play'd with equal Care
And Skill, yet Fortune cannot equal share,
But one must Loser be; so in this Play
The Senate in thy House falls at Pharsalia.
But long the Victor shan't enjoy the Fruits
Of his laborious conquering Persuits;
For he shall fall by cursed Treason's Wounds,
Who to's Ambition could prescribe no Bounds,
And after this great Discord in the State
Twixt Senate, People, and Triumvirate.
But from this Chaos there shall issue forth
An Emperor of matchless Pow'r and Worth,
Under whose Reign all Noise of War shall cease,
That Gods themselves shall envy human Peace.
Now hasten Home, as thou believ'st this true,
And my God's Blessing take, Hero, adieu.

After these Words, she turn'd herself about,
and kneel'd down before her Altar again. 
Now, this Adventure so extraordinary,
shock'd all my former Resolutions; for I
could not think her less than a Person divinely
inspir'd, if not that African Sybil
so talk'd on in the World. Her Manner
of living, and her written Leaves, left me
no Room for Doubt; so that I thought it
almost a Duty to give Credit to these her
Words, in which she mention'd the Continuation 
of the Scipio's Race, which I knew
must be in me, I having no Brother. All
Things consider'd, I began to conclude it to
be the Will of Heaven, that I should return
into my Country; nor did Fidelius want
Arguments to perswade me to this Interpretation
of the Prophesy, adding, that if
Clarinthia, by the extream Goodness of the
Gods, was escap'd, one might be sure, that
in all this Time she would be return'd into
Italy. All these Considerations put together,
I resolv'd to leave this delightful
Valley, and return to my Father's House,
where I arriv'd last Night without any
remarkable Adventure. There, to my
great Happiness, I not only found my Father
well, but my dear Sister safe return'd,
and in Company with my amiable Cousin
Clelia, and now, to my unspeakable Joy,
my adorable Clarinthia, of whose Escape
and Adventures I long to be inform'd. And
I no less, reply'd Scipiana; but we must
reserve that for another Occasion, and at
present return to our Father, who, no doubt,
by this Time expects us. Wherefore Asiaticus
taking Clarinthia, and desiring the rest
to accompany him, they all walk'd to the
House, where we will leave them to receive
the Welcomes of the noble Publius their Father,
and to relate to him their respective
Adventures. 