

Amongst this Number of happy
Persons, let us not forget the
fair Cordiala, who, by Scipiana's
Generosity, was accommodated
with all Necessaries to embellish her beautiful
Person, which shin'd with such Lustre,
as soon struck the Eyes and Heart of the
Youth Ismenus, who took all Opportunities
to make her understand his Inclinations:
And such was his Wit, Mein, and Person,
that his Endeavours were not fruitless; for,
unawares to her, a secret Affection took
Root, and grew in her Heart, too deep for
any Endeavours to eradicate; nevertheless,
her Prudence and Modesty conceal'd it
most carefully, and especially from Ismenus,
making Passion submit to Reason, which
taught her to refuse and avoid an Espousal,
where their mutual Poverty could produce
nothing but Misery. But this Reservedness 
serv'd only to fan the Flame of Ismenus; 
for as her Beauty gave Birth to his
Love, so her Discretion created his Esteem,
and both united in a vertuous and sincere
Affection. He learn'd by her Carriage to
distinguish between the African Facility in
Emelia, and the European Modesty in Cordiala,
one serving to nauseate and overcharge
the Stomach of the Lover, the other to excite
a constant Appetite. And 'tis certain
nothing so charms the Heart of Man as
Modesty in Woman; this being the Beauty
of the Mind, exceeds that of the Body, and
remains when the other perishes One gains
a Victory, but the other wholly subdues. 
Which the young Ismenus experienc'd every
Moment in the Person and Behaviour of the
fair Cordiala; for whensoever he accosted
her, she forc'd both her Tongue and Eyes
to give her Heart the Lye, fearing to embark
herself on those dangerous Seas of amorous
Intrigues, without Friend or Parent
for her Guide or Pilot; that whenever Ismenus
found Opportunity to assert his Passion,
she always left him in a disponding State,
and on the Brink of the worst of Precipices,
Despair. Then would he reflect on his hard
Fortune, wishing the Gods had made him
less amorous, or her less fair. O ye eternal
Powers! (would he say to himself)
why am I the only object of your Anger,
amongst all this happy Company of Lovers? 
Wherein have I offended your Divinities,
that I am thus the Object of your
Punishment in her Scorn? Am I disregarded,
and not protected by you, because I
am not born great? O, no, that were incongruous
with your Justice, since I direct all
my Actions and Intentions to vertuous and
honourable Ends; and my Love to Cordiala
is because she bears so true a Resemblance
to your Perfections. But, perhaps, Cordiala
is too bright and perfect to be look'd on
by the Eyes of the unworthy Ismenus; she
is made for some great Lord, and to be the
Mother of a Race of Heroes. Thus did
Ismenus pass his Moments in amorous Fancies,
between Fears and earnest Longings,
Hope having but a small Share of his solitary
Thoughts. 
Nor were the whole Company without
their respective Fears and Apprehensions. 
The Presence of Fabius and Jemella caus'd
great Agitations in the Hearts of Exilius,
Scipiana, Clelia, and Marcellus. 
In fine, the Hearts of all this illustrious
Company were surcharg'd with the Business
of their respective Amours. Only Clodius,
who had been so lavish of his Love, that he
was now become bankrupt, and had neither
Mistress nor Intrigue wherewith to divert
himself, but by the Blessing of his Stars
he does not remain so long: For Clelia, being
careful to inquire daily after the Health 
of Libidinia, was inform'd, that now she
was so well recover'd, that she intended very
shortly to pay her Respects to that illustrious
Company. When Clodius heard of
Libidinia, he said the Gods had brought him
thither in a lucky Moment; for, said he,
she was my first Mistress, and perhaps shall
be my last; for I will catch her in a Marriage-Noose,
if possible: In which State I
shall have Opportunity to be reveng'd of
her; she deserves no better than such a
loose hung Lover as my self, she having
taken large Liberties of that Kind; for it
was to me she first gave her Faith, and afterwards,
by the Perswasion of her Friends,
was marry'd to Aurelius. This her Infidelity
instructed me in the Rudiments of
Falshood, in which I have made such Proficiency,
that I dare challenge a Tryal of
Skill with her, or any false She in Europe. 
Therefore, Widow, when thou comest, thou
must have thy own Genius and nine Devils
more to help thee if thou escape. 
But we will leave these happy Lovers
and Friends to divert themselves with the
Raillery of Clodius, and conduct our Reader
to search after the Body of Turpius,
which has been so long Time lost and lamented
by his Daughter the beautious Clarinthia. 