

Gentlemen,
The liberty which I take in
addressing to You the trifling
production of a few idle hours, will,
doubtless, move your wonder, and,
probably, your contempt. I will not,
however, with the futility of apologies,
intrude upon your time, but briefly
acknowledge the motives of my temerity: 
left, by a premature exercise of
the patience from which I hope to profit,
I should abate of its benevolence, and be myself accessary to my own condemnation. 
Without name, without recommendation,
and unknown alike to success
and disgrace, to whom can I so properly
apply for patronage, as to those who
publicly profess themselves Inspectors of
all literary performances? 
The extensive plan of your critical
observations,—which, not confined to
works of utility or ingenuity, is equally
open to those of frivolous amusement,
and yet worse than frivolous dullness,— 
encourages me to seek for your protection,
since,—perhaps for my sins!—it
entitles me to your annotations. To
resent, therefore, this offering, however
insignificant, would ill become the
universality of your undertaking, tho'
not to despise it may, alas! be out of
your power. 
The language of adulation, and the
incense of flattery, though the natural
inheritance, and constant resource, from 
time immemorial, of the Dedicator, to
me offer nothing but the wistful regret
that I dare not invoke their aid. Sinister
views would be imputed to all I
could say; since, thus situated, to extol
your judgment, would seem the effect of art,
and to celebrate your impartiality,
be attributed to suspecting it. 
As Magistrates of the press, and Censors
for the Public,—to which you are
bound by the sacred ties of integrity to
exert the most spirited impartiality, and
to which your suffrages should carry the
marks of pure, dauntless, irrefragable
truth,—to appeal for your MERCY,
were to solicit your dishonour; and
therefore,—though 'tis sweeter than
frankincense,—more grateful to the
senses than all the odorous perfumes of
Arabia,—and though 
It droppeth like the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath,—
I court it not! to your Justice alone I
am entitled, and by that I must abide. 
Your engagements are not to the supplicating 
author, but to the candid
public, which will not fail to crave 
The penalty and forfeit of your bond.
No hackneyed writer, inured to abuse,
and callous to criticism, here
braves your severity;—neither does a
half-starved garretteer, 
Compell'd by hunger,—and request of friends,—
implore your lenity; your examination
will be alike unbiassed by partiality and
prejudice;—no refractory murmuring
will follow your censure, no private
interest be gratified by your praise. 
Let not the anxious solicitude with
which I recommend myself to your notice,
expose me to your derision. Remember,
Gentlemen, you were all
young writers once, and the most experienced
veteran of your corps, may,
by recollecting his first publication, renovate
his first terrors, and learn to allow
for mine. For, though Courage is
one of the noblest virtues of this nether
sphere, and, though scarcely more requisite
in the field of battle, to guard 
the fighting hero from disgrace, than
in the private commerce of the world,
to ward off that littleness of soul which
leads, by steps imperceptible, to all the
base train of the inferior passions, and
by which the too timid mind is betrayed
into a servility derogatory to the
dignity of human nature;—yet it is a
virtue of no necessity in a situation such
as mine; a situation which removes,
even from cowardice itself, the sting of
ignominy;—for surely that Courage may
easily be dispensed with, which would
rather raise disgust than admiration? 
Indeed, it is the peculiar privilege of
an author, to rob terror of contempt,
and pusillanimity of reproach. 
Here let me rest,—and snatch myself,
while yet I am able, from the fascination of
Egotism,—a monster who has
more votaries than ever did homage to
the most popular deity of antiquity; 
and whose singular quality is, that while
he excites a blind and involuntary adoration
in almost every individual, his
influence is universally disallowed, his
power universally contemned, and his 
worship, even by his followers, never
mentioned but with abhorrence. 
In addressing you jointly, I mean but
to mark the generous sentiments by
which liberal criticism, to the utter
annihilation of envy, jealousy, and all
selfish views, ought to be distinguished. 
I have the honour to be,
Gentlemen,
Your most obedient
humble servant,
* * * * * * * 