

SIR, – As I am now near the centre of this work, so I am to describe the great centre of England, the city of London, and parts adjacent. This great work is infinitely difficult in its particulars, though not in itself; not that the city is so difficult to be described, but to do it in the narrow compass of a letter, which we see so fully takes up two large volumes in folio, and which, yet, if I may venture to give an opinion of it, is done but by halves neither.
London, as a city only, and as its walls and liberties line it out, might, indeed, be viewed in a small compass; but, when I speak of London, now in the modern acceptation, you expect I shall take in all that vast mass of buildings, reaching from Black-Wall in the east, to Tot-Hill Fields  in the west; and extended in an unequal breadth, from the bridge, or river, in the south, to Islington north; and from Peterburgh House on the bank side in Westminster, to Cavendish Square, and all the new buildings by, and beyond, Hannover Square, by which the city of London, for so it is still to be called, is extended to Hide Park Corner in the Brentford Road, and almost to Maribone in the Acton Road, and how much farther it may spread, who knows? New squares, and new streets rising up every day to such a prodigy of buildings, that nothing in the world does, or ever did, equal it, except old Rome in Trajan’s time, when the walls were fifty miles in compass, and the number of inhabitants six million eight hundred thousand souls.
It is the disaster of London, as to the beauty of its figure, that it is thus stretched out in buildings, just at the pleasure of every builder, or undertaker of buildings, and as the convenience of the people directs, whether for trade, or otherwise; and this has spread the face of it in a most straggling, confused manner, out of all shape, uncompact, and unequal; neither long or broad, round or square; whereas the city of Rome, though a monster for its greatness, yet was, in a manner, round, with very few irregularities in its shape.
At London, including the buildings on both sides the water, one sees it, in some places, three miles broad, as from St George’s in Southwark, to Shoreditch in Middlesex; or two miles, as from Peterburgh House to Montague House; and in some places, not half a mile, as in Wapping; and much less, as in Redriff.
We see several villages, formerly standing, as it were, in the country, and at a great distance, now joined to the streets by continued buildings, and more making haste to meet in the like manner; for example, Deptford, this town was formerly reckoned, at least two miles off from Redriff, and that over the marshes too, a place unlikely ever to be inhabited; and yet now, by the increase of buildings in that town itself, and the many streets erected at Redriff, and by the docks and building-yards on the riverside, which stand between both, the town of Deptford, and the streets of Redriff, or Rotherhith (as they write it) are effectually joined, and the buildings daily increasing; and were the town of Deptford now separated, and rated by itself, I believe it contains more people, and stands upon more ground, than the city of Wells.
The town of Islington, on the north side of the city, is in like manner joined to the streets of London, excepting one small field, and which is in itself so small, that there is no doubt, but in a very few years, they will be entirely joined, and the same may be said of Mile-End, on the east end of the town.
Newington, called Newington-Butts, in Surrey, reaches out her hand north, and is so near joining to Southwark, that it cannot now be properly called a town by itself, but a suburb to the Burrough, and if, as they now tell us is undertaken, St George’s Fields should be built into squares and streets, a very little time will show us Newington, Lambeth, and the Burrough all making but one Southwark. That Westminster is in a fair way to shake hands with Chelsea, as St Gyles’s is with Marybone; and Great Russel Street by Montague House, with Tottenham-Court: all this is very evident, and yet all these put together, are still to be called London. Whither will this monstrous city then extend? and where must a circumvallation or communication line of it be placed?
I have, as near as I could, caused a measure to be taken of this mighty, I cannot say uniform, body; and for the satisfaction of the curious, I have here given as accurate a description of it, as I can do in so narrow a compass, as this of a letter, or as I could do without drawing a plan, or map of the places.


A Line of Measurement, drawn about all the Continued Buildings of the City of London, and Parts adjacent, including Westminster and Southwark, etc.



The line begins, for the Middlesex side of the buildings,






N.B. This line leaves out all the north side of Mile End town, from the end of the Dog-Row, to the Jews Burying Ground, which is all built; also all the north part of the Dog-Row, and all Bethnal Green : also all Poplar and Black-Wall, which are, indeed, contiguous.


For the Southwark side of the buildings, the line is as follows;

I allow an interval of two miles, from Poplar, cross the Isle of Dogs, and over the Thames, to the lower water-gate at Deptford, and though in measuring the circumference of all cities, the river, where any such runs through any part of the buildings, is always measured, yet; that I may not be said to stretch the extent of the buildings which I include in this account, I omit the river from Limehouse to Deptford.



Thus the extent or circumference of the continued buildings of the cities of London and Westminster and borough of Southwark, all which, in the common acceptation, is called London, amounts to thirty-six miles, two furlongs, thirty nine rods.

N.B. The town of Greenwich, which may, indeed, be said to be contiguous to Deptford, might be also called a part of this measurement; but I omit it, as I have the towns of Chelsea and Knights Bridge on the other side, though both may be said to join the town, and in a very few years will certainly do so.
The guesses that are made at the number of inhabitants, have been variously formed; Sir William Petty, famous for his political arithmetic, supposed the city, at his last calculation, to contain a million of people, and this he judges from the number of births and burials; and by this rule, as well by what is well known of the increase of the said births and burials, as of the prodigious increase of buildings, it may be very reasonable to conclude, the present number of inhabitants within the circumference I have mentioned, to amount to, at least, fifteen hundred thousand, with this addition, that it is still prodigiously increasing.
The government of this great mass of building, and of such a vast collected body of people, though it consists of various parts, is, perhaps, the most regular and well-ordered government that any city, of above half its magnitude, can boast of. The government of the city of London in particular, and abstractedly considered, is, by the Lord Mayor, twenty-four aldermen, two sheriffs, the recorder and common council; but the jurisdiction of these is confined to that part only, which they call the city and its liberties, which are marked out, except the Borough, by the walls and the bars, as they are called. The government of the out parts, is by justices of the peace, and by the sheriffs of London, who are, likewise, sheriffs of Middlesex; and the government of Westminster is, by a high bailiff, constituted by the Dean and Chapter, to whom the civil administrations is so far committed. The remaining part of Southwark side, when the city jurisdiction is considered, is governed, also by a bench of justices, and their proper substituted peace officers; excepting out of this the privileges of the Marshalseas, or of the Marshal’s Court, the privilege of the Marshal of the King’s Bench, the Mint, and the like.
To enter here, into a particular description of the city of London, its antiquities, monuments, &c. would be only to make an abridgment of Stow and his continuators, and would make a volume by itself; but I write in manner of a letter and in the person of an itinerant, and give a cursory view of its present state, and to the reader, who is supposed to be upon the spot, or near it, and who has the benefit of all the writers, who have already entered upon the description.
By London, as I shall discourse of it, I mean, all the buildings, places, hamlets, and villages contained in the line of circumvallation, if it be proper to call it so, by which I have computed the length of its circumference as above.
We ought, with respect to this great mass of buildings, to observe, in every proper place, what it is now, and what it was within the circumference of a few years past.
It is, in the first place, to be observed, as a particular and remarkable crisis, singular to those who write in this age, and very much to our advantage in writing, that the great and more eminent increase of buildings, in, and about the city of London, and the vast extent of ground taken in, and now become streets and noble squares of houses, by which the mass, or body of the whole, is become so infinitely great, has been generally made in our time, not only within our memory, but even within a few years, and the description of these additions, cannot be improper to a description of the whole, as follows.


A Brief Description of the New Buildings erected in and about the Cities of London and Westminster and Borough of Southwark, since the Year 1666


This account of new buildings is to be understood,
1. Of houses re-built after the great fires in London and Southwark, &c.
2. New foundations, on ground where never any buildings were erected before.
It is true, that before the Fire of London, the streets were narrow, and public edifices, as well as private, were more crowded, and built closer to one another; for soon after the Fire, the king, by his proclamation, forbid all persons whatsoever, to go about to re-build for a certain time, viz. till the Parliament (which was soon to sit) might regulate and direct the manner of building, and establish rules for the adjusting every man’s property, and yet might take order for a due enlarging of the streets, and appointing the manner of building, as well for the beauty as the conveniency of the city, and for safety, in case of any future accident; for though I shall not inquire, whether the city was burnt by accident, or by treachery, yet nothing was more certain, than that as the city stood before, it was strangely exposed to the disaster which happened, and the buildings looked as if they had been formed to make one general bonfire, whenever any wicked party of incendiaries should think fit.
The streets were not only narrow, and the houses all built of timber, lath and plaster, or, as they were very properly called paper work. But the manner of the building in those days, one story projecting out beyond another, was such, that in some narrow streets, the houses almost touched one another at the top, and it has been known, that men, in case of fire, have escaped on the tops of the houses, by leaping from one side of a street to another; this made it often, and almost always happen, that if a house was on fire, the opposite house was in more danger to be fired by it, according as the wind stood, than the houses next adjoining on either side. How this has been regulated, how it was before, and how much better it now is, I leave to be judged, by comparing the old unburnt part of the city with the new.
But though by the new buildings after the fire, much ground was given up, and left unbuilt, to enlarge the streets, yet ’tis to be observed, that the old houses stood severally upon more ground, were much larger upon the flat, and in many places, gardens and large yards about them, all which, in the new buildings, are, at least, contracted, and the ground generally built up into other houses, so that notwithstanding all the ground given up for beautifying the streets, yet there are many more houses built than stood before upon the same ground; so that taking the whole city together, there are more inhabitants in the same compass, than there was before. So many great houses were converted into streets and courts, alleys and buildings, that there are, by estimation, almost 4000 houses now standing on the ground which the Fire left desolate, more than stood on the same ground before.
Another increase of buildings in the city, is to be taken from the inhabitants in the unburnt parts following the same example of pulling down great old buildings, which took up large tracks of ground in some of the well inhabited places, and buildings on the same ground, not only several houses, but even whole streets of houses, which are since fully inhabited.
All those palaces of the nobility, formerly making a most beautiful range of buildings fronting the Strand, with their gardens reaching to the Thames, where they had their particular water-gates and stairs, one of which remains still, viz. Somerset House, have had the same fate, such as Essex, Norfolk, Salisbury, Worcester, Exceter, Hungerford, and York Houses; in the place of which, are now so many noble streets and beautiful houses, erected, as are, in themselves, equal to a large city, and extend from the Temple to Northumberland-House; Somerset House and the Savoy, only intervening and the latter of these may be said to be, not a house, but a little town, being parted into innumerable tenements and apartments. These are prodigious enlargements to the city, even upon that which I call inhabited ground, and where infinite numbers of people now live, more than lived upon the same spot of ground before.
But all this is a small matter, compared to the new foundations raised within that time, in those which we justly call the out parts; and not to enter on a particular description of the buildings, I shall only take notice of the places where such enlargements are made; as, first, within the memory of the writer hereof, all those numberless ranges of building, called Spittle Fields, reaching from Spittle-yard, at Northern Fall-gate, and from Artillery Lane in Bishopsgate-street, with all the new streets, beginning at Hoxton, and the back of Shoreditch Church, north, and reaching to Brick-Lane, and to the end of Hare-street, on the way to Bethnal Green, east; then sloping away quite to White Chapel Road, south east, containing, as some people say, who pretend to know, by good observation, above three hundred and twenty acres of ground, which are all now close built, and well inhabited with an infinite number of people, I say, all these have been built new from the ground, since the year 1666.
The lanes were deep, dirty, and unfrequented, that part now called Spittlefields-Market, was a field of grass with cows feeding on it, since the year 1670. Brick-Lane, which is now a long well-paved street, was a deep dirty road, frequented by carts fetching bricks that way into White-Chapel from Brick-Kilns in those fields, and had its name on that account; in a word, it is computed, that about two hundred thousand inhabitants dwell now in that part of London, where, about fifty years past, there was not a house standing.
On the more eastern part, the same increase goes on in proportion, namely, all Goodman’s Fields, the name gives evidence for it, and the many streets between White-Chapel and Rosemary Lane, all built since the year 1678. Well Close, now called Marine Square, was so remote from houses, that it used to be a very dangerous place to go over after it was dark, and many people have been robbed and abused in passing it; a well standing in the middle, just where the Danish church is now built, there the mischief was generally done; beyond this, all the hither or west end of Ratcliff-high-way, from the corner of Gravel-Lane, to the east end of East Smithfield, was a road over the fields.
To come to the north side of the town, and beginning at Shoreditch, west, and Hoxton-Square, and Charles’s-Square adjoining, and the streets intended for a market-place, those were all open fields, from Anniseed-clear to Hoxton Town, till the year 1689, or thereabouts. Farther west, the like addition of buildings begins at the foot way, by the Pest-house, and includes the French hospital, Old street two squares, and several streets, extending from Brick-Lane to Mount-Mill, and the road to Islington, and from the road, still west, to Wood’s Close, and to St John’s, and Clerkenwell, all which streets and squares are built since the year 1688 and 1689, and were before that, and some for a long time after, open fields or gardens, and never built on till after that time.
From hence we go on still west, and beginning at Gray’s-Inn, and going on to those formerly called Red Lyon Fields, and Lamb’s Conduit Fields, we see there a prodigious pile of buildings; it begins at Gray’s-Inn Wall towards Red-Lyon Street, from whence, in a straight line, ’tis built quite to Lamb’s Conduit Fields, north, including a great range of buildings yet unfinished, reaching to Bedford Row and the Cockpit, east; this pile of buildings is very great, the houses so magnificent and large, that abundance of persons of quality, and some of the nobility are found among them, particularly in Ormond Street, is the D—— of Powis’s house, built at the expense of France, on account of the former house being burnt, while the Duke D’Aumont, the French Ambassador Extraordinary lived in it; it is now a very noble structure, and is said to be, next the Banqueting House, the most regular building in this part of England. Here is also a very convenient church, built by the contribution of the gentry inhabitants of these buildings, though not yet made parochial, being called St George’s Chapel.
Farther west, in the same line, is Southampton great Square, called Bloomsbury, with King-street on the east side of it, and all the numberless streets west of the square, to the market place, and through Great-Russel-street by Montague House, quite into the Hampstead road, all which buildings, except the old building of Southampton House and some of the square, has been formed from the open fields, since the time above-mentioned, and must contain several thousands of houses.
From hence, let us view the two great parishes of St Giles’s and St Martin’s in the Fields, the last so increased, as to be above thirty years ago, formed into three parishes, and the other about now to be divided also. The increase of the buildings here, is really a kind of prodigy; all the buildings north of Long Acre, up to the Seven Dials, all the streets, from Leicester-Fields and St Martin’s-Lane, both north and west, to the Hay-Market and Soho, and from the Hay-Market to St James’s-street inclusive, and to the park wall; then all the buildings on the north side of the street, called Picadilly, and the road to Knight’s-Bridge, and between that and the south side of Tyburn Road, including Soho-Square, Golden-Square, and now Hanover-Square, and that new city on the north side of Tyburn Road, called Cavendish-Square, and all the streets about it. This last addition, is, by calculation, more in bulk than the cities of Bristol, Exeter and York, if they were all put together; all which places were, within the time mentioned, mere fields of grass, and employed only to feed cattle as other fields are.
This is enough to give a view of the difference between the present and the past greatness of this mighty city, called London.

N.B. Three projects have been thought of, for the better regulating the form of this mighty building, which though not yet brought to perfection, may, perhaps, in time, be brought forwards, and if it should, would greatly add to the beauty.
1. Making another bridge over the Thames.
2. Making an Act of Parliament, abrogating the names as well as the jurisdictions of all the petty privileged places, and joining or uniting the whole body, Southwark and all, into one city, and calling it by one name, London.
3. Forbidding the extent of the buildings in some particular places, where they too much run it out of shape, and letting the more indented parts swell out on the north and south side a little, to balance the length, and bring the form of the whole more near to that of a circle, as particularly stopping the running out of the buildings at the east and west ends, as at Ratcliff and Deptford, east, and at Tyburn and Kensington roads, west, and encouraging the building out at Moor-fields, Bunhil-fields, the west side of Shoreditch, and such places, and the north part of Gray’s-Inn, and other adjacent parts, where the buildings are not equally filled out, as in other places, and the like in St George’s Fields and behind Redriff on the other side of the water.
But these are speculations only, and must be left to the wisdom of future ages. Hitherto I have been upon the figure and extent of the city and its out-parts; I come now to speak of the inside, the buildings, the inhabitants, the commerce, and the manner of its government, &c.
It should be observed, that the city being now re-built, has occasioned the building of some public edifices, even in the place which was inhabited, which yet were not before, and the re-building others in a new and more magnificent manner than ever was done before.
1. That beautiful column, called the Monument, erected at the charge of the city, to perpetuate the fatal burning of the whole, cannot be mentioned but with some due respect to the building itself, as well as to the city; it is two hundred and two feet high, and in its kind, out does all the obelisks and pillars of the ancients, at least that I have seen, the top is fashioned like an urn.
2. The canal or river, called Fleet-ditch, was a work of great magnificence and expense; but not answering the design, and being now very much neglected, and out of repair, is not much spoken of, yet it has three fine bridges over it, and a fourth, not so fine, yet useful as the rest, and the tide flowing up to the last; the canal is very useful for bringing of coals and timber, and other heavy goods but the wharfs in many places are decayed and fallen in, which make it all look ruinous.
The Royal Exchange, the greatest and finest of the kind in the world, is the next public work of the citizens, the beauty of which answers for itself, and needs no description here; ’tis observable, that though this Exchange cost the citizens an immense sum of money re-building, some authors say, eighty thousand pounds, being finished and embellished in so exquisite a manner, yet it was so appropriated to the grand affair of business, that the rent or income of it for many years, fully answered the interest of the money laid out in building it. Whether it does so still or not, I will not say, but those shops, of which there were eight double rows above, and the shops and offices round it below, with the vaults under the whole, did at first, yield a very great sum.
Among other public edifices, that of the hospital of Bethlehem, or Bedlam, should not be forgot, which is at the very time of writing this, appointed to be enlarged with two new wings, and will then be the most magnificent thing of its kind in the world.
The churches in London are rather convenient than fine, not adorned with pomp and pageantry as in Popish countries; but, like the true Protestant plainness, they have made very little of ornament either within them or without, nor, excepting a few, are they famous for handsome steeples, a great many of them are very mean, and some that seem adorned, are rather deformed than beautified by the heads that contrived, or by the hands that built them.
Some, however, hold up their hands with grandeur and magnificence, and are really ornaments to the whole, I mean by these, such as Bow, St Brides, the new church in the Strand [St Mary’s], Rood-Lane Church, or St Margaret Pattons, St Antholins, St Clement Danes, and some others, and some of the fifty churches, now adding to the bounty and charity of the government, are like to be very well adorned. Three or four Gothic towers have been rebuilt at the proper expenses of the fund appointed, and are not the worst in all the city, namely St Michael at Cornhill, St Dunstan in the East, St Christophers, St Mary Aldermary, and at St Sepulchre’s.
But the beauty of all the churches in the city, and of all the Protestant churches in the world, is the cathedral of St Paul’s; a building exceeding beautiful and magnificent; though some authors are pleased to expose their ignorance, by pretending to find fault with it. ’Tis easy to find fault with the works even of God Himself, when we view them in the gross, without regard to the particular beauties of every part separately considered, and without searching into the reason and nature of the particulars; but when these are maturely inquired into, viewed with a just reverence, and considered with judgment, then we fly out in due admirations of the wisdom of the Author from the excellency of His works.
The vast extent of the dome, that mighty arch, on which so great a weight is supported (meaning the upper towers or lanthorn of stone work seventy feet high) may well account for the strength of the pillars and butments below; yet those common observers of the superficial parts of the building, complain, that the columns are too gross, that the work looks heavy, and the lower figures near the eye are too large, as if the Doric and the Attic were not each of them as beautiful in their place as the Corinthian.
The wise architect, like a complete master of his business, had the satisfaction, in his lifetime, of hearing those ignorant reprovers of his work confuted, by the approbation of the best masters in Europe; and the church of St Peter’s in Rome, which is owned to be the most finished piece in the world, only exceeds St Paul’s in the magnificence of its inside work; the paintings, the altars, the oratories, and the variety of its imagery; things, which, in a Protestant church, however ornamental, are not allowed of.
If all the square columns, the great pilasters, and the flat panel work, as well within as without, which they now allege are too heavy and look too gross, were filled with pictures, adorned with carved work and gilding, and crowded with adorable images of the saints and angels, the kneeling crowd would not complain of the grossness of the work; but ’tis the Protestant plainness, that divesting those columns, &c. of their ornaments, makes the work, which in itself is not so large and gross as that of St Peter’s, be called gross and heavy; whereas neither by the rules of order, or by the necessity of the building, to be proportioned and sufficient to the height and weight of the work, could they have been less, or any otherwise than they are.
When all these things are considered complexly, no man that has the least judgment in building, that knows any thing of the rules of proportion, and will judge impartially, can find any fault in this church; on the contrary, those excellent lines of Mr Dryden, which were too meanly applied in allegory to the praise of a paltry play, may be, with much more honour to the author, and justice to this work, applied here to St Paul’s Church.

Strong Dorick pillars form the base,
Corinthian fills the upper space;
So all below is strength, and all above is grace.

Sir Christopher [Wren]’s design was, indeed, very unhappily baulked in several things at the beginning, as well in the situation as in the conclusion of this work, which, because very few may have heard of, I shall mention in public, from the mouth of its author.
1. In the situation: he would have had the situation of the church removed a little to the north. By this situation, the east end of the church, which is very beautiful, would have looked directly down the main street of the city, Cheapside; and for the west end, Ludgate having been removed a little north, the main street called Ludgate-street and Ludgate-Hill, would only have sloped a little W.S.W. as they do now irregularly two ways, one within, and the other without the gate, and all the street beyond Fleet-Bridge would have received no alteration at all.
By this situation, the common thorough-fare of the city would have been removed at a little farther distance from the work, and we should not then have been obliged to walk just under the very wall as we do now, which makes the work appear quite out of all perspective, and is the chief reason of the objections I speak of; whereas, had it been viewed at a little distance, the building would have been seen infinitely to more advantage.
But the circumstance of things hindered this noble design, and the city being almost rebuilt before he obtained an order and provision for laying the foundation; he was prescribed to the narrow spot where we see it now stands, in which the building, however magnificent in itself, stands with infinite disadvantage as to the prospect of it; the inconvenience of which was so apparent when the church was finished, that leave was at length, though not without difficulty, obtained, to pull down one whole row of houses on the north side of the body of the church, to make way for the baluster that surrounds the cemetery or church-yard, and, indeed, to admit the light into the church, as well as to preserve it from the danger of fire.
Another baulk which Sir Christopher met with, was in the conclusion of the work, namely, the covering of the dome, which Sir Christopher would have had been of copper double gilded with gold; but he was over-ruled by party, and the city thereby, deprived of the most glorous sight that the world ever saw, since the temple of Solomon.
Yet with all these disadvantages, the church is a most regular building, beautiful, magnificent, and beyond all the modern works of its kind in Europe, St Peter’s at Rome, as above, only excepted.
It is true, St Peter’s, besides its beauty in ornament and imagery, is beyond St Paul’s in its dimensions, is every way larger; but it is the only church in the world that is so; and it was a merry hyperbole of Sir Christopher Wren’s, who, when some gentlemen in discourse compared the two churches, and in compliment to him, pretended to prefer St Paul’s, and when they came to speak of the dimensions, suggested, that St Paul’s was the biggest: I tell you, says Sir Christopher, you might set it in St Peter’s, and look for it a good while, before you could find it.
Having thus spoken of the city and adjacent buildings of London, and of the particulars which I find chiefly omitted by other writers, I have not room here to enter into all the articles needful to a full description. However, I shall touch a little at the things most deserving a stranger’s observation.
Supposing now, the whole body of this vast building to be considered as one city, London, and not concerning myself or the reader with the distinction of its several jurisdictions; we shall then observe it only as divided into three, viz. the city, the Court, and the out-parts.
The city is the centre of its commerce and wealth. The Court of its gallantry and splendour. The out-parts of its numbers and mechanics; and in all these, no city in the world can equal it. Between the Court and city, there is a constant communication of business to that degree, that nothing in the world can come up to it. As the city is the centre of business, there is the Custom-house, an article, which, as it brings in an immense revenue to the public, so it cannot be removed from its place, all the vast import and export of goods being, of necessity, made there.
Here, also, is the Excise Office, the Navy Office, the Bank, and almost all the offices where those vast funds are fixed, in which so great a part of the nation are concerned, and on the security of which so many millions are advanced.
Here are the South Sea Company, the East India Company, the Bank, the African Company, &c. whose stocks support that prodigious paper commerce, called stock jobbing; a trade, which once bewitched the nation to its ruin, and which, though reduced very much, and recovered from that terrible infatuation which once overspread the whole body of the people, yet is still a negotiation, which is so vast in its extent, that almost all the men of substance in England are more or less concerned in it, and the property of which is so very often alienated, that even the tax upon the transfers of stock, though but five shillings for each transfer, brings many thousand pounds a year to the government; and some have said, that there is not less than a hundred millions of stock transferred forward or backward from one hand to another every year, and this is one thing which makes such a constant daily intercourse between the Court part of the town, and the city; and this is given as one of the principal causes of the prodigious conflux of the nobility and gentry from all parts of England to London, more than ever was known in former years, viz. that many thousands of families are so deeply concerned in those stocks, and find it so absolutely necessary to be at hand to take advantage of buying and selling, as the sudden rise or fall of the price directs, and the loss they often sustain by their ignorance of things when absent, and the knavery of brokers and others, whom, in their absence, they are bound to trust, that they find themselves obliged to come up and live constantly here, or at least, most part of the year.
But let the citizens and inhabitants of London know, and it may be worth the reflection of some of the landlords, and builders especially, that if peace continues, and the public affairs continue in honest and upright management, there is a time coming, at least the nation hopes for it, when the public debts being reduced and paid off, the funds or taxes on which they are established, may cease, and so fifty or sixty millions of the stocks, which are now the solid bottom of the South-Sea Company, East-India Company, Bank, &c. will cease, and be no more; by which the reason of this conflux of people being removed, they will of course, and by the nature of the thing, return again to their country seats, to avoid the expensive living at London, as they did come up hither to share the extravagant gain of their former business here.
What will be the condition of this overgrown city in such a case, I must leave to time; but ... in time, ’tis to be hoped, all our taxes may cease, and the ordinary revenue may, as it always used to do, again supply the ordinary expense of the government.
Then, I say, will be a time to expect the vast concourse of people to London, will separate again and disperse as naturally, as they have now crowded hither. What will be the fate then of all the fine buildings in the out parts, in such a case, let any one judge.
There has formerly been a great emulation between the Court end of the town, and the city; and it was once seriously proposed in a certain reign, how the Court should humble the city; nor was it so impracticable a thing at that time, had the wicked scheme been carried on. Indeed, it was carried farther than consisted with the prudence of a good government, or of a wise people; for the Court envied the city’s greatness, and the citizens were ever jealous of the Court’s designs. The most fatal steps the Court took to humble the city, were, 1. The shutting up the Exchequer, and, 2. The bringing a quo
warranto against their charter; but these things can but be touched at here; the city has outlived it all, and both the attempts turned to the discredit of the Court party, who pushed them on. But the city, I say, has gained the ascendant, and is now made so necessary to the Court (as before it was thought rather a grievance) that now we see the Court itself the daily instrument to encourage and increase the opulence of the city, and the city again, by its real grandeur, made not a glory only, but an assistance and support to the Court, on the greatest and most sudden emergencies. Nor can a breach be now made on any terms, but the city will have the advantage; for while the stocks, and Bank, and trading companies remain in the city, the centre of the money, as well as of the credit and trade of the kingdom, will be there.
The Council, the Parliament, and the Courts of Justice, are all kept at the same part of the town; but as all suits among the citizens are, by virtue of their privileges, to be tried within the liberty of the city, so the term is obliged to be (as it were) adjourned from Westminster-Hall to Guild-Hall, to try causes there, also criminal cases are in like manner tried monthly at the Old Baily, where a special commission is granted for that purpose to the judges but the Lord Mayor always presides, and has the chair.
The equality, however, being thus preserved, and a perfect good understanding between the Court and city having so long flourished, this union contributes greatly to the flourishing circumstances of both, and the public credit is greatly raised by it; for it was never known, that the city, on any occasion, was so assistant to the government, as it has been since this general good agreement. No sum is so great, but the Bank has been able to raise. Here the Exchequer bills are at all times circulated, money advanced upon the funds as soon as laid, and that at moderate interest, not encroaching on the government, or extorting large interest to eat up the nation, and disappoint the sovereign, and defeat his best designs, as in King William’s time was too much the practice.
By this great article of public credit, all the king’s business is done with cheerfulness, provisions are now bought to victual the fleets without difficulty, and at reasonable rates. The several yards where the ships are built and fitted out, are currently paid: the magazines of military and naval stores kept full: in a word, by this very article of public credit, of which the Parliament is the foundation (and the city, are the architectures or builders) all those great things are now done with ease, which, in the former reigns, went on heavily, and were brought about with the utmost difficulty.
But, to return to the city; besides the companies and public offices, which are kept in the city, there are several particular offices and places, as,
Here are several great offices for several societies of insurers; for here almost all hazards may be insured; the four principal are called,1. Royal Exchange Ensurance: 2. The London Ensurers : 3. The Hand in Hand Fire Office : 4. The Sun Fire Office. In the two first of those, all hazard by sea are insured, that is to say, of ships or goods, not lives; as also houses and goods are insured from fire. In the last, only houses and goods. In all which offices, the premio is so small, and the recovery, in case of loss, so easy and certain, where no fraud is suspected, that nothing can be shown like it in the whole world; especially that of insuring houses from fire, which has now attained such an universal approbation, that I am told, there are above seventy thousand houses thus insured in London, and the parts adjacent.
The East-India House is in Leadenhall-Street, an old, but spacious building; very convenient, though not beautiful, and I am told, it is under consultation to have it taken down, and rebuilt with additional buildings for warehouses and cellars for their goods, which at present are much wanted.
The Bank is kept in Grocer’s Hall, a very convenient place, and, considering its situation, so near the Exchange, a very spacious, commodious place.
Here business is dispatched with such exactness, and such expedition and so much of it too, that it is really prodigious; no confusion, nobody is either denied or delayed payment, the merchants who keep their cash there, are sure to have their bills always paid, and even advances made on easy terms, if they have occasion. No accounts in the world are more exactly kept, no place in the world has so much business done, with so much ease.
In the next street (the Old Jury) is the Excise Office. In this one office is managed an immense weight of business, and they have in pay, as I am told, near four thousand officers. The whole kingdom is divided by them into proper districts, and to every district, a collector, a supervisor, and a certain number of gaugers, called, by the vulgar title excise men.
Nothing can be more regular, than the methods of this office, by which an account of the whole excise is transmitted from the remotest parts of the kingdom, once every six weeks, which is called a sitting, and the money received, or prosecutions commenced for it, in the next sitting.
Under the management of this office, are now brought, not only the excise upon beer, ale, and other liquors, as formerly, but also the duties on malt and candles, hops, soap, and leather, all which are managed in several and distinct classes, and the accounts kept in distinct books; but, in many places, are collected by the same officers, which makes the charge of the collection much easier to the government. Nor is the like duty collected in any part of the world, with so little charge, or so few officers.
The South-Sea House is situate in a large spot of ground, between Broad-Street and Threadneedle-Street, two large houses having been taken in, to form the whole office; but, as they were, notwithstanding, straitened for room, so they have now resolved to erect a new and complete building for the whole business, which is to be exceeding fine and large, and to this end, the company has purchased several adjacent buildings, so that the ground is enlarged towards Threadneedle-Street.
As the company are enlarging their trade to America, and have also engaged in a new trade, namely, that of the Greenland whale fishing, they are like to have an occasion to enlarge their offices. This building, they assure us, will cost the company from ten to twenty thousand pounds, that is to say, a very great sum.
The Post Office, a branch of the revenue formerly not much valued, but now, by the additional penny upon the letters, and by the visible increase of business in the nation, is grown very considerable. This office maintains now, packet boats to Spain and Portugal, which never was done before: so the merchants’ letters for Cadiz or Lisbonne, which were before two and twenty days in going over France and Spain to Lisbonne, oftentimes arrive there now, in nine or ten days from Falmouth. They have also a packet from England to the West-Indies; but I am not of opinion, that they will keep it up for much time longer, if it be not already let fall.
The penny post, a modern contrivance of a private person, one Mr William Dockraw, is now made a branch of the general revenue by the Post Office; and though, for a time, it was subject to miscarriages and mistakes, yet now it is come also into so exquisite a management, that nothing can be more exact, and ’tis with the utmost safety and dispatch, that letters are delivered at the remotest corners of the town, almost as soon as they could be sent by a messenger, and that from four, five, six, to eight times a day, according as the distance of the place makes it practicable; and you may send a letter from Ratcliff or Limehouse in the East, to the farthest part of Westminster for a penny, and that several times in the same day. Nor are you tied up to a single piece of paper, as in the General Post-Office, but any packet under a pound weight, goes at the same price. We see nothing of this at Paris, at Amsterdam, at Hamburgh, or any other city, that ever I have seen, or heard of.
The Custom House I have just mentioned before, but must take up a few lines to mention it again. The stateliness of the building, showed the greatness of the business that is transacted there : the Long Room is like an Exchange every morning, and the crowd of people who appear there, and the business they do, is not to be explained by words, nothing of that kind in Europe is like it. Yet it has been found, that the business of export and import in this port of London, is so prodigiously increased, and the several new offices, which they are bound to erect for the managing the additional parts of the customs, are such, that the old building, though very spacious, is too little, and as the late Fire burnt or demolished some part of the west end of the Custom House, they have had the opportunity in rebuilding, to enlarge it very much, buying in the ground of some of the demolished houses, to add to the Custom House, which will be now a most glorious building.
The quays, or wharfs, next the river, fronting not the Custom House only, but the whole space from the Tower stairs, or dock, to the bridge, ought to be taken notice of as a public building; nor are they less an ornament to the city, as they are a testimony of the vast trade carried on in it, than the Royal Exchange itself. The revenue, or income, brought in by these wharfs, inclusive of the warehouses belonging to them, and the lighters they employ, is said to amount to a prodigious sum; and, as I am told, seldom so little as forty thousand pounds per annum: and abundance of porters, watchmen, wharfingers, and other officers, are maintained here by the business of the wharfs; in which, one thing is very remarkable, that here are porters, and poor working men, who, though themselves not worth, perhaps, twenty pounds in the world, are trusted with great quantities of valuable goods, sometimes to the value of several thousand pounds, and yet ’tis very rarely to be heard, that any loss or embezzlement is made.
From these public places, I come next to the markets, which, in such a mass of building, and such a collection of people, and where such business is done, must be great, and very many. To take a view of them in particular;
First, Smithfield Market for living cattle, which is, without question, the greatest in the world no description can be given of it, no calculation of the numbers of creatures sold there, can be made. This market is every Monday and Friday. There is also a great market, or rather fair for horses, in Smithfield every Friday in the afternoon, where very great numbers of horses, and those of the highest price, are to be sold weekly.
The flesh markets are as follow : Leaden-Hall, Honey-Lane, Newgate, Clare, Shadwell, Southwark, Westminster, Spittle Fields, Hoxton (forsaken) Brook, Bloomsbury Newport, St James’s, Hungerford.


N.B. The last three are, without doubt, the greatest in the world of those kinds.

Bubble market
Exchange Alley.


Of the fourteen flesh markets, or markets for provisions, seven of them are of ancient standing, time out of mind. But the other seven are erected since the enlargement of buildings mentioned above. The old ones are, Leaden-Hall, Honey-Lane, Newgate Market, Southwark, Clare, St James’s, and Westminster; and these are so considerable, such numbers of buyers, and such an infinite quantity of provisions of all sorts, flesh, fish, and fowl, that, especially the first, no city in the world can equal them. ’Tis of the first of these markets, that a certain Spanish ambassador said, there was as much meat sold in it in one month, as would suffice all Spain for a year.
This great market, called, Leaden-Hall, though standing in the middle of the city, contains three large squares, every square having several outlets into divers streets, and all into one another. Every Wednesday is kept a market for raw hides, tanned leather, and shoemakers’ tools; and in the ware-houses, up stairs on the east and south sides of the square, is the great market for Colechester bays.
All the other markets follow the same method in proportion to the room they have for it; and there is an herb market in every one but the chief markets in the whole city for herbs and garden-stuff, are the Stocks and Covent Garden.
There are but two corn markets in the whole city and out parts; but they are monsters for magnitude, and not to be matched in the world. These are Bear Key, and Queen Hith. To the first comes all the vast quantity of corn that is brought into the city by sea, and here corn may be said, not to be sold by cart loads, or horse loads, but by ship loads, and, except the corn chambers and magazines in Holland, when the fleets come in from Dantzick and England, the whole world cannot equal the quantity bought and sold here.
The other, which I call a corn market too, is at Queen Hith; but this market is chiefly, if not wholly, for malt; as to the whole corn, as the quantity of malt brought to this market is prodigious great, so I must observe too, that this place is the receiver of all the malt, the barley of which, takes up the ground of so many hundred thousand acres of land in the counties of Surrey, Bucks, Berks, Oxford, Southampton, and Wilts, and is called west country malt.
The vessels which bring this malt and meal to Queen Hith, are worth the observation of any stranger that understands such things. They are remarkable for the length of the vessel, and the burthen they carry, and yet the little water they draw; in a word, some of those barges carry over a thousand quarter of malt at a time, and yet do not draw two foot of water. Some of these large barges come as far as from Abbington, which is above one hundred and fifty miles from London, if we measure by the river.
The next market, which is more than ordinary remarkable, is the coal market at Billingsgate. This is kept every morning on the broad place just at the head of Billingsgate Dock, and the place is called Room Land from what old forgotten original it has that name, history is silent. I need not, except for the sake of strangers, take notice, that the city of London, and parts adjacent, as also all the south of England, is supplied with coals, called therefore sea-coal, from Newcastle upon Tyne, and from the coast of Durham, and Northumberland. This trade is so considerable, that it is esteemed the great nursery of our best seamen. The quantity of coals, which it is supposed are, communibus annis, burnt and consumed in and about this city, is supposed to be about five hundred thousand chalder, every chalder containing thirty-six bushels, and generally weighing about thirty hundred weight.
All these coals are bought and sold on this little spot of Room Land, and, though sometimes, especially in case of a war, or of contrary winds, a fleet of five hundred to seven hundred sail of ships, comes up the river at a time, yet they never want a market. The brokers, or buyers of these coals, are called crimps, for what reason, or original, is likewise a mystery peculiar to this trade; for these people are noted for giving such dark names to the several parts of their trade; so the vessels they load their ships with at New Castle, are called keels, and the ships that bring them, are called cats, and hags, or hag boats, and fly boats, and the like.
It must be observed, that as the city of London occasions the consumption of so great a quantity of corn and coals, so the measurement of them is under the inspection of the Lord Mayor and court of aldermen, and for the direction of which, there are allowed a certain number of corn meters, and coal meters, whose places are for life, and bring them in a very considerable income. These places are in the gift of the Lord Mayor for the time being, and are generally sold for three or four thousand pounds a piece, when they fall. They have abundance of poor men employed under them, who are called, also, meters, and are, or ought to be, freemen of the city.
There is one great work yet behind, which, however, seems necessary to a full description of the city of London, and that is the shipping and the Pool; but in what manner can any writer go about it, to bring it into any reasonable compass? The thing is a kind of infinite, and the parts to be separated from one another in such a description, are so many, that it is hard to know where to begin.
The whole river, in a word, from London-Bridge to Black Wall, is one great arsenal, nothing in the world can be like it. The great building-yards at Schedam near Amsterdam, are said to out-do them in the number of ships which are built there, and they tell us, that there are more ships generally seen at Amsterdam, than in the Thames. As to the building part, I will not say, but that there may be more vessels built at Schedam, and the parts adjacent, than in the River Thames; but then it must be said;
1. That the English build for themselves only, the Dutch for all the world.
2. That almost all the ships the Dutch have, are built there, whereas, not one fifth part of our shipping is built in the Thames; but abundance of ships are built at all the sea-ports in England, such as at New-Castle, Sunderland, Stockton, Whitby, Hull, Gainsborough, Grimsby, Lynn, Yarmouth, Alborough, Walderswick, Ipswich and Harwich, upon the east coast; and at Shoram, Arundel, Brighthelmston, Portsmouth, Southampton, Pool, Weymouth, Dartmouth, Plymouth, besides other places, on the south coast.
3. That we see more vessels in less room at Amsterdam; but the setting aside their hoys, bilanders and schoots, which are in great numbers always there, being vessels particular to their inland and coasting navigation; you do not see more ships, nor near so many ships of force, at Amsterdam as at London.
4. That you see more ships there in less room, but, perhaps, not so many ships in the whole.
That part of the river of Thames which is properly the harbour, and where the ships usually deliver or unload their cargoes, is called the Pool, and begins at the turning of the river out of Lime-house Reach, and extends to the Custom-house-Keys. In this compass I have had the curiosity to count the ships as well as I could, en passant, and have found above two thousand sail of all sorts, not reckoning barges, lighters or pleasure-boats, and yachts; but vessels that really go to sea.
In the river, as I have observed, there are from Battle-Bridge on the Southwark side, and the Hermitage-Bridge on the city-side, reckoning to Black-Wall, inclusive,

To enter into any description of the great magazines of all manner of naval stores, for the furnishing those builders, would be endless, and I shall not attempt it; ’tis sufficient to add, that England, as I have said elsewhere, is an inexhaustible store-house of timber, and all the oak timber, and generally the plank also, used in the building these ships, is found in England only, nay, and which is more, it is not fetched from the remoter parts of England, but these southern counties near us are the places where ’tis generally found. But I must land, lest this part of the account seems to smell of the tar, and I should tire the gentlemen with leading them out of their knowledge.
No where in the world is so good care taken to quench fires as in London; I will not say the like care is taken to prevent them for I must say, that I think the servants, nay, the masters too in London, are the most careless people in the world about fire, and this, no doubt, is the reason why there are frequently more fires in London and in the out-parts, than there are in all the cities of Europe put them together; nor are they the more careful, as I can learn, either from observation or report, I say, they are not made more cautious, by the innumerable fires which continually happen among them.
And this leads me back to what I just now said, that no city in the world is so well furnished for the extinguishing fires when they happen.
1. By the great convenience of water which being every where laid in the streets in large timber pipes, as well from the Thames as the New-River, those pipes are furnished with a fire plug, which the parish officers have the key of, and when opened, let out not a pipe, but a river of water into the streets, so that making but a dam in the kennel, the whole street is immediately under water to supply the engines.
2. By the great number of admirable engines, of which, almost, every parish has one, and some halls also, and some private citizens have them of their own, so that no sooner does a fire break out, but the house is surrounded with engines, and a flood of water poured upon it, ‘till the fire is, as it were, not extinguished only, but drowned.
3. The several insurance offices, of which I have spoken above, have each of them a certain set of men, who they keep in constant pay, and who they furnish with tools proper for the work, and to whom they give jack-caps of leather, able to keep them from hurt, if brick or timber, or any thing not of too great a bulk, should fall upon them; these men make it their business to be ready at call, all hours, and night or day, to assist in case of fire; and it must be acknowledged, they are very dextrous, bold, diligent, and successful. These they call fire-men, but with an odd kind of contradiction in the title, for they are really most of them water-men.
However, the New-River, which is brought by an aqueduct or artificial stream from Ware, continues to supply the greater part of the city with water, only with this addition by the way, that they have been obliged to dig a new head or basin at Islington on a higher ground than that which the natural stream of the river supplies, and this higher basin they fill from the lower, by a great engine worked formerly with six sails, now by many horses constantly working; so from that new elevation of the water, they supply the higher part of the town with the same advantage, and more ease than the Thames engines do it.
There was a very likely proposal set on foot by some gentlemen, whose genius seemed equal to the work, for drawing another river, rather larger than that now running, and bringing it to a head on some rising grounds beyond Mary le Bonne. This water was proposed to be brought from the little Coln or Cole near St Albans, and the river, called Two Waters, near Rickmansworth, and as I have seen the course of the water, and the several supplies it was to have, and how the water-level was drawn for containing the current, I must acknowledge it was a very practical undertaking, and merited encouragement; but it was opposed in Parliament, and dropped for the present.
However, though this be laid aside, yet it cannot be denied, that the city of London is the best supplied with water of any great city in the world, and upon as easy terms to its inhabitants.
There were formerly several beautiful conduits of running-water in London, which water was very sweet and good, and was brought at an infinite expense, from several distant springs, in large leaden pipes to those conduits, and this was so lately, that several of those conduits were re-built since the Fire, as one on Snow-Hill and one at Stocks-Market, which serves as a ’pedestal for the great equestrian statue of King Charles II, erected there at the charge of Sir Robert Viner, then Lord Mayor, and who was then an eminent banker in Lombard-street; but his loyalty could not preserve him from being ruined by the common calamity, when the king shut up the Exchequer.
The gates of the city are seven, besides posterns, and the posterns that remain are four, besides others that are demolished. The gates are all remaining, two of them which were demolished at the fire, being beautifully re-built. These are Ludgate and Newgate; the first a prison for debt for freemen of the city only, the other a prison for criminals, both for London and Middlesex, and for debtors also for Middlesex, being the county gaol.
Moregate is also re-built, and is a very beautiful gateway, the arch being near twenty foot high, which was done to give room for the city Trained Bands to go through to the Artillery Ground, where they muster, and that they might march with their pikes advanced, for then they had pikemen in every regiment, as well in the army as in the militia, which since that, is quite left off; this makes the gate look a little out of shape, the occasion of it not being known. Cripplegate and Bishopsgate are very old, and make but a mean figure; Aldersgate is about one hundred and twenty years old, and yet being beautified, as I have said, on the occasion of King James’s entry, looks very handsome.
Aldgate was very ancient and decayed, so that as old as Aldgate, was a city proverb for many years; but this gate was re-built also, upon the triumphant entry of K. James I and looks still very well.
Temple-Bar is the only gate which is erected at the extent of the city liberties, and this was occasioned by some needful ceremonies at the proclaiming any King or Queen of England, at which time the gates are shut; the Herald at Arms knocks hard at the door, the sheriffs of the city call back, asking who is there? Then the herald answers, ‘I come to proclaim,’ &c. at which the sheriffs open, and bid them welcome, and so they go on to the Exchange, where they make the last proclamation. This gate is adorned with the figures of kings below, and traitors above, the heads of several criminals executed for treason being set up there; the statues below are of Queen Elizabeth and King James I, King Charles I and II.
There are in London, notwithstanding we are a nation of liberty, more public and private prisons, and houses of confinement, than any city in Europe, perhaps as many as in all the capital cities of Europe put together; for example:

PUBLIC GAOLS


The Tower.
Newgate.
Ludgate.
King’s Bench.
The Fleet.
Bridewell.
Marshalseas.
The Gatehouse.
Two Counters in the city.
One Counter in the Burrough.
St Martin’s le Grand.
The Clink, formerly the prison to the Stews.
Whitechapel.
Finsbury.
The Dutchy.
St Katherines.
Bale-Dock.
Little-Ease.
New-Prison.
New-Bridewell.
Tottil-Fields Bridewell.
Five night prisons, called round-houses, &c.

TOLERATED PRISONS

Bethlem or Bedlam.
Cum aliis.


One hundred and nineteen Spunging Houses.
Three Pest-houses.
Fifteen Private Mad-Houses.
The Admiralty Officers-Houses.
The King’s Messengers-Houses.
Tip-staffs Houses.
The Sergeant at Arms’s Officers Houses.
Chancery Officers Houses.
The Black Rod Officers-Houses.




N.B. All these private houses of confinement, are pretended to be little purgatories, between prison and liberty, places of advantage for the keeping prisoners at their own request, till they can get friends to deliver them, and so avoid going into public prisons; though in some of them, the extortion is such, and the accommodation so bad, that men choose to be carried away directly.
This has often been complained of, and hopes had of redress; but the rudeness and avarice of the officers prevails, and the oppression is sometimes very great; but that by the way.
To sum up my description of London, take the following heads; there are in this great mass of buildings thus called London,

Two cathedrals.
Four choirs for music-worship.
One hundred and thirty-five parish churches.
Nine new churches unfinished, being part of fifty appointed to be built.
Sixty-nine chapels where the Church of England service is performed.
Two churches at Deptford, taken into the limits now described.
Twenty-eight foreign churches.
Besides Dissenters meetings of all persuasions;
Popish chapels; and
One Jews’ synagogue.
There are also, thirteen hospitals, besides lesser charities, called Alms-houses, of which they reckon above a hundred, many of which have chapels for divine service.
Three colleges.
Twenty-seven public prisons.
Eight public schools, called Free Schools.
Eighty-three Charity Schools.
Fourteen markets for flesh.
Two for live cattle, besides two herb-markets.
Twenty-three other markets, as described.
Fifteen Inns of Court.
Four fairs.
Twenty-seven squares, besides those within any single building, as the Temple, Somerset House, &c.
Five public bridges.
One town-house, or Guild-Hall.
One Royal Exchange.
Two other Exchanges only for shops.
One custom-house.
Three Artillery Grounds.
Four pest-houses.
Two bishop’s palaces;
and
Three royal palaces.


Having dwelt thus long in the city, I mean properly called so, I must be the shorter in my account of other things.
The Court end of the town, now so prodigiously increased, would take up a volume by itself. The king’s palace, though the receptacle of all the pomp and glory of Great Britain, is really mean, in comparison of the rich furniture within, I mean the living furniture, the glorious Court of the King of Great Britain: the splendour of the nobility, the wealth and greatness of the attendants, the economy of the house, and the real grandeur of the whole royal family, out-does all the Courts of Europe, even that of France itself, as it is now managed since the death of Lewis the Great. But the palace of St James’s is, I say, too mean, and only seems to be honoured with the Court, while a more magnificent fabric may be erected, where the King of England usually resided, I mean at White-Hall.
The ruins of that old palace, seem to predict, that the time will come, when that Phoenix shall revive, and when a building shall be erected there, suiting the majesty and magnificence of the British princes, and the riches of the British nation. Many projects have been set on foot for the rebuilding the ancient palace  of White-hall; but most of them have related rather to a fund for raising the money, than a model for the building.
But I return to the description of things which really exist, and are not imaginary: as the Court is now stated, all the offices and places for business are scattered about.
The Parliament meets, as they ever did, while the Court was at Westminster, in the king’s old palace, and there are the courts of justice also, and the officers of the Exchequer, nor can it be said, however convenient the place is made for them; but that it has a little an air of venerable, though ruined antiquity. What is the Court of Requests, the Court of Wards, and the Painted Chamber, though lately repaired, but the corpse of the old English grandeur laid in state?
The whole, it is true, was anciently the king’s palace or royal house, and it takes up full as much ground as the new palace would do, except only the gardens and parks, the space before it, which is still called Palace-yard, is much greater than that which would be at the north gate of the palace of White-hall, as proposed.
But, alas! as I say, though they seem now even in their ruins, great; yet compared to the beauty and elegancy of modern living, and of royal buildings in this age, what are they! The royal apartments, the prince’s lodgings, the great officers’ apartments, what are they now, but little offices for clerks, rooms for coffee-houses, auctions of pictures, pamphlet and toy-shops?
Even St Stephen’s Chapel, formerly the royal chapel of the palace, but till lately beautified for the convenience of the House of Commons, was a very indifferent place, old and decayed. The House of Lords is a venerable old place, indeed; but how mean, how incoherent, and how straitened are the several avenues to it, and rooms about it? the matted gallery, the lobby, the back ways the king goes to it, how short are they all of the dignity of the place, and the glory of a King of Great Britain, with the Lords and Commons, that so often meet there?
Some attempts were made lately, to have restored the decrepit circumstances of this part of the building, and orders were given to Mr Benson, then surveyor of the king’s buildings, to do his part towards it; but it was directed so ill, or understood so little, that some thought he was more likely to throw the old fabric down, than to set it to rights, for which ignorance and vanity, ’tis said, some have not fared as they deserved.
It is true, the sitting of the Parliament is by the order of the Houses themselves, accommodated as well as the place will admit; but how much more beautiful it would be in such a building, as is above contrived, I leave to the contriver to describe and to other people to judge.
Come we next to Westminster-Hall; ’tis true, it is a very noble Gothic building, ancient, vastly large, and the finest roof of its kind in England, being one hundred feet wide; but what a wretched figure does it make without doors; the front, a vast pinnacle or pediment, after the most ancient and almost forgotten part of the Gothic way of working; the building itself, resembles nothing so much as a great barn of three hundred feet long, and really looks like a barn at a distance.
Nay, if we view the whole building from without doors, ’tis like a great pile of something, but a stranger would be much at a loss to know what; and whether it was a house, or a church, or, indeed, a heap of churches being huddled all together, with differing and distant roofs, some higher, some lower, some standing east and west, some north and south, and some one way, and some another.
The Abbey, or Collegiate Church of Westminster, stands next to this; a venerable old pile of building, it is indeed, but so old and weak, that had it not been taken in hand some years ago, and great cost bestowed in upholding and repairing it, we might, by this time, have called it a heap, not a pile, and not a church, but the ruins of a church. But it begins to stand upon new legs now, and as they continue to work upon the repairs of it, the face of the whole building will, in a short while, be entirely new.
This is the repository of the British kings and nobility, and very fine monuments are here seen over the graves of our ancient monarchs; the particulars are too long to enter into here, and are so many times described by several authors, that it would be a vain repetition to enter upon it here; besides, we have by no means any room for it. The monarchs of Great Britain are always crowned here, even King James II submitted to it, and to have it performed by a Protestant bishop. It is observable, that our kings and queens make always two solemn visits to this church, and very rarely, if ever, come here any more, viz. to be crowned and to be buried.
It is become such a piece of honour to be buried in Westminster-Abbey, that the body of the church begins to be crowded with the bodies of citizens, poets, seamen, and parsons, nay, even with very mean persons, if they have but any way made themselves known in the world; so that in time, the royal ashes will be thus mingled with common dust, that it will leave no room either for king or common people, or at least not for their monuments, some of which also are rather pompously foolish, than solid and to the purpose.
Near to this church is the Royal Free-School, the best of its kind in England, not out-done either by Winchester or Eaton, for a number of eminent scholars.
’Tis remarkable, that the whole city, called properly, Westminster, and standing on the S. side of the park, is but one parish, and is the only city of one parish in England. There is now another great church erected, or rather erecting, by the commissioners for building fifty new churches; but they have been strangely mistaken in the situation, which is a fenny marshy ground, and it is not found so able to support the weight as, perhaps, they were told it would; I say no more. The building was very curious, especially the roof; but the towers are not so beautiful as it is thought was intended, the foundation not being to be trusted.
The Cottonian Library is kept here in an ancient building, near Westminster-Hall gate; we were told it would be removed to the royal library, and then, that it would be removed to a house to be built on purpose; but we see neither yet in hand. This is one of the most valuable collections in Britain, and, the Bodleian Library excepted, is, perhaps, the best. It has in it some books and manuscripts invaluable for their antiquity; but I have not room so much as to enter upon giving an account of the particulars.
This part of Westminster has but one street, which gives it a communication with London, and this is called King-street, a long, dark, dirty and very inconvenient passage; but there seems to be no remedy for it, for most passengers get out of it through the Privy Garden, and some by private passages into the park, as at Locket’s, at the Cock-Pit, and the new gate from Queen’s-Square; but these are all upon sufferance.
Having mentioned White-Hall already, I have nothing more to say of it, but that it was, and is not, but may revive. There is, doubtless, a noble situation, fit to contain a royal palace, equal to Versailles but I have given you my thoughts on that subject at large.
Nor can I dwell here upon a description of His Majesty’s Court, or an account of the politics managed there; it does not relate to this work; let it suffice to say, His Majesty resides, especially all the winter, at St James’s; but the business of the government, is chiefly carried on at the Cock-pit. This is a royal building, was once part of White-hall, first the Duke of Monmouth lived in it, then Prince George of Denmark and his princess, afterwards Queen Ann, and since the fire at White-Hall, the Treasury, the Secretary’s office, the Council Chamber, the Board of Trade, and the Lord Chamberlain, hold all their particular offices here and here there is also, a by-way out of Duke-street into the park.
From thence we come to the Horse Guards, a building commodious enough, built on purpose; as a barrack for a large detachment of the Horse-Guards, who keep their post here, while attending on duty; over it are offices for payment of the troops, and a large court of judicature, for holding councils of war, for trial of deserters and others, according to the articles of war.
In the same range of buildings, stood the Admiralty Office, built by the late King William; but though in itself a spacious building, is found so much too narrow now the business is so much increased, and as there is a sufficient piece of spare ground behind it, to enlarge the building, we find a new and spacious office is now building in the same place, which shall be sufficient to all the uses required. This office is, perhaps, of the most importance of any of the public parts of the administration, the royal navy being the sinews of our strength, and the whole direction of it being in the hands of the commissioners for executing this office.
From this part of the town, we come into the public streets, where nothing is more remarkable than the hurries of the people; Charing-Cross is a mixture of Court and city; Man’s Coffee-house is the Exchange Alley of this part of the town, and ’tis perpetually thronged with men of business, as the others are with men of play and pleasure.
From hence advancing a little, we see the great equestrian statue of King Charles the First in brass, a costly, but a curious piece; however, it serves sufficiently, to let us know who it is, and why erected there. The circumstances are two, he faces the place where his enemies triumphed over him, and triumphs, that is, tramples in the place where his murtherers were hanged.
On the right side of the street, coming from White-Hall, is Northumberland-House, so called, because belonging to the Northumberland family for some ages but descending to the Duke of Somerset in right of marriage, from the late Duchess, heiress of the house of Piercy.
’Tis an ancient, but a very good house, the only misfortune of its situation is, its standing too near the street; the back part of the house is more modern and beautiful than the front, and when you enter the first gate, you come into a noble square fronting the fine lodgings. ’Tis a large and very well designed building, and fit to receive a retinue of one hundred in family; nor does the Duke’s family come so far short of the number, as not very handsomely to fill the house.
Advancing thence to the Hay-Market, we see, first, the great new theatre, a very magnificent building, and perfectly accommodated for the end of which it was built, though the entertainment there of late, has been chiefly operas and balls. These meetings are called BALLS, the word masquerade not being so well relished by the English, who, though at first fond of the novelty, began to be sick of the thing on many accounts. However, as I cannot in justice say any thing to recommend them, I choose to say no more; but go on.
From hence westward and northward, lie those vastly extended buildings, which add so exceedingly to the magnitude of the whole body, and of which I have already said so much. It would be a task too great for this work, to enter into a description of all the fine houses, or rather palaces of the nobility in these parts.
The hospitals in and about the city of London, deserve a little further observation, especially those more remarkable for their magnitude, as,
1. Bethlem or Bedlam: this and Bridewell, indeed, go together, for though they are two several houses, yet they are incorporated together, and have the same governors; also the president, treasurer, clerk, physician and apothecary are the same; but the stewards and the revenue are different, and so are the benefactions; but to both very great.
The orders for the government of the hospital of Bethlem are exceedingly good, and a remarkable instance of the good disposition of the gentlemen concerned in it, especially these that follow;
1. That no person, except the proper officers who tend them, be allowed to see the lunatics of a Sunday.
2. That no person be allowed to give the lunatics strong drink, wine, tobacco or spirits, or to sell any such thing in the hospital.
3. That no servant of the house shall take any money given to any of the lunatics to their own use; but that it shall be carefully kept for them till they are recovered, or laid out for them in such things as the committee approves.
4. That no officer or servant shall beat or abuse, or offer any force to any lunatic; but on absolute necessity. The rest of the orders are for the good government of the house.
This hospital was formerly in the street now called Old Bedlam, and was very ancient and ruinous. The new building was erected at the charge of the city in 1676, and is the most beautiful structure for such a use that is in the world, and was finished from its foundation in fifteen months; it was said to be taken ill at the Court of France, that it was built after the fashion of one of the King of France’s palaces. The number of people who are generally under cure in this hospital, is from 130 to 150 at a time. There are great additions now making to this hospital, particularly for the relief and subsistence of incurables, of which no full account can be given, because they are not yet finished.
II. The hospital of Bridewell, as it is an hospital, so it is also a house of correction. The house was formerly the king’s city palace; but granted to the city to be in the nature of what is now called a work-house, and has been so employed, ever since the year 1555. As idle persons, vagrants, &c. are committed to this house for correction, so there are every year, several poor lads brought up to handicraft trades, as apprentices, and of these the care is in the governors, who maintain them out of the standing revenues of the house.
There are two other Bridewells, properly so called, that is to say, houses of correction; one at Clarkenwell, called New Prison, being the particular Bridewell for the county of Middlesex, and another in Tuttle-fields, for the city of Westminster.
The other city hospitals, are the Blue-coat Hospital for poor freemen’s orphan children, and the two hospitals for sick and maimed people, as St Bartholomew’s and St Thomas’s. These three are so well known by all people that have seen the city of London, and so universally mentioned by all who have written of it, that little can be needful to add; however I shall say something as an abridgment.
III. Christ’s Hospital was originally constituted by King Edward VI who has the honour of being the founder of it, as also of Bridewell; but the original design was, and is owing to the Lord Mayor and aldermen of London, and the Christian endeavours of that glorious martyr, Dr Ridley then Bishop of London. The design is for entertaining, educating, nourishing and bringing up the poor children of the citizens, such as, their parents being dead, or fathers, at least, have no way to be supported, but are reduced to poverty.
Of these, the hospital is now so far increased in substance, by the benefactions of worthy gentlemen contributors, they now maintain near a thousand, who have food, clothing and instruction, useful and sufficient learning, and exceeding good discipline; and at the proper times they are put out to trades, suitable to their several genius’s and capacities, and near five thousand pounds a year are expended on this charity.
IV. St Bartholomew’s Hospital adjoins to Christ Church. The first founder is esteemed to be King Henry VIII whose statue in stone and very well done, is, for that very reason, lately erected in the new front, over the entrance to the Cloyster in West-Smithfield.
From this small beginning, this hospital rose to the greatness we now see it arrived at, of which take the following account for one year, viz. 1718;

V. St Thomas’s Hospital in Southwark, has a different foundation, but to the same purpose; it is under the same government, viz. the Lord Mayor, aldermen and commanalty of the city of London, and had a revenue of about 2000l. per annum, about 100 years ago.
This hospital has received greater benefactions than St Bartholomew’s; but then ’tis also said to have suffered greater losses, especially by several great fires in Southwark and elsewhere, as by the necessity of expensive buildings, which, notwithstanding the charitable gifts of divers great benefactors, has cost the hospital great sums. The state of this hospital is so advanced at this time, that in the same year as above, viz. 1718, the state of the house was as follows;

Adjoining to this of St Thomas’s, is lately laid a noble foundation of a new hospital, by the charitable gift and single endowment of one person, and, perhaps, the greatest of its kind, that ever was founded in this nation by one person, whether private or public, not excepting the kings themselves.
This will, I suppose, be called Guy’s Hospital, being to be built and endowed at the sole charge of one Mr Thomas Guy, formerly a bookseller in Lombard Street, who lived to see the said hospital not only designed, the ground purchased and cleared, but the building begun, and a considerable progress made in it, and died while these sheets were in the press.
It was generally understood to have been intended for a ward, or an addition to the old hospital of St Thomas’s, for the reception of such as were accounted incurable. But when Mr Guy died, his will being made public, it appeared, that it was really a separate, independent and distinct hospital, under distinct governors, and for a separate purpose, to wit, for receiving such poor persons as have been dismissed from other hospitals as incurable.
What the revenue, when settled, will be; what the building will amount to when finished; what the purchase of the land, and what the expense of finishing and furnishing it, cannot be estimated, ’till it be further looked into but we are told without doors, that besides all the expense of purchase, building, furnishing and finishing as above there will be left more than two hundred thousand pounds for endowing the hospital with a settled revenue, for maintaining the said poor, and yet the charitable founder was so immensely rich, that besides leaving four hundred pounds a year to the Blue-coat Hospital of London, and besides building an hospital for fourteen poor people at Tamworth in Staffordshire, where he was chosen representative; and besides several considerable charities which he had given in his life-time; he also gave away, in legacies, to his relations and others, above a hundred thousand pound more, so that he cannot, as has been said by some, be said to give a great charity to the poor, and forget his own family.
How Mr Guy amassed all this wealth, having been himself in no public employment or office of trust, or profit, and only carrying on the trade of a bookseller, till within a few years of his death, that is not the business of this book; ’tis enough to say, he was a thriving, frugal man, who God was pleased exceedingly to bless, in whatever he set his hand to, knowing to what good purposes he laid up his gains. He was never married, and lived to be above eighty years old; so that the natural improvements of this money, by common interest, after it was first grown to a considerable bulk, greatly increased the sum.
Next to these hospitals, whose foundations are so great and magnificent, is the work-house, or city work-house, properly so called, which being a late foundation, and founded upon mere charity, without any settled endowment, is the more remarkable, for here are a very great number of poor children taken in, and supported and maintained, fed, clothed, taught, and put out to trades, and that at an exceeding expense, and all this without one penny revenue.
It is established, or rather the establishment of it, is supported by an old Act of Parliament, 13. 14. Car. II empowering the citizens to raise contributions for the charge of employing the poor, and suppressing vagrants and beggars, and it is now, by the voluntary assistance and bounty of benefactors, become so considerable, that in the year 1715 they gave the following state of the house, viz.


There are three considerable charities given by private persons in the city of Westminster, viz.
1. The Gray-coat Hospital, founded by a generous subscription or contribution. It maintains 70 boys and 40 girls, clothed, fed, and taught, and in some measure provided for, by being put out to trades.
2. The Green-coat Hospital, in the same Fields, founded by King Charles I for poor fatherless children of St Margaret’s parish; and next to this hospital is the house of correction, or the Westminster Bridewell.
3. The Emanuel Hospital, founded by the Lady Ann Dacres, for ten poor men, and ten poor women, in the forty-third year of Queen Elizabeth.
There has been, also, a very noble hospital erected by contribution of the French refugees, for the maintenance of their poor. It stands near the Pest-house, in the foot-way to Islington in the parish of Cripplegate.
The hospital called the Charter House, or Sutton’s Hospital, is not by this supposed to be forgot, or the honour of it lessened. On the other hand, it must be recorded for ever, to be the greatest and noblest gift that ever was given for charity, by any one man, public or private, in this nation, since history gives us any account of things. The revenue of Mr Sutton’s hospital being, besides the purchase of the place, and the building of the house, and other expenses, little less than 6000l. per annum revenue.
These are the principal hospitals, but it will not be useless observation, nor altogether improper to take notice of it here, that this age has produced some of the most eminent acts of public charity; and of the greatest value, I mean from private persons, that can be found in any age within the reach of our English history, excepting only that of Sutton’s Hospital.
These, added to the innumerable number of alms-houses which are to be seen in almost every part of the city, make it certain, that there is no city in the world can show the like number of charities from private hands, there being, as I am told, not less than twenty thousand people maintained of charity, besides the charities of schooling for children, and besides the collections yearly at the annual feasts of several kinds, where money is given for putting out children apprentices, &c. so that the Papists have no reason to boast, that there were greater benefactions and acts of charity to the poor given in their times, than in our Protestant times; and this is indeed, one of the principal reasons for my making mention of it in this place.
I come now to an account of new edifices and public buildings erected or erecting in and about London, since the writing the foregoing account; and with this I conclude.
1. The fine new church of St Martin’s in the Fields, with a very fine steeple, which they tell us is 215 feet high, all wholly built by the contribution of that great parish, and finished with the utmost expedition.
2. The new Admiralty Office near White-hall, being on the same ground where the old office stood but much larger, being both longer in front and deeper backward, not yet finished.
3. Mr Guy’s new hospital for incurables, mentioned above, situated on ground purchased for that purpose, adjoining to St Thomas’s Hospital in Southwark, being a most magnificent building not yet quite finished.
4. Two large wings to the hospital of Bedlam, appointed also for incurables; this also not yet finished.
5. A large new meeting-house in Spittle-fields, for the sect of Dissenters, called Baptists, or Antepædo Baptists.
6. The South-Sea House in Threadneedle-street, the old house being entirely pulled down, and several other houses adjoining being purchased, the whole building will be new from the foundation; this not finished.
7. Several very fine new churches, being part of the fifty churches appointed by Act of Paliament, viz. one in Spittle-fields, one in Radcliff-High-way, one in Old-street, one at Lime-house, with a very beautiful tower, and one in Bloomsbury, and five more not finished.
8. The parish church of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, pulled down and re-building, by the contribution of the inhabitants, not as one of the fifty churches.
9. The Custom-house, which since the late fire in Thames-street, is ordered to be enlarged; but is not yet finished.
All these buildings are yet in building, and will all, in their several places, be very great ornaments to the city.
10. A new street or range of houses taken out of the south side of the Artillery Ground near Morefields, also an enlargement to the new burying ground as it was formerly called, on the north side of the same ground.
11. The iron balustrade, or others call it, balcony, on the lanthorn upon the cupola of St Paul’s, gilded.
12. A new bear-garden, called Figg’s Theatre, being a stage for the gladiators or prize-fighters, and is built on the Tyburn Road.

N.B. The gentlemen of the science, taking offence at its being called Tyburn Road, though it really is so, will have it called the Oxford Road; this public edifice is fully finished, and in use.
I conclude this account of London, with mentioning something of the Account of Mortality, that is to say, the births and burials, and I shall only take notice, that whereas, the general number of the burials in the year 1666, and farther back, were from 17000 to 19000 in a year, the last yearly bill for the year 1723, amounted as follows,
Christenings 19203.
Burials 29197.


Here is to be observed, that the number of burials exceeding so much the number of births, is, because as it is not the number born, but the number christened that are set down, which is taken from the parish register; so all the children of Dissenters of every sort, Protestant, Popish and Jewish are omitted, also all the children of foreigners, French, Dutch, &c. which are baptized in their own churches, and all the children of those who are so poor, that they cannot get them registered : so that if a due estimate be made, the births may be very well supposed to exceed the burials one year with another by many thousands.
It is not that I have no more to say of London, that I break off here; but that I have no room to say it, and though some things may be taken notice of by others, which I have passed over; yet I have also taken notice of so many things which others have omitted, that I claim the balance in my favour.
I am, SIR,
Yours, &c.
