

SIR, – I find so many things to say in every part of England, that my journey cannot be barren of intelligence, which way soever I turn; no, though I were to oblige myself to say nothing of any thing that had been spoken of before.
I intended once to have gone due west this journey; but then I should have been obliged to crowd my observations so close, (to bring Hampton-Court, Windsor, Blenheim, Oxford, the Bath and Bristol, all into one letter; all those remarkable places lying in a line, as it were, in one point of the compass) as to have made my letter too long, or my observations too light and superficial, as others have done before me.
This letter will divide the weighty task, and consequently make it fit lighter on the memory, be pleasanter to the reader, and make my progress the more regular: I shall therefore take in Hampton-Court and Windsor in this journey; the first at my setting out, and the last at my return, and the rest as their situation demands.
As I came down from Kingston, in my last circuit, by the south bank of the Thames, so I go up to Hampton-Court, now, on the north bank, which I mention, because as the sides of the country bordering on the river, lie parallel, so the beauty of the country, the pleasant situations, the glory of innumerable fine buildings, noblemen’s and gentlemen’s houses, and citizen’s retreats, are so equal a match to what I had described on the other side, that one knows not which to give the preference to.
Hampton-Court lies on the north bank of the river Thames, about two small miles from Kingston, and on the road from Stanes to Kingston Bridge; so that the road straightening the parks a little, they were obliged to part the parks, and leave the Paddock, and the Great Park, part on the other side the road, a testimony of that just regard that the kings of England always had, and still have, to the common good, and to the service of the country, that they would not interrupt the course of the road, or cause the poor people to go out of the way of their business, to or from the markets and fairs, for any pleasure of their own whatsoever.
The palace of Hampton-Court was first founded, and built from the ground, by that great statesman, and favourite of King Henry VIII, Cardinal Wolsey. If there be a situation on the whole river between Stanes-Bridge and Windsor-Bridge, pleasanter than another, it is this of Hampton; close to the river, yet not offended by the rising of its waters in floods, or storms, near to the reflux of the tides, but not quite so near as to be affected with any foulness of the water, which the flowing of the tides generally is the occasion of. The gardens extend almost to the bank of the river, yet are never overflowed; nor are there any marshes on either side the river to make the waters stagnate, or the air unwholesome on that account. The river is high enough to be navigable, and low enough to be a little pleasantly rapid; so that the stream looks always cheerful, not slow and sleeping, like a pond. This keeps the waters always clear and clean, the bottom in view, the fish playing, and in sight; and, in a word, it has every thing that can make an inland; or, as I may call it, a country river pleasant and agreeable.
I shall sing you no songs here of the river in the first person of a water nymph, a goddess, (and I know not what) according to the humour of the ancient poets. I shall talk nothing of the marriage of old Isis, the male river, with the beautiful Thame, the female river, a whimsy as simple as the subject was empty, but I shall speak of the river as occasion presents, as it really is made glorious by the splendour of its shores, gilded with noble palaces, strong fortifications, large hospitals, and public buildings; with the greatest bridge, and the greatest city in the world, made famous by the opulence of its merchants, the increase and extensiveness of its commerce; by its invincible navies, and by the innumerable fleets of ships sailing upon it, to and from all parts of the world.
As I meet with the river upwards in my travels through the inland country, I shall speak of it, as it is the channel for conveying an infinite quantity of provisions from remote counties to London, and enriching all the counties again that lie near it, by the return of wealth and trade from the city; and in describing these things I expect both to inform and divert my readers, and speak, in a more masculine manner, more to the dignity of the subject, and also more to their satisfaction, than I could do any other way.
The Prince and Princess, I remember came once down by water, upon the occasion of Her Royal Highness’s being great with child, and near her time; so near, that she was delivered within two or three days after. But this passage being in the royal barges, with strength of oars, and the day exceeding fine, the passage, I say, was made very pleasant, and still the more so for being short. Again this passage is all the way with the stream, whereas, in the common passage, upwards, great part of the way is against the stream, which is slow and heavy.
The situation of Hampton-Court being thus mentioned, and its founder, ’tis to be mentioned next, that it fell to the Crown in the forfeiture of his eminence the cardinal, when the king seized his effects and estate, by which this and Whitehall, another house of his own building also, came to King Henry VIII. Two palaces fit for the Kings of England, erected by one cardinal, are standing monuments of the excessive pride, as well as the immense wealth of that prelate, who knew no bounds of his insolence and ambition, till he was overthrown at once by the displeasure of his master.
Whoever knew Hampton-Court before it was begun to be rebuilt, or altered, by the late King William, must acknowledge it was a very complete palace before, and fit for a king; and though it might not, according to the modern method of building, or of gardening, pass for a thing exquisitely fine; yet it had this remaining to itself, and perhaps peculiar; namely, that it showed a situation exceedingly capable of improvement, and of being made one of the most delightful palaces in Europe.
This Her Majesty Queen Mary was so sensible of, that while the king had ordered the pulling down the old apartments, and building it up in that most beautiful form, which we see them now appear in, her majesty, impatient of enjoying so agreeable a retreat, fixed upon a building formerly made use of chiefly for landing from the river, and therefore called the Water Gallery. The Queen had here her gallery of beauties, being the pictures, at full length, of the principal ladies attending upon her majesty, or who were frequently in her retinue; and this was the more beautiful sight, because the originals were all in being, and often to be compared with their pictures. Her majesty had here a fine apartment, with a set of lodgings, for her private retreat only, but most exquisitely furnished; particularly a fine chintz bed, then a great curiosity; another of her own work, while in Holland, very magnificent, and several others; and here was also her majesty’s fine collection of Delft ware, which indeed was very large and fine; and here was also a vast stock of fine china ware, the like whereof was not then to be seen in England; the long gallery, as above, was filled with this china, and every other place, where it could be placed, with advantage.
All these things were finished with expedition, that here their majesties might repose while they saw the main building go forward. While this was doing, the gardens were laid out, the plan of them devised by the King himself; and especially the amendments and alterations were made by the King, or the Queen’s particular special command, or by both; for their majesties agreed so well in their fancy, and had both so good judgment in the just proportions of things, which are the principal beauties of a garden, that it may be said they both ordered every thing that was done.
The ground on the side of the other front, has received some alterations since the taking down the water gallery; but not that part immediately next the lodgings. The orange trees, and fine Dutch bays, are placed within the arches of the building under the first floor: so that the lower part of the house was all one as a green house for some time. Here stands advanced, on two pedestals of stone, two marble vases, or flower pots, of most exquisite workmanship; the one done by an Englishman, and the other by a German. ’Tis hard to say which is the best performance, though the doing of it was a kind of trial of skill between them; but it gives us room, without partiality, to say they were both masters of their art.
The fine scrolls and bordure of these gardens were at first edged with box; but on the Queen’s disliking the smell, those edgings were taken up, but have since been planted again, at least in many places, nothing making so fair and regular an edging as a box, or is so soon brought to its perfection.
On the north side of the house, where the gardens seemed to want screening from the weather, or the view of the chapel, and some part of the old building required to be covered from the eye; the vacant ground, which was large, is very happily cast into a wilderness, with a labyrinth, and espaliers so high, that they effectually take off all that part of the old building, which would have been offensive to the sight.
I hinted in my last that King William brought into England the love of fine paintings, as well as that of fine gardens; and you have an example of it in the cartoons, as they are called, being five pieces of such paintings, as, if you will believe men of nice judgment and great travelling, are not to be matched in Europe. The stories are known, but especially two of them, (viz.) that of St Paul preaching on Mars-Hill to the self-wise Athenians, and that of St Peter passing sentence of death on Ananias; I say, these two strike the mind with the utmost surprise; the passions are so drawn to the life, astonishment, terror and death in the face of Ananias; zeal and a sacred fire in the eyes of the blessed apostle; fright and surprise upon the countenances of the beholders in the piece of Ananias; all these describe themselves so naturally, that you cannot but seem to discover something of the like passions, even in seeing them.
’Tis reported, but with what truth I know not, that the late French king offered an hundred thousand louis d’ors for these pictures; but this, I say, is but a report. The King brought a great many other fine pieces to England, and with them the love of fine paintings so universally spread itself among the nobility and persons of figure all over the kingdom, that it is incredible what collections have been made by English gentlemen since that time; and how all Europe has been rummaged, as we say, for pictures to bring over hither, where, for twenty years, they yielded the purchasers, such as collected them for sale, immense profit. But the rates are abated since that, and we begin to be glutted with the copies and frauds of the Dutch and Flemish painters, who have imposed grossly upon us. But to return to the palace of Hampton-Court: Queen Mary lived not to see it completely finished; and her death, with the other difficulties of that reign, put a stop to the works for some time, till the King reviving his good liking of the place, set them to work again, and it was finished, as we see it. But I have been assured, that had the peace continued, and the King lived to enjoy the continuance of it, his majesty had resolved to have pulled down all the remains of the old building; and to have built up the whole palace after the manner of those two fronts already done. In these would have been an entire set of rooms of state for the receiving, and, if need had been, lodging, and entertaining any foreign prince, with his retinue; also offices for all the Secretaries of State, Lords of the Treasury, and of trade; as also apartments for all the great officers of the household. But the King’s death put an end to all these things.
Since the death of King William, Hampton-Court seemed abandoned of its patron. They have gotten a kind of proverbial saying relating to Hampton-Court, (viz.) that it has been generally chosen by every other prince, since it became a house of note. King Charles I was not only a prince that delighted in country retirements, but knew how to make choice of them by the beauty of their situation, the goodness of the air, &c. He took great delight here, and, had he lived to enjoy it in peace, had purposed to make it another thing than it was. But we all know what took him off from that felicity, and all others; and this house was at last made one of his prisons by his rebellious subjects.
His son, King Charles II may well be said to have an aversion to the place, for the reason just mentioned, namely, the treatment his royal father met with there; and particularly that the rebel and murtherer of his father, Cromwell, afterwards possessed this palace, and revelled here in the blood of the royal party, as he had done in that of his sovereign; King Charles II therefore chose Windsor, and bestowed a vast sum in beautifying the castle there, and which brought it to the perfection we see it in at this day.
King William, for King James is not to be named as to his choice of retired palaces, his delight running quite another way; I say, King William fixed upon Hampton-Court; and it was in his reign that Hampton-Court put on new clothes, and being dressed gay and glorious, made the figure we now see it in.
The late Queen, taken up for part of her reign in her kind regards to the Prince her spouse, was obliged to reside where her care of his health confined her, and in this case kept for the most part at Kensington, where he died; but her majesty always discovered her delight to be at Windsor, where she chose the little house, as ’twas called, opposite to the castle, and took the air in her chaise in the parks and forest, as she saw occasion.
Now Hampton-Court, by the like alternative, is come into request again; and we find his present majesty, who is a good judge too of the pleasantness and situation of a place of that kind, has taken Hampton-Court into his favour, and has made it much his choice for the summer’s retreat of the Court, and where they may best enjoy the diversions of the season.
From Hampton-Court I directed my course for a journey into the south west part of England; and I crossed to Chertsey on the Thames, a town I mentioned before; from whence crossing the Black Desert, as I called it, of Bagshot-Heath, I directed my course for Hampshire, or Hantshire.
Before we reach Basingstoke, we get rid of that unpleasant country, which I so often call a desert, and enter into a pleasant fertile country, enclosed and cultivated like the rest of England; and passing a village or two, we enter Basingstoke, in the midst of woods and pastures, rich and fertile, and the country accordingly spread with the houses of the nobility and gentry, as in other places. Basingstoke has a good market for corn, and lately, within a very few years, is fallen into a manufacture, (viz.) of making druggets and shalloons, and such slight goods, which, however, employs a good number of the poor people, and enables them to get their bread, which knew not how to get it before.
From hence the great western road goes to Whitchurch and Andover, two market towns, and sending members to Parliament; at the last of which, the Downs, or open country, begins, which we in general, though falsely, call Salisbury Plain. But I was obliged to go off to the left hand, to Alresford and Winchester. Alresford was a flourishing market town, and remarkable for this: that though it had no great trade, and particularly very little, if any manufactures, yet there was no collection in the town for the poor, nor any poor low enough to take alms of the parish, which is what I do not think can be said of any town in England besides.
But this happy circumstance, which so distinguished Alresford from all her neighbours, was brought to an end in the year ——, when, by a sudden and surprising fire, the whole town, with both the church and the market-house, was reduced to a heap of rubbish; and, except a few poor huts at the remotest ends of the town, not a house left standing. The town is since that very handsomely rebuilt, and the neighbouring gentlemen contributed largely to the relief of the people, especially, by sending in timber towards their building; also their market-house is handsomely built; but the church not yet, though we hear there is a fund raising likewise for that.
Here is a very large pond, or lake of water, kept up to a head, by a strong batterd’eau, or dam, which the people tell us was made by the Romans; and that it is to this day part of the great Roman highway, which leads from Winchester to Alton, and, as ’tis supposed, went on to London.
From hence, at the end of seven miles over the downs, we come to the very ancient city of Winchester; not only the great church, which is so famous all over Europe, and has been so much talked of, but even the whole city has, at a distance, the face of venerable, and looks ancient afar off; and yet here are many modern buildings too, and some very handsome; as the college schools; with the bishop’s palace, built by Bishop Morley, since the late wars; the old palace of the bishop having been ruined by that known church incendiary, Sir William Waller, and his crew of plunderers; who, if my information is not wrong, as I believe it is not, destroyed more monuments of the dead, and defaced more churches, than all the Round-heads in England beside.
The outside of the church is as plain and coarse, as if the founders had abhorred ornaments, or that William of Wickham had been a Quaker, or at least a Quietist. There is neither statue, or a niche for a statue, to be seen on all the outside; no carved work, no spires, towers, pinnacles, balustrades or any thing; but mere walls, buttresses, windows, and coins, necessary to the support and order of the building. It has no steeple, but a short tower covered flat, as if the top of it had fallen down, and it had been covered in haste to keep the rain out, till they had time to build it up again.
But the inside of the church has many very good things in it, and worth observation; it was for some ages the burying place of the English Saxon kings; whose relics, at the repair of the church, were collected by Bishop Fox, and, being put together into large wooden chests, lined with lead, were again interred at the foot of the great wall in the choir, three on one side, and three on the other; with an account whose bones are in each chest, whether the division of the relics might be depended upon, has been doubted, but is not thought material, so that we do but believe they are all there.
The choir of the church appears very magnificent; the roof is very high, and the Gothic work in the arched part is very fine, though very old; the painting in the windows is admirably good, and easy to be distinguished by those that understand those things.
The choir is said to be the longest in England; and as the number of prebendaries, canons, &c. are many, it required such a length. The ornaments of the choir are the effects of the bounty of several bishops; the fine altar (the noblest in England by much) was done by Bishop Morley; the roof, and the coat of arms of the Saxon and Norman kings, were done by Bishop Fox; and the fine throne, for the bishop in the choir, was given by Bishop Mew, in his life-time; and it was well it was; for if he had ordered it by will, there is reason to believe it had never been done. That reverend prelate, notwithstanding he enjoyed so rich a bishopric, scarce leaving money enough behind him, to pay for his coffin.
There are a great many persons of rank buried in this church, besides the Saxon kings, mentioned above; and besides several of the most eminent bishops of the see. Just under the altar lies a son of William the Conqueror, without any monument. The monument of Sir John Cloberry is extraordinary, but more, because it puts strangers upon enquiring into his story, than for any thing wonderful in the figure, it being cut in a modern dress; the habit gentlemen wore in those times, which, being now so much out of fashion, appears mean enough.
The body of the church was built by the famous William of Wickham; whose monument, intimating his fame, lies in the middle of that part, which was built at his expense. He was a courtier before a bishop; his natural genius was much beyond his acquired parts, and his skill in politics beyond his ecclesiastic knowledge. He is said to have put his master, King Edward III, to whom he was Secretary of State, upon the two great projects which made his reign so glorious, viz. first, upon setting up his claim to the crown of France, and pushing that claim by force of arms, which brought on the war with France, in which that prince was three times victorious in battle. (2) Upon setting up, or instituting the Order of the Garter; in which he (being before that made Bishop of Winchester) obtained the honour for the Bishops of Winchester, of being always prelates of the Order, as an appendix to the bishopric; and he himself was the first prelate of the Order, and the ensigns of that honour are joined with his episcopal ornaments, in the robing of his effigy on the monument above.
To the honour of this bishop, there are other foundations of his, but particularly the college in this city, which is a noble foundation indeed. The building consists of two large courts, in which are the lodgings for the masters and scholars, and in the centre a very noble chapel; beyond that, in the second court, are the schools, with a large cloister beyond them, and some enclosures laid open for the diversion of the scholars. There also is a great hall, where the scholars dine. The funds for the support of this college are very considerable; the masters live in a very good figure, and their maintenance is sufficient to support it: they have all separate dwellings in the house, and all possible conveniences appointed them. The scholars have exhibitions at a certain time of continuance here, if they please to study, in the New College at Oxford, built by the same noble benefactor.
This school has fully answered the end of the founder, who, though he was no great scholar, resolved to erect a house for the making the ages to come more learned than those that went before; and it had, I say, fully answered the end, for many learned and great men have been raised here, some of whom we shall have occasion to mention as we go on.
Among the many private inscriptions in this church, we found one made by an eminent physician in this city, on a mother and child, who, being his patients, died together, and were buried in the same grave, and which intimate, that one died of a fever, and the other of a dropsy.
At the west gate of this city was anciently a castle, known to be so by the ruins, more than by any extraordinary notice taken of it in history. What they say of it, that the Saxon kings kept their Court here, is doubtful, and must be meant of the West Saxons only; and as to the tale of King Arthur’s round table, which, they pretend, was kept here for him, and his two dozen of knights; which table hangs up still, as a piece of antiquity, to the tune of 1200 years, and has, as they pretend, the names of the said knights in Saxon characters, and yet such as no man can read. All this story I see so little ground to give the least credit to, that I look upon it, and ’t shall please you, to be no better than a FIB.
Where this castle stood, or whatever else it was, for some say there was no castle there, the late King Charles II marked out, a very noble design; which had he lived, would certainly have made that part of the country, the New-Market of the ages to come.
The building is begun, and the front next the city carried up to the roof, and covered; but the remainder is not begun. There was a street of houses designed from the gate of the palace down to the town, but it was never begun to be built; all hope of seeing this design perfected, or the house finished, is now vanished.
I cannot omit that there are several public edifices in the neighbourhood; towards the north, a piece of an old monastery undemolished, and which is still preserved to the religion, being the residence of some private Roman Catholic gentlemen, where they have an oratory, and, as they say, live still according to the rules of St Benedict. This building is called Hide-House; and, as they live very usefully and, to the highest degree, obliging among their neighbours they meet with no obstruction or disturbance from any body.
Winchester is a place of no trade, other than is naturally occasioned by the inhabitants of the city and neighbouring villages, one with another. Here is no manufacture, no navigation; here is a great deal of good company; and abundance of gentry being in the neighbourhood, it adds to the sociableness of the place. The clergy also here are, generally speaking, very rich, and very numerous.
As there is such good company, so they are gotten into that new-fashioned way of conversing by assemblies: they are pleasant and agreeable to the young people, and some times fatal to them, of which, in its place. Winchester has its share of the mirth: may it escape the ill consequences.
The hospital on the south of this city, at a mile’s distance on the road to Southampton, is worth notice. ’Tis said to be founded by King William Rufus, but was not endowed or appointed till later times by Cardinal Beaufort. Every traveller that knocks at the door of this house, in his way, and asks for it, claims the relief of a piece of white bread and a cup of beer; and this donation is still continued; a quantity of good beer is set apart every day to be given away; and what is left, is distributed to other poor, but none of it kept to the next day.
How the revenues of this hospital, which should maintain the master and thirty private gentlemen, who they call fellows, but ought to call brothers, is now reduced to maintain only fourteen, while the master lives in a figure equal to the best gentleman in the country, would be well worth the enquiry of a proper visitor, if such can be named. ’Tis a thing worthy of complaint, when public charities, designed for the relief of the poor, are embezzled and deprecated by the rich, and turned to the support of luxury and pride.
From Winchester, is about 25 miles, and over the most charming plains that can any where be seen, (far in my opinion) excelling the plains of Mecca, we come to Salisbury; the vast flocks of sheep, which one every where sees upon these downs, and the great number of those flocks, is a sight truly worth observation.
But ’tis more remarkable still; how a great part of these downs comes by a new method of husbandry, to be not only made arable, which they never were in former days, but to bear excellent wheat, and great crops too, though otherwise poor barren land, and never known to our ancestors to be capable of any such thing; nay, they would perhaps have laughed at any one that would have gone about to plough up the wild downs and hills, where the sheep were wont to go. But experience has made the present age wiser, and more skilful in husbandry; for by only folding the sheep upon the ploughed lands, those lands, which otherwise are barren, and where the plough goes within three or four inches of the solid rock of chalk, are made fruitful, and bear very good wheat, as well as rye and barley.
This plain country continues in length from Winchester to Salisbury 25 miles, from thence to Dorchester 22 miles, thence to Weymouth 6 miles, so that they lie near 50 miles in length, and breadth; they reach also in some places 35 to 40 miles. They who would make any practicable guess at the number of sheep usually fed on these downs, may take it from a calculation made, as I was told, at Dorchester, that there were 600000 sheep fed within 6 miles of that town, measuring every way round, and the town in the centre.
As we passed this plain country, we saw a great many old camps, as well Roman as British, and several remains of the ancient inhabitants of this kingdom, and of their wars, battles, entrenchments, encampments, buildings, and other fortifications, which are indeed very agreeable to a traveller, that has read any thing of the history of the country. Old Sarum is as remarkable as any of these, where there is a double entrenchment, with a deep graffe, or ditch, to either of them; the area about 100 yards in diameter, taking in the whole crown of the hill, and thereby rendering the ascent very difficult. Near this, there is one farm house, which is all the remains I could see of any town in or near the place, for the encampment has no resemblance of a town; and yet this is called the borough of Old Sarum, and sends two members to Parliament, who, those members can justly say, they represent, would be hard for them to answer.
Salisbury itself is indeed a large and pleasant city; though I do not think it at all the pleasanter for that which they boast so much of; namely, the water running through the middle of every street, or that it adds any thing to the beauty of the place, but just the contrary; it keeps the streets always dirty, full of wet and filth, and weeds, even in the middle of summer.
As the city of Winchester is a city without trade, that is to say, without any particular manufactures; so this city of Salisbury, and all the county of Wilts, of which it is the capital, are full of a great variety of manufactures; and those some of the most considerable in England; namely, the clothing trade, and the trade of flannels, druggets, and several other sorts of manufactures.
The city of Salisbury has two remarkable manufactures carried on in it, and which employ the poor of great part of the country round; namely, fine flannels, and long cloths for the Turkey trade, called Salisbury Whites. The people of Salisbury are gay and rich, and have a flourishing trade; and there is a great deal of good manners and good company among them; I mean, among the citizens, besides what is found among the gentlemen.
The cathedral is famous for the height of its spire, which is without exception the highest, and the handsomest in England, being from the ground 410 foot, and yet the walls so exceeding thin, that at the upper part of the spire upon a view made by the late Sir Christopher Wren, the wall was found to be less than five inches thick; upon which a consultation was had, whether the spire, or at least the upper part of it should be taken down, it being supposed to have received some damage by the great storm in the year 1703; but it was resolved in the negative, and Sir Christopher ordered it to be strengthened with bands of iron plates, as has effectually secured it; and I have heard some of the best architects say, it is stronger now than when it was first built.
They tell us, this church was 40 years a building, and cost an immense sum of money, but it must be acknowledged that the inside of the work is not answerable in the decoration of things, to the workmanship without; the painting in the choir  is mean, and more like the ordinary method of common drawing room, or tavern painting, than that of a church; the carving is good, but very little of it, and it is rather a fine church than finely set off. The ordinary boast of this building, that there were as many gates as months, as many windows as days, as many marble pillars as hours in the year, is now no recommendation at all. However the mention of it must be preserved.


   As many days as in one year there be,
So many windows in one church we see;
As many marble pillars there appear,
As there are hours throughout the fleeting year;
As many gates as moons one year do view:
Strange tale to tell, yet not more strange than true.


Among other monuments of noble men in this cathedral they show you one that is very extraordinary, and to which there hangs a tale: there was in the reign of Philip and Mary a very unhappy murther committed by the then Lord Sturton, or Stourton, a family since extinct, but well known till within a few years in that country. This Lord Stourton being guilty of the said murther, which also was aggravated with very bad circumstances, could not obtain the usual grace of the Crown, (viz.) to be beheaded, but Queen Mary positively ordered that like a common malefactor he should die at the gallows. After he was hanged, his friends desiring to have him buried at Salisbury, the bishop would not consent that he should be buried in the cathedral, unless as a farther mark of infamy, his friends would submit to this condition (viz.) that the silken halter in which he was hanged should be hanged up over his grave in the church, as a monument of his crime; which was accordingly done, and there it is to be seen to this day. The putting this halter up here, was not so wonderful to me as it was, that the posterity of that lord, who remained in good rank sometime after, should never prevail to have that mark of infamy taken off from the memory of their ancestor.
From hence directing my course to the sea-side, I left the great road, and went down the east side of the river towards New-Forest, and Lymington; and here I saw the ancient house and seat of Clarendon, the mansion of the ancient family of Hide, ancestors of the great Earl of Clarendon.
Being happily fixed by the favour of a particular friend at so beautiful a spot of ground as this of Clarendon Park, I made several little excursions from hence to view the northern parts of this county; a county so fruitful of wonders, that though I do not make antiquity my chief search, yet I must not pass it over entirely, where so much of it, and so well worth observation is to be found, which would look as if I either understood not the value of the study, or expected my readers should be satisfield with a total omission of it.
I have mentioned that this county is generally a vast continued body of high chalky hills, whose tops spread themselves into fruitful and pleasant downs and plains, upon which great flocks of sheep are fed, &c. But the reader is desired to observe these hills and plains are most beautifully intersected, and cut through by the course of divers pleasant and profitable rivers; in the course, and near the banks, of which there always is a chain of fruitful meadows, and rich pastures, and those interspersed with innumerable pleasant towns, villages, and houses, and among them many of considerable magnitude; so that while you view the downs, and think the country wild and uninhabited; yet when you come to descend into these vales you are surprised with the most pleasant and fertile country in England.
There are no less than four of these rivers which meet all together, at, or near the city of Salisbury, especially the waters of three of them run through the streets of the city; and the course of these three lead us through the whole mountainous part of the country, the two first join their waters at Wilton the shire-town, though a place of no great notice now; and these are the waters which run through the canal, and the gardens of Wilton House, the seat of that ornament of nobility and learning, the Earl of Pembroke.

One cannot be said to have seen any thing that a man of curiosity would think worth seeing in this county, and not have been at Wilton House; but not the beautiful building, not the ancient trophy of a great family, not the noble situation, not all the pleasures of the gardens, parks, fountains, hare-warren, or of whatever is rare either in art or nature are equal to, that yet more glorious sight, of a noble princely palace, constantly filled with its noble and proper inhabitants; viz. the lord and proprietor, who is indeed a true patriarchal monarch, reigns here with an authority agreeable to all his subjects (family); and his reign is made agreeable, by his first practising the most exquisite government of himself, and then guiding all under him by the rules of honour and virtue; being also himself perfectly master of all the needful arts of family government.
Here an exalted genius is the instructor, a glorious example the guide, and a gentle well directed hand the governor and law-giver to the whole; and the family like a well governed city appears happy, flourishing and regular, groaning under no grievance, pleased with what they enjoy, and enjoying every thing which they ought to be pleased with. Nor is the blessing of this noble resident extended to the family only, but even to all the country round, who in their degree feel the effects of the general beneficence; and where the neighbourhood, however poor, receive all the good they can expect, and are sure to have no injury, or oppression.
As the present Earl of Pembroke, the lord of this fine palace, is a nobleman of great personal merit, many other ways; so he is a man of learning, and reading, beyond most men of his lordship’s high rank in this nation, if not in the world; and as his reading has made him a master of antiquity, and judge of such pieces of antiquity, as he has had opportunity to meet with in his own travels, and otherwise in the world; so it has given him a love of the study, and made him a collector of valuable things, as well in painting as in sculpture, and other excellencies of art, as also of nature; in so much that Wilton-House is now a mere museum, a chamber of rarities, and we meet with several things there, which are to be found no where else in the world.
As his lordship is a great collector of fine paintings; so I know no nobleman’s house in England, so prepared, as if built on purpose to receive them; the largest, and the finest pieces that can be imagined extant in the world, might have found a place here capable to receive them. I say, they might have found, as if they could not now, which is in part true; for at present the whole house is so completely filled, that I see no room for any new piece to crowd in, without displacing some other fine piece that hung there before; as for the value of the piece, that might so offer to succeed the displaced, that the great judge of the whole collection, the earl himself, must determine, and as his judgement is perfectly good, the best picture would be sure to possess the place. The piece of our Saviour washing His disciples’ feet, which they show you in one of the first rooms you go into, must be spoken of by every body that has any knowledge of painting, and is an admirable piece indeed.
When you are entered the apartments, such variety seizes you every way, that you scarce know to which hand to turn your self. First, on one side you see several rooms filled with paintings, as before, all so curious, and the variety such, that ’tis with reluctance, that you can turn from them; while looking another way, you are called off by a vast collection of busto’s, and pieces of the greatest antiquity of the kind, both Greek, and Romans; among these, there is one of the Roman emperor, Marcus Aurelius in basso relievo. I never saw any thing like what appears here, except in the chamber of rarities at Munick in Bavaria.
Passing these, you come into several large rooms, as if contrived for the reception of the beautiful guests that take them up; one of these is near 70 foot long and the ceiling 26 foot high, with another adjoining of the same height, and breadth, but not so long. Those together might be called the Great Gallery of Wilton, and might vie for paintings with the gallery of Luxemburg in the Fauxbourg of Paris.
These two rooms are filled with the family pieces of the house of Herbert, most of them by Lilly, or Vandyke, and one in particularly, out does all that ever I met with, either at home, or abroad, ’tis done, as was the mode of painting at that time, after the manner of a family piece of King Charles I with his queen, and children, which before the burning of White-Hall, I remember to hang at the east end of the Long Gallery in the palace.
It would be endless to describe the whole set of the family pictures, which take up this room, unless we would enter into the roof-tree of the family, and set down a genealogical line of the whole house.
After we have seen this fine range of beauties, for such indeed they are; far from being at an end of your surprise, you have three or four rooms still upon the same floor, filled with wonders, as before. Nothing can be finer than the pictures themselves, nothing more surprising than the number of them; at length you descend the back-stairs, which are in themselves large, though not like the other. However, not a hand’s breadth is left to crowd a picture in of the smallest size, and even the upper rooms, which might be called garrets, are not naked, but have some very good pieces in them.
From this pleasant and agreeable day’s work, I returned to Clarendon, and the next day took another short tour to the hills, to see that celebrated piece of antiquity, the wonderful Stone-Henge, and upon the side of the river Avon, near the town of Amesbury. ’Tis needless, that I should enter here into any part of the dispute about which our learned antiquaries have so puzzled themselves, that several books, and one of them, in folio, has been published about it; some alleging it to be a heathen, or pagan temple, and altar, or place of sacrifice, as Mr Jones; others, a monument, or trophy of victory; others a monument for the dead, as Mr Aubury, and the like. Again, some will have it be British, some Danish, some Saxon, some Roman, and some before them all, Phenician.
I shall suppose it, as the majority of all writers do, to be a monument for the dead, and the rather, because men’s bones have been frequently dug up in the ground near them. The common opinion that no man could ever count them, that a baker carried a basket of bread, and laid a loaf upon every stone, and yet could never make out the same number twice: this, I take, as a mere country fiction, and a ridiculous one too; the reason why they cannot easily be told, is, that many of them lie half, or part buried in the ground, and a piece here, and a piece there, only appearing above the grass, it cannot be known easily, which belong to one stone, and which to another, or which are separate stones, and which are joined under ground to one another; otherwise, as to those which appear, they are easy to be told, and I have seen them told four times after one another, beginning every time at a different place, and every time they amounted to 72 in all.
The form of this monument is not only described but delineated in most authors, and indeed ’tis hard to know the first, but by the last; the figure was at first circular, and there were at least four rows or circles, within one another; the main stones were placed upright, and they were joined on the top by cross stones, laid from one to another, and fastened with vast mortices and tenants. Length of time has so decayed them, that not only most of the cross stones which lay on the top are fallen down, but many of the upright also, notwithstanding the weight of them is so prodigious great. How they came thither, or from whence, no stones of that kind being now to be found in any part of England near it, is still the mystery, for they are of such immense bulk that no engines, or carriages which we have in use in this age could stir them.
These stones at Stonehenge, as Mr Cambden describes them, were very large, the upright stones 24 foot high, 7 foot broad, 16 foot round; and weight 12 ton each; and the cross stones on the top, which he calls coronets, were 6 or 7 ton, but this does not seem equal, for if the cross stones weighed six, or seven ton, the others, as they appear now, were at least 5 or 6 times as big, and must weigh in proportion. And therefore, I must think their judgement much nearer the case who judge the upright stones at 16 ton, or thereabouts, supposing them to stand a great way into the earth, as ’tis not doubted but they do; and the coronets, or cross stones, at about two ton, which is very large too, and as much as their bulk can be thought to allow. Upon the whole, we must take them as our ancestors have done; namely, for an erection, or building so ancient, that no history has handed down to us the original, as we find it then uncertain, we must leave it so. ’Tis indeed a reverend piece of antiquity, and ’tis a great loss that the true history of it is not known.
The downs and plains in this part of England being so open, and the surface so little subject to alteration, there are more remains of antiquity to be seen upon them, than in other places; for example, I think they tell us there are three and fifty ancient encampments, or fortifications to be seen in this one county, some whereof are exceeding plain to be seen, some of one form, some of another; some of one nation, some of another, British, Danish, Saxon, Roman.
Also the barrows, as we all agree to call them, are very many in number in this county, and very obvious, having suffered very little decay. These are large hillocks of earth cast up, as the ancients agree, by the soldiers over the bodies of their dead comrades slain in battle; several hundreds of these are to be seen, especially in the north part of this county, about Marlbro’ and the downs, from thence to St Ann’s-Hill, and even every way, the downs are full of them.
I am now to pursue my first design, and shall take the west part of Wiltshire in my return, where are several things very well worth our stay. From hence in my way to the sea-side I came to New-Forest of which I have said something already.
This waste and wild part of the country was, as some record, laid open, and waste for a forest, and for game, by that violent tyrant William the Conqueror, and for which purpose he unpeopled the country, pulled down the houses, and which was worse, the churches of several parishes or towns, and of abundance of villages, turning the poor people out of their habitations, and possessions, and laying all open for his deer. The same histories likewise record that two of his own blood and posterity, and particularly his immediate successor William Rufus lost their lives in this forest: one (viz.) the said William Rufus being shot with an arrow directed at a deer, which the king, and his company were hunting, and the arrow glancing on a tree, changed his course and struck the king full on the breast, and killed him. This they relate as a just judgment of God on the cruel devastation made here by the Conqueror. Be it so or not, as heaven pleases; but that the king was so killed, is certain, and they show the tree, on which the arrow glanced, to this day.
I cannot omit to mention here a proposal made a few years ago to the late Lord Treasurer, Godolphin, for re-peopling this forest, which for some reasons I can be more particular in, than any man now left alive, because I had the honour to draw up the scheme, and argue it before that noble lord, and some others who were principally concerned at that time in bringing over, or rather providing for when they were come over, the poor inhabitants of the Palatinate; a thing in it self commendable, but as it was managed, made scandalous to England, and miserable to those poor people.
Some persons being ordered by that noble lord, above mentioned, to consider of measures, how the said poor people should be provided for, and whether they could be provided for, or no, without injury to the public. The answer was grounded upon this maxim, that the number of inhabitants is the wealth and strength of a kingdom, provided those inhabitants were such, as by honest industry applied themselves to live by their labour, to whatsoever trades, or employments they were brought up. In the next place it was enquired, what employments those poor people were brought up to? It was answered, there were husbandmen, and artificers of all sorts, upon which the proposal was as follows.


New Forest in Hampshire was singled out to be the place.


Here it was proposed to draw a great square-line, containing four thousand acres of land, marking out two large highways, or roads through the centre, crossing both ways, so that there should be a thousand acres in each division, exclusive of the land contained in the said cross roads.
Then it was proposed to single out twenty men, and their families, who should be recommended as honest industrious men, expert in, or at least capable of being instructed in husbandry, curing and cultivating of land, breeding and feeding cattle, and the like. To each of these should be parcelled out in equal distributions, two hundred acres of this land, so


The form of the several farms would be laid out thus.





a the church, b the shambles, c the market house, d a town hall, e a conduit with stocks, &c. F the conduits, or wells, G houses, H the lands enclosed behind, I streets of houses for tradesmen.
that the whole four thousand acres should be fully distributed to the said twenty families, for which they should have no rent to pay, and be liable to no taxes, but such as provided for their own sick or poor, repairing their own roads, and the like; this exemption from rent and taxes, to continue for twenty years, and then to pay each 50l. a year to the queen: that is to say, to the crown.
To each of these families, who I would now call farmers, it was proposed to advance 200l. in ready money, as a stock to set them to work, to furnish them with cattle, horses, cows, hogs, &c. and to hire and pay labourers, to enclose, clear, and cure the land; which it would be supposed the first year would not be so much to their advantage as afterwards; allowing them timber out of the forest to build themselves houses, and barns, sheds, and offices, as they should have occasion; also for carts, waggons, ploughs, harrows and the like necessary things, care to be taken that the men and their families went to work forthwith according to the design.

This was the scheme for settling the Palatinates, by which means twenty families of farmers, handsomely set up, and supported, would lay a foundation, as I have said, for six or seven hundred of the rest of their people; and as the land in New Forest is undoubtedly good and capable of improvement by such cultivation, so other wastes in England are to be found as fruitful as that; and twenty such villages might have been erected, the poor strangers maintained, and the nation evidently be bettered by it; as to the money to be advanced, which in the case of twenty such settlements, at 400l. each, would be 80000l. two things were answered to it.
1. That the annual rent to be received for all those lands after twenty years, would abundantly pay the public for the first disburses on the scheme above, that rent being then to amount to 40000l. per ann.
2. More money than would have done this, was expended or rather thrown away upon them here, to keep them in suspense, and afterwards starve them; sending them a begging all over the nation, and shipping them off to perish in other countries. Where the mistake lay, is none of my business to enquire.

I reserved this account for this place, because I passed in this journey over the very spot where the design was laid out; namely, near Lindhurst, in the road from Rumsey to Limington, whither I now directed my course.
Limington is a little but populous sea port, standing opposite to the Isle of Wight, in the narrow part of the strait, which ships some times pass through in fair weather, called the Needles; and right against an ancient town of that island called Yarmouth, and which, in distinction from the great town of Yarmouth in Norfolk, is called South Yarmouth. Limington sends two members to Parliament and this and her salt trade is all I can say to her; for though she is very well situated, as to the convenience of shipping, I do not find they have any foreign commerce, except it be what we call smuggling, and roguing; which, I may say, is the reigning commerce of all this part of the English coast, from the mouth of the Thames to the Land’s End of Cornwall.
From hence there are but few towns on the sea coast west, nor are there any harbours, or sea ports of any note, except Pool. As for Christ Church, though it stands at the mouth of the Avon, which, as I have said, comes down from Salisbury, and receives also the Stour and Piddle, two Dorsetshire rivers, which bring with them all the waters of the north part of Dorsetshire; yet it is a very inconsiderable poor place, scarce worth seeing, and less worth mentioning in this account; only, that it sends two members to Parliament, which many poor towns in this part of England do, as well as that.
From hence I stept up into the country north-west, to see the ancient town of Wimburn, or Wimburnminster. There I found nothing remarkable; but the church, which is indeed a very great one, ancient, and yet very well built, with a very firm strong square tower, considerably high; but was, without doubt, much finer, when on the top of it, stood a most exquisite spire, finer and taller, if fame lies not, than that at Salisbury and, by its situation, in a plainer, flatter country, visible, no question, much farther. But this most beautiful ornament was blown down by a sudden tempest of wind as they tell us in the year 1622.
The church remains a venerable piece of antiquity, and has in it the remains of a place, once, much more in request than it is now; for here are the monuments of several noble families; and in particular of one king, viz. King Ethelred, who was slain in battle by the Danes. He was a prince famed for piety and religion, and, according to the zeal of these times, was esteemed as a martyr; because venturing his life against the Danes, who were heathens, he died fighting for his religion and his country. The inscription upon his grave is preserved, and has been carefully repaired, so as to be easily read, and is as follows :

In hoc loco quiescit Corpus S. Etheldredi, Regis West Saxonum, Martyris, qui Anno Dom. DCCCLXXII. xxiii. Aprilis per Manus Danorum Paganorum Occubuit.

In English thus:

Here rests the body of Holy Etheldred, King of the West Saxons, and martyr, who fell by the hands of the pagan Danes, in the year of our Lord 872, the 23d of April.

South of this town, over a sandy wild and barren country, we came to Pool, a considerable sea-port, and indeed the most considerable in all this part of England; for here I found some ships, some merchants, and some trade; especially, here were a good number of ships fitted out every year to the Newfoundland fishing, in which the Pool men were said to have been particularly successful for many years past.
The town sits in the bottom of a great bay, or inlet of the sea, which entering at one narrow mouth opens to a very great breadth within the entrance, and comes up to the very shore of this town. This place is famous for the best, and biggest oysters in all this part of England, which the people of Pool pretend to be famous for pickling, and they are barrelled up here, and sent not only to London, but to the West Indies, and to Spain, and Italy, and other parts. ’Tis observed more pearl are found in the Pool oysters, and larger than in any other oysters about England.
Wareham is a neat town, and full of people, having a share of trade with Pool it self, it shows the ruins of a large town, and ’tis apparent has had eight churches, of which they have three remaining. South of Wareham, and between the bay I have mentioned and the sea, lies a large tract of land, which being surrounded by the sea, except on one side is called an island, though it is really what should be called a peninsula. This tract of land is better inhabited than the sea coast of this west end of Dorsetshire generally is, and the manufacture of stockings is carried on there also; it is called the Isle of Purbeck, and has in the middle of it a large market-town, called Corf, and from the famous castle there, the whole town is now called Corf-Castle, it is a corporation, sending members to Parliaments.
This part of the country is eminent for vast quarries of stone, which is cut out flat, and used in London in great quantities for paving court-yards, alleys, avenues to houses, kitchens, foot-ways on the sides of the high-streets, and the like; and is very profitable to the place, as also in the number of shipping employed in bringing it to London. There are also several rocks of very good marble, only that the veins in the stone are not black and white, as the Italian, but grey, red, and other colours.
From hence to Weymouth, we rode in view of the sea; the country is open, and in some respects pleasant, but not like the northern parts of the county, which are all fine carpet ground, soft as velvet. I cannot omit here a small adventure, which was very surprising to me on this journey; passing this plain country, we came to an open piece of ground where a neighbouring gentleman had at a great expense laid out a proper piece of land for a Decoy, or Duck-coy, as some call it; the works were but newly done, the planting young, the ponds very large, and well made; but the proper places for shelter of the fowl not covered, the trees not being grown, and men were still at work improving, and enlarging, and planting on the adjoining heath, or common. Near the decoy keeper’s house, were some places where young decoy-ducks were hatched, or otherwise kept to fit them for their work; to preserve them from vermin, polecats, kites, and such like, they had set traps, as is usual in such cases, and a gibbet by it, where abundance of such creatures as were taken were hanged up for show.
While the decoy man was busy showing the new-works, he was alarmed with a great cry about this house for Help, Help, and away he run, like the wind, guessing, as we supposed that something was catched in the trap. It was a good big boy about 13 or 14 year old, that cried out, for coming to the place, he found a great fowl catched by the leg in the trap, which yet was so strong, and so outrageous, that the boy going too near him, he flew at him, and frighted him, bit him, and beat him with his wings, for he was too strong for the boy. As the master ran from the decoy, so another manservant ran from the house, and finding a strange creature fast in the trap, not knowing what it was, laid at him with a great stick; the creature fought him a good while, but at length he struck him an unlucky blow, which quieted him; after this we all came up to see what was the matter, and found a monstrous eagle caught by the leg in the trap, and killed by the fellow’s cudgel, as above.
When the master came to know what it was, and that his man had killed it, he was ready to kill the fellow for his pains, for it was a noble creature indeed, and would have been worth a great deal to the man to have it shown about the country, or to have sold to any gentleman curious in such things; but the eagle was dead, and there we left it. ’Tis probable this eagle had flown over the sea from France, either there, or at the Isle of Weight, where the Channel is not so wide; for we do not find that any eagles are known to breed in those parts of Britain.
From hence we turned up to Dorchester, the county town, though not the largest town in the county; Dorchester is indeed a pleasant agreeable town to live in, and where I thought the people seemed less divided into factions and parties, than in other places; for though here are divisions and the people are not all of one mind, either as to religion, or politics, yet they did not seem to separate with so much animosity as in other places. Here I saw the Church of England clergymen, and the Dissenting minister, or preacher drinking tea together, and conversing with civility and good neighbourhood, like catholic Christians, and men of a catholic, and extensive charity. The town is populous, though not large, the streets broad, but the buildings old, and low; however, there is good company and a good deal of it; and a man that coveted a retreat in this world might as agreeably spend his time, and as well in Dorchester, as in any town I know in England.
The downs round this town are exceeding pleasant, and come up on every side, even to the very street’s end; and here it was that they told me, that there were 600 thousand sheep fed on the downs, within six miles of the town. This I say, I was told, I do not affirm it to be true; but when I viewed the country round, I confess I could not but incline to believe it.
The grass, or herbage of these downs is full of the sweetest, and the most aromatic plants, such as nourish the sheep to a strange degree, and the sheep’s dung again nourishes that herbage to a strange degree; so that the valleys are rendered extremely fruitful, by the washing of the water in hasty showers from off these hills. An eminent instance of this is seen at Amesbury in Wiltshire, the next county to this, for it is the same thing in proportion over this whole county: I was told that at this town there was a meadow on the bank of the river Avon, which runs thence to Salisbury, which was let for 12l. a year per acre for the grass only. This I enquired particularly after, at the place, and was assured by the inhabitants as one man, that the fact was true, and was showed the meadows; the grass which grew on them was such as grew to the length of ten or twelve foot, rising up to a good height, and then taking root again, and was of so rich a nature as to answer very well such an extravagant rent. The reason they gave for this was the extraordinary richness of the soil, made so, as above, by the falling, or washing of the rains from the hills adjacent.
From Dorchester it is six miles to the sea side south, and the ocean in view almost all the way. The first town you come to is Weymouth, or Weymouth and Melcomb, two towns lying at the mouth of a little rivulet, which they call the Wey, but scarce claims the name of a river; however, the entrance makes a very good, though small harbour, and they are joined by a wooden bridge; so that nothing but the harbour parts them; yet they are separate corporations, and choose each of them two Members of Parliament, just as London and Southwark.
Weymouth is a sweet, clean, agreeable town, considering its low situation, and close to the sea; ’tis well built, and has a great many good substantial merchants in it; who drive a considerable trade, and have a good number of ships belonging to the town. They carry on now, in time of peace, a trade with France; but besides this, they trade also to Portugal, Spain, Newfoundland, and Virginia.
While I was here once, there came a merchant ship into that road, called Portland Road, under a very hard storm of wind; she was homeward bound from Oporto for London, laden with wines, and as she came in, she made signals of distress to the town, firing guns for help, and the like, as is usual in such cases.
The venturous Weymouth-men went off, even before it was light, with two boats to see who she was, and what condition she was in, and found she was come to an anchor, and had struck her top-masts; but that she had been in bad weather, had lost an anchor and cable before, and had but one cable to trust to, which did hold her, but was weak; and as the storm continued to blow, they expected every hour to go on shore, and split to pieces.
Upon this, the Weymouth boats came back with such diligence, that, in less than three hours, they were on board them again with an anchor and cable, which they immediately bent in its place, and let go to assist the other, and thereby secured the ship. ’Tis true, that they took a good price of the master for the help they gave him; for they made him draw a bill on his owners at London for 12l. for the use of the anchor, cable, and boat, besides some gratuities to the men. But they saved the ship and cargo by it, and in three or four days the weather was calm, and he proceeded on his voyage, returning the anchor and cable again; so that, upon the whole, it was not so extravagant as at first I thought it to be.
The Isle of Portland lies right against this port of Weymouth. Hence it is, that our best and whitest free stone comes, with which the cathedral of St Paul’s, the Monument, and all the public edifices in the city of London, are chiefly built; and ’tis wonderful, and well worth the observation of a traveller to see the quarries in the rocks, from whence they are cut out, what stones, and of what prodigious a size are cut out there.
The sea off of this island, and especially to the west of it, is counted the most dangerous part of the British Channel. Due south, there is almost a continued disturbance in the waters, by reason of what they call two tides meeting, which I take to be no more than the sets of the currents from the French coast, and from the English shore meeting. This they call Portland Race; and several ships, not aware of these currents, have been embayed to the west of Portland, and been driven on shore on the beach, (of which I shall speak presently) and there lost.
To prevent this danger, and guide the mariner in these distresses, they have, within these few months, set up two light-houses on the two points of that island; and they had not been many months set up, with the directions given to the public for their bearings, but we found three outward-bound East-India ships which were in distress in the night, in a hard extreme gale of wind, were so directed by those lights, that they avoided going on shore by it, which, if the lights had not been there, would inevitably happened to their destruction.
This island, though seemingly miserable, and thinly inhabited, yet the inhabitants being almost all stone-cutters, we found there was no very poor people among them; and when they collected money for the rebuilding St Paul’s, they got more in this island than in the great town of Dorchester, as we were told.
From hence we went on to Bridport, a pretty large corporation town on the sea shore, though without a harbour. Here we saw boats all the way on the shore fishing for mackerel, which they take in the easiest manner imaginable. As soon as the boats had brought their fish on shore, we observed a guard, or watch, placed on the shore in several places, who we found had their eye not on the fishermen, but on the country people, who came down to the shore to buy their fish; and very sharp we found they were; and some that came with small carts were obliged to go back empty, without any fish. When we came to enquire into the particulars of this, we found, that these were officers placed on the shore by the justices and magistrates of the towns about, who were ordered to prevent the country farmers buying the mackerel to dung their land with them, which was thought to be dangerous, as to infection. In short, such was the plenty of fish that year, that mackerel, the finest and largest I ever saw, were sold at the sea side a hundred for a penny.
From Bridport, a town in which we see nothing remarkable, we came to Lime, the town particularly made famous by the landing of the Duke of Monmouth, and his unfortunate troop, in the time of King James II, of which I need say nothing, the history of it being so recent in the memory of so many living. This is a town of good figure, and has in it several eminent merchants, who carry on a considerable trade to France, Spain, Newfoundland, and the Streights; and though they have neither creek or bay, road, or river, they have a good harbour; but ’tis such a one as is not in all Britain besides, if there is such a one in any part of the world.
It is a massy pile of building, consisting of high and thick walls of stone. The walls are raised in the main sea, at a good distance from the shore; it consists of one main and solid wall of stone, large enough for carts and carriages to pass on the top, and to admit houses and ware houses to be built on it; so that it is broad as a street; opposite to this, but farther into the sea, is another wall of the same workmanship, which crosses the end of the first wall, and comes about with a tail, parallel to the first wall. Between the point of the first or main wall, is the entrance into the port, and the second, or opposite wall, breaking the violence of the sea from the entrance, the ships go into the basin, as into a pier, or harbour, and ride there as secure as in a mill pond, or as in a wet dock.
This work is called the COBB. The custom-house officers have a lodge and warehouse upon it, and there were several ships of very good force, and rich in value, in the basin of it when I was there. It might be strengthened with a fort, and the walls themselves are firm enough to carry what guns they please to plant upon it; but they did not seem to think it needful; and as the shore is convenient for batteries, they have some guns planted in proper places, both for the defence of the COBB, and the town also.
It was in sight of these hills that Queen Elizabeth’s fleet, under the command of the Lord Howard of Effingham, then admiral, began first to engage in a close, and resolved fight with the invincible Spanish Armada, in 1588. Maintaining the fight, the Spaniards making eastward, till they came the length of Portland Race, where they gave it over; the Spaniards having received considerable damage.
While we stayed here some time viewing this town and coast, we had opportunity to observe the pleasant way of conversation, as it is managed among the gentlemen of this county, and their families, which are without reflection some of the most polite and well bred people in the isle of Britain. As their hospitality is very great, and their bounty to the poor remarkable, so their generous friendly way of living with, visiting, and associating one with another is as hard to be described, as it is really to be admired; they seem to have a mutual confidence in, and friendship with one another, as if they were all relations. Nor did I observe the sharping tricking temper, which is too much crept in among the gaming and horse-racing gentry in some parts of England, to be so much known among them, any otherwise than to be abhorred; and yet they sometimes play too, and make matches, and horse-races, as they see occasion.
The ladies here do not want the help of assemblies to assist in match-making; or half-pay officers to run away with their daughters, which the meetings, called assemblies in some other parts of England, are recommended for. Here’s no Bury Fair, where the women are scandalously said to carry themselves to market, and where every night they meet at the play, or at the assembly for intrigue, and yet I observed that the women do not seem to stick on hands so much in this country, as in those countries, where those assemblies are so lately set up; the reason of which I cannot help saying, if my opinion may bear any weight, is, that the Dorsetshire ladies are equal in beauty, and may be superior in reputation. And yet the Dorsetshire ladies, I assure you, are not nuns, they do not go veiled about streets, or hide themselves when visited; but a general freedom of conversation, agreeable, mannerly, kind, and good runs through the whole body of the gentry of both sexes, mixed with the best of behaviour, and yet governed by prudence and modesty; such as I no where see better in all my observation, through the whole isle of Britain. In this little interval also I visited some of the biggest towns in the north-west part of this county, as Blandford, a handsome well built town, but chiefly famous for making the finest bonelace in England.
From thence I went west to Stourbridge, vulgarly called Strabridge; the town, and the country round is employed in the manufacture of stockings, and which was once famous for making the finest, best, and highest prized knit stockings in England; but that trade now is much decayed by the increase of the knitting-stocking engine, or frame, which has destroyed the hand knitting-trade for fine stockings through the whole kingdom.
From hence I came to Shireburn, a large and populous town, with one collegiate, or conventual church, and may properly claim to have more inhabitants in it than any town in Dorsetshire, though it is neither the county town, or does it send members to Parliament; the church is still a reverend pile, and shows the face of great antiquity.
Shaftesbury is also on the edge of this county, adjoining to Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, being 14 miles from Salisbury, over that fine down or carpet ground, which they call particularly, or properly Salisbury Plain. It has neither house or town in view all the way, but there is a certain never failing assistance upon all these downs for telling a stranger his way, and that is the number of shepherds keeping their vast flocks of sheep, which are every where in the way, and who, with a very little pains, a traveller may always speak with. Nothing can be like it, the Arcadians’ plains of which we read so much pastoral trumpery in the poets, could be nothing to them.
This Shaftesbury is now a sorry town, upon the top of a high hill, and which closes the plain, or downs, and whence nature presents you a new scene or prospect, (viz.) of Somerset and Wiltshire, where ’tis all enclosed, and grown with woods, forests, and planted hedge-rows. The country rich, fertile and populous of inhabitants, and those inhabitants fully employed in the richest and most valuable manufacture in the world, (viz.) the English clothing, as well, the medley, or mixed clothing, as whites.
In my return to my western progress, I passed some little part of Somersetshire, as through Evil, or Yeovil, upon the river Ivil, in going to which we go down a long steep hill, which they call Babylon-Hill; but from what original I could find none of the country people to inform me. It cannot pass my observation here, that when we are come this length from London, the dialect of the English tongue, or the country way of expressing themselves is not easily understood, it is so strangely altered; it is true, that it is so in many parts of England besides, but in none so gross a degree as in this part. This way of boorish country speech, as in Ireland, it is called the brogue upon the tongue; so here ’tis called jouring and ’tis certain, that though the tongue be all mere natural English, yet those that are but a little acquainted with them, cannot understand one half of what they say. It is not possible to explain this fully by writing, because the difference is not so much in the orthography of words, as in the tone, and diction; their abridging the speech, cham for I am, chil for I will, don, for put on, and doff, for put off, and the like. And I cannot omit a short story here on this subject; coming to a relation’s house, who was a school-master at Martock in Somersetshire, I went into his school to beg the boys a play day, as is usual in such cases, I should have said to beg the master a play day, but that by the way; coming into the school, I observed one of the lowest scholars was reading his lesson to the usher, which lesson it seems was a chapter in the Bible, so I sat down by the master, till the boy had read out his chapter. I observed the boy read a little oddly in the tone of the country, which made me the more attentive, because on enquiry, I found that the words were the same, and the orthography the same as in all our Bibles. I observed also the boy read it out with his eyes still on the book, and his head like a mere boy, moving from side to side, as the lines reached cross the columns of the book; his lesson was in the Cant. [Song of Solomon] 5. 3. of which the words are these,
‘I have washed my coat, how shall I put it on, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?’
The boy read thus, with his eyes, as I say, full on the text.
‘Chava doffed my cooat, how shall I don’t, chav a washed my veet, how shall I moil’em?’
How the dexterous dunce could form his mouth to express so readily the words, (which stood right printed in the book) in his country jargon, I could not but admire.
I could give many more accounts of the different dialects of the people of this country, in some of which they are really not to be understood, but the particulars have little or no diversion in them, they carry it such a length, that we see their jouring speech upon their monuments, and grave-stones; as for example, even in some of the church-yards of the city of Bristol, I saw this excellent poetry after some other lines—

And when that thou doest hear of thick,
Think of the glass that runneth quick.

But I proceed into Devonshire, from Evil we came to Crookorn, thence to Chard, and from thence into the same

road I was in before at Honiton. This is a large and beautiful market-town, very populous, and well built, and is so very remarkably paved with small pebbles, that on either sides the way a little channel is left shouldered up on the sides of it; so that it holds a small stream of fine clear running water with a little square dipping place left at every door, so that every family in the town has a clear clean running river, (as it may be called) just at their own door.
Here we see the first of the great serge manufacture of Devonshire, a trade too great to be described in miniature, as it must be, if I undertake it here; and which takes up this whole county, which is the largest and most populous in England, Yorkshire excepted, (which ought to be esteemed three counties, and is indeed divided as such into the East, West and North Riding;) but Devonshire one entire county, is so full of great towns, and those towns so full of people, and those people so universally employed in trade, and manufactures, that not only it cannot be equalled in England, but perhaps not in Europe.
In my travel through Dorsetshire, I ought to have observed that the biggest towns in that county sent no members to Parliament, and that the smallest did; that is to say, that Sherborn, Blandford, Winbornminster, Sturminster, and several other towns choose no members, whereas Weymouth, Melcom, and Bridport, were all burgess towns; but now we come to Devonshire, we find almost all the great towns, and some smaller choosing members also. It is true, there are some large populous towns that do not choose, but then there are so many that do, that the county seems to have no injustice, for they send up six and twenty members.
I cannot but recommend it to any gentlemen that travel this road, that if they please to observe the prospect for half a mile, till their coming down the hill, and to the entrance into Honiton, the view of the country is the most beautiful landskip in the world, a mere picture; and I do not remember the like in any one place in England; ’tis observable that the market of this town was kept originally on the Sunday, till it was changed by the direction of King John.
From Honiton the country is exceeding pleasant still, and on the road they have a beautiful prospect almost all the way to Exeter, which is twelve miles; on the left hand of this road lies also the town of St Mary Oterey, commonly called St Mary Autree. They tell us the name is derived from the river Ottery, and that, from the multitude of otters found always in that river, which however to me seems fabulous; nor does there appear to be any such great number of otters in that water, or in the county about, more than is usual in other counties, or in other parts of the county about them; they tell us they send 20000 hogsheads of cider hence every year to London, and which is still worse, that it is most of it bought there by the merchants to mix with their wines, which if true, is not much to the reputations of the London vintners; but that by the by.
From hence we came to Exeter, a city famous for two things, which we seldom find unite in the same town, (viz.) that ’tis full of gentry, and good company, and yet full of trade and manufactures also; the serge market held here every week is very well worth a stranger’s seeing, and next to the Brigg-Market at Leeds in Yorkshire, is the greatest in England. The people assured me that at this market is generally sold from 60 to 70 to 80, and sometimes a hundred thousand pounds value in serges in a week. I think ’tis kept on Mondays.
This city drives a very great correspondence with Holland, as also directly to Portugal, Spain and Italy; shipping off vast quantities of the woollen-manufactures, especially, to Holland, the Dutch giving very large commissions here for the buying of serges, perpetuan’s, and such goods; which are made not only in and about Exeter, but especially at Tiverton, Cullumbton, Bampton, and all the north east part of the county, which part of the county is, as it may be said, fully employed, the people made rich, and the poor that are properly so called, well subsisted, and employed by it.
Excester is a large rich, beautiful, populous, and was once a very strong city; but as to the last, as the castle, the walls, and all the old works are demolished so were they standing, the way of managing sieges, and attacks of towns is such now, and so altered from what it was in those days, that Excester in the utmost strength it could ever boast, would not now hold out five days open trenches; nay, would hardly put an army to the trouble of opening trenches against it at all. This city was famous in the late civil unnatural war, for its loyalty to the king, and for being a sanctuary to the queen.
The cathedral church of this city is an ancient beauty, or as it may be said, it is beautiful for its antiquity. But it has been so fully, and often described that it would look like a mere copying from others to mention it. This county, and this part of it in particular, has been famous for the birth of several eminent men, as well for learning, as for arts, and for war, as particularly: (1.) Sir William Petre, who was Secretary of State, and Privy Counsellor to King Henry VIII, Edward VI, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and seven times sent ambassador into foreign countries.
2. Sir Thomas Bodley, famous, and of grateful memory to all learned men, and lovers of letters, for his collecting, and establishing, the best library in Britain; which is now at Oxford, and is called after his name the Bodleian Library to this day.
3. Also Sir Francis Drake, born at Plymouth.
4. Sir Walter Raleigh, of both those I need say nothing. Fame publishes their merit upon every mention of their names.
5. That great patron of learning – Hooker, author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, and of several other valuable pieces.
[6.] Peter Blundel, a clothier, who built the free-school at Tiverton, and endowed it very handsomely, of which in its place.
[7.] Sir John Glanvill, a noted lawyer, and one of the judges of the Common Pleas.
[8.] Sergeant Glanvill his son, as great a lawyer as his father. These were born at Tavistock.
[9.] Sir Peter King, the present Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and many others.
I must now lean to the south, that is to say, to the south coast, for in going on indeed, we go south west.
About 22 miles from Excester we go to Totness, on the river Dart. This is a very good town; of some trade, but has more gentlemen in it than tradesmen of note; they have a very fine stone-bridge here over the river, which being within seven or eight miles of the sea, is very large, and the tide flows 10 or 12 foot at the bridge. Here was had the diversion of seeing them catch fish, with the assistance of a dog. The case is this, on the south side of the river, and on a slip, or narrow cut or channel made on purpose for a mill, there stands a corn-mill; the mill tail, or floor for the water below the wheels is wharfed up on either side with stone, above high-water mark, and for above 20 or 30 foot in length below it, on that part of the river towards the sea; at the end of this wharfing is a grating of wood, the cross-bars of which stand bearing inward, sharp at the end, and pointing inward towards one another, as the wires of a mouse-trap.
When the tide flows up, the fish can with ease go in between the points of these cross-bars, but the mill being shut down they can go no farther upwards; and when the water ebbs again, they are left behind, not being able to pass the points of the grating, as above, outwards; which like a mouse-trap keeps them in, so that they are left at the bottom with about a foot, or a foot and half water. We were carried hither at low water, where was saw about 50 or 60 small salmon, about 17 to 20 inches long, which the country people call salmon peal, and to catch these, the person who went with us, who was our landlord at a great inn next the bridge, put in a net on a hoop at the end of a pole, the pole going cross the hoop, which we call in this country a shove net : the net being fixed at one end of the place they put in a dog, who was taught his trade before hand, at the other end of the place, and he drives all the fish into the net, so that only holding the net still in its place, the man took up two or three and thirty salmon peal at the first time.
From hence we went still south about seven miles, (all in view of this river) to Dartmouth, a town of note, seated at the mouth of the river Dart, and where it enters into the sea at a very narrow, but safe entrance. The opening into Dartmouth Harbour is not broad, but the channel deep enough for the biggest ship in the royal navy; the sides of the entrance are high mounded with rocks; without which just at the first narrowing of the passage, stands a good strong fort without a platform of guns, which commands the port.
The narrow entrance is not much above half a mile, when it opens and makes a basin, or harbour able to receive 500 sail of ships of any size, and where they may ride with the greatest safety, even as in a mill-pond, or wet-dock. I had the curiosity here with the assistance of a merchant of the town to go out to the mouth of the haven in a boat to see the entrance, and castle, or fort that commands it; and coming back with the tide of flood, I observed some small fish to skip, and play upon the surface of the water, upon which I asked my friend what fish they were; immediately one of the rowers or seamen starts up in the boat, and throwing his arms abroad, as if he had been bewitched, cried out as loud as he could bawl, ‘a school, a school.’ The word was taken to the shore as hastily as it would have been on land if he had cried fire; and by that time we reached the quays, the town was all in a kind of an uproar.
The matter was, that a great shoal, or as they call it a school of pilchards came swimming with the tide of flood directly, out of the sea into the harbour. My friend whose boat we were in, told me this was a surprise which he would have been very glad of, if he could have had a day’s or two’s warning, for he might have taken 200 ton of them, and the like was the case of other merchants in town; for in short, no body was ready for them, except a small fishing boat, or two; one of which went out into the middle of the harbour, and at two or three hauls, took about forty thousand of them. We sent our servant to the quay to buy some, who for a half-penny, brought us seventeen, and if he would have taken them, might have had as many more for the same money; with these we went to dinner; the cook at the inn broiled them for us, which is their way of dressing them, with pepper and salt, which cost us about a farthing; so that two of us, and servant dined, and at a tavern too, for three farthings, dressing and all, and this is the reason for telling the tale. What drink, wine, or beer we had, I do not remember, but whatever it was, that we paid for by it self; but for our food we really dined for three farthings, and very well too.
In observing the coming in of those pilchards, as above, we found that out at sea, in the offing, beyond the mouth of the harbour there was a whole army of porpoises, which as they told us pursued the pilchards, and ’tis probable drove them into the harbour, as above.
Round the west side of this basin, or harbour in a kind of a semicircle, lies the town of Dartmouth, a very large and populous town, though but meanly built, and standing on the side of a steep hill; yet the quay is large, and the street before it spacious. Here are some very flourishing merchants, who trade very prosperously, and to the most considerable trading ports of Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the plantations; but especially, they are great traders to Newfoundland, and from thence to Spain, and Italy with fish.
A little to the southward of this town, and to the east of the port, is Torbay, of which I know nothing proper to my observation, more than that it is a very good road for ships. I suppose I need not mention, that they had from the hilly part of this town, and especially from the hills opposite to it, the noble prospect, and at that time particularly delightful, of the Prince of Orange’s fleet, when he came to that coast, and as they entered into Torbay, to land; the prince and his army being in a fleet of about 600 sail of transport ships, besides 50 sail of men of war of the line, all which with a fair wind, and fine weather came to an anchor there at once.
From hence we went to Plympton, a poor and thinly inhabited town, though blessed with the privilege of sending members to the Parliament; of which I have little more to say, but that from thence the road lies to Plymouth, distance about six miles.
Plymouth is indeed a town of consideration, and of great importance to the public. The situation of it between two very large inlets of the sea, and in the bottom of a large bay, which is very remarkable for the advantage of navigation. The Sound, or bay is compassed on every side with hills, and the shore generally steep and rocky, though the anchorage is good, and it is pretty safe riding. In the entrance to this bay, lies a large and most dangerous rock, which at high-water is covered, but at low-tide lies bare, where many a good ship has been lost, even in the view of safety, and many a ship’s crew drowned in the night, before help could be had for them.
Upon this rock, which was called the Eddystone, from its situation, the famous Mr Winstanley undertook to build a light-house for the direction of sailors, and with great art, and expedition finished it; which work considering its height, the magnitude of its building, and the little hold there was, by which it was possible to fasten it to the rock, stood to admiration, and bore out many a bitter storm.
Mr Winstanley often visited, and frequently strengthened the building, by new works, and was so confident of its firmness, and stability, that he usually said, he only desired to be in it when a storm should happen for many people had told him, it would certainly fall, if it came to blow a little harder than ordinary.
But he happened at last to be in it once too often; namely, when that dreadful tempest blew, Nov. the 27, 1703. This tempest began on the Wednesday before, and blew with such violence, and shook the light-house so much, that as they told me there, Mr Winstanley would fain have been on shore, and made signals for help, but no boats durst go off to him; and to finish the tragedy, on the Friday, Nov. 26, when the tempest was so redoubled, that it became a terror to the whole nation; the first sight there seaward, that the people of Plymouth, were presented with in the morning after the storm, was the bare Eddystone, the light-house being gone; in which Mr Winstanley, and all that were with him perished, and were never seen, or heard of since. But that which was a worse loss still, was, that a few days after a merchant’s ship called the Winchelsea homeward bound from Virginia, not knowing the Eddystone light-house was down; for want of the light that should have been seen run foul of the rock it self, and was lost with all her lading, and most of her men, but there is now another light-house built on the same rock.
One thing, which I was a witness to, on a former journey to this place, I cannot omit. It was the next year after that great storm, and but a little sooner in the year, being in August, I was at Plymouth, and walking on the Hoo, which is a plain on the edge of the sea, looking to the road, I observed the evening so serene, so calm, so bright, and the sea so smooth, that a finer sight, I think, I never saw; there was very little wind, but what was, seemed to be westerly; and, about an hour after, it blew a little breeze at south west, with which wind there came into the Sound, that night, and the next morning, a fleet of fourteen sail of ships, from Barbados; richly loaden, for London. Having been long at sea, most of the captains and passengers came on shore to refresh themselves, as is usual, after such tedious voyages, and the ships rode all in the Sound on that side next to Catwater : as is customary, upon safe arriving to their native country, there was a general joy and rejoicing, both on board and on shore.
The next day the wind began to freshen, especially in the afternoon, and the sea to be disturbed, and very hard it blew at night, but all was well for that time; but the night after it blew a dreadful storm, not much inferior, for the time it lasted, to the storm mentioned above, which blew down the light-house on the Eddy Stone; about midnight the noise was very dreadful, what with the roaring of the sea, and of the wind, intermixed with the firing of guns for help from the ships, the cries of the seamen and people on shore, and, which was worse, the cries of those, which were driven on shore by the tempest, and dashed in pieces. In a word, all the fleet, except three, or thereabouts, were dashed against the rocks, and sunk in the sea, most of the men being drowned. Those three, who were saved, received so much damage, that their lading was almost all spoiled. One ship in the dark of the night, the men not knowing where they were, run into Catwater, and run on shore there, by which she was however saved from shipwreck, and the lives of her crew were saved also.
This was a melancholy morning indeed; nothing was to be seen but wrecks of the ships, and a foaming furious sea, in that very place where they rode all in joy and triumph, but the evening before. The captains, passengers and officers who were, as I have said, gone on shore, between the joy of saving their lives, and the affliction of having lost their ships, their cargoes, and their friends, were objects indeed worth our compassion and observation; and there was a great variety of the passions to be observed in them : now lamenting their losses, then giving thanks for their deliverance, many of the passengers had lost their all, and were, as they expressed themselves, utterly undone; then again in tears for such as were drowned; the various cases were indeed very affecting, and, in many things, very instructing.
On the shore, over-against this island, is the citadel of Plymouth, a small, but regular fortification, inaccessible by sea, but not exceeding strong by land, except that they say the works are of a stone, hard as marble, and would not soon yield to the batteries of an enemy. But that is a language our modern engineers now laugh at. The town stands above this, upon the same rock, and lies sloping on the side of it, towards the east; the inlet of the sea, which is called Catwater, and which is a harbour, capable of receiving any number of ships, and of any size, washing the eastern shore of the town.
The other inlet of the sea, as I term it, is on the other side of the town, and is called Ham-Oze, being the mouth of the river Tamar, a considerable river, which parts the two counties of Devon and Cornwall. Here the war with France making it necessary that the ships of war should have a retreat nearer hand than at Portsmouth, the late King William ordered a wet dock, with yards, dry docks, launches, and conveniences of all kinds for building, and repairing of ships to be built; and with these followed necessarily the building of store-houses and ware-houses, for the rigging, sails, naval and military stores, &c. of such ships as may be appointed to be laid up there, as now several are, with very handsome houses for the commissioners, clerks, and officers of all kinds usual in the king’s yard, to dwell in. It is in short, now become as complete an arsenal, or yard, for building and fitting men of war as any of the government are masters of, and perhaps much more convenient than some of them, though not so large. The building of these things, with the addition of rope walks, and mast-yards, &c. as it brought abundance of trades-people, and workmen to the place, so they began by little and little to build houses on the lands adjacent, till at length there appeared a very handsome street, spacious and large, and as well inhabited, and so many houses are since added, that it is become a considerable town, and must of consequence in time draw abundance of people from Plymouth it self.
However, the town of Plymouth is, and will always be a very considerable town, while the excellent harbour makes it such a general port for the receiving all the fleets of merchants’ ships from the southward, as from Spain, Italy, the West-Indies, &c. who generally make it the first port to put in for refreshment, or safety, from either weather or enemies.
The town is populous and wealthy, having, as above, several considerable merchants, and abundance of wealthy shop-keepers, whose trade depends upon supplying the sea-faring people, that upon so many occasions put into that port. As for gentlemen, I mean those that are such by family, and birth, and way of living, it cannot be expected to find many such in a town, merely depending on trade, shipping and sea-faring business, yet I found here some men of value, persons of liberal education, general knowledge, and excellent behaviour, whose society obliges me to say, that a gentleman might find very agreeable company in Plymouth.
From Plymouth we pass the Tamar, over a ferry to Saltash, a little poor shattered town, the first we sat foot on in the county of Cornwall. The Tamar here is very wide, and the ferry boats bad, so that I thought my self well escaped, when I got safe on shore in Cornwall.
Saltash seems to be the ruins of a larger place, and we saw many houses as it were falling down, and I doubt not but the mice and rats have abandoned many more, as they say they will, when they are likely to fall; yet this town is governed by a mayor and alderman, has many privileges, sends members to Parliament, takes toll of all vessels that pass the river, and have the sole oyster fishing in the whole river, which is considerable. Mr Carew, tells us a strange story of a dog in this town, of whom it was observed, that if they gave him any large bone, or piece of meat, he immediately went out of doors with it, and after having disappeared for some time, would return again, upon which after some time they watched him, when to their great surprise they found that the poor charitable creature carried what he so got to an old decrepit mastiff, which lay in a nest that he had made among the brakes a little way out of the town, and was blind; so that he could not help himself, and there this creature fed him. He adds, also, that on Sundays, or holidays, when he found they made good cheer in the house, where he lived, he would go out, and bring this old blind dog to the door, and feed him there till he had enough, and then go with him back to his habitation in the country again, and see him safe in. If this story is true, it is very remarkable indeed, and I thought it worth telling, because the author was a person, who they say might be credited.
They talk of some merchants beginning to trade here, and they have some ships that use the Newfoundland fishery; but I could not hear of any thing considerable they do in it.
From Saltash I went to Liskard, about 7 miles. This is a considerable town, well built, has people of fashion in it, and a very great market; it also sends two members to Parliament, and is one of the five towns, called Stannary Towns, that is to say, where the blocks of TIN are brought to the coinage, of which by it self. This coinage of tin is an article very much to the advantage of the towns where it is settled, though the money paid goes another way. This town of Liskard was once eminent, had a good castle, and a large house, where the ancient Dukes of Cornwall kept their court in those days.
The only public edifices they have now to show, are the guild, or town-hall, a very good free-school, well provided; a very fine conduit in the market-place; an ancient large church, and which is something rare, for the county of Cornwall, a large new built meeting-house for the Dissenters, which I name, because they assured me there was but three more, and those very inconsiderable in all the county of Cornwall; whereas in Devonshire, which is the next county, there are reckoned about seventy, some of which are exceeding large and fine.
This town is also remarkable for a very great trade in all manufactures of leather, and some spinning of late years is set up here, encouraged by the woollen manufacturers of Devonshire.
Between these two towns of Saltash and Liskard, is St Germans, now a village, decayed, and without any market, but the largest parish in the whole county; in the bounds of which is contained, as they report, 17 villages, and the town of Saltash among them, for Saltash has no parish church it seems of it self but as a chapel of ease to St Germans.
On the hills north of Liskard, and in the way between Liskard and Lanceston, there are many tin mines, and as they told us some of the richest veins of that metal are found there, that are in the whole country; the metal when cast at the blowing houses into blocks, being as above, carried to Liskard to be coined.
On this south side we come to Foy, or Fowey, an ancient town, and formerly very large; nay, not large only, but powerful and potent for the Foyens, as they were then called, were able to fit out large fleets not only for merchant’s ships, but even of men of war; and with these not only fought with, but several times vanquished, and routed the squadron of the Cinque Port men, who in those days were thought very powerful.
Edward IV favoured them much, and because the French threatened them, to come up their river with a powerful navy to burn their town, he caused two forts to be built at the public charge, for security of the town and river, which forts at least some show of them remain there still, but the same King Edward was some time after so disgusted at the townsmen for officiously falling upon the French after a truce was made, and proclaimed, that he effectually disarmed them, took away their whole fleet, ships, tackle apparel and furniture; and since that time we do not read of any of their naval exploits, nor that they ever recovered, or attempted to recover their strength at sea. However, Foy, at this time, is a very fair town, it lies extended on the east side of the river for above a mile, the buildings fair; and there are a great many flourishing merchants in it, who have a great share in the fishing trade, especially for pilchards.
The river Fowey, which is very broad and deep here, was formerly navigable by ships of good burthen as high as Lestwithiel an ancient, and once flourishing, but now a decayed town, and as to trade and navigation quite destitute, which is occasioned by the river being filled up with sands, which some say, the tides drive up in stormy weather from the sea. This town of Lestwithiel, retains however several advantages, which support its figure, as first, that it is one of the Coinage Towns, as I call them, or Stannary Towns, as others call them. (2.) The common gaol for whole Stannary is here, as are also the county courts for the whole county of Cornwall. There is a mock cavalcade which is very remarkable.
Behind Foye, and nearer to the coast at the mouth of a small river, which some call Lowe, though without any authority, there stand two towns opposite to one another, bearing the name of the river Loe, that is to say, distinguished by the addition of East Loe, and West Loe. These are both good trading towns, and especially fishing towns and which is very particular, are like Weymouth and Melcomb, in Dorsetshire, separated only by the creek, or river; and yet each of them send members to Parliaments. These towns are joined together by a very beautiful and stately stone bridge having fifteen arches. Were they put together, they would make a very handsome seaport town. They have a great fishing trade here, as well for supply of the country, as for merchandise, and the towns are not despisable; but as to sending four members to the British Parliament, which is as many as the city of London chooses, that I confess seems a little scandalous, but to who, is none of my business to enquire.
The sea making several deep bays here, they who travel by land are obliged to go higher into the country to pass above the water, especially at Trewardreth Bay. The next inlet of the sea, is the famous firth, or inlet, called Falmouth Haven. It is certainly next to Milford Haven in South Wales, the fairest and best road for shipping that is in the whole of Britain, when there be considered the depth of water for above twenty miles within land; the safety of riding, sheltered from all kind of winds or storms, the good anchorage, and the many creeks, all navigable, where ships may run in and be safe, so that the like is no where to be found.
St Mawes and Pendennis are two fortifications placed at the points, or entrance of this haven, opposite to one another, though not with a communication, or view; they are very strong; the first principally by sea, having a good platform of guns, pointing thwart the channel, and planted on a level with the water; but Pendennis Castle is strong by land as well as by water, is regularly fortified, has good out works, and generally a strong garrison. St Mawes, otherwise called St Mary’s has a town annexed to the castle, and is a borough, sending members to the Parliament.
The town of Falmouth is by much the richest, and best trading town in this county, though not so ancient as its neighbour town of Truro; and indeed, is in some things obliged to acknowledge the seigniorty; namely, that in the corporation of Truro, the person who they choose to be their mayor of Truro, is also mayor of Falmouth of course. But let these advantages be what they will, the town of Falmouth has gotten the trade, at least the best part of it from the other, which is chiefly owing to the situation, for that Falmouth lying upon the sea, but within the entrance, ships of the greatest burthen come up to the very quays, and the whole royal navy might ride safely in the road, whereas the town of Truro lying far within, and at the mouth of two fresh rivers, is not navigable for vessels of above 150 tons, or thereabouts.
But let this be as it will, the trade is now in a manner wholly gone to Falmouth, the trade at Truro, being now chiefly if not only for shipping off of block TIN and copper ore, the latter being lately found in large quantities in some of the mountains between Truro, and St Michaels, and which is much improved since the several mills are erected at Bristol, and other parts, for the manufactures of battery ware or, as ’tis called, brass, which is made out of English copper, most of it dug in these parts; the ore it self also being found very rich and good.
Falmouth is well built, has abundance of shipping belonging to it, is full of rich merchants, and has a flourishing and increasing trade. I say increasing, because by the late setting up the English packets between this port and Lisbon, there is a new commerce between Portugal and this town, carried on to a very great value.
It is true, part of this trade was founded in a clandestine commerce, carried on by the said packets at Lisbon, where being king’s ships, and claiming the privilege of not being searched, or visited by the custom-house officers, they found means to carry off great quantities of British manufactures, which they sold on board to the Portuguese merchants, and they conveyed them on shore, as ’tis supposed without paying custom. But the government there, getting intelligence of it, and complaint being made in England also, where it was found to be very prejudicial to the fair merchant, that trade has been effectually stopped, but the Falmouth merchants having by this means gotten a taste of the Portuguese trade, have maintained it ever since in ships of their own. This is a specimen of the Portugal trade, and how considerable it is in it self, as well as how advantageous to England, but as that is not to the present case, I proceed.
Truro is however a very considerable town too; it stands up the water north and by east from Falmouth in the utmost extended branch of the haven, in the middle, between the conflux of two rivers, which though not of any long course, have a very good appearance for a port, and make a large wharf between them in the front of the town; and the water here makes a good port for small ships, though it be at the influx, but not for ships of burthen. This is the particular town where the Lord Warden of the Stannaries always holds his famous Parliament of Miners, and for stamping of TIN. There are at least three churches in it, but no Dissenter’s meeting house, that I could hear of.
Tregony, is upon the same water north east from Falmouth, distance about sixteen miles from it, but is a town of very little trade but what is carried on under the merchants of Falmouth, or Truro; the chief thing that is to be said of this town, is, that it sends members to Parliament.
Penryn, is up the same branch of the haven, as Falmouth, but stands four miles higher towards the west, yet ships come to it of as great a size, as can come to Truro it self; it is a very pleasant agreeable town, and for that reason has many merchants in it, who would perhaps otherwise live at Falmouth. The chief commerce of these towns, as to their sea affairs, is the pilchards, and Newfoundland fishing, which is very profitable to them all. It had formerly a conventional church, with a chantry, and a religious house, a cell to Kirton, but they are all demolished, and scarce the ruins of them distinguishable enough to know one part from another.
Quitting Falmouth Haven from Penryn west, we came to Helsten, about 7 miles, and stands upon the little river Cober, which however admits the sea so into its bosom as to make a tolerable good harbour for ships a little below the town. It is the fifth town, allowed for the coining TIN, and several of the ships called ‘tin’ ships are loaden here.
At Helford is a small, but good harbour between Falmouth and this port, where many times the TIN ships go in to load for London; also here are a good number of fishing vessels for the pilchard trade, and abundance of skilful fishermen.
Pensance is the farthest town of any note west, being 254 miles from London, and within about ten miles of the promontory, called the Lands End. The town of Pensance is a place of good business, well built and populous, has a good trade, and a great many ships belonging to it, notwithstanding it is so remote. Here are also a great many good families of gentlemen, though in this utmost angle of the nation; and, which is yet more strange, the veins of lead, tin, and copper ore, are said to be seen, even to the utmost extent of land at low water mark, and in the very sea; so rich, so valuable a treasure is contained in these parts of Great Britain, though they are supposed to be so poor, because so very remote from London, which is the centre of our wealth.
Between this town and St Burien stands a circle of great stones, not unlike those at Stonehenge in Wiltshire, with one bigger than the rest in the middle; they stand about 12 foot asunder, but have no inscription, neither does tradition offer to leave any part of their history upon record; as whether it was a trophy, or a monument of burial, or an altar for worship, or what else; so that all that can be learned of them, is, that here they are.
Near Pensance, but open to the sea, is that gulf they call Mounts Bay, named so from a high hill standing in the water, which they call St Michael’s Mount; the seamen call it only, the Cornish Mount. It has been fortified, though the situation of it makes it so difficult of access, that like the Bass in Scotland, there needs no fortification; like the Bass too, it was once made a prison for prisoners of State, but now it is wholly neglected.
I am now at my journey’s end. I must now return sur mes pas, as the French call it; though not literally so, for I shall not come back the same way I went; but I shall come back by the north coast, and my observations in my return will furnish very well materials for a fourth letter.
I am, &c.

Appendix to Letter
3


I HAVE ended this account at the utmost extent of the island of Great Britain west, without visiting those excrescences of the island, as I think I may call them, (viz.) the rocks of Scilly, of which, what is most famous, is their infamy, or reproach; namely, how many good ships are, almost continually dashed in pieces there, and how many brave lives lost, in spite of the mariners’ best skills, or the light-houses, and other sea-marks best notice.
These islands lie so in the middle between the two vast openings of the north and south narrow seas, or as the sailors call them, the Bristol Channel, and The Channel, (so called by way of eminence) that it cannot, or perhaps never will be avoided, but that several ships in the dark of the night, and in stress of weather may by being out in their reckonings, or other unavoidable accidents mistake, and if they do, they are sure, as the sailors call it, to run bump a shore upon Scilly, where they find no quarter among the breakers, but are beat to pieces, without any possibility of escape.
One can hardly mention the Bishop and his Clerks, as they are called, or the rocks of Scilly, without letting fall a tear to the memory of Sir Cloudesly Shovel, and all the gallant spirits that were with him at one blow, and without a moment’s warning dashed into a state of immortality; the admiral with three men of war, and all their men (running upon these rocks, right afore the wind, and in a dark night) being lost there, and not a man saved.
They tell us of eleven sail of merchant ships homeward-bound, and richly laden from the southward, who had the like fate, in the same place, a great many years ago; and that some of them coming from Spain, and having a great quantity of bullion, or pieces of eight on board, the money frequently drives on shore still, and that in good quantities, especially after stormy weather.
Nor is it seldom that the voracious country people scuffle and fight about the right to what they find, and that in a desperate manner, so that this part of Cornwall may truly be said to be inhabited by a fierce and ravenous people; for they are so greedy, and eager for the prey, that they are charged with strange, bloody, and cruel dealings, even sometimes with one another; but especially with poor distressed seamen when they come on shore by force of a tempest, and seek help for their lives, and where they find the rocks themselves not more merciless than the people who range about them for their prey.
Upon a former accidental journey into this part of the country, during the war with France, it was with a mixture of pleasure and horror that we saw from the hills at the Lizard, which is the southernmost point of this land, an obstinate fight between three French-men of war, and two English, with a privateer, and three merchant-ships in their company. The English had the misfortune, not only to be fewer ships of war in number, but of less force; so that while the two biggest French ships engaged the English, the third in the mean time took the two merchant-ships, and went off with them; as to the picaroon, or privateer, she was able to do little in the matter, not daring to come so near the men of war, as to take a broadside, which her thin sides would not have been able to bear, but would have sent her to the bottom at once; so that the English men of war had no assistance from her, nor could she prevent the taking the two merchant-ships; yet we observed that the English captains managed their fight so well, and their seamen behaved so briskly, that in about three hours both the Frenchmen stood off, and being sufficiently banged, let us see that they had no more stomach to fight; after which the English, having damage enough too no doubt, stood away to the eastward, as we supposed, to refit.
Nor is the Lizard Point less useful (though not so far west) than the other, which is more properly called the Land’s End; but if we may credit our mariners, it is more frequently, first discovered from the sea. So that the Lizard is the general guide, and of more use in these cases than the other point, and is therefore the land which the ships choose to make first, for then also they are sure that they are past Scilly, and all the dangers of that part of the island.
Nature has fortified this part of the island of Britain in a strange manner, and so as is worth a traveller’s observation, as if she knew the force and violence of the mighty ocean, which beats upon it, and which indeed, if the land was not made firm in proportion, could not withstand, but would have been washed away long ago.
First, there are the islands of Scilly, and the rocks about them, these are placed like outworks to resist the first assaults of this enemy, and so break the force of it; as the piles, or starlings (as they are called) are placed before the solid stonework of London-Bridge, to fence off the force, either of the water, or ice, or any thing else that might be dangerous to the work.
Then there are a vast number of sunk rocks, (so the seamen call them,) besides such as are visible, and above water; which gradually lessen the quantity of water, that would otherwise lie with an infinite weight and force upon the land; ’tis observed, that these rocks lie under water for a great way off into the sea on every side the said two horns of land; so breaking the force of the water, and as above lessening the weight of it.
But besides this, the whole terra firma, or body of the land, which makes this part of the isle of Britain, seems to be one solid rock, as if it was formed by Nature to resist the otherwise irresistible power of the ocean; and indeed if one was to observe with what fury the sea comes on sometimes against the shore here, especially at the Lizard Point, where there are but few, if any outworks, (as I call them) to resist it. How high the waves come rolling forward, storming on the neck of one another; particularly when the wind blows off sea, one would wonder, that even the strongest rocks themselves should be able to resist, and repel them.
And yet, as if all this was not enough, Nature has provided another strong fence, and that is, that these vast rocks are, as it were, cemented together by the solid and weighty ore of TIN and copper, especially the last, which is plentifully found upon the very outmost edge of the land, and with which the stones may be said to be soldered together, lest the force of the sea should separate and disjoint them, and so break in upon these fortifications of the island, to destroy its chief security.
Upon this remote part of the island we saw great numbers of that famous kind of crows, which is known by the name of the Cornish cough, or chough, so the country people call them. They are the same kind, which are found in Switzerland among the Alps, and which Pliny pretended, were peculiar to those mountains, and calls the Pyrrhocorax; the body is black, the legs, feet, and bill of a deep yellow, almost to a red. It is counted little better than a kite, for it is of ravenous quality, and is very mischievous; it will steal and carry away any thing it finds about the house, that is not too heavy, though not fit for its food; as knives, forks, spoons and linen cloths, or whatever it can fly away with, sometimes they say it has stolen bits of firebrands, or lighted candles, and lodged them in the stacks of corn, and the thatch of barns and houses, and set them on fire; but this I only had by oral tradition.
I might take up many sheets in describing the valuable curiosities of this little Cherosonese, or neck land, called the Land’s End. But I am too near the end of this letter. If I have opportunity, I shall take notice of some part of what I omit here, in my return by the northern shore of the county.
