

SIR, – Having thus finished my account of the east side of the north division of England, I put a stop here, that I may observe the exact course of my travels; for as I do not write you these letters from the observations of one single journey, so I describe things as my journeys lead me, having no less than five times travelled through the north of England, and almost every time by a different route; purposely that I might see every thing that was to be seen, and, if possible, know every thing that is to be known, though not (at least till the last general journey) knowing or resolving upon writing these accounts to you.
I entered Lancashire at the remotest western point of that county, having been at West-Chester upon a particular occasion, and from thence ferried over from the Cestrian Chersonesus, as I have already called it, to Liverpoole. This narrow slip of land, rich, fertile and full of inhabitants, though formerly, as authors say, a mere waste and desolate forest, is called Wirall or by some Wirehall. Here is a ferry over the Mersee, which, at full sea, is more than two miles over. We land on the flat shore on the other side, and are contented to ride through the water for some length, not on horseback but on the shoulders of some honest Lancashire clown, who comes knee deep to the best side, to truss you up, and then runs away with you, as nimbly as you desire to ride, unless his trot were easier; for I was shaken by him that I had the luck to be carried by more than I cared for, and much worse than a hard trotting horse would have shaken me.
Liverpoole is one of the wonders of Britain, and that more, in my opinion, than any of the wonders of the Peak; the town was, at my first visiting it, about the year 1680, a large, handsome, well built and increasing or thriving town, at my second visit, anno 1690, it was much bigger than at my first seeing it, and, by the report of the inhabitants, more than twice as big as it was twenty years before that; but, I think, I may safely say at this my third seeing it, for I was suprised at the view, it was more than double what it was at the second; and, I am told, that it still visibly increases both in wealth, people, business and buildings. What it may grow to in time, I know not.
There are no fortifications either to landward or seaward, the inhabitants resting secure under the protection of the general peace; though when the late northern insurrection  spread down their way, and came to Preston, they could have been glad of walls and gates; and indeed, had the rebel party had time to have advanced to Warrington, seized the pass there, and taken Manchester, as they would certainly have done in three days more, it would have fared but very ill with Liverpoole; who could have made but little resistance against an armed and desperate body of men, such as they appeared to be, and by that time would have been. But heaven had Liverpoole in its particular protection, as well as the whole kingdom; the rebels were met with, fought and defeated, before they gat leave to get so far, or to make any offer that way.
The town has now an opulent, flourishing and increasing trade, not rivalling Bristol, in the trade to Virginia, and the English island colonies in America only, but is in a fair way to exceed and eclipse it, by increasing every way in wealth and shipping. They trade round the whole island, send ships to Norway, to Hamburgh, and to the Baltick, as also to Holland and Flanders; so that, in a word, they are almost become like the Londoners, universal merchants.
Bristol lies open to the Irish Sea, so does Liverpoole: Bristol trades chiefly to the south and west parts of Ireland; from Dublin in the east, to Galloway west; Liverpoole has all the trade of the east shore and the north from the harbour of Dublin to London Derry. Bristol has the trade of South Wales; Liverpoole great part of the trade of North Wales; Bristol has the south west counties of England. It is some advantage to the growing commerce of this town, that the freemen of it are, in consequence of that freedom, free also of Bristol; and they are free also of the corporations of Waterford and Wexford in the kingdom of Ireland.
The people of Liverpoole seem to have a different scene of commerce to act on from the city of Bristol, which to me is a particular advantage to both, namely, that though they may rival one another in their appearances, in their number of shipping, and in several particulars, yet they need not interfere with one another’s business, but either of them seem to have room enough to extend their trade, even at home and abroad, without clashing with one another. One has all the north, and the other all the south of Britain to correspond in. As for Wales, ’tis, as it were, divided between them by nature it self.
Ireland is, as it were, all their own, and shared between them, as above; and for the northern coast of it, if the Liverpoole men have not the whole fishery, or, at least, in company with the merchants of London Derry, the fault is their own. The situation of Liverpoole gives it a very great advantage to improve their commerce, and extend it in the northern inland counties of England, particularly into Cheshire and Staffordshire, by the new navigation of the Rivers Mersee, the Weaver, and the Dane, by the last of which they come so near the Trent with their goods, that they make no difficulty to carry them by land to Burton, and from thence correspond quite through the kingdom, even to Hull; and they begin to be very sensible of the advantage of such a commerce.
I return therefore to the description of it as a town; the situation being on the north bank of the river, and with the particular disadvantage of a flat shore. This exposed the merchants to great difficulties in their business; for though the harbour was good, and the ships rode well in the offing, yet they were obliged to ride there as in a road rather than a harbour. Here was no mole or haven to bring in their ships and lay them up, (as the seamen call it) for the winter; nor any key for the delivering their goods. Upon this, the inhabitants and merchants have, of late years, and since the visible increase of their trade, made a large basin or wet dock, at the east end of the town, where, at an immense charge, the place considered, they have brought the tide from the Mersee to flow up by an opening that looks to the south, and the ships go in north; so that the town entirely shelters it from the westerly and northerly winds, the hills from the easterly, and the ships lie, as in a mill-pond, with the utmost safety and convenience.
The new church built on the north side of the town is worth observation. ’Tis a noble, large building, all of stone, well finished; has in it a fine font of marble placed in the body of the church, surrounded with a beautiful iron pallisado. There is a beautiful tower to this church, and a new ring of eight very good bells.
In a word, there is no town in England, London excepted, that can equal Liverpoole for the fineness of the streets, and beauty of the buildings; many of the houses are all of free stone, and completely finished; and all the rest (of the new part I mean) of brick, as handsomely built as London it self.
Mr Cambden says, it was a neat and populous town in his time; his reverend continuator confirms what I have said thus, that it was more than doubly increased in buildings and people in twenty-eight years, and that the customs were augmented tenfold in the same time; to which I am to add, that they are now much greater, that being written about two and thirty years ago, before the new church, or the wet dock, mentioned above, were made, and we know they have gone on increasing in trade, buildings and people, to this day. I refer the reader therefore to judge of the probable greatness of it now.
The sea coast affords little remarkable on the west side of this port, till we come farther north; so we left that part of the county, and going east we came to Warrington. This is a large market town upon the River Mersee, over which there is a stately stone bridge, which is the only bridge of communication for the whole county with the county of Chester; it is on the great road from London leading to Carlisle and Scotland, and, in case of war, has always been esteemed a pass of the utmost importance. Had the rebels advanced thus far in the late Preston affair, so as to have made themselves masters of it, it would have been so again; and, on that account, the king’s forces took special care, by a speedy advance to secure it.
Warrington is a large, populous old built town, but rich and full of good country tradesmen. Here is particularly a weekly market for linen, as I saw at Wrexham in Wales, a market for flannel. The linen sold at this market, is, generally speaking, a sort of table linen, called huk-a-back or huk-a-buk; ’tis well known among the good housewives, so I need not describe it. I was told there are generally as many pieces of this linen sold here every market day as amounts to five hundred pounds value, sometimes much more, and all made in the neighbourhood of the place.
From hence, on the road to Manchester, we passed the great bog or waste called Chatmos, the first of that kind that we see in England, from any of the south parts hither. It extends on the left-hand of the road for five or six miles east and west, and they told us it was, in some places, seven or eight miles from north to south. The nature of these mosses, for we found there are many of them in this country, is this, and you will take this for a description of all the rest. The surface, at a distance, looks black and dirty, and is indeed frightful to think of, for it will bear neither horse or man, unless in an exceeding dry season, and then not so as to be passable, or that any one should travel over them. What nature meant by such a useless production, ’tis hard to imagine; but the land is entirely waste, except for the poor cottager’s fuel, and the quantity used for that is very small.
From hence we came on to Manchester, one of the greatest, if not really the greatest mere village in England. It is neither a walled town, city, or corporation; they send no members to Parliament; and the highest magistrate they have is a constable or headborough; and yet it has a collegiate church, several parishes, takes up a large space of ground, and, including the suburb, or that part of the town called — over the bridge; it is said to contain above fifty thousand people.
The Manchester trade we all know; and all that are concerned in it know that it is, as all our other manufactures are, very much increased within these thirty or forty years especially beyond what it was before; and as the manufacture is increased, the people must be increased of course. It is true, that the increase of the manufacture may be by its extending itself farther in the country, and so more hands may be employed in the county without any increase in the town. But I answer that though this is possible, yet as the town and parish of Manchester is the centre of the manufacture, the increase of that manufacture would certainly increase there first, and then the people there not being sufficient, it might spread itself further.
But the increase of buildings at Manchester within these few years, is a confirmation of the increase of people; for that within very few years past, here, as at Liverpoole, and as at Froom in Somersetshire, the town is extended in a surprising manner; abundance, not of new houses only, but of new streets of houses, are added, a new church also, and they talk of another, and a fine new square is at this time building; so that the town is almost double to what it was a few years ago. I think my computation of fifty thousand people to be not reasonable only, but much within compass; and some of the ancient inhabitants are of the opinion there are above sixty thousand.
If then this calculation is just, as I believe it really is, you have here then an open village, which is greater and more populous than many, nay, than most cities in England, not York, Lincoln, Chester, Salisbury, Winchester, Worcester, Gloucester, no not Norwich it self, can come up to it; and for lesser cities, two or three put together, would not equal it, such as Peterborough, Ely, and Carlisle, or such as Bath, Wells and Litchfield, and the like of some others.
The town of Manchester boasts of four extraordinary foundations , viz. a college, an hospital, a free-school, and a library, all very well supported. The college was the charity of Thomas, Lord Delaware, who being but the cadet of the family, was bred a scholar, and was in orders. He founded the college anno 1421, after he was come to the honour and estate of his brother. The foundation escaped the general ruin in the time of Henry VIII but was dissolved in the reign of his successor Edward VI and the revenues fell to the Crown; but they were restored by Queen Mary, and the house re-established upon the first foundation, though with several additions. Queen Elizabeth enquiring into the nature of the gift, and having a favourable representation of it as a seminary not of Popery but of learning and true religion, founded it anew. This was anno 1578 and as, I say, she refounded it, so she new christened it, gave it the name it still enjoys, of Christ’s College in Manchester, and settled its ancient revenues as far as they could be recovered; but there had been great dilapidations in the time of the former unsettled governors of it by several former foundations.
As for the antiquity of the place, the antiquity of the manufacture indeed is what is of most consideration; and this, though we cannot trace it by history, yet we have reason to believe it began something earlier than the great woollen manufactures in other parts of England, of which I have spoken so often, because the cotton might it self come from the Mediterranean, and be known by correspondents in those countries, when that of wool was not pushed at, because our neighbours wrought the goods, and though they bought the wool from England, yet we did not want the goods; whereas, without making the cotton goods at home, our people could not have them at all; and that necessity, which is the mother of invention, might put them upon one; whereas having not the same necessity, ignorance and indolence prevented the other.
I cannot doubt but this increasing town will, some time or other, obtain some better face of government, and be incorporated, as it very well deserves to be.
About eight mile from Manchester, north west, lies Bolton, the town which gives title to the noble family of Powlet, Dukes of Bolton. We saw nothing remarkable in this town, but that the cotton manufacture reached hither; but the place did not, like Manchester, seem so flourishing and increasing.
On the left hand of this town, west, even to the sea-shore, there are not many towns of note, except Wiggan, on the high post road, and Ormskirk, near which we saw Latham House, famous for its being not only gallantly defended in the times of the late fatal wars, but that it was so by a woman; for the Lady Charlotte, Countess of Derby, defended the house to the last extremity against the Parliament forces; nor could she ever be brought to capitulate, but kept the hold till Prince Rupert, with a strong body of the King’s army, came to her relief, and obliged the enemy to raise their siege, anno 1644. It was indeed ruined in a second siege, and is not yet fully recovered from the calamity of it.
In the neighbourhood of this town, that is to say, between Wiggan and Bolton, is found that kind of coal they call Canell or Candle Coal, which, though they are found here in great plenty, and are very cheap, are yet very singular; for there are none such to be seen in Britain, or perhaps in the world besides. They so soon take fire, that, by putting a lighted candle to them, they are presently in a flame, and yet hold fire as long as any coals whatever, and more or less, as they are placed in the grate or hearth, whether flat or edged, whether right up and down, and polar, or level and horizontal.
They are smooth and slick when the pieces part from one another, and will polish like alabaster; then a lady may take them up in a cambric handkerchief and they will not soil it, though they are as black as the deepest jet. They are the most pleasant agreeable fuel that can be found, but they are remote; and though some of them have been brought to London, yet they are so dear, by reason of the carriage, that few care to buy them; we saw some of them at Warrington too, but all from the same pits.
It is not to be forgot that Warrington is near Winnick, a small town, but a large parish, and great benefice; but though it might be the greatest in England in those days, ’tis very far from being now so; for we never heard that it was worth above 800l. per annum, whereas Sedgfield, near Durham, is valued at this time at 1200l. per annum at least.
I must not pass over here the Burning Well, as ’tis called, near Wiggan, though I must acknowledge, that being turned from Bolton towards Rochdale, before I heard any thing of it that I gave any credit to, I did not go back to see it; not that I had not curiosity enough, if I had been satisfied it was valuable, but the country people, who usually enlarge upon such things rather than lessen them, make light of this; and so I cooled in my curiosity.
We turned east here, and came to Bury, a small market town on the River Roch, where we observed the manufacture of cotton, which are so great at Manchester, Bolton, &c. was ended, and woollen manufacture of coarse sorts, called half-thicks and kerseys, began, on which the whole town seemed busy and hard at work; and so in all the villages about it.
From thence we went on to Rochdale, a larger and more populous town than Bury, and under the hills, called Blackstone Edge. But I must now look northward. This great county, as we advance, grows narrow, and not only so, but mountainous, and not so full of towns or inhabitants as the south part; Preston and Lancaster are the only towns of note remaining.
Preston is a fine town, and tolerably full of people, but not like Liverpoole or Manchester; besides, we come now beyond the trading part of the county. Here’s no manufacture; the town is full of attorneys, proctors, and notaries, the process of law here being of a different nature than they are in other places, it being a duchy and county palatine, and having particular privileges of its own. The people are gay here, though not perhaps the richer for that; but it has by that obtained the name of Proud Preston. Here is a great deal of good company, but not so much, they say, as was before the late bloody action with the northern rebels; not that the battle hurt many of the immediate inhabitants, but so many families there and thereabout, have been touched by the consequences of it, that it will not be recovered in a few years, and they seem to have a kind of remembrance of things upon them still.
Lancaster is the next, the county town, and situate near the mouth of the River Lone or Lune. The town is ancient; it lies, as it were, in its own ruins, and has little to recommend it but a decayed castle, and a more decayed port (for no ships of any considerable burthen); the bridge is handsome and strong, but, as before, here is little or no trade, and few people.
This part of the country seemed very strange to us, after coming out of so rich, populous and fruitful a place, as I have just now described; for here we were, as it were, locked in between the hills on one side high as the clouds, and prodigiously higher, and the sea on the other, and the sea it self seemed desolate and wild, for it was a sea without ships, here being no sea port or place of trade, especially for merchants; so that, except colliers passing between Ireland and Whitehaven with coals, the people told us they should not see a ship under sail for many weeks together.
Here, among the mountains, our curiosity was frequently moved to enquire what high hill this was, or that. Indeed, they were, in my thoughts, monstrous high; but in a country all mountainous and full of innumerable high hills, it was not easy for a traveller to judge which was highest.
Nor were these hills high and formidable only, but they had a kind of an unhospitable terror in them. Here were no rich pleasant valleys between them, as among the Alps; no lead mines and veins of rich ore, as in the Peak; no coal pits, as in the hills about Hallifax, much less gold, as in the Andes, but all barren and wild, of no use or advantage either to man or beast. Indeed here was formerly, as far back as Queen Elizabeth, some copper mines, and they wrought them to good advantage; they are all given over long since, and this part of the country yields little or nothing at all.
But I must not forget Winander Meer, which makes the utmost northern bounds of this shire, which is famous for the char fish found here and hereabout, and no where else in England; it is found indeed in some of the rivers or lakes in Swisserland among the Alps, and some say in North Wales; but I question the last. It is a curious fish, and, as a dainty, is potted, and sent far and near, as presents to the best friends.
Here we entered Westmoreland, a country eminent only for being the wildest, most barren and frightful of any that I have passed over in England, or even in Wales it self; the west side, which borders on Cumberland, is indeed bounded by a chain of almost unpassable mountains, which, in the language of the country, are called Fells, and these are called Fourness Fells, from the famous promontory bearing that name, and an abbey built also in ancient times, and called Fourness.
But ’tis of no advantage to represent horror, as the character of a country, in the middle of all the frightful appearances to the right and left; yet here are some very pleasant, populous and manufacturing towns. Such as Kirby Launsdale, or Lunedale, because it stands on the River Lune, which is the boundary of the county, and leaves the hills of Mallerstang Forest, which are, in many places, impassable. The manufacture which the people are employed in here, are chiefly woollen cloths, at Kirkby Launsdale, and Kendal, and farther northward, a security for the continuance of the people in the place; for here is a vast concourse of people. In a word, I find no room to doubt the hills above mentioned go on to Scotland, for from some of the heights hereabouts, they can see even into Scotland it self.
The upper, or northern part of the county, has two manufacturing towns, called Kirkby Stephen, and Appleby; the last is the capital of the county, yet neither of them offer any thing considerable to our observation, except a great manufacture of yarn stockings at the former.
When we entered at the south part of this county, I began indeed to think of Merionethshire, and the mountains of Snowden in North Wales, seeing nothing round me, in many places, but unpassable hills, whose tops, covered with snow, seemed to tell us all the pleasant part of England was at an end. The great Winander Meer, like the Mediterranean Sea, extends it self, on the west side for twelve miles and more, reckoning from North Bridge on the south, where it contracts it self again into a river up to Grasmere north, and is the boundary of the county, as I have said, on that side; and the English Appenine, that is, the mountains of Yorkshire North Riding, lie like a wall of brass on the other; and in deed, in one sense, they are a wall of brass; for it is the opinion of the most skilful and knowing people in the country, that those mountains are full of inexhaustible mines of copper, and so rich, as not only to be called brass, copper being convertible into brass, but also to have a quantity of gold in them also.
But notwithstanding this terrible aspect of the hills, when having passed by Kendal, and descending the frightful mountains, we began to find the flat country show it self; we soon saw that the north and north east part of the county was pleasant, rich, fruitful, and, compared to the other part, populous. The River Eden, the last river of England on this side, as the Tyne is on the other, rises in this part out of the side of a monstrous high mountain, called Mowill Hill, or Wildbore Fell, which you please; after which, it runs through the middle of this vale, which is, as above, a very agreeable and pleasant country, or perhaps seems to be so the more, by the horror of the eastern and southern part.
In this vale, and on the bank of this river, stands Appleby, once a flourishing city, now a scattering, decayed, and half-demolished town, the fatal effects of the ancient inroads of the Scots, when this being a frontier county, those invasions were frequent, and who several times were masters of this town, and at length burnt it to the ground, which blow it has not yet recovered.
The Roman highway, which I have so often mentioned, and which, in my last letter, I left at Leeming Lane, enters this county from Rear Cross upon Stanmore, and crossing it almost due east and west, goes through Appleby, passing the Eden a little north from Perith, at an ancient Roman station called Brovoniacam, where there was a large and stately stone bridge; but now the great road leads to the left-hand to Perith.
Perith, or Penrith, is a handsome market town, populous, well built, and for an inland town, has a very good share of trade. It was unhappily possessed by the late party of Scots Highland rebels, when they made that desperate push into England, and which ended at Preston; in the moor or heath, on the north part of this town, the militia of the county making a brave appearance, and infinitely out-numbering the Highlanders, were drawn up; yet, with all their bravery, they ran away, as soon as the Scots began to advance to charge them, and never fired a gun at them, leaving the town at their mercy. However, to do justice even to the rebels, they offered no injury to the town, only quartered in it one night, took what arms and ammunition they could find, and advanced towards Kendal.
From hence, in one stage, through a country full of castles, for almost every gentleman’s house is a castle, we came to Carlisle, a small, but well fortified city, the frontier place and key of England on the west sea, as Berwick upon Tweed is on the east; and in both which there have, for many years, I might say ages, been strong garrisons kept to check the invading Scots; from below this town the famous Picts Wall began, which crossed the whole island to Newcastle upon Tyne, where I have mentioned it already. Here also the great Roman highway, just before named, has its end, this being the utmost station of the Roman soldiers on this side.
But before I go on to speak of this town, I must go back, as we did for our particular satisfaction, to the sea coast, which, in this northern county, is more remarkable than that of Lancashire, though the other is extended much farther in length; for here are some towns of good trade.
I enquired much for the pearl fishery here, which Mr Cambden speaks of, as a thing well known about Ravenglass and the River Ire, which was made a kind of bubble  lately. But the country people, nor even the fishermen, could give us no account of any such thing; nor indeed is there any great quantity of the shell-fish to be found here (now) in which the pearl are found, I mean the large oyster or mussel. What might be in former times, I know not.
Under this shire, the navigation being secured by this cape of St Bees, is the town of Whitehaven, grown up from a small place to be very considerable by the coal trade, which is increased so considerably of late, that it is now the most eminent port in England for shipping off coals, except Newcastle and Sunderland, and even beyond the last. They have of late fallen into some merchandising also, occasioned by the great number of their shipping, and there are now some considerable merchants; but the town is yet but young in trade.
About ten miles from Whitehaven north east, lies Cockermouth, upon the little River Cocker, just where it falls into the Derwent. This Derwent is famous for its springing out of those hills, called Derwent Falls, where the ancient copper mines were found in Queen Elizabeth’s time, and in which, it was said, there was a large quantity of gold. But they are discontinued since that time, for what reason, I know not; for there are several copper mines now working in this county, and which, as they told me, turn to very good account.
Some tell us, the copper mines on Derwent Falls were discontinued, because there being gold found among the ore, the queen claimed the royalty, and so no body would work them; which seems to be a reason why they should have been applied to the search with more vigour; but be that how it will, they are left off, and the more probable account is, what a gentleman of Penrith gave us, namely, that the charge of working them was too great for the profits.
Here we saw Skiddaw, one of those high hills of which, wherever you come, the people always say, they are the highest in England. Skiddaw indeed is a very high hill, but seems the higher, because not surrounded with other mountains, as is the case in most places where the other hills are, as at Cheviot, at Penigent, and at other places. From the top of Skiddaw they see plainly into Scotland, and quite into Dumfries-shire, and farther.
Cockermouth stands upon the River Derwent, about twelve miles from the sea, but more by the windings of the river, yet vessels of good burthen may come up to it. This River Derwent is noted for very good salmon, and for a very great quantity, and trout. Hence, that is, from Workington at the mouth of this river, and from Carlisle, notwithstanding the great distance, they at this time carry salmon (fresh as they take it) quite to London. This is performed with horses, which, changing often, go night and day without intermission, and, as they say, very much out-go the post; so that the fish come very sweet and good to London, where the extraordinary price they yield, being often sold at two shillings and sixpence to four shillings per pound, pay very well for the carriage.
They have innumerable marks of antiquity in this county, as well as in that of Westmoreland, mentioned before; yet, passing these, I could not but take notice of two or three more modern things, and which relate to our own nation. Such as,
1. That of Hart-Horn Tree, where they showed us the head of a stag nailed up against a tree, or rather showed us the tree where they said it was nailed up, in memory of a famous chase of a stag by one single dog. It seems the dog chased a stag from this place, (Whi[n]field Park) as far as the Red Kirk in Scotland, which, they say, is sixty miles at least, and back again to the same place, where, being both spent, and at the last gasp, the stag strained all its force remaining to leap the park pales, did it, and died on the inside; the hound, attempting to leap after him, had not strength to go over, but fell back, and died on the outside just opposite; after which the heads of both were nailed up upon the tree.
2.Another thing they told us was in the same park, viz. three oak trees which were called the Three Brether, the least of which was thirteen yards about; but they owned there was but one of them left, and only the stump of that; so we did not think it worth going to see, because it would no more confirm the wonder, than the people’s affirming it by tradition only. The tree or stump left, is called the Three Brether Tree, that is to say, one of the three brothers, or brethren.
3. West of this Hart-horn Tree, and upon the old Roman way, is the famous column, called the Countess Pillar, the best and most beautiful piece of its kind in Britain. It is a fine column of free-stone, finely wrought, enchased, and in some places painted. There is an obelisk on the top, several coats of arms, and other ornaments in proper places all over it, with dials also on every side.
[The] Countess of Pembroke had a noble and great estate in this county, and a great many fine old seats or palaces, all which she repaired and beautified, and dwelt sometimes at one, and sometimes at another, for the benefits of her tenants, and of the poor, who she always made desirous of her presence, being bettered constantly by her bounty, and her noble housekeeping. But those estates are all since that time gone into other families.
4. At Penrith also we saw several remarkable things, viz. (1.) Two remarkable pillars fourteen or fifteen foot asunder, and twelve foot high the lowest of them, though they seem equal. The people told us, they were the monument of Sir Owen Caesar. This Sir Owen, they tell us, was a champion of mighty strength, and of gigantic stature, and so he was, to be sure, if, as they say, he was as tall as one of the columns, and could touch both pillars with his hand at the same time. They relate nothing but good of him, and that he exerted his mighty strength to kill robbers, such as infested the borders much in those days, others related wild boars; but the former is most probable. (2.) On the north side of the vestry of this church is erected in the wall an ancient square stone, with a memorial, intimating, that in the year 1598 there was a dreadful plague in those parts, in which there died:



But though I am backward to dip into antiquity, yet no English man, that has any honour for the glorious memory of the greatest and truest hero of all our kings of the English or Saxon race, can go to Carlisle, and not step aside to see the monument of King Edward I at Burgh upon the Sands, a little way out of the city Carlisle, where that victorious prince died.
Near this town, and, as the inhabitants affirm, just on the spot where the king’s tent stood in which he expired, for he died in the camp, is erected a pillar of stone near thirty foot high, besides the foundation. This monument was erected by a private gentleman, for the eternal memory of a prince, who, when he lived, was the darling of the world, both for virtue and true fame.
But I return to Carlisle: the city is strong, but small, the buildings old, but the streets fair; the great church is a venerable old pile, it seems to have been built at twice, or, as it were, rebuilt, the upper part being much more modern than the lower. King Henry VIII fortified this city against the Scots, and built an additional castle to it on the east side; there is indeed another castle on the west, part of the town rounds the sea, as the wall rounds the whole, is very firm and strong. But Carlisle is strong by situation, being almost surrounded with rivers.
Here is a bridge over the Eden, which soon lets you into Scotland; for the limits are not above eight miles off, or thereabout. The south part of Scotland on this side, coming at least fifty miles farther into England, than at Berwick. There is not a great deal of trade here either by sea or land, it being a mere frontier. On the other side the Eden we saw the Picts Wall, of which I have spoken already, and some remains of it are to be seen farther west. But being now at the utmost extent of England on this side, I conclude also my letter, and am,
SIR, &c.
INTRODUCTION TO THE ACCOUNT AND DESCRIPTION OF SCOTLAND

HITHERTO all the descriptions of Scotland, which have been published in our day, have been written by natives of that country, and that with such an air of the most scandalous partiality, that it has been far from pleasing the gentry or nobility of Scotland themselves, and much farther has it been from doing any honour to the nation or to the country.
One known author has taken pains to describe their commerce as an immense thing for magnitude, has set off their manufactures in such a figure, and as such extraordinary things, that the English are trifles to them, and their merchandising, according to his account, must be inferior to very few, if any nation in Europe; nay, he is not ashamed to give us an account of the particulars of their exportations to China and the East Indies, to Turkey, and the Levant, where, I believe, never Scots ship yet sailed, unless it was in the service of English merchants, or some other foreign nation.
A more modern, and I must acknowledge, more modest writer than this, knowing he could not, with a front that, perhaps, he had not yet arrived to, set forth his country to her advantage, by giving a real description of that part which would necessarily show her deficiences, as well as her beauties; and retaining still that piece of northern vanity peculiar to the climate, to think mighty well of his own country, takes up with describing the seats of the nobility and gentry; a subject, which, it must be confessed, give him a greater scope, and in which he has good materials to work on. But, even in this, it must be added he would have done better, if he would have given the noblemen and gentlemen of Scotland leave to have known their own houses again, when they saw his description of them.
I have so much honour for the noblemen and gentlemen of Scotland, that I am persuaded they will be as well pleased to see justice done them and their country, as to see themselves flattered, and the world imposed upon about them. Their country is not so void of beauty, or their persons of merit, as to want it; and (I believe) they will not seek to be flattered, or be obliged by it, when ’tis attempted.
But be that as it will, the world shall, for once, hear what account an Englishman shall give of Scotland, who has had occasion to see most of it, and to make critical enquiries into what he has not seen; and, if describing it, as it really is, and as in time it may be, with probable reasons for the variation, will give satisfaction to the Scots, they will be obliged; on the contrary I shall neither flatter them or deceive them. Scotland is here described with brevity, but with justice; and the present state of things there, placed in as clear a light as the sheets, I am confined to, will admit; if this pleases, more particulars may be adventured on hereafter; if it should not, it would make me suspect the other authors I have mentioned, knew what would please their countrymen better than I. But I must run the venture of that, rather than trespass upon my own truth and their modesty.
I hope it is no reflection upon Scotland to say they are where we were, I mean as to the improvement of their country and commerce; and they may be where we are.
Here are but a few things needful to bring Scotland to be (in many parts of it at least) as rich in soil, as fruitful, as populous, as full of trade, shipping, and wealth, as most, if not as the best counties of England. These few things, indeed, are such as are absolutely necessary, and, perhaps, as things stand, may be difficult: such as
1. Time, public changes cannot be brought about in a day.
2. A change in the disposition of the common people, from a desire of travelling abroad, and wandering from home, to an industrious and diligent application to labour at home.
3. Stock and substance, to encourage that application: sloth is not a mere disease of the nation. The Scots are as diligent, as industrious, as apt for labour and business, and as capable of it, when they are abroad, as any people in the world; and why should they not be so at home? and, if they had encouragement, no doubt they would.
4. Some little alteration in their methods of husbandry, by which their lands would be improved, and the produce thereof turn better to account; of all which something may be said in our progress through the country, as occasion presents.
In the meantime, as I shall not make a paradise of Scotland, so I assure you I shall not make a wilderness of it. I shall endeavour to show you what it really is, what it might be, and what, perhaps, it would much sooner have been, if some people’s engagements were made good to them, which were lustily promised a little before the late Union: such as erecting manufactures there under English direction, embarking stocks from England to carry on trade, employing hands to cut down their northern woods, and make navigations to bring the fir-timber, and deals to England, of which Scotland is able to furnish an exceeding quantity; encouraging their fishery, and abundance of fine things more which were much talked of I say, but little done; and of which I could say more, but it is not the business of this work, nor, perhaps, will the age care to hear it.
I must, therefore, be contented to give an account of Scotland in the present state of it, and as it really is; leaving its misfortunes, and want of being improved as it might be, and, perhaps, ought to have been, for those to consider of, in whose power it is to mend it.
