


Shews the different operations of the same
passion, in persons of different principles
and dispositions. 

Sir Bazil had very much at heart the
accomplishment of the promise he
had made to mr. Trueworth, and indeed
no one thing could have seemed more
strange than that of his being otherwise,
when so many reasons concurred to engage
his integrity:—he had a real friendship 

for the person, who desired his assistance,
there were none among all his acquaintance
for whom he had a greater
regard, or who shared more of his good
wishes;—the natural affection he had
for his sister made him rejoice in the opportunity
of seeing her so happily disposed
of, and the particular interest of his
own passion, might well render him not
only sincere, but also zealous in promoting
an affair, which would so fully answer
all these ends. 
The first breaking the matter to miss
Harriot he looked upon as the greatest
difficulty; for he doubted not but when
once a belief of mr. Trueworth's inclinations
was properly inculcated in her, his
amiable person, and fine qualities, would
enable him to make his way, as a lover,
into a heart, which had already a high
esteem for him as an acquaintance. 
He resolved, however, not to delay
making the discovery, and his sisters
coming home soon after, he ran out of
his dressing-room, and met them as they
were going up stairs into their own chamber,
with a whole cargoe of silks, and
other things they had been buying:— 
‘Hold, hold,’ cried he, not suffering
them to pass, ‘pray come in here, and 

let me see what bargains you have
been making?’ —‘What understanding
can you, that are a batchelor, have
in these things?’ said mrs. Wellair,
laughing. —‘I have the more need then
of being informed,’ replied he, ‘that
I may be the better able to judge both
of the fancy and frugality of my wife,
whenever I am so happy to get one.’ 
‘Well, well, I know all you men
must be humoured,’ said mrs. Wellair,
in the same gay strain:—‘come, sister,
let us unpack our bundles.’ —With
these words they both went in, and the
servant who followed them with the
things, having laid them down on a table,
withdrew. 
The ladies then began to open their
parcels, and sir Bazil gave his opinion
first of one thing, and then of another,
as they were shewn to him, 'till miss Harriot
displaying a roll of very rich white
damask, ‘to which of you does this belong?’ 
said sir Bazil. —‘To me,’ answered
she. —‘Hah! —I am glad on it,
upon my soul,’ rejoined he:—‘this
is an omen of marriage, my dear sister:
—I will lay my life upon it, that you
become a bride in this gown.’ —‘I
must first find the man to make me so,’ 

cried she briskly. —‘He is not very far
to seek, I dare answer,’ said sir Bazil. 
—‘Why then,’ replied she, ‘when he
is found he must wait till my mind
comes to me, and that, I believe, will
not be in the wearing of this gown.’ 
‘I am of a different way of thinking,’ 
said he, somewhat more gravely than before; 
—‘what would you say if I should
tell you, that one of the finest, most
accomplished men in Europe is fallen
desperately in love with you, and has
engaged me to be his intercessor?’ —‘I
should say nothing,’ answered she, ‘but
that you have a mind to divert yourself,
and put me out of humour with my
new gown, by your converting it into
a hyerogliphic.’ —In speaking these
words she catched up her silk, and ran
hastily up stairs, leaving mrs. Wellair
and her brother together. 
‘Poor Harriot,’ said sir Bazil, after
she was gone, ‘I have put her to the
blush with the very name of matrimony; 
—but I assure you, sister,’ continued
he to mrs. Wellair, ‘the thing I
have mentioned is serious.’ —‘Indeed!’ 
cried that lady in some surprise. —‘Yes,
upon my honour,’ resumed he, ‘the
gentleman I mean had not left me above 

a quarter of an hour before you came
in, and I can tell you is one whom you
know.’ —‘If I know him,’ replied
she, after a pause, ‘I fancy I need not be
at any loss to guess his name, by the
description you have given me of him; 
for I have seen no man since my coming
to town, who so well deserves those encomiums
as mr. Trueworth.’ —‘I am
glad you think so,’ said sir Bazil; ‘for
I am certain your judgment will go a
great way with Harriot;—he is, in
fact, the person I have been speaking
of, and is so every way deserving of
my sister's affection, that she must not
only be the most insensible creature in
the world, but also the greatest enemy
to her own interest and happiness, to
refuse him.’ 
He then repeated to her all the conversation
he had that morning with mr.
Trueworth, the answers that gentleman
had given him to the proposition he had
made on mrs. Blanchfield's account;— 
his declaration of his passion for miss Harriot,
and every other particular, excepting
that of the non-payment of her fortune; 
and that he concealed only because
he would not be suspected to have been
bribed by it, to say more of his friend
than he really merited. 

Mrs. Wellair was equally charmed and
astonished at this report, and on sir Bazil's
telling her, that mr. Trueworth was under
some apprehensions, that the pleasure she
took in having her sister with her, would
be an impediment to his desires, she very
gravely replied, that she was very sorry
mr. Trueworth should imagine, she was
so wanting in understanding, or true affection
to her sister, as for the self-satisfaction
of her company, to offer any thing
in opposition to her interest or happiness. 
After this they had a good deal of discourse
together, concerning mr. Trueworth's
family and fortune, the particulars
of both which sir Bazil was very well
acquainted with, and mrs. Wellair being
thoroughly convinced by what he said of
the many advantages of the alliance proposed,
assured him, in the strongest terms
she was able, that she would do every
thing in her power to promote it. 
‘I'll entertain her on this subject while
we are dressing,’ said she;—‘your
pleasantry on the white damask will furnish
me with an excellent pretence;—I
shall begin in the same strain you did,
and then proceed to a serious narrative
of all you have been telling me, relating 

to mr. Trueworth; to which I shall
add my own sentiments of the amiableness
of his person, parts, and accomplishments,
and set before her eyes, in
the light it deserves, the generosity of
his passion, in refusing so great a fortune
as mrs. Blanchfield for her sake,
and the respectfulness of it, in not daring
to declare himself, till he had engaged
the only two, who may be supposed
to have any influence over her,
in favour of his suit.’ 
‘I know,’ said sir Bazil, ‘that you
women are the fittest to deal with one
another,—therefore, as I see you are
hearty in the cause, shall wholly depend
on your management;—but hearkye,
sister,’ continued he, perceiving she was
going out of the room, ‘I have one
thing to add,—I am to meet Trueworth
at the chocolate-house this evening; 
—he will be impatient for the success
of the promise I have made him; 
—now you know we shall have a great
deal of company at dinner to day, and
I may not have an opportunity of
speaking to you in private before the
time of my going to him;—for that
reason we must have some watch word
between us, that may give an intimation 

in general, how Harriot receives
what you have said to her.’ 
‘Oh, that is easy,’ cried mrs. Wellair,
‘as thus,—you shall take an occasion,
either at table, or any time when you
find it most proper, to ask me, how I
do? and by my answer to that question,
you will be able to judge what success
I have had.’ —‘Very right,’ replied
sir Bazil, ‘and I will be sure to observe.’ 
—There passed no more between them,
she went directly up stairs to do as she
had said, and sir Bazil to pay his morning
visit to miss Mabel, as he usually did
every day. 
The humours of these two worthy persons,
were extremely well adapted to
make each other happy:—sir Bazil was
gay, but he was perfectly sincere;— 
miss Mabel had a great deal of softness
in her nature, but it was entirely under
the direction of her prudence;—she returned
the passion of her lover with equal
tenderness, yet would not permit the gratification
of it, 'till every thing that
threatened an interruption of their mutual
ease should be removed. —Sir Bazil
made no secret of his affairs to her;— 
she knew very well, that he desired no
more at present of her father than the 

six thousand pounds, charged on his estate
for miss Harriot's fortune, and as the old
gentleman testified the highest esteem for
him, and satisfaction in the proposed
match, she flattered herself, that he would
at last consent to so reasonable a request,
but, till he did so, remained firm in her
resolution of denying both her own, and
lover's wishes. 
The pleasure with which they always
saw each other, was now however greatly
enhanced by his acquainting her with the
almost assured hope he had, that the difficulty,
which had so long kept them
asunder, would be soon got over, and he
should have the inexpressible satisfaction
of complying with the conditions her father
had proposed, without the least danger
of incurring any inconvenience to
himself. 
The clock striking two, he was obliged
to leave her, and go home to receive the
company he expected;—he behaved
among his friends with his accustomed
vivacity, but casting his eyes frequently
towards miss Harriot, he imagined he
saw a certain gloom upon her countenance,
which made him fearful for the
effect of mrs. Wellair's sollicitations, till
recollecting the agreement between him 

and that lady, he cried out hastily to her,
‘How do you do, sister?’ To which she
answered, with a smile, ‘As well as can
be expected, brother;’—and then to
prevent miss Harriot, or any one else
from wondering what she meant by so
odd a reply, added, ‘after the ugly jolt
I have had this morning over London
stones in a hackney coach.’ 
Sir Bazil easily understood, that by the
words, ‘As well as can be expected,’ his
sister meaned as much as could be hoped
for, from the first attack on a maid so
young and innocent, as miss Harriot, and
doubted not but that so favourable a beginning
would have as fortunate a conclusion. 
Those guests who had dined with him,
stayed supper also, but that did not hinder
him from fulfilling his engagement
with mr. Trueworth;—he begged they
would excuse a short excursion, which he
said he was obliged to make, on extraordinary
business, and accordingly went at
the time appointed for the meeting that
gentleman. 
Mr. Trueworth received the intelligence
he brought him, with transports befitting
the sincerity of his passion;—he 

thought he had little to apprehend,
since mrs. Wellair vouchsafed to become
his advocate. —‘It is certainly,’ said sir
Bazil, ‘greatly in her power to forward
the completion of your wishes, as it was
to have obstructed them;—but, my
dear friend,’ continued he, ‘there is no
time to be lost:—the business that
brought my sisters to town will soon be
over, and mrs. Wellair will then be on
the wing to get home to her husband
and family;—you must dine with me
to-morrow;—I shall be able by that
time to learn the particulars of Harriot's
behaviour, on her first hearing an account
of the affection with which you
honour her, and by that you may the
better judge how to proceed.’ —This
was the substance of all the discourse
they had together at that time;—sir
Bazil went home, and mr. Trueworth
adjourned to a coffee-house, where he
met with something not very pleasing to
him. —It was a letter from miss Flora,
containing these lines: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘My dear Trueworth,
For such you still are, and ever must
be, to my fond doating heart, though
I have too much cause to fear you cease 

to wish it;—else why this cruel absence? 
—I have not seen you these
three days!—an age to one that loves
like me. —I am racked to death with
the apprehensions of the motives of so
unexpected a neglect;—if my person
or passion were unworthy your regard,
why did you accept them with such enchanting
softness?—and if I ever had
any place in your affection, what have
I done to forfeit it? —But sure you
cannot think of abandoning me!—of
leaving me to all the horrors of despair
and shame! —No,—'tis impossible,— 
ingratitude consists not with that strict
honour you pretend to, and that I still
flatter myself you are in reality possessed
of:—you may have had some
business,—but how poor a thing is
business when compared with love! — 
And I may reply with our English
Sappho, in one of her amorous epistles, 

“Business you feign, but did you love like me,
“I should your most important business be.’

‘But whither does my hurrying spirits
transport me? —If I am still so happy
to retain any share of your heart, I
have said too much; if I am not, all I 

can say will be ineffectual to move you. 
—I shall, therefore, only tell you, that
I can live no longer without seeing you,
and will call on you at the coffee-house
this evening about eight, till when I
am, 
‘Though in the utmost distraction,
My dear, dear Trueworth,
Your passionately tender,
And devoted servant,
F. Mellasin. 
‘P.S. Having heard you say letters were
left for you at this place, and that you
stepped in once or twice every day,
I thought it more proper to direct
for you here, than at your own lodgings. 
—Once more adieu. —Do not
fail to meet me at the hour.’ 

Scarce could the ghost of a forsaken
mistress, drawing his curtains at the dead
of night, have shocked mr. Trueworth
more than this epistle;—he had indeed
done no more than any man, of his age
and constitution, would have done, if
tempted in the manner he had been, yet
he reproached himself severely for it:— 
he knew how little this unhappy creature
had her passions in subjection, and tho'
all the liking he ever had for her was 

now swallowed up in his honourable affections
for miss Harriot, yet he was too
humane and too generous not to pity the
extravagance of a flame he was no longer
capable of returning;—he wanted her
to know there was a necessity for their
parting, but knew not how to do it without
driving her to extremes:—he hated
all kind of dissimulation, and as neither
his honour, nor his inclination, would
permit him to continue an amorous correspondence
with her, he was very much
at a loss how to put an end to it, without
letting her into the real cause, which as
yet he thought highly improper to do. 
It cost him some time in debating within
himself how he should behave, in an
affair which was indeed, in the present
situation of his heart, pretty perplexing; 
—he considered miss Flora as a woman
of condition,—as one who tenderly loved
him, and as one, who, on both these accounts,
it would not become him to affront; 
—he reflected also, that a woman
who had broke through all the rules of
virtue, modesty, and even common decency
for the gratification of her wild
desires, might, when denied that gratification,
be capable of taking such steps
as might not only expose her own character,
but with it so much of his, as 

might ruin him with miss Harriot;—he
found it therefore highly necessary to disguise
his sentiments, and act towards her
in such a manner as should wean her affections
from him by degrees, without
his seeming to intend, or wish for such an
event. 
He had but just come to this determination
when he was told from the bar,
that a lady in a hackney coach desired to
speak with him;—he went directly to
her, but instead of ordering the man to
drive to any particular house, bid him
drive as slowly as he could round St.
James's Square. 
This very much startling her, she asked
him what he meaned? —‘Are all the
houses of entertainment in the town,’ 
said she, ‘shut up, that we must talk to
one another in the street?’ —‘It is impossible
for me, madam,’ answered he,
‘to have the pleasure of your company
this evening,—I am engaged with
some gentlemen at the house where you
found me, and have given my promise
to return in ten minutes.’ —These words,
and the reserved tone in which he spoke
them, stabbed her to the heart,—‘Ungenerous
man!’ cried she, ‘is it thus
you repay the most tender and ardent 

passion that ever was?’ —‘You ladies,’ 
said he, ‘when once you give way to the
soft impulse, are apt to devote yourselves
too much to it; but men have a
thousand other amusements, which all
claim a share in the variegated scenes of
life;—I am sorry, therefore, to find
you disquieted in the manner your letter
intimates. —Love should be nursed by
laughing, ease, and joy; four discontent,
reproaches, and complaints, deform its
native beauty, and render that a curse,
which otherwise would be the greatest
of our blessings. —I beg you, therefore,’ 
continued he, with somewhat
more softness in his voice, ‘for your own
sake, to moderate this vehemence;—be
assured I will see you as often as possible,
and shall always think of you
with the regard I ought to do.’ 
Perceiving she was in very great
agonies, he threw his arms about her
waiste, and gave her a very affectionate
salute, which, though no more than what
a brother might have offered to a sister,
a little mitigated the force of her grief:
—‘I see I am undone,’ cried she;—‘I
have lost your heart, and am the most
wretched creature upon earth!’ —‘Do
not say so,’ replied he;—‘I never can
be ungrateful for the favours you have 

bestowed upon me; but discretion ought
to be observed in an amour such as
our's:—I have really some affairs upon
my hands, which for a time will very
much engross me,—make yourself easy
then,—resume that gaiety, which renders
you so agreeable to the world, and
depend upon it, that to make me happy
you must be so yourself.’ —‘When
then shall I see you,’ cried she, still
weeping and hanging on his breast? — 
‘As soon as convenience permits I will
send to you,’ said he, ‘but there is a
necessity for my leaving you at present.’ 
He then called to the coachman to
drive back to the house where he had taken
him up. —It is not to be doubted
but she made use of all the rhetoric of
desperate dying love, and every other art
she was mistress of, to engage him to prefix
some time for their meeting; but he
would not suffer himself to be prevailed
upon so far, and he left her with no other
consolation than a second embrace, little
warmer than the former had been, and a
repetition of the promise he had made
of writing to her in a short time. 
