


Will prove, by a remarkable instance of
a high-raised hope suddenly disappointed,
the extreme weakness of building
our expectations upon mere conjecture. 

Though it is not to be imagined,
that the preparations for marriages,
such as those of sir Bazil Loveit, and mr.
Trueworth, could be an entire secret to
the town, especially as neither of the parties
had any motive to induce them to
desire it should be so; yet miss Betsy never
heard the least syllable of any such
thing being in agitation. —Those of her
acquaintance, whom she at present chiefly
conversed with, were either ignorant of it
themselves, or had never happened to
mention it in her presence; so that knowing 

nothing of mr. Trueworth's affairs of
late, more than what the lawyer had casually
related at her brother's, it is not
to be wondered at, that she imagined him
wholly disengaged, since the death of that
lady, who had so kindly remembered him
in her will. 
Neither ought it (her vanity considered)
to appear strange, that she was apt to
flatter herself with a belief of the return
of his affection to herself, when the memory
of the late object of it should be
utterly erased. 
When there is the least probability,
that what we ardently wish may come to
pass, the minutest circumstance, in favour
of our hopes, serves to assure us, that it
certainly will do so. 
Miss Betsy was going to make a visit at
Whitehall; but in crossing the park happened
to meet the two miss Airishes, who
asked her to take a turn with them:— 
to which she replied, that she would gladly
accompany them, but had sent word
to a lady that she was coming to pass the
whole evening with her. —‘Nay,’ said
the elder miss Airish, ‘we have an engagement
too at our own apartment,
and can stay only to walk once up the
Mall, and down again.’ —Miss Betsy 

replied, that would be no great loss of
time, and so went with them. —They
had not proceeded many yards in their
promenade, before miss Betsy saw mr.
Trueworth, with sir Bazil, coming directly
towards them. —The gentlemen
bowed to her as they approached more
near. —A sudden thought that moment
starting into miss Betsy's head, she dropped
her fan, as if by accident, as they
were passing each other, just at mr. Trueworth's
feet;—he stooped hastily to take
it up, and presented it to her:—‘I am
sorry, sir,’ said she, ‘to give you this
trouble.’ —‘Whatever services, madam,
are in my power to render you,’ replied
he, ‘will be always a pleasure to myself.’ 
—No more was said;—the gentlemen
and the ladies pursued their different routs. 
—This little adventure, however, had a
prodigious effect on miss Betsy;—she
thought she saw something so gay and
sparkling in the eyes of mr. Trueworth,
as denoted his mourning habit belied his
heart, and that he was not much affected
with the death of her, for whom decency
and gratitude had obliged him to put it on. 
After the gentlemen were out of hearing,
the two miss Airishes began to give
their judgments upon them:—the one
cried, they were both very pretty fellows; 

but the other accused them of want of
politeness,—‘As they saw we had no
man with us,’ said she, ‘they might, methinks,
have offered their service to gallant
us, especially as one of them seems
to be acquainted with miss Betsy.’ — 
But that young lady little regarded what
was said on this occasion, being too much
taken up with her own cogitations;— 
she repeated internally the words of mr.
Trueworth, and as she was persuaded he
was now at liberty to offer her all manner
of services, she interpreted, that by
‘whatever services were in his power,’ 
he meant to renew his services to her as
a lover. —This imagination elated her to
a very high degree, but hindered her from
holding any conversation with the two
ladies she was with, as it was improper
for her to say any thing on the subject,
which so much engrossed her thoughts. 
They all walked together up to Buckinge
ham house, then turned back, and th&sblank; 
two miss Airishes took leave of her at St.
James's;—they went into the palace,
and she was proceeding towards Spring-garden,
when she at a distance perceived
sir Bazil Loveit, mr. Trueworth, miss Mabel,
and two ladies, whose faces she was
entirely unacquainted with. 
The reader will not be at a loss to 

guess, that these two were no other than
mrs. Wellair and miss Harriot:—they
had been that afternoon to take leave of
some friends, on their going out of town,
and had appointed to meet the gentlemen
in the Mall;—in their way thither, they
had called upon miss Mabel, and brought
her with them. —This little troop being
all in the same sable livery, seemed so
much of a family, as threw miss Betsy
into some sort of surprize;—she knew
not that miss Mabel had the least acquaintance
with sir Bazil, nor even any more
with mr. Trueworth, than having seen
him a few times in her company. —As
they drew nearer, she made a motion to
miss Mabel, as if she was desirous of
speaking to her,—upon which that lady
advanced towards her, with these words:
‘I am sorry, madam,’ said she, ‘as you
are alone, that it is improper for me to
ask you to join us.’ —‘I am very glad,
madam, you do not,’ replied miss Betsy,
very much picqued, ‘because I should be
obliged to refuse you.’ —She no sooner
uttered these words than she passed hastily
on, and miss Mabel returned to her company,
who waited for her at some paces
distance. 
It must be acknowledged, that miss
Betsy had cause to be alarmed at a 

speech of this nature, from a lady of miss
Mabel's politeness and good humour;— 
she thought there must be some very
powerful reasons, which had obliged her
to make it; and what those reasons could
be, seemed at present an impenetrable secret. 
—She was too much disconcerted to
be able to pass the whole evening, as she
had promised the lady she went to she
would do;—she, therefore, pretended a
sudden indisposition, took her leave, and
went home, in order to be at full liberty
to ruminate on what had passed in the park. 
She had not been many minutes in her
own apartment, before she was interrupted
in her Meditations, by the coming of
her two brothers. —Several bustos, pictures,
pieces of old china, and other curiosities,
belonging to a nobleman, lately
deceased, being to be exposed to sale, the
elder mr. Thoughtless had an inclination
to become a purchaser of such of them as
he should find agreeable to his fancy, but
was willing to have his sister's judgment
in the matter; and it was to engage her
to go with him the next morning about
twelve o'clock, when the goods were to
be exhibited to public view, that had occasioned
him and mr. Francis to make her
this visit. —It is not to be doubted, but
that she was willing to oblige him in this 

point;—she assured him, she would be
ready against he came to call on her. 
When she was alone, she began to run
over in her mind, all the particulars of
what had passed that evening in the park,
and found something very extraordinary
on the whole. —It had seemed extremely
odd to her, that mr. Trueworth and sir
Bazil did not join her, and the two miss
Airishes; but then she thought she could
easily account for their not doing so, and
that mr. Trueworth did not chuse to
enter into any conversation with her, because
sir Bazil had happened to see her at
miss Forward's, and might possibly have
entertained no favourable idea of her on
that score:—she, therefore, with a great
deal of readiness excused mr. Trueworth
for this omission, especially as she was
possessed of the fancy, that the compliment
with which he returned her fan, and
the look he assumed during that action,
seemed to tell her, he wished for an opportunity
of adding something more tender. 
—But when she came to consider on the
second meeting, she was indeed very much
at a loss to fathom the meaning of what
she had seen;—she knew a thousand accidents
might have occasioned an acquaintance
between miss Mabel and sir Bazil,
and also, that the little she had with mr. 

Trueworth might have been casually improved; 
but could find not the least shadow
of reason, why that lady should tell
her, it was improper for to ask her to
join company with them. —Though she
had of late seen that lady less frequently
than usual, yet, whenever they did meet,
it was with the greatest civility and appearance
of friendship:—she had, in
reality, a sincere regard for her, and imagined
the other looked upon her with the
same, and therefore could not but believe,
the shyness she put on in the park, when
speaking to her, must have some very
powerful motive to occasion it. —Suspence
was, of all things, what miss Betsy
could least bear;—she resolved to be
convinced, though at the expence of that
pride she would not have forfeited on any
other account. —‘In spite of the ill-manners
she has treated me with,’ said
she, ‘I will go once more to her,—satisfy
my curiosity, as to the manner of
her behaviour, and then never see her
more.’ 
To be more sure of finding her at home,
she thought it best to make the visit she
intended in the morning:—accordingly
she sent to her brother, that being obliged
to go to a lady, who had desired to see
her, she could not wait for his coming to 

call on her, but would not fail to meet
him at the place of sale, about the hour
he had mentioned. —This promise she
thought it would be easy for her to perform,
as she designed to stay no longer
with miss Mabel, than would be sufficient
to get some light into a thing, which at
present gave her so much perplexity. 
She went about eleven o'clock, but was
strangely surprised, on her coming to the
house, to find all the windows shut up,
and after the chairmen had knocked several
times, the door opened by Nanny,
the little prating wench, who had lived
at mr. Goodman's. —‘Nanny!’ cried
miss Betsy, ‘bless me, do you live here?’ 
—‘Yes, madam,’ answered she, ‘I have
lived here ever since my master Goodman
died.’ —‘I am glad of it,’ returned
miss Betsy;—‘but pray is your
lady at home?’ —‘O, dear madam,’ 
said the girl, ‘my lady!—why, madam,
don't you know what's done to day?’ — 
‘Not I,’ replied she:—‘prithee what
dost mean? —What's done?’ —‘Lord,
madam,’ said Nanny, ‘I wonder you
should not know it;—my lady is
married to day.’ —‘Married!’ cried
miss Betsy hastily;—‘to whom?’ — 
‘To one sir Bazil Loveit, madam,’ replied
the other;—‘and mr. Trueworth is married 

too, to one miss Harriot, sir Bazil's
sister;—my old master gave both the
brides away. —I believe the ceremony
is over by this time;—but as soon as
it is they all bowl away for sir Bazil's
seat in Staffordshire:—they say there
will be open house kept there, and the
lord knows what doings. —All the
servants are gone,—none but poor me
left to look after the house.’ —‘Mr.
Trueworth married!’ cried miss Betsy,
in the greatest confusion, ‘I thought his
mistress had been dead.’ —‘No, no,
madam,’ said Nanny;—‘you mean
mrs. Blanchfield,—I know all that
story,—I was told it by one that comes
often here:—mr. Trueworth, I assure
you, never courted her;—she was only
in love with him, and on hearing his
engagement with miss Harriot, took it
to heart, poor soul, and died in a few
days, and has left him half her fortune,
and a world of fine things to miss Harriot.’ 
She was going on with this title-tattle,
but miss Betsy was scarce in a condition
to distinguish what she said;—she leaned
her head back against the chair, and was
almost fainting away. —The maid perceiving
the change in her countenance,
cried out, ‘Lord, madam, you are not
well,—shall I get you any thing?— 

but now I think on it there is a bottle
of drops my lady left behind her in the
dressing-room, I'll run and fetch them.’ 
—She was going to do as she said, but
miss Betsy recovering of herself, called to
her to stay, saying, she had no occasion
for any thing. —‘Lord, madam,’ said
she, ‘I did not think the marriage of mr.
Trueworth would have been such a
trouble to you, or I would not have
told you any thing of it. —I am sure
you might have had him if you would,
I remember well enough how he fought
for you with mr. Staple, and how he
followed you up and down, where ever
you went. —For that matter, miss Harriot
has but your leavings.’ —‘I give
myself no trouble who has him,’ replied
miss Betsy, disdainfully,—‘it is not him
I am thinking of;—I was only a little
surprized, that miss Mabel should make
such a secret of her affairs to me.’ — 
‘You know, madam,’ said Nanny, ‘that
my lady is a very close woman;—but
I wonder, indeed, she should tell you
nothing of it, for I have heard her speak
the kindest things of you.’ —‘Well,— 
it is no matter,’ replied miss Betsy:— 
‘farewell, Nanny,’—Then bid the chairmen
go on. —The confusion she was in,
hindered her from directing the chairmen
where to go;—so they were carrying her 

home again, 'till she saw herself at the
end of the street where she lived; but
then recollecting all at once where she
had appointed to meet her brothers, she
ordered them to go to Golden Square. 
It seemed as if fate interested itself in a
peculiar manner, for the mortification of
this young lady;—every thing contributed
to give her the most poignant shock
her foul could possibly sustain:—it was
not enough that she had heard the cruel
tidings of what she looked upon as the
greatest of misfortunes, her eyes must also
be witness of the stabbing confirmation:
—the place of sale was within two houses
of sir Bazil's; but as she had never heard
where that gentleman lived, could have
no apprehensions of the spectacle she was
to be presented with. —On her chair
turning into the square, she saw that side
of it, to which she had directed the men
to carry her, crowded with coaches,
horses, and a great concourse of people,
some waiting for the bridal bounty, but
more as idle spectators. —At first, she
imagined it was on the account of the
sale, but the same instant almost shewed
her her mistake. 
Several footmen with wedding favours
in their hats, two of whom she knew by 

their faces, as well as by their liveries,
belonged to mr. Trueworth, were just
mounting their horses:—the crowd was
so thick about the door, that it was with
some difficulty the chair passed on, and
she had an opportunity of seeing much
more than she desired. —There were three
coaches and six:—in the first, went sir
Bazil and the new-made lady Loveit, the
father of miss Mabel, and a young lady
whom miss Betsy had sometimes seen in
her company;—in the second, were
seated mr. Trueworth, his bride, mrs.
Wellair, and a grave old gentleman;— 
the third was filled by four maid servants,
and the two valet de chambres of the
two bridegrooms, with a great deal of
luggage before and behind. —The ladies
and gentlemen were all in extreme rich
riding habits, and the footmen, eleven in
number, being all in new liveries, and
spruce fellows, the whole cavalcade altogether
made a very genteel appearance. 
Miss Betsy, in spite of the commotions
in her breast, could not forbear standing
a little in the hall, after she had got out
of her chair, till the whole had passed,— 
‘Well,’ said she, to herself, with a deep
sigh, ‘all is over, and I must think no
no more of Trueworth;—but wherefore
am I thus alarmed? —He has 

long since been lost to me, nor did I
love him.’ 
She assumed all the courage her pride
could supply her with, and had tolerably
composed herself before she went up into
the sale room;—yet not so much but a
paleness, mixed with a certain confusion,
appeared in her countenance. Mr. Munden,
who happened to be there, as well
as her brothers, took notice of it, and
asked, if she was not well? To which she
replied, with an uncommon presence of
mind, that she was in perfect health, but
had been frightened as she came along,
by a great black ox, who, by the carelessness
of the drivers, had like to have run
his horns quite into the chair. —Mr.
Munden, who never wanted politeness,
and knew how to put on the most tender
air whenever he pleased, expressed an infinity
of concern for the accident she mentioned; 
and this behaviour in him she
either relished very well, or seemed to do
so. 
What credit her brothers gave to the
story of the ox is uncertain:—they, as
well as all the company in the room, had
been drawn to the windows, by the noise
of the cavalcade, which had set out from
sir Bazil's. —Every one was talking of it 

when miss Betsy entered, and 'tis very
probable the two mr. Thoughtlesses might
imagine it had an effect upon her, in spite
of the indifference she had always pretended; 
—they were, however, too prudent
to take any notice, especially as mr.
Munden was present. 
Whatever were the troubles of this
young lady, her spirit enabled her to conceal
them, and she gave her opinion of
the goods to be disposed on, with as
much exactitude, as if her mind had been
taken up with no other thing. 
Mr. Thoughtless made a purchase of
the twelve Cæsars in bronze, and two fruit
pieces of Varelst's, and mr. Munden, on
miss Betsy's expressing her liking of two
very large curious jars, bought them, and
presented them to her. 
Nothing material passed here; but the
sale being over for that day, every one returned
to their respective habitations, or
wherever business, or inclination called
them. 
