

I need not tell you (said she) that my Parents, by
their late Misfortunes, were reduced to an Ebb
too low, to be able to leave me a Fortune answerable
to the Hopes with which I had been educated; 
you know all those Affairs perfectly well; as also that
my Aunt in Wiltshire, pitying the Disappointment
which at so early an Age fell on me, took me under
her Protection: But you are yet to be inform'd, with
how extreme a Tenderness she treated me: All the
Love which I could have expected from the fondest
Mother, joined'o the Freedom of a Sister, and the Complaisance
of the most distant Acquaintance, I found
from her. The Belief that her Affection would considerably
add to my little Fortune, with the Advantages
of Youth, good Clothes, and a tolerable Face
and Humour, gain'd me, in a little Time after I had
been in her House, several who called themselves my
Lovers:–––But I was possess'd with I know not what
kind of an Aversion to any Talk of that Nature:–––– 
I was not only unsusceptible of Love, but also regardless
of Interest, for some of the Offers made would
have been highly for my Advantage to have accepted. 
––––Had my Aunt, indeed, been more pressing for
me to have made my Choice among them, 'tis probable
I should not have run the Hazard of disobliging
her; but as her Goodness to me was in every Thing
more than common, so it was also in this; and perceiving
no Inclination to change the State I was in, 

forbore to urge me beyond my own Desires. –––O
the Tranquility I then enjoy'd! ––––How calm, how
undisturb'd were then my Thoughts! ––––No busy
Cares waited on my waking Hours! ––––No racking
Anguish haunted my Nights, and broke my peaceful
Slumbers! ––––Life, like an unruffled Stream, slid on
serenely gay! ––––I was so ignorant of Woe, that
I believ'd there could not be a greater than the Headach! 
As for the Disorders of the Mind, I looked on
them as chimerical, unless occasion'd by some horrid
Crime, and therefore unworthy Commiseration. ––––– 
O that I still had been that happy Ideot! –––Dear-bought
Experience, how hast thou undone me! 
A Storm of Sighs here intercepted the Passage of
her Words; and she was obliged to pause, to give the
struggling Anguish vent, which else might have
thrown her again into the same Condition from which
she had so lately been recovered:––––But overcoming,
as well as she was able, the secret Load which pressed
her Spirits down, she at length resumed Strength enough
to prosecute her Relation, in this Manner: 
My Aunt, (pursued she) who, as I have already told
you, took Delight in affording me all the innocent
Recreations which were becoming me to take, wou'd
needs have me accompany some young Ladies in our
Neighbourhood, who were going to the Bath, it being
then the Season of the Year when all the gay
Part of the World resort thither, with as great an
Impatience to partake the Diversions of the Place, as
the Old and Infirm do in the Hope of being restored
to new Life and Health, by the help of those excellent
Waters. –––––You may be sure, I was not backward
in complying with a Command so perfectly
kind and obliging to me; and, to leave nothing undone,
which could make me see she study'd my Credit,
as well as Pleasure, she ordered several very rich Suits
of Clothes to be made for me, and presented me
with Jewels of hers to the Value of some thousand
Pounds, and gave two of her Footmen commission 

to wait on me there, as their sole Mistress. It was
thought by those who knew she was preparing to set
me out in this splendid Manner, that it was done
with a Design, that thus adorned, thus attended, I
might get a Husband among that numerous Assembly,
more to my Advantage than I could in our retir'd
Part of the World. If it were so, which I was
far from thinking, her kind Intentions found a cruel
Disappointment; all those Expectations, with my
Peace of Mind were sunk, to rise no more! ––––But
I will not anticipate what the Discovery is I have to
make, by giving you any Hints which may light
Conjecture to the Sequel:––––In fine, I went; made
as good an Appearance as any Lady on the Walks; 
and had my Vanity not a little gratify'd to find my
self more addressed to than some who had been celebrated
Toasts, and whose Birth and Fortune were
infinitely superior to mine. ––––I doubt not, indeed,
but great part of the Respects paid to me, was owing
to my Dress and Equipage; for being utterly unknown
there, I was taken for a much greater Fortune
than I was in reality. 
The Variety of Humours and Amusements one
finds in such Places, is agreeable enough to a Mind
entirely at ease, as mine was, and unprepossessed
with any other Ideas; and as I was naturally of a
Disposition rather too gay and spirituous, than the
contrary, I never refused the coming into any Measures
which had a Prospect of Diversion in them;––– 
whether the Company was for Riding, Walking,
Dancing, Playing, I readily made one, and had the
Reputation of being not the least entertainiug among
them. ––––But soon these empty Pleasures cea'ed; one
fatal Moment robbed them of their Joys, and taught
me to despise the gaudy, noisy Nothings, and send
my Soul in search of Happiness more elevated. 
Happening to go with one of the Ladies whom
I had accompanyed from home, one Morning, with
a Design to bath, we perceiv'd a Gentleman just
coming out of it. The peculiar Richness and fine 

Fancy of his Night-Gown and Cap immediately attracted
our Eyes; but we could not long be taken
up with an Admiration so trifling as his Dress, which
serv'd only to make his lovely Form more conspicuous:
The Nobleness of his Air, the Exactness of his
Shape, the manly Majesty which sparkled in his Eyes,
the thousand thousand unutterable Graces which
play'd about his fine proportioned Mouth, too much
engross'd our Sight, to leave a Glance for any other
View. ––––Mine it did, at least; and I could have wished
to have been all Eye, so greedy, so eager was I
to gaze upon his Charms. ––––The God of Love now
rush'd at once with his whole Force into my Soul,
and in an Instant, every throbbing Vein swell'd with
the new, the soft Desire! ––––The astonishing Delight
of looking on him, took from me the Power of
Thought; I seem'd as though riveted to the Place
I stood in; nor, till he was gone past my straining
Sight to reach him, had Speech or Motion, though
the Lady who was with me, as she afterwards told
me, had several Times spoke to me, and pulled me
by the Sleeve to come forward. Ignorant of what
I ailed, yet conscious of a wondrous Change within,
I long'd to be alone; and, under the Pretence of being
suddenly a little indispos'd, refused to bath that
Day, and retired as fast as I could to my Apartment. 
As little an Opinion as I had of Love, I had read
a great deal of its Influence; and when I examined the
Symptoms in myself, found they were so near the
Description of that Passion, that I no sooner began to
compare them, than I ceased to doubt if they were
the same. ––––Yes, I felt too strongly the Power I
had so long contemned, not to repent of my former
Unbelief. ––––And from the Moment I perceiv'd
myself in Love, perceived also I was unhappy; not
all the Flatteries I had been accustomed to hear, could
make me hope there was any Thing in me worthy
of being taken notice of by a Man, so far above the
common Rank of Men, as to his bodily Perfections, 

and who, I knew not, but might be of a Quality which
mightrender all Hope of a Return of Passion from him as
insolent, as vain! –––Resolving, however, to beascertained
who he was, and, if it was possible, have one more
Sight of him, I dressed myself in the most becoming
Manner I cou'd, believing that in all Probability he would
be on the Walks in the Evening; or if he were not, I
should easily find some one or other, who, by my Description
of him, might know him enough, to be able to
inform me of his Name and Quality. –––Between the
Time of my seeing him, and that to walk in, I had
various Conjectures what the Reason should be which
had obliged him to remain retir'd in a Place so publick; 
for I was certain he had very little appear'd
abroad, because there was no Assembly in which I had
not a part; and could not think he was lately come,
the Season being far spent, and the Company were
beginning to think of a Return. ––––However, in spite
of Improbability, this last happened to be the Truth; 
for I had no sooner entered the Walks, than I saw
him there, with an Air and Mien which methought
gave a new Lustre to the Place. 
The Freedom used there, gave him an Opportunity
of accosting me, and the Ladies with me; which
he did in a Manner far above my Hopes; and, in the
way of Conversation, let us know how unhappy he
thought himself to lose so much of the Season, which
had been occasion'd by a Fall from his Horse in coming
there, being obliged to lie a considerable Time on
the Road to Recover some Hurts that Accident had
given him. ––––Just as he was speaking this, some
Company joining us on the other side, with whom
my two Companions were talking. To be consin'd
so long, Madam, (said he to me.) in an odious Inn, was
to a Man naturally fond of Delicacy an unspeakable
Mortification; but my Misfortune had been by infinite
Degrees more terrible to be born, had I known
it had detain'd me from the the Presence of a Charmer
such as you. I will not go about, my dear Alinda,
to represent with how much Transport I received 

this little Compliment, nor the Manner in which I
answer'd it; you will hereafter have sufficient Proofs
of my Weakness, without spinning out my Narration
to a tedious Length by the Repetition of Trifles: So
I shall only say, this was but the Introduction to a
thousand more passionate and tender Declarations. –––– 
In fine, he behav'd himself in such a Manner, in spite
of the Disadvantages of being in a Place so publick,
and unfit for Discourses of that Nature, that I half
flattered myself I had been capable of creating the same
Emotions in his Soul, which I felt so powerful in
my own on his Account.–––– 
I went to Bed that Night, with Reflections far
different from those which had used to accompany
me. ––––I now knew what it was to hope and fear;––– 
to raise my tow'ring Expectations to the Skies, then
sink them with as little Shew of Reason down to Hell,
just as wild Fancy and unguided Thought presented an
Idea of Events, or to be wished or dreaded:–––Confounding
Probabilities with their Contraries;––––forming a
thousand incoherent Resolutions, yet unable to determine
any Thing. –––In all the sweet Perplexities, the pleasing
Restlessness that attends new-born Desire, did I pass
the Hours till the Dawn arriv'd; at which Time I
rose to dress, being to meet him by Appointment, to
share the Pleasures of a Morning Walk, which he said
was infinitely more agreeable, than the Times generally
made choice of for that Purpose. ––––Judge not
too severely of my Weakness, dear Alinda, that I so
imprudently consented to meet a Man alone, a Man
whom I had never seen but that Day, and whose
very Name I was yet a Stranger to: If ever you
have experienced the Force of raging burning Love,
you will forgive and pity my Proceedings, not only
what I have already related, but that which I have
yet to speak.–––– 
She blush'd, and paus'd at these Words, perhaps,
expecting Alinda would make some Answer to them; 
but perceiving she was silent, and took no other notice
of the Apology she made, than by tenderly looking 

on her, and gently bowing her Head in Approbation
of it, she continued to go on in the Recital she
had begun. 
To repeat (said she) the obliging Expressions he
made use of to thank the Condescension I had favour'd
him with, would be an Injury to them, since the
Energy with which they were deliver'd, and the
Looks which accompanied them, added a Charm to
them, which all the Words in the World, if spoke
by any other Person, could not boast. ––––I would
have you therefore imagine, that all that can be conceiv'd
of tender, of passionate, all that the most eager
Love and resin'd Wit have the Power to inspire,
filled his Professions, and adorned his Vows.––– 
The Conversation lasted for some Hours, and ended
in my permitting him to prosecute an honourable
Pretension: After he had assur'd me he intended no
other, and had acquainted me with his Name and Family,
That is an Article (pursued she, blushing more
than before) which I belleve I may spare myself the
Trouble of relating, since I doubt not but both by
my Description of his unequalld Charms, and the
Confusion with which I just now saw him at your
Gate, you are already sufficiently convinced it was
no less a Prodigy of Perfection than Bellamant, who
had the Power to influence me to a Weakness, which,
to have been guilty of for any other Man, would not
have been pardonable. 
It was with all the Earnestness in the World she
fixed her Eyes on the Face of Alinda, as though
she would dive into her Soul, and read the Effect
these Words made on her; but perceiving no visible
Alteration, proceeded in her Discourse without any
Interruption. 
The Joy I had (said she, with a Voice more assur'd
than before,) to find that Bellamant was not of a Rank
superior to my own, nor had an Estate which could
entitle him to the Hope of marrying a Woman with
a better Fortune than what I had in Possession, and
was in Expectation of from the Indulgence of my 

Aunt, is not to be expressed. ––––I now began to taste
the Sweets of Love: I had every Day some new
Proof of his Increase of Passion; and sure never Man
made so good Use of his Time as he did; for from
his coming to the Bath, and that in which we were
oblig'd to leave it, was not exceeding ten Days; and
were I to repeat the thousand thousand soft Protestations
he made me in that Time, you would scarce
believe as many Weeks would give them Utterance. 
We were, indeed, from the Moment in which I permitted
his Addresses scarce an Hour asunder, but in
the Hours allowed for Repose; and even those, the
seeming Impatience of his Passion would infringe,
and it was commonly Four or Five in the Morning,
before he could prevail on himself to leave me.–––– 
The Time of our Departure being come, he accompanied
us on Horseback to Wiltshire; and after
having obtained my Aunt's Leave, visited me at
Home with the same Assiduity he had done at the
Bath. ––––For the space of a Month, I would not
have changed my Condition with the first Princess
of the Royal Blood:––––I thought myself secure of
the Affections of the only Man in the World I looked
on as worthy of a Passion so sincere and violent
as mine, and one who, though I could not live in
Grandeur with, I believed had a Competency to maintain
us in a handsome Manner. ––––My Aunt, having had
several Conferences with him concerning Settlements
and Jointure, approved of all he said, and countenanced
our Affections, which seemed to wait a Consummation
only for a Gentleman, a distant Relation of
her's, who was a Lawyer, and was every Day expected
to come down and drawn the Writings. At
length he came; Bellamant had some Talk with him
on the Affair, and the next Evening was appointed
for signing the Deeds. 
Hitherto the Weakness of my inconsiderate
Passion, for a Man I had so little Knowledge of, was
excus'd by the Appearance of the greatest Honour
and Sincerity on his Side; but now comes the black 

Part of his Character! ––––Now, now the Disguise of
an Angel is thrown off for ever, and all the Fiend in
naked Vileness is expos'd, to view! ––––The Morning
of that Day, which I expected was to have made
him, in every Thing but the Ceremony of the Church,
for ever mine, instead of coming, as was his Custom
every Morning, to give me the Bonjour, by the
Hands of a Country Fellow, who lived in a Cottage
hard by, I receiv'd a Letter from him.–––– 
The first Sight of the Superscription, for I was
perfectly acquainted with the Character, immediately
told me who it came from. ––––The sending a Letter,
when I expected himself, and the odd Manner
in which it was brought, (having a Servant of his
own, who, if any Accident had occasioned his Writing,
one would think, should have been the most
proper Messenger,) alarm'd my trembling Heart with
Apprehensions which till that Moment I was a Stranger
to:––––A thousand various Conjectures, all shocking,
all confounding, ran in a Moment through my
giddy Brain, and so disabled all my Faculties, that I
had scarce Strength or Resolution to open it. But
when I did, I found the cruel Certainty of my unexampled
Shame, and his cold Perfidiousness, in these
Words: 

To the most Excellent of her Sex, the
never-too-much Ador'd Euphemia.
I have for some Days past, my for-ever-lov'd, for-ever-ador'd
Euphemia! been endeavouring to reveal
a cruel Secret, which to have hid from you,
would have render'd me more guilty in reality, than I
shall appear in the disclosing it; but it was not in my
Power, while looking on you, to tell you I must not look
on you no more:––––Yet such is the sad Necessity of
Fate! ––––I must tear myself for ever from you, must
resolve to gaze no more on your enchanting Eyes!––––– 
no more must listen to your heavenly Accents!––––no 

more must be bless'd with the transporting Proofs of Love,
confess'd for a Wretch, who has it not in his Power to
deserve the thousand thousand Part of that Profusion
of o'erpowering Joy your Goodness has so lavishly shower'd
on me! ––––Yes, Divine Creature! I must be curst
in an eternal Absence; or by staying, and putting myself
in possession of that Bliss your Extravagancy of Mercy
has made me hope, make you a Sharer in Misfortunes
which I tremble but to think on. ––––Rather let me die
in the severest Torments, or suffer the worst Misery of
Life, prolong'd in tedious Woe, and everlasting Despair,
than be guilty of a Crime to her whom more than my
Soul I love, and next to Heaven adore! ––––Oh! I'm
on the Rack while writing this! ––––How was it possible
I should speak it then? –––––Pardon me! pity me! 'tis
all I ask for the extremest Proof of Love a breaking,
bleeding Heart e'er gave! ––––Farewell! ––––The Tempest
in my Mind rages with a Violence too fierce to permit
me to add more! ––––I will not even wish you should
remember me, lest it might prevent your giving yourself
to some happier Man, though none can ever love
you with greater Purity, and zealous Passion, than him
who would have hazarded every Thing but your Peace
of Mind and Felicity, to have been 
Eternally Yours,
Bellamant. 

What became of me at reading this astonishing
Epistle, you may judge, by what I have told you of
the Violence of my Passion for this perfidious Ingrate. 
The Grief, the Shame, the Indignation, at being used in
such a manner, were of themselves sufficient to have
broke the Strings of a Heart more inur'd to Misfortunes,
and better fortify'd with Presence of Mind, than mine:
But to those other Passions I had Despair, and an unvanquishable
Tenderness to struggle with:––––I knew
not whether I was come to the Conclusion, before
I fell down in a Swoon, in which I remain'd till 

my Aunt, being told a Letter had been brought me,
came to my Chamber to learn the Contents, and
found me on the Floor with the fatal Paper open in
my Hand. ––––She called her Women immediately to
raise me, while she went aside to examine what had
occasioned the Condition she saw me in.–––– 
Being with much-ado brought to myself, she
used all imaginable Means for my Consolation; but
my distracted Brain still running on Bellamant,––––I
rav'd incessantly on his Name, entreating he might be
sent for, that I might, at least, have the Satisfaction
of upbraiding him. ––––That is what I would have
done for you, (said my Aunt;) but, alas! he is gone
too far from any Thing to overtake, unless it be the
Curses his Ingratitude to you has drawn upon him. ––– 
How! (interrupted I, wildly,) is then the Traytor
gone? –––He is, (resumed she:) On the first Discovery
of what had thrown you in these Agonies, I sent to
the House he lodg'd in, and by the People of it was
inform'd, that he took Horse last Night, after having
left that Letter, with a strict Charge, that they
should send it by somebody they could trust, to deliver
it into your own Hand this Morning,–––– 
This Aggravation of my Sorrows, threw me
again into the Condition from which I had so hardly
been recover'd, that my Aunt for some Time had
imagined my Soul had entirely taken leave of my Body. 
––––I continued in these Swoonings the whole Day,
and in the close of it fell into so violent a Fever, that
in less than a Week my Life was despair'd of by
the Physicians, whom my Aunt, in the beginning of
my Illness, had sent Post-Horses to fetch, scrupling
no Expence nor Care for my Recovery. But it
pleased Heaven, contrary to all their Hopes, when
my Distemper was at the worst, to give a sudden
Check to it. ––––I fell into a Sleep, which by the
Standers by was believ'd to be my last, and waked
considerably amended. By degrees the Violence of
the Fever abated, and I was soon restor'd to that bodily
Health I enjoyed before; but never, never must 

hope to recover the Disorders of my Mind:–––They,
like a Vulture, prey upon me still, and will do so
while Life shall last.–––– 
A considerable Augmentation of them I receiv'd,
when, being no sooner able to walk about my
Chamber, than my dear Aunt fell ill. Whether it were
that the Disease I had labour'd under had any Thing
of Malignity in it, or that it was owing to her great
Concern for me, I know not; but she was seized
with the very same Symptoms I had complained of:
And being of too great an Age to struggle with this
powerful Enemy of Nature, yielded to its Force, and
expired in a few Days. ––––In the very Pangs of her
Death, her Tenderness for me continued; she made
her Will, and to compensate as much as possible for
the Severity of Fortune in my ill-requited Love, bequeathed
me her whole Estate, having, as you know,
no Children of her own. 
I am now Mistress of two thousand Pounds a
Year, besides a considerable Sum of ready Money; 
but how little is it in the Power of Riches to buy
Content? ––––All her Goodness has done for me, serves
only to make me a more glorious Wretch. –––––My
Grief for the Loss of so dear a Relation, and one
who, but for the Contagion of my ill Fate, might
probably have lived some Years, was for a Time
suitable to the Cause: But that fatal Passion which,
from the first Sight of the ungrateful Bellamant, had
taken Possession of my Soul, would suffer no other
to be of any long Continuance.––– 
Again, the Idea of his Charms returned with
its full Force, and melted me to Wishes too shamefully
tender for me to think on without Blushes:–––– 
Again, the Remembrance of his Falshood, and amazing
Baseness, worked my aching Brain almost to
Madness:––––I hated, and yet loved; my divided Soul
was torn with Anguish inexpressible! insupportable!
till unable to endure the cruel Conflict of such different
Passions, I resolved never to rest till I had found
him, and, if possible, oblige him to an Explanation of 

his Behaviour, and by the Prevalence of what secret
Motive he could be induced so barbarously to quit a
Woman he had sworn to love, and who, before
this late, unhoped Addition of Fortune, was every
way his Equal. ––––The first Part of my Wish I have
already succeeded in, and hope also to accomplish the
rest, if Alinda is pleas'd to grant me the Continuance
of that Friendship she so generously has professed. 
