

Contains only such Things as the reader
might reasonably expect to have been
informed of before. 
It was the fate of miss Betsy to attract
a great number of admirers, but never
to keep alive, for any length of time, the
flame she had inspired them with. —Whether
this was owing to the inconstancy of
the addressers, or the ill conduct of the
person addressed, cannot absolutely be determined; 
but it is highly probable, that
both these motives might sometimes concur
to the losing her so many conquests. 
—Mr. Trueworth had been the most assiduous,
and also the most persevering of
all, that had ever yet wore her chains;— 
his love had compelled his judgment to
pay an implicit obedience to her will;— 
he had submitted to humour all the little
extravagancies of her temper, and affected
to appear easy at what his reason could
not but disapprove;—he had flattered 
himself, that all that was blameworthy in
her would wear off by degrees, and that
every error would be her last, 'till a long
succession of repeated inadvertencies made
him first begin to fear, and then to be
convinced, that however innocent she
might be in fact, her manner of behaviour
would ill suit with the character he
wished. should always be maintained by
the woman he made choice of for a wife. 
His meeting her at miss Forward's,— 
her obstinate persisting in going to the
play with that abandoned creature, after
the remonstrances he had made her on
that score,—her returning home so late,
and in disorder, conducted by a stranger,
—in fine, what he saw himself, and had
been told, concerning the proceedings
of that night, gave the finishing stroke to
all his hopes, that she would ever, at
least while youth and beauty lasted, be
brought to a just sensibility of the fashion
in which she ought to act. 
If the letter, contrived and sent by the
mischievous miss Flora, had reached his
hands but two days sooner, it would have
had no other effect upon him, than to make
him spurn the invective scroll beneath his
feet, and wish to serve the author in the
same manner; but poor miss Betsy had, 
by her own mismanagement, prepared his
heart to receive any impressions to her
prejudice, yet was the scandal it contained
of so gross a kind, that he could not presently
give into the belief of it,—“Good
God!” cried he, “it is impossible;—if
she has so little sense of honour, or reputation,
as the lightness of her carriage
makes some people too ready to
imagine, her very pride is sufficient to
secure her virtue:—she would not,— 
could not condescend to the embraces
of a man, who thought so meanly of
her, as to attempt the gaining her on
any other score than that of marriage!
—and yet,” pursued he, after a pause,
who knows, but that very pride, which
seems to be her defence, may have
contributed to her fall? —She has vanity
enough to imagine she may act
with impunity what she would condemn
in others. —She might fancy,
as the Poet says, 

“That faultless form could act no crime,
“But heav'n, on looking on it, must forgive.”

“Why then,” continued he, “should
the foolish remains of that tenderness I
once had for her make me still hesitate 
to believe her guilty? —No,—no,
the account before me has too much
the face of truth;—it is too circumstantial
to be the work of meer invention. 
—No one would forge a lie, and
at the same time present the means of
detecting it to be so. —Here is the village
specified,—the nurse's name,— 
a particular direction how I may convince
myself of the shameful truth. — 
There is no room to doubt.” 
To strengthen the opinion he had now
of her guilt, the words miss Flora had
said to him, returned to his remembrance,
—“That there was a time when miss
Betsy had trusted her with her dearest
secrets.” —“Her dearest secrets!” 
cried he:—“What secrets can a virtuous
young lady have, that shun the light,
and require so much fidelity in the concealment
of? —No,—no,—it must
be this miss Flora meaned by that emphatic
expression. —The other could
not hide the consequence of her shameful
passion from the family;—lady
Mellasin and miss Flora must know it,
and perhaps many more, who, while
they were witnesses of the respect I paid
her, laughed at the folly of my fond
credulity.” 
Thus at some times did he believe her
no less guilty than the letter said, but at
others, sentiments of a different nature
prevailed, and pleaded in her favour;— 
her adventure with the gentleman commoner
at Oxford came into his head:— 
“If the two great gaiety of her temper,” 
said he, “led her into a danger, she then
had courage and virtue to extricate herself
out of it.” —He also recollected several
expressions she had casually let fall, testifying
her disdain and abhorrence of every
thing that had the least appearance of indecency; 
—but then relapsing into his
former doubts,—“Yet who,” cried he,
again, “can account for accident?— 
she might in one unguarded moment
grant what in another she would blush
to think of.” 
How terrible is the situation of a lover,
who endeavours all he can to reconcile
his reason to his passion, yet to which
side soever he bends his thoughts, finds
them things so diametrically opposite and
incompatible, that either the one or the
other must be totally renounced. —Willing
therefore to take the party, which
would best become his honour and reputation,
mr. Trueworth resolved to banish
from his mind all the ideas of those amiable 
qualities he had admired in miss
Betsy, and remember only those which
gave him occasion for disgust. 
But this was a task not so easy to be
accomplished as he imagined; for though
the irregularity of miss Betsy's conduct
was of itself sufficient to deter him from a
marriage with her, yet he found he stood
in need of all helps to enable him to
drive that once so pleasing object entirely
from his mind. 
To be therefore more fully confirmed
how utterly unworthy she was of his regard,
than could be made by this
anonymous accusation, he went in person
down to Denham, where following the
directions given him in the letter, the
cottage where Goody Bushman lived was
presently pointed out to him, by the first
person he enquired of. —“So far, at
least,” said he to himself, “the letterwriter
has told truth.” —He then sent
his servant with the horses to wait his return
at a public house in the village, and
walked towards the place he came in search
of. 
He found the honest countrywoman
holding a child in her arms on one side
of the fire,—two rosy boys were sitting 
opposite to her, with each a great piece
of bread and butter in his hand. —At
fight of a strange gentleman she got off
her seat, and dropping a low curtesy,
cried, “Do you please to want my husband,
sir?” —“No,” said mr. Trueworth,
“my business is with you, if you
are mrs. Bushman.” —“Goody Bushman,
an't please you, sir,” replied she. 
—And then bidding the boys get further
from the chimney, reached him the hand
somest joint-stool her cottage afforded for
him to sit down. 
He told her, that he had a kinswoman,
who had some thoughts of putting a child
to nurse into the country,—that she had
been recommended;—“but,” said he,
“can we have nothing to drink together? 
—What sort of liquor does this
part of the world afford,”—“Alack
sir,” replied she, “you fine gentlemen,
mayhap, may like nothing but wine,
and there is none to be had any nearer
than Uxbridge.” —“Nor cyder,” 
cried he. —“I am afraid none good” 
replied she, “but there is pure good ale
down the lane, if your honour could
drink that.” —“It is all one to me,” 
said mr. Trueworth, “if you like it yourself.” 
—Then turning to him who
seemed the eldest of the two boys, “I 
suppose, my lad,” continued he, “you
can procure us a tankard of this same
ale.” —“Yes, sir,” cried his mother,
hastily, “go to Philpot's, and bid them
send a can of their best ale, and, do
you hear, desire my dame to draw it
herself.” —Mr. Trueworth then gave
the boy some money, and he went on
his errand, prudently taking with him
a large slice of bread that happened to lie
upon the dresser. 
“That is a fine child you have in your
lap,” said mr. Trueworth, “is it your
own?” —“No, sir,” answered she,— 
“this is a young Londoner.” —“Some
wealthy citizen's, I suppose,” rejoined
he. —“No, by my truly, sir,” said she,
“it has neither father nor mother, and
belike must have gone to the parish,
if a good sweet young lady had not
taken pity of it, and given it me to
nurse; and, would you think it, sir,
is as kind to it, and pays as punctually
for it, as if it were her own. —My
husband goes up to London every
month to receive the money, and she
never lets him come home without it,
and give him over and above six-pence
or a shilling to drink upon the road:
—poor man,—he loves a sup of good
ale dearly,—that's all his fault,— 
though I cannot say he ever neglects
his business;—he is up early and
down late, and does a power of work
for a little money. —Sir Roger Hill
will employ nobody but him, and good
reason, because he makes him take
whatever he pleases, and that is little
enough, God knows, for he is a hard
man, and if it were not for my nursing,
we could not make both ends
meet, as the saying is;—but he is
our landlord, and we dare not disoblige
him.” 
This innocent countrywoman would
probably have run on with the whole detail
of her family affairs, if mr. Trueworth,
desirous of turning the tide of her
communicative disposition into a channel
more satisfactory to his curiosity, had
not interrupted her. 
“This is a very extraordinary charity
you have been telling me of,” said he,
“especially in a young lady;—she must
certainly be somewhat of kin to the
child.” —“None in the varsal world,
sir,” answered she, “only her godmother.” 
—The boy now bringing in
the ale, mr. Trueworth was obliged to
taste it, and testify some sort of approbation,
as the good woman had praised 
it so much; but he made her drink a
hearty draught of it, after which, “And
pray,” resumed he, what is the name
of the child?” —“O sir,” replied she,
“the lady has given it her own name,
Betsy;—she is called miss Betsy
Thoughtless herself,—though she is a
woman grown, and might have had a
child or two of her own;—but you
know, sir, they are all called miss till
they are married.” 
Mr. Trueworth in the present disturbance
of his thoughts making no reply,
she went on:—“She is a sweet young
lady, I can tell you, sir,” said she,
“I never saw her but once, and that
was when I went to fetch the child,— 
she used me with so much familiarity,— 
not a bit proud,—charged me to take
care of her little Betsy, and told me,
if she lived, I should keep her till she
was big enough to go to school,— 
and told me, she would have her learn
to write, and read, and work;—and
then she would put her 'prentice to a
mantua-maker, or a milliner, or some
such pretty trade,—and then who
knows, sir,” continued she, holding up
the child at arms length, and dancing it,
“but some great gentleman or other
may fall in love with my little Betsy, 
and I may live to see her ride in her
coach? —I warrant she will make
much of her old nurse.” 
“There are many strange things happen
in the world, indeed,” said mr.
Trueworth, with a sigh. After which,
thinking there was no further discovery
to be made, he rose up to go away; but
seeing the change of the money he had
sent by the boy for the beer, lie upon
the table, he gave it to him, saying,
“Here, my good boy, take this, and
divide it with your brother, to buy
apples.” —Then turning to the nurse
took his leave of her with this compliment, “Well, mrs. Bushman, I believe
you are a very honest careful woman,
and shall not fail to remember you
whenever it comes in my way. —In
the mean time,” added he, putting a
crown-piece into her hands, “take this,
and make merry with your husband.” 
—The poor woman was so transported,
that she knew not how to thank him sufficiently,
—she made twenty curtesies,— 
crying, “Heaven bless you, sir;—you
are a right noble gentleman I am sure. 
—Marry such guests come not every
day.” —And with such like expressions
of gratitude, followed him 'till he was
quite out of hearing. 
What now could this enquiring lover
think? —Where was the least room for
any conjecture in favour of miss Betsy's
innocence, to gain entrance into his
breast? —He had seen the child,—had
heard by whom, and in what manner it
was delivered:—the charge given with
it, and the promises made for its future
protection, and whether the nurse was
really so weak as to be imposed upon by
this pretence of charity, or whether bribed
to impose it upon others, the fact, as related
in the letter, appeared to him so
plain, from every circumstance, as to admit
no possibility of a doubt. 
A marriage with miss Betsy was, therefore,
now quite out of the question with
him;—the fashion of entirely breaking
with her, was the only thing that puzzled
him. —Loth he was to reproach her with
the cause, and equally loth to be deemed
so inconstant, as to quit her without a
justifiable one. —He remained in this dilemma
for the space of two days, at the
expiration of which, after much debating
within himself, he wrote, and sent to her,
by a servant, the following epistle: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Madam,
The very ill success I have met with,
in the only business which brought
me to this town, has determined me to
quit it with all possible expedition, and
not to think of a return, 'till I find myself
in a disposition more capable of relishing
its pleasures. You have given
me, madam, too many instances how
little agreeable my presence has ever
been, not to convince me, that I stand
in no need of an apology for not waiting
on you in person, and that this
distant way of taking my leave will be
less unwelcome to you than a visit,
which perhaps would only have interrupted
your more gay amusements, and
broke in, for some moments, on that
round of pleasures, with which you are
perpetually encompassed. —May you
long enjoy all the felicities the fashion
you chuse to live in can bestow, while
I retire to solitude, and lost in contemplation,
on some late astonishing occurrences,
cry out with the poet: 

“There is no wonder, or else all is wonder.’

‘If I speak in riddles, a very small retrospect
on some remarkable passages in
your own conduct will serve for the solution; 
—but that might probably be
imposing on yourself too great a task. 
—I shall therefore trouble you no farther
than to assure you, that though I
cease to see you, I shall never cease to
be, 
‘With the most friendly wishes,
Madam,
Your very humble
C. Trueworth.’ 

Mr. Trueworth having dispatched this
letter, which he doubted not but would
finish all his concerns with miss Betsy,
thought he had nothing more to do, than
to take leave of the friends he had in
town, and retire to his seat in the country,
and there endeavour to lose the remembrance
of all that had been displeasing to
him since he left it. 