


Relates such things as the reader will doubtless think of very great importance, yet will hereafter be found of much greater than he can at present imagine. 

After this much-injured wife had
vented some part of the overflowing
passions of her soul in tears and exclamations,
she began to consider with
more calmness, in what manner she ought
to behave in so amazing a circumstance: 
—She had not the least propensity in her
nature to jealousy, yet she could not
think that any thing less than a criminal
correspondence between her husband and
this French woman, could induce the one,
or embolden the other, to act as they had
done towards her. 

‘Neither divine, nor human laws,’ 
said she, ‘nor any of those obligations
by which I have hitherto looked upon
myself as bound, can now compel me
any longer to endure the cold neglects,
the insults, the tyranny of this most
ungrateful—most perfidious man. —I
have discharged the duties of my station; 
I have fully proved I know how
to be a good wife, if he had known
how to be even a tolerable husband:
wherefore then should I hesitate to take
the opportunity, which this last act of
baseness gives me, of easing myself of
that heavy yoke I have laboured under
for so many cruel months.’ 
She would not, however, do any thing
precipitately; it was not sufficient she
thought that she should be justified to
herself; she was willing also to be justified
in the opinion of her friends:
her brother was the first person to be consulted,
she resolved therefore to go immediately
to him, but as it was necessary to
put some things in order before her departure,
in case she should return no
more, she called the maid, who always
waited on her in her chamber, to assist
her on this occasion. 

She locked up her jewels, and what
other trinkets she had of value in an amber
cabinet, and made her wearing apparel
be also disposed of in proper utensils,
leaving out only some linnen, and
other necessaries for the present use, which
she also caused to be pack'd up. —The poor
maid, who loved her mistress dearly, and
easily guessed the meaning of these preparations,
could not refrain weeping all
the time she was thus employed;—‘Ah,
madam,’ cried she, ‘what a sad thing
it is that married gentlemen will be so
foolish!—hang all the French, I say.’ 
‘—What do'st mean, Jenny, said mrs.
Munden?’—ah, madam, replied she, ‘I
should have told you before, but that
I was afraid of making you uneasy; 
but since I find you know how things
are, I shall make no secret of it:— 
you may remember, madam, that you
gave me leave last monday to go to
see my sister,—she lives in St. Martin's
lane,—it would have been nearer
for me, indeed, to have gone through
the Mews, but I know not how it
happened, I went by Charing-Cross,
and just as I was going to cross the
way, who should I see pop out of a
hackney coach, but my master and this
French woman;—they hurried together, 

arm in arm, into a bagnio,—and
you know, madam, some of those places
have but an ugly name;—for my
part I was so confounded, that I scarce
knew whether I stood upon my head,
or my heels; but I did not say a
word of what I had seen when I came
home, till just now John came down,
and told us all how that wicked woman
had afronted you.’ 
Mrs. Munden then recollected, that
mr. Munden's man was in the room,
when she related the behaviour of mademoiselle
de Roquelair, which she now
was not sorry for, nor of the fresh proof
given her by this maid of the perfidy of
her husband. 
‘Well, Jenny,’ said she, ‘I am not
yet determined how I shall proceed;— 
I am going to my brother's, and shall
take Tom with me,—if I do not come
back to night, he shall bring you instructions
what things to send me;— 
but in the mean time, say nothing to
your master of what we have been talking.’ 
Mrs. Munden could not forbear shedding
tears as she was going into her chair,
at the thoughts of this exile, voluntary 

as it was, from a house she had so much
right to call her own; but the poor maid
roard out so loud at seeing her depart,
that it brought all the servants out of the
kitchen to know what was the matter,
which being told by Jenny, occasioned so
general a grief among them, for the loss of
so good a mistress, that had mademoiselle
de Roquelair remained in the house, and
the same servants also been continued, it
is possible she would have had little either
of respect, or obedience from them. 
But fortune spared this mortification,
in order to inflict a much greater one on
her ingratitude and treachery. —Mr.
Munden had not quitted the presence of
his wife many minutes before he began
to reflect seriously on this accident;—he
found it might prove a very vexatious
one if the consequences it seem'd to
threaten were not in time prevented:— 
he highly blamed mademoiselle de Roquelair
for her behaviour to mrs. Munden,
not so much because it might give that
lady room to suspect in what manner he
had wronged her, as because it plainly
shewed, that the other intended to pin
herself upon him, and oblige him to
support her; a thing which did not at
all suit with his humour:—he had gratified
his passion almost to a surfeit;—a 

very little longer time would have made
him as heartily wish to get rid of her, as
ever he had done to gain her; and though
it could not be said he was as yet altogether
cloyed with the pleasures she so
lavishly bestowed, yet a little examination
into the extent of his inclinations,
convinced him, that he could bear the
loss of her for ever without pain. 
While the blood runs high, and desire
is rampant for possession, prudence is
of little force; but when the one begins
to flag, the other resumes its empire over
the mind, and never rests till it finds
means to retrieve what it has lost:—he
could now consider, that the money remitted
to Bologne by mr. Thoughtless,
could be received by nobody but mademoiselle
de Roquelair herself, and that
it was probable, that gentleman, if told
the usage had been given his sister, might
be provoked to recall his order, and prevent
the payment of it at all;—this
seemed, however, a plausible pretence for
persuading her to go away directly, and
also for making a merit to his wife of
what he did. 
Having fully determined within himself
how to proceed in this affair, he shortned
his morning's walk, and came home 

some hours before the usual time:—he
was at first a little fretted on being told
mrs. Munden was gone to her brother's,
not doubting but the errand on which
she went, was to complain of the treatment
she had received; but Jenny carefully
concealing what her mistress had
said to her, concerning her intentions of
coming back no more, he passed it lightly
over, imagining her accusations and
reproaches would cease, the object of them
being once removed. 
He found no difficulty in prevailing on
mademoiselle de Roquelair to go to
Bologne. —Three hundred louis d'ors
was too tempting a sum to be forfeited
meerly for the want of a little jaunt, especially
as she considered, that she might
accomplish her business there, and return
to London within the compass of a very
few days, and he told her, that he would
hire lodgings for her against her coming
back. 
‘Well then, my angel,’ said he, ‘no
time is to be lost;—as this is not post
day, if you set out immediately for
Dover, you may be at Bologne, and
have received the money before any
letter can reach that place to prevent it,
for it is very likely that the spite my 

wife has towards you, may work upon
the resentment of her brother to attempt
such a thing.’ —Every thing being
concluded upon for this expedition,
he went himself to procure a post-chaise,
appointing her to meet him at a place
he mentioned to her in an hour at
farthest. 
As he had promised to send all her
baggage to the lodgings which he should
provide for her reception, she had
nothing to do but to pack up some
few necessaries to take with her. This
little work being soon over, a hackney
coach carried her to the house that had
been agreed upon, where she saw a postchaise
already at the door, and the diligent
mr. Munden waiting for her coming:
—as she propsed to reach Canterbury
that same night, and it was then
past two o'clock, the lovers were obliged
to take a very hasty leave. 
This double deceitful man, having a
farther view in what he did than she had
any notion of, told her at parting, that
it would be proper for her to stay at
Bologne till she received a letter from him
with an account in what street, and part
of the town, the lodgings he should provide
for her were situated, to the end 

she might come directly into them on her
arrival;—he spoke this with an air so
full of tenderness and care for her repose,
that she had not the least suspicion
of his drift, and replied, that she would
not fail to do as he advised, but desired
he would be as speedy as possible in writing
to her;—‘for,’ cried she, embracing
him, ‘I shall think every day a
year till I return to the arms of my dear
Munden.’ 
Having thus in reality discarded his
mistress, though without her knowing he
had done so, he went home, in order to
boast to his wife of the complaisance he
had shewn to her in this affair, but finding
she was not yet come back, he called
for her maid, and bid her tell her the
moment she should return, that he had
complied with her request, and made the
French woman go out of the house. 
After having said this, he went out
again, and came not home till late at
night, when he was confounded beyond
measure on finding a letter from mrs.
Munden, which had been left for him by
her own footman in the beginning of the
evening, and contained these lines. 


To mr. Munden.
‘Sir,
As you cannot but be sensible, that
the mutual engagements between
us have been strictly adhered to on my
part, and almost in every particular falsified
on yours, you ought not to be surprised,
that I have at last resolved to
put a final end to a way of life so unpleasing
in the eyes of heaven, and so
disagreeable to ourselves;—it never
was in my power to make you truly
happy, nor in your will to make me
even tolerably easy;—I therefore fly
for ever from your ill usage, and once
more put myself under the protection
of my friends, to whom I also shall
commit the care of settling with you
the terms of our separation, which being
once agreed upon, you will not be
troubled either with the complaints, or
the reproaches, of 
‘Your much injured wife,
B. Munden.’ 
‘P. S. I have removed nothing out of
your house but what was my own
before marriage.’ 


Upon enquiring farther into the matter,
he was informed that mrs. Munden
had indeed removed a large India chest,
a buroe cabinet dressing-table, and in
fine, every thing that belonged immediately
to herself, and also that his family
was now reduced to two, her own man
and maid having followed her. 
All this convincing him how much she
was in earnest, involved him in the most
perplexing cogitations;—not that he regretted
the parting with her through any
remains of affection, or that his harden'd
heart was touched with a just sensibility
of her merit, or with any repentance of
his ill treatment of her, but that he knew
such an affair must necessarily be attended
with some noise and confusion, and in
many respects give him a good deal of
embarassment:—it was therefore these
two last reasons, which alone determined
him to make use of all his artifice to bring
about a second reconciliation. 
That beautiful lady in the mean time
had thoughts much more composed;— 
her brother had received her in the most
affectionate manner,—had approved of
her conduct in regard to her unfaithful
husband, had—assured her of the continuance 

of his friendship and protection,
and before she could request it of him,
invited her, and such of her servants as
she chose should attend her, to remain in
his house as long as she should think fit. 
—He desired her to take upon her the
sole command and management of his
house and family, and assigned the best
apartment for her particular use:—in
fine, he omitted nothing that might convince
her of a sincere welcome. 
On discoursing together concerning her
obtaining a separate maintenance, it was
the opinion of them both, that mr.
markland the lawyer should be advised
with, as he was a man who could
not but be well experienced in such affairs,
and accordingly a servant was dispatched
to that gentleman, to desire he
would come to them the next day. 
But though she had reason to be highly
satisfied with the reception given her by
her brother, yet she could not be quite
easy till she should hear what judgment
her dear lady Loveit would pass on the
step she had taken. —She went the next
morning to pay a visit at that lady's
toylet,—she related to her sincerely every
particular of the provocation she had received,
the manner in which she had resented 

it, and the resolution she had taken
of living in an eternal state of separation
from so bad a man; to which lady
Loveit replied, that though she was extremely
sorry for the occasion, yet she
thought if she had acted otherwise, it
would have been an injustice not only to
herself, but to all wives in general, by
setting them an example of submitting to
things required of them neither by law
nor nature. 
This encouragement, from a lady of
her known scrupulous disposition, made
mrs. Munden not doubt but she should
be equally absolved by lady Trusty, and
her brother Frank, to both whom she
wrote an account that evening of all she
had done. 
On her return from lady Loveit's, she
found a letter from mr. Munden in answer
to that she had sent to him the day
before:—the contents whereof were as
follow. 

To mrs. Munden.
‘Madam,
The unaccountableness of your behaviour
astonishes me! For heaven's
sake, how can you answer to yourself 

the having quitted your husband's
house for so trifling a pretence? —It is
true, I did not at first give much regard
to your complaint against mademoiselle
de Roquelair, but on considering it, I
obliged her to depart immediately. —I
do assure you, she set out yesterday for
Dover, and I believe by this time is as
far as Calais, on her way to Bologne, so
that there now remains no excuse for
your absenting yourself, and if you
should continue to do so, it will be a
very plain proof, that you are extremely
wanting in that duty and affection,
which the laws both of God and man
expect from you. —But I flatter myself
that is not the case, and therefore
expect you will return with all possible
expedition to him, who will be always
ready to prove himself 
‘Your most affectionate husband,
G. Munden.’ 
‘P. S. I know not what you mean by
settling terms of separation;— a
wife who elopes from her husband,
forfeits all claim to every thing that
is his, and can expect nothing from
him till she returns to her obedience; 
but were it otherwise, and the law
were entirely on your side in this 

point, you might be certain, that I
look upon the happiness of possessing
you in too just a light to be easily
brought into any agreement, that
would deprive me of you.’ 

Though mr. Munden wanted not cunning
in most things, yet in writing this
epistle he seemed not to consider the spirit,
or the penetration of his wife, who,
he might have known, had too great a
share of both, to be either intimidated by
the majesterial air of some of the expressions,
or soothed by the fawning, unsincere
compliments of the others. 
This vain attempt therefore only serving
to remind her of the many proofs
she had received both of his ill nature and
deceit towards her, instead of weakening
the resolution she had taken of not living
with him again, rather rendered it
more strong and permanent. 
