
Cannot fail of giving a very agreeable sensation to every honest and good-natured reader. 
Miss Wingman, who besides the natural affection she had for a mother who tenderly loved her, had always been bred in the strictest principles of duty and obedience to her, could not keep herself from being a little uneasy at the delay that had happen'd in their journey fearing that indulgent parent might be under some apprehensions of her being detained by a worse accident than the real one, a day longer than she expected. 
To relieve her as soon as possible, however, from the anxieties she might be under on this score, she made Landy, instead of stopping with them at Maidenhead, proceed directly, and with all the speed he could, towards London;—the honest steward, knowing his old lady's temper; was glad to be charged with this commission, assured the young one, that as far as the day was advanced, he doubted not but he should be able to 
reach Windsor that night, and from thence, setting out early the next morning, carry lady Wingman the joyful news of their approach several hours before the coach could possible arrive. 
This filial observance, in a young lady of miss Wingman's gay and volatile disposition, appear'd extremely amiable in the eyes both of Jenny and mr. Lovegrove; but I will not trouble the reader with any repetition of the many compliments they made to her upon this occasion, things of much greater moment requiring to be discuss'd. 
Nothing worthy of obtaining a place in this history happening at present, I shall only say they all came to Maidenhead perfectly well pleased with the change of their quarters, and that mr. Lovegrove, to whose direction every thing was left, took care they should be made full amends that evening for the bad entertainment of the preceding one. 
The servant who had been sent to attend the fair fugitive return'd, according to the orders he had received, very early in the morning, and brought an account that he had been so fortunate as to procure a handsome post-chaise for 
her, which was to carry her quite to Bristol. 
Mr. Lovegrove, Jenny, and miss Wingman were all up and dress'd,—all the equipage was ready; but lady Speck, who loved to travel at her ease, not rising before her usual hour, they did not set out so soon as some of the company, her sister in particular, were impatient to do. 
Notwithstanding this, the high metal of the horses and skill of the conductor brought them to London pretty early in the afternoon;—lady Speck, who thought herself under an indispensible duty of waiting on her mother before she went home, prevail'd on Jenny and mr. Lovegrove to accompany them, so the coachman was order'd to drive directly thither. 
It cannot be doubted but that the good old lady received her two daughters with all the demonstrations of affection imaginable, and those they brought with them with the greatest complaisance; but after the first salutations were over,—‘I am sorry, said she, turning to lady Speck, that what I wrote to Kitty has made you and miss Jessamy quit the pleasures 
of Bath so much sooner than I believe either of you intended.’ 
‘I am sorry, madam, reply'd she, for the occasion of your ladyship's writing in that manner.’ —‘So am not I, madam,’ cried a voice well known to all that were present, and immediately lord Huntley, follow'd by sir Thomas Welby, rush'd from an inner room, where they had withdrawn on the ladies coming up. —‘The late cloud, continued lord Huntley, cast upon my honour, I hope will only serve to render it more bright in the eyes of those to whom I most desire it should be conspicuous.’ 
He then paid his compliments to each of the ladies one after another, who were all of them so astonish'd at the sight of him, that they had not the power of uttering one word;—this scene, in effect, was so pleasant, that sir Thomas Welby laugh'd till his sides shook, and lady Wingman herself, in spite of her gravity, could not forbear smiling. 
As lord Huntley advanced to embrace mr. Lovegrove,—‘I congratulate you, my dear lord, said that gentleman,—I congratulate you, since there needs no other proof than seeing your lordship 
here to assure me that your innocence is fully clear'd.’ 
‘Ay, ay, cried sir Thomas Welby,—all this bustle has happen'd through my foolish mistake; and I am glad, that besides my fair charge and her mother, here are so many witnesses of my acknowledging it.’ 
‘Sir Thomas, reply'd lord Huntley, you have so well attoned for representing me more unworthy than I really am, or can be, by the promise you have given me of using your interest to make me more happy than I can ever deserve to be, that I have reason to bless an error so propitious to my hopes.’ 
‘The event, I perceive, has prov'd fortunate enough, said lady Speck; but methinks I should be glad to know how it came about to be so, and by what means sir Thomas was so strangely deceiv'd.’ 
‘Strangely indeed, madam, answer'd he;—I am ashamed to think of it;—but have a little patience, and you shall be fully acquainted with all the particulars of this very foolish affair;—it is a penance I have enjoin'd myself 
for my weakness in so rashly giving credit to appearances.’ 
The company now seated themselves, which before they had not done, and sir Thomas, on seeing the three young ladies and mr. Lovegrove prepar'd to give their attention to what he had to deliver, began the recital he had promised in these or the like words: 
“Happening to call, said he, at the house of an honest tradesman with whom I have been long acquainted, I was a little surprised, on passing through his shop, to hear a person who came in just after me enquire if lord Huntley or his lady were at home. 
“I staid not to hear what answer was given to the man, but went directly to my friend, who I saw sitting in his counting-house;—the first question I asked him was,—what lodgers he had in his house;—to which he reply'd,—that at present he had the honour of having lord and lady Huntley, of the kingdom of Ireland; but should not long be so happy, for they had taken a great house in the new buildings, and only waited till their furniture, 
which was on the road from West-Chester, should arrive. 
“The consternation I was in made me put a great many interrogatories to him, some of which I believe were impertinent enough, but he had the good manners, however, to answer succinctly to every thing I ask'd, according to the best of his knowledge:—he told me that lord Huntley had been in England some time before his lady,—that he had staid but two nights with her in these lodgings before he went out of town, and would not return till his house should be quite completed, and fit for his reception, leaving the care of every thing to her ladyship and the steward. 
“He also added, that hearing they intended to furnish one apartment entirely new, he had recommended an upholsterer and cabinet-maker to them for that purpose, and hoped he should have an opportunity of obliging several others of his friends and neighbours by helping them to the custom of this noble Lord. 
“As he is of a very communicative disposition he run on, of his own 
accord, with several other particulars; to which, indeed, I did not give much attention, thinking myself thoroughly convinced in the main point,—that of lord Huntley's being a married man. 
“But notwithstanding all he said served to corroborate that belief in me, I was willing to be still more confirm'd, which I thought I might be by seeing and speaking to the lady herself. 
“Accordingly I told my friend, that I was well acquainted with lord Huntley, though I had not till now heard of his marriage; but that since it was so, and the thing seem'd to be no secret, I should be glad to pay my compliments to her ladyship on that occasion. 
“To this he reply'd, that she was the best humour'd woman in the world, and he was sure would take it very kindly: —‘Yonder is the steward, cried he, I will let him know your intention;’—in speaking these words, and without waiting to hear what I would say, he beckon'd to a person who was that moment coming into the house;—presently the worst countenanced 
man I ever saw,—but who, on my signifying to him my desire of waiting on lady Huntley, answer'd with a great deal of civility, that he would see if her ladyship was at leisure to receive the honour of my visit. 
“I forgot to send up my name, which blunder occasion'd him to come down again on purpose to ask it;—I made no scruple to inform him who I was, with this addition of being one of lord Huntley's friends;—he went up again, but staid much longer above the second time than he had done the first;—at last, however, he return'd with leave for my admission. 
“I follow'd my conductor, who introduced me to the presence of a very lovely woman indeed, though she had somewhat of a down-cast look in her eyes, which, as well as a good deal of hesitation in her voice in receiving me, I at that time imputed to her modesty, on finding herself accosted by a stranger, but have since found more proper causes to ascribe it to,—those of guilt and fear. 
“When the first compliments were past, I took the liberty of asking her 
to what part of the country my lord was retired;—she seem'd in more confusion than before at this question, which then gave me some surprise; but on reflecting afterwards upon it, I easily found it had proceeded from her want of being prepared with an answer; I was, however, so inconsiderate as to furnish her with one, by mentioning Bath;—on which she presently cried out,—‘Yes, sir, my lord is gone to Bath with some persons of quality, his relations.’ 
“Having satisfied my curiosity with the sight of this fine lady, I took a pretty hasty leave of her, and went directly to lady Wingman, to whom I was impatient to communicate the discovery which I thought had been so providentially thrown in my way. 
“Her ladyship, as may easily be supposed, was both amazed and troubled; but the result of our conversation was to write immediately to miss Wingman, and apprise her of the danger we imagined she was in from the addresses of a married man;—my lady would needs send Landy with these dispatches, in order to enforce the 
contents, and to conduct her daughter up to London. 
“I need not tell you the satisfaction miss Wingman's letter gave us;—her ladyship was now perfectly easy, and I gave myself no farther pains to enquire after lord and lady Huntley;—happening, however, to meet my friend one day by accident, he told me that his lordship was expected in town every hour, and that all was ready for their going into their house,—so that he should soon lose his lodgers. 
“Things were in this position when I was told one morning, soon after I was out of bed, that lord Huntley and a gentleman he had brought with him were below and desired to speak with me;—I think I was not more astonish'd on hearing he was married, than I was at his making me a visit;—I ran down notwithstanding to receive him; but more hastened by the perplexity I was in than by any respect I had for him at that time.” 
‘Indeed, my lord, continued sir Thomas, addressing himself to lord Huntley, I can never too much admire your lordship's moderation in behaving 
towards me as you did, after knowing what I had wrote concerning you to miss Wingman.’ —‘Oh, sir Thomas, reply'd that nobleman, I reserved all my fire for those who I supposed had traduced me to you, and created me an enemy out of my best friend.’ 
Sir Thomas was about to make some return to what lord Huntley had said; but the ladies cried out,—that they were impatient for the catastrophe of this adventure, and desired he would give a truce to compliments and pursue the thread of his discourse;—on which he told them, they should be obey'd, and went on thus: 
“What I have farther to relate, said he, will be contained in a very short compass;—my lord and I soon came to an eclaircisement,—his lordship repeated to me the heads of my letter to miss Wingman, and I gave him a faithful account of the reasons on which my accusation was founded;—he requested me to use my endeavours to shew him the villain that had usurp'd his name; I readily complied, and attended his lordship and his friend, who I afterwards found was sir Robert 
Manley, to the house where the supposed lord Huntley and his lady lodg'd. 
“My honest friend was luckily at home, but on my desiring to speak with lord or lady Huntley, he told me they had left him two days before and were gone to their new house;—on which I ask'd him if he knew lord Huntley when he saw him: —‘Yes certainly, reply'd he, somewhat surprised at the question;’—“Am I the person, cried lord Huntley, stepping forward, that lodged with you and bore the name of lord Huntley?” —‘No, sir, answer'd he, nor has he any thing of your resemblance.’ Then said I, you have been imposed upon,—'tis well if not cheated too; for I assure you this is the real lord Huntley, and him you have had with you must be an impostor. 
“Never was horror and amazement more strongly painted than in the face of this poor tradesman: —‘Then I am undone, cried he, I do not mean for what I shall lose myself, though it is no trifle, but I have drawn in several of my friends to give them credit.’ —He then proceeded to inform us that they had taken up plate,—jewels,— 
houshold furniture, and wearing apparel to a considerable amount, and all through his recommendation;—we pitied his distress,—comforted him the best we could, and told him that as the affair was so recent, it was to be hoped their things might be recover'd. 
“Lord Huntley's honour was now fully clear'd, but he could not be content without condign punishment being inflicted on the villain who had assum'd his name and character for purposes so infamous and base;—the defrauded tradesmen were all sent for on this occasion, and as it could not be imagined that the pretended lord Huntley would either stay long in this town, or venture to appear to any stranger while in it, the best expedient that offer'd was to get a search-warrant to force open the doors of his new habitation; by which means he would not only be apprehended, but also such part of the goods he had taken up, which were not yet embezzled, might be restored to the proper owners. 
“A warrant was easily obtain'd on the oath of the several tradesmen, who all went with lord Huntley, sir Robert 
Manley, and myself, to see it put in execution by the officers of justice; but, to our great disappointment, the impostor was flown with the whole gang belonging to him, both male and female:—upon enquiry among the neighbours we found they had been there but one night, which time it may be supposed they had spent in packing up and carrying off what goods had been brought in; the house indeed, is conveniently situated for such a purpose, there being a back door through the stables into another street.” 
Here sir Thomas Welby ended his little narrative, what was said upon it will be part of the subject of the succeeding chapter. 
