

I Cannot, (said she,) boast either of a Family, or
any natural or acquir'd Endowments, which cou'd
entitle me to those Hopes the lovely and accomplish'd
Cleomira might reasonably depend on:
My Father was, indeed, a Gentleman; and if his
Estate was not the greatest, yet it was superior to
most Commons, who had taken no other Measures
to enlarge their Possessions than what was consistent
with Honesty, and that tranquil State of Life, which, 

I believe, he wou'd not have forsook to have been
Master of both Indies: And though my Education
was only such as the Country affords, yet, had I
follow'd those Precepts which my Infancy was taught,
it had been sufficient to have restrain'd me from doing
any Thing which cou'd draw on me the Contempt
of the World. I had the Misfortune to lose both my
Parents within a year of one another; but my Father,
(who was the longest Survivor,) had, a little
before his Death, provided me a Husband, a Gentleman
who long had lov'd me, and who was, indeed,
deserving of a much better Match: His Person was
extremely graceful and well-turn'd; his Behaviour
affable to all, and complaisant as far as Sincerity wou'd
permit; his Solidity of Judgment and sound Reasoning
surpriz'd those of twice his Years; and though
he had a peculiar Sweetness of Disposition, which
made it impossible for him to be an Enemy to any
one, yet was it temper'd with a due Regard to that
Principle of Honour which forbids any Friendship
with the vicious Part of Mankind, or for any private
End or Interest to pretend it. Virtue and Wit, though
in Rags, never fail'd to excite his highest Praises and
most zealous Esteem; and Folly and Baseness, though
adorn'd with Grandeur, his Contempt and open Detestation. 
It was impossible for a Heart so entirely
unpreposses'd as mine then was, to make any Objection
to a Person such as I have describ'd, especially
when recommended by a Father, who I knew
tenderly lov'd me, and was most watchful for my
Happiness; but as I had no Repugnance, so also I had
no extraordinary Satisfaction in the Thoughts of this
Match: I felt no Hopes, no Fears, no Wishes, no
Impatience, nor knew what 'twas to be uneasy or
transported. When I saw Worthly, (for that was the
Name of this excellent Man,) I was well enough
pleas'd, indeed; but when I saw him not, I was the
same: In fine, every Thing was indifferent to me; 
and had this Insensibility continu'd, I had liv'd one of
the most contented Women in the World. Every 

Thing being concluded on, a Day was fix'd for the
Celebration of our Marriage; but on the sudden Death
of my Father, which happen'd about a Week before,
for Decency's-sake, it was put off to a longer Time:
Nor cou'd Worthly, (ardent Lover, as all his Actions
spoke him,) say any Thing to the contrary. He
constantly visited me every Day, and I looking on
him as a Man ordain'd by Heaven, and him who had
the Disposal of me, for my Husband, allow'd him all
the Freedom of Conversation imaginable. The Alteration
which the Death of my Father had made in
our Family, gave him an Opportunity of proving his
Love and Generosity in a Manner which justly render'd
him very dear to my Esteem, (Oh! wou'd to
Heaven it had to my Affection too!) but I have since
found there is an Infinity of Distance between Love
and Friendship. My Father, little suspecting he was
so near his End, had made no Will, and being possess'd
of scarce any personal Estate, and the real descending
to my Brother, then a Student in the University,
it was generally fear'd among our Relations,
that myself and younger Sister wou'd be entirely Portionless. 
This Discourse soon reach'd Worthly's Ears; 
and he came to me one Day with a more than ordinary
Satisfaction in his Countenance, to tell me,
That nothing cou'd have happen'd more lucky for
his Wishes, than this Means of testifying to me and
the whole World, that it was my Love alone he was
ambitious of; and that he was so far from desiring
my Brother shou'd make good any Thing of what
my Father had promis'd, that he wou'd not be depriv'd
of the Glory of proving himself not altogether
unworthy my Regard, by marrying me without a
Fortune, to receive with me the Treasure of an Empire. 
I must have been void both of Gratitude and
common Sense, if I had not acknowledg'd this Behaviour
to have been generous above the Rank of
ordinary Lovers; especially, when I consider'd it
cou'd be none of those idle Compliments which Men
are often full of, when they think we have no Occasion 

to make use of their Service. I knew Worthly's
Temper too well to suspect the Sincerity of what he
said, and knew also, that he was too well acquainted
with my Brother's Character to expect any Thing
from him. He was when he left our House extremely
Wild and Thoughtless, wholly addicted to his
Pleasures, and seem'd so little inclinable to any solid
Reflections for the Good of his Family, or himself,
indeed, that it was the universal Discourse of the
Country, that he would make but an ill Use of his
Patrimony: But he disappointed the Belief of every
Body; and when he came from the University, (as
he did soon after my Father's Death, to take Possession,
he being more than of Age,) he made it appear
that Learning is the best Polisher of the Principles, as
well as Manners of those who apply themselves seriously
to it. He settled the Affairs of the Family in
a Fashion beyond what cou'd have been hop'd; and
having heard of my intended Marriage with Worthly,
and what my Father design'd to give me, said he
wou'd be far from contradicting the Will of so good
a Parent, tho' not compell'd to it by any Form of
Law; and sending for a Scrivener, not only made me
Mistress of the Fortune which had been promis'd,
but bound himself to give my Sister the same, whenever
she shou'd Marry, or come of Age; and because
there was no ready Money left, he made over the
Estate to pay it, reserving only to himself a Competency
to maintain him at the University, whither he
soon went back, and designs to continue some Years. 
My Brother's Generosity did not, however, lessen my
Obligations to Worthly; my Esteem for him encreas'd
daily, and he had, indeed, so many excellent Qualities,
that it was impossible, but the more one knew
him, the more one shou'd find to admire: In fine, all
that I knew of Love was his; nor had I the least
Notion, there was any Thing farther in that Passion,
than what he had inspir'd me with. ––––Happy had
I been never to have been undeceiv'd! But my ill
Fate decreed it otherwise, and sad Experience soon 

inform'd me that the Effects of Love are not Tranquility
and Ease. 
Not having been at any publick Place, (except
Church,) since the Death of my Father, Worthly
wou'd needs perswade me to go in his Coach to see
a famous Horse-Race, which was to be run a few
Miles distant from the Place where we liv'd. There
was a prodigious Concourse of People, and great
Part of them of the best Fashion in the Country
round about; the Sight gave us a great deal of Diversion; 
and when it was over, Worthly conducted
myself and Sister, (for I took her with me,) to a
House, where there was a noble Collation prepar'd
for our Entertainment; and in this, as in every Thing
else, he testify'd the Pride he took in obliging me. 
As we were returning home, the Coachman having
drank too plentifully, drove in such a furious Manner,
(in spite of his Master's often calling to him to take
Care,) that we were over-turn'd. None of us were
hurt: But this Accident was the Occasion of a Misfortune
much worse than any Thing that cou'd have
happen'd by the Fall. A Gentleman, who was riding
the same Way, and saw all that pass'd, came up to
us, and alighting from his Horse, made us several
Compliments on the Occasion, and, perceiving the
Condition our Coachman was in, entreated Worthly
to accept of a Servant he had with him, who, he
said, had often drove a Coach, and understood it very
well. The Fright that my sister and I were in made
Worthly gladly accept of the Offer; and immediately
the young Man, by his Master's Command, chang'd
Seats with the Coachman. All the Time of our little
Journey, the obliging Stranger rode by the Coachside,
and entertain'd us with a World of Gallantry; 
for, besides the Charms of his Person, which nothing
sure cou'd ever equalize, his Manner of Address
had something in it so inexpressibly engaging,
that had Cleomira seen him, Lysander wou'd have appear'd
less lovely. The Recluse cou'd not ferbear
shaking her Head and sighing at these Words, 

as believing it impossible for any Man to be possess'd
of Graces, which cou'd obscure those of her Lysander; 
but she wou'd not interrupt the other by entring into
an Argument, which 'twas probable they shou'd
not easily agree upon, and Belinda went on thus:
Worthly (continu'd she) was infinitely charm'd with
his Conversation, and gave me to understand, when
we came near home, that I cou'd do no less, in return
to the Civilities he had shew'd us, than invite
him in. My Complaisance for him was sufficient to
have made me yield to his Desire, in a much greater
Matter; but, alas! I granted this with a Pleasure,
which, at that Time, I knew not the Meaning of,
nor once imagin'd, that from the Wit and Beauty of
this lovely Unknown I had drawn in an Infection
at my Eyes and Ears, which, mixing with my whole
Mass of Blood, was to poison all the Quiet of my
future Days: I cannot tell you what 'twas I felt,
while in his Presence, but it was a Mixture of Delight
and Pain, a kind of racking Joy, and pleasing
Anguish. He stay'd not very long at our House,
Worthly was impatient to have him at his own, that
he might, in a Fashion which he wou'd not take
the Freedom to use in ours, requite the Civilities we
had receiv'd from him on the Road; and it was not
till I was left alone, and had Leisure for Reflection,
that I found myself unhappy enough to feel for this
Stranger, what Worthly's constant Assiduity, and my
Knowledge of his many Virtues, never cou'd inspire. 
I suffer'd many Conflicts on the first Discovery that
it really was Love, which so suddenly, and without
Reason, had taken Possession of my Soul: My just
Sense of the Obligations I had to Worthly, and my
Engagements to him, (from which I cou'd not without
both Ingratitude and Dishonour recede,) and my
wild Passion for a Man, who, perhaps, might never
regard me with any Thing more than an Indifference; 
––––a Man, who 'twas likely might be already
married, or prepossess'd with a more deserving Object; 
––––a Man, whose Temper, Principles, and Circumstances, 

were altogether unknown to me, fill'd
me at once with Shame, Remorse, Confusion, and
Despair. My Mind in this Disorder, 'twou'd be
needless to say it was impossible for Sleep to enter
my Eyes: I pass'd the Night in a Manner vastly different
from all I had ever known before; nor did the
Day bring any more Tranquility. In the Afternoon,
Worthly, according to Custom, came to visit me; 
but, alas! his Presence was now no longer welcome,
nor cou'd all his good Qualities have render'd him
supportable, had not his whole Discourse been of the
too lovely Stranger. He told me, that he had been
inform'd by himself of all his Circumstances; that he
was a Baronet, his Name Sir Thomas Courtal; that
having made the Tour of Europe, he thought his
Travels wou'd not be compleat, unless he cou'd be
able to give as good an Account of the Kingdom he
was born in, as of others; and to that End, was proceeding
in his Progress thro' every Country in which
there was any Thing rare or valuable to be seen. He
added to this Relation, so many Encomiums on the
Graces of his Person, the Charms of his Wit, and
and the seeming Sweetness of his Disposition, that
had I not been already too much prepossess'd in his
Favour, what he said was enough to have made me
so. Presuming on my Interest with you, (said this
unspecting Lover,) I have engag'd, that you shall
give me leave to bring him to wait on you sometimes,
while this Part of the Country is happy in
his Presence; which I hope (continu'd he looking
tenderly on me) will be long enough to see me blest
in the Title of your Husband. O God! with what
Emotions did my Bosom swell, when he pronounc'd
these Words! a thousand Times I was about to lay
open all the Weakness of my Soul, and warn him of
so dangerous a Guest; but Shame as often depriv'd
me of the Power:––––Yes, I protest, it gave me a
Concern I cannot well express, to see this generous,
this undesigning Man, thus lay a Snare for the Destruction
of his own Hopes: Yet, how cou'd I avoid 

it, without making a Confession too shocking for
my Modesty, or his Passion, to be able to sustain? 
In fine, I having said nothing to oppose it, he brought
him the next Day to visit me, and they became so
intimate in a little Time, that he scarce ever came
without him. O what a Trial was this for a Heart
so inexperienc'd as mine! How did I struggle to repel
my daily-encreasing Wishes? And how strenuously did
I endeavour to out-ballance Courtal's enchanting Graces,
by the solid Perfections of the other? But all in vain; 
the tow'ring Flame grew higher by my Attempts to
quell it, and a little Time convinc'd me, that Almighty
Love despises all Controul. Worthly's continual
Sollicitations for the Celebration of our Marriage,
render'd him more disagreeable; and the Trouble he
put me to in finding Excuses to delay it, made the
Sight of him intollerable: He had too much Penetration,
not to discover there was an Alteration in my
Behaviour; but having never receiv'd Testimonies of
any Thing more than my Esteem, imagin'd it proceeded
only from the little Inclination he had always
found in me to change my Condition; and redoubled
his Pressures in such a Manner, as made me stand in
need of much more Artifice than I was Mistress of,
to put him off, without letting him into the Secret
of my Reason for it. To heighten my Aversion,
and strengthen my Obstinacy in refusing him, I had
of late observ'd in the charming Courtal's Eyes a certain
Languishment they were not us'd to wear; I
often heard him sigh, observ'd him to look pale and
trembling, when, on any Occasion, he touch'd my
Hand: Symptoms which I now began to know
were infallible Tokens of a Tenderness, far beyond
that which springs from bare Esteem. And while I
flatter'd my fond Wishes with a Belief, that I was
secretly belov'd by him, I began insensibly to hate
the other, whom I look'd upon as the only Bar
'twixt me and all the Joys this World cou'd give. 
Tho' Worthly was one of the most obsequious Lovers
that ever was, yet he was too eager to brook a Delay, 

for which he cou'd assign no Reason; and finding
me still more and more averse to any Discourse
of Marriage, he sollicited all my Relations and Acquaintance
to speak to me, and learn the Cause, if
possible, why I shou'd now refuse what (if my Father's
Death had not deferr'd) had been granted with
my free Consent many Months before. I suffer'd
a vast deal of Persecution from all those People he
had engag'd in his Interest; and I know not what
the unanswerable Arguments they pleaded in his Favour
might not at last have perswaded me to, if he
had not (O ill-directed and unlucky Choice!) employ'd
even his ador'd Rival too in this Affair. I
was one Day in my Chamber musing, and full of
unsettled Resolutions, when I was told that Courtal
was below: His very Name alarm'd me; but when
I came down, and found he was alone, 'tis impossible
to guess at my Surprize! He easily perceiv'd it in
my Countenance; and approaching me with the most
humble and submissive Air, A Guest, Madam, (said
he,) of so little Merit as the unhappy Courtal wou'd
have small Reason to hope a Welcome here, if his
Presumption were not authoriz'd by him, who, blest
with the Divine Belinda's Love, knows the way to
obtain Pardon for himself and me. ––––From Worthly,
Madam, (continu'd he, perceiving I was silent,) the
fortunate Worthly, I am sent to tell you how much
he languishes under the Impossibility of waiting on
you this Evening, and to assure you, (if you can
doubt it,) that tho' unlucky Affairs detain him from
your Presence, his Soul and all his Wishes are with
you. Tho' I was prodigiously confounded to find
that Worthly had engag'd him to this Visit, yet I was
much more so at his Manner of telling it me: But
after I had desir'd him to sit, Any Friend of Worthly's
(answer'd I,) shall always find Welcome from Belinda:
But, I think, so much is owing to the vast
Merits of Sir Thomas Courtal, that there can be no
need of any second Name to introduce him any where. 
I design'd these Words no other than a Compliment; 

but the Confusion with which I spoke them,
gave him too much Reason to believe I had a farther
Meaning; and looking on me with Eyes which seem'd
to read my Soul,––––O God! (said he,) what sweet
Enchantment do those Words contain! The powerful
Spells disclose an opening Heaven to my ravish'd
View! and wrapp'd with Joys immortal, make me
forget the Hell of Misery I am doom'd too! ––––Then,
after a little Pause, and venting two or three Sighs,
which seem'd so vehement as though at each his
Heart were rent in sunder, Pardon, Madam, (resum'd
he,) the Violence of a sudden Transport, which some
delusive Hopes that Moment fir'd me with, and made
me neglect the Business which alone has given me
the Boldness of waiting on you. I felt, all the Time
he was speaking, Motions, which I know not how
to account for; I have already told you that I had
discover'd, or fancy'd that I had discover'd, by some
Looks and Words, which seem'd to be unguarded,
that he lov'd me; and though I desir'd nothing so
passionately as to be assur'd he did so, yet I dreaded
the Eclaircissement, and began to tremble with Fear
that he should say something which I was altogether
unprepared to answer: I have often reflected
since how silly my inward Perturbations made me
seem: Courtal must certainly guess from what
Source the Disorders he perceiv'd in my Countenance
proceeded, or believe me to be extremely wanting
in Conversation; and I was so ambitious of appearing
amiable in his Eyes, that I know not if I wou'd
not have chose he should be sensible of the Truth,
rather than impute my Behaviour to any natural Defect:
But whatever his Thoughts were, he eas'd my
Confusion, by immediately falling into a Discourse
of Worthly. He gave him Praises, which, tho' not
more than he deserv'd, were more than I was willing
to hear, at least, from the Mouth that spoke
them; and than began to tell me how ill the Impatience
of his Love made him brook my delaying to
give him a Happiness, which he had so much Cause 

to hope would long since have been compleated; and
that he begg'd I would assign some Period to his Sufferings,
that he the better might be enabled to endure
them. If before I was alarm'd at the Apprehension of
Courtal's entertaining me in another Manner, I was
now ten Times more so that he did not:–––It stung
me to the Soul to find, that when he had so favourable
an Opportunity to discover his Sentiments, he
should employ it in a Theme, which (if he had
those Inclinations that I had flatter'd myself I had
inspir'd,) must be so disagreeable to his own Desires. 
My Fears now turn'd to Indignation! I rag'd to think
my Wishes had deceiv'd me, and half despis'd him for
his Insensibility! I wonder (said I, with an Air, which
I believe, had a good deal of Contempt in it) that
Worthly shou'd take the Measures he does:–––Does
he think to teaze me into Compliance?–––and can
he imagine, that any Thing he can say, or the Persons
he employs, will influence so far, as to make
me grant what is not consistent with my Inclinations? 
–––I am not dispos'd to marry,–––at least, as
yet; and if I never shou'd be so, he ought not to
expect I should do a Violence to my own Humour,
to pleasure his. These, and the like ridiculous Expressions,
which my Vanity, or my Love, or both,
drew from me, were sufficient to let Courtal see
how little real Tenderness I had for his Rival; and,
doubtless, encourag'd him to make the Declaration
he presently did. Ah, Madam! (said he,) you are but
little sensible what the burning Impatience of a Lover's
Wishes make him suffer,–––what strong Convulsions,
––––what soul-rending Pangs invade the
Breast, which throbs with doubtful Expectation! ––– 
For my Part,–––could I, like Worthly, hope,–––as
all, who know you, must, like him, adore, I shou'd
be less enduring far! –––Those lovely Eyes shou'd
ne'er have Leave to close, or view another Object
but myself,–––nor Night, nor Day would I be absent:
–––I'd follow wheresoe'er you went,–––and
with imploring, dying Looks,–––with softening 

Tears,–––with Groans, and all the natural Eloquence
of moving Passion, hang on your Feet, and grasp
those happy Garments, till Coldness, Coyness, and
Reserve, was melted down;–––and your whole Soul
was Tenderness and Pity. You might be mistaken,
(reply'd I briskly;) for if I did not love, such a Behaviour
would make me hate. True, Madam, (resum'd
he, holding down his Head, and sighing,) I
know from the Unlov'd all Proofs would be unwelcome; 
and 'tis that Knowledge has deter'd me from
discovering what I feel;–––else had my Eyes and
Tongue, e'er now, disclos'd my Soul, and told Belinda
she engros'd it all;–––but hopeless,–––meritless,
I have in secret born the fest'ring Wound; nor
durst implore my fair Physician's Aid, lest, instead
of Balm, she should apply a Corrosive. –––Even this,
perhaps, (continu'd he, taking one of my Hands,
and eagerly kissing it,) you would think too great a
Recompence for the eternal Loss of my Repose. 
Tho' this Declaration would have prodigiously disorder'd
me before, yet being made at a Time when I
had just given over either the Hopes or the Fears of
hearing any such Thing, it confounded me much
more: I knew not what to say, nor how to look; 
I could not repel, and was unwilling to encourage; 
but, at last, thinking it best to take the middle Course,
I affected to turn his Behaviour into Merriment; 
and, with as much Gaiety as I could put on, I dare
swear (said I) there is no Danger of your losing
your Repose for any Woman in the World:–––You
have too much Wisdom to be much in Love; and most
of your Sex have too much Wit, and too little good
Nature not to despise the Effects of that Passion
wherever you perceive them. –––How, Madam, (interrupted
he,) such Words, coming from a Mouth
like yours, carry a Severity in them more cruel than
any Thing I could apprehend from so angelick a Composition:
–––While you tell me I have Wisdom, and
that I know not Love, you give the greatest Proof
you can, that you think me an Ideot; for to adore 

Belinda is sure the highest Wisdom; and to be insensible
of her Charms, is the last Degree of Folly and
Stupidity. –––Ah! wou'd to Heaven (continued he
sighing) it were as much in my Power to influence
you to Compassion for my Sufferings, as it is to
convince you of the Reality of them. I never
doubted your Gallantry, (answered I, scarce able to
retain any Part of that Humour I had assum'd;) but
if I had, you give me now a sufficient Testimony
of it, in so artfully turning the Discourse we were
upon, which indeed was too serious to be pleasing,
into a Raillery much more entertaining. –––He
wou'd not suffer me to proceed, but falling on his
Knees before me, and looking up in my Face with
a Tenderness unutterable, O hold, (cried he,) lovely
Insulter! give not to the most Almighty Truth a
breaking,–––bleeding Heart, e'er yet sent forth, so
injurious an Epiphet:–––By Heaven,–––by all that
Man adores,–––by all we are taught to hope, to fear,
or wish, you are dearer to my Soul than Health,
than Grandeur, Knowledge, Light, Life, or my
eternal Peace;–––than every Thing that Language
gives a Name to:–––But I may spare these Protestations
(rejoin'd he, after a little Pause,) too well do
those enchanting Eyes trace their own Power,–––– 
even now they penetrate, they pierce my Breast, and
read much more, oh! infinitely more, than I can
say. –––He would have gone on, but the Tread of
somebody coming down Stairs, oblig'd him to break
off, and reliev'd me from a Perplexity I know not
how I should have got through. It was my Sister
who came into the Room, just as he had risen from
the Posture he was in; but the Confusion that she
perceiv'd in both our Faces, made her (as she since
told me) guess what sort of Conversation he had entertain'd
me with; and, believing it would be a little
agreeable to me that he should have an Opportunity to
renew it, never left us while he stay'd. He could not,
indeed, after she came in, express his Sentiments any
farther by Words, but Looks, which I already too well 

understood, explain'd his Meaning; and certainly, tho'
at that Time I knew it not, met with a Return too
kind from mine. Just as he was taking his Leave,
he got the Liberty to say softly,–––O divine Belinda!
remember me:–––Pardon, and pity me. –––Alas!
'twas I had only need of Pity; for never did any
Creature pass a Night in greater Inquietudes
than I did the succeeding one:–––My Engagements
to Worthly, and the Impossibility of breaking them,
without rendring my self odious to all who knew
me;–––my already furious Passion for Courtal, and
the little Assurance I had of the Sincerity of his;–––– 
my Ingratitude for the one, and Weakness for the
other, shock'd all that was noble and generous in me,
and made me incapable of Ease: I had all to fear,
nothing to hope; nor could I form an Aim, which,
if obtain'd, could give me perfect Happiness. If I
should marry Worthly (said I to myself, how wretched
must I be? condemn'd to loath'd Embraces, and
the detested Task of forc'd Civility;–––by painful
Duty restrain'd from even the Wish of better Fortune,
yet Inclination still at War with Virtue, guilty and
innocent at once, and miserable in both:–––Or,
should I indulge my Passion in the too-charming
Courtal's dear Society, could I expect Content? Even
in his Arms, my Breach of Promise, and Ingratitude
to Worthly, his Despair, and the just Censures of the
reproaching World, would embitter all my Pleasures,
turn the dear purchas'd Blessing to a Curse,
and make my fancied Heaven a real Hell. In this
Manner would the different Agitations which tormented
me, make me argue with my self. Honour,
Reputation, and Gratitude were on Worthly's Side; 
but what are these when once oppos'd by Love! 
Courtal's bewitching Charms silenc'd, at last, all other
Considerations; and Passion had entirely vanquish'd
Reason, if my Doubts of his Sincerity had not interpos'd:
I could not be assur'd he lov'd me, because
he told me so; or if he did, how long his Passion
might continue. I had heard and read too much 

of Men's Inconstancy, their Flatteries, their thousand
Arts, to lure weak Woman to Belief and Ruin, not
to tremble when I thought there was a Possibility
he might not be exempted from those little Basenesses
of his Sex. –––These Meditations were the
troublesome Companions of my Pillow; nor could
my domestick Affairs, my Sister's agreeable Prattle,
nor all the Amusements which the Day brought
with it, have Power to drive them from my Thoughts:
My Body, restless as my Mind, displeas'd at every
Thing, uneasy every where, I wander'd up and
down from Room to Room, till I heard Worthly
was come to visit me. I was little prepar'd, and
less desirous to have seen him; but in the Hurry of
Temper had forgot to give Orders for my being denied:
I receiv'd him in such a Manner, as let him
plainly see he could not do a greater Displeasure than
in staying with me. He could not forbear taking notice
of the more than ordinary Coldness, and indeed
Peevishness of my Behaviour; and gave me some
Hints, tho' with all the Respect in the World, that a
Passion so truly ardent and unblameable as his had ever
been, might have expected a more favourable Return. 
There was too much Justice in his Complaints for
me to be able to answer them, and therefore endeavour'd
to quell them, by telling him, That as there
was no Body, to whom I was oblig'd to be accountable
for my Actions, to find fault with what I did
was not the Way to engage to a Change. Madam,
(said he,) I never yet have been presumptuous enough
to find fault with any Thing you think fit to do; 
but now begin to cease the Hope of ever perswading
you to any Thing in my Favour. –––I well see,
that in losing your Father, I lost my only Friend;––– 
had he liv'd, your Obedience to him would have given
me a Blessing, which I now despair of obtaining
from your Love. He look'd full in my Face as he
spoke these Words, and offer'd to take me by the
Hand; which I drawing back with a Reserve, which
came pretty near to Rudeness,–––I find (resum'd he) 

my Presence is unwelcome,–––I will therefore trouble
you no farther at this Time: May Heaven inspire
you with more grateful Sentiments, or give
me a Heart able to support your Cruelty. –––He had
Power to utter no more; but turning hastily away,
went out of Room in such Disorder, that it a little
mov'd me. But these good-natur'd Emotions lasted
not long; and what entirely chas'd 'em from my
Soul, was a Letter I immediately after receiv'd from
Courtal. The Words of which were these; 

If to adore without a Possibility of Hope be a Sin,
it is a Sin only against our own Happiness; a Sin
which all Mankind, who see you, must be guilty
of, and which Heaven, who gave you such resistless
Beauties, must inspire you to forgive. ––––Yes, you are
too Angelick to condemn us for Faults, which are not in
our Power to avoid. ––––'Tis my presuming Tongue, not
Heart, that has offended: I need not entreat your Pardon
for loving you, but for declaring that I do so; there
is, I fear, a dreadful Cause;–––I ought, indeed, to
have dy'd in Silence. I know not, but your Soul, in
spite of your Yesterday's Efforts to conceal it, is wholly
taken up with a more deserving Object, and the Impertinence
of my ill-tim'd Passion may have disturb'd
those soft Idea's which mutual Tenderness affords. ––– 
Tell me, divine Belinda! if I have been so criminal; 
Death shall be at once the Punisher of my Rashness,
and Cure of my Misery; but if your Breast has
any Room for Pity, O give me leave to try at least
to inspire it: None ever had a Plea more just, none
wou'd be more truly grateful than 
Your eternally Devoted
Courtal. 

You may judge with what Transports I read this
Letter, by those yourself has felt at receiving any
Thing of this kind from the charming Lysander; 

and I thought I had a prodigious Command of my
Temper, that I forbore giving any greater Demonstrations
of my Joy, than what the following Lines
contain'd: 

'Tis impossible either to read, or hear you without
allowing you to be the most accomplish'd,
most gallant, and witty of your Sex; but whether
to be able to retain those Graces, be consistent
with a Love so ardent as you wou'd perswade me yours
is, can only be judg'd by those vers'd in the Town-Manner
of addressing. I have often heard say, by those
more skill'd than myself, that the greatest Symptoms
of a true Passion is to be depriv'd of Utterance, and Incoherence
in Expression; and as I have not Vanity
enough to imagine there is any Thing in me capable of
engaging you to the Reality, am unwilling to be made
the Property of an Amusement only. However, with
that Sincerity, which we in the Country prefer to all
Things, I assure you that my Heart is utterly unprepossess'd
with any Idea of Mr. Worthly, farther than
his good Qualities inspire in all who know him; and
all my softer Wishes are at Liberty to extend themselves
wherever they shall find an Object deserving, by his
Constancy, the Regard of 
Belinda. 

I pass'd the ensuing Night in infinitely more Tranquillity
than I had that before: Love banish'd all the
Remains of Gratitude which had so much disturb'd
me: I gave a Loose to all the Tenderness it inspir'd; 
and in return, it flatter'd my fond Wishes with a
near Prospect of inexpressible Delight. To heighten
my Felicity, early in the Morning the assiduous
Courtal sent me a second Billet, in which I found
these Lines: 


With what Words, O most Divine Belinda!
shall I express the Rapture of my o'erjoy'd Heart,
at reading your dear, obliging Letter? Even the
Distrust you seem to have of my Sincerity, is capable
of giving me no Pain, while you vouchsafe to assure me
there is no greater Impediment to my Hopes! This my
faithful Services will soon remove; but had a Person of
more Merit taken up your Soul, I must for ever have
despair'd! –––Permit me then to begin the pleasing Task
of proving what I am this Afternoon; and by giving
me an early Leave to breathe out my Soul in Vows of
everlasting Truth before you, convince me (of what is
indeed too vast a Blessing to be easily believ'd) that
you will not be displeas'd to find the most tender, and
most faithful, as well as the most passionate of all
Lovers, is 
Your Adoring
Courtal. 

The seeming Sincerity of these few Lines subdued
my easy Faith, and I resolv'd no longer to distrust
my Happiness: Oh! he is all Angel, (cry'd I in a
Rapture,) divinely charming in Soul as well as Body! 
I must,–––I will,–––believe him. And in this Hurry
of unruly Joy, writ him an Answer in these
Words. 

'T Wou'd be an over-acted Modesty, and might justly
be taken for Stupidity, to feign an Insensibility
of your Attractions: The proudest of my Sex
wou'd glory in the Conquest of a Heart like yours; and
I confess, without a Blush, to find myself that happy envy'd
Woman wou'd gratify an Ambition, which unknowing
you there cou'd not be a Ground for. The
Favour of your visits however, I know not, as yet, how
to receive: Worthly, how small a Part soever he had
in my Heart, has met with Encouragement from my
Father, and in Obedience to his Commands, from me; 

and Prudence forbids too sudden a Turn in an Affair
of so much Consequence; but, if I find you in the little
Wood behind our House, about five this Evening, you
shall know more of the Sentiments of 
Belinda. 

You will, doubtless, wonder, that a Maid so little
accustom'd to Conversation shou'd not start at the
very Thought of an Assignation such as this; but
whether it were that the Inexperience of the World,
and the Baseness of Mankind kept me from imagining
the Danger, or the Violence of my Passion
from regarding it, I must leave to the Charity of
your Opinion: But, I confess, I felt not the least
Regret for what I had writ, and had no Uneasiness
but what sprung from my Impatience for the appointed
Hour. At last it came, and while I told the
Clock, my Soul exulted with a Pleasure, which till
then I never knew. I believe I need not tell you I
found Courtal in the Wood ready to receive me; 
you will easily imagine, that the most trifling Inclination
will, before Enjoyment, wing the Assiduity
of that ungovern'd and inconstant Sex; but I wish
there were a Possibility of informing you in what
Manner he accosted me, for there was something in
it so much beyond Imagination, charming and engaging,
that it in part wou'd justify my Behaviour
toward him. –––All his Gestures were so humble and
beseeching, yet withal so graceful;–––all his Looks
were accustom'd with such a piercing Softness;––– 
all his Words express'd so real a Tenderness, so perfect
a Sincerity, and so pure a Zeal, that even you,
too sadly skill'd in the vile Arts of false deceiving
Man, must have believ'd and trusted him! I walk'd
with him, heedless of the swift passing Hours, till
Day was almost spent; and it was not till the Want
of Light depriv'd me of the Pleasure of gazing on
him, that I consider'd how long I had been with
him; and that we were wander'd, insensibly, perhaps,
to either of us, at least to me I am sure it was 

so, a great Distance from the House, and into the
thickest and most obscure Part of the Wood. But it
was in vain, that I reminded him how convenient
it was that I shou'd return; he was too pressing, I
too transported to be able to refuse him so small a
Favour as my Company a few Minutes longer. Never
was a Night more delectable, more aiding to a
Lover's Wishes! the arching Trees form'd a Canopy
over our Heads, while through the gently shaking
Boughs soft Breezes play'd in lulling Murmurings, and
fann'd us with delicious Gales! a thousand Nightingals
sung amorous Ditties, and the billing Doves
coo'd out their tender Transports! –––Every Thing was
soothing,–––every Thing inspiring! The very Soul of
Love seem'd to inform the Place, and reign throughout
the Whole. A little tir'd with walking, my
too-dear Companion had prevail'd on me to rest myself
on a fine grassy Bank, which was at the Foot
of a great Tree: He took the licens'd Freedom to
place himself by me; and, methought, we sat with
all the Sweets of Nature blooming round us, like the
first happy Pair while bless'd with Innocence, they
knew not Shame, nor Fear. But he, alas! had
other Notions, and aiming only at my Ruin, believ'd
he cou'd not chuse a fitter Season, and perhaps
never shou'd have so favourable an Opportunity as
this: He now began to mingle Kisses and Embraces
with his Vows: My Hands were the first Victims
of his fiery Pressures; then my Lips, my Neck, my
Breast; and perceiving that, quite lost in Extasy, I
but faintly resisted what he did, far greater Boldnesses
ensued! –––My Soul dissolv'd! its Faculties o'erpower'd!
–––and Reason, Pride, and Shame, and Fear,
and every Foe to soft Desire, charm'd to Forgetfulness!
my trembling Limbs refus'd to oppose the
lovely Tyrant's Will! and, if my faultering Tongue
entreated him to desist, or my weak Hands attempted
to repulse the encroaching Liberty of his, it serv'd
but, as he said, the more to inflame his Wishes, and
raise his Passion to a higher Pitch of Fury! Oh! I 

had been inevitably lost, had not Heaven sent me a
Deliverance, even in the Moment I was about to be
made the most wretched of its Creatures. Worthly,
born for my Preservation! Worthly, doom'd to do
me all manner of good Offices, though to my own
Destruction! had been to enquire for me; and not
finding me at home, happen'd to come into the
Wood, not mistrusting I was there, but to indulge
that Melancholy my late Carriage had inspir'd. Chance
had led him to that Part where we were, and hearing
my Voice, he kept himself conceal'd, and was Witness
to all the latter Part of our Conversation: He
heard enough, Heaven knows, to make him scorn and
hate me; yet, generous to the last, when I was on
the very Brink of Ruin, he rush'd forth and sav'd
me. Rise, Villain, (said he,) and prepare for a different
Encounter:–––You shall not live to wrong another
in the Manner you have done me; nor shall that
Woman, ungrateful as she is, fall a Sacrifice to your
base Desires. The Surprise that Courtal was in at
these Words, and the Knowledge who it was that
spoke them, did not hinder him from putting himself
in a Posture to receive him: He had his Sword
out almost as soon as the other. But what was my
Confusion,–––my Distraction, to find myself thus expos'd!
and to the Man from whom of all the World
I most desir'd my Weakness shou'd be conceal'd! I
had certainly run between their Swords, and receiv'd
those Wounds each design'd for the other, but
Shame and Horror struck me motionless; and without
the Power even of endeavouring to prevent it,
must have been Witness to some fatal Consequence
of which myself was the Cause, if my Sister, being
told by some Body that saw me, where I was, and
wondring at my Stay, had not at that Instant come
with some of the Servants in search of me. The
enrag'd Rivals, on the first Appearance of the Lights
she brought with her, sheath'd their Swords; but she
saw enough in all our Faces to inform her, that something
extraordinary had happen'd: But it was in vain 

for her to enquire, we all were speechless with our
several Agitations; till Worthly, turning to Courtal,
We are prevented now, (said he,) but I shall take a
Time more proper to reward your Villany; and
giving him a furious Look, flung hastily away, without
staying for his Answer. Courtal was either less
disturb'd, or had infinitely more Command of his
Temper than any of us on this Occasion; and seeming
to take no Notice of his Rival's Words, gave me his
Hand, in order to conduct me home: But I cou'd
not now endure he shou'd look on me, or touch
me; and leaning on my Sister with one Hand, and
with the other holding a Handkerchief before my
Face, to hide as much as possible my Disorders, made
what Haste I cou'd from that unlucky Place. He did
not leave us, however, till we got quite to our Door; 
and as we went, made use of all his Rhetorick to
perswade me to think no otherwise of what had happen'd,
than as a Matter of no Consequence. It was
wholly improper I shou'd answer him as I wou'd,
therefore forbore answering at all: Nor was it to
any Purpose; that my Sister begg'd me to make her
a Relation of this Adventure, after we came home; 
and only telling her, that I was not in a talking Humour,
and bidding her trouble me no farther, I shut
myself into my Chamber, and there gave a Loose to
all the distracted Emotions of my Soul. –––Oh! what
did I not endure this cruel Night? and what, indeed,
must I for ever endure, in the Reflection on the
dreadful Consequence? Belinda could not come to
this Part of her Story without falling into Agonies,
much like those which had so often interrupted the
Recluse in the Course of her's; and it was now
that Lady's Turn to comfort; which she did with
such Success, that the other was soon able to resume
her Discourse in this Manner: 
The Shame and Confusion that I was in (said she)
at what happen'd, was not all that tormented me; 
I had Fears, which were, if possible, more alarming
even than my Remorse: I knew very well the 

Violence of Worthly's Passion for me:–––I saw the
just Rage my Behaviour had put him in, and remember'd
what he said to to Courtal at parting, and cou'd
not hope this Adventure wou'd end without Blood. 
After a thousand Inventions how to prevent the
Mischief I with so much Reason dreaded, I resolv'd,
at last, to try my Power once more with Worthly,
and compos'd my Thoughts as well as I could to form
a Letter to him, in which I confess'd that I had been
ungrateful to his Affection, and by my Folly and ill
Conduct had now render'd myself utterly unworthy
the Continuance of it; but conjur'd him by the Memory
of that Tenderness he once had for me, not
to publish my Weakness to the World, by making
any Noise of this Affair. I writ also to Courtal,
and entreated him, by all the Passion he profess'd
for me, and by those Assurances my late Condescension
had given him of mine, to avoid all Occasions of
meeting Worthly; and if he should receive any Letter
or Message like what his last Words imported,
to lay aside his Honour in favour of his Love, and
the Consideration how much my Reputation must
suffer in a Quarrel of that Nature. I express'd these
Request: to both of them in the most moving
Terms I was capable of, and what Effect I might
have wrought I know not; for though I went not
to Bed all Night, it was so late the next Day before
I had finish'd, that just as I was sealing up the last,
I was interrupted by my Sister's knocking violently at
my Chamber Door, and calling to me to open it, in a
Tone, and with a Disorder, which told something more
than ordinary was the Cause, before I gave her Entrance:
But, when I had,––––O Sister! (said she) Worthly is
kill'd,–––murdered by Sir Thomas Courtal, and his
Servants say it was on your Account they fought. ––– 
O God! what chilling Horrors seiz'd my whole
Frame when she pronounc'd these Words? If she
spoke any Thing more, I was incapable of hearing
it, for I fell immediately into a Swoon, in which
I lay so long, that, as they since told me, neither she 

nor the Maids that she call'd to my Assistance, believed
I should ever recover. But my Miseries were
not to have so short a Date, and I again return'd to
Sense,–––to all the Racks of Thought and curss'd Remembrance. 
As soon as my Agonies would give
me leave to speak, and to enquire, I received the
Confirmation of the dismal Story. They told me
that the Body of Worthly, cover'd with Wounds, and
all besmeared with Blood, was just brought by our
House, in order to be carried home, his Seat not being
above a Bow-Shot distant from ours; and,
that a Servant, who was witness to his dying Words,
and seemed acquainted with the whole Affair, waited
to speak with me. As much as I dreaded to hear
what the Fellow had to say to me, yet I order'd he
should come up; and when he did, desir'd him to
give me an Account of all he knew concerning this
unhappy Accident, which he presently did in these
Words: Early this Morning (said he) my Master
call'd me up, and giving me a Letter, commanded
me to carry it to the Inn where Sir Thomas Courtal
lay. I found him in Bed; but he immediately rose,
and gave me an Answer in Writing. At my Return
my Master was dress'd; and as soon as he had
read what I brought, prepar'd himself to go out, and
seeing me about to follow him, as was my Duty,
he forbid me with a Peevishness which he was not
us'd to express himself with. This Charge and the
Agitations I had observ'd both in his Countenance,
and that of Sir Thomas's, while he was reading the
Letter, gave me some Suspicion of the Truth. I acquainted
one of my Fellows with my Conjecture, and
we both thought it our Duty to seek him; but in
resolving what to do we had wasted so much Time,
that at our Entrance into a Field, (not far from hence,
and, which we thought, if any Thing of what we
imagin'd were true, would be as likely a Place as
any for the Scene of Action,) we met Sir Thomas
who seemed to be in a prodigious Hurry. I ask'd
if he seen my Master; and he answered that he had 

not. But we did not put so much Confidence in
what he said, but that we went on in the Way we
perceiv'd he came from, and soon found my poor
Master breathing out his last. When we came near
him, Harry, (said he to me, with a Voice scarce intelligible,)
I am kill'd:–––Tell Belinda that I die for
her,–––and warn her to take care of–––He was able
to bring forth no more; for at that Instant Death
clos'd his Lips for ever. Here the poor Fellow
ended his sad Account, and was just going out of
the Room half-blinded with his Tears, when I call'd
him back, to ask what was become of Courtal. You
may besure, Madam, (answered he,) that I would
leave nothing undone for the Revenge of my dear
Master's Blood; and as soon as the Body was carried
home, took Persons with me to search for him at
the Inn: But he was too speedy for my Diligence,
and, with both his Servants, had taken Horse, and,
I fear, is gone beyond the Reach of those sent in
Pursuit of him; for we cou'd get no Intelligence
which Road he took. Though I had all the real
Concern imaginable, and Grief for Worthly's Death,
and the Cause of it, yet, I confess, I could not hear
that Courtal was out of Danger without a secret
Joy, which was but too guilty. I dissembled it,
however, and dismiss'd the Fellow with a Belief that
all the Sorrow I had been in, sprung only from the
Loss of his Master. All our Family were of that Opinion; 
and I had the Opportunity of vailing my other
Troubles under that Covert, which was both just
and laudable. I had, indeed, so much Anxiety of
Mind, with every Thing together, that I was not
able to stay in a Place, where all I saw or heard
would but put me more in Remembrance of my
Misfortunes; and I will not tell you, but the Impossibility
of ever seeing Courtal there again, was
the chief Reason of making it odious to me. I
therefore order'd the Coach to be got ready, and
the same Day went to a Relation's House, about
eight Miles farther in the Country, desiring my Sister, 

if any Letter should come, to send it to me there; 
for I imagin'd Courtal would write to me as soon
as he thought himself out of Danger. I gave her
so strict a Charge to take care of it, that, join'd to
some other little Remarks she had made on my late
Carriage, made her not far from guessing the Truth of
my Sentiments; and she took the Liberty of reproaching
me with Ingratitude and Inconstancy. I
gave myself but little Concern to perswade her that
I did not deserve to be tax'd with those Vices; but
redoubling my Desires that she would send any Letter
that should be directed to me, took my Leave. 
What I did soon after, will convince you that nothing,
indeed, was able to abate that wild Passion
that Courtal had inspir'd me with; for having waited
at my Cousin's House about nine or ten Days, and
hearing nothing from home, I grew so uneasy, that
I resolv'd to be gone from thence. I remember'd
to have heard Courtal say he had Business in London,
which would oblige him to defer the Progress
he intended to make through the Counties till
next Year, and fancied he might be gone directly
thither. I did not doubt but if he were, I should
be able to find him out; and when once this Belief
had settled itself in me, I delay'd not a Moment,
but borrowing Horses and a Servant of my Cousin,
went straight to Warwick, and from thence
took the Stage for London. It was that Kinswoman
who directed me to this House, having formerly
been a Boarder here herself; and assuring me that if
any Packet came from our House, she should send
it immediately after me, made me pretty well satisfied
in my Mind, that no Mistake would prevent the
Blessing of hearing from him, and knowing where
to find him, in case I should miss of him in London. 
The Fatigue of my Journey did not hinder me
from sending, as soon as I came here, to all publick
Places to enquire for him; but no such Person was
to be found: And what amaz'd me most, was, that a
Man of that Fashion, and so noted as I imagin'd him 

to be, should be utterly unknown to every Body. 
I did not in the least doubt, but that if I had not the
good Fortune of meeting with him here, I should
be able to get a perfect Account of his Character and
Circumstances; but, alas! the Name of Courtal was
as little known as the Arabian Dialect; and I might
have spent my whole Life in a fruitless Inquisition,
had I not believ'd my Want of Intelligence was in
great Measure owing to the Carelesness of those I
employ'd, and resolv'd to be my own Spy in an Affair
of so much Consequence to my Peace. I had
no sooner determin'd on this, than an Opportunity
offer'd as lucky as I could have wish'd: One of the
Boarders here happened to have a young Lady, a Relation
of her's, come to visit her: There being a very
good Tragedy acted that Night, they agreed to go
to see it; and having talk'd of it before me, ask'd if
I would accompany them thither: Though I had
very little Relish for that, or any other Diversion,
as my Affairs were, yet I was extremely pleas'd
with the Proposal, believing no Place more probable
to give me a Sight of him, whose Presence was all
my Wishes aim'd at. Neither of them were dress'd
for the Boxes; and I had an inexpressible Satisfaction
in my Mind, to think, that if I should be so fortunate
to meet Courtal there, I should have the Opportunity
to observe his Manner of Behaviour, unseen
by him. In short, we all went in a Dishabillee to
to the Gallery, and chose to sit in the very Corner
of it, where, without being taken Notice of
ourselves, we might see with Ease all the Persons
that came into the House. The Ladies that came
with me, knowing me to be a Stranger, were so
complaisant as to give me an Account what and
who most of the Company of any Note were, as
they came into their Places; but I had little Ears for
their Discourse, my Soul was all collected in my
Eyes, and busily employ'd in search of him, whom
the Hope of seeing only had engaged my being there. 
Long I had look'd in vain, till the House being pretty 

full, and I beginning to despair of being so happy,
at last I saw him enter. His Charms were too peculiar,
and my Thoughts too full of them, not to
make me know him the Moment he set his Foot
into the Box. –––Good God! how lovely did he appear
that Night! how graceful! Those Perfections
which in the Country, where a Bon Mien is a Prodigy,
one might think shewn to Advantage, were
no less distinguishable among a Crowd of Beaux! 
Surrounded by those, who by their very Air one
might perceive made it their Study to attract, he
shone with a superior Brightness, and with an unaffected
manly Majesty asserted the Dignity of his
Charms, and seemed to scorn each triffling Emulator. 
As I was contemplating on his unmatch'd
Beauties, I heard one of my Companions say to the
other, Cousin, do you see who is yonder? Yes, (reply'd
she that was spoke to,) I find that Villain, to his
other Vices, has that of being asham'd of nothing. 
How unconcern'd he looks, (resum'd the former;)
and yet, I believe, this is the first Time of his appearing
since his late base Action. They had a good deal
more of this kind of Discourse between themselves,
which I but little regarded, not knowing of whom
they were talking, nor the least imagining that any
Thing of what they said was any Concern of mine; 
till some Ladies coming into the Box over-against
us, I saw Courtal quit his own, and stepping hastily
into that in which they were, seemed to entertain
them with a World of Gaiety, and with a Familiarity
which gave me a Taste of what (by the little
I felt) I believe to be the most dreadful of all Passions,
Jealousy! One of them, though I hated her for the
Freedom I saw she us'd him with, I could not forbear
thinking perfectly agreeable; but she that sat by
her, tho' not the thousandth Part so engaging, appeared
to have the greatest Share of Courtal's Admiration. 
I perceived he look'd on her with a beseeching
Air, and a Tenderness in his Deportment, which
made me almost mad, while the other often pull'd 

him by the Sleeve, patted his Hand, whisper'd to
him, and seem'd, by a World of little Fondnesses, to
endeavour to oblige him to a more peculiar Regard. 
Judge what my Condition was at a Sight so unexpected,
so fatal to my Hopes! I felt in one Moment
all that Despair, and Rage, and Jealousy, could inflict; 
and 'twas as much as I could do to restrain myself
from giving some Proof of it, which would have
made me ridiculous to the whole Assembly. Not
being able to observe their Motions any longer with
Patience, I turn'd to her that sat next me, and ask'd
if she knew who those Ladies were. One of them
(answered she) is the Wife, the other the Mistress of
that Gentleman that just now plac'd himself behind
them. –––The Wife! (interrupted I, in a
much greater Surprise than can be easily comprehended:)
The Wife did you say, Madam? Yes, (resum'd
she,) that Lady in the Green and Silver Brocade
is his Wife; but tho' she is accounted one
of the most celebrated Beauties in Town, and is
certainly a Woman of a very excellent Temper, had
a vast Fortune, and has not been married much above
a Year, yet she possesses but a small Share in her
unworthy Husband's Affection: I dare sware she has
this Moment a Weight of Discontent upon her Heart,
though her Prudence enables her to conceal any
Marks of it in her Countenance and Behaviour: That
Creature by her, in the flower'd Damask, who has
neither Beauty, good Shape, or any Thing to recommend
her but a little flashy Wit, and a vast deal of
Assurance, she is oblig'd, for her domestick Peace, to
be civil to, though every Body knows her to be the
most cruel Enemy she has, and that her Huband
passes most of his Hours, and great Part of his Substance,
with her. All the Time she was speaking,
though I listen'd attentively to what she utter'd, I
had my Eyes fix'd on Courtal: I lov'd with too
much Passion, not to be assur'd it was he I saw before
me;–––I knew I could not be mistaken, but
I imagin'd her to be infinitely so: What she told me 

was so inconsistent with the Idea I had form'd of his
Humour, or the Character I had heard of his Circumstances,
that I cou'd not believe one Tittle of
what she said. Madam, you are prodigiously deceiv'd
(cry'd I, in a kind of Disdain) in the Persons
you are talking of: That Gentleman was my particular
Acquaintance in the Country, and I am confident
has no Wife, or, if he had, is not of a Principle so
vile to use her in the Manner you describe. I know
not (said the other Lady) what he may have done
to entitle him to your good Opinion, but am very
certain, there are too many here who know him to
be a far worse Monster than my Cousin has represented
him. I shou'd be very much asham'd (rejoin'd
I, more warmly than before) to take the Part
of a Man, who really cou'd deserve those Severities
some Reports may have exacted from you, but must
ask your Pardon, if I tell you, that I cannot recede
from what I have said, because I am confident, if
Sir Thomas Courtal were sensible of the Accusations
he lies under, he wou'd find it no difficult Matter to
clear himself. –––Sir Thomas Courtal! (cry'd they both
out;) for Heaven's sake, who are you talking of? 
The Man (answer'd I, more amaz'd at that Question
than at what they had told me of him) whose Character
you have been so free with. ––––Bless me! (said
one of them,) I know him not: Nor I, (cry'd the
other:) I thought we had all this while been speaking
of my Lord–––– 
Here Belinda made a full Stop, as considering whether
she shou'd name him; and after about a Moment's
Reflection,––––You will pardon me, (said she
to the Recluse,) if I conceal the real Name of
this ungrateful Man; for, I confess, in spite of the
Deceit he has us'd me with, and the Crimes he has
been guilty of, I have still a Tenderness for him which
makes me unwilling to expose him. And the Recluse,
assuring her she wou'd be far from desiring
to know any more than she shou'd think fit to reveal,
gave her leave to proceed in her Discourse in
this Manner; 

If before (continu'd she) I thought these Ladies
were mistaken, I was now confirm'd they were so,
when they nam'd a Person altogether a Stranger to
me. I knew (said I) you must at last acknowledge
your Error; that Gentleman to whom you give the
Title of Lord is no more than a Baronet, his Name is
Sir Thomas Courtal; and, I am sure, if he were sensible
of it, wou'd be very sorry to have any Resemblance
of a Man so base. Good God! (said one of
them,) you will not go about to perswade us, that
he, in the White trimm'd with Gold, is any other
than the Person we have nam'd. I am very certain
it is not, (answer'd I.) As we were in this Dispute,
a Woman came to us to know if we wanted any
Fruit: Since (said the Lady) we are not able to convince
you, let this Woman be the Judge: These sort
of People are acquainted with every Body, and she
can have no Interest in disguising the Truth. When
she had spoke these Words, she beckon'd the Woman,
and making a Pretence of buying some Fruit, desir'd her
to tell us who that Gentleman was; she immediately
confirm'd what my Companions had said, and run
on in a good deal of impertinent Chat about him. 
You see (resum'd the Lady that boards here) how
much your Eyes, or the great Likeness there may
be between two Persons, has deceiv'd you; but we
have sufficient Reasons to know what he is, which
when we come home I will acquaint you with. At
that Instant the Curtain drew up, and the Attention
I found they were willing to give to the Play, prevented
any farther Discourse: But how I pass'd the
Time of the Performance cannot be conceiv'd, without
being possess'd with Agitations such as mine: I
had no room to hope there was a Probability of so
many Persons being mistaken, and his Behaviour to
the Ladies that sat in the Box with him, confirm'd
the Character I heard of him to be too true. But
presently after I receiv'd a Demonstration which took
from me all Possibility of doubting the Reality of
my Misfortunes: When the Play was done, having 

no Servant there to provide us a Coach, we were
oblig'd to wait at the Door for one to come to us,
which it could not do immediately, being hindred
by a Chariot which stood ready for its Owner's Approach. 
I observ'd there were two or three Footmen
belonging to it; and one of them, tho' now in
a different and much richer Dress, I perfectly remember'd
to be the Man that officiated in the Place
of poor Worthly's Coachman, that fatal Day in which
I first beheld the perjur'd Courtal, and since had been
the Bearer of those Billets I receiv'd from him. I
pull'd my Hood as forward as I could to prevent his
seeing my Face, and changing my Voice, ask'd him
to whom that Chariot belong'd; and he had no
sooner told me (as I fear'd he would) the Name
which had given me such Confusion, than perceiv'd
him coming, the Lord, or Courtal, or both,
for both indeed were one. He conducted the Ladies
he had been with into the Chariot; and stepping
hastily into a Chair which stood there, depriv'd me
of the Opportunity of speaking and upbraiding him,
as else I should have done in the distracted Condition
I then was, without any Regard how improper it
was I should do so in such a Place, and before the
Company I had with me. After this we got into a
Coach; and the Lady who came to visit her that
lives here, sat us down, it being in her way home. 
One would imagine, that to find my self thus cruelly
deceiv'd, had been sufficient to have made me forego
all the Tenderness which had led me into such Misfortunes; 
and if I could not think of him with Hatred,
to endeavour not to think of him at all: But
in spite of the just Rage I was in, the Impatience, the
jealous Curiosity of a Lover still remain'd: I remember'd
that one of the Ladies told me, they had
particular Reasons to know who the Person was
whom I affirm'd to be Sir Thomas Courtal, and had
hardly Patience to stay till Supper was over for the
Performance of the Promise she made me to acquaint
me with them. I was beginning to stretch my Invention 

to form a Story to make her believe, that
it was wholly on the Account of a Friend, and not of
any farther Consequence to me, which had made me
so inquisitive, lest by giving her Occasion to suspect
the Truth, I should expose my self to the Ridicule
of the whole Family. But I might have spar'd my
self that Trouble: The Aversion she had to him
kept her from regarding any Thing but the Pleasure
it gave her to have an Opportunity of telling a Story
so much to his Disadvantage; and I had little Occasion
for Entreaty to engage her to satisfy my Curiosity,
and make me sensible, that the Man I had
consider'd as so worthy Adoration, that all I could
do for him was rather a Merit than a Fault, was
indeed the most vile, and most perfidious of his
Sex. 
She illustrated the History she gave me with many
Circumstances, which aggravated the Foulness of the
Fact: But so much Time has been taken up in the
recounting of my own Affairs, that I will not detain
your Attention in relating the Particulars of this,
and shall only, by giving you the Heads of what she
told me, let you see that I am not the only Woman
whom his Artifices have render'd miserable. The
Sister of that Lady who came to visit her that lodges
here, tho' for a very different Reason, is as unhappy
as my self, and suffers as much in the not loving
him, as I do for loving him too well. She is, it
seems, one of the most agreeable Women in Town:
Her Accomplishments are such as cannot fail of attracting
a great Number of Admirers; but among
the rest, there was a young Man of Quality, who
profess'd the highest Esteem for her, and she thought
her self no less happy in his Addresses, than he did in
her Acceptance of them. They long had lov'd each
other with a most violent, tho' pure Affection; but
either through Disparity of Birth, or some other
Reason, both thought convenient to keep their Amour
a Secret. That Villain (for I shall henceforth
call him by no other Name) being an intimate Friend 

of the Lovers, was the only trusted Person. He
convey'd Letters between them, and through his
means they had frequent Opportunities of meeting. 
He continu'd faithful for some Time; but Miranda
was, it seems, too charming, not to be capable of
making an Impression on any Heart, much more on
one so amorous as his; and he is too base not to
make use of any Means, which might give him the
Gratification of his Wishes, and too artful to be at a
Loss to find them. As by his Contrivance they had
often met, so by his Contrivance they were at last
entirely parted; both having a Confidence in his Sincerity,
yielded an implicite Faith to what he said:
And he soon form'd a Stratagem to make each appear
to the other more worthy of Hate than Love,
till, if they could not entertain a real Aversion, they
feign'd at least so to do; and keeping their Resentments
still warm, by new Inventions, prevented either
from endeavouring an Eclaircissement. The
Lover, tho' he imagin'd he had bestow'd his Heart on
a Person altogether unworthy of the Present, was
too truly touch'd with the Passion he had profess'd,
to be able to withdraw it; and finding it impossible
to continue in the same Climate with her, without
continuing to adore her; and having too great a
Spirit to avow it, after what he suppos'd he knew
of her Ingratitude, resolv'd to put it out of his Power
to do any thing below the Dignity of that Reason,
which all People ought to make use of in an
Affair of that Kind, when they find themselves ill
treated, without a justifiable Cause, by the Person
who once has flatter'd them with a Shew of Tenderness. 
In short, to the Amazement of the whole
Town, and the great Grief of all his Friends and
Acquaintance, (but he whose Arts had occasion'd
him to do it,) he went to travel; and the Lady,
tho' her very Soul went with him, believing her
self injur'd by his Ingratitude, and the Insinuations
of his faithless Friend, scorn'd to make any Tryal of
her Power to prevent him. 

The belov'd Rival once remov'd, this common
Deceiver of them both,–––nay, of the whole World,
thought there was no Obstacle remaining to his
Wishes, and doubted not the Influence of his too-often
successful Charms. In a very few Days he
declar'd himself her Lover; and made no Scruple to
let her know, he hop'd she would reward his Passion. 
But, this once, he found his Designs frustrated:
However she had disguis'd it, she still retain'd too
great a Tenderness for her absent Lover, to entertain
the least Thought of putting any other in his Place; 
and besides, was a Woman of too much Honour and
Discretion, not to look on all Attempts made upon
her Virtue with the utmost Contempt; and that
this was so, there was no room to doubt, since she
knew him to be married. The Lady, who gave me
this Account, told me, that nothing could be more
enrag'd than she was at the Declaration he made
her; that she rejected all his Offers, and forbad him
ever to visit her any more: But, as it is the Nature
of that ingrateful Sex still to pursue what flies them,
he redoubled his Efforts. Deny'd the Liberty of
speaking, he writ to her in the most moving and
seeming sincere Strain that ever Heart dictated; but
after the Receipt of the first Letter, the known Character
on the Superscription prevented her from reading
what the next contain'd, and she immediately
sent it back unopen'd. Yet still undaunted he went
on; and to make her sensible how capable he was to
make even Contradictions join, and, by the Effects of
his too powerful Wit, dress the foulest Vice in the
Beauties of the fairest Virtue, he sent long Epistles to
argue down her Honour, and to perswade her, that
to a Passion so sublime as his, to be cruel only was
a Crime. But whether it was owing to her good
Sense or the Prepossession of another Idea, which
made her insensible of his (I must say) unmatch'd
Perfections, I know not; but as excellent a Logician
as he is, all his Sophistry here prov'd vain. And
tho' she could not avoid receiving some of his Letters, 

because he either disguis'd his Hand, or got
some other Person to direct them, yet they had no
other Effect on her, than what was very different
from his Expectations: She hated him still more; 
shun'd him as a Monster; and if, by chance, she
saw him at any publick Place, (as he took all Opportunities
of being where she was,) her very Countenance
discover'd the secret Disdainings of her Soul; 
and tho' where'er she turn'd he follow'd her with
Eyes trembling with Tenderness, and all the Languishments
of despairing Love, (Looks, Heaven
knows, he is too well us'd to wear,) a stern Severity
only shone in hers; and if, to avoid being taken
Notice of, she was oblig'd to answer the Civilities he
paid her, Scorn lighten'd in her Glances; whene'er
she spoke, proud Indignation triumph'd in her Accents,
and haughty Detestation sparkled in her Air. 
Such a Deportment, had his Passion been of that
Kind which is worthy of the Name of Love, must
have reduc'd him to a Condition justly meriting
Compassion; but Love is a Flame too bright, too
pure, to blaze in a Heart so full of Fraud and vile
Hypocrisy. As Affairs were in this Posture between
them, there came an Account that the Ship in which
the poor, unfortunate, deluded Lover embark'd was
cast away, and all on Board it lost; and at the very
same Time, his equally-deceiv'd Mistress receiv'd a
Letter, which he had writ to her from a Sea-port
Town, where they happen'd to put in. That unhappy
Gentleman, tho' he had been made to believe
her infinitely undeserving of it, still retain'd the same
Tenderness he had ever profess'd, and had not the
Power to forbear letting her know it, tho' he had
the Power to leave her. In this Testimony of his continu'd
Faith, there was some little Mixture of Upbraidings,
which made her no Stranger to the Cause
of his Departure; and that it was not his Want of
Love and Truth, but the seeming Reasons he had to
doubt of hers, which had depriv'd her of her Lover. 
Had it been possible to have recall'd him, with what a 

Transport must she have welcom'd an Eclaircissement; 
but, alas! he was now irrecoverably lost. She
found his Faith, his Constancy, his Tenderness but
found at the same Time she was past the Possibility
of receiving any Benefit of his Virtues; and, if one
rightly considers her Condition, I know not if it
were not less Misery to have believed him false, than
know him true, and know him lost for ever. I
will not go about to make any Repetition of what
I was told concerning the Surprise, Despair, and
Rage, which seiz'd the Heart of this unfortunate
Lady at so unexpected a Catastrophe; 'tis easy for
you to imagine she must be transported with an uncommon
Fury: But while she was venting the Anguish
of her Soul in Curses on the hated Author of
her Miseries, he was contriving Means to gratify
his Desires on her; and finding in vain to prosecute
his lawless Suit by those Ways he had began it in,
he had the unbounded Impudence to resolve on
others, yet more impious, and seek by Force to obtain
what he was now convinc'd Entreaties would
for ever fail to give him. Opportunity was all he
wanted to perpetrate his Design; and none for a
long Time offering, he grew desperate enough to
despise all Considerations; and knowing she very often
went to Evening-Prayers, he waited at the
Church-Door with a Hackney-Coach, and was about
to seize and drag her violently into it. The Action
was so sudden, that tho' there were many People
coming out at the same Time, the Surprise it gave
'em would have prevented her receiving any Assistance,
if two Gentlemen, that were passing by, had
not had Presence enough of Mind to draw their
Swords in her Defence, just as he had so far compass'd
his Intent, as to be getting into the Coach
himself, after having thrust her into it. He wanted
not Courage to engage with them both; but a Crowd
of People immediately coming about them, put
a Stop to any Mischief either to him or them. Had
such a Piece of Villany been attempted by a meaner 

Man, he certainly had been secur'd; but his Quality
made every Body unwilliug to create to themselves
so powerful an Enemy; and he had the Liberty of
retreating, venting ten thousand Curses on his ill
Fortune and the Gentlemen who had frustrated his
Design; while Miranda, tho' half dead with the
Fright, was safely conducted home by her Deliverers. 
Such an Attempt on a Lady so much distinguish'd
as Miranda, and made by such a Person,
must certainly occasion a great deal of Discourse in
the World; and her Brother, who is a Colonel,
would have been suspected to have but little Regard
to the Honour of his Family, if he had not resented
it in the Manner he did. The next Day he sent a
Challenge to the intended Ravisher; which being answered,
as he expected it would, they met in that
Field behind Mountague-House, so famous for Duels:
But, in spite of the Justness of his Cause, the Brother
had the worst of it; and the other leaving him
wounded, and, as he thought, dead, made his Escape; 
nor durst appear in Town, till he heard, contrary to
every Body's Expectation, that his Antagonist was
out of Danger; and that Night which shew'd him
to me at the Play-House, was the first of his being
seen since the Time he fought. 
