

Shews miss Betsy left entirely to her own
management, and the cause of it, with
some other particulars. 
Mr. Goodman, who had been a little
vexed at being interrupted, in the
remonstrances he thought so highly necessary
should be made to miss Betsy,
took an opportunity of renewing them
the next morning, in the strongest expressions
he was master of. 
Miss Betsy, with all her wit, had little
to say for herself, in answer to the serious
harangue made to her by mr. Goodman,
on her present fashion of behaviour;— 
her heart avowed the justice of his reproofs,
but her humour, too tenacious of
what pleased itself, and too impatient of
controul, would not suffer her to obey the
dictates either of his or her own reason. 
—She knew very well the tender regard
he had for her, on the account of her deceased
father, and that all he spoke was
calculated for her good; but then it was
a good she was not at present ambitious 
of attaining, and thought it the privilege
of youth to do whatever it listed, provided
the rules of virtue were unsringed,
so that all that he could get from her
was,—that her amusements were innocent,
—that she meant no harm in
any thing she did,—that it was dull for
her to sit at home alone, and when in
company could not quit it abruptly, on
any consideration of hours. 
Mr. Goodman found, that to bring
her to a more just sense of what was really
her advantage, would be a task impossible
for him to accomplish, and began
heartily to wish she were under the care
of some person, who had more leisure to
argue with her, on points so essential to
her happiness:—he told her, that he indeed
had feared his house would be too
melancholly a recess for her, since the revolution
that had lately happened in his
family, and therefore wished some more
proper place could be found for her; — 
‘And for such a one,’ said he, ‘I shall
make it my business to enquire,—and
there seems not only a necessity for my
doing so, but that you should also
choose another guardian; for as soon
as the present unlucky business I am engaged
in shall be over, it is my resolution
to break up house-keeping,— 
leave my business to my nephew, Ned
Goodman, whom I expect by the first
ship that arrives from the East-Indies,
and, having once seen him settled, retire,
and spend the remainder of my
days in the country.’ 
The melancholly accents with which
mr. Goodman uttered these words, touched
miss Betsy very much;—she expressed,
in terms the most affectionate, the deep
concern it gave her, that he had any
cause to withdraw from a way of life,
to which he had so long been accustomed; 
but added, that if it must be so, she
knew no person so proper, in whose hands
the little fortune she was mistress of should
be entrusted, as those of her brother
Thoughtless, if he would vouchsafe to
take that trouble upon him. 
‘There is no doubt to be made of
that, I believe,’ replied mr. Goodman,
‘and I shall speak to him about it the
first time I see him.’ —They had some
farther talk on miss Betsy's affairs, and
that young lady found, he had very largely
improved the portion bequeathed her
by her father; for which, in the first emotions
of her gratitude, she was beginning
to pour forth such acknowledgments, as
he thought it too much to hear, and interrupted 
her, saying, he had done no
more, than his duty obliged him to do,
and could not have answered to himself
the omission of any part of it. 
It is so natural for people to love money,
even before they know what to do
with it, that it is not to be wondered at,
that miss Betsy, now arrived at an age capable
of relishing all the delicacies of life,
should be transported at finding so considerable,
and withal so unexpected, an
augmentation of her fortune, which was
no less than one third of what her father
had left her. 
The innate pleasure of her mind, on
this occasion, diffused itself through all
her form, and gave a double lustre to her
eyes and air, so that she went with charms
new pointed to a ball that night, for
which the obsequious mr. Munden had
presented her with a ticket;—but though
she had all the respect in the world for
mr. Goodman, and indeed a kind of filial
love for him, yet she had it not in her
power to pay that regard to his admonitions
she ought to have done;—she
came not home till between one and two
o'clock in the morning, but was extremely
surprised to find, that when she
did so, the knocker was taken off the 
door; a thing which, in complaisance to
her, had never before been done, till she
came in, how late soever she stayed
abroad:—she was, nevertheless, much
more surprised, as well as troubled, when
on the first rap her chairmen gave a footman,
who waited in the hall for her return,
immediately opened the door, and
told her, with all the marks of sorrow
in his countenance, that his master had
been suddenly taken ill, and that his physician,
as well as mrs. Barns, the housekeeper,
had given strict orders there
should be no noise made in the house,
the former having said his life depended
on his being kept perfectly quiet. 
It is not to be doubted, but that, on
this information, she went with as little
noise as possible up to her chamber,
where Nanny, as she was putting her to
bed, confirmed to her what the footman
had said, and added, that she had heard
the doctor tell mrs. Barns, as he was
going out, that he was very apprehensive
his patient's disorder would not be easily
removed. 
Distempers of the body, which arise
from those of the mind, are indeed much
more difficult to be cured, than those
which proceed from meer natural causes. 
—Mr. Goodman's resentment for the ill
usage he had sustained, from a woman
he had so tenderly loved, awhile kept up
his spirits, and hindered him from feeling
the cruel sting, which preyed upon his
vitals, and insensibly slackened the strings
of life; but the first hurry being over,
and the lawyer having told him, that
every thing was drawn up, and his
cause would be brought before the commons
in a few days, he sunk beneath the
apprehensions,—the thoughts of appearing
before the doctors of the civil law,
to several of whom he was known, to
prove his own dishonour,—the talk of
the town,—the whispers,—the grimaces,
—the ridicule, which he was sensible
this affair would occasion when exposed,
—the pity of some,—and the
contempt he must expect from others;— 
all these things, though little regarded
by him while at a distance, now they
came more near at hand, and just ready
to fall upon him, gave him such a shock,
as all the courage he had assumed was not
sufficient to enable him to resist. 
He was seized at once with a violent
fit of an apoplexy at a coffee-house,
where a surgeon being immediately sent
for, he was let blood, as is common in
such cases. —This operation soon recovered 
him, so far as speech and motion,
but reason had not power to reassume her
seat in his disordered brain, for many
hours;—he was brought home in a
chair,—the surgeon attended him,— 
saw him put into bed, and sat by him a
considerable time, but finding him rather
worse than better, told mrs. Barns, he
durst not proceed any further, and that
they must have recourse to a physician,
which was accordingly done. 
This gentleman, who was esteemed the
most skilful of his profession, hearing mr.
Goodman frequently cry out, ‘My heart!
—my heart!’ laid his hand upon his bosom,
and found, by the extraordinary
pulsation there, that he had symptoms
of an inward convulsion, wrote a prescription,
and ordered he should be kept
extremely quiet. 
Towards morning he grew more composed,
and by degrees recovered the use
of his understanding as perfectly as ever,
but his limbs were so much weakened by
that severe attack the fit had made upon
him, that he could not sit up in his bed
without support. —The physician, however,
at his next visit, had great hopes
of him,—said his imbecility proceeded
only from a fever of the nerves, which 
he doubted not but to abate, and that he
would be well in a few days. —How uncertain,
—how little to be depended upon
is art, in some cases!—mr. Goodman
felt that within himself, which gave the
lie to all appearances, and fully convinced
that the hand of death had seized upon
his heart, would not defer a moment
putting all his affairs in such a posture,
as should leave no room for contention
among the parties concerned, after his
decease:—he began with sending for mr.
Thoughtless, and consigned over to him
the whole fortunes of mr. Francis, and
miss Betsy, the latter being first obliged,
as not being yet of age, to chuse him for
her guardian in form. —Having thus acquitted
himself, in the most honourable
manner, of the trust reposed in him, for
the children of his friend, he considered
what was best to be done, in relation to
those of his own blood. —By his death,
the intended process against lady Mellasin
would be prevented, and consequently
the third part of his effects would devolve
on her, as being the widow of a
citizen;—he, therefore, having consulted
with his lawyer, if such a thing were
practicable, made a deed of gift to his
nephew, mr. Edward Goodman, of all
his money in the bank, stocks, and other
public funds. —After this, he made his 
will, and the lawyer perceiving he had
left but few legacies, asked him, how the
residue of what he is possessed of should
be disposed; to which he replied, ‘Greatly
as I have been wronged by lady
Mellasin, I would not have her starve: —I have been calculating in my mind
to what her dividend may amount, and
believe it will be sufficient to enable
her to live in that retired manner,
which best becomes her age and character.’ 
Mr. Goodman, having thus settled all
his affairs in this world, began to make
such preparations for another, as are necessary
for the best of men. —In the
mean time, as the least noise was disturbing
to him, it was judged proper that
miss Betsy, who could not live without
company, should remove. —No boarding-place
to her mind being yet found,
and having done with all hopes of living
with her brother, (as she was by this time
informed of the true reasons he had for
her not doing so,) took lodgings in Jermyn-street,
and finding the interest of
her fortune, through the good management
of her late guardian, would allow
it, hired a maid and foot-boy to wait
upon her. 
The adieu she received from mr. Goodman
was the most tender and affectionate
that could be;—she was very much
moved with it, and sincerely lamented
the loss she should sustain of so honest
and worthy a friend; but her natural
sprightliness would not suffer any melancholly
reflections to dwell long upon her
mind, and the hurry she was in of sending
messages to all her acquaintance, with
an account of the change of her situation,
very much contributed to dissipate them. 
—This important business was scarce
over, and she well settled in her new
habitation, when one of mr. Goodman's
footmen brought her a letter from her
brother Frank, which had been just left
for her by the post. —It contained these
lines: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear sister,
I Have been snatched from the
brink of the grave, by the skill of
one of the best physicians in the world,
and the tender, and, I may say, maternal
care of our most dear, and truly
valuable friend, the excellent lady
Trusty. —The first use I made of my
recovered health, is to give an account 
of it to those, whom, I flatter myself,
will be obliged by the intelligence. —I
thank you for the many kind wishes
you have sent me, during the course of
my illness, but hoped to have seen, before
now, another name subscribed to
your letters, than that you received
from your birth; and cannot help saying,
I am a little surprised, that in the
two last you favoured me with, you
have been entirely silent on a subject
you know I have always had very much
at heart. —I have also very lately received
a letter from mr. Trueworth,
wherein he tells me, he is going to his
country seat,—expresses the most kind
concern for me, but mentions not the
least syllable of you, or of his passion. 
—I fear, my dear sister, there is some
misunderstanding between you, which
would very much trouble me, for your
sake especially, but I shall defer what
I have to say to you, till I have the
pleasure of seeing you. —I am not yet
judged fit to sit my horse for so long
a journey, and the places in the stage
coach are all taken for to-morrow, but
have secured one in Thursday's coach,
and expect to be with you on Saturday. 
—I accompany this to you with one
to my brother, and another to mr.
Goodman, so have no occasion to trouble 
you with my compliments to either. — 
Farewell. —I think I need not tell you,
that I am, 
‘With an unfeigned regard,
My dear sister,
Your very affectionate brother,
And humble servant,
F. Thoughtless. 
‘P. S. Sir Ralph and lady Trusty are
both from home at this time, or I am
certain their good wishes, if no more,
would have joined mine, that you
may never cease to enjoy whatever it
becomes you to desire. —My dear
Betsy, adieu.’ 

The joy, which this letter would have
afforded miss Betsy, had been compleat,
if not somewhat abated by the apprehensions
of what her brother would say to
her, when he should find she was indeed
intirely broke off with mr. Trueworth; 
but as the reader may probably desire to
know in what manner he pass'd his time
after that event, and the motives which
induced him to stay in London, it is
now highly proper to say something of
both. 