

One duel began, and another fought in
the same morning, on miss Betsy's account,
are here related, with the
manner in which the different antagonists
behaved to each other. 
Well may the god of love be painted
blind,—those devoted to his influence
are seldom capable of seeing things
as they truly are;—the smallest favour
elates them with imaginary hopes, and
the least coolness sinks them into despair; 
—their joys,—their griefs,—their fears
more frequently spring from ideal than
effective causes. —Mr. Staple judged not,
that miss Betsy refused to ease his jealous
apprehensions on the score of mr. Trueworth,
because it was her natural temper
to give pain to those that loved her, but
because she had really an affection for that
gentleman;—looking on himself therefore
as now abandoned to all hope, rage
and revenge took the whole possession of 
his soul, and chased away the softer emotions
thence. 
Having heard mr. Trueworth say he
was lodged in Pall-Mall, he went to the
Cocoa-Tree, and there informing himself
of the particulat house where his rival
might be found, sat down, and wrote the
following billet: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
“Sir,
Both our wishes tend to the possession
of one beautiful object;— 
both cannot be happy in the accomplishment; 
—it is fit therefore the sword
should decide the difference between us,
and put an end to those pretensions on
the one side or the other, which it is
not probable either of us will otherwise
recede from. —In confidence of
your complying with this proposal, I
shall attend you in the Green-Park,
between the hours of seven and eight
tomorrow morning;—as the affair
concerns only ourselves, I think it both
needless and unjust to engage any of
our friends in it, so shall come alone, and
expect you will do the same to, sir, 
“Your humble servant,
T. Staple.” 


Mr. Trueworth was at home, and, on
receiving this, immediately, and without
the least hesitation, wrote, and sent back by
the same messenger, the following answer: 

To T. Staple, Esq;
“Sir,
Though I cannot but think the
decision of our fate ought to be
left entirely to the lady herself, to whom,
whatever be the fortune of the sword, it
must at last be referred; yet as I cannot,
without being guilty of injustice
to my own honour and pretensions, refuse
you the satisfaction you require,
shall not fail to meet you at the time
and place mentioned in yours, till
when, I am, sir, 
“Your humble servant,
C. Trueworth.” 

By the stile of this letter it may be easily
perceived, that mr. Trueworth was not
very well pleased with this combat,
though the greatness of his courage and
spirit would not permit him to harbour
the least thought of avoiding it; yet whatever
his thoughts were on this occasion,
he visited miss Betsy the same day, and
discovered no part of them in his countenance,
—his behaviour, on the contrary, 
was rather more sprightly than usual;— 
he proposed to the two young ladies to go
on some party of pleasure: —miss Betsy
answered, with her accustomed freedom,
that she should like it very well; but
miss Flora, who had been for three or
four days past very sullen and ill-humoured,
said one minute she would go,
and the next that she would not, and gave
herself such odd and capricious airs, that
miss Betsy told her, she believed her head
was turned; to which the other replied,
tartly, that if the distemper was catching,
it would be no wonder she should be infected,
having it always so near her. — 
Miss Betsy replied, that she knew no
greater proof of madness, than to punish
one's self in the hope of mortifying another; 
—but that shall never be my
case, continued she, “as you will
find. —Then turning to mr. Trueworth,
if you will accept of my company,
without miss Flora,” said she,
laughing, we will take a walk into the
park. —It is not to be doubted, but
that the lover gladly embraced this opportunity
of having his mistress to himself. 
—'Tis like miss Betsy Thoughtless,
cried miss Flora, and only
like herself, to go abroad with a man
alone. —Miss Betsy regarded not this
reproach, but catching up her fan and 
gloves, gave mr. Trueworth her hand to
lead her where she had proposed, leaving
the other so full of spite, that the tears
gushed from her eyes. 
'Tis likely the reader will be pretty
much surprised, that miss Flora, who had
always seemed more ready than even miss
Betsy herself, to accept of invitations of
the sort mr. Trueworth had made, should
now all at once become so averse; but
his curiosity for an explanation of this
matter must be for a while postponed,
others, for which he may be equally impatient,
requiring to be first discussed. 
Two duels having been agreed upon to
be fought on the same morning, the respect
due to the quality of lord &wblank;,
demands we should give that wherein he was
concerned the preference in the repetition. 
The hour appointed being arrived, lord
&wblank;and his brother came into the
field,—mr. Bloomacre and his friend appeared
immediately after. —You are
the persons, said lord &wblank;, in an
exulting tone, who made the invitation,
but we are the first at table. —'Tis
not yet past the time,” replied Bloomacre,
looking on his watch, but the later
we come the more eagerly we shall fall
to. —In that instant all their swords 
were drawn; but they had scarce time to
exchange one thrust before a posse of constables,
with their assistants, armed with
staves and clubs, rushed in between them,
beat down their weapons, and carried them
all four to the house of the high-bailiff of
Westminster. 
That gentleman, by virtue of his office,
made a strict examination into what had
passed, and having heard what both parties
had to say, severely reprimanded the
one for having given the provocation, and
the other for the manner in which it was
resented;—he told them, he had a right,
in order to preserve the peace of Westminster,
and the liberties of it, to demand,
that they should find sureties for their future
behaviour, but in regard to their
quality and character, he would insist on
no more than their own word and honour,
that the thing should be mutually forgot,
and that nothing of the same kind, which
now had been happily prevented, should
hereafter be attempted. 
Lord &wblank; submitted to this injunction
with a great deal of readiness, and
mr. Bloomacre, seeing no other remedy,
did the same, after which the high-bailiff
obliged them to embrace, in token of the
sincerity of their reconciliation. 
Thus ended an affair which had threatened
such terrible consequences. —It made
however a very great noise, and the discourse
upon it was no way to the advantage
of lord &wblank;'s character, either
for generosity or courage. —Let us now
see the sequel of the challenge sent by
mr. Staple to mr. Trueworth. 
These gentlemen met almost at the same
time, in the place the challenger had appointed:
—few words served to usher in
the execution of the fatal purpose; mr.
Staple only said, “Come on, sir,— 
love is the word, and miss Betsy
Thoughtless be the victor's prize.” — 
With these words he drew his sword,— 
mr. Trueworth also drew his, and standing
on his defence, seeing the other was
about to push, cried,—“Hold, sir— 
your better fortune may triumph over
my life, but never make me yield up
my pretensions to that amiable lady:
—if I fall, I die her martyr, and wish
not to live but in the hope of serving
her.” —These words making mr. Staple
imagine, that his rival had indeed the
greatest encouragement to hope every
thing, added to the fury he was before
possessed of, “Die then her matyr,” said
he, and running upon him with more
force than skill, received a slight wound 
in his own breast, while aiming at the
other's heart. 
It would be needless to mention all the
particulars of this combat,—I shall only
say, that the too great eagerness of mr.
Staple gave the other an advantage over
him, which must have been fatal to him
from a less generous enemy; but the temperate
mr. Trueworth seemed to take an
equal care to avoid hurting his rival, as
to avoid being hurt by him;—seeing,
however, that he was about to make a
furious push at him, he ran in between,
closed with him, and mr. Staple's foot
happening to slip, he fell at full length
upon the earth, his sword at the same
time dropped out of his hand, which mr.
Trueworth took up. —“The victory is
yours,” cried he, “take also my life,
for I disdain to keep it.” —“No,” 
replied mr. Trueworth, “I equally disdain
to take an advantage, which meer
chance has given me:—rise, sir, and
let us finish the dispute between us, as
become men of honour.” —With these
words he returned him his sword. —“I
should be unworthy to be ranked among
that number,” said mr. Staple, on receiving
it, “to employ this weapon
against the breast, whose generosity restored
it, were any thing but miss Betsy 
at stake;—but what is life!—what is
even honour, without the hope of her! 
—I therefore accept your noble offer,
and death or conquest be my lot!” 
—They renewed the engagement with
greater violence than before:—after several
passes, all mr. Trueworth's dexterity
could not hinder him from receiving a
wound on his left side, but he gave the
other, at the same time, so deep a one in
his right arm, that it deprived him, in
an instant, of the power of continuing
the fight; on which mr. Trueworth dropping
the point of his sword, ran to him,
“I am sorry, sir,” said he, “for the accident
has happened;—I see you are
much hurt,—permit me to assist you
as well as I am able, and attend you
where proper care may be taken
of you.” —“I do not deserve this
goodness,” answered mr. Staple, “but
it is the will of heaven that you should
vanquish every way.” 
Mr. Trueworth then seeing the blood
run quite down upon his hand, stripped
up the sleeve, and bound the wound from
which it issued, as tight as he could with
his handkerchief, after which they went
together to an eminent surgeon near Piccadilly. 
—On examination of his wounds,
neither that in his arm, nor in his breast, 
appeared to be at all dangerous, the flesh
being only pierced, and no artery or tendon
touched. —Mr. Trueworth seemed
only assiduous in his cares for the hurts
he had given his rival without mentioning
the leaft word of that, which he had received
himself, 'till an elderly gentleman,
who happened to be with the surgeon
when they came in, and had all the time
been present, perceiving some blood upon
the side of his coat, a little above the hip,
cried out, “Sir, you neglect yourself. 
—I fear you have not escaped unhurt.” 
“—A trifle,” said mr. Trueworth, “a
meer scratch, I believe;—'tis time
enough to think of that.” —Nor would
he suffer the surgeon, though he bled very
fast, to come near him, 'till he had done
with mr. Staple. —It was, indeed, but a
slight wound, which mr. Trueworth had received,
though happening among a knot of
veins, occasioned the effusion of a pretty
deal of blood; for the stoppage of which
the surgeon applied an immediate remedy,
and told him, that it required little for a
cure besides keeping it from air. 
Mr. Staple, who had been deeply affected
with the concern this generous enemy
had expressed for him, was equally
rejoiced at hearing the wound he had given
him would be attended with no bad 
consequences. —Every thing that was
needful being done for both, the old gentleman
prevailed upon them to go with
him to a tavern a few doors off, having
first obtained the surgeon's leave, who
told him, a glass or two of wine could be
of no prejudice to either. 
This good-natured gentleman, who was
called mr. Chatfree, used to come frequently
to mr. Goodman's house, had
some knowlege of mr. Staple, and though
he was wholly unacquainted with mr.
Trueworth, conceived so great an esteem
for him, from his behaviour towards the
person he had fought with, that he thought
he could not do a more meritorious action,
than to reconcile to each other two such
worthy persons. —What effect his endeavours,
or rather their own nobleness of sentiments
produced, shall presently be shewn. 