


Seems to promise a very great change
for the better, both in the humour
and conduct of miss Betsy, in regard
to those who professed themselves her
lovers. 

As little as miss Betsy had accustomed
herself to compare and judge of
things, she wanted not the power, whenever
it pleased her to have the will to do
so:—the words of sir Frederick Fineer,
on taking leave of her at his last visit,
sunk pretty deeply into her mind, nor
could she remember them without a mixture
of surprise, resentment, and confusion. 
—No man, excepting mr. Saveing,
whose reasons for it she could not but
allow were justifiable, had hitherto ever 

presumed to make his addresses to her in
a clandestine manner, and sir Frederick
Fineer seemed to her, of all men, to have
the least excuse for doing so, and she
would not have hesitated one moment to
come into her brother Frank's opinion,
that he was no other than an impostor,
if the dependance she had on the good
faith of mrs. Modely had not prevented
her from entertaining such a belief. 
Besides, all the pleasure her gay young
heart as yet had ever been capable of taking
in the conquests she had made, consisted
in their being known, and this proceeding
in sir Frederick was too mortifying
to that darling propensity, to be easily
forgiven, even though he should make
it appear, that the motives on which he
requested this secrecy was such as could
not be dispensed with. 
‘What can the man mean?’ said she:
‘—I suppose, by his desiring his courtship
to me should be a secret, he intends
a marriage with me should be so
too;—that I should live with him
only as the slave of his loose pleasures; 
and, though a lawful wife, pass me in
the eyes of the world for a kept mistress. 
—Was ever such insolence!— 
such an unparalelled insult, both on my 

person and understanding! —Heaven
be my witness, that it is only his quality
could induce me; nay, I know not
as yet whether even that would be
sufficient to induce me to become his
wife, and can he be so ridiculously vain
as to imagine I would accept him on
any cheaper terms, than that eclat his
rank and fortune would bestow upon
me?’ 
She spent all that part of the night,
which she could spare from sleep, in meditating
on this affair, and at last came to
a resolution of seeing him no more, whatever
he might pretend in justification of
his late request. 
She also had it in her head to return
unopened any letter he should send, but
curiosity prevailed above her resentment
in this point, and when his servant came
in the morning, and presented her with
his master's compliments, and a billet at
the same time, she had not the power of
denying herself the satisfaction of seeing
what excuse he would make:—the contents
of it were as follow: 


To the delight of my eyes, the life of my
desires, the only hope and joy of my
adoring soul, the divine miss
Betsy Thoughtless. 
‘Bright star of England!
Since last I left your radiant presence,
my mind has been all dark
and gloomy,—my anxieties are unutterable,
—intollerable;—I know not
what cruel constructions you may put
upon the petition I made you, of not
mentioning me to your brothers;— 
but sure you cannot think I apprehend
a refusal from that quarter:—no,— 
my birth and fortune set me above all
doubts of that nature, and I am very
certain, that both they, and all your
kindred, would rather force you, if in
your power, to accept the hand I offer; 
but it is not to them, but to yourself
alone I can submit to yield. —Heaven,
'tis true, is in possessing you, but then
I would owe that heaven only to your
love;—you may think, perhaps, that
this is too great a delicacy, but know,
fair angel, that there is another motive,
—a motive, which, though derived from
the same source, binds me in a different
way. —Fain would I court you,—fain
marry you with all the pomp and splendor 

your superior beauty merits; but
neither my virtue, my honour, nor my
religion will permit it:—the mystery
is this: 
‘Upon examining into the cause, why
we see so many jarring pairs united in
the sacred yoke of matrimony, I found
it wholly owing to the want of that true
affection, which, to make perfect happiness,
ought to precede the nuptial ceremony,
—that sordid interest,—the
persuasions of friends, or some such selfish
view, either on the one side or the
other, had given the hand without the
heart, and inclination had no share in
beckoning to the altar. 
‘Being convinced of this truth by innumerable
examples, and resolved to
avoid the fate of others, I made a vow,
and bound myself by the most solemn
imprecations never to marry any woman,
how dear soever she might be to
me, that would not assure me of her
love, by flying privately with me to the
altar, without consulting friends, or
asking any advice, but of her own soft
desires. 
‘This, my adorable charmer, being
the case, I am certain you have too 

high a sense of the duty owing to all
that's holy, to exact from me a thing
which you cannot be but certain, must
entail eternal perdition on my perjured
soul. 
‘Let us haste then to tie the blissful
knot, and surprise our friends with a
marriage they little dreamed of. —As
Phœbus each night hurries himself into
the lap of Thetis, to render his appearance
more welcome the next day, so
shall the next morning, after our marriage,
behold us shine forth at once no
less gorgeous than the bright ruler of
the day, dazzling the eyes of the admiring
world. 
‘I am fired with the imagination, and
am wrapped in extacies unutterable,— 
but will fly this evening to your divine
feet, where I hope to persuade you to
delay our mutual happiness no longer
than to-morrow, and exchange my present
appellation of lover into that of
husband, assuring yourself I shall then be,
as now, with the most consummate devotion
to your all-conquering charms, 
‘Sweet goddess of my hopes,
Your passionate adorer,
And everlasting slave,
F. Fineer. 

‘P.S. I beseech you will give necessary
orders for preventing any impertinent
intruder from breaking in upon our
converse, for, exclusive of my vow,
I should detest, as the poet says, 

“With noise and shew, and in a crowd to woo,
“For true felicity dwells but in two.’

Once more, my dear divinity,—adieu.’ 

Miss Betsy read this letter over several
times, and made herself mistress of the
sense, as she thought, of every part of it; 
—she had always found, in every thing
he said or did, a great deal of the affected
and conceited coxcomb; but in this, she
imagined he discovered more of the designing
knave:—the vow he mentioned
was an excuse too shallow to pass on a
discernment such as her's; but her vanity
still suggesting, that he was really in love
with her, and that if he intended any
villainy towards her, it was enforced by
the violence of his passion, it came into
her head, that there was a possibility of
his being already married, or contracted,
to some lady, whom he durst not break
with, but being bent on gaining her at all
events, he had formed this pretence of a 

vow, in order to gain her to a clandestine
marriage, thinking, that after it was over,
and there was no remedy, she would be
content to live with him in a private manner,
since it would then be impracticable
for her to do so in a public one. 
This indeed she could not be certain of,
but she was so, that it did not become a
woman of any family and character to receive
the addresses of a man, how superior
soever he might be in point of fortune,
who either was ashamed, or had
any other reasons to hinder him from
avowing his passion to her relations. 
She resolved therefore to put an end at
once to a courtship, which, however
high her expectations at first had been,
she now saw no probability would afford
her either honour or satisfaction. 
She had no sooner fixed herself in this
determination, than she went to her cabinet,
with an intent to pack up all the
letters she had received from him, and
enclose them in one to mrs. Modely; but
recollecting, she had given one of them
to her brother Frank, which he had not
yet returned, she thought she would defer,
'till another opportunity, this testimony 

of the disregard she had for himself,
and all that came from him. 
To prevent, however, his troubling
her with any more visits, messages, or
epistles, she sat down to her escrutore,
and immediately wrote her present sentiments
to his agent, in the following
terms: 

To mrs. Modely.
‘Dear Modely,
As it is not my custom to write to men,
except on business, of which I never
reckoned love, nor the professions of
it, any part, I desire you will tell sir
Frederick Fineer, that the only way for
him to keep his oath inviolated, is to
cease entirely all farther prosecution of
his addresses to me; for as my birth
and fortune, as well as my humour,
set me above encouraging a secret correspondence
with any man, on what
pretence soever it may be requested; he
may expect, nay assure himself, that on
the next visit he attempts to make me,
or letter or message he causes to be left
for me, I shall directly acquaint my
brothers with the whole story of his
courtship, the novelty of which may
possibly afford us some diversion. 

‘I thank you for the good I believe
you intended me, in your recommendation
of a lover, whose title and estate
you might think had some charms in
them, and the oddities of whose temper
you were perhaps unacquainted with. 
‘I desire, however, you will henceforward
make no mention of him, but,
whenever I send for you, confine your
conversation to such matters as befits
your vocation, for as to others I find
you are but little skilled in what will
please her, who is, 
‘Notwithstanding this raillery,
My dear Modely,
Your friend and servant,
B. Thoughtless. 
‘P. S. To shew how much I am in earnest,
I should have sent the baronet all the
epistles he has been at the pains of
writing to me; but I am just going
out, and have not leisure to look
them up;—I will not fail, however,
to let him have them in a day or
two:—they may serve any other
woman as well as me, and save him
abundance of trouble in his next
courtship. —You see I have some 

good-nature, though nothing of that
love I suppose he imagined his merits
had inspired me with. —Adieu.’ 

Miss Betsy was highly diverted, after
sending this dispatch, to think how silly
poor Modely would look, on finding herself
obliged to deliver such a message to
her grand lodger, and how dismally mortified
he would be on the receiving it. 
