


Gives an exact account of what happened
in the family of mr. Munden, after
the lamentable and deplored death of
his lady's favourite squirrel, with several
other particulars, much less significant,
yet very necessary to be told. 

If mr. Munden had set his whole invention
to work, in order to find the
means of rendering himself hateful in
the eyes of his wife, he could not have
done it more effectually, than by his savage
treatment of her beloved squirrel; 
—many circumstances, indeed, concurred
to set this action of his in the most odious
light that could possibly be given it. 
In the first place, the massacre of so
unhurtful a little creature, who never did
any thing to provoke its fate, had something
in it strangely spleenatic and barbarous. 
In the next, the bloody and inhuman
deed being perpetrated by this injurious
husband, merely in opposition to his wife,
and because he knew it would give her 

some sort of affliction, was sufficient to
convince her, that he took pleasure in
giving pain to her, and also made her not
doubt, but he would stop at nothing for
that purpose, provided it were safe, and
came within the letter of the law. 
It grieved her to be deprived of a little
animal she so long had kept,—with whose
pretty tricks she had so often been diverted; 
and it must be confessed, that to
be deprived of so innocent a satisfaction,
by the very man she had looked upon as
bound by all manner of ties to do every
thing to please her, was enough to give
the most galling reflections to a woman
of her delicacy and spirit. 
But there was still another, and by
many degrees a more aggravating motive
for her indignation;—if she had purchased
this squirrel with her own money,
or if it had been presented to her by any
other hands than those of mr. Trueworth,
not only the loss would have been less
shocking to her, but also the person, by
whom she sustained that loss, would,
perhaps, have found less difficulty in obtaining
her forgiveness. 
She kept her promise, however, and ordered
a bed to be made ready for her in 

another room:—mr. Munden came not
home that night, 'till very late; and being
told what his wife had done took not
the least notice of it, but happening to
meet her the next morning, as she was
coming down stairs, ‘So, madam,’ said
he, ‘I suppose you fancy this obstinate
disobedience to your husband is mighty
becoming in you.’ 
‘When a husband,’ answered she, ‘is
ignorant of the regard he ought to have
for his wife, or forgets to put it in practice,
he can expect neither affection nor
obedience, unless the woman he has married
happens to be an ideot.’ 
They passed each other with these words,
and she went directly to lady Trusty, being
impatient to acquaint her with the behaviour
of her husband towards her since
she last had seen her. 
This worthy lady was astonished beyond
measure at the recital;—it seemed
so strange to her, that a gentleman of mr.
Munden's birth, fortune, and education,
should ever entertain the sordid design of
obliging his wife, to convert to the family
uses, what had been settled on her
for her own private expences, that she
could not have given credit to it from 

any other mouth than that of the weeping
sufferer:—his killing of the squirrel
also, though a trifle in itself, she could
not help thinking denoted a most cruel,
revengeful, and mean mind. 
But how much soever she condemned
him in her heart, she forbore expressing
the whole of her sentiments on this occasion
to his wife, being willing, as they
were joined to each other, by the most
sacred and indissoluble bonds, rather to
heal, if possible, the breach between them,
than to add any thing which might serve
to widen it. 
She told her, that though she could not
but confess, that mr. Munden had behaved
towards her, through this whole affair,
in a manner very different from what
he ought to have done, or what might
have been expected from him, yet she
was sorry to find, that she had carried
things to that extremity, particularly she
blamed her for having quitted his bed; 
—‘because,’ said she, ‘it may furnish
him with some matter of complaint
against you, and likewise make others
suspect you have not that affection for
him, which is the duty of a wife.’ 

Mrs. Munden making no answer to
this, and looking a little perplexed,— 
‘I do not mean, by what I have said,’ 
resumed lady Trusty, ‘to perswade you
to make any mean steps towards a reconciliation:
—that is, I would not
have you confess you have been in the
wrong, or tell him you are sorry for
what you have done:—that would be
taking a blame upon yourself you do
not deserve, and he would imagine he
had a right to expect the same on every
trifling occasion. —It may be, he might
be imperious and ill-natured enough to
create quarrels, merely for the sake of
humbling your spirit and resentment
into submissions.’ 
‘But as to live in the manner you are
likely to do together,’ continued she,
‘cannot but be very displeasing in the
eye of heaven, and must also expose
both of you to the censure and contempt
of the world, when once it comes
to be known and talked of; some means
must be speedily found to bring about
an accommodation between you.’ 
‘O! madam,’ cried the other, hastily
interrupting her, ‘how impossible is it
for me ever to look with any thing but 

disdain and resentment, on a man, who
after so many protestations of eternal
love, eternal adoration, has dared to
treat me in this manner! —No,’ added
she, with greater vehemence than before,
‘I despise the low,—the groveling
mind;—light and darkness are not
more opposites than we are, and can as
easily agree.’ 
‘You must not think, nor talk in this
fashion,’ said the good lady:—‘all
you can accuse him of will not amount
to a separation;—besides consider
how odd a figure a woman makes, who
lives apart from her husband:—there
is an absolute necessity for a reconciliation,
and as it is probable, that neither
of you will pursue any measures for that
purpose, it is highly proper your friends
should take upon them to interpose in
the affair. 
It was a considerable time before mrs.
Munden could be perswaded, by all the
arguments lady Trusty made use of, that
either her duty, her interest, or her reputation,
required she should forgive the insults
she had received, from this ungrateful
and unworthy husband. 

The good lady would not, however,
give over till she had prevailed on her
not only to listen to her reasons, but also
to be at last perfectly convinced by them:
—this point being gained, the manner in
which the matter should be conducted,
was the next thing that employed her
thoughts. 
It seemed best to her, that the two mr.
Thoughtlesses should not be made acquainted
with any part of what had passed,
if the business she so much wished to see
accomplished could be effected without
their knowledge;—her reason for it was
this:—they were both men of pretty
warm dispositions, especially the younger,
and as they had been so assiduous in promoting
this match, so early a breach, and
the provocations given for it by mr. Munden,
might occasion them to shew their
resentment for his behaviour in a fashion,
which would make what was already very
bad, much worse. 
‘Sir Ralph is a man in years,’ said she,
—‘has been your guardian, and I am
apt to believe, that on both these accounts
his words will have some weight
with mr. Munden:—the friendship
which he knows is between us, will 

also give me the privilege of adding
something in my turn; and I hope by
our joint mediation this quarrel may be
made up, so far at least as that you may
live civilly together.’ 
Mrs. Munden made no other reply to
what her ladyship had said, than to thank
her for the interest she took in her affairs,
and the trouble she was about to give sir
Ralph on her account. 
The truth is, this young lady would in
her heart have been much better satisfied,
that there had been a possibility of being
separated for ever, from a person, who,
she was now convinced, had neither love
nor esteem for her, rather than to have
consented to cohabit with him as a wife,
even though he should be prevailed upon
to request it, in the most seemingly submissive
terms. 
While they were in this conversation a
message came from mr. Edward Goodman,
containing an invitation to sir Ralph
and lady Trusty, to an entertainment that
gentleman had ordered to be prepared the
next day for several of his friends, on a
particular occasion, which, because the
reader as yet is wholly ignorant of, it is 

highly proper he should be made acquainted
with. 
