

The author is under some apprebensions,
will not be quite pleasing to the
humour of every reader. 
It is certain that mr. Trueworth, at
the time of his writing his last letter
to miss Betsy, was fully determined to go
into the country, and was already beginning
to make such preparations, as he
found necessary for his journey, when an
accident of a very singular nature put a
sudden stop to them, and to his intentions. 
He was one day just dressed, and going
out, in order to dine with some company,
for he now chose to be as little
alone as possible, when one of his servants
delivered a letter to him, which he said
was brought by a porter, who waited below
for an answer. —As the superscription
was in a woman's hand, and he was
not accustomed to receive any billets from
that sex, he broke it open, with a kind
of greedy curiosity, and found in it these
lines: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
I am a woman of fortune, family,
and an unblemished character,— 
very young, and most people allow
not disagreeable:—you have done me
the greatest injury in the world without
knowing it; but I take you to be more
a man of honour, than not to be willing
to make what reparation is in your
power. —If the good opinion I have
of you does not deceive me, you will
readily accept this challenge, and not
fail to meet me about eleven o'clock
to-morrow in the morning, at General
Tatton's bench, opposite Rosamond's
Pond, in St. James's Park,—there to
hear such interrogatories as I shall think
fit to make you, and on your sincere
answer to which, depends the whole future
peace, if not the life of her, who,
at present, can only subscribe herself, 
‘In the greatest confusion,
Sir,
Your unfortunate,
And impatient
Incognita.’ 

Mr. Trueworth was a good deal surprized,
but had no occasion to consult
long with himself in what manner it would
become a man of his years to behave in
such an adventure, and therefore sat down
and immediately wrote an answer in these
terms: 

To the fair Incognita.
‘Madam,
Though a challenge from an
unknown antagonist might be rejected
without any danger of incurring
the imputation of cowardise; and, besides,
as the combat to which I am invited
is to be that of words, in which
your sex are generally allowed to excel,
I have not any sort of chance for
overcoming; yet to shew that I dare
encounter a fine woman at any weapon,
and shall not repine at being foiled,
will not fail to give you the triumph
you desire, and to that end will
wait on you exactly at the time and
place mentioned in yours,—till when
you may rest satisfied that I am, 
‘With the greatest impatience,
The obliging Incognita's
Most devoted servant,
C. Trueworth.’ 

Though mr. Trueworth had not only
heard of, but also experienced, when on
his travels abroad, some adventures of a
parallel nature with this, yet as it never
had entered into his head, that the English
ladies took this method of introducing
themselves to the acquaintance of
those they were pleased to favour, the
challenge of the incognita,—who she
was,—where she had seen him,—what
particular action of his had merited her
good graces, and a thousand other conjectures,
all tending to the same object,
very much engrossed his mind. —Indeed
he was glad to encourage any thoughts,
which served to drive those of miss Betsy
thence, whose idea, in spite of all his endeavours,
and her supposed unworthiness,
would sometimes intervene, and poison
the sweets of his most jovial moments
among his friends. 
His curiosity, for it cannot be said he
was as yet instigated by a warmer passion,
rendered him however very careful not to
suffer the hour mentioned in the lady's
letter to escape; but though he was at
the place somewhat before the time, she
was the first, and already waited his approach. 
—As he turned by the corner of
the pond, he began to reflect, that as she 
had given him no signal, whereby she
might be known, he might possibly mistake
for his Incognita some other, whom
chance might have directed to the bench,
and was somewhat at a loss how to accost
her, in such a manner, as that the
compliment might not make him be
looked upon as rude or mad, by a
person who had no reason to expect it from
him. 
But the lady, who, it is likely, was
also sensible she had been a little wanting
in this part of the assignation, soon eased
him of the suspence he was in, by rising
from her seat, as he drew near, and saluting
him with these words,—‘How
perfectly obliging,’ said she, ‘is this
punctuality? —It almost flatters me I
shall have no reason to repent the step
I have taken.’ —‘A person who is injured,’ 
replied mr. Trueworth, ‘has
doubtless a right to complain; and if I
have, though never so unwarily, been
guilty of any wrong, cannot be too
hasty, nor too zealous in the reparation; 
—be pleased therefore, madam,
to let me know the nature of my offence,
and be assured, that the wishes
of my whole heart shall be to expiate
it.’ 
In concluding these words, one of her
gloves being off, he took hold of her
hand, and kiss'd it with either a real, or
a seeming warmth. —‘Take care what
you say,’ cried she, ‘lest I exact more
from you, than is in your power to
perform; but let us sit down,’ pursued
she, suffering him still to keep her hand
in his, ‘and beginning to fulfil the promise
you have made, by satisfying me
in some few points I have to ask, with
the same sincerity as you would answer
heaven.’ —‘Be assured I will,’ said he,
putting her hand a second time to his
mouth, ‘and this shall be the book on
which I will swear to every article.’ 
‘First then,’ demanded she, ‘Are you
married, or contracted?’ —‘Neither,
by all that's dear,’ said he. —‘Have
you no attachment,’ resumed she, ‘to
any particular lady, that should hinder
your engaging with another?’ —‘Not
any upon my honour,’ answered he. 
I should before now have acquainted
my reader, that the lady was not only
masqued, but also close muffled in her
hood, that mr. Trueworth could discover
no part even of the side of her face,
which, growing weary of this examination, 
he took an opportunity to complain of. 
—‘Why this unkind reserve, my charming
Incognita?’ said he, ‘I have heard
of penitents, who, while confessing
crimes they were ashamed of, kept
their faces hid, but I believe there never
was a confessor who concealed himself,
—permit me to see to whom I am
laying open my heart, and I shall do it
with pleasure.’ —‘That cannot be,’ 
answered she, ‘even for the very reason
you have alledged:—I have something
to confess to you, would sink me into
the earth with shame, did you behold
the mouth that utters it. —In fine,
I love you, and after having told you
so, can you expect I will reveal myself,’ 
—‘Else how can I return the bounty as I
ought,’ cried he, ‘or you be assured
you have not lavished your favours on an
insensible or ungrateful heart?’ 
‘Time may do much’, said she; —‘a
longer and more free conversation with
you may perhaps embolden me to make
a full discovery of my face to you, as
I have already done of my heart.’ — 
Mr. Trueworth then told her, that the
place they were in would allow but very
few freedoms, and added, that if he were
really so happy as she flattered him he
was, she must permit him to wait on her, 
where he might have an opportunity of
testifying the sense he had of so unhoped,
and as yet so unmerited a blessing. 
‘Alas!’ cried she, ‘I am quite a novice
in assignations of this sort,—I
have so entire a dependance on your
honour, that I dare meet you any where,
provided you give me your solemn
promise not to take any measures for
knowing who I am, nor make any attempts
to oblige me to unmask, till
I have assumed courage enough to become
visible of my own free will.’ 
Mr. Trueworth readily enough gave
her the promise she exacted from him,
not at all doubting but he should be easily
able to find means to engage her consent
for the satisfaction of his curiosity, in
these points. —‘Well then,’ said she,
‘it belongs to you to name a place proper
for these secret interviews.’ 
On this, after a little pause, he answered,
that since she judged it inconvenient
for him to wait upon her at home,
or any other place where she was known,
he would be about the close of day at a
certain coffee-house, which he named to
her. —‘Where,’ continued he, ‘I will 
attend your commands, and on your
condescending to stop at the door in a
hackney coach, will immediately come
forth, and conduct you to a house secure
from all danger of discovery.’ — 
She hesitated not a moment to comply
with his proposal, yet in the same breath
she did so, affected to be under some
fears, which before she had not
made the least shew of;—said, she
hoped he would not abuse the confidence
she reposed in him,—that he would
take no advantage of the weakness she
had shewn,—that though she loved him
with the most tender passion, and could
not have lived without revealing it to
him, yet her inclinations were innocent,
and pure as those of a vestal virgin, and
a great deal more stuff of the like sort,
which though mr. Trueworth could scarce
refrain from smiling at, yet he answered
with all the seriousness imaginable,—‘I
should be unworthy, madam, of the affection
you honour me with,’ said he,
were I capable of acting towards you
in any manner unbecoming of you, or
of myself; and you may depend I shall
endeavour to regulate my desires, so as
to render them agreeable to yours.’ 
After some further discourse of the like
nature, she rose up, and took her leave,
insisting at parting, that he should not
attempt to follow her, or take any method
to find out what way she went; 
which injunction he punctually obeyed,
not stirring from the bench, 'till she was
quite out of sight. 
This adventure prodigiously amused
him;—never, in his whole life, had he
met with any thing he knew so little how
to judge of. —She had nothing of the
air of a woman of the town, and besides,
he knew it was not the interest of those,
who made a trade of their favours, to
dispense them in the manner she seemed
to intend;—nor could he think her a
person of the condition and character her
letter intimated. He could not conceive,
that any of those he was acquainted with,
would run such lengths for the gratification
of their passion, especially for a man,
who had not taken the least pains to inspire
it. —Sometimes he imagined it was
a trick put upon him, in order to make
trial how far his vanity would extend in
boasting of it;—it even came into his
head, that miss Betsy herself might get
somebody to personate the amorous Incognita,
for no other purpose than to 
divert herself, and disappoint his high
raised expectation; but this last conjecture
dwelt not long upon him:—he had
heard she now entertained another lover,
with whom she was very much taken up,
and, consequently, would not give herself
so much trouble about one, who had entirely
quitted her. —In fine, he knew
not what to think, as he could not tell
how to believe he had made such an impression
upon any woman, without knowing
it, as the Incognita pretended, he
was apt to imagine he should neither see
nor hear any more of her. —This uncertainty,
however, employed his mind the
whole day, and he was no less impatient
for the proof, than he would have
been, if actually in love with his invisible
mistress. 
The wished-for hour at last arrived,
and he waited not long before he was eased
of one part of his suspence, by being told,
a lady in a hackney coach enquired for
him:—he was extremely pleased to find,
at least, he had not been imposed upon,
by a trick of any of his frolicksome
companions, and immediately flew to the
coach side, where seeing it was indeed
his Incognita, he jumped directly in, with
a transport, which, doubtless, was very
agreeable to her. 
Though he had often heard some gentlemen
speak of houses, where two persons
of different sexes might at any time
be received, and have the privilege of
entertaining each other with all the freedom
and privacy they could desire, yet as
he had never been accustomed to intrigues
of this nature, and thought he should
have no occasion to make use of such
places, he had not given himself the
trouble of asking where they might be
found, therefore had now no other resource,
than either a tavern, or a bagnio,
the latter of which he looked upon, for
more reasons than one, as the most commodious
of the two, so ordered the coachman
to drive to one in Silver-street;— 
he excused himself at the same time to
the lady, for not having been able to
provide a better asylum for her reception; 
but she appeared perfectly content,
—told him, she had put herself under
his care,—relied upon his honour and
discretion,—and left all to his direction. 
Being come into the bagnio, they were
shewed into a handsome large room, with
a bed-chamber within it. —Mr. Trueworth
had his eye on every thing in an
instant, and finding all was right, ordered
a supper to be prepared, and then told 

the waiter, he would dispence with his
attendance, till it was ready. —As soon
as he found himself alone with his Incognita,
‘Now, my angel,’ said he, embracing
her, ‘I have an opportunity to
thank you for the affection you have
flattered me with the hopes of, but at
the same time must complain of the
little proofs you give me of it;—the
greatest stranger to your heart would
be allowed the privilege of a salute,
yet I am denied the pleasure of touching
those dear lips, which have denounced
my happiness.’ —‘Do not reproach
me,’ answered she, ‘with denying
what is not yet in my power to
grant;—I cannot let you see my face,
and you have promised not to force me.’ 
—‘I have,’ replied he; ‘but that promise
binds me not from indulging my
impatient wishes with things you have
not stipulated:—your neck, your
breasts are free, and those I will' be revenged
upon.’ —With these words he
took some liberties with her, which may
better be conceived than described;— 
she but faintly resisted, and, perhaps,
would have permitted him to take greater
thus masqued, but the discovery of her
face was what he chiefly wanted: ‘You
might, at least,’ cried he, ‘oblige me
with a touch of those lovely lips, I am 
forbid to gaze upon;—here is a dark
recess,’ continued he, pointing to the
inner room, ‘will save your blushes.’ — 
He then raised her from the chair, and
drawing her gently towards the door,
sung, in a very harmonious voice, this
stanza: 

‘Away with this idle, this scrupulous fear,
 ‘For a kiss in the dark,
 ‘Cry'd the amorous spark,
‘There is nothing, no nothing too dear.’

Having led her into the chamber, and
seated her on the bed, which happened to
be so disposed, that no gleam of light
came upon it, from the candles in the
next room,—‘Now, my charmer,’ said
he, taking hold of her mask, ‘you
have no excuse for keeping on this inviduous
cloud.’ —‘How impossible is
it,’ answered she, letting it fall into his
hand, ‘to refuse you any thing!’ 
What conversation after this passed between
them, I shall leave to the reader's
imagination, and only say, that the voice
of the Incognita being more distinguishable
by the button of her mask being
removed, mr. Trueworth could not help
thinking, he had heard before accents
very like those with which he was now 
entertained, though where, or from what
mouth they had proceeded, he was not
able to recollect. 
This conjecture, however, rendering
him more impatient than ever for the
discovery; he omitted nothing in his
power, either by words or actions, to disswade
her from re-assuming her vizard,
when they should quit that scene of darkness. 
—‘How gladly would I comply,’ 
cried she, ‘but that I fear—.’ ‘Fear
what!’ cried mr. Trueworth, eagerly
interrupting her. —‘I fear to lose you,’ 
replied she, fondly embracing him;— 
‘my face is already but too well known
to you;—you have often seen it, but
seen it without those emotions I endeavour
to inspire:—how then can I now
hope it will have the effect I wish!’ — 
‘Unkindly judged,’ said he, ‘with what
indifference soever I may have regarded
you, the endearing softness, the enchanting
transports you have now
blessed me with, would give new charms
to every feature, and make me find
perfections I never saw before. —Come
then, my goddess,’ continued he, raising
her, ‘shine with full lustre on me,
and fix me your adorer.’ —‘Well,’ 
cried she, ‘you are not to be resisted,
and I will venture.’ 
These words brought them to the chamber
door, and shewed the Incognita to her
amazed gallant, to be no other than miss
Flora. —‘Miss Flora Mellasin! —Good
heavens!’ cried he. —‘You seem surprised
and shock'd,’ said she:—‘alas!
my apprehensions were too just.’ 
—‘Pardon me, madam,’ answered he, ‘I
am indeed surprised, but it is through
an excess of joy;—could I have ever
thought, the favours I have received
were bestowed by the amiable miss
Flora Mellasin!’ 
It is certain, that his astonishment at
first was very great; but recovering himself
from it in a short time, a thousand
passages in miss Flora's former behaviour
towards him occurred to his remembrance,
and made him wonder at himself for not
having sooner found her out, in the person
of his Incognita. —They passed their
time, till the night was pretty far advanced,
in a manner very agreeable to
each other, nor parted without reciprocal
assurance of renewing this tender intercourse
the next day, at the same place. 