

Contains some passages, which, perhaps,
may be looked upon as pretty extraordinary. 
According to the common rule
of honour among gentlemen, mr.
Trueworth had certainly behaved so, as
not to have either that, or his good-nature,
called in question; but this was
not enough to satisfy him:—he could
not be easy under the reflection, that the
obligations he had conferred gave a painful
gratitude to the receiver. 
He was deeply affected with mr. Staple's
letter;—he doubted not but that gentleman
in forcing himself to resign his
pretensions to miss Betsy, must suffer the
extremest agonies; and heartily commiserating
a case, which, had fortune so decreed,
might have been his own, immediately
wrote to him in the following
terms: 

To T. Staple, Esq;
“Sir,
I am ashamed to find the little I
have done so much over-rated, by
a person, who, I am certain, is capable
of the greatest things; but should be
involved in more confusion still, should
any consideration of me, or my happiness,
prevail on you to become an enemy
to your own. —I am altogether
unacquainted with what kind of sentiments
either of us is regarded by the
fair object of our mutual wishes. — 
It is highly probable her young heart
may, as yet, be quite insensible of those
we have endeavoured to inspire it with; 
—for my own part, as I have yet no
reason to despair, so I have had also
but little room for hope. —You, sir,
have an equal chance, for any thing I
know, or can boast of to the contrary,
and as you saw I refused to hazard my
pretensions on the point of the sword,
neither justice, nor honour, requires
you should forfeit yours, though an
accident gave me the advantage of you
in the field. —'Tis by miss Betsy herself
our fate is to be judged. —'Tis
yet a moot-point whether either will
succeed in the attempt of pleasing her. 
We may, perhaps, contend for an airy
expectation, while another more fortunate
shall bear away the prize from
both; but if one of us is decreed to
be the happy man, on which soever the
lot shall fall, he ought not to incur the
hatred of the other. 
“I gladly embrace the offer of your
friendship, and whatever is the fortune
of our love, should in that, as in
all other events, endeavour to prove,
that I am, 
“With an equal sincerity,
Sir,
Your very much obliged,
And most humble servant,
C. Trueworth.” 

Mr. Staple read this letter many times
over, but received not all the satisfaction,
which the author intended it should give
him, although he acknowledged the generosity
of his rival, yet he could not conceive
there was a possibility for a man in
love to be easy under the addresses of
another, without knowing himself secure
of not being prejudiced by them:—he, 
therefore, concluded that mr. Chatfree
was right in his conjecture, and that miss
Betsy only waited for her brother's coming
to town to declare in favour of mr.
Trueworth. 
This gentleman had a great share of
spirit, and some pride, and these making
him disdain to pursue a fruitless aim, and
suffering himself to be publickly overcome
by mr. Trueworth in love, as he
had been in fight, very much contributed
to enable him to keep that resolution he
had formed in the presence of mr. Goodman
and mr. Chatfree. 
He answered mr. Trueworth's letter,
however, with the utmost complaisance,
but without letting him know any part
of his intentions, in relation to miss Betsy,
fearing least any farther contest on
this affair might draw from that gentleman
fresh proofs of a generosity, to
which, already, he looked upon himself
as too much obliged. 
Miss Betsy little suspecting what had
passed between her two lovers, since their
meeting in the Green-park, received mr.
Trueworth, when he came to visit her
the same day, as usual, with a great deal
of good humour. —She took not any notice 
that she had heard of the duel, imagining,
that he would himself inform her
of it, and he not thinking it would become
him to do so, as having had the
advantage of his rival, 'tis probable there
would have been no mention made of
it, if lady Mellasin had not come into the
room, and told him, that she would not
have broke in upon his conversation with
miss Betsy, if it had been possible for her
to have resisted the pleasure of congratulating
him, not only on his safety, but
also on his coming off victor in the field
of battle. 
The modesty of mr. Trueworth would
not suffer him to hear these last words
without blushing; but soon recovering
himself, “Fortune, madam,” answered
he, “is not always the most favourable
to the most deserving:—her partial
smiles will never make me vain, or
happy, unless,” continued he, looking
tenderly on miss Betsy, “she would add
to her indulgence here, and give me
room to hope, my services to this lady
might one day be crowned with the
same success, as she this morning gave
my sword.” —“The one,” said miss
Betsy, smiling, “has nothing to do with
the other, and I do not know how to
think a man, who really wishes nothing 
so much as to appear agreeable in the
eyes of his mistress, would run the
hazard of making the contemptible figure
of a culprit at the bar of a court
of judicature.” 
They then fell into some discourse on
duelling, and mr. Trueworth could not
help joining with the ladies, in condemning
the folly of that custom, which, contrary
to the known laws of the land, and
oftentimes contrary to his own reason
too, obliges the gentleman either to obey
the call of the person who challenges him
to the field, or, by refusing, submit himself
not only to all the insults his adversary
is pleased to treat him with, but
also to be branded with the infamous
character of a coward, by all that know
him. 
Nothing material enough to be related,
happened in this visit, except that miss
Flora, who had been abroad when mr.
Trueworth came, and returned home a small
time before he went away, talked much
more in half an hour, than she had done
for some whole days past; but it was in
so odd a manner, sometimes praising,
sometimes blaming his conduct, in regard
to the transactions of that morning, that
he could not well determine in his mind, 
whether she was a friend, or an enemy to
the success of his passion. —Miss Betsy
herself was a little surprized, but nothing
relating to that young lady dwelt much
upon her mind, as she really thought she
had no design in any thing she said or
did. —The behaviour of mr. Staple ran
much more in her head; she knew he
was pretty much wounded, and therefore
might suppose him unable to wait on her
in person, but having expected he would
send his compliments to her, either by letter
or message, and finding he did neither
the whole day, it seemed to her a thing
too strange to be accounted for:—she was,
however, eased of the suspence we was
in, on that score, by receiving from him,
as she was at breakfast the next morning,
the following epistle: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
“Madam,
A Brother's recommendation, superior
merit, and your own inclination,
have all united to plead my rival's
cause, and gain the verdict against unhappy
me! —I ought more early to
have seen the vanity of attempting to
succeed, where mr. Trueworth was the
candidate; yet hurried by the violence
of my passion, I rushed into an action, 
which, by adding to his glory, has
shewn my demerits in a more conspicuous
light than ever. 
“It would be needless to repeat what
happened yesterday; I cannot doubt,
madam, but you are well acquainted
with all the particulars of my folly,
and the just punishment it met with. 
—I have only to say the generosity of
my rival, and my conqueror, has restored
me to my lost reason, and convinced
me, that whatever preference he
may be so happy as to have gained in
your esteem, he is indebted for it to the
excellence of your good sense, and not
that partial fancy which frequently misguides
the choice of persons of your
sex and age. 
“I would have waited on you in person
to take my everlasting leave, but
am not certain how far I ought to
depend on the strength of my resolution
in your presence. —Permit, therefore,
my pen to do that which my
tongue would faulter in performing. 
—Yes, madam, I must forego, renounce
forever those glorious expectations
with which so lately I flattered
my fond heart;—henceforth must
think on you as the fallen father of 
mankind did on the tree of life:— 
the merits of my too accomplished rival
are the flaming swords which drive
me from my once hoped-for paradise; 
and while I mourn my unhappy fate,
compels me to own it to be just. — 
Farewell, O most amiable of your sex! 
Farewell forever! —I have troubled
you too long, and have no excuse to
make, but that it is the last you will
receive from me. —May the blest guardians
of the fair and good be your
constant directors, and shield you from
all ills. —Be assured that till I cease
to exist, I shall not cease to be, 
“With the sincerest good wishes,
Madam,
Your most faithful,
Though unfortunate, humble servant,
T. Staple.” 

Miss Betsy was astonished to that degree,
on reading so unexpected a declaration,
that she could scarce believe she was
awake for some moments, and thought it
all a dream;—she broke off, and made
several pauses in the reading, crying out, 
“Good God! —Is it possible? —What
does the man mean? —How came
such stuff into his head? —He is mad,
sure!” 
Mr. Goodman, who had some notion
of what had put her into this ferment,
and was willing to be more confirmed,
asked her, in a pleasant way, what had
occasioned it? —“Indeed, sir,” replied
miss Betsy, endeavouring to compose herself,
“I have been so confounded, that
I knew not where I was, or who was
in the room. —I ask your pardon,— 
but this, I hope, will plead my excuse,” 
continued she, throwing the letter
on the table, “your friend has given
over his suit to me, which I am
very glad of; but the motives, which
he pretends oblige him to it, are so
odd and capricious, as not to be accounted
for.” 
“Given over his suit,” cried lady Mellasin,
hastily;—“O! pray, let us hear
on what pretence?” —On which mr.
Goodman read the letter aloud, the very
repetition of which renewed miss Betsy's
agitations. —“He has acted,” said mr.
Goodman, as soon as he had done reading,
“like a man of sense and resolution,
and I see no cause why you should be 
disconcerted at the loss of a lover,
whose pretensions you did not design
to favour.” —“He was very hasty,
however,” cried miss Betsy, scornfully,
in concluding for me. —What did the
man think I was to be won at once? 
Did he imagine his merits were so extraordinary,
that there required no
more to obtain, than barely to ask?
but I give myself no concern on that
score, I assure you, sir;—it is the insolence
of his accusing me of being in
love that vexes me. —Who told him,
I wonder!—or, how came such a
a thing into his head, that mr. Trueworth
had the preference in my esteem? 
—By the manner in which he speaks
of him in this letter, he has found
more perfections in him, than ever I
did, and would make one think he
were himself enamoured of his rival's
merits.” 
In answer to all this, he told her with
a serious air, that mr. Staple was bound
by all those ties, which engage a noble
mind, to act in the manner he had done; 
—that he had been twice indebted to
mr. Trueworth for his life, and that the
whole behaviour of that gentleman towards
him, both during the combat, and 
after it was over, demanded all the returns
that gratitude could pay. 
He afterwards run into a detail of all
the particulars of what had passed between
the two rivals, many of which the ladies
were ignorant of before. —Lady Mellasin
joined with her husband, in extolling the
greatness of soul, which mr. Trueworth
had shewn on this occasion; but miss
Flora said little, and what she did was
rather in praise of mr. Staple. —“Mr.
Trueworth,” cried she, “is a fine gentleman
enough, but has done no more
than what any man of honour would
do; and, for my part, I think that mr.
Staple, in putting the self-denial he
has now shewn in practice, discovers
more of the hero and philosopher, than
the other has done.” 
The conversation, on this topic, lasted
some time, and probably would not
have broke off so soon, if it had not been
interrupted by two young ladies coming
in to ask miss Betsy and miss Flora if they
were not for the park that morning? To
which they having agreed, and promised
to call on them in their way, went up
into their chamber, in order to prepare
themselves for the walk proposed. 