

Contains an odd accident, which happened
to miss Betsy in the cloisters of
Westminster-abbey. 
Mr. Trueworth, who was yet far from
being acquainted with the temper of
the object he adored, now thought he had
no reason to despair of being one day in
possession of all he aimed to obtain;—it
seemed certain to him, at least, that he
had nothing to apprehend from the pretensions
of a rival, who at first he had
looked upon as so formidable, and no
other at present interposed between him
and his designs. 
Miss Betsy, in the mean time, wholly
regardless of who hoped, or who despaired,
had no aim in any thing she did,
but meerly to divert herself, and to that
end laid hold of every opportunity that
offered. Mr. Goodman having casually
mentioned, as they were at supper, that
one mr. Soulguard had just taken orders,
and was to preach his first sermon at Westminster-abbey
the next day, she presently
had a curiosity of hearing how he would 
behave in the pulpit;—his over modest,
and, as they termed it, sheepish behaviour
in company, having, as often as he came
there, afforded matter of ridicule to her
and miss Flora. —These two young ladies
therefore talking on it after they were in
bed, agreed to go to the cathedral, not
doubting but they should have enough to
laugh at, and report to all those of their
acquaintance who had ever seen him. 
What meer trifles,—what airy nothings
serve to amuse a mind not taken up
with more essential matters? —Miss Betsy
was so full of the diversion she should have
in hearing the down-looked bashful mr.
Soulguard harangue his congregation, that
she could think and talk of nothing else,
till the hour arrived when she should go
to experience what she had so pleasant an
idea of. 
Miss Flora, who had till now seemed as
eager as herself, cried all at once, that
her head ached, and that she did not care
for stirring out: —miss Betsy, who would
fain have laughed her out of it, told
her, she had only got the vapours,—that
the parson would cure her,—and such
like things,—but the other was not to be
prevailed upon by all miss Betsy, or even
lady Mellasin herself, could say, and answered, 
with some sullenness, that positively
she would not go. —Miss Betsy was highly
ruffled at this sudden turn of her temper,
as it was now too late to send for
any other young lady of her acquaintance
to go with her;—resolving, nevertheless,
not to baulk her humour, she ordered a
chair to be called, and went alone. 
Neither the young parson's manner of
preaching, nor the text he chose, being
any way material to this history, I shall
therefore pass over the time of divine service,
and only say, that after it was ended
miss Betsy passing towards the west-gate,
and stopping to look on the fine tomb,
erected to the memory of mr. secretary
Craggs, was accosted by mr. Bloomacre,
a young gentleman who sometimes visited
lady Mellasin, and lived at Westminster,
in which place he had a large estate. 
He had with him, when he came up
to her, two gentlemen of his acquaintance,
but who were entire strangers to miss
Betsy: —“What,” said he, “the celebrated
miss Betsy Thoughtless!—miss
Betsy Thoughtless! the idol of mankind!
alone, unattended by any of her
train of admirers, and contemplating
these memento's of mortality!” —“To
compliment my understanding,” replied 
she, gaily, “you should rather have told
me I was contemplating the memento's
of great actions.” —“You are at the
wrong end of the cathedral for that,
madam,” resumed he, “and I don't
remember to have heard any thing extraordinary
of the life of this great
man, whose effigy makes so fine a figure
here, except the favours he received
from the ladies.” 
“'Twere too much then to bestow
them on him both alive and dead,” 
cried she, “therefore we'll pass on to
some other.” 
Mr. Bloomacre had a great deal of wit
and vivacity, nor were his two companions
deficient in either of these qualities; 
so that between the three miss Betsy was
very agreeably entertained: —they went
round from tomb and tomb, and the real
characters, as well as epitaphs, some of
which are flattering enough, afforded a
variety of observations. —In fine, the
conversation was so pleasing to miss Betsy,
that she never thought of going home,
'till it grew too dark to examine either
the sculpture, or the inscriptions; so insensibly
does time glide on, when accompanied
with satisfaction. 
But now ensued a mortification, which
struck a damp on the sprightliness of this
young lady: —she had sent away the
chair which brought her, not doubting
but that there would be others about the
church doors. She knew not how difficult
it was to procure such a vehicle in
Weftminster, especially on a Sunday;— 
to add to her vexation, it rained very
much, and she was not in a habit fit to
travel on foot in any weather, much less
in such as this. 
They went down into the cloisters, in
order to find some person whom they
might send, either for a coach or chair,
for the gentlemen would have been glad
of such conveniencies for themselves, as
well as miss Betsy:—they walked round
and round several times, without hearing
or seeing any body;—but at last a fellow,
who used to be employed in sweeping
the church doors, offered his service
to procure them what they wanted, in
case there was a possibility of doing it;— 
they promised to gratify him well for his
pains, and he ran with all the speed he
could to do as he had said. 
The rain and wind increased to such a
prodigious height, that scarce was ever a 
more tempestuous evening. —Almost a
whole hour was elapsed, and the man not
come back, so that they had reason to
fear neither coach nor chair was to be got. 
—Miss Betsy began to grow extremely
impatient;—the gentlemen endeavoured
all they could to keep her in good humour,
—“We have a good stone roof
over our heads, madam,” said one of
them, “and that at present shelters us
“from the inclemency of the elements;” 
“—besides,” cried another, “the storm
cannot last always,—and when it is
a little abated,—here are three of us,
—we will take you in our arms by
turns, and carry you home.” —All
this would not make miss Betsy laugh,
and she was in the utmost agitation of
mind to think what she should do, when,
on a sudden, a door in that part of the
cloister which leads to Little Dean's Yard
was opened, and a very young lady, not
exceeding eleven years of age, but very
richly habited, came running out, and
taking miss Betsy by the sleeve, “Madam,” 
said she, “I beg to speak with
you.” —Miss Betsy was surprised, but
stepping some paces from the gentlemen
to hear what she had to say, the other
drawing towards the door, cried, “Please,
madam, to come in here;” on which she
followed, and the gentlemen stood about 
some four or five yards distant. —Miss
Betsy had no sooner reached the threshold,
which had a step down into the hall, than
the young lady took hold of her hand,
and pulling her gently down, as if to
communicate what she had to say with
the more privacy, a footman, who stood
behind the door, immediately clapped it
to, and put the chain across, as if he
apprehended some violence might be offered
to it. —Miss Betsy was in so much
consternation, that she was unable to speak
one word, 'till the young lady, who still
had hold of her hand, said to her, “You
may thank heaven, madam, that our
family happened to be in town,—else
I do not know what mischief might
have befallen you.” —“Bless me,” 
cried miss Betsy, and was going on, but
the other interrupted her, saying, hastily,
as she led her forward, “Walk this way,
—my brother will tell you all.” — 
Miss Betsy then stopped short, “What
means all this? said she: where am I
pray, miss? who is your brother?” 
To which the other replied, that her brother
was the lord viscount &wblank;, and
that he at present was the owner of that
house. 
The surprize miss Betsy had been put
in by this young lady's first accosting her, 
was not at all dissipated by these words,
but had now an equal portion of curiosity
added to it;—she longed to know the
meaning of words, which at present seemed
so mysterious to her, and with what kind
of mischief she had been threatened, that
she readily accompanied her young conductress
into a magnificent parlour, at
the upper end of which sat the nobleman
she had been told of,—“I am extremely
happy,” said he, as soon as he saw her
enter, “that providence has put it in
my power to rescue so fine a lady from
the villainy contrived against her.” 
Miss Betsy replied, that she should always
be thankful for any favours conferred
upon her, but desired to know of
what nature they were, for which she was
indebted to his lordship: —he then told
her, that the persons she had been with
had the most base designs upon her;—that
he had heard, from a closet window where
he was sitting, two of them lay the plot
for carrying her off in a hackney coach; 
and added, that being struck with horror
at the foul intention, he had contrived, by
the means of his sister, to get her out of
their power;—“For,” said he, “I know
one of them to be so bloody a villain,
that had I gone out myself, I must have
fallen a sacrifice to their resentment.” 
Miss Betsy was quite confounded; she
knew not how to question the veracity of
a nobleman, who could have no view or
interest to deceive her, yet it was equally
incongruous to her, that mr. Bloomacre
could harbour any designs upon her of
that sort his lordship mentioned:—she
had several times been in company with
that gentleman, and he had never behaved
towards her in a manner which could
give her room to suspect he had any dishonourable
intentions towards her;—but
then, the treatment she had received from
the gentleman-commoner at Oxford reminded
her, that men of an amorous
complexion want only an opportunity to
shew those inclinations which indolence, or
perhaps indelicacy, prevents them from
attempting to gratify by assiduities, and
courtship. 
After having taken some little time to
consider what she should say, she replied,
that she was infinitely obliged to his lordship
for the care he took of her, but
might be very well amazed to hear those
gentlemen had any ill designs upon her,
two of whom were perfect strangers to
her, and the other often visited at the
house where she was boarded. As for
the sending for a coach, she said it was 
by her own desire, if no chair could be
procured; and added, that if his lordship
had no other reason to apprehend any ill
was meant to her, she could not, without
injustice, forbear to clear up the mistake. 
Lord &wblank; was a little confounded
at these words, but soon recovering himself,
told her, that she knew not the real
character of the persons she had been with; 
—that Bloomacre was one of the greatest
libertines in the world;—that though she
might agree to have a coach sent for, she
could not be sure to what place it might
carry her, and that he heard two of them,
while the third was entertaining her,
speak to each other in a manner which
convinced him the most villainous contrivance
was about to be practised on
her. 
A loud knocking at the door now interrupted
their discourse;—both his lordship
and his sister seemed terribly alarmed,
—all the servants were called, and charge
given not to open the door upon any account,
—to bar up the lower windows,
and to give answers from those above, to
whoever was there. —The knocking continued
with greater violence than it began,
and miss Betsy heard the gentlemen's
voices talking to the servants, and though 
she could not distinguish what they said,
found there were very high words between
them. —My lord's sister ran into the hall to
listen, then came back, crying, “O what
terrible oaths! —I am afraid they will
break open the door.” —“No,” replied
lord &wblank;, “it is too strong for
that;—but I wish we had been so
wise as to send for a constable.” —One
of the servants came down, and repeated
what their young lady had said; adding,
that the gentlemen swore they would not
leave the place, till they had spoke with
the lady, who they said had been trepanned
into that house: —on this, “Suppose,
my lord,” said miss Betsy, “I
go to the door, and tell them, that I
will not go with them.” —“No, madam,” 
answered lord &wblank;, “I
cannot consent my door shall be
opened to such ruffians; for, besides
that they would certainly seize, and
carry you off by force, I know not
what mischief they might do my poor
men, for having at first refused them
entrance.” —She then said, she would
go up to the window, and answer them
from thence; but he would not suffer her
to be seen by them at all, and to keep her
from insisting on it, told her a great many
stories of rapes, and other mischiefs had 
been perpetrated by Bloomacre, and those
he kept company with. 
All this did not give miss Betsy those
terrors, which it is very plain his lordship
and sister endeavoured to inspire her
with, yet would she say no more of appearing
to the gentlemen, as she found
he was so averse to it. 
At length the knocking ceased, and
one of the footmen came down, and said,
that those who had given his lordship this
disturbance had withdrawn from the door,
and he believed were gone quite out of
the cloisters;—but this intelligence did
not satisfy lord &wblank;; he either was,
or pretended to be, in fear, that they were
still skulking in some corner, and would
rush in if they once saw the door opened. 
—There was still the same difficulty as
ever, how miss Betsy should get home; 
—that is, how she should get safely out
of the house, for the rain being over, the
servants said they did not doubt but they
should be able to procure a chair or coach:
—after much debating on this matter, it
was thus contrived. 
Lord &wblank; had a window that looked
into the yard of one of the prebendary's,
—a footman was to go out of this window 
to the back door of that reverend
divine, relate the whole story, and beg
leave to go through his house: —this
request being granted, the footman went,
and returned in less than half an hour,
with the welcome news, that a chair was
ready, and waited in College-street. — 
Miss Betsy had no way of passing, but
by the same the footman had done, which
she easily did, by being lifted by my lord
into the window, and descending from it
by the help of some steps, placed on the
other side by the servants of the prebendary. 
It would be superfluous to trouble the
reader with any speeches made by lord
&wblank; and his sister to miss Betsy, or
the replies she made to them; I shall only
say, that passing through this house, and
the College-garden, at the door of which
the chair attended, she went into it, preceded
by lord &wblank;'s footman, muffled
up in a cloak, and without a flambeau,
to prevent being known, in case she should
be met by Bloomacre, or either of his
companions; and with this equipage she
arrived safely at home, though not without
a mind strangely perplexed at the meaning
of this adventure. 