
Affords fresh matter to employ the speculation of every curious reader. 
By Jemmy's letter from Ham-Hall, Jenny found that the time which he proposed to continue there was elapsed, and therefore doubting not but that he was now in town, sent her servant the minute she came home to acquaint him with her arrival; but she was a good deal surprised when the return of the messenger informed her that after staying but two nights in London he had set out the very day before for Bath. 
The gall of this disappointment had an equal portion of sweetness mingled with it;—if she was vex'd at not being able to see him so soon as she had expected, she was no less pleased on the haste he had made to go to Bath, as she knew he could have no reason to imagine she as yet had left that place. 
This being a new proof of the sincerity of his affection towards herself, very much abated her impatience to reproach 
him with the less honourable addresses he had made elsewhere; and she sometimes even doubted within herself whether she ought ever to give him any shock upon that score. 
When the suspicion of an enormous injury is once removed, all lesser ones decrease in magnitude, and seem less deserving our resentment than they really are;—Jenny believing her lover innocent, as to the main point, began now to think little of any thing else he might be guilty of. 
The good humour she was in at present with him render'd her mind quite composed; but the time was not yet arrived when she was to remain in any settled state of tranquility;—a letter was brought to her by a person who refused to say either from whom or from whence he came;—it contained these lines: 
To miss Jessamy.
“Madam,
The high character I have heard of your good nature and compliance, makes me not doubt but you are endow'd with an equal share of justice and generosity, especially 
when those noble virtues are to be exerted in favour of a person of your own sex; and in that confidence take the liberty of intreating you will set me right in an affair on which the whole happiness of my life depends, and which none but yourself can clear up from its present ambiguity. 
“I have for a considerable time received the most passionate addresses of a gentleman who I very well know the world once look'd upon as destin'd to be yours;—he has gain'd my friends consent, and by his merits and assiduities, so great an ascendant over me, that nothing hitherto has hinder'd me from accepting his hand but the fears that in doing so I should be accessary to his being guilty of an irreparable injury to you. 
“After this it may perhaps be needless to tell you that I mean mr. Jessamy; but as my circumstances require a plain and categorical answer from you on this head, it behoves me to express myself in terms which will admit no room to doubt their meaning;—it is indeed, madam, no other than he whom I love, and by whom I am equally beloved, and who, while he confesses 
a former engagement with you, protests at the same time, and with the same seeming sincerity at least, that it is now entirely broken off, and that he is at full liberty to dispose of his person where he has given his heart. 
“But I have been told, by people more experienced than myself, that men will say and swear any thing to gain their point; I dare therefore depend on nothing but an assurance from yourself of the reality of his professions;—tell me, I beseech you, how far the intended union between you is dissolv'd, and whether I may be his without a crime;—pity a rival who would rather die than invade your property, if once convinced he is so;—ease a suspence which has something in it more distracting,—more cruel, than all that could be inflicted by the last despair on her, who is, 
“With the greatest respect,
Madam,
Your most obedient,
Though unknown servant.” 
P. S. “I beg an immediate answer, because I have promised to give mine to mr. Jessamy on his return from Bath, and should be glad to know before he comes in what manner I ought to square my conduct towards him.” 

On the first reading this letter, new alarms, new doubts, new jealousies, instantly fill'd the head and heart of Jenny; but on a second perusal there seem'd to her something too romantic in the expression, as well as purport of it, for her to believe it founded upon real fact; and she began to fancy it was either intended by her enemies as an insult, or by her friends as a jest;—resolving therefore, that from which quarter forever it came, neither of them should have any room to laugh at her behaviour on the occasion, she took a small piece of paper and wrote in it the following words: 
“If I were really possess'd of all the good qualities ascrib'd to me in the letter before me, I know none of them that would oblige me to send any answer to an anonymous epistle;—when the lady who wrote it thinks proper to reveal herself she may depend 
on the satisfaction she desires; in the mean time she is at liberty to form what conjectures she pleases, and to be directed by them which appear to her to have the greatest probability of being right.” 
This, without either seal or direction, and only folded in a careless manner, she gave to the messenger who had brought the letter, and bid him carry it to those that sent him. 
She set herself down again in order to re-examine the contents of this extraordinary epistle; but the more she did so the less able was she to conceive either the real intention of it, or from what hand it came. 
After forming, and as often rejecting a thousand different conjectures, it at last came into her head, that the woman to whom Jemmy had wrote that letter, which she received at Bath by mistake, had contrived this stratagem to create a dissention between them. 
‘I have heard, said she to herself, that women of the vile profession I suppose her of, value themselves upon these kind of artifices, and take a pride in 
the mischief they sometimes occasion;—but certainly, continued she, those on whom such little tricks have any effect must have a very small share of understanding:—Jemmy, however, added she after a pause, will see by this the scandal and danger of entering into any sort of intimacy with such abandom'd creatures.’ 
But though it must be acknowledged that there was the appearance of a good deal of reason to confirm her in this last opinion, yet I believe the sagacious reader, by what has been the business of several chapters in the first volume of this work, will easily guess that the letter in question was only an addition to the former attempts made by the invidious Belpine to dissolve that cement of affection which had so long united the hearts of our two lovers. 
It was indeed no other than that base man, who knowing she was in town, by having accidentally met her footman in the morning, had taken this method of corroborating the many others which he before had put in practice. 
He waited at a coffee-house in the neighbourhood to see what return Jenny 
would make by his emissary, which finding not so satisfactory as he wish'd, he went directly to visit her, hoping that by her countenance and behaviour, immediately after the receipt of this letter, he should be able to discover, more than by her answer to it, what effect it had wrought upon her. 
It has been already observed that Jemmy had inspired her with the best opinion of this treacherous friend, so she no sooner heard he was below than she ordered he should be introduced, and received him with that sweetness and affability with which she always treated those whom she thought deserving of it. 
What company was at Bath,—who made the most brilliant appearance there,—who won, and who lost at play, with other such like matters, employed the first moments of their conversation; but Belpine, desirous of turning it on something more applicable to his purpose, gave over speaking on these subjects as soon as he could do so without abruptness. 
Mr. Jessamy must certainly be very unhappy, madam, said he, on finding you had quitted Bath before his arrival 
there.’ —‘He deserves little pity on that score, reply'd Jenny;—you men can always find ways to divert yourselves;—few of you regret the absence of an old friend, when you have so many opportunities of engaging new ones.’ 
Though she spoke these words with a very gay air, yet there was a certain keenness in her looks at the same time which persuaded this watchful observer that his plot had not entirely failed of the success he aimed at. 
‘I do not pretend, madam, resum'd he, to dive into the sentiments of mr. Jessamy; but I am very sure that if you were free and at liberty to be adored, there are men in the world, who would think no joy equal to that of gazing on you, and of repeating every day,—every hour,—nay, every minute, the influence of your charms.’ 
‘It is possible indeed, answer'd she, that there may be some who would endeavour to make me believe so, and that might even be vain enough to imagine I was pleased with what they said;—it is therefore very fortunate for me that I was disposed on by my parents 
before I arrived at an age to be tiez'd with such impetinencies.’ 
‘It is strange how you have escaped them; however, madam, said he, your marriage with mr. Jessamy being so long delay'd might reasonably tempt those who wish it so to flatter themselves with a belief that it never will be accomplish'd, and that there was somewhat of a disinclination either on the one side or the other.’ 
These words made her not doubt but that the report she had heard so much of concerning Jemmy's inconstancy had also reach'd his ears, and she would certainly have been instigated, if not by female curiosity, by love or jealousy, to enter into some discourse with him on that head, if the intimacy between them had not restrain'd her, as she thought he would not betray to her the secret of his friend, in case he were intrusted with it. 
What he said however bringing fresh to her memory the vexation she had lately undergone on this account, her countenance went through several changes in the space of half a minute, —‘Whoever should think in the manner you mention, reply'd she, would discover a great want of 
judgment;—a conjecture of this nature could be justified only by the behaviour of one or the other of us, and I believe it has been such on both sides as to give no room for suspicion that either of us regreted the agreement made between our parents.’ 
A lady to whom Jenny had sent a card that morning, to give notice of her being in town, that same instant coming in prevented Belpine from making any answer, and he took his leave soon after, having discovered by this visit that his artifices had given her some uneasiness, but less resentment than was necessary for the success of his design. 
