

Will in all likelihood appear, to the greatest part of our readers, a good deal more interesting than the former. 
After that conversation which had engross'd the whole of the preceding chapter, a multiplicity of engagements, of one sort or other, so took up Jemmy's time, that he could not find one hour to visit his beloved and most deserving mistress for three days successively; but on the evening of the latter he found, on his coming home, a little billet from her which had been left for him in the afternoon, the contents whereof were as follows: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Dear Jemmy,
“A Proposal has been made to me, which before I accept of am desirous to acquaint you with; if this is so fortunate as to find you at home shall be glad of seeing you this evening; if not, expect you will not fail of calling on me in the morning as early as you can; because I have promised to give my final answer some time to-morrow. I am, 
With all sincerity,
Dear Jemmy,
Yours, &c. &c.
J. Jessamy. 

On the first mention of this billet, after an absence of so unusual a length between these two lovers, when in the same town together, I dare believe that many of my female readers expected to find it fill'd either with reproaches or complaints; or, perhaps with a mixture of both; but Jenny was of a different complexion from the generality of her sex, she could love without anxiety, and glad as she was whenever she saw the object of her passion, was never angry or unhappy when she saw him not. 
If all women could bring themselves to behave in the manner Jenny did, I cannot but think they would find their account in it, not only in the tranquility of their own minds, but also in rendering more permanent the affection of the man they loved; doubts, suspicions, and jealousies, though arising from a tender cause, frequently hurry the person possess'd of them into such furious marks of resentment, as, if the lover has the least inclination to break off, gives him a fair pretence of doing so. 
The guilty heart, which perhaps might be in time reclaim'd by its own consciousness of being in the wrong, is often hardened by unbraidings; there is a certain pride and obstinacy in some natures which will not bear reproof, and makes them persist in the errors which themselves condemn, only because they are condemned by others. 
But if the man, who knows he justly merits all the reproaches he can be loaded with, can so ill endure rebuke, how shall the innocent, the faithful lover support it; to be accused of a crime his very apprehension shudders at, to be treated by the woman he adores with sullen coldness, and with causeless testimonies of suspicion, must give him the most poignant inquietude; and though he may submit to it at first, and be even pleased, as imagining such a behaviour an indication of the most tender passion in his mistress; yet, when he finds all his endeavours to calm the tempest in her soul are fruitless, he will at last, especially if he is a man of sense and spirit, be wearied out, as the poet truly says, 
Small jealousies, indeed, inflame desire;
Too great, not fan, but quite put out the fire.
Or as another, in my opinion, more emphatically expresses his sense of the matter: 
'Tis just, when doubts without foundation grow,
Those who believe us false should find us so.
But I have seen too much how far the power of jealousy, a passion truly call'd the poison of love, operates on a female mind, not to be sensible that all the advice I can give on this occasion will be entirely thrown away; and that I have more reason to ask pardon of my fair readers for this digression, than to flatter myself they will be any way profited by it. 
To return therefore to the business of my history; it was too late when Jemmy received the abovemention'd summons from his mistress to attend her that night; but he comply'd with it very early the next morning, according to her request; and indeed much sooner than she could reasonably have expected he would be stirring. 
He found her incompassed with trunks and ban-boxes, and very busy in packing up her apparel: ‘You have found me preparing for a journey, cry'd she, which notwithstanding I would neither resolve upon, nor promise to take without receiving your approbation of it.’ 
‘You surprise me, said he,—a journey; and wait for my approbation of it.’ —‘Yes,—replyed she, it was to that end I sent for you in such a hurry; but sit down and I will tell you all.’ —Jemmy then took a chair, and she placing herself in another opposite to him, began as follows: 
‘You must know, said she, that I din'd yesterday, by invitation, at lady Speck's;—her sister, miss Wingman, was with her; they are both going to Bath to-morrow, and were very urgent with me to accompany them: —As I never saw that place, and have heard so much of it, I must confess I should be well enough pleased to go thither; especially when I have the opportunity of being escorted by three or four stout fellows with fire-arms, by way of defence from the gentlemen collectors of the road.’ 
‘I know, replied Jemmy, that lady Speck will abate nothing that she thinks becoming her quality, and always travels in a genteel manner. —And so you set out to-morrow? 
‘I do not tell you I shall set out at all, answer'd she, for I am not yet determined.’ —Jemmy then ask'd her on what motive she hesitated.’ —‘Can you not guess,—cry'd she,—looking kindly on him?’ ‘No upon my honour, said he. ‘Then you are not so just to me as you ought to be,—returned she gravely;—you might have thought I would agree to nothing of this nature, without having first consulted you.’ 
‘Me, cry'd Jemmy, did you not tell me you should like to go?’ —‘Yes, replied she, but as I suppose, according to the footing on which we now stand, that it will be my duty hereafter to submit my inclinations to the regulation of your will, I thought it proper to give you a previous sample how easy it will be for me to do so. In fine, my dear Jemmy, I will not go without your consent; nor even without your approbation.’ 
‘This is indeed a proof of tenderness, cry'd he, which I could not expect, nor can any way deserve, unless it be by joining my entreaties with the ladies, that you will not refuse their request.’ In speaking these words he rose from his seat and snatch'd her to his arm with an infinity of transport and affection. 
‘Then you are willing, said she, returning him his embrace, to part with me for the long space of six or seven weeks at least? for they do not purpose to return sooner.’ 
‘I will not pretend to be so much the master of myself, said he, still holding her by the hand, as to be perfectly content during such a separation as you have mention'd; but I can see no reason to put my patience to so severe a trial; I might follow you directly, but it happens unluckily that my steward whom I have sent for comes to town tomorrow, and the affairs I have to settle with him will detain me for some days; but I believe I may flatter myself with seeing my dear Jenny at Bath within a fortnight at the very farthest.’ 
‘May I then expect you’, cryed she? with a voice which express'd the utmost satisfaction.’ ‘You may not only expect but depend upon my coming;’ answered he, ‘you have the greatest security for it that is in nature, which is that of my own inclination.’ —‘Believe me, my dear Jenny, that I never was easy when absent from you for any length of time;—the thoughts of you still mingled with all the little sports and recreations of my childhood; and now when riper years have made me more truly sensible, of the perfections you are mistress of, I feel it would be an utter impossibility to live without seeing you.’ 
She answer'd these fond expressions with others no less endearing; after which, she told him, that since he agreed to her going, and had promised to follow, she would send immediately, and let lady Speck know she should be ready to attend her ladyship next morning. 
Jemmy then left her to do as she had said, and went home to dress; but return'd in the evening, and staid supper with her, when nothing passed of consequence enough to trouble the reader with, except his renewing the assurances he before had given her of seeing her at Bath as soon as his business was dispatch'd. 
