

Treats of many things, which though they may seem at present less affecting than some others, yet are very necessary for the reader to be acquainted with, before we proceed farther into the history. 
Youth, beauty, and wit, have deservingly a very powerful influence over the human heart; and every day, experience obliges us to own, that wealth, without the aid of any of these, is of itself sufficient to captivate;—it supplies all other defects;—it smooths the wrinkles of fourscore;—it shapes deformity into comeliness, and gives graces to idiotism itself; as it is said by the inimitable Shakespear: 
 Gold! yellow, glittering, precious gold!
Gold! that will make black, white; foul, fair; wrong, right;
 Base, noble; old, young; cowards, valiant!
But when the gifts of nature are join'd with those of fortune, how strong is the attraction!—how irresistible is the force of such united charms! according to the words of the humorous poet: 
Hence 'tis, no lover has the power
T' enforce a desperate amour,
As he that has two strings to's bow,
And burns for love and money too.
We ought not therefore, methinks, to judge with too much severity on the vanity of a fine lady; who seeing herself perpetually surrounded with a crowd of lovers, each endeavouring to excel all his rivals in the most extravagant demonstrations of affection, can hardly believe she deserves not some part, at least, of the admiration she receives. 
But what pretence soever we may make to excuse the weakness of exulting in a multiplicity of lovers, it is still a weakness which all imaginable care ought to be taken to subdue; as it may draw on the most fatal consequences both on the admirers and admired: —What duels have been fought! —What torrents of blood have been shed in the mad-brain'd fury of jealous rivalship! —And how often have we seen the idol fair herself, who lately triumph'd in the pains she gave, neglected in her turn,—deserted and abandon'd to the last despair! 
But this is only for such whom it may concern; the ladies I am at present speaking of were of a different stamp; lady Speck had something of a pretty particular nature, both in her humour and character, as the reader will hereafter be informed; in the mean time must content himself with a small sketch of both. 
She liked a freedom of conversation with the men, but then she liked that conversation should be general; she took neither pride nor pleasure in the particular devoirs of those who profess'd themselves her lovers; and the encouragement she gave to the addresses of mr. Lovegrove and others, was not the effect of any coquetry in her disposition, but was occasion'd merely by her policy, as she thought such a behaviour would be the best means to conceal a secret inclination she had entertain'd in favour of one; which inclination many reasons forbid her to make known, or even to be guess'd at. 
Miss Wingman was of a humour so very volatile, that it was quite out of her power to think seriously for a minute together on any one thing whatever, and love the least of all took up her attention;—always pleased,—always happy, she neither plumed herself on the new conquests she acquired, nor regretted the loss of those slaves, who, weary of their bondange, shook off her chains. 
As for the heroine of this history, her early engagement with Jemmy was so well known, that it had hitherto defended her from all attacks, either to put her constancy to the trial, or shew the world in what manner she would behave amidst a plurality of lovers. 
But now the time was come in which this young lady was to give most substantial proofs, not only of her affection and fidelity to the man whom she looked upon ordained to be her future husband, but also of her generosity and gratitude to those to whose passion she had it not either in her power or inclination to make an adequate return. 
As all the arts of love and wit were put in practice by lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove, in the court they made to their respective mistresses, sir Robert Manley thought it would ill become a man of his years and character to let a fine lady sit neglected by, especially one who appear'd so deserving as Jenny did, of all that could be said in her praise. 
But though the compliments he entertain'd her with had at first no other foundation than mere gallantry, yet the manner in which she received them, and the answers she gave, were such as would have rendered it impossible for him to have withstood the charms of her tongue, even had he been unsusceptible to those of her eyes. 
In fine, none of the perfections she was endowed with were lost upon him; he soon found the full effects of a passion he had been only sporting with, and might say with Cowley, 
Unhurt, untouch'd, did I complain,
And terrify'd all others with my pain;
But now I feel the mighty evil,
Ah there's no fooling with the devil:
In things where fancy much does reign
'Tis dangerous too cunningly to feign;
The play at last a truth does grow,
And custom into nature go.
Love, tho' it may be counterfeited so as not to be, without great penetration, discover'd to be false, cannot, wherever it is sincere, be wholly conceal'd; sir Robert's two friends perceived the change in him before he was quite assur'd of it in himself:—they were a little pleasant with him on the occasion; but at the same time acknowledged, that the beauty and merit of miss Jenny Jessamy demanded all the respect that could be paid to her. 
Sir Robert on this readily confess'd, that he had never seen a young lady whose person and accomplishments gave a more fair prospect of making compleatly happy the man who should possess her; ‘But, said he, I have been told somewhat of an engagement she is under, and I should be sorry to appear either unjust in attempting to invade the property of another, or so weak as to give up my heart entirely without a possibility of having it well receiv'd.’ 
Lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove were neither of them ignorant of what he meant; but the former having heard, in casual conversation, some of those whispers which the artifices of Bellpine had circulated through almost all companies, cried hastily out, ‘If a match between miss Jenny and a young heir of her own name, be the sole impediment to your making your addresses to her, I believe I may venture to assure you, from very good hands, that it is quite broke off; and that for some time they have neither regarded nor treated each other with any thing more than a bare civility.’ 
‘Your lordship's intelligence, said mr. Lovegrove, seems to me agreeable to reason on the nature of the thing; the marriage was agreed upon by their parents before the young people were capable of judging for themselves, and as now they are arrived at years of maturity, I see no cause, except a disinclination on the one side or the other for delaying the consummation of what was so long ago projected.’ 
People easily believe what they wish, and indeed there was so much appearance of reason in the inference mr. Lovegrove had drawn, that it is not to be wonder'd at that the young baronet readily gave into it. 
But he was still better satisfied, when, after having declared how happy he should think himself in an assurance of Jenny's heart being disengaged, mr. Lovegrove told him, that since he found he was so serious in the affair, he would speak to lady Speck, and endeavour to come at the certainty. 
‘And I, cried lord Huntley, will sound miss Wingman on the occasion; I believe she will make no scruple to inform what she knows of it; and as she is nearer to her own years than her sister may be supposed to be, yet deeper in her secrets and confidants.’ 
It would be superfluous to repeat the many retributions sir Robert made to the gentlemen on the friendly part they took in his interest; so I shall only say, they were such as became the mouth of a man very much in love, and who scorn'd to make use of any dishonourable or ungenerous means for the attainment of his wishes. 
