
Affords less than perhaps may be expected, yet enough to satisfy a reasonable reader. 
Jemmy's impatience to entertain his fair mistress, brought him next morning to visit her in her own apartment; but as their conversation consisted only of such things as the reader is already well acquainted with, it would be needless to repeat it here, so I shall only say, that all which can be conceived of soft and tender, passed between them;—he thought that he could never sufficiently acknowledge the proofs she had given him of her affection;—nor she too much return those she had received from him: —Sweet are the charms of mutual love, when inspired by merit, and accompanied by virtue. 
Neither of them, however, suffered themselves to be so far absorb'd in mutual endearments as to forget the respect owing to their friends;—Jenny had no sooner heard that the company had left their chambers than she proposed joining 
them; and Jemmy had conceived so high an idea of lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove, on the character given of them by sir Robert Manley, that he rejoiced in this opportunity of entering into a more particular acquaintance with them. 
On their going into the dining-room they found sir Robert Manley was also come to pay the salutations of the morning, and enquire how they intended to pass the day; to which the ladies reply'd, that they could not pass it more agreeably than in the situation he had provided for them, especially as their women had not yet had time to regulate their things in a proper manner to appear in public, and that if he and mr. Jessamy would give them their company, they should think it no confinement to stay at home: —This being readily agreed to,—feasting,—cards, and conversation engrossed the hours till the night was pretty far advanced;—nor were the gentlemen permitted to depart without a promise of returning the next day. 
Lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove had hitherto been entire strangers to Jemmy, but they now found enough in his conversation to make them think themselves 
happy in his acquaintance; and he, as well as sir Robert Manley, was never left out in any party of pleasure formed by them. 
In fine, though they continued in different lodgings, they seemed but as one family;—they all went together to visit the churches and convents,—to the opera,—the comedy,—the thuileries,—the gardens of Luxemberg,—made frequent tours to Marli,—Fontainbleau,—and Versailles;—not a day passed over without some new amusement, and time slid on in a perpetual round of pleasure. 
Lord Huntley, who had been several times before at Paris, had a pretty large acquaintance among persons of the best fashion;—these hearing of his marriage and arrival, came to visit him, and likewise introduced their wives and daughters to the ladies, so that there was frequently a very large and brilliant assembly of both sexes at the hotel. 
Lady Huntley and lady Speck had their share of admiration among the connoisseurs; but Jenny seemed, in the eyes of most of them, greatly to outshine both her fair companions;—she was toasted and distinguished by the name of 
—La Belle Angloise:—Jemmy was ravished at the fine things he heard said of her; and the more so, as he found she was not the least elated by the praises she received. 
This crowd of company,—this incessant hurry of accumulated diversions, however, deprived our lover of the opportunity of entertaining his dear mistress in private, as often as the pleasure he took in her conversation above all others made him wish to do; and it is probable this restriction fill'd him with more impatience than ever he felt before for the consummation of their marriage. 
One day, when he found himself alone with her, he fail'd not to press her in the most strong terms he was able on that article; but she repy'd,—that it was then neither a fit time nor place for such a thing,—and that she wish'd he would not think of it till they should return to England. 
‘Why not a fit time and place, my dear Jenny, said he, can there be any time or place unfit to solemnize a covenant made so long ago for us by our parents?—a covenant which I hope the expectations of fulfilling has always 
been equally agreeable to ourselves;—remember, continued he, kissing her hand, the transporting promise you made in one of your kind epistles,—that if I could not go to you,—you would come to me, and the ambassador's chaplain should complete my happiness.’ 
‘When I made that promise, answer'd she, I meant nothing more than to observe it religiously;—and should have contented myself to have lived in a continual banishment with you;—but, my dear Jemmy, the case, thank Heaven, is now quite alter'd,—the circumstances of our affairs have changed their face,—the wretch Belpine is recover'd,—no danger threatens your return, and as we have been here already near two months, it cannot be supposed shall stay much longer;—wherefore then should we hurry thus precipitately into a marriage, while in a foreign land and absent from the greatest part of our friends?’ 
She had scarce ended these words when lady Huntley came into the room; but on seeing them together was about to retire immediately, crying, she would not interrupt their conversation;—Jenny call'd to her to stay, and Jemmy recollecting 
how much she had been his friend, in a discourse of the like nature just after her coming from Bath, told her that her layship's presence would be so far from giving any interruption, that it was highly necessary to decide a little dispute between him and miss Jessamy. 
‘I guess the subject, answer'd she with a smile; and if I am to be arbiter, shall not fail to give it on your side the question, as I shall then be sure of obliging both parties.’ —‘You may be mistaken,’ cry'd Jenny, and was going on; but Jemmy, who would have the advantage of being first heard, remonstrated to the fair judge all the inquietudes of an ever hoping,—ever expecting, and never gratified passion, and all the anxieties attending impatience and suspence;—the manner in which he express'd himself had so much of the humorous in it, mix'd with the pathetic, as made both the ladies laugh heartily:—Jenny, in her turn, repeated the reasons she had for denying her lover's request in terms no less sprightly;—after which, ‘—Well, said lady Huntley, this is a moot point, and I must even leave it where I found it, and the room, that you may agree upon it between yourselves.’ 
She was going to do as she said, and had turn'd away for that purpose;—‘Hold, lady Huntley, cried Jenny, you must not depart till I have convinced you of my generosity to this unreasonable man:—here, continued she to Jemmy, is my hand, which I faithfully promise to give you before a Parson as soon as we arrive at London, and things can be got ready for the ceremony:’ —Jemmy receiv'd and kiss'd it with the greatest satisfaction. 
‘This is as it should be, said lady Huntley; and to heighten your contentment, mr. Jessamy, I can tell you that I believe you will very shortly have an opportunity to demand the performance of this promise;—for my part I begin to be weary of Paris;—mr. Lovegrove, I can perceive, is so too; and if we can persuade lady Speck to be of the same opinion, I know I can easily bring my lord into it.’ 
She was going on when lord Huntley came in with a letter in his hand;—‘Oh, my dear, cried he, I have been looking for you through all the rooms;—I have just receiv'd a letter from sir Thomas Welby.’ 
—‘I hope mamma 
is well, cried she hastily,—and no ill accident has happen'd.’ —‘Not in the least, return'd he, but far on the contrary;—sir Thomas only writes to let us know that his son is married, and will very shortly bring his bride to visit us in Paris.’ 
‘I am astonish'd, cried lady Huntley;—mr. Welby married! —I do not understand how such a thing can be;—he took leave of mamma and I just after my coming from Bath, and told us he was to set out on his travels next day, and I thought that he was gone:—sure he must either have made a very short tour, or have stopp'd in his progress and have pick'd up a wife by the way.’ 
‘I know nothing of the particulars, resum'd his lordship;—but you shall hear what sir Thomas says on the occasion:’—with these words he look'd over the letter,—and singling out that part of it which he thought would most satisfy her curiosity, read as follows: 
“I thought him too young to marry; but found his inclinations so much divided between love and travelling, that the latter would have afforded 
him neither pleasure nor improvement without the gratification of the former, so consented to both;—he was married last week, and two days ago set out on his rambles, and has taken his bride with him:—as they intend to stay some time at Paris, in their way to Italy and other parts, he will have the honour to present her to the ladies, and I flatter myself she will appear not unworthy of their countenance and friendship.” 
‘Well, this is strange, said she, perceiving he had done; but does not mention to whom he is married.’ —‘Not a syllable, reply'd he; but we shall soon know more of the matter;—for I find by the date of this letter, which I did not observe before, that it has been retarded, by some accident or another, in the post; and the young gentleman, by the time mention'd of his leaving London, must infallibly be already arriv'd, or very near.’ 
These words had but just escap'd his lips, when a servant came hastily into the room and said, that a gentleman, who call'd himself Welby, was in the great salon with lady Speck and mr Lovegrove, and they sent him to let his lordship know it. 
On this lord and lady Huntley went to receive their new guest; but Jemmy and Jenny, having no acquaintance with him, thought themselves excused from paying their compliments to him at this time. 
