
Is very short, but pithy. 
A volatile temper is not always a sufficient security from discontent;—Jemmy loved his dear Jenny 
even more than he knew he did himself; and to be assured from a mouth whose veracity he was too well convinced of to suspect, that it was said he had quitted her for the sake of miss Chit, he look'd upon as such an indignity to her merits, as gave him more pain than any censure the supposed change might bring upon himself. 
He wrote to her that same night; but as he hoped the idle report which gave him so much vexation could not as yet, at least, have extended itself so far as Bath, he thought it improper to make any mention of it till he should see her in person, and have the better opportunity of proving the falsehood of it;—he complained therefore only of the business that kept him so long from her, and his heart now more than ever overflowing with love and tenderness, his expressions were conformable. 
This was the letter which Jenny received immediately after the intelligence given her by lady Speck and miss Wingman of his supposed infidelity;—the effects of it have been already shewn, and need not be repeated. 
Belpine, who had been at miss Chit's concert, was a good deal surprised at not 
finding Jemmy there, as he knew he had been invited, but much more when that young lady, taking him aside, shew'd him the answer that had been sent to her card, and reproach'd him in terms pretty severe for having endeavour'd to persuade her she was mistress of an heart which she now found was so firmly attach'd to another. 
Happy was it for this deceitful man that the time and place would not allow of much discourse, as he had not consider'd that such an event might possibly happen, nor was he prepared with any subterfuge for his proceeding;—the confusion he was in was very great; but it did not make him repent of what he had done, or cease from future projects for the same base end; as will hereafter appear. 
It is natural, when the mind is over-charged with thoughts of any kind, to disburthen itself to those who we believe take an interest in our affairs;—Jemmy had not a greater confidence in any one man of his acquaintance than in Belpine,—it may be supposed, therefore, that he fail'd not to communicate to him the perplexity he was at present under, and the story which had occasion'd it. 
That faithless friend affected the utmost astonishment at the recital, and cried out with a shew of the most affectionate zeal;—‘Good God! —I hope miss Jessamy has heard nothing of this.’ 
‘I think it scarce possible, reply'd Jemmy, that such a report can have reach'd her ears at least as yet, in the place where she is; and as I hope to be with her in a few days shall take care to arm her against what she might be told hereafter by relating it myself.’ 
This greatly disconcerted Belpine;—he had flatter'd himself that Jemmy's affairs would have detain'd him so long in London, that the stratagems laid to inspire her with a belief of his inconstancy would have taken too strong a hold of her heart to be totally removed:—fain he would have dissuaded him from going to Bath, but could find no reasons for that purpose plausible enough to prevent the real motive from being suspected;—chance, however, at present befriended his designs, and did that for him which all his own invention, fertile as it was, could not furnish him with the means of accomplishing. 
As Jemmy, in an indolent and uncontemplative mood, was one day loitering in Covent-Garden Piazza, a fine gilt chariot, with two footmen behind it, stopp'd at one of the arches, and just as he was passing, an ancient gentleman and a very young lady alighted out of it, and went into the great auction-house, lately mr. Cock's, but now occupy'd in the same manner by mr. Langford. 
He started, and was strangely surprised at sight of this lady;—not on account of her beauty, though she was handsome beyond description, but because he thought himself perfectly well acquainted with her face; but where, or at what time, he had been so, he could not presently recollect. 
He stood for the space of several minutes endeavouring to recover a more distinct idea of that lovely person; but finding it impossible, he stepp'd to one of the footmen, who was leaning his back against a pillar, and ask'd him to whom that chariot belong'd; and being answer'd—‘To sir Thomas Hardy.’ —‘Then, resumed Jemmy, I suppose the young lady with him is his daughter.’ —‘No, sir, replied the fellow with a smile, 
which he was not able to restrain,—I assure you she is his wife.’ 
Jemmy on this began to think he had been mistaken;—resolving however to be convinced, he went into the auction room, doubting not but a second and more full view would set him right. 
There was a great deal of company, but he presently singled her out, and was now more assured than ever that they were no strangers to each other; when, on fixing his eyes upon her, he perceiv'd her countenance change at sight of him, that she grew pale and red by turns, and betrayed all the marks of the utmost confusion. 
Yet all this was not sufficient to enable him to bring back to remembrance what curiosity made him so desirous of retrieving, till the lady, taking the opportunity of her husband's being engaged in looking over some pictures, advanced hastily towards him, and said in a low voice—‘What has mr. Jessamy forgot his Celia of the woods?’ 
‘Heavens! cried he, what a stupid dolt was I?’ —‘Hush, reply'd she, take no notice of me here;’—she had kept 
her eyes upon her husband all the time she was speaking to Jemmy, and observing that he now look'd that way rejoin'd him in an instant. 
The old baronet kept very close to his fair wife all the rest of the time, yet had she the address to steal a moment just to bid Jemmy meet her at ten the next morning at that end of the Mall next Buckingham house. 
He could only give her a bow of assent; and remain'd in a consternation which only can be guess'd at by the knowledge who Celia was, and the intercourse he formerly had with her. 
