

Is taken up with a conversation of very great importance. 
Neither lady Speck nor her sister were ignorant of those reports which had been so maliciously spread, concerning a change in the sentiments of Jemmy;—they had heard it averr'd by several of their acquaintances, as a thing past all dispute; but as their fair friend had never made them the confidants of her imaginary misfortune, they thought it too tender and delicate a point to be touch'd upon in her presence, and had always carefully avoided giving her the least hint that they had been told of such a thing. 
It was owing however merely to the esteem and friendship they had towards her, that had induced them to persuade her to accompany them to Bath, believing that the pleasures of that place might keep her from resenting too deeply an indignity which few women are able to support with patience. 
Regarding her in the affectionate manner they did, it could not but afford them a good deal of satisfaction to be inform'd by lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove of the new conquest she had made; judging, as they reasonably might, that the offer of a heart, such as that of sir Robert Manley, would fully compensate for the loss they supposed she had sustain'd by the infidelity of Jemmy. 
Both these ladies assured not only their lovers, but sir Robert himself, of the part they took in his interest, and that they would lay hold of the first opportunity to speak to Jenny on the affair, in such terms as should seem to them most effectual to convince her that she ought not to slight a proposal which could not but prove for her honour and advantage to accept. 
They were punctual to their promise; the next morning, as they were sitting all together at breakfast, lady Speck introduced what she intended to insinuate, by making some observations on the temper and behaviour of mankind in general; till by degrees she fell insensibly, as it were, and without seeming to have any design, into very great commendations of sir Robert Manley; saying, that she thought that he had more virtue and fewer faults, than most men of her acquaintance; and then ask'd Jenny what was her opinion of him. 
‘Really, madam, replyed she, I pretend to very little judgment of mankind, especially in those I have known so short a time; but by what I have seen of sir Robert, he appears to me to have honour and good sense, and also to be well natur'd.’ 
‘You have named, said lady Speck, the three grand requisites for making a good husband; and I hope that the object of his affections will soon be convinced that he is possess'd of them, as well as with an infinity of love. 
‘Is sir Robert then about marrying, demanded Jenny. —‘I cannot say absolutely about it, return'd lady Speck; for I am pretty certain he has not yet assumed courage enough to make any declaration of his passion; all I know is, that he is most violently in love.’ 
‘He is undoubtedly a very fine Gentleman, said Jenny, and if his passion be sincere and honourable he shall have my good wishes for his success. As to his success, resum'd her ladyship, it it depends entirely on yourself;—for I assure you, it is with you he is in love.’ 
‘With me! madam,’ cry'd Jenny, very much astonish'd, and setting down her dish of tea; —‘What does your ladyship mean? —‘I mean as I have said, replied the other;—but if you have a mind the intelligence should be repeated, I will oblige you so far as to assure you, that it is with your individual self sir Robert Manley is in love.’ 
‘I perceive, said Jenny, your ladyship is pleased to divert yourself this morning at my expence. —No, I protest, return'd lady Speck, I was never more in earnest in my whole life. —Indeed, rejoin'd miss Wingman, I can vouch for my sister's sincerity in this point;—sir Robert has made mr. Lovegrove and lord Huntley the confidants of his passion; and I believe you will very soon hear it from his own mouth.’ 
‘I hope not, answer'd Jenny, in a very reserved tone;—for if sir Robert has in reality any such inclinations towards me as you mention, he should at least, methinks, have the prudence to keep them to himself, as he cannot but know my hand has long since been destined to another.’ 
‘Say rather, cry'd lady Speck, intended to be given; for it is not in the power of parents to make their childrens fate;—they often decree for us what we do not think fit to comply with even while they live, to awe us into obedience by their frowns; but when they are dead, and we are left to the management of ourselves, we children pay not much regard to the injunctions of those who are no longer in a condition to thwart our inclinations.’ 
‘That may be the case sometimes madam, said Jenny; but I should be sorry to be among the number of those who verify it; our parents have not only an undoubted right to dispose of us, but also are much better judges of what will make our happiness than ourselves can pretend to be.’ 
‘All this is very true, cry'd miss Wingman very briskly, but how much soever those who would pass for the discreet part of our sex may picque themselves upon their implicit obedience in this point, I believe the men will not be found altogether so sanguine in the performance of their duty.’ 
‘No, no, reply'd lady Speck, inclination does all on their part;—it is not virtue,—it is not wit,—it is not beauty,—it is not all the perfections that Heaven and nature can bestow,—but Fancy,—partial Fancy, by which the heart of man is influenced; and that woman who perseveres in her affection for a lover, who either never did, or having once done so, ceases to regard her as he ought, discovers a meanness of spirit which must render her contemptible, both in his eyes and those of all her acquaintance.’ 
Jenny, whose penetration few things escaped, presently comprehended that this discourse was aim'd to raise some suspicions in her mind concerning the constancy of Jemmy; and looking on such an attempt as highly injurious both to herself and him, answer'd with somewhat of what the French call a fierty in her voice and countenance, in these terms: 
‘The more ridiculous it appears, said she, the more reason has mr. Jessamy and myself to thank Heaven for directing the care of our indulging fathers to cast our lot where there is no danger of such a misfortune happening to neither of us.’ 
Lady Speck and miss Wingman looked on each other with some amazement while Jenny was speaking, as not well knowing what to think; but after a pause of some minutes, ‘Some people, said lady Speck, a little scornfully, take a pride in being blind to what half the town has long since seen and laugh'd at.’ Here she stoped, and miss Wingman, who was the more spiritous of the two, and a good deal nettled at the tart manner in which Jenny had spoke, cry'd out, ‘Dear sister, I beg you will shew miss Jessamy the letter your ladyship received since our coming down to Bath; it is the duty of her friends to force open her eyes, as she seems obstinate to shut daylight out.’ 
‘It is a thing I have been very loth to mention, resum'd lady Speck, and now do it with an extreme reluctance; but since there is no other way to convince you that the world is not so ignorant as you imagine, of the inconstancy and perfidiousness of mr. Jessamy, read that,—and cease for the future to offer any thing in the vindication of so unworthy a man.’ 
In speaking these words she took a letter out of her pocket and put it into Jenny's hand, which that young lady opening, with an agitation of spirits very unusual with her, found it contain'd as follows. 
To the Honourable Lady Speck, at Bath.
Madam,
“As I know very well that minds truly benignant and humane, like your ladyship's, take a pleasure in every opportunity of doing good, I shall make no apology for the trouble of this anonymous epistle; especially as it is wrote with a view of serving a young lady, who so well deserves and possesses so much of your ladyship's kind wishes as miss Jessamy.” 
“But not to keep your ladyship in suspence, permit me to acquaint you, that mr. Jessamy, who for some time has made his private addresses to miss Chit, has now taken the opportunity of your fair friend's absence to avow publickly his passion for that young person. Some people will have it, that every thing is already so far concluded upon between them that a marriage will very shortly be consummated; but this I will not pretend to affirm: it is certain, however, that he loves her; and that a little skill in music, out-ballances, in his giddy fancy, all the real merits of the beautiful and accomplished miss Jessamy.” 
“I know not whether she is as yet appriz'd of his infidelity, or has even any suspicions of it; but the less she is so the more will it shock her tender nature to find, at her return, that he is married, or about being married to another. —How could her gentle heart support the sudden disappointment? —How bear the double pangs of the indignity offer'd to her love and beauty? —Fatal, alas, might be the consequences of such a stroke, if not previously prepar'd and arm'd against it!” 
“It depends greatly on your ladyship to shield that injured innocence from being too deeply affected with her misfortune; and as her case must touch every one who has a soul capable of social commiseration, I take the liberty, with all submission, to entreat you, madam, to give her such warnings of her fate as may render the certainty, whenever it shall arrive, less heavy to be borne;—if once thoroughly persuaded there is a probability of his being false, it will at least take off the alarming surprise of finding he is so; and the more early she is brought to suspect his baseness, the more opportunity she will have to exert the good sense she is mistress of, in despising instead of lamenting it.” 
“The manner in which this is most proper to be done will best be determined by your ladyship's superior judgment: I only beg that the above hints may be received, in an assurance that they proceed from a heart truly devoted to honour and virtue, and entirely free from all views but such as may be conducive to promote the cause of those noble principles.” 
I am,
With a profound respect,
Madam,
Your ladyship's
Most humble,
Most faithful
And obedient servant. 
P. S. “Your ladyship will pardon the concealment of my name for the present, as an advice of this nature might probably subject the person who gives it to many great inconveniencies, if known before the affair to which it relates is absolutely concluded and past beyond all possibility of denial.” 

Scarce had Jenny patience to go through with this invidious scroll;—‘Good God,’ cry'd she, to lady Speck;—who is it can have the baseness to assert such monstrous untruths, or the presumption to attempt making your ladyship's good nature the dupe of a design so villanous, and withal so mean?’ 
Then immediately recollecting what had just now been told her concerning the passion sir Robert Manley had entertain'd for her, she hesitated not a moment to accuse him of having taken this method to alienate her affections from Jemmy; and looking on the contrivance with that contempt and indignation it really deserved, began to reproach in terms the most bitter that could issue from a mouth so little accustom'd to invectives. 
The two ladies seem'd quite astonish'd at her behaviour, and both join'd to endeavour to convince her of the injustice to sir Robert, who they believed had too much honour to attempt the gaining of his point by a way so abject and so unworthy of his character; and to clear his innocence, assured her that they had heard an account of Jemmy's infidelity from many hands before they had left London; or that sir Robert had ever seen her face. 
All they could say, however, was insufficient to make Jenny recede from her opinion; the dispute grew pretty warm, and would probably have run to greater lengths, if it had not been seasonably interrupted by some company coming to visit them. 
