

Compleats the character of a modern fine gentleman, or a pretty fellow for the ladies. 
I Believe there are none into whose hands these volumes shall happen to fall, at least if they consider the story of mrs. M&wblank;&wblank; with any attention, but will easily perceive there was enough in it to give a very great alarm to a man so much enamour'd as mr. Lovegrove. 
He had observed, that for some time before, as well as since their coming down to Bath, Celandine had been aq constant dangler after lady Speck. —Love and jealousy are quick-sighted passions:—he thought also, that though she ridiculed and laugh'd at his assiduities, she was not so much displeased with them as she ought to have been. 
This had frequently given him some uneasy apprehensions; but as there were several other gentlemen of worth and honour who made their addresses to lady Speck, as well as himself; and she had 
never given him any assurance of distinguishing him above his competitors, he thought it would be too presuming in him to call her ladyship's conduct in question; especially in regard to a man who did not publickly profess himself her lover, and whose person, character, and behaviour she always affected to despise. 
But now to be told, that he had impudently boasted his coming down to Bath was on the invitation of a woman of quality, from whom he gave some hints of having received very extraordinary favours; and to find that the person to whom he said this had any reason to guess the woman of quality he mention'd was no other than lady Speck, was such a shocking corroboration of his former suspicions as fired him with the extremest rage. 
Whether lady Speck had in reality granted any favours to Celandine, or whether it was his own idle vanity alone, which had made him talk in the manner he had done, this generous lover thought it would become him to chastise the insolence of such a braggadocia, but in what manner he should do so very much perplex'd him: to send him a challenge on this account he feared would make too great a noise, and consequently displease 
the lady whose honour he meant to defend. —After much debating within himself, an expedient came into his mind, which he immediately put in execution. 
He found, by what he had heard Jenny say to mrs. M&wblank;&wblank;, that Celandine had taken the liberty to treat that young lady in a manner very unworthy of her character;—this seem'd to him a good pretence for covering the face of his design; and therefore resolv'd to make her quarrel appear as the chief motive of his resentment, touching only obliquely on that he had conceiv'd against him in regard of lady Speck. 
Having well consider'd on all the consequences that might probably attend the step he was about to take, and fully determin'd with himself to pursue it, he wrote to Celandine that same evening in the following terms: 

To R. Celandine, Esq;
“Sir,
You have affronted a young lady of distinguish'd merit, at present under the protection of the woman I adore; and, it is said, have given room for suspicion of your having also entertain'd 
thoughts of herself altogether unbecoming of you;—I think it therefore a duty incumbent on me to demand that satisfaction which every gentleman has a right to expect, when injured in the persons of those he professes to esteem. —I shall be glad to see you to-morrow morning about six, in the first field at the end of the walks, where I flatter myself you will not long suffer yourself to be waited for, by 
“Yours,
E. Lovegrove.” 
“P. S. I shall come alone, for I see no need that any friends, either of yours or mine, should be involv'd in this dispute.” 

This billet he sent by one of his servants; who, after staying a considerable time, return'd with an answer containing these lines: 
To E. Lovegrove, Esq;
“Sir,
I am sorry you should desire any thing of me which suits not my humour to comply with;—lady 
Speck and miss Jessamy are both of them very fine women; but upon my soul I think neither of them, or any other woman, worth drawing my sword for;—so must desire you will excuse my refusing to meet you on this score; on any other you may command 
“Yours,
R. Celandine” 

It would be difficult to decide, whether anger or contempt was the most predominant passion in the mind of mr. Lovegrove on reading the above:—he resolved, however, not to suffer the insolence of that bad man to go unpunish'd, but went very early the next morning to his lodgings, in order either to force from him the satisfaction he required: or still persisting to refuse it, to give him such treatment as men are ordinarily accustom'd to receive after behaving in the manner he had done. 
As he was going towards the house he perceived, while at some distance, a post-chaise waiting at the door; and before he could well reach it, saw Celandine just ready to step in;—on this he sprung forward with all the speed he could, and 
catching Celandine by the arm,—‘Stay, sir, cried he, you must not think to leave this town without making some atonement for your behaviour in it.’ 
‘Sir, replied the other, with some hesitation in his voice,—I give an account of my actions to no man,—nor has any man a right to inspect into them.’ —Every man of honour has a right to inspect into the actions of a villain, rejoin'd mr. Lovegrove fiercely, and if you are guilty of such as you have neither the justice to acknowledge, nor the courage to defend, you know the recompence you are to expect.” 
‘I dare fight,’ said Celandine, and immediately drew his sword, as did mr. Lovegrove his at the same time; but both were prevented by a great possee of people, who in an instant were gather'd about them, drawn thither by the outcries of Celandine's servants, the postilion, and the people of the house who were come to the door to take leave of their lodger; and it was the expectation of this seasonable interruption, which doubtless inspired the antagonist of mr. Lovegrove with so much boldness on a sudden. 
They had scarce time to make one push before they were disarm'd by the populace; and a constable, who lived hard by, coming to interpose his authority to put an end to the fray, took possession of both their swords, and told them they must give him leave to conduct them to a magistrate;—they readily submitted, and were follow'd by a continually increasing crowd, as lady Speck's woman had described. 
They soon arrived at the house of a gentleman in commission of the peace, who happen'd to be a person of great worth and honour. —Celandine exhibited a most pitious complaint against his adversary;—first, for sending him a challenge to fight on account of things which he said he knew nothing of; and afterwards for assaulting him in the streets, putting a stop to his journey, and occasioning a riot and disturbance in the town. —Mr. Lovegrove was entirely silent till the other had left off speaking, and then related the whole which had pass'd between them naturally as it was. —The magistrate could scarce forbear smiling, but desired to see both the letters; on which Celandine produced the challenge; but mr. Lovegrove, being 
unwilling to expose the names of the ladies, which the other had indiscreetly mention'd in his answer, said he had it not about him, and believ'd he had lost it. 
After having heard both parties, the worshipful gentleman began to expatiate, in terms befitting his character, on the bad custom of duelling;—he said, that though the too frequent practice of it had render'd it not dishonourable, yet it was directly contrary to the rules both of religion and morality, and to the laws of society as well as those of the land;—after which he recommended to them, and even exacted their mutual promise, to regard each other from that time forward, not as enemies, if they could not do so as friends. 
‘I will not take his word, sir, cried Celandine hastily,—I am convinced he has malice against me in his heart; I go in danger of my life by him, and desire I may be admitted to make oath of it, and that he may be bound over.’ —This could not be refused, and the book was immediately presented to him.’ 
‘Are you, sir, of the same way of thinking too, said the justice to mr. Lovegrove,’—‘No, upon my honour, sir, reply'd he; I am not under the least apprehensions on the score of this gentleman; and dare answer for him, that if there were as little danger in his tongue as there is to be fear'd from his sword, he would be the most unhurtful creature breathing.’ 
It was with difficulty the justice restrain'd himself from laughing; but preserving as much an air of gravity as he could on the occasion— ‘Well then, sir, said he, I am compell'd, by the duties of my office, to discharge your adversary, and oblige you to give security for your future behaviour towards him.’ 
On this Celandine thank'd him, and took his leave;—several of the croud, who had burst into the hall, follow'd him with a thousand scurril jests and fleers at his cowardice; but he was too much a man of peace to take any notice of what they said; and making what haste he could to the chaise, which still waited for him, set out for London, probably wishing he had not left it to come down to Bath. 
Mr. Lovegrove sent for lord Huntley and sir Robert Manley, who immediately came, and all the little formalities of this affair being over, and settled to the satisfaction of the gentleman before whom they were, he threw off the magistrate and assum'd a character more natural to him,—that of a man perfectly well bred and complaisant,—was very pleasant with them on the conduct of Celandine,—compell'd them to stay breakfast with him, and entertain'd them as elegantly as such a repast would admit. 
