

Contains some passages, which, 'tis probable,
will afford more pain than
pleasure, yet are very pertinent to
the history, and necessary to be related. 
Though the words which miss
Flora had let fall to mr. Trueworth,
concerning miss Betsy, seemed as if spoken
by meer chance, there was couched under
them, a design of the most black and
villainous kind, that ever entered the
breast of woman, as will presently appear
to the astonishment of every reader. 
In order to do this, we must relate an
incident in miss Betsy's life, not hitherto
mentioned, and which happened some
little time before her going to Oxford,
with her brother Frank. 
On her first coming to town, a woman
had been recommended to her for starching, 
and making up her fine linnen:— 
this person she had ever since employed,
and took a great fancy to, as she found
her honest, industrious, and very obliging. 
—The poor creature was unhappily
married,—her husband was gone from
her, and had listed himself for a soldier; 
—being born in a distant county, she
had no relations to whom she could apply
for assistance,—was big with child,
and had no support but the labour of her
hands. —These calamitous circumstances
so much touched the commiserative nature
of miss Betsy, that she frequently
gave her double the sum she demanded
for her work, besides bestowing on her
many things she left off wearing, which,
though trifles in themselves, were very
helpful to a person in such distress. 
Miss Mabel, for whom she also worked
at the same time, was no less her patroness,
than miss Betsy. —In fine, they
were both extremely kind to her, in so
much as made her often cry out, in a
transport of gratitude, that these two good
young ladies were worth to her all the
customers she had besides:—they continued
to prove themselves so, indeed; 
for when her child was born, which happened to be a girl, they stood god-mothers,
and not only gave handsomely 
themselves, but raised a contribution
among their acquaintance, for the support
of the lying-in woman and her infant; 
the former, however, did not long
enjoy the blessing of two such worthy
friends,—she died before the expiration
of her month, and the latter being wholly
destitute, was about to be thrown upon
the parish;—some well-disposed neighbour,
who knew how kind miss Mabel
and miss Betsy had been, came and acquainted
them with the melancholly story; 
—they consulted together, and each reflecting,
that she had undertaken the protection
of this infant at the font, thought
herself bound by duty to preserve it from
those hardships with which children thus
exposed, are sometimes treated:—they,
therefore, as they were equally engaged,
agreed to join equally in the maintenance
of this innocent forelorn. 
This was a rare charity indeed, and
few there are, especially at their years,
who so justly consider the obligations of a
baptismal covenant. —It was also the
more to be admired, as neither of them
had the incomes of their fortunes in their
own hands, the one being under guardianship,
and the other at the allowance of a
father, who, though rich, was extremely
avaritious. 
As they were therefore obliged to be
good œconomists in this point, and nurses
in the country are to be had at a much
cheaper rate than in town, they got a
person to seek out for one, who would
not be unreasonable in her demands, and
at the same time do justice to her charge. 
—Such a one, according to the character
given of her by neighbours, being found,
the child decently cloathed, was sent down
to her habitation, which was in a little
village about seventeen miles from London. 
—For the sake of concealing the
part miss Mabel had in this affair from
the knowledge of her father, it was judged
proper that miss Betsy should seem to
take the whole upon herself, which she
did, and the nurse's husband came up
every month, and received the money
from her hands, as also whatever other
necessaries the child wanted. 
Who would imagine, that such a glorious
act of benevolence should ever be
made a handle to traduce and villify the
author?—yet what cannot malice, accompanied
with cunning, do? —It can
give the fairest virtue the appearance of
the foulest vice, and pervert the just estimation
of the world into a mistaken scorn
and contempt. 
Miss Flora, after receiving the disappointment,
as related in the sixth chapter
in this volume, was far from desisting
from the wicked design she had conceived
of putting an end to the intercourse between
miss Betsy and mr. Trueworth:— 
her fertile brain presented her with a thousand
stratagems, which she rejected, either
as they were too weak to accomplish what
she wished, or too liable to discovery, till
at last she hit upon the most detestable
project of representing what proceeded
from the noblest propensity of miss Betsy's
nature, as the effect of a criminal compulsion; 
—in fine, to make it appear so
feasible, as to be believed, that the child
who owed half its maintainance to her
charity was entirely kept by herself, and
the offspring of her own body. 
Having well weighed and deliberated
on this matter, it seemed to her such as
mr. Trueworth, on the most strict examination,
could not discover the deception
of;—she therefore resolved to pursue
it, and accordingly wrote the following
letter: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
The friendship I had for some of
your family, now deceased, and
the respect due to your own character
in particular, obliges me to acquaint
you with truths more disagreeable than
perhaps you ever yet have heard;— 
but before I proceed to the shocking
narrative, let me conjure you to believe,
that in me your better angel
speaks, and warns you to avoid that
dreadful gulph of everlasting misery,
into which you are just ready to be
plunged. 
‘I am informed, by those who are
most versed in your affairs, and on whose
veracity I may depend, that a treaty of
marriage is on foot, and almost as good
as concluded, between you and miss
Betsy Thoughtless. —A young lady,
I must confess, well descended,—hand-some,
and endued with every accomplishment
to attract the admiration of
mankind, and if her soul had the least
conformity with her exterior charms,
you, doubtless, might have been one of
the most happy, and most envyed man
on earth;—but, sir, this seeming innocence 
is all a cheat,—another has
been before-hand with you, in the joys
you covet;—your intended bride has
been a mother without the pleasure of
owning herself as such. —The product
of a shameful passion is still living, and
though she uses the greatest caution in
this affair, I have by accident discovered,
is now nursed at Denham, a small village,
within too miles of Uxbridge,
by a gardener's wife, who is called by
the country people, goody Bushman. 
—I give you this particular account,
in order that you may make what enquiry
you shall think proper into a fact,
which I am sorry to say, you will find
but too real. —I pity from my soul the
unfortunate seduced young lady,— 
she must be doubly miserable, if by
having lost her virtue, she loses a husband
such as you;—but if after this
you should think fit to prosecute your
pretensions, I wish she may endeavour,
by her future conduct, to atone for
the errors of the past;—but alas! her
present manner of behaviour, affords no
such promising expectations; and if you
should set your honour and fortune, and
all that is dear to you, against so precarious
a stake, as the hope of reclaiming
a woman of her temper, it must
certainly fill all your friends with astonishment 
and grief;—but you are yourself
the best judge of what it will become
you to do,—I only beg, that
you will be assured this intelligence
comes from one, who is, 
‘With the utmost sincerity,
Sir,
Your well-wisher,
And most humble,
Though unknown, servant.’ 

She would not trust the success of the
mischief she intended by this letter, 'till
she had examined and re-examined every
sentence, and finding it altogether such
as she thought would work the desired
effect, got one, who was always her ready
agent, in matters of this kind, to copy
it over, in order to prevent any accident
from discovering the real author, and
then sent it as directed by the pennypost. 
How far the event answered her expectations
shall very shortly be related,
but incidents of another nature, requiring
to be first mentioned, the gratification of 
that curiosity, which this may have excited,
must for a while be deferred. 