

Concludes this history, and all the author thinks fit, at present, to intrude upon the public. 
After mrs. Welby had finish'd the account of her adventures, and receiv'd the praises due to her conduct thro' the whole of them, they all return'd into the dining-room; where, finding mr. Welby had entertain'd the gentlemen in much the same manner as his wife had done the ladies, the conversation on this subject became general; and when they discoursed more at large on the odd circumstances of what they had heard related, and consider'd the generosity of sir Thomas Welby,—the dissinterested passion of his son, and the extraordinary discretion of the young lady, they were at a loss to say which of the three characters had the greatest claim to admiration. 
These new comers now found themselves so happy in the society of those they were among, that, till the expiration of full three weeks, they seem'd not 
to remember they had any farther course to steer; nor did their friends think it too great an act of complaisance either to revisit with them all the places they had been at before, or to stay in Paris so much longer than they had intended, or would have done, but for so agreeable an addition to their company. 
At length, however, they were oblig'd to separate,—mr. Welby and his fair wife began their progress towards the Alps, in order to pass into Italy; and the other gentlemen and ladies, now equally impatient to be at home as they had been to go abroad, set out in a few days after on their return to England, where they happily arriv'd without meeting any accidents to retard their journey. 
This agreeable company now ceased to be of one family,—lord Huntly and mr. Lovegrove took their ladies home, and sir Robert Manley and our lovers returned to their respective habitations, to receive the visits of those friends and acquaintance from whom they had so long been absent;—Jemmy, however, was seldom from his dear Jenny, and had now a full opportunity to remind her of the promise she had made him; and that amiable lady, thinking they had sufficiently 
prov'd the love and sincerity of each other, no longer sought excuses to delay what he desir'd. 
But before we bring them to the altar, it may not be improper to acquaint the reader with something concerning Belpine, as he was the person who had taken so much pains to hinder their felicity from being ever compleated, and has, on that score, made too considerable a figure in this history to be wholly dropp'd. 
The expences of his way of living having by much exceeded the slender income of his patrimony, he found himself obliged to mortgage, for near half the value, in order to discharge several debts, which had began to be very troublesome to him, and had exposed him to repeated insults. 
But this was a trifling misfortune, when compared with that which soon ensued:—lady Hardy had declar'd herself pregnant, which so enrag'd him, that not remembring the advice given him by the old housekeeper, he plainly accused his aunt of incontinency, and for proofs of his allegation against her, related all the good woman had reveal'd to him; and 
also all he knew concerning the passion she pretended to have felt for Jemmy. 
But he was presently convinced of the error he had been guilty of in this rash behaviour;—sir Thomas, either not believing, or not seeming to do so, treated all he said as a base forgery, and flew into the extremest rage,—forbad him coming any more into his presence, or even to think of him as an uncle, and at the same time bound himself by the most solemn imprecation, that whether the child his lady went with should live or die, to take such measures as should infallibly prevent the villain, who had so infamously traduced her, from ever inheriting any part of his estate. 
Thus undone in all his future expectations, and reduced to an incapacity of living in a fashion equal to his birth, and much more to that of his ambition, it is not to be doubted but that he suffer'd all that despair and enervate rage could inflict upon him. 
In this condition, the only method his invention could supply him with to avoid poverty, and its sure attendant, the contempt of the world, was to sell an estate, which he found by much too inconsiderable 
for his support, and get into the army;—he accordingly did so, paid off the mortgage upon it, and with the remainder of the money he receiv'd for the purchase bought a captain of foot's commission in a marching regiment, which, to add to his mortification, was presently after order'd to one of the plantations in the West-Indies, and he was obliged to leave England, with all its dear delights, and embark for the Creolian coast some weeks before our lovers and their friends return'd from France,—a punishment which his own pride and luxury had brought upon him, and was justly due to the complicated vices of so bad a heart. 
Jemmy was little affected at this piece of intelligence; but Jenny, who thought him capable of every thing that was base and wicked, and had not been altogether free from apprehensions of some mischief which his revenge and malice might possibly be productive of, could not forbear rejoicing, in spite of all the good-nature she was endow'd with, that a man of such dangerous propensities was so far remov'd. 
Among other occurrences of less importance to her peace than this of Belpine, she was also inform'd that mrs. 
Marlove, whom if the reader has forgot, he may find mention'd the beginning of this work, was now separated from her husband, having first made him, by her over delicacy and capricious temper, heartily weary of a state he had enter'd into with transport and the prospect of a lasting happiness. —She heard also that the marriage of Rodophil's mistress with the captain having been discover'd, her father oblig'd them to live together; but that they agreed so ill that the contentions between them made much diversion for their neighbours;—and that miss Chit had quarrel'd with her great friend lady Fisk, on the score of a young nobleman who had made his addresses to both, and equally despised both, tho' neither could suffer herself to believe so; and that the animosity of these fair rivals was arriv'd to such a height, that they made no scruple of betraying to the world all the failings each had been guilty of, and of which they had been mutually the confidants. 
But our amiable Jenny had now done enquiring into the follies and mistakes of her sex, as she had seen enough of both to know how to avoid them; and all the preparations for giving herself to Jemmy being now ready, their marriage was solemnized, 
by her own desire, in the Abbey church of Westminster, in the presence of lord Huntly, mr. Lovegrove and their ladies, sir Robert Manley, and some other friends, among whom mr. Ellwood and mr. Morgan were not left out. 
It would be needless to repeat the satisfaction which this happy catastrophe gave to every one who took any interest in the welfare of our accomplish'd lovers, or the sincere congratulations the new united pair receiv'd upon it; —I shall therefore leave them, after the hurry of feasting and visiting was over, to enjoy, in calm retirement, the more pure and lasting sweets of a well govern'd and perfect tenderness. 
