


Contains such things as will be pleasing
to those, whose candid dispositions inte
est them in favour of the heroine
of this history. 

Nothing so much encourages an unwarrantable
passion for a married
woman, as to know she has a husband
regardless of her charms. —A young gay
gentleman, a companion of mr. Munden's,
privy to most of his secrets, and
partner with him in many a debauch,
had seen mrs. Munden at miss Airish's,
where she still continued to visit. He
had entertained a kind of roving flame
for her, which his friendship for her husband
could not prevent him from
wishing to gratify. But though they often
met, he never could get an opportunity
of declaring himself;—all he
could do was sometimes to whisper in her
ear, that she was divinely handsome;— 
that he adored her; and that he died for
her;—and such like stuff, which she was 

too often accustomed to hear, to take
much notice of. 
The indifferent opinion, which most
men of pleasure or in other words,
genteel rakes of the town, have of women
in general, joined to the too great gaiety
he had observed in mrs. Munden's behaviour,
made him imagine there required
little more for the gaining her than the
making his addresses to her:—the
means of speaking to her in private seemed
to him the sole difficulty he had to get
over, and in order to do so, he wrote to
her in the following terms. 

To Mrs. Munden.
“Madam,
A fine woman would reap little advantage
from the charms she is
mistress of, if confined to the languid
embraces of a single possessor:— 
marriage takes off all the poignancy of
desire;—a man has no relish for
beauties that are always the same and
always in his power; those endearments,
which would make his happiness, become
disgustful to him, by being his
duty, and he naturally flies to seek joys
yet untasted in the arms of others:— 
this, fair angel, is the case with us 

all;—you have too much good sense
not to know it, or to expect your husband
should vary from his sex in this
particular. 
“Let those unhappy women therefore
to whom nature has been niggard of
her bounties, pine in an abandoned
bed:—you are formed to give, and to
receive the most unbounded joys of
love;—to bless, and to be blest with
the utmost profusion of extacies unspeakable. 
“To tell you how infinitely I adore
you, and how much I have languished
for an opportunity of declaring my
passion, would require a volume, instead
of a letter;—besides, my pen
would but faintly express the sentiments
of my soul;—they will have more
energy when whispered in your ear: — 
I know such a thing is impossible at
your own house, or at any of those
where you visit. —Favour me then I
beseech you with taking a little walk
in the privy garden near the waterside
to-morrow about eleven, from which
place, if my person and passion be not
altogether disagreeable to you, we
may adjourn to some other, where I 

may give you more substantial demonstrations
how much I am, 
“With the utmost sincerity,
Dear Madam,
Your eternally devoted
And most faithful admirer.” 
P. S. “I do not sign my name for
fear of accidents, but flatter myself
my eyes have already said enough to
inform you who I am.” 

If this letter had come but a very small
time before it did, 'tis possible that tho'
mrs. Munden would even then have been
highly offended at the presumption, yet
her vanity and curiosity mght have excited
her to give the meeting required in
it by the author, though it had only been,
as she would then have imagined merely
to see who he was, and laugh at his stupidity
for addressing her in that manner. 
Not but she had some distant guess at
the person, but whether it was him, or
any other who had taken this liberty, she
now gave herself not the least concern;— 
she was only desirous to put an entire stop
to those audacious hopes she found he had 

entertained, and to keep herself from receiving
any future solicitations from the
same quarter at least. 
To send back his letter without any
other token of her resentment, and disdain
at the contents, she thought would
not be sufficient, and her ready wit after
a little pause, presented her with a method
more efficacious;—it was this: 
She folded up the epistle in the same
fashion it was when she received it, and
inclosed it in another peice of paper, in
which she wrote these lines. 

Sir.
As I cannot think any man would
be weak enough to dictate an
epistle of this nature to the wise of
mr. Munden, I must suppose you made
some mistake in the direction, and sent
that to me, which was intended for
some other woman, whose character it
might better agree with. 
“I must intreat you however to be
more careful for the future, for if any
such impertinence should a second time
arise, I shall think myself obliged to
make a confidante of my husband, 

whose good sense and penetration will
doubtless enable him to discover the
author, and his spirit and courage instruct
him in what manner to resent
the affront offered to 
“His ever faithful
And most affectionate wife,
B. Munden.” 

This had all the effect she wish'd it
should have:—the beau was ashamed of
the fruitless attack he had made;—wrote
to her no more,—avoided her sight as
much as possible, and whenever chance
brought him into her company, behaved
towards her with all the distance and respect
imaginable. 
This lady, now fully convinced how
dangerous it was to be too much admir'd
for her external charms, ceased even to
wish they should be taken notice of, and
set herself seriously about improving those
perfections of the mind, which she was
sensible could alone entitle her to the esteem
of the virtuous and the wise. 
Mr. Munden, who had never been disquieted
at the former part of his wife's
behaviour, was equally insensible of this 

alteration in her:—his cares, indeed,
were too much taken up for re-establishing
himself with his right hon. patron, to
give any attention to what pass'd at
home. 
After much debating within himself,
he thought it best to proceed, so as not to
let the noble lord imagine he was acquainted
with any part of the attempt
made upon his wife;—but though he
attended his levee as usual,—paid him
the same compliments, and seemed rather
more obsequious than ever, he had the
mortification to find himself very cooly
received. —He stood undistinguished in
the circle, which constantly waited the
motions of that great man,—was scarcely
spoke to by him, and then with a kind
of an indrawn reserve, which made him
justly enough apprehend, that he had little
now to hope for from him. 
The truth is, he saw through the policy
of this dependant;—he could not
doubt but mrs. Munden had told him
of the violence he had offered to her;— 
he was conscious of the baseness of it, but
he was not angry with himself for it, tho'
with the person he would have injured,
and could not forgive him for the knowledge 

of his crime, though the other was
willing to forgive the crime itself. 
The treatment he received at lord
**** made him extremely churlish to
his wife:—he looked upon her as the
primary cause of his misfortune, cursed
his marriage with her, and even hated her
for the beauties and good qualities, which
should have endeared her to him. —Nothing
she could say, or do, had the power
of pleasing him, so that she stood in need
of all her courage and fortitude to enable
her to support, with any tolerable degree
of patience, the usage she received. 
To heighten her misfortune, the late
levity of her temper had hindered her
from cultivating an acquaintance with
any one person, on whose secrecy, sincerity,
and sedateness she could enough depend,
for the disburthening her mind of
those vexations, with which it was sometimes
overwhelmed. 
But this was a matter of disquiet to
her, which she had not long to complain
of;—heaven sent her a consolation, of
which she had not the least distant expectation,
and restored her to a friend, by
whom she had thought herself utterly forsaken, 

and whom she had not herself scarce
thought of for a long time. 
Lady Loveit was now but just return'd
from the country, where she had continued
ever since her marriage with sir
Basil. —A famous French milliner being
lately arrived from Paris, with abundance
of curiosities, her ladyship went to see if
there was any thing she should think
worth the purchasing. —Mrs. Munden
was led by the same curiosity, and it was
at this woman's house, that these ladies
happened to meet after so long an absence
from each other. 
Mrs. Munden was a little confused at
first sight of her, as bringing to her mind
some passages, which it was never in her
power to think on with the indifference
she wished to do. —They embraced,
however, with a great deal of affection,— 
made each other the usual compliments
on the mutual change of their condition,
for lady Loveit, by some accident, had
heard of mrs. Munden's marriage. 
Though both these ladies were much
more taken up with each other than with
examining the trifles they came to see,
yet neither of them would quit the shop 

without becoming customers:—lady
Loveit perceiving that mrs. Munden had
neither coach, nor chair at the door, after
having asked what part of the town she
lived in, and finding it was not too much
out of her way, desired she would give
her leave to set her down in her chariot. 
Mrs. Munden readily accepted the offer,
and being come to the door of her
house, would have persuaded lady Loveit
to alight, and come in, but she excused
herself, and at the same time gave her
a pressing invitation to her house as soon
as opportunity permitted. —‘I know,
madam,’ said she smiling, ‘that it is my
duty to pay the first visit to your ladyship,
—yet as you are here,—I
should not stand on that punctilio with
you,’ interrupted lady Loveit, with the
same good humour, ‘but I expect company
at home, and know not but that
they already wait for me.’ The other
then told her, she would do herself the
favour to attend her ladyship in a day or
two: and this was all that passed at this
first interview. 
Mrs. Munden was extremely rejoiced at
the opportunity of renewing her acquaintance
with this lady, in whom she had
not the least room to doubt, but that she 

should find what she so much wanted, a
faithful adviser and an agreeable companion; 
—they had always loved each
another;—there was a great parity of
sentiment and principle between them,
and as nothing but their different ways of
thinking in point of conduct towards the
men, had hindered them from being inseparable
friends, that bar being remov'd
by mrs. Munden's change of temper, and
her being now, what lady Loveit always
was, no other remained to keep them from
communicating their thoughts with the
utmost freedom to each other. 
The visit promis'd by mrs. Munden,
was not delayed beyond the time she mentioned,
lady Loveit received her without
the least reserve, and they soon entered into
conversation with the same sprightliness,
as before the change of their conditions. 
Mrs. Munden had resolved within herself,
not to make the least mention of mr.
Trueworth's name, but feeling, notwithstanding,
a good deal of impatience to
hear something of him, artfully entered
into a discourse, which she knew must
draw the other in to say something
concerning him. 

‘I need not ask,’ said she, ‘how you
liked the country; it is pretty plain from
your continuing there such a length of
time, that you found more pleasures at
sir Bazil's seat, than any you had left behind.’ 
‘The house is well situated indeed’,
replied lady Loveit, ‘yet I have passed the
least part of my time there, since I left
London,—nor have we staid away so
long entirely through choice, but have
in a manner been detained by a succession
of accidents altogether unforeseen. 
‘It took up six weeks,’ continued she,
‘to receive the visits, which were every
day crouded upon us, from all parts of
the country:—this hurry being over,
we could do no less than accompany
mr. Wellair and his lady, who had been
with us all this while, to their house,
where we stayed about a fortnight;— 
after which, sir Bazil having promised
my brother and sister Trueworth, to
pass some time with them in Oxfordshire,
we crossed the country to that
gentleman's fine seat, where, as you may
suppose, his arrival was welcomed in
much the same manner sir Basil's had
been in Staffordshire:—besides all his
relations, intimate friends, tenants and
dependants, I believe there was scarce
a gentleman or lady, twenty miles round, 

who did not come to congratulate him
on his marriage and return. 
‘For the reception of those guests,’ 
went she still on, ‘the generous mr. Trueworth
omitted nothing that might testify
his joy on the occasion of their
coming;—feasting employed their
days, and balls their nights:—but
alas! in the midst of these variegated
scenes of pleasure, death—sudden death,
snatched away the source of all our joys,
and turned the face of gladness into the
most poignant grief. 
‘Death, did your ladyship say!’ cried
mrs. Munden, with an extraordinary emotion,
‘Is then mr. Trueworth dead?’ ‘No
madam’, replied the other, wiping away
some tears, which the memory of this
fatal accident drew from her eyes, ‘mr.
Trueworth lives, and I hope will long
do so, to be an honour to his country,
and a comfort to all, who are so happy
as to know him,—for certainly there
never was a man more endued with
qualities for universal good;—but it
was his wife,—his amiable wife, that
died.’ 
‘His wife!’ cried mrs. Munden, interrupting
her a second time, ‘Is he already 

a widower? Too soon, indeed, he
became so,’ answered lady Loveit;— 
‘scarce three months were elapsed from
the day which made her a bride, to
that which made her a lifeless corpse:— 
we were altogether with some other
company one evening in the turret,
which, by the help of some large
tellescopes mr. Trueworth had placed
there, commands the prospect of three
countries at once, when my poor sister
was seized suddenly ill;—as she was
supposed to be pregnant, her complaint
at first, was taken no other notice of,
than to occasion som pleasantries, which
new married women must expect to
bear;—but she soon grew visibly
worse,—was obliged to be carried
down stairs, and put directly into bed; 
the next morning she discovered some
symptoms of a fever, but it proved no
more than the forerunner of the smallpox,
of which distemper she died, before
her danger was apprehended, even
by the physician. 
‘How I pity both the living and the
dead,’ said mrs. Munden, ‘mr. Trueworth
certainly could not support so
great a loss, with any degree of moderation?’ 
—‘The shock at first’, replied
lady Loveit, ‘was as much as all his 

philosophy and strength of reason
could enable him to combat with:— 
sir Basil, though deeply affected for the
loss of so amiable a sister, was obliged
to conceal his own sorrows, the better
to alleviate those he saw him in, and
this kept us for two whole months at
his house after the ceremony of the
funeral was over. We had then prevailed
on him to return with us to London; 
every thing was prepared for our departure,
when an unlucky accident happened
to myself, which detained us for
yet a considerable time longer. 
‘We were diverting ourselves one day
with angling,’ continued she, ‘when in
endeavouring to cast my rod at too
great a distance, I stooped so far over
the bank, that I plunged all at once,
head foremost, into the water:—the
pond, it seems, was pretty deep, and I
was in some danger;—sir Basil and
mr. Trueworth seeing me fall, jumped
in at the same instant, and by their assistance,
I was brought safe to shore; I
was immediately carried into the house,
stript of my wet garments, and put into
a warm bed, but the fright had so
great an effect upon me, that it caused
an abortion, which as I was then in the
fifth month of my pregnancy, had like 

to have proved fatal to me:—I was
close prisoner to my chamber for several
weeks, and on my being just
able to leave it, was advised to have
recourse, first to the Bristol, and then
to the Bath waters, for the better establishment
of my health: accordingly
we went to both those places, stayed as
long at each as I found needful for the
purpose that brought me thither, and on
my perfect recovery, sir Basil having
some business at his estate, returned to
Staffordshire;—made a short excursion
to mrs. Wellair's, and then we bowled
up to London. 
‘This,’ added she, is the whole history
of my eleven months absence;—I
should only have told you, that we had
not mr. Trueworth's company in our
last ramble;—one of the members for
his county having vacated his seat by
accepting an employment, mr. Trueworth
was prevailed upon, by a great
number of gentlemen and freeholders, to
oppose his being rechosen, by setting up
for a candidate himself;—the election
was to come on in a few days after our
departure, and we have since heard that
he succeeded in his attempt.’ 
Lady Loveit having finished her long 

narrative, and received the compliments
of mrs. Munden for the trouble she had
given herself, was beginning to ask some
questions concerning her own affairs, but
some ladies coming in, broke off, for the
present, all conversation on this head, and
mrs. Munden soon after took leave, tho'
not without receiving an assurance from
the other, of having her visit returned in
a short time. 
