
Contains some occurrences deserving the attention of the reader. 
In a continual rack of thought, to which all the persuasions of her friends could not give the least intermission, did the fair heroine of this history pass her nights and days, till Jemmy, being safely arrived at Calais, sent her the following epistle: 


To miss Jessamy.
My for ever dear, dear Jenny.
“The concern I saw you under on my departure has hung more heavy on my spirits than even the occasion that inforced it; but I assure you that none of your commands have been lost upon me, I have taken all the precautions that human prudence could suggest not to render your kind wishes unavailing, and preserve a life which I am so happy as to know you set some value upon. 
“The date of this will inform you that I have now reach'd an asylum, from whence it is not in the power of my enemies to snatch me;—but perhaps, after all, I might have spared your tender heart the cruel alarm I have given it, and myself the trouble of coming hither:—since I left London I have sometimes been tempted to hope that Belpine is not dead, and that it was no more than a swoon in which I left him;—if so, with what transport shall I soon return to thank my dear Jenny for all her unequal goodness? 
“It is you,—and you alone,—my everlasting charmer,—that can make either my life or liberty a blessing; and when this cursed affair is once over, I shall then doubly taste the sweets of both;—for oh,—my soul,—I now feel that the apprehensions of being deprived of you, are infinitely more terrible to me than those of becoming an exile,—an outlaw,—a vagabond. 
“But I will not turn the eyes of my imagination that way;—my reason, my resolution faulter at it,—and as Otway says, 
Madness lies there, and Hell is in the thought.
“I will rather endeavour to believe the best, and that the first intelligence I receive from England will intirely banish these sad ideas from my mind;—but whatever I suffer, or shall hereafter suffer, I beg my dear Jenny will exert all her fortitude to repel the invasions of an over-much grief and pity;—let your answer to this assure me, that you bear with moderation this sudden turn in our late blest condition, 
which is the only consolation can at present be received by him who is, 
“With a love unutterable,
Soul of my soul,
Your most faithfully,
And most passionately
Devoted lover and servant,
J. Jessamy.” 
“P.S. In the distraction of my thoughts I had like to have sent this away without informing you where an answer might find me,—pardon therefore the wildness of my brain, and direct for me at monsieur Grandsine's, the Silver Lion in Calais.” 

The joy which filled the affectionate heart of Jenny, on finding her dear Jemmy had so happily avoided all the pursuit might be made after him, was so great, that for a time it intirely dissipated all her other anxiety. 
But the ease she enjoy'd was momentary,—all the information the enquiries that her friends could procure was, that 
tho' Belpine was not dead, he was far from being out of danger, and the consideration on what consequences his death must produce, in case his wound should prove mortal, rendered her incapable of enjoying any lasting or perfect satisfaction. 
It cannot be supposed that she contented herself with once perusing a letter she had so much languished for;—she read it over and over, and the oftener she did so, the more a flood of tenderness poured in upon her soul; but the reader will be better able to judge, by her own words, of the disposition she was in, than by any description I am able to give of it. 
After having well weighed what apprehensions they were which seem'd to give him the most pain, she thought herself obliged, both by love and gratitude, to make use of her utmost endeavours to remove them; as will be seen in the answer she gave to his letter, which was wrote in the following terms: 

To James Jessamy, Esq;
“My very dear Jemmy,
I congratulate you on your fortunate arrival at Calais;—you cannot more rejoice on finding yourself in a place 
of safety, than I have done in the knowledge that you are so;—I have also the pleasure to acquaint you, that Belpine still lives,—I wish I could lengthen the intelligence by adding, that there are hopes of his recovery, but that is a satisfaction as yet denied us. 
“But wherefore, my dear Jemmy, do you wound my heart with apprehensions for which you have not the least ground;—do you know so little of your Jenny as to believe that any change of circumstances can change her sentiments in regard to you? —No,—if the vain supposition of losing me disturbs your peace, henceforth be perfectly at rest; for be assured, that wherever you are I will be. 
“Take not this as a flight of sudden passion, which I may hereafter be tempted to repent of and retract, but as the firm and determinate resolution of my soul, founded on the principles of honour, of duty, and of justice, as well as inclination. 
“Love for each other, my dear Jemmy, was the first lesson taught us in our most early years, and I have too long been accustomed to the practice, to be 
capable of swerving from it;—should therefore the fate of Belpine, which Heaven forbid, be such as our worst fears suggest, you have no more to do, on the news of it, than to go directly into Paris, and provide a proper place for my reception;—and there, if you continue to desire it, the English Ambassador's Chaplain may fulfil the engagement made for us between our parents. 
“Farewell,—I flatter myself that you will find some satisfaction in the assurance I now give you of being, 
“With all the tenderness,
You can wish or expect,
My dear Jemmy,
Sincerely faithfully,
And ever yours,
J. Jessamy. 
“P.S. I must do our common friends the justice to let you know they are greatly affected at your misfortune, all of them, at least that I see;—indeed if they were not, they would find little 

welcome from me. —Once more adieu,—I expect to hear from you again by the first post.” 

Jenny, not doubting but what she had wrote would afford great relief to the anxieties of her lover, found in that thought sufficient to calm those she had felt within herself;—such is the effect of a real tenderness, as to make us take pleasure in every thing that we imagine will give pleasure to the person beloved. 
And now let those readers, who in the beginning of this history were apt to look on Jemmy and Jenny as two insensibles, acknowledge their mistake; and be convinced that flames which burn with rapidity at first are soonest wasted, and that a gentle, and almost imperceptible glow of a pure affection, when once raised up by any extraordinary incident, sends forth a stronger and more lasting heat. 
I remember to have formerly read a little pamphlet, entitled, ‘Reflections on the different effects of love,’ which contains many pretty observations on the subject I am speaking of; but I know of none more just than this of mr. Dryden: 

Love various minds does variously inspire,
He stirs in gentle nature's gentle fire,
Like that of incense on the altars laid;
But raging flames tempestuous souls invade;
A fire which every wind of passion blows,
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.
It may easily be perceived, by those who consider the motives on which the events of this history depend, that our lovers were not thus stirred up by accidents relating merely to themselves, but by such as concerned each other;—Jemmy had not fought with Belpine but for the discontent and affronts which he thought his dear Jenny had suffer'd thro' his base artifices;—nor would Jenny have discovered any part of the warmth she now did, had she not been invigorated by the perplexity and danger of her Jemmy. 
Nothing certainly can be more truly worthy of admiration than the love,—the constancy,—the generosity, of this amiable lady, who at her years could so readily renounce her native country,—kindred, and all the amusements to which 
her youth had been accustomed, and resolve to live in a perpetual banishment, if by the death of Belpine, the man ordain'd to be her husband in his more prosperous circumstances, should now be reduced to the condition of an exile. 
Nor was Jemmy, gay and unthinking as he has sometimes appeared, at all inferior to his charming mistress, in giving her the most unquestionable and exalted proofs of the sincerity and disinterestedness of his passion, as the next chapter will declare. 
