

Contains an example that for a woman to be too good is not one of those things which are impossible to be found in human life. 
Though the foregoing report, began and industriously propagated by Bellpine, had spread itself through all the acquaintance both of Jemmy and Jenny, yet did it not presently reach the ears of either of them; and they went on, as they had been accustom'd to do, communicating to each other every little adventure which fell into the way of each, provided they were such as might be, in any measure, conducive to the important end proposed, that of rectifying or improving their minds. 
Among the many they recited to each other, some of which were too trifling to be inserted here, Jemmy happen'd upon one of a most extraordinary nature, and therefore must not be omitted; it was this: 
He had been for some time pretty conversant with a gentleman named Kelsey; he was a man of family, fortune, good sense, and a very agreeable companion; but one thing was said of him, that, in the opinion of all the discreet part of his acquaintance, tarnish'd the lustre of all his other qualities,—that of his being a very bad husband to a most deserving wife. 
This lady, to whom he had been married scarce a year, was very young, beautiful, and had every thing in her person requisite to make her beloved; and was in high estimation for the strictness of her virtue, her piety, and the affability of her behaviour; how could it then but seem strange to Jemmy, that two persons of the characters these bore in the world should not live happily together? he never heard any mention of the disagreement between them, without feeling a kind of painful curiosity for the cause, but he could find none who were able to give him any information in that point, tho' every one spoke loudly of the effects. 
Chance at last presented him with the wish'd for discovery: a gentleman of distinction, a distant relation of Jemmy's, was to have a private concert at his own house; Jemmy was one of the invited persons, with leave to bring any friend with him whom he should think proper; on which he made choice of Kelsey, and accordingly made him a visit on the morning of the day appointed, to desire he would accompany him to this entertainment, if not previously engaged to any other place. 
Mr. Kelsey thank'd him for the obliging offer he had made him, reply'd, that he had no engagement at all upon his hands; ‘but if I had, said he, I should be tempted to break through it, since I am certain none could afford me so much real pleasure as that of waiting on mr. Jessamy any where; but more especially, continued he, on an occasion so perfectly agreeable to my taste.’ 
Jemmy, after having made a suitable return to this compliment, was preparing to take leave, and desir'd that they might meet at White's chocolate-house about six; but the other would not suffer him to depart in this manner, he insisted on his staying to dine with him, and pass the time where he was till the hour arrived in which they should adjourn to a place more agreeable. 
Jemmy would have excused himself from dining, as he had not the honour, he said, to be known to his lady:—to which mr. Kelsey answer'd, that his wife was not ignorant of the respect due from her to any of her husband's friends. 
The curiosity that Jemmy had for being an eye-witness of a lady's deportment whom he had heard so much of, and as yet had never seen, she seldom appearing in any public place, prevail'd with him at length to comply with her husband's request; they amused themselves with looking over some fine pieces of music, which mr. Kelsey had that morning brought home in score, till three o'clock, at which hour he had order'd dinner to be ready. 
The clock having struck, that gentleman conducted his guest into the next room, where they found the sideboard set out, the cloth laid, the corks of the bottles drawn, and every thing prepared for dinner being served up; but no servant was in waiting all was hush'd and silent as tho' they had just rose from table, instead of not being as yet set down. 
Mr. Kelsey waited some minutes, but at last rung the bell, on which the butler came up; on being ask'd if dinner was not ready, he reply'd, with some hesitation, that he would enquire of the cook, and then went hastily away; soon after mr. Kelsey rung again, and another servant appear'd, to whom his master making the same demand as to the former, answer'd bluntly, that his lady was not yet come out of her closet: ‘Go then and call her, said mr. Kelsey:’—the fellow went, but returned immediately, and said the door was lock'd, and tho' he had both knock'd and call'd could get no answer; on which mr. Kelsey grew extremely red, and begging pardon of Jemmy for leaving him alone a moment flew up stairs himself. 
Jemmy was very much surpris'd at all this, but had not time to make any reflections on it; mr. Kelsey came presently down follow'd by his lady, a very lovely woman, indeed; but seem'd greatly disconcerted: Jemmy advanced to pay her the civilities of a stranger, which, in spite of the confusion she was in, she receiv'd with the utmost sweetness and good breeding, and they all sat down to table. 
The first course was served up in an instant; the garnishing of the dishes was elegant enough and inviting to the appetite, as doubtless what they contain'd would also have been, if not so much prolong'd beyond the necessary time: mr. Kelsey stuck his fork first into one thing and then into another, then threw it down, bit his lips, and seem'd in very great emotions. 
Jemmy could be at no loss to guess the occasion; and, to palliate the discontent he saw him in, help'd himself pretty plentifully out of that dish which was nearest to him; but never was any thing so spoil'd, the truffles, morelles, artichokes, and other such things as should embellish the sauce were in a manner dissolv'd in it, and the meat itself wanted little of being so too, so that nothing but the bones discovered what it was. 
Yet Jemmy fell to eating heartily, crying it was very fine, that it was dress'd exactly to his taste; but this politeness in him did not restore the good humour of his friend; the lady too was in some pain on seeing the ill effects which her staying too long in the closet had produced; and, addressing herself to Jemmy, ‘I am afraid, sir, said she, that your complaisance at this time gets the better of your sincerity; what is here is very much over done; but I hope we shall not find every thing so.’ 
As she ended these words a servant set a fine hare upon the table, and mr. Kelsey perhaps flattering himself that his wife might be a true prophetess on this occasion, took up his knife and fork once more, in order to carve; but the skin was so dried by being kept at a distance from the fire, that he found some difficulty to penetrate it, and when with much labour he had done so, the flesh beneath fell spontaneously from the bones, and indeed was almost fit for pulverizing. 
Mr. Kelsey, who was naturally fiery, and apt to kindle on every little provocation, now lost all patience; he flung the dish from him with such a vehemence, that but for the footman's agility in catching it between his hands it must have fallen on the floor. 
The lady, who was all confusion, said she was sorry and ashamed that it had happened so: ‘S'death, madam, cry'd he, starting from the table, does it ever happen otherwise? if you had even common decency, you would not treat me in this manner: can you find no time to pray but just when dinner is coming upon table? must my appetite continually be starved, my peace destroy'd, my reputation scandalized, my friends affronted, and all through your unseasonable devotion?’ 
It is mighty well, my dear, reply'd she rising, it is mighty well; but I shall say no more; it is from heaven alone that I must seek support, under the ill humour and intemperance of a husband:’ then turning to Jemmy, ask'd his pardon for what had past, and went hastily out of the room with eyes all bathed in tears. 
‘Would to heaven I had never seen your face,’ cry'd mr. Kelsey furiously, and stamping with his foot as she was going out; but she took no notice either of his words or actions, and pass'd on as fast as she could: he continued walking about the room with gestures which evidently denoted the inward rage he was possess'd of, while Jemmy labour'd, tho' for some time in vain, to convince him that he was in the wrong to put himself into such agitations on account of an accident. 
‘Call it not accident, mr. Jessamy, reply'd he, what you have now been witness of has been almost every day repeated ever since our marriage. Oh, continued he, almost raving,—how I could curse the hour,—the day,—the institution,—sacred as it is call'd, that join'd together two such opposites?’ 
At last, however, the consideration he had for his friend got the better of the resentment he had against his wife, and setting down again and making Jemmy do so also: ‘I know not, said he, whether I shall ever be forgiven for the rudeness I have been guilty of; you have, indeed, suffer'd too much through the folly of my wife, and I ought not to have prolong'd your pennance by my ill humour, notwithstanding the justifiableness of it had, I been alone.’ 
He then, without waiting for Jemmy's reply, call'd to the butler and ask'd him if there were any cold meats in the house that might supply the difficiency they had sustain'd: the man on this ran down stairs, and presently return'd follow'd by another servant with a large ham, of which a very little had been cut. ‘Come my dear friend, said mr. Kelsey, a cold repast is better than none at all; this we had yesterday and could not be spoil'd, tho' the chickens about it fell to pieces of themselves, like the hare you just now saw,’ 
He said no more, but fell heartily on the ham before them; Jemmy, who for all his complaisance had made but a half dinner, follow'd his example; and a desert, consisting of tarts, pitty-patties, Jellies, fruits, and such like things, being afterwards placed upon the table, neither of these gentlemen had any reason to complain of their bad living that day. 
When the cloth and servants were withdrawn, and the bottle and the glasses were the sole witnesses of their conversation, Jemmy finding the other was now in a disposition to bear it, began to rally him a little on the subject of his late disquiets: ‘Faith, reply'd mr. Kelsey, I have a true English stomach of my own, and cannot bear the least disappointment in victuals; and this fervour of devotion takes my wife at such odd periods, that whether I have company, or am oblig'd to go out on business at an appointed hour, never can be certain that dinner will be served according to the time. 
‘This unhappy humour in her, continued he, it is that drives me so much abroad, I am compell'd by it to entertain my friends at a tavern, to transact all my affairs there; and sometimes indeed, to refresh my own senses with peace, and a bit of meat dress'd as it ought to be. How is it possible I should love home, when the very person in whose power it chiefly is to render it agreeable, exercises that power rather to create disgust than liking? I once loved her, and none but she herself could have wean'd my heart from the tender passion I had for her; but besides, whenever I complain of what you have seen, and some other irregularities in domestic life, she bursts into tears and reproaches; accuses me of unkindness, of intemperance, of prophaness to heaven, of regarding too much the things of this world, and such like stuff, which if I fly to avoid, I am at least justified in the poet's words. 
Clamours our privacies uneasy make,
Birds leave their nests disturb'd, and beasts their haunts forsake.
Jemmy, who could find little to say in the defence of mrs. Kelsey, and had too much complaisance and good nature to say any thing against her, artfully waved the conversation and started more agreeable subjects, between which and the bottle they pass'd the time till the hour arrived which call'd them to the concert. 
This being an entertainment adapted to the taste of both these gentlemen, 'tis not to be doubted but the pleasure they received in it attoned for all the mortifications of the preceding day; but, as it presented nothing material enough to acquaint the reader with, we shall make no further mention of it. 
