

Will satisfy the reader's curiosity in
some points, and increase it in others.
Though mr. Goodman,
under whose care, and in
whose house, miss Betsy
had been for upwards of
a year, knew much more
of that young lady's humour
and disposition, than mr. Chatfree,
who saw her but seldom, could possibly
do, and could not be brought to think as
he did, that the merits of mr. Trueworth 
had made any effectual impression on her
heart; yet he imagined, that to propagate
such an opinion in mr. Staple would conduce
very much to perswade him to break
off his courtship, which was a thing very
much desired by mr. Goodman, as he was
certain the continuance of it would be attended
with almost insurmountable difficulties,
and create many vexations and
disputes, when mr. Francis Thoughtless
came to town. 
The two old gentlemen went on together,
discoursing on this affair, 'till they
came to the lodgings of mr. Staple, where
they found him sitting in an easy chair,
leaning on a table, with papers and a
standish before him;—they perceived he
had been writing, for the pen was not
out of his hand when they entered the
room:—he threw it down, however, as
soon as he saw them, and rose to receive
them with a great deal of politeness,
though accompanied with an air, which,
in spite of his endeavours to conceal it,
discovered he laboured under an extraordinary
dejection of spirits. 
“I am glad,” said mr. Chatfree, pointing
to the pen, “to see you are able to
make use of that weapon, as I feared
your arm had been too much prejudiced 
by another.” —“I have found some
difficulty, indeed, in doing it,” replied
the wounded gentleman; “but something,
which seemed to me a case of
necessity, obliged me to exert my utmost
efforts for that purpose.” 
After the first civilities were over, and
they were all seated, mr. Goodman and
mr. Chatfree began to open the business
upon which they came;—mr. Goodman
represented to him, in the most pathetic
terms, the deep concern he had been in,
for having ever encouraged his addresses
to miss Betsy, and excused himself for
having done so, by his ignorance, at that
time, that mr. Trueworth had been previously
recommended by her brother;— 
he then gave him some hints, that the
civilities miss Betsy had treated him with,
he feared, were rather owing to that little
vanity, which is generally the companion
of youth and beauty, than to that real
regard, which his passion and person merited
from her, and said, he heartily wished
to see him withdraw his affections
from an object, where he could not now
flatter him with the least hope of a suitable
return. 
“No, no,” cried mr. Chatfree, interrupting
him hastily, “you may take my 
word, she is as much in love, as a girl
of her temper can be, with mr. Trueworth,
and I do not doubt but you
will all see the effects of it, as soon as
her brother comes to town.” —Mr.
Goodman, on this, took an opportunity
of telling mr. Staple, that the ascendant
that young gentleman had over his sister,
and the zeal he expressed for the interest
of his friend, would certainly go a great
way in determining the point; and added,
that if it were true, as his friend suggested,
that she had really an inclination for
mr. Trueworth, she would then avow it,
and make a merit of it to her brother,
as if done merely in regard to him. 
Many other arguments were urged by
these two gentlemen, in order to convince
mr. Staple of the little probability there
was of succeeding with miss Betsy, all
which he listened to attentively, never
interrupting what either of them said,
'till perceiving they had ended all they
had to offer on the subject, he made them
this reply. 
“Gentlemen,” said he, “I am infinitely
obliged to you both for this visit,
and the friendly purpose of it,
which, I perceive, was to give me that 
advice, which you might reasonably
think I wanted. —I have heard, and
I believe have not lost one word, at
least, I am sure no part of the meaning
of what you have delivered:—I
own there is great justice in every thing
you have all edged, and am pleased to
think the arguments you bring are
such, as, before your coming here, I
had myself brought against the folly of
my own unhappy passion for miss Betsy; 
but, gentlemen, it is not that I am
capable of being deterred from prosecuting
it, by any thing I might have
to apprehend, either to her own inclinations,
or her brother's persuasions,
but for other reasons, which, at present,
perhaps, you may be ignorant of, yet
are such, as to conceal I should but half
be just. —Be pleased, sir,” continued
he, addressing himself to mr. Goodman,
and giving him a paper, “to read that
letter, and see what my resolutions
are, and the motives I have for them.” 
Mr. Goodman was beginning to look
over the paper, but mr. Staple requested he
would read it aloud, as he desired that
mr. Chatfree should be partaker of the
contents; on which he read, with an
audible voice, these lines: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
“Sir,
When I proposed the decision of
our fate by force of arms, I offered,
at the same time, that the glory
of serving miss Betsy should be the
victor's triumph. —This your too great
modesty declined;—but, sir, though
you scorned to accept the advantage
your superior skill acquired, your generosity,
in spite of you, has gained. 
—I loved miss Betsy, and would have
maintained my claim against all who
should have dared to dispute her with
me, while justice, and while honour
permitted me to do so; but though I
am unfortunate, I never can be base. — 
My life, worthless as it is, has twice
been in your power, and I should be
no less hateful to myself, than contemptible
to the world, should I offer
to interrupt the peace of him that gave
it. —May you be as successful in love
as you have been in fight, and the
amiable object be convinced of her own
happiness in making yours. —I desist
forever from the vain hopes I once
was flattered with, and the first Wish
my soul now harbours, is to be worthy 
the title of your friend, as I am bound
to avow myself, 
“With the greatest sincerity,
Sir,
Your most obliged,
And most humble servant,
T. Staple.” 

“Nothing,” said mr. Goodman, as
soon as he had done reading, “can equal
your generosity, in forming this resolution,
but the wisdom in persisting in
it; and if I find you do so, shall have
more reason to congratulate you upon
it, than I should think I had on the
success of your wishes in marrying miss
Betsy.” 
“I should laugh now,” cried mr. Chatfree,
“if mr. Trueworth, in a fit of generosity
too, should also take it into
his head to resign his pretensions, and
choose to wear the willow, instead of
the myrtle garland, because you do
so.” —“He has already proved his
generosity,” replied mr. Staple with a
sigh, which he was unable to restrain,
“and has no need to give the severe 
testimony you mention, if he is so
happy as you seem to think he is;— 
but,” continued he, “it is not my
business to examine who yields, or who
pursues miss Betsy,—I am fixed in
my determination of seeing her no more,
and as soon as I am recovered from the
hurts I have received on her account,
will go into the country, and seek a cure
in absence for my unavailing passion.” 
Neither mr. Goodman, nor mr. Chatfree,
were so old as to have forgot how
hard it is for a youthful heart to give up
its darling wishes, and sacrifice desire to
discretion. —They said abundance of
handsome things, omitted nothing which
they imagined might add to the fortitude
of his present way of thinking. He, on
the other hand, to take from them all
remains of doubt, concerning the sincerity
of his intentions, sealed the letter he had
wrote to mr. Trueworth, and sent it to
that gentleman, while they were in the
room. 
Mr. Goodman was extremely pleased
in his mind, that an affair, which, for
some time past, had given him a good
deal of anxiety, was in so fair a way of
being ended, without further mischief:— 
he took no notice, however, on his return 
home, at least not before miss Betsy,
of the visit he had been making, or that
he knew any thing more of mr. Staple,
than what she had been told herself by
mr. Chatfree. 
In the mean time, this young lady affected
to appear more grave than ordinary: —I say, affected to be so; for as
she had been at first shocked by mr. Chatfree's
report, and afterwards teized by his
raillery, and then reprimanded, on the
score of her conduct, by mr. Goodman,
she was not displeased in her heart at the
dangerous proof, which the two lovers
had given of their passion. 
She lost, however, great part of the satisfaction
this adventure might have afforded
her, for want of a proper person
to whom she might have talked freely on
it. —She had, indeed, many acquaintance,
in some of whom she, doubtless,
might have confided; but she did not
choose to be herself the reporter of this
story to any one, who had not heard of
it from other hands; and miss Flora, who
knew the whole, and was her companion
and bedfellow, was grown of late so sullen
and peevish, as not to be capable of
either giving or receiving any diversion
in discourses of that nature. 
It is certain, that there never was a
more astonishing alteration in the temper
of any one person in so short a time,
than in that of miss Flora:—her once
gay and spirituous behaviour, which,
without being a beauty, rendered her extremely
agreeable, was now become all
dull and gloomy. —Instead of being fond
of a great deal of company, she now rather
chose to avoid than covet the society
of any one;—she said but little, and
when she spoke, it was only to contradict
whatever she heard alledged by others;— 
a heavy melancholly, mixed with an illnatured
frown, perpetually lowered upon
her brow:—in fine, if she had been a
little older, she might have sat for the
picture of Envy. —Miss Betsy, by being
most with her, felt most the effects of her
bad humour; but as she thought she could
easily account for it, the sweetness of her
disposition made her rather pity than resent
the change. 
A young linnen-draper, of whom lady
Mellasin some times bought things, had
taken a great fancy to miss Flora, and
not doubting but she had a fortune in
some measure answerable to the appearance
she made, got a friend to intercede with
lady Mellasin, for leave to pay his respects 
to her daughter:—this being granted,
he made several visits at the house, and
was very well received by miss Flora herself,
as well as by those who had the disposal
of her, 'till coming on the topic of
fortune, mr. Goodman plainly told him,
that having many relations of his own to
provide for, the most he could spare to
miss Flora was five hundred pounds. — 
The draper's passion was very much
damped, on hearing his mistress's portion
was like to be so small;—he told
mr. Goodman, that though he was very
much charmed with the person and behaviour
of the young lady, and should be
proud of the honour of an alliance with
such a family, yet as he was a young
man, and but lately set up for himself,
he wanted money to throw into trade,
and could not think of marrying without
more than three times the sum offered; 
—he added, that a young lady of her
birth, and bringing-up, would expect to
live as she had been accustomed, which
he could no way promise she should do,
without a fortune sufficient to defray the
expence. 
Mr. Goodman thought the reasons he
gave were very just, and as he was unwilling
to stretch his hand any farther
than he had said, and was too honest to 
promise more than he intended to perform,
replied with the same freedom that
the other had spoke, that in truth he did
not think Flora would make a fit wife for
a tradesman;—that the girl was young
enough, not ugly, and it was his opinion
that she should wait till a more suitable
match should offer. In a word, mr.
Goodman's answer put a final end to the
courtship, and though miss Flora affected
to disdain the mercenary views, as she
termed them, of the draper, and never
spoke of him but with the utmost contempt,
yet her melancholly coming on
soon after he had desisted his addresses,
made miss Betsy think she had reason to
impute it to no other cause; and therefore,
in mere compassion to this imaginary
mortification, was so far from retorting
any of those little taunts, and malicious
inuendo's, with which she was continually
treated by the other, that she took
all the pains she could to alleviate the
vexation she saw her in, and sooth her
into a better humour. 
The reader will probably think as miss
Betsy did, but the falsity of this conjecture,
and the cruel return the good-nature
of that young lady met with, will in due
time and place appear. 