
Treats of such things as the author is pretty well convinced, from a long series of observations on the human mind, will afford more pleasure than offence, even among some of those who most affect a contrary sensation. 
How strangely ignorant are we of our own hearts?—How weak a dependance is there to be placed upon our best resolves?—So true is this maxin of mr. Dryden's: 

Men are but children of a larger growth,
Our appetites as apt to change as theirs,
And full as craving too, and full as vain:
Who that has heard with what reluctance Jemmy went down to Bedfordshire,—the insensibility he express'd for all the gaieties and pleasures of the nuptial feast, and the impatience he had to take his leave of friends who so much desired and valued his company;—who, I say, that has been informed of all this but would 
have thought that, according to the promise he had made to Jenny in his letter to her from Ham-Hall, he would have done little more in London than just pass through it in his way to Bath? 
Yet see the swift vicisitude, and how suddenly the rolling tide of inclination is capable of overturning those designs which even we ourselves have believed were sounded on the most solid basis, and impossible to be shaken. 
But I will not detain the attention of my reader with any superfluous remarks of my own, the fact I am going to relate will be sufficient of itself to prove the uncertain state of human resolution, and may serve to abate the pride of those who depend too much on their own strength of mind. 
Jemmy, who during his stay in the country had his whole soul absorb'd, as it were, in the thoughts of his dear and deserving Jenny, had no sooner reach'd London than his stability began to slacken; and though he did not cease to love her with the same tenderness as ever, yet that burning impatience he had so lately felt to be with her became less fierce on something coming in his way which till he saw had almost slipt his memory. 
He came to town in a post-chaise; but how his inclinations stood in regard to lady Hardy, or whether he would have endeavoured to see her before he went to Bath, is altogether uncertain; something however happen'd which turn'd the balance on her side, and reminded him both of her and the promise he had made in that letter, which he doubted not but she had received. 
He alighted at a coffee-house which he was accustom'd to frequent very much; a stop of coaches happening to be in the street, he saw sir Thomas and lady Hardy in one of them, just opposite to the door he was going to enter;—she saw him too, and gave him a very significant look, which was all the salutation the place and company she was in would allow of. 
A young amorous heart, I think, may with some analogy be compared to tinder, as it is ready to take fire from every spark that falls;—how cool soever Jemmy might have been some moments before, this sight sufficed to revive the glowing embers of desire, and made him think it would not become him to neglect totally so kind and fair a creature. 
He supp'd that night with some company he met at the coffee-house; but resolved to send to her by the way of mrs. Comode the next morning;—the impatience of the lady, nevertheless, prevented his intentions, and on his coming home he was presented with a letter which his people said had been left for him by a porter above an hour before. 
He opened it with some eagerness, not doubting from what hand it came, and found as he had imagined, the cover from mrs. Comode, with these lines: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Honour'd sir,
“I send you what I dare say will be a welcome present,—your answer to it with the utmost expedition is requested, to be left at my house as usual;—I beg you, sir, to believe that I shall always be ready to oblige you and the beautiful party to the utmost of my poor power, being 
“With the greatest respect,
Sir,
Your most obedient,
And most humble servant
To command,
B. Comode.” 

The contents of the inclosed were as follow: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Sir,
“I see you are in town, but am far from assuring myself you have any thoughts of me;—the violence of your passion for your charming Jenny, and the hurry you are in to follow her to Bath, may probably have made you forget that there is such a person in the world as myself;—I send this therefore to desire one more interview, even though it should be to take an everlasting leave;—my happy rival would not certainly regret your giving that satisfaction to a woman who loves you more than perhaps she is capable of doing:—honour and gratitude demand this from you,—to them I appeal, and shall commit my cause. 
“Since you went out of town, I have another misfortune added to that of having discovered your engagement with Jenny;—mrs. Comode has lett her lodgings to to a person intimately acquainted with my husband, so it is utterly impracticable for me to see you 
there; and I am reduced, by this piece of ill luck, to desire you will find out some more proper place for our meeting;—whether it be at your own house, or at that of any friend in whom you can confide, is a matter of indifference to me,—only remember that I will not venture to a tavern, bagnio, or any such public place. 
“As I am convinced your heart, if not wholly lost, is at least divided, I should have little joy in the continuance of an intercourse so dangerous to myself, and so negligently pursued by you;—you need not, therefore, be under any apprehensions of my persecuting you with a passion you seem'd to have ceased desiring any farther proofs of;—happy should I be, indeed, to find myself mistaken in what I have so much cause to fear:—see me once more, however, and fix the yet uncertain fate of her who is, 
“With too much sincerity,
The unkind Jessamy's
Still affectionate
And devoted,
Celia.” 
“P. S. If you no longer have any love for me, let pity and good nature for that you have inspired me with prevail on you not to keep me in suspence;—I languish, I am distracted, till I receive your answer with an appointment where and when I shall have the opportunity of telling you all my soul is full of.” 

This passionate epistle gave Jemmy much more pain than pleasure,—not that he was either surprised or troubled at the knowledge he found she had of his engagement with Jenny;—he was sensible a thousand accidents might reveal it to her, nor did he think she had any business to interfere with the honourable addresses he made elsewhere; and, had she ever question'd him upon that subject, would not have evaded or deny'd the truth. 
But it vex'd him a good deal, to find that the providing a place for their meeting was required of him;—whatever amorous intrigues he had hitherto been engaged in had been accompany'd with no difficulties,—they had fallen in his way without any pains of his own,—he had never been put to the trouble of forming any contrivances for the carrying them on; 
and the injunction now laid upon him was a thing no less new than disagreeable to him. 
Never had he been so much puzzled in his whole life;—he judged it highly inconvenient, for many reasons, to make an appointment with her at his own house; and as she had excepted against all those he should readily have proposed, he might well be at a very great loss to whom he should apply on such an occasion. 
What course he took in this perplexing dilemma and what consequences attended this adventure, as well as the catastrophe of many others mentioned in this work, the reader, if he has patience to wait, will find fully set forth and explained in the succeeding volume. 
