

Discovers to miss Betsy a piece of
treachery she little expected to hear
of. 
Miss Flora, who had been deterred
from saying all she had a mind to do,
on the affair between miss Betsy's two
lovers, now took this opportunity of giving
her tongue all the latitude it wanted. 
They were no sooner come into the chamber,
than, “Lord, my dear,” cried she,
with a tone vastly different from that, in
which she had spoke to her of late, “how
vexed am I for you! —It will certainly
go all about the town, that you are in
love with Trueworth, and there will
be such cabals, and such whispering
about it, that you will be plagued to
death:—I could tear him to pieces,
methinks; for I am sure he is a vain
fellow, and the hint must first come
from himself.” 
“I never saw any think like vanity in
him,” replied miss Betsy, “and I am
rather inclined to believe mr. Staple
got the notion from the idle rattle of 
mr. Chatfree.” —“Mr. Chatfree,” said
miss Flora, “thought of no such thing
himself, 'till he had been at the tavern
with mr. Trueworth; but if I was in
your place, I would convince mr. Staple
and the world, that I was not capable
of the weakness imputed to me.” 
“Why, what would you have me do?” 
cried miss Betsy. —“I would have you
write to mr. Staple,” answered the
other, “and let him know the deception
his rival has put upon him.” —Miss
Betsy, who had always an aversion to any
thing of this kind, and thought it too
great a condescension to write on any
score to a man, who had pretended love
to her, shook her head at this proposal,
and exclaimed against it with the utmost
vehemence. 
Miss Flora made use of all the arguments
she could think on, to bring her
off, from what she called so ill-judged a
pride;—among other things, she told
her, that in compassion to the despair that
gentleman had so feelingly expressed in
his letter, she ought to give him the consolation
of knowing, that if he had not
gained so far on her affections as he wished,
it was not because his rival had gained
more; and added, that the step she perswaded 
her to take, was such, as common
justice to her own character had a right
to exact from her. 
Miss Betsy heard, but was not to be
prevailed upon by all she could say on
this subject; but the other, who had a
greater share of artifice, than, perhaps,
was ever known in one of her years,
would not give over the design she had
formed in her head, and perceiving that
the writing to a man was the greatest objection
miss Betsy had to letting mr. Staple
know she was not so much attached to
his rival, as he imagined, took another
way of working her to her purpose, which
she thought would be less irksome. 
“Well then, my dear miss Betsy,” 
said she, in the most flattering accent, “I
will tell you the only method you can
take, and I am glad I have been so
lucky to hit upon it:—you shall
let me go, and make mr. Staple a visit
as of my own accord 
—I shall take care
not to drop a syllable that may give
him room to think you know of my
coming; but yet as he may suppose I
am enough in your secrets to be
mistress of this, or, at least, not altogether
a stranger to it, he will, doubtless,
say something to me concerning 
the matter; but if he should not, it
will be easy for me, in the way of discourse,
and as it were by chance, to
express myself in such terms as will
entirely clear you, and rid him of all
the apprehensions he is under, of your
being in love with mr. Trueworth.” 
Miss Betsy was not in her heart at all
averse to mr. Staple's having that eclaircisement
miss Flora had mentioned, and
was much less shocked at this proposal,
than she had been at the former, offered
to her consideration for that purpose; yet
did not seem to come into it, till the other
had lavished all the arguments that woman,
witty and willful to obtain her ends,
could urge to prevail on her to do so; 
and at last consented not to the execution,
without exacting from miss Flora the
most solemn vow of an inviolable secrecy. 
This project being concluded on, and
every thing relating to it settled while
they were dressing, they went together according
to their promise to the ladies
who expected them, and then accompanied
them into the park;—but as if this
was to be a day of surprises to miss Betsy,
she here met with something which gave
her, at least, an equal share with that 
she had received from the letter of mr.
Staple. 
They had not gone many yards in the
Mall, before they saw three gentlemen
coming towards them; one of whom, as
they drew nearer to each other, miss Betsy
and miss Flora presently knew to be the
son of alderman Saving, though he was
grown fatter, more ruddy, and in many
respects much altered from what he was
when he visited at mr. Goodman's. 
As our young ladies had not heard of
this gentleman's return to England, it was
natural for them, especially miss Betsy,
after what had passed between them, to
be in some little surprise at the sudden
sight of him;—he was in some confusion
too; but both parties had presence enough
of mind to recover themselves, so as to
salute as persons would do, who never
had any thing more than an ordinary acquaintance
with each other. 
After the civilities common to people,
who thus meet by accident, mr. Saving
asked the ladies leave for himself and
friends to join company; which being
readily granted, they all walked up the
Mall together;—but the place being
pretty full, were obliged to divide themselves, 
and walk in couples, or as it
happened. During this promenade, mr.
Saving found an opportunity of saying to
miss Betsy, unheard by any of the others,
“Madam, I have something to acquaint
you with, of great consequence to yourself:
—it is improper for me either to
come or write to you at mr. Goodman's,
therefore wish you would appoint
some place where I might speak
to you.” 
Miss Betsy was very much startled at
his mentioning such a thing, and replied,
—“No, mr. Saving, I do not make
a practice of consenting to assignations
with men, nor have yet forgot that
which I consented to with you.” —“I
am very well able to clear myself of
any fault on that score,” said he, “but,
madam, to ease you of those apprehensions,
which might, perhaps, make
you think yourself obliged to keep me
at a distance, it is proper to acquaint
you, that I am married, and that it is
only through a friendly regard for your
honour and peace, that I would warn
you against the perfidy of a pretended
friend.” —Perceiving she started at these
words, and repeated them two or three
times over, “Yes, madam,” resumed he,
“and if you will permit me to speak to 
you in a proper place, will bring with
me an unquestionable proof of the truth
of what I say.” 
One of the ladies happening to turn
back to say something to miss Betsy, prevented
him from adding further; but
what he had already spoke, made a very
deep impression on her mind;—she could
not conceive, who the false friend should
be, that he had mentioned, unless it were
miss Flora; but though she had seen
many instances of her insincerity, was
not able to form any conjecture what she
could have been guilty of to her, that
mr. Saving, who had been so long absent,
could possibly be made acquainted
with. 
Thinking, however, that she ought not
to deny herself the satisfaction of the
eclaircisement he offered, especially as it
was now to be given, not by a lover, but
a friend, she sought and found a moment
before they left the Mall, of saying to
him without the notice of the company,
“Sir, I have considered on the hint you
gave me;—whatever concerns my
honour, or my peace, must certainly
merit my attention:—I have an acquaintance
in St. James's palace, whom
I will visit as soon as dinner is over 
if you walk a turn or two in the gallery
leading to the chapel-royal, you
will see me pass that way between four
and five o'clock.” —To this mr. Saving
replied, that he would not fail to
attend her there. 
Miss Flora, who had been informed by
miss Betsy, after they had parted from
mr. Saving, that he was married, was
very full of the news when she came home,
but mr. Goodman, to whom the whole
story of that affair had been related by
the alderman, said, that the young gentleman
had done very wisely, in complying
with the commands of his father; and
added, that the lady had a very agreeable
person, a large fortune, and, above all,
was extremely modest and discreet; so
that there was no room to doubt his happiness. 
—There was some further discourse
at table, concerning this new-wedded
pair; but miss Betsy took little share in
it, as giving herself no pain for the interests
of a person for whom she never
had any thing but the most perfect indifference. 
She was, notwithstanding, impatient
enough for the account she expected to
receive from him, and without saying one
word, either to miss Flora, or any of the 
family, where she was going, went at the
time prefixed to the place she had appointed
to meet him. 
Mr. Saving, to avoid being accused of
want of punctuality in the affairs of friendship,
as he had been in those of love,
came somewhat before his time into the
palace. —As she ascended the great stairs
she saw him looking through one of the
windows, waiting her approach, which
greatly pleased her, as she would not have
thought it proper to have walked there
alone, nor would have been willing to
have departed without the gratification of
that curiosity his words had excited in
her. 
Excepting the time of divine service,
and when the king, or any of the royal
family go to chapel, few places are more
retired than this gallery, none, besides
the officers of the houshold passing on business
into some of the apartments, scarce
ever going into it, so that the choice miss
Betsy made, in her appointment with mr.
Saving, was extremely judicious. 
As the business on which they met,
was of a nature very different from love
and gallantry, and time was precious to
them both, they needed not many compliments 
to usher in what mr. Saving had
to say:—he only, to excuse his behaviour
to her, while he had professed himself her
lover, was beginning to relate the sudden
manner in which he had been forced
abroad; but she stopped him from going
on, by telling him, she had heard the
whole story of that affair from mr. Goodman,
to whom the alderman had made no
secret of it. 
“I have only then,” said he, “to
acquaint you, madam, that soon after
my arrival in Holland, looking over
some papers, that my father had put
into my portmanteau for my instruction
in the business I was sent to negociate,
I found among them a letter,
which, doubtless, in the hurry he was
in, he had shuffled with the others
through mistake;—which, pray madam,” 
continued he, giving her a paper,
“be pleased to peruse, and tell me
whether honour and justice did not oblige
me to take the first opportunity
of cautioning you against the baseness
and malice of a person, you might
otherwise, perhaps, confide in, on matters
of more consequence to your peace,
than any thing on my account could
be.” 
Miss Betsy had no sooner taken the
paper, and looked on the superscription,
which was to alderman Saving, than she
cried out, with great amazement, “Bless
me!—this is miss Flora's hand.” — 
“I think,” said mr. Saving, “that I might
safely venture to affirm it upon oath,
having often seen her writing, and
have even some of it at this instant by
me, in a song she copied for me, on
my first acquaintance with her;—but
read, madam,” pursued he, “read the
wicked scroll, and see the methods she
took to prevail on a father to banish
from his presence, and the kingdom,
an only son, and to traduce that innocence
and virtue which she hated, because
incapable of imitating.” 
On this, miss Betsy trembling, between
a mixture of surprize and anger, hastily
unfolded the letter, and found in it these
lines, wrote in the same hand with the
superscription. 

“Sir,
The real esteem I have for all persons
of honesty and probity, obliges
me to give you this seasonable
warning of the greatest misfortune that
can possibly befall a careful and a tender 
parent, as I know you are;—but
not to keep you in suspence,—your
son, sir,—your only,—your darling
son!—that son, whom you have educated
with so much tenderness, and
who is so deservedly dear to you, is on
the verge of ruin:—his unhappy acquaintance
with mr. Goodman's family
has subjected him to the artifices of a
young girl, whose little affairs are in
the hands of that gentleman. —She is
a great coquette,—if I had said, jilt
too, I believe the injustice I should
have done her character would not
have been much; but as her share,
either of fortune or reputation, is very
small, I cannot condemn her for putting
in practice all the stratagems in
her power of securing to herself a future
settlement by marriage,—I should,
sir, only be sorry that the lot should
fall upon your son, as I know, and the
world acknowledges him to be a gentleman
of much more promising expectations. 
—It is, however, a thing I fear
too near concluded;—he loves her to
distraction,—will venture every thing
for the gratification of his passion:— 
She has a great deal of cunning, though
little understanding in things more becoming
of her sex;—she is gay, vain,
and passionately fond of gaming, and 
all the expensive diversions of the town. 
—A shocking, and most terrible composition
for a wife! yet such will she
very speedily be made by the poor infatuated
mr. Saving, if you, sir, in
your paternal wisdom do not find some
way to put a stop to his intentions. 
—The original of the picture I have
been representing is called miss Betsy
Thoughtless, a name well known among
the gallant part of the town. I hope
you will take the above intelligence in
good part, as it is meant, 
“With the greatest sincerity, and
Attachment to your interests,
By, sir,
Your most humble,
But unknown servant,
A. Z.” 
“P. S. Sir, your son is every day at mr.
Goodman's, and if you will take the
trouble to set a watch over him, or
send any person to enquire in the
neighbourhood, it will be easy for
you to satisfy yourself in the truth
of what I have related.” 

The consternation miss Betsy was in, on
reading this cruel invective, was such, as
for some moments deprived her from the
power of speaking. —Mr. Saving could
neither wonder at, nor blame so just a resentment,
yet to mitigate it in part, he
confessed to her a secret, which, till then,
she had been wholly ignorant of. 
“Though nothing, madam,” said he,
“can excuse the crime she has been guilty
of towards you, yet permit me to acquaint
you, that the malice is chiefly
levelled against me, and you are only
wounded through my sides” 
“How can that be?” cried she, “she
does justice to your character, while
she defames mine in the most barbarous
manner.” —“Meer artifice, madam,” 
answered he, “to work my father to her
purpose, as I will presently convince
you.” 
He then told her, that before he ever
had the honour of seeing her, he had
treated miss Flora with some gallantries; 
“which,” said he, “her vanity made
her take as the addresses of a serious
passion, 'till those she found I afterwards 
made to you, convinced her to the contrary. 
—This, madam,” continued he,
“I am well assured of by her laying hold
of every opportunity to reproach my
inconstancy, as she termed it:—finding
how little I regarded all she said to
me on that score, and still persisted in
my devoirs to you, she doubtless had
recourse to this most wicked stratagem
to cut me from all hope, even though
it had been in my power to have inclined
you to favour my suit.” 
Miss Betsy found this supposition so
reasonable, and so conformable to the
temper of miss Flora, that she agreed
with mr. Saving in it. —She did not
now wonder at her wishing to be revenged
on him, but could not brook with patience
the method she took for being so,
and said, that if mr. Goodman did not
do her justice on the author of so infamous
a libel, she would immediately quit
his house, and chuse another guardian. 
“Hold, madam,” said he, “I must
intreat you will give me leave to remind
you of the consequences that may
possibly attend your taking such a step: 
—I own with you, that treachery and
calumny, such as her's, cannot be too
severely exposed and punished; but, 
madam, consider, that in order to do
this, the accident which brought the
letter into my possession, and the opportunity
you have allowed me of presenting
it to you, must be made known,
the latter of which you may be confident
she would not fail to make such
representations of, as would not only
hurt me, both with my father and my
wife, but also furnish the malicious
world, too apt to judge by appearances,
with some pretence for casting a blemish
on your own reputation.” 
These remonstrances had some part of
the effect they were intended for on the
mind of miss Betsy, yet having an aversion
to dissimulation, and not knowing
whether she could be able to conceal
either her resentment or the cause of it,
she cried out hastily, without considering
what she said, “Why then did you let
me know the injury done me, since it
it is improper for me to do any thing,
that might extort a reparation?” 
“I could not, madam,” replied he,
“behold you harbouring a snake in your
bosom without warning you of the
sting. —I am certain the easing you
of my troublesome addresses has been 
no cause of mortification; and it was
not that you should revenge what she
has already done, but to put you upon
your guard against any thing she may
hereafter attempt to do, that I resolved
to take the first opportunity of letting
you see what she was capable of.” 
Miss Betsy was by this time fully persuaded
by his arguments, but could not
forbear complaining of the difficulty it
would be to her to look, or speak civilly,
to sleep in the same bed, or behave in any
respect as she had been accustomed, towards
so unworthy a creature:—she
thanked him, however, for his good intentions
to her, and before they parted,
promised to follow his advice, if it were
only, as she said, in consideration, that
to act in a different manner might be a
prejudice to his domestic peace. 