

Shews miss Betsy in a new scene of life,
and the frequent opportunities she had
of patting in practice those lessons she
was beginning to receive from her young
instructress at the boarding-school. 
Tho' it is certainly necessary to inculcate
into young girls all imaginable
precaution, in regard to their behaviour
towards those of another sex, yet I know
not if it is not an error to dwell too much
upon that topic. Miss Betsy might, possibly,
have sooner forgot the little artifices
she had seen practised by miss Forward,
if her governess, by too strenuously
endeavouring to convince her how unbecoming
they were, had not reminded her
of them. Besides, the good old gentlewoman
was far stricken in years;—time
had set his iron fingers on her cheeks,— 
had left his cruel marks on every feature
of the face, and she had little remains of
having ever been capable of exciting those
inclinations she so much condemned;— 
so that what she said seemed to miss Betsy
as spoke out of envy, or to shew her authority, 
rather than the real dictates of
truth. 
I have often remarked, that reproofs
from the old and ugly have much less efficacy
than when given by persons less advanced
in years, and who may be supposed
not altogether past sensibility themselves
of the gaieties they advise others to
avoid. 
Tho' all the old gentlewoman said could
not perswade miss Betsy there was any
harm in miss Forward's behaviour towards
young Sparkish, yet she had the complaisance
to listen to her with all the attention
the other could expect, or desire from
her. 
She was, indeed, as yet too young to
consider of the justice of the other's reasoning,
and her future conduct shewed,
also, she was not of a humour to give her
self much pains in examining, or weighing
in the balance of judgment, the merit
of the arguments she heard urged, whether
for or against any point whatsoever. She
had a great deal of wit, but was too volatile
for reflection, and as a ship, without
sufficient ballast, is tost about at the pleasure
of every wind that blows, so was she 
hurried thro' the ocean of life, just as each
predominant passion directed. 
But I will not anticipate that gratification,
which ought to be the reward of a
long curiosity. The reader, if he has patience
to go thro' the following pages,
will see into the secret springs which set
this fair machine in motion, and produced
many actions, which were ascribed, by the
ill-judging and malicious world, to causes
very different from the real ones. 
All this, I say, will be revealed in time; 
but it would be as absurd in a writer to
rush all at once into the catastrophe of the
adventures he would relate, as it would
be impracticable in a traveller to reach
the end of a long journey, without sometimes
stopping at the inns in his way to
it. —To proceed therefore gradually with
my history. 
The father of miss Betsy was a very
worthy, honest, and good-natured man,
but somewhat too indolent; and, by depending
too much on the fidelity of those
he entrusted with the management of his
affairs, had been for several years involved
in a law suit, and, to his misfortune, the
aversion he had to business rendered him
also incapable of extricating himself from 
it, and the decision was spun out to a
much greater length than it need to have
been, could he have been prevailed upon
to have attended in person the several
courts of justice the cause had been carried
thro', by his more industrious adversary. 
The exorbitant bills, however, which his
lawyers were continually drawing upon
him, joined with the pressing remonstrances
of his friends, at last roused him from
that inactivity of mind, which had already
cost him so dear, and determined him not
only to take a journey to London, but
likewise not to return home, 'till he had
seen a final end put to this perplexing affair. 
Before his departure he went to the
boarding-school, to take his leave of his
beloved Betsy, and renew the charge he
had frequently given the governess concerning
her education; adding, in a mournful
accent, that it would be a long time
before he saw her again. 
These words, as it proved, had somewhat
of prophetic in them. On his arrival
in London, he found his cause in so
perplexed and entangled a situation, as gave
him little hopes of ever bringing it to a
favourable issue. The vexation and fatigue
he underwent on this account, joined 
with the closeness of the town air,
which had never agreed with his constitution,
even in his younger years, soon
threw him into that sort of consumption,
which goes by the name of a galloping
one, and they say, is the most difficult of
any to be removed. He died in about
three months, without being able to do
any great matters concerning the affair,
which had drawn him from his peaceful
home, and according to all probability
hastened his fate. Being perfectly sensible,
and convinced of his approaching dissolution,
he made his will, bequeathing the
bulk of his estate to him whose right it
was, his eldest son, then upon his travels
thro' the greatest part of Europe; all his
personals, which were very considerable in
the bank, and other public funds, he ordered
should be equally divided between
Francis his second son, at that time a student
at Oxford, and miss Betsy; constituting,
at the same time, as trustees to the
said testament, sir Ralph Trusty, his near
neighbour in the country, and mr. Goodman,
a wealthy merchant in the city of
London; both of them gentlemen of unquestionable
integrity, and with whom he
had preserved a long and uninterrupted
friendship. 
On the arrival of this melancholly news,
miss Betsy felt as much grief as it was
possible for a heart so young and gay as
hers to be capable of; but a little time,
for the most part, serves to obliterate the
memory of misfortunes of this nature, even
in persons of a riper age; and had miss
Betsy been more afflicted than she was,
something happened soon after, which
would have very much contributed to her
consolation. 
Mr. Goodman having lived without
marrying till he had reached an age, which
one should have imagined would have
prevented him from thinking of it at all,
at last took it into his head to become a
husband. The person he made choice
of was called lady Mellasin, relict of a
baronet, who having little or no estate,
had accepted of a small employment about
the court, in which post he died, leaving
her ladyship one daughter, named Flora,
in a very destitute condition. Goodman,
however, had wealth enough for both,
and consulted no other interest than that
of his heart. 
As for the lady, the motive on which
she had consented to be his wife may
easily be guessed; and when once made 
so, gained such an absolute ascendancy
over him, that whatever she declared
as her will, with him had the force
of a law. She had an aversion to the city,
—he immediately took a house of her
choosing at St. James's, inconvenient as it
was for his business. Whatever servants
she disapproved, tho' of never so long
standing, and of the most approved sidelity,
were discharged, and others, more
agreeable to her, put in their places. In
fine, nothing she desired was denied,— 
he considered her as an oracle of wit and
wisdom, and thought it would be an unpardonable
arrogance to attempt to set his
reason against hers. 
This lady was no sooner informed of the
trust reposed in him, than she told him,
she thought it would be highly proper for
miss Betsy to be sent for from the school,
and boarded with them, not only as her
daughter would be a fine companion for
that young orphan, they being much of
the same age, and she herself was more
capable of improving her mind, than any
governess of a school could be supposed
to be; but that also having her under his
own eye, he would be more able to discharge
his daty towards her as a guardian,
than if she were at the distance of near an
hundred miles. 
There was something in this proposal
which had indeed the face of a great deal
of good-nature and consideration for miss
Betsy, at least, it seemed highly so to mr.
Goodman; but as sir Ralph Trusty was
joined with him in the guardianship of
that young beauty, and was at that time
in London, he thought it proper to consult
him on the occasion; which having
done, and finding no objection on the part
of the other, lady Mellasin, to shew her
great complaisance to the daughter of her
husband's deceased friend, sent her own
woman to bring her from the boarding-school,
and attend her up to London. 
Miss Betsy had never seen this great
metropolis; but had heard so much of the
gay manner in which the genteel part of
the world passed their time in it, that she
was quite transported at being told she
was to be removed thither. Mrs. Prinks
(for so lady Mellasin's woman was called)
did not fail to heighten her ideas of the
pleasures of the place to which she was
going, nor to magnify the goodness of
her lady, in taking her under her care,
with the most extravagant encomiums: it
is not, therefore, to be wondered at, that
neither the tears of the good governess,
who truly loved her, nor those of her dear 
miss Forward, nor of any of those she left
behind, could give any more than a momentary
regret to a heart so possest with
the expectations of going to receive every
thing with which youth is liable to be enchanted. 
She promised, however, to keep
up a correspondence by letters, which she
did, 'till things, that seemed to her of
much more importance, put her L&wblank;e
acquaintance entirely out of her head. 
She was met at the inn, where the stage
put up, by mr. Goodman in his own
coach, accompanied by miss Flora: The
good old gentleman embraced her with
the utmost tenderness, and assured her that
nothing in his power, or in that of his
family, would be wanting to compensate
as much as possible the loss she had sustained
by the death of her parents. The
young lady also said many obliging things
to her, and they seemed highly taken with
each other at this first interview, which
gave the honest heart of Goodman an infinite
satisfaction. 
The reception given her by lady Mellasin
when brought home, and presented
to her by her husband, was conformable
to what mrs. Prinks had made her expect,
—that lady omitting nothing to 
make her certain of being always treated
by her with the same affection as her own
daughter. 
Sir Ralph Trusty, on being informed
his young charge was come to town, came
the next day to Mr. Goodman's to visit
her. —His lady accompanied him. There
had been a great intimary and friendship
between her, and the mother of miss Betsy,
and she could not hold in her arms the
child of a person so dear to her, without
letting fall some tears, which were looked
upon, by the company, as the tribute due
to the memory of the dead. The conjecture,
in part, might be true, but the
flow proceeded from the mixture of another
motive, not suspected:—that of
compassion for the living. This lady was
a woman of great prudence, piety, and
virtue;—she had heard many things relating
to the conduct of lady Mellasin,
which made her think her a very unfit
person to have the care of youth, especially
those of her own sex. She had been
extremely troubled when Sir Ralph told
her, that miss Betsy was sent for from the
country, to live under such tuition, and
would fain have opposed it, could she have
done so without danger of creating a
misunderstanding between him and Mr.
Goodman, well knowing the bigotted respect 
the latter had for his wife, and how
unwilling he would be to do any thing,
that had the least tendency to thwart her
inclinations. She communicated her sentiments,
however, on this occasion, to no
person in the world, not even to her own
husband; but resolved, within herself, to
take all the opportunities that fell in her
way, of giving miss Betsy such instructions
as she thought necessary for her behaviour
in general, and especially towards the family
in which it was her lot to be placed. 
Miss Betsy was now just entering into
her fourteenth year,—a nice and delicate
time, in persons of her sex; since it is then
they are most apt to take the bent of impression,
which, according as it is well or
ill directed, makes, or marrs, the future
prospect of their lives. She was tall, well
shaped, and perfectly amiable, without being
what is called a compleat beauty, and
as she wanted nothing to render her liable
to the greatest temptations, so she stood
in need of the surest arms for her defence
against them. 
But while this worthy lady was full of
cares, for the well doing of a young creature,
who appeared so deserving of regard,
miss Betsy thought she had the highest
reason to be satisfied with her situation, and 
how, indeed, could it be otherwise?— 
lady Mellasin kept a great deal of company; 
—she received visits every morning
from ten to one o'clock, from the most
gay and polite of both sexes;—all the
news of the town was talked on at her
levee, and it seldom happened that some
party of pleasure was not formed for the
ensuing evening, in all which miss Betsy
and miss Flora had their share. 
Never did the mistress of a private family
indulge herself, and those about her,
with such a continual round of publick
diversions. The court, the play, the ball,
and opera, with giving and receiving visits,
engrossed all the time could be spared
from the toilet. It cannot, therefore,
seem strange, that miss Betsy, to whom
all these things were entirely new, should
have her head turned with the promiscuous
enjoyment, and the very power of reflection
lost amidst the giddy whirl, nor that
it should be so long before she could recover
it enough, to see the little true felicity
of such a course of life. 
Among the many topics, with which
this brilliant society entertained each other,
it may be easily supposed, that love and
gallantry were not excluded. Lady Mellasin,
tho' turned of forty, had her fine 
things said to her; but both heaven and
earth were ransack'd for comparisons in
favour of the beauty of miss Flora and
miss Betsy; but as there was nothing particular
in these kind of addresses, and intended
only to shew the wit of those that
made them, these young ladies answered
them only with raillery, in which art miss
Betsy soon learned to excel. —She had
the glory, however, of being the first who
excited a real passion in the heart of any
of those who visited lady Mellasin; tho'
being accustomed to hear declarations,
which had the appearance of love, yet
were really no more than words of course,
and made indiscriminately to every fine
woman, she would not presently perswade
herself, that this was more serious. 
This first victim of her charms, was
the only son of a very rich alderman, and
having a fortune left him by a relation,
independant of his father, who was the
greatest miser in the world, was furnish'd
with the means of mingling with the beau
monde, and of making one at every diversion
that was proposed. 
He had fancied miss Flora a mighty
fine creature, before he saw miss Betsy; 
but the imaginary flame he had for her
was soon converted into a sincere one 
for the other. He truly loved her, and
was almost distracted at the little credit
she gave to his professions. His perseverance,
—his tremblings, whenever he
approached her,—his transports on seeing
her,—his anxieties at taking leave,
so different from what she had observed in
any other of those who had pretended to
list themselves under the banner of her
charms, at length convincing her of the
conquest she had made, awakened in her
breast that vanity so natural to a youthful
mind. She exulted,—she plumed
herself,—she used him ill and well by
turns, taking an equal pleasure in raising,
or depressing, his hopes, and, in spite of
her good nature, felt no satisfaction superior
to that of the consciousness of a
power of giving pain to the man who
loved her;—but with how great a mortification
this short-liv'd triumph was succeeded,
the reader shall presently be made
sensible. 