


Is the last, and if the author's word may be taken for it, the best. 

Innocent and pure as the inclinations
of mrs. Munden were, it is highly
probable, however, that she was not
sorry to see the time arrive, which was
to put an end to that cruel constraint her 

charming lover had been so long under,
and while it gave him leave to declare the
whole fervency of the passion he was possest
of, allowed her also to confess her
own without a blush. 
Mr. Trueworth, who had kept an exact
account of the time, contrived it so,
that a letter from him should reach her
hands the very next day after that, in
which she was to throw off her mourning
weeds:—it was in these terms he now
wrote. 

To Mrs. Munden.
‘Madam,
The year of my probation is expired; 
—I have now fully performed
the painful penance you enjoined,
and you must expect me shortly
at your feet, to claim that recompence
which my submission has in some measure
merited:—you cannot now without
an injustice contrary to your nature,
forbid me to approach you with my
vows of everlasting love, nor any
longer restrain my impatient lips from
uttering the languishments of my
adoring heart, nor can I now content
myself with telling you at the distance
of so many miles, how very dear you
are to me:—no, you must also read
the tender declaration in my eyes, and
hear it in my sighs;—the laws of 

tyrant custom have been fulfilled in
their most rigorous forms, and those of
gentler love may sure demand an equal
share in our obedience:—fain would
my flattering hopes persuade me, that
I shall not find you a too stubborn
rebel to that power, to whose authority
all nature yields a willing homage,
and that my happiness is a thing of
some consequence to you:—if I am
too presuming, at least forgive me, but
let your pen assure me you do so
by the return of the post, till when I
am, with a mixture of transport and
anxiety, 
‘Madam,
Your passionately devoted,
And most faithful adorer,
C. Trueworth.’ 

Though this was no more than mrs.
Munden had expected, it diffused thro'
her whole frame a glow of satisfaction,
unknown to those who do not love as
she did;—she thought indeed, as well
as he, that there was now no need of continuing
that cruel constraint, she so long
had imposed upon herself, and hesitated
not if she should acknowledge what he
before had not the least cause to doubt; 
—the terms which she expressed herself
in, were these. 


To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
I Know there is a great share of impatience
in the composition of your
sex, and wonder not at yours:— 
much less have I any pretence to accuse
you of presumption, as you are
too well acquainted with the just sensibility
I have of your merits not to expect
all the marks of it that an honourable
passion can require:—an attempt
to conceal my heart from you
will be in vain;—you saw the inmost
recesses of it at a time when you should
most have been a stranger there;— 
but what was then my shame to have
discovered, is now my glory to avow; 
and I scruple not to confess that whatever
makes your happiness will confirm
mine:—but I must stop here, or
when I see you I shall have nothing
left to add, in return for the pains so
so long a journey will cost you;—let
no anxieties however render the way
more tedious, but reflect, that every
step will bring you still nearer to a
place where you may be certain of a
reception equal to your wishes, from
her, who is with an unfeigned sincerity, 
‘Yours, &c.
B. Munden’ 


This was the first love-letter she had
ever wrote, and it must be owned that
the passion she was inspired with, had already
made her a pretty good proficient
that way;—but though the prudish part
of the sex may perhaps accuse her of
having confessed too much, yet those of a
more reasonable way of thinking, will
be far from pronouncing sentence against
her;—the person of mr. Trueworth,
his admirable endowments,—the services
he had done her, might well warrant
the tenderness she had for him;— 
his birth, his estate, his good character,
and her own experience of his many virtues,
sufficiently authorized her acceptance
of his offers; and it would have
been only a piece of idle affectation in
her, to have gone about to have concealed
her regard for a person whom so many
reasons induced her to marry,—especially
as chance had so long before betrayed
to him her inclinations in his
favour. 
Thus fully justified within herself, and
assured of being so hereafter to all her
friends, and to the world in general, she
indulged the most pleasing ideas of her
approaching happiness, without the least
mixture of any of those inquietudes
which pride, folly, ill-fortune, or ill-humour
too frequently excite, to poison 

all the sweets of love, and imbitter the
most tender passion. 
As she had not made lady Trusty the
confidante of any part of what had passed
between her and mr. Trueworth, deterred
at first through shame, and
afterwards by the uncertainty of his persisting
in his addresses, that lady would
have been greatly surprized at the extraordinary
vivacity, which now on a
sudden sparkled in her eyes, if there had
not been other motives besides the real
one, by which she might account for it. 
Mrs. Munden had received intelligence,
that lady Loveit was safely delivered
of a son and heir, and what was
yet more interesting to her, that mr.
Thoughtless was married to a young
lady of a large fortune, and honourable
family;—letters also came from mr.
Francis Thoughtless, acquainting them
that he had obtained leave from his
colonel to leave the regiment for two
whole mouths, and that after the celebration
of his brother's nuptials, he
would pass the remainder of his furlow
with them in L&wblank;e. 
These indeed were things which at
another time would have highly delighted
the mind of mrs. Munden, but at this, her 

thoughts were so absorb'd in mr. Trueworth,
whom she now every hour expected,
that friendship, and even that natural affection
which had hitherto been so distinguishable
a part of her character, could
now boast of but a second place. 
Lady Trusty observing her one day in
a more than ordinary chearful humour,
took that opportunity of discoursing her
on a matter, which had been in her head
for some time. —‘Mr. Munden has
been dead a year,’ said she; ‘you have
paid all that regard to his memory,
which could have been expected from
you, even for a better husband, and
cannot now be blamed for listening to
any offers that may be made to your
advantage.’ —‘Offers, madam!’ cried
mrs. Munden,—‘on what score does
your ladyship mean?’—what others
can you suppose,’ replied she gravely,
‘than those of marriage;—there are
two gentlemen who have solicited both
sir Ralph and myself, to use our interest
with you in their behalf,—neither
of them are unworthy your consideration; 
—the one is mr. Woodland,
whom you have frequently seen here,
his estate at present, indeed, is no more
than eight hundred pound a year, but
he has great expectations from a rich
uncle:—the other is our vicar, who 

besides two large benefices, has lately
had a windfall of near a thousand
pounds a year, by the death of
his elder brother, and it is the opinion
of most people, that he will be made a
bishop on the first vacancy.’ 
‘So much the worse, madam,’ said the
spirituous mrs. Munden; ‘for if he takes
the due care he ought to do of his diocess,
he will have little time to think
of his wife:—as to mr. Woodland,
indeed, I have but one objection to
make, but that is a main one;—I do
not like him, and am well assured I
never can:—I therefore beg your ladyship,’ 
continued she with an air both
serious and disdainful, ‘to advise them
to desist all thoughts of me, on the account
you mention, and to let them
know I did not come to L&wblank;e
to get a husband, but to avoid all impertinent
proposals of that kind.’ 
‘It is not in L&wblank;e,’ replied
lady Trusty, a little piqued at these last
words, ‘but in London you are to expect
proposals, deserving this contempt;— 
here are no false glosses to deceive
or impose on the understanding;— 
here are no pretenders to birth, or to
estate, every one is known for what he
he really is, and none will presume to 

make his addresses to a woman without
a consciousness of being qualified to
receive the approbation of her friends. 
‘I will not dispute with your ladyship
in this point, replied mrs. Munden,— 
I grant there is less artifice in the
country than the town, and should
scarce make choice of a man that has
been bred, and chuses to reside always
in the latter;—but, madam, it is not
the place of nativity, nor the birth, nor
the estate,—but the person, and the
temper of the man can make me truly
happy;—I shall always pay a just regard
to the advice of my friends, and
particularly to your ladyship; but as I
have been once a sacrifice to their persuasions,
I hope you will have the
goodness to forgive me, when I say,
that if ever I become a wife again, love,
an infinity of love, shall be the chief
inducement.’ 
‘On whose side? cried lady Trusty
hastily; ‘On both, I hope, madam,’ replied
mrs, Munden with a smile: ‘Take
care, my dear,’—rejoined the other,
‘for if you should find yourself deceived
in that of the man, your own
would only serve to render you the
more unhappy.’ 

The fair widow was about to make
some answer, which perhaps would have
let lady Trusty into the whole secret of
her heart, if the conversation had not
been broke off by a very loud ringing of
the bell at the great gate of the court
yard before the house, on which, as it
was natural for them, they both ran to
the window to see what company were
coming. 
The first object that presented itself to
them, was a very neat running footman,
who on the gate being opened, came
tripping up towards the house, and was
immediately followed by a coach with
one gentleman in it, drawn by six prancing
horses, and attended by two servants
in rich liveries, and well mounted; 
lady Trusty was somewhat surprised, as
she never had seen either the person in the
coach, or the equipage before, but infinitely
more so when mrs. Munden starting
from the window, in the greatest confusion
imaginable, cried,—‘Madam,
with your leave,—I will speak to him
in the parlour.’ —‘Speak to whom?’ 
said lady Trusty:—The other had not
the power to answer, and was running
out of the room, when a servant of sir
Ralph's came up to tell her, a gentleman,
who called himself Trueworth, was
come to wait on her. —‘I know—I 

know,’ cried she, ‘conduct him into the
parlour.’ 
Prepared as she was by the expectation
of his arrival, all her presence of
mind was not sufficient to enable her to
stand the sudden rush of joy, which on
sight of him burst in upon her heart;— 
nor was he less overcome,—he sprang
into her arms, which of themselves
opened to receive him, and while he kissed
away the tears that trickled from her
eyes, his own bedewed her cheeks. —‘Oh
have I lived to see you thus!’—cried
he,—‘thus ravishingly kind!’ —‘And
have I lived,’ rejoined she, ‘to receive
these proofs of affection from the best
and most ill used of men:—Oh Trueworth! 
—Trueworth!’ added she, ‘I
have not merited this from you.’ — 
‘You merit all things,—said he, ‘let us
talk no more of what is past, but tell
me that you now are mine;—I came
to make you so by the irrevocable
ties of love and law, and we must now
part no more! —Speak my angel,—my
first, my last charmer,’ continued he, perceiving
she was silent, blushed, and hung
down her head;—‘let those dear lips
confirm my happiness, and say the
time is come, that you will be all mine. 
The trembling fair now having gathered
a little more assurance, raised her eyes 

from the earth, and looking tenderly on
him,—‘you know you have my heart,
cried she, and cannot doubt my hand.’ 
After this a considerable time was past
in all those mutual endearments, which
honour and modesty would permit, without
mrs. Munden's once remembering the
obligations she was under of relieving lady
Trusty from the consternation she had
left her in. 
That lady had indeed heard her servant
say who was below, but as mrs.
Munden had never mentioned the name
of mr. Trueworth the whole time she had
been with her, and had not any suspicion
of the correspondence between them,
much less could have the least notion of
her affection for a gentleman, whom she
had once refused, in spite of the many advantages
an alliance with him offered, nothing
conld be more astonishing to her
than this visit, and the disorder with
which mrs. Munden went down to receive
it. 
She was still ruminating on an event,
which appeared so extaordinary to her,
when the now happy lovers entered the
room, and discovered by their countenances,
some part of what she wished to
know;—‘I beg leave, madam, said mrs. 

Munden, ‘to introduce to your ladyship,
a gentleman whose name and character
you are not unacquainted with, mr.
Trueworth.’ 
‘I am, indeed, no stranger to both,’ replied
lady Trusty, advancing to receive
him, ‘nor to the respect they claim:’ he
returned this compliment with a politeness
which was natural to him, and after they
were seated, her ladyship beginning to express
the satisfaction she felt in seeing a
gentleman of whose amiable qualities she
had so high an idea;—‘Your ladyship
does me too much honour, said he, but
I fear you will repent this goodness,
when you shall find I am come with an
intent to rob you of a companion, who
I know is very dear to you.’ 
‘If you should succeed in the robbery
you mention, answered she smiling,
you will make me ample attonement
for it by the pleasure you will give me
in knowing what I have lost is in such
good hands.’ 
Mr. Trueworth had no time to make
any reply to these obliging words, sir
Ralph who had dined abroad, came in that
instant, not a little surprized to find so
gay an equipage, and altogether unknown
to him, before his door, but on his lady's 

acquainting him with the name of
their new guest, welcomed him with a
complaisance not at all inferior to what
she had shewn. —There requires little ceremony
between persons of true breeding
to enter into a freedom of conversation,
and the good old baronet was beginning
to entertain mr. Trueworth with some
discourses, which at another time would
have been very agreeable to him, but
that obedient lover having undertaken in
order to save the blushes of his fair mistress,
to make them fully sensible of the
motive, which had brought him into
L&wblank;, delayed the performance
no longer than was necessary to do it
without abruptness. 
Mrs. Munden, who in desiring he should
break the matter, had not meant he
should do it so suddenly, or in her presence,
looked like the sun just starting
from a cloud all the time he was speaking,
and was ready to die with shame when sir
Ralph said, that since all things were concluded
between them, and there was no
need for farther courtship, he could not see
any reason why their marriage should not
be immediately compleated: but lady
Trusty, in compassion to her fair friend's
confusion, opposed this motion:—the
next day after the succeeding one, was
however appointed without any shew of 

reluctance on the side of mrs. Munden,
and the inexpressible satisfaction of Mr.
Trueworth. 
He had lain the night before at at inn
about eight miles short of sir Ralph's
seat, and as he had no acquaintance either
with him or his lady, had intended
to make that his home during his stay in
the country, but sir Ralph and lady Trusty
would not consent to his departure, and
all he could obtain from them was permission
to send back his coach, with one
servant to take care of the horses. 
No proposals having yet been made
concerning a settlement for mrs. Munden,
by way of dowry, mr. Trueworth took
sir Ralph aside the next morning, and desired
he would send for a lawyer, which
he immediately did,—a gentleman of
that profession happening to live very near,
—and on his coming, received such instructions
from mr. Trueworth for drawing
up the writings, as convinced sir
Ralph both of the greatness of his generosity,
and the sincerity of his love to
the lady he was about to make his wife. 
Expedition having been recommended
to the lawyer, he returned soon after dinner
with an instrument drawn up in so
judicious a manner, that it required not 

the least alteration;—while sir Ralph
and mr. Trueworth were locked up with
him in order to examine it, mrs. Munden
received no inconsiderable addition to the
present satisfaction of her mind, by the
arrival of her brother Frank:—after the
first welcome being given,—‘You are
come, captain,’ said lady Trusty, ‘just
time enough to be a witness of your
sister's marriage, which is to be celebrated
tomorrow.’ —‘Marriage, cried
he,—‘and without acquainting either
of her brothers with her intentions!— 
but I hope,’ continued he, ‘it is not
to disadvantage, as your ladyship seems
not displeased at it.’ —‘I assure you,
captain,’ resumed lady Trusty, ‘I knew
nothing of the affair till yesterday, nor
had ever seen before the gentleman your
sister has made choice of, but love and
destiny,’ added she, ‘are not to be resisted.’ 
These words, and the serious
air she assumed in speaking them, giving
him cause to fear his sister was going to
throw herself away, he shook his head,
and seemed in a good deal of uneasiness,
but had not opportunity to testify what
he felt, any otherwise than by his looks. 
—Sir Ralph and mr Trueworth in that
instant entered the room;—the extreme
surprize he was in at the sight of the
latter, was such as prevented him from
paying his respects to either in the manner 

he would have done, if more master
of himself; but mr. Trueworth easily
guessing the emotions of his mind, lock'd
him in his arms, saying,—‘Dear Frank,
I shall at last be so happy as to call you
brother;—Heavens, is it possible!’— 
cried he, ‘Am I awake? or is this
illusion!’—then running to mrs. Munden,
‘Sister’ said he, ‘is what I hear a
real fact! are you indeed to be married
to mr. Trueworth?’ —‘You hear I
am,’ answered she smiling, ‘and hear
it from a mouth not accustomed to deceit;’ 
he then flew to mr. Trueworth,
crying, ‘My dear, dear Trueworth, I
little hoped this honour:’—then turning
to lady Trusty,—‘Oh madam, said he,
how agreeably have you deceived me!’ 
‘I knew it would be so,’—replied she,
‘yet I told you nothing but the truth.’ 
The extravagance of the young captain's
joy being a little over, mr. Trueworth
presented mrs. Munden with the
parchment he had received from the lawyer,
—‘What is this?’ demanded she:— 
‘Take it, take it,’ cried sir Ralph, ‘it is
no less than a settlement of eight hundred
pounds a year to you, in case of
accidents. —I accept it, sir,’ said mrs.
Munden to mr. Trueworth, ‘as a fresh
proof of your affection, but heaven
forbid I should ever live to receive any 

other advantage from it.’ —He kissed
her hand with the most tender transports
on these obliging words;—after which,
they all seated themselves, and never was
there a joy more perfect and sincere than
what each of this worthy company gave
demonstrations of in their respective characters. 
The next morning compleated
the wishes o the enamoured pair, and the
satisfaction of their friends. 
An account of this event was dispatched
the next post to all, who had any welfare
in the interest of the new wedded lovers:
—mr. Thoughtless, though very much
engrossed by his own happiness, could not
but rejoice in the good fortune of his
sister:—sir Basil, who since his thorough
knowledge of mrs. Munden, had a high
esteem for her, was extremely glad, but
his lady was warm even to an excess in
her congratulations: in fine, there were
few of her acquaintance who did not in
some measure take part in their felicity. 
Thus were the virtues of our heroine,
(those follies that had defaced them being
fully corrected) at length rewarded with
a happiness, retarded only till she had render'd
herself wholly worthy of receiving it. 
