


Contains divers things. 

Miss Betsy was all this time enjoying
the little fraud she had been guilty
of:—the idea how mr. Trueworth would
be surprized at finding his picture had
been taken away, and the various conjectures
that would naturally rise in his
mind, upon so odd an accident, gave her
more real pleasure than others feel on the
accomplishment of the most material
event. 
She was, indeed, of a humour the most
perfectly happy for herself that could be; 
—chearful,—gay,—not apt to create
imaginary ills, as too many do, and become
wretched for misfortunes which have
no existence, but in their own fretful dispositions. 
—On any real cause, either for
grief or anger, that happened to her, no
body, it is certain, felt them with a more
poignant sensibility; but then she was affected
with them but a short time. — 
The turbulent passions could obtain no
residence in her mind, and on the first
approaches of their opposite emotions entirely 

vanished, as if they had never been. 
—The arrows of affliction, of what kind
soever they were, but slightly glanced upon
her heart, not pierced it, much less were
able to make any lasting impression there. 
She now visited as usual,—saw as
much company as ever, and hearing no
mention made, wherever she went, of
her adventure with the mock baronet,
concluded, the whole thing was, and
would remain, an eternal secret, and
therefore easily forgot it; or, if it came
into her head, remembered it only on account
of her deliverer. 
She was now on exceeding good terms
with her brothers, who were full of spirits
themselves:—the elder mr. Thoughtless,
who loved play but too well, had lately
had some lucky casts, and mr. Francis
had accomplished his affairs,—his commission
was signed, and every thing contributed
to render the whole family perfectly
easy in themselves, and obliging to
each other. 
In the midst of this contentment of
mind mr. Edward Goodman came to
town from Deal:—the two mr. Thoughtlesses,
on account of the many obligations
they had to his uncle, and the good 

character they had heard of himself, received
him with abundance of respect and
affection. 
This young Indian had a great deal of
the honest simplicity of his uncle, both in
his countenance and behaviour, and wanted
not politeness and good manners sufficient
to render his conversation very agreeable. 
He was sent from Bengal at about four
years of age, and received the first rudiments
of his education at one of the best
schools in England, where he continued
till he had attained to his nineteenth, and
then returned to his native country, and
was now about twenty-four. 
Mr. Thoughtless had now got so much
the better of his mistress, as to prevail on
her, to content herself with keeping in
her own apartment, whenever he had any
company, by whom it was improper for
her to be seen. 
He made a handsome entertainment
for mr. Goodman, soon after his arrival,
to which the lawyer, who had the care of
his affairs, with his wife, a well bred,
discreet woman, was also invited;—miss 

Betsy, at the request of her brother, presided
at the head of the table. 
Dinner was ordered to be ready about
three, and the invitation accordingly made; 
but the lawyer not coming, his wife, perceiving
they waited for him, was a little
perplexed; but she was soon eased of it,
by his coming in less than a quarter of an
hour, after the time he was expected. 
This gentleman was the very person
who made mrs. Blanchfield's will, and to
apologize for his stay, he related to them
the cause that had detained him, which
was, that a demur being made to the payment
of some part of the money bequeathed
by that lady to mr. Trueworth,
he had been obliged to go with him, in
order to rectify the mistake which had
occasioned it. —In giving this account
he imagined not, that any person present
had the least concern in it, or even were
acquainted with either of the parties he
mentioned. 
Miss Betsy said nothing, but had her
own reflections on what he had been saying; 
—she, however, had the satisfaction
of hearing her two brothers ask those
questions she longed to put to him herself. 
—By the answers he made, she doubted 

not, but the deceased had been courted
by mr. Trueworth,—had loved him, and
was to have been married to him, by her
having made him so considerable a legacy. 
The rest of their conversation that whole
day, was chiefly on matters concerning
the late mr. Goodman,—the baseness of
lady Mellasin, and the measures that were
taking to detect the fraud she had been
guilty of;—all which was very dry and
insipid to miss Betsy at this time, as indeed
it would have been, had it turned on
any other subject. —She was not, therefore,
very sorry when the company broke
up, that she might be at home, and at
full liberty to indulge meditations, which
promised her more satisfaction than any
thing she could hear abroad. 
She had set it down in her mind, from
what the lawyer had said, as a sure fact,
that mr. Trueworth, since his desisting
his courtship to her, had loved another,
and also, that her rival in his affection
was now no more. —‘He need not,’ said
she to herself, ‘be at the trouble of sitting
a second time for his picture, in
compliment to her; nor can what I have
done be a subject of disquiet to either
of them.’ 

She then would take his picture out of
the cabinet, where she had concealed it,
and examine it attentively:—‘Good
god!’ cried she, ‘how uncertain is the
heart of man? —How little dependance
ought we to place on all the professions
of love they make us? —Just so he
looked,—with all this tenderness in his
eyes, when his false tongue protested,
he never could think of marrying any
woman but myself.’ —But these uneasy,
and indeed unjust, reflections, lasted not
above a minute:—‘Mrs. Blanchfield,’ 
said she, ‘had a large fortune;—it was
that perhaps he was in love with, and
finding no hope of gaining me, he
might be tempted by his ambition to
make his addresses to her:—but whatever
were his thoughts on her account,
she is now dead;—and who knows
what may happen?—that he once
loved me is certain;—if he should return
to his first vows, the obligation I
have received from him would not permit
me to treat him with the same indifference
I have done. —I am not in
love with any man,’ continued she; 
‘but, if I ever marry, he certainly, exclusive
of what he has done for me, deserves
in every respect to have the preference,
and I should with less regret 

submit to the yoke of wedlock with
him, than any other I have seen.’ 
Thus went she on, forming ideal prospects
all that night, and part of the ensuing
day, when the elder mr. Thoughtless
came, and gave her the most unwelcome
interruption she could receive. 
He told her, that he had just received
an account, to his entire satisfaction in
every thing, relating to mr. Munden, and
that no reasonable objection could be
made, either as to the family,—the
estate, or the character of that gentleman; 
—‘Therefore,’ said he, ‘as you have
thought fit to encourage his pretensions,
and he has continued them a sufficient
length of time, to defend you from the
censure of a too quick consent, you
cannot, I think, in honour, but reward
his passion without delay.’ 
Miss Betsy was, at present, in a disposition
very unfit to comply with her brother's
advice; but after all that had been
urged by him, and by mr. Francis, she
could not assume courage wholly to refuse. 
She hesitated,—she began a sentence
without ending it,—and when she did, 

her answers were not at all of a piece
with that ready wit which she had always
testified on other occasions. 
Mr. Thoughtless perceiving she was rather
studious to evade giving any determinate
answer, than willing to give such a one
as he desired she should, began to expostulate with her on the capriciousness
of her humour and behaviour;—he conjured
her to reflect on her late adventure
with the impostor, sir Frederick Fineer; 
and how ill it became her to countenance
the addresses of a wretch like him, and at
the same time trifle with a man of fortune
and reputation. 
She suffered him to go on in this manner
for a considerable time, without giving
him the least interruption, but by
degrees recovering her spirits,—‘I shall
take care, sir,’ said she, ‘never to fall
into the like adventure again, neither
do I intend to trifle with mr. Munden; 
but marriage is a thing of too serious a
nature to hurry into, without first having
made trial of the constancy of the
man who would be a husband, and also
of being well assured of one's own
heart.’ 

Mr. Thoughtless then told her, with
some warmth, that he found she was relapsing
into a humour, and way of thinking,
which could not in the end but bring
ruin on herself, and disgrace to all her family; 
and added, that for his part he
should intermeddle no more in her affairs. 
—The tender soul of miss Betsy was
deeply affected at these words;—she
loved her brothers, and could not bear
their displeasures;—the thought of having
any disagreement with them was
dreadful to her, yet the putting a constraint
on her inclinations to oblige them
was no less so:—in this dilemma, whether
she complied, or whether she refused,
she found herself equally unhappy. 
One moment she was opening her
mouth to yield a ready assent to all that
was requested of her, on the score of mr.
Munden;—the next to confess, that she
neither liked, nor loved that gentleman,
and knew not whether she should ever be
able to resolve on a marriage with him; 
but her sincerity forbade the one, and her
fears of offending gave a check to the
other, and both together kept her entirely
silent. 

‘You ought, methinks, however,’ resumed
mr. Thoughtless, ‘to have spared
mr. Munden the trouble of laying open
his circumstances, and me that of examining
into them.’ —‘I should undoubtedly
have done so, sir,’ answered
she, ‘if I had been entirely averse to the
proposals of mr. Munden, therefore both
you and he are too hasty in judging. — 
You know, brother, that sir Ralph, and
my dear lady Trusty, will be in town
in a very few days, and I am willing to
have the approbation of as many of my
friends as possible, in a thing of so
much consequence to my future peace.’ 
Mr. Thoughtless was now somewhat
better satisfied than he had been, and
after recommending to her a constancy of
mind and resolution, took his leave of her. 
This conversation having a little dissipated
those gay imaginations she was before
possessed of, she began to consider seriously,
what she meant by all this, and
what it availed her to give both her lover
and brothers so much matter of complaint
against her; she reflected, that she had
now gone so far with that gentleman, that
neither honour towards him, nor regard
to her own reputation, would well suffer 

her to go back;—‘Since it is so then,’ 
said she to herself, ‘to what end do I
take all this trouble to invent excuses
for delaying what must one day necessarily
be?’ 
‘Yet, wherefore must it be,’ continued
she? ‘I have made no promise, and if a
better offer should happen, I see no reason
that obliges me to reject it:—for
example,—if mr. Trueworth, or such
a one as mr. Trueworth, if his equal is
to be found in nature, neither my brothers,
nor the world, I fancy, would
condemn me for quitting mr. Munden.’ 
‘Why then,’ cried she, ‘need I make
all this haste to put myself out of the
way of fortune? —I am young enough,
—have lost no part of what has attracted
me so many admirers; and while
my heart and hand are free, have, at
least, a chance of being more happy,
than mr. Munden can make me.’ 
In fine, being fully perswaded in her
mind, that the lady, who had supplanted
her in mr. Trueworth's affection, was
dead, she imagined, there was a probability
he might renew his addresses to
herself:—she wished, at least, to make
the experiment, and to that end resolved, 

to give no promise to mr. Munden;— 
yet would she not allow herself to think
she loved the other, but only that she
would give him the preference, as he was
a match of more advantage. 
Nothing is more certain, nor, I believe,
more obvious to the reader, than that this
young lady, almost from the time of mr.
Trueworth's quitting her, had entertained
a growing inclination for him, which the
late service he had rendered her had very
much increased;—but this her pride
would not suffer her to own, even to herself,
as the comic poet truly says, 

‘For whatsoe'er the sages charge on pride,
‘The angels fall, and twenty faults beside,
‘On earth 'tis sure, 'mong us of mortal calling,
‘Pride saves man oft, and woman too, from falling.


