
Contains none of those beautiful digressions, those remarks, or reflections which a certain would-be critic pretends are so much distinguish'd in the writings of his two favourite authors; yet, it is to be hoped, will afford sufficient to please all those who are willing to be pleased. 
The smallest trifle, if requested by a friend, is a business of importance to the truly tender and sincere;—Jenny was as much pleased with having found an opportunity of sending her picture to 
Jemmy, as some ladies would be with being presented themselves with one set round with diamonds. 
She contented not herself, however, with having obliged him in this particular, she knew he would also expect an immediate answer to his letter; and accordingly, that same evening, wrote to him in the following terms: 

To James Jessamy, Esq;
“My dear Jemmy,
I Rejoice to hear that Calais is less irksome to you than by the description has been given me of sea-port towns I fear'd it was;—you could not oblige me more than in telling me that you endeavour to make it as agreeable as possible, and that you support this banishment with some tolerable degree of patience. 
“Would to Heaven it were any way consistent with the affection I have for you to invite you home; but all the accounts our friends as yet have been able to get, in relation to Belpine's condition, are so very dubious and imperfect, that till we are more assured I dare not even indulge a wish of seeing 
you here: —Perplexing circumstance! that compels me to be thus anxious for the welfare of a villain who has attempted to destroy my peace, and that of him whose happiness I prize above my own. 
“As you desire to have my picture, I have intreated the favour of sir Robert Manley to deliver it to you as he passes through Calais in his way to Paris;—he has the character of a person of great sense and honour, and I believe deserves it;—he talks of staying a day or two in the place where you are, and if so, I am apt to think his conversation, while thus destitute of company, will be at least equally agreeable to the little token that introduces him to your acquaintance. 
“I have seen so few people since you went away, that I have nothing to relate worthy your attention, except what you know already, that I am, 
“With the most tender affection,
Dear Jemmy,
Your's entirely,
And for ever,
J. Jessamy.” 

“P. S. I will not ask your picture in return, because I know not whether the place you are in affords any artists of that kind; and besides,—flatter myself that fate will order it so that you will not be obliged to continue there long enough to have it drawn.” 

Had Jenny deferr'd this letter till the next day, it is certain she would have wrote in a quite different manner;—pretty early in the morning mr. Morgan came and brought her the joyful news that Belpine had been seen walking about his chamber and looking through the window. 
Mr. Lovegrove also made her a visit the same day, and confirm'd what the old gentleman had said; as did several others of her friends, who had been industrious in sifting out the truth of an affair which they knew was of so much consequence to her peace. 
Two or three days put the veracity of this intelligence beyond all dispute,—the surgeon who had all this time attended Belpine, no longer denied but that his patient was out of danger from his wound, and the people of the house confess'd to 
those who enquired into the matter, that he had quitted his bed, and it was expected would soon go abroad for the air. 
Jenny, who was fully informed of every thing that pass'd on this occasion, was beginning to entertain the most pleasing ideas of seeing her dear Jemmy within a very short space of time, and waited for a letter from him with less patience than ever she had done before, as the answer she should send him to it would be accompanied with an assurance that all the apprehensions his friends had for him were removed, and he might now return with safety. 
She figured to herself the extacy with which her lover would receive this information,—the haste he would make to obey the welcome summons, and the mutual joy of their happy meeting;—thus was she amused, as Shakespear elegantly expresses it, 
Lull'd in the day, dreams of a mind in love.
But when the wish'd for letter arrived, she found the delightful prospect she had form'd was, for the present, quite obscured, as the reader will see in these lines: 


To miss Jessamy.
“My Soul's Treasure,
“You have not only given me the resemblance of your angelic self, but at the same time given me a friend, for whom, next to that I ought to bless and thank you;—you will doubtless wonder how I am become so well acquainted with the virtues of sir Robert Manley in the short time we have been together;—I will tell you then,—he has made me the confidante of the passion he had for you,—your behaviour on his declaring it, and the noble conquest he gain'd over himself when you so generously avowed your fidelity to me, and dependance on mine to you. 
“But oh, my Jenny,—how could I curse that dog Belpine!—how could I repeat, a thousand and a thousand times, the blow I have given him, when I look back upon that scene of wretchedness into which I might have been inevitably plung'd by his base arts?—your ears continually fill'd with reports of my perfidiousness and ingratitude,—a rival of such dangerous merit, encouraged by them to make his addresses 
to you; what must have become of me, if the most unparallel'd constancy on your side, and the strictest adherence to justice and honour on his, had not secured my hopes?—but, thanks to both, the storm is overblown,—the danger is past, and I should give up all myself to joy, and forgive the wretch whose vile attempts to ruin me have the more confirm'd my happiness. 
“And now, my dearest,—I am to inform you that to-morrow I remove myself farther from you,—my new friend tells me, that I might have seen Paris,—all the royal palaces, and every thing deserving observation, in the time I have been here; and is surprised that I did not take this opportunity of going to a place which affords so much to excite the curiosity of a stranger;—in fine, he has seduced me to accompany him;—I would not have you think, however, that I yielded to his persuasions but in the assurance he gave me that he had often heard you lament the solitude of my condition, and with me in a more agreeable situation. 
“Though I dare take his word, yet I should be glad of receiving a farther confirmation from yourself;—a line from your dear hand will be a joyful welcome to me on my arrival at that great city to which I am going:—I know you too well to doubt of your kind compliance with this request, as it is the only thing which can enable me to relish any amusements that may present themselves to me. 
“Our worthy friend, who is willing to contribute all he can to my satisfaction, writes this night to mr. Waters, a banker in Paris, to desire that if any letters directed for me are left at his house, they shall be taken care of. —Farewel,—believe that wherever I am, my heart is always with you, and that I never can be other than, 
“With inviolable love and truth,
My dear Jenny,
Your most passionately,
And most tenderly
Devoted lover,
And servant,
J. Jessamy.” 
“P. S. Sir Robert lays a strict injunction upon me to engage your pardon for the tales he has told me, and to make his compliments and best wishes acceptable to you.” 

How would some ladies ahve swell'd at this disappointment? —I believe I know those who would have thrown the letter from them with the utmost disdain,—perhaps torn it, and cried out—‘How dare the fellow use me thus?—he ought to have asked me leave before he went away;—he does not deserve that I should ever see him more,’—and a thousand such like reproaches;—but the reader has seen too much of Jenny to expect this sort of behaviour in her;—at first, indeed, it gave a little check to her late flow of spirits, to find her lover was every day going farther from her, at a time when she had hoped he would be approaching towards her; but she soon recover'd herself, and, on well weighing the motives that induced him to leave Calais, found she had more reason to approve than to condemn him for it. 
Though in his letters to her he had dissembled his chagrin, for fear she should be too much affected with it, yet she was 
sensible that for a man of his gay temper to be so long pent up in such a place as Calais, could not but be very irksome to him; and as he yet was ignorant of the hopes his friends had of his returning soon to England, neither wonder'd at, nor was angry that he so readily embraced sir Robert Manley's proposal of passing the time of his absence in a manner so much more capable of improving his mind, as well as of gratifying his senses. 
This was the way in which she argued with herself in defence of her lover's proceedings; and upon the whole, was not sorry to be deprived of his company for a while longer, as he was gone to view the magnificence of a place so famous throughout Europe, and so much the mode for all young persons of condition to be acquainted with. 
