

Brings many things on the carpet, highly
pleasing to miss Betsy, in their beginning,
and no less perplexing to her in
their consequences. 
The account of those many and dreadful
misfortunes, which the ill conduct
of miss Forward had drawn upon her,
made miss Betsy extremely pensive. ‘'Tis
strange,’ said she to herself, ‘that a woman
cannot indulge herself in the liberty
of conversing freely with a man, without
being perswaded by him to do every
thing he would have her.’ She thought,
however, that some excuse might be made
for miss Forward, on the score of her
being so strictly debarred from all acquaintance
with the other sex. ‘People,’ 
cried she, ‘have naturally an inclination
to do what they are most forbid. The 
poor girl had a curiosity to hear herself
addressed, and having no opportunity
of gratifying that passion, but by admitting
her lover at so odd a time and
place, was indeed too much in his
power to have withstood her ruin, even
if she had been mistress of more courage
and resolution than she was.’ 
On meditating on the follies which women
are sometimes prevailed upon to be
guilty of, the discovery she had made of
miss Flora's intrigue with Gayland came
fresh into her mind. ‘What,’ said she,
‘could induce her to sacrifice her honour? 
Declarations of love were not new to
her. She heard every day the flatteries
with which our sex are treated by the
men, and needed not to have purchased
the assiduities of any one of them at so
dear a rate. Good God! are innocence
and the pride of conscious virtue, things
of so little estimation, as to be thrown
away for the trifling pleasure of hearing
a few tender protestations? Perhaps all
false, and uttered by one whose heart
despises the easy fondness he has triumphed
over, and ridicules the very
grant of what he has so earnestly sollicited!’ 
It is certain, this young lady had the
highest notions of honour and virtue, and
whenever she gave herself time to reflect,
looked on every thing that had a tendency
to make an encroachment on them with
the most extreme detestation; yet had she
good-nature enough to pity those faults
in others, she thought it impossible for her
to be once guilty of herself. 
But amidst sentiments as noble, and as
generous, as ever heart was possessed of,
vanity, that foible of her soul, crept in,
and would have its share. She had never
been thoroughly attacked in a dishonourable
way, but by Gayland, and the gentleman-commoner
at Oxford; both which
she rebuffed with a becoming disdain. In
this she secretly exulted, and had that dependance
on her power of repelling all the
efforts, come they in what shape soever,
that should be made against her virtue,
that she thought it beneath her to behave
so as not to be in danger of incurring
them. 
How great a pity it is, that a mind
endued with so many excellent qualities,
and which had such exalted ideas of what
is truly valuable in woman kind, should
be tainted with a frailty of so fatal a nature, 
as to expose her to temptations,
which if she were not utterly undone, it
must be owing rather to the interposition
of her guardian angel, than to the strength
of human reason: but of that hereafter; 
at present there were none had any base
designs upon her; we must shew what
success those gentlemen met with, who
addressed her with the most pure and honourable
intentions: of this number we
shall speak first of mr. Trueworth and mr.
Staple; the one, as has been already said,
strenuously recommended by her brother,
the other by mr. Goodman. 
Mr. Staple had the good fortune (if it
may be called so) to be the first of these
two who had the opportunity of declaring
his passion: the journey of the other to
London having been retarded two days
longer than he intended. 
This gentleman having mr. Goodman's
leave, made a second visit at his house. 
Lady Mellasin and miss Flora knowing on
what business he was come, made an excuse
for leaving him and miss Betsy together. 
He made his addresses to her,
in the forms which lovers usually observe
on the first declaration; and she replied to
what he said, in a manner not to encourage 
him too much, nor yet to take
from him all hope. 
While they were discoursing a footman
came in, and told her, a gentleman from
Oxford desired to speak with her, having
some commands from her brother to deliver
to her. Mr. Staple supposing they
had business took his leave, and mr. Trueworth,
for it was he indeed, was introduced. 
“Madam,” said he, saluting her with
the utmost respect, “I have many obligations
to mr. Thoughtless; but none
which demands so large a portion of
my gratitude, as the honour he has
conferred upon me in presenting you
with this letter.” To which she replied,
that her brother must certainly have a
great confidence in his goodness, to give
him this trouble; with these words she
took the letter out of his hand, and having
obliged him to seat himself; “You
will pardon sir,” said she, “the rudeness,
which my impatience to receive
the commands of so near and dear a
relation makes me guilty of.” He
made no other answer to these words than
a low bow, and she withdrew to a window,
and found the contents of her brother's
letter were these: 


To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear sister,
I shall leave Oxford to-morrow,
in order to cross the country for the
seat of sir Ralph Trusty, as I suppose
mr. Goodman will inform you, I having
wrote to him by the post; but the most
valuable of my friends being going to
London, and expressing a desire of renewing
that acquaintance he had begun
to commence with you here, I have taken
the liberty of troubling him with
the delivery of this to you. He is a
gentleman whose merits you are yet a
stranger to, but I have so good an
opinion of your penetration, as to be
confident a very little time will convince
you, that he is deserving all the esteem
in your power to regard him with: in
the mean time doubt not, but you will
receive him as a person whose success,
in every thing, is much desired by him,
who is, 
‘With the tenderest good wishes,
Dear sister,
Your most affectionate brother,
F. Thoughtless.’ 

As she did not doubt but, by the stile
and manner of this letter, that it had been
seen by mr. Trueworth, she could not keep
herself from blushing, which he observing
as he sat, flattered himself with taking as a
good omen. He had too much awe upon
him, however, to make any declaration
of his passion at first visit, neither, indeed,
had he the opportunity of doing it, lady
Mellasin, and miss Flora, thinking they
had left mr. Staple and miss Betsy a sufficient
time together, came into the room:
the former was surprised to find he was
gone, and a strange gentleman in his
place; but miss Flora remembering him
perfectly well, they saluted each other
with the freedom of persons who were
not entire strangers, they entered into a
conversation, and other company coming
in, mr. Trueworth had an opportunity of
displaying the fine talents he was master
of: his travels,—the observations he had
made on the curiosities he had seen abroad,
particularly at Rome, Florence, and Naples,
were highly entertaining to the company; 
on taking leave he told the ladies,
he hoped they would allow him the favour
of making one at their tea-table
sometimes, while he remained in London:
to which lady Mellasin and her daughter,
little suspecting the motive he had for this 
request, joined in assuring him, he could
not come too often, and that they should
expect to see him every day; but miss
Betsy looking on herself as chiefly concerned
in his admission, modestly added to
what they had said, only that a person so
much, and she doubted not but so justly,
esteemed by her brother, might be certain
of a sincere welcome from her. 
Every body was full of the praises of
this gentleman, and miss Betsy, though
she said the least of any one, thought her
brother had not bestowed more on him,
than he really deserved. Mr. Goodman
coming home soon after, there appeared
some marks of displeasure in his countenance,
which, as he was the best humoured
man in the world, very much surprised those
of his family; but the company not being
all retired, none of them seemed to
take any notice of it, and went on with
the conversation they were upon before
his entrance. 
The visitors, however, were no sooner
gone, than without staying to be asked,
he immediately let them into the occasion
of his being so much reffled: “miss
Betsy,” said he, “you have used me
very ill: I did not think you would 
have made a fool of me in the manner
you have done.” “Bless me, sir,” 
cried she, “in what have I offended?” 
“You have not only offended against me,” 
answered he, very hastily, “but also
against your own reason, and common
understanding: you are young, 'tis
true, yet not so young as not to know
it is both ungenerous and silly to impose
upon your friends.” “I scorn the
thought, sir, of imposing upon any
body,” said she; “I therefore desire,
sir, you will tell me what you mean
by so unjust an accusation.” “Unjust!” 
resumed he, “I appeal to the whole world,
if it were well done of you to suffer
me to encourage my friend's courtship
to you, when at the same time your
brother had engaged you to receive the
addresses of another.” 
Miss Betsy, though far from thinking
it a fault in her to hear the proposals of
a hundred lovers, had as many offered
themselves, was yet a little shocked at the
reprimand given her by mr. Goodman; 
and not being able presently to make any
reply to what he had said, he took a letter
he had just received from her brother
out of his pocket, and threw it on the
table, with these words: “That will shew,” 
said he, “whether I have not cause to 
resent your behaviour in this point.” 
Perceiving she was about to take it up,
“Hold,” cried he, “my wife shall read
it, and be the judge between us.” 
Lady Mellasin, who had not spoke all
this time, then took the letter, and read
aloud the contents, which were these: 

To mr. Goodman.
‘Sir,
This comes to let you know I have
received the remittances you were
so obliging to send me. I think to set
out to-morrow for L&wblank;e, but shall
not stay there for any length of time:
my intentions for going into the army
are the same as when I last wrote to
you, and the more I consider on that
affair, the more I am confirmed that a
military life is most suitable of any to
my genius and humour: if, therefore,
you can hear of any thing proper for
me, either in the guards, or in a marching
regiment, against I come to town,
I shall be infinitely thankful for the
trouble you take in the enquiry; but,
sir, this is not all the favour I have to
ask of you at present. A gentleman of
family, fortune, and character, has seen
my sister, likes her, and is going to 
London, on no other business than to
make his addresses to her. I have already
wrote to her on this subject, and
I believe she will pay some regard to
what I have said in his behalf. I am
very well assured she never can have a
more advantageous offer, as to his circumstances,
nor be united to a man of
more true honour, morality, and sweetness
of disposition; all which I have had
frequent occasions of being an eye-witness
of: but she is young, gay, and as yet,
perhaps, not altogether so capable as I
could wish of knowing what will make
for her real happiness; I therefore intreat
you, sir, as the long experienced friend
of our family, to forward this match,
both by your advice, and whatever else
is in your power, which certainly will
be the greatest act of goodness you can
confer on her, as well as the highest obligation
to a brother, who wishes nothing
more than to see her secured from all
temptations, and well settled in the
world. I am, 
‘With the greatest respect,
Sir,
Your most humble,
And most obedient servant,
F. Thoughtless. 
‘P. S. I had forgot to inform you, sir,
that the name of the gentleman, I take
the liberty of recommending with so
much warmth, is Trueworth; that he
is descended from the ancient Britons
by the father's side, and by the mother's
from the honourable and well
known Oldcastle's, in Kent.’ 

“O, fye miss Betsy,” said lady Mellasin,
‘how could you serve mr. Goodman
so? What will mr. Staple say, when he
comes to know he was encouraged to
court a woman that was already pre-engaged.” 
“Pre-engaged, madam,” 
cried miss Betsy, in a scornful tone,
“what to a man I never saw but three
times in my whole life, and whose
mouth never uttered a syllable of love
to me.” She was going on, but mr.
Goodman, who was still in a great heat,
interrupted her, saying, “No matter
whether he has uttered any thing of the
business or not, it seems you are enough
acquainted with his sentiments, and I
doubt not but he knows you are, or he
would not have taken a journey to London
on your account. You ought therefore
to have told me of his coming,
and what your brother had wrote concerning
him, and I should then have 
let mr. Staple know it would be to no
purpose to make any courtship to you,
as I did to another just before I came
home, who I find has taken a great
fancy to you; but I have given him
his answer; for my part I do not understand
this way of making gentlemen
lose their time.” 
'Tis probable these last words nettled
miss Betsy more than all the rest he had
said; she imagined herself secure of the
hearts of both Trueworth and Staple, but
was vexed to the heart to have lost the
addresses of a third admirer, through the
scruplousness of mr. Goodman, who she
looked upon to have nothing to do with
her affairs in this particular: she was too
cunning, however, to let him see what
her thoughts were on that occasion, and
only said that he might do as he pleased;— 
that she did not want a husband;— 
that all men were alike to her:—but
added, that it seemed strange to her, that
a young woman who had her fortune to
make might not be allowed to hear all
the different proposals should be offered to
her on that score, and with these words
flung out of the room, and went up
into her chamber, nor would be prevailed
upon to come down again that night,
though miss Flora, and mr. Goodman 
himself, repenting he had said so much,
called to her for that purpose. 