


If it were not for some few particulars,
might as well be passed over as read. 

Miss Betsy, one would think, had now
sufficient matter to employ her meditations,
on the score of those two lovers,
who at present laid close siege to her,
neither of whom she was willing to part
entirely with, and to retain either she
found required some management: — 
mr. Munden was beginning to grow impatient
at the little progress his long
courtship had made on her affections; 
and sir Frederick Fineer, on the other
hand, was for bringing things to a conclusion
at once:—she was also every
day receiving transient addresses from 

many others, which, though not meant
seriously by those that made them, nor
taken so by her, served occasionally to fill
up any vacuum in her mind;—yet was it
not in the power of love,—gallantry,
or any other amusement, to drive the
memory of mr. Trueworth wholly out of
her head; which shews, that to a woman
of sense, a man of real merit, even
though he is not loved, can never be totally
indifferent. 
But she was at this time more than ordinarily
agitated on that gentleman's account; 
—she doubted not but her brother
Frank, either had, or would shortly
have a long conference with him, on the
subject of his desisting his visits to her,
and could not keep herself from feeling
some palpitations for the event; for
though she was not resolved to afford any
recompence to his love, she earnestly
wished, he should continue to desire it,
and that she might still preserve her former
dominion over a heart, which she
had always looked upon as the most valuable
prize of all that her beauty had
ever gained. 
Thus unreasonable, and indeed unjust,
was she in the affairs of love:—in all
others she was humane, benevolent, and 

kind; but here covetous, even to greediness,
of receiving all, without any intention
of making the least return. —In
fine, the time was not yet come, when
she should be capable of being touched
with that herself, which she took so much
pride to inspire in others. 
Though she could not love, she was
pleased with being loved:—no man, of
what degree or circumstance soever,
could offend her by declaring himself her
admirer; and as much as she despised sir
Frederick Fineer for his romantic manner
of expressing the passion he professed for
her, yet to have missed him out of the
number of her train of captives, would
have been little less mortification to her,
than the loss of a favourite lover would
have been to some other women. 
That enamorato of all enamoratoes,
would not, however, suffer the flame,
which he flattered himself with having
kindled in her, to grow cool, and ambitious
also of shewing his talents in verse
as well as prose, sent her that morning
the following epistle: 


‘To the bright goddess of my soul,
the adorable miss Betsy
Thoughtless.
‘Most divine source of joy,
To shew you in what manner I pass
the hours of absence from you, and
at the same time represent the case of a
lover racked with suspence, and tossed
alternately between hopes and fears, I
take the liberty to inscribe to you the
inclosed poem, which I most humbly
beseech you to take as it is meant, the
tribute of my duteous zeal,—an humble
offering presented at the shrine of your
all-glorious beauty, from 
‘Lovely ruler of my heart,
Your eternally devoted,
And no less faithful slave,
F. Fineer. 


‘A true picture of my heart, in the different
stages of its worship.

A POEM,
 ‘Most humbly inscribed to the never-enough deified
Miss BETSY THOUGHTLESS. 

‘When first from my unfinish'd sleep I start,
‘I feel a flutt'ring faintness round my heart;
‘A darksome mist, which rises from my mind,
‘And, like sweet sun-shine, leaves your name behind.


‘When from your shadow to yourself I fly,
‘To drink in transport at my thirsty eye,
‘Each orb surveys you with a kindling sight,
‘And trembles to sustain the vast delight:
‘From head to foot, o'er all your heav'n they stray,
‘Dazzled with lustre in your milky way:
‘At last you speak, and, as I start to hear,
‘My soul is all collected in my ear.



‘But when resistless transport makes me bold,
‘And your soft hand inclosed in mine I hold,
‘Then flooding raptures swim through ev'ry vein,
‘And each swol'n art'ry throbs with pleasing pain.


‘Fain would I snatch you to my longing arms,
‘And grasp in extacy your blazing charms:
‘O then,—how vain the wish that I pursue!
‘I would lose all myself, and mix with you:
‘Involv'd,—embody'd, with your beauties join,
‘As fires meet fires, and mingle in their shine;
‘Absorb'd in bliss, I would dissolving lie,
‘Become all you, and soul and body die.


‘Weigh well these symptoms, and then judge, in part,
‘The poignant anguish of the bleeding heart
‘Of him, who is, with unutterable love, Resplendent charmer,
‘Your hoping,—fearing, languishing adorer,


‘F. Fineer. 

‘P.S. I propose flying to the feet of my
adorable about five o'clock this afternoon; 
—do not, I beseech, you,
clip the wings of my devotion, by
forbidding my approach.’ 
How acceptable to a vain mind, is
even the meanest testimony of admiration! 
—If miss Betsy was not charmed with
the elegance of this offering, she was, at
least, very well pleased with the pains he
took in composing it. —In the humour
she then was, she would perhaps have rewarded
the labour of his brain, with giving
him an opportunity of kissing her
shoe a second time, but she expected her
brother Frank about the hour he mentioned,
with some intelligence of mr.
Trueworth, and had engaged to pass the
evening abroad, as has been already mentioned. 
She sent, however, a very complaisant
message by the servant, who brought the
letter;—she ordered he should come
up into her dining-room, and then, with
a great deal of sweetness, desired him to
tell his master, that she was under a necessity
of spending the whole day with
some relations that were just come to
town, therefore intreated he would defer 

the honour he intended her, 'till some
other time. 
Mr. Francis Thoughtless did indeed
call upon her, as she imagined he would; 
—he had been at the lodgings of mr.
Trueworth, but that gentleman happened
to be abroad at the time he went, and he
was now obliged to go with his brother
on some business relating to the commission
he was about to purchase, so could
not stay long enough with hen to enter
into any conversation of moment. 
Miss Betsy had now full two hours
upon her hands after her brother left her,
to which she had appointed mr. Munden
to come to conduct her to the country-dancing,
and as she had not seen miss
Mabel for a good while, and had heard
that lady had made her several visits
when she was not at home to receive
them, she thought to take this opportunity
of having nothing else to do, to return
part of the debt, which civility demanded
from her to her friend. —Accordingly
she set out in a hackney coach,
but met with an accident by the way,
which not only disappointed her intentions,
but likewise struck a strange damp on the
gaiety of her spirits. 

As they were driving pretty fast thro'
a narrow street, a gentleman's chariot run
full against them, with such rapidity,
that both received a very great shock, insomuch
that the wheels were locked, and
it was not without some difficulty, and
the assistance of several people, who seeing
what had happened ran out of their
shops and houses, that the coachmen were
able to keep their horses from going on; 
which had they done, both the machines
must inevitably have been torn to pieces:
—there were two gentlemen in the chariot,
who immediately jumped out;— 
miss Betsy screaming, and frighted almost
to death, was also helped out of the
coach by a very civil tradesman, before
whose door the accident had happened; 
—he led her into his shop, and made
her sit down, while his wife ran to fetch
a glass of water, and some hartshorn
drops. 
Her extreme terror had hindered her
from discovering who was in the chariot,
or whether any one was there, but the
gentlemen having crossed the way, and
come into the same shop, she presently
knew the one to be sir Bazil Loveit, and
the other mr. Trueworth;—her surprize
at sight of the latter was such as might 

have occasioned some raillery, if it had
not been concealed under that which she
had sustained before:—sir Bazil approached
her with a very respectful bow,
and made a handsome apology for the
fault his man had committed, in not
giving way when a lady was in the coach; 
to which she modestly replied, that there
could be no fault where there was no design
of offending. —Mr. Trueworth then
drawing near, with a very cold and reserved
air told her, he hoped she would
receive no prejudice by the accident 
‘I believe the danger is now over,’ 
said she, struck to the very heart at finding
herself accosted by him in a manner
so widely different from that to which
she had been accustomed:—scarce had
she the fortitude to bear the shock it gave
her; but summoning to her aid all that
pride and disdain could supply her with,
to prevent him from perceiving how much
she was affected by his behaviour:—‘I
could not, however,’ pursued she, with
a tone of voice perfectly ironical, ‘have
expected to receive any consolation under
this little disaster from mr. Trueworth; 
—I imagined, sir, that some
weeks ago you had been reposing yourself
in the delightful bowers; and sweet 

recesses of your country seat. —How
often have I heard you repeat with
pleasure these lines of mr. Addison's? 

“Bear me, ye gods! to Umbria's gentle seats,
“Or hide me in sweet Bayia's soft retreats.

‘Yet still I find you in this noisy,
bustling town.’ —She concluded these
words with a forced sinile; which mr.
Trueworth taking no notice of, replied,
with the same gravity as before, ‘I purposed
indeed, madam, to have returned
to Oxfordshire, but events then unforeseen
have detained me.’ 
While they were speaking, sir Bazil recollecting
the face of miss Betsy, which till
now he had not done, cried, ‘I think, madam,
I have had the honour of seeing you
before this.’ —‘Yes, sir Bazil,’ replied
she, knowing very well he meaned at
miss Forward's, ‘you saw me once in a
place, where neither you, nor any one
else, will ever see me again, but I did
not then know the character of the person
I visited:’ To which sir Bazil only
replying, that he believed she did not,
mr. Trueworth immediately rejoined, 

that the most cautious might be once deceived. 
The emphasis with which he uttered
the word once, made miss Betsy see, that
he bore still in mind the second error she
had been guilty of, in visiting that woman; 
but she had no time to give any
other answer than a look of scorn and indignation,
sir Bazil's footman telling him,
the chariot was now at liberty, and had
received no damage; on which the gentlemen
took their leave of her, mr. Trueworth
shewing no more concern in doing
so, than sir Bazil himself, or any one
would have done, who never had more
than a mere cursory acquaintance with her. 
She would not be perswaded to go into
the coach again, much less could she
think of going on her intended visit, but
desired a chair to be called, and went directly
home, in order to give vent to
those emotions, which may easier be conceived,
than represented. 
