


Presents the reader with some passages,
which could not conveniently be told
before, and without all doubt have
been for a long time impatiently expected. 

The spirits of lady Mellasin had for
several months been kept up by the
wicked agents she had employed in the
management of the worst cause, that ever
was taken in hand:—those subtle and
most infamous wretches, in order to draw
fresh supplies of money from that unhappy
woman, had still found means to
elude and baffle all the endeavours of mr.
Goodman's honest lawyer, to bring the
matter to a fair trial. 
But at last all their diabolical inventions,
—their evasions,—their subterfuges
failing, and the day appointed, which
they knew must infallibly bring the whole
dark mystery of iniquity to light, when
all their perjuries must be explored, and
themselves exposed to the just punishment 

of such flagitious crimes, not one of
them had courage to stand the dreadful
test, nor face that awful tribunal they had
so greatly abused. 
Yet so cruel were they, even to the very
woman, all the remains of whose shattered
fortune they had shared among them, as
not to give her the least warning of her
fate. —Nor till the morning, which she
was made to hope would decide every
thing in her favour, did she know she was
undone, deserted, and left alone to bear
the brunt of all the offended laws inflict
on forgery. 
What words can represent the horror,
—the confusion of her guilty mind, when
neither the person who drew up the pretended
will, nor either of those two who
had set their names as witnesses appearing,
she sent in search of them, and found
they were all removed from their habitations,
and fled, no one could inform her
where. 
Scarce had she time to make her escape
out of the court, before word was given
to an officer to take her into custody;— 
not daring to go home, nor knowing to
whom she could have recourse for shelter
in this exigence, she ran like one distracted 

through the streets, 'till she came to one
of the gates of St. James's park, where
meeting with a porter, she sent him to
her lodgings, to order her daughter Flora,
and mrs. Prinks, to come that instant to
her. 
Mrs. Prinks immediately obeyed the
summons, but miss Flora had the audacity
to desire to be excused, being then
dressing to go on a business, which indeed
she then imagined was of much
more consequence to herself than any thing
relating to her mother could possibly be. 
After this dissolute and unfortunate
creature was left by mr. Trueworth, in
the manner described in the third volume
of this history, she gave a loose to agonies,
which only those who have felt the same
can be capable of conceiving. 
Her shrieks, and the request mr. Trueworth
had made on his going out, brought
up the woman of the house herself, to administer
what relief was in her power, to
a lady who seemed to stand in so much
need of it. 
Having prevailed on her to come down
stairs, she seated her in a little room behind
the bar, and as she saw the violence 

of her passions threw her into frequent
faintings, neglected nothing which she
thought might be of service to recover
her spirits, and compose her mind. 
As she was thus charitably employed,
a young gentleman, who used the house,
and was very free with all belonging to
it, happened to come in:—miss Flora,
besides being handsome, had something
extremely agreeable and engaging in her
air, and had her heart been possessed of
half that innocence her countenance gave
the promise of, her character would have
been as amiable as it was now the contrary. 
There are some eyes which shine thro'
their tears, and are lovely in the midst of
anguish:—those of miss Flora had this
advantage, and she appeared, in spite of
her disorder, so perfectly charming to the
stranger, that he could not quit the place
without joining his endeavours to those of
the good natur'd hostess for her consolation,
and had the satisfaction to find them
much more effectual for that purpose. 
The afflicted fair one finding herself
somewhat better, thanked the good woman
in the politest terms for the pains
she had been at; but the gentleman would 

not be denied seeing her safe home in a
coach, saying, the air on a sudden might
have too violent an effect on her so lately
recovered spirits, and that it was not fit
she should be alone in case of accidents. 
Miss Flora was easily prevailed upon to
accept this obliging offer;—he attended
her home,—stayed about half an hour
with her, and entreated she would give
him permission to come the next day, and
enquire after her health. 
She knew the world too well, and the
disposition of mankind in general, not to
see that there was something more than
mere compassion in the civilities he had
shewn to her;—she examined his person,
—his behaviour, and found nothing in
either that was not perfectly agreeable; 
and though she had really loved mr.
Trueworth to the greatest excess that woman
could do, yet, as she knew he was
irrecoverably lost, she looked upon a new
attachment as the only sure means of putting
the past out of her head. 
A very few visits served to make an
eclaircissment of the thoughts they mutually
had entertained of each other, and as
he had found by the woman of the tavern,
that the distress of this young lady had 

been occasioned by a love quarrel with a
gentleman, who had brought her into that
house, he began with expressing the utmost
abhorrence of that injustice and ingratitude,
which some were capable of; 
—‘but,’ said he, ‘if some of us have
neither love nor honour for those that
love us, we all certainly love our own
happiness, and he must be stupid and
insensible, indeed,’ added he, embracing
her with the warmest transport, ‘who
could not find it eternally within these
arms.’ 
‘You all talk so,’ answered she, with
the most engaging smile she could put on; 
—‘but as my youth,—innocence,— 
and, perhaps, a little mixture of female
vanity have once misled me, it behoves
me to be extremely cautious how the
tender impulse gets a second time possession
of my heart.’ 
In fine, she put him not to a too great
expence of vows and protestations before
she either was, or pretended to be convinced
of the sincerity of his passion, and
also rewarded it in as ample a manner as
his soul could wish. 
It is certain, that for a time, this new
gallant behaved with the extremest fondness 

towards her,—did every thing that the
most ardent lover could do to please her,
—he treated her,—carried her to all
public places of entertainment, and what
in her present circumstances was most necessary
to her, was continually making her
very rich and valuable presents. 
But it could not be expected, that an
amour entered into in this manner, and
which had no solid esteem on either side
for its foundation, would be of any long
continuance:—the gentleman had a great
deal of good nature, but was gay and inconstant,
as the most variable of his sex; 
—he found a new charm in every new
face that presented itself to him,—and as
he wanted no requisites to please the fair,
he too seldom failed in his intents upon
them. 
Miss Flora was not ignorant, that he
had many amusements of this kind, even
while he kept up the most tender correspondence
with her; but perceiving, that
both reproaches and complaints were equally
in vain with a man of his humour, she
had the cunning to forbear persecuting
him with either, and by appearing always
easy, degagée, and unconcerned, preserved
her acquaintance with him, and received 

proofs of his liberality long after
she had lost those of his inclination. 
On being told, that he was going on a
party of pleasure into the south of France,
she exercised all her wit and artifice to
engage him to permit her to be one of
the company; but he treated this request
as a mere bagatelle,—said the thing was
utterly impracticable,—that none of the
gentlemen took any ladies with them,— 
so he would not have her think of it. 
It was in order to take her leave of
him, before his departure, that she was
going to his lodgings when lady Mellasin
had sent for her into the park. 
The cool reception he had given her
sent her home in a very ill humour, which
was greatly heightened by a letter, which
she found mrs. Prinks had left for her on
the table. 
That woman having joined her lady in
the park, and consulted together what was
to be done, they took a hackney coach,
and drove to an obscure part of the town,
where they hired lodgings in a feigned
name, after which mrs. Prinks hurried
home,—packed up what cloaths, and
other necessaries she thought would be 

immediately wanted, and after having
wrote a short account to miss Flora of the
misfortune that had happened, and given
her directions where to come, returned
with all haste to her disconsolate lady. 
