


Contains a brief recital of several
very remarkable, and equally affecting
occurrences, of which the last mentioned
extraordinary adventure was productive,
and which may justly enough
be look'd upon as yet more extraordinary
than even the adventure itself. 

Mr. Munden, who was no less pleased
and vain on the confidence his noble
patron seemed to repose in him, than he 

was ambitious of the favours he hoped
to receive from him, had been extremely
diligent in the execution of that commission
he had been entrusted with, but
found much more difficulty in it than he
could have imagined. 
He was told at the bar of the Cocoatree,
that the gentleman he enquired for
had not been there since morning;—that
sir John E&wblank; had taken him home with
him to dinner, and that in all probability
they were still together. 
Mr. Munden, on this, order'd the coachman
to drive to Mark-lane with all the
speed he could, but had, on his coming
there, the mortification to hear, that Mr.
W&wblank;had left sir John about a quarter of
an hour before, and was gone to the
other end of the town; on which he drove
back to the Cocoa-tree, thinking he
might now meet him there, but was again
disappointed. 
They informed him, however, that mr.
W&wblank;had just called in, but staid no
longer than to tell them he would be
there again in half an hour. —Mr. Munden
was impatient at this delay, but could
not think of returning to lord ****, without
having done the business he was sent 

upon: he therefore sat down, and
waited till the other came, which was
somewhat sooner than the time he had
been made to hope. 
These gentlemen, though far from being
intimately acquainted, were not altother
strangers, having frequently met at
the levee of lord ****. —They now saluted
each other with the utmost politeness,
after which, mr. Munden drawing
him to the most retired part of the room,
‘I have had a chace after you, sir,’ said
he, ‘for a good part of this afternoon,
and which would have been impertinent
in me, if not excuseable by my being
under an indispensible obligation of
seeing you.’ 
‘Then, sir,’ replied the other, ‘whatever
the business be, I shall think myself
happy in being found. —This, sir, will
inform you,’ said mr. Munden, giving
him the letter. From lord ****, cried
mr. W&wblank;, as soon as he saw the superscription,
—‘It is so,’ answered mr.
Munden, ‘and I am heartily sorry for
the occasion.’ 
Mr. W&wblank; made no reply to what mr.
Munden said, till he had examined the
contents of the letter; and then after puting 

it into his pocket with a careless air,
‘I see into the meaning of this,’ said he; 
‘an ugly accident, which I have but
lately discovered, has, I believe, misrepresented
me to his lordship:—could I
be capable of what he at present thinks
I am, I should be utterly unworthy of
the condescention he vouchsafes me by
this invitation;—but, sir, all this is
sounded on a mistake, which may easily
be rectified;—I will not give his
lordship the trouble of going to the
green park, I will wait on him at
his own house at the hour he mentions,
and if what I have to say to him, does
not fully convince him of my innocence,
will follow either to that, or any other
place he pleases, tho' no consideration
in the world, except his own commands,
should compel me to draw my
sword against a breast I so much love
and reverence.’ 
Mr. Munden replied, that he should
be extremely glad to find an affair, which
at present seemed to threaten such fatal
consequences, was amicably made up; and
after having assured him, that he would
deliver what he had said, to his lordship,
in the most exact manner, was about to
take his leave, but could not do it so
soon as he desired, the other still detaining 

him by beginning some subject or
other of conversation, which, how frivolous
soever, mr. Munden could not break
off too suddenly without incuring censure
of abruptness, and ill manners. 
Lord **** in the mean time was in
the utmost agitation;—not for the
return of mr. Munden, for he very well
knew the message he would bring, but
he had taken a great deal of pains to no
purpose:—the beauty of mrs. Munden
had inspired him with the most eager desire
of enjoying her;—the gaiety of her
temper, joined to the temptations in his
power to offer, had given him an almost
assured hope of gaining her;—and now
to find himself thus repulsed,—repulsed
with such disdain, left a surprize upon him
which very much increased the shock of
his disappointment. 
Besides, as he doubted not but she
would inform her husband of all that had
passed between them, it gave the most
mortal stab to that haughtiness too incident
to opulence and grandeur, to reflect
he had given a man, so much beneath
him, an opportunity of triumphing over
him in his mind. 
He had not recovered his confusion,
and was walking backwards and forwards
in his drawing-room, with a disordered
motion, when mr. Munden returned, to
whom he neither spoke, nor look'd upon. 
The satisfaction this gentleman had
felt on finding the business of his embassy
was like to terminate so happily, was
very much damped at seeing himself received
in this manner. 
‘I did not expect to find your lordship
alone,’ said mr. Munden,—‘I believe
not,’ replied he; ‘but an unlucky accident
at home deprived me of my
cousin's company, and your wife it
seems did not think herself safe with
me.’ 
These last words, and the contemptuous
tone in which they were expressed,
put him into the extremest consternation; 
—‘I hope, my lord,’ cried he, ‘that
mrs. Munden cannot have so far forgot
herself as to have acted in any manner
unbecoming of the respect due to your
lordship. —Fine women will have their
caprices,’ resumed the peer;—‘but
no matter, let no more be said of it.’ 
Mr. Munden then proceeded to repeat
what mr. W&wblank; had said to him, but his 

lordship took no notice, and seemed entirely
unconcerned all the time he was
speaking; till the other adding, that if
his lordship thought proper, he would
attend him in the morning, in order to
be at hand, in case the event should require
his presence:—on which the peer
replied peevishly,—‘No, no;—you need
not come,—I believe there will be no
occasion;—if there be, I can send for
you.’ 
After this, mr. Munden easily perceiving
his company was rather trouble-some
than agreeable, made a low obeisance,
and withdrew, almost distracted in
his mind at this sudden turn of temper
in his patron, and no less impatient to
hear what his wife had to say on that account. 
It was not in one of the best of humours,
as the reader may easily imagine,
that he now came home, nor did he find
mrs. Munden in one very proper to alleviate
his vexation. She was extremely pensive,
and when he asked her in somewhat of
an imperious voice the reason of having
lest lord **** in so abrupt a manner, ‘When
you,’ said she, ‘forsook the guardianship
of my honour, it was time for me to
take the defence of it upon myself, 

which I could do no other way than by
flight.’ 
‘What is it you mean?’ cried he,— 
‘I am certain my lord has too much
friendship for me, to offer any rudenese
to you. —Be not too certain,’ answered
she, ‘of the friendship of that base
great man.’ —She then began to repeat
the discourse, with which his lordship
had entertained her, after being left alone
with him, but had gone through a very
small part of it, before her husband interrupted
her, saying with a kind of a
malicious sneer,—that he was positive
there was nothing at all in what she apprehended; 
—that it was impossible for
the noble lord to be in earnest when he
talked to her in such terms;—that she
had only been deceived by her own vanity,
to mistake for a serious design
upon her virtue, what was only meant
for meer gallantry;—and then added
with more passion, that he feared her idle
resentment had lost him all his interest
with the best of friends. 
‘Good Heaven!’—cried she,—‘defend
me, and all virtuous women from
such gallantries;—but know, sir, continued
she, with a great deal of vehemence; 
—‘that but for that idle resentment, 

as you are pleased to call it,
my ruin and your dishonour would have
been completed by this best of friends.’ 
‘How,’ said mr. Munden eagerly,— 
‘he did not sure proceed to actions?’ 
Perceiving he was now in a disposition
to listen with more attention to what
she said than hitherto he had done, she
hesitated not to acquaint him with every
particular of his lordship's behaviour to
her, and the means by which she had desended
herself. 
During this recital, mr. Munden bit
his lips, and appeared in very great emotions; 
—he spoke not a word however,
till his fair wife, pitying the anxieties she
saw him under, desired him to think no
more of this accident since it was so happily
got over: —‘It may be so in your
opinion,’ answered he fiercely,—‘but
not in mine: —I foresee the consequences,
though you perhaps think
not of them. —'Tis true, my lord's behaviour
is not to be justified, nor can
yours in regard to me be so; you ought
to have considered the dependance I
had on him, and not have carried
things with so high a hand;—you
might have doubtless evaded this attempt
by more gentle, and less affrontive 

methods; but that cursed pride of
yours must be gratified, though at the
expence of all my expectations:’— 
With these words he flung out of the room,
and this was all the return she met with
from her ungrateful husband, for having
resisted with such courage and resolution,
temptations, which some women would
have thought themselves absolved for
yielding to the force of. 
Ill-natured and perverse as mr. Munden
was, it must be confessed, that his present
situation nevertheless merited some
compassion:—he had a great share of
ambition;—loved both pleasure and
grandeur to an excess; and though far
from being of a generous disposition, the
pride and vanity of his humour made him
do many things through ostentation,
which his estate would not well support:
—he kept company with persons of
tank and fortune, much superior to his
own, and as he bore an equal part in their
expences whenever he was with them,
he stood in need of some addition to his
revenue:—well therefore might he be
chagrined at an accident, that cast so dark
a cloud over that prospect of interest and
preferment, he had flattered himself with
from lord ****. 

But though this was the main point,
it was not the sole subject of his discontent. 
—The motives for his being sent
by lord **** to mr. W&wblank;, the pretended
quarrel between them, and the trifling
excuses made by the latter to detain him
from making too quick a return, were
all too obvious for him not to be assured
that gentleman was privy, and agreed to
be an assistant in the design his lordship
had upon his wife. 
Mr. W&wblank;, though the representative of
a borough in C&wblank;, was indeed no more
than a creature of lord ****, to whose
interest alone he was indebted for his seat
in parliament; but it was not because mr.
Munden knew him to be obliged to do
every thing enjoined by his lordship, that
restrained the resentment he conceived
against him from breaking out, but because
he considered that a quarrel between them
on this score might occasion the affair
to become public, and expose both himself
and wife to the ridicule of as many
as should hear of it. 
Wrath, when enervate, especially if
inflamed by any just provocation, is certainly
very dreadful to be borne, and what
this injured husband sustained in the first
emotions of it, must have excited the pity
of every reader of this history, if he 

had not afterwards meanly vented it where
he had not the least occasion for disgust,
but rather of the highest love, tenderness,
and admiration. 
In the midst of these perplexities, however,
let us leave him for a while, and
return to her whose beauty had been the
innocent cause of all this trouble to him,
and danger to herself. 
Wonderful indeed were the effects this
last adventure produced in her;—many
times before had she been on the very
verge of ruin, and as often indebted
merely to fortune for her preservation
from the mischiefs, into which her inadvertency
had almost plunged her;—but
none of those dangers,—those escapes
had ever been capable of making any
lasting impression on her mind, or fixing
her resolution to avoid running again into
the same mistakes. 
The cruel reproaches and reflections
cast on her by mr. Munden, filled her
not now with the least resentment; for
though she deserved them not upon the
score he made them, yet she was conscious,
that she did so for going to the
house of lord ****, after having the 

strongest reasons to believe he had dishonourable
intentions towards her. 
She blushed to remember, that she had
given herself leave to be pleased at the
thoughts of appearing amiable in the
eyes of that great man: —‘Good God!’ 
cried she, ‘what infatuation possess'd me! 
—Am I not married! —Is not all I
am the property of mr. Munden! — 
Is it not highly criminal in any one to
offer to invade his right! —And can I
be so wicked to take delight in the
guilt, to which I am in a manner accessory!’ 
‘The vanities of my virgin state,
continued she, ‘might plead some excuse; 
—but nothing now can be urged
in my defence for persevering in them. 
—The pride of subduing hearts is
mine no more;—no man can now
pretend to love me but with the basest
and most shameful views. —The man
who dares to tell me he adores me,
contradicts himself by that very declaration,
and while he would persuade
me he has the highest opinion of me,
discovers he has in reality the meanest’ 
In fine, she now saw herself, and the
errors of her past conduct in their true 

light: —‘How strange a creature have I
been!’ cried she, ‘how inconsistent
with myself! I knew the character of a
coquet both silly and insignificant, yet
did every thing in my power to acquire
it:—I aimed to inspire awe and reverence
in the men, yet by my imprudence
emboldened them to the most unbecoming
freedoms with me:—I had sense
enough to discern real merit in those
who profest themselves my lovers, yet
affected to treat most ill those, in whom
I found the greatest share of it. —Nature
has made me no fool, yet not one
action of my life has given any proof
of common reason. 
‘Even in the greatest, and most serious
affair of life—that of marriage’— 
added she, with a deep sigh, ‘have I
not been governed wholly by caprice! 
—I rejected mr. Trueworth, only
because I thought I did not love him
enough, yet gave myself to mr. Munden,
whom at that time I did not
love at all, and who has since, alass,
taken little care to cultivate that affection
I have laboured to feel for him.’ 
In summing up this charge against herself,
she found that all her faults, and her
misfortunes had been owing either to an 

excess of vanity;—a mistaken pride,— 
or a false delicacy:—the two former appeared
now too contemptible in her eyes
for her not to determine utterly to extirpate. 
—But the latter she found less reason
to correct, since it happened only in
regard to mr. Trueworth, and could never
happen again, as both their marriages
had put a total end to all tender communication
between them. 
This change in mrs. Munden's humour,
great and sudden as it was, did not however
prove a transient one:—every day,
every hour confirmed her in it;—and if
at any time her natural vivacity made her
seem a little pleased on hearing her wit,
—her beauty,—or any other perfection,
or accomplishment, too lavishly extolled,
she presently checked herself for it, and
assumed a look of reserve, which though
less haughty than she had sometimes put
on upon different occasions, had not the
less effect, and seldom failed to awe the
flatterer into silence, a proof of which
the reader will immediately be presented
with. 
