

The Contentment that appear'd in
the Faces of the new married Pair,
added so much to the Impatience of
the Chevalier Brillian to see
his belov'd Ansellina, that in
a few Days after the Wedding, he
took leave of them, and departed for Amiens: But
as human Happiness is seldom of long Continuance,
and Alovisa placing the Ultimate of her's
in the Possession of her charming Husband, secure
of that, despis'd all future Events; 'twas time for
Fortune, who long enough had smil'd, now to
turn her Wheel, and punish the Presumption that
defy'd her Power. 
As they were one Day at Dinner, a Messenger
came to acquaint Count D'elmont that Monsieur
Frankville was taken, suddenly, so violently 

ill, that his Physicians despair'd of his Life; 
and that he begg'd to speak with him immediately:
This Gentleman had been Guardian to the
Count during his Minority; and the Care and
Faithfulness with which that Trust had been discharg'd,
made him, with Reason, to regret the
Danger of losing so good a Friend: He delay'd
the Visit not a Moment, and found him as the Servant
had told him, in a Condition which could
cherish no Hopes of Recovery; as soon as he perceiv'd
the Count come into the Chamber, he desir'd
to be left alone with him, which Order being
presently obey'd: My dear Charge, (said he,
taking him by the Hand, and pressing it to his
trembling Bosom) you see me at the Point of
Death; but the Knowledge of your many Virtues,
and the Confidence I have that you will not deny
me the Request I am about to ask, makes me support
the Thoughts of it with Moderation. The
other assuring him of his Readiness to serve him in
any Command, encourag'd the old Gentleman to
prosecute his Discourse in this manner: You are
not ignorant, my Lord, (rejoin'd he) that my
Son (the only one I have) is on his Travels, gone
by my Approbation, and his own Desires to make
the Tour of Europe; but I have a Daughter, whose
Protection I would entreat you to undertake; her
Education in a Monastery has hitherto kept her intirely
unacquainted with the Gaieties of a Court,
or the Conversation of the Beau Monde; and I
have sent for her to Paris, purposely to introduce
her into Company proper for a young Lady, who
I never design'd for a Recluse; I know not whether
she will be here time enough to close my
Eyes, but if you will promise to receive her into
your House, and not suffer her artless and unexperienc'd
Youth to fall into those Snares which
are daily laid for Innocence, and take so far a
Care, that neither she, nor the Fortune I leave 

her, be thrown away upon a Man unworthy of
her, I shall die well satisfy'd. D'elmont answer'd
this Request with repeated Assurances of
fulfilling it, and frankly offer'd, if he had no other
Person in whom he rather would confide, to
take the Management of the whole Estate he left
behind him, till young Frankville should return. 
The anxious Father was transported at this
Favour, and thank'd him in Terms full of Gratitude
and Affection; they spent some Hours in
settling this Affair, and perhaps had not ended it
so soon, if Word had not been brought, that the
young Lady, his Daughter, was alighted at the
Gate. 'Tis impossible to express the Joy which fill'd
the old Gentleman's Heart at this News, and he
began afresh to put the Count in Mind of what he
had promis'd concerning her. As they were in
this endearing, tho' mournful, Entertainment, the
matchless Melliora enter'd; the Surprize and
Grief for her Father's Indisposition (having heard
of it but since she came into the House) hindered
her from regarding any thing but him, and throwing
herself on her Knees by the Bedside, wash'd
the Hand which he stretch'd out to raise her with,
in a Flood of Tears, accompany'd with Expressions,
which, unstudy'd and incoherent as they
were, had a Delicacy in 'em, that shew'd her Wit
not inferiour to her Tenderness, and that no Circumstance
could render her otherwise than the
most lovely Person in the World: When the first
Transports of her Sorrow were over, and that
with much ado she was persuaded to rise from the
Posture she was in: The Affliction I see thee in,
my dear Child, (said her Father) would be a vast
Addition to the Agonies I feel, were I not so happy
as to be provided with Means for a Mitigation
of it; think not in losing me thou wilt be left wholly
an Orphan; this worthy Lord will dry thy Tears:
Therefore my last Commands to thee shall be, to 

oblige thee to endeavour to deserve the Favours he
is pleas'd to do us in accepting thee for—He
would have proceeded, but his Physicians (who
had been in Consultation in the next Room) coming
in, prevented him; and Count D'elmont taking
the charming Melliora by the Hand, led
her to the Window, and beginning to speak some
Words of Consolation to her, the Softness of his
Voice, and graceful Manner with which he deliver'd
himself (always the inseparable Companions
of his Discourse, but now more particularly
so) made her cast her Eyes upon him; but, alas!
he was not an Object to be safely gaz'd at, and
in spight of the Grief she was in, she found something
in his Form which dissipated it; a kind of
painful Pleasure, a Mixture of Surprize, and Joy,
and Doubt, ran thro' her in an instant; her Father's
Words suggested to her Imagination, that
she was in a Possibility of calling the charming
Person that stood before her, by a Name more
tender than that of Guardian, and all the Actions,
Looks, and Address of D'elmont serv'd but to
confirm her in that Belief: For now it was, that
this Insensible began to feel the Power of Beauty,
and that Heart which had so long been impregnable,
surrender'd in a Moment; the first Sight
of Melliora gave him a Discomposure he had
never felt before, he sympathiz'd in all her Sorrows,
and was ready to join his Tears with hers; 
but when her Eyes met his, the God of Love
seem'd there to have united all his Lightenings for
one effectual Blaze; their Admiration of each
other's Perfections was mutual, and tho' he had
got the Start in Love, as being touch'd with that
all-mighty Dart, before her Affliction had given
her leave to regard him, yet the Softness of her
Soul made up for that little Loss of Time, and it
was hard to say whose Passion was the strongest; 
she listen'd to his Condolement, and Assurances of 

everlasting Friendship, with a Pleasure which was
but too visible in her Countenance, and more enflam'd
the Count. As they were exchanging Glances,
as if each vied with the other who should
dart the fiercest Rays, they heard a sort of ominous
Whispering about the Bed, and presently
one of those who stood near it, beckon'd them to
come thither; the Physicians had found Monsieur
Frankville in a much worse Condition than
they left him in, and soon after perceiv'd evident
Symptoms in him, of approaching Death; and
indeed there were but a very few Moments between
him and that other unfathomable World; 
the Use of Speech had left him, and he could take
no other Leave of his Daughter than with his
Eyes, which sometimes were cast tenderly on her,
sometimes on the Count, with a beseeching Look,
as it were, to conjure him to be careful of his
Charge, then up to Heaven, as witness of the
Trust he repos'd in him. There could not be a
Scene more melancholy than this dumb Farewel; 
and Melliora, whose soft Disposition had never
before been shock'd, had not Courage to support
so dreadful a one as this, but fell upon the Bed
just as her Father breath'd his last, as motionless
as he. It is impossible to represent the Agonies
which fill'd the Heart of D'elmont at this
View; he took her in his Arms, and assisted those
who were endeavouring to recover her, with a
Wildness in his Countenance, a trembling Horror
shaking all his Fabrick in such a Manner, as might
have easily discover'd to the Spectators (if they
had not been too busily employ'd to take notice of
it) that he was actuated by a Motive far more
powerful than that of Compassion. As soon as
she came to herself, they forc'd her from the dead
Body of her Father (to which she clung) and carried
her into another Room; and it being judg'd 

convenient that she should be remov'd from that
House, where every thing wou'd serve but to remind
her of her Loss, the Count desir'd the Servants
of Monsieur Frankville shou'd be
call'd, and then in the presence of 'em all, declar'd
their Master's last Request, and order'd an Account
of all Affairs shou'd be brought to his House,
where he wou'd immediately conduct their young
Lady, as he had promis'd to her Father. If Melliora
had been without any other Cause of
Grief, this Eclarcisment had been sufficient to have
made her miserable: She had already entertained
a most tender Affection for the Count, and had
so little Discernment as not to be sensible she had
made the like Impression on him; but now she
wak'd as from a Dream of promis'd Joys, to certain
Woes; and the same Hour which gave Birth
to her Passion, commenc'd an adequate Despair,
and kill'd her Hopes just budding. 
Indeed there never was any Condition so
truly deplorable as that of this unfortunate Lady; 
she had just lost a dear and tender Father, whose
Care was ever watchful for her, her Brother was
far off, and she had no other in the World to apply
herself to for Comfort or Advice, not even an
Acquaintance at Paris, or Friend, but him who
but newly was become so, and whom she found
it dangerous to make use of, whom she knew it was
a Crime to love, yet cou'd not help loving; the
more she thought, the more she grew distracted,
and the less able to resolve on any Thing; a thousand
times she call'd on Death to give her ease,
but the pale Tyrant flies from the Pursuer; she had
not been yet long enough acquainted with the Ills
of Life, and must endure (how unwilling soever)
her Part of Sufferings in common with the rest of
human Kind. 

As soon as D'elmont had given some necessary
Directions to the Servants, he came to the
Couch, where she was sitting in a fix'd and silent
Sorrow (tho' inwardly toss'd with various and violent
Agitations) and offering her his Hand, entreated
her to permit him to wait on her from that
House of Woe. Alas! said she, to what purpose
shou'd I remove, who bear my Miseries about
me? Wretch that I am!—a Flood of Tears here
interpos'd, and hinder'd her from proceeding,
which falling from such lovely Eyes, had a magnetick
Influence to draw the same from every Beholder; 
but D'elmont, who knew that was not
the way to comfort her, dry'd his as soon as possible,
and once more begg'd she wou'd depart:
Suffer my return then (answer'd she) to the Monastery,
for what have I to do in Paris, since I have
lost my Father? By no means, Madam (resum'd
the Count hastily) that were to disappoint your Father's
Designs, and contradict his last Desires; believe,
most lovely Melliora (continu'd he, taking
her by the Hand and letting fall some Tears
which he cou'd not restrain, upon it) that I bear at
least an equal Share in your Affliction, and lament
for you, and for myself: Such a Regard my grateful
Soul paid Monsieur Frankville for all his
wondrous Care and Goodness to me, that in his
Death methinks I am twice an Orphan. But
Tears are fruitless to re-inspire his now cold
Clay, therefore must transmit the Love and Duty
I owed him living, to his Memory dead, and an
exact Performance of his Will; and since he
thought me worthy of so vast Trust as Melliora,
I hope she will be guided by her Father's Sentiments,
and belive that D'elmont (tho' a Stranger
to her) has a Soul not uncapable of Friendship. 
Friendship! did I say? (rejoin'd he softning
his Voice) that Term is too mean to express a 

Zeal like mine, the Care, the Tenderness, the
Faith, the fond Affection of Parents,—Brothers,
—Husband,—Lovers, all compriz'd in
one, one great unutterable, comprehensive Meaning,
is mine for Melliora! She return'd no
Answer but Sighs, to all he said to her; but he renewing
his Entreaties, and urging her Father's Commands,
she was at last prevail'd upon to go into
his Chariot, which had waited at the Door all the
Time of his being there. 
As they went, he left nothing unsaid that he
believ'd might tend to her Consolation; but she
had Griefs, which at present he was a Stranger to,
and his Conversation, in which she found a thousand
Charms, rather encreass'd than diminish'd the
Trouble she was in: Every Word, every Look of
his, was a fresh Dagger to her Heart, and in
spight of the Love she bore her Father, and the
unfeign'd Concern his sudden Death had given her,
she was now convinc'd that Count D'elmont's
Perfections were her severest Wounds. 
When they came to his House, he presented
her to Alovisa, and giving her a brief Account
of what had happen'd, engag'd that Lady to receive
her with all imaginable Demonstrations of
Civility and Kindness. 
He soon left the two Ladies together, pretending
Business; but indeed to satisfy his Impatience,
which long'd for an Opportunity to meditate on
this Adventure. But his Reflections were now
grown far less pleasing than they used to be; real
Sighs flew from his Breast uncall'd; and Melliora's
Image in dazling Brightness! in terrible
Array of killing Charms! fir'd him with (impossible
to be attain'd) Desires: He found by sad Experience
what it was to Love, and to Despair. He
admir'd! ador'd! and wish'd, even to Madness!
yet had too much Honour, too much Gratitude for
the Memory of Monsieur Frankville; and 

too sincere an Awe for the lovely Cause of his Uneasiness,
to form a Thought that cou'd encourage
his new Passion. What wou'd he not have given
to have been unmarried? How often did he curse
the Hour in which Alovisa's Fondness was discover'd? 
And how much more his own Ambition,
which prompted him to take Advantage of it, and
hurry'd him precipitately to a Hymen, where Love
(the noblest Guest) was wanting? It was in these
Racks of Thought, that the unfortunate Amena
was remembred, and he cou'd not forbear acknowledging
the Justice of that Doom, which inflicted
on him these very Torments he had given her. 
A severe Repentance seiz'd on his Soul, and Alovisa,
for whom he never had any thing more than
an Indifferency, now began to seem distasteful to
his Fancy; he look'd on her, as indeed she was,
the chief Author of Amena's Misfortunes, and
abhorr'd her for that Infidelity; but when he consider'dher,
as the Bar 'twixt him and Melliora,
she appear'd like his ill Genius to him, and he
cou'd not support the Thoughts of being oblig'd
to love her (or at least to seem as if he did) with
Moderation. In the midst of these Reflections,
his Servant came in, and deliver'd a Letter to him,
which had been just left by the Post. The Count
immediately knew the Hand to be Amena's, and
was cover'd with the utmost Confusion and Remorse
when he read these Lines. 


To the too Charming and Pefidious D'elmont.
Now hopes, and Fears, and Jealousies are over! 
Doubt is no more! you are for ever lost! and
my unfaithful, happy Rival! triumphs in your
Arms, and my Undoing! —I need not wish you
Joy, the haste you made to enter into Hymen's Bonds,
and the more than ordinary Pomp with which that
Ceremony was celebrated, assures me you are highly satisfied
with your Condition; and that any future Testimonies
of the Friendship of so wretched a Creature
as Amena, wou'd be receiv'd by you, with the
same Disregard, as those she has given you of a more
tender Passion. —Shameful Remembrance! oh that I
cou'd blot it out! —Erace from the Book of Time
those fond deluded Hours! Forget I ever saw the
lovely false D'elmont! Ever listned to his soft
persuasive Accents! and thought his Love a mighty
Price for Ruin—My Father writes that your are
married, commands my Return to Paris, and assume
an Air as gay, and chearful as that with which I
used to appear. —Alas! how little does he know his
Daughter's Heart? and how impossible is it, for me
to obey him: Can I look on you as the Husband of
Alovisa, without remembring you were once the
Lover of Amena? Can Love like mine, so fierce,
so passionately tender, e'er sink to a calm Indifference? 
Can I behold the fond Endearments of your
bridal Joys (which you'd not be able to restrain, even
before me) and not burst with Envy? No, the Sight
wou'd turn me quite distracted, and I shou'd commit
some desperate Violence that wou'd undoe us all.— 

Therefore, I hide myself for ever from it, bid an everlasting
Adieu to all the gay Delights and Pleasures of
my Youth. —To all the Pomp and Splendour of the
Court. —To all that the mistaken World calls Happiness. 
—To Father, Friends, Relations, all that's dear
—But your Idea, and that, not even these consecrated
Walls. nor Iron Gates keep out; sleeping or waking
you are ever with me; you mingle with my most solemn
Devotions; and while I pray to Heaven that I
may think on you no more, a guilty Pleasure rises in
my Soul, and contradicts my Vows! All my Confessions
are so many Sins, and the same Breath which
tells my Ghostly Father I abjure your Memory, speaks
your dear Name with Transport. Yes—Cruel! Ungrateful! 
—Faithless as you are, I still do love you— 
Love you to that infinite Degree, that now, methinks,
fir'd with thy Charms (repenting all I've said) I
cou'd wish even to renew those Moments of my
Ruin! —Pity me D'elmont, if thou hast Humanity. 
—Judge what the Rackings of my Soul must
be, when I resolve, with all this Love, this Languishment
about me, never to see you more. 
Every thing is preparing for my Reception into Holy
Orders (how unfit I am, Heaven knows) and in a few
Days I shall put on the Veil which excludes me from
the World for ever: Therefore if these distracted Lines
are worth an Answer, it must be speedy, or it will
not come to my Hands; perhaps not find me living— 
I can no more—Farewel (thou dear Destroyer of my
Soul.) 
Eternally farewel, Amena. 
P. S. I do not urge you to write, Alovisa (I
wish I cou'd not say your Wife) will perhaps think
it too great a Condescension, and not suffer you
so long from her Embraces. —Yet if you can get
loose—But you know best what's proper to be
done—Forgive the Restlessness of a dispairing 

Wretch, who cannot cease to love, tho' from this
Moment she must cease to tell you so—Once more
and for ever, 
Adieu. 

Had this Letter came a Day sooner, 'tis probable
it wou'd have had but little Effect on the
Soul of D'elmont; but his Sentiments of Love
were now so wholly chang'd, that what before he
wou'd but have laugh'd at, and perhaps despis'd,
now fill'd him with Remorse and Anguish. He
read it over several Times, and found so many
Proofs in it of a sincere and constant Affection,
that he began to pity her with a Tenderness like
that of a Relation, but no more. The charming
Melliora had engross'd all his fonder Wishes; 
else it is not impossible but that Alovisa might
have had more Reason to fear her Rivalship after
Marriage than before. That Lady having been
without the Presence of her dear Husband some
Hours, had not patience to remain any longer
without seeing him; and making an Excuse to
Melliora for leaving her alone, came running
to the Closet where he was; how unwelcome she
was grown, the Reader may imagine; he receiv'd
her, not as he was wont; the Gaiety which used
to sparkle in his Eyes (at once declaring and creating
amorous Desires) now gave Place to a sullen
Gloominess, he look'd not on her, or if by chance he
did, 'twas more with Anger than with Love; in spite
of his Endeavours to conceal it, she was too quicksighted
(as all are that truly love) not to be sensible
of this Alteration. However, she took no
notice of it, but kissing and embracing him (according
to her Custom, whenever they were alone)
begg'd him to leave his solitary Amusement, and
help to comfort the afflicted Lady he brought there. 
Her Endearments serv'd but to encrease his Peevishness,
and heighten her Surprize at his Behaviour; 

and indeed, the Moment that she enter'd the Closet,
the last of her Tranquillity. 
When with much Persuasions she had prevail'd
with him to go with her into the Room where
Melliora was, he appear'd so disorder'd at the
second Sight of that Charmer, as wou'd certainly
have let Alovisa into the Secret of his Passion,
had she not been retir'd to a Window to recover
herself from the Confusion her Husband's Coldness
had thrown her in, and by that fortunate Disregard
of his Looks at the critical Instant, given him (who
never wanted Presence of Mind) leave to form both
his Countenance and Manner of Address, so as to
give no Suspicion of the Truth. 
This little Company was very far from being
entertaining to one another; every one had their
particular Cogitations, and were not displeas'd not
to be interrupted in them. It growing late, Alovisa
conducted Melliora to a Chamber
which she had order'd to be prepar'd for her, and
then retir'd to her own, hoping that when the
Count shou'd come to bed, she might be able to
make some Discovery of the Cause of his Uneasiness:
but she was deceiv'd, he spoke not to her,
and when by a thousand little Inventions she urg'd
him to reply to what she said, it was in such a Fashion
as only let her see, that he was extremely
troubled at something, but could not guess at what. 
As soon as Day broke, he rose, and shutting himself
into his Closet, left her in the greatest Consternation
imaginable; she cou'd not think it possible
that the Death of Monsieur Frankville shou'd
work this Transformation, and knew of no other
Misfortune that had happened: at last she remembred
she had heard one of the Servants say, a Letter
was brought to their Master by the Post, and
began to reflect on every Thing (in the Power of
Fortune to determine) that cou'd threaten a Disturbance,
yet was still as ignorant as ever. She lay not 

long in bed, but putting on her Cloaths with more
Expedition than usual, went to the Closet, resolving
to speak to him in a manner as shou'd oblige
him to put an end to the Uncertainty she was in,
but finding the Door lock'd, her Curiosity made
her look thro' the Keyhole, and she saw him sometimes
very entirely reading a Letter, and sometimes
writing, as tho' it were an Answer to it. A
sudden Thought came into her Head, and she immediately
went softly from the place where she was,
without knocking at the Door, and stay'd in a little
Chamber adjacent to it, where none cou'd pass
to, or from the Closet, without being perceiv'd by
her; she had not waited long, before she heard
the Count ring, and presently saw a Servant enter,
and soon after return with a Letter in his Hand; 
she wou'd not speak to him then, for fear of being
over-heard by her Husband, but following him
down Stairs, and when he came towards the bottom,
call'd to him in a low Voice to tarry till she
came to him; the Fellow durst not but obey, and
there being no body near 'em, commanded him
to deliver her the Letter: But he either afraid or
unwilling to betray his Trust, excus'd himself from
it as well as he cou'd, but she was resolv'd to
have it; and when Threats would not avail, condescended
to Entreaties, to which she added Bribes; 
which last Article join'd to the Promise she made
of never revealing it, won him to her Purpose. 
She had scarce Patience to forbear opening it before
she got to her Chamber: The Superscription
(which she saw was for Amena) fir'd her with Disdain
and Jealousy, and it is hardly possible to imagine,
and much less to describe the Torrent of her
Indignation, when she found that it contain'd these
Words. 


To the Lovely Amena.
You accuse me of Cruelty, when at the same time
you kill me with yours: How vile, how despicable,
must I be grown in your Opinion, when you believe
I can be happy, when you are miserable? —Can I
enjoy the Pleasures of a Court, while you are shut
within a Cloyster? —Shall I suffer the World to be
depriv'd of such a Treasure as Amena, for the Crime
of worthless D'elmont? —No, no fair injur'd
Softness, return, and bless the Eyes of every Beholder! 
Shine out again in your native Lustre, uneclips'd by
Grief, the Star of Beauty! and the Guide of Love. — 
And, if my unlucky Presence will be a Damp to the
Brightness of your Fires, I will for ever quit the
Place. —Tho' I cou'd wish, you'd give me leave sometimes
to gaze upon you, and draw some hop'd Presages
of future Fortune from the Benignity of your
Influence. —Yes, Amena, I wou'd sigh out my
Repentance at your Feet, and try at least to obtain a
Pardon for my Infidelity. —For 'tis true, what you
have heard,—I am marry'd. —But oh! Amena,
Happiness is not always an Attendant on Hymen. — 
However, I yet may call you Friend—I yet may love
you, tho' in a different Way from what I once pretended
to; and believe me, that the Love of Souls, as it is
the most ancommon, especially in our Sex, so 'tis the
most refin'd and noble of all Passions, and such a
Love shall be for ever yours. Even Alovisa (who
has robb'd you of the rest) cannot justly resent my giving
you that Part. —You'll wonder at this Alteration
in my Temper, but 'tis sincere, I am no more the
gay, the roving D'elmont; and when you come to 

Paris, perhaps you will find me in a Condition more
deserving your Pity than Indignation. What shall I
say, Amena? My Crime is my Punishment, I have
offended against Love, and against you, and am, if
possible, as miserable, as guilty: Torn with Remorse
and tortur'd with—I cannot—must not name
it—'tis something which can be term'd no other than
the utmost Severity of my Fate. —Haste then to pity
me, to comfort, to advise me, if (as you say) you yet
retain any Remains of your former Tenderness for this
ungrateful Man. 
D'elmont. 

Ungrateful indeed! cry'd Alovisa,
(transported with Excess of Rage and Jealousy)
Oh the Villain! —What Miseries! What Misfortunes
are these thou talk'st of? What Unhappiness
has waited on thy Hymen? 'Tis I alone am wretched!
base Deceiver! 
Then, as if she wanted to discover something
farther to heighten the Indignation she was in, she
began to read it over again; and indeed the more
she consider'd the Meaning of what she read, the
more her Passions swell'd, 'till they got at last the
entire Dominion of her Reason: She tore the Letter
in a thousand Pieces, and was not much less
unmerciful to her Hair and Garments. 'Tis possible,
that in the Violence of her Fury, she might
have forgot her Promise to the Servant, to vent
some part of it on her Husband, if her Woman,
coming into the Room to know if she was ready
to dress, had not prevented her, by telling her the
Count was gone abroad, and had left Word, that
he should not return 'till the Evening. Alovisa
had thrown herself on the Bed, and the Curtains
being drawn, discover'd not the Disorder she was
in, and which her Pride made her willing should
be still a Secret; therefore dismiss'd her with saying, 

she would call her when she wanted any
thing. Tho' Alovisa was too apt to give a
Loose to her Passions on every Occasion, to the
Destruction of her own Peace, yet she knew well
enough how to disguise 'em, whenever she found
the Concealing of them would be an Advantage to
her Designs: And when the Transports of her
Rage was so far over, as to give her Liberty of
Reflection, and she began to examine the State of
her Affection to the Count, she soon perceiv'd it
had so much the better of all other Considerations,
that in spite of the Injustice she thought him guilty
of to her, she could not perswade herself to do any
thing that might give him a Pretence to quarrel
with her: She thought she had done enough in
intercepting this Letter, and did not doubt but that
Amena would take his not writing to her so much
to Heart, as to prevent her ever returning to Paris,
and resolv'd to omit nothing of her former
Endearments, or make a Shew of being in the least
disoblig'd; this sort of Carriage she imagin'd would
not only lay him more open and unguarded to the
diligent, Watch she design'd to make on all his
Words and Actions, but likewise awaken him to
a just Sense of her Goodness, and his own Ingratitude. 
—She rightly judg'd, that when People are
marry'd, Jealousy was not a proper Method to revive
a decay'd Passion, and that after Possession it
must be only Tenderness, and constant Assiduity to
please, that can keep up Desire fresh and gay: Man
is too arbitrary a Creature to bear the least Contradiction,
where he pretends an absolute Authority; 
and that Wife who thinks by ill Humour and
perpetual Taunts, to make him weary of what she
would reclaim him from, only renders herself
more hateful, and makes that justifiable, which before
was blameable in him. These, and the like
Considerations made Alovisa put on a Countenance
of Serenity, and she so well acted the Part 

of an unsuspecting Wife, that D'elmont was far
from imagining what she had done: However he
still behav'd with the same Caution as before, to
Melliora; and certainly never did People disguise
the Sentiments of their Souls more artfully
than did these three. —Melliora veil'd her secret
Languishments, under the Covert of her
Grief for her Father; the Count his burning Anguish,
in a gloomy Melancholy for the Loss of his
Friend; but Alovisa's Task was much the hardest,
who had no Pretence for Grief, (raging, and
bleeding with neglected Love, and stifled Pride)
to frame her Temper to a seeming Tranquillity— 
All made it their whole Study to deceive each other,
yet none but Alovisa was entirely in the
dark; for the Count and Melliora had but
too true a Guess at one another's Meaning, every
Look of his (for he had Eyes that needed no Interpreter)
gave her Intelligence of his Heart, and
the Confusion which the understanding these Looks
gave her, sufficiently told him how sensible she
was of 'em. —Several Days they liv'd in this manner,
in which time Monsieur Frankville was
interr'd. Which Solemnity the Count took care
should be perform'd with a Magnificence suitable
to the Friendship he publickly profess'd to have
born him, and the secret Adoration his Soul paid
to his Remains. 
Nothing happened of moment, 'till a Day
or two after the Funeral; a Gentleman newly arriv'd
at Paris, came to visit the Count, and gave
him an Account of Amena's having taken the
Habit; how, (said D'elmont interrupting him)
is it possible? —Has she then profess'd? Yes, answer'd
the Gentleman, having a Sister, whom I
always tenderly lov'd, at the Monastery at St. Dennis,
my Affection oblig'd me to make it in my
Way to visit her. Amena was with her at the
Grate when she receiv'd me; I know not how, 

among other Discourses, we happen'd to talk of
the fine Gentlemen of Paris, which it was impossible
to do, without mentioning Count D'elmont;
the Count answer'd not this Compliment as he
would have done at another Time, but only bowing
with an humble Air, gave him Liberty to prosecute
his Discourse; the Moment (resum'd he)
that Amena heard your Name, the Tears run
from her fair Eyes, in such abundance, and she
seem'd oppress'd with so violent a Grief, that she
was not able to stay any longer with us. When
she was gone, my Sister, whom she had made her
Confident, gave me the History of her Misfortunes,
and withal, told me, that the next Day she
was to be initiated into Holy Orders. My Curiosity
engag'd me to stay at St. Dennis, to see the Ceremony
perform'd, which was solemn; but not
with that Magnificence which I expected; it seems
it was Amena's Desire that it should be as private
as possible, and for that Reason, none of
her Relations were there, and several of the Formalities
of Entrance omitted: After it was over,
my Sister beckon'd me to come to the Grate, where
I saw her before, and conjur'd me in the Name of
her new Sister, to give this to your Hands; in
speaking these Words, he took a Letter out of his
Pocket, which the Count immediately opening, to
his great Surprize, found it contain'd, as follows. 

To the Inhuman D'elmont.
To be pity'd by you, and that you should tell me
so, was all the Recompense I ask'd for Loss of Father,
Friends, Reputation, and eternal Peace; 
but now, too late, I find that the fond Maid who 

scorns the World for Love, is sure to meet for her Reward
the Scorn of him she loves—Ungrateful Man! 
Could you not spare one Moment from that long Date
of Happiness, to give a last Farewel to her you have
undone? What would not this barbarous Contempt
have drawn upon you, were I of Alovisa's Temper? 
Sure I am, all that Disdain and Rage could
inspire Malice with, had been inflicted on you, but
you well know my Soul is of another Stamp—Fool that
I was, and little vers'd in the base Arts of Man, believ'd
I might, by Tenderness and faithful Friendship,
gain Esteem, tho' Wit and Beauty, the two great
Provocatives to create Love, were wanting. But do
not think that I am yet so mean as to desire to hear
from you; no, I have put all future Correspondence
with you out of my Power, and hope to drive it even
from my Wish: Whether your Disdain, or the holy
Banner I am listed under, has wrought this Effect, I
know not, but methinks I breath another Air, think
on you with more Tranquillity, and bid you, without
dying, 
Eternally adieu, Amena 
P. S. Let Alovisa know I am no more
her Rival, Heaven has my Soul, and I forgive you
both. 

D'elmont was strangely fir'd at the reading
these Lines, which left him no Room to doubt
that his Letter had miscarried; he could not presently
imagine by what Means, but was resolv'd,
if possible, to find it out. However, he dissembled
his Thoughts 'till the Gentleman had taken
his leave; then calling for the Servant, whom he
had entrusted with the carrying it, he took him by
the Throat, and holding his drawn Sword directly
to his Breast, swore that Moment should be his
last, if he did not immediately confess the Truth:
The poor Fellow frighted almost to Death, trembling, 

and falling on his Knees, implor'd Forgiveness; 
and discover'd all. Alovisa who was in
the next Chamber, hearing her Husband call'd for
that Servant, with a Tone somewhat more imperious
than what he was accustom'd to, and a great
Noise soon after, imagin'd some Accident had
happen'd to betray her, and ran in to know the
Certainty, just as the Count had discharged the
Servant, at once from his Service and his Presence. 
You have done well, Madam, (said D'elmont,
looking on her with Eyes sparkling with Indignation)
you have done well, by your impertinent
Curiosity and Imprudence, to rouze me from my
Dream of Happiness, and remind me, that I am
that wretched Thing a Husband! 'Tis well indeed
(answer'd Alovisa, who saw now that there
was no need of farther Dissimulation) that any
thing can make you remember, both what you
are, and what I am. You, (resum'd he, hastily
interrupting her) have taken an effectual Method
to prove yourself a Wife!—a very Wife!—insolent
—jealous—and censorious! —But, Madam,
(continued he frowning) since you are pleas'd to
assert your Privilege, be assur'd, I too shall take
my turn, and will exert the—Husband! In say- 
this, he flung out of the Room, in spite of her
Endeavours to hinder him, and going hastily thro'
a Gallery which had a large Window that look'd into
the Garden, he perceived Melliora lying on a
green Bank, in a melancholy, but a charming Posture,
directly opposite to the Place where he
was; her Beauties appear'd, if possible, more to
Advantage than ever he had seen them, or at least
he had more Opportunity thus unseen by her, to
gaze upon 'em; he in a Moment lost all the Rage
of Temper he had been in, and his whole Soul
was taken up with Softness; he stood for some
Moments fix'd in silent Admiration; but Love has
small Dominion in a Heart, that can content itself
with a distant Prospect, and there being a Pair of 

Back-Stairs at the farther End of the Gallery, which
led to the Garden; he either forgot, or not regarded
what Construction Alovisa might make
on this private Interview, if by Chance, from any
of the Windows she shou'd be Witness of it. 
Melliora was so intent on a Book she had
in her Hand, that she saw not the Count 'till he
was close enough to her to discern what was the
Subject of her Entertainment, and finding it the
Works of Monsieur L'fontenelle; Philosophy,
Madam, at your Age (said he to her with an
Air, which express'd Surprize) is as wondrous as
your other Excellencies; but I am confident, had
this Author ever seen Melliora, his Sentiments
had been otherwise than now they seem to be,
and he would have been able to write of nothing
else but Love and Her. Melliora blush'd extremely
at his unexpected Presence, and the Complement
he made her; but recollecting herself as
soon as she cou'd; I have a better Opinion of
Monsieur L'fontenelle (answer'd she;) but
if I were really Mistress of as many Charms as you
wou'd make me believe, I should think myself little
beholding to Nature, for bestowing them on
me, if by their Means I were depriv'd of so choice
an Improvement as this Book has given me. 
Thank Heaven, then Madam (resum'd he) that
you were born in an Age successive to that which
has produc'd so many fine Treatises of this kind
for your Entertainment; since (I am very confident)
this, and a long Space of future Time will
have no other Theme, but that which at present
you seem so much averse to. Melliora found
so much difficulty in endeavouring to conceal the
Disorder she was in at this Discourse, that it rendered
her unable to reply; and he, who possibly
guest the occasion of her Silence, taking one of
her Hands, and tenderly pressing it between his,
look'd so full in her Eyes, as heighten'd her Confusion, 

and discover'd to his ravish'd View, what
most he wish'd to find: Ambition, Envy, Hate,
Fear, or Anger, every other Passion that finds Entrance
in the Soul, Art and Discretion, may disguise; 
but Love, tho' it may be feign'd, can never
be conceal'd, not only the Eyes (those true and
most perfect Intelligencers of the Heart) but every
Feature, every Faculty betrays it? It fills the whole
Air of the Person possest with it; it wanders round
the Mouth! plays in the Voice! trembles in the
Accent! and shows itself a thousand different,
nameless Ways? Even Melliora's Care to
hide it, made it more apparent, and the transported
D'elmont not considering where he was,
or who might be a Witness of his Rapture, cou'd
not forbear catching her in his Arms, and grasping
her with an Extasy, which plainly told her what
his Thoughts were, tho' at that time he had not
Power to put 'em into Words; and indeed there
is no greater Proof of a vast and elegant Passion,
than the being uncapable of expressing it. —He
had perhaps held her in this strict Embrace 'till
some Accident had discover'd and separated him
from her, if the Alarm this Manner of Proceeding
gave her Modesty, had not made her force
herself from him. —They both stood in a silent
Consternation, nor was he much less disorder'd at
the Temerity, the violence of his ungovernable
Passion had made him guilty of, than she was at
the Liberty he had taken; he knew not how to
excuse, nor she to reproach; Respect (the constant
Attendant on a sincere Affection) had ty'd his
Tongue, and Shame, mixed with the Uncertainty
after what manner she shou'd resent it, Hers. At
last, the natural Confidence of his Sex encourag'd
him to break this mute Entertainment. —There
are Times, Madam (said he) in which the wisest
have not Power over their own Actions—If therefore
I have offended, impute not the Crime to 

me, but that unavoidable Impulse which for a
Moment hurry'd me from myself; for be assured
while D'elmont can command his Thoughts,
they shall be most obedient to your Wishes. —As
Melliora was about to reply, she saw a Servant
coming hastily to speak to the Count, and
was not a little glad of so favourable an Opportunity
to retire without being oblig'd to continue a
Discourse in which she must either lay a severe
Punishment on her Inclinations by making a Quarrel
with him, or by forgiving him too easily a Trespass
against the strict Precepts of Virtue she had
always profess'd: She made what haste she cou'd
into her Chamber, and carry'd with her a World
of troubled Meditations; she now no longer doubted
of the Count's Passion, and trembled with the
Apprehension of what he might in time be
prompted to; but when she reflected how dear
that Person she had so much cause to fear, was to
her, she thought herself, at once the most unfortunate
and most guilty of her Sex. 
The Servant who gave 'em this seasonable Interruption,
delivered a Letter to his Master, which
he opening hastily, knowing that it came from his
Brother by the Seal, found the Contents as follows: 

I Hop'd (my dearest Friend, and Brother) by this
Day to have embraced you; but Fortune takes Delight
to disappoint our wishes, when highest rais'd
and nearest to their Aim. —The Letter I carry'd from
her, whom I think it my Happiness to call Sister, join'd
with my own Faith, Love, and Assiduity, at length
triumph'd over all the little Niceties and Objections my
Charmer made against our Journey, and she condescended
to order every thing requisite for our Departure
from Amiens shou'd be got ready. —But how
shall I express the Grief, the Horror, the Distraction 

of my Soul, when the very Evening before the Day
we shou'd have set out, as I was sitting with her, a
sudden, but terrible Illness, like the Hand of Death,
seiz'd on her, she fell (oh! my Brother) cold and
speechless in my Arms—Guess, what I endur'd at
that afflicting Moment; all that I had of Man, or
Reason left me; and sure had not the Care of the Baroness
and some other Ladies (whom my Cries drew in
to her Assistance) in a little time recover'd her, I had
not now surviv'd to give you this Account: Again I
saw the Beauties of her Eyes! again, I heard her
Voice! but her Disorder was yet so great, that it was
thought convenient she should be put to bed; the Baroness
seeing my Despair, desired me not to quit her House,
and by that means I had News every Hour, how her
Fever encreas'd or abated, for the Physicians being desired
to deal freely, assured us, that was her Distemper:
For several Days she continu'd in a Condition
that could give us no Hopes of her Recovery; in which
Time, as you may imagine, I was little capable of Writing. 
—The Wildness of my unruly Grief, made me
not be permitted to come into her Chamber; but they
cou'd not, without they had made use of Force, hinder
me from lying at her Door: I counted all her Groans,
heard every Sigh the Violence of her Pain drew from
her, and watch'd the Countenance of every Person who
came out of her Chamber, as Men who wou'd form a
Judgment of future Consequences, do the Signs in Heaven. 
—But I trouble you with this tedious Recital; 
she is now, if there is any Dependance on the Doctor's
Skill, past Danger, tho' not fit to travel, at least this
Month, which gives no small Alleviation to the Greatness
of my Joys (which otherwise wou'd be unbounded)
for her Recovery, since it occasions so long a Separation
from the best of Brothers, and of Friends: Farewel,
may all your wishes meet Success, and an eternal
Round of Happiness attend you: to add to mine, I beg
you'll write by the first Post, which, next to seeing you,
is the greatest I can taste. I am, my Lord, with all 

imaginable Tenderness and Respect, your most affectionate
Brother and humble Servant, 
Brillian. 

The Count judg'd it proper that Alovisa
should see this Letter, because it so much concern'd
her Sister, and was ordering the Servant to carry it to
to her (not being himself willing to speak to her)
just as she was coming towards him: She had receiv'd
a Letter from the Baroness De Beronvill, at
the same time that the Chevalier Brillian's
was brought, and was glad to take the Opportunity
of communicating the Contents of it, in hopes
by this Conversation, to be reconciled to her Husband:
But the gloomy Sullenness of the Humour
he had left her with, return'd at Sight of her; and
after some little Discourse of Family Affairs, which
he could not avoid answering, walk'd carelesly
away: She follow'd him at a distance, 'till he was
got to the Gallery, and perceiving he went toward
his Closet, mended her Pace, and was close to him
when he was going in. My Lord (said she) with
a Voice but half assured, and which would not
have given her leave to utter more, if he had not
interrupted her, by telling her he wou'd be alone,
and shutting the Door hastily upon her; but she
prevented his locking of it, by pushing against it
with all her Force, and he, not exerting his, for
fear of hurting her, suffer'd her Entrance: But
look'd on her with a Countenance so forbidding, as
in spite of the natural Haughtiness of her Temper,
and the Resolution she had made to speak to him,
render'd her unable for some Moments to bring
forth a Word; but the silent Grief which appear'd
in her Face, pleaded more with the good Nature of
the Count, than any thing she could have said:
He began to pity the Unhappiness of her too violent
Affection, and to wish himself in a Capacity 

of returning it; however, he (like other Husbands)
thought it best to keep up his Resentments, and
take this Opportunity of quelling all the Woman in
her Soul, and humbling all the little Remains of
Pride that Love had left her. Madam (resum'd
he) with an Accent, which tho' something more
softned, was still imperious enough, if you have
any Thing of Consequence to impart to me, I desire
you will be as brief as you can, for I would
be left to the Freedom of my Thoughts—Alovisa
cou'd not yet answer, but letting fall a
Shower of Tears, and throwing herself on the
Ground, embraced his Knees with so passionate
a Tenderness, as sufficiently express'd her Repentance
for having been guilty of any thing to disoblige
him. D'elmont was most sensibly touch'd
at this Behaviour, so vastly different from what
he cou'd have expected from the Greatness of her
Spirit; and raising her with an obliging Air, I am
sorry (said he) that any thing should happen to occasion
this Submission; but since what's past, is out
of either of our Powers to recal, I shall endeavour
to think of it no more, provided you'll promise me,
never for the future to be guilty of any thing which
may give me an Uneasiness by the sight of yours— 
'Tis impossible to represent the Transport of Alovisa
at this kind Expression; she hung upon his
Neck, kissed the dear Mouth which had pronounc'd
her Pardon, with Raptures of unspeakable Delight; 
she sigh'd with Pleasure, as before she had done
with Pain, she wept, she even dy'd with Joy! — 
No, no, my Lord, my Life, my Angel! (cry'd she,
as soon as she had Power to speak) I never will
offend you more, no more be jealous, no more
be doubtful of my Happiness! you are!—you
will be only mine, I know you will—Your kind
Forgiveness of my Folly, assures me that you are
mine, not more by Duty than by Love! a Tye
far more valuable than that of Marriage. The 

Count, conscious of her Mistake, had much ado
to conceal his Disorder at these Words; and being
unwilling she shou'd proceed, as soon as he could
(without seeming unkind or rude) disengag'd himself
from her Arms, and took a Pen in his Hand,
which he told her he was about to employ in answering
the Chevalier Brillian's Letter:
Alovisa, who now resolv'd an entire Obedience
to his Will, and remembring he had desired to be
alone, withdrew, full of the Idea of an imagin'd
Felicity—Her Heart was now at ease, she believ'd
that if her Husband had any Remains of Passion
for Amena, the Impossibility of ever seeing her
again, would soon extinguish them; and since she
was so happily reconciled, was far from repenting
her intercepting of his Letter: But, poor Lady, she
did not long enjoy this Peace of Mind, and this
Interval of Tranquillity serv'd but to heighten her
ensuing Miseries. 
The Count's secret Passion for Melliora
grew stronger by his endeavouring to suppress it; 
and perceiving that she carefully avoided all Opportunities
of being alone with him one Moment
since his Behaviour to her in the Garden, he grew
almost distracted with the continual Restraint he
was forc'd to put on all his words and Actions: He
durst not sigh nor send an amorous Glance, for
fear of offending her, and alarming his Wife's
Jealousy, so lately lull'd to sleep. He had no Person
in whom he had Confidence enough to trust
with his Misfortune, and had certainly sunk under
the Pressure of it, if Alovisa, who observing
an Alteration in his Countenance and
Humour, fearing he was really indispos'd
(which was the Excuse he made for his Melancholy)
had not persuaded him to go into the
Country, hoping that Change of Air might do
him good. He had a very fine Seat near Anjerville
in the Province of Le Beausse, which he had 

not been at for some Years, and he was very willing
to comply with Alovisa's Desires of passing
the Remainder of the Summer in a Solitude,
which was now become agreeable to him; the
greatest Difficulty was, in perswading Melliora
to accompany them thither; he guess'd by her
reserv'd Behaviour, that she only waited an Opportunity
to leave the Place where he was, and was
not mistaken in his Conjecture. One Day as they
were talking of it, she told them she was resolv'd
to return to the Monastery where she had been educated; 
that the World was too noisy a Place for
one of her Taste, who had no Relish for any of
the Diversions of it. Every Word she spoke, was
like a Dagger to D'elmont's Heart; yet, he so
artfully manag'd his Endeavours, between the Authority
of a Guardian, and the Entreaties of a
Friend, that she was at last overcome. 'Tis hard
for the severest Virtue to deny themselves the
Sight of the Person belov'd; and whatever Resolutions
we make, there are but few, who, like
Melliora, might not by such a Lover be prevail'd
upon to break them. 
As soon as their coming into the Country was
spread abroad, they were visited by all the Neighbouring
People of Quality, but there was none so
welcome to D'elmont as the Baron D'espernay;
they had before the Count's going into the Army
been very intimate Acquaintance, and were equally
glad of this Opportunity to renew a Friendship,
which Time and Absence had not entirely erased. 
The Baron had a Sister, young and very agreeable,
but gay even to Coquetry; they liv'd together,
being both single, and he brought her with
him, hearing the Count was married, to visit his
Lady: There were several other young Noblemen
and Ladies there at the same time, and the Conversation
grew so delightfully entertaining, that it was
impossible for Persons less prepossess'd than the 

Count and Melliora, to retain their Chagrin;
but, tho' there were scarce any in the Company
that might not have listened with a pleas'd Attention,
to what those two admirable Persons were
capable of saying, yet their secret Sorrows kept
them both in silence, 'till Melantha, for that
was the Name of the Baron's Sister, took upon her
to divert the Company with some Verses on
Love; which she took out of her Pocket-Book
and read to 'em: Every Body extoll'd the Softness
of the Style, and the Subject they were upon. 
But Melliora, who was willing to take all Opportunities
of condemning that Passion, as well to
conceal it in herself as to check whatever Hopes
the Count might have, now discover'd the Force
of her Reason, the Delicacy of her Wit, and the
Penetration of her Judgment, in a Manner so
sweetly surprizing to all that were Strangers to her,
that they presently found, that it was not want of
noble, and truly agreeable Thoughts or Words to
express 'em, that had so long depriv'd them of the
Pleasure of hearing her; she urg'd the Arguments
she brought against the giving way to Love, and
the Danger of all softening Amusements, with such
a becoming Fierceness, as made every Body of
the Opinion, that she was born only to create Desire,
not be susceptible of it herself. The Count,
as he was most concern'd, took the most particular
Notice of all she said, and was not a little alarm'd
to see her appear so much in earnest, but
durst not answer, or endeavour to confute her,
because of Alovisa's Presence: But it was not
long before he had an Opportunity, a few Days
after he met with one as full as he could wish. 
Returning one Evening from the Baron D'espernay's,
whom he had now made the Confident of
his Passion, and who had encourag'd him in it, he
was told that Alovisa was gone out to take the
Air, and hearing no mention of Melliora's 

being with her, he stay'd not to enquire, but
running directly to her Chamber, made his
Eyes his best Informers: He found her lying
on a Couch in a most charming Dishabilee; 
she had but newly come from bathing, and her
Hair unbraided, hung down upon her Shoulders
with a Negligence more beautiful than all the Aids
of Art could form in the most exact Decorum of
Dress; part of it fell upon her Neck and Breast,
and with its lovely Shadiness, being of a delicate
dark Brown, set off to vast Advantage the matchless
Whiteness of her Skin: Her Gown and the rest of
her Garments were white, and all ungirt, and
loosly flowing, discover'd a thousand Beauties,
which modish Formalities conceal. A Book lay
open by her, on which she had reclin'd her Head,
as if been tir'd with reading; she blush'd at Sight
of the Count, and rose from off the Couch with a
Confusion which gave new Lustre to her Charms; 
but he not permitting her to stir from the Place
she was in, sat down by her, and casting his Eyes
on the Book which lay there, found it to be Ovid's
Epistles; how, Madam, cry'd he, not a little pleased
with the Discovery, dare you, who the other
Day so warmly inveigh'd against Writings of this
Nature, trust yourself with so dangerous an Amusement? 
How happens it, that you are so suddenly
come over to our Party? Indeed, my Lord, (answer'd
she, growing more disorder'd) it was Chance rather
than Choice, that directed this Book to my Hands; 
I am yet far from approving Subjects of this kind,
and believe I shall be ever so: Not that I can see
any Danger in it, as to myself; the Retirement I
have always liv'd in, and the little Propensity I
find to entertain a Thought of that uneasy Passion,
has hitherto secur'd me from any Pre-possession,
without which, Ovid's Art is vain. Nay, Madam,
reply'd the Count, now you contradict your former
Argument, which was, that these sort of 

Books were, as it were, Preparatives to Love,
and by their softening Influence, melted the Soul,
and made it fit for amorous Impressions, and so
far, you certainly were in the right; for when
once the Fancy is fixed on a real Object, there
will be no need of auxilliary Forces, the Dear Idea
will spread itself thro' every Faculty of the
Soul, and in a Moment inform us better than all
the Writings of the most experienc'd Poets could
do in an Age. Well, my Lord, said she, (endeavouring
to compose herself) I am utterly unambitious
of any Learning this Way, and shall endeavour
to retain in Memory, more of the Misfortunes
that attended the Passion of Sappho, than the
tender, tho' never so elegant, Expressions it produc'd:
And if all Readers of Romances took this
Method, the Votaries of Cupid would be fewer,
and the Dominion of Reason more extensive. You
speak (answer'd D'elmont) as tho' Love and
Reason were incompatible. There is no Rule,
(said she) my Lord, without Exception; they are
indeed sometimes united, but how often they are
at Variance, where may we not find Proofs; History
is full of them, and daily Examples of the
many Hair-brain'd Matches, and Slips, much less
excusable, sufficiently evince how little Reason
has to do in the Affairs of Love; I mean (continu'd
she, with a very serious Air) that sort of
Love; for there are two, which hurries People on
to an immediate Gratification of their Desires, tho'
never so prejudicial to themselves, or the Person
they pretend to love. Pray, Madam, (said the
Count, a little nettled at this Discourse) what
Love is that which seems at least to merit the Approbation
of a Lady so extremely nice? It has
many Branches (reply'd she;) in the first place,
that which we owe to Heaven, in the next to our
King, our Country, Parents, Kindred, Friends,
and lastly, that which Fancy inclines, and Reason 

guides us to, in a Partner for Life; but here every
Circumstance must agree, Parity of Age, of
Quality, of Fortune, and of Humour, Consent of
Friends, and equal Affection in each other; for if
any one of these Particulars fail, it renders all the
rest of no Effect. Ah! Madam, (cry'd the Count,
not able to suffer her to proceed) what Share of
Pity then can you afford a Man, who loves where
almost all these Circumstances are wanting, and
what Advice would you give a Wretch so curs'd? 
I would have him think, (said she, more gravely
than before.) How, Madam, (resum'd he) think
did you say? Alas! 'tis Thought that has undone
him. That's very possible (answer'd she;) but yet
'tis want of thinking justly; for in a Lover's Mind
Illusions seem Realities, and what at another time
would be look'd on as impossible, appears easy
then: They indulge, and feed their new-born Folly
with a Prospect of Hope, tho' ne'er so distant a
one; and in the vain Pursuit of it, fly Consideration,
'till Despair starts up in the midway, and
barrs their promis'd View; whereas, if they gave
way to due Reflection, the Vanity of the Attempt
would presently be shewn, and the same Cause
that bid 'em cease to hope, would bid 'em cease
to wish. Ah! Madam, (said he) how little do
you know of that Passion, and how easily could I
disprove you, by the Example of my Friend; Despair
and Love are of an equal Age in him, and
from the first Moment he beheld his adorable
Charmer, he has languish'd without the least Mixture
of a flattering Hope. I grant the Flames with
which our modern Gallants are ordinarily animated,
cannot subsist long without Fuel; but where Love
is kindled in a generous Heart, by a just Admiration
of the real Merits of the Object belov'd, Reason
goes Hand in Hand with it, and makes it lasting
as our Life. In my Mind, (answer'd Melliora
coldly) an Esteem so grounded may more 

properly be ascribed to Friendship. Then be it so,
Madam, (rejoin'd the Count briskly) Friendship
and Love, where either are sincere, vary but little
in their Meaning; there may indeed be some Distinctions
in their Ceremonies, but their Essentials
are still the same: and if the Gentleman I speak
of were so happy as to hope his Friendship would
be acceptable, I dare promise that he never would
complain his Love were not so. You have a
strange Way (said she) to confound Ideas, which
in my Opinion are so vastly different, that I should
make no Difficulty in granting my Friendship to as
many of my Acquaintance as had Merit to deserve
it; but if I were to love in that general
Manner, 'twould be a Crime wou'd justly render
me contemptible to Mankind. Madam, (reply'd
the Count) when I spoke of the Congruity of
Love and Friendship, I did not mean that sort,
which, to me, seems unworthy of the Name of either,
but that exalted one, which made Orestes and
Pilades, Theseus and Perithous, so famous. That,
which has no Reserve, no separate Interest, or
divided Thoughts, that which fills all—gives all
the Soul, and esteems even Life a Trifle, to prove
itself sincere—What can Love do more than
yield every thing to the Object belov'd? And
Friendship must do so too, or it is not Friendship. 
Therefore take heed, fair Angel, (continu'd he,
taking her Hand and kissing it) how you promise
Friendship, where you ne'er mean to love: and
observing she was silent, your Hand, (said he)
your Lip, your Neck, your Breast, your all—all
this whole Heaven of Beauty must be no longer in
your own Disposal—all is the Prize of Friendship! 
As much confus'd as Melliora was at these
Words, which gave her sufficient Reason to fear
he would now declare himself more fully than she
desir'd; she had Spirit and Resolution enough to
withdraw her Hand from his, and with a Look, 

that spoke her Meaning but too plainly for the Repose
of the enamour'd D'elmont: I shall take
care, my Lord, (said she) how I commence a
Friendship with any Person who shall make use of
it to my Prejudice. 
The Count was now sensible of his Error in
going so far, and fearing he had undone himself
in her Esteem by his rash Proceeding, thought it
was best at once to throw off a Disguise, which,
in spite of his Endeavours would fall off of itself,
and by making a bold and free Confession of his
real Sentiments, oblige her to a Discovery of her's. 
—I do not doubt your Caution, Madam, (answered
he) in this Point: Your reserved Behaviour,
even to me, convinces me, but too fully, how
little you are disposed to give, or receive any
Proofs of Friendship: But perhaps (continu'd he,
with a deep Sigh) my too presuming Eyes have
render'd me a suspected Person, and while you
find in me the Wretch I have describ'd, you find
nothing in me worthy of a happier Fortune. You
are worthy every thing, my Lord, (said Melliora,
quite beside herself at these Words) nor are
you less happy than you deserve to be, and I
would rather that these Eyes should lose their Sight
than view you otherwise than now I see you,
bless'd in every Circumstance, the Darling of the
World, the Idol of the Court, and Favourite of
Heaven! Oh! stop, (cry'd D'elmont, hastily
interrupting her) forbear to curse me farther,
rather command my Death, than wish the Continuance
of my present Miseries. Cruel Melliora,
too well, alas! you know what I have endur'd
from the first fatal Moment I beheld you,
and only feign an Ignorance to distract me more:
A thousand times you have read my rising Wishes,
sparkling in my Eyes, and glowing on my Cheeks; 
as often seen my Virtue struggling in silent Tremblings
and Life-wasting Anguish to suppress Desire. 

Nay, Madam, (said he, catching fast hold
of both her Hands, seeing her about to rise) by all
my sleepless Nights, and restless Days, by all the
countless burning Agonies, by all the Torments
of my gall'd, bleeding, Heart, I swear, that you
shall hear me: I have heard too much (cry'd Melliora,
not able to contain herself) and tho' I am
unwilling to believe you have any farther Aim in
this Discourse than your Diversion, yet I must tell
your Lordship, that there are Themes more proper
for it, than the Daughter of your Friend, who
was entrusted to your Care with a far different Opinion
of your Behaviour to her. What have I
done (resum'd the almost distracted Count, falling
at her Feet, and grasping her Knees!) what have
I done, inhuman Melliora! to deserve this
Rigour? My Honour has hitherto prevail'd above
Desire, fierce and raging as it is, nor had I any
other Hopes by making this Declaration, than to
meet that Pity my Misfortunes merit, and you
cannot without Ingratitude deny: Pity even to
Criminals is allow'd, and sure, where the Offence
is involuntary, like mine, 'tis due. 'Tis impossible
to guess the Conflict in Melliora's Breast at
this Instant; she had heard a most passionate Declaration
of Love from a married Man, and by Consequence,
whatever his Pretences were, could look
on his Designs no otherwise than aim'd at the Destruction
of her Honour, and was fir'd with a virtuous
Indignation: But then she saw in this married
Man, the only Person in the World, who
was capable of inspiring her with a tender Thought; 
she saw him reduc'd to the last Extremity of Dispair
for her sake; she heard his Sighs, she felt
his Tremblings as he held her, and cou'd not refrain
shedding some Tears, both for him and
for herself, who indeed suffer'd little less; but the
Count was not so happy as to be Witness of this
Testimony of her Compassion: He had reclin'd 

his Head on her Lap, possibly to hide those that
forc'd their Way thro' his Eyes, at the same time; 
and Alovisa's Voice, which they heard below,
giving them both an Alarm, they had no further Opportunity
for Speech, and the Count was but just
gone out of the Room, and Melliora laid on
the Couch in the same careless Posture which he
had found her in, when Alovisa enter'd the
Chamber; and after having a little pleasantly reproach'd
her, for being so lazy as not to accompany
her in the Walk she had been taking, ask'd
her if she had not seen the Count, who she had
been told was come home: Poor Melliora
had much ado to conceal the Disorder she was in
at this Question, but recovering herself, as well as
she could, answer'd in the affirmative; but that he
had not staid there longer than to enquire where
she was gone, and that she knew not but he might
be gone in search of her. This was enough to
make Alovisa take her leave, impatient for the
Sight of her dear Lord, a Happiness she had not
enjoy'd since Morning; but she was disappointed
of her Hope. The Count, as late as it was in the
Evening, went into his Chaise, which had not been
set up since he came from the Baron D'espernay's,
and drove thither again with all the Speed
he could. 
The Baron was extremely surpriz'd at his sudden
Return, and with so much Confusion and Melancholy
in his Countenance; but much more so,
when he had given him an Account of what had
pass'd between him and Melliora, and could
not forbear rallying him excessively on the Occasion. 
What, said he, a Man of Wit and Pleasure,
like Count D'elmont, a Man who knows the
Sex so well, could he let slip so favourable an Opportunity
with the finest Woman in the World!
one, for whose Enjoyment he would die! —Could
a Frown, or a little angry Coyness, (which ten to 

one was but affected) have Power to freeze such
fierce Desires! The Count was not at present in a
Humour to relish this Merriment, he was too seriously
in Love to bear that any thing relating to it,
should be turn'd into Ridicule, and was far from
repenting he had done no more, since what he had
done had occasion'd her Displeasure: But the Baron
who had Designs in his Head, which he knew
could not by any Means be brought to succeed,
but by keeping the Count's Passion warm, made
use of all the Artifice he was Master of, to embolden
this respective Lover to the Gratification
of his Wishes: And growing more grave than he
had been, my Lord, said he, you do not only injure
the Dignity of our Sex in general, but your
own Merits in particular, and perhaps even Melliora's
secret Inclinations, by this unavailing
distant Carriage, and causeless Despair. —Have
you not confess'd that she has look'd on you with a
Tenderness, like that of Love; that she has blush'd
at your Sight, and trembled at your Touch? — 
What would you more that she should do, or what
indeed can she do more, in Modesty, to prove
her Heart is yours? A little Resolution on your
side would make her all yours—Women are taught
by Custom to deny what most they covet, and to
seem angry, when they are best pleas'd; believe
me, D'elmont, that the most rigid Virtue of
'em all, never yet hated a Man for those Faults,
which Love occasions. All this, answer'd the
Count, is what I readily agree to—But, oh! her
Father's Memory! My Obligation to him! Her
Youth and Innocence! are Daggers to my cool Reflections
—Wou'd it not be Pity, D'espernay!
(continu'd he, with a deep Sigh) even if she should
consent, to ruin so much Sweetness? The Baron
could not forbear laughing at these Words; and
the Count who had started these Objections, only
with the Hope of having them remov'd, easily 

suffer'd himself to be perswaded to follow his Inclinations; 
and it was soon concluded betwixt
them, that, on the first Opportunity, Melliora
should fall a Sacrifice to Love. 
The Count came not home 'till the next Morning,
and brought the Baron with him, for they
were now become inseparable Friends: At his Return,
he found Alovisa in a very ill Humour
for his being abroad all Night; and in spite of the
Resolution she had made of shewing a perfect Resignation
to her Husband's Will, could not forbear
giving him some Hints, how unkindly she
took it, which he but little regarded; all his
Thoughts were now bent on the gaining Melliora. 
But that Lady alarm'd at his late Behaviour,
and with Reason, doubting her own Power
of resenting it as she ought, or indeed resisting any
future Attempts he might make, feign'd the
Necessity of performing some private Rules of
Devotion, enjoin'd her as a Penance, and kept
her Chamber that she might not see him. 
The Disquietudes of D'elmont for being
forc'd to live, but for three or four Days without
the Happiness of beholding her, convinc'd him
how impossible it was for him to overcome his
Passion, tho' he should never so vigorously endeavour
it, and that whatever Method he should make
use of to satisfy it, might be excus'd by the Necessity. 
What is it that a Lover cannot accomplish
when Resolution is on his side? D'elmont after
having formed a thousand fruitless Inventions,
at last pitch'd on one which promis'd him an Assurance
of Success. In Melliora's Chamber
there was a little Door that open'd to a Pair of
Back-Stairs, for the Convenience of the Servants
coming to clean the Room, and at the Bottom of
that Descent, a Gate into the Garden. The Count
set his Wits to work, to get the Keys of those two 

Doors; that of the Garden stood always in it, nor
could he keep it without its being miss'd at Night,
when they should come to fasten the Gate; therefore
he carefully took the Impression in Wax, and
had one made exactly like it: The other he could
by no means compass without making some Excuse
to go to Melliora's Chamber, and she
had desir'd that none might visit her: But he overcome
this Bar to his Design at last; there was a
Cabinet in it, where he told Alovisa he had
put some Papers of great Concern, which now he
wanted to look over, and desir'd she would make
an Apology for his coming in to fetch them. 
Melliora imagin'd this was only a Pretence to
see her; but his Wife being with him, and he saying
nothing to her, or taking any further notice than
what common Civility requir'd, was not much
troubled at it. While Alovisa was paying a
Compliment to the Recluse, he was dexterous
enough to slip the Key out of the Door, unperceiv'd
by either of them. 
As soon as he had got the Passport to his expected
Joys in his Possession, he order'd a couple of
Saddle Horses to be made ready, and only attended
by one Servant, rid out, as if to take the Air; 
but when they were got about two or three Miles
from the House, commanded him to return and
tell his Lady, that he should lie that Night at the
Baron D'espernay's; the Fellow obey'd, and
clapping Spurs to his Horse, was immediately lost
in a Cloud of Dust. 
D'elmont had sent this Message to prevent
any of the Family sitting up expecting him, and
instead of going to the Barons, turn'd short, and
went to Angerville, where meeting with some Gentlemen
of his Acquaintance, he pass'd the Hours 'till
between Twelve and One, as pleasantly as his Impatience
to be with Melliora would give him
leave. He had not much above a Furlong to ride, 

and his Desires made him not spare his Horse,
which he ty'd by the Bridle, hot and foaming as he
was, to a huge Oak, which grew pretty near his
Garden; it was encompassed only with a Hedge,
and that so low, that he got over it without any
Difficulty; he look'd carefully about him, and
found no Tell-tale Lights in any of the Rooms,
and concluding all was as hush'd as he cou'd wish,
open'd the first Door; but the encreasing Transports
of his Soul, as he came up Stairs, to be so
near the end of all his Wishes, are more easily
imagin'd than express'd; but as violent as they
were, they presently receiv'd a vast Addition,
when he came into the happy Chamber, and by a
most delightful Gloom, a Friend to Lovers, (for
it was neither Dark nor Light) he beheld the lovely
Melliora in her Bed, and fast asleep; her
Head was reclin'd on one of her Arms; a Pillow
softer and whiter far than that it lean'd on; the
other was stretch'd out, and with its extension had
thrust down the Bed-cloaths so far, that all the
Beauties of her Neck and Breast appear'd to View. 
He took an inexpressible Pleasure in gazing on her
as she lay, and in this silent Contemplation of her
thousand Charms, his Mind was agitated with various
Emotions; and the resistless Posture he beheld
her in, rouz'd all that was honourable in him; he
thought it pity even to wake her, but more to
wrong such Innocence; and he was sometimes
prompted to return and leave her as he found
her. 
But whatever Dominion, Honour and Virtue
may have over our waking Thoughts, 'tis certain
that they fly from the clos'd Eyes, our Passions
then exert their forceful Power, and that which is
most predominant in the Soul, agitates the Fancy,
and brings even Things impossible to pass: Desire,
with watchful Diligence repell'd, returns with
greater Violence in unguarded Sleep, and overthrows 

the vain Efforts of Day. Melliora in
spite of her self, was often happy in Idea, and possess'd
a Blessing which Shame and Guilt deterr'd her
from in reality. Imagination at this Time was
active, and brought the charming Count much
nearer than indeed he was, and he, stooping to
the Bed, and gently laying his Face close to hers,
(possibly designing no more than to steal a Kiss
from her, unperceiv'd) that Action concurring at
that Instant with her Dream, made her throw her
Arm (still slumbering) about his Neck, and in a
soft and languishing Voice, cry out, O! D'elmont,
cease, cease to Charm, to such a height
—Life cannot bear these Raptures! —And then
again embracing him yet closer,—O! too, too
lovely Count—Extatick Ruiner! 
Where was now the Resolution he was forming
some Moments before? If he had now left
her, some might have applauded an Honour so
uncommon, but more wou'd have condemn'd his
Stupidity; for I believe there are very few Men,
how Stoical soever they pretend to be, that in such
a tempting Circumstance would not have lost all
Thoughts, but those, which the present Opportunity
inspir'd. That he did, is most certain, for
he tore open his Wastcoat, and join'd his panting
Breast to hers, with such a tumultuous Eagerness! 
Seiz'd her with such a rapidity of transported Hopecrown'd
Passion, as immediately wak'd her from
an imaginary Felicity, to the Approaches of a solid
one. Where have I been (said she, just opening
her Eyes) where am I? —(And then coming
more perfectly to her self) Heaven! What's this? 
—I am D'elmont (cry'd the overjoy'd Count)
the happy D'elmont! Melliora's, the
charming Melliora's D'elmont! Oh, all
ye Saints, (resum'd the surpriz'd, trembling Fair)
ye ministring Angels! whose Business it is to guard
the Innocent! protect and shield my Virtue! O! 

say, how came you here, my Lord? Love, said
he, Love that does all, that Wonder-working
Power has sent me here, to charm thee, sweet Resister,
into yielding. O! hold, (cry'd she, finding
he was proceeding to Liberties, which her Modesty
could not allow of) forbear, I do conjure
you, even by that Love you plead, before my Honour,
I'll resign my Life! Therefore, unless you
wish to see me dead, a Victim to your cruel, fatal
Passion, I beg you to desist, and leave me:— 
I cannot—must not (answer'd he, growing still
more bold) what when I have thee thus! Thus
naked in my Arms, trembling, defenceless, yielding,
panting with equal Wishes, thy Love confess'd,
and every Thought Desire! What could'st
thou think if I should leave thee? How justly
would'st thou scorn my easy Tameness; my Dulness,
unworthy the Name of Lover, or even of
Man! —Come, come, no more Reluctance
(continued he, gathering Kisses from her soft
snowy Breast at every Word) Damp not the Fires
thou hast rais'd with seeming Coyness! I know
thou art mine! All mine! And thus I—Yet think
(said she, interrupting him, and struggling in his
Arms) think what 'tis you wou'd do; nor for a
Moment's Joy, hazard your Peace for ever. By
Heaven, cry'd he, I will this Night be Master of
my Wishes, no matter what to Morrow may bring
forth: As soon as he had spoke these Words, he
put it out of her Power either to deny or reproach
him, by stopping her Mouth with Kisses, and was
just on the Point of making good what he had
vow'd, when a loud knocking at the Chamber
Door, put a stop to his beginning Extacy, and
chang'd the sweet Confusion Melliora had
been in, to all the Horrors, of a Shame and Guiltdistracted
Apprehension: They made no Doubt
but that it was Alovisa, and that they were betray'd; 
the Count's greatest Concern was for 

Melliora, and the Knocking still continuing
louder, all he could do in this Exigence, was to
make his Escape the Way he came: There was
no time for taking leave, and he could only say,
perceiving she was ready to faint with her Fears— 
Be comforted my Angel, and resolute in your Denials,
to whatever Questions the natural Insolence of
a jealous Wife may provoke mine to ask you; and
we shall meet again (if D'elmont survives this
Disappointment) without Danger, of so quick, so
curst a Separation). Melliora was in too
much Distraction to make any Answer to what he
said, and he had left the Room some Moments before
she cou'd get Spirit enough to ask who was at
the Door? But when she did was as much surpriz'd
to find it was Melantha, who desir'd to be
let in, as before she was frighted at the Belief it
was Alovisa; however, she immediately slipt
on her Night-Gown and Slippers, and open'd the
Door. 
You are a sound Sleeper indeed (cry'd Melantha
laughing) that all the Noise I have
made cou'd not wake you. I have not been all
this while asleep (answer'd Melliora;) but
not knowing you were in the House, cou'd not
imagine who it was that gave me this Disturbance. 
I heartily ask your Pardon (said Melantha)
and I know, my Dear, you are too good natur'd
to refuse it me, especially when you know the
Occasion, which is so very whimsical, that as
grave as you are, you cannot help being diverted
with it—But come (continued she) get on your
Cloaths, for you must go along with me. Where?
said Melliora. Nay, nay, ask no Questions
(resum'd Melantha) but make haste, every
Minute that we idle away here, loses us the Diversion
of an Age. As she spake these Words, she
fell into such an excessive Laughter, that Melliora
thought her Mad; but being far from sympathizing 

in her Gaiety; it has always (said she)
been hitherto my Custom to have some Reason for
what I do, tho' in never so trifling an Affair; and
you must excuse me, if I do not break it now. Pish
(cry'd Melantha) you are of the oddest
Temper,—but I will give you your Way for
once,—provided you'll get your self ready in
the mean time. I shall certainly put on my Cloaths
(said Melliora) lest I should take cold, for
I expect you'll not permit me to sleep any more
this Night. You may be sure of it (rejoin'd Melantha.) 
But to the Purpose,—You must
know, having an Hour or two on my Hands, I
came this Evening to visit Alovisa, and found
her in the strangest Humour! —Good God!
what unaccountable Creatures these married Women
are?—her Husband it seems had sent her
Word that he would lie at my Brother's, and the
poor loving Soul could not bear to be a Night
without him. I stay'd to condole with her, (tho'
on my Life I could not forbear laughing in her
Face) 'till it was too late to go Home. —About
twelve a Clock she yawn'd, stretch'd, and grew
most horridly out of Temper; rail'd at Mankind
prodigiously, and curs'd Matrimony as heartily as
one of Fourscore could do, that had been twice a
Widow, and was left a Maid! —With much ado, I
made her Woman thrust her into Bed, and retir'd
to a Chamber which they shew'd me; but I had no
Inclination to sleep, I remember'd my self of five
or six Billet-Doux I had to Answer,—a Lover,
that growing foolishly troublesome, I have some
Thoughts of discharging to-morrow—Another that
I design to Countenance, to pique a third—a new
Suit of Cloaths and Trimmings for the next Ball
—Half a hundred new Songs—and—a thousand
other Affairs of the utmost Consequence to a
young Lady, came into my Head in a Moment; 
and the Night being extreamly pleasant, I set the 

Candle in the Chimney, open'd the Window, and
fell to considering—But I had not been able to
come to a Conclusion what I should do in any one
thing I was thinking of, before I was interrupted
in my Cogitations, with a Noise of something rushing
hastily thro' the Myrtles under my Window,
and presently after, saw it was a Man going hastily
toward the great Alley of the Garden. —At first I
was going to cry out and Alarm the Family, taking
it for a Thief: But, Dear Melliora, how glad
am I that I did not? —For who do you think, when
I look'd more heedfully, I perceiv'd it was? Nay,
how should I know? (cry'd Melliora peevishly,
fearing the Count's Inadvertency had expos'd
himself and her to this foolish Woman's Curiosity)
It was Count D'elmont (resum'd Melantha)
I'll lay my Life, that he has been on
some Intrigue to Night, and met with a Disappointment,
by his quick Return. —But prithee make
haste, for I long to rally him about it. What wou'd
you do, Madam? (said Melliora) you wou'd
not sure go to him? Yes, (answer'd Mllantha)
I will go down into the Garden, and so shall you. 
—I know you have a back Way from your Chamber
—Therefore lay aside this unbecoming Demureness,
and let us go, and talk him to Death. You
may do as you please, (said Melliora) but
for my Part, I am for no such Frolicks. Was ever
any thing so young, so formal as you are! (rejoin'd
Melantha) but I am resolv'd to teaze
you out of a Humour so directly opposite to the
Beau-Monde, and, if you will not Consent to go
down with me, I will fetch him up to your Chamber
—Hold, hold, (cry'd Melliora, perceiving
she was going) what do you mean? for Heavens
sake stay; what will Alovisa think? — 
I care not, reply'd the other, I have set my Heart
on an Hour's Diversion with him, and will not be 

baulk'd, if the Repose of the World, much less
that of a jealous, silly, Wife, depended on it. 
Melliora saw into the Temper of this Capricious
young Lady too well, not to believe she
would do as she had said, and perhaps, was not
overwilling to venture her with the Count alone,
at that Time of Night, and in the Humour she
knew he was; therefore putting on an Air more
chearful than that she was accustom'd to wear, well
(said she) I will accompany you into the Garden,
since it will so much oblige you; but, if the Count
be wise, he will, by quitting the Place as soon as
he sees us, disappoint you worse than I should have
done, if I had kept you here. With these Words
she took her by the Hand, and they went down
the Stairs, where the Count was but just past before
them. 
He had not Power to go away, without knowing
who it was, that had given him that Interruption,
and had stood all this Time, on the upper
Step behind the inner Door. His Vexation, and
Disdain when he heard it was Melantha, gave
him as much Pain, as his Concern while he believ'd
it Alovisa; and he cou'd not forbear
muttering a thousand Curses on her Impertinence. 
He always despis'd, but now abhorr'd her: She had
behav'd her self to him in a Fashion, as made him
sufficiently sensible she was desirous of engaging
him, and he resolv'd to mortify, by the bitterest
Slights, both her Pride and Love, if 'tis proper to
call that sort of liking which agitates the Soul of
a Coquet, by that Name. 
The Ladies walk'd in the Garden for some time,
and Melantha search'd every Bush before she
found the Count, who stood conceal'd in the Porch,
which being cover'd with Jessamin, and Fillaree,
was Dark enough to hide him from their View,
tho' they had pass'd close to him as they came out. 
He had certainly remain'd there 'till Morning, and 

disappointed Melantha's Search, in part of the
Revenge he ow'd her, if his Desires to be with
Melliora on any Terms, had not prevail'd,
even above his Anger to the other. But he could
not see that Charmer of his Soul, and imagine
there might be yet an Opportunity that Night, of
stealing a Kiss from her, (now, he believ'd, resistless
Lips) of touching her Hand! Her Breast! 
And repeating some farther Freedoms, which his
late Advantage over her had given him, without
being fill'd with Wishes too fiery and too impatient
to be restrain'd. He watch'd their turning,
and when he saw that they were near an Ally,
which had another that led to it, he went round
and met them. 
Melantha was overjoy'd at the Sight of
him, and Melliora, tho' equally pleas'd, was
cover'd with such a Confusion, at the Remembrance
of what had pass'd, that it was happy for
her that her Companion's Volubility gave her no
room for Speech. There is nothing more certain,
than that Love, tho' it fills the Mind with a thousand
charming Ideas, which those untouch'd by that
Passion are not capable of conceiving; yet it entirely
takes away the Power of Utterance, and the
deeper Impression it had made on the Soul, the
less we are able to express it, when willing to indulge
and give a loose to Thought; what Language
can furnish us with Words sufficient? All are
too poor, all wanting both in Sublimity and Softness; 
and only Fancy! a Lover's Fancy! can reach
the exalted Soaring of a Lover's Meaning! But if
so impossible to be describ'd, if of so vast, so
wonderful a Nature, as nothing but itself can
comprehend; how much more impossible must it
be, entirely to conceal it! What Strength of boasted
Reasons? What Force of Resolution? What
modest Fears, or cunning Artifice, can correct the
Fierceness of its fiery Flashes in the Eyes, keep 

down the struggling Sighs, command the Pulse,
and bid Trembling cease? Honour and Virtue may
distance Bodies, but there is no Power in either of
those Names, to stop the Spring, that with a rapid
Whirl transports us from our selves, and darts our
Souls into the Bosom of the darling Object. This
may seem strange to many, even of those who
call, and perhaps believe that they are Lovers; but
the few who have Delicacy enough to feel what I
but imperfectly attempt to speak, will acknowledge
it for Truth, and pity the Distress of Melliora. 
As they were passing thro' a Walk of Trees on
each Side, whose intermingling Boughs made a
friendly Darkness, and every thing undistinguishable,
the amorous D'elmont throwing his eager
Arms round the Waist of his (no less transported)
Melliora, and printing burning Kisses
on her Neck, reap'd painful Pleasure, and created
in her a racking kind of Extacy, which might
perhaps, had they been now alone, prov'd her
Desires very little different from his. 
After Melantha had vented part of the
Raillery she was so big with, on the Count, which
he but little regarded, being wholly taken up with
other Thoughts, she propos'd going into the Wilderness,
which was at the farther End of the Garden:
And they readily agreeing to it; Come, my
Lord, (said she) to the Count, you are melancholy,
I have thought of a Way which will either indulge
the Humour you are in, or divert it, as you
shall chuse: There are several little Paths in the
Wilderness, let us take each a separate one; and
when we meet, which shall be here, where we
part, agree to tell an entertaining Story, which,
whoever fails in, shall be doom'd to the Punishment
of being left here all Night: The Count at
these Words, forgot all his Animosity, and was
ready to hug her for this Proposal. Melliora 

did a little oppose it, but the others were too powerful,
and she was forc'd to submit. Thou art the
dullest Creature, I'll lay my Life, my Lord, (cry'd Melantha,
taking hold of the Count in a gay manner)
that it falls to her Lot to stay in the Wilderness. 
O, Madam, (reply'd the Count) you are too severe,
we ought always to suspend our Judgment'till after
Trial, which I confess my self so pleas'd with, that
I am impatient for its coming on. Well, then,
(said she, laughing) farewel for an Hour. Agreed,
(cry'd the Count) and walk'd away: Melantha
saw which way he went, and took another
Path, leaving Melliora to go forward in that
in which they were; but I believe the Reader will
imagine that she was not long to enjoy the Privilege
of her Meditations. 
After the Count had gone some few Paces,
he planted himself behind a Thicket, which, while
it hid him, gave the Opportunity of observing
them; and when he found the Coast clear, rush'd
out, and with unhurting Gripe, seiz'd once more
on the unguarded Prey. Blest turn of Fortune,
(said he in a Rapture) Happy, happy Moment! — 
Lost, lost Melliora, (said she) unhappy Maid! 
—Oh why, my Lord, this quick Return! This is
no Place to answer thee, (resum'd he, taking her
in his Arms, and bearing her behind that Thicket,
where he himself had stood.) 'Twas in vain for her
to resist, if she had had the Power over her Inclinations; 
'till he, setting her softly down, and beginning
to Caress her in the manner he had done
when she was in Bed, she assum'd Strength enough
to raise herself a little, and catching hold of his
transgressing Hands, laid her Face on them, and
bath'd them in a Shower of Tears: O! D'elmont
(said she) cruel D'elmont! Will you then take
Advantage of my Weakness? I confess I feel for
you a Passion, far beyond all, that yet ever bore
the Name of Love; and that I can no longer withstand 

the too powerful Magick of your Eyes, nor
deny any Thing that charming Tongue can ask; 
but now's the Time to prove your self a Heroe!
subdue your self, as you have conquer'd me! be
satisfied with vanquishing my Soul, fix there your
Throne, but leave my Honour free! Life of my
Life (cry'd he) wound me no more by such untimely
Sorrows: I cannot bear thy Tears, by Heaven
they sink into my Soul, and quite unman me; 
but tell me (continued he, tenderly kissing her)
couldst thou, with all this Love, this charming— 
something more than Softness—cou'dst thou, I say,
consent to see me pale and dead, stretch'd at thy
Feet, consum'd with inward Burnings, rather than
blest, than rais'd by Love and thee, to all a Deity
in thy Embraces? For Oh! believe me when I
swear, that 'tis impossible to live without thee. 
No more, no more, (said she, letting her Hand
fall gently on his Breast) too easily I guess thy
Sufferings by my own; but yet D'elmont 'tis
better to die in Innocence, than to live in Guilt. 
Oh! why (resum'd he, sighing as if his Heart
would burst) shou'd what we can't avoid be call'd
a Crime? Be Witness for me Heaven! how much
I have struggled with this rising passion, even to
Madness struggled!—but in vain; the mounting
Flame blazes the more, the more I would suppress
it—my very Soul's on fire—I cannot bear it— 
Oh, Melliora! didst thou but know the thousandth
Part of what this Moment I endure, the
strong Convulsions of my warring Thoughts, thy
Heart, steel'd as it is, and frosted round with Virtue,
wou'd burst its icy Shield, and melt in Tears
of Blood, to pity me. Unkind and Cruel! (answer'd
she) do I not partake them then? —Do I
not bear, at least, an equal Share in all your Agonies? 
Have you no Charms—or have not I a
Heart? —A most susceptible and tender Heart? — 
Yes, you may feel it throb, it beats against my 

Breast, like an imprison'd Bird, and fain would
burst it's Cage! to fly to you, the Aim of all its
Wishes! —Oh, D'elmont! —With these Words
she sunk wholly into his Arms, unable to speak
more: Nor was he less dissolv'd in Rapture, both
their Souls seem'd to take Wing together, and left
their Bodies motionless, as unworthy to bear a Part
in their more elevated Bliss. 
But D'elmont, at his returning Sense, repenting
the Effects of the violent Transport he had
been in, was now preparing to take from the resistless
Melliora, the last, and only remaining
Proof that she was all his own, when Melantha
(who had contriv'd this Separation only with
a Design to be alone with the Count, and had
carefully observ'd which way he took) was coming
to wards them. The Rustling of her Cloaths
among the Bushes, gave the disappointed Lover
leave to rise from the Posture he was in, and
Melliora to abscond behind a Tree, before
she could come near enough to discern who was
there. 
Melantha, as soon as she saw the Count,
put on an Air of Surprize, as if it were but by
chance that she was come into his Walk, and
laughing with a visible Affectation, bless me! you
here, my Lord! (said she) I vow this has the Look
of Assignation, but I hope you will not be so vain
as to believe I came on purpose to seek you. No,
Madam, (answer'd he coldly) I have not the least
Thought of being so happy. Lord! you are
strangely grave (rejoin'd she;) but suppose I really
had come with a Design to meet you, what kind
of a Reception might I have expected? I know no
Reason, Madam, (said he) that can oblige me to
entertain a Supposition so unlikely. Well then (resum'd
she) I'll put it past a Supposition, and tell
you plainly, that I did walk this way on purpose to
divert your Spleen. I am sorry (reply'd he, tir'd 

to death with her Impertinence) that you are disappointed; 
for I am not in a Humour at present
of receiving any Diversion. Fie, (said she) is this
an Answer for the gay, gallant, engaging Count
D'elmont, to give a Lady who makes a Declaration
of admiring him—who thinks it not too
much to make the first Advances, and who wou'd
believe herself fully recompenced for breaking
thro' the nice Decorums of her Sex, if he receiv'd
it kindly—Madam, (said he, not a little amaz'd
at her Imprudence) I know of no such Person,
or if I did, I must confess, shou'd be very
much puzzled how to behave in an Adventure so
uncommon. Pish, (answer'd she, growing vex'd
at his Coldness) I know that such Adventures are
not uncommon with you: I'm not to learn the
Story of Alovisa, and if you had not been first
address'd, perhaps might have been 'till now unmarried. 
Well, Madam, (said he, more out of Humour)
put the Case that what you say were true,
I am married; and therefore (interrupted she) you
ought to be better acquainted with the Temper of
our Sex, and know, that a Woman where she
says she loves, expects a thousand fine Things in
Return. But there is more than a Possibility (answer'd
he) of her being disappointed; and methinks,
Madam, a Lady of your Gaiety shou'd be conversant
enough with Poetry, to remember those two
Lines of a famous English Poet. 

All naturally fly, what does pursue:
'Tis fit Men should be coy, when Women woe.

Melantha was fretted to the Heart to find
him so insensible; but not being one of those who
are apt to repent any thing they have done, she
only pretended to fall into a violent Fit of Laughter,
and when she came out of it, I confess (said she)
that I have lost my Aim, which was, to make you
believe I was dying for Love of you, raise you to 

the highest Degree of Expectation, and then have
the Pleasure of Baulking you at once, by letting
you know the Jest. —But your Lordship is too
hard for me, even at my own Weapon, Ridicule. 
I am mightily oblig'd to you, Madam, (answer'd
he more briskly than before) for your Intention
however; but 'tis probable, if I cou'd have been
drawn into a Belief that you were in earnest, I
might, at such a Time, and such a Place as this,
have taken some Measures which wou'd have sufficiently
reveng'd me on you—But come, Madam,
(continu'd he) the Morning begins to break, if you
please we will find out Melliora, and go into
the House: As he spoke these Words, they perceiv'd
her coming towards them, who had only
taken a little round to meet 'em, and they all
three made what haste they cou'd in: Count
D'elmont ask'd a formal Leave of Melliora
to go thro' her Chamber, none of the Servants
being yet stirring, to let him into the House any
other way, which being granted, he cou'd not
help sighing as he passed by the Bed, where he
had been lately so cruelly disappointed, but had no
Opportunity to speak his Thought at that time to
Melliora. 
The Count rung for his Gentleman to rise to
undress him, and order'd him to send somebody to
take care of his Horse, and went to bed. Alovisa
was very much surpriz'd at his Return from the
Baron's at so unseasonable an Hour, but much
more so, when in the Morning, Melantha
came laughing into the Chamber, and told her all
that she knew of the Adventure of the Night before; 
her old Fit of Jealousy now resum'd its Dominion
in her Soul, she cou'd not forbear thinking
that there was something more in it than Melantha
had discover'd; and presently imagin'd
that her Husband stay'd not at the Baron's because
she was abroad; but she was more confirm'd in 

this Opinion, when Melantha calling for her
Coach to go home, the Count told her, that he
wou'd accompany her thither, having urgent Business
with her Brother. 'Tis almost impossible
to guess the Rage Alovisa was in, but she dissembled
it 'till they were gone, then going into
Melliora's Chamber, she vented part of it
there, and began to question her about their Behaviour
in the Wilderness. Tho' Melliora
was glad to find, since she was jealous, that she
was jealous of any Body rather than herself, yet
she said all that she cou'd, to persuade her, that she
had no Reason to be uneasy. 
But Alovisa was always of too fiery a Nature
to listen patiently to any thing that cou'd be
offer'd, to alter the Opinion she had taken up, tho'
it were with never so little Appearance of Reason; 
but much more now, when she thought herself,
in a manner confirm'd: Forbear, (said she) dear
Melliora, to take the Part of Perfidy: I know
he hates me, I read it in his Eyes, and feel it on
his Lips, all Day he shuns my Converse, and at
Night, colder than Ice, receives my warm Embraces,
and when (oh! that I cou'd tear the tender
Folly from my Heart) with Words as soft as Love
can form, I urge him to disclose the Cause of his
Disquiet, he answers but in Sighs, and turns away:
Perhaps (reply'd Melliora) his Temper naturally
is gloomy, and Love itself has scarce the
Power to alter Nature. Oh! no, (interrupted Alovisa)
far from it: Had I ne'er known him
otherwise, I cou'd forgive what now I know; but
he was once as kind as tender Mothers to their
new born Babes, and fond as the first Wishes of
desiring Youth: Oh! with what Eagerness has he
approach'd me, when absent but an Hour! — 
Had'st thou e'er seen him in those Days of Joy,
even thou, cold cloyster'd Maid, must have ador'd
him. What Majesty then sat upon his Brow?— 

What matchless Glories shone around him! — 
Miriads of Cupids, shot resistless Darts in every
Glance! —His Voice, when softned in amorous Accents,
boasted more Musick than the Poet Orpheus! 
When e'er he spoke, methought the Air
seem'd charm'd, the Winds forgot to blow, all
Nature listen'd, and like, Alovisa, melted into
Transport! —But he is chang'd in all—the Heroe,
and the Lover are extinct, and all that's left of
the once gay D'elmont is a dull senseless Picture. 
Melliora was too sensibly touch'd with
this Discourse, to be able presently to make any
Answer to it, and she cou'd not forbear accompanying
her in Tears, while Alovisa renew'd
her Complaints in this manner: His Heart (said she)
his Heart is lost, for ever ravish'd from me; that
Bosom where I had treasur'd all my Joys, my
Hopes, my Wishes, now burns and pants with
Longings for a Rival. Curst! curst Melantha!
by Heaven, they are even impudent in Guilt, they
toy, they kiss, and make Assignations before my
Face, and this Tyrant Husband braves me with
his Falshood, and thinks to awe me into Calmness. 
But if I endure it—No (continu'd she,
stamping and walking about the Room in a disorder'd
Motion) I'll be no longer the tame easy
Wretch I have been—all France shall echo with
my Wrongs—The ungrateful Monster! —Villain,
whose well-nigh wasted Stream of Wealth
had dry'd, but for my kind Supply, shall he enslave
me! —Oh! Melliora, shun the Marriage-Bed,
as thou wouldst a Serpent's Den, more ruinous,
more poisonous far is Man. 
'Twas in vain that Melliora endeavour'd
to pacify her, she continu'd in this Humour all
Day, and in the Evening receiv'd a considerable
Addition to her former Disquiet. The Count sent
a Servant of the Baron's (having not taken any of
his own with him) to acquaint her, that he should 

not be at home that Night. 'Tis well, (said she,
ready to burst with Rage) let the Count know
that I can change as well as he, and shall excuse
his Absence, tho' it lasts to all Eternity: Go, (continu'd
she, seeing him surpriz'd) deliver this Message,
and withal, assure him, that what I say I
mean. She had scarce made an end of these
Words, when she flung out of the Room, unable
to utter more, and lock'd herself into her Chamber,
leaving Melliora no less distracted, tho'
for different Reasons, to retire to her's. 
She had not 'till now, had a Moment's Time
for Reflection since her Adventure in the Wilderness,
and the Remembrance of it, join'd with the
Despair and Grief of Alovisa, which she knew
herself the sole Occasion of, threw her into most
terrible Agonies. She was ready to die with
Shame, when she consider'd how much the Secret
of her Soul was laid open to him, who of all the
World she ought most to have conceal'd it from,
and with Remorse, for the Miseries her fatal
Beauty was like to bring on a Family, for whom
she had the greatest Friendship. 
But these Thoughts soon gave way to another,
equally as shocking; she was present when
the Servant brought Word the Count would lie
abroad, and had all the Reason imaginable to believe
that Message was only a Feint, that he might
have an Opportunity to come unobserv'd to her
Chamber, as he had done the Night before. She
could not presently guess by what Means he had
got in, and therefore was at a Loss how to prevent
him, 'till recollecting all the Circumstances
of that tender Interview, she remember'd that
when Melantha had surpriz'd them, he made
his Escape by the Back-Stairs into the Garden, and
that when they went down, the Door was lock'd; 
therefore concluded it must be by a Key that he
had gain'd Admittance; and began to set her Invention 

to work, how to keep this dangerous Enemy
to her Honour, from coming in a second
Time. She had no Keys that were large enough
to fill the Wards, and if she had put one in on the
inside, it would have fallen out immediately on
the least Touch; but at last, after trying several
Ways, she tore her Handkerchief into small Pieces,
and thrust it into the Hole with her Busk, so hard,
that it was impossible for any Key to enter. 
Melliora thought she had done a very heroick
Action, and sate herself down on the Bed-side,
in a pleas'd Contemplation of the Conquest, she
believ'd her Virtue had gain'd over her Passion. 
But, alas! how little did she know the true State
of her own Heart? She no sooner heard a little
Noise at the Door, as presently after she did, but
she thought it was the Count, and began to tremble
not with Fear, but Desire. 
It was indeed Count D'elmont, who had
borrow'd Horses and a Servant of the Baron, and
got into the Garden as before, but with a much
greater Assurance now of making himself entirely
happy in the Gratification of his utmost Wishes. 
But 'tis impossible to represent the Greatness of his
Vexation and Surprize, when all his Efforts to open
the Door were in vain; he found something
had been done to the Lock, but could not discover
what, nor by any Means remove the Obstacle
which Melliora had put there. She, on the
other hand, was in all the Confusion imaginable; 
sometimes prompted by the Violence of her Passion,
she would run to the Door, resolving to open
it; and then, frighted with the Apprehension
of what would be the Consequence, as hastily fly
from it: If he had staid much longer, 'tis possible
Love would have got the better of all Considerations,
but a Light appearing on the other side of
the Garden, oblig'd the thrice disappointed Lover
to quit his Post. He had sent away the Horses by 

the Servant who came with him, and had no Opportunity
of going to the Baron's that Night, so
came to his own Fore-gate, and thunder'd with a
Force suitable to the Fury he was possess'd with; 
it was presently open'd, most of the Family being
up. Alovisa had rav'd herself into Fits, and
her Disorder created full Employment for the Servants,
who busily running about the House with
Candles, fetching things for her, occasion'd that
Reflection which he had seen. 
The Count was told of his Lady's Indisposition,
but he thought he had sufficient Pretence not
to come where she was, after the Message she had
sent him by the Baron's Servant, and order'd a Bed
to be made ready for him in another Chamber. 
Alovisa soon heard he was come in, and it
was with much ado, that her Women prevail'd on
her not to rise and go to him that Moment, so little
did she remember what she had said. She pass'd
the Night in most terrible Inquietudes, and early in
the Morning went to his Chamber, but finding it
shut, she was oblig'd to wait, tho' with a World
of Impatience, 'till she heard he was stirring,
which not being till towards Noon, she spent
all that Time in considering how she should accost
him. 
As soon as the Servant, whom she had order'd to
watch, brought her Word that his Lord was dressing,
she went into his Room; there was nobody
with him but his Gentleman, and he withdrawing
out of Respect, imagining, by both their Countenances,
there might something be said, not proper
for him to hear. I see (said she) my Presence
is unwish'd, but I have learn'd from you to scorn
Constraint, and as you openly avow your Falshood,
I shall my Indignation, and my just Disdain! 
Madam, (answer'd he, suddenly) if you
have any thing to reproach me with, you could
not have chose a more unlucky Time for it, than 

this, nor was I ever less dispos'd to give you Satisfaction. 
No, barbarous cold Insulter! (resum'd
she) I had not the least Hope you would; I find
that I am grown so low in your Esteem, I am not
worth Pains of an Invention. —By Heaven, this
damn'd Indifference is worse than the most vile
Abuse! —'Tis plain Contempt! —O that I could
resent it as I ought—then Sword, or Poison
should revenge me—Why am I so curs'd to Love
you still? —O that those Fiends (continu'd she,
bursting into Tears) that have deform'd thy Soul,
would change thy Person too, turn every Charm to
horrid Blackness, grim as thy Cruelty, and foul as
thy Ingratitude, to free that Heart, thy Perjury
has ruin'd! I thought, Madam, (said he, with an
Accent maliciously ironical) that you had thrown
off, even the Appearances of Love for me, by
the Message you sent me yesterday—O thou Tormenter!
(interrupted she) hast thou not wrong'd
me in the tenderest Point, driven me to the last
Degree of Misery! to Madness! to Despair? And
dost thou—can'st thou reproach me for complaining? 
—Your Coldness, your Unkindness stung me
to the Soul, and then I said, I know not what— 
but I remember well, that I would have seem'd
careless and indifferent like you. You need not
(reply'd he) give yourself the Trouble of an Apology,
I have no Design to make a Quarrel of it; 
and wish, for both our Peace, you could as easily
moderate your Passions, as I can mine; and that
you may the better do so, I leave you to reflect
on what I have said, and the little Reason I have
ever given you for such Intemperance. He left
the Chamber with these Words, which instead of
quelling, more enflam'd Alovisa's Rage. She
threw herself down into an Elbow-Chair that stood
there, and gave a Loose to the Tempest of her
Soul; sometimes she curs'd, and vow'd the bitterest
Revenge, sometimes she wept, and at others, 

was resolv'd to fly to Death, the only Remedy
for neglected Love. In the midst of these
confus'd Meditations, casting her Eye on a Table
by her, she saw a Paper, and something written
on it, which hastily taking up, found it the
Count's Character, and read (to her inexpressible
Torment) these Lines. 

The Despairing D'elmont to his Repenting Charmer.
What cruel Star last Night, had Influence over
my inhumane Dear? Say, to what Cause must
I ascribe my fatal Disappointment? For I would
fain believe I owe it not to thee! —Such an Action,
after what thou hast confess'd, I could expect from nothing
but a Creature of Melantha's Temper— 
No, 'tis too much of the vain Coquet, and indeed too
much of the Jilt, for my Adorable to be guilty of— 
and yet—oh! how shall I excuse thee? when every
thing was hush'd, Darkness my Friend, and all my
Wishes rais'd, when every Nerve trembled with fierce
Desires, and my Pulse beat a Call to Love, or Death,
—(For if I not enjoy thee, that will soon arrive) then,
then what, but thy self, forgetting all thy Vows, thy
tender Vows of the most ardent Passion, cou'd have
destroy'd my Hopes? —Oh! where was then that
Love which lately flatter'd my fond doating Soul,
when sinking, dying in my Arms, my Charmer lay! 
And suffer'd me to reap each Prologue Favour to
the greatest Bliss—But they are past, and rigid Honour
stands to guard those Joys, which— 


There was no more written, but there needed
no more to make Alovisa, before half distracted,
now quite so. She was now convinc'd
that she had a much more dangerous Rival than
Melantha; and her Curiosity who it might be,
was not much less troublesome to her than other
Passions. 
She was going to seek her Husband with this
Testimony of his Infidelity in her Hand, when he,
remembering he had left it there, was coming hastily
back to fetch it. The Excess of Fury which
she met him with, is hardly to be imagin'd; she
upbraided him in such a Fashion as might be called
reviling, and had so little Regard to good Manners,
or even Decency in what she said, that it
dissipated all the Confusion he was in at first, to
see so plain a Proof against him in her Hands, and
rouz'd him to a Rage not much inferior to her's. 
She endeavour'd (tho' she took a wrong Method)
to bring him to a Confession he had done amiss; 
and he to lay the Tempest of her Tongue, by
storming louder, but neither succeeded in their
Wish: And he, stung with the Bitterness of her
Reproaches, and tired with Clamour, at last flung
from her with a solemn Vow never to eat, or sleep
with her more. 
A Wife, if equally haughty and jealous, if less
fond than Alovisa, will scarce be able to comprehend
the Greatness of her Sufferings: And it is
not to be wonder'd at, that she, so violent in all
her Passions, and agitated by so many at once,
committed a thousand Extravagancies, which those
who know the Force but of one, by the Aid of
Reason, may avoid. She tore down the Count's
Picture which hung in the Room, and stamp'd on
it, then the Letter, her own Cloaths and Hair, and
whoever had seen her in that Posture, would have
thought she appear'd more like what the Furies are
represented to be, than a Woman. 

The Count when he took leave the Night before
of the Baron D'espernay, had promis'd to
return to him in the Morning, and give him an
Account of his Adventure with Melliora; but
the Vexation of his Disappointment, and Quarrel
with his Wife, having hinder'd him all this time,
the Baron came to his House, impatient to know
the Success of an Affair on which his own Hopes
depended. He was told by the Servants that their
Lord was above; and running hastily without Ceremony,
the first Person he saw was Alovisa,
in the Condition I have describ'd. 
The Baron had passionately lov'd this Lady
from the first Moment he had seen her; but it was
with that sort of Love, which considers more its
Gratification, than the Interest, or Quiet of the
Object beloved. He imagin'd by the Wildness of
Alovisa's Countenance and Behaviour, that
the Count had given her some extraordinary Occasion
of Distaste; and was so far from being troubled
at the Sorrow he beheld her in, that he rejoyc'd
in it, as the Advancement of his Designs. 
But he wanted not Cunning to disguise his Sentiments,
and approaching her with a tender and
submissive Air, entreated her to tell him the Cause
of her Disorder. Alovisa had always considered
him as a Person of Worth, and one who was
entitled to her Esteem by the vast Respect he always
paid her, and the Admiration, which in every
Opportunity, he express'd for her Wit and
Beauty. She was not perhaps far from guessing
the Extent of his Desires, by some Looks, and
private Glances he had given her, and, notwithstanding
her Passion for the Count, was too vain
to be offended at it. On the contrary, it pleas'd
her Pride, and confirm'd her in the good Opinion
she had of herself, to think a Man of his Sense
should be compell'd by the Force of her irresistible
Attractions, to adore and to despair, and 

therefore made no Difficulty of disburthening all
the Anguish of her Soul, in the Bosom of this, as
she believ'd, so faithful Friend. 
The Baron seem'd to receive this Declaration
of her Wrongs; with all imaginable Concern: and
accus'd the Count of Stupidity in so little knowing
the Value of a Jewel he was Master of, and gave
her some Hints, that he was not unsensible who
the Lady was, that had been the Cause of it, which
Alovisa presently taking hold on; O, speak
her Name (said she) quick, let me know her, or
own thy Friendship was but feign'd to undo me,
and that thou hatest the wretched Alovisa. O far!
(resum'd he) far be such Thoughts; first let me die
to prove my Zeal—my Faith, sincere to you, who
only next to Heaven, are worthy Adoration—but
forgive me, if I say, in this, you must not be obey'd. 
O why, said she? Perhaps (answer'd he)
I am a trusted Person—a Confident—and if I
should reveal the Secret of my Friend, I know,
tho' you approv'd the Treachery, you would detest
the Traytor. Oh! never, (rejoin'd she impatiently)
'twould be a Service, more than the
whole Study of my Life can pay—Am I not
rack'd,—stabb'd—and mangled in Idea, by some
dark Hand shaded with Night and Ignorance? 
And should I not be grateful for a friendly Clue to
guide me from this Labyrinth of Doubt, to a full
Day of Certainty, where all the Fiend may stand
expos'd before me, and I have Scope to execute
my Vengeance? Besides, (continu'd she, finding
he was silent, and seemingly extremely mov'd at
what she said) 'tis joining in the Cause of Guilt
to hide her from me—Come, you must tell me— 
your Honour suffers else—both that, and Pity,
plead the Injured's Cause. Alas! (said he) Honour
can ne'er consent to a Discovery of what,
with solemn Vows I have promis'd to conceal. 
But, oh!—there is something in my Soul more 

powerful, which says, that Alovisa must not
be deny'd. Why then (cry'd she) do you delay? 
Why keep you me on the Rack, when one short
Word would ease me of my Torment? I have
consider'd, (answer'd he, after a Pause) Madam,
you shall be satisfied, depend on it you shall, tho'
not this Moment, you shall have greater Proofs
than Words can give you—Ocular Demonstration
shall strike Denial dumb. What mean you? (interrupted
she.) You shall behold (said he) the guilty
Pair, link'd in each other's Arms. Oh, Espernay!
(rejoin'd she) couldst thou do that? —'Tis easy
(answer'd he) as I can order Matters—but longer
Conference may render me suspected—I'll go seek
the Count, for he must be my Engine to betray
himself—In a Day or two, at farthest, you shall
enjoy all the Revenge Detection can bestow. 
Alovisa would fain have perswaded him to
have told him the Name of her Rival, in part of
that full Conviction he had promis'd her, but in
vain, and she was oblig'd to leave the Issue of this
Affair entirely to his Management. 
The Baron was extreamly pleas'd with the
Progress he had made, and did not doubt, but,
for the Purchase of this Secret, he should obtain
every thing he desir'd of Alovisa. He found
Count D'elmont full of troubled and perplexed
Thoughts; and when he had heard the History of
his Disappointment: I am sorry to hear (said he)
that the foolish Girl does not know her own Mind
—but come, my Lord, (continu'd he, after a little
Pause) do not suffer yourself to sink beneath a
Caprice, which all those who converse much with
that Sex must frequently meet with—I have a Contrivance
in my Head, that cannot fail to render all
her peevish Virtue frustrate, and make her happy
in her own Despite. Oh, Espernay! (reply'd
the Count) thou talkest as Friendship prompts
thee, I know thou wishest my Success, but, alas! 

so many, and such unforeseen, Accidents have happen'd
hitherto to prevent me, that I begin to think
the Hand of Fate has set me down for lost. For
shame, my Lord, (interrupted the Baron) be not
so poor in Spirit––––once more I tell you that she
shall be yours––––a Day or two shall make her so
––––and because I know you Lovers are unbelieving,
and impatient—I will communicate the
Means A Ball, and Entertainment, shall be provided
at my House, to which all the neighbouring
People shall be invited; amongst the Number,
yourself, your Lady, and Melliora; it will
be late before 'tis done, and I must perswade your
Family, and some others, who live farthest off,
(to countenance the Design) to stay all Night; all
that you have to do, is to keep up your Resentment
to Alovisa, that you may have a Pretence
to sleep from her: I shall take care to have Melliora
plac'd where no Impediment may bar
your Entrance. Impossible Suggestion! (cry'd
D'elmont, shaking his Head) Alovisa is in
too much Rage of Temper to listen to such an Invitation,
and without her, we must not hope for
Melliora. How industrious are you (resum'd
the Baron) to create Difficulties where there is
none. Tho' I confess, this may have, to you, a
reasonable Appearance of one. But know, my
Friendship builds its Hopes to serve you on a sure
Foundation—This jealous furious Wife, makes
me the Confident of her imagin'd Injuries, conjures
me to use all my Interest with you for a Reconcilement,
and believes I am now pleading for
her—I must for a while rail at your Ingratitude,
and condemn your want of Taste, to keep my
Credit with her, and now and then sweeten her
with a doubtful Hope, that it may be possible at last
to bring you to acknowledge, that you have been
in an Error; this at once confirms her, that I 

am wholly on her side, and engages her to follow
my Advice. 
Tho' nothing palls so much as too easy an Assurance
of Means to gratify it, yet a little Hope is
absolutely necessary to preserve it. The fiery
Wishes of D'elmont's Soul, before chill'd by
Despair, and half suppress'd with clouding Griefs,
blaz'd now as fierce and vigorous as ever; and he
found so much Probability in what the Baron said,
that he was ready to adore him for the Contrivance. 
Thus all Parties, but Melliora, remain'd
in a sort of a pleas'd Expectation. The Count
doubted not of being happy, nor Alovisa of
having her Curiosity satisfy'd by the Baron's Assistance,
nor himself of the Reward he design'd to
demand of her for that good Service, and each
long'd impatiently for the Day, or rather Night,
which was to bring this great Affair to a Period. 
Poor Melliora was the only Person who had
no Interval of Comfort. Restrain'd by Honour,
and enflam'd by Love, her very Soul was torn:
And when she found that Count D'elmont
made no Attempt to get into her Chamber again,
as she imagin'd he would, she fell into a Despair
more terrible than all her former Inquietudes; she
presently fancy'd that the Disappointment he had
met with the Night before, had driven the hope-less
Passion from his Heart, and the Thoughts of
being no longer beloved by him, were unsupportable. 
She saw him not all that Day, nor the next,
the Quarrel between him and Alovisa having
caus'd separate Tables, she was oblig'd in Deceney
to eat at that where she was, and had the Mortification
of hearing herself curs'd every Hour by
the enrag'd Wife, in the Name of her unknown
Rival, without daring to speak a Word in her own
Vindication. 

In the mean time the Baron, diligent to make
good the Promises he had given the Count and
Alovisa, for his own Ends, got every thing
ready, and came himself to D'elmont's House,
to entreat their Company at his. Now, Madam,
(said he, to Alovisa) the time is come to prove
your Servant's Faith; this Night shall put an End to
your Uncertainty. They had no Opportunity for
further Speech, Melliora came that Moment
into the Room, who being ask'd to go to the Ball,
and seeming a little unwilling to appear at any publick
Diversion, by Reason of the late Death of her
Father, put the Baron in a mortal Apprehension
for the Success of his Undertaking: But Alovisa
joining in his Entreaties, she was at last prevail'd
upon: The Count went along with the Baron in
his Chariot, and the Ladies soon follow'd in an
other. 
There was a vast deal of Company there,
and the Count danc'd with several of the Ladies,
and was extreamly gay amongst them: Alovisa
watch'd his Behaviour, and regarded every one
of them, in their turn, with Jealousy, but was far
from having the least Suspicion of her whom only
she had Cause. 
Tho' Melliora's greatest Motive to go,
was because she might have the Happiness of seeing
her admir'd Count, a Blessing she had not
enjoy'd these two Days, yet she took but little Satisfaction
in that View, without an Opportunity
of being spoke to by him. But that Uneasiness
was remov'd, when the serious Dances being over,
and they all joining in a grand Ballet, he every now
and then got means to say a thousand tender Things
to her, press'd her Hand whenever he turn'd her,
and would sometimes, when at a Distance from
Alovisa, pretend to be out, on purpose to
stand still and talk to her. This kind of Behaviour
banish'd part of her Sufferings; for though she 

cou'd consider both his and her own Passion in no
other View, than that of a very great Misfortune
to them both; yet there are so many Pleasures, even
in the Pains of Love, such tender Thrillings,
such Soul-ravishing Amusements, attend some happy
Moments of Contemplation, that those who
most endeavour, can wish but faintly to be freed
from. 
When it grew pretty late, the Baron made a
sign to the Count to follow him into a little Room
joining to that where they were; and when he had,
Now, my Lord, (said he) I doubt not but this Night
will make you entirely Possessor of your Wishes:
I have prolonged the Entertainment, on purpose
to detain those, who 'tis necessary for our Design,
and have order'd a Chamber for Melliora,
which has no Impediment to Bar your Entrance:
O! Thou best of Friends (answer'd D'elmont)
how shall I requite thy Goodness? In making (resum'd
the Baron) a right Use of the Opportunity
I give you; for if you do not, you render fruitless
all the Labours of my Brain, and make me
wretched while my Friend is so. Oh! fear me not
(cry'd D'elmont in a Rapture) I will not be
deny'd, each Faculty of my Soul is bent upon Enjoyment; 
tho' Death in all its various Horrors
glar'd upon me, I'd scorn 'em all in Melliora's
Arms—Oh! the very Name transports me— 
New fires my Blood, and tingles in my Veins— 
Imagination points out all her Charms—Methinks
I see her lie in sweet Confusion—Fearing—Wishing
—Melting—Her glowing Cheeks—Her closing
dying Eyes—her ever kindling—Oh! 'tis too vast
for Thought! Even Fancy flags, and cannot reach
her Wonders! As he was speaking, Melantha,
who had taken notice of his going out of the
Room, and had followed him with a Design of
talking to him, came time enough to hear the latter
Part of what he said; but seeing her Brother 

with him, withdrew with as much haste as she came
and infinitely more uneasiness of Mind; she was
now but too well assured that she had a greater difficulty
than the Count's Matrimonial Engagement
to get over, before she could reach his Heart, and
was ready to burst with Vexation to think she was
supplanted: Full of a Thousand tormenting Reflections
she return'd to the Ball-Room, and was so out
of Humour all the Night, that she could hardly be
commonly civil to any Body that spoke to her. 
At last, the Hour so much desired by the Count,
the Baron, and Alovisa, (though for various
Reasons) was arriv'd. The Company broke up; 
those who liv'd near, which were the greatest Part,
went home, the others being entreated by the Baron,
stay'd. When they were to be conducted to
their Chambers, he call'd Melantha, and desired
she would take care of the Ladies as he should
direct; but above all, charg'd to place Alovisa
and Melliora in two Chambers, which he
shewed her. 
Melantha was now let into the Secret she
so much desir'd to know, the Name of her Rival,
which she had not come time enough to hear, when
she did the Count's rapturous Description of her. 
She had before found out, that her Brother was in
Love with Alovisa, and did not doubt but that
there was a double Intrigue to be carry'd on that
Night, and was the more confirm'd in that Opinion,
when she remembred, that the Baron had
order'd the Lock that Day to be taken off that
Chamber where Melliora was to be lodg'd. 
It presently came into her Head to betray all she
knew to Alovisa; but she soon rejected that
Resolution for another, which she thought would
give her a more pleasing Revenge. She conducted
all the Ladies to such Chambers as she thought
fit, and Alovisa to that her Brother had desired,
having no design of disappointing him; but 

Melliora she led to one where she always lay
her self, resolving to supply her Place in the other,
where the Count was to come: Yes, (said she to
her self) I will receive his Vows in Melliora's
stead; and when I find him rais'd to the highest
Pitch of Expectation, declare who I am, and awe
him into Tameness: 'Twill be a charming Piece
of Vengeance; besides, if he be not the most
ungrateful Man on Earth, he must adore my Generosity,
in not exposing him to his Wife, when I
have him in my Power, after the Coldness he has
used me with. She found something so pleasing
in this Contrivance, that no Considerations whatever
could have Power to deter her from pursuing
it. 
When the Baron found every thing was silent
and ready for his Purpose, he went softly to Count
D'elmont's Chamber, where he was impatiently
expected; and taking him by the Hand, led
him to that where he had order'd Melliora
to be lodg'd. When they were at the Door, you
see, my Lord, (said he) I have kept my Promise; 
there lies the Idol of your Soul, go in, be bold,
and all the Happiness you wish attend you. The
Count was in too great a Hurry of disorder'd
Thoughts to make him any other Answer than a
passionate Embrace, and gently pushing open the
Door, which had no fastning to it, left the Baron
to prosecute the remaining Part of his treacherous
Design. 
Alovisa had all the time of her being at
the Baron's, endur'd most grievous Racks of Mind,
her Husband appear'd to her that Night more gay
and lovely, if possible, than ever; but that Contentment
which sat upon his Face, and added to his
Graces, stung her to the Soul, when she reflected
how little Sympathy there was between them:
Scarce a Month (said she to herself) was I bless'd
with those Looks of Joy, a pensive Sullenness has 

dwelt upon his Brow e'er since, 'till now; 'tis
from my Ruin that his Pleasure flows, he hates
me, and rejoices in a Pretence, tho' never so poor
a one, to be absent from me. She was inwardly
toss'd with a Multitude of these and the like Perturbations,
tho' the Assurance the Baron had given
her of Revenge, made her conceal them tolerably
well, while she was in Company; but when
she was left alone in the Chamber, and perceiv'd
the Baron did not come so soon as she expected,
her Rage broke out in all the Violence imaginable:
She gave a loose to every foolish Passion, and
when she saw him enter, Cruel D'espernay
(said she) where have you been! —Is this the Friendship
which you vow'd? To leave me here distracted
with my Griefs, while my perfidious Husband,
and the cursed She that robs me of him, are perhaps,
as happy as their guilty Love can make them? 
Madam, (answer'd he) 'tis but a Moment since
they are met: A Moment! (interrupted she) a Moment
is too much, the smallest Particle of undivided
Time, may make my Rival blest, and vastly
recompence for all that my Revenge can do. Ah! 
Madam, (resum'd the Baron) how dearly do you
still Love that most ungrateful Man: I had hopes
that the full Knowledge of his Falshood might have
made you scorn the Scorner; I shall be able by to
Morrow (reply'd the cunning Alovisa, who
knew his Drift well enough) to give you a better
account of my Sentiments than now I can:—But
why do we delay (continued she impatiently) are
they not together? —The Baron saw this was no
time to press her farther, and therefore taking a
Wax Candle which stood on the Table in one Hand,
and offering the other to lead her, I am ready, Madam,
(said he) to make good my Promise, and
shall esteem no other Hours of my Life happy,
but those which may be serviceable to you. They
had only a small Part of a Gallery to go thro', and 

Alovisa had no time to answer to these last
Words, if she had been compos'd enough to have
done it, before they were at the Door, which as
soon as the Baron had brought her to, he withdrew
with all possible Speed. 
Tho' the Count had been but a very little time
in the Arms of his suppos'd Melliora, yet
he had made so good use of it, and had taken so
much Advantage of her complying Humour, that
all his Fears were at an End; he now thought himself
the most Fortunate of all Mankind; and Melantha
was far from repenting the Breach of
the Resolution she had made of discovering herself
to him. His Behaviour to her was all Rapture,
all killing Extacy; and she flatter'd herself with a
Belief, that when he shou'd come to know to whom
he ow'd that Bliss he had possess'd, he would not be
ungrateful for it. 
What a confus'd Consternation must this Pair
be in, when Alovisa rush'd into the Room;— 
'Tis hard to say, which was the greatest, the Count's
Concern for his imagin'd Melliora's Honour,
or Melantha's for her own; but if one may
form a Judgment from the Levity of the one's
Temper, and Generosity of the other's, one may
believe that his had the Preheminence: But neither
of them were so lost in Thought, as not to
take what Measures the Time and Place would permit,
to baffle the Fury of this incens'd Wife: Melantha
slunk under the Cloaths, and the Count
started up in the Bed at the first Appearance of the
Light, which Alovisa had in her Hand, and
in the most angry Accent he could turn his Voice
to, ask'd her the Reason of her coming there? 
Rage, at this sight, (prepar'd and arm'd for it as
she was) took away all Power of Utterance from
her; but she flew to the Bed, and began to tear
the Cloaths (which Melantha held fast over
her Head) in so violent a manner, that the Count 

found, the only way to tame her, was to meet
Force with Force; so jumping out, he seiz'd on
her, and throwing her into a Chair, and holding
her down in it, Madam, Madam, (said he) you are
Mad, and I as such shall use you, unless you promise
to return quietly, and leave me. She cou'd
yet bring forth no other Words, than Villain,— 
Monster! —And such like Names, which her Passion
and Injury suggested, which he but little regarded,
but for the Noise she made: For Shame, (resum'd
he) expose not thus your self and me; if
you cannot command your Temper, at least confine
your Clamours—I will not stir (said she, raving
and struggling to get loose) 'till I have seen
the Face that has undone me, I'll tear out her bewitching
Eyes—the curst Adultress! And leave her
Mistress of fewer Charms than thou canst find in
me: She spoke this with so elevated a Voice, that
the Count endeavour'd to stop her Mouth, that she
might not alarm the Company that were in the
House; but he cou'd not do it time enough to prevent
her from schrieking out Murder! —Help! or
the barbarous Man will kill me! At these Words
the Baron came running in immediately, full of
Surprize and Rage at something he had met with
in the mean time: How came this Woman here?
cry'd the Count to him. Ask me not, my Lord,
(said he) for I can answer nothing; but every
thing this cursed Night, I think, has happen'd by
Enchantment; he was going to say something more,
but several of his Guests hearing a Noise, and Cry
of Murder, and directed by the Lights they saw in
that Room, came in, and presently after a great
many of the Servants, that the Chamber was as
full as it cou'd hold: The Count let go his Wife
on the sight of the first Stranger that enter'd; and
indeed there was no need of his confining her in
that Place (tho' he knew not so much) for the Violence
of so many contrary Passions warring in her 

Breast at once, had thrown her into a Swoon, and
she fell back when he let go his hold of her, motionless,
and in all appearance Dead. The Count
said little, but began to put on his Cloaths, asham'd
of the Posture he had been seen in; but the Baron
endeavour'd to perswade the Company, that it was
only a Family Quarrel of no Consequence, told
them he was sorry for the Disturbance it had given
them, and desir'd them to return to their Rest; and
when the Room was pretty clear, order'd two or
three of the Maids to carry Alovisa to her
Chamber, and apply things proper for her Recovery:
As they were bearing her out, Melliora,
who had been frighted as well as the rest with the
Noise she heard, was running along the Gallery to
see what had happen'd, and met them; her Trouble
to find Alovisa in that Condition, was unfeign'd,
and she assisted those that were employ'd
about her, and accompany'd them where they carry'd
her. 
The Count was going to the Bed-side to comfort
the conceal'd Fair, that lay still under the
Cloaths, when he saw Melliora at the Door:
What Surprize was ever equal to his at that View? 
—He stood like one, transfix'd with Thunder; he
knew not what to think, or rather cou'd not think
at all, confounded with the seeming Impossibility. 
He beheld the Person whom he thought had lain
in his Arms, whom he had enjoy'd, whose Bulk
and Proportion he still saw on the Bed, whom he
was just going to address to, and for whom he had
been in all the Agonies of Soul imaginable, come
from a distant Chamber, and unconcern'd, ask'd
cooly, how Alovisa came to be taken ill! He
look'd confusedly about, sometimes on Melliora,
sometimes towards the Bed, and sometimes
on the Baron: Am I awake? (said he) or is every
thing I see and hear, Illusion? The Baron could
not presently resolve after what manner he should 

answer, tho' he perfectly knew the Truth of this
Adventure, and who was in Bed; for, when he
had conducted Alovisa to that Room, in order
to make the Discovery he had promised, he
went to his Sister's Chamber, designing to abscond
there, in Case the Count should fly out on his Wife's
Entrance, and seeing him there, imagine who it was
that betray'd him; and finding the Door shut, knock'd
and call'd to have it open'd: Melliora, who
began to think she should lie in Quiet no where,
ask'd who was there? and what he would have? 
I would speak with my Sister, (reply'd he, as much
astonish'd then, to hear who it was that answer'd
him, as the Count was now to see her) and Melliora
having assur'd him that she was not with
her, left him no room to doubt, by what means
the Exchange had been made: Few Men, how
amorous soever themselves, care that the Female
Part of their Family should be so; and he was most
sensibly mortify'd with it; but reflecting that it
could not be kept a Secret, at least from the Count; 
My Lord, (said he, pointing to the Bed) their lies
the Cause of your Amazement, that wicked Woman
has betray'd the Trust I repos'd in her, and
deceiv'd both you and me: Rise, continu'd he,
throwing open the Curtains, thou Shame of thy
Sex, and everlasting Blot and Scandal of that noble
House thou art descended from; rise, I say, or I
will stab thee here in this Scene of Guilt; in speaking
these Words, he drew out his Sword, and appear'd
in such a real Fury, that the Count, tho'
more and more amaz'd with every thing he saw and
heard, made no doubt but he wou'd do as he said,
and ran to hold his Arm. 
As no Woman that is Mistress of a great Share
of Wit, will be a Coquet, so no Woman that has
not a little, can be one: Melantha, though
frighted to Death with these unexpected Occurrences,
feign'd a Courage, which she had not in 

reality, and thrusting her Head a little above the
Cloaths; bless me, Brother (said she) I vow I do not
know what you mean by all this Bustle, neither am
I guilty of any Crime: I was vex'd indeed to be
made a Property of, and chang'd Beds with Melliora
for a little innocent Revenge; for I always
design'd to discover myself to the Count time
enough to prevent mischief. The Baron was not
so silly as to believe what she said, tho' the Count
as much as he hated her, had too much Generosity
to contradict her; and keeping still hold of the Baron,
Come D'espernay, (said he) I believe
your Sister's Stars and mine have from our Birth
been at Variance, for this is the third Disappointment
she has given me; once in Melliora's
Chamber, then in the Wilderness, and now here; 
but I forgive her, therefore let us retire and leave
her to her Repose. The Baron was sensible that all
the Rage in the World could not recal what had
been done, and only giving her a furious Look,
went with the Count out of the Room, without
saying any thing more to her at that Time. 
The Baron with much entreating, at last prevail'd
on Count D'elmont to go into his Bed,
where he accompanied him; but they were both
of them too full of troubled Meditations to sleep:
His Sister's Indiscretion vex'd the Baron to the
Heart, and took away great part of the Joy, for
the fresh Occasion the Count had given Alovisa
to withdraw her Affections from him. But with
what Words can the various Passions that agitated
the Soul of D'elmont be describ'd? The Transports
he had enjoy'd in an imaginary Felicity,
were now turned to so many real Horrors; he
saw himself expos'd to all the World, for it would
have been Vanity to the last Degree, to believe
this Adventure would be kept a Secret; but what
gave him the most bitter Reflection, was, that
Melliora when she should know it, as he 

could not doubt but she immediately wou'd be told
it by Alovisa, wou'd judge of it by the Appearance,
and believe him at once, the most vicious
and most false of Men. As for his Wife, he thought
not of her, with any Compassion for his Sufferings,
but with Rage and Hate, for that jealous Curiosity
which he suppos'd had led her to watch his Actions
that Night; (for he had not the least Suspicion of
the Baron.) Melantha he always despis'd, but
now detested, for the Trick she had put upon him,
yet thought it would be not only unmanly, but
barbarous to let her know he did so. It was in vain
for him to endeavour to come to a Determination
after what manner he should behave himself to any
of them; and when the Night was past in forming
a thousand several Resolutions, the Morning found
him as much to seek as before: He took his leave
early of the Baron, not being willing to see any of
the Company after what had happened, 'till he was
more compos'd. 
He was not deceiv'd in his Conjectures concerning
Melliora; for Alovisa was no
sooner recovered from he Swoon, than she, with
bitter Exclamations, told her what had been the
Occasion, and put that astonish'd fair One into
such a visible Disorder, as had she not been too
full of Misery, to take notice of it, had made her
easily perceive that she was deeply interested in the
Story: But whatever she said against the Count, as
she could not forbear sometimes, calling him ungrateful,
perjur'd, deceitful, and inconstant, Alovisa
took only, as a Proof of Friendship to herself,
and the Effects of that just Indignation all
Women ought to feel for him, that takes a Pride
in injuring any one of them. 
When the Count was gone, the Baron sent to
Alovisa to enquire of her Health, and if he
might have leave to visit her in her Chamber; and
being told she desired he shou'd, resolv'd now to 

make his Demand. Melliora had but just
parted from her, in order to get herself ready to
go home, and she was alone when he came in. 
As soon as the first Civilities were over, she began
afresh to conjure him to let her know the Name of
her Rival, which he artfully evading, tho' not
absolutely denying, made her almost distracted; the
Baron carefully observ'd her every Look and Motion,
and when he found her Impatience was rais'd to
the highest Degree; Madam, (said he, taking her
by the Hand, and looking tenderly on her) you
cannot blame a Wretch who has lavish'd all he had
away to one poor Jewel, to make the most he can
of that, to supply his future Wants: I have already
forfeited all Pretence to Honour, and even
common Hospitality, by betraying the Trust that
was repos'd in me, and exposing under my own
Roof, the Man who takes me for his dearest Friend; 
and what else I have suffer'd from that unavoidable
Impulse which compell'd me to do all this, yourself
may judge, who too well know, the Pangs
and Tortures of neglected Love—Therefore (continued
he, with a deep Sigh) since this last Reserve
is all my Hope's dependance; do not, oh!
charming Alovisa, think me mercinary, if I
presume to set a Price upon it, which I confess too
high, yet nothing less can purchase. No Price,
cry'd Alovisa, (who thought a little Condescension
was necessary to win him to her Purpose) can
be too dear to buy my Peace, nor Recompence
too great for such a Service. What, not your
Love, said the Baron, eagerly kissing her Hand? 
No (resum'd she, forcing herself to look kindly on
him) not even that, when such a Proof of your's
engages it; but do not keep me longer on the Rack,
give me the Name and then—She spoke these
last Words with such an Air of Languishment, that
the Baron thought his Work was done, and growing
bolder, from her Hand he proceeded to her 

Lips, and answer'd her only in Kisses, which, distasteful
as they were to her, she suffer'd him to
take, without Resistance; but that was not all he
wanted, and believing this the Critical Minute, he
threw his Arms about her Waste, and began to
draw her by little and little towards the Bed; which
she affected to permit with a kind of an unwilling
Willingness; saying, well, if you wou'd have me
able to deny you nothing you can ask, tell me the
Name I so much wish to know: But the Baron was
as cunning as she, and seeing thro' her Artifice,
was resolv'd to make sure of his Reward first: Yes,
yes, my adorable Alovisa (answer'd he, having
brought her now very near the Bed) you shall immediately
know all, thy Charms will force the Secret
from my Breast, close as it is lodg'd within
my inmost Soul. —Dying with Rapture, I will tell
thee all. —If that a Thought of this injurious Husband,
can interpose amidst Extatick Joys. What
will not some Women venture, to satisfy a jealous
Curiosity? Alovisa had feign'd to consent to
his Desires (in hopes to engage him to a Discovery)
so far, and had given him so many Liberties, that
now, it was as much as she cou'd do to save herself
from the utmost Violence; and perceiving she
had been out-witted, and that nothing but the really
yeilding up her Honour, cou'd oblige him to
reveal what she desired. Villain, said she, (struggling
to get loose from his Embrace) dare thy base
Soul believe so vilely of me? Release me from
thy detested Hold, or my Cries shall force thee to
it, and proclaim thee what thou art, a Monster! The
Baron was not enough deluded by her Pretence of
Kindness, to be much surpriz'd at this sudden
Turn of her Behaviour, and only cooly answer'd,
Madam, I have no Design of using Violence, but
perceive, if I had depended on your Gratitude, I
had been miserably deceiv'd. Yes (said she, looking
contemptibly on him) I own thou wouldst; 

for whatsoever I might say, or thou couldst hope,
I love my Husband still, with an unbated Fondness,
doat upon him! Faithless and cruel as he is, he is
still lovely! his Eyes lose nothing of their Brightness,
nor his Tongue its Softness! his very Frowns
have more Attraction in them than the Smiles of any
other Man! and canst thou think! thou, so different
in all from him, that thou seemest not the same
Species of Humanity, nor oughtest to stile thyself
a Man, since he is no more: Canst thou, I say, believe
a Woman, bless'd as Alovisa has been,
can e'er blot out the dear Remembrance, and quit
her Hopes of re-gain'd Paradise in his Embrace,
for certain Hell in thine? She spoke these Words
with so much Scorn, that the Baron, skill'd as he
was in every Art to tempt, cou'd not conceal the
Spite he conceiv'd at them, and letting go her
Hand, (which perforce he had held) I leave you,
Madam, (said he) to the Pleasure of enjoying your
own Humour; neither that, nor your Circumstances
are to be envy'd; but I'd have you to remember,
that you are your own Tormentor, while you refuse
the only means can bring you Ease. I will
have Ease another Way (said she, incens'd at the
Indignity she imagin'd he treated her with) and if
you still persist in refusing to discover to me the
Person who has injur'd me, I shall make no Difficulty
of letting the Count know how much of his
Secrets you have imparted, and for what Reason
you conceal the other. You may do so (answer'd
he) and I doubt not but you will—Mischief is the
darling Favourite of Woman! Blood is the Satisfaction,
perhaps, that you require, and if I fall by
him, or he by me, your Revenge will have its
Aim, either on the Unloving or Unloved; for me,
I set my Life at nought, without your Love
'tis Hell; but do not think that even dying, to purchase
Absolution, I'd reveal one Letter of that
Name you so much wish to hear, the Secret shall 

be buried with me. —Yes, Madam, (continu'd
he, with a malicious Air) that happy Fair unknown,
whose Charms have made you wretched, shall
undiscover'd, and unguess'd at, triumph in those
Joys you think none but your Count can give. 
Alovisa had not an Opportunity to make any
Answer to what he said; Melliora came that
Moment into the Room, and ask'd if she was ready
to go, and Alovisa saying that she was, they
both departed from the Baron's House without
much Ceremony on either Side. 
Alovisa had not been long at Home, before
a Messenger came to acquaint her, that her Sister
having miss'd of her at Paris, was now on her
Journey to le Beausse, and would be with her in a
few Hours: She rejoic'd as much at this News, as
it was possible for one so full of Disquiet to do,
and order'd her Chariot and Six to be made ready
again, and went to meet her. 
D'elmont heard of Ansellina's coming
almost as soon as Alovisa, and his Complaisance
for Ladies, join'd with the extream Desire
he had of seeing his Brother, whom he believ'd
was with her, would certainly have given him
Wings to have flown to them with all imaginable
Speed, had not the late Quarrel between him and
his Wife, made him think it improper to join
Company with her on any Account whatever: he
was sitting in his Dressing-Room Window, in a
melancholy and disturb'd Meditation, ruminating
on every Circumstance of his last Night's Adventure,
when he perceiv'd a Couple of Horsemen
come galloping over the Plain, and make directly
toward his House. The Dust they made, kept
him from distinguishing who they were, and they
were very near the Gate before he discover'd them
to be the Chevalier Brillian, and his Servant:
The Surprize he was in to see him without Ansellina
was very great, but much more so, when 

running down, as soon as he saw he was alighted,
and opening his Arms eagerly to embrace him; 
the other drawing back, No, my Lord, (said he)
since you are pleas'd to forget I am your Brother,
I pretend no other way to merit your Embraces:
Nor can think it any Happiness to hold him in my
Arms, who keeps me distant from his Heart. 
What mean you? (cry'd D'elmont, extreamly
astonish'd at his Behaviour.) You know so little
(resum'd the Chevalier) of the Power of Love
yourself, that perhaps you think I ought not to
resent what you have done to ruin me in mine:
But, however, Sir, Ambition is a Passion which
you are not a Stranger to, and having settled your
own Fortune according to your Wish, methinks
you should not wonder that I take it ill, when you
endeavour to prevent my doing so to. The Count
was perfectly confounded at these Words, and
looking earnestly on him; Brother (said he) you
seem to lay a heavy Accusation on me; but if you
still retain so much of that former Affection which
was between us, as to desire I should be clear'd in
your Esteem, you must be more plain in your Charge; 
for tho' I easily perceive that I am wrong'd, I cannot
see by what means I am so. My Lord, you
are not wrong'd, (cry'd the Chevalier hastily) you
know you are not: If my Tongue were silent,
the Despair that sits upon my Brow, my alter'd
Looks, and Grief-sunk Eyes, wou'd proclaim your
barbarous—most unnatural Usage of me. Ungrateful
Brillian (said the Count, at once inflam'd
with Tenderness and Anger) is this the Consolation
I expected from your Presence? I know
not for what Cause I am upbraided, being innocent
of any, nor what your Troubles are; but
I am sure my own are such, as needed not this
Weight to overwhelm me. He spoke this so feelingly,
and concluded with so deep a Sigh, as most 

sensibly touch'd the Heart of Brillian. If I
cou'd believe that you had any (reply'd he) it
were enough to sink me quite, and rid me of a
Life which Ansellina's Loss has made me
hate. What, said you, (interrupted the Count)
Ansellina's Loss? If that be true, I pardon all
the Wildness of your unjust Reproaches; for well
I know, Despair has small regard to Reason; but
quickly speak the Cause of your Misfortune:— 
I was about to enquire the Reason that I saw you
not together, when your unkind Behaviour drove
it from my Thoughts. That Question (answer'd
the Chevalier) ask'd by you some Days since,
wou'd have put me past all the Remains of Patience; 
but I begin to hope I am not so unhappy as I
thought, but still am blest in Friendship, tho' undone
in Love—but I'll not keep you longer in
suspence, my Tale of Grief is short in the repeating,
tho' everlasting in its Consequence. In saying
this he sat down, and the Count doing the like,
and assuring him of Attention, he began his Relation
in this manner. 
Your Lordship may remember that I gave you
an Account by Letter, of Ansellina's Indisposition,
and the Fears I was in for her; but by the
time I receiv'd your Answer, I thought myself the
happiest of Mankind: She was perfectly recovered,
and every Day I receiv'd new Proofs of her
Affection: We began to talk now of coming to
Paris, and she seem'd no less impatient for that
Journey than myself, and one Evening, the last
I ever had the Honour of her Conversation, she
told me, that in spite of the Physician's Caution,
she wou'd leave Amiens in three or four Days; you
may be sure I did not disswade her from that Resolution; 
but, how great was my Astonishment,
when going the next Morning to the Baronesses, to
give the Ladies the Bon-jour as I constantly did
every Morning, I perceiv'd an unusual Coldness in 

the Face of every one in the Family; the Baroness
herself spoke not to me, but to tell me that Ansellina
wou'd see no Company: How, Madam,
said I, am I not excepted from those general Orders,
what can this sudden Alteration in my Fortune
mean? I suppose (reply'd she) that Ansellina
has her Reasons for what she does: I said
all that Despair could suggest, to oblige her to give
me some Light into this Mystery, but all was in
vain, she either made me no Answers, or such as
were not satisfactory; and growing weary with being
importun'd, she abruptly went out of the
Room, and left me in a Confusion not to be express'd. 
I renew'd my Visit the next Day, and
was then deny'd admittance by the Porter: The
same the following one; and as Servants commonly
form their Behaviour according to that of those
they serve, it was easy for me to observe, I was
far from being a welcome Guest. I writ to Ansellina,
but had my Letter return'd unopen'd; 
and that Scorn so unjustly thrown upon me, tho'
it did not absolutely cure my Passion, yet it stirr'd
up so much just Resentment in me, that it abated
very much of its Tenderness. About a Fortnight
I remain'd in this Perplexity, and at the end of it
was plung'd into a greater, when I receiv'd a little
Billet from Ansellina, which, as I remember,
contain'd these Words. 

Ansellina to the Chevalier Brillian.
I Sent your Letter back without perusing, believing
it might contain something of a Subject which I am
resolv'd to encourage no farther: I do not think it
proper at present to acquaint you with my Reasons for 

it; but if I see you at Paris, you shall know them:
I set out for thence to Morrow, but desire you not to
pretend to Accompany me thither, if you wou'd preserve
the Esteem of, 
Ansellina. 

I cannot but say I thought this manner of proceeding
very odd, and vastly different from that
Openness of Nature I always admir'd in her; but
as I had been always a most obsequious Lover, I
resolv'd not to forfeit that Character, and give a
Proof of an implicite Obedience to her will, tho'
with what Anxiety of Mind you may imagine. I
stood at a Distance, and saw her take Coach; and
as soon as her Attendants were out of sight, I got
on Horseback and follow'd; I several Times lay
at the same Inn where she did, but took care not
to appear before her: Never was any sight more
pleasing to me than that of Paris, because I there
hop'd to have my Destiny unravell'd; but your being
out of Town, preventing her making any stay,
I was reduc'd to another trial of Patience. About
seven Furlongs from hence, hap'ning to Bait at the
same Cabaret with her, I saw her Woman, who
had been always perfectly obliging to me, walking
alone in the Garden; I took the Liberty to show
my self to her, and ask her some Questions concerning
my future Fate, to which she answer'd with
all the Freedom I cou'd desire; and observing the
Melancholy, which was but too apparent in my
Countenance; Sir, said she, tho' I think nothing
can be more blame-worthy than to betray the Secrets
of our Superiors, yet I hope I shall stand excus'd
for declaring so much of my Lady's as the
Condition you are in seems to require; I would
not therefore have you believe that in this Separation
you are the only Sufferer, I can assure you,
my Lady bears her part of Sorrow too. —How can 

that be possible (cry'd I) when my Misfortune is
brought upon me, only by the change of her Inclination? 
Far from it (answer'd she) you have a
Brother—he only is to blame, she has receiv'd Letters
from Madam D'elmont, which have—as
she was speaking, she was call'd hastily away, without
being able to finish what she was about to say,
and I was so impatient to hear: Her naming you
in such a manner, planted ten thousand Daggers
in my Soul! —What cou'd I imagine by those
Words, You have a Brother, he only is to blame, and
her mentioning Letters from that Brother's Wife; 
but that it was through you I was made wretched? 
I repeated several times over to my self what she
had said, but cou'd wrest no other Meaning from
it, than that you being already possess'd of the elder
Sister's Fortune, were willing to engross the
other's too, by preventing her from marrying. Pardon
me, my Lord, if I have injur'd you, since I
protest, the Thoughts of your designing my Undoing,
was, if possible, more dreadful to me than
the Ill it self. 
You will, reply'd the Count, be soon convinc'd
how little Hand I had in those Letters, whatever
they contain'd, when you have been here a few
Days. He then told him of the Disagreement between
himself and Alovisa, her perpetual
Jealousy, her Pride, her Rage, and the little probability
there was of their being ever reconcil'd,
so as to live together as they ought, omitting nothing
of the Story, but his Love for Melliora,
and the Cause he had given to create this Uneasiness. 
They both concluded, that Ansellina's
alteration of Behaviour was entirely owing to something
her Sister had written, and that she wou'd
use her utmost endeavour to break off the Match
wholly in Revenge to her Husband: As they were
discoursing on Means to prevent it, the Ladies
came to the Gate; they saw them through the 

Window, and ran to receive them immediately. 
The Count handed Ansellina out of the
Coach, with great Complaisance, while the Chevalier
wou'd have done the same by Alovisa,
but she wou'd not permit him, which the Count
observing, when he had paid those Compliments
to her Sister, which he thought Civility requir'd,
Madam, (said he, turning to her and frowning)
is it not enough, you make me wretched by your
continual Clamours and Upbraidings, but that
your ill Nature must extend to all whom you believe
I love? She answer'd him only with a disdainful
Look, and haughty Toss, which spoke the
Pleasure she took in having it in her Power to give
him Pain, and went out of the Room with Ansellina. 
D'elmont's Family was now become a most
distracted one, every Body was in Confusion, and
it was hard for a disinterested Person to know how
to behave among them: The Count was ready to
die with Vexation, when he reflected on the Adventure
at the Baron's with Melantha, and
how hard it would be to clear his Conduct in that
Point with Melliora: She on the other Hand,
was as much tormented at his attempting it. 'The
Chevalier was in the height of Despair when he
found that Ansellina continued her Humour,
and still avoided letting him know the Occasion of
it: And Alovisa, tho' she contented herself
for some Hours with relating to her Sister all the
Passions of her Husband's unkind usage of her,
yet when that was over, her Curiosity return'd, and
she grew so madly zealous to find out who her Rival
was, that she repented her Behaviour to the
Baron, and sent him next Day, privately, a Billet,
wherein she assur'd him, that she had acquainted
the Count with nothing that had pass'd between
them, and she desir'd to speak with him, 'Tis
easy to be believ'd he needed not a second Invitation; 

he came immediately, and Alovisa renew'd
her Entreaties in the most pressing manner
she was capable of, but in vain, he told her plainly,
that if he cou'd not have her Heart, nothing
but the full Possession of her Person should extort
the Secret from him. 'Twould swell this Discourse
beyond what I design, to recount her various Starts
of Passions, and different Turns of Behaviour,
sometimes louder than the Winds, she rav'd! Commanded! 
Threatned! Then, still as April Showers,
or Summer Dews, she wept, and only whisper'd
her Complaints, now dissembling Kindness,
then declaring unfeign'd Hate; 'till at last, finding
it impossible to prevail by any other means, she promis'd
to admit him at Midnight into her Chamber:
But as it was only the Force of her too passionate
Affection for her Husband, which had work'd her
to this pitch of raging Jealousie, so she had no
sooner made the Assignation, and the Baron had
left her, (to seek the Count, to prevent any suspicion
of their long Conversation) but all D'elmont's
Charms came fresh into her Mind, and
made the Thoughts of what she had promis'd,
odious and insupportable; she open'd her Mouth
more than once to call back the Baron, and recant
all she had said; but her ill Genius, or that
Devil, Curiosity, which too much haunts the Minds
of Women, still prevented her: What will become
of me, (said she to herself) what is it I am
about to do? Shall I forego my Honour—quit
my Virtue—sully my yet unspotted Name with
endless Infamy—and yield my Soul to Sin, to
Shame, and Hortor, only to know what I can
ne'er redress? —If D'elmont hates me now,
will he not do so still? —What will this curs'd
Discovery bring me but added Tortures, and fresh
weight of Woe. Happy had it been for her if these
Considerations cou'd have lasted, but when she had
been a Minute or two in this Temper, she wou'd 

relapse and cry, What! must I tamely bear it then? 
—Endure the Flouts of the malicious World, and
the Contempt of every saucy Girl, who while she
pities, scorns my want of Charms—Shall I neglected
tell my Tale of Wrongs, (Oh! Hell is in that
Thought) 'till my Despair shall reach my Rival's
Ears, and crown her adulterous Joys with double
Pleasure. —Wretch that I am! —Fool that I am,
to hesitate, my Misery is already past Addition, my
everlasting Peace is broke! Lost even to Hope,
what can I more endure? —No, since I must be
ruin'd, I'll have the Satisfaction of dragging with
me to Perdition, the vile, the cursed She that has
undone me: I'll be reveng'd on her, then die my
self, and free me from Pollution. As she was in
this last Thought, she perceiv'd at a good Distance
from her, the Chevalier Brillian and Ansellina
in Discourse; the sight of him immediately
put a new Contrivance into her Head, and she compos'd
herself as she cou'd, and went to meet them. 
Ansellina having been left alone, while
her Sister was entertaining the Baron, had walk'd
down into the Garden to divert herself, where the
Chevalier, who was on the watch for such an Opportunity,
had follow'd her; he could not forbear,
tho' in Terms full of Respect, taxing her
with some little Injustice for her late Usage of him,
and Breach of Promise, in not letting him know
her Reasons for it. She, who by Nature was extreamly
averse to the disguising her Sentiments,
suffer'd him not long to press her for an Eclarcisment,
and with her usual Freedom, told him what
she had done, was purely in Compliance with her
Sister's Request; that she cou'd not help having the
same Opinion of him as ever, but that she had
promis'd Alovisa to defer any Thoughts of
marrying him, 'till his Brother should confess his
Error: The obliging things she said to him, tho'
she persisted in her Resolution, dissipated great 

part of his Chagreen, and he was beginning to
excuse D'elmont, and persuade her, that her
Sister's Temper was the first occasion of their Quarrel,
when Alovisa interrupted them. Ansellina
was a little out of Countenance at her
Sister's Presence, imagining she would be incens'd
at finding her with the Chevalier; but that distressed
Lady was full of other Thoughts, and desiring
him to follow her to her Chamber, as soon as they
were set down, confess'd to him, how, fir'd with
his Brother's Falshood, she endeavour'd to Revenge
it upon him, that she had been his Enemy,
but was willing to enter into a Measures for his Satisfaction,
provided he would comply with one,
which she should propose; which he faithfully promising,
after she had sworn him to Secrecy, discover'd
to him every Circumstance, from her first
Cause of Jealousy, to the Assignation she had made
with the Baron: Now, said she, it is in your Power
to preserve both your Brother's Honour and my
Life, (which I sooner will resign than my Vertue)
if you stand conceal'd in a little Closet, which I
shall convey you to, and the Moment he has satisfy'd
my Curiosity, by telling me her Name that
has undone me, rush out and be my Protector. 
The Chevalier was infinitely surpriz'd at what he
heard, for his Brother had not given him the least
hint of his Passion, but thought the Request she
made too reasonable to be deny'd. 
While they were in this Discourse, Melliora,
who had been sitting indulging her Melancholy
in that Closet which Alovisa spoke of,
and which did not immediately belong to that
Chamber, but was a sort of an Entry, or Passage,
into another, and tir'd with Reflection,
was fallen asleep, but on the Noise which Alovisa
and the Chevalier made in coming in,
wak'd, and heard to her inexpressible trouble,
the Discourse that pass'd between them; she knew 

that unknown Rival was her self, and condemn'd
the Count of the highest Imprudence, in making
a Confident, as she found he had, of the Baron; 
she saw her Fate, at least that of her Reputation,
was now upon the Crisis, that that very Night
she was to be expos'd to all the Fury of an enrag'd
Wife, and was so shook with Apprehension, that
she was scarce able to go out of the Closet time
enough to prevent their discovering she was there:
What could she do in this Exigence; the Thoughts
of being betray'd, was worse to her than a thousand
Deaths, and it was to be wonder'd at, as she
has since confest, that in the height of Desperation,
she had not put an end to the Tortures of Reflection,
by laying violent Hands on her own Life. 
As she was going from the Closet hastily to her own
Appartment, the Count and Baron pass'd her, and
that Sight heightening the Distraction she was in,
she stept to the Count, and in a faultring, scarce
intelligible Accent, whisper'd, for Heaven's Sake
let me speak with you before Night, make some
pretence to come to my Chamber, where I'll wait
for you. And as soon as she had spoke these
Words, darted from him so swift, that he had no
Opportunity of replying, if he had not been too
much overwhelmed with Joy at this seeming Change
of Fortune to have done it; he misunderstood part
of what she said, and instead of her desiring to
speak with him before Night, he imagin'd she said
at Night. He presently communicated it to the
Baron, who congratulated him upon it; and never
was any Night more long'd for, than this by
them both. They had not indeed many Hours of
Expectation, but Melliora thought them Ages; 
all her hopes were, that if she cou'd have an Opportunity
of discovering to Count D'elmont
what she had heard between his Wife and Brother,
he might find some means to prevent the Baron's
Treachery from taking Effect. But when Night 

grew on, and she perceiv'd he came not, and she
consider'd how near she was to inevitable Ruin,
what Words can sufficiently express her Agonies? 
So I shall only say, they were too violent to have
long kept Company with Life; Guilt, Horror,
Fear, Remorse, and Shame, at once oppress'd
her, and she was very near sinking beneath their
Weight, when somebody knock'd softly at the
Door; she made no doubt but it was the Count,
and open'd it immediately, and he catching her in
his Arms with all the eagerness of transported
Love, she was about to clear his Mistake, and let
him know it was not an amorous Entertainment
she expected from him, when a sudden Cry of Murder,
and the Noise of clashing Swords, made him
let go his hold, and draw his own, and run along
the Gallery to find out the Occasion; where being
in the dark, and only directed by the Noise he
heard in his Wife's Chamber, something met the
Point, and a great Shriek following it; he cry'd
for Lights, but none coming immediately, he stepping
farther, stumbled at the Body which had fallen; 
he then redoubled his Outcrys, and Melliora,
frighted as she was, brought one from her Chamber,
and at the same Instant that they discover'd
it was Alovisa, who coming to alarm the Family,
had by Accident run on her Husband's
Sword; they saw the Chevalier pursuing the Baron,
who, mortally wounded, dropt down by Alovisa
Side; what a dreadful View was this? The
Count, Melliora, and the Servants, who by
this time were most of them rowz'd, seem'd
without Sense or Motion, only the Chevalier had
Spirit enough to speak, or think, so stupify'd was
every one with what they saw. But he ordering
the Servants to take up the Bodies, sent one of 'em
immediately for a Surgeon, but they were both of
them past his Art to cure; Alovisa spoke no
more, and the Baron liv'd but two Days, in which 

time the whole Account, as it was gather'd from
the Mouths of those chiefly concern'd, was set
down, and the Tragical Part of it being laid before
the KING, there appear'd so much of Justice
in the Baron's Death, and Accident in Alovisa's,
that the Count and Chevalier found it no
difficult matter to obtain their Pardon. The Chevalier
was soon after married to his beloved Ansellina;
but Melliora look'd on herself
as the most guilty Person upon Earth, as being
the primary Cause of all the Misfortunes that had
happen'd, and retir'd immediately to a Monastery,
from which, not all the Entreaties of her
Friends, nor the Implorations of the amorous
D'elmont could bring her; she was resolv'd
now to punish, by a voluntary Banishment from
all she ever did, or could love, the Guilt of indulging
that Passion while it was a Crime. He, not
able to live without her, at least in the same Climate,
committed the Care of his Estate to his Brother,
and went to Travel, without an Inclination
ever to return. Melantha, who was not
of a Humour to take any thing to Heart, was married
in a short Time, and had the good Fortune not
to be suspected by her Husband, though she brought
him a Child in Seven Months after her Wedding. 
