


Love in death,—an example rather to be wondered at than imitated. 

On mr. Trueworth's going to sir Bazil's,
he found the two ladies with all
the appearance of the most poignant grief
in their faces:—mrs. Wellair's eyes
were full of tears, but those of her
lovely sister seemed to flow from an exhaustless
spring. 
This was a strange phœnomenon to mr.
Trueworth;—it struck a sudden damp
upon the gaiety of his spirits, and he had
but just recovered his surprize enough to
ask the meaning, when mrs. Wellair prevented
him, by saying, ‘O! mr. Trueworth,
we have a melancholly account
to give you;—poor mrs. Blanchfield is
no more.’ 

‘Dead!’—cried he. —‘Dead,’ repeated
miss Harriot;—‘but the manner
of it will affect you most.’ —‘A
much less motive,’ replied he, ‘if capable
of giving pain to you, must certainly
affect me;—but I beseech you,
madam,’ continued he, ‘keep me not
in suspence.’ 
‘You may remember,’ said miss Harriot,
sighing, ‘that some time ago we
told you, that mrs. Blanchfield had
taken leave of us, and was gone down
to Windsor;—it seems she had not
been long there before she was seized
with a disorder, which the physicians
term a fever on the spirits:—whatever
it was, she lingered in it for about
three weeks, and died yesterday;— 
some days before she sent for a lawyer,
and disposed of her effects by will:— 
she also wrote a letter to me, which last
she put into the hands of a maid, who
has lived with her almost from her infancy,
binding her by the most solemn
vow to deliver it to me, as soon as
possible after she was dead, and not 'till
then, on any motive whatsoever.’ 
‘The good creature,’ pursued miss
Harriot, ‘hurried up to town this morning, 

to perform her lady's last injunctions:
—this is the letter I received
from her,’ continued she, taking it out
of her pocket, and presenting it to him,— 
‘read it, and join with us in lamenting
the fatal effects of a passion people take
so much pains to inspire.’ 
The impatience mr. Trueworth was in,
for the full explanation of a mystery,
which, perhaps, he had some guess into
the truth of, hindered him from making
any answer to what miss Harriot had said
upon the occasion;—he hastily opened
the letter, and found in it these lines: 

To miss Harriot Lovit.
‘Dear happy friend,
As my faithful Lucy at the same time
she delivers this into your hands,
brings you also the intelligence of my
death, the secret it discovers cannot
raise in you any jealous apprehensions:
—I have been your rival, my dear Harriot,
but when I found you were mine,
wished you not to lose what I would
have given the world, had I been mistress
of it, to have gained;—the first
moment I saw the too agreeable mr.
Trueworth, something within told me,
he was my fate;—that according as I 

appeared in his eyes I must either be
happy or no more;—it has proved the
latter,—death has seized upon my
heart, but cannot drive my passion
thence:—whether I shall carry it beyond
the grave I shall know before this
reaches you, but at present I think it is
so incorporated with my immortal part,
as not to be separated by the dissolution
of my frame. 
‘I will not pretend to have had so
much command over myself, as to refrain
taking any step for the forwarding
my desires;—before I was convinced
of his attachment to you, I caused a letter
to be wrote to him, making him an
offer of the heart and fortune of a
person, unnamed indeed, but mentioned
as one not altogether unworthy of his
acceptance:—this he answered as requested,
and ingenuously confessed, that
the whole affections of his soul were already
devoted to another,—I had then
no more to do with hope, nor had any
thing to attempt but the concealing my
despair;—this made me quit London,
and all that was valuable to me in it. 
—I flattered myself, alas! that time
and absence would restore my reason; 
—but, as I said before, my doom was
fixed,—irrevocably fixed! and I soon 

found, by a thousand symptoms of an
inward decay, that to be sensible of that
angelic man's perfections, and to live
without him, are things incompatible in
nature;—even now, while I am writing,
I feel the icy harbingers of death
creep through my veins, benumbing as
they pass;—soon,—very soon shall I
be reduced to a cold lump of senseless
clay;—indeed I have now no wish for
life, nor business to transact below. — 
I have settled my worldly affairs, and
disposed of the effects that heaven has
blessed me with, to those I think most
worthy of them. —My last will is in
the hands of mr. Markland the lawyer,— 
I hope he is an honest man; but least
he should prove otherwise, let mr. Trueworth
know, I have made him master
of half that fortune, which once I should
have rejoiced to have laid wholly at his
feet;—all my jewels I entreat you to
accept,—they can add nothing to your
beauty, but may serve to ornament your
wedding garments;—Lucy has them
in her possession, and will deliver them
to you. 
‘And now, my dear miss Harriot, I
have one favour to beg of you, and that
is, that you exert all the influence your
merits claim over the heart of mr. Trueworth, 

to engage him to accompany
you in seeing me laid in earth. —I
know your gentle generous nature too
well to doubt you will deny me this request,
and the very idea, that you will
ask, and he will grant, gives, methinks,
a new vigour to my enfeebled spirits. 
—O! if departed souls are permitted,
as some say they are, to look down on
what passes beneath the moon, how will
mine triumph,—how exult, to see my
poor remains thus honoured!—thus attended! 
—I can no more but this,— 
may you make happy the best of men,
and may he make you the happiest of
women. —Farewell,—eternally farewell,
—be assured, that as I lived, so I
die, 
‘With the greatest sincerity,
Dear miss Harriot,
Your's, &c.
J. Blanchfield. 
‘P.S. Be so good to give my last adieu&sacute; 
to my dear mrs. Wellair;—she will
find I have not forgot her, nor my
little godson, in my bequests.’ 


How would the vain, unthinking fop,
have exulted on such a proof of his imagined
merit?—how would the sordid
avaritious man, in the pleasure of finding
so unexpected an accession to his wealth,
have forgot all compassion for the hand
that gave it! —Mr. Trueworth, on the
contrary, blushed at having so much more
ascribed to him, than he would allow
himself to think he deserved, and would
gladly have been deprived of the best part
of his fortune, rather than have received
an addition to it by such fatal means.’ 
The accident, however, was so astonishing
to him, that he scarce believed it real,
nor could what he read in the letter, under
her own hand, nor all mrs. Wellair,
and miss Harriot alledged, persuade him
to think, at least to acknowledge, that
the lady's death was owing to a hopeless
flame for him. 
While they were speaking sir Bazil came
in;—he had been at home when his
sister received the letter, and had heard
what Lucy said of her mistress's indisposition,
and was therefore no stranger to
any part of the affair. 

‘Well, Trueworth,’ said he to that
gentleman, ‘I have often endeavoured to
emulate, and have even envied the great
talents you are master of, but am now
reconciled to nature for not bestowing
them on me, lest they might prove of
the same ill consequence to some woman
as your's has been to mrs. Blanchfield.’ 
‘Dear sir Bazil,’ replied mr. Trueworth,
‘do not attempt to force me into
an imagination, which would render me
at once both vain and wretched. — 
Chance might direct the partial inclination
of this lady to have kinder thoughts
of me than I could either merit or return,
but I should be loth to believe,
that they have produced the sad event
we now lament.’ 
‘I am of opinion, indeed,’ said sir Bazil,
‘that there are many who deceive
themselves, as well as the world, in this
point. —People are apt to mistake that
for love, which is only the effect of
pride for a disappointment; but it would
be unjust to suppose this was the case
with mrs. Blanchfield:—the generous
legacy she has bequeathed to you, and
the tenderness with which she treats my
sister, leaves no room to suspect her soul 

was tainted with any of those turbulent
emotions, which disgrace the name of
love, and yet are looked upon as the
consequences of that passion;—she
knew no jealousy,—harboured no revenge,
—the affection she had for you
was simple and sincere, and meeting no
return preyed only upon herself, and by
degrees consumed the springs of life.’ 
‘I am glad, however,’ said the elder
sister of sir Bazil, ‘to find that mr. Trueworth
has nothing to reproach himself
with, on this unhappy score;—some
men, on receiving a letter of the nature
he did, would through mere curiosity of
knowing on whose account it came, have
sent an answer of encouragement;—it
must be owned, therefore, that the command
he had over himself in this act of
generosity to his unknown admirer, demanded
all the recompence in her power
to make.’ 
Mr. Trueworth, whose modesty had
been sufficiently wounded in this conversation,
hastily replied, ‘Madam, what
you by an excess of goodness are pleased
to call generosity, was, in effect, no
more than a piece of common honesty:
—the man capable of deceiving a woman,
who regards him, is no less a 

villain, than he who defrauds his neighbour
of the cash intrusted in his hands:
—the unfortunate mrs. Blanchfield did
me the honour to depend on my sincerity
and secrecy;—I did but my duty
in observing both,—and she, in so
highly over-rating that act of duty,
shewed indeed the magnanimity of her
own mind, but adds no merit to mine.’ 
‘I could almost wish it did not,’ said
miss Harriot, sighing. —‘Madam!’ cried
mr. Trueworth, looking earnestly on her,
as not able to comprehend what she meant
by these words. —‘Indeed,’ resumed she,
‘I could almost wish, that you were a
little less deserving than you are, since
the esteem you enforce is of so dangerous
a kind.’ —She uttered this with
so inexpressible a tenderness in her voice
and eyes, that he could not restrain himself
from kissing her hand in the most
passionate manner, though in the presence
of her brother and sister, crying, at
the same time, ‘I desire no more of the
world's esteem, than just so much as
may defend my lovely Harriot from all
blame, for receiving my addresses.’ 
They afterwards fell into some discourse,
concerning what was really deserving
admiration, and what was so only in appearance 

in which many mistakes in judging
were detected, and the extreme weakness
of giving implicitly into the opinion of
others, exposed by examples suitable to
the occasion. 
But these are inquisitions which 'tis possible
would not be very agreeable to the
present age, and it would be madness to
risque the displeasure of the multitude for
the sake of gratifying a few;—so the
reader must excuse the repetition of what
was said by this agreeable company on
that subject. 
