


Contains very little to the purpose. 

Mr. Francis Thoughtless had no sooner
left the lodgings of mr. Trueworth,
than he went directly to those of his sister
Betsy, where, in the humour he then was,
the reader will easily suppose, he could
not be very good company:—after telling
her he had seen mr. Trueworth, and
had some conversation with him on her
account,—‘I am now convinced,’ said
he, ‘of what before I doubted not, that
by your own ill management, and want
of a just sense of what is for your interest
and happiness, you have lost an
opportunity of establishing both, which 

can never be retrieved;—nor is this
all,—your manner of behaviour not
only ruins yourself, but involves all belonging
to you in endless quarrels and
perplexities.’ 
These were reproaches which miss Betsy
had too much spirit to have borne from
any one but a brother, and even to him,
she was far from yielding that she had
in any measure deserved them:—‘I
defy Trueworth himself,’ cried she,
‘with all the resentment of a disappointed
lover in her heart, to accuse me of one
action, that the strictest virtue could
condemn.’ 
‘Ah, sister,’ replied he, ‘do not let
your vanity deceive you on this score:
—I see very plainly, that mr. Trueworth
regards you with too much indifference
to retain resentment for any
treatment you have given him;—that
he once loved you I am well assured; 
that he no longer does so, is owing to
yourself:—but I shall mention him no
more,—the passion he had for you is
extinguished, I believe, beyond all possibility
of reviving, nor would I wish
you to attempt it:—I would only have
you remember what mr. Goodman uttered
concerning you with almost his 

dying breath; for my own part, I have
not been a witness of your conduct,
since the unhappy brulée I fell into on
your account at Oxford, which I then
hoped would be a sufficient warning for
your future conduct.’ 
If miss Betsy had been less innocent, it
is probable she would have replied in a
more satisfactory manner to her brother's
reproaches; but the real disdain she always
had for whatever had the least tendency
to dishonour, made her zealous in
defending herself only in things, of which
she was not accused, and too silent in regard
of those, in which she was judged
blame-worthy. 
‘What avails your being virtuous?’ 
said mr. Francis:—‘I hope,—and I
believe you are so;—but your reputation
is of more consequence to your family:
—the loss of the one might be
concealed, but a blemish on the other
brings certain infamy and disgrace on
yourself, and all belonging to you.’ 
On this, she assumed the courage to
tell him, his way of reasoning was neither
just nor delicate. —‘Would you,’ said
she, ‘be guilty of a base action, rather
than have it suspected that you were 

so?’ —‘No,’ answered he; ‘but virtue
is a different thing in our sex, to
what it is in yours;—the forfeiture of
what is called virtue in a woman is
more a folly than a baseness; but the
virtue of a man is his courage, his
constancy, his probity, which if he
loses, he becomes contemptible to himself,
as well as to the world.’ 
‘And certainly,’ rejoined miss Betsy,
with some warmth, ‘the loss of innocence
must render a woman contemptible
to herself, though she should happen
to hide her transgression from the
world.’ —‘That may be,’ said mr.
Francis; ‘but then her kindred suffer
not through her fault:—the remorse,
and the vexation for what she has done,
is all her own. —Indeed, sister,’ continued
he, ‘a woman brings less dishonour
upon a family, by twenty private
sins, than by one public indiscretion.’ 
‘Well,’ answered she, ‘I hope I shall
always take care to avoid both the one
and the other, for my own sake. —As
to indulging myself with the innocent
pleasures of the town, I have the example
of some ladies of the first quality,
and best reputation, to justify me in it.’ 

Mr. Thoughtless was about to make
some reply, which, perhaps, would have
been pretty keen, but was prevented by
the coming in of her maid, who delivering
a letter to her, and saying, ‘From
sir Frederick Fineer, madam,’ she hastily
broke it open, and having read it,
bid the maid let sir Frederick's servant
know she would be at home. 
‘There, brother,’ said she, giving him
the letter, ‘read that, and be convinced
I have not lost every good offer in losing
mr. Trueworth.’ —‘I wish you have
not,’ answered he sullenly. —He took
the paper, however, and read the contents
of it, which were these: 

To the divine arbitress of my fate, the
omnipotently lovely miss Betsy
Thoughtless.
‘O Goddess! more cruel than the
avenging Nemisis, what have I
done, that like Ixion I must still be
tortured on the wheel of everlasting
hopes and fears? —I hoped yesterday to
have approached the shrine of your resplendent
charms, but you had quitted
the sacred dome which you inhabit, and
vouchsafed to bless some happier mansion 

with your presence;—perhaps a
rival:—Oh, forbid it heaven!—forbid
it all ye stars, that under the Supreme
rule all beneath the moon!—the
thought is terrible, and shocks the in-most
cavities of my adoring jealous soul. 
—I kneel while I am writing, and implore
you to grant me permission to sip
a cup of nectar and ambrosia at your
tea-table this afternoon;—and if you
can, without injustice to superior merit,
debar all other intruders thence, that I
may have liberty to pour forth my ejaculations
at your feet. —I am, 
‘With the most ardent devotion,
Brightest refulgency of beauty,
Your most adoring,
And everlasting slave,
F. Fineer.’ 

As little as mr. Francis at this time
was disposed to mirth, he could not, in
spite of his ill humour, refrain laughing,
on reading some expressions in this heroically
learned epistle:—‘I need not ask,’ 
said he, throwing the letter contemptuously
on the table, ‘who, or what this
new adorer of yours is:—it is easy to 

see he is either mad or a fool, or thinks
to make you so.’ 
‘I have as bad an opinion of his intellects
as you have,’ replied she; ‘but I
assure you he is a baronet, and the presumptive
heir of a much greater title,
and has an estate large enough to keep
me a coach and twelve, if the custom
of the country permitted.’ 
Mr. Francis paused for a few moments,
and after looking over the letter again,— 
‘I wish,’ said he, ‘instead of a fool of
fashion, he is not a knave in the disguise
of a coxcomb;—his stupidity seems
to me to be too egregious to be natural,
—all his expressions have more the
appearance of a studied affectation, than
of a real folly;—take care sister, I have
heard there are many impostors in this
town, who are continually on the watch
for young ladies, who have lost their
parents, and live in the unguarded manner
you do.’ 
Miss Betsy seemed to treat her brother's
suspicions on this head with a good deal
of contempt:—she told him, that the
person, at whose house she became acquainted
with sir Frederick, knew his
circumstances perfectly well,—that he 

had a prodigious estate,—was of a very
ancient and honourable family, and conversed
with several people of the first quality
in England;—‘However,’ added
she, ‘you may call here this afternoon,
and see him yourself if you please; for,
according to my judgment, he has not
wit enough to be an impostor.’ 
Mr. Francis replied, that he would be
glad to see so extraordinary a person, if
he were not obliged to go upon some business,
relating to the commission he was
solliciting, which he feared would detain
him beyond the hour;—‘but with your
leave,’ said he, ‘I will take this letter
with me, and hear what my brother
thinks of it.’ 
To this miss Betsy readily agreed, and
he went away in somewhat of a better humour
than he had entered, or that he had
put her into by the severe reprimands he
had given her. 
She had a very tender regard for her
brothers, but did not think it their province
to prescribe rules for her behaviour; 
—she looked upon herself as a better
judge in what manner it would become
her to act, than they could possibly be,
as having lived more years in London 

than either of them had done months,
and if she was willing to be advised,
would not submit to be directed by them. 
Thus did her pride a while support her
spirits, but when she reflected on the affair
of mr. Trueworth, and the reasons
she had given him for speaking and thinking
of her in that cool and indifferent
manner, she found he now did, she began
to be somewhat less tenacious, and acknowledged
within herself, that her brother
Frank, exclusive of his friendship for
that gentleman, had sufficient cause to
blame her conduct in that point, and the
heat of passion, which had been raised by
some expressions he had uttered being
over, she ceased to take unkindly what
she was now sensible had only been occasioned
by his zeal for her welfare. 
She now saw in their true light all the
mistakes she had been guilty of,—all
her dangers,—all her escapes,—and
blushed to remember, how she had been
plunged into the one, merely by her own
inadvertency, and been blessed with the
other, only by the interposition of some
accident, altogether unforeseen, and even
unhoped for, by her. 

She had also a more just and lively
idea of the merits of mr. Trueworth,
than ever she had been capable of entertaining,
while he professed himself her
lover:—the amiableness of his person,
—his fine understanding,—his generosity,
—his bravery,—his wit, and the delicacy
and elegance of his conversation,
seemed to her impossible to be equall'd; 
—she considered too, that his estate was
much beyond what her fortune could expect,
and that even his family was superior
to her's, and could not help being
very sensibly affected; that she had
so rashly thrown away her pretensions to
the heart of so valuable a man. 
‘'Tis true,’ said she, ‘that if I had
an inclination to marry, I have other
offers:—mr. Munden, by his way of
living, must have a good estate, perhaps
not inferior to that of mr. Trueworth:
—the man has good sense, and
wants neither personal nor acquired endowments,
and I have tried both his
love and constancy;—besides, he lives
always in town, has a taste for the
pleasures of it,—a woman could not
be very unhappy in being his wife. — 
Then there is sir Frederick Fineer;— 
he is a fool indeed,—but he is a man 

of quality, and I know several ladies,
who are the envy of their own sex, and
the toast of the other, and yet have
fools for their husbands.’ 
In this manner did she continue reasoning
within herself, till her head began to
ake, and she was luckily relieved from it,
by the last mentioned subject of her meditations. 
He approached her with his accustomed
formalities, first saluting the hem of her
garment, then her hand, and lastly her
lips, which she receiving with an air
more than ordinarily serious, and also
making very short replies to the fine
speeches he had prepared to entertain her
with:—‘What invidious cloud,’ said
he, ‘obscures the lightning of your eyes,
and hides half the divinity from my ravish'd
sight!’ —‘People cannot be always
in the same humour, sir Frederick,’ 
answered she. —‘Your's should be always
gay,’ rejoined he, ‘if once you
were mine;—you should do nothing
but love and laugh, and dress and
eat, and drink, and be adored:— 
speak then, my angel,’ continued he,
‘when shall be the happy day? —Say,
shall it be to-morrow?’ 

Here it was not in her power to retain
any part of her former gravity:—‘Bless
me,’ cried she, ‘to-morrow! —What,
marry to-morrow?—sure, sir Frederick,
you cannot think of such a
thing? —Why, I have not so much as
dreamt of it.’ —‘No matter,’ answered
he, ‘you will have golden dreams enough
in my embraces,—defer then the mutual
bliss no longer,—let it be to-morrow.’ 
—‘You are certainly mad,
sir Frederick,’ said she; ‘but if I were
enough so too, as really to consent to
such a hasty nuptial,—where pray are
the preparations for it?’ 
‘Oh, madam, as to that,’ resumed he,
‘people of quality always marry in a
deshabille;—a new coach,—chariot,
—servants,—liveries, and rich cloaths
for ourselves, may all be got ready before
we make our public appearance at
court, or at church.’ —‘But there are
other things to be considered,’ said miss
Betsy, laughing outright. —‘None of
any importance,’ replied he:—‘I will
jointure you in my whole estate,—the
writings shall be drawn to-night, and
presented to you with the wedding-ring.’ 

‘This would be wonderful dispatch indeed,’ 
said she; ‘but, sir, I have two
brothers whom I must first consult on
the affair.’ —Sir Frederick seemed extremely
struck at these words, but recovering
himself as soon as he was able, ‘I
thought, madam,’ cried he, ‘you were
entirely at your own disposal.’ —‘I am
so, sir,’ answered she, ‘but I love my
brothers, and will do nothing without
their approbation.’ —‘Ah, cruel fair,’ 
cried he, ‘little do you know the delicacy
of my passion,—I must owe you wholly
to yourself;—your brothers, no doubt,
would favour my desires, but 'tis your
own free-will alone can make me blessed. 
—Tell me not then of brothers,’ continued
he, ‘but generously say you will
be mine.’ 
Miss Betsy was about to make some reply,
when word was brought that a servant
of the elder mr. Thoughtless desired to
speak with her, on which she arose hastily,
and went to the top of the stair-case to
hear what message he had to deliver to
her, and was pleasingly surprised when he
told her, that his master desired the favour
of her company to supper immediately
at his house. —As she never had an
invitation there before, she was at a loss 

to guess what could have caused so sudden
an alteration;—she asked the fellow what
company was there:—he told her, only
mr. Francis, and another gentleman whose
name he knew not, but believed they
wanted her on some affairs concerning the
late mr. Goodman, because as he was
waiting, he heard them often mention
that gentleman and lady Mellasin. 
Though she could not conceive on
what purpose she was to be consulted on
any thing relating to mr. Goodman, yet
she was extremely glad, that any occasion
had happened to induce her brother to
send for her to his house, and ordered the
man to acquaint his master, that she would
not fail to wait upon him, with as much
expedition as a chair could bring her. 
On her return to sir Frederick, she
told him, she had received a summons
from her elder brother, which she was
under an indispensable necessity of complying
with, so desired he would defer,
'till another opportunity, any farther discourse
on the subject they had been talking
of. —Having said this, she called
hastily for her fan and gloves, and at the
same time gave orders for a chair. —Sir
Frederick seemed very much confounded,
but finding that any attempt to detain 

her would be impracticable, took his
leave, saying, ‘You are going to your
brother's, madam:’ To which she answering,
she was so. ‘I beg then, madam,’ 
rejoined he, ‘that you will not
mention any thing concerning me, or
the passion I have for you, till I have
the honour of seeing you again. —Be
assured,’ continued he, ‘I have mighty
reasons for this request, and such, as I
flatter myself you will allow to be just.’ 
—He said no more, but perceiving she
was ready, led her down stairs, and having
put her into a chair, went into that
which waited for himself, little satisfied
with the success of this visit. 
Though the motives on which miss
Betsy's company was desired in so much
hurry, by a brother, who had never before
once invited her, may seem strange,
yet as that incident was but the consequence
of other matters, which yet remain
untold, regularity requires they should
first be discussed. 
