

Contains some part of the history of miss
Forward's adventures, from the time
of her leaving the boarding-school,
as related by herself to miss Betsy. 
Miss Betsy had now her head, though
not her heart, full of the two new
conquests she had made: mr. Trueworth
was strongly recommended by her brother, 
—mr. Staple by her guardian; yet all the
idea she had of either of them, served only
to excite in her the pleasing imagination
how, when they both came to address her,
she should play the one against the other,
and give herself a constant round of diversion,
by their alternate contentment or
disquiet. As the barometer, said she to
herself, is governed by the weather, so is
the man in love governed by the woman
he admires: he is a meer machine,—acts
nothing of himself,—has no will or power
of his own, but is lifted up, or depressed,
just as the charmer of his heart is in the
humour. I wish, continued she, I knew
what day these poor creatures would come,
—though 'tis no matter,—I have got it
seems possession of their hearts, and their
eyes will find graces in me, let me appear
in what shape soever. 
These contemplations, however enchanting
as they were to her vanity, did not
render her forgetful of the promise she had
made miss Forward, and, as soon as dinner
was over, ordered a hackney-coach to
be called, and went to the place miss Forward's
letter had directed. 
It is scarce possible for any one to be
more surprised than she was, on entering
the house of mrs. Nightshade. The father 
of miss Forward was a gentleman of a
large estate, and of great consideration in
the county where he lived, and she expected
to have seen his daughter in lodgings
suitable to her birth and fortune: instead
of which, she found herself conducted
by an old ill-looked mean woman, who
gave her to understand she was the mistress
of the house, up two-pair-of-stairs, so narrow
that she was obliged to hold her hoop
quite under her arm, in order to gain the
steep, and almost perpendicular ascent:— 
she was then shewed into a little dirty
chamber, where on a wretched bed miss
Forward lay in a most melancholly and dejected
posture. “Here is a lady wants
you,” said the hag, who ushered in
miss Betsy. These words, and the opening
the door, made miss Forward start
from the bed to receive her visitor in the
best manner she could: she saluted, she
embraced her with all the demonstrations
of joy and affection; but miss Betsy was
so confounded at the appearance of every
thing about her, that she was almost incapable
of returning her caresses. 
Miss Forward easily perceived the confusion
her friend was in, and having led
her to a chair, and seated herself near her,
“My dear miss Betsy,” said she, “I do
not wonder you are alarmed at finding 
me in a condition so different from
what you might have expected: my letter
indeed gave you a hint of some misfortunes
that had befallen me; but I
forbore letting you know of what nature
they were, because the facts, without
the circumstances, which would have
been too long to communicate by writing,
might have made me appear more
criminal, than I flatter myself you will
think I really am, when you shall be
told the whole of my unhappy story.” 
Miss Betsy then assured her, she should
take a friendly part in every thing that had
happened to her, and that nothing could
oblige her more than the confidence she
mentioned: on which the other taking her
by the hand, and letting fall some tears,
said, “O miss Betsy! miss Betsy,—I have
suffered much, and if you find a great
deal to blame me for, you will find yet
much more to pity.” Then after having
paused a little, as if to recollect' the
passages she was about to relate, began in
this manner: 
‘You must remember,’ said she, ‘that
when you left us to go for London, I
was strictly watched and confined, on
account of my innocent correspondence
with mr. Sparkish; but that young gentleman 
being sent to the university soon
after, I had the same liberty as ever,
and as much as any young lady in the
school. The tutorefs, who was with us
in your time, being in an ill state of
health, went away, and one mademoiselle
Grenouille, a French-woman, was
put in her place: the governess had
a high opinion of her, not only on the
score of the character she had of her,
but also for the gravity of her behaviour. 
But as demure, however, as she affected
to be before her, she could be as merry
and facetious as ourselves, when out of
her sight, as you will soon perceive by
what I have to tell you. 
‘Whenever any of us took an evening's
walk, this was the person to whose care
we were entrusted, the governess growing
every day more infirm, and indeed
unable to attend us. 
‘It was towards the close of a very hot
day, that myself, and two more, went
with mademoiselle Grenouille to take
a little air in the lane, at the backside
of the great road, that leads up to lord
***'s fine seat. We were about the
middle of the lane when we heard the
sound of French-horns, double-curtalls,
and other instruments of wind-music: 
mademoiselle at this could not restrain
the natural alertness of her country, but
went dancing on, 'till we came very
near those that played. 
‘You must know, my dear miss Betsy,’ 
continued she, ‘that my lord***'s park
wall reaches to the bottom of this lane,
and has a little gate into it: having, it
seems, some company with him, he had
ordered two tents to be erected in that
part of the park; the one for himself
and friends, the other for the music,
who sounded the instruments to the
healths were toasted: but this we being
ignorant of, and delighted with the harmony,
wandered on till we came close
to the little gate I mentioned, and there
stood still listening to it. Some one or
other of the gentlemen saw us, and said
to the others, ‘We have Eve's-droppers;’ 
on which they quitted their seats,
and ran to the gate: on seeing them all
approach, we would have drawn back,
but they were too quick for us; the gate
was instantly thrown open, and six or
seven gentlemen, of whom my lord himself
was one, rushed out upon us. Perceiving
we endeavoured to escape them,
they catched hold of us, ‘Nay ladies,’ 
said one of them, ‘you must not think 
to avoid paying the piper, after having
heard his music.’ 
‘Mademoiselle, on this, addressed herself
to my lord ***, with as much formality
as she could assume, and told
him, we were young ladies of distinction,
who were placed at a boarding-school
just by, and at present were under
her care, so begged no rudeness
might be offered. His lordship protested
on his honour none should; but
insisted on our coming into the park, and
drinking one glass of whatever wine we
pleased; upon which, ‘What say you,
ladies?’ cried mademoiselle, ‘I believe
we may depend on his lordship's protection.’ 
None of us opposed the motion,
as being as glad to accept it as
herself. In fine, we went in, and were
conducted to the tent, in the midst of
which were placed bottles, glasses, jellies,
sweetmeats, pickles, and I know not
what other things to regale and quicken
the appetite. Servants, who attended,
cooled the glasses out of a silver fountain,
on a little pedestal, at the one end
of the tent, and filled every one a glass
with what each of us chose. One of the
company perceiving our conductress was
a French-woman, talked to her in her
own language, and led her a minuette 
round the table; and, in the mean time,
the others took the opportunity of entertaining
us: he that had hold of me, so
plied me with kisses and embraces, that
I scarce knew where I was. —Oh! the
difference between his caresses and the
boyish insipid salutes of master Sparkish! 
The others, I suppose, were served with
the same agreeable robustness I was; but
I had not the power of observing them,
any more than, as I afterwards found,
they had of me. 
‘In fine, never were poor innocent girls
so pressed,—so kissed:—every thing
but the dernier undoing deed, and that
there was no opportunity of completing,
every one of us, our tutoress not excepted,
I am certain experienced.’ 
“Heavens!” cried miss Betsy, interrupting
her, “how I envied your happiness
a moment since, and how I tremble
for you now.” 
‘O miss Betsy,’ replied miss Forward,
every thing would have been done in
that forgetful hour; but as I have already
said, there was not an opportunity. 
My lover notwithstanding, for so I must
call him, would not let me get out of
his arms, till I had told him my name, 
and by what means he should convey a
letter to me. I affected to make a
scruple of granting this request, though
heaven knows I was but too well pleased
at his grasping me still faster, in order
to compel me to it. I then gave him
my name, and told him, that if he
would needs write, I knew no other
way by which he might be sure of my
receiving his letter, but by slipping it
into my hand as I was coming out of
church, which he might easily do, there
being always a great concourse of people
about the door; on this he gave me a
salute, the warmth of which I never
shall forget, and then suffered me to depart
with my companions, who, if they
were not quite so much engaged as myself,
had yet enough to make them remember
this night's ramble. 
‘The tutoress knew well enough how to
excuse our staying out so much longer
than usual, and neither the governess,
nor any one in the family, except ourselves,
knew any thing of what had
passed. I cannot say but my head ran
extremely on this adventure. I heartily
wished my pretty fellow might keep his
word in writing to me, and was forming
a thousand projects how to keep up
a correspondence with him. I don't tell 
you I was what they call in love; but
certainly I was very near it, and longed
much more for sunday than ever I had
done for a new gown: at last the wished
for day arrived,—my gentleman was
punctual,—he came close to me in the
church-porch,—I held my hand in a
careless manner, with my handkerchief
in it, behind me, and presently found
something put into it, which I hastily
conveyed into my pocket, and on coming
home, found a little three-corner'd
billet, containing these lines: 

To the charming miss Forward.
“Most lovely of your sex,
I have not slept since I saw you,
—so deep an impression has your
beauty made on my heart, that I find
I cannot live without you; nor even
die in peace, if you vouchfafe not my
last breath to issue at your feet. In
pity then to the sufferings you occasion,
grant me a second interview, though it
be only to kill me with your frowns. 
I am too much a stranger in these parts
to contrive the means; be, therefore,
so divinely good to do it for me, else
expect to see me carried by your door
a bleeding, breathless corps,—the victim 
of your cruelty, instead of your
compassion, to 
“Your most grateful adorer,
And everlasting slave,
R. Wildly.” 

‘In a postscript to this,’ pursued miss
Forward, ‘he told me, that he would be
in the church-porch in the afternoon,
hoping to receive my answer by the
same means I had directed him to convey
to me the dictates of his heart. 
‘I read this letter over and over, as
you may easily guess, by my remembering
the contents of it so perfectly; but
it is impossible for me to express the
perplexity I was in how to reply to it. 
I do not mean how to excuse myself from
granting the interview he so passionately
requested; for that, perhaps, I wished
for with as much impatience as he could
do, but I was distracted at not being
able to contrive any practicable method
for our meeting. 
‘O miss Betsy, how did I long for you,
or such a friend as you, to assist me in
this dilemma! but there was no one
person in the whole house I dared trust 
with such a secret: —I could not eat a
bit of dinner, nor scarce speak a word
to any body; so much were my thoughts
taken up with what I should do. I was
resolved to see him, and hear what he
had to say, whatever should be the consequence:
at last I hit upon a way, dangerous
indeed in every respect, and
shameful in a girl of my condition; 
yet as there were no other, the frenzy I
was possessed of, compelled me to have
recourse to it. 
‘You must remember, my dear miss
Betsy,’ continued she, with a deep sigh,
‘the little door at the farther end of the
garden, where by your kind contrivance
young Sparkish was introduced: it was
at this door I determined to meet mr.
Wildly. This you may be sure could
not be done by day, without a discovery,
some one or other being continually
running into the garden. I therefore
fixed the rendezvous at night, at
an hour when I was positive all the family
would be in bed, and ordered it in
this manner: 
‘Chance aided my ill genius in my
undoing: I lay at that time alone;— 
miss Bab, who used to be my bedfellow,
was gone home for a fortnight, on account 
of a great wedding in their family,
and I thought I could easily slip down
stairs when every body was asleep, and
go through the kitchen, from which you
know there is a passage into the garden. 
I took no care for any thing, but to prevent
the disappointment of my design; 
for I apprehended nothing of ill from a
man who adored me, and of whose will
and actions I foolishly imagined I had
the sole command. 
‘The settling this matter in my mind
engrossed all my thoughts, till the bell
began to ring for divine service, and I
had only time to write these lines in answer
to his billet: 

To mr. Wildly.
“Sir,
I have been always told it was
highly criminal in a young maid,
like me, to listen to the addresses of
any man without receiving the permission
of her parents for so doing; 
yet, I hope, I shall stand excused both
to them and you, if I confess I am willing
to be the first to hear what so nearly
concerns myself. I have but one way
of speaking to you, and if your love
be as sincere and fervent as you pretend, 
you will not think it too much to wait
between the hours of eleven and twelve
this night, at a green door, in the wall
which encompasses our garden, at the
further end of the lane, leading to that
part of lord ***'s park, where we first
saw each other; you will find me, if
no cross accident intervenes, at the time
and place I mention; but impute this
condescension to no other motive than
that compassion you implore. I flatter
myself your intentions are honourable,
and in that belief am, 
“Sir,
Your humble servant,
A. Forward.” 

Miss Betsy, during the repetition of this
letter, and some time before, shook her
head, and shewed great tokens of surprize
and disapprobation, but offering no inter-ruption,
the other went on in her discourse
in this manner: 
‘I protest to you, my dear miss Betsy,’ 
said she, ‘that I had nothing in view by
this letter, and the assignation it contained,
than to secure him to me as a
lover. I never had reason to repent of
the private correspondence I carried on 
with mr. Sparkish, nor knew it was in
the nature of man to take advantage of
a maid's simplicity; but I will not protract
the narrative I promised by any
needless particulars. Every thing happened
but too fortunately, alas! according
to my wish: I found mr. Wildly
in the church-porch, gave him the fatal
billet, unperceived by any one: night
came on,—all the family were gone to
their repose,—and I unseen, unheard,
and unsuspected, quitted my chamber,
and taking the route I told you of,
opened the garden door, where it seems
the person I expected had waited above
half an hour. 
‘His first salutations were the most
humble, and withal the most endearing,
that could be. ‘My angel,’ said he,
‘how heavenly good you are! permit
me thus to thank you.’ With these
words he threw himself on his knees,
and taking one of my hands, kissed it
with the extremest tenderness. But, oh!
let no young woman depend on the first
professions of her lover; nor in her own
power of keeping him at a proper distance.’ 
Here a sudden gush of tears prevented
her, for some minutes, from prosecuting 
her discourse, and miss Betsy found herself
obliged to treat her with more tenderness,
than in her own mind she thought
the nature of her case deserved. 