
The history of Celia in the woods prosecuted in that of lady Hardy, related by herself to Jemmy. 
“I will not, said she, poison the sweets of our present moments with any description of the bitter pangs I suffer'd in not finding you as I expected in the wood;—I had too much dependance on your love and honour to entertain one thought that this disappointment was an act of your own choice; and therefore fear'd that you was either suddenly taken sick, or that some other ill accident had befallen you. 
“Under these apprehensions I pass'd the most cruel night that ever was;—nor did the day bring me much more tranquility; though I sometimes flatter'd myself that business,—company, or some such like enemy to love, had kept you from me the evening before, and that you would not fail on this to come and make attonement for the disquiet you had given me. 
“Accordingly, in this hope I went about the usual hour to the dear scene of our past meetings;—I threw myself on the little hillock where we had sat—I kiss'd,—I embraced the tree you had lean'd against;—I invoked love and all its powers to bring my Jessamy once more to my arms;—and ran to the entrance of the wood, and sent my longing eyes towards town, vainly still expecting your approach;—I envied the little birds that hopped among the boughs above my head, and wish'd to be one of them, that I might fly to the place which I then thought contain'd you, and see in what manner you were employ'd. 
“I had like to have forgot, continued she, I promised that I would not trouble you either with my grief or my despair, yet I am unwarily running into a detail of both;—pardon me,—my dear Jessamy,—and prepare to hear what contrivances my passion for you inspired me with. 
“It was almost dark when I left the wood; my uncle was come out of the grounds and at home before me; he chid me for being abroad so late; but 
I made an excuse which, though not worth your hearing, pass'd well enough upon him:—I rose very early the next morning, and wrote a little letter to you; but when I had done knew not which way to convey it to you, nor indeed how to direct it properly, as I had never heard you say to which of the colleges you belonged. 
“Resolved, however, at any rate, and whatever I did, to be satisfied concerning your health, and what was become of you, I went to Oxford under the pretence of buying something I stood in need of;—I was afraid and ashamed to go to the University to ask for you; but believing that you must be known in town, enquired at several great shops, but without any success, till a Perriwig-maker directed me to go to a coffee-house, which he said you used every day. 
“Here I was informed that you had been sent for to London on account of your father's indispositions, and was gone the day before; but that not having quitted the University, it was expected you would not long be absent,—this intelligence a little comforted me, and I return'd with a satisfaction 
in my mind, which I believe might spread a more than ordinary glee upon my countenance. 
“But however it was, my looks, it seems, were that day ordain'd to do for me what I never had vanity enough to expect from them. 
“On my coming home, I found a chariot with two footmen waiting at our door, and within a very old grave gentleman busy in discourse with my uncle;—the latter had some time before got a slip from a fine exotic plant out of a nobleman's garden, which he had rear'd to such perfection that it was now loaded with flowers; and it was concerning the purchase of this, and some other curiosities my uncle's nursery afforded, that had brought this guest to our house. 
“I fancy, my dear Jessamy, that you already imagine that the person I am speaking of was no other than sir Thomas Hardy, whose wife I now am, and who you saw yesterday with me at the auction;—it was he, indeed, whose heart, without designing it, I captivated at first sight.” 
Jemmy on this could not forbear making some compliments on the force of her charms;—to which she only reply'd, that of how great service soever they had been to her interest, she took no pleasure in looking lovely in any eyes but those of her dear Jessamy,—and then went on with her discourse. 
“The old baronet, resumed she, had his eyes fix'd upon me from the moment I came into the room, and soon took an opportunity of asking my uncle if I was his daughter. —‘No, please your honour, reply'd he, she is only my niece;—farmer Adams, one of your honour's tenants, is her father.’ 
‘Oh then, cried sir Thomas, I suppose he has sent her hither to be out of the way of some handsome young man or another whom she may have taken a liking to.’ —‘No, please your honour, said my uncle, I hope the girl has no such thoughts in her head as yet;—my brother only lets her be here out of kindness to me, to look after my house.’ 
‘A very pretty house-keeper, indeed, rejoin'd sir Thomas; and I do not doubt but manages as well as can be expected.’ 
—‘For her years, sir, said my uncle.’ —‘I dare swear she does, cried my new lover; and if it were not for robbing you, I should be glad to have such a one to look after my affairs.’ 
“I could not forbear blushing excessively at these words; though I was far from imagining he had any design in them:—he said no more, however, at that time; but having ordered my uncle to bring home the plants he had bought of him, went into his chariot, though not without giving me a very amorous look as he passed by. 
“For my part, I should have thought no more of this stuff afterwards, but was very much surprised when I saw him come again the next day;—my uncle happened to be abroad, and I was sitting alone at work in a little room just by the door, which was wide open, and he came directly in. 
‘Where is your uncle, my pretty maid, said he, I would buy some things of him:’ —‘I reply'd,—that I believed he was not far off, and I would call the boy to go in search of him.’ —‘It is no matter, return'd he, taking hold of my hand to prevent my doing as I 
had said;—and to tell you the truth, I am glad of this opportunity of saying something to you that may be for your advantage.’ 
“I wonder'd what he meant, but sat down again on his bidding me;—he then told me I was a very pretty maid, and would be more pretty still if I was dress'd as I ought to be. —‘'Tis a pity, said he, looking on me from head to foot, that such limbs as these should be employ'd in any hard or servile work. —I know very well that neither your father nor your uncle are able to do much for you; therefore if you will be one of my family, you shall eat and drink of the best,—have fine silk cloaths, and have no business but to see that the servants do theirs.’ 
“To all this I answer'd, that I was very much obliged to his honour for the offer he made me, but that I was not accustom'd to the ways of gentlemen, and in no respect qualified for the place he mentioned. 
‘Yes,—my dear girl, cried he, you are sufficiently qualified for every thing I shall require of you;’—in speaking these words he threw his wither'd 
hands about my neck, and kiss'd me with a vehemence which one would not think his years capable of. 
“I protest to you, continued she, that I was so foolish as not to apprehend the base design he had upon me till this last action convinced me of it. —I struggled and got loose from an embrace which was then so detestable to me;—I told him that I was not for his purpose, and that I never would be the wicked creature he would have me. 
‘You are a little fool, and do not consider the value of the offer you reject, said he, throwing a handful of guineas into my lap. —See here,—your pocket shall be always fill'd with these to dispose of as you shall think fit;—you shall have what you please,—do what you please,—command me and my whole estate;—I desire only a little love in recompence.’ 
“I despise all you can give or promise, answer'd I; therefore take back your gold or I shall throw it out of doors for your servants to pick up;—poor as I am, I will not sell my honesty.’ 
“It was not in this manner, my Jessamy, pursued she, looking fondly on him, that I withstood the attempts you made upon my virtue;—How wide is the difference between love and interest? —My old Baronet, however, took my behaviour as the effect of the most pure and perfect virtue;—he was both amazed and charmed with it, and approaching me with looks as respectful as they had lately been presuming;—‘Well, my lovely maid, said he, I will not henceforward go about to seduce your innocence,—I love you, but will endeavour to conquer my desires.’ 
“I answer'd in a tone pretty rude I believe,—that it was the only thing he could oblige me in; on which he stood in a considerative posture for some moments,—at last coming out of it,’—‘Celia, said he, looking earnestly on my face,—it is my desire to do every thing to oblige you; and since that will do it shall come here no more.’ “—With these words he turn'd from me, and it was with much ado I prevail'd on him to take up his money; but I protested a single piece should not remain behind.” 
Her ladyship was going on, but mrs. Comode, who was all complaisance, came in with tea, which occasion'd a small interruption, after which she resumed her discourse, as will be seen in the next chapter. 
