
In which the reader is not to expect any extraordinary matters. 
Sophia could not put a period to her recital without letting fall some tears;—Jenny, who was all good-nature, though she did not approve of her conduct in some parts of it, said many obliging things for her consolation;—and after expressing her detestation of the almost unexampled baseness and ingratitude of Willmore, told her, among 
other things, that tho' she was extremely sorry to be deprived of her conversation, she could not but highly applaud the resolution she had taken of retiring into a monastery, as change of place, and a way of living so entirely new to her, might by degrees wear out the remembrance of whatever had been disagreeable to her in the past. 
‘Besides, said that amiable lady with a smile, you will perhaps hear of many adventures parallel to your own among the holy sisterhood; for I have been told, and am apt to think with some truth, that the convents are greatly indebted, for being crowded as they are, to the inconstancy and ingratitude of the other sex.’ 
The other agreeing with her in this point, they were beginning to enter into a discourse concerning the swift transition which sometimes happens from the flesh to the spirit, from an enthusiasm in love to an enthusiasm in devotion, when Sophia on a sudden recollecting herself, cried out,—‘But my dear miss Jessamy, I have been so engross'd by my own affairs that I forgot, till now, to enquire into yours;—I flatter myself, however, that you have no 
reason to complain of woes you so well know how to pity in another.’ 
‘Indeed, replied Jenny, I have had my share of anxieties too, though of a nature far different from yours;’—and then repeated to her the whole story of that confusion which both herself and Jemmy had been involv'd in, through the report raised by Belpine; as also the unhappy consequences which had attended the discovery of his baseness. 
They continued talking together upon this subject till Sophia thought it a proper time to retire; but Jenny would not suffer her to go till she had given her promise to see her again before she left the kingdom. 
Her unhappy adventure had made a very great impression on the mind of our young heroine;—she sincerely loved her, and pitied her misfortune; but could not help thinking it both strange and blameable in her to entertain so violent a passion for a man whose character she knew so little of. 
—‘People make their own unhappiness, and then lament it, cried she somewhat peevishly; sure I never could have been so indiscreet;’ but this thought no sooner came into her 
head than it was check'd by another;—Yet how vain am I to flatter myself with such an imagination, or presume so far on my own strength of reason;’ as the poet truly says, 
When things go ill, each fool presumes to advise,
And if more happy, thinks himself more wise.
‘How can I be certain, pursued she, that in the same circumstances I should not have acted in the same manner that poor Sophia has done? —I have been defended from the misfortune that has befallen her;—first, by my father's care in training me up to love where interest and convenience would accompany my passion,—and afterwards by the well proved fidelity of the man ordain'd for me:—had I been left to my own choice, who knows what might have happen'd? —I remember to have read a passage somewhere which may remind the fortunate part of the world, that they ought not to think they are so through their own merits, but the prevalence of their better stars: 

With prosperous gales life's vessel smoothly glides,
And on the smiling waves triumphant rides;
But when rough storms from adverse quarters roar,
How difficult to gain the wish'd for shore?’
Thus did the knowledge of her friend's mistake, instead of making her set any value upon herself for not having been guilty of the like error, serve only to fill her with the warmest gratitude to Heaven that had not exposed her to the like danger. 
Happy would it be, both for themselves and others, if all those ladies who know themselves free from the weakness incident to some others of their sex were of Jenny's way of thinking; but I shall say no more upon this head,—the reader must have sufficiently observ'd, through all her actions, the sweetness and candour of her disposition;—therefore, according to the words of the inspired writer, 
Let her own works praise her in the gates.

She was every day expecting her unfortunate friend to make her a second visit to take leave, when she received one from another person, on the same ceremony, which tho' she thought she had no manner of concern in at that time, proved afterwards matter of much satisfaction to her. 
Sir Robert Manley had a sudden call to Paris, on account of the death of an uncle, who disliking the times had retired thither some time ago, carrying with him all his effects, which were very considerable;—it was this gentleman, tho' his business required haste, that could not think of leaving the kingdom without first waiting on Jenny, to know if she had any commands in his power to execute at the place he was going to. 
She thank'd him in the most obliging terms, but told him she had no affairs in Paris, nor did not know of any acquaintance she had at present in all France, except mr. Jessamy, who was no farther than Calais. 
‘I shall pass through Calais, madam, answer'd he, perhaps stay a night or two there;—I shall doubtless see mr. 
Jessamy,—at least it will be in my power so to do, if you permit me to acquaint him that I have the honour to be known to you, and to carry to him the joyful news of your being in good health.’ 
Tho' she had the highest esteem for this gentleman, on account of his many amiable qualities, as well as for his birth, fortune and accomplishments, yet always keeping in mind the declaration he had once made of a passion for her, she maintained a greater reserve towards him than to any other of her acquaintance,—and now only reply'd coldly, that if chance should bring them together, mr. Jessamy would certainly think himself honour'd in the company of a gentleman of his character. 
As he was to take post for Dover the next morning, and had many friends to see before his departure, the visit he made here was very short; but he had not been gone an hour before Jenny found she had need of his service at Calais, and began a little to repent she had received the offer he had made her with so much indifference;—a letter was brought her from Jemmy containing these lines: 


To miss Jessamy.
“Dearest and only dear,
Nothing but your commands could have kept me here, after what mr. Morgan has wrote to me;—instead of this you would now have seen me at your feet. —Oh Jenny!—tender generous soul:—but I will not wound your delicacy either with thanks or praises;—indeed all the tribute I could pay of both would be too mean for the occasion. 
“You desire to know in what manner I pass my time while banish'd from you, and I will give you an exact account:—your ideas of my sea-coast promenades are just; but for the rest I am not quite so unhappy as your fancy represents. 
—They say Calais is the sink of France;—but if it is—what must be the garden?—the streets, indeed, are for the most part narrow and ill paved; but there is a square, call'd La Place, spacious, airy, and very commodious for walking; and the ramparts afford as delectable a prospect as imagination can well figure out:—then the air is so serene and pure,—the water good,—the wine excellent, and 
the inhabitants, even to the lowest degree of the people, extremely polite, an instance of which I experienced a few nights past, and must acquaint you with it. 
“Having seen all that is worthy of observation in the town, curiosity led me to pass the gates, which I had no sooner done than I found myself at the entrance of three great roads;—that before me, as I have since been informed, is the high way to Paris;—that on the right hand to St. Omers;—and on the left to Bologne;—the good order in which they are kept, and two triangles of beautiful fields which separate the one from the other, took my eye extremely;—the evening was very pleasant,—every thing about me indulged contemplation, and I wandered on to a considerable distance, when a soldier came running almost breathless after me, and being obliged to stop and turn about by his repeated calling to me, he accosted me with a very low bow, and told me, that perceiving I was a stranger, he thought it his duty to acquaint me that the gates were always shut at eight o'clock and the keys carried to the governor; that it was very near 
that hour, and if I did not immediately return I should find it very difficult, if not impossible, to re-enter the town;—on this I mended my pace according to his advice; but tho' I went as fast as I could, came but just time enough to go over the first draw-bridge, which they were preparing to take up;—I now saw the danger I had escaped,—thanked the honest soldier for his intelligence, and offer'd him a piece of money, on which he drew back and surprised me with this answer:’ —‘No, sir, said he, the honour of serving you is a sufficient recompence,—we soldiers never take money but from the king our master.’ —“Judge, my dear Jenny, of the courtesy of the French nation in general by the sample I have given you of it in this soldier. 
“I will not, however, so far deceive either myself or you, as not both to think and say, that if I were to continue here for any length of time, I should not be very much at a loss for company, the town consisting chiefly of trading people, who are entirely taken up with their several avocations, so that excepting the officers of the army, and some few friars, there is 
little conversation suitable to the taste of an Englishman. 
“I was yesterday at St. Omers, to take a view of that famous seminary of jesuits, which has given to the world so many prime-ministers, bishops, cardinals and popes; but as I staid but a few hours there I saw scarce any thing of the place, except the College, which is indeed a very fine one; and I only tell you this to shew you that I neglect no opportunity of amusing myself. 
“I also intend to make a visit to Bologne to-morrow, as I am told there are several English gentlemen there at present, for some of whom I have a particular regard. 
—I may perhaps stay two or three days; but if I should transgress the time of the mail coming in, shall leave orders for letters with my direction to be sent after me;—I would not be deprived one moment of the pleasure of hearing from you for all the enjoyments the world can give;—for know, my dear Jenny, it is not the Park,—the Plays,—the Operas,—the Assemblies, nor the company at White's, but it is your dear society alone I languish for, and which I trust to heaven I shall soon be 
bless'd with;—till when call every soft idea of love and tenderness to your imagination, and let them tell you how much I am, 
“Beyond what words can speak,
My dear, dear Jenny,
Your most passionate admirer,
And eternally devoted
Lover and servant,
J. Jessamy.” 
“P. S. I remember you have a little picture which was drawn for you some years ago, and came as near the life as any thing of art can do;—it would be a very great pleasure to me if you could contrive a way to send it to me without much trouble to yourself;—for though, as you may be certain, your image is indelibly fix'd upon my heart, I should be glad, methinks, to feast my eyes as well as mind with your dear resemblance.” 

Jenny was now heartily sorry this letter had not arriv'd before sir Robert Manley took his leave, as she might have engag'd 
him to be the bearer of the picture Jemmy requested of her. 
She resolved, however, rather than not comply with the desire of a person so dear to her, to take the liberty of sending to that gentleman, and intreating the favour of speaking with him, if possible, before he set out on his journey. 
Sir Robert was not at home when her servant went, nor received the message that had been left for him till it was too late to wait on her that night; but would not go out of town without obeying her summons, and came pretty early the next morning. 
Jenny could not repeat, without blushing, the motive which had induced her to send for him; but after having said all, and indeed much more than was necessary, to apologize for what she had done;—‘Madam, answer'd he, I know not how to thank, as it deserves, the confidence you repose in me; but you must own, that in doing me this favour you put my honour to the severest trial: —How are you sure that a trust such as your picture may not tempt me to be base?’ 
‘I will venture that, said she gaily, and should be glad to be quite as sure you will pardon the trouble I give you on this occasion.’ —On this sir Robert said many gallant things; but concluded with a promise of delivering his charge safe into the hands of the happy person for whom it was intended,—and then took leave, as time pressed him to depart, and his chaise and servants had all this while waited for him at the door. 
