


Shews that miss Betsy, whenever she
pleased to exert herself, had it in her
power to be discreet, even on occasions
the most tempting to her humour
and inclination. 

Soon after miss Betsy had sent away
what she thought would be a final answer
to sir Frederick, her brother Frank
came in;—she immediately shewed him
the letter she had received that morning,
and related to him in what manner she
had behaved concerning it, with which he
was extremely pleased, and said more tender
things to her, than any she had heard
from him, since he came to town. 

‘This is a way of acting, my dear
sister,’ said he, ‘which if you persevere
in, will infallibly gain you the esteem
of all who know you; for while you
encourage the addresses of every idle
fop, believe me, you will render yourself
cheap, and lose all your merit with
the sensible part of mankind.’ 
If she was not quite of his opinion in
this point, she offered no arguments in
opposition to the remark he had made,
and assured him, as she had done once
before, that she would never give any
man the least grounds to hope she approved
his pretensions, 'till she had first
received the sanction of both his, and her
brother Thoughtless's approbation. 
He then told her, that they had received
intelligence, that the India ship,
which they heard was to bring mr. Edward
Goodman, was safely arrived in the
Downs; so that in all likelihood that
gentleman would be in London in two or
three days at farthest;—‘which I am
very glad of,’ said he; ‘for, though I
believe the lawyer a very honest, diligent
man as any can be of his profession,
the presence of the heir will give a life 

to the cause, and may bring things to
a more speedy issue.’ 
He also told her, that a gentleman of
his brother's acquaintance had the day before
received a letter from sir Ralph
Trusty, intimating, that he should be
obliged, by the death of mr. Goodman,
there being affairs of consequence between
them, to come to town much sooner than
he had intended, and that he should
bring his lady with him:—‘And then,
my dear sister,’ said he, ‘you will be
happy for a time at least, in the conversation
and advice of one, who, I am
certain, in her good wishes for you, deserves
to be looked upon by you, as a
second mother.’ 
He was going on in some farther commendations
of that worthy lady, when
miss Betsy's man came to the dining room
door, and told her, that mr. Munden
was below in the parlour, and would wait
on her, if she was at leisure. —Mr.
Francis perceiving she was hesitating
what answer to make, cried hastily,
‘pray sister admit him:—this is lucky,
now I shall see how much he excells mr.
Trueworth in person and parts.’ —‘I
never told you,’ answered she, ‘that he
did so in either; but perhaps he may 

in his good opinion and esteem for me; 
—however, I think you promised never
to mention Trueworth again to me;— 
I wish you would keep your word.’ — 
Well,—I have done,’ said he, ‘do
not keep the gentleman waiting.’ —On
which she bade the footman desire mr.
Munden to walk up. 
That gentleman was a good deal disconcerted
in his mind, concerning the little
progress his courtship had made with miss
Betsy;—he had followed her for a considerable
time,—been at a great expence
in treating and making presents to her;— 
he had studied her humour, and done
every thing in his power to please her, yet
thought himself as far from the completion
of his wishes, as when he began his addresses
to her;—he had not for several
days had an opportunity of speaking one
word to her in private;—she was either
abroad when he came, or so engaged in
company, that his presence served only to
fill a vacant seat in her dining-room;— 
he therefore determined to know what fate
he was to expect from her. 
As he had not been told any body was
now with her, and had never seen mr.
Francis before, he was a little startled on
his coming into the room, to find a young, 

gay gentleman seated very near her, and
lolling his arm, in a careless posture, over
the back of the chair in which she was sitting; 
—on his entrance, they both rose to
receive him with a great deal of politeness,
which he returned in the same manner; 
but added to the first compliments, that he
hoped he had been guilty of no intrusion. 
‘Not at all, sir,’ replied the brother of
miss Betsy, ‘I was only talking to my
sister on some family affairs, which we
may resume at any time, when no more
agreeable subjects of entertainment fall
in our way.’ —‘Yes, mr. Munden,’ 
said miss Betsy, ‘this is that brother, whose
return to town you so often heard me wish
for:—and this, brother,’ continued
she, turning to mr. Francis, ‘is a gentleman
who sometimes does me the honour
of calling upon me, and whose visits to
me I believe you will not disapprove.’ 
She had no sooner ended these words
than the two gentlemen mutually advanced,
embraced, and said they should be proud
of each other's acquaintance; after which
they entered into a conversation sprightly
enough for the time it lasted, which was
not long; for mr. Francis looking on his
watch said, he was extremely mortified to
leave such good company, but business of 

a very urgent nature called him to a different
place at that hour. 
As much as mr. Munden was pleased
to find himself so obligingly introduced
by his mistress, to the acquaintance of her
brother, he was equally glad to be rid
of him at this juncture, when he came
prepared to press her so home to an eclaircissement,
as should deprive her of all
possibility of keeping himself any longer
in suspence. 
It was in vain for her now to have recourse
to any of those evasions by which
she had hitherto put him off, and she
found herself under a necessity either of
entirely discarding him, or giving him
some kind of assurance, that the continuance
of his pretensions would not be in
vain. 
Never had she been so plunged before,
—never had any of her lovers insisted in
such plain terms on her declaring herself,
and she was compelled, as it were, to tell
him, since he was so impatient for the
definition of his fate, it was from her
brothers he must receive it, for she was
resolved, nay had solemnly promised, to
enter into no engagement without their
knowledge and approbation. —‘But suppose,’ 

said he, ‘I should be so happy
as to obtain their consent, may I then
assure myself you will be mine?’ — 
‘Would you wish me to hate you,’ cried
she, somewhat peevishly? —‘Hate me!’ 
answered he;—‘no, madam, it is your
love I would purchase, almost at the
expence of life.’ 
‘Persecute me then no more,’ said she,
‘to give you promises or assurances,
which would only make me see you
with confusion, and think of you with
regret;—it is sufficient I esteem you,
and listen to the professions of your love,
—let that content you, and leave to
myself the grant of more.’ —‘Yet,
madam,’ resumed he,—and was going
on, but was interrupted by the maid,
who came hastily into the room, and
said, ‘Madam, here is miss Mabel.’ 
She had no sooner spoke these words,
than the lady she mentioned followed her
into the room. —Miss Betsy was never
more glad to see her than now, when her
presence afforded her so seasonable a relief:
—‘My dear miss Mabel,’ said she,
‘this is kind indeed, when I already owe
you two visits.’ —‘I believe you owe
me more,’ answered she, with a smile; 
but I did not come to reproach you,— 

nor can this indeed be justly called a
visit, since it is only a mere matter of
business brings me hither at this time.’ 
Mr. Munden on this thought proper
to take his leave, but, in doing so, said
to miss Betsy, with a very grave air,— 
‘I hope, madam, you will have the goodness
to consider seriously on what we
have been talking of:—I will do myself
the honour to wait upon your brothers
to-morrow, and afterwards on
yourself.’ —With these words he withdrew
without staying for any answer. 
‘I know not,’ said miss Mabel, after
he was gone, ‘whether what I have to
say to you will be of sufficient moment
to excuse me for depriving you of your
company,—since I only called to tell
you, that we are eased of our little pensioner
at Denham, by the father's unexpectedly
coming to claim his own.’ 
Miss Betsy replied, that she guessed as
much, for she had heard those people had
been at her lodgings, when she was not
at home, and had said somewhat of their
business to her servant. —‘I am also to
pay you,’ resumed the other, ‘my quota
of the last month's nursing.’ —In speaking
these words she took out of her pocket 

the little sum she stood indebted for, and
laid it on the table. 
Though miss Betsy had the most perfect
regard and good wishes for miss Mabel,
and miss Mabel the same for miss
Betsy, yet neither of them was in the secrets
of the other:—they visited but
seldom, and when they did, talked only
on indifferent affairs. —In fine, though
they both loved the amiable qualities each
found in the other, yet the wide contrariety
between their dispositions, occasioned
a coolness in their behaviour, which their
hearts were far from feeling. 
Miss Mabel stayed but a very few
minutes, after having dispatched the business
she came upon, nor was miss Betsy
at all troubled at her departure, being at
present, what she very rarely was, in a
humour rather to be alone than in any
company whatever. 
She no sooner was at liberty than she
began to reflect on the transactions of that
morning;—she had done two things,
which seemed pretty extraordinary to her; 
—she had entirely dismissed one lover, a
piece of resolution she did not a little value
herself upon, but then she was vexed 

at the too great encouragement, as she
thought it, which she had given to another. 
‘What shall I do with this Munden?’ 
said she to herself. —‘If my brothers
should take it into their heads to approve
of his pretensions, I shall be as
much teazed on his account, as I was
on that of mr. Trueworth's:—I have
no aversion indeed to the man, but I
am equally as far from having any love
for him;—there is nothing in his person,
or behaviour, that might make a
woman ashamed of being his wife, yet
I can see nothing so extraordinary in
him, as to induce me to become so.’ 
‘Why then,’ continued she, ‘did I
not tell him at once I would not have
him, and that if he was weary of paying
his respects to me, he might carry
them where they would be more kindly
received? —It was a very silly thing
in me to send him to my brothers;— 
they are in such haste to get me out of
the way of what they call temptation,
that I believe they would marry me to
any man, that was of a good family
and had an estate. —If I must needs
have a husband to please them, I had
better have taken Trueworth,—I am
sure there is no comparison between the 

men; but it is too late to think of that
now, for it is very plain, both by his
behaviour to me when last I saw him,
and by what he said to my brother
Frank, that he has given over all intentions
on that score.’ 
She was in the midst of these cogitations,
when a servant belonging to the
ladies whom she visited at St. James's,
came and presented her with a letter,
containing these lines: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Dear creature,
My sister and self had an invitation
to a party of pleasure, where there
will be the best company,—the best
musick, and the best entertainment in
the world; but my father having unluckily
forced her to pass some days
with an old aunt, who lies dangerously
sick at Hampstead, I know nobody can
so well supply her vacant place, as your
agreeable self;—therefore, if you are
not already too deeply engaged this
evening, would beg the favour of you
to share with me in the proposed diversion:
—we shall have two young gentlemen
of rank for our conductors and
protectors;—but I flatter myself you 

will make no scruple to go any where
with her, who is, 
‘With the most perfect amity,
Dear miss Betsy,
Your most humble,
And most obedient servant,
A. Airish. 
‘P.S. Let me know whether I can be
so happy as to have you with me,
and if so, I will call on you about
five, and drink tea, for we shall not
go to the assembly till eight.’ 

This proposal put miss Betsy out of all
her serious reflections, and she returned
for answer to the lady, that she would
not fail to be at home, and ready to attend
her at the appointed hour. 
Accordingly, as soon as ever dinner
was over, she went to dress, and thought
of nothing but how to make as brilliant a
figure as any she should meet with at the
assembly. —Miss Airish came somewhat
before the hour she had mentioned in her
letter, accompanied by two rakes of quality,
whom miss Betsy had seen two or 

three times before with her and her sister,
and by one of whom she had once been
treated with some familiarities, which had
made her ever since very cautious of
giving him any opportunity to attempt
the like. 
As much, therefore, as she had pleased
herself with the idea of this evening's
pleasures, she no sooner saw who were to
be their conductors, than she resolved not
to put herself into their powers, yet knew
not how, without affronting miss Airish,
to avoid complying with the promises she
had made of accompanying her. 
They all came singing and romping into
the room, but the perplexity of miss
Betsy's mind made her receive them with
a very serious air:—the men accosted
her with a freedom conformable enough
to their own characters, but not very
agreeable to one of her's, and she rebuffed
with a good deal of contempt him, with
whom she had most reason to be offended. 
‘Lord! how grave you look,’ said
miss Airish, observing her countenance; 
‘prithee, my dear creature, put on a
more chearful aspect:—this is to be a
night of all spirit,—all mirth,—all
gaiety.’ —‘I am sorry I cannot be partaker 

of it,’ said miss Betsy, who, by
this time, had contrived an excuse. — 
‘Lord! what do you mean?—not partaker
of it!’ cried miss Airish, hastily; 
‘—sure you would not offer to disappoint
us?’ —‘Not willingly,’ replied
miss Betsy; ‘but I was just going to
send to let you know, I have received
a message from my elder brother, to
come to his house, in order to meet
some persons there, on very extraordinary
business;—but, I hope,’ added
she, ‘that my not going will be no hindrance
to the diversion you propose.’ 
‘It would have been none, madam,’ 
said one of the gallants, ‘if this assembly
were like others; but we are only a select
company of gay young fellows,
who resolve to try how far nature may
be exhilerated by regaling every sense
at once:—to prevent all quarrels, every
man is to bring a lady with him, who
is to be his partner in singing,—dancing,
—playing,—or whatever they
two shall agree upon. —We two,’ continued
he, ‘pitched upon the two miss
Airishes, but one of them being gone
another way, we thought of you, otherwise
we could have found ladies who
would have obliged us.’ 

‘Very likely,’ replied miss Betsy, ‘and
I suppose it may not yet be too late to
seek them.’ —‘But I had rather have
you than all the world,’ cried he, that
miss Betsy was most apprehensive of,
‘you know I have always shewn a particular
tendre for you;—therefore prithee,’ 
continued he, catching her in his
arms, and eagerly kissing her, ‘my dear
girl, send some excuse to your brother,
and let us have you with us.’ 
‘Unhand me, my lord,’ cried she,
struggling to get loose,—‘what you
ask is impossible, for I neither can nor
will go.’ —The resolution with which
she spoke these words, and the anger
which at the same time sparkled in her
eyes, made them see it would be but lost
labour to endeavour to persuade her;— 
they looked one at another, and were
confounded what to do, till miss Airish,
vexed to the very heart at miss Betsy's
behaviour, hit upon an expedient to solve
up the matter: —‘Well,’ said she, ‘since
miss Betsy cannot go, I will introduce
your lordship to a young lady, who, I
am sure, will not refuse us;—besides,
I know she is at home, for I saw her
looking out of her chamber window as 

we came by;—but we must go directly,
that she may have time to dress.’ 
On this, they both cried with all their
hearts, and one of them taking her hand
skipped down stairs with her, in the same
wild way they came up:—the other
followed, only turning his head towards
miss Betsy, cried, with a malicious sneer, 

“How unregarded now that piece of beauty stands!”

Miss Betsy, though sufficiently piqued,
was very glad to get rid of them, and
the more so, that by their happening to
call on her, instead of her meeting them
at miss Airish's appartment, she had the
better opportunity of excusing herself from
going where they desired. 
