


Is very well deserving the attention of
all those who are about to marry. 

While miss Flora was buoyed up
with the expectation, that her mother
would soon be reconciled to mr.
Goodman, she abated not of her former
gaiety, and thought of nothing but indulging
her amorous inclinations with the
man she liked; but when once those expectations
ceased, her spirits began to fail:
—she now found it necessary for her interest,
as well as pleasure, to preserve, if
possible, the affection of her lover;—she
knew not what dreadful consequences the
prosecution, mr. Goodman was about to
exhibit against her mother, might be attended
with, and trembled to think, she
must share with her the double load of
infamy and penury, and rightly judged,
that a man of mr. Trueworth's fortune,
honour, and good-nature, would not suffer
a woman, with whom he continued a tender
communication, to be oppressed with
any ills his purse could relieve her from:
—the apprehensions, therefore, that she
might one day be reduced to stand in 

need of his support, assisted the real passion
she had for him, and made her feel,
on the first appearance of his growing
coldness towards her, all those horrors,
those distractions, which her letters to
him had so livelily represented. 
On his ceasing to make any fixed
appointment with her, and from seeing
her every day, to seeing her but once in
three or four days, gave her, with reason,
the most terrible alarms;—but when,
after an absence of near a week, she had
followed him to the coffee-house, the
cool and indifferent reception she there
met with, gave her, indeed, a mortal stab
to all her hopes, and she no longer hesitated
to pronounce her own doom, and
cry out, she was undone. 
The excuse he made of business was too
weak,—too trite,—too common place
to gain any credit with her, or alleviate
her sorrows;—she knew the world too well
to imagine a young gay gentleman, like
him, would forego whatever he thought
a pleasure, for any business he could possibly
have;—she doubted not but there
was a woman in the case, and the thoughts
that, while she was in vain expecting him,
he was solliciting those favours from a rival,
she had so lavishly bestowed, and 

languished to repeat, fired her jealous
brain, even to a degree of frenzy. 
Awhile she raved with all the wild
despair of ill requited burning love, but
other emotions soon rose in her distracted
bosom not to controul, but add fresh
fewel to the flame already kindled there:
—‘My circumstances!’ cried she;— 
‘my wretched circumstances! —What
will become of me?—involved in my
mother's shame, he will, perhaps, make
that a pretence for abandoning me to
those misfortunes, I thought I might
have depended on him to relieve.’ 
However, as the little billet, in answer
to her last letter to him, contained a promise,
that he would write to her the next
day, she endeavoured, as much as she was
able, to compose herself till that time,
though she was far from hoping the explanation
she expected to receive in it,
would afford any consolation to her tormented
mind. 
Mr. Trueworth also, in the mean time,
was not without his own anxieties:—a
man of honour frequently finds more difficulty
in getting rid of a woman he is
weary of, and loves him, than obtaining
a woman he loves, and is in pursuit 

of; but this gentleman had a more than
ordinary perplexity to struggle through:
—few women would go the lengths miss
Flora had done for the accomplishment
of her desires, and he easily saw, by the
whole tenor of her behaviour, she would
go as great, and even more to continue
the enjoyment of them. 
Glad would he have been to have
brought her by degrees to an indifference
for him,—to have prevailed on her to
submit her passion to the government of
her reason, and to be convinced, that an
amour, such as their's had been, ought
to be looked upon only as a transient
pleasure;—to be continued while mutual
inclination and convenience permitted,
and when broke off remembered but as a
dream. 
But this he found was not to be done
with a woman of miss Flora's temper;— 
he therefore thought it best not to keep
her any longer in suspence, but let her
know at once the revolution in her fate,
as to that point, which regarded him,
and the true motive that had occasioned
it, which he accordingly did in these
terms: 


To miss Flora Mellasin.
‘Madam,
It is with very great difficulty I employ
my pen to tell you, it is wholly
inconvenient for us ever to meet again,
in the manner we have lately done; but
I flatter myself you have too much good
sense, and too much honour, not to
forgive what all laws, both human and
divine, oblige me to. —I am entering
into a state, which utterly forbids the
continuance of those gallantries, which
before pleaded their own excuse;—in
fine, I am going to be married, and it
would be the highest injustice in me to
expect that fidelity, which alone can
make me happy in a wife, if my own
conduct did not set her an example. 
‘Though I must cease to languish for
a repetition of those favours you have
blessed me with, yet be assured I shall
always remember them with gratitude,
and the best good wishes for the prosperity
of the fair bestower. 
‘I send you back all the testimonies I
have received of your tenderness, that
are in my power to return:—It belongs
to yourself to make use of your 

utmost endeavours for the recovery of
the heart, which dictated them. —This
I earnestly entreat of you, and in the
hope that you will soon accomplish a
work so absolutely necessary for your
peace and reputation, I remain, 
‘As far as honour will permit,
Madam,
Your most obliged,
And most humble servant,
C. Trueworth.’ 

Mr. Trueworth flattered himself, that
so plain a declaration of his sentiments,
and intentions, would put a total end to
all future correspondence between them,
and having looked it over, after he had
finished and found it such as he thought
proper for the purpose, put it under a
cover, with all the letters he had received
from miss Flora, not excepting the first
invitation she had made him, under the
title of the Incognita, and sent away the
packet by a porter; for he had never entrusted
his servants with the conveyance
of any epistle from him to that lady. 

Miss Flora, from the moment her eyes
were open in the morning, if it can be
supposed she had any sleep that night,
had been watching with the most racking
impatience for the arrival of mr. Trueworth's
messenger;—she wished, but
dreaded more the eclaircisement, which
she expected would be contained in the
mandate he had promised to send, yet
was distracted for the certainty, how cruel
soever it might prove. 
At length it came, and with it a confirmation
of even worse than the most
terrible of her apprehensions had suggested:
—the sight of her own letters on her
opening it, almost threw her into a
swoon; but when her streaming eyes had
greedily devoured the contents of the billet
that accompanied them, excess of desperation
struck her for some moments
stupid, and rendered her mind inactive as
her frame. 
But when awakened from this lethargy
of silent grief, she felt all the horrors of
a fate she had so much dreaded:—frustrated
at once in every hope, that love or
interest had presented to her, words cannot
paint the wildness of her fancy;— 
she tore her hair and garments, and scarce 

spared that face, she had taken so much
pains to ornament, for wanting charms
to secure the conquest it had gained. 
But with the more violence those tour-billions
of the mind rage for a while,
the sooner they subside, and all is hush'd
again;—as I remember to have somewhere
read, 

‘After a tempest, when the winds are laid,
‘The calm sea wonders at the wreck it made.’

So this unhappy and abandoned creature,
too much deserving of the fate she
met with, having exhausted her whole
stock of tears, and wasted all the
breath that life could spare, in fruitless
exclamations, the passions which had raised
these commotions in her soul, became
more weak, and the beguiler Hope once
more returned, to lull her wearied spirits
into a short-lived ease. 
She now saw the folly of venting her
rage upon herself;—that to give way to
grief and despair would avail her nothing,
but only serve to render her more miserable; 
—that instead of sitting tamely
down, and meanly lamenting her misfortune 

in the loss of a lover, on whom she
had built so much, she ought rather to
exert all the courage, resolution, and artifice
she was mistress of, in contriving
some way of preventing it, if possible. 
‘He is not yet married,’ said she;— 
‘the irrevocable words not yet are past:
—I have already broke off his courtship
to one woman,—why may I not
be as successful in doing so with another? 
—He cannot love the present engrosser
of his heart more than he did
miss Betsy Thoughtless;—'tis worth,
at least, the pains of an attempt.’ 
The first step she had to take, towards
the execution of her design, was to find
out the name, condition, and dwelling,
of her happy rival, and this she thought
there would be no great difficulty in doing,
as she doubted not but mr. Trueworth
visited her every day, and it would
be easy for her to employ a person to
watch where he went, and afterwards to
make the proper enquiries. 
But, in the mean time, it required
some consideration how to behave to that
gentleman, so as to preserve in him some
sort of esteem for her, without which she
rightly judged it would be impossible for 

her ever to recover his love, in case she
should be so fortunate as to separate him
from the present object of his flame. 
She knew very well, that all testimonies
of despair, in a woman no longer loved,
only create uneasiness in the man who
occasioned it, and but serve to make him
more heartily wish to get rid of her; she
therefore found it best, as it certainly
was, to pretend to fall in with mr. Trueworth's
way of thinking,—seem to be
convinced by his reasons, and ready to
submit to whatever suited with his interest
or convenience:—it was some time before
she could bring herself into a fit temper
for this act of dissimulation, but she
at last arrived at it, and gave a proof
how great a proficient she was in it, by
the following lines: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Dear Sir,
I am apt to believe you as little expected
as desired an answer to the
eclaircisement of yesterday, nor would
I have given you the trouble of this,
but to assure you, it shall be the last
of any kind you ever shall receive from
me. —Yes,—I have now done with
reproaches, and complaints,—I have 

nothing to alledge against you,—nothing
to accuse you of:—could the
fond folly of my tender passion have
given me leisure for a moment's reflection,
I had foreseen, that the misfortune,
which is now falling upon me,
was inevitable. —I am now convinced,
that I ought not to have hoped, that
the unbounded happiness I so lately enjoyed,
could be of any long duration; 
—that a man of your fortune and
figure in the world, must one day marry; 
—names and families must be supported,
and your's is too considerable
for you to suffer it to be extinct:—I
must not,—I will not, therefore, repine
at a thing, which, in my cooler
moments, I cannot but look upon as
essential to your honour and convenience. 
—Had you quitted me on any
other score, I cannot answer but I might
have been hurried into extravagancies
displeasing to you, and unbecoming of
myself:—but here I must resign, and
am determined to do so, with the same
patience, in shew at least, as if I had
never loved. —I will not tell you the
agonies I have sustained in the cruel
conflict, between my reason and my
passion, in making this resolution:— 
it is sufficient for you to know, that the
former has the victory. —More might 

too much effect your generous nature; 
besides, when woes are remediless, they
are best borne in silence. 
‘Farewell! —Oh, farewell for ever!
—may you find every thing in the
happy she you make your choice of, to
give you lasting bliss; and, to compleat
all, may she love you with the
same ardency, tenderness, and disinterestedness,
as her, who must now only
subscribe herself, 
‘At an eternal distance!
Dear, dear Sir,
Your most faithful friend,
And humble servant,
F. Mellasin.’ 

This letter, which, it must be confessed,
was wrote artfully enough, had all the effect
it was intended for, on the mind of
mr. Trueworth;—it not only afforded
him an infinity of contentment, as he
hoped she would soon be enabled to banish
all those disturbed emotions, which
naturally attend the breaking off an acquaintance,
such as their's had been, but
it also established in him, a very high 

idea of her good understanding,—disinterested
affection,—honour, and sincerity; 
but how long he continued in this
favourable opinion, as to the three last
mentioned qualifications, will hereafter be
shewn. 
In the mean time, something happened,
which, as he was a man just, even to the
extremest nicety, gave him, according to
his way of thinking, a great deal of reason
to reproach himself. 
