







While occupied with these reflections, the light hastily
disappeared, and darkness, rendered, by a cloudy atmosphere,
uncommonly intense, succeeded. She had the
means of lighting a lamp, that hung against the wall, but had
been too much immersed in thought, to notice the deepening
of the gloom. Recovering from her reverie, she looked
around her with some degree of trepidation, and prepared to
strike a spark, that would enable her to light her lamp.
She had hitherto indulged an habitual indifference to danger.
Now the presence of Ormond, the unknown purpose
that led him hither, and the defencelessness of her condition,
inspired her with apprehensions, to which she had hitherto
been a stranger. She had been accustomed to pass many
nocturnal hours in this closet. Till now, nothing had occurred,
that made her enter it with circumspection, or continue
in it with reluctance.
Her sensations were no longer tranquil. Each minute
that she spent in this recess, appeared to multiply her hazards.
To linger here, appeared to her the height of
culpable temerity. She hastily resolved to return to the
farmer's dwelling, and, on the morrow, to repair to New
York. For this end, she was desirous to produce a light.
The materials were at hand.
She lifted her hand to strike the flint, when her ear caught
a sound, which betokened the opening of the door, that led
into the next apartment. Her motion was suspended, and
she listened as well as a throbbing heart would permit. That
Ormond's was the hand that opened, was the first suggestion
of her fears. The motives of this unseasonable entrance,
could not be reconciled with her safety. He had given no
warning of his approach, and the door was opened with tardiness
and seeming caution.
Sounds continued, of which no distinct conception could
be obtained, or the cause that produced them assigned. The
floors of every apartment being composed, like the walls and
ceiling, of cement, footsteps were rendered almost undistinguishable.
It was plain, however, that some one approached
her own door.






The panic and confusion that now invaded her, was owing
to surprise, and to the singularity of her situation. The
mansion was desolate and lonely. It was night. She was
immersed in darkness. She had not the means, and was
unaccustomed to the office of repelling personal injuries.
What injuries she had reason to dread, who was the agent,
and what were his motives, were subjects of vague and incoherent
meditation.
Meanwhile, low and imperfect sounds, that had in them
more of inanimate than human, assailed her ear. Presently
they ceased. An inexplicable fear deterred her from calling.
Light would have exercised a friendly influence. This, it
was in her power to produce, but not without motion and
noise, and these, by occasioning the discovery of her being
in the closet, might possibly enhance her danger.
Conceptions like these, were unworthy of the mind of Constantia.
An interval of silence succeeded, interrupted only
by the whistling of the blast without. It was sufficient for
the restoration of her courage. She blushed at the cowardice
which had trembled at a sound. She considered that
Ormond might, indeed, be near, but that he was probably
unconscious of her situation. His coming was not with the
circumspection of an enemy. He might be acquainted with
the place of her retreat, and had come to obtain an interview,
with no clandestine or mysterious purposes. The noises she
had heard, had, doubtless, proceeded from the next apartment,
but might be produced by some harmless or vagrant
creature.
These considerations restored her tranquillity. They enabled
her, deliberately, to create a light, but they did not
dissuade her from leaving the house. Omens of evil seemed
to be connected with this solitary and darksome abode.
Besides, Ormond had unquestionably entered upon this
scene. It could not be doubted that she was the object of
his visit. The farm house was a place of meeting, more
suitable and safe than any other. Thither, therefore, she
determined immediately to return.
The closet had but one door, and this led into the chamber
where the sounds had arisen. Through this chamber,
therefore, she was obliged to pass, in order to reach the
staircase, which terminated in the hall below.






Bearing the light in her left hand, she withdrew the bolt
of the door, and opened. In spite of courageous efforts, she
opened with unwillingness, and shuddered to throw a glance
forward or advance a step into the room. This was not
needed, to reveal to her the cause of her late disturbance.
Her eye instantly lighted on the body of a man, supine, motionless,
stretched on the floor, close to the door through
which she was about to pass.
A spectacle like this, was qualified to startle her. She
shrunk back and fixed a more steadfast eye, upon the prostrate
person. There was no mark of blood or of wounds,
but there was something in the attitude, more significant of
death than of sleep. His face rested on the floor, and his
ragged locks concealed what part of his visage was not hidden
by his posture. His garb was characterized by fashionable
elegance, but was polluted with dust.
The image that first occurred to her, was that of Ormond.
This instantly gave place to another, which was familiar to
her apprehension. It was at first too indistinctly seen to suggest
a name. She continued to gaze and to be lost in fearful
astonishment. Was this the persen whose entrance had
been overheard, and who had dragged himself hither to die
at her door? Yet, in that case, would not groans and expiring
efforts have testified his condition, and invoked her
succor? Was he not brought hither in the arms of his assassin?
She mused upon the possible motives that induced
some one thus to act, and upon the connexion that might
subsist, between her destiny and that of the dead.
Her meditations, however fruitless, in other respects, could
not fail to show her the propriety of hastening from this spot.
To scrutinize the form or face of the dead, was a task, to
which her courage was unequal. Suitably accompanied and
guarded, she would not scruple to return and ascertain, by
the most sedulous examination, the causes of this ominous
event.
She stept over the breathless corpse, and hurried to the
staircase. It became her to maintain the command of her
muscles and joints, and to proceed without faltering or hesitation.
Scarcely had she reached the entrance of the hall,
when, casting anxious looks forward, she beheld a human




figure. No scrutiny was requisite to inform her, that this
was Ormond.
She stopped. He approached her with looks and gestures,
placid but solemn. There was nothing in his countenance
rugged or malignant. On the contrary, there were
tokens of compassion.
So, said he, I expected to meet you. A light, gleaming
from the window, marked you out. This, and Laffert's directions,
have guided me.
What said Constantia, with discomposure in her accent,
was your motive for seeking me?
Have you forgotten, said Ormond, what passed at our
last interview? The evil that I then predicted is at hand.
Perhaps, you were incredulous; you accounted me a madman
or deciever; now I am come to witness the fulfilment
of my words, and the completion of your destiny. To rescue
you, I have not come; that is not within the compass of
human powers.
Poor Constantia! he continued, in tones that manifested
genuine sympathy, look upon thyself as lost. The toils that
beset thee are inextricable. Summon up thy patience to
endure the evil. Now will the last and heaviest trial betide
thy fortitude. I could weep for thee, if my manly nature
would permit. This is the scene of thy calamity, and this
the hour.
These words were adapted to excite curiosity mingled
with terror. Ormond's deportment was of an unexampled
tenor, as well as that evil which he had so ambiguously predicted.
He offered no protection from danger, and yet gave
no proof of being himself an agent or auxiliary. After a
minute's pause, Constantia recovering a firm tone, said:
Mr. Ormond! Your recent deportment but ill accords
with your professions of sincerity and plain dealing. What
your purpose is, or whether you have any purpose, I am at
a loss to conjecture. Whether you most deserve censure
or ridicule, is a point which you afford me not the means of
deciding, and to which, unless on your own account, I am
indifferent. If you are willing to be more explicit, or if
there be any topic on which you wish further to converse,
I will not refuse your company to Laffert's dwelling. Longer
to remain here, would be indiscreet and absurd.







So saying she motioned towards the door. Ormond was
passive, and seemed indisposed to prevent her departure,
till she laid her hand upon the lock. He then, without moving
from his place, exclaimed.
Stay. Must this meeting, which fate ordains to be the last,
be so short? Must a time and place so suitable, for what
remains to be said and done, be neglected or misused? No.
You charge me with duplicity, and deem my conduct either
ridiculous or criminal. I have stated my reasons for concealment,
but these have failed to convince you. Well.
Here is now an end to doubt. All ambiguities are preparing
to vanish.
When Ormond began to speak, Constantia paused to
hearken to him. His vehemence was not of that nature,
which threatened to obstruct her passage. It was by entreaty
that he apparently endeavored to detain her steps, and
not by violence. Hence arose her patience to listen. He
continued.
Constantia! thy father is dead. Art thou not desirous of
detecting the author of his fate? Will it afford thee no consolation
to know that the deed is punished? Wilt thou suffer
me to drag the murderer to thy feet? Thy justice will
be gratified by this sacrifice. Somewhat will be due to him
who avenged thy wrong in the blood of the perpetrator?
What sayest thou? Grant me thy permission, and, in a
moment, I will drag him hither.
These words called up the image of the person, whose
corpse she had lately seen. It was readily conceived that to
him Ormond alluded, but this was the assassin of her father,
and his crime had been detected and punished by Ormond!
These images had no other effect than to urge her departure;
she again applied her hand to the lock, and said;
This scene must not be prolonged. My father's death I
desire not to hear explained or to see revenged, but whatever
information you are willing or able to communicate,
must be deferred.
Nay, interrupted Ormond, with augmented vehemence,
art thou equally devoid of curiosity and justice? Thinkest
thou, that the enmity which bereft thy father of life, will not
seek thy own? There are evils which I cannot prevent




thee from enduring, but there are, likewise, ills which my
counsel will enable thee and thy friend to shun. Save me
from witnessing thy death. Thy father's destiny is sealed;
all that remained was to punish his assassin; but thou and
thy Sophia still live. Why should ye perish by a like stroke?
This intimation was sufficient to arrest the steps of Constantia.
She withdrew her hand from the door, and fixed
eyes of the deepest anxiety on Ormond;—What mean you?
How am I to understand—
Ah! said Ormond, I see thou wilt consent to stay. Thy
detention shall not be long. Remain where thou art during
one moment; merely while I drag hither thy enemy, and
shew thee a visage which thou wilt not be slow to recognise.
Saying this, he hastily ascended the staircase, and quickly
passed beyond her sight.
Deportment thus mysterious, could not fail of bewildering
her thoughts. There was somewhat in the looks and accents
of Ormond, different from former appearances; tokens
of a hidden purpose and a smothered meaning, were perceptible;
a mixture of the inoffensive and the lawless, which
added to the loneliness and silence that encompassed her,
produced a faltering emotion. Her curiosity was overpowered
by her fear, and the resolution was suddenly conceived,
of seizing this opportunity to escape.
A third time she put her hand to the lock and attempted to
open. The effort was ineffectual. The door that was accustomed
to obey the gentlest touch, was now immoveable.
She had lately unlocked and passed through it. Her eager
inspection convinced her that the principal bolt was still withdrawn,
but a smaller one was now perceived, of whose existence
she had not been apprized, and over which her key
had no power.
Now did she first harbor a fear that was intelligible in its
dictates. Now did she first perceive herself sinking in the
toils of some lurking enemy. Hope whispered that this foe
was not Ormond. His conduct had bespoken no willingness
to put constraint upon her steps. He talked not as if
he was aware of this obstruction, and yet his seeming acquiescence
might have flowed from a knowledge that she
had no power to remove beyond his reach.






He warned her of danger to her life, of which he was her
self-appointed rescuer. His counsel was to arm her with
sufficient caution; the peril that awaited her was imminent;
this was the time and place of its occurrence, and here she
was compelled to remain, till the power that fastened, would
condescend to loose the door. There were other avenues
to the hall. These were accustomed to be locked, but Ormond
had found access, and if all continued fast, it was incontestable
that he was the author of this new impediment.
The other avenues were hastily examined. All were
bolted and locked. The first impulse led her to call for
help from without, but the mansion was distant from Laffert's
habitation. This spot was wholly unfrequented. No passenger
was likely to be stationed where her call could be
heard. Besides, this forcible detention might operate for a
short time, and be attended with no mischievous consequences.
Whatever was to come, it was her duty to collect
her courage and encounter it.
The steps of Ormond above now gave tokens of his approach.
Vigilant observance of this man was all that her
situation permitted. A vehement effort restored her to some
degree of composure. Her stifled palpitations allowed her
steadfastly to notice him, as he now descended the stairs,
bearing a lifeless body in his arms. There, said he, as he
cast it at her feet, whose countenance is that? Who would
imagine that features like those, belonged to an assassin and
imposter?
Closed eyelids and fallen muscles, could not hide from
her lineaments so often seen. She shrunk back and exclaimed—
Thomas Craig!
A pause succeeded, in which she alternately gazed at the
countenance of this unfortunate wretch and at Ormond. At
length, the latter exclaimed.
Well, my girl; hast thou examined him? Dost thou recognise
a friend or an enemy?
I know him well; but how came this? What purpose
brought him hither? Who was the author of his fate?
Have I not already told thee that Ormond was his own
avenger and thine? To thee and to me he has been a robber.
To him thy father is indebted for the loss not only of
property but life. Did crimes like these merit a less




punishment? And what recompense is due to him whose vigilance
pursued him hither, and made him pay for his offences
with his blood? What benefit have I received at thy hand
to authorize me, for thy sake, to take away his life?
No benefit received from me, said Constantia, would justify
such an act. I should have abhorred myself for annexing
to my benefits, so bloody a condition. It calls for no
gratitude for recompense. Its suitable attendant is remorse.
That he is a thief, I know but too well; that my father died
by his hand is incredible.—No motives or means—
Why so? interrupted Ormond. Does not sleep seal up
the senses? Cannot closets be unlocked at midnight? Cannot
adjoining houses communicate by doors? Cannot these
doors be hidden from suspicion by a sheet of canvass?
These words were of startling and abundant import. They
reminded her of circumstances in her father's chamber,
which sufficiently explained the means by which his life was
assailed. The closet, and its canvass-covered wall; the adjoining
house untenanted and shut up—but this house, though
unoccupied, belonged to Ormond! From the inferences
which flowed hence, her attention was withdrawn by her
companion, who continued.
Do these means imply the interposal of a miracle? His
motives? What scruples can be expected from a man inured,
from infancy, to cunning and pillage? Will he abstain
from murder when urged by excruciating poverty, by menaces
of persecution; by terror of expiring on the gallows?
Tumultuous suspicions were now awakened in the mind
of Constantia. Her faltering voice scarcely allowed her to
ask; how know you that Craig was thus guilty; that these
were his incitements and means?—
Ormond's solemnity now gave place to a tone of sarcasm
and looks of exultation. Poor Constantia! Thou art still
pestered with incredulity and doubts! My veracity is still in
question! My knowledge, girl, is infallible. That these were
his means of access I cannot be ignorant, for I pointed them
out. He was urged by these motives, for they were stated
and entorced by me. His was the deed, for I stood beside
him when it was done.
These indeed, were terms that stood in no need of further
explanation. The veil that shrouded this formidable being,





was lifted high enough to make him be regarded with inexplicable
horror. What his future acts should be, how his
omens of ill were to be solved, were still involved in uncertainty.

In the midst of fears for her own safety, by which Constantia
was now assailed, the image of her father was revived;
keen regret and vehement upbraiding were conjured up.
Craig then was the instrument, and your's the instigation
that destroyed my father! In what had he offended you?
What cause had he given for resentment?
Cause! replied he, with impetuous accents, Resentment!
None. My motive was benevolent; my deed conferred a
benefit. I gave him sight and took away his life, from motives
equally wise. Know you not that Ormond was fool
enough to set value on the affections of a woman? These
were sought with preposterous anxiety and endless labor.
Among other facilitators of his purpose, he summoned gratitude
to his aid. To snatch you from poverty, to restore his
sight to your father, were expected to operate as incentives
to love.
But here I was the dupe of error. A thousand prejudices
stood in my way. These, provided our intercourse were
not obstructed, I hoped to subdue. The rage of innovation
seized your father; this, blended with a mortal antipathy
to me, made him labor to seduce you from the bosom of
your peaceful country; to make you enter on a boisterous
sea; to visit lands where all is havoc and hostility. To
snatch you from the influence of my arguments.
This new obstacle I was bound to remove. While revolving
the means, chance and his evil destiny, threw Craig in my
way. I soon convinced him that his reputation and his life
were in my hands. His retention of these depended upon
my will, on the performance of conditions which I prescribed.
My happiness and your's, depended on your concurrence
with my wishes. Your father's life was an obstacle to your
concurrence. For killing him, therefore, I may claim your
gratitude. His death was a due and disinterested offering,
at the altar of your felicity and mine.
My deed was not injurious to him. At his age, death,
whose coming, at some period, is inevitable, could not be
distant. To make it unforeseen and brief, and void of pain;




to preclude the torments of a fingering malady; a slow and
visible descent to the grave; was the dictates of beneficence.
But of what value was a continuance of his life? Either
you would have gone with him to Europe, or have staid at
home with me. In the first case, his life would have been
rapidly consumed by perils and cares. In the second, separation
from you, and union with me, a being so detestable,
would equally have poisoned his existence.
Craig's cowardice and crimes, made him a pliant and commodious
tool. I pointed out the way. The unsuspected
door, which led into the closet of your father's chamber,
was made by my direction, during the life of Helena. By
this avenue I was wont to post myself, where all your conversations
could be overheard. By this avenue, an entrance
and retreat were afforded to the agent of my newest purpose.

Fool that I was! I solaced myself with the belief that all
impediments were now smoothed, when a new enemy appeared;
my folly lasted as long as my hope. I saw that to
gain your affections, fortified by antiquated scruples, and obsequious
to the guidance of this new monitor, was impossible.
It is not my way to toil after that which is beyond my reach.
If the greater good be inaccessible, I learn to be contented
with the less.
I have served you with successless sedulity. I have set
an engine in act to obliterate an obstacle to your felicity, and
lay your father at rest. Under my guidance, this engine
was productive only of good. Governed by itself or by
another, it will only work you harm. I have, therefore,
hastened to destroy it. Lo! it is now before you motionless
and impotent.
For this complexity of benefit I look for no reward. I
am not tired of well-doing. Having ceased to labor for an
unattainable good, I have come hither to possess myself of all
that I now crave, and by the same deed to afford you an
illustrious opportunity to signalize your wisdom and your fortitude.

During this speech, the mind of Constantia became more
deeply pervaded with dread of some over-hanging but incomprehensible
evil. The strongest impulse was, to gain a
safe asylum, at a distance from this spot, and from the




presence of this extraordinary being. This impulse was followed
by the recollection, that her liberty was taken away;
that egress from the hall was denied her, and that this restriction
might be part of some conspiracy of Ormond,
against her life.
Security from danger like this, would be, in the first
place, sought, by one of Constantia's sex and opinions, in
flight. This had been rendered, by some fatal chance, or
by the precautions of her foe, impracticable. Stratagem or
force was all that remained, to elude or disarm her adversary.
For the contrivance and execution of frauds, all the
habits of her life and all the maxims of her education, had
conspired to unfit her. Her force of muscles would avail
her nothing, against the superior energy of Ormond.
She remembered that to inflict death, was no iniquitous
exertion of self defence, and that the penknife which she
held in her hand, was capable of this service. She had
used it to remove any lurking obstruction in the wards of
her key, supposing, for a time, this to be the cause of her
failing to withdraw the bolt of the door. This resource,
was, indeed, scarcely less disastrous and deplorable, than
any fate from which it could rescue her. Some uncertainty
still involved the intentions of Ormond. As soon as he
paused, she spoke.
How am I to understand this prelude? Let me know
the full extent of my danger; why it is that I am hindered
from leaving this house, and why this interview was sought.
Ah! Constantia! This, indeed, is merely a prelude to a
scene that is to terminate my influence over thy fate. When
this is past, I have sworn to part with thee forever. Art
thou still dubious of my purpose? Art thou not a woman?
And have I not intreated for thy love, and been rejected?
Canst thou imagine that I aim at thy life? My avowals
of love were sincere; my passion was vehement and undisguised.
It gave dignity and value to a gift in thy power, as
a woman, to bestow. This has been denied. That gift has
lost none of its value in my eyes. What thou refusedst to
bestow, it is in my power to extort. I came for hat end.
When this end is accomplished, I will restore thee to liberty.
These words were accompanied by looks, that rendered
all explanation of their meaning useless. The evil reserved




for her, hitherto obscured by half disclosed and contradictory
attributes, was now sufficiently apparent. The truth
in this respect unveiled itself with the rapidity and brightness
of an electrical flash.
She was silent. She cast her eyes at the windows and
doors. Escape through them was hopeless. She looked at
those lineaments of Ormond which evinced his disdain of
supplication and inexorable passions. She felt that intreaty
and argument would be vain. That all appeals to his compassion
and benevolence would counteract her purpose, since,
in the unexampled conformation of this man's mind, these
principles were made subservient to his most flagitious designs.
Considerations of justice and pity were made, by a
fatal perverseness of reasoning, champions and bulwarks of
his most atrocious mistakes.
The last extremes of opposition, the most violent expedients
for defence, would be justified by being indispensable.
To find safety for her honor, even in the blood of an assailant,
was the prescription of duty. The equity of this
species of defence, was not, in the present confusion of her
mind, a subject of momentary doubt.
To forewarn him of her desperate purpose, would be to
furnish him with means of counteraction. Her weapon
would easily be wrested from her feeble hand. Ineffectual
opposition would only precipitate her evil destiny. A rage,
contented with nothing less than her life, might be awakened
in his bosom. But was not this to be desired? Death,
untimely and violent, was better than the loss of honor.
This thought led to a new series of reflections. She
involuntarily shrunk from the act of killing, but would her
efforts to destroy her adversary be effectual? Would not
his strength and dexterity, easily repel or elude them? Her
power, in this respect, was questionable, but her power
was undeniably sufficient to a different end. The instrument,
which could not rescue her from this injury, by the destruction
of another, might save her from it by her own destruction.

These thoughts rapidly occurred, but the resolution to
which they led, was scarcely formed, when Ormond advanced
towards her. She recoiled a few steps, and, shewing the
knife which she held, said:






Ormond! Beware! Know that my unalterable resolution
is, to die uninjured. I have the means in my power. Stop
where you are; one step more, and I plunge this knife into
my heart. I know that to contend with your strength or
your reason, would be vain. To turn this weapon against
you, I should not fear, if I were sure of success; but to
that I will not trust. To save a greater good by the sacrifice
of life, is in my power, and that sacrifice shall be
made.
Poor Constantia! replied Ormond, in a tone of contempt;
so! thou preferrest thy imaginary honor to life! To escape
this injury without a name or substance. Without connexion
with the past or future; without contamination of thy
purity or thraldom of thy will; thou wilt kill thyself; put
an end to thy activity in virtue's cause; rob thy friend
of her solace; the world of thy beneficence; thyself of
being and pleasure?
I shall be grieved for the fatal issue of my experiment;
I shall mourn over thy martyrdom to the most opprobious
and contemptible of all errors, but that thou shouldst undergo
the trial is decreed. There is still an interval of hope,
that thy cowardice is counterfeited, or that it will give place
to wisdom and courage.
Whatever thou intendest, by way of prevention or cure,
it behoves thee to employ with steadfastness. Die with the
guilt of suicide and the brand of cowardice upon thy memory,
or live with thy claims to felicity and approbation undiminished.
Choose which thou wilt. Thy decision is of
moment to thyself, but of none to me. Living or dead,
the prize that I have in view shall be mine.—
