

Martynne, while he expressed his confidence, that the
experiment would only confirm his triumph, readily assented
to the proposal, and the interview above described
took place accordingly, the next morning. Had he not
been taken by surprise, it is likely the address of a man,
who possessed no contemptible powers, would have extricated
him from some of his embarrassment.
That my portrait should be in the possession of one,
whom I had never before seen, and whose character and
manners entitled him to no respect, was a source of some
surprise. This mode of multiplying faces is extremely
prevalent in this age, and was eminently characteristic of
those with whom I had associated in different parts of
Europe. The nature of my thoughts had modified my
features into an expression, which my friends were pleased
to consider as a model for those who desired to personify
the genius of suffering and resignation.
Hence among those whose religion permitted their devotion
to a picture of a female, the symbols of their chosen
deity were added to features and shape that resembled
mine. My own caprice, as well as that of others, always
dictated a symbolical, and in every new instance, a different
accompaniment of this kind. Hence was offered
the means of tracing the history of that picture which Martynne
possessed.
It had been accurately examined by Miss Ridgeley, and
her description of the frame in which it was placed, instantly
informed me that it was the same which, at our parting, I
left in the possession of Constantia. My friend and myself
were desirous of employing the skill of a Saxon painter, by
name Eckstein. Each of us were drawn by him, she with
the cincture of Venus, and I with the crescent of Dian. This




symbol was still conspicuous on the brow of that image,
which Miss Ridgeley had examined, and served to identify
the original proprietor.
This circumstance tended to confirm my fears that Constantia
was dead, since that she would part with this picture
during her life, was not to be believed. It was of little moment
to discover how it came into the hands of the present
possessor. Those who carried her remains to the grave,
had probably torn it from her neck and afterwards disposed
of it for money.
By whatever means, honest or illicit, it had been acquired
by Martynne, it was proper that it should be restored to
me. It was valuable to me, because it had been the property
of one whom I loved, and it might prove highly injurious
to my fame and my happiness, as the tool of this man's
vanity, and the attester of his falsehood. I, therefore, wrote
him a letter, acquainting him with my reasons for desiring
the repossession of this picture, and offering a price for it,
at least double its value, as a mere article of traffic. Martynne
accepted the terms. He transmitted the picture, and
with it a note, apologizing for the artifice of which he had
been guilty, and mentioning, in order to justify his acceptance
of the price which I had offered, that he had lately
purchased it for an equal sum of a goldsmith in Philadelphia.

This information suggested a new reflection. Constantia
had engaged to preserve, for the use of her friend, copious
and accurate memorials of her life. Copies of these were,
on suitable occasions, to be transmitted to me, during my
residence abroad. These I had never received, but it was
highly probable that her punctuality, in the performance of
the first part of her engagement, had been equal to my own.
What, I asked, had become of these precious memorials?
In the wreck of her property were these irretrievably ingulfed?
It was not probable that they had been wantonly
destroyed. They had fallen, perhaps, into hands careless
or unconscious of their value, or still lay, unknown and neglected,
at the bottom of some closet or chest. Their recovery
might be effected by vehement exertions, or by
some miraculous accident. Suitable inquiries, carried on
among those who were active in those scenes of calamity,




might afford some clue by which the fate of the Dudleys,
and the disposition of their property, might come into fuller
light. These inquiries could be made only in Philadelphia,
and thither, for that purpose, I now resolved to repair.
There was still an interval of some weeks, before the departure
of the packet in which I proposed to embark.
Having returned to the capital, I devoted all my zeal to
my darling project. My efforts, however, were without
success. Those who administered charity and succor
during that memorable season, and who survived, could remove
none of my doubts, nor answer any of my inquiries.
Innumerable tales, equally disastrous with those which Miss
Ridgeley had heard, were related; but, for a considerable
period, none of their circumstances were sufficiently accordant
with the history of the Dudleys.
It is worthy of remark, in how many ways, and by what
complexity of motives, human curiosity is awakened and
knowledge obtained. By its connexion with my darling
purpose, every event in the history of this memorable pest,
was earnestly sought and deeply pondered. The powerful
considerations which governed me, made me slight
those punctilious impediments, which, in other circumstances,
would have debarred me from intercourse with the
immediate actors and observers. I found none who were
unwilling to expatiate on this topic, or to communicate the
knowledge they possessed. Their details were copious in
particulars, and vivid in minuteness. They exhibited the
state of manners, the diversified effects of evil or heroic
passions, and the endless forms which sickness and poverty
assume in the obscure recesses of a commercial and populous
city.
Some of these details are too precious to be lost. It is
above all things necessary that we should be thoroughly acquainted
with the condition of our fellow-beings. Justice
and compassion are the fruit of knowledge. The misery
that overspreads so large a part of mankind, exists chiefly
because those who are able to relieve it do not know that
it exists. Forcibly to paint the evil, seldom fails to excite
the virtue of the spectator, and seduce him into wishes, at
least, if not into exertions of beneficence.
The circumstances in which I was placed were, perhaps,




wholly singular. Hence the knowledge I obtained was
more comprehensive and authentic than was possessed by
any one, even of the immediate actors or sufferers. This
knowledge will not be useless to myself or to the world.
The motives which dictated the present narrative, will hinder
me from relinquishing the pen, till my fund of observation
and experience be exhausted. Meanwhile, let me
resume the thread of my tale.
The period allowed me before my departure was nearly
expired, and my purpose seemed to be as far from its accomplishment
as ever. One evening I visited a lady, who
was the widow of a physician, whose disinterested exertions
had cost him his life. She dwelt with pathetic earnestness
on the particulars of her own distress, and listened with
deep attention to the inquiries and doubts which I laid before
her.
After a pause of consideration, she said, that an incident
like that related by me, she had previously heard from one
of her friends, whose name she mentioned. This person
was one of those whose office consisted in searching out the
sufferers, and affording them unsought and unsolicited relief.
She was offering to introduce me to this person, when
he entered the apartment.
After the usual compliments, my friend led the conversation
as I wished. Between Mr. Thompson's tale and that
related to Miss Ridgeley, there was an obvious resemblance.
The sufferers resided in an obscure alley. They had shut
themselves up from all intercourse with their neighbors, and
had died, neglected and unknown. Mr. Thompson was
vested with the superintendence of this district, and had
passed the house frequently without suspicion of its being
tenanted.
He was at length informed by one of those who conducted
a hearse, that he had seen the window in the upper story of
this house lifted, and a female shew herself. It was night,
and the hearseman chanced to be passing the door. He
immediately supposed that the person stood in need of his
services, and stopped.
This procedure was comprehended by the person at the
window, who, leaning out, addressed him in a broken and




feeble voice. She asked him why he had not taken a different
route, and upbraided him for inhumanity in leading
his noisy vehicle past her door. She wanted repose, but
the ceaseless rumbling of his wheels would not allow her the
sweet respite of a moment.
This invective was singular, and uttered in a voice which
united the utmost degree of earnestness, with a feebleness
that rendered it almost inarticulate. The man was at a loss
for a suitable answer. His pause only increased the impatience
of the person at the window, who called upon him, in
a still more anxious tone, to proceed, and entreated him to
avoid this alley for the future.
He answered that he must come whenever the occasion
called him. That three persons now lay dead in this alley,
and that he must be expeditious in their removal, but that
he would return as seldom and make as little noise as possible.
He was interrupted by new exclamations and upbraidings.
These terminated in a burst of tears, and assertions, that
God and man were her enemies. That they were determined
to destroy her, but she trusted that the time would
come when their own experience would avenge her wrongs,
and teach them some compassion for the misery of others.
Saying this, she shut the window with violence, and retired
from it sobbing with a vehemence, that could be distinctly
overheard by him in the street.
He paused for some time, listening when this passion
should cease. The habitation was slight, and he imagined
that he heard her traversing the floor. While he staid, she
continued to vent her anguish in exclamations and sighs, and
passionate weeping. It did not appear that any other person
was within.
Mr. Thompson being next day informed of these incidents,
endeavored to enter the house, but his signals, though loud
and frequently repeated, being unnoticed, he was obliged to
gain admission by violence. An old man, and a female,
lovely in the midst of emaciation and decay, were discovered
without signs of life. The death of the latter appeared to
have been very recent.
In examining the house, no traces of other inhabitants
were to be found. Nothing, serviceable as food, was discovered,
but the remnants of mouldy bread scattered on a





table. No information could be gathered from neighbors
respecting the condition and name of these unfortunate
people. They had taken possession of this house, during
the rage of this malady, and refrained from all communication
with their neighbors.
There was too much resemblance between this and the
story formerly heard, not to produce the belief that they
related to the same persons. All that remained was to
obtain directions to the proprietor of this dwelling, and exact
from him all that he knew respecting his tenants.
I found in him a man of worth and affability. He readily
related, that a man applied to him for the use of this house,
and that the application was received. At the beginning of
the pestilence, a numerous family inhabited this tenement,
but had died in rapid succession. This new applicant was
the first to apprize him of this circumstance, and appeared
extremely anxious to enter on immediate possession.
It was intimated to him that danger would arise from the
pestilential condition of the house. Unless cleansed and
purified, disease would be unavoidably contracted. The
inconvenience and hazard, this applicant was willing to encounter,
and, at length, hinted that no alternative was allowed
him, by his present landlord, but to lie in the street or to
procure some other abode.
What was the external appearance of this person?
He was infirm, past the middle age, of melancholy aspect,
and indigent garb. A year had since elapsed, and more
characteristic particulars had not been remarked, or were
forgotten. The name had been mentioned, but in the midst
of more recent and momentous transactions, had vanished
from remembrance. Dudley, or Dolby, or Hadley, seemed
to approach more nearly than any other sounds.
Permission to inspect the house was readily granted. It
had remained, since that period, unoccupied. The furniture
and goods were scanty and wretched, and he did not care
to endanger his safety, by meddling with them. He believed
that they had not been removed or touched.
I was insensible of any hazard which attended my visit,
and, with the guidance of a servant, who felt as little apprehension
as myself, hastened to the spot. I found nothing but




tables and chairs. Clothing was nowhere to be seen. An
earthen pot, without handle, and broken, stood upon the
kitchen hearth. No other implement or vessel for the preparation
of food, appeared.
These forlorn appearances were accounted for by the
servant, by supposing the house to have been long since
rifled of every thing worth the trouble of removal, by the
villains who occupied the neighboring houses; this alley, it
seems, being noted for the profligacy of its inhabitants.
When I reflected that a wretched hovel like this, had
been, probably, the last retreat of the Dudleys, when I
painted their sufferings, of which the numberless tales of
distress, of which I had lately been an auditor, enabled me
to form an adequate conception, I felt as if to lie down and
expire on the very spot where Constantia had fallen, was
the only sacrifice to friendship, which time had left to me.
From this house I wandered to the field, where the dead
had been promiscuously and by hundreds, interred. I counted
the long series of graves, which were closely ranged,
and, being recently levelled, exhibited the appearance of a
harrowed field. Methought I could have given thousands,
to know in what spot the body of my friend lay, that I
might moisten the sacred earth with my tears. Boards hastily
nailed together, formed the best receptacle, which the
exigencies of the time could grant to the dead. Many
corpses were thrown into a single excavation, and all distinctions
founded on merit and rank, were obliterated.
The father and child had been placed in the same cart,
and thrown into the same hole.
Despairing, by any longer stay in the city, to effect my
purpose, and the period of my embarkation being near, I
prepared to resume my journey. I should have set out the
next day, but a family, with whom I had made acquaintance,
expecting to proceed to New York within a week, I consented
to be their companion, and, for that end, to delay
my departure.
Meanwhile, I shut myself up in my apartment, and pursued
avocations, that were adapted to the melancholy tenor
of my thoughts. The day, preceding that appointed for
my journey, arrived. It was necessary to complete my




arrangements with the family, with whom I was to travel, and
to settle with the lady, whose apartments I occupied.
On how slender threads does our destiny hang! Had not
a momentary impulse tempted me to sing my favorite ditty
to the harpsichord, to beguile the short interval, during which
my hostess was conversing with her visiter in the next
apartment, I should have speeded to New York, have embarked
for Europe, and been eternally severed from my
friend, whom I believed to have died in phrenzy and beggary,
but who was alive and affluent, and who sought me
with a diligence, scarcely inferior to my own. We imagined
ourselves severed from each other, by death or by impassable
seas, but, at the moment when our hopes had sunk to
the lowest ebb, a mysterious destiny conducted our footsteps
to the same spot.
I heard a murmuring exclamation; I heard my hostess
call, in a voice of terror, for help; I rushed into the room;
I saw one stretched on the floor, in the attitude of death;
I sprung forward and fixed my eyes upon her countenance;
I clasped my hands and articulated—Constantia!—
She speedily recovered from her swoon. Her eyes
opened, she moved, she spoke. Still methought it was an
illusion of the senses, that created the phantom. I could
not bear to withdraw my eyes from her countenance. If
they wandered for a moment, I fell into doubt and perplexity,
and again fixed them upon her, to assure myself of her
existence.
The succeeding three days were spent in a state of dizziness
and intoxication. The ordinary functions of nature
were disturbed. The appetite for sleep and for food were
confounded and lost, amidst the impetuosities of a master passion.
To look and to talk to each other, afforded enchanting
occupation for every moment. I would not part from her
side, but eat and slept, walked, and mused, and read, with
my arm locked in her's, and with her breath fanning my
cheek.
I have indeed much to learn. Sophia Courtland has never
been wise. Her affections disdain the cold dictates of discretion,
and spurn at every limit, that contending duties and
mixed obligations prescribe.
And yet, O! precious inebriation of the heart! O!




preeminent love! What pleasure of reason or of sense, can
stand in competition with those attendant upon thee?—
Whether thou hiest to the fanes of a benevolent deity, or
layest all thy homage at the feet of one, who most visibly
resembles the perfections of our Maker, surely thy sanction
is divine; thy boon is happiness!—
