

After a night of repose rather than of sleep, I began
the search after my friend. I went to the house which the
Dudleys formerly inhabited, and which had been the asylum
of my infancy. It was now occupied by strangers, by
whom no account could be given of its former tenants. I
obtained directions to the owner of the house. He was equally
unable to satisfy my curiosity. The purchase had been
made at a public sale, and terms had been settled not with
Dudley, but with the sheriff.
It is needless to say, that the history of Craig's imposture
and its consequences, were confirmed by every one
who resided at that period in New York. The Dudleys
were well remembered, and their disappearance, immediately
after their fall, had been generally noticed, but whither they
had retired, was a problem which no one was able to solve.
This evasion was strange. By what motives the Dudleys
were induced to change their ancient abode, could be
vaguely guessed. My friend's grandfather was a native of
the West Indies. Descendants of the same stock still resided
in Tobago. They might be affluent, and to them it was
possible, that Mr. Dudley, in this change of fortune, had betaken
himself for relief. This was a mournful expedient,
since it would raise a barrier between my friend and myself
scarcely to be surmounted.
Constantia's mother was stolen by Mr. Dudley from a
convent at Amiens. There were no affinities, therefore, to
draw them to France. Her grandmother was a native of
Baltimore, of a family of some note, by name Ridgeley.
This family might still exist, and have either afforded an
asylum to the Dudleys, or, at least, be apprised of their destiny.
It was obvious to conclude that they no longer





existed within the precincts of New York. A journey to Baltimore
was the next expedient.
This journey was made in the depth of winter, and by the
speediest conveyance. I made no more than a day's sojourn
in Philadelphia. The epidemic by which that city had
been lately ravaged, I had not heard of it till my arrival in
America. Its devastations were then painted to my fancy
in the most formidable colors. A few months only had
elapsed since its extinction, and I expected to see numerous
marks of misery and depopulation.
To my no small surprise, however, no vestiges of this calamity
were to be discerned. All houses were open, all
streets thronged, and all faces thoughtless or busy. The
arts and the amusements of life seemed as sedulously cultivated
as ever. Little did I then think what had been, and
what, at that moment, was the condition of my friend. I
stopped for the sake of respite from fatigue, and did not, therefore,
pass much time in the streets. Perhaps, had I walked
seasonably abroad, we might have encountered each other,
and thus have saved ourselves from a thousand anxieties.
At Baltimore I made myself known, without the formality
of introduction, to the Ridgeleys. They acknowledged
their relationship to Mr. Dudley, but professed absolute ignorance
of his fate. Indirect intercourse only had been
maintained, formerly, by Dudley with his mother's kindred.
They had heard of his misfortune, a twelvemonth after it
happened, but what measures had been subsequently pursued,
their kinsman had not thought proper to inform them.
The failure of this expedient almost bereft me of hope.
Neither my own imagination nor the Ridgeleys, could suggest
any new mode by which my purpose was likely to be
accomplished. To leave America, without obtaining the
end of my visit, could not be thought of without agony, and
yet the continuance of my stay promised me no relief from
my uncertainties.
On this theme I ruminated without ceasing. I recalled
every conversation and incident of former times, and
sought in them a clue, by which my present conjectures
might be guided. One night, immersed alone in my chamber,
my thoughts were thus employed. My train of meditation
was, on this occasion, new. From the review of




particulars from which no satisfaction had hitherto been gained,
I passed to a vague and comprehensive retrospect.
Mr. Dudley's early life, his profession of a painter, his
zeal in this pursuit, and his reluctance to quit it, were remembered.
Would he not revert to this profession, when
other means of subsistence were gone. It is true, similar
obstacles with those which had formerly occasioned his resort
to a different path, existed at present, and no painter of
his name was to be found in Philadelphia, Baltimore, or New
York. But would it not occur to him, that the patronage
denied to his skill, by the frugal and unpolished habits of his
countrymen, might with more probability of success, be
sought from the opulence and luxury of London? Nay, had
he not once affirmed in my hearing, that if he ever were reduced
to poverty, this was the method he would pursue?
This conjecture was too bewitching to be easily dismissed.
Every new reflection augmented its force. I was suddenly
raised by it from the deepest melancholy to the region of
lofty and gay hopes. Happiness, of which I had began to
imagine myself irretrievably bereft, seemed once more to
approach within my reach. Constantia would not only be
found, but be met in the midst of those comforts which her
father's skill could not fail to procure, and on that very stage
where I most desired to encounter her. Mr. Dudley had
many friends and associates of his youth in London. Filial
duty had repelled their importunities to fix his abode in Europe,
when summoned home by his father. On his father's
death these solicitations had been renewed, but were disregarded
for reasons, which he, afterwards, himself confessed,
were fallacious. That they would, a third time be preferred,
and would regulate his conduct, seemed to me incontestable.
I regarded with wonder and deep regret, the infatuation
that had hitherto excluded these images from my understanding
and my memory. How many dangers and toils had I
endured since my embarkation at Naples, to the present
moment? How many lingering minutes had I told since my
first interview with Courtland? All were owing to my own stupidity.
Had my present thoughts been seasonably suggested,
I might long since have been restored to the embraces of
my friend, without the necessity of an hour's separation
from my husband.






These were evils to be repaired as far as it was possible.
Nothing now remained but to procure a passage to Europe.
For this end diligent inquiries were immediately set on foot.
A vessel was found, which, in a few weeks, would set out upon
the voyage. Having bespoken a conveyance, it was incumbent
on me to sustain with patience the unwelcome delay.
Meanwhile, my mind, delivered from the dejection and
perplexities that lately haunted it, was capable of some attention
to surrounding objects. I marked the peculiarities
of manners and language in my new abode, and studied the
effects which a political and religious system, so opposite to
that with which I had conversed, in Italy and Switzerland,
had produced. I found that the difference between Europe
and America, lay chiefly in this; that, in the former, all
things tended to extremes, whereas, in the latter, all things
tended to the same level. Genius, and virtue, and happiness
on these shores, were distinguished by a sort of mediocrity.
Conditions were less unequal, and men were strangers
to the heights of enjoyment and the depths of misery, to
which the inhabitants of Europe are accustomed.
I received friendly notice and hospitable treatment from
the Ridgeleys. These people were mercantile and plodding
in their habits. I found in their social circle, little exercise
for the sympathies of my heart, and willingly accepted their
aid to enlarge the sphere of my observation.
About a week before my intended embarkation, and when
suitable preparation had been made for that event, a lady arrived
in town, who was cousin to my Constantia. She had
frequently been mentioned in favorable terms, in my hearing.
She had passed her life, in a rural abode with her father,
who cultivated his own domain, lying forty miles from Baltimore.

On an offer being made to introduce us to each other, I
consented to know one whose chief recommendation, in my
eyes, consisted in her affinity to Constantia Dudley. I found
an artless and attractive female, unpolished and undepraved
by much intercourse with mankind. At first sight, I was
powerfully struck by the resemblances of her features to
those of my friend, which sufficiently denoted their connexion
with a common stock.






The first interview afforded mutual satisfaction. On our
second meeting, discourse insensibly led to the mention of
Miss Dudley, and of the design which had brought me to
America. She was deeply affected by the earnestness with
which I expatiated on her cousin's merits, and by the proofs
which my conduct had given of unlimited attachment.
I dwelt immediately on the measures which I had hitherto
ineffectually pursued to trace her footsteps, and detailed the
grounds of my present belief, that we should meet in London.
During this recital, my companion sighed and wept.
When I finished my tale, her tears, instead of ceasing, flowed
with new vehemence. This appearance excited some
surprise, and I ventured to ask the cause of her grief.
Alas! She replied, I am personally a stranger to my
cousin, but her character has been amply displayed to me
by one who knew her well. I weep to think how much she
has suffered. How much excellence we have lost!
Nay, said I, all her sufferings will, I hope, be compensated,
and I by no means consider her as lost. If my search in
London be unsuccessful, then shall I indeed despair.
Despair then, already, said my sobbing companion, for
your search will be unsuccessful. How I feel for your disappointment!
but it cannot be known too soon. My cousin
is dead!
These tidings were communicated with tokens of sincerity
and sorrow, that left me no room to doubt that they were
believed by the relater. My own emotions were suspended
till interrogations had obtained a knowledge of her reasons
for crediting this fatal event, and till she had explained the
time and manner of her death. A friend of Miss Ridgeley's
father had witnessed the devastations of the yellow fever in
Philadelphia. He was apprised of the relationship that subsisted
between his friend and the Dudleys. He gave a minute
and circumstantial account of the arts of Craig. He
mentioned the removal of my friends to Philadelphia, their
obscure and indigent life, and finally, their falling victims to
the pestilence.
He related the means by which he became apprised of
their fate, and drew a picture of their death, surpassing all
that imagination can conceive of shocking and deplorable.





The quarter where they lived was nearly desolate. Their
house was shut up, and, for a time, imagined to be uninhabited.
Some suspicions being awakened, in those who superintended
the burial of the dead, the house was entered, and
the father and child discovered to be dead. The former
was stretched upon his wretched pallet, while the daughter
was found on the floor of the lower room, in a state that denoted
the sufferance, not only of disease, but of famine.
This tale was false. Subsequent discoveries proved this
to be a detestable artifice of Craig, who, stimulated by incurable
habits, had invented these disasters, for the purpose of
enhancing the opinion of his humanity, and of furthering his
views on the fortune and daughter of Mr. Ridgeley.
Its falsehood, however, I had as yet no means of ascertaining.
I received it as true, and at once dismissed all my
claims upon futurity. All hopes of happiness, in this mutable
and sublunary scene, was fled. Nothing remained, but
to join my friend in a world, where woes are at an end and
virtue finds recompense. Surely, said I, there will sometime
be a close to calamity and discord. To those whose
lives have been blameless, but harassed by inquietudes, to
which not their own, but the errors of others have given birth,
a fortress will hereafter be assigned unassailable by change,
impregnable to sorrow.
O! my ill-fated Constantia! I will live to cherish thy
remembrance, and to emulate thy virtue. I will endure
the privation of thy friendship and the vicissitudes that shall
befall me, and draw my consolation and courage, from the
foresight of no distant close to this terrestrial scene, and of
ultimate and everlasting union with thee.
This consideration, though it kept me from confusion
and despair, could not, but with the healing aid of time, render
me tranquil or strenuous. My strength was unequal to
the struggle of my passions. The ship in which I engaged
to embark, could not wait for my restoration to health, and I
was left behind.
Mary Ridgeley was artless and affectionate. She saw
that her society was dearer to me than that of any other and
was therefore seldom willing to leave my chamber. Her
presence, less on her own account, than by reason of her




personal resemblance, and her affinity by birth to Constantia,
was a powerful solace.
I had nothing to detain me longer in America. I was
anxious to change my present lonely state, for the communion
of those friends, in England, and the performance of
those duties, which were left to me. I was informed that a
British Packet, would shortly sail from New York. My frame
was sunk into greater weakness, than I had felt at any former
period; and I conceived, that to return to New York, by
water, was more commodious than to perform the journey
by land.
This arrangement was likewise destined to be disappointed.
One morning I visited, according to my custom, Mary
Ridgeley. I found her in a temper somewhat inclined to
gaiety. She rallied me, with great archness, on the care
with which I had concealed from her a tender engagement,
into which I had lately entered.
I supposed myself to comprehend her allusion, and, therefore,
answered that accident rather than design, had made
me silent on the subject of marriage. She had hitherto
known me by no appellation, but Sophia Courtland. I had
thought it needless to inform her, that I was indebted for my
name to my husband, Courtland being his name.
All that, said my friend, I know already, and so you sagely
think that my knowledge goes no farther than that? We
are not bound to love our husbands longer than their lives.
There is no crime, I believe, in preferring the living to the
dead, and most heartily do I congratulate you on your present
choice.
What mean you? I confess your discourse surpasses
my comprehension.
At that moment the bell at the door rung a loud peal.
Miss Ridgeley hastened down at this signal, saying, with much
significance—
I am a poor hand at solving a riddle. Here comes one who,
if I mistake not, will find no difficulty in clearing up your
doubts.
Presently, she came up, and said, with a smile of still
greater archness;—Here is a young gentleman, a friend of
mine, to whom I must have the pleasure of introducing you.




He has come for the special purpose of solving my riddle.—
I attended her to the parlor without hesitation.
She presented me, with great formality, to a youth, whose
appearance did not greatly prepossess me in favor of his
judgment. He approached me with an air, supercilious and
ceremonious, but the moment he caught a glance at my
face, he shrunk back, visibly confounded and embarrassed.
A pause ensued, in which Miss Ridgeley had opportunity to
detect the error into which she had been led, by the vanity
of this young man.
How now, Mr. Martynne, said my friend, in a tone of ridicule,
is it possible you do not know the lady who is the
queen of your affections, the tender and indulgent fair one,
whose portrait you carry in your bosom; and whose image
you daily and nightly bedew with your tears and kisses?
Mr. Martynne's confusion instead of being subdued by his
struggle, only grew more conspicuous, and after a few incoherent
speeches and apologies, during which he carefully
avoided encountering my eyes, he hastily departed.
I applied to my friend, with great earnestness, for an explanation
of this scene. It seems that, in the course of conversation
with him, on the preceding day, he had suffered
a portrait which hung at his breast, to catch Miss Ridgeley's
eye. On her betraying a desire to inspect it more nearly,
he readily produced it. My image had been too well copied
by the artist, not to be instantly recognised.
She concealed her knowledge of the original, and by
questions, well adapted to the purpose, easily drew from
him confessions that this was the portrait of his mistress.
He let fall sundry innuendoes and surmises, tending to impress
her with a notion of the rank, fortune and intellectual
accomplishments of the nymph, and particularly of the doating
fondness and measureless confidence, with which she
regarded him.
Her imperfect knowledge of my situation, left her in some
doubt as to the truth of these pretensions, and she was willing
to ascertain the truth, by bringing about an interview.
To guard against evasions and artifice in the lover, she carefully
concealed from him her knowledge of the original, and
merely pretended that a friend of her's, was far more beautiful
than her whom this picture represented. She added,




that she expected a visit from her friend the next morning,
and was willing, by shewing her to Mr. Martynne, to convince
him how much he was mistaken, in supposing the perfections
of his mistress unrivalled.
