

In a short time the lady retired. I naturally expected
that some comments would be made on her behavior, and
that the cause of her surprise and distress on seeing me,
would be explained, but Welbeck said nothing on that subject.
When she had gone, he went to the window and stood
for some time occupied, as it seemed, with his own thoughts.
Then he turned to me, and, calling me by my name, desired
me to accompany him up stairs. There was neither cheerfulness
nor mildness in his address, but neither was there
any thing domineering or arrogant.
We entered an apartment on the same floor with my
chamber, but separated from it by a spacious entry. It was
supplied with bureaus, cabinets, and book-cases. “This,”
said he, “is your room and mine; but we must enter it and
leave it together. I mean to act not as your master but your
friend. My maimed hand,” so saying he shewed me his
right hand, the forefinger of which was wanting, “will not
allow me to write accurately or copiously. For this reason
I have required your aid, in a work of some moment. Much
haste will not be requisite, and as to the hours and duration
of employment, these will be seasonable and short.
“Your present situation is new to you and we will therefore
defer entering on our business. Meanwhile you may




 amuse yourself in what manner you please. Consider this
house as your home and make yourself familiar with it.
Stay within or go out, be busy or be idle, as your fancy shall
prompt: only you will conform to our domestic system as
to eating and sleep; the servants will inform you of this.
Next week we will enter on the task for which I designed
you. You may now withdraw.”
I obeyed this mandate with some awkwardness and hesitation.
I went into my own chamber not displeased with an
opportunity of loneliness. I threw myself on a chair and
resigned myself to those thoughts which would naturally
arise in this situation. I speculated on the character and
views of Welbeck. I saw that he was embosomed in tranquillity
and grandeur. Riches, therefore, were his; but in
what did his opulence consist, and whence did it arise?
What were the limits by which it was confined, and what its
degree of permanence? I was unhabituated to ideas of
floating or transferable wealth. The rent of houses and
lands was the only species of property which was, as yet,
perfectly intelligible. My previous ideas led me to regard
Welbeck as the proprietor of this dwelling and of numerous
houses and farms. By the same cause I was fain to suppose
him enriched by inheritance, and that his life had been
uniform.
I next adverted to his social condition. This mansion
appeared to have but two inhabitants besides servants. Who
was the nymph who had hovered for a moment in my sight?
Had he not called her his daughter? The apparent difference
in their ages would justify this relation; but her guise,
her features, and her accents were foreign. Her language
I suspected strongly to be that of Italy. How should he be
the father of an Italian? But were there not some foreign
lineaments in his countenance?
This idea seemed to open a new world to my view. I
had gained from my books, confused ideas of European
governments and manners. I knew that the present was a
period of revolution and hostility. Might not these be illustrious
fugitives from Provence or the Milanese? Their
portable wealth, which may reasonably be supposed to be
great, they have transported hither. Thus may be




 explained the sorrow that veils their countenance. The loss of
estates and honors; the untimely death of kindred, and perhaps
of his wife, may furnish eternal food for regrets. Welbeck's
utterance, though rapid and distinct, partook, as I
conceived, in some very slight degree of a foreign idiom.
Such was the dream that haunted my undisciplined and
unenlightened imagination. The more I revolved it, the
more plausible it seemed. On this supposition every appearance
that I had witnessed was easily solved—unless it
were their treatment of me. This, at first, was a source of
hopeless perplexity. Gradually, however, a clue seemed to
be afforded. Welbeck had betrayed astonishment on my
first appearance. The lady's wonder was mingled with
distress. Perhaps they discovered a remarkable resemblance
between me and one who stood in the relation of
son to Welbeck, and of brother to the lady. This youth
might have perished on the scaffold or in war. These, no
doubt, were his clothes. This chamber might have been
reserved for him, but his death left it to be appropriated to
another.
I had hitherto been unable to guess at the reason why all
this kindness had been lavished on me. Will not this conjecture
sufficiently account for it? No wonder that this
resemblance was enhanced by assuming his dress.
Taking all circumstances into view, these ideas were not,
perhaps, destitute of probability. Appearances naturally
suggested them to me. They were, also, powerfully enforced
by inclination. They threw me into transports of
wonder and hope. When I dwelt upon the incidents of my
past life, and traced the chain of events, from the death of
my mother to the present moment, I almost acquiesced in
the notion that some beneficent and ruling genius had prepared
my path for me. Events which, when foreseen,
would most ardently have been deprecated, and when they
happened were accounted in the highest degree luckless,
were now seen to be propitious. Hence I inferred the
infatuation of despair, and the folly of precipitate conclusions.

But what was the fate reserved for me? Perhaps Welbeck
would adopt me for his own son. Wealth has ever





 been capriciously distributed. The mere physical relation
of birth is all that entitles us to manors and thrones. Identity
itself frequently depends upon a casual likeness or an
old nurse's imposture. Nations have risen in arms, as in
the case of the Stewarts, in the cause of one, the genuineness
of whose birth has been denied, and can never
be proved. But if the cause be trivial and fallacious, the
effects are momentous and solid. It ascertains our portion
of felicity and usefulness, and fixes our lot among peasants
or princes.
Something may depend upon my own deportment. Will
it not behove me to cultivate all my virtues and eradicate all
my defects? I see that the abilities of this man are venerable.
Perhaps he will not lightly or hastily decide in my
favor. He will be governed by the proofs that I shall
give of discernment and integrity. I had always been exempt
from temptation, and was therefore undepraved, but
this view of things had a wonderful tendency to invigorate
my virtuous resolutions. All within me was exhilaration
and joy.
There was but one thing wanting to exalt me to a dizzy
height, and give me place among the stars of heaven. My
resemblance to her brother had forcibly affected this lady;
but I was not her brother. I was raised to a level with her
and made a tenant of the same mansion. Some intercourse
would take place between us. Time would lay level impediments
and establish familiarity, and this intercourse
might foster love and terminate in—marriage!
These images were of a nature too glowing and expansive
to allow me to be longer inactive. I sallied forth into
the open air. This tumult of delicious thoughts in some
time subsided, and gave way to images relative to my present
situation. My curiosity was awake. As yet I had
seen little of the city, and this opportunity for observation
was not to be neglected. I therefore coursed through several
streets, attentively examining the objects that successively
presented themselves.
At length, it occurred to me to search out the house in
which I had lately been immured. I was not without hopes
that at some future period I should be able to comprehend




 the allusions, and brighten the obscurities that hung about
the dialogue of last night.
The house was easily discovered. I reconnoitred the
court and gate through which I had passed. The mansion
was of the first order in magnitude and decoration. This
was not the bound of my present discovery, for I was gifted
with that confidence which would make me set on foot inquiries
in the neighborhood. I looked around for a suitable
medium of intelligence. The opposite and adjoining houses
were small, and apparently occupied by persons of an indigent
class. At one of these was a sign denoting it to be
the residence of a tailor. Seated on a bench at the door
was a young man, with coarse uncombed locks, breeches
knee-unbuttoned, stockings ungartered, shoes slip-shod and
unbuckled, and a face unwashed, gazing stupidly from hollow
eyes. His aspect was embellished with good nature
though indicative of ignorance.
This was the only person in sight. He might be able to
say something concerning his opulent neighbor. To him,
therefore, I resolved to apply. I went up to him, and,
pointing to the house in question, asked him who lived
there?
He answered, “Mr. Mathews.”
“What is his profession,—his way of life?”
“A gentleman. He does nothing but walk about.”
“How long has he been married?”
“Married! He is not married as I know on. He never
has been married. He is a bachelor.”
This intelligence was unexpected. It made me pause to
reflect whether I had not mistaken the house. This, however,
seemed impossible. I renewed my questions.
“A bachelor, say you? Are you not mistaken?”
“No. It would be an odd thing if he was married. An
old fellow, with one foot in the grave—Comical enough
for him to git a vife.”
“An old man? Does he live alone? What is his
family?”
“No, he does not live alone. He has a neice that lives
with him. She is married, and her husband lives there too.”
“What is his name?”
“I don't know. I never heard it as I know on.”






“What is his trade?”
“He's a marchant; he keeps a store somewhere or
other; but I don't know where.”
“How long has he been married?”
“About two years. They lost a child lately. The young
woman was in a huge taking about it. They say she was
quite crazy some days for the death of the child; and she
is not quite out of the dumps yet. To be sure the child
was a sweet little thing; but they need not make such a
rout about it. I'll warn they'll have enough of them before
they die.”
“What is the character of the young man? Where was
he born and educated? Has he parents or brothers?”
My companion was incapable of answering these questions,
and I left him with little essential addition to the
knowledge I already possessed.
