
As I walk'd through
the wilderness of this
world, I lighted on a
certain place, where
was a Denn; And I
laid me down in that
place to sleep: And as I slept I dreamed
a Dream. I dreamed, and behold
I saw a Man *  cloathed with
Raggs, standing in a certain place,
with his face from his own House, a
Book in his hand, and a great burden
upon his back. I looked, and saw him
open the Book, and Read therein;
and as he Read, he wept and trembled:
and not being able longer to

contain, he brake out with a lamentable
cry; saying, what shall I do?
I saw also that he looked this way,
and that way, as if he would run;
yet he stood still, because as I perceived,
he could not tell which way
to go. I looked then, and saw a Man
named Evangelist coming to him, and
asked, Wherefore dost thou cry? He
answered, Sir, I perceive, by the
Book, in my hand, that I am Condemned
to die, and *  after that to
come to Judgement; and I find that
I am not *  willing to do the first, nor
*  able to do the second.
Then said Evangelist, Why not
willing to die? since this life is attended
with so many evils? The Man
answered, Because I fear that this
burden that is upon my back, will
sinck me lower then the Grave; and
I shall fall into *  Tophet. And Sir, if
I be not fit to go to Prison, I am not
fit (I am sure) to go to Judgement,
and from thence to Execution; And
the thoughts of these things make me
cry.
Then said Evangelist, If this be
thy condition, why standest thou still
He answered, Because I know not

whither to go. Then he gave him
a Parchment-Roll, and there was
written within, *  Fly from the wrath
to come.
The Man therefore Read it, and
looking upon Evangelist very carefully;
said, Whither must I fly? Then
said Evangelist, pointing with his
finger over a very wide Field, Do
you see yonder *  Wicket-gate? The
Man said, No. Then said the other,
Do you see yonder *  shining light?
He said, I think I do. Then said Evangelist,
Keep that light in your eye,
and go up directly thereto, ** Christ & the way to him cannot be found without the word. so
shalt thou see the Gate; at which
when thou knockest, it shall be told
thee what thou shalt do.
So I saw in my Dream, that the
Man began to run; Now he had not
run far from his own door, but his
Wife and Children perceiving it, began
to cry after him to return: *  but
the Man put his fingers in his Ears,
and ran on crying, Life, Life, Eternal
Life: so he looked not behind
him, *  but fled towards the middle
of the Plain.
The Neighbours also came out to
** They that fly from the wrath to come are A Gazing-Stock to the world. Jer. 20.10. see him run, and as he ran, some

mocked, others threatned; and some
cried after him to return: Now among
those that did so, there were
two that were resolved to fetch him
back by force: The name of the one
was Obstinate, and the name of the
other Pliable. Now by this time the
Man was got a good distance from
them; But however they were resolved
to pursue him; which they did,
and in little time they over-took him.
Then said the Man, Neighbours,
Wherefore are you come? They said, To
perswade you to go back with us; but
he said, That can by no means be:
You dwell, said he, in the City of
Destruction (the place also where I
was born,) I see it to be so; and dying
there, sooner or later, you will
sink lower then the Grave, into a
place that burns with Fire and Brimstone;
Be content good Neighbours,
and go along with me.
** Obstinate. What! said Obstinate, and leave
our Friends, and our comforts behind
us!
** Christian Yes, said Christian, (for that was
his name) because that all is not
*  worthy to be compared with a little
of that that I am seeking to enjoy,

and if you will go along with me,
you shall fare as I my self; for there
where I go, is *  enough, and to spare;
Come away, and prove my words.
Obst. What are the things you seek,
since you leave all the World to find them?
Chr. I seek an *  Inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fadeth
not away; and it is laid up in Heaven,
and fast there, to be bestowed at the
time appointed,*  on them that diligently
seek it.
Ob. Tush, said Obstinate, away with
your Book; will you go back with us, or
no?
Ch. No, not I, said the other; because
I have laid my hand to the
*  Plow.
Ob. Come then, Neighbour Pliable,
let us turn again, and go home without
him; There is a Company of these
Craz'd-headed Coxcombs, that when
they take a fancy by the end, are wiser
in their own eyes then seven men that
can render a Reason.
Pli. Then said Pliable, Don't revile;
if what the good Christian says
is true, the things he looks after, are
better then ours: my heart inclines
to go with my Neighbour.

Obst. What! more Fools still? Be
ruled by me and go back, who knows
whither such a brain-sick fellow will
lead you? Go back, go back, and be
wise.
Ob. Come with me Neighbour
Pliable; there are such things to be
had which I spoke of, and many
more Glories besides. If you believe
not me, read here in this Book, and
for the truth of what is exprest therein,
behold all is confirmed by the
†  blood of him that made it.
Pli. Well Neighbour Obstinate (said
Pliable) I begin to come to a point; I
intend to go along with this good man,
and to cast in my lot with him: But
my good Companion, do you know the
way to this desired place?
Ch. I am directed by a man whose
name is Evangelist: to speed me to a
little Gate that is before us, where
we shall receive instruction about the
way.
Pli. Come then good Neighbour, let
us be going.
Then they went both togethnr.
Obst. And I will go back to my
place, said Obstinate. I will be no
Companion of such miss-led fantastical
Fellows.

Now I saw in my Dream, that
when Obstinate was gon back, Christian
and Pliable went ** Talk between Christian, and Pliable. talking over
the Plain; and thus they began their
discourse.
Christ, Come Neighbour Pliable,
how do you do? I am glad your are
perswaded to go along with me; and
had even Obstinate himself, but felt
what I have felt of the Powers and
Terrours of what is yet unseen, he
would not thus lightly have given us
the back.
Pliable. Come Neighbour Christian,
since there is none but us two here, tell
me now further, what the things are,
and how to be enjoyed, whither we are
going?
Ch. I can better conceive of them
with my Mind, then speak of them
with my Tongue: But yet since you
are desirous to know, I will read of
them in my Book.
Pli. And do you think that the words
of your Book are certainly true?
Ch. Yes verily, for it was made
by him that †  cannot lye.
Plia: Well said; what things are
they?
Ch. There is an *  endless Kingdom

to be Inhabited,  and everlasting life
to be given us; that we may Inhabit
that Kingdom for ever.
Pli. Well said; and what else?
Chr. There are Crowns of Glory
to be given us; †  and Garments that
will make us shine like the Sun in the
Firmament of Heaven.
Plia. This is excellent; And what
else?
Ch. There shall be no more crying,
*  nor sorrow; For he that is owner
of the places, will wipe all tears
from our eyes:
Pli. And what company shall we have
there?
Ch. There we shall be with Seraphims,
*  and Cherubins, Creatures that
will dazle your eyes to look on them:
There also you shall meet with thousands,
and ten thousands that have
gone before us to that place; none
of them are hurtful, but loving, and
holy: every one walking in the sight
of God; and standing in his presence
with acceptance for ever: In a
word, there we shall see the †  Elders
with their Golden Crowns: There
we shall see the Holy †  Virgins with
their Golden Harps. There we

shall see a  Men that by the World
were cut in pieces, burned in flames;
eaten of Beasts, drownded in the
Seas, for the love that they bare to
the Lord of the place; all well, and
cloathed with b  Immortality, as with
a Garment.
Pli. The hearing of this is enough to
ravish ones heart; but are these things
to be enjoyed? how shall we get to be
Sharers hereof?
Ch. The Lord, the Governour of
that Countrey, hath Recorded that
c  in this Book: The substance of
which is, If we be truly willing to
have it, he will bestow it upon us
freely.
Pli. Well, my good Companion, glad
am I to hear of these things; Come on,
let us mend our pace.
Ch. I cannot go so fast as I would,
by reason of this burden that is upon
my back.
Now I saw in my Dream, that just
as they had ended this talk, they
drew near to a very Miry Slough, that
was in the midst of the Plain, and
they being heedless, did both fall
suddenly into the bogg. The name
of the Slow was Dispond. Here therefore

they wallowed for a time, being
grieviously bedaubed with the
dirt; And Christian, because of the
burden that was on his back, began
to sink in the Mire.
Pli. Then said Pliable, Ah, Neighbour
Christian, where are you now?
Ch. Truly, said Christian, I do not
know.
Pli. At that, Pliable began to be
offended; and angerly said to his
Fellow, Is this the happiness you have
told me all this while of? if we have such
ill speed at our first setting out, what
may we expect, 'twixt this, and our
Journeys end? dd It is not enough to be Pliable. May I get out again
with my life, you shall possess the brave
Country alone for me. And with that
he gave a desperate struggle or two,
and got out of the Mire, on that
side of the Slough which was next to
his own House: So away he went,
and Christian saw him no more.
Wherefore Christian was left to tumble
in the Slough of Dispondency alone,
but still he endeavoured to struggle
to that side of the Slough, that was still
further ee Christian in trouble, seeks still to get further from his own House. from his own House, and
next to the Wicket-gate; the which
he did, but could not get out, because

of the burden that was upon
his back. But I beheld in my Dream,
that a Man came to him, whose
name was Help, and asked him, What
he did there?
Chr. Sir, said Christian, I was directed
this way by a Man called Evangelist;
who directed me also to
yonder Gate, that I might escape
the wrath to come: And as I was going
thither, I fell in here.
Help. But why did you not look for
ff The Promises. the steps?
Ch. Fear followed me so hard, that
I fled the next way, and fell in.
Help. Give me thy hand. So he gave
him his hand, and g  he drew him out,
and set him upon sound ground, and
bid him go on his way.
Then I stepped to him that pluckt
him out; and said; Sir, Wherefore
(since over this place, is the way from
the City of Destruction, to yonder
Gate) is it, that this Plac is not mended,
that poor Travellers might go
thither with more security? And he
said unto me; this Miry slough is such
a place as cannot be mended: It is
the descent whither the scum and
filth that attends conviction for sin,

continually run, and therefore is it
called the Slough of Dispond: for still as
the sinner is awakened about his lost
condition, there ariseth in his soul
many fears, and doubts, and discouraging
apprehensions, which all
of them get together, and settle in
this place: And this is the reason of
the badness of this ground.
It is not the h  pleasure of the King,
that this place should remain so bad;
his Labourers also, have by the direction
of His Majesties Surveyors,
been for above this sixteen hundred
years, imploy'd about this patch of
ground, if perhaps it might have
been mended: yea, and to my knowledge,
saith he, Here hath been swallowed
up, at least. Twenty thousand
Cart Loads; Yea Millions of
wholesom Instructions, that have at
all seasons been brought from all
places of the Kings Dominions, (and
they that can tell, say, they are
the best Materials to make good
ground of the place) If so be it might
have been mended, but it is the Slough
of Dispond still; and so will be; when
they have done what they can.
True, there are by the direction of

the Law-giver, certain good and
substantiall ii The Promises of forgiveness and acceptance to life by faith in Christ. Steps, placed even
through the very midst of this Slough;
but at such time as this place doth
much spue out its filth, as it doth against
change of weather, these steps
are hardly seen; or if they be, Men
through the diziness of their heads,
step besides; and then they are bemired
to purpose, notwithstanding
the steps be there; but the ground is
k  good when they are once got in at
the Gate.
Now I saw in my Dream, that by
this time Pliable was got home to
his House again. So his Neighbours
came to visit him; and some of them
called him wise Man for coming
back; and some called him Fool, for
hazarding himself with Christian:
others again did mock at his Cowardliness;
saying, Surely since you
began to venture, I would not have
been so base to have given out for a
few difficulties. So Pliable sat sneaking
among them. But at last he got
more confidence, and then they all
turned their tales, and began to deride
poor Christian behind his back.
And thus much concerning Pliable.

By this time Christian was got up
to the Gate. Now over the Gate
there was Written, Knock and it shall
be opened unto you. l  He knocked
therefore, more then once or twice,
saying,

May I now enter here? will he within
Open to sorry me, though I have bin
An undeserving Rebel? then shall I
Not fail to sing his lasting praise on high
At last there came a grave Person to
the Gate, named Good-will, who asked
Who was there? and whence he came?
and what he would have?
Ch. Here is a poor burdened sinner,
I come from the City of Destruction,
but am going to Mount Zion, that I
may be delivered from the wrath to
come; I would therefore, Sir, since
I am informed that by this Gate is the
way thither, know if you are willing
to let me in.
Good Will. mm The Gate will be opened to broken-hearted sinners. I am willing with all
my heart, said he; and with that he
opened the Gate.
So when Christian was stepping in,
the other gave him a pull; Then said
Christian, What means that? The other

told him, A little distance from
this Gate, there is erected a strong
Castle, of which nn Satan envies those that enter the straight Gate. Beelzebub is the
Captain: from thence both he, and
them that are with him shoot Arrows
at those that come up to this
Gate; if happily they may dye before
they can enter in. Then said
Christian, I rejoyce and tremble. So
when he was got in, the Man of the
Gate asked him, Who directed him
thither?
Ch. Evangelist bid me come hither
and knock, (as I did;) And he said, that
you, Sir, would tell me what I must
do.
Good Will. An open Door is set before
thee, and no man can shut it.
Ch. Now I begin to reap the benefits
of my hazzards.
Good Will. But how is it that you
came alone?
Ch. Because none of my Neighbours
saw their danger, as I saw
mine.
Good Will. Did any of them know
of your coming?
Ch. Yes, my Wife and Children
saw me at the first, and called after
me to turn again: Also some of my

Neighbours stood crying, and calling
after me to return; but I put my
Fingers in mine Ears, and so came
on my way.
Good Will. But did none of them
follow you, to perswade you to go back?
Ch. Yes, both Obstinate, and Pliable:
But when they saw that they
could not prevail, Obstinate went
railing back; but Pliable came with
me a little way.
Good Will. But why did he not come
through?
Ch. We indeed came both together,
until we came at the Slow of Dispond,
into the which, we also suddenly fell.
And then was my Neighbour Pliable
discouraged, and would not adventure
further. oo A Man may have Company when he sets out for Heaven. & yet go thither alone. Wherefore getting out
again, on that side next to his own
House; he told me, I should possess
the brave Countrey alone for him:
So he went his way, and I came mine.
He after Obstinate, and I to this Gate.
Good Will. Then said Good Will,
Alass poor Man, is the Cælestial Glory
of so small esteem with him, that he
counteth it not worth running the
hazards of a few difficulties to obtain
it. Well, good Christian, come

a little way with me, and I will teach
thee about the way thou must go.
Look before thee; dost thou see this
narrow way? That is the way thou
must go. It was cast up by the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Christ, his Apostles;
and it is as straight as a Rule can
make it: This is the way thou must go.
Ch. But said Christian, Is there no
turnings nor windings by which a
Stranger may loose the way?
Good Will. Yes, there are many
ways Butt down upon this; and they
are Crooked, and Wide: But thus
thou may'st distinguish the right from
the wrong, That only being straight
and narrow.
Then I saw in my Dream, That
Christian asked him further, If he
could not help him off with his burden
that was upon his back; For as
yet he had not got rid thereof, nor
could he by any means get it off
without help.
He told him; As to the burden, be
content to bear it, untill thou comest
to the place of pq There is no deliverance from the guilt, and burden of sin, but by the death & blood of Christ. Deliverance; for
there it will fall from thy back it self.
Then Christian began to gird up
his loins, and to address himself to

Journey. So the other told him, that
by that he was gone some distance
from the Gate, he would come at
the House of the Interpreter; at
whose Door he should knock; and he
would shew him excellent things.
Then Christian took his leave of his
Friend, and he again bid him, God
speed.
Then he went on, till he came at
the House of the qq Christian comes to the House of the Interpreter. Interpreter, where
he knocked over and over: at last
one came to the Door, and asked
Who was there?
Ch. Sir, here is a Travailer, who
was bid by an acquaintance of the
Good-man of this House, to call
here for my profit: I would therefore
speak with the Master of the House:
so he called for the Master of the
House; who after a little time came
to Christian, and asked him what he
would have?
Ch. Sir, said Christian, I am a
Man that am come from the City of
Destruction, and am going to the
Mount Zion, and I was told by the
Man that stands at the Gate, at the
head of this way, That if I called
here, you would shew me excellent

things, rr He is entertained. such as would be an help
to me in my Journey.
Inter. Then said the Interpreter,
ss Illumination. Come in, I will shew thee that which
will be profitable to thee. So he commanded
his Man to light the Candle,
and bid Christian follow him; so he
had him into a private Room, and
bid his Man open a Door; the which
when he had done, tt Christian sees a brave Picture. Christian saw a
Picture of a very grave Person hang
up against the Wall, and this was the
fashion of it. uu The fashion of the Picture. It had eyes lift up to
Heaven, the best of Books in its hand,
the Law of Truth was written upon its
lips, the World was behind his back; it
stood as if it Pleaded with Men, and a
Crown of Gold did hang over its head.
Ch. Then said Christian, What means
this?
Inter. The man whose Picture this
is, is one of a thousand, he can x  beget
Children, Travel in birth with
Children, and y  Nurse them himself,
when they are born. And whereas
thou seest z  him with eyes lift up to
Heaven, the best of Books in his hand,
and the Law of Truth writ on his
lips: it is to shew thee, that his work
is to know and unfold dark things

to sinners; even as also thou seest
aa The meaning of the Picture. him stand as if he Pleaded with
Men: And whereas thou seest the
World as cast behind him, and that a
Crown hangs over his head; that is,
to shew thee that slighting and despising
the things that are present,
for the love that he hath to his Masters
service, he is sure in the World
that comes next to have Glory for
his Reward: Now, said the Interpreter,
I have shewed thee this Picture,
first, bb Why he shewed him the Picture first. because the Man whose Picture
this is, is the only Man, whom the
Lord of the Place whither thou art
going, hath Authorized, to be thy
Guide in all difficult places thou
mayest meet with in the way: wherefore
take good heed to what I have
shewed thee, and bear well in thy
mind what thou hast seen; lest in thy
Journey, thou meet with some that
pretend to lead thee right, but their
way goes down to death.
Then he took him by the hand, and
led him into a very large Parlour
that was full of dust, because never
swept; the which, after he had reviewed
a little while, the Interpreter
called for a man to sweep: Now

when he began to sweep, the dust began
so abundantly to fly about, that
Christian had almost therewith been
choaked: Then said the Interpreter to
a Damsel that stood by, Bring hither
Water, and sprinkle the Room; which
when she had done, was swept and
cleansed with pleasure.
Ch. Then said Christian, What means
this?
In. The Interpreter answered;
This Parlor is the heart of a Man
that was never sanctified by the sweet
Grace of the Gospel: The dust, is
his Original Sin, and inward Corruptions
that have defiled the whole
Man; He that began to sweep at
first, is the Law; but She that brought
water, and did sprinkle it, is the Gospel:
Now, whereas thou sawest that
so soon as the first began to sweep, the
dust did so fly about that the
Room by him could not be cleansed,
but that thou wast almost choaked
therewith. This is to shew thee, that
the Law, instead of cleansing the
heart (by its working) from sin, d 
doth revive, put e  strength into, and
f  increase it in the soul, as it doth

discover and forbid it, but doth not
give power to subdue.
Again, as thou sawest the Damsel
sprinkle the Room with Water, upon
which it was cleansed with pleasure:
This is to shew thee, that when the
Gospel comes in the sweet and precious
influences thereof to the heart,
then I say, even as thou sawest the
Damsel lay the dust by sprinkling
the Floor with Water, so is sin vanquished
and subdued, and the soul
made clean, through the Faith of it;
and consequently g  fit for the King of
Glory to inhabit.
I saw moreover in my Dream, hh He shewed him Passion & Patience.
that the Interpreter took him by the
hand, and had him into a little Room;
where sat two little Children, each
one in his Chair: The name of the
eldest was Passion, and of the other
Patience; Passion seemed to be much
discontent, but Patience was very
quiet. Then Christian asked, What
is the reason of the discontent of
Passion?Passionwill have it now. The Interpreter answered,
The Governour of them would have
him stay for his best things till the
beginning of the next year; but he
will have all now: ii Patience is for waiting. But Patience is
willing to wait.

Then I saw that one came to kk Passion has his desire. Passion,
and brought him a Bag of Treasure,
and poured it down at his feet;
the which he took up, and rejoyced
therein; and withall, laughed Patience
to scorn: But I beheld but a
while, and he had ll And quickly lavishes all away. lavished all away,
and had nothing left him but
Rags.
Ch. Then said Christian to the Interpreter, mm The matter expounded. Expound this matter more
fully to me.
In. So he said, These two Lads are
Figures; Passion, of the Men of this
World; and Patience, of the Men of
that which is to come: For as here
thou seest, Passion will have all now,
this year; that is to say, in this World;
So are the Men of this World: they
must have all their good things now,
they cannot stay till next Year; that
is, until the next World, for their
Portion of good. That Proverb, A
n  Bird in the Hand is worth two in the
Bush, is of more Authority with
them, then are all the Divine Testimonies
of the good of the World to
come. But as thou sawest, that he
had quickly lavished all away, and
had presently left him, nothing but

Raggs; So will it be with all such
Men at the end of this World.
Ch. Then said Christian, Now I see
that Patience has the best oo Patience has the best Wisdom. Wisdom;
and that upon many accounts. 1. Because
he stays for the best things. 2. And
also because he will have the Glory of
His, when the other hath nothing but
Raggs.
In. Nay, you may add another;
to wit, The glory of the next World
will never wear out; but these are
suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had
not so much reason to laugh at Patience,
because he had his good things
first, as Patience will have to laugh
at Passion, pp Things that are first must give place, but things that are last, are lasting. because he had his best
things last; for first must give place to
last, because last must have his time
to come, but last gives place to nothing;
for there is not another to succeed:
he therefore that hath his Portion
first, must needs have a time to
spend it; but he that has his Portion
last, must have it lastingly. Therefore
it is said of q  Dives, In thy lifetime
thou hadest, or receivedest thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things; But now he is comforted, and
thou are tormented.

Ch. Then I perceive, 'tis not best to
covet things that are now; but to wait
for things to come.
In. You say the Truth; r  For the
things that are seen, are Temporal; but
the things that are not seen, are Eternal:
But though this be so; yet since things
present, and our fleshly appetite, are
such near Neighbours one to another;
and again, because things to come,
and carnal sense, are such strangers
one to another: therefore it is, that
the first of these so suddenly fall into
amity, and that distance is so continued
between the second.
Then I saw in my Dream, that the
Interpreter took Christian by the
hand, and led him into a place,
where was a Fire burning against a
Wall, and one standing by it always,
casting much Water upon it to quench
it: Yet did the Fire burn higher and
hotter.
Then said Christian, What means
this?
The Interpreter answered, This
fire is the work of Grace that is
wrought in the heart; he that casts
Water upon it, to extinguish and put
it out, is the Devil: but in that thou

seest the fire notwithstanding burn
higher and hotter, thou shalt also
see the reason of that: So he had him
about to the back side of the Wall,
where he saw a Man with a Vessel of
Oyl in his hand, of the which he did
also continually cast, but secretly, into
the fire. Then said Christian, What
means this? The Interpreter answered,
This is Christ, who continually
with the Oyl of his Grace, maintains
the work already begun in the heart;
By the means of which, notwithstanding
what the Devil can do, the
souls of his People s  prove gracious
still. And in that thou sawest, that
the Man stood behind the Wall to
maintain the fire; this is to teach
thee, that it is hard for the tempted
to see how this work of Grace is
maintained in the soul.
I saw also that the Interpreter took
him again by the hand, and led him
into a pleasant place, where was
builded a stately Palace, beautiful to
behold; at the sight of which, Christian
was greatly delighted; he saw
also upon the top thereof, certain
Persons walked, who were cloathed
all in Gold. Then said Christian, May

we go in thither? Then the Interpreter
took him, and led him up toward
the door of the Palace; and
behold, at the door stood a great
Company of men, as desirous to go
in, but durst not. There also sat a
Man, at a little distance from the
door, at a Table-side, with a Book,
and his Inkhorn before him, to take
the Name of him that should enter
therein: He saw also that in the doorway,
stood many Men in Armour to
keep it; being resolved to do to the
Man that would enter, what hurt and
mischief they could. Now was Christian
somwhat in a muse: at last, when
every Man started back for fear of the
Armed Men; Christian saw a Man of
a very stout countenance come up to
the Man that sat there to write; saying,
Set down my name, Sir, the which
when he had done, he saw the Man
draw his Sword, and put an Helmet
upon his Head, and rush toward the
door upon the Armed Men, who laid
upon him with deadly force; but the
Man, not at all discouraged, fell to
cutting and hacking most fiercely; so,
after he had u  received and given
many wounds to those that attempted

to keep him out, he cut his way
through them all, and pressed forward
into the Palace; at which there
was a pleasant voice heard from
those that were within, even of the
Three that walked upon the top of
the Palace.

Come in, Come in;
Eternal Glory thou shalt win.
So he went in, and was cloathed with
such Garments as they. Then Christian
smiled, and said, I think verily I
know the meaning of this.
Now, said Christian, let me go
hence: Nay stay (said the Interpreter,)
till I have shewed thee a little
more, and after that thou shalt go
on thy way. So he took him by the
hand again, and led him into a very
dark Room, where there sat a Man
in an Ironxx Despair like an Iron Cage. Cage.
Now the Man, to look on, seemed
very sad: he sat with his eyes looking
down to the ground, his hands
folded together; and he sighed as if
he would break his heart. Then said
Christian, What means this? At which
the Interpreter bid him talk with the
Man.
Chr. Then said Christian to the

Man, What art thou? The Man answered,
I am what I was not once.
Chr. What wast thou once?
Man. The Man said, I was once
a fair and flourishing Professor, both
in mine own eyes, and also in the
eyes of others: I once was, as I
thought, fair for the Cœlestial City,
and had then even joy at the thoughts
that I should get thither.
Chr. Well, but what art thou now?
Man. I am now a Man of Despair,
and am shut up in it, as in this Iron
Cage. I cannot get out; O now I
cannot.
Chr. But how camest thou in this
condition?
Man. I left off to watch, and be
sober; I laid the reins upon the neck
of my lusts; I sinned against the light
of the Word, and the goodness of
God: I have grieved the Spirit, and
he is gone; I tempted the Devil, and
he is come to me; I have provoked
God to anger, and he has left me; I
have so hardened my heart, that I
cannot repent.
Then said Christian to the Interpreter,
But is there no hopes for such a
Man as this? Ask him, said the Interpreter?

Nay, said Christian, pray
Sir, do you.
Inter. Then said the Interpreter,
Is there no hope but you must be kept in
this Iron Cage of Despair?
Man. No, none at all.
Inter: Why? the Son of the Blessed
is very pitiful.
Man. I have y  Crucified him to my
self, a fresh. I have despised z  his Person,
I have despised his Righteousness,
I have counted his Blood an unholy
thing, I have done despite a  to the
Spirit of Grace: Therefore I have
shut my self out of all the Promises;
and there now remains to me nothing
but threatnings, dreadful threatnings,
faithful threatnings of certain Judgement,
which shall devour me as an
Adversary.
Inter. For what did you bring your
self into this condition?
Man. For the Lusts, Pleasures, and
Profits of this World; in the injoyment
of which, I did then promise
my self much delight: but now even
every one of those things also bite
me, and gnaw me like a burning
worm.

Inter. But canst thou not now repent
and turn?
Man. God hath denied me repentance;
his Word gives me no encouragement
to believe; yea, himself
hath shut me up in this Iron Cage,
nor can all the men in the World let
me out. O Eternity! Eternity! how
shall I grapple with the misery that I
must meet with in Eternity!
Inter. Then said the Interpreter to
Christian, Let this mans misery be
remembred by thee, and be an everlasting
caution to thee.
Chr. Well, said Christian, this is
fearful; God help me to watch and
be sober; and to pray, that I may
shun the causes of this mans misery.
Sir, is it not time for me to go on my
way now?
Inter. Tarry till I shall shew thee
one thing more, and then thou shalt
go on thy way.
So he took Christian by the hand again,
and led him into a Chamber,
where there was one a rising out of
Bed; and as he put on his Rayment,
he shook and trembled. Then said
Christian, Why doth this Man thus
tremble? The Interpreter then bid

him tell to Christian the reason of his
so doing, So he began, and said. This
night as I was in my sleep, I Dreamed,
and behold the Heavens grew exceeding
black; also it thundred and
lightned in most fearful wise, that it
put me into an Agony.  So I looked
up in my Dream, and saw the Clouds
rack at an unusual rate; upon which
I heard a great sound of a Trumpet,
and saw also a Man sit upon a Cloud,
attended with the thousands of Heaven;
they were all in flaming fire, also
the Heavens was on a burning flame.
I heard then a voice, saying, Arise ye
Dead, and come to Judgement; and
with that, the Rocks rent, the Graves
opened, & the Dead that were therein,
came forth; some of them were
exceeding glad, and looked upward;
and some sought to hide themselves
under the Mountains: Then I saw
the Man that sat upon the Cloud,
open the Book; and bid the World
draw near. Yet there was by reason
of a Fiery flame that issued out and
came from before him, a convenient
distance betwixt him and them, as
betwixt the Judge and the Prisoners
at the Bar. I heard it also proclaimed

to them that attended on the Man
that sat on the Cloud; c Gather together
the Tares, the Chaff, and Stubble,
and cast them into the burning Lake;
and with that, the Bottomless pit opened,
just whereabout I stood; out
of the mouth of which there came in
an abundant manner Smoak, and
Coals of fire, with hideous noises. It
was also said to the same persons;
Gather my Wheat into my Garner.
And with that I saw many catch't up
d  and carried away into the Clouds,
but I was left behind. I also sought
to hide my self, but I could not; for
the Man that sat upon the Cloud, still
kept his eye upon me:  my sins also
came into mind, and my Conscience
did accuse me on every side. Upon
this I awaked from my sleep.
Chr. But what was it that made you
so fraid of this sight?
Man. Why I thought that the day
of Judgement was come, and that I
was not ready for it: but this frighted
me most, that the Angels gathered
up several, and left me behind; also
the pit of Hell opened her mouth
just where I stood: my Conscience too
within afflicted me; and as I thought,

the Judge had always his eye upon
me, shewing indignation in his countenance.
Then said the Interpreter to Christian,
Hast thou considered all these
things?
Chri. Yes, and they put me in
hope and fear.
Inter. Well, keep all things so in thy
mind, that they may be as a Goad in
thy sides, to prick thee forward in the
way thou must go. Then Christian
began to gird up his loins, and to address
himself to his Journey. Then
said the Interpreter, The Comforter
be always with thee good Christian,
to guide thee in the way that leads
to the City.
So Christian went on his way, saying,

Here I have seen things rare, and profitable;
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable
In what I have began to take in hand:
Then let me think on them, and understand
Wherefore they shewed me was, and let me be
Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee.

Now I saw in my Dream, that
the high way up which Christian was
to go, was fenced on either side with
a Wall, and that Wall is called Salvation.
Up this way therefore did
burdened Christian run, but not without
great difficulty, because of the
load on his back.
He ran thus till he came at a place
somewhat ascending; and upon that
place stood a Cro&esset;, and a little below
in the bottom, a Sepulcher. So
I saw in my Dream, that just as
Christian came up with the Cross, his
burden loosed from off his Shoulders,
and fell from off his back; and began
to tumble, and so continued to
do, till it came to the mouth of the
Sepulcher, where it fell in, and I saw
it no more.
Then was Christian glad ee When God releases us of our guilt and burden, we are as those that leap for joy. and
lightsom, and said with a merry heart,
He hath given me rest, by his sorrow;
and life, by his death. Then he stood
still a while, to look and wonder; for
it was very surprizing to him, that
the sight of the Cross should thus
ease him of his burden. He looked
therefore, and looked again, even
till the springs that were in his head

sent the f  waters down his cheeks.
Now as he stood looking and weeping,
behold three shining ones came
to him, and saluted him, with Peace
be to thee: so the first said to him, Thy
sins be forgiven. The second, stript
him of his Rags, and cloathed him
with change of Raiment. The third
also set a mark in his fore-head,
and gave him a Roll with a Seal upon
it, which he bid him look on as he
ran, and that he should give it in at
the Cœlestial Gate: so they went their
way. Then Christian gave three
leaps for joy, and went out singing,

Thus far did I come loaden with my sin;A Christian can sing tho alone, when God doth give him the joy of his heart
Nor could ought ease the grief that I was in,
Till I came hither: What a place is this!
Must here be the beginning of my bliss!
Must here the burden fall from off my back?
Must here the strings that bound it to me, crack?
Blest Cross! blest Sepulcher! blest rather be
The Man that there was put to shame for me.

I saw then in my Dream that
he went on thus, even untill he
came at a bottom, where he saw,
a little out of the way, three Men
fast-asleep with Fetters upon their
heels. The name of the one was
aa Simple, Sloth, and Presumption. Simple, another Sloth, and the third
Presumption.
Christian then seeing them lye in
this case, went to them, if peradventure
he might awake them. And
cryed, You are like them that sleep
on the top of a Mast, for the dead
Sea is under you, a Gulf that hath
no bottom: Awake therefore and
come away, be willing also, and I
will help you off with your Irons. He
also told them, If he that goeth about
like a roaring Lion comes by, you
will certainly become a prey to his
teeth. With that they lookt upon
him, and began to reply in this sort:
bb There is no perswasion will do, if God openeth not the eyes. Simple said, I see no danger, Sloth
said, Yet a little more sleep: and Presumption
said, Every Fatt must stand
upon his own bottom, what is the answer
else that I should give thee? And so
they lay down to sleep again, and
Christian went on his way.

Yet was he troubled to think, That
men in that danger should so little
esteem the kindness of him that so
freely offered to help them, both by
awakening of them, counselling of
them, and proffering to help them off
with their Irons. And as he was
troubled there-about, he espied two
Men come tumbling over the Wall,
on the left hand of the narrow way;
and they made up a pace to him. The
name of the one was Formalist, and
the name of the other Hypocrisie. So,
as I said, they drew up unto him,
who thus entered with them into discourse.
Chr. Gentlemen, Whence came you,
and whither do you go?
Form. and Hyp. We were born in
the Land of Vain-glory, and are going
for praise to Mount Sion.
Chr. Why came you not in at the
Gate which standeth at the beginning
of the way? Know you not that it is
written,   That he that cometh not in
by the door, but climbeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a
robber?
Form. and Hyp. They said, That
to go to the Gate for entrance, was

by all their Countrey-men counted
too far about; and that therefore
their usual way was to make a short
cut of it, and to climb over as they
had done.
Chr. But will it not be counted a
Trespass, against the Lord of the City
whither we are bound, thus to violate
his revealed will?
Form. and Hyp. They told him,
dd They that come into the way, but not by the door, think that they can say something in vindication of their own Practice. That as for that, he needed not to
trouble his head thereabout: for what
they did, they had custom for; and
could produce, if need were, Testimony
that would witness it, for
more then a thousand years.
Chr. But, said Christian, Will your
Practice stand a Trial at Law?
Form. & Hyp. They told him, That
Custom, it being of so long a standing,
as above a thousand years,
would doubtless now be admitted as
a thing legal, by any Impartial Judge.
And besides, said they, so be we get
into the way, what's matter which
way we get in; if we are in, we are
in: thou art but in the way, who,
as we perceive, came in at the Gate;
and we are also in the way, that came

tumbling over the wall: Wherein now
is thy condition better then ours?
Chr. I walk by the Rule of my
Master, you walk by the rude working
of your fancies. You are counted
thieves already, by the Lord of the
way; therefore I doubt you will
not be found true men at the end of
the way. You come in by your selves
without his direction, and shall go
out by your selves without his mercy.
To this they made him but little
answer; only they bid him look to
himself. Then I saw that they went
on every man in his way, without
much conference one with another;
save that these two men told Christian,
That, as to Laws and Ordinances,
they doubted not but they should as
conscientiously do them as he. Therefore
said they, We see not wherein
thou differest from us, but by the
Coat that is on thy back, which was,
as we tro, given thee by some of thy
Neighbours, to hide the shame of
thy nakedness.
Chr. By e  Laws and Ordinances,
you will not be saved, since you came
not in by the door. And as for this
Coat that is on my back, it was given

me by the Lord of the place whither
I go; and that, as you say, to cover
my nakedness with. And I take it as
a token of his kindness to me, for I
had nothing but rags before. And
besides, ff Christian has got his Lords Coat on his back and is comforted therewith, he is comforted also with his Mark and his Roll. thus I comfort my self as I
go: Surely, think I, when I come to
the Gate of the City, the Lord thereof
will know me for good, since I
have his Coat on my back; a Coat
that he gave me freely in the day that
he stript me of my rags. I have moreover
a mark in my forehead, of
which perhaps you have taken no
notice, which one of my Lords most
intimate Associates, fixed there in the
day that my burden fell off my
shoulders. I will tell you moreover,
that I had then given me a Roll sealed
to comfort me by reading, as I go in
the way; I was also bid to give it in
at the Cœlestial Gate, in token of
my certain going in after it: all
which things I doubt you want, and
want them, because you came not
in at the Gate.
To these things they gave him no
answer, only they looked upon each
other and laughed. Then I saw that
they went on all, save that Christian

kept before, who had no more talk
but with himself, and that somtimes
sighingly, and somtimes comfortably:
also he would be often reading in the
Roll that one of the shining ones
gave him, by which he was refreshed.
I beheld then, that they all went
on till they came to the foot of an
Hill, gg He comes to the hill Difficulty. at the bottom of which was a
Spring. There was also in the same
place two other ways besides that
which came straight from the Gate;
one turned to the left hand, and the
other to the right, at the bottom of
the Hill: but the narrow way lay
right up the Hill (and the name of
the going up the side of the Hill, is
called Difficulty.) Christian now went
to the Spring and drank thereof to
refresh himself, and then began to go
up the Hill; saying,

This Hill, though high, I covet to ascend;
The difficulty will not me offend;
For I perceive the way to life lies here;
Come, pluck up, Heart; lets neither faint nor fear:
Better, tho difficult, th'right way to go,
Then wrong, though easie, where the end is wo.

The other two also came to the foot
of the Hill. But when they saw that
the Hill was steep and high, and that
there was two other ways to go; and
supposing also, that these two ways
might meet again, with that up which
Christian went, on the other side of
the Hill: Therefore they were resolved
to go in those ways (now the
name of one of those ways was
Danger, and the name of the other
Destruction) So hh The danger of turning out of the way. the one took the
way which is called Danger, which
led him into a great Wood; and the
other took directly up the way to Destruction,
which led him into a wide
field full of dark Mountains, where
he stumbled and fell, and rise no
more.
I looked then after Christian, to see
him go up the Hill, where I perceived
he fell from running to going, and
from going to clambering upon his
hands and his knees, because of the
steepness of the place. Now about
the midway to the top of the Hill,
was a pleasant ii A word of grace. Arbour, made by
the Lord of the Hill, for the refreshment
of weary Travailers. Thither
therefore, Christian got, where also

he sat down to rest him. Then he
pull'd his Roll out of his bosom and
read therein to his comfort; he also
now began afresh to take a review
of the Coat or Garment that was
given him as he stood by the Cross.
Thus pleasing himself a while, he at
last fell into a slumber, and thence
into a fast sleep, which detained him
in that place untill it was almost
night, and in his sleep his ii He that sleeps is a loser. Roll fell
out of his hand. Now as he was sleeping,
there came one to him & awaked
him saying, Go to the Ant, thou sluggard,
consider her ways and be wise:
and with that Christian suddenly started
up, and sped him on his way,
and went a pace till he came to the
top of the Hill.
Now when he was got up to the
top of the Hill, there came two Men
running against him amain; the name
of the one was Timorus, and the name
of the other Mistrust. To whom
Christian said, Sirs, what's the matter
you run the wrong way? Timorus
answered, That they were going to
the City of Zion, and had got up
that difficult place; but, said he, the
further we go, the more danger we

meet with, wherefore we turned, and
are going back again.
Yes, said Mistrust, for just before
us lye a couple of Lyons in the
way, whether sleeping or wakeing
we know not; and we could not
think, if we came within reach, but
they would presently pull us in pieces.
Chr. Then said Christian, You make
me afraid, but whither shall I fly to
be safe? If I go back to mine own
Countrey, That is prepared for Fire
and Brimstone; and I shall certainly
perish there. If I can get to the Cœlestial
City, I am sure to be in safety
there. I must venture: To go back
is nothing but death, to go forward
is fear of death, and life everlasting
beyond it. I will yet go forward. So
Mistrust and Timorus ran down
the Hill; and Christian went on his
way. But thinking again of what he
heard from the men, he felt in his bosom
for his Roll, that he might read
therein and be comforted; but he
felt and kk Christian miss'd his Roll, wherein he used to take comfort. found it not. Then was Christian
in great distress, and knew not
what to do, for he wanted that which
used to relieve him, and that which
should have been his Pass into the

Cœlestial City. Here therefore he began
to be much perplexed, and knew
not what to do, at last he bethought
himself that he had slept in the Arbour
that is on the side of the Hill:
and falling down upon his knees, he
asked God forgiveness for that his
foolish Fact; and then went back to
look for his Roll. But all the way
he went back, who can sufficiently
set forth the sorrow of Christians
heart? somtimes he sighed, somtimes
he wept, and often times he chid
himself, for being so foolish to
fall asleep in that place which was
erected only for a little refreshment
from his weariness. Thus therefore
he went back; carefully looking on
this side, and on that, all the way
as he went, if happily he might find
his Roll, that had been his comfort
so many times in his Journey. He
went thus till he came again within
sight of the Arbour, which he sat
and slept; but that sight renewed
ll Christian bewails his foolish sleeping. Rev. 2.2. his sorrow the more, by bringing
again, even a fresh, his evil of sleeping
unto his mind. Thus therefore
he now went on bewailing his sinful
sleep, saying, O wretched Man that I

am, that I should sleep in the daytime!
that I should sleep in the midst
of difficulty! that I should so indulge
the flesh, as to use that rest for ease
to my flesh, which the Lord of the
Hill hath erected only for the relief
of the spirits of Pilgrims! How many
steps have I took in vain! (Thus it
happened to Israel for their sin, they
were sent back again by the way of
the Red-Sea) and I am made to tread
those steps with sorrow, which I
might have trod with delight, had it
not been for this sinful sleep. How
far might I have been on my way by
this time! I am made to tread those
steps thrice over, which I needed
not to have trod but once: Yea now
also I am like to be benighted, for
the day is almost spent. O that I had
not slept! Now by this time he was
come to the Arbour again, where
for a while he sat down and wept, but
at last (as Christian would have it)
looking sorrowfully down under the
Settle, there he espied his Roll; the
which he with trembling and haste
catch't up, and put it into his bosom;
but who can tell how joyful this Man
was, when he had gotten his Roll again!

For this Roll was the assurance
of his life and acceptance at the desired
Haven. Therefore he laid it
up in his bosom, gave thanks to God
for directing his eye to the place
where it lay, and with joy and tears
betook himself again to his Journey.
But Oh how nimbly now, did he go
up the rest of the Hill! Yet before
he got up, the Sun went down upon
Christian; and this made him again
recall the vanity of his sleeping to his
remembrance, and thus he again began
to condole with himself: Ah thou
sinful sleep! how for thy sake am I like to
be benighted in my Journey! I must
walk without the Sun, darkness must
cover the path of my feet, and I must
hear the noise of doleful Creatures, because
of my sinful sleep! Now also he
remembred the story that Mistrust
and Timorus told him of, how they
were frighted with the sight of the
Lions. Then said Christian to himself
again, These Beasts range in the
night for their prey, and if they should
meet with me in the dark, how should
I shift them! how should I escape being
by them torn pieces? Thus he
went on his way, but while he was

thus bewayling his unhappy miscarriage,
he lift up his eyes, and behold
there was a very stately Palace before
him, the name whereof was
Beautiful, and it stood just by the
High-way side.
So I saw in my Dream, that he
made haste and went forward, that if
possible he might get Lodging there;
now before he had gone far, he entered
into a very narrow passage,
which was about a furlong off of the
Porters Lodge, and looking very
narrowly before him as he went, he
espied two Lions in the way. Now,
thought he, I see the dangers that
Mistrust and Timorus, were driven
back by. (The Lions were Chained,
but he saw not the Chains) Then he
was afraid, and thought also himself
to go back after them, for he thought
nothing but death was before him:
But the Porter at the Lodge, whose
name is m  Watchful, perceiving that
Christian made a halt, as if he would
go back, cried unto him, saying,
Is thy strength so small? fear not the
Lions, for they are Chained: and are
plaed there for trial of faith where it
is; and for discovery of those that

have none: keep in the midst of the
Path, and no hurt shall come unto
thee.
Then I saw that he went on, trembling
for fear of the Lions; but taking
good heed to the directions of
the Porter; he heard them roar, but
they did him no harm. Then he clapt
his hands, and went on, till he came
and stood before the Gate where the
Porter was. Then said Christian to
the Porter, Sir, What house is this?
and may I lodge here to night? The
Porter answered, This House was
built by the Lord of the Hill: and he
built it for the relief and security of
Pilgrims. The Porter also asked
whence he was, and whither he was
going?
Chr. I am come from the City of
Destruction, and am going to Mount
Zion, but because the Sun is now set,
I desire, if I may, to lodge here to
night.
Por. What is your name?
Chr. My name is now Christian;
but my name at the first was Graceless:
I came of the Race of Japhet, whom
God will perswade to dwell in the
Tents of Shem.

Por. But how doth it happen that you
come so late, the Sun is set?
Chr. I had been here sooner, but
that, wretched man that I am! I slept
in the Arbour that stands on the
Hill side; nay, I had notwithstanding
that, been here much sooner, but
that in my sleep I lost my Evidence,
and came without it to the brow of
the Hill; and then feeling for it, and
finding it not, I was forced with sorrow
of heart, to go back to the place
where I slept my sleep, where I found
it, and now I am come.
Por. Well, I will call out one of
the Virgins of this place, who will,
if she likes your talk, bring you in
to the rest of the Family, according
to the Rules of the House. So Watchful
the Porter rang a Bell, at the
sound of which, came out at the
door of the House, a Grave and Beautiful
Damsel, named Discretion, and
asked why she was called.
The Porter answered, This Man is
in a Journey from the City of Destruction
to Mount Zion, but being
weary, and benighted, he asked me
if he might lodge here to night; so I
told him I would call for thee, who

after discourse had with him, mayest
do as seemeth thee good, even according
to the Law of the House.
Then she asked him whence he
was, and whither he was going, and
he told her. She asked him also, how
he got into the way, and he told her;
Then she asked him, What he had
seen, and met with in the way, and
he told her; and last, she asked his
name, so he said, It is Christian; and
I have so much the more a desire to
lodge here to night, because, by
what I perceive, this place was
built by the Lord of the Hill, for the
relief and security of Pilgrims. So
she smiled, but the water stood in
her eyes: And after a little pause,
she said, I will call forth two or three
more of the Family. So she ran to
the door, and called out Prudence,
Piety, and Charity, who after a little
more discourse with him, had him
in to the Family; and many of
them meeting him at the threshold
of the House, said, Come in thou
blessed of the Lord; this House was
built by the Lord of the Hill, on
purpose to entertain such Pilgrims in.
Then he bowed his head, and followed

them into the House. So when he
was come in, and set down, they
gave him somthing to drink; and
consented together that until supper
was ready, some one or two of
them should have some particular
discourse with Christian, for the best
improvement of time: and they appointed
Piety and Prudence to discourse
with him; and thus they
began.
Piety. Come good Christian, since
we have been so loving to you, to receive
you into our House this night; let us,
if perhaps we may better our selves
thereby, talk with you of all things
that have happened to you in your Pilgrimage.
Chr. With a very good will, and I
am glad that you are so well disposed.
Piety What moved you at first to betake
your self to a Pilgrims life?
Chr. I was aa How Christian was driven out of his own Countrey. driven out of my Native
Countrey, by a dreadful sound
that was in mine ears, to wit, That
unavoidable destruction did attend
me, if I abode in that place where I
was.
Piety. But how did it happen that
you came out of your Countrey this way?

Chr. It was as God would have it,
for when I was under the fears of
destruction, I did not know whither
to go; but by chance there came a
Man, even to me, (as I was trembling
and weeping) whose name is
bb How he got into the way to Sion. Evangelist, and he directed me to the
Wicket-Gate, which else I should
never have found; and so set me into
the way that hath led me directly to
this House.
Piety. But did you not come by the
House of the Interpreter?
Chr. Yes, and did see such things
there, the remembrance of which
will stick by me as long as I live;
specially three cc A rehersal of what he saw in the way. things, to wit, How
Christ, in despite of Satan, maintains
his work of Grace in the heart; how
the Man had sinned himself quite out
of hopes of Gods mercy; and also
the Dream of him that thought in
his sleep the day of Judgement was
come.
Piety. Why? Did you hear him tell
his Dream?
Cho. Yes, and a dreadful one it
was. I thought it made my heart ake
as he was telling of it, but yet I am
glad I heard it.

Piety. Was that all that you saw at
the House of the Interpreter?
Chr. No, he took me and had
me where he shewed me a stately
Palace, and how the People were
clad in Gold that were in it; and
how there came a venturous Man,
and cut his way through the armed
men that stood in the door to keep
him out; and how he was bid to come
in, and win eternal Glory. Methought
those things did ravish my heart; I
could have staid at that good Mans
house a twelve-month, but that I
knew I had further to go.
Piety. And what saw you else in the
way?
Chr. Saw! Why I went but a little
further, and I saw one, as I thought
in my mind, hang bleeding upon the
Tree; and the very sight of him made
my burden fall off my back (for I
groaned under a weary burden) but
then it fell down from off me. 'Twas
a strange thing to me, for I never saw
such a thing before: Yea, and while
I stood looking up, (for then I could
not forbear looking) three shining
ones came to me: one of them testified
that my sins were forgiven me;

another stript me of my Rags, and
gave me this Broidred Coat which you
see; and the third set the mark which
you see, in my forehead, and gave
me this sealed Roll (and with that
he plucked it out of his bosom.)
Piety. But you saw more then this,
did you not?
Chr. The things that I have told
you were the best: yet some other
small matters I saw, as namely I saw
three Men, Simple, Sloth, and Presumption,
lye a sleep a little out of
the way as I came, with Irons upon
their heels; but do you think I could
awake them! I also saw Formalist and
Hypocrisie come tumbling over the
wall, to go, as they pretended, to
Sion, but they were quickly lost;
even as I myself did tell them, but they
would not believe: but, above all, I
found it hard work to get up this Hill,
and as hard to come by the Lions
mouths; and truly if it had not been
for the good Man, the Porter that
stands at the Gate, I do not know,
but that after all, I might have gone
back again: but now I thank God I
am here, and I thank you for receiving
of me.

Then Prudence thought good to
ask him a few questions, and desired
his answer to them.
Pru. Do you not think somtimes of
the Countrey from whence you came?
Chr. Yes, dd Christians thoughts of his Native Countrey. but with much shame
and detestation; Truly, if I had been
mindful of that Countrey from whence I
came out, I might have had opportunity
to have returned, but now I desire a
better Countrey, that is, an Heavenly. 
Pru. Do you not yet bear away with you
some of the things that then you were
conversant withal?
Chr. Yes, but greatly against my
will; especially my inward and
ee Christian distasted with carnal cogitations. carnal cogitations; with which all
my Countrey-men, as well as my self,
were delighted, but now all those
things are my grief: and might I but
chuse mine own things, I would
ff Christians choice. chuse never to think of those things
more; but when I would be doing of
that which is best, that which is worst
is with me.
Pru. Do you not find sometimes,
as if those things were vanquished,
which at other times are your perplexity.
Chr. Yes, but that is but seldom,

but they are to me gg Christians golden hours Golden hours,
in which such things happens to me.
Pru. Can you remember by what
means you find your anoyances at times,
as if they were vanquished?
Chr. Yes, when hh How Christian gets power against his corruptions. I think what I
saw at the Cross, that will do it; and
when I look upon my Broidered
Coat, that will do it; also when I
look into the Roll that I carry in my
bosom, that will do it; and when
my thoughts wax warm about whither
I am going, that will do it.
Pru. And what is it that makes you
so desirous to go to Mount Zion?
Chr. Why,i Why Christian would be at Mount Zion. there I hope to see
him alive, that did hang dead on the
Cross; and there I hope to be
rid of all those things, that to this
day are in me, an anoiance to me;
there they say there is no death, and
there I shall dwell with such Company
as I like best. For to tell you
truth, I love him, because I was by him
eased of my burden, and I am weary
of my inward sickness; I would fain
be where I shall die no more, and
with the Company that shall continually
cry Holy, Holy, Holy.
Now I saw in my Dream, that thus

they sat talking together untill supper
was ready. So when they had
made ready, they sat down to meat;
Now the Table was furnished kk What Christian had to his supper. with
fat things, and with Wine that was
well refined; and all their talk ll Their talk at supper time at
the Table, was about the Lord of the
Hill: As namely, about what he had
done, and wherefore he did what he
did, and why he had builded that
House: and by what they said, I
perceived that he had been a great
Warriour, and had fought with and
slain him that had the power of
death, but not without great danger
to himself, which made me love
him the more.
For, as they said, and as I believe
(said Christian) he did it with the
loss of much blood; but that which
put Glory of Grace into all he did,
was, that he did it of pure love to
his Countrey. And besides, there
were some of them of the House
hold that said, they had seen and
spoke with him since he did dye on
the Cross; and they have attested,
that they had it from his own lips,
that he is such a lover of poor Pilgrims,

that the like is not to be found from
the East to the West
They moreover gave an instance
of what they affirmed, and that was,
He had stript himself of his glory that
he might do this for the Poor; and
that they heard him say and affirm,
That he would not dwell in the
Mountain of Zion alone. They said
moreover, That he had made many
Pilgrims aa Christ makes Princes of Beggars. Princes, though by nature
they were Beggars born, and their
original had been the Dunghil.
Thus they discoursed together till
late at night, and after they had
committed themselves to their Lord
for Protection, they betook themselves
to rest. The Pilgrim they laid
in a large upper bb Christians Bed-Chamber. Chamber, whose
window opened towards the Sun rising;
the name of the Chamber was
Peace, where he slept till break of
day; and then he awoke and sang,

Where am I now! is this the love and care
Of Jesus, for the men that Pilgrims are!
Thus to provide! That I should be forgiven!
And dwell already the next door to Heaven.

So in the Morning they all got up,
and after some more discourse, they
told him that he should not depart,
till they had shewed him the Rarities
of that place. And first they had him
into the Study, cc Christian had into the Study, and what he saw there. where they shewed
him Records of the greatest Antiquity;
in which, as I remember my
Dream, they shewed him first the
Pedigree of the Lord of the Hill,
that he was the Son of the Ancient
of Days, and came by an eternal
Generation. Here also was more
fully Recorded the Acts that he had
done, and the names of many hundreds
that he had taken into his
service; and how he had placed them
in such Habitations that could neither
by length of Days nor decaies
of Nature, be dissolved.
Then they read to him some of
the worthy Acts that some of his Servants
had done. As how they had
subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness,
obtained Promises, stopped
the mouths of Lions, quenched the
d  violence of Fire, escaped the edge
of the Sword; out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant
in fight, and turned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens.

Then they read again in another
part of the Records of the House,
where it was shewed how willing
their Lord was to receive into his
favour any, even any, though they
in time past had offered great affronts
to his Person and proceedings. Here
also were several other Histories of
many other famous things, of all
which Christian had a view. As of
things both Ancient and Modern;
together with Prophecies and Predictions
of things that have their
certain accomplishment, both to the
dread and amazement of enemies,
and the comfort and solace of Pilgrims.
The next day they took him and
had him into the ee Christian had into the Armory. Armory; where
they shewed him all manner of Furniture,
which their Lord had provided
for Pilgrims, as Sword, Shield,
Helmet, Brest plate, All-Prayer, and
Shooes that would not wear out.
And there was here enough of this
to harness out as many men for the
service of their Lord, as there
be Stars in the Heaven for multitude.

They also shewed him some of the
Engines with which some of his Servants
had done wonderful things.
ff Christian is made to see Ancient things. They shewed him Moses Rod, the
Hammer and Nail with which Jael
slew Sisera, the Pitchers, Trumpets,
and Lamps too, with which Gideon
put to flight the Armies of Midian.
Then they shewed him the Oxes goad
wherewith Shamger slew six hundred
men. They shewed him also the
Jaw bone with which Sampson did
such mighty feats; they shewed him
moreover the Sling and Stone with
which David slew Goliah of Gath:
and the Sword also with which their
Lord will kill the Man of Sin, in the
day that he shall rise up to the prey.
They shewed him besides many excellent
things, with which Christian
was much delighted. This done, they
went to their rest again.
Then I saw in my Dream, that on
the morrow he got up to go forwards,
but they desired him to stay till the
next day also, and then said they, we
will, if the day be clear, shew you the
gg Christian shewed the delectable Mountains delectable Mountains; which they
said, would yet further add to his comfort;
because they were nearer the

desired Haven, then the place where
at present he was. So he consented
and staid. When the Morning was up,
they had him to the top of the House,
h  and bid him look South, so he did;
and behold at a great distance he
saw a most pleasant Mountainous
Countrey, beautified with Woods,
Vinyards, Fruits of all sorts, Flowers
also; Springs and Fountains, very
delectable to behold. Then he asked
the name of the Countrey, they said
it was Immanuels Land: and it is as
common, said they, as this Hill is
to and for all the Pilgrims. And
when thou comest there, from thence
said they, thou maist see to the Gate
of the Cœlestial City, as the Shepheards
that live there will make appear.
Now he bethought himself of setting
forward, ii Christian sets forward. and they were willing
he should: but first, said they, let
us go again into the Armory, so they
did; and when he came there, they
kk Christian sent away Armed: harnessed him from head to foot
with what was of proof, lest perhaps
he should meet with assaults in the
way. He being therefore thus acoutred
walketh out with his friends

to the Gate, and there he asked the
Porter if he saw any Pilgrims pass by,
Then the Porter answered, Yes.
Chr. Pray did you know him?
Por. I asked his name, and he
told me it was Faithful.
Chr. O, said Christian, I know
him, he is my Towns-man, my near
Neighbour, he comes from the place
where I was born: how far do you
think he may be before?
Porter. He is got by this time below
the Hill.
Chr. ii How Christian and the Porter greet at parting. Well, said Christian, good
Porter the Lord be with thee, and add
to all thy blessings much increase, for
the kindness that thou hast shewed
to me.
Then he began to go forward, but
Discretion, Piety, Charity, and Prudence,
would accompany him down
to the foot of the Hill. So they went
on together, reiterating their former
discourses till they came to go down
the Hill. Then said Christian, As it
was difficult coming up, so (so far as
I can see) it is dangerous going down.
Yes, said Prudence, so it is; for it is an
hard matter for a man to go down
into the valley of Humiliation, as

thou art now, and to catch no slip by
the way; therefore, said they, are
we come out to accompany thee
down the Hill. So he began to go
down, but very warily, yet he caught
a slip or too.
Then I saw in my Dream, that
these good Companions, when Christian
was gone down to the bottom of
the Hill, gave him a loaf of Bread,
a bottle of Wine, and a cluster of
Raisins; and then he went on his
way.
But now in this Valley of Humiliation
poor Christian was hard put
to it, for he had gone but a little way
before he espied a foul Fiend coming
over the field to meet him; his
name is Apollyon. Then did Christian
begin to be afraid, and to cast
in his mind whither to go back, or to
stand his ground. But he considered
again, that he had no Armour for
his back, and therefore thought that
to turn the back to him, might give
him greater advantage with ease to
pierce him with his Darts; therefore
he resolved kk Christians resolution at the approach of Apollyon. to venture, and
stand his ground. For thought he,
had I no more in mine eye, then the

saving of my life, 'twould be the best
way to stand.
So he went on, and Apollyon met
him; now the Monster was hidious
to behold, he was cloathed with
scales like a Fish (and they are his
pride) he had Wings like a Dragon,
and out of his belly came Fire and
Smoak, and his mouth was as the
mouth of a Lion. When he was
come up to Christian, he beheld him
with a disdainful countenance, and
thus began to question with him.
Apol. Whence come you, and whither
are you bound?
Chr. I come from the City of
Destruction, ll Discourse betwixt Christian and Apollyon. which is the place of
all evil, and am going to the City of
Zion.
Apol. By this I perceive thou art
one of my Subjects, for all that Countrey
is mine; and I am the Prince and
God of it. How is it then that thou
hast ran away from thy King? Were it
not that I hope thou maiest do me more
service, I would strike thee now at one
blow to the ground.
Chr. I was born indeed in your
Dominions, but your service was
hard, and your wages such as a man

could not live on, for the wages of Sin
is death; therefore when I was come
to years, I did as other considerate
persons do, look out, if perhaps I
might mend my self,
Apol. There is no Prince that will
thus lightly lose his Subjects; neither will
I as yet lose thee. But since thou complainest
of thy service and wages, mm Apollyons flattery. be
content to go back; what our Countrey
will afford, I do here promise to give
thee.
Chr. But I have let my self to another,
even to the King of Princes,
and how can I with fairness go back
with thee?
Apol. Thou hast done in this, accorcording
to the Proverb, uu Apollyon undervalues Christs service. changed a
bad for a worse: but it is ordinary for
those that have profe&esset;ed themselves his
Servants, after a while to give him
the slip, and return again to me: do
thou so to, and all shall be well.
Chr. I have given him my faith,
and sworn my Allegiance to him;
how then can I go back from this,
and not be hanged as a Traitor?
Apol. Thou didest the same to me,
oo Apollyon pretends to be merciful and yet I am willing to pass by all, if
now thou wilt turn again, and go back.

Chr. What I promised thee was
in my non-age; and besides, I
count that the Prince under whose
Banner now I stand, is able to absolve
me; yea, and to pardon also
what I did as to my compliance with
thee: and besides, (O thou destroying
Apollyon) to speak truth, I like
his Service, his Wages, his Servants,
his Government, his Company, and
Countrey better then thine: and
therefore leave off to perswade me
further, I am his Servant, and I will
follow him.
Apol. Consider again when thou art
in cool blood, what thou art like to meet
with in the way that thou goest. Thou
knowest that for the most part, his Servants
come to an ill end, because they are
transgressors against me, and my ways:Apollyon pleads the grievous ends of Christians, to disswade Christian from persisting in his way.
How many of them have been put to
shameful deaths! and besides, thou countest
his service better then mine, whereas
he never came yet from the place where
he is, to deliver any that served him
out of our hands: but as for me, how
many times, as all the World very well
knows, have I delivered either by
power or fraud, those that have faithfully
fully served me, from him and his,

though taken by them: and so I will
deliver thee.
Chr. His forbearing at present to
deliver them, is on purpose to try
their love, whether they will cleave
to him to the end: and as for the ill
end thou sayest they come too, that
is most glorious in their account: For
for present deliverance, they do not
much expect it; for they stay for
their Glory, and then they shall have
it, when their Prince comes in his,
and the Glory of the Angels.
Apol. Thou hast already been unfaithful
in thy service to him, and how
dost thou think to receive wages of
him?
Chr. Wherein, O Apollyon, have
I been unfaithful to him.
Apol. Thou didst faint at first
setting out,Apollyon pleads Christians infirmities against him. when thou wast almost
choked in the Gulf of Dispond. Thou
diddest attempt wrong ways to be rid of
thy burden, whereas thou shouldest have
stayed till thy Prince had taken it off:
Thou didst sinfully sleep and loose thy
choice thing: thou wast also almost perswaded
to go back, at the sight of the
Lions; and when thou talkest of thy
journey and of what thou hast heard,

and seen, thou art inwardly desirous of
vain-glory in all that thou sayest or
doest.
Chr. All this is true, and much
more, which thou hast left out; but
the Prince whom I serve and honour,
is merciful, and ready to forgive:
but besides, these infirmities
possessed me in thy Countrey, for
there I suckt them in, and I have
groaned under them, been sorry for
them, and have obtained pardon of
my Prince.
Apol. Then Apollyon broke out into
a grievous rage, saying,Apollyon in a rage falls upon Christian. I am an
Enemy to this Prince: I hate his Person,
his Laws, and People: I am come
out on purpose to withstand thee.
Chr. Apollyon beware what you
do, for I am in the Kings High-way,
the way of Holiness, therefore take
heed to your self.
Apol. Then Apollyon strodled quite
over the whole breadth of the way,
and said, I am void of fear in this
matter, prepare thy self to dye, for
I swear thou shalt go no further, here
will I spill thy soul; and with that,
he threw a flaming Dart at his brest,
but Christian had a Shield in his hand

with which he caught it, and so prevented
the danger of that.Christian wounded in his understanding, faith and conversation. Then
did Christian draw, for he saw 'twas
time to bestir him; and Apollyon assalt
made at him, throwing Darts as
thick as Hail; by the which, notwithstanding
all that Christian could
do to avoid it, Apollyon wounded
him in his head, his hand and foot;
this made Christian give a little back:
Apollyon therefore followed his work
amain, and Christian again took courage,
and resisted as manfully as he
could. This sore Combat lasted for
above half a day, even till Christian
was almost quite spent. For you must
know that Christian by reason of his
wounds, must needs grow weaker
and weaker.
Then Apollyon espying his opportunity,
began to gather up close to
Christian, and wrestling with him,
gave him a dreadful fall;Apollyon casteth down to the ground the Christian. and with
that, Christians Sword flew out of his
hand. Then said Apollion, I am sure
of thee now; and with that, he had almost
prest him to death, so that Christian
began to despair of life. But as
God would have it, while Apollyon
was fetching of his last blow,

thereby to make a full end of this
good Man,Christians victory over Apollyon. Christian nimbly reached
out his hand for his Sword, and
caught it, saying, Rejoyce not against
me, O mine Enemy! when I fall, I shall
arise; and with that, gave him a deadly
thrust, which made him give back, as
one that had received his mortal
wound: Christian perceiving that,
made at him again, saying, Nay, in all
these things we are more then Conquerours.
And with that, Apollyon spread
forth his Dragons wings, and sped
him away,  that Christian for a season
saw him no more.
In this Combat no man can imagine,
unless he had seen and heardA brief relation of the Combat by the spectator.
as I did, what yelling, and hideous
roaring Apollyon made all the time
of the fight, he spake like a Dragon:
and on the other side, what sighs and
groans brast from Christians heart.
I never saw him all the while, give so
much as one pleasant look, till he
perceived he had wounded Apollyon
with his two edged Sword, then indeed
he did smile, and look upward:
but 'twas the dreadfullest sight that
ever I saw.

So when the Battel was over,Christian gives God thanks for deliverance
Christian said, I will here give thanks
to him that hath delivered me out of
the mouth of the Lion; to him that
did help me against Apollyon: and so
he did, saying,

Great Beelzebub, the Captain of this Fiend,
Design'd my ruin; therefore to this end
He sent him harnest out, and he with rage
That Hellish was, did fiercely me Ingage:
But ble&esset;ed Michael helped me, and I
By dint of Sword did quickly make him flye;
Therefore to him let me give lasting praise,
And thank and bless his holy name always.
Then there came to him an hand,
with some of the leaves of the Tree
of Life, the which Christian took, and
applyed to the wounds that he had
received in the Battel, and was healed
immediately. He also sat down
in that place to eat Bread, and to
drink of the Bottle that was given

him a little before, so being refreshed,
he addressed himself to his Journey,
with his aaChristian goes on his Journey with his Sword drawn in his hand. Sword drawn in his
hand, for he said, I know not but
some other Enemy may be at hand.
But he met with no other affront
from Apollyon, quite through this
Valley.
Now at the end of this Valley, was
another, called the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, and Christian must
needs go through it, because the
way to the Cœlestial City lay
through the midst of it: Now this
Valley is a very solitary place. The
Prophet b  Jeremiah thus describes it,
A Wilderness, a Land of desarts, and
of Pits, a Land of drought, and of the
shadow of death, a Land that no Man
(but a Christian) passeth through, and
where no man dwelt.
Now here Christian was worse
put to it then in his fight with Apollyon,
as by the sequel you shall see.
I saw then in my Dream, that
when Christian was got to the Borders
of the Shadow of Death, there
met him two Men, cc The children of the Spies go back. Children of
them that brought up an evil report
of the good Land, making hast to

go back: to whom Christian spake
as follows.
Chr. Whither are you going?
Men. They said, Back, back; and
would have you to do so too, if either
life or peace is prized by you.
Chr. Why? whats the matter? said
Christian.
Men. Matter! said they; we were
going that way as you are going, and
went as far as we durst; and indeed
we were almost past coming back,
for had we gone alittle further, we
had not been here to bring the news to
thee.
Chr. But what have you met with,
said Christian?
Men. Why we were almost in the
Valley of the shadow of death,  but
that by good hap we looked before
us, and saw the danger before we
came to it.
Chr. But what have you seen, said
Christian?
Men. Seen! Why the Valley it
self, which is as dark as pitch; we
also saw there the Hobgoblins, Satyrs,
and Dragons of the Pit: we heard
also in that Valley a continual howling
and yelling, as of a People under

unutterable misery; who there
sat bound in affliction and Irons: and
over that Valley hangs the discouraging
d  Clouds of confusion, death
also doth always spread his wings
over it: in a word, it is every whit
dreadful; being utterly without Order.
Chr. Then said Christian, I perceive
not yet, by what you have said, but
that c  this is my way to the desired
Haven.
Men. Be it thy way, we will not
chuse it for ours; so they parted, and
Christian went on his way, but still
with his Sword drawn in his hand,
for fear lest he should be assaulted.
I saw then in my Dream, so far as
this Valley reached,  there was on
the right hand a very deep Ditch;
that Ditch is it into which the blind
have led the blind in all Ages, and
have both there miserably perished.
Again, behold on the left hand, there
was a very dangerous Quagg, into
which, if even a good Man falls, he
can find no bottom for his foot to
stand on; Into that Quagg King David
once did fall, and had no doubt
therein been smothered, had not He
that is able, pluckt him out.

The path-way was here also exceeding
narrow, and therefore good
Christian was the more put to it; for
when he sought in the dark to shun
the ditch on the one hand, he was
ready to tip over into the mire on the
other; also when he sought to escape
the mire, without great carefulness
he would be ready to fall into the
ditch. Thus he went on, and I heard
him here sigh bitterly: for besides the
dangers mentioned above, the path-way
was here so dark, that oft times
when he lift up his foot to set forward,
he knew not where, or upon
what he should set it next.
About the midst of this Valley, I
perceived the mouth of Hell to be,
and it stood also hard by the wayside:
Now thought Christian, what
shall I do? And ever and anon the
flame and smoak would come out
in such abundance, with sparks and
hideous noises, (things that cared not
for Christians Sword, as did Apollyon
before) that he was forced to put up
his Sword, and betake himself to another
weapon called f  All-prayer,
so he cried in my hearing, g  O Lord I
beseech thee deliver my Soul. Thus he

went on a great while, yet still the
flames would be reaching towards
him: also he heard doleful voices, and
rushings too and fro, so that sometimes
he thought he should be torn in
pieces, or troden down like mire in
the Streets. This frightful sight was
seen, and these dreadful noises were
heard by him for several miles together:
and coming to a place,Christian put to a stand, but for a while where
he thought he heard a company of
Fiends coming forward to meet him,
he stopt, and began to muse what he
had best to do. Somtimes he had
half a thought to go back. Then
again he thought he might be halfway
through the Valley; he remembred
also how he had already vanquished
many a danger: and that
the danger of going back might be
much more, then for to go forward,
so he resolved to go on. Yet the
Fiends seemed to come nearer and
nearer, but when they were come
even almost at him, he cried out
with a most vehement voice, I will
walk in the strength of the Lord God;
so they gave back, and came no further.
One thing I would not let slip, I

took notice that now poor Christian
was so confounded, that he did not
know his own voice: and thus I perceived
it: Just when he was come
over against the mouth of the burning
Pit, one of the wicked ones got
behind him, and stept up softly to
him, and whisperingly suggested many
grievous blasphemies to him,
which he aaChristian made believe that he spake blasphemies, when 'twas Satan that suggested them into his mind. verily thought had proceeded
from his own mind. This
put Christian more to it than any
thing that he met with before, even
to think that he should now blaspheme
him that he loved so much before;
yet could he have helped it, he
would not have done it: but he had
not the discretion neither to stop his
ears, nor to know from whence those
blasphemies came.
When Christian had travelled in
this disconsolate condition some considerable
time, he thought he heard
the voice of a man, as going before
him,  saying, Though I walk through
the valley of the shaddow of death, I will
fear none ill, for thou art with me.
Then was he glad, and that for
these reasons:
First, Because he gathered from

thence that some who feared God
were in this Valley as well as himself.
Secondly, For that he perceived
God was with them, though in that
dark and dismal state; and why not,
thought he, with me,  though by reason
of the impediment that attends this
place, I cannot perceive it.
Thirdly, For that he hoped (could
he over-take them) to have company
by and by. So he went on,Amos 5. 8: Christian glad at break of day. and
called to him that was before, but he
knew not what to answer, for that he
thought himself to be alone: And by
and by, the day broke; then said Christian,
He hath turned the shadow of
death into the morning.
Now morning being come, he looked
back, not of desire to return, but
to see, by the light of the day, what
hazards he had gone through in the
dark. So he saw more perfectly the
Ditch that was on the one hand, and
the Quag that was on the other; also
how narrow the way was which
lay betwixt them both; also now he
saw the Hobgoblins, and Satyrs, and
Dragons of the Pit, but all afar off,
for after break of day, they came not
nigh; yet they were discovered to

him, according to that which is written,
He discovereth deep things out of
darkness, and bringeth out to light the
shadow of death.
Now was Christian much affected
with his deliverance from all the
dangers of his solitary way, which
dangers, tho he feared them more
before, yet he saw them more clearly
now, because the light of the day
made them conspicuous to him; and
about this time the Sun was rising,
and this was another mercy to Christian:
for you must note, that tho the
first part of the Valley of the Shadow
of death was dangerous, yet this
second part which he was yet to go,
was, if possible, far more dangerous:
for from the place where he now
stood, even to the end of the Valley,
the way was all along set so full of
Snares, Traps, Gins, and Nets here,
and so full of Pits, Pitfalls, deep
holes and shelvings down there,  that
had it now been dark, as it was when
he came the first part of the way,
had he had a thousand souls, they
had in reason been cast away; but
as I said, just now the Sun was rising.
Then said he, His candle shineth on my

head, and by his light I go through
darkness.
In this light therefore, he came to
the end of the Valley. Now I saw
in my Dream, that at the end of this
Valley lay blood, bones, ashes, and
mangled bodies of men, even of Pilgrims
that had gone this way formerly:
And while I was musing what
should be the reason, I espied alittle
before me a Cave, where two Giants,
Pope and Pagan, dwelt in old time,
by whose Power and Tyranny the
Men whose bones, blood, ashes, &c.
lay there, were cruelly put to death.
But by this place Christian went without
much danger, whereat I somewhat
wondered; but I have learnt
since, that Pagan has been dead many
a day; and as for the other, though
he be yet alive, he is by reason of
age, and also of the many shrewd
brushes that he met with in his
younger dayes, grown so crazy, and
stiff in his joynts, that he can now do
little more then sit in his Caves
mouth, grinning at Pilgrims as they
go by, and biting his nails, because
he cannot come at them.
So I saw that Christian went on

his way, yet at the sight of the old
Man, that sat in the mouth of the
Cave, he could not tell what to
think, specially because he spake to
him though he could not go after
him; saying, You will never mend, till
more of you be burned: but he held
his peace, and set a good face on't,
and so went by, and catcht no hurt.
Then sang Christian.

O world of wonders! (I can say no less)
That I should be preserv'd in that distress
That I have met with here! O ble&esset;ed bee
That hand that from it hath delivered me!
Dangers in darkness, Devils, Hell and Sin,
Did compass me, while I this Vale was in:
Yea, Snares, and Pits, and Traps, and Nets did lie
My path about, that worthless silly I
Might have been catch't, intangled, and cast down:
But since I live, let JESUS wear thy Crown.

Now as Christian went on his way,
he came to a little ascent, which was
cast up on purpose, that Pilgrims
might see before them: up there
therefore Christian went, and looking
forward, he saw Faithful before
him, upon his Journey. Then said
Christian aloud, Ho, ho, So-ho; stay
and I will be your Companion. At
that Faithful looked behind him, to
whom Christian cried again, Stay,
stay, till I come up to you: But Faithful
answered, No, I am upon my life,
and the Avenger of Blood is behind
me. At this Christian was somwhat
moved, and puting to all his strength,Christian overtakes Faithful.
he quickly got up with Faithful, and
did also over-run him, so the last was
first. Then did Christian vain-gloriously
smile, because he had gotten
the start of his Brother: but not taking
good heed to his feet, he suddenly
stumbled and fell,Christians fall, makes Faithful and he go lovingly together. and could
not rise again, untill Faithful came up
to help him.
Then I saw in my Dream, they
went very lovingly on together; and
had sweet discourse of all things that
had happpened to them in their
Pilgrimage; and thus Christian began.

Chr. My honoured and well beloved
Brother Faithful, I am glad that I
have overtaken you; and that God has
so tempered our spirits that we can walk
as Companions in this so pleasant a
path.
Fai. I had thought dear friend, to
have had your company quite from
our Town, but you did get the start
of me, wherefore I was forced to
come thus much of the way alone.
Chr. How long did you stay in the
City of Destruction, before you set out
after me on your Pilgrimage?
Fai. Till I could stay no longer;
for there was great talk presently after
you was gone out, that our City
would in short time with Fire from
Heaven be burned down to the
ground.Their talk about the Countrey from whence they came.
Chr. What! Did your Neighbours
talk so?
Faith. Yes, 'twas for a while in
every bodies mouth.
Chr. What, and did no more of them
but you come out to escape the danger?
Faith. Though there was, as I
said, a great talk thereabout, yet
I do not think they did firmly believe
it. For in the heat of the discourse,

I heard some of them deridingly
speak of you, and of your
desperate Journey (for so they called
this your Pilgrimage) but I did believe,
and do still, that the end of
our City will be with Fire and Brimstone
from above: and therefore I
have made mine escape.
Chr. Did you hear me talk of Neighbour
Pliable?
Faith. Yes Christian, I heard that
he followed you till he came at the
Slough of Dispond; where as some said,
he fell in; but he would not be
known to have so done; but I am sure
he was soundly bedabled with that
kind of dirt.
Chr. And what said the Neighbours
to him?
Faith.How Plyable was accounted of when he oet home.. He hath since his going back
been had greatly in derision, and that
among all sorts of People: some do
mock and despise him, and scarce will
any set him on work. He is now seven
times worse then if he had never gone
out of the City.
Chr. But why should they be so set
against him, since they also despise the
way that he forsook?

Faith. Oh, they say, Hang him,
he is Taurn-Coat, he was not true to
his profession. I think God has stired
up even his Enemies to hiss at him,
and make him a Proverb, because he
hath forsaken the way. 
Chr. Had you no talk with him before
you came out?
Faith. I met him once in the
Streets, but he leered away on the
other side, as one ashamed of what
he had done; so I spake not to him.
Chr. Well,The Dog and Sow. at my first setting out,
I had hopes of that Man; but now I
fear he will perish in the overthrow of
the City, for it is happened to him according
to the true Proverb, The Dog
is turned to his Vomit again, and the
Sow that was Washed to her wallowing
in the mire.
Faith. They are my fears of him
too: But who can hinder that which
will be?
Well Neighbour Faithful, said
Christian, let us leave him; and talk
of things that more immediately
concern our selves. Tell me now, what
you have met with in the way as you
came; for I know you have met with

some things, or else it may be writ for
a wonder.
Faith. I escaped the Slough that I
perceive you fell into, and got up to
the Gate without that danger;Faithfull assaulted by Wanton. only
I met with one whose name was Wanton,
that had like to have done me a
mischief.
Chr. 'Twas well you escaped her
Net; Joseph was hard put to it by her,
and he escaped her as you did, but it
had like to have cost him his life. But
what did she do to you?
Faith. You cannot think (but that
you know somthing) what a flattering
tongue she had, she lay at me
hard to turn aside with her, promising
me all manner of content.
Chr. Nay, she did not promise you
the content of a good conscience.
Faith. You know what I mean, all
carnal and fleshly content.
Chr. Thank God you have escaped
her: The a  abhorred of the Lord shall fall
into her Ditch.
Faith. Nay, I know not whether
I did wholly escape her, or no.
Chr. Why, I tro you did not consent
to her desires?
Faith. No, not to defile my self;

  for I remembred an old writing that
I had seen, which saith, Her steps
take hold of Hell. So I shut mine
eyes, because I would not be bewitched
with her looks: then she railed
on me, and I went my way.
Chr. Did you meet with no other assault
as you came?He is assaulted by Adam the first.
Faith. When I came to the foot
of the Hill called Difficulty, I met
with a very aged Man, who asked
me, What I was, and whither bound?
I told him, That I was a Pilgrim, going
to the Cœlestial City: Then said
the old Man, Thou lookest like an honest
fellow; Wilt thou be content to
dwell with me, for the wages that I shall
give thee? Then I asked him his name,
and where he dwelt? He said his
name was Adam the first, and do dwell
in the Town of b  Deceit. I asked him
then, What was his work? and what
the wages that he would give? He
told me, That his work was many delights;
and his wages, that I should be
his Heir at last. I further asked him,
What House he kept, and what other
Servants he had? so he told me,
That his House was maintained with all
the dainties in the world, and that his

Servants, were those of his own begetting.
Then I asked, If he had any
children? He said that he had but
three Daughters, The c  lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride
of life, and that I should marry them
all, if I would. Then I asked, How
long time he would have me live
with him? And he told me, As long as
he lived himself.
Chr. Well, and what conclusion came
the Old Man, and you to, at last?
Faith. Why, at first I found my
self somewhat inclinable to go with
the Man, for I thought he spake very
fair; But looking in his forehead as
I talked with him, I saw there written,
Put off the old Man with his
deeds.
Chr. And how then?
Faith. Then it came burning hot
into my mind, whatever he said, and
however he flattered, when he got me
home to his House, he would sell me
for a Slave. So I bid him forbear to
talk, for I would not come near the
door of his House. Then he reviled me,
and told me that he would send such
a one after me, that should make my
way bitter to my soul: So I turned

to go away from him: But just as I
turned my self to go thence, I felt
him take hold of my flesh, and give
me such a deadly twitch back, that I
thought he had pull'd part of me after
himself; This made me cry, d  O
wretched Man! So I went on my way
up the Hill.
Now when I had got about half
way up, I looked behind me, and
saw one coming after me, swift as
the wind; so he overtook me just about
the place where the Settle
stands.
Chr. Just there, said Christian, did
I sit down to rest me; but being overcome
with sleep, I there lost this Roll
out of my bosom.
Faith. But good Brother here me
out: So soon as the Man over-took
me, he was but a word and a blow:
for down he knockt me, and laid me
for dead. But when I was a little
come to my self again, I asked him
wherefore he served me so? he said,
Because of my secret inclining to Adam
the first; and with that, he strook
me another deadly blow on the brest,
and beat me down backward, so I
lay at his foot as dead as before. So

when I came to my self again, I cried
him mercy; but he said, I know not
to shew mercy, and with that knockt
me down again He had doubtless
made a hand of me, but that one
came by, and bid him forbear.
Chr. Who was that, that bid him
forbear?
Faith. I did not know him at first,
but as he went by, I perceived the
holes in his hands, and his side; then
I concluded that he was our Lord So
I went up the Hill.
Chr. That Man that overtook you,
was Moses, e  he spareth none, neither
knoweth he how to shew mercy to those
that transgress his Law.
Faith. I know it very well, it was
not the first time that he has met with
me. 'Twas he that came to me when
I dwelt securely at home, and that
told me, He would burn my House
over my head, if I staid there.
Chr. But did not you see the House
that stood there on the top of that Hill
on the side of which Moses met you?
Faith. Yes, and the Lions too, before
I came at it; but for the Lions,
I think they were a sleep, for it was
about Noon; and because I had so

much of the day before me, I passed
by the Porter, and came down the
Hill.
Chr. He told me indeed that he saw
you go by, but I wish you had called at
the House; for they would have shewed
you so many Rarities, that you would
scarce have forgot them to the day of
your death. But pray tell me, did you
meet no body in the Valley of Humility?
Faith. Yes,Faithfull assaulted by Discontent. I met with one Discontent,
who would willingly have
perswaded me to go back again with
him: his reason was, for that the
Valley was altogether without Honour;
he told me moreover, That
there to go, was the way to disobey
all my Friends, as Pride, Arogancy,
Self-Conceit, worldly Glory, with
others, who he knew, as he said, would
be very much offended, if I made
such a Fool of my self, as to wade
through this Valley.
Chr. Well, and how did you answer
him?Faithfuls answer to Discontent
Faith. I told him, That although
all these that he named might claim
kindred of me, and that rightly, (for
indeed they were my Relations, according
to the flesh) yet since I became

a Pilgrim, they have disowned me,
as I also have rejected them; and
therefore they were to me now, no
more then if they had never been of
my Linage; I told him, moreover,
That as to this Valley, he had quite
miss-represented the thing: for before
Honour is Humility, and a haughty
spirit before a fall. Therefore said I,
I had rather go through this Valley to
the Honour that was so accounted by
the wisest, then chuse that which he
esteemed most worth our affections.
Chr. Met you with nothing else in
that Valley?He is assaulted with Shame
Faith. Yes, I met with Shame;
But of all the Men that I met with
in my Pilgrimage, he I think bears
the wrong name: the other would
be said nay, after after a little argumentation
(and some what else)
but this bold faced Shame, would never
have done
Chr. Why, what did he say to you?
Faith. What! why he objected
against Religion it self; he said it was
a pitiful low sneaking business for a
Man to mind Religion; he said that a
tender conscience was an un-manly
thing, and that for a Man to watch

over his words and ways, so as to
tye up himself from that hectoring
liberty, that the brave spirits of the
times accustom themselves unto,
would make me the Ridicule of the
times.  He objected also, that but few
of the Mighty, Rich, or Wise, were
ever of my opinion; nor any of them,
before they were perswaded to be
Fools,  and to be of a voluntary fondness,
to venture the loss of all, for
no body else knows what. He moreover
objected the base and low
estate and condition of those that
were chiefly the Pilgrims of the
times; in which they lived, also their
ignorance, and want of understanding
in all natural Science. Yea, he
did hold me to it at that rate also, about
a great many more things then
here I relate; as, that it was a shame
to sit whining and mourning under a
Sermon, and a shame to come sighing
and groaning home. That it was
a shame to ask my Neighbour forgiveness
for petty faults, or to make
restitution where I had taken from
any: He said also that Religion made
a man grow strange to the great, because
of a few vices (which he called

by finer names) and made him
own and respect the base, because
of the same Religious fraternity. And
is not this, said he, a shame?
Chr. And what did you say to him?
Faith. Say! I could not tell what
to say at the first. Yea, he put me
so to it, that my blood came up in
my face, even this Shame fetch't it
up, and had almost beat me quite
off. But at last I began to consider,
That that which is highly esteemed among
Men, is had in abomination with
God. And I thought again, This
Shame tells me what men are, but it
tells me nothing what God, or the
word of God is. And I thought
moreover, That at the day of doom,
we shall not be doomed to death or
life, according to the hectoring spirits
of the world; but according to
the Wisdom and Law of the Highest.
Therefore thought I, what God says,
is best, is best, though all the Men
in the world are against it. Seeing
then, that God prefers his Religion,
seeing God prefers a tender Conscience,
seeing they that make themselves
Fools for the Kingdom of
Heaven, are wisest, and that the

poor that loveth Christ, is richer then
the greatest Man in the world that
hates him; Shame depart, thou art
an Enemy to my Salvation: shall I
entertain thee against my Soveraign
Lord? How then shall I look him in
the face at his coming?  Should I
now be ashamed of his ways and Servants,
how can I expect the blessing?
But indeed this Shame was a
bold Villain, I could scarce shake him
out of my company; yea, he would
be haunting of me, and continually
whispering me in the ear, with some
one or other of the infirmities that
attend Religion: but at last I told
him, 'Twas but in vain to attempt further
in this business; for those things
that he disdained, in those did I see
most glory: And so, at last I got past
this importunate one.

The tryals that those men do meet withal
That are obedient to the Heavenly call,
Are manifold, and suited to the flesh,
And come, and come, and come again afresh;
That now, or somtime else, we by them may
Be taken, overcome, and cast away.

O let the Pilgrims, let the Pilgrims then,
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men.
Chr. I am glad, my Brother, that
thou didst withstand this Villain so
bravely; for of all, as thou sayst, I think
he has the wrong name: for he is so bold
as to follow us in the Streets, and to attempt
to put us to shame before all men;
that is, to make us ashamed of that
which is good: but if he was not himself
audacious, he would never attempt to do
as he does, but let us still resist him: for
notwithstanding all his Bravadoes, he
promoteth the Fool, and none else. The
Wise shall Inherit Glory, said Solomon,
but shame shall be the promotion 
of Fools.
Faith. I think we must cry to him for
help against shame, that would have us
be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth.
Chr. You say true. But did you meet
no body else in that Valley?
Faith. No not I, for I had Sun-shine
all the rest of the way, through that,
and also through the Valley of the
shadow of death.

Chr. 'Twas well for you, I am sure
it fared for otherwise with me. I had
for a long season, as soon almost
as I entred into that Valley, a dreadful
Combat with that foul Fiend
Apollyon: Yea, I thought verily he
would have killed me; especially
when he got me down, and crusht
me under him, as if he would have
crusht me to pieces. For as he threw
me, my Sword flew out of my hand;
nay he told me, He was sure of me:
but I cried to God, and he heard me,
and delivered me out of all my troubles.
Then I entred into the Valley of the
shadow of death, and had no light
for almost half the way through it.
I thought I should a been killed there,
over, and over; But at last, day
brake, and the Sun rise, and I went
through that which was behind with
far more ease and quiet
Moreover, I saw in my Dream,
that as they went on, Faithful, as he
chanced to look on one side, saw a
Man whose name is Talkative, walking
at a distance besides them, (for
in this place, there was room enough
Talkative described.for them all to walk) He was a tall
Man, and somthing more comely at a

distance then at hand. To this Man,
Faithful addressed himself in this
manner.
Faith. Friend, Whither away? Are
you going to the Heavenly Countrey?
Talk. I am going to that same
place.
Faith. That is well: Then I hope we
may have your good Company.
Talk. With a very good will, will
I be your Companion.
Faith.Faithful and Talkative enter discourse. Come on then, and let us go
together, and let us spend our time in
discoursing of things that are profitable.
Talk To talk of things that are
good, to me is very acceptable, with
you, or with any other; and I am
glad that I have met with those that
incline to so good a work. For to
speak the truth, there are but few
that care thus to spend their time
(as they are in their travels) but
chuse much rather to be speaking of
things to no profit,Talkatives dislike of bad discourse. and this hath
been a trouble to me.
Faith. That is indeed a thing to be
lamented, for what things so worthy of
the use of the tongue and mouth of
men on Earth, as are the things of the
God of Heaven?

Talk. I like you wonderful well,
for your saying is full of conviction;
and I will add, What thing so pleasant,
and what so profitable, as to
talk of the things of God?
What things so pleasant? (that is,
if a man hath any delight in things
that are wonderful) for instance: If
a man doth delight to talk of the
History or the Mystery of things,
or if a man doth love to talk of Miracles,
Wonders or Signs, where
shall he find things Recorded so delightful,
and so sweetly penned, as
in the holy Scripture?
Faith. That's true: but to be profited
by such things in our talk, should be
that which we design.
Talk. That is it that I said: for to
talk of such things is most profitable,
for by so doing, a Man may get knowledge
of many things, as of the vanity
of earthly things, and the befit
of things above: (thus in general)
but more particularly, By this a man
may learn the necessity of the New-birth,
the insufficiency of our works,
the need of Christs righteousness, &c.
Besides,Talkatives fine discourse. by this a man may learn by
talk, what it is to repent, to believe,

to pray, to suffer, or the like: by this
also a Man may learn what are the
great promises & consolations of the
Gospel, to his own comfort. Further,
by this a Man may learn to refuse
false opinions, to vindicate the truth,
and also to instruct the ignorant.
Faith. All this is true, and glad am
I to hear these things from you.
Talk. Alas! the want of this is
the cause that so few understand the
need of faith, and the necessity of a
work of Grace in their Soul, in order
to eternal life: but ignorantly
live in the works of the Law, by
which a man can by no means obtain
the Kingdom of Heaven.
Faith. But by your leave, Heavenly
knowledge of these, is the gift of God;
no man attaineth to them by humane industry,
or only by the talk of them.
Talk. All this I know very well,
for a man can receive nothing except
it be given him from Heaven; all is
of Grace, not of works: I could
give you an hundred Scriptures forO brave Talkative
the confirmation of this.
Faith. Well then, said Faithful,
what is that one thing, that we shall at
this time found our discourse upon?

Talk.O brave Talkative What you will: I will talk of
things Heavenly, or things Earthly;
things Moral, or things Evangelical;
things Sacred, or things Prophanes;
things past, or things to come; thing
forraign, or things at home; things
more Essential, or things Circumstantial:
provided that all be done to
our profit.
Faith. Now did Faithful begin to
wonder; and stepping to Christian, (for
he walked all this while by himself,Faithful beguiled by Talkative.) he
said to him, (but softly) What a brave
Companion have we got! Surely this
man will make a very excellent Pilgrim.
Chr. At this Christian modestly
smiled,Christian makes a discovery of Talkative, telling Faithful who he was. and said, This man with whom
you are so taken, will beguile with
this tongue of his, twenty of them
that know him not.
Faith. Do you know him then?
Chr. Know him! Yes, better than
he knows himself.
Faith. Pray what is he?
Chr. His name is Talkative, he
dwelleth in our Town; I wonder that
you should be a stranger to him,
only I consider that our Town is
large.

Faith. Whose Son is he? And whereabout
doth he dwell?
Chr. He is the Son of one Saywell,
he dwelt in Prating-row; and he is
known of all that are acquainted
with him, by the name of Talkative
in Prating-row: and notwithstanding
his fine tongue, he is but a sorry
fellow.
Faith. Well, he seems to be a very
pretty man.
Chr. That is, to them that have
not through acquaintance with him,
for he is best abroad, near home he is
ugly enough: your saying, That he
is a pretty man, brings to my mind
what I have observed in the work of
the Painter, whose Pictures shews
best at a distance; but very near,
more unpleasing.
Faith. But I am ready to think you
do but jest, because you smiled.
Chr. God-forbid that I should jest,
(though I smiled) in this matter, or
that I should accuse any falsely; I
will give you a further discovery of
him: This man is for any company,
and for any talk; as he talketh now
with you, so will he talk when he is
on the Ale-bench: and the more

drink he hath in his crown, the
more of these things he hath in his
mouth: Religion hath no place in his
heart, or house, or conversation; all
he hath, lieth in his tongue, and his
Religion is to make a noise therewith.
Faith. Say you so! Then am I in this
man greatly deceived.
Chr.  Deceived! you may be sure
of it. Remember the Proverb, They
say and do not: but the Kingdom of
God is not in word,Talkative talks, but does not. but in power. He
talketh of Prayer, of Repentance,
of Faith, and of the New birth: but
he knows but only to talk of them.
I have been in his Family, and have
observed him both at home and abroad;
and I know what I say of him
is the truth.His house is empty of Religion. His house is as empty
of Religion, as the white of an Egg
is of savour. There is there, neither
Prayer, nor sign of Repentance for
sin: Yea, the bruit in his kind serves
God far better then he. He is the
very stain, reproach, and shame of
Religion to all that know him;He is a stain to Religion. it can
hardly have a good word in all that
end of the Town where he dwells, 
through him. Thus say the common

People that know him,The proverb that goes of him A Saint abroad,
and a Devil at home: His poor
Family finds it so, he is such a churl,
such a railer at, and so unreasonable
with his Servants, that they neither
know how to do for, or speak to him.
Men that have any dealings with
him,Men shun to deal with him. say 'tis better to deal with a
Turk then with him, for fairer dealing
they shall have at their hands.
This Talkative, if it be possible, will
go beyond them, defraud, beguile,
and over-reach them. Besides, he
brings up his Sons to follow his steps;
and if he findeth in any of them a
foolish timorousness (for so he calls
the first appearance of a tender conscience)
he calls them fools and blockheads;
and by no means will imploy
them in much, or speak to their
commendations before others. For
my part I am of opinion, that he has
by his wicked life caused many to
stumble and fall; and will be, if
God prevent not, the ruine of many
more.
Faith. Well, my Brother, I am
bound to believe you, not only because
you say you know him, but also because
like a Christian, you make your reports

of men. For I cannot think that you
speak these things of ill will, but because
it is even so as you say.
Chr. Had I known him no more
than you, I might perhaps have
thought of him as at the first you
did: Yea, had he received this report
at their hands only that are
enemies to Religion, I should have
thought it had been a slander: (A Lot
that often falls from bad mens
mouths upon good mens Names and
Professions:). But all these things, yea
and a great many more as bad, of
my own knowledge I can prove him
guilty of. Besides, good men are
ashamed of him, they can neither
call him Brother nor Friend; the
very naming of him among them,
makes them blush, if they know him.
Fa. Well, I see that Saying and Doing
are two things, and hereafter I shall
better observe this distinction.
Chr. They are two things indeed,
The Carkass of Religion.and are as diverse as are the Soul
and the Body: For as the Body without
the Soul, is but a dead Carkass;
so, Saying, if it be alone, is but a dead
Carkass also. The Soul of Religion
is the practick part: Pure Religion

and undefiled,  before God and the
Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless
and Widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspoted from the World.
This Talkative is not aware of, he
thinks that hearing and saying will
make a good Christian, and thus he
deceiveth his own Soul. Hearing is
but as the sowing of the Seed; talking
is not sufficient to prove that
fruit is indeed in the heart and life;
and let us assure our selves, that at
the day of Doom, men shall be judged
according to their fruits. It will
not be said then, Did you believe? but, 
Were you Doers, or Talkers only? and
accordingly shall they be judged. The
end of the World is compared to our
Harvest, and you know men at
Harvest regard nothing but Fruit.
Not that any thing can be accepted
that is not of Faith. But I speak this,
to shew you how insignificant the
profession of Talkative will be at that
day.
Fa. This brings to my mind that of
Moses,  by which he describeth the beast
that is clean. He is such an one that
parteth the Hoof, and cheweth the Cud:
Not that parteth the Hoof only, or that

cheweth the Cud only. The Hare cheweth
the Cud,Faithful convinced of the badness of Talkative. but yet is unclean, because
he parteth not the Hoof. And
this truly resembleth Talkative; he
cheweth the Cud, he seeketh knowledge,
he cheweth upon the Word, but he divideth
not the Hoof, he parteth not
with the way of sinners; but as the Hare,
retaineth the foot of a Dog, or Bear,
and therefore he is unclean.
Chr. You have spoken, for ought
I know, the true Gospel sense of those
Texts, and I will add an other thing.
Paul calleth some men, yea and
those great Talkers too,  sounding
Brass, and Tinckling Cymbals; that
is,Talkative like two things that sound without life. as he Expounds them in another
place, Things without life, giving sound.
Things without life, that is, without
the true Faith and Grace of the Gospel;
and consequently, things that
shall never be placed in the Kingdom
of Heaven among those that are the
Children of life: Though their sound
by their talk, be as if it were the
Tongue or voice of an Angel.
Fait. Well, I was not so fond of his
Company as first, but I am as sick of it
now. What shall we do to be rid of
him?

Chr. Take my advice, and do as I
bid you, and you shall find that he
will soon be sick of your Company
too, except God shall touch his heart
and turn it.
Fait. What would you have me to do?
Chr. Why, go to him, and enter
into some serious discourse about the
power of Religion: And ask him plainly
(when he has approved of it, for
that he will) whether this thing be
set up in his Heart, House or Conversation.
Fait. Then Faithful stept forward
again, and said to Talkative: Come,
what chear? how is it now?
Talk. Thank you, Well. I thought
we should have had a great deal of
Talk by this time.
Fait. Well, if you will, we will fall
to it now; and since you left it with me
to state the question, let be this: How
doth the saving grace of God discover it
self, when it is in the heart of man?
Talk. I perceive then that our
talk must be about the power of things;
Well, 'tis a very good question,Talkatives false discovery of a work of grace. and
I shall be willing to answer you. And
take my answer in brief thus. First,
Where the Grace of God is in the heart,

it causeth there a great out-cry against
sin. Secondly &lblank;
Fait. Nay hold, let us consider of one
at once: I think you should rather say,
It showes it self by inclining the Soul to
abhor its sin.
Talk. Why, what difference is
there between crying out against and
abhoring of sin?
Fait. Oh! a great deal; a man may
cry out against sin,To cry out against sin, no sign of Grace of policy; but he cannot
abhor it, but by vertue of a Godly
antipathy against it: I have heard many
cry out against sin in the Pulpit who
yet can abide it well enough in the heart,
and house, and conversation. Josephs
Mistris cried out with aloud voice,
as if she had been very holy; but she
would willingly, notwithstanding that,
have committed uncleanness with him.
Some cry out against sin, even as the
Mother cries out against her child
in her lap, when she calleth it slut and
naughty Girl, and then falls to hugging
and kissing it.
Talk. You lie at the catch, I perceive.
Fait. No not I, I am only for seeing
things right. But what is the second
thing whereby you would prove a discovery

of a work of grace in the heart?
Talk. Great Knowledge of Gospel
Mysteries.Great knowledge no sign of grace.
Fait. This signe should have been first,
but first or last, it is also false; for,
Knowledge, great knowledge,  may be obtained
in the mysteries of the Gospel, and
yet no work of grace in the Soul. Yea,
if a man have all knowledge, he may yet
be nothing, and so consequently be no
child of God. When Christ said, Do you
know all these things? And the Disciples
had answered, Yes: He addeth, Blessed
are ye if ye do them. He doth not lay
the blessing in the knowing of them, but in
the doing of them. For there is a knowledge
that is not attended with doing: He
that knoweth his Masters will, and
doth it not. A man may know like an
Angel and yet be no Christian; therefore
your sign is not true. Indeed to know, is a
thing that pleaseth Talkers and Boasters;
but to do, is that which pleaseth God. Not
that the heart can be good without
knowledge, for without that the heart
is naught: There is therefore knowledge,
and knowledge.Knowledge and knowledge. Knowledge that resteth
in the bare speculation of things, and
knowledge that is accompanied with the
grace of faith and love, which puts a

man upon doing even the will of God
from the heart: the first of these will
serve the Talker, but without the other
the true Christian is not content. Give
me understanding, and I shall keep thy
Law,True knowledge attended with endeavours yea I shall observe it with my
whole heart, Psal. 119. 34.
Talk. You lie at the catch again,
this is not for edification.
Fait. Well, if you please propound
another sign how this work of grace discovereth
it self where it is.
Talk. Not I, for I see we shall not
agree.
Fait. Well, if you will not, will you
give me leave to do it?
Talk. You may use your Liberty.
Fait. A work of grace in the soul discovereth
it self,One good sign of grace either to him that hath
it, or to standers by.
To him that hath it,  thus. It gives
him conviction of sin, especially of the
defilement of his nature, and the sin of
unbelief, (for the sake of which he is
sure to be damned, if he findeth not
mercy at Gods hand by faith in Jesus
Christ.) This sight and sense of things
worketh in him sorrow and shame for sin;
he findeth moreover revealed in him
the Saviour of the World, and the absolute

necessity of closing with him for
life, at the which he findeth hungrings
and thirstings after him, to which hungrings,
&c. the promise is made. Now
according to the strength or weakness
of his faith in his Saviour, so is his
joy and peace, so is his love to holiness,
so are his desires to know him
more, and also to serve him in this
World. But though I say it discovereth
it self thus unto him; yet it is
but seldom that he is able to conclude
that this is a work of Grace, because
his corruptions now, and his abused reason,
makes his mind to mis-judge in this
matter; therefore in him that hath this
work, there is required a very sound
Judgement, before he can with steddiness
conclude that this is a work of Grace.
To others it is thus discovered. 
1. By an experimental confession of
his Faith in Christ. 2. By a life answerable
to that confession, to wit, a life of
holiness; heart-holiness, family-holiness
(if he hath a Family) and by Conversation-holiness
in the World: which
in the general teacheth him, inwardly
to abhor his Sin, and himself for that
in secret, to suppress it in his Family,
and to promote holiness in the World;

not by talk only, as an Hypocrite or
Talkative Person may do: but by a practical
Subjection in Faith, and Love, to
the power of the word: And now Sir,
as to this brief description of the work
of Grace, and also the discovery of it,
if you have ought to object, object: if
not, then give me leave to propound to
you a second question.
Talk.Another good sign of Grace. Nay, my part is not now to
object, but to hear, let me therefore
have your second question.
Faith. It is this, Do you experience
the first part of this description of it?
and doth your life and conversation testifie
the same? or standeth your Religion
in Word or in Tongue, and not in
Deed and Truth? pray, if you incline to
answer me in this, say no more then you
know the God above will say Amen to;
and also, nothing but what your Conscience
can justifie you in. For, not he
that commendeth himself is approved,
but whom the Lord commendeth.
Besides, to say I am thus, and
thus,Talkative not pleased with Faithfuls question. when my Conversation, and all
my Neighbours tell me, I lye, is great
wickedness.
