




In which the Reader will meet with an old
Acquaintance. 
We left Amelia, at the End of our
last Book, nursing her sick Child; 
and tho' our Reader is no doubt
very desirous of knowing the Event of so
tender a Concern to that amiable Woman,
we must desire him to suspend his Curiosity
till the Return of Mr. Booth, who was willing
to make use of the Opportunity of one
Day in seven to taste the fresh Air. 
At Nine in the Morning he went to pay
a Visit to his old Friend Colonel James,
resolving, if possible, to have a full Explanation 

of that Behaviour which appeared to
him so mysterious; but the Colonel was as
inaccessible as the best defended Fortress; 
and it was as impossible for Booth to pass
beyond his Entry, as the Spaniards found
it to take Gibraltar. He received the usual
Answers; first, that the Colonel was not
stirring, and an Hour after that he was
gone out. All that he got by asking further
Questions was only to receive still
ruder and ruder Answers; by which, if he
had been very sagacious, he might have
been satisfied how little worth his while it
was to desire to go in: for the Porter at a
great Man's Door is a kind of Barometer,
by which you may discover the Warmth
or Coldness of his Master's Friendship. 
Nay, in the highest Stations of all, as the
great Man himself hath his different kinds
of Salutation, from an hearty Embrace with
a Kiss, and my dear Lord, or dear Sir
Charles, down to, well Mr. &wblank; what
would you have me do? So the Porter to
some bows with Respect, to others with a
Smile, to some he bows more, to others
less low, to others not at all. Some he just
lets in, and others he just shuts out. And
in all this they so well correspond, that one
would be inclined to think that the great
Man and his Porter had compared their 

Lists together, and like two Actors concerned
to act different Parts in the same
Scene, had rehearsed their Parts privately
together, before they ventured to perform
in Public. 
Tho' Booth did not perhaps see the whole
Matter in this just Light, for that in reality
it is; yet he was discerning enough to conclude,
from the Behaviour of the Servant,
especially when he considered that of the
Master likewise, that he had entirely lost
the Friendship of James; and this Conviction
gave him a Concern, that not only
the flattering Prospect of his Lordship's Favour
was not able to compensate; but which
even obliterated, and made him for a while
forget the Situation in which he had left his
Amelia; and he wandered about almost two
Hours, scarce knowing where he went, 'till
at last he dropt into a Coffee-house near
St. James's, where he sat himself down. 
He had scarce drank his Dish of Coffee,
before he heard a young Officer of the
Guards cry to another, ‘Od d&wblank;m me
Jack, here he comes—here's old Honour
and Dignity, faith.’ Upon which he saw
a Chair open, and out issued a most erect
and stately Figure indeed, with a vast Perriwig 

on his Head, and a vast Hat under his
Arm. This august Personage having entered
the Room walked directly up to the
upper End, where having paid his Respects
to all present of any Note, to each according
to Seniority, he at last cast his Eyes
on Booth, and very civilly, tho' somewhat
coldly, asked him how he did. 
Booth, who had long recognized the Features
of his old Acquaintance Major Bath,
returned the Compliment with a very low
Bow; but did not venture to make the first
Advance to Familiarity, as he was truly
possessed of that Quality which the Greeks
considered in the highest Light of Honour,
and which we term Modesty; tho' indeed
neither ours nor the Latin Language hath
any Word adequate to the Idea of the
Original. 
The Colonel, after having discharged
himself of two or three Articles of News,
and made his Comments upon them, when
the next Chair to him became vacant, called
upon Booth to fill it. He then asked him
several Questions relating to his Affairs; and
when he heard he was out of the Army,
advised him earnestly to use all means to 

get in again, saying, that he was a pretty
Lad, and they must not lose him. 
Booth told him in a Whisper, that he
had a great deal to say to him on that Subject,
if they were in a more private Place; 
upon this the Colonel proposed a Walk in
the Park, which the other readily accepted. 
During their Walk, Booth opened his
Heart, and among other Matters acquainted
Col. Bath that he feared he had lost the
Friendship of Col. James; ‘though I am
not,’ said he, ‘conscious of having done
the least thing to deserve it.’ 
Bath answered, ‘You are certainly mistaken,
Mr. Booth. I have indeed scarce
seen my Brother since my coming to Town:
for I have been here but two Days; however
I am convinced he is a Man of too
nice Honour to do any thing inconsistent
with the true Dignity of a Gentleman.’ 
Booth answered, ‘he was far from accusing
him of any thing dishonourable.’ —‘D&wblank;n
me,’ said Bath, ‘if there is a Man alive
can, or dare accuse him: If you have the
least Reason to take any thing ill, why
don't you go to him? you are a Gentleman,
and his Rank doth not protect 

him from giving you Satisfaction.’ ‘The
Affair is not of any such kind,’ says Booth,
‘I have great Obligations to the Colonel,
and have more reason to lament than complain; 
and if I could but see him, I am
convinced I should have no cause for either; 
but I cannot get within his House; it was
but an Hour ago, a Servant of his turned
me rudely from the Door.’ ‘Did a Servant
of my Brother use you rudely?’ 
said the Colonel, with the utmost Gravity. 
‘I do not know, Sir, in what Light you
see such things; but to me the Affront of
a Servant is the Affront of the Master; 
and if he doth not immediately punish it,
by all the Dignity of Man, I would see
the Master's Nose between my Fingers.’ 
Booth offered to explain, but to no Purpose; 
the Colonel was got into his Stilts; and it
was impossible to take him down, nay, it
was as much as Booth could possibly do to
part with him without an actual Quarrel; 
nor would he perhaps have been able to have
accomplished it, had not the Colonel by Accident
turned at last to take Booth's Side of
the Question; and before they separated,
he swore many Oaths that James should
give him proper Satisfaction. 




Containing a Brace of Doctors, and much
physical Matter. 
Such was the End of this present Interview,
so little to the Content of
Booth, that he was heartily concerned he
had ever mentioned a Syllable of the Matter. 
He now returned with all his Uneasiness
to his Amelia, whom he found in a
Condition very little adapted to relieve or
comfort him. That poor Woman was now
indeed under very great Apprehensions for
her Child, whose Fever now began to rage
very violently: and what was worse, an
Apothecary had been with her, and frightened
her almost out of her Wits. He had
indeed represented the Case of the Child to
be very desperate, and had prevailed on the
Mother to call in the Assistance of a Doctor. 
Booth had been a very little time in the
Room before this Doctor arrived, with the
Apothecary close at his Heels, and both approached
the Bed, where the former felt the
Pulse of the Sick, and performed several
other physical Ceremonies. He then began
to enquire of the Apothecary what he had 

already done for the Patient; all which, as
soon as informed, he greatly approved. The
Doctor then sat down, called for a Pen and
Ink, filled a whole Side of a Sheet of Paper
with Physic, then took a Guinea, and took
his leave; the Apothecary waiting upon
him down Stairs, as he had attended him up. 
All that Night both Amelia and Booth sat
up with their Child, who rather grew worse
than better. In the Morning Mrs. Ellison
found the Infant in a raging Fever, burning
hot, and very light-headed, and the Mother
under the highest Dejection: for the Distemper
had not given the least Ground to
all the Efforts of the Apothecary and Doctor,
but seemed to defy their utmost Power,
with all that tremendous Apparatus of Phials
and Gallypots, which were ranged in Battle-array
all over the Room. 
Mrs. Ellison seeing the distressed, and indeed
distracted Condition of Amelia's Mind,
attempted to comfort her by giving her
Hopes of the Child's Recovery. ‘Upon
my Word, Madam,’ says she, ‘I saw a
Child of much the same Age with Miss,
who, in my Opinion was much worse,
restored to Health in a few Days by a Physician
of my Acquaintance; nay, I have 

known him cure several others of very bad
Fevers; and, if Miss was unde his Care,
I dare swear she would do very well:’ 
‘Good Heavens! Madam,’ answered Amelia,
‘why would you not mention him to
me? for my part, I have no Acquaintance
with any London Physicians, nor do I
know whom the Apothecary hath brought
me.’ ‘Nay, Madam,’ cries Mrs. Ellison,
‘it is a tender thing you know, to recommend
a Physician; and as for my Doctor,
there are abundance of People who give
him an ill Name; indeed it is true, he
hath cured me twice of Fevers, and so he
hath several others to my Knowledge; 
nay, I never heard of any more than one
of his Patients that died; and yet as the
Doctors and Apothecaries all give him an
ill Character, one is fearful, you know,
dear Madam.’ —Booth enquired the Doctor's
Name, which he no sooner heard, than
he begged his Wife to send for him immediately,
declaring he had heard the highest
Character imaginable of him at the Tavern,
from an Officer of very good Understanding. 
Amelia presently complied, and a Messenger
was dispatched accordingly. 
But before the second Doctor could be
brought, the first returned with the Apothecary 

attending him, as before. He again
surveyed and handled the Sick; and when
Amelia begged him to tell her, if there was
any Hopes, he shook his Head, and said,
‘To be sure, Madam, Miss is in a very dangerous
Condition, and there is no Time
to lose. If the Blisters, which I shall now
order her, should not relieve her, I fear
—we can do no more.’ —‘Would not you
please, Sir,’ says the Apothecary, ‘to
have the Powders and the Draught repeated?’ 
—‘How often were they ordered?’ 
cries the Doctor—‘Only tertia
quaq. Horâ,’ says the Apothecary—‘Let
them be taken every Hour, by all means,’ 
cries the Doctor; ‘and—let me see, pray
get me a Pen and Ink. —If you think
the Child in such imminent Danger,’ said
Booth, ‘would you give us Leave to call
in another Physician to your Assistance— 
Indeed my Wife—O by all means,’ said
the Doctor, ‘it is what I very much wish. 
Let me see, Mr. Arsenic, whom shall we
call’—‘what do you think of Dr. Dosewell?’ 
said the Apothecary—‘no body
better,’ cries the Physician—‘I should
have no Objection to the Gentleman,’ answered
Booth, ‘but another hath been recommended
to my Wife.’ He then mentioned
the Physician, for whom they had 

just before sent. ‘Who, Sir,’ cries the Doctor,
dropping his Pen; and when Booth repeated
the Name of Thompson, ‘Excuse me, Sir,’ 
cries the Doctor hastily, ‘I shall not meet
him’—‘why so, Sir?’ answered Booth. ‘I
will not meet him,’ replied the Doctor,
shall I meet a Man who pretends to know
more than the whole College, and would
overturn the whole Method of Practice,
which is so well established, and from
which no one Person hath pretended to
deviate?’ ‘Indeed, Sir,’ cries the Apothecary,
‘you do not kwow what you are
about, asking your Pardon; why, he
kills every body he comes near.’ ‘That
is not true,’ said Mrs. Ellison, ‘I have
been his Patient twice, and I am alive
yet.’ —‘You have had good Luck then,
Madam,’ answered the Apothecary; ‘for
he kills every body he comes near’— 
Nay, I know above a dozen others of my
own Acquaintance,’ replied Mrs. Ellison,
who have been all cured by him’—‘That
may be, Madam,’ cries Arsenic, ‘but he
kills every body for all that—why, Madam,
did you never hear of Mr. &wblank; 
I can't think of the Gentleman's Name,
tho' he was a Man of great Fashion, but
every body knows whom I mean.’ ‘Every
body indeed must know whom you mean,’ 

answered Mrs. Ellison, ‘for I never heard
but of one, and that many Years ago.’ 
Before the Dispute was ended, the Doctor
himself entered the Room. As he was a
very well-bred and a very good-natured Man,
he addressed himself with much Civility to
his Brother Physician, who was not quite
so courteous on his side. However, he suffered
the new Comer to be conducted to the
sick Bed, and at Booth's earnest Request to
deliver his Opinion. 
The Dispute which ensued between the
two Physicians would perhaps be unintelligible
to any but to those of the Faculty, and
not very entertaining to them. The Character
which the Officer and Mrs. Ellison
had given of the second Doctor, had greatly
prepossessed Booth in his Favour; and indeed
his Reasoning seemed to be the juster. 
Booth therefore declared he would abide by
his Advice; upon which the former Operator,
with his Zany the Apothecary, quitted
the Field, and left the other in full Possession
of the Sick. 
The first thing the new Doctor did was
(to use his own Phrase) to blow up the physical
Magazine. All the Powders and Potions 

instantly disappeared at his Command:
for he said there was a much readier and
nearer way to convey such Stuff to the Vault,
than by first sending it through a human
Body. He then ordered the Child to be
blooded, gave it a Clyster, and some cooling
Physic; and, in short, (that I may not
dwell too long on so unpleasing a Part of
History) within three Days cured the little
Patient of her Distemper, to the great Satisfaction
of Mrs. Ellison, and to the vast
Joy of Amelia. 
Some Readers will perhaps think this
whole Chapter might have been omitted; 
but though it contains no great Matter of
Amusement, it may at least serve to inform
Posterity concerning the present State of
Physic. 



In which Booth pays a Visit to the noble Lord. 
When that Day of the Week returned
in which Mr. Booth chose
to walk abroad, his Child being now perfectly
recovered, and Amelia's Chearfulness
returned, he went to wait on the noble Peer
according to his kind Invitation. 

Booth now found a very different Reception
with this great Man's Porter, from
what he had met with at his Friend the Colonel's. 
He no sooner told his Name, than
the Porter with a Bow told him his Lordship
was at home; the Door immediately flew
wide open; and he was conducted to an Antichamber,
where a Servant told him he
would acquaint his Lordship with his Arrival. 
Nor did he wait many Minutes before
the same Servant returned, and ushered
him to his Lordship's Apartment. 
He found my Lord alone, and was received
by him in the most courteous Manner
imaginable. After the first Ceremonials
were over, his Lordship began in the following
Words. ‘Mr. Booth, I do assure
you you are very much obliged to my
Cousin Ellison. She hath given you such
a Character that I shall have a Pleasure in
doing any thing in my Power to serve
you. —But it will be very difficult, I am
afraid, to get you a Rank at home. In
the West-Indies perhaps, or in some Regiment
abroad it may be more easy; and
when I consider your Reputation as a
Soldier, I make no doubt of your Readiness
to go to any Place where the Service 

of your Country shall call you.’ Booth
answered, ‘that he was highly obliged to
his Lordship, and assured him, he would
with great Chearfulness attend his Duty in
any Part of the World. The only thing
grievous in the Exchange of Countries,’ 
said he, ‘in my Opinion is to leave those
I love behind me, and I am sure, I shall
never have a second Trial equal to my
first. It was very hard, my Lord, to
leave a young Wife big with her first
Child, and so affected with my Absence,
that I had the utmost Reason to despair
of ever seeing her more. After such a
Demonstration of my Resolution to sacrifice
every other Consideration to my Duty,
I hope your Lordship will honour me
with some Confidence, that I shall make
no Objection to serve in any Country.’ 
‘My dear Mr. Booth,’ answered the Lord,
‘you speak like a Soldier, and I greatly
honour your Sentiments. Indeed I own
the Justice of your Inference from the
Example you have given: For, to quit a
Wife as you say, in the very Infancy of
Marriage, is, I acknowledge, some Trial
of Resolution.’ Booth answered with a
low Bow, and then after some immaterial
Conversation, his Lordship promised to speak
immediately to the Minister, and appointed 

Mr. Booth to come to him again on the Wednesday
Morning, that he might be acquainted
with his Patron's Success. The poor Man
now blushed and looked silly, till after some
time, he summoned up all his Courage to
his Assistance, and relying on the other's
Friendship, he opened the whole Affair of
his Circumstances, and confessed that he
did not dare stir from his Lodgings above
one Day in Seven. His Lordship expressed
great Concern at this Account, and very
kindly promised to take some Opportunity
of calling on him at his Cousin Ellison's,
when he hoped, he said, to bring him comfortable
Tidings. 
Booth soon afterwards took his Leave
with the most profuse Acknowledgments
for so much Goodness, and hastened Home
to acquaint his Amelia with what had so
greatly overjoyed him. She highly congratulated
him on his having found so generous
and powerful a Friend, towards whom
both their Bosoms burnt with the warmest
Sentiments of Gratitude. She was not however
contented, till she had made Booth renew
his Promise in the most solemn Manner
of taking her with him. After which they
sat down with their little Children to a Scrag
of Mutton and Broth, with the highest Satisfaction, 

and very heartily drank his Lordship's
Health in a Pot of Porter. 
In the Afternoon this happy Couple, if
the Reader will allow me to call poor People
happy, drank Tea with Mrs. Ellison, where
his Lordship's Praises being again repeated
by both the Husband and Wife were very
loudly echoed by Mrs. Ellison. While they
were here, the young Lady, whom we
have mentioned at the End of the last Book
to have made a Fourth at Whist, and with
whom Amelia seemed so much pleased, came
in; she was just returned to Town from a
short Visit in the Country, and her present
Visit was unexpected. It was however very
agreeable to Amelia, who liked her still
better upon a second Interview, and was resolved
to solicit her further Acquaintance. 
Mrs. Bennet still maintained some little
Reserve, but was much more familiar and
communicative than before. She appeared
moreover to be as little ceremonious as
Mrs. Ellison had reported her, and very
readily accepted Amelia's Apology for not
paying her the first Visit, and agreed to
drink Tea with her the very next Afternoon. 

Whilst the above-mentioned Company
were sitting in Mrs. Ellison's Parlour, Serjeant
Atkinson passed by the Window, and
knocked at the Door. Mrs. Ellison no
sooner saw him, than she said, ‘pray, Mr.
Booth, who is that genteel young Serjeant? 
He was here every Day last Week,
to enquire after the Health of Miss, and
at the Time of her Danger shewed almost
as much Concern for her as you did yourself.’ 
This was indeed a Fact; but as
the poor Fellow had received all his Answers
from the Maid or Mrs. Ellison, Booth had
never heard a word of the Matter. He
was however greatly pleased with what he
was now told, and burst forth into great
Praises of the Serjeant, which were seconded
by Amelia, who added that he was her Foster-Brother,
and she believed one of the
honestest Fellows in the World. 
‘And I'll swear,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘he
is one of the prettiest—Do, Mr. Booth,
desire him to walk in. A Serjeant of the
Guards is a Gentleman, and I had rather
give such a Man as you describe a Dish
of Tea, than any Beau Fribble of them
all.’ 

Booth wanted no great Solicitation to
shew any kind of Regard to Atkinson; and
accordingly the Serjeant was ushered in,
tho' not without some Reluctance on his
Side. There is perhaps nothing more uneasy
than those Sensations which the French call
the mauvaise Honte, nor any more difficult
to conquer; and poor Atkinson would, I am
persuaded, have mounted a Breach with
less Concern, than he walked into a Room
before three Ladies, two of whom were his
avowed well Wishers. 
Tho' I do not entirely agree with the
late learned Mr. Essex the celebrated Dancing-Master's
Opinion, that Dancing is the
Rudiments of polite Education, as he
would, I apprehend, exclude every other
Art and Science; yet is it certain, that
Persons whose Feet have never been under
the Hands of the Professors of that Art,
are apt to discover this Want in their Education
in every Motion, nay, even when
they stand or sit still. They seem indeed to
be over-burthened with Limbs, which they
know not how to use, as if when Nature
hath finished her Work, the Dancing-Master
still is necessary to put it in Motion. 

Atkinson was at present an Example of
this Observation, which doth so much Honour
to a Profession for which I have a very
high Regard. He was handsome and exquisitely
well made; and yet, as he had
never learnt to dance, he made so awkward
an Appearance in Mrs. Ellison's Parlour,
that the good Lady herself, who had invited
him in, could at first scarce refrain
from Laughter at his Behaviour. 
He had not however been long in the
Room, before Admiration of his Person
got the better of such risible Ideas. So
great is the Advantage of Beauty in Men
as well as Women, and so sure is this Quality
in either Sex of procuring some Regard
from the Beholder. 
The exceeding courteous Behaviour of
Mrs. Ellison, joined to that of Amelia and
Booth, at length dissipated the Uneasiness
of Atkinson; and he gained sufficient Confidence
to tell the Company some entertaining
Stories of Accidents, that had happened
in the Army within his Knowledge; 
which tho' they greatly pleased all present,
are not however of Consequence enough to
have a Place in this History. 

Mrs. Ellison was so very importunate with
her Company to stay Supper, that they all
consented. As for the Serjeant, he seemed
to be none of the least welcome Guests. 
She was indeed so pleased with what she
had heard of him, and what she saw of
him, that when a little warmed with Wine,
for she was no Flincher at the Bottle, she
began to indulge some Freedoms in her
Discourse towards him, that a little offended
Amelia's Delicacy, nay, they did not seem
to be highly relished by the other Lady. 
Tho' I am far from insinuating that these
exceeded the Bounds of Decency, or were
indeed greater Liberties than Ladies of the
middle Age, and especially Widows, do
frequently allow to themselves. 



Relating principally of the Affairs of Serjeant
Atkinson. 
The next Day, when all the same
Company, Atkinson only excepted,
assembled in Amelia's Apartment, Mrs. Ellison
presently began to discourse of him,
and that in Terms not only of Approbation,
but even of Affection. She called him her 

clever Serjeant, and her dear Serjeant, repeated
often that he was the prettiest Fellow
in the Army, and said it was a thousand
Pities he had not a Commission; for that if
he had, she was sure he would become a
General. 
‘I am of your Opinion, Madam,’ answered
Booth; ‘and he hath got 100l. of
his own already, if he could find a Wife
not to help him to two or three hundred
more, I think he might easily get a Commission
in a Marching Regiment; for I
am convinced there is no Colonel in the
Army would refuse him.’ 
‘Refuse him indeed!’ said Mrs. Ellison; 
‘no. He would be a very pretty Colonel
that did. And upon my Honour, I believe
there are very few Ladies who would
refuse him, if he had but a proper Opportunity
of soliciting them. The Colonel
and the Lady both would be better
off, than with one of those pretty Masters
that I see walking about, and draging
their long Swords after them, when
they should rather drag their Leading-Strings.’ 

‘Well said,’ cries Booth, ‘and spoken
like a Woman of Spirit. —Indeed, I believe,
they would be both better served.’ 
‘True Captain,’ answered Mrs. Ellison,
‘I would rather leave the two first Syllables
out of the Word Gentleman, than the
last.’ 
‘Nay I assure you,’ replied Booth, ‘there
is not a quieter Creature in the World. 
Tho' the Fellow hath the Bravery of a
Lion, he hath the Meekness of a Lamb. 
I can tell you Stories enow of that Kind,
and so can my dear Amelia when he was a
Boy.’ 
‘O if the Match sticks there,’ cries
Amelia, ‘I positively will not spoil his
Fortune by my Silence. I can answer
for him from his Infancy, that he was
one of the best natured Lads in the
World. I will tell you a Story or two of
him, the Truth of which I can testify
from my own Knowledge. When he was
but six Years old, he was at Play with
me at my Mother's House, and a great
Pointing-dog bit him through the Leg. 
The poor Lad in the Midst of the Anguish 

of his Wound, declared he was
overjoyed it had not happened to Miss,
(for the same Dog had just before snapt
at me, and my Petticoats had been my
Defence.) Another Instance of his Goodness
which greatly recommended him to
my Father, and which I have loved him
for ever since, was this. My Father was
a great Lover of Birds, and strictly forbad
the spoiling of their Nests. Poor Joe
was one Day caught upon a Tree, and
being concluded guilty, was severely lashed
for it; but it was afterwards discovered
that another Boy, a Friend of Joe's, had
robbed the Nest of its young ones, and
poor Joe had climbed the Tree in order
to restore them, notwithstanding which
he submitted to the Punishment rather
than he would impeach his Companion. 
But if these Stories appear childish and
trifling, the Duty and Kindness he hath
shewn to his Mother, must recommend
him to every one. Ever since he hath
been fifteen Years old, he hath more than
half supported her; and when my Brother
died, I remember particularly Joe at his
Desire, for he was much his Favourite,
had one of his Suits given him, but instead
of his becoming finer on that Occasion,
another young Fellow came to 

Church in my Brother's Cloaths, and my
old Nurse appeared the same Sunday in a
new Gown, which her Son had purchased
for her with the Sale of his Legacy.’ 
‘Well, I protest, he is a very worthy
Creature,’ said Mrs. Bennet. 
‘He is a charming Fellow,’ cries Mrs.
Ellison,—‘but then the Name of Serjeant,
Capt. Booth, tho' as the Play says, my
Pride brings me off again.’ 

And whatsoever the Sages charge on Pride,
The Angels Fall, and twenty other good Faults beside;
On Earth I'm sure—I'm sure—something—calling
Pride saves Man and our Sex too from falling.
Here a Footman's Rap at the Door shook
the Room. Upon which Mrs. Ellison running
to the Window, cry'd out, let me die
if it is not my Lord, what shall I do? I
must be at home to him, but suppose he
should enquire for you, Captain, what shall
I say? or will you go down with me? 

The Company were in some Confusion at
this Instant, and before they had agreed on
any thing, Booth's little Girl came running
into the Room, and said, ‘there was a prodigious
great Gentleman coming up Stairs.’ 
She was immediately followed by his Lordship,
who, as he knew Booth must be at
home, made very little or no Enquiry at
the Door. 
Amelia was taken somewhat at a Surprize,
but she was too polite to shew much Confusion:
for though she knew nothing of the
Town, she had had a genteel Education,
and kept the best Company the Country afforded. 
The Ceremonies therefore past as
usual, and they all sat down. 
His Lordship soon addressed himself to
Booth, saying, ‘As I have what I think
good News for you, Sir, I could not delay
giving myself the Pleasure of communicating
it to you. I have mentioned
your Affair where I promised you, and
I have no doubt of my Success. One
may easily perceive, you know, from the
Manner of Peoples behaving upon such
Occasions; and indeed, when I related
your Case I found there was much Inclination 

to serve you. Great Men, Mr.
Booth, must do things in their own Time; 
but I think you may depend on having
something done very soon.’ 
Booth made many Acknowledgments for
his Lordship's Goodness, and now a second
time paid all the Thanks which would
have been due, even had the Favour been obtained. 
This Art of promising is the Oeconomy
of a great Man's Pride, a sort of
good Husbandry in conferring Favours, by
which they receive ten-fold in Acknowledgments
for every Obligation, I mean among
those who really intend the Service: for
there are others who cheat poor Men of
their Thanks, without ever designing to
deserve them at all. 
This Matter being sufficiently discussed,
the Conversation took a gayer Turn; and
my Lord began to entertain the Ladies with
some of that elegant Discourse, which tho'
most delightful to hear, it is impossible
should ever be read. Such Conversation indeed,
as it extremely resembles brisk bottled
Ale in its Liveliness, so doth it in this, that
it is as impossible to transfuse the one from
the Lips to Paper, as to decant the other. 

Both by such Operations lose all their Spirit,
and nothing but Froth remains. 
His Lordship was so highly pleased with
Amelia, that he could not help being somewhat
particular to her; but this Particularity
distinguished itself only in a higher
Degree of Respect, and was so very polite
and so very distant, that she herself was
pleased, and at his Departure, which was
not till he had far exceeded the Length of a
common Visit, declared he was the finest
Gentleman she had ever seen, with which
Sentiment her Husband and Mrs. Ellison
both entirely concurred. 
Mrs. Bennet on the contrary exprest some
little Dislike to my Lord's Complaisance,
which she called excessive. ‘For my own
Part,’ said she, ‘I have not the least
Relish for those very fine Gentlemen; 
what the World generally calls Politeness,
I term Insincerity; and I am more
charmed with the Stories which Mrs. Booth
told us of the honest Serjeant, than with
all that the finest Gentlemen in the World
ever said in their Lives.’ 
‘O to be sure,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘All
for Love, or the World well Lost, is a 

Motto very proper for some Folks to
wear in their Coat of Arms; but the
Generality of the World will, I believe,
agree with that Lady's Opinion of my
Cousin, rather than with Mrs. Bennet.’ 
Mrs. Bennet seeing Mrs. Ellison took Offence
at what she said, thought proper to
make some Apology, which was very readily
accepted, and so ended the Visit. 
We cannot however put an End to the
Chapter without observing, that such is the
ambitious Temper of Beauty, that it may
always apply to itself that celebrated Passage
in Lucan, 

Nec quenquam jam ferre potest Cæsarve priorem
Pompeiusve parem.—
Indeed, I believe, it may be laid down as
a general Rule, that no Woman who hath
any great Pretensions to Admiration, is
over-well pleased in a Company, where she
perceives herself to fill only the second Place. 
This Observation however I humbly submit
to the Judgment of the Ladies, and hope
it will be considered as retracted by me, if
they shall dissent from my Opinon. 




Containing Matters that require no Preface. 
When Booth and his Wife were left
alone together, they both extremely
exulted in their good Fortune, in having
found so good a Friend as his Lordship; 
nor were they wanting in very warm Expressions
of their Gratitude towards Mrs. Ellison. 
After which they began to lay down
Schemes of Living when Booth should have
his Commission of Captain, and after the
exactest Computation, concluded that with
Œconomy, they should be able to save,
at least, fifty Pounds a Year out of their
Income, in order to pay their Debts. 
These Matters being well settled, Amelia
asked Booth what he thought of Mrs. Bennet. 
‘I think, my Dear,’ answered Booth, ‘that
she hath been formerly a very pretty Woman.’ 
‘I am mistaken,’ replied she, ‘if
she be not a very good Creature. I don't
know I ever took such a Liking to any
one on so short an Acquaintance. I fancy
she hath been a very spritely Woman: 
For if you observe, she discovers by starts
a great Vivacity in her Countenance.’ ‘I 

made the same Observation,’ cries Booth:
‘sure some strange Misfortune hath befallen
her.’ ‘A Misfortune indeed!’ answered
Amelia, ‘sure Child, you forgot what Mrs.
Ellison told us, that she had lost a beloved
Husband. A Misfortune which I have
often wondered at any Woman's surviving,’ 
—at which Words, she cast a tender
Look at Booth, and presently afterwards
throwing herself upon his Neck, cried— 
‘O Heavens! what a happy Creature am
I; when I consider the Dangers you have
gone through, how I exult in my Bliss!’ 
The good natured Reader will suppose that
Booth was not deficient in returning such
Tenderness, after which the Conversation
became too fond to be here related. 
The next Morning Mrs. Ellison addressed
herself to Booth as follows: ‘I shall make
no Apology, Sir, for what I am going to
say, as it proceeds from my Friendship
to yourself and your dear Lady. I am
convinced then, Sir, there is something
more than Accident in your going Abroad
only one Day in the Week. Now, Sir,
if, as I am afraid, Matters are not altogether
as well as I wish them, I beg, since
I do not believe you are provided with a
Lawyer, that you will suffer me to recommend 

one to you. The Person I shall
mention is, I assure you, of much Ability
in his Profession, and I have known
him do great Services to Gentlemen under
a Cloud. Do not be ashamed of your
Circumstances, my dear Friend. They
are a much greater Scandal to those, who
have left so much Merit unprovided for.’ 
Booth gave Mrs. Ellison abundance of
Thanks for her Kindness, and explicitely
confest to her that her Conjectures were
right, and without Hesitation accepted the
Offer of her Friend's Assistance. 
Mrs. Ellison then acquainted him with
her Apprehensions on his Account. She
said she had both Yesterday and this Morning
seen two or three very ugly suspicious
Fellows pass several times by her Window. 
‘Upon all Accounts,’ said she, ‘my dear
Sir, I advise you to keep yourself close
confined till the Lawyer hath been with
you. I am sure he will get you your
Liberty, at least of walking about within
the Verge—There's something to be done
with the Board of Green Cloth, I don't
know what; but this I know, that several
Gentlemen have lived here a long
Time very comfortably, and have defied all 

the Vengance of their Creditors. However,
in the mean time you must be a
close Prisoner with your Lady; and I believe
there is no Man in England but
would exchange his Liberty for the same
Goal.’ 
She then departed, in order to send for
the Attorney, and presently afterwards the
Serjeant arrived with News of the like
Kind. He said he had scraped an Acquaintance
with Murphy. ‘I hope your
Honour will pardon me,’ cries Atkinson,
‘but I pretended to have a small Demand
upon your Honour myself, and offered
to employ him in the Business. Upon
which he told me, that if I would go
with him to the Marshal's Court, and
make Affidavit of my Debt, he should be
able very shortly to get it me; for I shall
have the Captain in Hold,’ cries he, ‘within
a Day or two. I wish,’ said the Serjeant,
‘I could do your Honour any Service. 
Shall I walk about all Day before the
Door? or shall I be Porter and watch it
in the Inside, till your Honour can find
some means of securing yourself? I hope
you will not be offended at me, but I
beg you would take care of falling into
Murphy's Hands; for he hath the Character 

of the greatest Villain upon Earth. 
I am afraid you will think me too bold,
Sir; but I have a little Money, if it can
be of any Service, do, pray your Honour,
command it. It can never do me
so much Good any other way. Consider,
Sir, I owe all I have to yourself, and my
dear Mistress.’ 
Booth stood a Moment, as if he had been
Thunder-struck, and then, the Tears bursting
from his Eyes, he said: ‘Upon my
Soul, Atkinson, you overcome me. I
scarce ever heard of so much Goodness,
nor do I know how to express my Sentiments
of it. But be assured, as for your
Money, I will not accept it, and let it
satisfy you, that in my present Circumstances
it would do me no essential Service; 
but this be assured of likewise, that
whilst I live, I shall never forget the
Kindness of the Offer—However, as I
apprehend I may be in some Danger of
Fellows getting into the House, for a
Day or two, as I have no Guard but a
poor little Girl, I will not refuse the
Goodness you offer to shew in my Protection. 
And I make no doubt but Mrs.
Ellison will let you sit in her Parlour for
that Purpose.’ 

Atkinson with the utmost Readiness undertook
the Office of Porter; and Mrs. Ellison
as readily allotted him a Place in her
Back-parlour, where he continued three Days
together, from Eight in the Morning till
Twelve at Night; during which Time he
had sometimes the Company of Mrs. Ellison,
and sometimes of Booth, Amelia, and
Mrs. Bennet too; for this last had taken as
great a Fancy to Amelia, as Amelia had to
her, and therefore as Mr. Booth's Affairs
were now no Secret in the Neighbourhood,
made her frequent Visits during the Confinement
of her Husband, and consequently
her own. 
Nothing, as I remember, happened in
this Interval of Time, more worthy Notice
than the following Card, which Amelia received
from her old Acquaintance Mrs.
James. ‘Mrs. James sends her Compliments
to Mrs. Booth, and desires to know
how she does; for as she hath not had the
Favour of seeing her at her own House,
or of meeting her in any public Place, in
so long Time, fears it may be owing to ill
Health.’ 

Amelia had long given over all Thoughts
of her Friend, and doubted not but that
she was as entirely given over by her; she
was very much surprized at this Message,
and under some Doubt whether it was not
meant as an Insult, especially from the mention
of public Places, which she thought
so inconsistent with her present Circumstances,
of which she supposed Mrs. James
was well apprized. However, at the Entreaty
of her Husband, who languished for
nothing more than to be again reconciled to
his Friend James, Amelia undertook to pay
the Lady a Visit, and to examine into the
Mystery of this Conduct, which appeared
to her so unaccountable. 
Mrs. James received her with a Degree
of Civility that amazed Amelia, no less than
her Coldness had done before. She resolved
to come to an Eclaircissement, and having
sat out some Company that came in, when
they were alone together, Amelia, after
some Silence, and many Offers to speak,
at last said, ‘my dear Jenny, (if you will
now suffer me to call you by so familiar a
Name,) have you entirely forgot a certain
young Lady who had the Pleasure of being
your intimate Acquaintance at Montpelier?’ 

—‘Whom do you mean, dear
Madam?’ cries Mrs. James, with great
Concern. ‘I mean myself,’ answered Amelia
—‘You surprize me, Madam,’ replied
Mrs. James. ‘How can you ask me that
Question?’ ‘Nay, my Dear, I do not
intend to offend you,’ cries Amelia? ‘but
I am really desirous to solve to myself the
Reason of that Coldness which you shewed
me, when you did me the Favour of a
Visit. Can you think, my Dear, I was
not disappointed when I expected to meet
an intimate Friend, to receive a cold
formal Visitant? I desire you to examine
your own Heart, and answer me honestly,
if you do not think I had some little
Reason to be dissatisfied with your Behaviour?’ 
‘Indeed, Mrs. Booth,’ answered
the other Lady, ‘you surprize me very
much; if there was any thing displeasing
to you in my Behaviour, I am extremely
concerned at it. I did not know I had
been defective in any of the Rules of
Civility, but if I was, Madam, I ask
your Pardon.’ ‘Is Civility then, my
Dear,’ replied Amelia, ‘a synonymous
Term with Friendship? Could I have
expected when I parted the last Time with
Miss Jenny Bath, to have met her the
next Time in the Shape of a fine Lady, 

complaining of the Hardship of climbing
up two Pair of Stairs to visit me, and
then approaching me with the distant Air
of a new or a slight Acquaintance? Do
you think, my dear Mrs. James, if the
Tables had been turned, if my Fortune
had been as high in the World as yours,
and you in my Distress and abject Condition,
that I would not have climbed as
high as the Monument to visit you?’ 
‘Sure, Madam,’ cries Mrs. James, ‘I
mistake you, or you have greatly mistaken
me. Can you complain of my not visiting
you, who have owed me a Visit almost
these three Weeks. Nay, did I not
even then send you a Card, which sure was
doing more than all the Friendship and
good Breeding in the World required; 
but indeed as I had met you in no public
Place, I really thought you was ill?’ 
‘How can you mention public Places to
me,’ said Amelia, ‘when you can hardly
be a Stranger to my present Situation? 
Did you not know, Madam, that I was
ruined.’ ‘No indeed, Madam, did I not,’ 
replied Mrs. James, ‘I am sure I should have
been highly concerned if I had.’ ‘Why
sure, my Dear,’ cries Amelia, ‘you could
not imagine that we were in affluent Circumstances,
when you found us in such a 

Place, and in such a Condition.’ ‘Nay,
my Dear,’ answered Mrs. James, ‘since
you are pleased to mention it first yourself,
I own I was a little surprized to see
you in no better Lodgings; but I concluded
you had your own Reasons for liking
them; and for my own part, I have laid
it down as a positive Rule, never to enquire
into the private Affairs of any one,
especially of my Friends. I am not of
the Humour of some Ladies, who confine
the Circle of their Acquaintance to
one Part of the Town, and would not be
known to visit in the City for the World. 
For my part, I never dropt an Acquaintance
with any one, while it was reputable
to keep it up; and I can solemnly declare,
I have not a Friend in the World
for whom I have a greater Esteem than I
have for Mrs. Booth.’ 
At this Instant the Arrival of a new
Visitant put an end to the Discourse, and
Amelia soon after took her Leave without
the least Anger, but with some little unavoidable
Contempt for a Lady, in whose
Opinion, as we have hinted before, outward
Form and Ceremony constituted the whole
Essence of Friendship; who valued all her
Acquaintance alike, as each Individual served 

equally to fill up a Place in her visiting
Roll, and who in reality had not the least
Concern for the good Qualities or Well-being
of any of them. 



Containing much heroic Matter. 
At the End of three Days Mrs. Ellison's
Friend had so far purchased Mr. Booth's
Liberty, that he could walk again abroad
within the Verge, without any Danger of
having a Warrant backed against him by
the Board before he had Notice. As for the
ill-looked Persons that had given the Alarm,
it was now discovered that another unhappy
Gentleman, and not Booth was the Object
of their Pursuit. 
Mr. Booth now being delivered from his
Fears, went, as he had formerly done, to
take his Morning-walk in the Park. Here
he met Colonel Bath in Company with
some other Officers, and very civilly paid
his Respects to him. But instead of returning
the Salute, the Colonel looked him
full in the Face with a very stern Countenance; 
and if he could be said to take any
Notice of him, it was in such a Manner as 

to inform him he would take no Notice of
him. 
Booth was not more hurt than surprized
at this Behaviour, and resolved to know the
Reason of it. He therefore watched an
Opportunity till the Colonel was alone, and
then walked boldly up to him, and desired to
know if he had given him any Offence,—the
Colonel answered hastily, ‘Sir, I am above
being offended with you, nor do I think it
consistent with my Dignity to make you any
Answer.’ Booth replied, ‘I don't know,
Sir, that I have done any thing to deserve
this Treatment.’ —‘Look'ee, Sir,’ cries the
Colonel, ‘if I had not formerly had some
Respect for you, I should not think you
worth my Resentment. However, as you
are a Gentleman born and an Officer, and
as I have had an Esteem for you, I will
give you some Marks of it by putting it in
your Power to do yourself Justice. I will
tell you therefore, Sir, that you have acted
like a Scoundrel.’ —‘If we were not in the
Park,’ answered Booth warmly, ‘I would
thank you very properly for that Compliment.’ 
—‘O Sir!’ cries the Colonel, ‘we can
be soon in a convenient Place.’ Upon which
Booth answered he would attend him wherever
he pleased. —The Colonel then bid him 

come along, and strutted forward directly up
Constitution-Hill to Hyde-Park, Booth following
him at first, and afterwards walking before
him, till they came to that Place which
may be properly called the Field of Blood,
being that Part a little to the Left of the
Ring, which Heroes have chosen for the
Scene of their Exit out of this World. 
Booth reached the Ring some Time before
the Colonel; for he mended not his Pace
any more than a Spaniard. To say Truth,
I believe it was not in his Power; for he
had so long accustomed himself to one and
the same Strut, that as a Horse used always
to Trotting can scarce be forced into a Gallop,
so could no Passion force the Colonel to
alter his Pace. 
At length, however, both Parties arrived
at the Lists, where the Colonel very deliberately
took off his Wig and Coat, and laid
them on the Grass, and then drawing his
Sword, advanced to Booth, who had likewise
his drawn Weapon in his Hand, but
had made no other Preparation for the
Combat. 
The Combatants now engaged with great
Fury, and after two or three Passes, Booth 

run the Colonel through the Body and threw
him on the Ground, at the same Time possessing
himself of the Colonel's Sword. 
As soon as the Colonel was become Master
of his Speech, he called out to Booth in a
very kind Voice, and said, ‘you have
done my Business, and satisfied me that
you are a Man of Honour, and that my
Brother James must have been mistaken: 
For I am convinced, that no Man who will
draw his Sword in so gallant a Manner,
is capable of being a Rascal, d&wblank;n me,
give me a Buss, my dear Boy, I ask your
Pardon for that infamous Appellation I
dishonoured your Dignity with; but,
d&wblank;n me, if it was not purely out of
Love, and to give you an Opportunity
of doing yourself Justice, which I own
you have done like a Man of Honour. 
What may be the Consequence I know
not, but, I hope, at least I shall live to
reconcile you with my Brother.’ 
Booth shewed great Concern and even
Horror in his Countenance. ‘Why, my
dear Colonel,’ said he, ‘would you force
me to this? For Heaven's Sake, tell me,
what I have ever done to offend you.’ 

‘Me!’ cried the Colonel. ‘Indeed, my
dear Child, you never did any Thing to
offend me. Nay, I have acted the Part
of a Friend to you in the whole Affair. 
I maintained your Cause with my Brother
as long as Decency would permit, I could
not flatly contradict him, tho' indeed I
scarce believed him. But what could I
do, if I had not fought with you, I must
have been obliged to have fought with
him? However, I hope, what is done
will be sufficient, and that Matters may
be discomodated without your being put
to the Necessity of Fighting any more on
this Occasion.’ 
Never regard me, cried Booth eagerly,
for Heaven's Sake think of your own Preservation. 
Let me put you into a Chair,
and get you a Surgeon. 
‘Thou art a noble Lad,’ cries the Colonel,
who was not got on his Legs,‘and I am
glad the Business is so well over. For tho'
your Sword went quite through, it slanted
so, that I apprehend there is little Danger
of Life. However, I think there is enough
done to put an honourable End to the Affair,
especially as you was so hasty to disarm 

me. I bleed a little, but I can walk
to the House by the Water; and if you
will send me a Chair thither I shall be obliged
to you.’ 
As the Colonel refused any Assistance, (indeed
he was very able to walk without it,
tho' with somewhat less Dignity than usual
Booth set forward to Grovesnor-Gate, in
order to procure the Chair, and soon after
returned with one to his Friend; whom
having conveyed into it, he attended himself
on Foot into Bond-street, where then
lived the most eminent Surgeon in the
Kingdom, or perhaps in the World. 
The Surgeon having probed the Wound
turned towards Booth who was apparently
the guilty Person, and said with a Smile,
‘Upon my Word, Sir, you have performed
the Business with great Dexterity; 
and if any Gentleman hath a Mind to be
run through the Body, I think I may
venture to recommend you of all Mankind
for the Operator.’ 
‘Sir,’ cries the Colonel to the Surgeon,
‘I would not have you imagine I am afraid
to die. I think I know more what belongs
to the Dignity of a Man; and, I 

believe, I have shewn it at the Head of a
Line of Battle. Do not impute my Concern
to that Fear, when I ask you whether
there is or is not any Danger?’ 
‘Really, Colonel,’ answered the Surgeon,
who well knew the Complexion of the
Gentleman then under his Hands, ‘It
would be a little Presumption to say, that
a Man who hath been just run through
the Body, is in no manner of Danger. 
But this, I think, I may promise you
with all the Dignity of a Surgeon, that I
yet perceive no very bad Symptoms, and
unless something worse should appear, or
a Fever be the Consequence, I hope you
may live to be again at the Head of a
Line of Battle.’ 
‘I am glad to hear that is your Opinion,’ 
quoth the Colonel, ‘for I am not desirous
of dying, tho' I am not afraid of it. 
But if any thing worse than you apprehend
should happen, I desire you will be
a Witness of my Declaration, that this
young Gentleman is entirely innocent. I
forced him to do what he did. My dear
Booth, I am pleased Matters are as they
are. You are the first Man that ever
gained an Advantage over me; but i 

was very lucky for you that you disarmed
me, and I doubt not, but you have the
Equannanimity to think so. If the Business
therefore hath ended without doing any
thing to the Purpose, it was Fortune's
Pleasure, and neither of our Faults.’ 
Booth heartily embraced the Colonel, and
assured him of the great Satisfaction he had
received from the Surgeon's Opinion; and
soon after the two Combatants took their
Leave of each other. The Colonel after he
was drest, went in a Chair to his Lodgings,
and Booth walked on Foot to his; where
he luckily arrived without meeting any of
Mr. Murphy's Gang; a Danger which never
once occurred to his Imagination till he was
out of it. 
The Affair he had been about had indeed
so entirely occupied his Mind, that it had
obliterated every other Idea; among the
rest, it caused him so absolutely to forget
the Time of the Day, that tho' he had exceeded
the Time of Dining above two
Hours, he had not the least Suspicion of
being at home later than usual. 




In which the Reader will find Matter worthy
his Consideration. 
Amelia having waited above an Hour
for her Husband concluded, as he was
the most punctual Man alive, that he had
met with some Engagement abroad, and
sat down to her Meal with her Children; 
which, as it was always uncomfortable in
the Absence of her Husband, was very short; 
so that before his Return all the Apparatus
of dining was entirely removed. 
Booth sat some time with his Wife, expecting
every Minute when the little Maid
would make her Appearance; at last Curiosity,
I believe, rather than Appetite, made
him ask, how long it was to Dinner? To
Dinner! my dear, answered Amelia; sure
you have dined, I hope? Booth replied in
the Negative; upon which his Wife started
from her Chair, and bestirred herself as nimbly
to provide him a Repast, as the most
industrious Hostess in the Kingdom doth,
when some unexpected Guest of extraordinary
Quality arrives at her House. 

The Reader hath not, I think, from any
Passages hitherto recorded in this History had
much Reason to accuse Amelia of a blameable
Curiosity; he will not, I hope, conclude that
she gave an Instance of any such Fault,
when, upon Booth's having so long overstaid
his Time, and so greatly mistaken the
Hour of the Day, and upon some other Circumstances
of his Behaviour: (for he was too
honest to be good at concealing any of his
Thoughts) she said to him, after he had
done eating, ‘My Dear, I am sure something
more than ordinary hath happened
to-day, and I beg you will tell me what
it is.’ 
Booth answered, that nothing of any Consequence
had happened; that he had been
detained by a Friend, whom he met accidentally,
longer than he expected. In short,
he made many shuffling and evasive Answers,
not boldly lying out, which perhaps
would have succeded, but poorly and vainly
endeavouring to reconcile Falshood with
Truth. An Attempt which seldom fails to
betray the most practised Deceiver. 
How impossible was it therefore for poor
Booth to succeed in an Art for which Nature 

had so entirely disqualified him. His Countenance
indeed confessed faster than his
Tongue denied; and the whole of his Behaviour
gave Amelia an Alarm, and made
her suspect something very bad had happened; 
and as her Thoughts turned presently
on the Badness of their Circumstances,
she feared some Mischief from his Creditors
had befallen him: for she was too ignorant
of such Matters to know, that if he had
fallen into the Hands of the Philistines,
(which is the Name given by the Pious to
Bailiffs) he would hardly have been able so
soon to recover his Liberty. Booth at last
perceived her to be so uneasy, that as he
saw no Hopes of contriving any Fiction to
satisfy her, he thought himself obliged to
tell her the Truth, or at least Part of the
Truth, and confessed that he had had a little
Skirmish with Colonel Bath, in which
he said the Colonel had received a slight
Wound, not at all dangerous; and this, says
he, is all the whole Matter. ‘If it be so,’ 
cries Amelia, ‘I thank Heaven no worse
hath happened; but why, my dear, will
you ever converse with that Madman, who
can embrace a Friend one Moment, and
fight with him the next?’ Nay, my dear,’ 
answered Booth, ‘you yourself must confess,
though he be a little too much on the Qui 

vive, he is a Man of great Honour and
Good-nature.’ ‘Tell me not,’ replied
she, ‘of such Good-nature and Honour
as would sacrifice a Friend and a whole
Family to a ridiculous Whim. O Heaven,’ 
cried she, falling upon her Knees,
‘from what Misery have I escaped, from
what have these poor Babes escaped thro'
your gracious Providence this Day!’ — 
Then turning to her Husband—she cry'd— 
‘But are you sure the Monster's Wound
is no more dangerous than you say? A
Monster surely I may call him, who can
quarrel with a Man that could not, that
I am convinced would not offend him.’ 
Upon this Question Booth repeated the
Assurances which the Surgeon had given
them, perhaps with a little Enlargement,
which pretty well satisfied Amelia; and instead
of blaming her Husband for what he
had done, she tenderly embraced him, and
again returned Thanks to Heaven for his
Safety. 
In the Evening Booth insisted on paying
a short Visit to the Colonel, highly against
the Inclination of Amelia, who by many
Arguments and Entreaties endeavoured to
dissuade her Husband from continuing an 

Acquantaince; in which she said she should
always foresee much Danger for the future. 
However, she was at last prevailed upon to
acquiesce; and Booth went to the Colonel,
whose Lodgings happened to be in the
Verge as well as his own. 
He found the Colonel in his Night-gown
and his great Chair, engaged with another
Officer at a Game at Chess. He rose immediately,
and having heartily embraced
Booth, presented him to his Friend, saying
he had the Honour to introduce to him as
brave and as fortitudinous a Man as any in the
King's Dominions. —He then took Booth
with him into the next Room, and desired
him not to mention a Word of what had
happened in the Morning, saying, ‘I am
very well satisfied that no more hath happened; 
however, as it ended in nothing,
I could wish it might remain a Secret.’ 
Booth told him he was heartily glad to find
him so well, and promised never to mention
it more to any one. 
The Game at Chess being but just begun,
and neither of the Parties having gained
any considerable Advantage, they neither
of them insisted on continuing it; and now 

the Colonel's Antagonist took his leave, and
left the Colonel and Booth together. 
As soon as they were alone, the latter
earnestly entreated the former to acquaint
him with the real Cause of his Anger; ‘for
may I perish,’ cries Booth, ‘if I can even
guess what I have ever done to offend
either you, or your Brother Col. James.’ 
‘Look'ee, Child,’ cries the Colonel, ‘I
tell you I am for my own Part satisfied:
for I am convinced that a Man who will
fight can never be a Rascal; and therefore
why should you enquire any more of
me at present? When I see my Brother
James, I hope to reconcile all Matters,
and perhaps no more Swords need be
drawn on this Occasion.’ But Booth still
persisting in his Desire, the Colonel after some
Hesitation, with a tremendous Oath, cry'd
out, ‘I do not think myself at liberty to
refuse you after the Indignity I offered
you; so since you demand it of me, I
will inform you. My Brother told me you
had used him dishonourably, and had divellicated
his Character behind his Back. He
gave me his Word too that he was well assured
of what he said. What could I have
done, though I own to you I did not believe 

him, and your Behaviour since hath
convinced me I was in the right, I must
either have given him the Lye, and fought
with him, or else I was obliged to behave
as I did, and fight with you. And now,
my Lad, I leave it to you to do as you
please; but if you are laid under any Necessity
to do yourself further Justice, it is
your own Fault.’ 
‘Alas! Colonel,’ answered Booth, ‘besides
the Obligations I have to the Colonel,
I have really so much Love for him, that
I think of nothing less than Resentment. 
All I wish is to have this Affair brought
to an Eclaircissement, and to satisfy him
that he is in an Error: for though his Assertions
are cruelly injurious, and I have
never deserved them; yet I am convinced
he would not say what he did not himself
think. Some Rascal envious of his Friendship
for me hath belyed me to him; and
the only Resentment I desire is to convince
him of his Mistake.’ 
At these Words—the Colonel grinned horribly
a ghastly Smile, or rather Sneer, and
answered, ‘Young Gentleman, you may
do as you please; but by the eternal Dignity
of Man, if any Man breathing had 

taken a Liberty with my Character,— 
here, here—Mr. Booth (shewing his Fingers)
here— d&wblank;n me should be his Nostrils, he
should breathe through my Hands, and
breathe his last— d&wblank;n me.’ 
Booth answered, ‘I think Colonel I may
appeal to your Testimony that I dare do
myself Justice; since he who dare draw
his Sword against you, can hardly be supposed
to fear any other Person; but I repeat
to you again that I love Col. James
so well, and am so greatly obliged to him,
that it would be almost indifferent to me,
whether I directed my Sword against his
Breast, or my own.’ 
The Colonel's Muscles were considerably
softened by Booth's last Speech; but he
again contracted them into a vast Degree of
Fierceness, before he cryed out—‘Boy,
thou hast Reason enough to be vain; for
thou art the first Person that ever could
proudly say he gained an Advantage over
me in Combat. I believe indeed, thou
art not afraid of any Man breathing, and
as I know thou hast some Obligations to
my Brother, I do not discommend thee; 
for nothing more becomes the Dignity of
a Man than Gratitude. Besides, as I am 

satisfied my Brother can produce the Author
of the Slander—I say, I am satisfied
of that, d&wblank;n me, if any Man alive
dares assert the contrary; for that would
be to make my Brother himself a Liar,
I will make him produce his Author; and
then, my dear Boy, your doing yourself
proper Justice there, will bring you finely
out of the whole Affair. As soon as my
Surgeon gives me Leave to go abroad,
which, I hope, will be in a few Days, I
will bring my Brother James to a Tavern,
where you shall meet us; and I will engage
my Honour, my whole Dignity to
you, to make you Friends.’ 
This Assurance of the Colonel gave Booth
great Pleasure; for few Persons ever loved
a Friend better than he did James; and as
for doing military Justice on the Author of
that scandalous Report which had incensed
his Friend against him, not Bath himself
was ever more ready on such an Occasion
than Booth to execute it. He soon after
took his Leave, and returned home in high
Spirits to his Amelia, whom he found in
Mrs. Ellison's Apartment, engaged in a
Party at Ombre with that Lady, and her
right honourable Cousin. 

His Lordship had, it seems, had a second
Interview with the great Man, and having
obtained further Hopes (for I think there
was not yet an absolute Promise) of Success
in Mr. Booth's Affairs, his usual good Nature
brought him immediately to acquaint
Mr. Booth with it. As he did not therefore
find him at home, and as he met with the
two Ladies together, he resolved to stay till
his Friend's Return, which he was assured
would not be long, especially as he was so
lucky, he said, to have no particular Engagement
that whole Evening. 
We remarked before, that his Lordship,
at the first Interview with Amelia, had distinguished
her by a more particular Address
from the other Ladies; but that now
appeared to be rather owing to his perfect
good Breeding, as she was then to be considered
as the Mistress of the House, than
from any other Preference. His present
Behaviour made this still more manifest; 
for as he was now in Mrs. Ellison's Apartment,
tho' she was his Relation and old
Acquaintance, he applied his Conversation
rather more to her than to Amelia. His
Eyes indeed were now and then guilty of
the contrary Distinction, but this was only by 

Stealth; for they constantly withdrew the
Moment they were discovered. In short,
he treated Amelia with the greatest Distance,
and at the same time with the most profound
and awful Respect; his Conversation was
so general, so lively, and so obliging, that
Amelia, when she added to his Agreeableness
the Obligations she had to him for his
Friendship to Booth, was certainly as much
pleased with his Lordship, as any virtuous
Woman can possibly be with any Man,
besides her own Husband. 



Containing various Matters. 
We have already mentioned the good
Humour in which Booth returned
home; and the Reader will easily believe it
was not a little encreased by the good Humour
in which he found his Company. My
Lord received him with the utmost Marks
of Friendship and Affection, and told him
that his Affairs went on as well almost as he
himself could desire, and that he doubted
not very soon to wish him Joy of a Company. 

When Booth had made a proper Return
to all his Lordship's unparallelled Goodness,
he whispered Amelia that the Colonel was
entirely out of Danger, and almost as well
as himself. This made her Satisfaction
complete, threw her into such Spirits,
and gave such a Lustre to her Eyes, that
her Face, as Horace says, was too dazzling
to be looked at; it was certainly too handsome
to be looked at without the highest
Admiration. 
His Lordship departed about 10 o'Clock,
and left the Company in Raptures with him,
especially the two Ladies, of whom it is
difficult to say which exceeded the other in
his Commendations. Mrs. Ellison swore she
believed he was the best of all Humankind; 
and Amelia, without making any Exception,
declared he was the finest Gentleman, and
most agreeable Man she had ever seen in
her Life; adding, it was great pity he should
remain single. ‘That's true indeed,’ cries
Mrs. Ellison, ‘and I have often lamented
it, nay I am astonished at it, considering
the great Liking he always shews for our
Sex, and he may certainly have the Choice
of all. The real Reason, I believe, is
his Fondness for his Sister's Children. I 

declare, Madam, if you was to see his
Behaviour to them, you would think they
were his own. Indeed he is vastly fond
of all manner of Children.’ ‘Good
Creature,’ cries Amelia, ‘if ever he doth
me the Honour of another Visit, I am
resolved I will shew him my little Things. 
I think, Mrs. Ellison, as you say my Lord
loves Children, I may say without Vanity,
he will not see many such.’ ‘No indeed,
will he not,’ answered Mrs. Ellison, ‘and
now I think on't, Madam, I wonder at
my own Stupidity in never making the
Offer before; but since you put it into
my Head, if you will give me Leave,
I'll take Master and Miss to wait on my
Lord's Nephew and Niece. They are
very pretty behaved Children; and little
Master and Miss will be, I dare swear,
very happy in their Acquaintance; besides,
if my Lord himself should see
them, I know what will happen; for he
is the most generous of all human Beings.’ 
Amelia very readily accepted the Favour
which Mrs. Ellison offered her; but Booth
exprest some Reluctance. ‘Upon my word,
my Dear,’ said he, with a Smile, ‘this
Behaviour of ours puts me in mind of the 

common Conduct of Beggars; who,
whenever they receive a Favour, are sure
to send other Objects to the same Fountain
of Charity. Don't we, my Dear,
repay our Obligations to my Lord in the
same manner, by sending our Children a
begging to him?’ 
‘O beastly!’ cries Mrs. Ellison; ‘how
could such a Thought enter your Brains! 
I protest, Madam, I begin to grow ashamed
of this Husband of yours. How
can you have so vulgar a way of thinking. 
Begging indeed! the poor little dear
Things a begging—If my Lord was capable
of such a Thought, tho' he was my
own Brother instead of my Cousin, I should
scorn him too much ever to enter his
Doors.’ —‘O dear Madam,’ answered
Amelia, ‘you take Mr. Booth too seriously,
when he was only in jest; and the Children
shall wait upon you whenever you
please.’ 
Tho' Booth had been a little more in
earnest than Amelia had represented him,
and was not perhaps quite so much in the
wrong as he was considered by Mrs. Ellison; 
yet seeing there were two to one against
him, he wisely thought proper to recede, 

and let his Simile go off with that Air of a
Jest, which his Wife had given it. 
Mrs. Ellison however could not let it pass
without paying some Compliments to Amelia's
Understanding, nor without some obscure
Reflexions upon Booth, with whom
she was more offended than the Matter required. 
She was indeed a Woman of most
profuse Generosity, and could not bear a
Thought which she deemed vulgar or sneaking. 
She afterwards launced forth the most
profuse Encomiums of his Lordship's Liberality,
and concluded the Evening with
some Instances which he had given of that
Virtue, which if not the noblest, is perhaps
one of the most useful to Society, with
which great and rich Men can be endowed. 
The next Morning early Serjeant Atkinson
came to wait on Lieutenant Booth, and desired
to speak with his Honour in private. Upon
which, the Lieutenant and Serjeant took a
Walk together in the Park. Booth expected
every Minute when the Serjeant would
open his Mouth, under which Expectation
he continued till he came to the End of the
Mall, and so he might have continued till
he came to the End of the World: For
tho' several Words stood at the End of the 

Serjeant's Lips, there they were likely to
remain for ever. He was indeed in the
Condition of a Miser, whom a charitable
Impulse hath impelled to draw a few Pence
to the Edge of his Pocket, where they are
altogether as secure, as if they were in the
Bottom: For, as the one hath not the
Heart to part with a Farthing; so neither
had the other the Heart to speak a Word. 
Booth at length wondering that the Serjeant
did not speak, asked him what his
Business was, when the latter with a stammering
Voice began the following Apology. 
‘I hope, Sir, your Honour will not be
angry, nor take any thing amiss of me. 
I do assure you, it was not of my Seeking,
nay, I dare not proceed in the Matter
without first asking your Leave. Indeed,
if I had taken any Liberties from
the Goodness you have been pleased to
shew me, I should look upon myself as
one of the most worthless and despicable
of Wretches; but nothing is farther from
my Thoughts. I know the Distance which
is between us; and because your Honour
hath been so kind and good as to treat me
with more Familiarity than any other Officer
ever did, if I had been base enough
to take any Freedoms, or to encroach 

upon your Honour's Goodness, I should
deserve to be whipt through the Regiment. 
I hope therefore, Sir, you will
not suspect me of any such Attempt.’ 
‘What can all this mean, Atkinson,’ cries
Booth, ‘what mighty Matter would you
introduce with all this previous Apology?’ 
‘I am almost ashamed and afraid to
mention it,’ answered the Serjeant, ‘and
yet I am sure, your Honour will believe
what I have said, and not think any thing
owing to my own Presumption; and at
the same time I have no Reason to think
you would do any thing to spoil my Fortune
in an honest Way, when it is dropt
into my Lap without my own seeking. 
For may I perish if it is not all the Lady's
own Goodness, and I hope in Heaven
with your Honour's Leave, I shall live
to make her amends for it.’ —In a Word,
that we may not detain the Reader's Curiosity
quite so long as he did Booth's, he acquainted
that Gentleman that he had an
Offer of Marriage from a Lady of his Acquaintance,
to whose Company he had introduced
him, and desired his Permission
to accept of it. 

Booth must have been very dull indeed,
if after what the Serjeant had said, and after
what he had heard Mrs. Ellison say, he
had wanted any Information concerning the
Lady. He answered him briskly and chearfully,
that he had his free Consent to marry
any Woman whatever; ‘and the greater
and richer she is,’ added he, ‘the more
I shall be pleased with the Match. I
don't enquire who the Lady is,’ said he,
smiling, ‘but I hope she will make as
good a Wife, as I am convinced her
Husband will deserve.’ 
‘Your Honour hath been always too
good to me,’ cries Atkinson; ‘but this I
promise you, I will do all in my Power
to merit the Kindness she is pleased to
shew me. I will be bold to say she will
marry an honest Man, tho' he is but a
poor one; and she shall never want any
thing which I can give her or do for her,
while my Name is Joseph Atkinson.’ 
‘And so her Name is a Secret, Joe; is
it? cries Booth.’ 
‘Why, Sir,’ answered the Serjeant, ‘I
hope your Honour will not insist upon 

knowing that, as I think it would be dishonourable
in me to mention it.’ 
‘Not at all,’ replied Booth, ‘I am the
farthest in the World from any such Desire. 
I know thee better than to imagine
thou wouldst disclose the Name of a fair
Lady.’ Booth then shook Atkinson heartily
by the Hand, and assured him earnestly
of the Joy he had in his good Fortune; for
which the good Serjeant failed not of making
all proper Acknowledgments. After
which they parted, and Booth returned home. 
As Mrs. Ellison opened the Door, Booth
hastily rushed by; for he had the utmost
Difficulty to prevent laughing in her Face. 
He ran directly up Stairs, and throwing
himself into a Chair discharged such a Fit
of Laughter as greatly surprized, and at
first almost frightned his Wife. 
Amelia, it will be supposed, presently enquired
into the Cause of this Phænomenon,
with which Booth, as soon as he was able
(for that was not within a few Minutes) acquainted
her. The News did not affect
her in the same Manner it had affected her
Husband. On the contrary, she cried, ‘I
protest I cannot guess what makes you see 

it in so ridiculous a Light. I really think
Mrs. Ellison hath chosen very well. I am
convinced Joe will make her one of the
best of Husbands; and in my Opinion,
that is the greatest Blessing a Woman can
be possessed of.’ 
However, when Mrs. Ellison came into
her Room a little while afterwards to fetch
the Children, Amelia became of a more risible
Disposition, especially when the former
turning to Booth who was then present,
said, ‘So, Captain, my jantee Serjeant
was very early here this Morning. I
scolded my Maid heartily for letting him
wait so long in the Entry like a Lacquais,
when she might have shewn him into my
inner Apartment.’ At which Words Booth
burst out into a very loud Laugh; and Amelia
herself could no more prevent laughing
than she could blushing. 
‘Heyday!’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘what
have I said to cause all this Mirth?’ and
at the same Time blushed, and looked very
silly, as is always the Case with Persons
who suspect themselves to be the Objects of
Laughter, without absolutely taking what
it is which makes them ridiculous. 

Booth still continued laughing; but Amelia
composing her Muscles said, ‘I ask your
Pardon, dear Mrs. Ellison; but Mr. Booth
hath been in a strange gigling Humour all
this Morning; and I really think it is infectious.’ 
‘I ask your Pardon too, Madam,’ cries
Booth, ‘but one is sometimes unaccountably
foolish.’ 
‘Nay, but seriously,’ said she, ‘what is
the Matter? —Something I said about the
Serjeant, I believe; but you may laugh
as much as you please, I am not ashamed
of owning, I think him one of the prettiest
Fellows I ever saw in my Life; and, I
own, I scolded my Maid at suffering him
to wait in my Entry; and where is the
mighty ridiculous Matter, pray?’ 
‘None at all,’ answered Booth, ‘and, I
hope, the next Time he will be ushered
into your inner Apartment.’ 
‘Why should he not, Sir,’ replied she? 
‘For wherever he is ushered, I am convinced
he will behave himself as a Gentleman
should.’ 

Here Amelia put an end to the Discourse,
or it might have proceeded to very great
Lengths: for Booth was of a waggish Inclination; 
and Mrs. Ellison was not a Lady
of the nicest Delicacy. 



The heroic Behaviour of Col. Bath. 
Booth went this Morning to pay a
second Visit to the Colonel, where he
found Col. James. Both the Colonel and the
Lieutenant appeared a little shocked at their
first Meeting; but Matters were soon cleared
up; for the former presently advanced to
the latter, shook him heartily by the Hand,
and said—‘Mr. Booth, I am ashamed to
see you; for I have injured you, and I
heartily ask your Pardon. I am now perfectly
convinced, that what I hinted to
my Brother, and which I find had like to
have produced such fatal Consequences,
was entirely groundless. If you will be
contented with my asking your Pardon,
and spare me the disagreeable Remembrance
of what led me into my Error, I
shall esteem it as the highest Obligation.’ 

Booth answered, ‘As to what regards
yourself, my dear Colonel, I am abundantly
satisfied; but, as I am convinced,
some Rascal hath been my Enemy with
you in the cruellest Manner, I hope, you
will not deny me the Opportunity of
kicking him through the World.’ 
‘By all the Dignity of Man,’ cries Colonel
Bath, ‘the Boy speaks with Spirit,
and his Request is reasonable.’ 
Colonel James hesitated a Moment, and
then whispered Booth that he would give
him all the Satisfaction imaginable concerning
the whole Affair, when they were
alone together; upon which Booth addressing
himself to Colonel Bath, the Discourse
turned on other Matters, during the Remainder
of the Visit, which was but short,
and then both went away together, leaving
Colonel Bath as well as it was possible to
expect, more to the Satisfaction of Booth
than of Col. James, who would not have
been displeased if his Wound had been more
dangerous: for he was grown somewhat
weary of a Disposition that he rather called
captious than heroic, and which, as he every
Day more and more hated his Wife, he apprehended 

might some time or other give
him some Trouble: For Bath was the most
affectionate of Brothers, and had often swore
in the Presence of James, that he would eat
any Man alive who should use his Sister ill. 
Col. Bath was well satisfied that his Brother
and the Lieutenant were gone out with
a Design of Tilting, from which he offered
not a Syllable to dissuade them, as he was
convinced it was right, and that Booth could
in Honour take, nor the Colonel give any
less Satisfaction. When they had been
gone therefore about half an Hour, he rang
his Bell, to enquire if there was any News
of his Brother; a Question which he repeated
every ten Minutes, for the Space of two
Hours, when having heard nothing of him,
he began to conclude that both were killed
on the Spot. 
While he was in this State of Anxiety,
his Sister came to see him; for notwithstanding
his Desire of keeping it a Secret, the
Duel had blazed all over the Town. After
receiving some kind Congratulations on his
Safety, and some unkind Hints concerning
the Warmth of his Temper, the Colonel
asked her when she had seen her Husband; 
she answered not that Morning. He then 

communicated to her his Suspicion, told
her he was convinced his Brother had drawn
his Sword that Day, and that as neither of
them had heard any thing from him, he
began to apprehend the worst that could
happen. 
Neither Miss Bellamy, nor Mrs. Cibber,
were ever in a greater Consternation on the
Stage, than now appeared in the Countenance
of Mrs. James. ‘Good Heavens! 
Brother,’ cries she, ‘what do you tell
me! you have frightened me to Death. 
—Let your Man get me a Glass of
Water immediately, if you have not a
Mind to see me die before your Face. 
When, where, how was this Quarrel,
why did you not prevent it, if you knew
of it? Is it not enough to be every Day
tormenting me with hazarding your own
Life, but must you bring the Life of
one who you know must be and ought to
be so much the dearest of all to me, into
Danger? Take your Sword, Brother,
take your Sword, and plunge it into my
Bosom; it would be kinder of you than
to fill it with such Dreads and Terrours.’ 
—Here she swallowed the Glass of Water; 
and then threw herself back in her Chair,
as if she had intended to faint away. 

Perhaps if she had so, the Colonel would
have lent her no Assistance; for she had
hurt him more than by ten thousand Stabs. 
He sat erect in his Chair, with his Eyebrows
knit, his Forehead wrinkled, his Eyes
flashing Fire, his Teeth grating against each
other, and breathing Horrour all around
him. In this Posture he sat for some time
silent, casting disdainful Looks at his Sister. 
At last, his Voice found its Way through
a Passion which had almost choaked him,
and he cried out. ‘Sister, what have I
done to deserve the Opinion you express
of me? Which of my Actions hath made
you conclude that I am a Rascal and
a Coward? Look at that poor Sword,
which never Woman yet saw but in its
Sheath, what hath that done to merit
your Desire that it should be contaminated
with the Blood of a Woman?’ 
‘Alas! Brother,’ cried she, ‘I know
not what you say, you are desirous, I
believe, to terrify me out of the little
Senses I have left. What can I have said
in the Agonies of Grief, into which you
threw me, to deserve this Passion?’ 

‘What have you said,’ answered the
Colonel, ‘you have said that which if a
Man had spoken, nay, d&wblank;n me, if he
had but hinted that he durst even think,
I would have made him eat my Sword,
by all the Dignity of Man, I would have
crumbled his Soul into Powder. —But, I
consider that the Words were spoken by
a Woman, and I am calm again. Consider,
my Dear, that you are my Sister,
and behave yourself with more Spirit. I
have only mentioned to you my Surmise. 
It may not have happened as I suspect; 
but let what will have happened, you will
have the Comfort that your Husband
hath behaved himself with becoming Dignity,
and lies in the Bed of Honour.’ 
‘Talk not to me of such Comfort,’ 
replied the Lady, ‘it is a Loss I cannot
survive; but why do I sit here lamenting
myself, I will go this Instant and know
the worst of my Fate, if my trembling
Limbs will carry me to my Coach. — 
Good morrow, dear Brother, whatever
becomes of me, I am glad to find you
out of Danger.’ —The Colonel paid her
his proper Compliments, and she then left
the Room, but returned instantly back; 

saying, ‘Brother, I must beg the Favour
of you to let your Footman step to my
Mantua-maker, I am sure it is a Miracle
in my present distracted Condition, how
it came into my Head.’ The Footman
was presently summoned, and Mrs. James
delivered him his Message, which was to
countermand the Orders which she had
given that very Morning, to make her up
a new Suit of Brocade. ‘Heaven knows,’ 
says she, ‘now when I can wear Brocade,
or whether ever I shall wear it.’ And
now having repeated her Message with
great Exactness, lest there should be any
Mistake, she again lamented her wretched
Situation, and then departed, leaving the
Colonel in full Expectation of hearing speedy
News of the fatal Issue of the Battle. 
But tho' the Reader should entertain the
same Curiosity, we must be excused from
satisfying it, till we have first accounted for
an Incident which we have related in this
very Chapter, and which we think deserves
some Solution. The Critic, I am convinced,
already is apprized that I mean the friendly
Behaviour of James to Booth, which from
what we had before recorded, seemed so
little to be expected. 

It must be remembred, that the Anger
which the former of these Gentlemen had
conceived against the latter, arose entirely
from the false Account given by Miss Mathews
of Booth, whom that Lady had accused
to Colonel James of having as basely
as wickedly traduced his Character. 
Now, of all the Ministers of Vengeance,
there are none with whom the Devil deals
so treacherously, as with those whom he
employs in executing the mischievous Purposes
of an angry Mistress; for no sooner
is Revenge executed on an offending Lover,
than it is sure to be repented, and all the
Anger which before raged against the beloved
Object, returns with double Fury on
the Head of his Assassin. 
Miss Mathews therefore no sooner heard
that Booth was killed, (for so was the Report
at first, and by a Colonel of the Army)
than she immediately concluded it to be
James. She was extremely shock'd with
the News, and her Heart instantly began to
relent. All the Reasons on which she had
founded her Love, recurred in the strongest
and liveliest Colours to her Mind, and all
the Causes of her Hatred sunk down and 

disappeared; or if the least Remembrance
of any thing which had disobliged her remained,
her Heart became his zealous Advocate,
and soon satisfied her that her own
Fates were more to be blamed than he, and
that without being a Villain, he could have
acted no otherwise than he had done. 
In this Temper of Mind, she looked on
herself as the Murderer of an innocent Man,
and what to her was much worse, of the Man
she had loved, and still did love with all the
Violence imaginable. She looked on James
as the Tool with which she had done this
Murder; and as it is usual for People who
have rashly or inadvertently made any animate
or inanimate thing the Instrument of
Mischief, to hate the innocent Means by
which the Mischief was effected: (for this is
a subtle Method which the Mind invents to
excuse ourselves, the last Objects on whom
we would willingly wreak our Vengeance;)
so Miss Mathews now hated and cursed
James as the efficient Cause of that Act
which she herself had contrived, and laboured
to carry into Execution. 
She sat down therefore in a furious Agitation,
little short of Madness, and wrote
the following Letter. 


‘I hope this will find you in the Hands
of Justice, for the Murder of one of the
best Friends that ever Man was blest with. 
In one sense indeed, he may seem to have
deserved his Fate, by chusing a Fool for
a Friend; for who but a Fool would
have believed what the Anger and Rage
of an injured Woman suggested; a Story
so improbable, that I could scarce be
thought in earnest when I mentioned it. 
‘Know then, cruel Wretch, that poor
Booth loved you of all Men breathing,
and was, I believe, in your Commendation,
guilty of as much Falsehood, as I
was in what I told you concerning him. 
‘If this Knowledge makes you miserable,
it is no more than you have made 
‘The unhappy
F. Mathews.’ 
This Letter was communicated to the
Author of this History by Mr. Booth himself,
who received it from the Hands of
Colonel James; as to the other Anecdotes
relating to this Lady, he had them from
Miss Mathews's Maid-Servant, who was in 

all the Secrets of her Mistress; and after
she quitted her Service, came to live with
a young Lady, who was an intimate Acquaintance
of the Author. 
Many other Materials of a private Nature
were communicated by one of the
Clerks of the Universal Register Office; 
who, by having a general Acquaintance with
Servants, is Master of all the Secrets of
every Family in the Kingdom. 



Being the last Chapter of the Fifth Book. 
We shall now return to Colonel James
and Mr. Booth, who walked together
from Colonel Bath's Lodging with
much more peaceable Intention than that
Gentleman had conjectured, who dreamt of
nothing but Swords and Guns, and Implements
of Wars. 
The Birdcage-Walk in the Park was the
Scene appointed by James for unburthening
his Mind. Thither they came, and there
James acquainted Booth with all that which
the Reader knows already, and gave him 

the Letter which we have inserted at the
End of the last Chapter. 
Booth exprest great Astonishment at this
Relation, not without venting some Detestation
of the Wickedness of Miss Mathews; 
upon which James took him up, saying,
he ought not to speak with such Abhorrence
of Faults, which Love for him had occasioned. 
‘Can you mention Love, my dear Colonel,’ 
cried Booth, ‘and such a Woman
in the same Breath?’ 
‘Yes faith! can I,’ says James; ‘for
the Devil take me, if I know a more
lovely Woman in the World.’ Here he
began to describe her whole Person; but as
we cannot insert all the Description, so we
shall omit it all; and concluded with saying,
‘curse me, if I don't think her the finest
Creature in the Universe. I would give
half my Estate, Booth, she loved me as
well as she doth you. Tho', on second
Consideration, I believe I should repent
that Bargain; for then, very possibly, I
should not care a Farthing for her.’ 

‘You will pardon me, dear Colonel,’ 
answered Booth; ‘but to me there appears
somewhat very singular in your way of
thinking. Beauty is indeed the Object of
Liking, great Qualities of Admiration,
good ones of Esteem; but the Devil take
me, if I think any thing but Love to be
the Object of Love.’ 
‘Is there not something too selfish,’ replied
James, ‘in that Opinion; but without
considering it in that Light, is it not
of all things the most insipid? All Oil!
all Sugar! all Honey! Zounds! it is
enough to cloy the sharp-set Appetite of
a Parson. Acids surely are the most
likely to quicken.’ 
‘I do not love reasoning in Allegories,’ 
cries Booth, ‘but with regard to Love, I
declare I never found any thing cloying
in it. I have lived almost alone with my
Wife near three Years together, was never
tired with her Company, nor ever wished
for any other; and I am sure, I never
tasted any of the Acid you mention to
quicken my Appetite.’ 

‘This is all very extraordinary and romantic
to me,’ answered the Colonel. 
‘If I was to be shut up three Years with
the same Woman, which Heaven forbid!
nothing, I think, could keep me alive,
but a Temper as violent as that of Miss
Mathews. As to Love, it would make
me sick to Death, in the twentieth Part
of that Time. If I was so condemned,
let me see, what would I wish the Woman
to be! I think no one Virtue would be
sufficient. With the Spirit of a Tigress,
I would have her be a Prude, a Scold, a
Scholar, a Critic, a Wit, a Politician, and
a Jacobite; and then perhaps eternal Opposition
would keep up our Spirits; and
wishing one another daily at the Devil,
we should make a shift to drag on a damnable
State of Life, without much Spleen
or Vapours.’ 
‘And so you do not intend,’ cries Booth,
‘to break with this Woman.’ 
‘Not more than I have already, if I can
help it,’ answered the Colonel. 
‘And you will be reconciled to her?’ 
said Booth. 

‘Yes, faith! will I, if I can,’ answered
the Colonel—‘I hope you have no Objection.’ 
‘None, my dear Friend,’ said Booth,
‘unless on your Account.’ 
‘I do believe you,’ said the Colonel,
‘and yet let me tell you, you are a very
extraordinary Man, not to desire me to
quit her on your own Account. Upon
my Soul, I begin to pity the Woman,
who hath placed her Affection perhaps
on the only Man in England of your Age,
who would not return it. But for my
part, I promise you I like her beyond all
other Women; and whilst that is the Case,
my Boy, if her Mind was as full of Iniquity
as Pandora's Box was of Diseases,
I'd hug her close in my Arms, and only
take as much Care as possible to keep the
Lid down for fear of Mischief. —But
come, dear Booth,’ said he, ‘let us consider
your Affairs; for I am ashamed of
having neglected them so long; and the
only Anger I have against this Wench
is, that she was the Occasion of it.’ 

Booth then acquainted the Colonel with
the Promises he had receiv'd from the noble
Lord, upon which James shook him by
the Hand, and heartily wish'd him Joy,
crying, ‘I do assure you if you have his
Interest, you will need no other; I did
not know you was acquainted with him.’ 
To which Mr. Booth answered that he
was but a new Acquaintance, and that he
was recommended to him by a Lady. 
‘A Lady,’ cries the Colonel,—‘well,
I don't ask her Name. You are a happy
Man, Booth, amongst the Women; and
I assure you, you could have no stronger
Recommendation. The Peer loves the
Ladies, I believe, as well as ever Mark
Antony did; and it is not his Fault, if he
hath not spent as much upon them. If
he once fixes his Eye upon a Woman, he
will stick at nothing to get her.’ 
‘Ay, indeed!’ cries Booth. ‘Is that his
Character?’ 
‘Ay, faith!’ answered the Colonel, ‘and
the Character of most Men beside him. Few
of them, I mean, will stick at any thing 

beside their Money. Jusque a la Bourse, is
sometimes the Boundary of Love as well as
Friendship. And, indeed, I never knew
any other Man part with his Money so
very freely on these Occasions. You see,
dear Booth, the Confidence I have in your
Honour.’ 
‘I hope, indeed, you have,’ cries Booth,
‘but I don't see what Instance you now
give me of that Confidence.’ 
‘Have not I shewn you,’ answered James,
‘where you may carry your Goods to Market? 
I can assure you, my Friend, that is
a Secret I would not impart to every Man
in your Situation, and all Circumstances
considered.’ 
‘I am very sorry, Sir,’ cries Booth very
gravely, and turning as pale as Death, ‘you
should entertain a Thought of this Kind. 
A Thought which hath almost frozen up
my Blood. I am unwilling to believe
there are such Villains in the World; but
there is none of them whom I should
detest half so much as myself, if my own
Mind had ever suggested to me a Hint
of that Kind. I have tasted of some
Distresses of Life, and I know not to 

what greater I may be driven; but my
Honour, I thank Heaven, is in my own
Power, and I can boldly say to Fortune,
she shall not rob me of it.’ 
‘Have I not exprest that Confidence,
my dear Booth?’ answered the Colonel. 
‘And what you say now well justifies my
Opinion; for I do agree with you, that
considering all things, it would be the
highest Instance of Dishonour.’ 
‘Dishonour indeed!’ returned Booth. 
‘What to prostitute my Wife! —Can I
think there is such a Wretch breathing?’ 
‘I don't know that,’ said the Colonel; 
‘but I am sure, it was very far from my
Intention to insinuate the least Hint of
any such Matter to you. Nor can I
imagine how you yourself could conceive
such a Thought. The Goods I meant,
were no other than the charming Person
of Miss Mathews; for whom I am convinced
my Lord would bid a swinging
Price against me.’ 
Booth's Countenance greatly cleared up
at this Declaration, and he answered with a
Smile, that he hoped he need not give the 

Colonel any Assurances on that Head. However,
tho' he was satisfied with regard to the
Colonel's Suspicions; yet some Chimeras
now arose in his Brain, which gave him no
very agreeable Sensations. What these were
the sagacious Reader may probably suspect; 
but if he should not, we may perhaps have
Occasion to open them in the Sequel. Here
we will put an End to this Dialogue, and
to the fifth Book of this History. 