




Containing the Exordium, &c. 
The various Accidents which befel
a very worthy Couple, after their
uniting in the State of Matrimony,
will be the Subject of the following History. 
The Distresses which they waded through,
were some of them so exquisite, and the
Incidents which produced these so extraordinary,
that they seemed to require not only
the utmost Malice, but the utmost Invention
which Superstition hath ever attributed to
Fortune: Tho' whether any such Being interfered
in the case, or, indeed, whether
there be any such Being in the Universe, is a
Matter which I by no Means presume to
determine in the Affirmative. To speak a
bold Truth, I am, after much mature Deliberation,
inclined to suspect, that the Public 

Voice hath in all Ages done much Injustice
to Fortune, and hath convicted her of
many Facts in which she had not the least
Concern. I question much, whether we
may not by natural Means account for the
Success of Knaves, the Calamities of Fools,
with all the Miseries in which Men of Sense
sometimes involve themselves by quitting
the Directions of Prudence, and following
the blind Guidance of a predominant Passion; 
in short, for all the ordinary Phenomena
which are imputed to Fortune; 
whom, perhaps, Men accuse with no less
Absurdity in Life, than a bad Player complains
of ill Luck at the Game of Chess. 
But if Men are sometimes guilty of laying
improper Blame on this imaginary Being,
they are altogether as apt to make her
Amends, by ascribing to her Honours
which she as little deserves. To retrieve
the ill Consequences of a foolish Conduct,
and by struggling manfully with Distress
to subdue it, is one of the noblest Efforts of
Wisdom and Virtue. Whoever, therefore,
calls such a Man fortunate, is guilty of no
less Impropriety in Speech, than he would
be, who should call the Statuary or the
Poet fortunate, who carved a Venus or who
writ an Iliad. 

Life may as properly be called an Art as
any other; and the great Incidents in it are
no more to be considered as mere Accidents,
than the several Members of a fine
Statute, or a noble Poem. The Critics
in all these are not content with seeing any
Thing to be great, without knowing why
and how it came to be so. By examining
carefully the several Gradations which conduce
to bring every Model to Perfection,
we learn truly to know that Science in
which the Model is formed: As Histories
of this Kind, therefore, may properly be
called Models of Human Life; so by observing
minutely the several incidents which
tend to the Catastrophe or Completion of
the whole, and the minute Causes whence
those Incidents are produced, we shall best
be instructed in this most useful of all Arts,
which I call the Art of Life. 



The History sets out. Observations on the Excellency
of the English Constitution, and curious
Examinations before a Justice of Peace. 
On the first of April, in the Year &wblank;,
the Watchman of a certain Parish (I
know not particularly which) within the 

Liberty of Westminster, brought several Persons
whom they had apprehended the preceding
Night, before Jonathan Thrasher,
Esq; one of the Justices of the Peace for
that Liberty. 
But here, Reader, before we proceed to
the Trials of these Offenders, we shall,
after our usual Manner, premise some
Things which it may be necessary for thee
to know. 
It hath been observed, I think, by many,
as well as the celebrated Writer of three
Letters, that no human Institution is capable
of consummate Perfection. An Observation
which perhaps that Writer at
least gathered from discovering some Defects
in the Polity even of this well regulated
Nation. And, indeed, if there should
be any such Defect in a Constitution which
my Lord Coke long ago told us, the Wisdom
of all the wise Men in the World,
if they had all met together at one time,
could not have equalled, which some of
our wisest Men who were met together
long before, said was too good to be altered
in any Particular; and which, nevertheless,
hath been mending ever since, by a very
great Number of the said wise Men: if, I 

say, this Constitution should be imperfect,
we may be allowed, I think, to doubt
whether any such faultless Model can be
found among the Institutions of Men. 
It will probably be objected, that the
small Imperfections which I am about to
produce, do not lie in the Laws themselves,
but in the ill Execution of them; but, with
Submission, this appears to me to be no
less an Absurdity, than to say of any Machine
that it is excellently made, tho' incapable
of performing its Functions. Good
Laws should execute themselves in a well
regulated State; at least, if the same Legislature
which provides the Laws, doth
not provide for the Execution of them,
they act as Graham would do, if he should
form all the Parts of a Clock in the most
exquisite Manner, yet put them so together
that the Clock could not go. In this Case,
surely we might say that there was a small
Defect in the Constitution of the Clock. 
To say the Truth, Graham would soon
see the Fault, and would easily remedy
it. The Fault indeed could be no other
than that the Parts were improperly disposed. 

Perhaps, Reader, I have another Illustration,
which will set my Intention in
still a clearer Light before you. Figure
to yourself then a Family, the Master of
which should dispose of the several œconomical
Offices in the following Manner; 
viz. should put his Butler in the Coachbox,
his Steward behind his Coach, his
Coachman in the Butlery, and his Footman
in the Stewardship; and in the same
ridiculous Manner should misemploy the
Talents of every other Servant, it is easy
to see what a Figure such a Family must
make in the World. 
As ridiculous as this may seem, I have
often considered some of the lower Offices
in our civil Government to be disposed in
this very Manner. To begin, I think, as
low as I well can, with the Watchmen
in our Metropolis; who being appointed
to guard our Streets by Nigh from Thieves
and Robbers, an Office which at least requires
Strength of Body, are chosen out
of those poor old decrepit People, who
are from their Want of bodily Strength
rendered incapable of getting a Livelihood
by Work. These Men, armed only
with a Pole, which some of them are 

scarce able to lift, are to secure the Persons
and Houses of his Majesty's Subjects
from the Attacks of Gangs of young, bold,
stout, desperate and well-armed Villains. 

Quæ non viribus istis
Munera conveniunt.
If the poor old Fellows should run
away from such Enemies, no one I think
can wonder, unless he should wonder that
they are able even to make their Escape. 
The higher we proceed among our
public Officers and Magistrates, the less Defects
of this kind will perhaps, be observable. 
Mr. Thrasher, however, the Justice
before whom the Prisoners above-mentioned
were now brought, had some few
Imperfections in his magistratical Capacity. 
I own, I have been sometimes inclined to
think, that this Office of a Justice of
Peace requires some Knowledge of the
Law: for this simple Reason; because in
every Case which comes before him, he is
to judge and act according to Law. Again,
as these Laws are contained in a great
Variety of Books; the Statutes which relate
to the Office of a Justice of Peace,
making of themselves at least two large 

Volumes in Folio; and that Part of his
Jurisdiction which is founded on the common
Law being dispersed in above a hundred
Volumes, I cannot conceive how this
Knowledge should be acquired without
reading; and yet certain it is Mr. Thrasher
never read one Syllable of the Matter. 
This perhaps was a Defect; but this
was not all: for where mere Ignorance is
to decide a Point, it will always be an
even Chance whether it decides right or
wrong; but sorry am I to say, Right was
often in a much worse Situation than this,
and Wrong hath often had Five hundred
to one on his Side before that Magistrate; 
who, if he was ignorant of the Law of
England, was yet well versed in the Laws
of Nature. He perfectly well understood
that fundamental Principle so strongly laid
down in the Institutes of the learned Rochefoucault; 
by which the Duty of Self-love
is so strongly enforced, and every Man is
taught to consider himself as a Loadstone,
and to attract all things to that Centre. To
speak the Truth plainly, the Justice was
never indifferent in a Cause, but when he
could get nothing on either Side. 

Such was the Justice to whose tremendous
Bar, Mr. Gotobed the Constable on
the Day above-mentioned, brought several
Delinquents, who, as we have said, had
been apprehended by the Watch for diverse
Outrages. 
The first who came upon his Trial was
as bloody a Spectre as ever the Imagination
of a Murderer or a Tragic Poet conceived. 
This poor Wretch was charged
with a Battery by a much stouter Man
than himself: indeed the accused Person
bore about him some Evidence that he had
been in an Affray, his Cloaths being very
bloody; but certain open Sluices on his
own Head sufficiently shewed whence all
the scarlet Stream had issued; whereas the
Accuser had not the least Mark or Appearance
of any Wound. The Justice
asked the Defendant, What he meant by
breaking the King's Peace—To which he
answered,—‘Upon my Shoul I do love the
King very well, and I have not been after
breaking any Thing of his that I do
know; but upon my Shoul this Man
hath brake my Head, any my Head did
brake his Stick; that is all, Gra.’ He 

then offered to produce several Witnesses
against this improbable Accusation; but
the Justice presently interrupted him, saying,
‘Sirrah, your Tongue betrays your
Guilt. You are an Irishman, and that
is always sufficient Evidence with me.’ 
The second Criminal was a poor Woman,
who was taken up by the Watch as
a Street-walker. It was alleged against her
that she was found walking the Streets
after Twelve o'Clock, and the Watchman
declared he believed her to be a common
Strumpet. She pleaded in her Defence (as
was really the Truth) that she was a Servant,
and was sent by her Mistress, who
was a little Shopkeeper, and upon the
Point of Delivery, to fetch a Midwife; 
which she offered to prove by several of
the Neighbours, if she was allowed to send
for them. The Justice asked her why
she had not done it before. To which she
answered, she had no Money, and could
get no Messenger. The Justice then called
her several scurrilous Names; and declaring
she was guilty within the Statute of
Street-walking, ordered her to Bridewell for
a Month. 

A genteel young Man and Woman were
then set forward, and a very grave looking
Person swore he caught them in a Situation
which we cannot as particularly
describe here as he did before the Magistrate; 
who, having received a Wink from
his Clerk, declared with much Warmth
that the Fact was incredible and impossible. 
He presently discharged the accused
Parties, and was going, without any
Evidence, to commit the Accuser for
Perjury; but this the Clerk dissuaded him
him from, saying, he doubted whether a
Justice of Peace had any such Power. 
The Justice at first differed in Opinion; and
said, ‘He had seen a Man stand in the Pillory
about Perjury; nay, he had known a
Man in Goal for it too; and how came he
there, if he was not committed thither?’ 
‘Why that is true, Sir,’ answered the
Clerk. ‘And yet I have been told by a
very great Lawyer, that a Man can't be
committed for Perjury before he is indicted; 
and the Reason is, I believe, because
it is not against the Peace before
the Indictment makes it so.’ ‘Why that
may be,’ cries the Justice; ‘and indeed
Perjury is but scandalous Words, and I
know a Man can't have no Warrant 

for those, unless you put for rioting * 
them into the Warrant.’ 
The Witness was now about to be discharged,
when the Lady whom he had
accused, declared she would swear the Peace
against him; for that he had called her a
Whore several times. ‘Oho! you will
swear the Peace, Madam, will you?’ 
cries the Justice, ‘Give her the Peace,
presently; and pray, Mr. Constable, secure
the Prisoner, now we have him, while a
Warrant is made to take him up.’ All
which was immediately performed, and
the poor Witness for want of Sureties was
sent to Prison. 
A young Fellow, whose Name was
Booth, was now charged with beating the 

Watchman, in the Execution of his Office,
and breaking his Lanthorn. This was deposed
by two Witnesses; and the shattered
Remains of a broken Lanthorn, which had
been long preserved for the Sake of its
Testimony, were produced to corroborate
the Evidence. The Justice, perceiving
the Criminal to be but shabbily drest,
was going to commit him without asking
any further Questions. At length,
however, at the earnest Request of the
Accused, the worthy Magistrate submitted
to hear his Defence. The young Man
then alledged, as was in Reality the Case,
‘That as he was walking home to his
Lodging, he saw two Men in the Street
cruelly beating a third, upon which he
had stopt and endeavoured to assist the
Person who was so unequally attacked; 
that the Watch came up during the Affray,
and took them all four into Custody; 
that they were immediately carried to the
Round-house, where the two original
Assailants, who appeared to be Men of
Fortune, found Means to make up the
Matter, and were discharged by the
Constable; a Favour which he himself,
having no Money in his Pocket, was
unable to obtain. He utterly denied
having assaulted any of the Watchmen, 

and solemnly declared, that he was offered
his Liberty at the Price of Half a
Crown.’ 
Tho' the bare Word of an Offender can
never be taken against the Oath of his Accuser; 
yet the Matter of this Defence was
so pertinent, and delivered with such an
Air of Truth and Sincerity, that had the
Magistrate been endued with much Sagacity,
or had he been very moderately
gifted with another Quality very necessary
to all who are to administer Justice, he
would have employed some Labour in
cross-examining the Watchmen; at least
he would have given the Defendant the
Time he desired to send for the other
Persons who were present at the Affray; 
neither of which he did. In short, the Magistrate
had too great an Honour for Truth
to suspect that she ever appeared in sordid
Apparel; nor did he ever sully his sublime
Notions of that Virtue, by uniting them
with the mean Ideas of Poverty and Distress. 
There remained now only one Prisoner,
and that was the poor Man himself in
whose Defence the last mentioned Culprit 

was engaged. His Trial took but a very
short time. A Cause of Battery and broken
Lanthorn was instituted against him, and
proved in the same Manner; nor would
the Justice hear one Word in Defence: but
tho' his Patience was exhausted, his Breath
was not; for against this last Wretch he
poured forth a great many Vollies of Menaces
and Abuse. 
The Delinquents were then all dispatched
to Prison, under a Guard of Watchmen; 
and the Justice and the Constable
adjourned to a neighbouring Alehouse, to
take their Morning Repast. 



Containing the Inside of a Prison. 
Mr. Booth (for we shall not trouble
you with the rest) was no sooner
arrived in the Prison, than a Number of
Persons gathered round him, all demanding
Garnish; to which Mr. Booth not
making a ready Answer, as indeed he
did not understand the Word, some
were going to lay hold of him, when a
Person of apparent Dignity came up and
insisted that no one should affront the Gentleman. 

This Person then, who was no
less than the Master or Keeper of the
Prison, turning towards Mr. Booth, acquainted
him, that it was the Custom of
the Place for every Prisoner, upon his first
Arrival there, to give something to the
former Prisoners to make them drink. 
This, he said, was what they called Garnish; 
and concluded with advising his
new Customer to draw his Purse upon the
present Occasion. Mr. Booth answered,
that he would very readily comply with
this laudable Custom, was it in his Power; 
but that in reality he had not a Shilling in
his Pocket, and what was worse, he had
not a Shilling in the World. —‘Oho!
if that be the Case,’ cries the Keeper, ‘it
is another Matter, and I have nothing to
say.’ Upon which he immediately departed,
and left poor Booth to the Mercy of
his Companions, who without loss of Time
applied themselves to uncasing, as they
term'd it, and with such Dexterity, that
his Coat was not only stript off, but out
of Sight in a Minute. 
Mr. Booth was too weak to resist, and
too wise to complain of this Usage. As
soon therefore as he was at Liberty, and
declared free of the Place, he summoned 

his Philosophy, of which he had no inconsiderable
Share, to his Assistance, and resolved
to make himself as easy as possible
under his present Circumstances. 
Could his own Thoughts indeed have suffered
him a Moment to forget where he
was, the Dispositions of the other Prisoners
might have induced him to believe that he
had been in a happier Place: For much
the greater part of his Fellow-Sufferers,
instead of wailing and repining at their
Condition, were laughing, singing and diverting
themselves with various kinds of
Sports and Gambols. 
The first Person who accosted him was
called Blear-Eyed Moll; a Woman of no
very comely Appearance. Her Eye (for
she had but one) whence she derived her
Nick-name was such, as that Nick-name
bespoke; besides which it had two remarkable
Qualities; for first, as if Nature had
been careful to provide for her own Defect,
it constantly looked towards her
blind Side; and secondly, the Ball consisted
almost entirely of white, or rather
yellow, with a little grey Spot in the Corner,
so small that it was scarce discernible. 
Nose she had none; for Venus, envious 

perhaps at her former Charms, had carried
off the gristly Part; and some earthly
Damsel, perhaps from the same Envy, had
levelled the Bone with the rest of her Face: 
Indeed it was far beneath the Bones of
her Cheeks, which rose proportionally
higher than is usual. About half a dozen
ebeny Teeth fortified that large and long
Canal, which Nature had cut from Ear to
Ear, at the Bottom of which was a Chin,
preposterously short, Nature having turned
up the Bottom, instead of suffering it
to grow to its due Length. 
Her Body was well adapted to her Face; 
she measured full as much round the middle
as from Head to Foot; for besides the
extreme Breadth of her Back, her vast
Breasts had long since forsaken their native
Home, and had settled themselves a little
below the Girdle. 
I wish certain Actresses on the Stage,
when they are to perform Characters of
no amiable Cast, would study to dress
themselves with the Propriety, with which
Blear-Eyed-Moll was now arrayed. For
the Sake of our squeamish Reader, we shall
not descend to Particulars. Let it suffice
to say, nothing more ragged, or more 

dirty, was ever emptied out of the Roundhouse
at St. Giles's. 
We have taken the more Pains to describe
this Person for two remarkable Reasons; 
the one is, that this unlovely Creature
was taken in the Fact with a very
pretty young Fellow; the other, which is
more productive of moral Lesson, is, that
however wretched her Fortune may appear
to the Reader, she was one of the
merriest Persons in the whole Prison. 
Blear-Eyed-Moll then came up to Mr.
Booth with a Smile, or rather Grin on her
Countenance, and asked him for a Dram
of Gin; and when Booth assured her
that he had not a Penny of Money, she
replied, ‘–––D&wblank;n your Eyes, I thought
by your Look you had been a clever Fellow,
and upon the snaffling Lay*  at least; 
but D&wblank;n your Body and Eyes, I find
you are some sneaking Budge †  Rascal,’ 
She then launched forth a Volley of dreadful
Oaths, interlarded with some Language,
not proper to be repeated here, and was
going to lay hold on poor Booth, when a
tall Prisoner, who had been very earnestly 

eyeing Booth for some Time, came up, and
taking her by the Shoulder, flung her
off at some Distance, cursing her for a
B–––h, and bidding her let the Gentleman
alone. 
This Person was not himself of the most
inviting Aspect. He was long visaged, and
pale, with a red Beard of above a Fortnight's
Growth. He was attired in a brownish
black Coat, which would have shewed more
Holes than it did, had not the Linen which
appeared through it, been entirely of the
same Colour with the Cloth. 
This Gentleman, whose Name was Robinson,
addressed himself very civilly to
Mr. Booth, and told him he was sorry to
see one of his Appearance in that Place: 
‘For as to your being without your Coat,
Sir,’ says he, ‘I can easily account for
that; and indeed Dress is the least Part
which distinguishes a Gentleman.’ At
which Words he cast a significant Look
on his own Coat, as if he desired they should
be applied to himself. He then proceeded
in the following Manner: 
‘I perceive, Sir, you are but just arrived
in this dismal Place, which is, indeed, 

rendered more detestable by the Wretches
who inhabit it, than by any other Circumstance; 
but even these a wise Man
will soon bring himself to bear with Indifference: 
For what is, is; and what
must be, must be. The Knowledge of
this, which, simple as it appears, is in
truth the Highth of all Philosophy, renders
a wise Man superior to every Evil
which can befal him. I hope, Sir, no
very dreadful Accident is the Cause of
your coming hither; but whatever it was,
you may be assured it could not be otherwise: 
For all Things happen by an inevitable
Fatality; and a Man can no more
resist the Impulse of Fate, than a Wheelbarrow
can the Force of its Driver.’ 
Besides the Obligation which Mr. Robinson
had conferred on Mr. Booth, in delivering
him from the Insults of Blear-ey'd
Moll, there was something in the Manner
of Robinson, which, notwithstanding the
Meanness of his Dress, seemed to distinguish
him from the Crowd of Wretches
who swarmed in those Regions; and above
all, the Sentiments which he had just declared,
very nearly coincided with those of
Mr. Booth: This Gentleman was what
they call a Freethinker, that is to say, a 

Deist, or, perhaps, an Atheist; for tho' he
did not absolutely deny the Existence of a
God; yet he entirely denied his Providence. 
A Doctrine which, if it is not downright
Atheism, hath a direct Tendency towards
it; and, as Dr. Clarke observes, may soon
be driven into it. And as to Mr. Booth,
tho' he was in his Heart an extreme Well-wisher
to Religion (for he was an honest
Man) yet his Notions of it were very slight
and uncertain. To say Truth, he was in
the wavering Condition so finely described
by Claudian: 

labefacta cadebat
Religio, causæq; viam non sponte sequebar
Alterius; vacuo quæ currere semina motu
Affirmat; magnumq; novas per inane figuras
Fortuna non arte regi, quæ numina sensu
Ambiguo, vel nulla putat, vel nescia nostri.
This Way of thinking, or rather of
doubting, he had contracted from the same
Reasons which Claudian assigns, and which
had induced Brutus in his latter Days, to
doubt the Existence of that Virtue which he
had all his Life cultivated. In short, poor
Booth imagined, that a larger Share of Misfortunes
had fallen to his Lot than he had
merited; and this led him, who (tho' a 

good classical Scholar) was not deeply learned
in religious Matters, into a disadvantageous
Opinion of Providence. A dangerous
Way of reasoning, in which our Conclusions
are not only too hasty, from an
imperfect View of Things; but we are
likewise liable to much Error from Partiality
to ourselves; viewing our Virtues
and Vices as through a Perspective, in
which we turn the Glass always to our
own Advantage, so as to diminish the one,
and as greatly to magnify the other. 
From the above Reasons, it can be no
Wonder that Mr. Booth did not decline
the Acquaintance of this Person, in a Place
which could not promise to afford him any
better. He answered him, therefore, with
great Courtesy, as indeed he was of a very
good and gentle Disposition; and after expressing
a civil Surprize at meeting him
there, declared himself to be of the same Opinion
with regard to the Necessity of human
Actions; adding, however, that he did not
believe Men were under any blind Impulse
or Direction of Fate; but that every Man
acted merely from the Force of that Passion
which was uppermost in his Mind, and
could do no otherwise. 

A Discourse now ensued between the two
Gentlemen, on the Necessity arising from
the Impulse of Fate, and the Necessity
arising from the Impulse of Passion, which,
as it will make a pretty Pamphlet of itself,
we shall reserve for some future Opportunity. 
When this was ended, they set forward
to survey the Goal, and the Prisoners,
with the several Cases of whom
Mr. Robinson, who had been some time
under Confinement, undertook to make
Mr. Booth acquainted. 



Disclosing further Secrets of the Prison-House. 
The first Persons whom they past by
were three Men in Fetters, who
were enjoying themselves very merrily over
a Bottle of Wine and a Pipe of Tobacco. 
These, Mr. Robinson informed his Friend,
were three Street-robbers, and were all
certain of being hanged the ensuing Sessions. 
So inconsiderable an Object, said
he, is Misery to light Minds, when it is at
any Distance. 

A little farther they beheld a Man prostrate
on the Ground, whose heavy Groans,
and frantic Actions, plainly indicated the
highest Disorder of Mind. This Person
was, it seems, committed for a small Felony; 
and his Wife, who then lay-in, upon
hearing the News, had thrown herself from
a Window two Pair of Stairs high, by which
means he had, in all Probability, lost both
her and his Child. 
A very pretty Girl then advanced towards
them, whose Beauty Mr. Booth
could not help admiring the Moment he
saw her; declaring, at the same time, he
thought she had great Innocence in her
Countenance. Robinson said she was committed
thither as an idle and disorderly Person,
and a common Street-walker. As
she past by Mr. Booth, she damn'd his
Eyes, and discharged a Volley of Words,
every one of which was too indecent to be
repeated. 
They now beheld a little Creature sitting
by herself in a Corner and crying bitterly. 
This Girl, Mr. Robinson said, was committed,
because her Father-in-Law, who
was in the Granadier Guards, had sworn 

that he was afraid of his Life, or of some
bodily Harm, which she would do him,
and she could get no Sureties for keeping
the Peace: for which Reason Justice
Thrasher had committed her to Prison. 
A great Noise now arose, occasioned
by the Prisoners all flocking to see a
Fellow whipt or petty Larceny, to which
he was condemned by the Court of
Quarter Sessions; but this soon ended in
the Disappointment of the Spectators: for
the Fellow, after being stript, having advanced
another Sixpence, was discharged
untouched. 
This was immediately followed by another
Bustle. Blear-Eyed Moll, and several
of her Companions, having got Possession
of a Man who was committed for certain
odious unmanlike Practices, not fit to be
named, were giving him various Kinds
of Discipline, and would probably have
put an End to him, had he not been rescued
out of their Hands by Authority. 
When this Bustle was a little allayed,
Mr. Booth took Notice of a young Woman
in Rags sitting on the Ground, and
supporting the Head of an old Man in her 

Lap, who appeared to be giving up the
Ghost. These, Mr. Robinson informed him,
were Father and Daughter; that the latter
was committed for stealing a Loaf, in order
to support the former, and the former for
receiving it knowing to be stolen. 
A well-drest Man then walked surlily
by them, whom Mr. Robinson reported to
have been committed on an Indictment
found against him for a most horrid Perjury; 
but, says he, we expect him to be
bailed To-day. Good Heaven! cries Booth,
can such Villains find Bail, and is no Person
charitable enough to bail that poor
Father and Daughter? Oh! Sir, answered
Robinson, the Offence of the Daughter,
being Felony, is held not to be bailable
in Law; whereas Perjury is a Misdemeanor
only; and therefore Persons who are
even indicted for it, are nevertheless capable
of being bailed. Nay of all Perjuries that
of which this Man is indicted, is the worst:
for it was with an Intention of taking
away the Life of an innocent Person by
Form of Law. As to Perjuries in civil
Matters, they are not so very criminal. 
They are not, said Booth; and yet even these
are a most flagitious Offence, and worthy
the highest Punishment. Surely they ought 

to be distinguished, answered Robinson, from
the others: for what is taking away a little
Property from a Man compared to taking
away his Life, and his Reputation, and
ruining his Family into the Bargain? —I
hope there can be no Comparison in the
Crimes, and I think there ought to be none
in the Punishment. However, at present,
the Punishment of all Perjury is only Pillory,
and Transportation for seven Years; 
and as it is a traversable and bailable Offence,
Methods are often found to escape
any Punishment at all *  
Booth exprest great Astonishment at this,
when his Attention was suddenly diverted
by the most miserable Object that he had
yet seen. This was a Wretch almost naked,
and who bore in his Countenance, joined
to an Appearance of Honesty, the Marks
of Poverty, Hunger, and Disease. He
had, moreover, a wooden Leg, and two
or three Scars on his Forehead. The Case
of this poor Man is indeed unhappy enough,
said Robinson. He hath served his Country, 

lost his Limb, and received several Wounds
at the Siege of Gibraltar. When he was
discharged from the Hospital abroad, he
came over to get into that of Chelsea, but
could not immediately, as none of his Officers
were then in England; in the mean
time, he was one Day apprehended and committed
hither on Suspicion of stealing three
Herrings from a Fishmonger. He was
tried several Months ago for this Offence,
and acquitted; indeed his Innocence manifestly
appeared at the Trial; but he was
brought back again for his Fees, and here
he hath lain ever since. 
Booth exprest great Horror at this Account,
and declared if he had only so much
Money in his Pocket, he would pay his
Fees for him; but added, that he was not
possest of a single Farthing in the World. 
Robinson hesitated a Moment, and then
said, with a Smile, ‘I am going to make
you, Sir, a very odd Proposal after your
last Declaration; but what say you to a
Game at Cards, it will serve to pass a
tedious Hour, and may divert your
Thoughts from more unpleasant Speculations?’ 

I do not imagine Booth would have
agreed to this: for tho' some Love of
Gaming had been formerly amongst his
Faults; yet he was not so egregiously addicted
to that Vice, as to be tempted by
the shabby Plight of Robinson, who had,
if I may so express myself, no Charms for
a Gamester. If he had, however, any such
Inclinations, he had no Opportunity to
follow them: for before he could make any
Answer to Robinson's Proposal, a strapping
Wench came up to Booth, and taking hold
of his Arm, asked him to walk aside with
her; saying, ‘What a Pox, are you such a
fresh Cull that you do not know this Fellow? 
Why he is a Gambler, and committed
for cheating at Play. There is not such
a Pickpocket in the whole Quad * .’ 
A Scene of Altercation now ensued, between
Robinson and the Lady, which ended
in a Bout at Fisticuffs, in which the Lady
was greatly superior to the Philosopher. 
While the two Combatants were engaged,
a grave looking Man, rather better
drest than the Majority of the Company, 

came up to Mr. Booth, and taking him
aside, said, ‘I am sorry, Sir, to see a
Gentleman, as you appear to be, in such
Intimacy with that Rascal, who makes
no Scruple of disowning all revealed Religion. 
As for Crimes, they are human
Errors, and signify but little; nay, perhaps
the worse a Man is by Nature, the
more Room there is for Grace. The
Spirit is active, and loves best to inhabit
those Minds where it may meet with the
most Work. Whatever your Crime be,
therefore, I would not have you despair; 
but rather rejoice at it: for perhaps it
may be the Means of your being called.’ 
He ran on for a considerable Time with
this Cant, without waiting for an Answer,
and ended in declaring himself a Methodist. 
Just as the Methodist had finished his
Discourse, a beautiful young Woman was
ushered into the Goal. She was genteel
and well drest, and did not in the least resemble
those Females whom Mr. Booth had
hitherto seen. The Constable had no
sooner delivered her at the Gate, than she
asked, with a commanding Voice, for the
Keeper; and, when he arrived, she said to
him, ‘Well, Sir, whither am I to be conducted? 

I hope I am not to take up my
Lodging with these Creatures.’ The
Keeper answered, with a Kind of surly
Respect, ‘Madam, we have Rooms for
those that can afford to pay for them.’ 
At these Words she pulled a handsome
Purse from her Pocket, in which many
Guineas chinked, saying, with an Air of
Indignation, ‘that she was not come thither
on account of Poverty.’ The Keeper no
sooner viewed the Purse, than his Features
became all softned in an Instant, and with all
the Courtesy of which he was Master, he
desired the Lady to walk with him, assuring
her that she should have the best Apartment
in his House. 
Mr. Booth was now left alone; for the
Methodist had forsaken him, having, as
the Phrase of the Sect is, searched him to
the Bottom. In fact, he had thoroughly examined
every one of Mr. Booth's Pockets; 
from which he had conveyed away a Penknife
and an Iron Snuff-box, these being
all the Moveables which were to be found. 
Booth was standing near the Gate of the
Prison when the young Lady above-mentioned
was introduced into the Yard. He
viewed her Features very attentively, and 

was persuaded that he knew her. She was
indeed so remarkably handsome, that it
was hardly possible for any who had ever
seen her to forget her. He enquired of one
of the Under-keepers, if the Name of the
Prisoner lately arrived was not Mathews; 
to which he was answered that her Name
was not Mathews but Vincent, and that she
was committed for Murder. 
The latter Part of this Information
made Mr. Booth suspect his Memory more
than the former: for it was very possible
that she might have changed her Name; 
but he hardly thought she could so far
have changed her Nature as to be guilty
of a Crime so very incongruous with her
former gentle Manners: for Miss Mathews
had both the Birth and Education of a
Gentlewoman. He concluded, therefore,
that he was certainly mistaken, and rested
satisfied without any further Enquiry. 




Containing certain Adventures which befel
Mr. Booth in the Prison. 
The Remainder of the Day Mr.
Booth spent in melancholy Contemplation
on his present Condition. He was
destitute of the common Necessaries of
Life, and consequently unable to subsist
where he was; nor was there a single Person
in Town to whom he could with any
reasonable Hope apply for his Delivery. 
Grief for some time banished the Thoughts
of Food from his Mind; but, in the Morning,
Nature began to grow uneasy for want
of her usual Nourishment: for he had not
eat a Morsel during the last forty Hours. 
A penny Loaf, which is, it seems, the
ordinary Allowance to the Prisoners in
Bridewell, was now delivered him; and
while he was eating this, a Man brought
him a little Packet sealed up, informing
him that it came by a Messenger who said it
required no Answer. 
Mr. Booth now opened his Packet, and
after unfolding several Pieces of blank
Paper successively, at last discovered a 

Guinea, wrapt with great Care in the innermost
Paper. He was vastly surprised
at this Sight, as he had few, if any Friends,
from whom he could expect such a Favour,
slight as it was; and not one of his Friends,
as he was apprized, knew of his Confinement. 
As there was no Direction to the
Packet, nor a Word of Writing contained
in it, he began to suspect that it was delivered
to the wrong Person; and, being
one of most untainted Honesty, he
found out the Man who gave it to him,
and again examined him concerning the
Person who brought it, and the Message
delivered with it. The Man assured Booth
that he had made no Mistake; saying, ‘If
your Name is Booth, Sir, I am positive
you are the Gentleman to whom the Parcel
I gave you belongs.’ 
The most scrupulous Honesty would,
perhaps, in such a Situation, have been
well enough satisfied in finding no Owner
for the Guinea; especially when Proclamation
had been made in the Prison, that
Mr. Booth had received a Packet without
any Direction, to which if any Person had
any Claim, and would discover the Contents,
he was ready to deliver it to such
Claimant. No such Claimant being found, 

(I mean none who knew the Contents; for
many swore that they expected just such
a Packet, and believed it to be their Property)
Mr. Booth very calmly resolved to
apply the Money to his own Use. 
The first Thing after Redemption of the
Coat, which Mr. Booth, hungry as he was,
thought of, was to supply himself with
Snuff, which he had long, to his great
Sorrow, been without. On this Occasion
he presently missed that Iron Box which
the Methodist had so dextrously conveyed
out of his Pocket, as we mentioned in the
last Chapter. 
He no sooner missed this Box, than he
immediately suspected that the Gambler
was the Person who had stolen it; nay, so
well was he assured of this Man's Guilt,
that it may perhaps be improper to say he
barely suspected it. Tho' Mr. Booth was,
as we have hinted, a Man of a very sweet
Disposition; yet was he rather over-warm. 
Having, therefore, no Doubt concerning
the Person of the Thief, he eagerly sought
him out, and very bluntly charged him
with the Fact. 

The Gambler, whom I think we should
now call the Philosopher, received this
Charge without the least visible Emotion
either of Mind or Muscle. After a short
Pause of a few Moments, he answered with
great Solemnity as follows: ‘Young Man, I
am entirely unconcerned at your groundless
Suspicion. He that censures a Stranger,
as I am to you, without any Cause,
makes a worse Compliment to himself
than to the Stranger. You know yourself,
Friend; you know not me. It is
true indeed you heard me accused of being
a Cheat and a Gamester; but who is my
Accuser? Look at my Apparel, Friend,
do Thieves and Gamesters wear such
Cloaths as these? Play is my Folly, not
my Vice; it is my Impulse, and I have
been a Martyr to it. Would a Gamester
have asked another to play when he could
have lost Eighteen Pence and won nothing? 
However, if you are not satisfied
you may search my Pockets; the Outside
of all but one will serve your Turn,
and in that one there is the Eighteen
Pence I told you of.’ He then turned
up his Cloaths; and his Pockets entirely
resembled the Pitchers of the Belides. 

Booth was a little staggered at this Defence. 
He said, the real Value of the Iron
Box was too inconsiderable to mention; but
that he had a capricious Value for it, for
the Sake of the Person who gave it him:
‘for tho' it is not,’ said he ‘worth Sixpence,
I would willingly give a Crown
to any one who would bring it me
again.’ 
Robinson answered, ‘if that be the Case,
you have nothing more to do but to
signify your Intention in the Prison; and
I am well convinced you will not be long
without regaining the Possession of your
Snuff box.’ 
This Advice was immediately followed,
and with Success, the Methodist presently
producing the Box; which, he said, he had
found, and should have returned it before,
had he known the Person to whom it belonged; 
adding, with uplifted Eyes, that
the Spirit would not suffer him knowingly
to detain the Goods of another, however
inconsiderable the Value was. ‘Why
so, Friend?’ said Robinson. ‘Have I not
heard you often say, the wickeder any
Man was, the better, provided he was 

what you call a Believer.’ ‘You mistake
me,’ cries Cooper (for that was the Name
of the Methodist) ‘no Man can be wicked
after he is possessed by the Spirit. There is
a wide Difference between the Days of Sin
and the Days of Grace. I have been a
Sinner myself.’ ‘I believe thee,’ cries
Robinson, with a Sneer. ‘I care not,’ answered
the other, ‘what an Atheist believes. 
I suppose you would insinuate
that I stole the Snuff-box; but I value
not your Malice: the Lord knows my
Innocence.’ He then walked off with
the Reward; and Booth turning to Robinson,
very earnestly asked Pardon for his
groundless Suspicion; which the other,
without any Hesitation, accorded him,
saying, ‘You never accused Me, Sir; you
suspected some Gambler, with whose
Character I have no Concern. I should
be angry with a Friend or Acquaintance
who should give a hasty Credit to any
Allegation against me; but I have no
Reason to be offended with you for believing
what the Woman, and the Rascal
who is just gone, and who is committed
here for a Pickpocket, which you did
not perhaps know, told you to my Disadvantage. 
And if you thought me to
be a Gambler, you had just Reason to 

suspect any Ill of me: for I myself am
confined here by the Perjury of one of
those Villains; who having cheated me
of my Money at Play, and hearing that
I intended to apply to a Magistrate
against him, himself began the Attack,
and obtained a Warrant against me of
Justice Thrasher, who, without hearing
one Speech in my Defence, committed
me to this Place.’ 
Booth testified great Compassion at this
Account; and he having invited Robinson to
Dinner, they spent that Day together. In
the Afternoon Booth indulged his Friend
with a Game at Cards; at first for Half-pence,
and afterwards for Shillings, when
Fortune so favoured Robinson, that he did
not leave the other a single Shilling in his
Pocket. 
A surprising Run of Luck in a Gamester
is often mistaken for somewhat else,
by Persons who are not over zealous Believers
in the Divinity of Fortune. I have
known a Stranger at Bath, who hath happened
fortunately (I might almost say unfortunately)
to have four by Honours in
his Hand almost every time he dealt, for a
whole Evening, shunned universally by 

the whole Company the next Day. And
certain it is, that Mr. Booth, tho' of a
Temper very little inclined to Suspicion,
began to waver in his Opinion, whether
the Character given by Mr. Robinson of
himself, or that which the others gave of
him, was the truer. 
In the Morning Hunger paid him a second
Visit, and found him again in the
same Situation as before. After some Deliberation,
therefore, he resolved to ask
Robinson to lend him a Shilling or two of
that Money which was lately his own. 
And this Experiment, he thought, would
confirm him either in a good or evil Opinion
of that Gentleman. 
To this Demand Robinson answered with
great Alacrity, that he should very gladly
have complied, had not Fortune played
one of her Jade Tricks with him: ‘for,
since my winning of you,’ said he, ‘I have
been stript not only of your Money, but
my own.’ He was going to harangue
farther; but Booth with great Indignation
turned from him. 
This poor Gentleman had very little
time to reflect on his own Misery, or the 

Rascality, as it appeared to him, of the
other, when the same Person, who had
the Day before delivered him the Guinea
from the unknown Hand, again accosted
him, and told him a Lady in the House
(so he expressed himself) desired the Favour
of his Company. 
Mr. Booth immediately obeyed the Message,
and was conducted into a Room in
the Prison, where he was presently convinced
that Mrs. Vincent was no other than
his old Acquaintance Miss Mathews. 



Containing the extraordinary Behaviour of
Miss Mathews on her meeting with Booth,
and some Endeavours to prove by Reason and
Authority, that it is possible for a Woman to
appear to be what she really is not. 
Eight or nine Years had past since
any Interview between Mr. Booth and
Miss Mathews; and their meeting now in
so extraordinary a Place affected both of
them with an equal Surprize. 
After some immaterial Ceremonies, the
Lady acquainted Mr. Booth, that having 

heard there was a Person in the Prison who
knew her by the Name of Mathews, she
had great Curiosity to enquire who he was,
whereupon he had been shewn to her
from the Window of the House; that
she immediately recollected him, and being
informed of his distressful Situation, for
which she expressed great Concern, she had
sent him that Guinea which he had received
the Day before; and then proceeded to excuse
herself for not having desired to see
him at that time, when she was under the
greatest Disorder and Hurry of Spirits. 
Booth made many handsome Acknowledgments
of her Favour; and added, that
he very little wondered at the Disorder
of her Spirits, concluding, that he was
heartily concerned at seeing her there; but
I hope, Madam, said he— 
Here he hesitated; upon which, bursting
into an Agony of Tears, she cried out, ‘O
Captain, Captain, many extraordinary
Things have past since last I saw you. O
gracious Heaven! did I ever expect that
this would be the next Place of our meeting!’ 

She then flung herself into her Chair, where
she gave a Loose to her Passion, whilst he,
in the most affectionate and tender Manner,
endeavoured to sooth and comfort her; 
but Passion itself did probably more for its
own Relief than all his friendly Consolations. 
Having vented this in a large Flood
of Tears, she became pretty well composed; 
but Booth unhappily mentioning her Father,
she again relapsed into an Agony, and cried
out, ‘Why? why will you repeat the
Name of that dear Man? I have disgraced
him, Mr. Booth, I am unworthy
the Name of his Daughter.’ —Here Passion
again stopped her Words, and discharged
itself in Tears. 
After this second Vent of Sorrow or
Shame; or, if the Reader pleases, of Rage,
she once more recovered from her Agonies. 
To say the Truth, these are, I believe, as
critical Discharges of Nature, as any of
those which are so called by the Physicians; 
and do more effectually relieve the Mind
than any Remedies with which the whole
Materia Medica of Philosophy can supply
it. 
When Mrs. Vincent had recovered her
Faculties, she perceived Booth standing 

silent, with a Mixture of Concern and
Astonishment in his Countenance; then addressing
herself to him with an Air of most
bewitching Softness, of which she was a
perfect Mistress, she said, ‘I do not wonder
at your Amazement, Captain Booth; 
nor indeed at the Concern which you so
plainly discover for me: for I well know
the Goodness of your Nature; but O
Mr. Booth! believe me, when you know
what hath happened since our last Meeting,
your Concern will be raised, however
your Astonishment may cease. O, Sir,
you are a Stranger to the Cause of my
Sorrows.’ 
‘I hope, I am, Madam, answered he; 
for I cannot believe what I have heard in the
Prison—surely Murder—’ At which Words
she started from her Chair, repeating,
Murder! ‘Oh! 'tis Music in my Ears. — 
You have heard then the Cause of my
Commitment, my Glory, my Delight, my
Reparation! —Yes, my old Friend, this
is the Hand, this is the Arm that drove
the Penknife to his Heart. Unkind Fortune,
that not one Drop of his Blood
reached my Hand. —Indeed, Sir, I never
would have washed it from it. —But tho'
I have not the Happiness to see it on my 

Hand, I have the glorious Satisfaction
of remembring I saw it run in Rivers on
the Floor; I saw it forsake his Cheeks. 
I saw him fall a Martyr to my Revenge. 
And is the killing a Villain to be called
Murder? Perhaps the Law calls it so. — 
Let it call it what it will, or punish me
as it pleases. —Punish me!—no, no— 
That is not in the Power of Man—not
of that Monster Man, Mr. Booth. I am
undone, am revenged, and have now no
more Business for Life; let them take it
from me when they will.’ 
Our poor Gentleman turned pale with
Horror at this Speech, and the Ejaculation
of Good Heavens! what do I hear! burst
spontaneously from his Lips! Nor can we
wonder at this, tho' he was the bravest of
Men; for her Voice, her Looks, her
Gestures, were properly adapted to the Sentiments
she exprest. Such indeed was her
Image, that neither could Shakespeare describe,
nor Hogarth paint, nor Clive could
act a Fury in higher Perfection. 
‘What do you hear?’ reiterated she. ‘You
hear the Resentment of the most injured
of Women. You have heard, you say,
of the Murder; but do you know the 

Cause, Mr. Booth? Have you, since your
Return to England, visited that Country
where we formerly knew one another? 
Tell me, do you know my wretched
Story? Tell me that, my Friend.’ 
Booth hesitated for an Answer; indeed he
had heard some imperfect Stories, not
much to her Advantage. She waited
not till he had formed a Speech; 
but cried, ‘Whatever you may have
heard, you cannot be acquainted with all
the strange Accidents which have occasioned
your seeing me in a Place, which,
at our last Parting, was so unlikely that
I should ever have been sound in; nor
can you know the Cause of all that I have
uttered, and which, I am convinced, you
never expected to have heard from my
Mouth. If these Circumstances raise
your Curiosity, I will satisfy it.’ 
He answered, that Curiosity was too mean
a Word to express his ardent Desire of
knowing her Story. Upon which, with
very little previous Ceremony, she began
to relate what is written in the following
Chapter. 

But before we put an End to this, it
may be necessary to whisper a Word or two
to the Critics, who have perhaps begun to express
no less Astonishment than Mr. Booth,
that a Lady, in whom we had remarked a
most extraordinary Power of displaying
Softness, should the very next Moment after
the Words were out of our Mouth, express
Sentiments becoming the Lips of a
Dalila, Jezebel, Medea, Semiramis, Parysatis,
Tanaquil, Livilla, Messalina, Agrippina, Brunichilde,
Elfrida, Lady Macbeth, Joan of
Naples, Christina of Sweden, Katharine
Hays, Sarah Malcolm, Con. Philips * , or any
other Heroine of the tender Sex, which
History sacred or prophane, antient or modern,
false or true, hath recorded. 
We desire such Critics to remember, that
it is the same English Climate, in which
on the lovely 10th of June, under a serene
Sky, the amorous Jacobite kissing the odoriferous
Zephyr's Breath, gathers a Nosegay
of white Roses to deck the whiter
Breast of Celia; and in which, on the 11th
of June, the very next Day, the boisterous
Boreas, roused by the hollow Thunder,
rushes horrible through the Air, and driving
the wet Tempest before him, levels the 

Hope of the Husbandman with the Earth,
dreadful Remembrance of the Consequences
of the Revolution. 
Again let it be remembered, that it is
the self same Celia, all tender, soft, and
delicate; who with a Voice, the Sweetness
of which the Sirens might envy, warbles
the harmonious Song in Praise of the
young Adventurer; and again, the next
Day, or, perhaps, the next Hour, with
fiery Eyes, wrinkled Brows, and foaming
Lips, roars forth Treason and Nonsense
in a political Argument with some Fair
one, of a different Principle. 
Or, if the Critic be a Whig, and consequently
dislikes such kind of Similes,
as being too favourable to Jacobitism,
let him be contented with the following
Story: 
I happened in my Youth to sit behind
two Ladies in a Side-Box at a Play, where,
in the Balcony on the opposite Side was
placed the inimitable B&wblank;y C&wblank;s, in
Company with a young Fellow of no very
formal, or indeed sober Appearance. One
of the Ladies, I remember, said to the
other–––‘Did you ever see any thing look
so modest and so innocent as that Girl 

over the way? What Pity it is such a
Creature should be in the Way of Ruin,
as I am afraid she is, by her being alone
with that young Fellow!’ Now this
Lady was no bad Physiognomist; for
it was impossible to conceive a greater
Appearance of Modesty, Innocence and
Simplicity, than what Nature had displayed
in the Countenance of that Girl; and yet,
all Appearances notwithstanding, I myself
(remember Critic it was in my Youth) had
a few Mornings before seen that very identical
Picture of all those ingaging Qualities
in Bed with a Rake at a Bagnio, smoaking
Tobacco, drinking Punch, talking Obscenity,
and swearing and cursing with all
the Impudence and Impiety of the lowest
and most abandoned Trull of a Soldier. 



In which Miss Mathews begins her History. 
Miss Mathews having barred the
Door on the Inside, as securely as
it was before barred on the Outside, proceeded
as follows: 
‘You may imagine, I am going to begin
my History at the Time when you left 

the Country; but I cannot help reminding
you of something which happened before. 
You will soon recollect the Incident; but
I believe you little know the Consequence
either at that time or since. Alas! I
could keep a Secret then: now I have no
Secrets; the World knows all; and it is
not worth my while to conceal any thing. 
Well!—You will not wonder, I believe. 
—I protest I can hardly tell it you even
now. —But I am convinced you have
too good an Opinion of yourself to be
surprised at any Conquest you may have
made. —Few Men want that good Opinion
—and perhaps very few had ever
more Reason for it. Indeed, Will, you
was a charming Fellow in those Days; 
nay you are not much altered for the
worse now, at least in the Opinion of
some Women: for your Complexion and
Features are grown much more masculine
than they were.’ Here Booth made her a
low Bow, most probably with a Compliment; 
and, after a little Hesitation, she
again proceeded—‘Do you remember a
Contest which happened at an Assembly,
betwixt myself and Miss Johnson, about
standing uppermost? You was then my
Partner; and young Williams danced with
the other Lady. The Particulars are not 

now worth mentioning, tho' I suppose
you have long since forgot them. Let it
suffice that you supported my Claim, and
Williams very sneakingly gave up that of
his Partner, who was with much Difficulty
afterwards prevailed to dance with
him. You said,–––I am sure I repeat the
Words exactly, that “you would not
for the World affront any Lady there; 
but that you thought you might, without
any such Danger declare, that there
was no Assembly in which that Lady,
meaning your humble Servant, was not
worthy of the uppermost Place; nor
will I, said you, suffer the first Duke in
England, when she is at the uppermost
End of the Room, and hath called her
Dance, to lead his Partner above her.” 
‘What made this the more pleasing to
me was, that I secretly hated Miss Johnson. 
Will you have the Reason? Why
then I will tell you honestly, she was my
Rival;—that Word perhaps astonishes
you, as you never, I believe, heard of any
one who made his Addresses to me; and
indeed my Heart was till that Night entirely
indifferent to all Mankind. I mean
then that she was my Rival for Praise,
for Beauty, for Dress, for Fortune, and 

consequently for Admiration. My Triumph
on this Conquest is not to be expressed,
any more than my Delight in
the Person to whom I chiefly owed it. 
The former, I fancy, was visible to the
whole Company; and I desired it should
be so; but the latter was so well concealed,
that no one, I am confident, took
any Notice of it. And yet you appeared
to me that Night to be an Angel. 
You looked, you danced, you spoke— 
every Thing charmed me.’ 
‘Good Heavens!’ cries Booth, ‘is it possible
you should do me so much unmerited
Honour, and I should be Dunce
enough not to perceive the least Symptom!’ 
‘I assure you,’ answered she, ‘I did all I
could to prevent you; and yet I almost
hated you for not seeing through what I
strove to hide. Why, Mr. Booth, was
you not more quick-sighted? —I will
answer for you—your Affections were
more happily disposed of to a much
better Woman than myself, whom you
married soon afterwards. I should ask
you for her, Mr. Booth; I should have
asked you for her before; but I am unworthy 

of asking for her, or of calling her
my Acquaintance.’ 
Booth stopt her short, as she was running
into another Fit of Passion, and
begged her to omit all former Matters,
and acquaint him with that Part of her
History to which he was an entire Stranger. 
She then renewed her Discourse as follows: 
‘You know, Mr. Booth, I soon
afterwards left that Town, upon the
Death of my Grandmother, and returned
home to my Father's House; where I
had not been long arrived before some
Troops of Dragoons came to quarter in
our Neighbourhood. Among the Officers
there was a Cornet, whose detested
Name was Hebbers, a Name I could
scarce repeat, had I not at the same time
the Pleasure to reflect that he is now no
more. My Father, you know, who is
a hearty Well-wisher to the present Government,
used always to invite the Officers
to his House; so did he these. Nor
was it long before this Cornet, in so particular
a Manner recommended himself
to the poor old Gentleman (I cannot
think of him without Tears) that our 

House became his principal Habitation; 
and he was rarely at his Quarters, unless
when his superior Officers obliged him to
be there. I shall say nothing of his Person,
nor could that be any Recommendation
to a Man; it was such, however,
as no Woman could have made Objection
to. Nature had certainly wrapt up her
odious Work in a most beautiful Covering. 
To say the Truth, he was the handsomest
Man, except one only, that I ever saw— 
I assure you, I have seen an handsomer
—but—well—He had besides all the
Qualifications of a Gentleman, was
genteel, and extremely polite, spoke
French well, and danced to a Miracle; 
but what chiefly recommended him to
my Father was his Skill in Music, of
which you know that dear Man was the
most violent Lover. I wish he was not
too susceptible of Flattery on that Head; 
for I have heard Hebbers often greatly
commend my Father's Performance, and
have observed, that he was wonderfully
pleased with such Commendations. To
say the Truth, it is the only Way I can
account for the extraordinary Friendship
which my Father conceived for this Person; 
such a Friendship that he at last
became a Part of our Family.’ 

‘This very Circumstance, which, as I
am convinced, strongly recommended
him to my Father, had the very contrary
Effect with me; I had never any Delight
in Music, and it was not without much
Difficulty I was prevailed on to learn to
play on the Harpsichord, in which I had
made a very slender Progress. As this Man,
therefore, was frequently the Occasion of
my being importuned to play against my
Will, I began to entertain some Dislike
for him on that Account; and as to his
Person, I assure you, I long continued
to look on it with great Indifference. 
‘How strange will the Art of this
Man appear to you presently, who had
sufficient Address to convert that very
Circumstance which had at first occasioned
my Dislike, into the first Seeds
of Affection for him. 
‘You have often, I believe, heard my
Sister Betty play on the Harpsichord; she
was indeed reputed the best Performer
in the whole Country. 
‘I was the farthest in the World from
regarding this Perfection of hers with 

Envy. In Reality, perhaps, I despised
all Perfection of this Kind; at least, as I
had neither Skill nor Ambition to excel
this Way, I looked upon it as a Matter
of mere Indifference. 
‘Hebbers first put this Emulation in my
Head. He took great Pains to persuade
me, that I had much greater Abilities of
the musical Kind than my Sister; and
that I might, with the greatest Ease, if I
pleased, excel her; offering me, at the
same time, his Assistance, if I would resolve
to undertake it. 
‘When he had sufficiently inflamed my
Ambition, in which perhaps he found
too little Difficulty, the continual Praises
of my Sister, which before I had disregarded,
became more and more nauseous
in my Ears; and the rather as Music being
the favourite Passion of my Father,
I became apprehensive (not without frequent
Hints from Hebbers of that Nature)
that she might gain too great a Preference
in his Favour. 
‘To my Harpsichord then I applied
myself Night and Day, with such Industry
and Attention, that I soon began 

to perform in a tolerable Manner. I do
not absolutely say I excelled my Sister; 
for many were of a different Opinion; 
but indeed there might be some Partiality
in all that. 
‘Hebbers, at least, declared himself on
my Side, and no Body could doubt his
Judgment. He asserted openly, that I
played in the better Manner of the two; 
and one Day, when I was playing to him
alone, he affected to burst into a Rapture
of Admiration, and, squeezing me
gently by the Hand, said,’ ‘There, Madam,
I now declare you excel your
Sister as much in Music, as,’ added he,
in a whispering Sigh, ‘you do her and
all the World in every other Charm.’ 
‘No Woman can bear any Superiority
in whatever thing she desires to excel in. 
I now began to hate all the Admirers of
my Sister, to be uneasy at every Commendation
bestowed on her Skill in Music,
and consequently to love Hebbers for
the Preference which he gave to mine. 
‘It was now that I began to survey the
handsome Person of Hebbers with Pleasure. 
And here, Mr. Booth, I will betray 

to you the grand Secret of our Sex. 
—Many Women, I believe, do with
great Innocence, and even with great
Indifference, converse with Men of the
finest Persons; but this I am confident
may be affirmed with Truth, that when
once a Woman comes to ask this Question
of herself; Is the Man whom I like for
some other Reason, handsome? Her
Fate and his too very strongly depend
on her answering in the Affirmative. 
‘Hebbers no sooner perceived that he
made an Impression on my Heart, of
which, I am satisfied, I gave him too undeniable
Tokens, than he affected, on a
sudden, to shun me in the most apparent
Manner. He wore the most melancholy
Air in my Presence, and, by his
dejected Looks and Sighs, firmly persuaded
me, that there was some secret. 
Sorrow labouring in his Bosom; nor will
it be difficult for you to imagine to what
Cause I imputed it. 
‘Whilst I was wishing for his Declaration
of a Passion, in which, I thought, I
could not be mistaken, and, at the same
Time, trembling, whenever we met, with
the Apprehension of this very Declaration, 

the Widow Cary came from London
to make us a Visit, intending to stay
the whole Summer at our House. 
‘Those who know Mrs. Cary, will
scarce think I do her an Injury, in saying,
she is far from being handsome; 
and yet she is as finished a Coquette as
if she had the highest Beauty to support
that Character. But, perhaps, you have
seen her; and, if you have, I am convinced
you will readily subscribe to my Opinion.’ 
Booth answered, he had not; and then
she proceeded as in the following Chapter. 



The History of Miss Mathews continued. 
‘This young Lady had not been
three Days with us, before Hebbers
grew so particular with her, that it was
generally observed, and my poor Father,
who, I believe, loved the Cornet as if he
had been his Son, began to jest on the
Occasion, as one who would not be displeased
at throwing a good Jointure into
the Arms of his Friend. 

‘You will easily guess, Sir, the Disposition
of my Mind on this Occasion; but
I was not permitted to suffer long under
it; for one Day, when Hebbers was alone
with me, he took an Opportunity of expressing
his Abhorrence at the Thoughts
of marrying for Interest, contrary to his
Inclinations. I was warm on the Subject,
and, I believe, went so far as to say,
That none but Fools and Villains did so. He
replied, with a Sigh, Yes, Madam, but
what would you think of a Man whose
Heart is all the while bleeding for another
Woman, to whom he would willingly sacrifice
the World; but, because he must sacrifice
her Interest as well as his own, never durst
even give her a Hint of that Passion which
was preying on his very Vitals? Do you believe,
Miss Fanny, there is such a Wretch
on Earth? I answered, with an assumed
Coldness, I did not believe there was; he
then took me gently by the Hand, and,
with a Look so tender that I can not describe
it, vowed he was himself that
Wretch. Then starting, as if conscious
of an Error committed, he cried with a
faltering Voice, What am I saying? Pardon
me, Miss Fanny; since I beg only your
Pity, I never will ask for more. —At these 

Words, hearing my Father coming up, I
betrayed myself entirely, if, indeed, I had
not done it before. I hastily withdrew
my Hand, crying, Hush! for Heaven's
Sake, my Father is just coming in; my
Blushes, my Look, and my Accent telling
him, I suppose, all which he wished
to know. 
‘A few Days now brought Matters to
an Eclaircissement between us; the being
undeceived in what had given me so
much Uneasiness, gave me a Pleasure too
sweet to be resisted. To triumph over
the Widow, for whom I had, in a very
short Time, contracted a most inveterate
Hatred, was a Pride not to be described. 
Hebbers appeared to me to be the Cause
of all this Happiness. I doubted not
but that he had the most disinterested
Passion for me, and thought him every
way worthy of its Return. I did return
it, and accepted him as my Lover. 
‘He declared the greatest Apprehensions
of my Father's Suspicion, though I am
convinced these were causeless, had his
Designs been honourable. To blind
these, I consented that he should carry
on sham Addresses to the Widow, who 

was now a constant Jest between us; and
he pretended, from Time to Time, to
acquaint me faithfully with every Thing
that past at his Interviews with her; nor
was this faithless Woman wanting in her
Part of the Deceit. She carried herself
to me all the while with a Shew of Affection,
and pretended to have the utmost
Friendship for me. But such are
the Friendship of Women!’ 
At this Remark, Booth, though enough
affected at some Parts of the Story, had
great Difficulty to refrain from Laughter; 
but, by good Luck, he escaped being perceived; 
and the Lady went on without Interruption. 
‘I am come now to a Part of my Narrative
in which it is impossible to be particular,
without being tedious; for as to
the Commerce between Lovers, it is, I
believe, much the same in all Cases; and
there is, perhaps, scarce a single Phrase
that hath not been repeated ten Millions
of Times. 
‘One Thing, however, as I strongly remarked
it then, so I will repeat it to you
now. In all our Conversations, in Moments 

when he fell into the warmest
Raptures, and exprest the greatest Uneasiness
at the Delay of his Joys, he seldom
mentioned the Word Marriage; and never
once solicited a Day for that Purpose. 
Indeed Women cannot be cautioned too
much against such Lovers; for though I
have heard, and perhaps, truly, of some
of our Sex of a Virtue so exalted, that it
is Proof against every Temptation; yet
the Generality, I am afraid, are too
much in the Power of a Man to whom
they have owned an Affection. What is
called being upon a good Footing, is, perhaps,
being upon a very dangerous one; 
and a Woman who hath given her Consent
to marry, can hardly be said to be
safe till she is married. 
‘And now, Sir, I hasten to the Period
of my Ruin. We had a Wedding in our
Family; my musical Sister was married
to a young Fellow as musical as herself. 
Such a Match, you may be sure, amongst
other Festivities, must have a Ball. Oh!
Mr. Booth, shall Modesty forbid me to
remark to you what past on that Occasion? 
But why do I mention Modesty,
who have no Pretensions to it? Every
Thing was said, and practised, on that 

Occasion, as if the Purpose had been to
inflame the Mind of every Woman present. 
That Effect, I freely own to you,
it had with me. Music, Dancing, Wine,
and the most luscious Conversation, in
which my poor dear Father innocently
joined, raised Ideas in me of which I shall
for ever repent; and I wished; (why
should I deny it?) that it had been my
Wedding, instead of my Sister's. 
‘The Villain Hebbers danced with me
that Night, and he lost no Opportunity
of improving the Occasion. In short,
the dreadful Evening came. My Father,
though it was a very unusual Thing
with him, grew intoxicated with Liquor; 
most of the Men were in the same Condition; 
nay, I myself drank more than
I was accustomed to, enough to inflame,
though not to disorder. I lost my former
Bed-fellow, my Sister, and,–––you
may, I think, guess the rest,–––the Villain
found Means to steal to my Chamber,
and I was undone. 
‘Two Months I passed in this detested
Commerce, buying, even then, my guilty,
half-tasted Pleasures at too dear a Rate, 

with continual Horror and Apprehension; 
but what have I paid since, what do
I pay now, Mr. Booth? O may my Fate
be a Warning to every Woman to keep
her Innocence, to resist every Temptation,
since she is certain to repent of the
foolish Bargain. May it be a Warning
to her to deal with Mankind with Care
and Caution; to shun the least Approaches
of Dishonour, and never to
confide too much in the Honesty of a
Man, nor in her own Strength, where
she has so much at Stake; let her remember
she walks on a Precipice, and the
bottomless Pit is to receive her, if she
slips; nay, if she makes but one false
Step. 
‘I ask your Pardon, Mr. Booth, I might
have spared these Exhortations, since no
Woman hears me; but you will not
wonder at seeing me affected on this Ocsion.’ 
Booth declared he was much more surprised
at her being able so well to preserve
her Temper in recounting her Story. 
‘O Sir, answered she, I am at length
reconciled to my Fate; and I can now 

die with Pleasure, since I die revenged. 
I am not one of those mean Wretches
who can sit down and lament their Misfortunes. 
If I ever shed Tears, they are
the Tears of Indignation–––but I will
proceed. 
‘It was my Fate now to solicit Marriage; 
and I failed not to do it in the
most earnest Manner. He answered me
at first with Procrastinations, declaring
from time to time he would mention it
to my Father, and still excusing himself
for not doing it. At last he thought on
an Expedient to obtain a longer Reprieve. 
This was by pretending that he should
in a very few Weeks be preferred to the
Command of a Troop; and then he said,
he could with some Confidence propose
the Match. 
‘In this Delay I was persuaded to acquiesce; 
and was indeed pretty easy; for
I had not yet the least Mistrust of his
Honour; but what Words can paint my
Sensations! when one Morning he came
into my Room, with all the Marks of
Dejection in his Countenance, and
throwing an open Letter on the Table,
said, There is News, Madam, in that Letter 

which I am unable to tell you; nor
can it give you more Concern than it
hath given me. 
‘This Letter was from his Captain,
to acquaint him, that the Rout, as they
call it, was arrived, and that they were
to march within two Days. And this I
am since convinced was what he expected,
instead of the Preferment which had
been made the Pretence of delaying our
Marriage. 
‘The Shock which I felt at reading
this was inexpressible, occasioned indeed
principally by the Departure of a Villain
whom I loved. However, I soon acquired
sufficient Presence of Mind to
remember the main Point; and I now
insisted peremptorily on his making me
immediately his Wife, whatever might
be the Consequence. 
‘He seemed thunderstruck at this Proposal,
being, I suppose, destitute of any
Excuse: But I was too impatient to wait
for an Answer, and cried out with much
Eagerness, Sure you cannot hesitate a Moment
upon this Matter–––Hesitate! Madam!
replied he–––What you ask is impossible–––Is 

this a Time for me to mention a Thing of
this kind to your Father? –––My Eyes were
now opened all at once–––I fell into a
Rage little short of Madness. Tell not
me, I cried, of Impossibilities, nor Times,
nor of my Father,—my Honour, my
Reputation, my All are at Stake. –––I will
have no Excuse, no Delay–––make me your
Wife this instant, or I will proclaim you
over the Face of the whole Earth for the
greatest of Villains. –––He answered, with
a kind of Sneer, What will you proclaim,
Madam? –––Whose Honour will you injure? ––– 
My Tongue faltered when I offered to
reply, and I fell into a violent Agony,
which ended in a Fit; nor do I remember
any thing more that past, till I found
myself in the Arms of my poor affrighted
Father. 
‘O Mr. Booth! what was then my Situation. 
I tremble even now from the
Reflection. —I must stop a Moment. I
can go no farther.’ Booth attempted all
in his Power to sooth her; and she soon
recovered her Powers, and proceeded in
her Story. 




In which Miss Mathews concludes her Relation. 
‘Before I had recovered my Senses,
I had sufficiently betrayed myself
to that best of Men, who instead of upbraiding
me, or exerting any Anger, endeavoured
to comfort me all he could; 
with Assurances that all should yet be
well. This Goodness of his affected
me with inexpressible Sensations; I prostrated
myself before him, embraced and
kissed his Knees; and almost dissolved in
Tears, and a Degree of Tenderness
hardly to be conceived—But I am
running into too minute Descriptions. 
‘Hebbers seeing me in a Fit had left me,
and sent one of the Servants to take
Care of me. He then ran away like a
Thief from the House, without taking
his Leave of my Father, or once thanking
him for all his Civilities. He did
not stop at his Quarters, but made directly
to London, apprehensive, I believe,
either of my Father or Brother's Resentment; 
for I am convinced he is a Coward. 
Indeed his Fear of my Brother
was utterly groundless; for I believe he 

would rather have thanked any Man
who had destroyed me, and I am sure I
am not in the least behind Hand with
him in good Wishes. 
‘All his Inveteracy to me had, however,
no Effect on my Father, at least at
that time; for though the good Man
took sufficient Occasions to reprimand
me for my past Offence, he could not
be brought to abandon me. A Treaty
of Marriage was now set on Foot, in
which my Father himself offered me to
Hebbers, with a Fortune superior to that
which had been given with my Sister; nor
could all my Brother's Remonstrances
against it, as an Act of the highest Injustice,
avail. 
‘Hebbers entered into the Treaty, tho'
not with much Warmth. He had even
the Assurance to make additional Demands
on my Father, which being complied
with, every thing was concluded,
and the Villain once more received into
the House. He soon found Means to
obtain my Forgiveness of his former
Behaviour; indeed he convinced me, so
foolishly blind is female Love, that he
had never been to blame. 

‘When every thing was ready for our
Nuptials, and the Day of the Ceremony
was to be appointed, in the midst of my
Happiness, I received a Letter from an
unknown Hand, acquainting me (guess,
Mr. Booth, how I was shocked at receiving
it) that Mr. Hebbers was already married
to a Woman, in a distant Part of the
Kingdom. 
‘I will not tire you with all that past
at our next Interview. I communicated
the Letter to Hebbers, who, after some
little Hesitation, owned the Fact; and
not only owned it, but had the Address to
improve it to his own Advantage, to make
it the Means of satisfying me concerning
all his former Delays; which, to say
the Truth, I was not so much displeased
at imputing to any Degree of Villany,
as I should have been to impute it
to the Want of a sufficient Warmth
of Affection; and tho' the Disappointment
of all my Hopes, at the very
Instant of their expected Fruition, threw
me into the most violent Disorders; yet
when I came a little to myself, he had
no great Difficulty to persuade me that
in every Instance, with regard to me,
Hebbers had acted from no other Motive 

than from the most ardent and ungovernable
Love. And there is, I believe,
no Crime which a Woman will not forgive,
when she can derive it from that
Fountain. In short, I forgave him all,
and am willing to persuade myself I am
not weaker than the rest of my Sex. 
Indeed, Mr. Booth, he hath a bewitching
Tongue, and is Master of an Address
that no Woman could resist. I do assure
you the Charms of his Person are his
least Perfection, at least in my Eye.’ 
Here Booth smiled, but happily without
her perceiving it. 
‘A fresh Difficulty (continued she) now
arose. This was to excuse the Delay of
the Ceremony to my Father, who every
Day very earnestly urged it. This made
me so very uneasy that I at last listened
to a Proposal, which if any one, in the
Days of my Innocence, or even a few
Days before, had assured me I could have
submitted to have thought of, I should
have treated the Supposition with the
highest Contempt and Indignation; nay I
scarce reflect on it now with more Horror
than Astonishment. In short I agreed
to run away with him. To leave my 

Father, my Reputation, every thing
which was or ought to have been dear to
me, and to live with this Villain as a
Mistress, since I could not be his Wife. 
‘Was not this an Obligation of the
highest and tenderest Kind, and had I
not Reason to expect every Return in the
Man's Power on whom I had conferred
it? 
‘I will make short of the Remainder of
my Story: for what is there of a Woman
worth relating, after what I have told
you? 
‘Above a Year I lived with this Man in
an obscure Court in London, during which
time I had a Child by him, whom Heaven,
I thank it, hath been pleased to take to
itself. 
‘During many Months he behaved to
me with all the apparent Tenderness and
even Fondness imaginable; but alas!
how poor was my Enjoyment of this
compared to what it would have been in
another Situation? When he was present,
Life was barely tolerable; but when
he was absent, nothing could equal the 

Misery I endured. I past my Hours almost
entirely alone: for no Company,
but what I despised, would consort with
me. Abroad I scarce ever went, lest I
should meet any of my former Acquaintance; 
for their Sight would have plunged
a thousand Daggers in my Soul. My
only Diversion was going very seldom to
a Play, where I hid myself in the Gallery,
with a Daughter of the Woman of
the House. A Girl indeed of good Sense,
and many good Qualities: but how much
beneath me was it to be the Companion
of a Creature so low! O Heavens! When
I have seen my Equals glittering in a Side-box,
how have the Thoughts of my lost
Honour torn my Soul!’ 
‘Pardon me, dear Madam,’ cries Booth,
‘for interrupting you; but I am under
the utmost Anxiety to know what became
of your poor Father, for whom I
have so great a Respect, and who, I am
convinced, must so bitterly feel your
Loss.’ 
‘O Mr. Booth,’ answered she ‘he was
scarce ever out of my Thoughts. His
dear Image still obtruded itself in my
Mind, and I believe would have broken 

my Heart, had I not taken a very preposterous
Way to ease myself. I am
indeed almost ashamed to tell you; but
Necessity put it in my Head. —You will
think the Matter too trifling to have been
remembered, and so it surely was; nor
should I have remembered it on any
other Occasion. You must know then,
Sir, that my Brother was always my inveterate
Enemy, and altogether as fond
of my Sister. He once prevailed with
my Father to let him take my Sister with
him in the Chariot, and by that Means
I was disappointed of going to a Ball
which I had set my Heart on. The Disappointment,
I assure you, was great at
the time; but I had long since forgotten
it. I must have been a very bad Woman,
if I had not: for it was the only Thing
in which I can remember that my Father
ever disobliged me. However, I now
revived this in my Mind, which I artificially
worked up into so high an Injury,
that I assure you it afforded me no little
Comfort. When any tender Idea intruded
into my Bosom, I immediately
raised this Fantom of an Injury in my
Imagination, and it considerably lessened
the Fury of that Sorrow which I should
have otherwise felt for the Loss of so 

good a Father; who died within a few
Months of my Departure from him. 
‘And now, Sir, to draw to a Conclusion. 
One Night as I was in the Gallery
at Drury-Lane Play-house, I saw below
me, in a Side-box—(she was once below
me in every Place) that Widow
whom I mentioned to you before—I
had scarce cast my Eyes on this Woman,
before I was so shocked with the Sight,
that it almost deprived me of my Senses; 
for the Villain Hebbers came presently in,
and seated himself behind her. 
‘He had been almost a Month from
me, and I believed him to be at his
Quarters in Yorkshire. Guess what were
my Sensations, when I beheld him sitting
by that base Woman, and talking to her
with the utmost Familiarity. I could
not long endure this Sight; and having
acquainted my Companion that I was
taken suddenly ill, I forced her to go
home with me at the End of the second
Act. 
‘After a restless and sleepless Night,
when I rose the next Morning I had the
Comfort to receive a Visit from the 

Woman of the House, who, after a very
short Introduction, asked me when I had
heard from the Captain, and when I expected
to see him? I had not Strength
or Spirits to make her any Answer; and
she proceeded thus: Indeed I did not
think the Captain would have used me so. 
My Husband was an Officer of the Army, as
well as himself; and if a Body is a little low
in the World, I am sure that is no Reason
for Folks to trample on a Body. I defy the
World to say as I ever was guilty of an ill
Thing. For Heaven's Sake, Madam, says
I, what do you mean! Mean! cries she,
I am sure if I had not thought you had been
Captain Hebber's Lady, his lawful Lady
too, you should never have set Footing in
my House. I would have Captain Hebbers
know, that tho' I am reduced to let Lodgings,
I never have entertained any but Persons of
Character—In this Manner, Sir, she ran
on, saying many shocking things not worth
repeating, till my Anger at last got the
better of my Patience as well as my Sorrow,
and I pushed her out of the Room. 
‘She had not been long gone before her
Daughter came to me, and after many
Expressions of Tenderness and Pity acquainted
me, that her Mother had just 

found out, by Means of the Captain's
Servant, that the Captain was married to
another Lady; which if you did not know
before, Madam, said she, I am sorry to be
the Messenger of such ill News. 
‘Think, Mr. Booth, what I must have
endured to see myself humbled before
such a Creature as this, the Daughter of
a Woman who lets Lodgings! However,
having recollected myself a little, I
thought it would be in vain to deny any
thing; so knowing this to be one of the
best natured and most sensible Girls in
the World, I resolved to tell her my
whole Story, and for the future to make
her my Confidente. I answered her,
therefore, with a good deal of Assurance,
that she need not regret telling
me this Piece of ill News, for I had
known it before I came to her House. 
‘Pardon me, Madam, replied the Girl,
You cannot possibly have known it so long; 
for he hath not been married above a Week:
last Night was the first Time of his appearing
in public with his Wife at the Play. 
Indeed I knew very well the Cause of your
Uneasiness there; but would not mention—’ 

‘His Wife at the Play! answered I eagerly,
What Wife! whom do you mean?’ 
‘I mean the Widow Carey, Madam,
replied she, to whom the Captain was married
a few Days since. His Servant was
here last Night to pay for your Lodging; 
and he told it my Mother.’ 
‘I know not what Answer I made, or
whether I made any; I presently fell dead
on the Floor, and it was with great Difficulty
I was brought back to Life by the
poor Girl: for neither the Mother, nor
the Maid of the House, would lend me
any Assistance, both seeming to regard
me rather as a Monster than a Woman. 
‘Scarce had I recovered the Use of my
Senses, when I received a Letter from
the Villain, declaring he had not Assurance
to see my Face, and very kindly
advising me to endeavour to reconcile
myself to my Family; concluding with
an Offer, in case I did not succeed, to
allow me twenty Pounds a-Year to support
me in some remote Part of the Kingdom. 

‘I need not mention my Indignation at
these Proposals. In the highest Agony
of Rage, I went in a Chair to the detested
House, where I easily got Access to the
Wretch I had devoted to Destruction,
whom I no sooner found within my
Reach, than I plunged a drawn Penknife,
which I had prepared in my Pocket for
the Purpose, into his accursed Heart. 
For this Fact I was immediately seized,
and soon after committed hither; and for
this Fact I am ready to die, and shall
with Pleasure receive the Sentence of the
Law. 
‘Thus, Sir,’ said she, ‘I have related
to you my unhappy Story; and if I have
tired your Patience, by dwelling too long
on those Parts which affected me the
most, I ask your Pardon.’ 
Booth made a proper Speech on this Occasion,
and having expressed much Concern
at her present Situation, concluded
that he hoped her Sentence would be milder
than she seemed to expect. 
Her Reply to this was full of so much
Bitterness and Indignation, that we do not 

think proper to record the Speech at length; 
in which, having vented her Passion, she
all at once put on a serene Countenance,
and with an Air of great Complacency,
said, ‘Well, Mr. Booth, I think I have
now a Right to satisfy my Curiosity, at
the Expence of your Breath. I may
say it is not altogether a vain Curiosity; 
for perhaps I have had Inclination enough
to interest myself in whatever concerns
you;—but no Matter for that—Those
Days (added she with a Sigh) are now
over.’ 
Booth, who was extremely good-natured
and not ill-bred, told her that she should
not command him twice whatever was in
his Power; and then, after the usual Apology,
was going to begin his History,
when the Keeper arrived and acquainted
the Lady that Dinner was ready, at the
same time saying, ‘I suppose, Madam, as
the Gentleman is an Acquaintance of yours,
he must dine with us too.’ 
Miss Mathews told the Keeper that she
had only one Word to mention in private
to the Gentleman, and that then they
would both attend him. —She then pulled
her Purse from her Pocket, in which were 

upwards of 20 Guineas, being the Remainder
of the Money for which she had sold a
gold repeating Watch, her Father's Present,
with some other Trinkets, and desired Mr.
Booth to take what he should have Occasion
for;—saying, ‘You know, I believe, dear
Will, I never valued Money; and now I am
sure I shall have very little Use for it.’ 
Booth, with much Difficulty, accepted of
Two Guineas; and then they both together
attended the Keeper. 



Table Talk consisting of a facetious Discourse
that passed in the Prison. 
There were assembled at the Table
the Governor of these (not improperly
called infernal) Regions; the Lieutenant
Governor, vulgarly named the first
Turnkey; Miss Mathews, Mr. Booth, Mr.
Robinson the Gambler, several other Prisoners
of both Sexes, and one Murphy
an Attorney. 
The Governor took the first Opportunity
to bring the Affair of Miss Mathews
upon the Carpet, and then turning to Murphy,
he said, ‘It is very lucky this Gentleman 

happens to be present; I do assure
you, Madam, your Cause cannot be in
abler Hands. He is, I believe, the best
Man in England at a Defence; I have
known him often succeed against the
most positive Evidence.’ 
‘Fy, Sir,’ answered Murphy, ‘you know
I hate all this; but if the Lady will
trust me with her Cause, I will do the
best in my Power. Come, Madam,
don't be discouraged; a Bit of Manslaughter
and cold Iron, I hope, will be
the worst: or perhaps we may come off
better, with a Slice of Chance-Medley, or
se Defendendo.’ 
‘I am very ignorant of the Law, Sir,’ 
cries the Lady. 
‘Yes, Madam,’ answered Murphy, ‘it
can't be expected you should understand
it. There are very few of us who
profess it, that understand the whole;— 
nor is it necessary we should. There is a
great deal of Rubbish of little Use about
Indictments and Abatements, and Bars,
and Ejectments, and Trovers, and such
Stuff, with which People cram their
Heads to little Purpose. The Chapter 

of Evidence is the main Business; that is
the Sheet-Anchor: that is the Rudder,
which brings the Vessel safe in Portum. 
Evidence is indeed the Whole, the Summa
totidis, for de non apparentibus et non insistentibus
eandem est ratio.’ 
‘If you address yourself to me, Sir,’ 
said the Lady, ‘you are much too learned,
I assure you, for my Understanding.’ 
‘Tace, Madam,’ answered Murphy, ‘is
Latin for a Candle: I commend your
Prudence. I shall know the Particulars
of your Case when we are alone.’ 
‘I hope the Lady,’ said Robinson, ‘hath
no Suspicion of any Person here. I hope
we are all Persons of Honour at this
Table.’ 
‘D&wblank;n my Eyes!’ answered a well-dressed
Woman, ‘I can answer for myself
and the other Ladies; though I never
saw the Lady in my Life, she need not
be shy of us, d&wblank;n my Eyes! I scorn
to rap *  against any Lady.’ 
‘D&wblank;n me, Madam!’ cried another
Female, ‘I honour what you have done. 

I once put a Knife into a Cull myself— 
so my Service to you, Madam, and I
wish you may come off with se Diffidendo
with all my Heart.’ 
‘I beg, good Woman,’ said Miss Mathews,
‘you would talk on some other
Subject, and give yourself no Concern
about my Affairs.’ 
‘You see, Ladies,’ cried Murphy,
‘the Gentlewoman doth not care to talk
on this Matter before Company; so pray
do not press her.’ 
‘Nay, I value the Lady's Acquaintance
no more than she values mine,’ cries
the first Woman who spoke—‘I have
kept as good Company as the Lady, I
believe, every Day in the Week. Good
Woman! I don't use to be so treated— 
If the Lady says such another Word
to me, d&wblank;n me, I'll darken her Day-lights,
and sow up her Sees for her— 
Marry, come up, good Woman!—the
Lady's a Whore as well as myself; and
though I am sent hither to Mill Doll,
d&wblank;n my Eyes, I have Money enough to
buy it off as well as the Lady herself.’ 

Action might perhaps soon have ensued
this Speech, had not the Keeper interposed
his Authority, and put an End to
any further Dispute. Soon after which,
the Company broke up; and none but
himself, Mr. Murphy, Captain Booth,
and Miss Mathews remained together. 
Miss Mathews then, at the Entreaty of
the Keeper, began to open her Case to Mr.
Murphy, whom she admitted to be her
Solicitor, though she still declared she was
indifferent as to the Event of the Trial. 
Mr. Murphy having heard all the Particulars
with which the Reader is already
acquainted (as far as related to the Murder)
shook his Head, and said, ‘There is
but one Circumstance, Madam, which I
wish was out of the Case; and that we
must put out of it: I mean the carrying,
the Penknife drawn into the Room with
you; for that seems to imply Malice prepensive,
as we call it in the Law: This
Circumstance therefore must not appear
against you; and if the Servant who
was in the Room observed this, he must
be bought off at all Hazards. All here,
you say, are Friends; therefore I tell you 

openly, you must furnish me with Money
sufficient for this Purpose. Malice is all
we have to guard against.’ 
‘I would not presume, Sir,’ cries Booth,
‘to inform you in the Law; but I have
heard in Case of stabbing, a Man may be
indicted upon the Statute; and it is capital,
though no Malice appears.’ 
‘You say true, Sir,’ answered Murphy,
‘a Man may be indicted contra
Formam Statutis; and that Method, I allow
you, requires no Malice; I presume
you are a Lawyer, Sir?’ 
‘No, indeed, Sir,’ answered Booth, ‘I
know nothing of the Law.’ 
‘Then, Sir, I will tell you—If a Man
be indicted contra Formam Statutis, as we
say, no Malice is necessary; because the
Form of the Statute makes Malice; and
then what we have to guard against is
having struck the first Blow—Pox on't, it
is unlucky this was done in a Room— 
If it had been in the Street, we could
have had five or six Witnesses to have
proved the first Blow, cheaper, than I am
afraid we shall get this one; for when a 

Man knows, from the unhappy Circumstances
of the Case, that you can procure
no other Witness but himself, he is always
dear. It is so in all other Ways of Business
—I am very implicite, you see; but
we are all among Friends. The safest
Way is to furnish me with Money enough
to offer him a good round Sum at once; 
and, I think, (it is for your Good I speak)
fifty Pounds is the least that can be offered
him. —I do assure you, I would offer
him no less, was it my own Case.’ 
‘And do you think, Sir,’ said she, ‘that
I would save my Life at the Expence of
hiring another to perjure himself?’ 
‘Ay, surely do I,’ cries Murphy; ‘for
where is the Fault, admitting there is
some Fault in Perjury, as you call it; 
and to be sure, it is such a Matter, as
every Man would rather wish to avoid
than not: And yet, as it may be managed,
there is not so much as some People
are apt to imagine in it; for he need
not kiss the Book, and then pray where's
the Perjury? But if the Crier is sharper
than ordinary, what is it he kisses? Is it
any thing but a Bit of Calves-skin? I am
sure a Man must be a very bad Christian 

himself, who would not do so much as
that to save the Life of any Christian
whatever, much more of so pretty a Lady
—Indeed, Madam, if we can make out
but a tolerable Case, so much Beauty will
go a great ways with the Judge and the
Jury too.’ 
The latter Part of this Speech, notwithstanding
the Mouth it came from, caused
Miss Mathews to suppress much of the Indignation
which began to arise at the former; 
and she answered with a Smile,
‘Sir, you are a great Casuist in these Matters; 
but we need argue no longer concerning
them; for if fifty Pounds would
save my Life, I assure you I could not
command that Sum. The little Money
I have in my Pocket is all I can call
my own; and, I apprehend, in the Situation
I am in, I shall have very little of
that to spare.’ 
‘Come, come, Madam,’ cries Murphy,
‘Life is sweet, let me tell you, and
never sweeter than when we are near
losing it. I have known many a Man
very brave and undaunted at his first
Commitment, who, when Business began
to thicken a little upon him, hath changed 

his Note. —It is no Time to be saving
in your Condition.’ 
The Keeper, who, after the Liberality
of Miss Mathews, and on seeing a Purse of
Guineas in her Hand, had conceived a
great Opinion of her Wealth, no sooner
heard that the Sum which he had in Intention
intirely confiscated for his own
Use, was attempted to be broke in upon,
thought it high time to be upon his Guard. 
‘To be sure,’ cries he, ‘Mr. Murphy,
Life is sweet, as you say, that must be
acknowledged; to be sure Life is sweet; 
but sweet as it is, no Persons can advance
more than they are worth to save it. And
indeed, if the Lady can command no
more Money than that little she mentions,
she is to be commended for her Unwillingness
to part with any of it; for, to be
sure, as she says, she will want every Farthing
of that, to live like a Gentlewoman
till she comes to her Trial. And, to be
sure, as sweet as Life is, People ought to
take Care to be able to live sweetly while
they do live: Besides, I can't help saying,
the Lady shews herself to be what she
is, by her Abhorrence of Perjury, which
is certainly a very dreadful Crime. And,
though the not kissing the Book doth, 

as you say, make a great deal of Difference; 
and, if a Man had a great while to
live and repent, perhaps he might swallow
it well enough; yet when People
comes to be near their End, (as who can
venture to foretel what will be the Lady's
Case!) they ought to take care not to overburthen
their Conscience. I hope the
Lady's Case will not be found Murder; 
for I am sure I always wish well to all my
Prisoners, who shew themselves to be
Gentlemen, or Gentlewomen; yet one
should always fear the worst.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir, you speak like an Oracle,’ 
answered the Lady; ‘and one Subornation of
Perjury would sit heavier on my Conscience,
than twenty such Murders as I am
guilty of.’ 
‘Nay, to be sure, Madam,’ answered
the Keeper, ‘no body can pretend to tell
what Provocation you must have had; 
and certainly, it can never be imagined,
that a Lady who behaves herself so handsomely
as you have done ever since you
have been under my Keys, should be
guilty of killing a Man without being
very highly provoked to do it.’ 

Mr. Murphy was, I believe, going to
answer, when he was called out of the
Room; after which, nothing passed between
the remaining Persons worth relating,
till Booth and the Lady retired back again
into the Lady's Apartment. 
Here they fell immediately to commenting
on the foregoing Discourse; but as their
Comments were, I believe, the same with
what most Readers have made on the same
Occasion, we shall omit them. At last
Miss Mathews reminding her Companion of
his Promise of relating to her what had befallen
him since the Interruption of their
former Acquaintance, he began, as is written
in the next Book of this History. 