


A Visit, in which David receives much friendly Advice. 
About this Time Mr. and Mrs. Orgueil
returned from the Bath. And
here I must exculpate Mr. Orgueil from
having any Hand in the ill Usage of little
Cynthia. He was generally in his Study,
contemplating on his Rule of Rectitude,
and exulting in the Beauties of Human
Reason; that if any Man should be so mad
as to blaspheme this his much reverenced
Idol, he might be ready to do his Duty,
and write an elaborate Rhapsody in its Justification. 
Mrs. Orgueil, a little mollified, or a little
frightened, by the Sound of Death, and
finding (in the Phrase of old Mrs. Dunster)
that in that one Circumstance, at least, the
Poor have an equal Privilege with the Rich,
joined with her Husband in sending a very
civil Message to David and his Wife, desiring
to see them and their little Daughter 

Fanny, who was about the Age of Henrietta-Cassandra. 
Camilla sighed, and let fall the
Words, “Can I visit that cruel Woman!” 
David was unwilling to desire any thing
irksome to Camilla, but knowing Mr. Orgueil's
Innocence concerning the Treatment
of his dear Niece, and that if the Correspondence
between Mrs. Orgueil and Camilla
was dropped, the inveterate Spirit of the
former would not suffer him to have the
Shadow of a Friend in her Husband, he
was inclined that his Wife should accept
the Invitation. But, whilst he was deliberating,
an Accident happened, that suddenly
determined him, and consequently Camilla,
to accept the Invitation of Mrs. Orgueil. 
For the old Gentleman, her Father, complained
that he felt an unusual Weakness,
and a very uncommon Pain in his Head; 
on which David, with a Countenance that
denoted a Terror arising from Compassion,
said, “My dear Camilla, we must not, at
present, cease to grasp every the least
glimmering Hope of Friendship.” 
Camilla answered by an immediate Compliance. 
She dressed herself and her Child,
although only in Stuff, as neat as any Fortune
could have made them, and attended
her Husband to Mr. Orgueil's. 

When they were arrived, David was carried
into the Study, and Camilla, with her
Child, was ushered into the Drawing room,
where they were received by Mrs. Orgueil,
Miss Henrietta, and Lady Mary B&wblank;,
a young Lady of about sixteen, that Mrs.
Orgueil had brought with her from the
Bath. 
Camilla, at her first Entrance (all little
Cynthia's Sufferings rushing at once on her
Imagination) was greatly shocked; but
Mrs. Orgueil received her with such uncommon
Civility and Good-humour, that her
Mind, naturally more bent to be pleased
than displeased, by Degrees grew tolerably
chearful and serene. 
In this History Mrs. Orgueil, in her
Transactions with our favourite Characters,
does not often appear in a very favourable
Light; but let it not, therefore, be imagined
she could never practise the amiable,
for nothing could be more so than she was
at this Time, till an accidental Mention of
Valentine's Wife wrought in her an almost
incredible Change; her Countenance, which
was before placid, now grew fierce; her
Voice was raised into a disagreeable Loudness; 

and the small Degree of Softness with
which the Death of little Cynthia had supplied
her Mind, vanished, and gave Place
to the rougher Passion, inspired by the hated
Idea of her Mother; and she let her Rage
work itself up to such a Height, that she
spoke with so much Harshness even of the
dead Infant, that little Fanny, who was
playing at the other End of the Room with
Henrietta, bursted into Tears. 
Mrs. Orgueil began to be outrageous at
poor little Fanny's Tears. She could not
bear, she said, that Children should be suffered
to be so troublesome: she would not
have Miss Henny so, for the World. Indeed,
now the poor Child's Good-nature
made her weep, to see her Companion cry,
but Fanny's Roaring was nothing but Humour
and Perverseness. 
As the Sum and Substance of Lady Mary
B&wblank;'s Education consisted of repeated Instructions
to keep up the Dignity of her
Station; and that the Consideration of her
own Superiority should always be uppermost
in her Thoughts; Camilla's first Appearance
had inspired her with Contempt:
for a Stuff Gown, and an unaffected Behaviour,
did not agree with the Idea she had 

formed of a Gentlewoman. Yet having an
implicit Faith in Mrs. Orgueil's Knowledge
of the World, whilst she chose to be polite,
Lady Mary also thought Civility was due
to Camilla; but as soon as Mrs. Orgueil
chose to display herself in a different Character,
Lady Mary, although without uttering
a Word, added her Insolence to
Mrs. Orgueil's, by looking askance at Camilla
and her Child, as if they were unworthy
the Honour of her Presence. 
It was, indeed, an odd Scene; Mrs. Orgueil's
raised Voice, Lady Mary's Looks of
Disdain, Henrietta roaring because her Companion
had for that Moment ceased playing
with her, poor Fanny weeping, and Camilla
—could not immediately take her leave,
because David had desired her to stay with
Mrs. Orgueil till he sent to her, having some
Business with Mr. Orgueil, which he might
not presently have an Opportunity of opening. 
But joyful was Camilla's Heart when
a Message from her dear Husband released
her from this her disagreeable Confinement. 
David, whilst with Orgueil in his Study,
spent his Time full as pleasantly as did Camilla
with the entertaining Company in the
Drawing room. He, in a few Words, 

made known to Orgueil the utmost Distress
of his Circumstances, without the Use of
either Rhetoric or Complaint; for his own
Heart was so rent by any mournful Pictures
of a Friend's Misfortune, that he could not
prevail on himself to draw them. In Theory
no Man breathing knew better than David
that the painting your Misery in the strongest
Colours, is necessary to raise what is called
Compassion in a proud Mind; as a proud
Mind is piqued till you are quite subdued,
and the more Weakness and Pusillanimity
you shew, the more will you move such
Compassion: for a Man of this Turn must
be reminded, that he is as much your Superior
in Constancy of Mind, as in Fortune,
before he can bring himself to think you
are a fit Object of his Pity. I say, that
although David, in Theory, knew all this,
yet as he at the same time felt his own Heart
so fraught with Kindness, that the very
Glimpse of a Friend's Distress, was enough
to make him exert every Faculty and every
Power for his Relief, he could not, when
he wanted the Assistance of a Friend, bring
himself to treat him like one that would delight
in the Image of his Miseries: in short,
David's Behaviour had such an Effect on
Orgueil, that he shewed great Liberality towards
him, in a Commodity, which it was 

impossible for his Family to feed on, namely,
in Advice to practise what either his
Disposition, or his Situation, rendered impracticable; 
—to buy every thing at
the best Hand, when his Circumstances
forced him to pay a Hundred per Cent.
for every Necessary that was expended in his
House:—to manage his Family as if they
all enjoyed a continued State of good
Health, whether they did so or no, and
whilst the Infirmities of his Father's Age
made many Things necessary, that might
otherwise have been spared. Nay, he advised
him to lead his Life back again,—to
unlend every Sum of Money he had lost by
assisting the Unfortunate,—to ungive every
Benefaction his happier Days had enabled
him to bestow,—to unbuy every Comfort
and Convenience with which he had pleased
and delighted his own Family;—and to
unhire that Chariot, in which he had
brought little Cynthia Home from the Bath:
or if I may not be permitted to give to this
Part of his Conversation the Name of Advice,
I cannot, with any Propriety, think
of a softer Appellation for it than Reproach. 
David and Camilla walked Home, each
of them endeavouring to be as chearful as 

possible, although Mrs. Orgueil's Behaviour
had revived in Camilla's Mind the strongest
Sensibility of poor little Cynthia's Sufferings; 
and David returned to his little Habitation
loaded with the additional Misery of the
Arrows of Unkindness, which Mr. Orgueil
had stuck in his Heart. Not but Mr. Orgueil
earnestly assured him, the whole time,
of the Height of his Friendship, and that
he only advised him for his own Good and
future Prosperity. But David now, from
Despair itself, gaining some small Degree of
Resolution, settled it firmly in his Mind,
that he would no longer give Faith to such
cruel Promises of Friendship. 