


Containing the Space of Five Days. 



Of Prologues. 
I have heard of a Dramatic Writer who
used to say, he would rather write a
Play than a Prologue; in like manner,
I think, I can with less Pains write one of 

the Books of this History, than the Prefatory
Chapter to each of them. 
To say the Truth, I believe many a
hearty Curse hath been devoted on the Head
of that Author, who first instituted the Method
of prefixing to his Play that Portion
of Matter which is called the Prologue; 
and which at first was Part of the Piece itself,
but of latter Years hath had usually
so little Connexion with the Drama before
which it stands, that the Prologue
to one Play might as well serve for any other. 
Those indeed of more modern Date,
seem all to be written on the same three Topics,
viz. an Abuse of the Taste of the
Town, a Condemnation of all Cotemporary
Authors, and an Elogium on the Performance
just about to be represented. The
Sentiments in all these are very little varied,
nor is it possible they should; and indeed
I have often wondered at the great Invention
of Authors, who have been capable of
finding such various Phrases to express the
same thing. 
In like manner I apprehend, some future
Historian (if any one shall do me the Honour
of imitating my Manner) will, after
much scratching his Pate, bestow some good 

Wishes on my Memory, for having first
established these several initial Chapters; 
most of which, like Modern Prologues, may
as properly be prefixed to any other Book
in this History as to that which they introduce,
or indeed to any other History as to this. 
But however Authors may suffer by
either of these Inventions, the Reader will
find sufficient Emolument in the one, as
the Spectator hath long found in the other. 
First, it is well known, that the Prologue
serves the Critic for an Opportunity to try
his Faculty of Hissing, and to tune his
Cat-call to the best Advantage; by which
means, I have known those Musical Instruments
so well prepared, that they have
been able to play in full Concert at the first
rising of the Curtain. 
The same Advantages may be drawn from
these Chapters, in which the Critic will be always
sure of meeting with something that may
serve as a Whetstone to his noble Spirit; 
so that he may fall with a more hungry
Appetite for Censure on the History itself. 
And here his Sagacity must make it needless
to observe how artfully these Chapters
are calculated for that excellent Purpose; 

for in these we have always taken Care to
intersperse somewhat of the sour or acid
Kind, in order to sharpen and stimulate the
said Spirit of Criticism. 
Again, the indolent Reader, as well as
Spectator, finds great Advantage from both
these; for as they are not obliged either to
see the one or read the others, and both the
Play and the Book are thus protracted, by
the former they have a Quarter of an Hour
longer allowed them to sit at Dinner, and
by the Latter they have the Advantage of
beginning to read at the fourth or fifth
Page instead of the first; a Matter by no
means of trivial Consequence to Persons
who read Books with no other View than
to say they have read them, a more general
Motive to reading than is commonly
imagined; and from which not only Law
Books, and Good Books, but the Pages of
Homer and Virgil, of Swift and Cervantes
have been often turned over. 
Many other are the Emoluments which
arise from both these, but they are for the
most part so obvious that we shall not at
present stay to enumerate them; especially
since it occurs to us that the principal Merit 

of both the Prologue and the Preface is that
they be short. 



A whimsical Adventure which befel the Squire,
with the distressed Situation of Sophia. 
We must now convey the Reader
to Mr. Western's Lodgings which
were in Piccadilly, where he was placed by
the Recommendation of the Landlord at the
Hercules Pillars at Hide-Park-Corner; for at
that Inn, which was the first he saw on his
Arrival in Town, he placed his Horses,
and in those Lodgings, which were the
first he heard of, he deposited himself. 
Here when Sophia alighted from the
Hackney-Coach, which brought her from
the House of Lady Bellaston, she desired to
retire to the Apartment provided for her,
to which her Father very readily agreed,
and whither he attended her himself. A
short Dialogue, neither very material nor
pleasant to relate minutely, then passed between
them, in which he pressed her vehemently
to give her Consent to the Marriage
with Blifil, who, as he acquainted her, was 

to be in Town in a few Days; but instead
of complying, she gave a more peremptory
and resolute Refusal than she had ever done
before. This so incensed her Father, that
after many bitter Vows that he would force
her to have him whether she would or no,
he departed from her with many hard
Words and Curses, locked the Door and
put the Key into his Pocket. 
While Sophia was left with no other Company
than what attend the closest State Prisoner,
namely, Fire and Candle, the Squire
sat down to regale himself over a Bottle of
Wine, with his Parson and the Landlord of
the Hercules Pillars, who, as the Squire
said, would make an excellent third Man,
and could inform them of the News of the
Town, and how Affairs went; for to be
sure, says he, he knows a great deal since
the Horses of a many of the Quality stand
at his House. 
In this agreeable Society, Mr. Western
past that Evening and great part of the succeeding
Day, during which Period nothing
happened of sufficient Consequence to find
a Place in this History. All this time
Sophia past by herself; for her Father swore
she should never come out of her Chamber 

alive, unless she first consented to marry
Blifil; nor did he ever suffer the Door to
be unlocked unless to convey her Food, on
which Occasions he always attended himself. 
The second Morning after his Arrival,
while he and the Parson were at Breakfast
together on a Toast and Tankard, he was
informed that a Gentleman was below to
wait on him. 
‘A Gentleman!’ quoth the Squire,
‘who the Devil can he be? Do, Doctor,
go down and see who 'tis. Mr. Blifil can
can hardly be come to Town yet. 
—Go down, do, and know what his Business
is.’ 
The Doctor returned with an Account
that it was a very well drest Man, and by
the Ribbon in his Hat, he took him for an
Officer of the Army; that he said he had
some particular Business, which he could
deliver to none but Mr. Western himself. 
‘An Officer!’ cries the Squire, ‘what
can any such Fellow have to do with me? 
If he wants an Order for Baggage-Waggons,
I am no Justice of Peace here, 

nor can I grant a Warrant. —Let un
come up then, if he must speak to me.’ 
A very genteel Man now entered the
Room; who, having made his Compliments
to the Squire, and desired the Favour
of being alone with him, delivered himself
as follows. 
“Sir, I come to wait upon you by the
Command of my Lord Fellamar, but
with a very different Message from what
I suppose you expect, after what past the
other Night.” 
‘My Lord who?’ cries the Squire, ‘I
never heard the Name o' un.’ 
‘His Lordship,’ said the Gentleman,
‘is willing to impute every thing to the
Effect of Liquor, and the most trifling
Acknowledgment of that Kind will set
every thing right; for as he hath the most
violent Attachment to your Daughter,
you, Sir, are the last Person upon Earth,
from whom he would resent an Affront; 
and happy is it for you both that he hath
given such public Demonstrations of his
Courage, as to be able to put up an Affair
of this Kind, without Danger of any 

Imputation on his Honour. All he desires
therefore, is, that you will before
me, make some Acknowledgment, the
slightest in the World will be sufficient,
and he intends this Afternoon to pay his
Respects to you, in order to obtain your
Leave of visiting the young Lady on the
Footing of a Lover.’ 
‘I don't understand much of what you
say, Sir,’ said the Squire; ‘but I suppose,
by what you talk about my Daughter,
that this is the Lord which my Lady
Cousin Bellaston mentioned to me, and said
something about his courting my Daughter. 
If so be, that how, that be the Case
—you may give my Service to his Lordship,
and tell un the Girl is disposed of already.’ 
‘Perhaps, Sir,’ said the Gentleman,
‘you are not sufficiently apprized of the
Greatness of this Offer. I believe such
a Person, Title, and Fortune, would be
no where refused.’ 
‘Lookee, Sir,’ answered the Squire,
‘to be very plain, my Daughter is bespoke
already; but if she was not, I would not
marry her to a Lord upon any Account; 

I hate all Lords; they are a Parcel of
Courtiers and Hannoverians, and I will
have nothing to do with them.’— 
‘Well, Sir,’ said the Gentleman, ‘if
that is your Resolution, the Message I
am to deliver to you, is, that my Lord
desires the Favour of your Company this
Morning in Hide-Park.’ 
‘You may tell my Lord,’ answered the
Squire, ‘that I am busy and cannot come. 
I have enough to look after at home, and
can't stir abroad on any Account.’ 
‘I am sure, Sir,’ quoth the other, ‘you
are too much a Gentleman to send
such a Message; you will not, I am convinced,
have it said of you, that after
having affronted a noble Peer, you refuse
him Satisfaction. His Lordship would
have been willing, from his great Regard
to the young Lady, to have made up
matters in another way; but unless he is
is to look on you as a Father, his Honour
will not suffer his putting up such
an Indignity as you must be sensible you
offered him.’ 

‘I offered him!’ cries the Squire; ‘it
is a d&wblank;m'd Lie, I never offered him any
Thing.’ 
Upon these Words the Gentleman returned
a very short verbal Rebuke, and this he accompanied
at the same time with some manual
Remonstrances, which no sooner reached
the Ears of Mr. Western, than that worthy
Squire began to caper very briskly about
the Room, bellowing at the same time with
all his Might, as if desirous to summon a
greater Number of Spectators to behold his
Agility. 
The Parson, who had left great part of
the Tankard unfinished, was not retired
far; he immediately attended therefore on
the Squire's Vociferation, crying, ‘Bless
me! Sir, what's the Matter?’ —‘Matter!’ 
quoth the Squire, ‘here's a Highway-Man,
I believe, who wants to rob
and murder me—for he hath fallen
upon me with that Stick there in his Hand,
when I wish I may be d&wblank;n'd if I gid un
the least Provocation.’ 
‘How, Sir,’ said the Captain, ‘did you
not tell me, I ly'd.’ 

‘No, as hope to be saved, answered the
Squire. —I believe I might say, “'Twas
a Lie that I had offered any Affront to
my Lord,”—but I never said the Word
you lie. —I understand myself better, and
you might have understood yourself better
than to fall upon a naked Man. If
I had had a Stick in my Hand, you
would not have dared strike me. I'd
have knocked thy Lanthorn Jaws about
thy Ears. Come down into Yard this
Minute, and I'll take a Bout with thee
at single Stick for a broken Head, that
I will; or I will go into naked Room and
box thee for a Belly full. At unt half a
Man, at unt I'm sure.’ 
The Captain, with some Indignation,
replied, ‘I see, Sir, you are below my
Notice, and I shall inform his Lordship
you are below his. —I am sorry I have
dirtied my Fingers with you.’ —At which
Words he withdrew, the Parson interposing
to prevent the Squire from stopping him,
in which he easily prevailed, as the other,
though he made some Efforts for the Purpose,
did not seem very violently bent on
Success. However, when the Captain was
departed, the Squire sent many Curses and
some Menaces after him; but as these did 

not set out from his Lips till the Officer
was at the Bottom of the Stairs, and grew
louder and louder as he was more and more
remote, they did not reach his Ears, or at
least did not retard his Departure. 
Poor Sophia however, who, in her Prison,
heard all her Father's Outcries from
first to last, began now first to thunder
with her Foot, and afterwards to scream as
loudly as the old Gentleman himself had
done before, though in a much sweeter
Voice. These Screams soon silenced the
Squire, and turned all his Consideration towards
his Daughter, whom he loved so
tenderly, that the least Apprehension of any
Harm happening to her, threw him
presently into Agonies: For except in that
single Instance in which the whole future
Happiness of her Life was concerned, she
was sovereign Mistress of his Inclinations. 
Having ended his Rage against the Captain,
with swearing he would take the Law
of him, the Squire now mounted up Stairs
to Sophia, whom, as soon as he had unlocked
and opened the Door, he found all pale
and breathless. The Moment however that
she saw her Father, she collected all her
Spirits, and catching him hold by the 

Hand, she cry'd passionately, ‘O my dear
Sir, I am almost frightned to Death; I
hope to Heaven no Harm hath happened
to you.’ —‘No, no, cries the Squire,
no great Harm. The Rascal hath not
hurt me much, but rat me if I don't ha
the Laa o'un.’ ‘Pray, dear Sir, says she,
tell me what's the Matter, who is it that
hath insulted you?’ ‘I don't know the Name
o'un, answer'd Western, some Officer Fellow
I suppose that we are to pay for beating
us, but I'll make him pay this Bout, if the
Rascal hath got any thing, which I suppose
he hath not. For thos he was drest
out so vine, I question whether he hath
got a Voot of Land in the World.’ 
But, dear Sir, cries she, what was the
Occasion of your Quarrel?’ ‘What
should it be, Sophy? answered the Squire,
but about you, Sophy? All my Misfortunes
are about you; you will be the
Death of your poor Father at last. Here's
a Varlet of a Lord, the Lord knows who
forsooth! who hath a taan a Liking to
you, and because I would not gi un my
Consent, he sent me a Kallenge. Come,
do be a good Girl, Sophy, and put an
End to all your Father's Troubles; come
do, consent to ha un; he will be in Town
within this Day or two; do but promise
me to marry un as soon as he comes, and 

you will make me the happiest Man in
the World, and I will make you the
happiest Woman; you shall have the
finest Cloaths in London, and the finest
Jewels, and a Coach and Six at your
Command. I promised Allworthy already
to give up half my Estate,—Odrabbet
it! I should hardly stick at giving up
the whole.’ ‘Will my Papa be so kind, says
she, as to hear me speak?’ —‘Why wout
ask, Sophy? cries he, when dost know that
I had rather hear thy Voice, than the Music
of the best Pack of Dogs in England. 
—Hear thee, my dear little Girl! I hope
I shall hear thee as long as I live; for if I
was ever to lose that Pleasure, I would not
gee a Brass Varden to live a Moment longer. 
Indeed, Sophy, you do not know
how I love you, indeed you don't, or
you never could have run away, and left
your poor Father, who hath no other Joy,
no other Comfort upon Earth but his little
Sophy.’ At these Words the Tears stood
in his Eyes; and Sophia, (with the Tears
streaming from hers) answered, ‘Indeed, my
dear Papa, I know you have loved me tenderly,
and Heaven is my Witness how sincerely
I have returned your Affection; nor
could any thing but an Apprehension of being
forced into the Arms of this Man, have
driven me to run from a Father whom I 

love so passionately, that I would, with
Pleasure, sacrifice my Life to his Happiness; 
nay, I have endeavoured to reason
myself into doing more, and had almost
worked up a Resolution, to endure the
most miserable of all Lives, to comply
with your Inclination. It was that Resolution
alone to which I could not force
my Mind; nor can I ever.’ Here the
Squire began to look wild, and the Foam
appeared at his Lips, which Sophia observing,
begged to be heard out, and then proceeded,
‘If my Father's Life, his Health,
or any real Happiness of his was at Stake,
here stands your resolved Daughter, may
Heaven blast me, if there is a Misery I would
not suffer to preserve you. —No, that
most detested, most loathsome of all Lots
would I embrace. I would give my
Hand to Blifil for your Sake.’ —‘I tell
thee, it will preserve me, answers the Father; 
it will gee me Health, Happiness,
Life, every thing,—Upon my Soul I
shall die if dost refuse me; I shall break
my Heart, I shall upon my Soul.’ —‘Is
it possible, says she, you can have such a
Desire to make me miserable?’ ‘I tell
thee noa, answered he loudly, my whole
Desire is to make thee happy; me! d&wblank;n
me if there is a Thing upon Earth I 

would not do to see thee happy.’ —‘And will not my dear Papa allow me to have
the least Knowledge of what will make
me so? If it be true that Happiness consists
in Opinion; what must be my Condition,
when I shall think myself the most miserable
of all the Wretches upon Earth.’ 
Better think yourself so, said he, than
know it by being married to a poor bastardly
Vagabond.’ ‘If it will content
you, Sir, said Sophia, I will give you
the most solemn Promise never to marry
him nor any other one while my Papa
lives, without his Consent. Let me dedicate
my whole Life to your Service; 
let me be again your poor Sophy, and my
whole Business and Pleasure be, as it hath
been, to please and divert you.’ ‘Lookey,
Sophy, answered the Squire, I am not to
be choused in this Manner. Your Aunt
Western would then have Reason to think
me the Fool she doth. No, no, Sophy, I'd
have you to know I have a got more Wisdom,
and know more of the World than
to take the Word of a Woman in a Matter
where a Man is concerned.’ ‘How,
Sir, have I deserved this Want of Confidence?
said she, have I ever broke a single
Promise to you? Or have I ever been
found guilty of a Falshood from my Cradle?’ 

‘Lookee, Sophy, cries he, that's
neither here nor there. I am determin'd
upon this Match, and have him you shall,
d&wblank;n me if shat unt. D&wblank;n me if shat unt,
though dost hang thyself the next Morning.’ 
At repeating which Words he
clinched his Fist, knit his Brows, bit his
Lips, and thundered so loud, that the poor
afflicted, terrified Sophia sunk trembling into
her Chair, and had not a Flood of
Tears come immediately to her Relief, perhaps
worse had followed. 
Western beheld the deplorable Condition
of his Daughter with no more Contrition
or Remorse, than the Turnkey of Newgate
feels at viewing the Agonies of a tender
Wife, when taking her last Farewel of her
condemned Husband; or rather he looked
down on her with the same Emotions which
arise in an honest fair Tradesman, who sees
his Debtor dragged to Prison for 10l.
which, though a just Debt, the Wretch is
wickedly unable to pay. Or, to hit the Case
still more nearly, he felt the same Compunction
with a Bawd when some poor
Innocent whom she hath ensnared into her
Hands, falls into Fits at the first Proposal
of what is called seeing Company. Indeed
this Resemblance would be exact, was it 

not that the Bawd hath an Interest in what
she doth, and the Father, though perhaps
he may blindly think otherwise, can in Reality
have none in urging his Daughter to
almost an equal Prostitution. 
In this Condition he left his poor Sophia,
and departing with a very vulgar Observation
on the Effect of Tears, he locked the
Room, and returned to the Parson, who
said every Thing he durst in Behalf of the
young Lady, which though perhaps it was
not quite so much as his Duty required,
yet was it sufficient to throw the Squire into
a violent Rage, and into many indecent
Reflections on the whole Body of the Clergy,
which we have too great an Honour
for that sacred Function to commit to Paper. 




What happened to Sophia during her Confinement. 
The Landlady of the House where
the Squire lodged had begun very
early to entertain a strange Opinion of her
Guests. However as she was informed that
the Squire was a Man of a vast Fortune,
and as she had taken Care to exact a very
extraordinary Price for her Rooms, she did
not think proper to give any Offence; for
though she was not without some Concern
for the Confinement of poor Sophia, of
whose great Sweetness of Temper and Affability,
the Maid of the House had made
so favourable a Report, which was confirmed
by all the Squire's Servants, yet she had
much more Concern for her own Interest,
than to provoke one, whom, as she said,
she perceived to be a very hastish Kind of
a Gentleman. 
Though Sophia eat but little, yet she was
regularly served with her Meals; indeed I
believe if she had liked any one Rarity,
that the Squire, however angry, would 

have spared neither Pains nor Cost to have
procured it for her; since however strange it
may appear to some of my Readers, he
really doated on his Daughter, and to
give her any Kind of Pleasure was the highest
Satisfaction of his Life. 
The Dinner Hour being arrived, black
George carried her up a Pullet, the Squire
himself (for he had sworn not to part with
the Key) attending the Door. As George
deposited the Dish, some Compliments
passed between him and Sophia (for he had
not seen her since she left the Country,
and she treated every Servant with more
Respect than some Persons shew to those
who are in a very slight Degree their Inferiors)
Sophia would have had him take
the Pullet back, saying, she could not eat; 
but George begged her to try, and particularly
recommended her to the Eggs, of
which he said it was full. 
All this Time the Squire was waiting at
the Door; but George was a great Favourite
with his Master, as his Employment
was in Concerns of the highest Nature,
namely, about the Game, and was accustomed
to take many Liberties. He had officiously
carried up the Dinner, being, as he said, very 

desirous to see his young Lady; he made
therefore no Scruple of keeping his Master
standing above ten Minutes, while Civilities
were passing between him and Sophia,
for which he received only a good-humoured
Rebuke at the Door when he returned. 
The Eggs of Pullets, Partridges, Pheasants,
&c. were, as George well knew, the
most favourite Dainties of Sophia. It was
therefore no Wonder, that he who was a
very good-natured Fellow, should take Care
to supply her with this Kind of Delicacy,
at a Time when all the Servants in the
House were afraid she would be starved; 
for she had scarce swallowed a single Morsel
in the last forty Hours. 
Though Vexation hath not the same
Effect on all Persons, as it usually hath on
a Widow, whose Appetite it often renders
sharper than it can be rendered by the Air
on Bansted Downs, or Salisbury Plain, yet
the sublimest Grief, notwithstanding what
some People may say to the contrary, will
eat at last. And Sophia herself, after some
little Consideration, began to dissect the
Fowl, which she found to be as full of
Eggs as George had reported it. 

But if she was pleased with these, it contained
something which would have delighted
the Royal Society much more; for if a
Fowl with three Legs be so invaluable a
Curiosity, when perhaps Time hath produced
a Thousand such, at what Price
shall we esteem a Bird which so totally contradicts
all the Laws of Animal Œconomy,
as to contain a Letter in its Belly? Ovid
tells us of a Flower into which Hyacinthus
was metamorphosed, that bears Letters on
its Leaves, which Virgil recommended as
a Miracle to the Royal Society of his Day; 
but no Age nor Nation hath ever recorded
a Bird with a Letter in its Maw. 
But though a Miracle of this Kind might
have engaged all the Academies des Sciences
in Europe, and perhaps in a fruitless Enquiry,
yet the Reader by barely recollecting
the last Dialogue which passed between
Messieurs Jones and Partridge, will be very
easily satisfied from whence this Letter
came, and how it found its Passage into the
Fowl. 
Sophia, notwithstanding her long Fast,
and notwithstanding her favourite Dish was
there before her, no sooner saw the Letter 

than she immediately snatched it up, tore it
open, and read as follows. 

‘Madam,
Was I was not sensible to whom I have
the Honour of writing, I should endeavour,
however difficult, to paint the
Horrors of my Mind, at the Account
brought me by Mrs. Honour: but as Tenderness
alone can have any true Idea of
the Pangs which Tenderness is capable of
feeling; so can this most amiable Quality
which my Sophia possesses in the most eminent
Degree, sufficiently inform her
what her Jones must have suffered on this
melancholy Occasion. Is there a Circumstance
in the World which can heighten
my Agonies, when I hear of any Misfortune
which hath befallen you? Surely
there is one only, and with that I am accursed. 
It is, my Sophia, the dreadful
Consideration that I am myself the wretched
Cause. Perhaps I here do myself too
much Honour, but none will envy me
an Honour which costs me so extremely
dear. Pardon me this Presumption, and
pardon me the greater still, if I ask you
whether my Advice, my Assistance, my
Presence, my Absence, my Death or my
Tortures can bring you any Relief? Can 

the most perfect Admiration, the most
watchful Observant, the most ardent Love,
the most melting Tenderness, the most
resigned Submission to your Will, make
you Amends for what you are to sacrifice
to my Happiness? If they can, fly, my
lovely Angel, to those Arms which are
ever open to receive and protect you; and
to which, whether you bring yourself alone,
or the Riches of the World with
you, is, in my Opinion, an Alternative
not worth regarding. If, on the contrary,
Wisdom shall predominate, and, on
the most mature Reflection, inform you,
that the Sacrifice is too great; and if there
be no Way left to reconcile you to your
Father, and restore the Peace of your
dear Mind, but by abandoning me, I
conjure you drive me for ever from your
Thoughts, exert your Resolution, and
let no Compassion for my Sufferings bear
the least Weight in that tender Bosom. 
Believe me, Madam, I so sincerely love
you better than myself, that my great and
principal End is your Happiness. My
first Wish (why would not Fortune indulge
me in it?) was, and pardon me if I
say, still is to see you every Moment the
happiest of Women; my second Wish is to
hear you are so; but no Misery on Earth can 

equal mine, while I think you owe an
uneasy Moment to him who is,’ 
‘Madam,
In every Sense, and to every Purpose,
Your devoted
Thomas Jones.’ 
What Sophia said, or did, or thought
upon this Letter, how often she read it, or
whether more than once, shall all be left to
our Reader's Imagination. The Answer to
it he may perhaps see hereafter, but not at
present; for this Reason, among others,
that she did not now write any, and that
for several good Causes, one of which was
this, she had no Paper, Pen, nor Ink. 
In the Evening while Sophia was meditating
on the Letter she had received, or
on something else, a violent Noise from below
disturbed her Meditations. This Noise
was no other than a round Bout at Altercation
between two Persons. One of
the Combatants, by his Voice, she immediately
distinguished to be her Father; 
but she did not so soon discover the shriller
Pipes to belong to the Organ of her Aunt
Western, who was just arrived in Town, and 

having by means of one of her Servants,
who stopt at the Hercules Pillars, learnt
where her Brother lodged, she drove directly
to his Lodgings. 
We shall therefore take our Leave at present
of Sophia, and with our usual Good-Breeding,
attend her Ladyship. 



In which Sophia is delivered from her Confinement. 
The Squire and the Parson (for the
Landlord was now otherwise engaged)
were smoaking their Pipes together, when
the Arrival of the Lady was first signified. 
The Squire no sooner heard her Name,
than he immediately ran down to usher her up
Stairs; for he was a great Observer of such
Ceremonials, especially to his Sister, of
whom he stood more in Awe than of any
other human Creature, though he never
would own this, nor did he perhaps know
it himself. 
Mrs. Western, on her Arrival in the
Dining-Room, having flung herself into a
Chair, began thus to harangue. ‘Well, 

surely no one ever had such an intolerable
Journey. I think the Roads, since so
many Turnpike Acts, are grown worse
than ever. La, Brother, how could you get
into this odious Place? No Person of Condition,
I dare swear, ever set Foot here before.’ 
‘I don't know, cries the Squire, I
think they do well enough; it was Landlord
recommended them. I thought as
he knew most of the Quality, he could
best shew me where to get among um.’ 
Well, and where's my Niece? says the
Lady, have you been to wait upon Lady
Bellaston yet?’ ‘Ay, ay, cries the Squire,
your Niece is safe enough; she is up
Stairs in Chamber.’ ‘How, answered the
Lady, is my Niece in this House, and doth
she not know of my being here?’ No,
no Body can well get to her, says the Squire,
‘for she is under Lock and Key. I have her
safe; I vetched her from my Lady Cousin
the first Night I came to Town, and
I have taken Care o' her ever since; she
is as secure as a Fox in a Bag, I promise
you.’ ‘Good Heaven! returned Mrs.
Western, what do I hear! I thought what
a fine Piece of Work would be the Consequence
of my Consent to your coming
to Town yourself; nay, it was indeed
your own headstrong Will, nor can I 

charge myself with having ever consented
to it. Did not you promise me, Brother,
that you would take none of these
headstrong Measures. Was it not by
those headstrong Measures that you forced
my Niece to run away from you in
the Country? Have you a Mind to oblige
her to take such another Step?’ 
Z&wblank;ds and the Devil, cries the Squire,
dashing his Pipe on the Ground, did ever
Mortal hear the like? when I expected
you would have commended me for all
I have done, to be fallen upon in this
Manner!’ ‘How! Brother, said the Lady,
have I ever given you the least Reason
to imagine I should commend you
for locking up your Daughter? Have I
not often told you, that Women in a
free Country are not to be treated with
such arbitrary Power? We are as free as
the Men, and I heartily wish I could
not say we deserve that Freedom better. 
If you expect I should stay a Moment
longer in this wretched House, or that I
should ever own you again as my Relation,
or that I should ever trouble myself
again with the Affairs of your Family,
I insist upon it that my Niece be set at Liberty
this Instant.’ This she spoke with
so commanding an Air, standing with her 

Back to the Fire, with one Hand behind
her, and a Pinch of Snuff in the other,
that I question whether Thalestris at the
Head of her Amazons, ever made a more
tremendous Figure. It is no Wonder
therefore that the poor Squire was not Proof
against the Awe which she inspired. There,’ 
he cried, throwing down the Key, ‘There it
is, do whatever you please. I intended
only to have kept her up till Blifil came
to Town, which can't be long; and now
if any Harm happens in the mean Time,
remember who is to be blamed for it.’ 
‘I will answer it with my Life, cry'd
Mrs. Western, but I shall not intermeddle
at all, unless upon one Condition, and
that is, that you will commit the whole
entirely to my Care, without taking any
one Measure yourself, unless I shall eventually
appoint you to act. If you ratify
these Preliminaries, Brother, I yet will
endeavour to preserve the Honour of
your Family; if not, I shall continue in
a neutral State.’ 
‘I pray you, good Sir, said the Parson,
permit yourself this once to be admonished
by her Ladyship; peradventure by
communing with young Madam Sophia, she 

will effect more than you have been able
to perpetrate by more rigorous Measures.’ 
‘What dost thee open upon me?’ cries
the Squire. ‘If thee dost begin to babble,
I shall whip thee in presently.’ 
‘Fie, Brother,’ answered the Lady, ‘is
this Language to a Clergyman? Mr. Supple
is a Man of Sense, and gives you the
best Advice, and the whole World, I
believe, will concur in his Opinion; but
I must tell you I expect an immediate
Answer to my categorical Proposals. Either
cede your Daughter to my Disposal,
or take her wholly to your own surprizing
Discretion, and then I here, before
Mr. Supple, evacuate the Garrison,
and renounce you and your Family for
ever.’ 
‘I pray you let me be a Mediator,’ cries
the Parson; ‘let me supplicate you.’ 
‘Why there lies the Key on the Table,’ 
cries the Squire. ‘She may take un up, if
she pleases; who hinders her?’ 

‘No, Brother,’ answered the Lady, ‘I
insist on the Formality of its being delivered
me, with a full Ratification of all
the Concessions stipulated.’ 
‘Why then I will deliver it to you. — 
—There 'tis,’ cries the Squire. ‘I am
sure, Sister, you can't accuse me of ever
denying to trust my Daughter to you. 
She hath a lived wi' you a whole Year
and muore to a Time, without my ever
zeeing her.’ 
‘And it would have been happy for her,’ 
answered the Lady, ‘if she had always
lived with me. Nothing of this Kind
would have happened under my Eye.’ 
‘Ay, certainly,’ cries he, ‘I only am
to blame.’ 
‘Why, you are to blame, Brother,’ answered
she, ‘I have been often obliged to
tell you so, and shall always be obliged
to tell you so. However, I hope you
will now amend, and gather so much
Experience from past Errors, as not
to defeat my wisest Machinations by
your Blunders. Indeed, Brother, you 

are not qualified for these Negotiations. 
All your whole Scheme of Politics is
wrong. I once more, therefore, insist,
that you do not intermeddle. Remember
only what is past.— 
‘Z&wblank;ds and Bl&wblank;d, Sister,’ cries the
Squire, ‘What would you have me say? 
‘You are enough to provoke the Devil.’ 
‘There now,’ said she, ‘just according
to the old Custom. I see, Brother, there
is no talking to you. I will appeal to Mr.
Supple, who is a Man of Sense, if I said
any Thing which could put any Human
Creature into a Passion; but you are so
wrong-headed every Way.’ 
‘Let me beg you, Madam,’ said the
Parson, ‘not to irritate his Worship.’ 
‘Irritate him?’ said the Lady;—‘Sure
you are as great a Fool as himself. Well,
Brother, since you have promised not to
interfere, I will once more undertake the
Management of my Neice. Lord have
Mercy upon all Affairs which are under
the Directions of Men. The Head of
one Woman is worth a thousand of you.’ 
And now having summoned a Servant to 

shew her to Sophia, she departed, bearing
the Key with her. She was no sooner gone,
than the Squire (having first shut the Door)
ejaculated twenty Bitches, and as many
hearty Curses against her, not sparing himself
for having ever thought of her Estate; 
but added, ‘Now one hath been a Slave so
long, it would be Pity to lose it at last,
for want of holding out a little longer. 
The Bitch can't live for ever, and I know
I am down for it upon the Will.’ 
The Parson greatly commended this Resolution; 
and now the Squire having ordered
in another Bottle, which was his
usual Method when any Thing either pleased
or vexed him, did, by drinking plentifully
of this medicinal Julap, so totally wash away
his Choler, that his Temper was become
perfectly placid and serene, when
Mrs. Western returned with Sophia into the
Room. The young Lady had on her Hat
and Capuchin, and the Aunt acquainted
Mr. Western, ‘that she intended to take her
Niece with her to her own Lodgings; 
for, indeed, Brother,’ says she, ‘these
Rooms are not fit to receive a Christian
Soul in.’ 

‘Very well, Madam,’ quoth Western,
‘whatever you please. The Girl can never
be in better Hands than yours; and the
Parson here can do me the Justice to say,
that I have said fifty Times behind your
Back, that you was one of the most sensible
Women in the World.’ 
‘To this,’ cries the Parson, ‘I am
ready to bear Testimony.’ 
‘Nay, Brother,’ says Mrs. Western, ‘I
have always, I'm sure, given you as favourable
a Character. You must own
you have a little too much Hastiness in
your Temper; but when you will allow
yourself Time to reflect, I never knew a
Man more reasonable.’ 
‘Why then, Sister, if you think so,’ 
said the Squire, ‘here's your good Health
with all my Heart. I am a little passionate
sometimes, but I scorn to bear
any Malice. Sophy, do you be a good
Girl, and do every Thing your Aunt orders
you.’ 
‘I have not the least Doubt of her,’ 
answered Mrs. Western. ‘She hath had already 

an Example before her Eyes, in
the Behaviour of that Wretch her Cousin
Harriot, who ruined herself by neglecting
my Advice. —O Brother, what think
you? You was hardly gone out of Hearing,
when you set out for London, when
who should arrive but that impudent Fellow
with the odious Irish Name—that
Fitzpatrick. He broke in abruptly upon
me without Notice, or I would not have
seen him. He ran on a long, unintelligible
Story about his Wife, to which he
forced me to give him a Hearing; but
I made him very little Answer, and delivered
him the Letter from his Wife,
which I bid him answer himself. I suppose
the Wretch will endeavour to find
us out; but I beg you will not see her,
for I am determined I will not.’ 
‘I zee her?’ answered the Squire; ‘you
need not fear me. I'll ge no Encouragement
to such undutiful Wenches. It is
well for the Fellow her Husband, I was
not at Huome. Od rabbit it, he should
have taken a Dance thru the Horse-pond,
I promise un. You zee, Sophy, what
Undutifulness brings Volks to do. You
have an Example in your own Family.’ 
‘Brother,’ cries the Aunt, ‘you need not 

shock my Niece by such odious Repetitions. 
Why will you not leave every
Thing entirely to me?’ ‘Well, well; I
wull, I wull;’ said the Squire. And now
Mrs. Western, luckily for Sophia, put an
End to the Conversation, by ordering Chairs
to be called. I say luckily; for had it continued
much longer, fresh Matter of Dissention
would, most probably, have arisen between
the Brother and Sister; between
whom Education and Sex made the only
Difference; for both were equally violent
and equally positive, they had both a vast
Affection for Sophia, and both a sovereign
Contempt for each other. 



In which Jones receives a Letter from Sophia,
and goes to a Play with Mrs. Miller
and Partridge. 
The Arrival of Black George in Town,
and the good Offices which that grateful
Fellow had promised to do for his old
Benefactor, greatly comforted Jones in the
Midst of all the Anxiety and Uneasiness
which he had suffered on the Account of
Sophia; from whom, by the Means of the 

said George, he received the following Answer
to his Letter, which Sophia, to whom
the Use of Pen, Ink, and Paper was restored
with her Liberty, wrote the very
Evening when she departed from her Confinement. 

‘Sir,
As I do not doubt your Sincerity in
what you write, you will be pleased to
hear that some of my Afflictions are at
an End, by the Arrival of my Aunt
Western, with whom I am at present, and
with whom I enjoy all the Liberty I can
desire. One Promise my Aunt hath insisted
on my making, which is, that I
will not see or converse with any Person
without her Knowledge and Consent. 
This Promise I have most solemnly given,
and shall most inviolably keep: And tho'
she hath not expresly forbidden me writing,
yet that must be an Omission from
Forgetfulness; or this, perhaps, is included
in the Word conversing. However,
as I cannot but consider this as a
Breach of her generous Confidence in my
Honour, you cannot expect that I shall,
after this, continue to write myself, or to
receive Letters without her Knowledge. 
A Promise is with me a very sacred 

Thing, and to be extended to every
Thing understood from it, as well as to
what is expressed by it; and this Consideration
may perhaps, on Reflection, afford
you some Comfort. But why should
I mention a Comfort to you of this Kind? 
For though there is one Thing in which
I can never comply with the best of Fathers,
yet am I firmly resolved never to
act in Defiance of him, or to take any
Step of Consequence without his Consent. 
A firm Perswasion of this, must teach you
to divert your Thoughts from what Fortune
hath (perhaps) made impossible. 
This your own Interest persuades you. 
This may reconcile you, I hope, to Mr.
Allworthy; and if it will, you have my
Injunctions to pursue it. Accidents have
laid some Obligations on me, your good
Intentions probably more. Fortune may,
perhaps, be sometimes kinder to us both
than at present. Believe this, that I shall
always think of you as I think you deserve,
and am,’ 
‘Sir,
Your Obliged Humble Servant,
Sophia Western.‘ 

‘I charge you write to me no more— 
at present at least; and accept this, which
is now of no Service to me, which I know
you must want, and think you owe the
Trifle only to that Fortune by which you
found it. *  
A Child who hath just learnt his Letters,
would have spelt this Letter out in less
Time than Jones took in reading it. The
Sensations it occasioned were a Mixture of
Joy and Grief; somewhat like what divide
the Mind of a good Man, when he peruses
the Will of his deceased Friend, in which
a large Legacy, which his Distresses make
the more welcome, is bequeathed to him. 
Upon the whole, however, he was more
pleased than displeased; and indeed the
Reader may probably wonder that he was
displeased at all; but the Reader is not
quite so much in Love as was poor Jones: 
And Love is a Disease, which, tho' it may in
some Instances resemble a Consumption,
(which it sometimes causes) in others proceeds
in direct Opposition to it, and particularly
in this, that it never flatters itself, or sees
any one Symptom in a favourable Light. 

One Thing gave him complete Satisfaction,
which was, that his Mistress had regained
her Liberty, and was now with a
Lady where she might at least assure herself
of a decent Treatment. Another comfortable
Circumstance, was the Reference
which she made to her Promise of never
marrying any other Man: For however
disinterested he might imagine his Passion,
and notwithstanding all the generous Overtures
made in his Letter, I very much
question whether he could have heard a
more afflicting Piece of News, than that
Sophia was married to another tho' the
Match had been never so great, and
never so likely to end in making her completely
happy. That refined Degree of
Platonic Affection which is absolutely detached
from the Flesh, and is indeed entirely
and purely spiritual, is a Gift confined
to the female Part of the Creation; 
many of whom I have heard declare, (and
doubtless with great Truth) that they
would, with the utmost Readiness, resign
a Lover to a Rival, when such Resignation
was proved to be necessary for the
temporal Interest of such Lover. Hence,
therefore, I conclude, that this Affection is 

in Nature, though I cannot pretend to say,
I have ever seen an Instance of it. 
Mr. Jones having spent three Hours in
reading and kissing the aforesaid Letter,
and being, at last, in a State of good Spirits,
from the last-mentioned Considerations,
he agreed to carry an Appointment
which he had before made into Execution. 
This was to attend Mrs. Miller and her
younger Daughter into the Gallery at the
Playhouse, and to admit Mr. Partridge as
one of the Company. For as Jones had
really that Taste for Humour which many
affect, he expected to enjoy much Entertainment
in the Criticisms of Partridge; 
from whom he expected the simple Dictates
of Nature, unimproved indeed, but likewise
unadulterated by Art. 
In the first Row then of the first Gallery
did Mr. Jones, Mrs. Miller, her youngest
Daughter, and Partridge take their Places. 
Partridge immediately declared, it was the
finest Place he had ever been in. When
the first Musick was played, he said, ‘It
was a Wonder how so many Fidlers
could play at one Time, without putting
one another out.’ While the Fellow was
lighting the upper Candles, he cry'd out 

to Mrs. Miller, ‘Look, look, Madam,
the very Picture of the Man in the End
of the Common-Prayer Book; before the
Gunpowder-Treason Service:’ Nor could
he help observing, with a Sigh, when all
the Candles were lighted, ‘That here were
Candles enough burnt in one Night, to
keep an honest poor Family for a whole
Twelvemonth.’ 
As soon as the Play, which was Hamlet
Prince of Denmark, began, Partridge was
all Attention, nor did he break Silence till
the Entrance of the Ghost; upon which
he asked Jones, ‘what Man that was in the
strange Dress; something,’ said he, ‘like
what I have seen in a Picture. ‘Sure it is
not Armour, is it?’ Jones answered,
‘That is the Ghost.’ To which Partridge
replied with a Smile, ‘Perswade me to that,
Sir, if you can. Though I can't say I
ever actually saw a Ghost in my Life,
yet I am certain I should know one, if I
saw him, better than that comes to. No,
no, Sir, Ghosts don't appear in such
Dresses as that, neither.’ In this Mistake,
which caused much Laughter in the
Neighbourhood of Partridge, he was suffered
to continue, 'till the Scene between
the Ghost and Hamlet, when Partridge gave 

that Credit to Mr. Garrick, which he had
denied to Jones, and fell into so violent a
Trembling, that his Knees knocked against
each other. Jones asked him what was the
Matter, and whether he was afraid of the
Warrior upon the Stage? ‘O la! Sir,’ 
said he, ‘I perceive now it is what you told
me. I am not afraid of any Thing; for
I know it is but a Play: And if it was
really a Ghost, it could do one no Harm
at such a Distance, and in so much Company; 
and yet if I was frightened, I am
not the only Person.’ ‘Why, who,’ cries
Jones, ‘dost thou take to be such a
Coward here besides thyself?’ ‘Nay, you
may call me Coward if you will; but if
that little Man there upon the Stage is
not frightned, I never saw any Man
frightned in my Life. Ay, ay; go along
with you! Ay, to be sure! Who's Fool
then? Will you? Lud have Mercy upon
such Fool-Hardiness! —Whatever happens,
it is good enough for you. — 
Follow you? I'd follow the Devil as soon. 
Nay, perhaps, it is the Devil—for they
say he can put on what Likeness he
pleases. —Oh! here he is again. — 
No farther! No, you have gone far enough
already; farther than I'd have
gone for all the King's Dominions.’ Jones 

offered to speak, but Partridge cried,
‘Hush, hush, dear Sir, don't you hear
him!’ And during the whole Speech of
the Ghost, he sat with his Eyes fixed partly
on the Ghost, and partly on Hamlet, and
with his Mouth open; the same Passions
which succeeded each other in Hamlet, succeeding
likewise in him. 
When the Scene was over, Jones said,
‘Why, Partridge, you exceed my Expectations. 
You enjoy the Play more
than I conceived possible.’ ‘Nay, Sir,
answered Partridge, ‘if you are not afraid
of the Devil, I can't help it; but to be
sure it is natural to be surprized at such
Things, though I know there is nothing
in them: Not that it was the Ghost that
surprized me neither; for I should have
known that to have been only a Man in a
strange Dress: But when I saw the little
Man so frightned himself, it was that
which took Hold of me.’ ‘And dost
thou imagine then, Partridge,’ cries Jones,
that he was really frightned?’ ‘Nay, Sir,’ 
said Partridge, ‘did not you yourself observe
afterwards, when he found out it was his
own Father's Spirit, and how he was
murdered in the Garden, how his Fear
forsook him by Degrees, and he was struck 

dumb with Sorrow, as it were, just as I
should have been, had it been my own
Case. —But hush! O la! What Noise
is that? There he is again. —Well, to
be certain, though I know there is nothing
at all in it, I am glad I am not
down yonder, where those Menare.’ Then
turning his Eyes again upon Hamlet, ‘Ay,
you may draw your Sword; what signifies
a Sword against the Power of the
Devil?’ 
During the second Act, Partridge made
very few Remarks. He greatly admired
the Fineness of the Dresses; nor could he
help observing upon the King's Countenance. 
‘Well,’ said he, ‘how People
may be deceived by Faces? Nulla fides
fronti is, I find, a true Saying. Who
would think, by looking in the King's
Face, that he had ever committed a Murder?’ 
He then enquired after the Ghost; 
but Jones, who intended he should be surprized,
gave him no other Satisfaction,
than ‘that he might possibly see him again
soon, and in a Flash of Fire.’ 
Partridge sat in fearful Expectation of
this; and now when the Ghost made his
next Appearance, Partridge cried out,
‘There, Sir, now; what say you now? Is he 

frightned now or no? As much frightned
as you think me, and, to be sure, no
Body can help some Fears, I would not
be in so bad a Condition as what's his
Name, Squire Hamlet, is there, for all
the World. Bless me! What's become
of the Spirit? As I am a living Soul, I
thought I saw him sink into the Earth.’ 
Indeed, you saw right,’ answered Jones. 
‘Well, well,’ cries Partridge, ‘I know
it is only a Play; and besides, if there
was any Thing in all this, Madam Miller
would not laugh so: For as to you, Sir,
you would not be afraid, I believe, if
the Devil was here in Person. —There,
there—Ay, no Wonder you are in
such a Passion; shake the vile wicked
Wretch to Pieces. If she was my own
Mother I should serve her so. To be
sure, all Duty to a Mother is forfeited by
such wicked Doings. —Ay, go about
your Business; I hate the Sight of
you.’ 
Our Critic was now pretty silent till the
Play, which Hamlet introduces before the
King. This he did not at first understand,
'till Jones explained it to him; but he no
sooner entered into the Spirit of it, than he
began to bless himself that he had never 

committed Murder. Then turning to Mrs.
Miller, he asked her, ‘If she did not imagine
the King looked as if he was touched; 
though he is,’ said he, ‘a good
Actor, and doth all he can to hide it. 
Well, I would not have so much to answer
for, as that wicked Man there hath,
to sit upon a much higher Chair than he
sits upon. —No wonder he run away; 
for your Sake I'll never trust an innocent
Face again.’ 
The Grave-digging Scene next engaged
the Attention of Partridge, who expressed
much Surprize at the Number of Skulls
thrown upon the Stage. To which Jones
answered, ‘That it was one of the
most famous Burial-Places about Town.’ 
No wonder then,’ cries Partridge, ‘that
the Place is haunted. But I never saw
in my Life a worse Grave-digger. I had
a Sexton, when I was Clerk, that should
have dug three Graves while he is digging
one. The Fellow handles a Spade
as if it was the first Time he had ever
had one in his Hand. Ay, ay, you may
sing. You had rather sing than work,
I believe.’ —Upon Hamlet's taking up
the Skull, he cry'd out, ‘Well, it is strange
to see how fearless some Men are: I 

never could bring myself to touch any
Thing belonging to a dead Man on any
Account. —He seemed frightned enough
too at the Ghost I thought. Nemo omnibus
horis sapit.’ 
Little more worth remembring occurred
during the Play; at the End of which
Jones asked him, ‘which of the Players he
had liked best?’ To this he answered,
with some Appearance of Indignation at
the Question, ‘The King without Doubt.’ 
‘Indeed, Mr. Partridge,’ says Mrs. Miller,
you are not of the same Opinion with the
Town; for they are all agreed, that Hamlet
is acted by the best Player who was
ever on the Stage.’ ‘He the best Player!’ 
cries Partridge with a contemptuous Sneer,
why I could act as well as he myself. I
am sure if I had seen a Ghost, I should
have looked in the very same Manner,
and done just as he did. And then, to
be sure, in that Scene, as you called it,
between him and his Mother, where you
told me he acted so fine, why, Lord help
me, any Man, that is, any good Man,
that had had such a Mother, would have
done exactly the same. I know you are
only joking with me; but, indeed, Madam,
though I was never at a Play in
London, yet I have seen acting before in 

the Country; and the King for my Money; 
he speaks all his Words distinctly,
half as loud again as the other. —Any
Body may see he is an Actor.’ 
While Mrs. Miller was thus engaged in
Conversation with Partridge, a Lady came
up to Mr. Jones, whom he immediately knew
to be Mrs. Fitzpatrick. She said, she had
seen him from the other Part of the Gallery,
and had taken that Opportunity of
speaking to him, as she had something to
say, which might be of great Service to
himself. She then acquainted him with
her Lodgings, and made him an Appointment
the next Day in the Morning; which,
upon Recollection, she presently changed to
the Afternoon; at which Time Jones promised
to attend her. 
Thus ended the Adventure at the Playhouse; 
where Partridge had afforded great
Mirth, not only to Jones and Mrs. Miller,
but to all who sat within hearing, who were
more attentive to what he said, than to
any Thing that passed on the Stage. 
He durst not go to Bed all that Night, for
Fear of the Ghost, and for many Nights after, 

sweat two or three Hours before he went
to sleep, with the same Apprehensions, and
waked several Times in great Horrors, crying
out, ‘Lord have Mercy upon us! there
it is.’ 



In which the History is obliged to look back. 
It is almost impossible for the best Parent
to observe an exact Impartiality to
his Children, even though no superior Merit
should biass his Affection; but sure a
Parent can hardly be blamed, when that
Superiority determines his Preference. 
As I regard all the Personages of this
History in the Light of my Children, so I
must confess the same Inclination of Partiality
to Sophia; and for that I hope the
Reader will allow me the same Excuse,
from the Superiority of her Character. 
This extraordinary Tenderness, which I
have for my Heroine, never suffers me to
quit her any long Time without the utmost
Reluctance. I could now, therefore, return
impatiently to enquire what hath happened
to this lovely Creature since her Departure 

from her Father's, but that I am obliged
first to pay a short Visit to Mr. Blifil. 
Mr. Western, in the first Confusion into
which his Mind was cast, upon the sudden
News he received of his Daughter, and in
his first Hurry to go after her, had not
once thought of sending any Account of
the Discovery to Blifil. He had not gone
far, however, before he recollected himself,
and accordingly stopt at the very first
Inn he came to, and dispatched away a
Messenger to acquaint Blifil with his having
found Sophia, and with his firm Resolution
to marry her to him immediately, if he
would come up after him to Town. 
As the Love which Blifil had for Sophia
was of that violent Kind, which nothing
but the Loss of her Fortune, or some such
Accident, could lessen, his Inclination to the
Match was not at all altered by her having
run away, though he was obliged to lay
this to his own Account. He very readily,
therefore, embraced this Offer. Indeed, he
now proposed the Gratification of a very
strong Passion besides Avarice, by marrying
this young Lady, and this was Hatred: 
For he concluded that Matrimony afforded
an equal Opportunity of satisfying either
Hatred or Love; and this Opinion is very 

probably verified by much Experience. To
say the Truth, if we are to judge by the
ordinary Behaviour of married Persons to
each other, we shall, perhaps, be apt to
conclude, that the Generality seek the Indulgence
of the former Passion only in
their Union of every Thing but of Hearts. 
There was one Difficulty, however, in
his Way, and this arose from Mr. Allworthy. 
That good Man, when he found by
the Departure of Sophia, (for neither that,
nor the Cause of it, could be concealed
from him) the great Aversion which she
had for his Nephew, began to be seriously
concerned that he had been deceived into
carrying Matters so far. He by no Means
concurred with the Opinions of those Parents,
who think it as immaterial to consult
the Inclinations of their Children in the Affair
of Marriage, as to solicit the good Pleasure
of their Servants when they intend to
take a Journey; and who are, by Law or
Decency at least, withheld often from using
absolute Force. On the contrary, as he
esteemed the Institution to be of the most
sacred Kind, he thought every preparatory
Caution necessary to preserve it holy and
inviolate; and very wisely concluded, that
the surest Way to effect this, was by laying
the Foundation in previous Affection. 

Blifil indeed soon cured his Uncle of all
Anger on the Score of Deceit, by many Vows
and Protestations that he had been deceived
himself, with which the many Declarations
of Western very well tallied; but now to
persuade Allworthy to consent to the renewing
his Addresses, was a Matter of such apparent
Difficulty, that the very Appearance
was sufficient to have deterred a less enterprizing
Genius; but this young Gentleman
so well knew his own Talents, that nothing
within the Province of Cunning, seemed to
him hard to be atchieved. 
Here then he represented the Violence of
his own Affection, and the Hopes of subduing
Aversion in the Lady by Perseverance. 
He begged that in an Affair on
which depended all his future Repose, he
might at least be at Liberty to try all fair
Means for Success. Heaven forbid, he
said, that he should ever think of prevailing
by any other than the most gentle Methods. 
‘Besides, Sir, said he, if they fail, you may
then (which will be surely time enough)
deny your Consent.’ He urged the great
and eager Desire which Mr. Western had for the
Match, and lastly, he made great Use of
the Name of Jones, to whom he imputed 

all that had happened, and from whom, he
said, to preserve so valuable a young Lady
was even an Act of Charity. 
All these Arguments were well seconded
by Thwackum, who dwelt a little stronger on
the Authority of Parents than Mr. Blifil
himself had done. He ascribed the Measures
which Mr. Blifil was desirous to take
to Christian Motives; ‘and though,’ says
he, ‘the good young Gentleman hath mentioned
Charity last, I am almost convinced
it is his first and principal Consideration.’ 
Square, possibly, had he been present,
would have sung to the same Tune, though
in a different Key, and would have discovered
much Moral Fitness in the Proceeding; 
but he was now gone to Bath for
the Recovery of his Health. 
Allworthy, though not without Reluctance,
at last yielded to the Desires of his
Nephew. He said, he would accompany
him to London, where he might be at Liberty
to use every honest Endeavour to gain the
Lady: ‘But I declare,’ said he, ‘I will
never give my Consent to any absolute
Force being put on her Inclinations, nor 

shall you ever have her, unless she can be
brought freely to Compliance.’ 
Thus did the Affection of Allworthy for
his Nephew, betray the superiour Understanding
to be triumphed over by the inferiour; 
and thus is the Prudence of the best of
Heads often defeated by the Tenderness of
the best of Hearts. 
Blifil having obtained this unhoped for
Acquiescence in his Uncle, rested not till
he carried his Purpose into Execution. And
as no immediate Business required Mr. Allworthy's
Presence in the Country, and little
Preparation is necessary to Men for a Journey,
they set out the very next Day, and
arrived in Town that Evening when Mr.
Jones, as we have seen, was diverting himself
with Partridge at the Play. 
The Morning after his Arrival, Mr.
Blifil waited on Mr. Western, by whom he
was most kindly and graciously received,
and from whom he had every possible
Assurance (perhaps more than was possible)
that he should very shortly be as happy as
Sophia could make him; nor would the
Squire suffer the young Gentleman to return
to his Uncle, till he had, almost against his
Will, carried him to his Sister. 




In which Mr. Western, pays a Visit to his
Sister, in company with Mr. Blifil. 
Mrs. Western was reading a Lecture on
Prudence, and Matrimonial Politics
to her Niece, when her Brother and Blifil
broke in with less Ceremony than the Laws
of Visiting require. Sophia no sooner saw
Blifil, than she turned pale, and almost lost
the Use of all her Faculties; but her Aunt
on the contrary waxed red, and having all
her Faculties at Command, began to exert
her Tongue on the Squire. 
‘Brother,’ said she, ‘I am astonished
at your Behaviour, will you never learn
any Regard to Decorum? Will you still
look upon every Apartment as your own,
or as belonging to one of your Country
Tenants? Do you think yourself
at Liberty to invade the Privacies of
Women of Condition, without the least
Decency or Notice?’ —‘Why, what,
a Pox! is the Matter now, quoth the
Squire, one would think, I had caught you
at &wblank; None of your Brutality, Sir, I
beseech you,’ answered she. —You have 

surprized my poor Niece so, that she can
hardly, I see, support herself. —Go,
my dear, retire, and endeavour to recruit
your Spirits; for I see you have Occasion.’ 
At which Words, Sophia, who
never received a more welcome Command,
hastily withdrew. 
‘To be sure, Sister,’ cries the Squire,
‘you are mad, when I have brought Mr.
Blifil here to court her, to force her
away.’ 
‘Sure, Brother,’ says she, ‘you are
worse than mad, when you know in
what Situation Affairs are, to &wblank; I am
sure, I ask Mr. Blifil pardon, but he
knows very well to whom to impute so
disagreeable a Reception. For my own
part, I am sure, I shall always be very glad
to see Mr. Blifil; but his own good Sense
would not have suffered him to proceed
so abruptly, had you not compelled him
to it.’ 
Blifil bowed and stammered and looked
like a Fool; but Western without giving
him time to form a Speech for the Purpose,
answered, ‘Well, well, I am to blame if
you will, I always am, certainly; but 

come, let the Girl be fetched back again,
or let Mr. Blifil go to her—He's come
up on Purpose, and there is no time to
be lost.’ 
‘Brother,’ cries Mrs. Western, ‘Mr.
Blifil, I am confident, understands himself
better than to think of seeing my
Niece any more this Morning after what
hath happened. Women are of a nice
Contexture, and our Spirits when disordered
are not to be recomposed in a Moment. 
Had you suffered Mr. Blifil to
have sent his Compliments to my Niece,
and to have desired the Favour of waiting
on her in the Afternoon, I should possibly
have prevailed on her to have seen him; 
but now I despair of bringing about any
such Matter.’ 
‘I am very sorry, Madam,’ cried Blifil,
‘that Mr. Western's extraordinary Kindness
to me, which I can never enough acknowledge,
should have occasioned—’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ said she interrupting him,
you need make no Apologies, we all
know my Brother so well.’ 
‘I don't care what any Body knows of
me,’ answered the Squire,—‘but when
must he come to see her; for consider, I 

tell you, he is a come up on purpose, and so
is Allworthy.’ ‘Brother,’ said she, ‘whatever
Message Mr. Blifil thinks proper to
send to my Niece, shall be delivered to
her, and I suppose she will want no Instructions
to make a proper Answer. I
am convinced she will not refuse to see
Mr. Blifil at a proper Time.’ —‘The
Devil she won't,’ answered the Squire. — 
Odsbud! —Don't we know—I say nothing,
but some Volk are wiser than all
the World. —If I might have had my
will, she had not run away before: And
now I expect to hear every Moment she
is guone again. For as great a Fool as
some Volk think me, I know very well
she hates’—‘No Matter, Brother,’ 
replied Mrs. Western, ‘I will not
hear my Niece abused. It is a Reflection
on my Family. She is an Honour to
it, and she will be an Honour to it, I
promise you. I will pawn my whole Reputation
in the World on her Conduct. — 
I shall be glad to see you, Brother, in the
Afternoon; for I have somewhat of Importance
to mention to you. —At present
Mr. Blifil, as well as you, must excuse
me, for I am in haste to dress.’ — 
‘Well but,’ said the Squire, ‘do, appoint
a Time.’ —‘Indeed,’ said she, ‘I can 

appoint no Time. —I tell you, I will see
you in the Afternoon.’ —‘What the Devil
would you have me do,’ cries the
Squire, turning to Blifil, ‘I can no muore
turn her, than a Beagle can turn an old
Hare. Perhaps, she will be in a better
Humour in the Afternoon.’ —‘I am
condemned, I see, Sir, to Misfortune,’ answered
Blifil, ‘but I shall always own my
Obligations to you.’ —He then took
a ceremonious Leave of Mrs. Western, who
was altogether as ceremonious on her Part,
and then they departed, the Squire muttering
to himself with an Oath, that Blifil
should see his Daughter in the Afternoon. 
If Mr. Western was little pleased with this
Interview, Blifil was less. As to the former,
he imputed the whole Behaviour of
his Sister to her Humour only, and to her
Dissatisfaction at the omission of Ceremony
in the Visit; but Blifil saw a little deeper
into Things. He suspected somewhat
of more Consequence, from two or three
Words which dropt from the Lady; and,
to say the Truth, he suspected right, as
will appear when I have unfolded the several
Matters which will be contained in
the following Chapter. 




Schemes of Lady Bellaston for the Ruin of
Jones. 
Love had taken too deep a Root in the
Mind of Lord Fellamar to be plucked
up by the rude Hands of Mr. Western. 
In the Heat of Resentment he had indeed
given a Commission to Captain Egglane, which
the Captain had far exceeded in the Execution; 
nor had it been executed at all, had
his Lordship been able to find the Captain
after he had seen Lady Bellaston, which was
in the Afternoon of the Day after he had received
the Affront; but so industrious was
the Captain in the Discharge of his Duty,
that having after long Enquiry found out
the Squire's Lodgings very late in the Evening,
he sat up all Night at a Tavern, that
he might not miss the Squire in the Morning,
and by that Means missed the Revocation
which my Lord had sent to his Lodgings. 
In the Afternoon then next after the intended
Rape of Sophia, his Lordship, as
we have said, made a Visit to Lady Bellaston, 

who laid open so much of the Character
of the Squire, that his Lordship plainly
saw the Absurdity he had been guilty of in
taking any Offence at his Words, especially
as he had those honourable Designs on his
Daughter. He then unbosomed the violence
of his Passion to Lady Bellaston, who
readily undertook the Cause, and encouraged
him with certain Assurance of a most favourable
Reception, from all the Elders of
the Family, and from the Father himself
when he should be sober, and should be
made acquainted with the Nature of the Offer
made to his Daughter. The only Danger,
she said, lay in the Fellow she had
formerly mentioned, who, though a Beggar
and a Vagabond, had by some Means or
other, she knew not what, procured himself
tolerable Cloaths, and past for a Gentleman. 
‘Now,’ says she, ‘as I have, for
the sake of my Cousin, made it my Business
to enquire after this Fellow, I have
luckily found out his Lodging; with
which she then acquainted his Lordship. 
I am thinking, my Lord,’ added she, ‘(for
this Fellow is too mean for your personal
Resentment) whether it would not be possible
for your Lordship to contrive some
Method of having him pressed and sent
on board a Ship. Neither Law nor Conscience 

forbid this Project: for the Fellow,
I promise you, however well drest,
is but a Vagabond, and as proper as any
Fellow in the Streets to be pressed into the
Service; and as for the conscientious
Part, surely the Preservation of a young
Lady from such Ruin is a most meritorious
Act; nay, with regard to the Fellow
himself, unless he could succeed
(which Heaven forbid) with my Cousin, it
may probably be the means of preserving
him from the Gallows, and perhaps may
make his Fortune in an honest Way.’ 
Lord Fellamar very heartily thanked her
Ladyship, for the Part which she was pleased
to take in the Affair, upon the Success
of which his whole future Happiness entirely
depended. He said, he saw at present
no Objection to the pressing Scheme,
and would consider of putting it in Execution. 
He then most earnestly recommended
to her Ladyship, to do him the
Honour of immediately mentioning his
Proposals to the Family; to whom he said,
he offered a Carte Blanche, and would settle
his Fortune in almost any manner they
should require. And after uttering many
Extasies and Raptures concerning Sophia,
he took his leave and departed, but not before 

he had received the strongest Charge to
be ware of Jones, and to lose no time in
securing his Person where he should no
longer be in a Capacity of making any Attempts
to the Ruin of the young Lady. 
The Moment Mrs. Western was arrived
at her Lodgings, a Card was dispatched
with her Compliments to Lady Bellaston; 
who no sooner received it, than with the Impatience
of a Lover, she flew to her Cousin,
rejoiced at this fair Opportunity, which beyond
her Hopes offered itself: for she was
much better pleased with the Prospect of
making the Proposals to a Woman of
Sense, and who knew the World, than to
a Gentleman whom she honoured with the
Appellation of Hottentot; though indeed
from him she apprehended no Danger of a
Refusal. 
The two Ladies being met, after very
short previous Ceremonials, fell to Business,
which was indeed almost as soon concluded
as begun; for Mrs. Western no sooner
heard the Name of Lord Fellamar than her
Cheeks glowed with Pleasure; but when
she was acquainted with the Eagerness of
his Passion, the Earnestness of his Proposals,
and the Generosity of his Offer, she 

declared her full Satisfaction in the most
explicit Terms. 
In the Progress of their Conversation their
Discourse turned to Jones, and both Cousins
very pathetically lamented the unfortunate
Attachment, which both agreed, Sophia had
to that young Fellow; and Mrs. Western
entirely attributed it to the Folly of her
Brother's Management. She concluded
however at last, with declaring her Confidence
in the good Understanding of her
Niece, who though she would not give up
her Affection in Favour of Blifil, will, I
doubt not, says she, soon be prevailed upon
to sacrifice a simple Inclination to the Addresses
of a fine Gentleman, who brings her
both a Title and a large Estate: For ‘indeed,’ 
added she, ‘I must do Sophy the
Justice to confess, this Blifil is but a hideous
kind of Fellow, as you know, Bellaston,
all Country Gentlemen are, and hath nothing
but his Fortune to recommend
him.’ 
‘Nay,’ said Lady Bellaston, ‘I don't
then so much wonder at my Cousin; for
I promise you, this Jones is a very agreeable
Fellow, and hath one Virtue which
the Men say is a great Recommendation 

to us. What do you think, Bel—I shall
certainly make you laugh; nay, I can hardly
tell you myself for laughing? —Will you
believe that the Fellow hath had the Assurance
to make Love to me? But if you
should be inclined to disbelieve it, here is
Evidence enough, his own Hand-writing,
I assure you.’ She then delivered her
Cousin the Letter with the Proposals of
Marriage, which if the Reader hath a Desire
to see, he will find already on Record
in the XVth Book of this History. 
‘Upon my Word, I am astonished,’ 
said Mrs. Western, ‘this is indeed a Masterpiece
of Assurance. With your leave, I
may possibly make some use of this Letter; 
You have my full Liberty,’ cries Lady
Bellaston,’ ‘to apply it to what Purpose you
please. However, I would not have it
shewn to any but Miss Western, nor to her
unless you find Occasion.’ ‘Well, and
how did you use the Fellow?’ returned Mrs.
Western. ‘Not as a Husband,’ said the
Lady, ‘I am not married, I promise you,
my Dear. You know, Bell, I have try'd
the Comforts once already, and once I think
is enough for any reasonable Woman.’ 

This Letter Lady Bellaston thought
would certainly turn the Balance against
Jones in the Mind of Sophia, and she was
emboldened to give it up, partly by her
Hopes of having him instantly dispatched
out of the way, and partly by having secured
the Evidence of Honour, who, upon
sounding her, she saw sufficient Reason to
imagine, was prepared to testify whatever
she pleased. 
But perhaps the Reader may wonder
why Lady Bellaston, who in her Heart
hated Sophia, should be so desirous of promoting
a Match, which was so much to
the Interest of the young Lady. Now
I would desire such Readers to look carefully
into human Nature, Page almost
the last, and there he will find, in scarce
legible Characters, that Women, notwithstanding
Characters, that Women, notwithstanding
the preposterous Behaviour of Mothers,
Aunts, &c. in matrimonial Matters, do
in Reality think it so great a Misfortune to
have their Inclinations in Love thwarted, that
they imagine they ought never to carry Enmity
higher than upon these Disappointments; 
again he will find it written much about the
same Place, that a Woman who hath once
been pleased with the Possession of a Man, will 

go above half way to the Devil, to prevent
any other Woman from enjoying the same. 
If he will not be contented with these
Reasons, I freely confess I see no other
Motive to the Actions of that Lady, unless
we will conceive she was bribed by
Lord Fellamar, which for my own Part I
see no Cause to suspect. 
Now this was the Affair which Mrs.
Western was preparing to introduce to Sophia,
by some prefatory Discourse on the
Folly of Love, and on the Wisdom of legal
Prostitution for Hire, when her Brother
and Blifil broke abruptly in upon her; and
hence arose all that Coldness in her Behaviour
to Blifil, which tho' the Squire, as was usual
with him, imputed to a wrong Cause, infused
into Blifil himself, (he being a much
more cunning Man,) a Suspicion of the real
Truth. 




In which Jones pays a Visit to Mrs. Fitzpatrick. 
The Reader may now perhaps be
pleased to return with us to Mr.
Jones, who at the appointed Hour attended
on Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but before we relate
the Conversation which now past, it may
be proper, according to our Method, to return
a little back, and to account for so
great an Alteration of Behaviour in this
Lady, that from changing her Lodging
principally to avoid Mr. Jones, she had now
industriously, as hath been seen, sought this
Interview. 
And here we shall need only to resort to
what happened the preceding Day, when hearing
from Lady Bellaston, that Mr. Western
was arrived in Town, she went to pay her
Duty to him, at his Lodgings at Piccadilly,
when she was received with many scurvy
Compellations too coarse to be repeated, and
was even threatned to be kicked out of Doors. 
From hence an old Servant of her Aunt
Western, with whom she was well acquainted,
conducted her to the Lodgings of that 

Lady, who treated her, not more kindly,
but more politely; or, to say the Truth,
with Rudeness in another Way. In
short, she returned from both, plainly
convinced not only that her Scheme
of Reconciliation had proved abortive,
but that she must for ever give over all
Thoughts of bringing it about by any
Means whatever. From this Moment Desire
of Revenge only filled her Mind; and
in this Temper meeting Jones at the Play,
an Opportunity seemed to her to occur of
effecting this Purpose. 
The Reader must remember, that he
was acquainted by Mrs. Fitzpatrick, in
the Account she gave of her own Story,
with the Fondness Mrs. Western had formerly
shewn for Mr. Fitzpatrick at Bath,
from the Disappointment of which, Mrs.
Fitzpatrick derived the great Bitterness her
Aunt had expressed toward her. She had
therefore no Doubt but that the good Lady
would as easily listen to the Addresses of
of Mr. Jones, as she had before done to
the other, for the Superiority of Charms
was clearly on the side of Mr. Jones, and the
Advance which her Aunt had since made in
Age, she concluded (how justly I will not say) 

was an Argument rather in Favour of her
Project than against it. 
Therefore, when Jones attended after a
previous Declaration of her Desire of serving
him, arising, as she said, from a firm Assurance
how much she should by so doing oblige
Sophia; and after some Excuses for her former
Disappointment, and after acquainting
Mr. Jones in whose Custody his Mistress
was, of which she thought him ignorant; 
she very explicitly mentioned her Scheme to
him, and advised him to make sham Addresses
to the older Lady, in order to procure
an easy Access to the Younger, informing
him at the same time of the Success
which Mr. Fitzpatrick had formerly owed
to the very same Stratagem. 
Mr. Jones exprest great Gratitude to the
Lady for the kind Intentions towards him
which she had expressed, and indeed testified,
by this Proposal; but besides intimating
some Diffidence of Success from the Lady's
Knowledge of his Love to her Neice, which
had not been her Case in regard to Mr.
Fitzpatrick, he said, he was afraid Miss
Western would never agree to an Imposition
of this Kind, as well from her utter
Detestation of all Fallacy, as from her avowed
Duty to her Aunt. 

Mrs. Fitzpatrick was a little nettled at
this; and indeed if it may not be called a
Lapse of the Tongue, it was a small Deviation
from Politeness in Jones, and into
which he would scarce have fallen, had not
the Delight he felt in praising Sophia, hurried
him out of all Reflection; for this Commendation
of one Cousin was more than a
tacit Rebuke on the other. 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ answered the Lady, with
some Warmth, ‘I cannot think there is any
thing easier than to cheat an old Woman
with a Profession of Love, when her Complexion
is amorous; and, tho' she is my
Aunt, I must say, there never was a more
liquorish one than her Ladyship. Can't
you pretend that the Despair of possessing
her Niece, from her being promised to Blifil,
has made you turn your Thoughts towards
her? As to my Cousin Sophia, I
can't imagine her to be such a Simpleton
as to have the least Scruple on such an
Account, or to conceive any Harm in
punishing one of these Haggs for the
many Mischiefs they bring upon Families,
by their Tragi-comic Passions; for which
I think it is pity they were not punishable
by Law. I had no such Scruple myself,
and yet I hope my Cousin Sophia will not 

think it an Affront when I say she cannot
detest every real Species of Falshood
more than her Cousin Fitzpatrick. To
my Aunt indeed I pretend no Duty, nor
doth she deserve any. However, Sir, I
have given you my Advice, and if you
decline pursuing it, I shall have the less
Opinion of your Understanding, that's
all.’ 
Jones now clearly saw the Error he had
committed, and exerted his utmost Power
to rectify it; but he only faultered and
fluttered into Nonsense and Contradiction. 
To say the Truth, it is often safer to abide
by the Consequences of the first Blunder, than
to endeavour to rectify it; for by such Endeavours,
we generally plunge deeper instead
of extricating ourselves; and few Persons
will on such Occasions, have the good Nature,
which Mrs. Fitzpatrick display'd to
Jones; by saying, with a Smile, ‘You need
attempt no more Excuses; for I can
easily forgive a real Lover, whatever is
the Effect of Fondness for his Mistress. 
She then renewed her Proposal, and very
fervently recommended it, omitting no Argument
which her Invention could suggest
on the Subject; for she was so violently incensed
against her Aunt, that scarce any 

Thing was capable of affording her equal
Pleasure with exposing her, and, like a true
Woman, she would see no Difficulties in the
Execution of a favourite Scheme. 
Jones however persisted in declining the
Undertaking, which had not indeed the least
Probability of Success. He easily perceived
the Motives which induced Mrs. Fitzpatrick
to be so eager in pressing her Advice. He
said he would not deny the tender and passionate
Regard he had for Sophia; but was
so conscious of the Inequality of their Situations,
that he could never flatter himself
so far as to hope that so divine a young
Lady would condescend to think on one so
unworthy; nay he protested he could scarce
bring himself to wish she should. He concluded
with a Profession of generous Sentiments,
which we have not at present Leisure
to insert. 
There are some fine Women (for I dare
not here speak in too general Terms)
with whom Self is so predominant, that
they never detach it from any Subject; 
and as Vanity is with them a ruling Principle,
they are apt to lay hold of whatever
Praise they meet with; and, though the Property
of others, convey it to their own Use. 
In the Company of these Ladies it is impossible 

to say any thing handsome of another Woman,
which they will not apply to themselves; 
nay they often improve the Praise they seize; 
as for Instance, if her Beauty, her Wit,
her Gentility, her good Humour deserve so
much Commendation, what do I deserve
who possess those Qualities in so much
more eminent a Degree? 
To these Ladies a Man often recommends
himself while he is commending another
Woman; and while he is expressing
Ardour and generous Sentiments for his
Mistress, they are considering what a
charming Lover this Man would make to
them, who can feel all this Tenderness for
an inferiour Degree of Merit. Of this,
strange as it may seem, I have seen many
Instances besides Mrs. Fitzpatrick, to whom
all this really happened, and who now began
to feel a Somewhat for Mr. Jones, the
Symptoms of which she much sooner understood
than poor Sophia had formerly
done. 
To say the Truth, perfect Beauty in both
Sexes is a more irresistible Object than it is
generally thought; for notwithstanding some
of us are contented with more homely Lots,
and learn by Rote (as Children to repeat what
gives them no Idea) to despise Outside, and 

to value more solid Charms; yet I have
always observed at the Approach of consummate
Beauty, that these more solid
Charms only shine with that Kind of Lustre
which the Stars have after the rising of the
Sun. 
When Jones had finished his Exclamations,
many of which would have become
the Mouth of Oroondates himself, Mrs.
Fitzpatrick heaved a deep Sigh, and taking
her Eyes off from Jones, on whom they
had been some time fixed, and dropping
them on the Ground, she cry'd, ‘Indeed
Mr. Jones, I pity you; but it is the
Curse of such Tenderness to be thrown
away on those who are insensible of it. 
I know my Cousin better than you, Mr.
Jones, and I must say, any Woman who
makes no Return to such a Passion and
such a Person, is unworthy of both.’ 
‘Sure, Madam, said Jones, you can't
mean.’ —‘Mean? cries Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
I know not what I mean; there is something,
I think, in true Tenderness bewitching; 
few Women ever meet with it
in Men, and fewer still know how to value
it when they do. I never heard such
truly noble Sentiments, and I can't tell
how it is, but you force one to believe 

you. Sure she must be the most contemptible
of Women who can overlook
such Merit.’ 
The Manner and Look with which all
this was spoke infused a Suspicion into Jones,
which we don't care to convey in direct
Words to the Reader. Instead of making
any Answer, he said, ‘I am afraid Madam,
I have made too tiresome a Visit,’ 
and offered to take his Leave. 
‘Not all, Sir, answered Mrs. Fitzpatrick. — 
Indeed I pity you, Mr. Jones, indeed I do; 
but if you are going, consider of the Scheme
I have mentioned, I am convinced you
will approve it, and let me see you again
as soon as you can. —To-morrow
Morning if you will, or at least some
time to-morrow. I shall be at Home
all Day.’ 
Jones then, after many Expressions of
Thanks, very respectfully retired; nor
could Mrs. Fitzpatrick forbear making him
a Present of a Look at parting, by which
if he had understood nothing, he must have
had no Understanding in the Language of
the Eyes. In Reality it confirmed his Resolution 

of returning to her no more; for
faulty as he hath hitherto appeared in this
History, his whole Thoughts were now so
confined to his Sophia, that I believe no
Woman upon Earth could have now drawn
him into an Act of Inconstancy. 
Fortune however, who was not his
Friend, resolved, as he intended to give
her no second Opportunity, to make the
best of this; and accordingly produced the
tragical Incident which we are now in sorrowful
Notes to record. 



The Consequence of the preceding Visit. 
Mr. Fitzpatrick having received the
Letter before-mentioned, from Mrs.
Western, and being by that Means acquainted
with the Place to which his Wife was
retired, returned directly to Bath, and
thence the Day afterwards set forward to
London. 
The Reader hath been already often informed
of the jealous Temper of this Gentleman. 
He may likewise be pleased to 

remember the Suspicion which he had at
Upton conceived of Jones, upon his finding
him in the Room with Mrs. Waters; and
though sufficient Reasons had afterwards
appeared entirely to clear that Suspicion,
yet now reading so handsome a Character
of Mr. Jones from his Wife caused him to
reflect that she likewise was in the Inn at
the same Time, and jumbled together such
a Confusion of Circumstances in a Head
which was naturally none of the clearest, that
the whole produced that green-ey'd Monster
mentioned by Shakespear in his Tragedy
of Othello. 
And now as he was enquiring in the
Street after his Wife, and had just received
Directions to the Door, unfortunately Mr.
Jones was issuing from it. 
Fitzpatrick did not yet recollect the Face
of Jones; however seeing a young well-dressed
Fellow coming from his Wife, he made
directly up to him, and asked him what he
had been doing in that House: ‘For I am
sure, said he, you must have been in it,
as I saw you come out of it.’ 

Jones answered very modestly, ‘That he
had been visiting a Lady there.’ To
which Fitzpatrick replied, ‘What Business
have you with the Lady?’ Upon which
Jones, who now perfectly remembred the
Voice, Features, and indeed Coat, of the
Gentleman, cried out,—‘Ha, my good
Friend! give me your Hand; I hope
there is no ill Blood remaining between
us upon a small Mistake which happened
so long ago.’ 
‘Upon my Soul, Sir, said Fitzpatrick,
I don't know your Name, nor your Face.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir, said Jones, neither have I
the Pleasure of knowing your Name, but
your Face I very well remember to have
seen before, at Upton, where a foolish
Quarrel happened between us, which, if
it is not made up yet, we will now make
up over a Bottle.’ 
‘At Upton! cried the other. —Ha!
upon my Soul, I believe your Name is
Jones.’ ‘Indeed answered he, it is.’ 
—‘O, upon my Soul, cries Fitzpatrick,
you are the very Man I wanted to meet. 
—Upon my Soul I will drink a Bottle
with you presently; but first I will give 

you a great Knock over the Pate. There
is for you, you Rascal. Upon my Soul,
if you do not give me Satisfaction for
that Blow, I will give you another.’ And
then drawing his Sword, puts himself in a
Posture of Defence, which was the only
Science he understood. 
Jones was a little staggered by the Blow
which came somewhat unexpectedly; but
presently recovering himself he also drew,
and tho' he understood nothing of Fencing,
prest on so boldly upon Fitzpatrick that he
beat down his Guard, and sheathed one half
of his Sword in the Body of the said Gentleman
who had no sooner received it than he
stept backwards, dropt the Point of his
Sword, and leaning upon it, cried, ‘I have
Satisfaction enough; I am a dead Man.’ 
‘I hope not, cries Jones, but whatever
be the Consequence you must be sensible
you have drawn it upon yourself. At this
Instant a Number of Fellows rushed in and
seized Jones, who told them he should
make no Resistance, and begged some
of them at least would take Care of the
wounded Gentleman.’ 
‘Ay, cries one of the Fellows, the
wounded Gentleman will be taken Care 

enough of; for I suppose he hath not
many Hours to live. As for you, Sir,
you have a Month at least good yet.’ 
D&wblank;n me, Jack, said another, he hath
prevented his Voyage; he's bound to another
Port now;’ and many other such
Jests was our poor Jones made the Subject of,
by these Fellows, who were indeed the Gang
employed by Lord Fellamar, and had dogged
him into the House of Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
waiting for him at the Corner of the Street
when this unfortunate Accident happened. 
The Officer who commanded this Gang
very wisely concluded, that his Business was
now to deliver his Prisoner into the Hands
of the Civil Magistrate. He ordered him
therefore to be carried to a publick House,
where having sent for a Constable, he delivered
him to his Custody. 
The Constable seeing Mr. Jones very
well drest, and hearing that the Accident
had happened in a Duel, treated his Prisoner
with great Civility, and, at his Request,
dispatched a Messenger to enquire
after the wounded Gentleman, who was
now at a Tavern under the Surgeon's Hands. 
The Report brought back was that the
Wound was certainly mortal, and there were 

no Hopes of Life. Upon which the Constable
informed Jones, that he must go before a Justice. 
He answered, Wherever you please; I
am indifferent as to what happens to me,
for tho' I am convinced I am not guilty of
Murder in the Eye of the Law, yet the
Weight of Blood I find intolerable upon
my Mind. 
Jones was now conducted before the Justice,
where the Surgeon who drest Mr.
Fitzpatrick appeared, and deposed that he
believed the Wound to be mortal; upon
which the Prisoner was committed to the
Gatehouse. It was very late at Night, so
that Jones would not send for Partridge
till the next Morning; and as he never shut
his Eyes till seven, so it was near twelve before
the poor Fellow, who was greatly
frightned at not hearing from his Master so
long, received a Message which almost deprived
him of his Being, when he heard
it. 
He went to the Gate-house with trembling
Knees and a beating Heart, and was no
sooner arrived in the Presence of Jones,
than he lamented the Misfortune that
had befallen him with many Tears,
looking all the while frequently about 

him in great Terror; for as the News
now arrived that Mr. Fitzpatrick was dead,
the poor Fellow apprehended every Minute
that his Ghost would enter the Room. At
last he delivered him a Letter, which he
had like to have forgot, and which came
from Sophia by the Hands of black George. 
Jones presently dispatched every one out
of the Room, and having eagerly broke open
the Letter, read as follows. 

‘You owe the hearing from me again
to an Accident which I own surprizes
me. My Aunt hath just now shewn me
a Letter from you to Lady Bellaston,
which contains a Proposal of Marriage. 
I am convinced it is your own Hand; and
what more surprizes me is, that it is dated
at the very Time when you would have
me imagine you was under such Concern
on my Account. —I leave you to comment
on this Fact. All I desire is, that
your Name may never more be mentioned
to 
‘S. W.’ 
Of the present Situation of Mr. Jones's
Mind, and of the Pangs with which he 

was now tormented, we cannot give the
Reader a better Idea, than by saying his
Misery was such, that even Thwackum
would almost have pitied him. But bad as
it is, we shall at present leave him in it, as
his good Genius (if he really had any) seems
to have done. And here we put an End
to the sixteenth Book of our History. 