

Is of less importance than the former, yet must not be omitted. 
Lady Mellasin having vented her spleen
on those, who by their stations were
obliged to bear it, and the object of it
removed out of the house, became extremely
chearful the remaining part of the
day. The fashion in which it might be
supposed miss Betsy would be accosted by
her tarpaulin enamorato, and the reception
she would give his passion, occasioned
a great deal of merriment, and even mr.
Goodman, seeing his dear wife took part
in it, would sometimes throw in his joke. 
“Well, well,” cried miss Betsy, to
heighten the diversion, “what will you
say how, if I should take a fancy to the
captain, so far as to prefer him to any
of those who think it worth their while
to sollicit me on the score of love?” 
“This is quite ungenerous in you,” 
cried miss Flora, “did you not promise
to turn the captain over to me, when
you had done with him.” —“That 
may not happen a great while,” replied
the other; “for I assure you I have seen him
three or four times, when he has called
here on business to mr. Goodman, and
think to part with a lover of his formidable
aspect would be to deprive
myself of the most conspicuous of my
whole train of admirers;—but suppose,” 
continued she, in the same gay
strain, “I resign to you mr. Staple or
mr. Trueworth, would not that do as
well?” 
“Do not put me in the head of either
of them, I beseech you,” said miss Flora,
“for fear I should think too seriously on
the matter, and it should not be in
your power to oblige me.” 
“All that must be left to chance,” 
cried miss Betsy; “but so far I dare promise
you, as to do enough to make
them heartily weary of their courtship
to me, and at liberty to make their addresses
elsewhere.” 
After this they fell into some conversation
concerning the merits of the two
last mentioned gentlemen:—they allowed
mr. Staple to have the finest face, and
that mr. Trueworth was the best shaped,
and had the most graceful air in every 
thing he did:—mr. Staple had an infinity
of gaiety, both in his look and behaviour:
—mr. Trueworth had no less of
sweetness, and if his deportment seemed
somewhat too serious for a man of his
years, it was well atoned for by the excellence
of his understanding. —Miss
Flora however said, upon the whole, that
both of them were charming men, and
lady Mellasin added, that it was a great
pity either of them should have bestowed
his heart where there was so little likelihood
of ever receiving any recompence. — 
“Why so, my dear,” cried mr. Goodman,
“if my pretty charge is at present
in a humour to make as many fools as
she can in this world, I hope she is not
determined to lead apes in another;— 
I warrant she will change her mind one
time or other. —I only wish she may
not, as the old saying is, out-stand her
market.” 
While they were thus discoursing, a
servant brought a letter from mr. Staple,
directed to miss Betsy Thoughtless, which
was immediately delivered to her: —on
being told from whence it came, gave it to
mr. Goodman, saying, “I shall make no
secret of the contents,—therefore, dear
guardian, read it for the benefit of the
company.” 
Mr. Goodman shook his head at the
little sensibility she testified of his friend's
devoirs, but said nothing, being willing
to gratify the curiosity he doubted not
but they all were in, miss Betsy herself
not excepted, as careless as she affected to
be, which he did by reading in an audible
voice these lines: 

To the most amiable and most accomplished of her sex.
‘‘Madam,
If the face be the index of the mind,
(as I think one of our best poets takes
upon him to assert) your soul must certainly
be all made up of harmony, and
consequently take delight in what has
so great a similitude of its own heavenly
nature. —I flatter myself, therefore, you
will not be offended that I presume to
intreat you will grace with your presence,
a piece of music, composed by
the so justly celebrated signor Bonancini,
and I hope will have justice done it in
the performance,—they being the best
hands in town that are employed. 
‘I do myself the honour to inclose
tickets for the ladies of mr. Goodman's
family, and beg leave to wait on you 
this afternoon, in the pleasing expectation,
not only of being permitted to attend
you to the concert, but also of an
opportunity of renewing those humble
and sincere professions I yesterday began
to make, of a passion, which only
charms such as yours could have the
power of inspiring in any heart, and can
be felt by none with greater warmth,
zeal, tenderness, and respect, than by
that of him who is, and ever must be, 
‘Madam,
Your most passionate,
And most faithful admirer,
T. Staple. 
‘P. S. If there are any other ladies of
your acquaintance, to whom you think
the entertainment may be agreeable,
be pleased to make the invitation,— 
I shall bring tickets with me to accommodate
whoever you choose to
accompany you. —Once more I beseech
you, madam, to believe me as
above, 
‘Yours, &c.’ 

Mr. Goodman had scarce finished reading
this letter, when lady Mellasin and
her daughter both cried out, at the same
time, “O miss Betsy,—how unlucky
this happens: —what will you do with
the captain now?” 
“We will take him with us to the
concert,” replied she;—“and in my
opinion nothing could have fallen out
more fortunately. —The captain has
appointed to visit me at five,—mr.
Staple will, doubtless, be here about
that time, if not before, in order to
usher us to the entertainment, so that
my tar cannot expect any answer from
me to his letter, and consequently I
shall gain time.” 
Though mr. Goodman was far from
approving this way of proceeding, yet he
could not forbear smiling with the rest,
at miss Betsy's contrivance, and told her,
it was a pity she was not a man, she
would have made a rare minister of state. 
“Well, since it is so,” said lady Mellasin,
“I will have the honour of complimenting
the captain with the ticket
mr. Staple intended for me.” Both
miss Flora and miss Betsy pressed her 
ladyship to be of their company, and my. 
Goodman likewise endeavoured to perswade
her to go; but she excused herself,
saying, “A concert was never among
the number of those entertainments she
took pleasure in: ” on which they 'left
off speaking any farther on it;—but miss
Betsy was not at a loss in her own mind to
guess the true reason of her ladyship's refusal,
and looked on it as a confirmation
of the truth of what Nanny had told her,
concerning the diamond necklace. 
There seemed, notwithstanding, one
difficulty still remaining for miss Betsy to
get over; which was the probability of
mr. Trueworth's making her a vifit that
afternon;—she did not choose to leave
him to go to the concert, nor yet to ask
him to accompany them to it, because
she thought it would be easy for a man
of his penetration to discover that mr.
Staple was his rival; which she was by
no means willing he should do before he
had made a declaration to her of his own
passion. 
She was beginning to consider how she
should manage in a point, which she
looked upon as pretty delicate, when a
letter from that gentleman eased her of
all the apprehensions she at present had, 
on his score. —The manner in which he
expressed himself was as follows: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Madam,
I Remember (as what can be forgot in
which you have the least concern)
hat the first time I had the honour of
seeing you at Oxford, you seemed to
take a great deal of pleasure in the pretty
tricks of a squirrel, which a lady in the
company had on her arm: —one of
those animals (which they tell me has
been lately catched) happening to fall
in my way, I take the liberty of presenting
him to you, intreating you will
permit him to give you such diversion
as is in his power. —Were the little
denizen of the woods endued with any
share of human reason, how happy would
he think himself in the loss of his liberty,
and how hug those chains which entitle
him to so glorious a servitude.’ 
‘I had waited on you in person, in the
hope of obtaining pardon for approaching
you with so trifling an offering; but
am deprived of that satisfaction by the
pressing commands of an old aunt, who
insists on my passing this evening with
her: —but what need is there to apologize 
for the absence of a person so
little known to you, and whose sentiments
are yet less so? I rather ought to
fear that the frequency of those visits I
shall hereafter make, may be looked
upon as taking too presuming an advantage
of the permission you have been
so good to give me. I will not, however,
anticipate so great a misfortune, but
endeavour to prevent it by proving, by
all the ways I am able, that I am, 
‘With the most profound submission,
Madam,
Your very humble, obedient,
And eternally devoted servant,
C. Trueworth.’ 

Miss Betsy, after having read this letter,
ordered the person who brought it should
come into the parlour; on which he delivered
to her the present mentioned in
the letter, which she received with a great
deal of sweetness, gave the fellow something
to drink her health, and sent her
service to his master, with thanks, and an
assurance that she should be glad to see
him, whenever it suited with his convenience. 
All the ladies then began to examine
the squirrel, which was, doubtless, the
most beautiful creature of its kind, that
could be purchased the chain, which
fastened it to its habitation, was gold, the
links very thick, and curiously wrought. 
—Every one admired the elegance of the
donor's taste. 
Miss Betsy herself was charmed to an
excess, both with the letter and the present; 
but as much as she was pleased with
the respectful passion of mr. Trueworth,
she could not find in her heart to think
of parting with the assiduities of mr. Staple,
nor even the blunt addresses of captain
Hysom, at least 'till she had exercised
all the power her beauty gave her over
them. 
As the two last mentioned gentlemen
were the friends of mr. Goodman, he
went out somewhat before the hour in
which either of them was expected to
come, choosing not to seem to know what
it was not in his power to amend, and
determined, as he had promised miss
Betsy, not to interfere between her and
any of those who pretended to court her. 
These two lovers came to the door at
the same time, and mr. Staple saying to
the footman that opened the door, that
he was come to wait on miss Betsy. —“I
want to speak with that young gentlewoman
too,” cried the captain, “if
she be at leisure: —tell her my name
is Hysom.” 
Mr. Staple was immediately shewed up
into the dining-room, and the captain in
the parlour, 'till miss Betsy should be told
his name: “That spark,” said he to himself,
“I find is known here, I suppose he
is one of those mr. Goodman told me
of, that has a mind to miss Betsy; but
as she knew I was to be here, I think
she might have left some orders concerning
me, and not made me wait till
that young gew-gaw had spoke his
mind to her.” 
The fellow not coming down immediately,
he grew very angry, and began to
call and knock with his cane against the
floor, which, it may be easily imagined,
gave some sport to those above. —Miss
Betsy, however, having told mr. Staple
the character of the man, and the diversion
she intended to make of his pretensions,
would not vex him too much, and 
to atone for having made him attend so
long, went to the top of the stairs herself,
and desired him to walk up. 
The reception she gave him was full of
all the sweetness she could assume, and
excused having made him wait, and laid
the blame on the servant, who, she pretended,
could not presently recollect his
name: —this put him into an exceeding
good humour, “Nay, fair lady,” said he,
“as to that I have stayed much longer
sometimes, before I could get to the
speech of some people, who I have not
half the respect for as I have for you; 
—but you know,” continued he, giving
her a kiss, the smack of which might
be heard three rooms off, “that I have
business with you,—business that requires
dispatch, and that made me a
little impatient.” 
All the company had much ado to refrain,
laughing out-right, but miss Betsy
kept hen countenance to a miracle, “We
will talk of business another time,” 
said she “we are going to hear a fine entertainment
of musick;—you must not
refuse giving us your company,—lady
Mellafin has got a ticket on purpose
for you—“I am very much obliged
to her ladyship,” replied the captain, 
“but I do not know whether mr. Goodman
may think well of it or not; for
he would fain have put me off from
visiting his charge here. —I soon
found by his way of speaking the wind
did not set fair for me from that quarter,
so tacked about,—shifted my
sails, and stood for the port directly.” 
“Manfully resolved, indeed!” said mr.
Staple; “but I hope, captain, you have
kept a good look-out, in order to avoid
any ship of greater burthen, that might
else chance to overset you.” —Oh, sir! as
to that,” replied the captain, “you
might have spared yourself the trouble
of giving me this caution, there are
only two small pinks in my way, and
they had best stand clear, or I shall run
foul on them.” 
Though mr. Staple had been apprized
before-hand of the captain's pretences, and
that miss Betsy intended to encourage
them only by way of amusement to herself
and friends, yet the rough manner in
which his rival had uttered these words,
brought the blood into his cheeks, which
lady Mellasin perceiving, and fearing
that what was began in jest might in the
end become more serious than could be
wished, turned the conversation, and addressing 
herself to the captain, on the score
of what he had said concerning mr. Goodman,
made many apologies for her husband's
behaviour in this point: —assured
him, that he had not a more sincere friend
in the world, nor one who would be more
ready to serve him, in whatever was in
his power. 
The captain had a fund of great goodnature
in his heart, but was somewhat too
much addicted to passion, and frequently
apt to resent without a cause, but when
once convinced he had been in the wrong,
no one could be more ready to acknowlege
and ask pardon for his mistake:—he
had been bred at sea;—his conversation,
for almost his whole life, had been chiefly
among those of his own occupation;— 
he was altogether unacquainted with the
manners and behaviour of the polite
world, and equally a stranger to what is
called genteel raillery, as he was to courtly
complaisance; it is not, therefore, to be
wondered at, that he was often rude,
without designing to be so, and took
many things as affronts, which were not
meant as such. 
Lady Mellasin, who neverwanted words,
and knew how to express herself in the
most perswasive terms, whenever she 
pleased to make use of them, had the
address to convince the captain, that mr.
Goodman was no enemy to his suit,
though he would not appear to encourage
it. 
While the captain was engaged with
her ladyship in this discourse, miss Betsy
took the opportunity of telling mr. Staple
that she insisted upon it, that he should
be very civil to a rival from whose pretensions
he might be certain he had nothing
to apprehend, and moreover that
when she gave him her hand to lead her
into the concert-room, he should give his
to miss Flora, without discovering the
least marks of discontent:—the lover
looked on this last injunction as too severe
a trial of his patience; but she would needs
have it so, and he was under a necessity
of obeying, or of suffering much greater
mortification from her displeasure. 
Soon after this they all four went to
the entertainment in mr. Goodman's coach,
which lady Mellasin had ordered to be got
ready. —The captain was mightily pleased
with the music, and had judgment enough
in it to know it was better than the band
he had on board his ship:—“When
they have done playing,” said he, “I
will ask them what they will have to 
go with me the next voyage;” but
mr. Staple told him, it would be an affront,
that they were men who got more
by their instruments than the best officer
either by sea or land did by his commission. 
—This mistake, as well as many
others the captain fell into, made not
only the company he was with, but those
who sat near enough to hear him, a good
deal of diversion. 
Nothing of moment happening either
here, or at mr. Goodman's, where they
all supped together, it would be needless
to repeat any particulars of their conversation; 
what has been said already of
their different sentiments and behaviour,
may be a sufficient sample of the whole. 