

Contains a brief account of Jenny's journey to Bath; and also some passages which happened on her arrival there. 
Jenny, though she had all the reason imaginable to be pleased with this excursion, not only in the gratification of her curiosity in the sight of a place she had heard so much of, but also in the society of the company she went with; of whose characters it is highly proper to give the reader some account. 
Lady Speck had been the wife of a person of great distinction, whom she lost in the first year of their marriage; but as love had not been in the least consulted by either party in the formation of that union, so grief had for his death little effect, either on the delicacy of her complexion, or the sprightliness of her humour; she had also some consolations which many widows want; for besides a very large jointure settled on her by her marriage articles, she was now in possession of an estate of near two thousand pounds a year, by the demise of an uncle. 
The age of this lady did not exceed twenty-five; miss Wingman, who was her sister by her mother's side, was six or seven years younger, and a great heiress; both of them had a great deal of wit and vivacity, but though they saw all the gay company in town, and convers'd freely, neither of them had been guilty of any thing that could call their conduct in question, or cast a blemish on their reputations. 
These ladies, to whose characters I should also have added that of being very agreeable in their persons, could not fail of attracting a great number of admirers; and as their going to Bath was no secret, those who were most eager to prove the sincerity of their attachment, thought they could not do it a better way than by following them. 
But there were two who distinguish'd themselves from all the rest of their competitors, by a particular act of knight errantry, these were mr. Lovegrove and lord Huntly; the one had for some time made his addresses to lady Speck, and the other either was, or pretended to be passionately devoted to her sister. 
These gentlemen, who were intimate friends, and the mutual confidants of each other's passion, contrived a little plot of love and gallantry between them, the idea of which gave them as much pleasure as they doubted not but their mistresses would receive in the execution of it. 
Having taken care to inform themselves as exactly as possible of the time in which the ladies were to set out, they left London some hours sooner, and arrived at Maidenhead early enough to accomplish what they had projected. 
They put up at the first great inn in the town, and having given orders for a very elegant dinner to be prepared, posted themselves in a room that looked towards the road, that they might be ready to intercept the ladies, in case they should not intend to bait at this place. 
This precaution was necessary, for lady Speck's Jehu was driving furiously on, as they generally do when passing through any town or village where they have not orders to stop. —The gentlemen saw them at a distance, and immediately sallied out. Lord Huntley's two servants laid hold of the bridles of the sore horses, and one of Mr. Lovegrove's, with an authoritative voice, call'd to the coachman to draw back the reins, their principals at the same time advanced at the coach door, and accosted those within it, in these terms: 
‘We arrest you, ladies, in the name of love, said lord Huntley; that God, so universally obeyed, has commission'd us, his faithful votaries, to stop your farther progress without his special leave;—Ceres and Bacchus are too of the party, added mr. Lovegrove, and it would be in vain for you to think of resisting their united influence.’ 
That momentary surprise which the ladies were in at the first stoppage of their coach vanish'd on the sight of the persons who had occasion'd it; and lady Speck, who happen'd to sit on that side where they were, answer'd with a great deal of spirit, ‘We have nothing to do with the mischievious little deity;—but as to Ceres and Bacchus, they are beneficent powers, and I think we ought to shew them some complaisance;—What say you ladies?’ continued she, turning to her sister and miss Jessamy; the latter of whom, being wholly unaquainted with the gentlemen, made no reply, nor indeed had she time; for miss Wingman presently took up the Word, and said, ‘Nay sister, I think we have no choice to make; we are taken prisoners and must submit to the laws of the conquerors.’ 
The coach door was then open'd, the ladies were handed out and conducted into a room, where they found the tablecloth laid, and side-board set forth with as much elegance and propriety as if they had been in their own houses; but as they came somewhat sooner than the gentlemen expected, mr. Lovegrove left lord Huntly to entertain them for a moment, while he went down to give orders for hastening dinner. 
As he was returning from this little expedition a post-chaise, attended by one servant, came galloping into the yard of the inn; the person who alighted from it was sir Robert Manley, a very great acquaintaince of mr. Lovegrove's; they immediately saw each other, and mutually advanced with open arms. 
On putting the question to each other concerning the rout they were pursuing, Lovegrove related in a few words the method that lord Huntly and himself had taken, to ingratiate themselves into the favour of their mistresses. 
‘You are happy fellows, said sir Robert, smiling, I am for Bath too; but you see how forlorn and solitary my journey will be in comparison of yours, who carry along with you those pleasures I am obliged to go in search of.’ 
Mr. Lovegrove then told him, there was a third lady in company, ‘who young and handsome as she is, said he, is like to have but a dull time of it, as my lord and I have our particular attachments; therefore, if I could prevail on you to join us, we should be all right, and more at liberty to indulge our several inclinations.’ 
‘I understand you, replied the baronet, and was never backward in my life to come to the relief of a distressed fair one; I shall find something or other to say to her, while you are entertaining your mistresses.’ 
On this the other purposed that he should prosecute his journey with them, in lord Huntley's landau; to which he also agreeing, discharg'd in the same instant the post-chaise that had brought him thither, and they went up stairs together to join the company. 
‘I have staid a long time, said mr. Lovegrove, presenting sir Robert, but have brought my excuse in my hand.’ —This gentleman was particularly known to lord Huntley, and no stranger to lady Speck and her sister, and was received by them with all imaginable demonstrations of satisfaction; but Jenny, not having the least personal acquaintance with him, said no more than what bare civility demanded from her to a man of his rank and character. 
The conversation, during the time of dinner, becoming extremely gay and spirituous, our young heroine however bore a part in it, with so much wit and vivacity, which, added to her other charms, could not fail of captivating almost any heart, not already strongly prepossess'd in favour of another object;—his lordship and mr. Lovegrove were defended, not only by the ideas, but also by the presence of their mistresses; but what the heart of sir Robert Manley felt on the sudden rush of such united perfection, will very shortly be discover'd. 
It would be quite needless to tell the reader that the table was elegantly serv'd, for no one can suppose that gentlemen who had taken so much pains to acquire an opportunity of entertaining their mistresses, would omit any thing for that purpose which the place they were in was capable of furnishing. 
The same spirit of gallantry continued during the whole journey;—wherever they baited, which was as often as any agreeable prospect invited; the ladies had nothing to pay, either for themselves, their servants, or their horses;—as they travell'd very leisurely they found, on their arrival at Bath, their women attendants, who had come down with their luggage in the stage coach, had been there some hours before them, and prepar'd every thing necessary for their reception at the lodgings which lady Speck had previously taken care to secure. 
It being towards evening when they came into the town, the gentlemen, after seeing their fair companions safe into their apartments, withdrew, on pretence of leaving them to take that repose which the delicacy of their constitutions might require; but, in reality, to go about the execution of a project they had all three been concerting on the road, and which they imagined would give the ladies a second surprise, no less agreeable than the former. 
They had been told there were a company of players, and a tolerable good band of musick, at that time in town; and as these people were to be employed for what they had design'd, they went directly to the theatre, and hired such of them as they found most fit for their purpose; which was no other than to compliment the ladies on their arrival, in a manner altogether new and unexpected. 
Lord Huntley, who was a native of the kingdom of Ireland, had brought over with him a little musical interlude, which had been exhibited at a marriage feast where his lordship had been a guest. 
As they were upon the subject of gallantry, he proposed to mr. Lovegrove to entertain the ladies with this piece, by way of giving them their welcome to Bath, in case they should be able to procure people to perform the parts. 
The personages which composed the drama, were Love, Honour and Pleasure. —Mr. Lovegrove was charm'd with the thought; and sir Robert Manley said, that nothing could be more suitably adapted to the design they were at present upon. 
The play-house, as I have already said, supply'd them with performers better than they could even have hoped for in that place;—a flaxen hair'd boy, with sparkling eyes,—cheeks which imitated the new blown rose, and an admirable voice, was chose to represent the God of soft desires. —A man of a most graceful aspect, and who had great skill in musick, was to appear in the character of Honour. —A very beautiful young woman, and who also sung well, was to assume the name of Pleasure; and seemed, by her looks and manner, to be capable of giving a very just idea of the character she bore. 
These people, properly habited and equipp'd for the several parts they were to act, and attended by musicians with various kinds of instruments, were all placed in a close arbour, at the farther end of the garden belonging to the house where the ladies lodged; the mistress of which lord Huntley had acquainted with the design of surprising the ladies with a morning's entertainment, and conducted them in through a back door with secrecy, according to the directions given her by his lordship. 
Every thing being thus prepared, a servant was dispatch'd to the ladies, with the compliments of lord Huntley, mr. Lovegrove, and sir Robert Manley; and entreating permission to wait on them, which being granted, they all immediately went;—the latter of these gentlemen having, perhaps, as strong an attachment to be of the party as either of the former. 
Scarce were the first salutations over, when the concert began, with an overture of wind and string instruments, accompanied with an harpsicord;—the ladies started;—‘Bless me! cry'd one;‘—What's this?—musick,—cry'd another,—and so near us,—where can it come from?’ 
‘The sounds, said mr. Lovegrove, seem to me to proceed from behind the house. —Certainly 'tis so, rejoin'd lord Huntley,—I fancy, ladies, you will hear it more distinctly in the next room.’ In speaking these words, without staying for permission to do so, he threw open the folding doors and they all ran in. 
But how prodigiously were the fair audience surprised, when, on drawing up the windows, they saw the garden planted on each side with musicians, who all, at sight of them bow'd with the most profound reverence almost to the earth, in token that it was to them their present labours were devoted. 
‘What can this mean? said lady Speck. —Here are those coming, reply'd mr. Lovegrove, who I believe will explain the mystery.’ There was time for no more on either side: Honour rush'd forth from his leafy covert, conducting little Cupid by the hand, and both advanced together to the middle of the alley; where, after making their obeisance to the windows, they began a duet, expressing the advantages each of them received by the fellowship of the other. Love confess'd that his Darts carried gall instead of honey into the heart they reach'd, when not under the direction of Honour;—and Honour acknowledged, he never appear'd so truly amiable as when accompanied by Love. 
They had no sooner ceased than Pleasure came tripping out, and told them, in a cantato, whenever they two were united, she must necessarily follow with all the sweets of nature. —They made her suitable answers in recitativo. —After which the whole was concluded with a grand chorus. 
This entertainment had all the effect that could be wish'd for by the contrivers of it;—Jenny was charmed with the elegance of the design,—miss Wingman with the words, and lady Speck with the musick. —In fine, they all seem'd to vye with each other in giving the greatest praises to it. 
While they were thus expressing their satisfaction, the gentlemen put their heads out of the window, and lord Huntley, in the name of the rest, said to the actors: —‘We shall see you this evening at the theatre, and make our acknowledgements for the trouble we have given you; in the mean time you may carry with you the glory of knowing your performance has been approv'd of by the finest ladies in the world.’ 
On this the players, after making a low bow to the company, retired, and were conducted out of the garden by the gentlewoman of the house, through the same gate by which they had enter'd. 
A piece of gallantry, so flattering to the vanity of the young and gay, could not but receive from lady Speck and her sister, all the retributions it demanded from them;—and Jenny, though far from thinking herself a party interested in it, said a thousand fine things in its praise. 
Charm'd as the lovers were with the gracious acceptance their mistresses vouchsafed to what they had done, their politeness reminded them, that they had already transgress'd the usual boundaries of a morning's visit; therefore they took leave till a more convenient hour of the day should permit them to return. 
