
Makes a short pause in the history, in order to present the reader with the detail of a matrimonial contest on a pretty particular occasion. 
A very celebrated French author tells us, in his treatise on the human mind, that what we commonly call humour is no more than nature in odd circumstances: —‘Humour, says he, is made up of three qualities,—an ambition of appearing peculiar,—a strong attachment to some one trifle, and an obstinate perseverance in whatever it inclines to;—all these three, he still goes on, are in nature; but then it is in nature perverted, unregulated by reason, and consequently in odd circumstances.’ 
How far he is right in this definition I dare not take upon me to determine; but it is certain, that one daily sees a great many people whose characters and manners cannot otherwise be very easily accounted for. 
When any two of these humourists meet together in company, and some subject happens to be started in which they differ in opinion, how farcical would be the dispute between them, if not liable to be attended with worse mischiefs than mutual altercations;—both of them vehemently tenacious of what he imagines is right, and equally impatient of contradiction, they foam,—they fret,—they rail,—affect to despise each other, and frequently from such beginnings the most lasting animosities arise; though perhaps the thing in question is a mere bagatelle; or, if not so, of no more consequence to either of them than what is doing in the farthest parts of Ethiopia, or the Desarts of Arabia. 
But how much soever we may laugh at such idle quarrels between persons who are strangers, or only casually acquainted with each other, it must afford a very melancholy reflection when we see the same effects on those who are most near, either by blood or alliance. 
Of all tyes, that of marriage requires the strictest unanimity; yet how many do we find, who, merely for the gratification of some ridiculous caprice of their 
own, endeavour to render miserable the person whom, by all laws, both human and divine, they are bound to make it their study to oblige, and turn that state, which should be all love and harmony, into one of discord and confusion. 
The people with whom Jenny lived were of this unhappy class;—they had little to discompose them, except the perverseness of their own humours; but this indulged was sufficient to involve them in greater inquietudes than fortune could otherwise have inflicted on them:—without the least understanding in political affairs, they took it into their heads to attach themselves to different parties, not thro' principle or interest, but merely because they had a mind to do so:—this opposition of humour, for it could not be call'd sentiment, occasioned perpetual jars between them, in which they were sometimes so loud and disturbing, that Jenny had more than once threaten'd to quit their house; and it was, perhaps, the fear of losing so beneficial a boarder that kept them within any tolerable bounds. 
It is very strange, and would be incredible, if daily experience did not evince the truth; that people of a genteel education, 
—naturally complaisant, and of a social disposition in other things, should suffer themselves to be so much influenced by some one favourite humour as to throw off all love,—all good manners,—all decency, and act like the most rude unpolish'd creatures in the universe. 
Yet thus it sometimes proves,—neither the husband nor the wife I am speaking of were ignorant how to behave themselves agreeably to the world and to each other; but unfortunately happening to be of a different way of thinking in one particular point, their passions got the better of all other considerations, and both of them seem'd divested of reason, and equally even of common civility, as will be seen in the instance I am going to relate. 
The wife was now lying-in of a first child, which happen'd to prove a daughter; Jenny, who had promised to be one of the sponsors at the font, frequently stept into the room to enquire after the health of the new-made mother and her infant;—as she was going on this good-natur'd and charitable errand, she heard the husband's voice within exceeding loud, and found they were at very high words; 
but this did not hinder her entering, not doubting but her presence would allay the storm, as it had done many times before. 
But this couple were at this time raised to a pitch too high to be easily quell'd; —‘A man, cried he, had better be buried alive than be married to a fool,—an ideot:’ —‘And a woman, retorted she with equal bitterness, had better be in her grave than married to a man who, without the least share of reason, fancies he has more than any body else.’ 
‘Fye, said Jenny, is this a time for quarrelling,—when one should expect to see only mutual endearments? Pray what has occasion'd this dissention? some trifle, I will lay my life.’ —‘No, madam, answer'd he, it is no trifle, I assure you, but the most serious thing that can be: —Would you believe it, miss Jessamy, continued he pointing to his wife,—that unnatural mother there would make me hate the infant she has brought into the world.’ 
‘Regard not what he says, miss Jessamy, cried she, let him not lay the blame on his own venemous heart on 
me;—for he may be assured, that if he has his will, I would see the little creature, dear as it now is to me, sprawling,—dying at my feet, rather than act a mother's part.’ —‘And if your peevish obstinacy prevails, rejoin'd he, it never shall know me for a father,—shall never share my blessing or my substance.’ 
‘Bless me, said Jenny, what horrid menaces are these to the poor helpless innocent? —but still I am in the dark as to the meaning.’ —Both the husband and the wife had their mouths open at the same time to make answer to this demand; but the weak condition of the woman having taken away some part of her usual volubility, he had the advantage of speaking first. —‘The dispute between us, madam, said he, is concerning the name by which the child shall be baptised,—I am desirous it should be Charlot, and she, in downright opposition to me, will needs have it call'd Wilhelmina.’ 
‘Oh Heavens!’ cried Jenny with a sort of a scornful smile, ‘is all this contention about a name?’ 
—‘A name, madam, resumed he eagerly,—a name is not so trifling a thing as you seem to think it:—I am an Englishman, 
madam,—I love my country, and will have no foreign names in my family.’ 
‘It is a small mark of your loving your country,’ bawl'd she out as loud as she was able, ‘when your child is to have a horrid,—papish,—jacobite name;—but she shall never be made a christian on such terms;—I had a thousand times rather see her an atheist, an infidel, or any thing, than an odious jacobite.’ 
‘Both of you are certainly mad, said Jenny, and put constructions upon things which no people in the world, except yourselves, would ever think of;—as if the name of a person were the symbol of a party:—but even if it were so, how can Charlot be accounted papish?—or Wilhelmina, outlandish. —The one, as I take it, being the feminine of Charles and the other of William, which are both English, and also good protestant names.’ 
‘Your derivation, madam, is extremely right as to the one, replied the husband; but not as to the other;—Charlot is indeed the feminine of Charles; but, in our language, the feminine of William would be Willamina or Willamana, 
not Wilhelmina;—that hel in the middle shews it is not of English extraction.’ 
Jenny laugh'd heartily at this definition, though she could not but allow it to be just;—on which the wife said somewhat sullenly,—that she did not care to what country the name most properly belong'd, if it were even the Hotentots, provided it did not favour of jacobitism;—and then beginning to inveigh afresh against her husband's principles, provok'd him to be no less severe on those she profess'd. 
While they were railing, a thought came into Jenny's head which luckily put an end to this ridiculous controversy, and was, perhaps, the only way that could have done it: —‘I have been considering on this matter, said she, not that I pretend to decide which of you is in the right; for as the thing appears to me you are both equally in the wrong; but as I am to be god-mother to the child, and it is the very first time I have ever taken that charge upon me, I think I might have expected the compliment of giving the name.’ 
At these words the husband and wife looked on each other with a good deal of confusion, which lasted for some minutes;—after which,—‘Indeed, madam, said he, turning to Jenny, our unpoliteness well deserves this reprimand;—but it is not yet too late, I hope, to make attonement;—the honour you do us claims at least the retaliation you mention:—be pleased, therefore, to bestow upon the child what name you shall think proper,—I shall readily aquiesce to whatsoever you make choice of, even though it should be Wilhelmina.’ 
‘Nor will I oppose miss Jessamy, rejoined the wife very gravely; but flatter myself she will not call my poor baby the cursed name of Charlot;’—she said no more, but could not utter these few words without letting fall some tears of spite, which Jenny, as good-natured as she was, did not regard with much compassion. 
‘Since then you consent to leave this important matter to my decision, answer'd she with a smile, you may depend that I shall present my little god-daughter at the font neither by the name of Charlot or Wilhelmina; but 
in compliment to a person who is much nearer to me than any Charles or William in the world, I shall call it Jemima.’ 
‘I understand your reason for that, madam, perfectly well, said the wife, I know mr. Jessamy's name is James; and I assure you that I have so high a respect for that gentleman on his own account, as well as yours, that I shall be proud to have my child call'd after him.’ 
‘I hold up both my hands in token of approbation,’ cried the husband; and was so well pleased with the choice Jenny had made, that he would doubtless have added something more, if he had not been prevented by the fears of rouzing certain imaginations in his wife's head, which he was glad to find had not yet enter'd there, on account of the name Jenny had mention'd. 
Thus was this mighty controversy, at last, happily adjusted through the interposition of Jenny, to the entire satisfaction of one of the parties concern'd, and without giving the other the least cause to think herself aggriev'd. 
The next day having before been agreed upon for the performance of the ceremony, the infant was made a christian by that name which the fair and discreet mediator had proposed. 
Nothing happening afterwards of consequence enough to trouble the reader with the repetition of, I shall now return to the thread of my history, which it is more than possible some may condemn me for having interrupted. 
