

Serves as a supplement to the former. 
The next morning miss Flora opened
her lips almost as soon as she did her
eyes, to talk to miss Betsy on the design
had been agreed upon between them the
day before, in relation to mr. Staple. — 
She told her, she had employed her whole
thoughts about it ever since, and that she
had found out a way of introducing the
discourse, so as to give him no suspicion
that she came from her, yet, at the same
time, take away all his apprehensions of
her being in love with mr. Trueworth; 
and added, that she would go to his lodgings
immediately after breakfast. 
“Indeed,” replied miss Betsy, sullenly,
“you shall do no such thing;—I do not 
care what his apprehensions are, or any
one's else;—the men may all think
and do as they will,—I shall not fill
my mind with any stuff about them.” 
“—Heyday,” cried miss Flora, a good
deal shocked at this sudden turn, “what
whim has got possession of you now?” 
“The whim you endeavoured to possess
me with,” said miss Betsy, scornfully,
“would have been a very ridiculous one
I am sure;—but I have considered
better on it, and despise such foolish
fancies.” —“Good-lack,” returned
the other, “you are grown wonderous
wise methinks,—at least imagine yourself
so;—but I shall go to mr. Staple
for all this,—I cannot bear that he
should think you are in love with
Trueworth.” —I know no business,” 
said miss Betsy, in a haughty tone, “you
have either with my love or hate, and
I desire, for the future, you will forbear
troubling your head in my affairs.” 
Miss Flora then told her, that what she
had offered was meerly in regard to her
reputation, and then ran over again all
the arguments she had urged, in order to
prevail on her to come into the measures
she proposed; but whatever she said,
either in the wheedling or remonstrating
accent, was equally ineffectual, the other 
remained firm in her resolution, and behaved
in a manner so different from what
miss Flora had ever seen her do before,
that she knew not what to think of it. — 
Having her own reasons, however, to
bring her, if possible, to a less grave
way of thinking, she omitted nothing in
the power of artifice, that she imagined
might be conducive to that end. —All
the time they were rising,—all the time
they were dressing, did she continue to labour
on this score, without being able to
obtain any other answers to what she said,
than such as were peremptorily in the
negative. 
It is certain, that miss Betsy was of so
soft and tractable a disposition, that half
the arguments miss Flora had alledged,
would, at another time, have won her to
consent to things of much greater consequence
than this appeared to be; but the
discovery she had the day before made of
her deceit, and the little good-will she
had towards her, gave her sufficient reason
to apprehend, that she had some further
designs than she pretended in this project,
though of what nature it could be
was not in her power to conceive. —The
thing in dispute seemed to her extremely
trifling in itself, but the eagerness with
which she was pressed to it, by a person 
of whose treachery she had so flagrant a
proof, convinced her, that she ought not
on any account to acquiesce. 
Miss Flora, on the other hand, was disconcerted
beyond measure at this unexpected
change in miss Betsy's humour,
of which she was as little able to divine
the cause, as the other was to guess the
design she had formed; but determining
to accomplish her point, if possible, at any
rate, she endeavoured all she could to dissemble
her chagrin, and still affected a
mighty regard for the honour of miss
Betsy, telling her, she was resolved to serve
her whether she would or not, and that
how much soever she disapproved it, she
should pursue her first intention, and undeceive
mr. Staple in the opinion he had,
of her being so silly as to fall in love
with mr. Trueworth. 
Miss Betsy on hearing this, and not
doubting but she would do as she had
said, turned towards her, and looking full
upon her with a countenance composed
enough, but which had yet in it somewhat
between the ironical and severe, replied
in these terms,—“Since you are
so much bent,” said she, “on making
a visit to mr. Staple, far be it from me,
miss Flora, to deprive that gentleman 
of the favour you intend him, provided
you give me your promise, in the presence
of mr. Goodman, and he will be
your security for the performance of it,
that you will mention neither my name
nor that of mr. Trueworth, and above
all, that you will not pretend to have
any knowledge of affairs you never
have been trusted with.” 
However inconsiderate, or incautious,
miss Betsy may appear to the reader, as
to her conduct in general, it must be acknowledged,
that at this time she shewed
an uncommon presence of mind. —This
was, indeed, the only way to put a stop,
and quash at once that scheme, which her
false friend had formed to do her a real
prejudice, under the pretence of serving
her. 
It is not in words to express the confusion
miss Flora was in, on hearing miss
Betsy speak in this manner. —Bold as
she was by nature, and habituated to repartee,
she had not now the power of uttering
one word: innocence itself, when
over-awed by authority, could not have
stood more daunted and abashed, while
the other, with a careless air, added,
“As soon as we go down stairs I shall 
speak to mr. Goodman about this
matter.” 
Whether miss Betsy really intended to
put this menace in execution, or not, is
uncertain; for miss Flora recovering her
spirits, and her cunning at the same time,
affected to burst into a violent fit of
laughter, “Mr. Goodman!” said she; 
“mighty pretty, indeed!—you would
trouble mr. Goodman with the little
impertinencies we talk on between ourselves!
but do so if you think proper. 
—I shall tell him the truth, that I
made this proposal to you only to try
you, and but acted the second part of
what mr. Chatfree had begun. —You
did not imagine sure,” continued she,
with a malicious sneer, “that I loved
you so well, that for your sake I would
hazard my person and reputation, by
going to see a young gay fellow at his
own lodgings.” 
“As for that,” cried miss Betsy, with
a look as contemptuous as she could possibly
assume, “I am equally well acquainted
with the modesty and sincerity
of miss Flora, and know how to
set a just value upon both.” —In
speaking these words, having now got on
her cloaths, she flung out of the room 
without staying to hear what answer the
other would have made. 
After this, these two high spirits had
little intercourse, never speaking to each
other, but on such common affairs as
were unavoidable between persons who
lived in the same house, eat at the same
table, and lay in the same bed. —How
miss Flora employed her thoughts will
very shortly be seen, but we must first
examine what effect these late occurrences
had on the mind of miss Betsy. 
Young as she was, she might be said to
have seen a great deal of the world; and
as she had a fine understanding, and a
very just notion of things, wanted only to
reflect on the many follies and deceits
which some of those who call themselves
the beau monde are guilty of, to be enabled
to despise them. —The last letter she had
received from lady Trusty made a strong
impression on her, and casting a retrospect
on several past transactions she had
been witness of, as well as those she had
been concerned in herself, began to wonder
at, and condemn the vanity of being
pleased with such shadowy nothings:— 
such fleeting, unsubstantial delights, accompanied
with noise and hurry in the
possession, and attended with weariness 
and vexation of spirit. —A multiplicity
of admirers seemed now to her among
this number;—her soul confessed, that to
encourage the addresses of a fop, was both
dangerous and silly; and to flatter with
vain hopes the sincere passion of a man
of honour, was equally ungenerous and
cruel. 
These considerations were very favourable
to mr. Trueworth;—she ran
through every particular of that gentleman's
character and behaviour, and could
find nothing which could make her stand
excused even to herself, for continuing
to treat him with the little seriousness
she had hitherto done. 
“What then shall I do with him?” 
said she to herself. “Must I at once discard
him,—desire him to desist his
visits, and tell him I am determined
never to be his!—or must I resolve
to think of marrying him, and henceforward
entertain him, as the man who
is really ordained to be one day my
husband! —I have at present rather an
aversion, than an inclination to a weded
state; yet if my mind should alter
in this point, where shall I find a partner
so qualified to make me happy in
it?—but yet,” continued she, “to 
become a matron at my years, is what
I cannot brook the thoughts of;—if
he loves me he must wait,—it will
be sufficient to receive the addresses of
no other; but then how shall I refuse
those who may make an offer of them,
without giving the world room to believe
I am pre-engaged.” 
Thus did she argue with herself,— 
the dilemma appeared hard to her, but
what was the result of her reasonings will
best appear in the answer she sent to lady
Trusty's letter, which was in the following
terms: 

To lady Trusty.
‘Madam,
I Received the honour of yours, and
sincerely thank you for the good
wishes and advice contained in it: be
assured, madam, I have a just sense of
the value I ought to set upon them,
and shall henceforth do the utmost in
my power to deserve it. —I have, indeed,
no parent to direct, and but few
faithful friends to guide me through
the perplexing labyrinth of life. —I
confess, I have been too often misled
by the prevalence of example, and my
own idle caprice,—it is therefore the 
highest charity to shew me to myself. 
—I now see, and am ashamed of the
many inadvertencies I have been guilty
of. —The dangers which a young woman,
like me, must necessarily be continually
exposed to, appear to me, from
what you say of them, in their proper
colours, and convince me, that no person
of understanding would condemn
me, if to avoid so many threatened ills,
I flew to that asylum your ladyship has
mentioned. —I will own to you yet
farther, madam, that I am not insensible
of the merits of mr. Trueworth,
nor of the advantages, which would attend
my acceptance of his proposals; 
but I know not how it is, I cannot all
at once bring myself into a liking of
the marriage state. —Be assured of this,
that I never yet have seen any man,
whom my heart has been more inclined
to favour, and that, at present, I neither
receive, nor desire the addresses of
any other. —There is no answering for
events, but, in the way of thinking I
now am, it seems not improbable, that
I shall one day comply with what my
friends take so much pains in perswading
me to. —In the mean time, I beseech
you to believe I shall regulate my
conduct, so as to ease you of all those 
apprehensions you are so good to entertain
on my account. —I am, 
‘With a profound respect,
Madam,
Your ladyship's most obliged,
And most devoted servant,
E. Thoughtless.’ 

Miss Betsy also answered her brother's
letter at the same time; but the purport
of it being much the same with that she
wrote to lady Trusty, there is no occasion
for inserting it. 