

Though Sir Ulick O'Shane contrived
to laugh on most occasions, where
other people would have wept, and,
though he had pretty well case-hardened
his heart, yet he was shocked by the
first news of the death of Sir Herbert
Annaly. He knew the man must die,
he said,—so must we all, sooner or later,
but for the manner of his death, Sir
Ulick could not help feeling a secret
pang. It was he who had encouraged,
or at least connived at, the practices of
those wretches, who roused the generous
and just indignation of Sir Herbert, and
in pursuit of whom this fine young man
fell a sacrifice.

Not only “the still small voice,” but
the cry of the country was against Sir
Ulick on this occasion. He saw that
he must give up the offenders, and shew
decidedly, that he desired to have them
punished. Decidedly, then, and easily,
as ever prince abandoned secretary or
chancellor to save his own popularity,
quickly as ever grand seignior gave up
grand vizier or chief baker to appease
the people, Sir Ulick gave up his “honest
rascals,” his “rare rapparees,” and
even his “wrecker royal.” Sir Ulick
set his magistrate, Mr. M'Crule, at work
for once on the side both of justice and
law; warrants, committals, and constables,
cleared the land. Many fled,—a
few were seized, escorted ostentatiously
by a serjeant and twelve of Sir Ulick's
corps, and lodged in the county jail to
stand their trial, bereft of all favour and
protection, bonâ fide delivered up to
justice.
A considerable tract of Sir Ulick's

coast estate, in consequence of this, remained
untenanted. Some person in
whom he could confide must be selected,
to inhabit the fishing lodge, and to take
care of the cabins and land till they should
be reset. Sir Ulick pitched upon Moriarty
Carroll for this purpose, and promised
him such liberal reward, that all
Moriarty's friends congratulated him
upon his “great luck in getting the appointment
against the man, too, that Mr.
Marcus had proposed and favoured.”
Marcus, who was jealous in the extreme
of power, and who made every
trifle a matter of party competition, was
vexed at the preference given against
an honest man and a friend of his own,
in favour of Moriarty, a catholic; a
fellow he had always disliked, and a
protégé of Mr. Ormond's. Ormond all
the time, though obliged to Sir Ulick for
his kindness to Moriarty, was too intent
on other things, to think much about the
matter. When he should see Florence

Annaly again, seemed to him the only
question in the universe of great importance.
Weak passions, it has been observed,
are weakened, strong passions strengthened
by absence.
Just at this time arrived letters for
Mr. Ormond from Paris, from M. and
Madame de Connal; very kind letters,
with pressing invitations to him to pay
them a visit. M. de Connal informed
him, “that the five hundred pounds, king
Corny's legacy, was ready waiting his
orders. M. de Connal hoped to put it into
Mr. Ormond's hands in Paris in his own
hotel, where he trusted that Mr. Ormond
would do him the pleasure of soon occupying
the apartments which were preparing
for him.” It did not clearly
appear, whether they had or had not
heard of his accession of fortune. Dora's
letter was not from Dora—it was from
Madame de Connal. It was on green
paper, with a border of Cupids and roses,

and store of sentimental devices in the
corners. The turn of every phrase, the
style, as far as Ormond could judge, was
quite French—aiming evidently at being
perfectly Parisian. Yet it was a
letter so flattering to the vanity of man,
as might well incline him to excuse the
vanity of woman. “Besides, really,” 
as Sir Ulick O'Shane observed, “after
making due deductions for French sentiment,
there remains enough to satisfy
an honest English heart, that the lady
really desires to see you, Ormond; and
that now, in the midst of her Parisian
prosperity, she has the grace to wish to
shew kindness to her father's adopted
son, and to the companion and friend of
her childhood.”—Sir Ulick was of opinion,
that Ormond could not do better
than accept the invitation. Ormond
was surprised, for he well recollected
the manner in which his guardian
had formerly, and not many
months ago, written and spoken of

Connal as a coxcomb, and something
worse.
“That is true,” said Sir Ulick, “but
that was when I was angry about your
legacy, which was of great consequence
to us then, though of none now—I certainly
did suspect the man of a design to
cheat you, but it is clear I was wrong— 
I am ready candidly to acknowledge,
that I did him injustice. Your money
is at your order—and I have nothing to
say, but to beg M. de Connal ten thousand
French pardons—Observe, I do
not beg pardon for calling him a coxcomb,
for a coxcomb he certainly is.”
“An insufferable coxcomb!” cried
Ormond.
“But a coxcomb in fashion,” said Sir
Ulick; “and a coxcomb in fashion is a
useful connexion. He did not fable
about Versailles—I have made particular
inquiries from our embassador at
Paris, and he writes me word, that Connal
is often at court—en bonne odeur, at

Versailles. The embassador says, he
meets the Connals every where in the
first circles—how they got there I don't
know.”
“I am glad to hear that for Dora's
sake,” said Ormond.
“I always thought her a sweet, pretty
little creature,” said Sir Ulick—“and no
doubt she has been polished up; and
dress and fashion make such a difference
in a woman,—I suppose she is now ten
times better—that is, prettier—she will
introduce you at Paris, and your own
merit, that is, manners, and figure, and
fortune, will make your way every
where.—By the by, I do not see a word
about poor Mademoiselle—Oh, yes, here
is a line squeezed in at the edge—‘Mille
tendres souvenirs, de la part de Mademoiselle
O'Faley.’”
“Poor Mademoiselle!”
“Poor Mademoiselle!” repeated Sir
Ulick.
“Do you mean that thing half Irish,

half French, half mud, half tinsel?” said
Ormond.
“Very good memory! very sly,
Harry! but still in the Irish half of her
I dare say there is a heart, and we must
allow her the tinsel, in pure gratitude; for
having taught you to speak French so
well—that will be a real advantage to
you in Paris.”
“Whenever I go there, Sir,” said
Ormond, coldly.
Sir Ulick was very much disappointed
at perceiving, that Ormond had no mind
to go to Paris; but dropping the subject,
he turned the conversation upon
the Annalys—he praised Florence to the
skies, hoped that Ormond would be more
fortunate than Marcus had been, for
some how or other he should never live or
die in peace till Florence Annaly was
more nearly connected with him. He
regretted, however, that poor Sir Herbert
was carried off before he had completed
the levying of those fines, which

would have cut off the entail, and barred
the heir at law from the Herbert estates.
Florence was not now the great heiress
it was once expected she should be, indeed
she had but a moderate gentlewoman's
fortune—not even what at Smithfield a
man of Ormond's fortune might expect; 
but Sir Ulick knew, he said, that this
would make no difference to his ward,
unless to make him in greater impatience
to propose for her.
It was impossible to be in greater impatience
to propose for her than Ormond
was. Sir Ulick did not wonder at it; 
but he thought that Miss Annaly would
not, could not, listen to him yet. Time,
the comforter, must come first, and while
time was doing his business, love could
not decently be admitted.
“That was the reason,” said Sir
Ulick, returning by another road to the
charge, “why I advised a trip to Paris; 
but you know best.”
“I cannot bear this suspense, and I

must and will know my fate—I will write
instantly and obtain an answer.”
“Do so; and to save time, I can tell
what your fate and your answer will be:
from Florence Annaly, assurance of perfect
esteem and regard, as far as friendship,
perhaps; but she will tell you, that
she cannot think of love at present. Lady
Annaly, prudent Lady Annaly, will say,
that she hopes Mr. Ormond will not think
of settling for life till he has seen something
more of the world. Well, you
don't believe me,” said Sir Ulick, interrupting
himself just at the moment when
he saw that Ormond began to think there
was some sense in what he was saying.
“If you don't believe me, Harry,” 
continued he, “consult your oracle, Dr.
Cambray, he has just returned from Annaly,
and he can tell you how the land
lies.”
Dr. Cambray agreed with Sir Ulick,
that both Lady Annaly and her daughter
would desire, that Ormond should see

more of the world before he settled for
life; but as to going off to Paris, without
waiting to see or write to them, Dr.
Cambray agreed with Ormond, that it
would be the worst thing he could do— 
that so far from appearing a proof of his
respect to their grief, it would seem only
a proof of indifference, or a sign of impatience— 
they would conclude, that he was
in haste to leave his friends in adversity,
to go to those in prosperity, and to enjoy
the gaiety and dissipation of Paris. Dr.
Cambray advised, that he should remain
quietly where he was, and wait till Miss
Annaly should be disposed to see him.
This was most prudent, Ormond allowed.
“But then the delay;” to conquer by
delay we must begin by conquering our
impatience—now, that was what our hero
could not possibly do. Therefore, he
jumped hastily to this conclusion, that— 
“in love affairs no man should follow any
mortal's opinion but his own.”
Accordingly he sat down and wrote to

Miss Annaly a most passionate letter,
enclosed in a most dutiful epistle to Lady
Annaly, as full of respectful attachment
and entire obedience as a son-in-law
expectant could devise—beginning very
properly, and very sincerely, with anxiety
and hopes about her ladyship's health,
and ending, as properly, and as sincerely,
with hopes that her ladyship would permit
him, as soon as possible, to take from
her the greatest, the only remaining
source of happiness she had in life—her
daughter.
Having worded this very plausibly— 
for he had now learned how to write a
letter—our hero dispatched a servant of
Sir Ulick's with his epistle, with orders
to wait certainly for an answer; but above
all things, to make haste back. Accordingly
the man took a cross road, a short
cut, and coming to a broken bridge,
which he did not know was down till he
was close upon it, he was obliged to go
back and go round, and did not get home

till long after dark night—and the only
answer he brought was, there was no
answer, only Lady Annaly's compliments.
Ormond could scarcely believe that no
answer had been sent; but the man took
all the saints in Heaven, or in the calendar,
to witness, that he would not tell his
honour, or any jantleman, a lie.
Upon a cross-examination, the man
gave proof that he had actually seen both
the ladies. They were sitting so and so,
and dressed so and so, in mourning.
Further, he gave undeniable proof that
he had delivered the letters, and that
they had been opened and read; for— 
by the same token—he was summoned up
to my lady on account of one of Mr.
Ormond's letters he did not know which,
or to who, being dated Monday, whereas
it was Wednesday; and he had to clear
himself of having been three days on the
road.
Ormond, inordinately impatient, could
not rest a moment. The next morning

he set off full speed for Annaly, determined
to find out what was the matter.
Arrived there—a new footman came
to the door with “Not at home, Sir.” 
Ormond could have knocked him down,
but he contented himself with striking
his own forehead—however, in a genteel
proper voice, he desired to see Sir Herbert's
own man, O'Reilly.
“Mr. O'Reilly is not here, Sir: absent
on business.”
Every thing was adverse. Ormond
had one hope that this new fellow, not
knowing him, might by mistake have
included him in a general order against
morning visitors.
“My name is Ormond, Sir.”
“Yes, Sir.”
“And I beg you will let Lady Annaly
and Miss Annaly know, that Mr.
Ormond is come to pay his respects to
them.”
The man seemed very unwilling to
carry any message to his ladies. “He

was sure,” he said, “that the ladies
would not see any body?”
“Was Lady Annaly ill?”
“Her ladyship had been but poorly,
but was better within the last two days.”
“And Miss Annaly.”
“Wonderful better too, Sir; has got
up her spirits greatly to-day.”
“I am very glad to hear it,” said
Ormond. “Pray, Sir, can you tell me
whether a servant from Mr. Ormond
brought a letter here yesterday.”
“He did, Sir.”
“And was there any answer sent?”
“I really can't say, Sir.”
“Be so good to take my name to
your lady,” repeated Ormond.
“Indeed, Sir, I don't like to go in,
for I know my lady—both my ladies is
engaged, very particularly engaged— 
however, if you very positively desire it,
Sir—” 
Ormond did very positively desire it,
and the footman obeyed. While Ormond

was waiting impatiently for the
answer, his horse, as impatient as himself,
would not stand still. A groom, who had
been playing at ball with the footman
in the yard, saw the uneasiness of the
horse; observing that it was occasioned
by a peacock, who, with spread tail, was
strutting in the sunshine, he ran and
chased the bird away. Ormond thanking
the groom, threw him a luck token,
and not recollecting his face, asked how
long he had been at Annaly.
“I think you were not here when I
was here last?” said Ormond.
“No, Sir,” said the man, looking a
little puzzled; “I never was here till
the day before yesterday in my born
days. We bees from England.”
“We!”
“That is I and master—that is master
and I.”
Ormond grew pale; but the groom
saw nothing of it—his eyes had fixed
upon Ormond's horse.

“A very fine horse this ofy ours, Sir,
for sartain, if he could but stand, Sir; 
he's main restless at a door. My master's
horse is just his match for that.”
“And pray who is your master, Sir?” 
said Ormond, in a voice which he forced
to be calm.
“My master, Sir, is one Colonel Albemarle,
son of the famous General Albemarle; 
as lost his arm, Sir—you might
have heard talk of, time back,” said the
groom.
At this moment a window-blind was
flapped aside, and before the wind blew
it back to its place again, Ormond saw
Florence Annaly sitting on a sofa, and a
gentleman, in regimentals, kneeling at
her feet.
“Bless my eyes!” cried the groom,
“what made you let go his bridle, Sir— 
only you sat him well, Sir, he would ha'
thrown you that minute—Curse the blind!
that flapped in his eyes.”
The footman re-appeared on the steps.

“Sir, it is just as I said—I could not be
let in. Mrs. Spencer, my lady's woman,
says the ladies is engaged—you can't see
them.”
Ormond had seen enough.
“Very well, Sir,” said he, “Mr. Ormond's
compliments—he called, that's
all.”
Ormond put spurs to his horse and
galloped off, and fast as he went, he urged
his horse still faster.
In the agony of disappointed love and
jealousy, he railed bitterly against the
whole sex, and against Florence Annaly
in particular. Many were the rash vows
he made, that he would never think of
her more!—that he would tear her from
his heart—that he would shew her that
he was no whining lover, no easy dupe,
to be whiffled off and on, the sport of a
coquet.
“A coquet!—is it possible, Florence
Annaly!—You—and after all!”
Certain tender recollections obtruded;

but he repelled them, he would not allow
one of them to mitigate his rage. His
naturally violent passion of anger, now
that it broke again from the controul of
his reason, seemed the more ungovernable
from the sense of past and the dread of
future restraint.
So, when a horse naturally violent, half
trained to the curb, takes fright, or takes
offence, and, starting, throws his master,
away he gallops; enraged the more by
the falling bridle, he rears, plunges,
curvets, and lashes out behind at broken
girth or imaginary pursuer.
“Good Heavens! what is the matter
with you, my dear boy?—what has happened?” 
cried Sir Ulick the moment he
saw him, for the disorder of Ormond's
mind appeared strongly in his face and
gestures—still more strongly in his words.
When he attempted to give an account
of what had happened, it was so broken,
so exclamatory, that it was wonderful
how Sir Ulick made out the plain fact.

Sir Ulick, however, well understood the
short-hand language of the passions; he
listened with eager interest—he sympathized
so fully with Ormond's feelings— 
expressed such astonishment, such indignation,
that Harry, feeling him to be his
warm friend, loved him as heartily as in
the days of his childhood.
Sir Ulick saw and seized the advantage— 
he had almost despaired of accomplishing
his purpose, now was the critical
instant.
“Harry Ormond,” said he, “would
you make Florence Annaly feel to the
quick—would you make her repent in
sackcloth and ashes—would you make
her pine for you, aye! till her very heart
is sick?”
“Would I? to be sure—shew me how!— 
only shew me how!” cried Ormond.
“Look ye, Harry—to have and to hold
a woman—trust me—for I have had and
held many!—to have and to hold a woman,
you must first shew her that you

can, if you will, fling her from you, aye!
and leave her there—set off for Paris to-morrow
morning—My life upon it, the
moment she hears you are gone, she will
wish you back again.”
“I'll set off to-night,” said Ormond,
ringing the bell to give orders to his servant
to prepare immediately for his departure.
Thus Sir Ulick, seizing precisely the
moment when Ormond's mind was at the
right heat, aiming with dexterity, and
striking with force, bent and moulded
him to his purpose.
While preparations for Ormond's journey
were making, Sir Ulick said that
there was one thing he must insist upon
his doing before he quitted Castle Hermitage— 
he must look over and settle his
guardianship accounts.
Ormond, whose head was far from business
at this moment, was very reluctant; 
he said that the accounts could wait till
he should return from France; but Sir

Ulick said that if he, or if Ormond, were
to die, leaving the thing unsettled, it
would be loss of property to the one, and
loss of credit to the other. Ormond then
begged that the accounts might be sent
after him to Paris; he would look over
them there at leisure, and sign them.
No, Sir Ulick said, they ought to be
signed by some forthcoming witness in
this country. He urged it so much, and
put it upon the footing of his own credit
and honour in such a manner, that Ormond
could not refuse. He seized the
papers, and took a pen to sign them; 
but Sir Ulick snatched the pen from his
hand, and absolutely insisted upon his
first knowing what he was going to sign.
“The whole account could have been
looked over while we have been talking
about it,” said Sir Ulick.
Ormond sat down and looked it over,
examined all the vouchers, saw that every
thing was perfectly right and fair, signed
the accounts, and esteemed Sir Ulick the

more for having insisted upon shewing,
and proving, that all was exact.
Sir Ulick offered to manage his affairs
for him while he was away, particularly
a large sum which Ormond had in the
English funds. Sir Ulick had a banker
and a broker in London, on whom he
could depend, and he had, from his place
and connexions, &c. means of obtaining
good information in public affairs; he
had made a great deal himself by speculations
in the funds, and he could buy
in and sell out to great advantage, he
said, for Ormond. But for this purpose
a letter of attorney was necessary to be
given by Ormond to Sir Ulick.
There was scarcely time to draw one
up, nor was Sir Ulick sure that there
was a printed form in the house. Luckily,
however, a proper power was found, and
filled up, and Ormond had just time to
sign it before he stepped into the carriage; 
he embraced his guardian, and
thanked him heartily for his care of the

interests of his purse, and still more for
the sympathy he had shewn in the interests
of his heart. Sir Ulick was moved
at parting with him, and this struck
Harry the more, because he certainly
struggled to suppress his feelings. Ormond
stopped at Vicar's Vale to tell
Dr. Cambray all that had happened, to
thank him and his family for their kindness,
and to take leave of them.
They were indeed astonished when he
entered, saying— 
“Any commands, my good friends,
for London or Paris, I am on my way
there—carriage at the door.”
At first, they could not believe him to
be serious; but when they heard his
story, and saw by the agitation of his
manner, that he was in earnest, they
were still more surprised at the suddenness
of his determination. They all believed
and represented to him that there
must be some mistake, and that he was
not cool enough to judge sanely at this
moment.

Dr. Cambray observed, that Miss Annaly
could not prevent any man from
kneeling to her. Ormond haughtily said,
“he did not know what she could prevent,
he only knew what she did. She had not
vouchsafed an answer to his letter—she
had not admitted him. These he thought
were sufficient indications, that the person
at her feet was accepted. Whether he
were or not, Ormond would inquire no
farther. She might now accept or refuse,
as she pleased—he would go to
Paris.”
His friends had nothing more to say
or to do but to sigh, and to wish him a
good journey, and much pleasure at Paris.
Ormond now requested, that Dr. Cambray
would have the goodness to write to
him from time to time, to inform him of
whatever he might wish to know, during
his absence. He was much mortified to
hear from the doctor, that he was obliged
to remove, with his family, for some
months, to a distant part of the north of

England; and that, as to the Annalys,
they were immediately removing to the
sea coast of Devonshire, for the benefit
of a mild climate, and of sea bathing.
Ormond, therefore, had no resource but
in his guardian. Sir Ulick's business,
however, was to take him over to London,
from whence Ormond could not expect
much satisfactory intelligence with
respect to Ireland.
Ormond flew to Dublin, crossed the
channel in an express boat, travelled
night and day in the mail to London,
from thence to Dover—crossed the water
in a storm, and travelled with the utmost
expedition to Paris, though there was no
one reason why he should be in haste; and
for so much, his travelling was as little
profitable or amusing as possible. He
saw, heard, and understood nothing, till
he got to Paris.
It has been said, that the traveller without
sensibility may travel from Dan to
Beer-Sheba without finding any thing

worth seeing. The traveller who has
too much sensibility observes often as
little—of this all persons must be sensible,
who have ever travelled when their minds
were engrossed with painful feelings, or
possessed by any strong passion.