

During Lord Oldborough's absence
his faithful secretary had been active in
his service. Mr. Temple went immediately
to his friend Alfred Percy. Alfred
had just returned fatigued from the
courts, and was resting himself, in conversation
with his wife and Caroline.
“I am sorry to disturb you, Alfred,” 
said Mr. Temple, “but I must take you
away from these ladies to consult you on
particular business.”
“Oh! let the particular business wait
till he has rested himself,” said Mrs.
Percy, “unless it be a matter of life and
death.”
“Life and death!” cried Lady
Frances Arlington, running in at the
open door. “Yes! it is a matter of life
and death. ... Stay, Mr. Temple! Mr.

Percy! going the moment I come into
the room—Impossible!”
“Impossible it would be,” said Mr.
Temple, “in any other case. ...
But—.”
 ‘When a lady's in the case,
You know all other things of course give place,’
cried Lady Frances. So positively, gentlemen,
I stop the way.—But Mr.
Temple, to comfort you—for I never
saw a man, gallant, or ungallant, look so
impatient; I shall not be able to stay
above a moment. ... Thank you, Mrs.
Percy, I ca'nt sit down. ... Mrs. Crabstock,
the crossest of Crabstocks and
stiffest of pattern women, is in the carriage
waiting for me.—Give me joy—I
have accomplished my purpose, and
without Lady Jane Granville's assistance
—obtained a permit to go with Lady
Trant, and made her take me to Lady
Angelica's last night.—Grand conversazione!—Saw
the German Baron!—Caught
both the profiles—have 'em here

... defy you not to smile.—Look,” 
cried her Ladyship, drawing out of her
ridicule a caricature—which she put into
Caroline's hand, and, whilst she was looking
at it, Lady Frances went on speaking
rapidly.
“Only a sketch, a scrawl in pencil,
while they thought I was copying a sonnet
to wisdom—on the worst bit of paper
too, in the world ... old cover of a letter I
stole from Lady Trant's ridicule, while
she was at cards.—Mr. Temple, you
shall see my chef d'œuvre, by and by; 
don't look at the reverse of the medal,
pray.—Did not I tell you, you were
the most impatient man in the world?”
It was true, that Mr. Temple was at this
instant most impatient to get possession
of the paper, for on the back of that
cover of the letter, on which the caricature
was drawn, the hand-writing of the
direction appeared to him ... He dared
scarcely believe his eyes—his hopes.
“Mrs. Crabstock, my Lady ...” 
said the footman, “is waiting.”

“I know, Sir,” said Lady Frances ...
“So, Caroline, you won't see the likeness.
—Very well; if I can't get a compliment,
I must be off.—When you draw a
caricature, I won't praise it.—Here!
Mr. Temple, one look, since you are
dying for it.”
“One look will not satisfy me;” cried
Mr. Temple, seizing the paper: “your
Ladyship must leave the drawing with us
till to morrow.”
“Us—must.—Given at our court
of St. James's.—Lord Oldborough's own
imperative style.”
“Imperative! no; humbly I beseech
your Ladyship, thus humbly,” cried Mr.
Temple, kneeling in jest, but keeping in
earnest fast hold of the paper.
“But why? Why?. ... Are you
acquainted with Lady Angelica? ...
I did not know you knew Lady Angelica.”
“It is excellent!—It is admirable—I
cannot let it go. ... This hand, that
seized it, long shall hold the prize.”

“The man's mad—But don't think
I'll give it to you—I would not give it
to my mother ... but I'll lend it to
you, if you'll tell me honestly why you
want it.”
“Honestly—I want to show it to a
particular friend, who will be delighted
with it.”
“Tell me who, this minute, or you
shall not have it.”
“Mrs. Crabstock, my Lady, bids me
say, the Duchess—.”
“The Duchess—The deuse!—if she's
come to the Duchess, I must go.—I
hope your man, Mrs. Percy, won't tell
Mrs. Crabstock he saw this gentleman
kneeling.”
“Mrs. Crabstock's getting out, my
Lady,” said the footman, returning.—
“Mr. Temple, for mercy's sake, get
up.”
“Never, till your Ladyship gives me
the drawing.”
“There! there! let me go—audacious!”—

“Good morning to you, Mrs. Percy.
—Good bye, Caroline.—Be at Lady
Jane's to night, for I'm to be there.”
Her Ladyship ran off, and met Mrs.
Crabstock on the stairs, with whom we
leave her to make her peace as she
pleases.
“My dear Temple, I believe you are
out of your senses,” said Alfred, “I never
saw any man so importunate about
a drawing, that is not worth a straw ...
trembling with eagerness, and kneeling!
—Caroline, what do you think Rosamond
would have thought of all this?”
“If she knew the whole, she would
have thought I acted well,” said Mr.
Temple.—“But come, I have business.”
Alfred took him into his study, and
there the whole affair was explained.—Great
was Alfred's astonishment ... Mr.
Temple had brought with him the specimen
of the forgery, to show to Alfred,
and, upon comparing it with the handwriting
on the cover of the letter on
which the caricature was drawn, the

similarity appeared to be strikingly exact.—The
cover, which had been stolen,
as Lady Frances Arlington said, from
Lady Trant's ridicule, was directed to
Captain Nuttall.—He was one of the
persons to whom forged letters had been
written, as appeared by the list which
Lord Oldborough had left with Mr.
Temple. The secretary was almost certain,
that his Lordship had never written
with his own hand to any Captain Nuttall; 
but this he could ask the moment
he should see Lord Oldborough again.—It
seemed as if this paper had never been
actually used as the cover of a letter, for
it had no post-mark, seal, or wafer.—Upon
further inspection, it was perceived,
that a t had been left out in the name
of Nuttall, and it appeared probable, that
the cover had been thrown aside, and a
new one written in consequence of this
omission.—But Alfred did not think it
possible, that Lady Trant could be the
forger of these letters, because he had
seen some of her Ladyship's notes of invitation

to Caroline, and they were written
in a wretched cramped hand.
“But that cramped hand might be
feigned to conceal the powers of penmanship,” 
said Mr. Temple.
“Well! granting her Ladyship's talents
were equal to the mere execution,
Alfred persisted in thinking she had not
abilities sufficient to invent or combine
all the parts of such a scheme—She
might be an accomplice, but she must
have had a principal—And who could
that principal be—?”
The same suspicion, the same person,
came at the same moment, into the heads
of both gentlemen, as they sat looking
at each other.
“There is an intimacy between them” 
—said Alfred—“Recollect all the pains
Lady Trant took for Mrs. Falconer
about English Clay—They ...”
“Mrs. Falconer!—But how could
she possibly get at Lord Oldborough's
private seal—a seal that is always locked
up—a seal never used to any common

letter, never to any but those written by
his own hand to some private friend,
and on some very particular occasion—Since
I have been with him I have not
seen him use that seal three times”—
“When and to whom, can you recollect?” 
said Alfred.
“I recollect!—I have it all!” exclaimed
Mr. Temple, striking the table
—“I have it ... But, Lady Frances
Arlington! I am sorry she is gone.”
“Why! what of her?—Lady Frances
can have nothing more to do with the
business?”
“She has a great deal more, I can
assure you—but without knowing it.”
“Of that I am certain, or all the
world would have known it long ago—but
... Tell me how?—”
“I recollect, at the time when I was
dangling after Lady Frances ... There's
good in every thing ... just before we
went down to Falconer-Court, her Ladyship
who, you know, has always some
reigning fancy, was distracted about

what she called, bread-seals—She took
the impression of seals off, with bread
... no matter how, but she did, and
used to torment me ... no—I thought
it a great pleasure at the time ... to
procure for her all the pretty seals I
could.”
“But, surely, you did not give her
Lord Oldborough's?”
“I!—not I!—how could you imagine
such a thing?”
“You were in love, and might have
forgot consequences.”
“A man in love may forget every
thing, I grant ... except his fidelity—No—I
never gave the seal—but I perfectly
recollect Lady Frances showing it
to me in her collection, and my asking
her how she came by it.”—
“And how did she?”
“From the cover of a note which the
Duke, her uncle, had received from
Lord Oldborough, and I, at the time,
remembered his Lordship's having written
it to the Duke of Greenwich on the

birth of his grandson. Lord Oldborough
had, upon a former occasion, affronted
his Grace by sending him a note sealed
with a wafer—this time his Lordship
took special care, and sealed it with his
private seal of honor.”
“Well! But how does this bring the
matter home to Mrs. Falconer?” said
Alfred.
“Stay—I am bringing it as near
home to her as possible—We all went
down to Falconer-Court together—And
there I remember Lady Frances had her
collection of bread-seals, and was daubing
and coloring them with vermillion
... and Mrs. Falconer was so anxious
about them—and Lady Frances gave her
several ... I must see Lady Frances
again directly, to inquire whether she
gave her, among the rest, Lord Oldborough's—I'll
go to Lady Jane Granville's
this evening on purpose—But
had I not better go this moment to Lady
Trant?”
Alfred advised, that having traced the

matter thus far, they should not hazard
giving any alarm to Lady Trant, or to
Mrs. Falconer, but should report to
Lord Oldborough what progress had
been made.
Mr. Temple accordingly went home,
to be in readiness for his Lordship's
return.—During Lord Oldborough's
drive from Windsor, the first exaltation
of indignant pride having subsided, and
his cool judgment reflecting upon what
had passed, he considered that, however
satisfactory to his own mind might be
the feeling of his innocence, the proofs
of it were necessary to satisfy the public; 
he saw that his character would be left
doubtful, and at the mercy of his enemies,
if he were in pique and resentment
hastily to resign, before he had
vindicated his integrity.—“If your
proofs be produced, my Lord!”—these
words recurred to him, and his anxiety
to obtain these proofs rose high—and
high was his satisfaction the moment he
saw his secretary; for, by the first glance

at Mr. Temple's countenance he perceived,
that some discovery had been
made.
Alfred, that night, received, through
Mr. Temple, his Lordship's request, that
he would obtain what further information
he could relative to the private seal,
in whatever way he thought most prudent.—His
Lordship trusted entirely to
his discretion—Mr. Temple was engaged
with other business.
Alfred went with Caroline to Lady
Jane Granville's, to meet Lady Frances
Arlington; he entered into conversation,
and by degrees brought her to his point,
playing all the time with her curiosity,
and humoring her childishness, while he
carried on his cross-examination.
At first she could not recollect any
thing about making the seals he talked
of—“It was a fancy that had passed—and
a past fancy,” she said, “was like
a past love, or a past beauty, good for
nothing but to be forgotten.”—However,

by proper leading of the witness, and
suggesting time, place, and circumstance,
he did bring to the fair lady's
mind all that he wanted her to remember.
“She could not conceive what
interest Mr. Percy could take in the
matter ... it was some jest about Mr.
Temple, she was sure ... Yes, she did
recollect a seal with a Cupid riding a
lion, that Mr. Temple gave her just
before they went to Falconer-Court—was
that what he meant?”
“No—but a curious seal”—(Alfred
described the device).
“Lord Oldborough's!—Yes, there
was some such odd seal ... But it was
not given to her by Mr. Temple—she
took that from a note to his uncle, the
Duke of Greenwich.”
“Yes—that Alfred said he knew; 
but what did her Ladyship do with it?”
“You know how I got it!—Bless
me, you seem to know every thing I
do and say—You know my affairs vastly

well—you act the conjurer admirably—pray,
can you tell me who I am to
marry?”—
“That I will—when your Ladyship
has told me to whom you gave that
seal?”—
“That I would, and welcome, if I
could recollect—but I really can't—If
you think I gave it to Mr. Temple, I
assure you, you are mistaken, you may
ask him.”
“I know your Ladyship did not give
it to Mr. Temple—But to whom did you
give it?”
“I remember now ... not to any
gentleman after all—you are positively
out—
“I gave it to Mrs. Falconer.”
“You are certain of that, Lady
Frances Arlington?”
“I am certain, Mr. Alfred Percy.”
“And how can you prove it to me,
Lady Frances?”
“The easiest way in the world ...
by asking Mrs. Falconer—Only I don't

go there now much, since Georgiana
and I have quarrelled—but what can
make you so curious about it?”
“That's a secret—May I ask, if your
Ladyship would know the seal again if
you saw it?—Is this any thing like the
impression?”—(showing her the seal on
the forged cover).
“The very same that I gave Mrs.
Falconer, I'll swear to it—I'll tell you
how I know it particularly. There's a
little outer rim here, with points to it,
which there is not to the other—I fastened
my bread-seal into an old setting of
my own, from which I had lost the stone—Mrs.
Falconer took a fancy to it,
among a number of others, so I let her
have it.”
“Now I have answered all your questions— 
Answer mine—Who am I to
marry?”
“Your Ladyship will marry whoever
... your Ladyship pleases.”
“That was an ambiguous answer,” 
she observed, “for that she pleased every

body.”—Her Ladyship was going to
run on with some further questions, but
Alfred, pretending that the oracle was
not permitted to answer more explicitly,
left her completely in the dark as to
what his meaning had been in this whole
conversation.
He reported progress to Lord Oldborough—and
his Lordship slept as
soundly this night as he did the night
after he had been attacked by the mob.
The next morning the first person he
desired to see was Mr. Falconer—his
Lordship sent for him into his cabinet.
“Mr. Commissioner Falconer, I promised
to give you notice whenever I
should see any probability of my going
out of power.”
“Good Heaven! my Lord,” exclaimed
the Commissioner, starting back— 
The surprise, the consternation were
real—Lord Oldborough had his eye
upon him to determine that point.
“Impossible, surely!—I hope. ...”
His hope flitted at the moment to the

Duke of Greenwich—but returned instantly—he
had made no terms ... had
missed his time—If Lord Oldborough
should go out of office, his place, his
pension, gone—utter ruin.
Lord Oldborough marked the vacillation
and confusion of his countenance,
and saw that he was quite unprepared.
“I hope ... Merciful Powers! I
trust ... I thought your Lordship had
triumphed over all your enemies, and
was firmer in favor and power than ever.
—What can have occurred ...?”
Without making any answer, Lord
Oldborough beckoned to the Commissioner
to approach nearer the window
where his Lordship was standing, and
then suddenly put into his hand the cover
with the forged hand-writing and seal.
“What am I to understand by this,
my Lord?” said the bewildered Commissioner,
turning it backwards and forwards
... “Major Spry!—I never saw
the man in my life ... May I ask, my

Lord, what I am to comprehend from
this?”
“I see, Sir, that you know nothing
of the business.”—
The whole was explained by Lord
Oldborough succinctly—The astonishment
and horror in the poor Commissioner's
countenance and gestures, and
still more, the eagerness with which he
begged to be permitted to try to discover
the authors of this forgery, were
sufficient proofs, that he had not the
slightest suspicion, that the guilt could
be traced to any of his own family.
Lord Oldborough's look, fixed on the
Commissioner, expressed what it had
once before expressed.
“Sir, from my soul, I pity you!” 
The Commissioner saw this look, and
wondered why Lord Oldborough should
pity him at a time when all his Lordship's
feelings should naturally be for
himself.
“My Lord, I would engage we shall
discover ... we shall trace it.”

“I believe that I have discovered ...
that I have traced it,” said Lord Oldborough—and
he sighed.
Now that sigh was more incomprehensible
to the Commissioner than all
the rest, and he stood with his lips open
for a moment, before he could utter,
“Why then resign, my Lord?”
“That is my affair,” said Lord Oldborough
—“Let us, if you please, Sir,
think of yours, for, probably, this is the
only time I shall ever more have it in
my power, to be of the least service to
you.”
“Oh, my Lord! My Lord, don't
say so,” said the Commissioner, quite
forgetting all his artificial manner, and
speaking naturally—“the last time you
shall have it in your power! ... Oh, my
dear Lord, don't say so!”
“My dear Sir, I must—it gives me
pain—you see it does.”
“At such a time as this, to think of
me instead of yourself ... My Lord, I

never knew you till this moment—so
well.”
“Nor I, you, Sir”—said Lord Old-borough—“ 
It is the more unfortunate
for us both, that our connexion and intercourse
must now for ever cease.”
“Never, never, my Lord, if you
were to go out of power to morrow ...
which Heaven, in it's mercy and justice,
forbid! ... I could never forget the
goodness ... I would never desert ...
in spite of all interest ... I should continue
... I hope your Lordship would
permit me to pay my duty ... all intercourse
could never cease.”
Lord Oldborough saw, and almost
smiled at the struggle between the courtier
and the man—the confusion in the
Commissioner's mind, between his feelings
and his interest. Partly his Lordship
relieved, and partly he pained Mr.
Falconer, by saying, in his firm tone,
“I thank you, Mr. Falconer—but all
intercourse must cease—After this hour
we meet no more. I beg you, Sir, to

collect your spirits—and to listen to me
calmly—Before this day is at an end,
you will understand why all further intercourse
between us would be useless
to your interest, and incompatible with
my honor.—Before many hours are
past, a blow will be struck, which will
go to your heart ... for I see you have
one ... and deprive you of the power of
thought—It is my wish to make that
blow fall as lightly upon you as possible.”
“Oh, my Lord, your resignation
would indeed be a blow, I could never
recover ... The bare apprehension deprives
me at this moment of all power of
thought, ... but still I hope.” ...
“Hear me, Sir, I beg, without interruption,—It
is my business to think
for you—Go immediately to the Duke of
Greenwich, make what terms with him
you can—make what advantage you can
of the secret of my approaching resignation,
a secret I now put in your power,
to communicate to his Grace—and which

no one yet suspects—I having told it to
no one living but to yourself.—Go
quickly to the Duke—time presses—I
wish you success—and a better patron
than I have been, than my principles
would permit me to be—Farewell, Mr.
Falconer.”
The Commissioner moved towards the
door, when Lord Oldborough said,
“Time presses,”—but the Commissioner
stopped—turned back—could not go ...
The tears—real tears—rolled down his
cheeks—Lord Oldborough went forward,
and held out his hand to him— 
The Commissioner kissed it, with the
reverence with which he would have
kissed his sovereign's hand, and bowing,
he involuntarily backed to the door, as
if quitting the presence of Majesty.
“It is a pity that man was bred a
mere courtier, and that he is cursed with
a family, on none of whom there is any
dependance”—thought Lord Oldborough—as
the door closed upon the Commissioner
for ever.

Lord Oldborough delayed an hour
purposely, to give Mr. Falconer advantage
of the day with the Duke of Greenwich:
then ordered his carriage, and
drove ... to Mrs. Falconer's.
Great was her surprise at the minister's
entrance.
..“Concerned the Commissioner was
not at home.”
“My business is with Mrs. Falconer.”
“My Lord ... your Lordship, ...
the honor and the pleasure, of a visit ...
Georgiana, my dear.” ...
Mrs. Falconer nodded to her daughter,
who most unwillingly ... and as if dying
with curiosity, retired—
The smile died away upon Mrs. Falconer's
lips, as she observed the stern
gravity of Lord Oldborough's countenance—She
moved a chair towards his
Lordship—he stood, and leaning on the
back of the chair, paused, as he looked
at her.——
“What is to come?—Cunningham
perhaps!” ... thought Mrs. Falconer—

“or perhaps something about John—When
will he speak?. ... I can't ...
I must.” ...
“I am happy to see your Lordship
looking so well.”—
“Is Mrs. Falconer acquainted with
Lady Trant?”—
“Lady Trant ... Yes, my Lord.”
“Mercy! Is it possible!—No, for
her own sake she would not betray me,” 
... thought Mrs. Falconer.
“Intimately?” said Lord Oldborough.
“Intimately. ... That is as one's
intimate with every body ... of a certain
sort ... one visits ... but no farther
... I can't say I have the honor” ...
Mrs. Falconer was so distracted by
seeing Lord Oldborough searching in his
pocketbook for a letter, that in spite of
all her presence of mind, she knew not
what she said; and all her presence of
countenance failed, when Lord Oldborough
placed before her eyes, the cover
directed to Captain Nuttall.

“Can you guess how this came into
Lady Trant's possession, Madam?”
“I protest, my Lord,” ... her voice
trembling, in spite of her utmost efforts
to command it—“I don't know, ...
nor can I conceive” ...
“Nor can you conceive by whom it
was written, Madam?”
“It appears,. ... It bears a resemblance
... some likeness ... as far as I
recollect ... but it is so long since I
have seen your Lordship's own hand ...
And hands are so like ... sometimes ...
And I am so bad a judge. ... Every
hand, all fashionable hands, are so like.”
“And every seal, like every seal?”—said
Lord Oldborough, placing the counterfeit
seal before Mrs. Falconer.—
“I recommend it to you, Madam, to
waste no further time in evasion: but to
deliver to me the counterpart of this seal,
the impression of my private seal, which
you had from Lady Frances Arlington.”
“A mere bread seal! ... her Ladyship
surely has not said,. ... I really

have lost it, ... if I ever had it ...
I declare your Lordship terrifies me so,
by this strange mode” ...
“I recommend it to you once more,
Madam, and for the last time, I earnestly
recommend it to you, to deliver up to me
that seal, for I have sworn to my belief,
that it is in your possession; a warrant
has in consequence been issued, to seize
and search your papers, ... the persons
who are to execute it are below—The
purport of my present visit ... of which
I should gladly have been spared the
pain, is to save you, Madam, from the
public disgrace of having a warrant executed.—Do
not faint, Madam, if you
can avoid it, nor go into hysterics—for
if you do—I must retire—And the warrant
must be executed—your best course
is to open that desk, to give me up the
seal, to make to me at this instant a full
confession of all you know of this transaction—If
you do thus,—for your
husband's sake, Madam, I will, as far as
I can consistently with what is due to

myself, spare you the shame of an
arrest.”—
Mrs. Falconer, with trembling hands,
unlocked the desk, delivered the seal.
“And a letter which I see in this same
hand writing, Madam, if you please.”—
She gave it—And then unable to
support herself longer, sunk upon a sofa,—But
she neither fainted nor screamed,—She
was aware of the consequences—Lord
Oldborough opened the window,
to give her air—She was relieved by a
burst of tears—and was silent—and
nothing was heard but her sobs, which
she endeavored to suppress in vain—She
was more relieved on looking up by
one glance at Lord Oldborough's countenance,
where she saw compassion
working strongly.—
But before she could take any advantage
of it, the expression was changed,
the feeling was controlled, he was conscious
of it's weakness—he recollected
what public justice, and justice to his
own character required—he recollected

all the treachery, the criminality, of
which she had been guilty.
“Madam, you are not now in a condition
I see to explain yourself further,—I
will relieve you from my presence—my
reproaches you will never hear—But I
shall expect from you, before one hour,
such an avowal in writing of this whole
transaction, as may, with the written confession
of Lady Trant, afford the proofs
which are due to my Sovereign, and to
the public, of my integrity.”
Mrs. Falconer bowed her head,—covered
her face—clasped her hands in
agony; as Lord Oldborough retired, she
sprang up, followed to throw herself at
his feet, yet without knowing what she
could say.
“The Commissioner is innocent!—If
you forsake him he is undone—All, all of
us, utterly ruined;—Oh, Georgiana!
Georgiana! where are you? speak for
me!”
Georgiana was in an inner apartment,
trying on a new robe, à la Georgienne.

“Whatever you may wish further to
say to me, Madam,” said Lord Oldborough,
disengaging himself from her,
and passing decidedly on, before Georgiana
appeared—“You will put in
writing, and let me have within this hour—or
never.”
Within that hour, Commissioner Falconer
brought, for Lord Oldborough,
the paper his wife had drawn up—but
the Commissioner was obliged to deliver
it to Mr. Temple, for Lord Oldborough
had so ordered, and his Lordship persevered
in refusing to see him more—Mrs.
Falconer's paper was worded with
all the art and address of which she was
mistress, and all the pathos she could
command—Lord Oldborough looked
only for facts—these he marked with his
pencil, and observed where they corroborated
and where they differed from Lady
Trant's confession, which Mr. Temple
had been charged to obtain during his
Lordship's visit to Mrs. Falconer.—The
greater part of the night Lord Old-borough

and Mr. Alfred Percy were
employed arranging these documents, so
as to put the proofs in the clearest and
shortest form, to be laid before his Majesty
the succeeding day.
It appeared, that Mrs. Falconer had
been first tempted to these practices by
the distress for money, into which extravagant
entertainments—or, as she stated,
the expenses incident to her situation—expenses
which far exceeded her income,
had led her. It was supposed, from her
having kept open house at times for the
minister, that she and the Commissioner
had great influence; she had been applied
to, presents had been offered, and
she had long withstood. But, at length,
Lady Trant acting in concert with her,
they had been supplied with information
by a clerk in one of the offices, a relation
of Lady Trant, who was a vain, incautious
youth, and, it seems, did not know
the use made of his indiscretion—He
told what promotions he heard spoken of—what
commissions were making out—


The ladies prophesied, and their prophecies
being accomplished, they gained
credit. For some time they kept themselves
behind the scenes—and many,
applying to A.B.—and dealing with they
did not know whom, paid for promotion,
which would have come unpaid for—Others
paid and were never promoted,
and wrote letters of reproach—Captain
Nuttal was among these, and he it was,
who, finding himself duped, first stirred
in the business, and by means of an
active member of opposition, to whom he
made known his secret grievance, brought
the whole to light.
The proofs arranged ... (and Lord
Oldborough never slept till they were perfected)
he reposed tranquilly—The next
day, asking an audience of his Majesty,
he simply laid the papers on his Majesty's
table, observing, that he had been so
fortunate as to succeed in tracing the
forgery, and that he trusted these papers
contained all the necessary proofs.
His Lordship bowed and retired instantly,

leaving his Majesty to examine
the papers alone.
The resolution to resign his ministerial
station, had long been forming in Lord
Oldborough's mind. It was not a resolution
taken suddenly in pride or pique, but
after reflection, and upon strong reasons.
It was a measure which he had long been
revolving in his secret thoughts.—During
the enthusiasm of political life, the
proverbial warnings against the vanity
of ambition, and the danger of dependance
on the favor of princes, had passed
on his ear but as a school-boy's lesson,
a phrase ‘to point a moral, or adorn a
tale.’ He was not a reading man, and
the maxims of books he disregarded or
disbelieved; but in the observations he
made for himself he trusted; the lessons
he drew from life were never lost upon
him, and he acted in consequence of
that which he believed, with a decision,
vigor, and invariability, seldom found
even among philosophers.—Of late
years he had, in real life, seen striking

instances of the treachery of courtiers,
and had felt some symptoms of insecurity
in the smile of princes.—Fortune had
been favorable to him—she was fickle—he
feared her—he determined to quit her
before she should change—Ambition, it
is true, had tempted him; he had risen
to her highest pinnacle, he would not
be hurled from high, he would descend
voluntarily, and with dignity.—Lord
Oldborough's habits of thought were as
different as possible from those of a metaphysician; 
he had reflected less upon
the course of his own mind, than upon
almost any other subject; but he knew
human nature practically; disquisitions
on habit, passion, or the sovereign good,
were unread by him, nor, in the course
of his life, had he ever formed a system,
moral or prudential; but the same penetration,
the same longanimity, which enabled
him to govern the affairs of a great
nation, gave him, when his attention
turned towards himself, a prévoyance for
his own happiness.—In the meridian

of life, he had cherished ambition as the
only passion, that could supply him with
motive strong enough to call great
powers into great action. But of late
years he had felt something, not only of
the waywardness of fortune, but of the
approaches of age—not in his mind, but
in his health, which had suffered by the
exertions of his mind. The attacks of
hereditary gout had become more violent,
and more frequent. If he lived,
these would, probably, often incapacitate
him, at seasons, from his arduous
ministerial duties—Much, that he did
well, must be ill done by deputy—He
had ever reprobated the practice of
leaving the business of the nation to be
done by clerks and underlings in office.—Yet
to this the minister, however able,
however honest, must come at last, if
he persist in engrossing business and
power, beyond what an individual can
wield.—Love for his country, a sense of
his own honor, integrity, and consistency,
here combined to determine this

great minister to retire while it was yet
time, to secure, at once, the dignity
and happiness of the evening of life—The
day had been devoted to good and
high purposes—that was enough—he
could now, self-satisfied and full of honor,
bid adieu to ambition.—This resolution,
once formed, was fixed. In vain
even his sovereign endeavored to dissuade
him from carrying it into execution.
When the King had examined the
papers, which Lord Oldborough had laid
before him, his Majesty sent for his
Lordship again, and the moment the
minister entered the cabinet, his Majesty
expressed his perfect satisfaction in seeing,
that his Lordship had, with so little
trouble, and with his usual ability, got to
the bottom of this affair.
What was to be done next?—The
Duke of Greenwich was to be summoned—His
Grace was in astonishment,
when he saw the papers which contained
Lord Oldborough's complete vindication,

and the crimination of Mrs. Falconer—Through
the whole, as he read on, his
Grace had but one idea, viz. “Commissioner
Falconer has deceived me with
false intelligence of the intended resignation.”—Not
one word was said by
Lord Oldborough to give his Grace
hope of that event—till the member of
opposition by whom the forged letters
had been produced, till all those who
knew or had heard any thing of the transaction,
were clearly and fully apprised
of the truth—After this was established,
and that all saw Lord Oldborough
clear and bright in honor, and, at
least apparently, as firm in power as he
had ever been, to the astonishment of
his sovereign his Lordship begged permission
to resign.
Whatever might have been the effect
of misrepresentation to lower Lord Oldborough's
favor, at the moment when he
spoke of retiring, his King recollected
all his past services; all that must, in
future, be hazarded and lost in parting

with such a minister! so eminent in
abilities, of such tried integrity, of such
fidelity, such attachment to his person,
such a zealous supporter of royalty, such
a favorite with his people, so successful
as well as so able a minister! Never was
he so much valued as at this moment.
All his sovereign's early attachment returned
in full strength and warmth.
“No, my Lord, you must not—you
will not leave me!”
These simple words, spoken with the
warmth of the heart, touched Lord Oldborough
more than can be told. It was
difficult to resist them from a sovereign—especially
when he saw tears in the
eyes of the monarch whom he loved—
But his resolution was taken—He
thanked his Majesty, not with the commonplace
thanks of courtiers, but with
his whole heart and soul he thanked his
Majesty for this gracious condescension—this
testimony of approbation—these
proofs of sensibility to his attachment,
which paid—overpaid him, in a moment,

for the labors of a life—The recollection
of them would be the glory, the solace
of his age—could never leave his memory
while life lasted—would, he thought, be
present to him, if he should retain his
senses, in his dying moment—But—he
was, in the midst of this strong feeling,
firm to the resolution his reason had
taken.—He humbly represented, that
he had waited for a favorable time, when
the affairs of the country were in a prosperous
train, when there were few difficulties
to embarrass those whom his
Majesty might name to succeed to his
place at the head of administration—There
were many who were ambitious
of that station—Zeal, talents, and the
activity of youth, were at his Majesty's
command. For himself, he found it
necessary for his health and happiness,
to retire from public business; and to
resign the arduous trust, with which he
had been honored.
“My Lord, if I must accept of your
resignation, I must—but I do it with

regret—Is there any thing your Lordship
wishes ... any thing you will name,
for yourself or your friends, that I can
do, to show my sense of your services
and merit?”
“For myself, your Majesty's bounty
has left me nothing to wish.”
“For your friends then, my Lord?—Let
me have the satisfaction of obliging
you through them.”
Nothing could be more gracious, or
more gratifying than the whole of this
parting audience.—It was Lord Oldborough's
last audience.
The news of his resignation, quickly
whispered at Court, was not that day
publicly known or announced. The next
morning his Lordship's levee was crowded
beyond example in the memory of
ministers. Mr. Temple, by his Lordship's
order, announced as soon as possible
the minister's having resigned.—All
were in astonishment—many in sorrow—some
few—a very few of the most insignificant
of the crowd, persons incapable

of generous sympathy, who thought they
could follow their own paltry interests
unnoticed, left the room in consequence
of Mr. Temple's information, without
paying their farewell respects to this
great minister ... minister now no
more.
The moment he appeared, there was
sudden silence.—All eyes were fixed upon
him, every one pressing to get into the
circle.
“Gentlemen, thank you for these
marks of attention—of regard—Mr.
Temple has told you ... you know,
my friends, that I am a man without
power.”—
“We know,” answered a distinguished
gentleman, “that you are Lord Oldborough.—With
or without power, the
same in the eyes of your friends, and of
the British nation.”
Lord Oldborough bowed low, and looked
gratified.—His Lordship then went
round the circle with an air more cheerful,
more free from reserve, than usual;

with something in his manner more of
sensibility, but nothing less of dignity.
All who merited distinction, he distinguished
by some few appropriate words,
which each remembered afterwards, and
repeated to their families and friends.
He spoke or listened to each individual
with the attention of one, who is courting,
not quitting popularity. Free from
that restraint and responsibility, which
his public and ministerial duties had imposed
upon him, he now entered into the
private concerns of all, and gave his parting
assistance or counsel.—He noted all
grievances—registered all promises that
ought to be recommended to the care of
his successor in office. The wishes of
many, to whom he had forborne to give
any encouragement, he now unexpectedly
fulfilled and surpassed. When all
were satisfied, and had nothing more to
ask, or to hope, from him, they yet deayed,
and parted from Lord Oldborough
with difficulty and regret.—
A proof that justice commands more

than any other quality, the respect and
gratitude of mankind.—Take time and
numbers into the calculation, and all discover,
in their turn, the advantage of
this virtue. This minister, a few regretted
instances excepted,—had shown no
favor, but strict justice, in his patronage.
All Lord Oldborough's requests for his
friends were granted, all his recommendations
attended to; it was grateful to
him to feel, that his influence lasted after
his power had ceased. Though the sun
had apparently set, it's parting rays continued
to brighten and cheer the prospect.
Under a new minister, Mr. Temple
declined accepting of the embassy, which
had been offered to him. Remuneration
suitable to his services, and to the high
terms, in which Lord Oldborough had
spoken of his merit, was promised; and
without waiting to see in what form, or
manner, this promise would be accomplished,
the secretary asked, and obtained
permission to accompany his revered

master to his retirement. Alfred Percy,
zealous and ardent in Lord Oldborough's
service, the more this great man's character
had risen upon his admiration, had
already hastened to the country to prepare
every thing at Clermont-Park for his reception.—By
his orders, that establishment
had been retrenched; by Alfred Percy's
activity it was restored.—Services,
which the richest nobleman in the land
could have purchased, or the highest have
commanded, Alfred was proud to pay as
a voluntary tribute to a noble character.
Lord Oldborough set out for the country
at a very early hour in the morning,
and no one previously knew his intentions,
except Mr. Temple. He was desirous
to avoid what it had been whispered
was the design of the people, to attend
him in crowds through the streets of the
metropolis.
As they drove out of town, Lord
Oldborough recollected, that in some
account either of the Duke of Marlborough,
or the Duke of Ormond's leaving

London, after his dismission from court,
it is said, that of all those whom the
Duke had served, all those who had
courted and flattered him in the time of
his prosperity and power, none showed
any gratitude, or attachment, excepting
one page, who appeared at the coach
door as his master was departing, and
gave some signs of genuine sorrow and
respect.
“I am fortunate,” said Lord Oldborough,
“in having few complaints to
make of ingratitude.—I make none.—The
few I might make,”—continued his
Lordship, who now rewarded Mr. Temple's
approved fidelity, by speaking to
him with the openness and confidence of
friendship,—“the few I might make have
been chiefly caused by errors of my own
in the choice of the persons I have
obliged.—I thank Heaven, however, that
upon the whole, I leave public life, not
only with a good conscience, but with a
good opinion of human nature.—I speak
not of courtiers,—there is nothing of nature

about them,—they are what circumstances
make them.—Were I to live
my life over again, the hours spent with
courtiers are those, which I should most
wish to be spared. But by a statesman,
or a minister, these cannot be avoided.—For
myself, in resigning my ministerial
office, I might say, as Charles the Fifth,
when he abdicated, said to his successor,
‘I leave you a heavy burthen; for since
my shoulders have borne it, I have not
passed one day exempt from disquietude.’
“But from the first moment I started
in the course of ambition, I was aware
that tranquillity must be sacrificed, and
to the last moment I abided by the
sacrifice. The good I had in view, I
have reached,—the prize, at which I
aimed, I have won.—The glory of England
was my object,—her approbation,
my reward.—Generous people!—If
ever I bore toil or peril in your cause, I
am rewarded, and never shall you hear
me say, that ‘the unfruitful glories please

no more.’—And the esteem of my sovereign!—I
possess it.—It is indefeasibly
mine.—His favor, his smiles, are his to
give, or take away.—Never shall he
hear from me the wailings of disappointed
ambition.”—