

A few days after the departure of M.
de Tourville, Commissioner Falconer, a
friend, or at least a relation of Mr.
Percy's, came to pay him a visit. As
the Commissioner looked out of the window
and observed the Dutch carpenter,
who was passing by with tools under his
arm, he began to talk of the late shipwreck.
Mr. Falconer said he had heard
much of the successful exertions and hospitality
of the Percy family on that occasion
—regretted that he had himself been
called to town just at that time—asked
many questions about the passengers on
board the vessel, and when M. de Tourville
was described to him, deplored that
Mr. Percy had never thought of trying
to detain this foreigner a few days
longer.

For—argued the Commissioner, though
M. de Tourville might not be an accredited
chargè d' affaires yet, since he was
a person in some degree in an official
capacity, and intrusted with secret negotiations,
government might have wished
to know something about him, and at all
events, added the Commissioner, with a
shrewd smile, it would have been a fine
way of paying our court to a certain great
man.
“So, Commissioner, you still put
your trust in great men,” said Mr. Percy.
“Not in all great men, but in some,” 
replied the Commissioner—“for instance
in your old friend, Lord Oldborough,
who, I'm happy to inform you, is just
coming into our neighbourhood to Clermont-Park,
of which he has at last completed
the purchase, and has sent down
his plate and pictures.—Who knows but
he may make Clermont-Park his summer
residence, instead of his place in Essex?
and if he should, there's no saying of
what advantage it might be, for I have it

from the very best authority, that his
lordship's influence in a certain quarter
is greater than ever. Of course, Mr.
Percy, you will wait upon Lord Oldborough,
when he comes to this part of
the country?”
“No, I believe not:” said Mr. Percy,
“I have no connexion with him now—”
“But you were so intimate with him
abroad,” expostulated Mr. Falconer.
“It is five and twenty years since I
knew him abroad,” said Mr. Percy,
and from all I have heard, he is an altered
man. When I was intimate with
Lord Oldborough, he was a generous,
open-hearted youth. He has since become
a politician, and I fear he has sold
himself for a ribbon to the demon of ambition.”
“No matter to whom he has sold himself,
or for what,” replied the Commissioner,
“that is his affair, not ours. We
must not be too nice. He is well disposed
towards you, and, my dear Sir,
I should take it as a very particular favor,

if you would introduce me to his
lordship.”
“With great pleasure,” said Mr. Percy,
“the very first opportunity.”
“We must make opportunities—not
wait for them,” said the Commissioner,
smiling.—“Let me entreat that you will
pay your respects to his lordship as soon
as he comes into the country. It really
is but civil—And take me in your hand.”
“With all my heart,” said Mr. Percy,
—“but mine shall be only a visit of
civility.”
Well satisfied with having obtained
this promise, Commissioner Falconer departed.
Besides his general desire to be acquainted
with the great, the Commissioner
had particular reasons for wishing to
be introduced at this time to Lord Oldborough,
and he had a peculiar cause for
being curious about M. de Tourville.— 
Mr. Falconer was in possession of the
packet which that diplomatist had lost.
It had been found by one of the Commissioner's

sons, Mr John Falconer, or rather
by Mr. John Falconer's dog Neptune,
who brought it to his master, when
he was bathing in the sea the day after
the shipwreck. It had been thrown by
the tide among some sea-weed, where it
was entangled, and where it lay hid till it
was discovered by the dog. Mr. John Falconer
had carried it home, and boasting of
his dog's sagacity, had produced it rather
as a proof of the capital manner in which
he had taught Neptune to fetch and carry,
than from any idea or care for the value
of the packet. John Falconer being
one of those men who care for very little
in this world,
“Whilst they have their dog and their gun.”
Not so the Commissioner, who immediately
began to examine the papers
with serious curiosity, to discover whether
they could by any means be productive
of advantage to him or his family.
The sea-water had injured only the outer
pages; but though the inner were not

in the least damaged, it was difficult to
make out their contents, for they were
written in cipher. Commissioner Falconer,
however, was skilled in the art of
deciphering, and possessed all the ingenuity
and patience necessary for the business.
The title, superscription, and
signature of the paper were obliterated, so
that he could not guess from whom they
came, or to whom they were addressed; 
he perceived that they were political, but
of what degree of importance they might
be he could not decide, till he heard
of M. de Tourville the diplomatist and of
his distress at the loss of this packet.
The Commissioner then resolved to devote
the evening, ensuing day, and night,
if requisite, to the business, that he might
have it in readiness to carry with him
when he went to pay his respects to Lord
Oldborough. Foreseeing that something
might be made of this intercepted despatch,
and fearing that if he mentioned
it to Mr. Percy, that gentleman might
object to opening the papers, Mr. Falconer

left Percy-Hall without giving the
most remote hint of the treasure which
he possessed, or of the use that he intended
to make of his discovery.
Early in the ensuing week Mr. Percy
went to pay his visit of civility, and Mr.
Falconer his visit of policy, to Lord Oldborough.
His lordship was so much altered,
that it was with difficulty Mr.
Percy recollected in him any traces of
the same person. The Lord Oldborough
he had formerly known was gay,
gallant, and rather dissipated, of a frank,
joyous air and manner. The Lord Oldborough,
whom he now saw, was a serious,
reserved-looking personage, with
a face, in which the lines of thought and
care were deeply marked; large eyebrows,
vigilant eyes, with an expression
of ability and decision in his whole countenance,
but not of tranquillity, or of
happiness. His manner was well bred,
but rather cold and formal: his conversation
circumspect, calculated to draw
forth the opinions, and profit by the information

of others, rather than to assert
or display his own. He seemed to converse,
to think, to live, not with any enjoyment
of the present, but with a view
to some future object, about which he
was constantly anxious.
Mr. Percy and Mr. Falconer both observed
Lord Oldborough attentively during
this visit: Mr. Percy studied him
with philosophical curiosity, to discover
what changes had been made in his lordship's
character by the operation of ambition,
and to determine how far that passion
had contributed to his happiness;— 
Mr. Falconer studied him with the interested
eye of a man of the world, eager
to discern what advantage could be made
by ministering to that ambition, and to
decide whether there was about his lordship
the making of a good patron.
There was, he thought, the right
twist, if he had but skill to follow, and
humor it in the working; but this was a
task of much nicety. Lord Oldborough
appeared to be aware of the Commissioner's

views, and was not disposed to burden
himself with new friends. It seemed
easy to go to a certain point with his
lordship, but impossible to get further,
easy to obtain his attention, but scarcely
possible to gain his confidence.
The Commissioner, however, had
many resources ready; many small
means of fastening himself both on his
lordship's private and public interests.
He determined to begin first with the
despatch which he had been deciphering.
With this view he led Mr. Percy
to speak of the shipwreck, and of M. de
Tourville. Lord Oldborough's attention
was immediately awakened; and
when Mr. Falconer perceived, that the
regret for not having seen M. de Tourville,
and the curiosity to know the nature
of his secret negociations had been
sufficiently excited, the Commissioner
quitted the subject, as he could go no
farther whilst restrained by Mr. Percy's
presence. He took the first opportunity
of leaving the room with his lordship's

nephew, Col. Hauton, to look at some
horses, which were to run at the ensuing
races.
Left alone with Mr. Percy, Lord
Oldborough looked less reserved, for he
plainly saw,—indeed Mr. Percy plainly
showed, that he had nothing to ask from
the great man, but that he came only to
see his friend.
“Many years since we met, Mr.
Percy,” said his lordship, sitting down
and placing his chair for the first time
without considering whether his face or
his back were to the light.—“A great
many years since we met, Mr. Percy.
And yet, I should not think so from
your appearance; you do not look as if.
... shall I say it? ... five and twenty years
had passed since that time. But you
have been leading an easy life in the
country, ... the happiest life. ... I envy
you.”
Mr. Percy, thinking that these were
words of course, the mere polite cant of
a courtier to a country-gentleman,

smiled, and replied, that few, who were
acquainted with their different situations
in the world, would imagine that Mr.
Percy could be an object of envy to
Lord Oldborough, a statesman at the
summit of favor and fortune.
“Not the summit,”—said Lord Oldborough,
sighing;—“and if I were even
at the summit, it is, you know, a dangerous
situation. Fortune's wheel never
stands still—the highest point therefore
the most perilous.”—His Lordship sighed
again as deeply as before.—Then
spoke, or rather led to the subject, of
general politics, of which Mr. Percy
gave his opinions with freedom and openness,
yet without ever forgetting the
respect due to Lord Oldborough's situation.
His Lordship seemed sensible
of this attention, sometimes nodded, and
sometimes smiled, as Mr. Percy spoke
of public men or measures; but when
he expressed any sentiment of patriotism,
or of public virtue, Lord Oldborough
took to his snuff-box, shook and

levelled the snuff, and if he listened,
listened as to words superfluous and irrelevant.
When Mr. Percy uttered any
principle favorable to the liberty of the
press, or of the people, his lordship
would take several pinches of snuff rapidly
to hide the expression of his countenance; 
if the topics were continued,
his averted eyes and compressed lips
showed disapprobation, and the difficulty
he felt in refraining from reply.
From reply, however, he did absolutely
refrain; and after a pause of a few moments,
with a smile, in a softer and
lower voice than his usual tone, he
asked Mr. Percy some questions about
his family, and turned the conversation
again to domestic affairs;—expressed surprise,
that a man of Mr. Percy's talents
should live in such absolute retirement,
and seeming to forget what he had said
himself but half an hour before, of the
pains and dangers of ambition, and all
that Mr. Percy had said of his love of
domestic life, appeared to take it for

granted, that Mr. Percy would be glad
to shine in public, if opportunity were
not wanting. Upon this supposition,
his lordship dexterously pointed out
ways by which he might distinguish himself; 
threw out assurances of his own
good wishes, compliments to his talents,
and, in short, sounded his heart, still
expecting to find corruption or ambition
at the bottom.—But none was to be
found—Lord Oldborough was convinced
of it—and surprised.—Perhaps his esteem
for Mr. Percy's understanding fell some
degrees—he considered him as an eccentric
person, acting from unaccountable
motives.—But still he respected
him as that rarest of all things in a politician's
eye—a really honest independent
man. He believed also that Mr.
Percy had some regard for him; and whatever
portion it might be, it was valuable
and extraordinary—for it was disinterested; 
—besides, they could never cross
in their objects—and as Mr. Percy lived
out of the world, and had no connexion

with any party, he was a perfectly safe
man. All these thoughts acted so powerfully
upon Lord Oldborough, that he
threw aside his reserve, in a manner
which would have astonished and delighted
Mr. Falconer.—Mr. Percy was
astonished, but not delighted—he saw
a noble mind corroded and debased by
ambition—virtuous principle, generous
feeling, stifled—a powerful, capacious
understanding distorted beyond recovery
—a soul once expatiating, and full of
high thoughts, now confined to a span
—bent down to low concerns—imprisoned
in the precincts of a court.—
“You pity me,” said Lord Oldborough,
who seemed to understand Mr.
Percy's thoughts—“you pity me—I
pity myself.—But such is ambition, and
I cannot live without it—once and always
it's slave.”
“A person of such a strong mind as
Lord Oldborough could emancipate
himself from any slavery—even that of
habit.”

“Yes, if he wished to break through
it—but he does not.”
“Can he have utterly—”
“Lost his taste for freedom? you
would say—Yes—utterly—I see you
pity me,” said his Lordship with a bitter
smile—“and,” added he, rising
proudly, “I am unused to be pitied,
and I am awkward, I fear, under the
obligation.”—Resuming his friendly aspect,
however, in a moment or two, he
followed Mr. Percy, who had turned to
examine a fine picture.
“Yes; a Corregio.—You are not
aware, my dear Sir,” continued he— 
“that between the youth you knew at
Paris, and the man who has now the
honor to speak to you, there is nothing
in common—absolutely nothing—except
regard for Mr. Percy. You had always
great knowledge of character, I remember; 
but with respect to my own, you
will recollect, that I have the advantage
of possessing la carte du pays.—You are
grown quite a philosopher, I find.—And

so am I, in my own way. In short, to
put the question between us at rest for
ever, there is nothing left for me in life
but ambition. Now let us go to Corregio,
or what you please.”
Mr. Percy followed his lordship's lead
immediately to Italy, to France, to Paris,
and talking over old times and
youthful days, the conversation grew
gay and familiar.—Lord Oldborough
seemed enlivened and pleased, and yet,
as if it was a reminiscence of a former
state of existence, he often repeated— 
“Ah! those were young days—very
young—I was a boy then—quite a
boy.”—At last, Mr. Percy touched
upon love and women, and, by accident,
mentioned an Italian lady whom they
had known abroad.—A flash of pale anger,
almost of phrenzy, passed across
Lord Oldborough's countenance, he
turned short, darted full on Mr. Percy
a penetrating, imperious, interrogative
look.—Answered by the innocence, the
steady openness of Mr. Percy's countenance,

Lord Oldborough grew red instantly,
—and, conscious of his unusual
change of color, stood actually abashed.— 
A moment afterward, commanding his
agitation, he forced his whole person to
an air of tranquillity—took up the red
book, which lay upon his table—walked
deliberately to a window, and, looking
earnestly through his glass, asked if Mr.
Percy could recollect who was member
for some borough in the neighbourhood?
The conversation after this, languished; 
and though some efforts were made, it
never recovered the tone of ease and
confidence. Both parties felt relieved
from an indefinable sort of constraint by
the return of the gentlemen. Mr. Falconer
begged Mr. Percy to go and look
at a carriage of a new construction,
which the colonel had just brought from
town; and the colonel accompanying
Mr. Percy, the stage was thus left clear
for the Commissioner to open his business
about M. de Tourville's packet.
He did it with so much address, and

with so little circumlocution, that Lord
Oldborough immediately comprehended
how important the papers might be to
him, and how necessary it was to secure
the decipherer. When Mr. Percy returned,
he found the Commissioner and his
lordship in earnest and seemingly confidential
conversation. Both Mr. Falconer
and Mr. Percy were now pressed to stay
to dine and to sleep at Clermont-Park; 
an invitation which Mr. Percy declined,
but which the Commissioner accepted.
In the evening, when the company
who had dined at Clermont-Park were
settled to cards and music, Lord Oldborough,
after walking up and down the
room with the Commissioner in silence
for some minutes, retired with him into
his study, rang, and gave orders that
they should not be interrupted on any
account till supper. The servant informed
his lordship, that such and such persons,
whom he had appointed, were waiting.
—“I cannot possibly see them till
to morrow”—naming the hour.—The servant

laid on the table before his lordship
a huge parcel of letters.—Lord Oldborough,
with an air of repressed impatience,
bid the man send his secretary,
Mr. Drakelow,—looked over the letters,
wrote with a pencil, and with great dispatch,
a few words on the back of each— 
met Mr. Drakelow as he entered the
room,—put the unfolded letters all together
into his hands—
“The answers, on the back—to be
made out in form—ready for signature
at six to morrow.”—
“Yes, my lord—May I ask. ...”
“Ask nothing, Sir, if you please—I
am busy—you have your directions—”
Mr. Drakelow bowed submissive, and
made his exit with great celerity.
“Now to our business, my dear Sir,” 
said his lordship, seating himself at the
table with Mr. Falconer, who immediately
produced M. de Tourville's papers.—
It is not at this period of our story necessary
to state precisely their contents;

it is sufficient to say, that they opened to
Lord Oldborough a scene of diplomatic
treachery abroad, and of ungrateful duplicity
at home. From some of the intercepted
letters he discovered that certain
of his colleagues, who appeared to
be acting along with him with the utmost
cordiality, were secretly combined
against him; and were carrying on an
underplot, to deprive him at once of popularity,
favor, place, and power.—The
strength, firmness,—hardness of mind,
which Lord Oldborough exhibited at
the moment of this discovery, perfectly
amazed Mr. Falconer.–His Lordship gave
no sign of astonishment, uttered no indignant
exclamation, nor betrayed any
symptoms of alarm; but he listened with
motionless attention, when Mr. Falconer
from time to time interrupted his reading,
and put himself to great expense of
face and lungs to express his abhorrence
of “such inconceivable treachery.” Lord
Oldborough maintained an absolute silence,
and waiting till the Commissioner

had exhausted himself in invective— 
would point with his pencil to the line in
the paper where he had left off, and
calmly say ... “Have the goodness
to go on—Let us proceed, Sir, if you
please.”—
The Commissioner went on till he
came to the most important and interesting
point, and there glancing his eye on
his intended patron's profile, which was
towards him,—he suddenly stopped.— 
Lord Oldborough, raising his head from
the hand on which it leaned, turned his
full front face upon Mr. Falconer.
“Let me hear the whole, if you
please, Sir.—To form a judgment upon
any business, it is necessary to have the
whole before us.—You need not fear to
shock my feelings, Sir.—I wish always
to see men and things as they are.”—Mr.
Falconer still hesitating, and turning over
the leaves—“As my friend in this business,
Mr. Falconer,”—continued his
Lordship—“you will comprehend, that
the essential point is to put me as soon

as possible in possession of the facts—then
I can decide, and act—If it will not fatigue
you too much, I wish to go through
these papers before I sleep.”—
Fatigue! Oh my Lord, I am not in the
least ... cannot be fatigued—But the
fact is, I cannot go on—for the next
pages I have not yet deciphered—the cipher
changes here—
Lord Oldborough looked much disappointed
and provoked, but after a few
minutes' pause calmly said—“What time
will it take, Sir, to decipher the remainder?—”
The Commissioner protested he did not
know—could not form an idea—he and
his son had spent many hours of intense
labor on the first papers before he could
make out the cipher—now this was a
new cipher, probably more difficult, and
whether he could make it out at all, or
in what time, he was utterly unable to
say.—Lord Oldborough replied—“Let us
understand one another at once, Commissioner
Falconer, if you please—My maxim,

and the maxim of every man in public
life is, or ought to be,—Serve me and
I will serve you.—I have no pretensions
to Mr. Falconer's friendship on any
other grounds, I am sensible; nor on any
other terms can he have a claim to whatever
power of patronage I possess. But
I neither serve nor will be served by
halves—My first object is to make myself
master, as soon as possible, of the
contents of the papers in your hands, my
next to secure your inviolable secresy on
the whole transaction.
The Commissioner was going to make
vows of secresy and protestations of zeal,
but Lord Oldborough cut all that short
with—“Of course—Of course”—pronounced
in the driest accent—and went
on with—
“Now, Sir, you know my object; 
will you do me the honor to state yours?— 
You will excuse my abruptness—time in
some circumstances is every thing—Do
me and yourself the justice to say at once
what return I can make for the service

you have done or may do me and government.”
“My only hesitation in speaking, my
Lord, was—”
“Have no hesitation in speaking, I beseech you, Sir—”
I beseech, in tone, was in effect, I command
you, Sir,—And Mr. Falconer, under
the influence of an imperious and superior
mind, came at once to that point,
which he had not intended to come to
for a month, or to approach till after infinite
precaution and circumlocution.
“My object is, to push my son Cunningham
in the diplomatic line, my Lord
—and I wish to make him one of your
secretaries.”
The Commissioner stopped short, astonished
to find that the truth, and the
whole truth, had absolutely passed his
lips, and in such plain words!—but they
could not be recalled,—he gasped for
breath—and began an apologetical sentence
about “poor Mr. Drakelow, whom

he should be so sorry to injure or displace—”
“Never mind that now—time enough
to think of Drakelow,” said Lord Oldborough,
walking up and down the room
—then stopping short—
“I must see your son, Sir.”
“I will bring him here to morrow, if
your Lordship pleases.”
“As soon as possible! But he can
come surely without your going for him
—write, and beg that we may see him
at breakfast—at nine if you please.”
The letter was written, and dispatched
immediately. Lord Oldborough, whilst
the Commissioner was writing, noted
down the heads of what he had learned
from M. de Tourville's packet.—Then
locked up those of the papers which had
been deciphered, put the others into Mr.
Falconer's charge, and recommended it
to him to use all possible despatch in deciphering
the remainder.—The Commissioner
declared he would sit up all night

at the task; this did not appear to be
more than was expected.—His Lordship
rung, and ordered candles in Mr. Falconer's
room, then returned to the company
in the saloon, without saying another
word. None could guess by his
countenance or deportment, that any
unusual circumstance had happened, or
that his mind was in the least perturbed.
Mrs. Drakelow thought he was wholly
absorbed in a rubber of whist, and Miss
Drakelow at the same time was persuaded
that he was listening to her
music.
Punctual to the appointed hour—for
ambition is as punctual to appointments
as love—Mr. Cunningham Falconer
made his appearance at nine, and was
presented by his father to Lord Oldborough,
who received him, not with any
show of gracious kindness, but as one
who had been forced upon him by circumstances,
and whom, for valuable
considerations, he had bargained to take
into his service. To try the young diplomatist's

talents, Lord Oldborough led
him first to speak on the subject of the
Tourville papers, then urged him on to
the affairs of Germany, and the general
interests and policy of the different
courts of Europe. Trembling, and in
agony for his son, the Commissioner
stood aware of the danger of the youth's
venturing out of his depth, aware also
of the danger of showing that he dared
not venture, and incapable of deciding
between these equal fears: but soon he
was reassured by the calmness of his
son.—Cunningham, who had not so
much information or capacity, but who
had less sensibility than his father, often
succeeded where his father's timidity
prognosticated failure. Indeed, on the
present occasion, the care which the
young diplomatist took not to commit
himself, the dexterity with which he
“helped himself by countenance and
gesture,” and “was judicious by signs,” 
proved that he was well skilled in all
those arts of seeming wise, which have

been so well noted for use by “the greatest,
wisest, meanest of mankind.” Young
though he was, Cunningham was quite
sufficiently slow, circumspect, and solemn,
to deserve to be ranked among
those whom Bacon calls Formalists,
“who do nothing, or little, very solemnly,
—who seem always to keep back
somewhat; and when they know within
themselves they speak of what they do
not know, would, nevertheless, seem to
others to know that, of which they may
not well speak.”
Lord Oldborough listened to whatever
he said, and marked all that he did not
say with an air of attentive composure,
which, as Mr. Falconer thought, augured
well for his son; but now and then there
was, for scarcely a definable portion of
time, an expression of humor in his
Lordship's eye, a sarcastic smile, which
escaped the Commissioner's observation,
and which, even if he had observed, he
could not, with his limited knowledge of
Lord Oldborough's character, have rightly

interpreted. If his Lordship had expressed
his thoughts, perhaps, they might
have been, though in words less quaint,
nearly the same as those of the philosophic
statesman, who says:
“It is a ridiculous thing, and fit for
a satire to persons of judgment, to see
what shifts these formalists have, and
what prosepectives to make superficies to
seem body that hath depth and bulk.”
But Lord Oldborough philosophising,
and Lord Oldborough acting, were two
different people. His perception of the
ridicule of the young secretary's solemnity,
and of the insufficiency of his information
and capacity, made no alteration
in the minister's determination. The
question was not whether the individual
was fit for this place, or that employment,
but whether it was expedient
he should have it for the security of political
power. Waving all delicacy,
Lord Oldborough now, as in most other
cases, made it his chief object to be understood
and obeyed, therefore he applied

directly to the universal motive,
and spoke the universal language of interest.
“Mr. Falconer,” said he, “if you
put me in possession of the remainder
of M. de Tourville's papers this night, I
will to morrow morning put this young
gentleman into the hands of my present
secretary Mr. Drakelow, who will prepare
him for the situation you desire.
Mr. Drakelow himself will, probably,
soon leave me to be employed more advantageously
for his Majesty's service,
in some other manner.”
The decipherers, father and son, shut
themselves up directly, and set to work
with all imaginable zeal. The whole
packet was nearly expounded before
night, and the next morning Lord Oldborough
performed his part of the agreement.
He sent for Mr. Drakelow, and
said:
“Mr. Drakelow, I beg that, upon
your return to town, you will be so
good as to take this young gentleman,

Mr. Cunningham Falconer, to your office.
Endeavour to prepare him to supply
your place with me whenever it
may be proper for his Majesty's service,
and for your interests, to send you to
Constantinople, or elsewhere.”—
Mr. Drakelow, though infinitely surprised
and displeased, bowed all submission.
Nothing else he knew was to be
done with Lord Oldborough. His Lordship,
as soon as his secretary had left
the room, turned to Cunningham, and said:
“You will not mention any thing
concerning M. de Tourville's intercepted
papers to Mr. Drakelow, or to any other
person. Affairs call me to town immediately:
to morrow morning at six, I
set off. You will, if you please, Sir, be
ready to accompany me. I will not
detain you longer from any preparations
you may have to make for your
journey.”
“No sooner had the father and son
quitted Lord Oldborough's presence,

than Mr. Falconer exclaimed with exultation:
“I long to see our good cousin Percy,
that I may tell him how I have provided
already for one of my sons.”
“But remember, Sir,” said Cunningham,
“that Mr. Percy is to know nothing
of the Tourville packet.”
“To be sure not,” said Mr. Falconer,
“he is to know nothing of the menas,
he is to see only the end—the successful
end.—Ha! cousin Percy, I think we
know rather better than you do, how to
make something of every thing—even of
a shipwreck.”—
“To prevent his having any suspicions,” 
continued Cunningham, “it will
be best to give Mr. Percy some probable
reason for Lord Oldborough's taking
to us so suddenly. It will be well to
hint that you have opportunities of obliging
about the borough, or about the
address at the county-meeting, or ...”
“No, no; no particulars, never go to
particulars,” said old Falconer, “stick

to generals, and you are safe.—Say, in
general, that I had an opportunity of
obliging government. Percy is not curious,
especially about jobbing. He will
ask no questions, or, if he should, I can
easily put him upon a wrong scent.— 
Now, Cunningham, listen to me; I have
done my best, and have got you into a
fine situation; but remember, you cannot
get on in the diplomatic line without
a certain degree of diplomatic information.
I have pointed this out to you
often; you have neglected to make yourself
master of these things, and, for want
of them, in office you will come, I fear,
some day or other to shame.”—
“Do not be afraid of that—no danger
of my coming to shame any more
than a thousand other people in office,
who never trouble themselves about diplomatic
information, and all that.— 
There is always some clerk who knows
the forms, and with those, and looking
for what one wants on the spur of the
occasion, in books and pamphlets, and

so forth, one may get on very well—if
one does but know how to keep one's
own counsel.—You see I got through
with Lord Oldborough to day—”
“Aye—but I assure you I trembled
for you, and I could have squeezed myself
into an auger-hole once, when you
blundered about that treaty of which I
knew, that you knew nothing.”
“Oh, Sir, I assure you I had turned
over the leaves. I was correct enough
as to the dates; and, suppose I blundered,
as my brother Buckhurst says,
half the world never know what they
are saying, and the other half never find
it out.—Why, Sir, you were telling me
the other night such a blunder of Prince
Potemkin's ...”
“Very true,” interrupted the Commissioner,
“but you are not Prince Potemkin,
nor yet a prime minister, if you
were, no matter how little you knew— 
you might get other people to supply
your deficiencies. But now in your
place, and in the course of making your

way upwards, you will be called upon
to supply others with the information
they may want. And you know I shall
not be always at your elbow; therefore,
I really am afraid—”
“Dear Sir, fear nothing!” said Cunningham,
“I shall do as well as others
do—the greatest difficulty is over. I
have taken the first step, and it has cost
nothing.”
“Well, get on, my boy—honestly, if
you can—but get on.”