

What has become, all this time, of the
Falconer family?
Since the marriage of Miss Falconer
with Sir Robert Percy, all intercourse
between the Falconers and our branch
of the Percy family had ceased. But
one morning, Alfred was surprised by a
visit from Commissioner Falconer. The
Commissioner looked thin, pale, and
wretched.—He began by condoling with
Alfred on their mutual family misfortunes.
—Alfred received this condolence
with politeness, but with a proud consciousness,
that, notwithstanding his father's
imprisonment, and the total ruin
of fortune with which he was threatened,
neither his father, nor any individual
in his family, would change
places with any one of the Falconers,

since nothing dishonorable could be imputed
to Mr. Percy, nor were his misfortunes
occasioned by any imprudence
of his own.
A deep sigh from the Commissioner,
at the moment these thoughts were passing
in Alfred's mind, excited his compassion,
for he perceived, that the same
reflexions had occurred to Mr. Falconer.
After taking an immoderate quantity
of snuff, the Commissioner went on, and
disclaimed in strong terms all knowledge
of his son in law Sir Robert's cruel arrest
of his cousin. The Commissioner
said, that Sir Robert Percy had, since
his marriage with Bell Falconer, behaved
very ill, and had made his wife show
great ingratitude to her own family— 
that in Mrs. Falconer's distress, when
she and Georgiana were most anxious to
retire from town for a short time, and
when Mrs. Falconer had naturally looked
to the house of her married daughter as
a sure asylum, the doors of Percy-Hall
had been actually shut against her, Sir

Robert declaring, that he would not be
involved in the difficulties and disgrace
of a family, who had taken him in to
marry a girl without any fortune.
Alfred was perfectly convinced, both
from the cordial hatred with which the
Commissioner now spoke of his son-in-law,
and from Mr. Falconer's disposition,
that he had nothing to do with the
cruel measures, which Sir Robert had
taken against Mr. Percy. Commissioner
Falconer was not a malevolent, but a
weak man—incapable of being a disinterested
friend—equally incapable of becoming
a malicious enemy. The Commissioner
now proceeded to his own affairs,
and to the business of his visit.— 
He said, that he had been disappointed
in all his hopes from the Greenwich
party, that when that sad business of Mrs.
Falconer's came out, they had seized this
as a pretence for dropping him altoge
ther—that when they had, by Lord Oldborough's
retreat from office, obtained
every thing they wanted, and had no

more occasion for assistance or information,
they had shamefully forgotten or
disowned all their former promises to
Cunningham Falconer.—They had refused
to accredit him at the court of
Denmark, refused even to defray the expenses
of his journey thither, which, in
the style in which he had thought it necessary
for an ambassador to travel, had
been considerable. Upon the hopes held
out, he had taken a splendid house in
Copenhagen, and had every day, for
some weeks, been in expectation of the
arrival of his credentials. When it was
publicly known, that another ambassador
was appointed, Cunningham's creditors
became clamorous; he contrived to escape
from Copenhagen in the night, and was
proceeding incog. in his journey homewards,
when he was stopped at one of
the small frontier towns, and was there
actually detained in prison for his debts.
The poor Commissioner produced his
son's letter, giving an account of his detention,
and stating, that, unless the money

he had raised in Copenhagen was
paid, there was no hope of his being
liberated.—He must perish in a foreign
jail.
We spare the reader the just reproaches
which the unhappy father, at this moment,
uttered against the son's duplicity.
—It was his fate, he said, to be ruined
by those, for whom he had been laboring
and planning, night and day, for so many
years.—“And now,” concluded Mr.
Falconer,—“here am I, reduced to sell
the last acre of my paternal estate ... I
shall literally have nothing left but
Falconer-Court, the demesne, and my
annuity!—Nothing!—But it must
be done, ill as he has used me, and
impossible as it is, ever, even at this
crisis, to get the truth from him ... I
must pay the money—he is in jail, and
cannot be liberated without this sum—I
have here, you see, under the hand of
the chief magistrate, sufficient proof ...
I will not, however, trouble you, my
dear Sir, with showing more of these

letters.—Only it is a comfort to me
to speak to one, who will listen with
some sympathy ... Ah! Sir, when out
of place! ... out of favor! ... selling
one's estate! ... how people change!— 
But I am taking up your time.—Since
these lands are to be sold, the sooner,
the better.—Your father, you know, is
trustee to my marriage settlements, and,
I believe, his consent, his signature, will
be necessary—will it not?—I am no
lawyer—I really am not clear what is
necessary—and my solicitor, Mr.Sharpe,
I have dismissed—perhaps, you will allow
me to put the business into your
hands.”—
Alfred undertook it, and kindly told
the Commissioner, that if he would send
him his papers, he would, without putting
him to any expense, look them over
carefully—have all the necessary releases
drawn—and make his title clear to any
purchaser who should apply.
The Commissioner was full of gratitude
for this friendly offer, and immediately

begged, that he might leave his
title deeds with Alfred. Accordingly the
servant was desired to bring in the box,
which he had left in the carriage.—The
Commissioner then rose to take leave,
but Alfred begged he would stay, till he
had written a list of the deeds, as he
made it a rule never to take charge of
any papers, without giving a receipt for
them. The Commissioner thought this
“a superfluous delicacy between friends
and relatives;” but Alfred observed, that
relations would, perhaps, oftener continue
friends, if in matters of business
they took care always to be as exact as
if they were strangers.
The Commissioner looked at his watch
—said he was in haste—he was going to
wait upon Lord somebody, from whom,
in spite of all his experience, he expected
something.
“You will find a list of the deeds, I
have a notion,” said he, “in the box,
Mr. Alfred Percy, and you need only
sign it—that will be quite sufficient.”

“When I have compared the papers
with the list I will sign it,” said Alfred,
—“my clerk and I will do it as quickly
as possible.”—
The Commissioner, secretly cursing
Alfred's accuracy, and muttering something
of the necessity for his own punctuality,
was, however, obliged to submit
—He sat down—the clerk was sent for
—the box was opened.—The list of the
papers was, as Alfred found, drawn out
by Buckhurst Falconer; and the Commissioner
now recollected the time,
“Just when poor Buckhurst,” said the
father, with a sigh—“was arguing with
me against going into the church—At
that time I remember he was desperately
in love with your sister Caroline.”—
—“Why, in truth,” said Alfred,
smiling, as he read over the scrawled
list, “this looks a little as if it were
written by a man in love—Here's another
reason for our comparing the papers
and the list.”
“Well—well—I took it all upon

trust, I am no lawyer—I never looked
at them—never opened the box, and am
very sorry to be obliged to do it now.”—
The essential care, either of papers or
estate, the Commissioner had evermore
neglected, while he had all his life been
castle-building, or pursuing some phantom
of fortune at court. Whilst Alfred
was comparing the papers and the list,
the Commissioner went on talking of the
marriage of Caroline with Count Altenberg,
asking when they expected the
Count to return, or when Caroline would
go to him. It was possible, that Count
Altenberg might be moved to make some
remonstrance in favor of Cunningham; 
and a word or two from him to the
Duke of Greenwich would do the business— 
The Commissioner longed to hint
this to Alfred, but Alfred was so intent
upon these bundles of parchment, that
till every one of them was counted, it
would be in vain to make the attempt.
So the Commissioner impatiently stood
by, while the clerk went on calling over

the papers, and Alfred, in equal strains,
replying— 
“Thank Heaven!” said he to himself,
they have got to the last bundle.”
“Bundle eighteen,” cried the clerk.
“Bundle eighteen”—replied Alfred
—“How many numbers does it contain?”
“Six”—said the clerk.—
“Six!—no, seven, if you please,” 
said Alfred.
“But six in the list, Sir.”
“I will read them over,” said Alfred.
“Number one, Deed of Assignment to
Filmer Griffin, Esq. No.2. Deed of
Mortgage to Margaret Simpson, widow.
No. 3. Deed of Lease and Release.
No.4. Lease for a Year.”
“No 4. no such thing ... Stop, Sir,
Deed!”
Alfred gave one look at the paper,
and starting up, snatched it from the
hands of his clerk, with an exclamation
of joy—rang the bell—ordered a coach
to be called instantly—then signed the

receipt for the Commissioner, put it
into his hands—locked the box; and all
was done with such rapidity, that the
Commissioner had neither time to recover
from his surprise, nor to express
his curiosity.
Whilst the coach was coming to the
door, Alfred being now a little more
composed, explained—It was Sir John
Percy's Deed—the long lost Deed—the
loss of which had deprived his father of
his estate—and of his liberty.
Buckhurst Falconer, it seems, had, by
mistake, put it into this box; the Commissioner
now recollected, that several
of Mr. Percy's papers had been lying on
the table at the time Buckhurst was
packing these up, and he had been
charged not to mix them—But he was
careless, and in love—Alfred, at that
time, was not in the country, and the
Deed had never been thought of, or
missed, till the night of the fire at Percy-Hall.
—And then, after the most diligent
search, it was concluded, that it

must have been consumed in the flames.
—Alfred could not stay to listen either
to the Commissioner's congratulations, or
to his apologies for Buckhurst's carelessness,
but hurried away to be the
bearer of the joyful tidings to his father,
mother, and Caroline.
Rosamond and his wife he put into
the coach with him, and drove off, telling
them they would see presently where
they were going, and for what—All
the way Rosamond exercised her ingenuity
in vain, trying to find out her
brother's purpose. When they arrived
within sight of the King's-Bench-prison; 
her imagination went beyond the truth,
and she was sure that Alfred had
obtained an order some way or other,
for her father's release. Alfred, provoked
by her imagining something beyond
the reality, represented to her the
absurdity, the impossibility of her supposition; 
and that, in England, there is
no obtaining any order to supersede the
course of law. Rosamond's next guess

was, if not a legal, a moral impossibily.
She fancied, that Sir Robert Percy had
relented, and that he had sent his father-in-law,
Commissioner Falconer, to make
terms with Alfred, and to grant her father
release—To this one point of her
father's release all her ideas tended, but
she could get no further.
The moment Mr. Percy saw his son,
he said—“Alfred, I am sure, by your
countenance, that you have some good
news to tell me.”—
Caroline and Mrs. Percy, almost at
the same moment, repeated the same
thing.
Alfred answered, by producing Sir
John Percy's deed, which he quietly
laid down on the table before his father,
telling him how it had been found—A
few minutes Alfred staid to hear the exclamations
of joy, then suddenly snatched
up his hat, and said, “I must leave
you, or, after all, I may be the cause
of my father's being detained some
months longer in prison—No, my dear

Rosamond, I can't stay—Term begins
next week—not a moment to be lost— 
can't explain, you would not understand
my lawyer-reasons—Good by—God bless
you all—happier faces I never saw.”
Alfred wrote immediately to Sir Robert
Percy, informing him, “that Sir
John Percy's deed was found, that it
should be shown to whoever he should
send to Alfred's house to see it”—He
added, “that he trusted Sir Robert
would, when he should be satisfied of
the existence, and identity of the deed,
stop his present proceedings, and release
Mr. Percy; as a continuance of the suit
could only ultimately increase the costs
and damages, which, in the event of a
new trial, must fall entirely, and heavily,
upon Sir Robert.”
No answer was received for some days
from Sir Robert; Mr. Sharpe, his Solicitor,
called, however, on Alfred, and
in his presence—for Alfred would not let
it out of his hands—examined the deed
—noted down in his pocket-book the

date, names of the witnesses, and some
other particulars, of which, he observed,
it was necessary he should inform Sir
Robert, before he could be satisfied as to
the identity of the conveyance—Sharpe
was particularly close and guarded in
his looks and words during this interview; 
would neither admit nor deny that
he was satisfied, and went away, leaving
nothing certain, but that he would write
to Sir Robert—Alfred thought he saw,
that they meant to avoid giving an answer,
in order to keep possession and
detain his father prisoner some months
longer; till another term. He took all
the necessary steps to bring the matter
to trial immediately, without waiting for
any answer from Sir Robert—No letter
came from him, but Alfred received
from his Solicitor the following note:

“Sir,
“I am directed by Sir Robert
Percy, to acquaint you, in reply to
yours of the 20th instant, that conceiving

his title to the Percy estate to be no
way affected by the instrument to which
you allude therein, he cannot withdraw
his present suit for the mesne rates.
“Sir Robert Percy has ordered me, as
his Solicitor, to take defence against your
ejectment, stating to be, for the recovery
of aforesaid lands—forthwith,
And am, Sir,
your humble servant,
A. Sharpe.”
Wednesday.”
Alfred was surprised, disappointed,
and alarmed, by this answer—for he had
imagined, that their utmost malice could
only have attempted to prolong the period
of his father's imprisonment, by
continuing the present suit, which must,
as he had thought, fall to the ground,
in consequence of the recovery of the
deed—But the idea of their taking defence,
and standing a new trial against
this deed, had never occurred to him as
possible even to their effrontery in villainy

—He consulted Mr. Friend, who,
after considering Sharpe's letter, could
not devise what defence they intended
to make, as the deed, upon most accurate
examination, appeared duly executed,
according to the provision of the
statute of frauds. Upon the whole,
Mr. Friend was of opinion, that the letter
was meant merely to alarm the plaintiffs,
and to bring them to offer or consent to
a compromise. In this opinion Alfred
was confirmed the next day, by an interview
with Sharpe, accidental on
Alfred's part, but designed and prepared
by the Solicitor, who watched Alfred as
he was coming out of the Courts, and
dogged him till he parted from some
gentlemen, with whom he was walking,
then joining him, he said, in a voice
which Mr. Allscrip might have envied
for it's power of setting sense at defiance:
“I am happy, Mr. Alfred Percy, to
chance to see you to day ... for, with a
view to put an end to litigation and difficulties,

I had a few words to suggest—premising,
that I do not act or speak
now, in any wise, as or for Sir Robert
Percy, or with reference to his being
my client, nor as a solicitor in this
cause—be it understood, but merely and
solely as one gentleman to another, upon
honor—and not bringing forward any
idea to be taken advantage of hereafter,
as tending to any thing in the shape of
an offer to compromise, which, in a
legal point of view, you know, Sir, I
could not be warranted to hazard for my
client, and of consequence, which I
hereby declare, I do not in any degree
mean.”
“Would you be so good, Mr. Sharpe,
to state at once what you do mean—for
I confess I do not, in any degree, understand
you.”
“Why then, Sir, what I mean is,
simply, and candidly, and frankly, this,
that if I could, without compromising
the interest of my client, which, as an
honest man, I am bound not to do or

appear to do, I should wish to put an
end to this litigation between relations; 
and though your father thinks me his
enemy, would convince him to the contrary,
if he would allow me, and could
point out the means of shortening that
confinement, which has occasioned so
much scandal; and moreover, could devise
an accommodation, which might be
agreeable to both parties, and save you
a vast deal of trouble and vexation; possession,” 
added he, laughing, “being
nine tenths of the law.”—
Mr. Sharpe paused, as if hoping that
something would now be said by Alfred,
that might direct him whether to advance
or recede; but Alfred only observed,
that the end Mr. Sharpe proposed
to himself by speaking, was to be understood,
and that this desirable end he
had not yet attained.
“Why, Sir, in some cases, one cannot
venture to make one self understood
any way but by innuendoes.”—
“Then, good morning to you, Sir,

you and I can never understand one
another.”
“Pardon me, Sir, unless you are in
a hurry,” cried Mr. Sharpe, catching
Alfred by the button, “which (when so
large an estate, to which you might
eventually succeed, and your father's
liberty moreover are in question) you are
too much a man of feeling, and a man
of business to be—In one word then,
for I wont detain you another moment,
and I throw myself open, and trust to
your honor.”
“You do me honor.”
“Put a parallel case.—“You
plaintiff A—, I defendant B—,
I should, if I were A—, but no way
advising it, being B—, offer to divide
the whole property; and that
the offer would be accepted, I'd engage
upon my honor, supposing myself witnessing
the transaction, only just as a
gentleman.”
“Impossible, Sir,” cried Alfred, with
indignation. “Do you take me for a

fool? Do you think I would give up half
my father's estate, knowing that he has
a right to the whole?—It is true we are
anxious, to see my father released from
that prison into which he has been unjustly
and cruelly thrown, but, be assured Sir,
that though we, his children, would think
no price that we could pay too great, to
purchase his liberty, even a few months
sooner than the course of law will give it
to him, yet, he would never permit me
to make such a sacrifice, as that which
you propose.”
“Propose ... pardon me, Sir—I proposed
nothing—far from it—only suggested
an A.B. case—But one word more
Sir,” cried Mr. Sharpe, holding Alfred
who was breaking from him,—“for your
own ... your father's interest,—you see
this thing quite in a wrong point of view,
when you talk of a few months more or
less imprisonment, and delay of getting
possession, being all there is between us,
—Depend upon it, if it goes to trial, you
will never get possession.”

“Then Sir, if you think so, you are
betraying the interest of your client, in
advising me not to let it go to trial.”
“Good God, Sir! but that is between
you and me only.”
“Pardon me Sir, it is between you
and your conscience.”—
“Oh, if that's all!—My conscience
is at ease, when I'm trying to prevent
the scandal of litigation between relations.
... Therefore, just let me mention
to you for your private information,
what I know Sir Robert would not wish
to come out before the trial.”
“Don't tell it to me Sir—I will not
hear it—Excuse me,” cried Alfred,— 
breaking from him, and walking on very
fast.
Faster still Sharpe pursued,—“you'll
remember Sir at all events, that what has
been said is not to go farther,—you'll
not forget.”—
“I shall never forget, that I am a man
of honor Sir,”—said Alfred.—
Sharpe parted from him muttering,

“that if he lived to the day of trial, he
would repent this.”
“And if I live to the day of judgment,
I shall never repent it,” thought
Alfred.
Now fully convinced, that Sir Robert
desired a compromise, and wanted only
to secure, whilst in possession, some portion
of that property, which he knew the
law would ultimately force him to relinquish; 
Alfred persevered in his course,
freed from the alarm into which he had
been thrown, when he first learned that
his opponents intended to take defence.
—Alfred felt assured, that they would
never let the matter come to trial—But
time passed on, and they still persisted— 
A hint was given to Alfred, by one of
his father's old tenants. ... But we will
not forestal this part of the story.—
Whilst Alfred was comparing various
reports and suspicions, calculating moral
and legal possibilities, and preparing for
the decisive day of trial, the following
letter arrived from Godfrey.

“Dear father, mother, brothers, sisters,
all! I hope, you are not under any
anxiety about me, for here I am safe
and sound, and in excellent quarters, at
the house of Mynheers Grinderweld,
Groensveld, and Slidderschild, Amsterdam—the
Dutch merchants who were
shipwrecked on our coast years ago—If
it had happened yesterday, the thing
could not be fresher in their memories— 
My dear Rosamond, when we laughed
at their strange names, square figures,
and formal advice at parting, to apply to
them if ever we should in the changes
and chances of human events be reduced
to distress, we little thought, that I a
prisoner should literally come to seek
shelter at their door.—And most hospitably
have I been received—National
prejudices, which I early acquired, I
don't know how, against the Dutch,
made me fancy that a Dutchman could
think only of himself, and would give
nothing for nothing. I can only say
from experience, I have been as hospitably

treated in Amsterdam, as ever I
was in London. These honest merchants
have overwhelmed me with civilities
and substantial services, and still
they seem to think, they can never do
enough for me—I wish I may ever see
them on English ground again—But we
have no Percy-Hall to receive them in
now, and as well as I remember the
Hills, we could not conveniently stow
more than one at a time—Side by side
as they stood after breakfast, I recollect,
at Percy-Hall, they would fill up the
parlor at the Hills.—
“I have reason to be in high spirits
to day, for these good people have just
been telling me, that the measures they
have been taking to get my exchange
effected have so far succeeded, they have
reason to believe, that in a week or a
fortnight at farthest, I shall be under way
for England.—
“In the mean time, you will wonder
perhaps how I got here—for I perceive
that I have subjected myself to Rosamond's

old reproach of never beginning
my story at the beginning—My father
says, half the mistakes in the conduct of
human affairs arise from our taking for
granted; but I think I may take it for
granted, that either from the newspapers,
or from Gascoigne, who must be in
England before this time, you have
learned, that the transport I was on
board, with my division of the regiment,
parted convoy in the storm of the 18th,
in the night, and at day break fell in
with two Dutchmen—Our brave boys
fought, as English sailors always do. ...
But it is all over now, and it does not
signify prosing about it—Two to one was
too much—we were captured. I had
not been five minutes on the Dutchman's
deck, when I observed one of the sailors
eyeing me very attentively—Presently he
came up and spoke to me, and asked, if
my name was not Percy, and if I did not
recollect to have seen him before—He
put me in mind of the shipwreck, and
told me he was one of the sailors, who

were harboured in one of my father's out
houses, whilst they were repairing the
wreck—I asked him what had become of
the drunken carpenter, and told him the
disaster that ensued in consequence of
that rascal's carelessness—My sailor was
excessively shocked at the account of
the fire at Percy-Hall,—he thumped his
breast, till I thought he would have
broken his breast-bone; and after relieving
his mind, by cursing and swearing,
in high Dutch, low Dutch, and
English, against the drunken carpenter,
he told me, that there was no use in
saying any more, for that he had punished
himself.—He was found dead
one morning behind a barrel, from
which in the night he had been drinking
spirits surreptitiously with a straw!—Pray
tell this to our good old steward,
who used always to prophecy, that this
fellow would come to no good—Assure
him however at the same time, that all
the Dutch sailors do not deserve his
maledictions. Tell him, I can answer

for the poor fellow who recognised me,
and who during the whole passage never
failed to show me and my fellow prisoners,
down to the lowest soldiers of the regiment,
every little attention in his power.
When we got to Amsterdam, it was he
reminded me of the Dutch merchants,
told me their names, which, without his
assistance, I might have perished before
I could ever have recollected, showed
me the way to their house, and never
rested, till he saw me well settled.
“You will expect from me some
account of this place, ...—you need
not expect any, for just as I had got to
this line in my letter, appeared one who
has put all the lions of Amsterdam fairly
out of my head—Mr. Gresham!—He
has been for some weeks in the country,
and has just returned—The Dutch merchants
not knowing of his being acquainted
with my family, had never
mentioned him to me—or me to him—So
our surprise at meeting was great—and
mutual—what pleasure it is in a foreign

country, and to a poor prisoner, to see
any one from dear England—and one
who knows our own friends. I had never
known Mr. Gresham myself, but you
have all by your letters made me well
acquainted with him—I like him prodigiously,—to
use a lady's word—(not
yours, Rosamond)—Letters from Mr.
Henry were waiting for him here—He
has just opened them, and the first news
he tells me is, that Caroline is going to
be married—Is it possible?—Count Altenberg!—The
last time I heard from
you, you mentioned nothing of this?
Some of your letters must have been
lost—Pray write again immediately, and
do not take it for granted, that I shall be
at home before a letter can reach me,
but give me a full history of every thing
up to the present moment—How I wish
I was with you!—Groensveld is sealing
his letters for London, and says, he must
have mine now or never—Adieu—Pray
write fully—you can't be too minute for

a poor prisoner!—Yours affectionately,
burning with curiosity,—
G. Percy.”
It was fortunate that Mr. Henry's
letters had been sent before Caroline's
wedding; as it prevented Godfrey's
knowing any thing of the melancholy
confusion of that day, and of the imprisonment
of his father—While his
family were debating, whether they should
or should not comply with his request of
writing him a full account of all things,
a letter arrived from Mr. Gresham to
Mr. Henry, with information, that Godfrey's
exchange had been actually effected,
and that he had just secured his passage on
board a vessel for England, which would
sail the ensuing week; no letter therefore
could possibly reach him before he
should quit Amsterdam.
In a committee of dates, held by the
whole family—Rosamond exclusive,—who
never knew any thing about dates,

it was settled, that, wind and weather
permitting, Godfrey would arrive just
about the time, when the trial was to
come on.
This somewhat encreased Alfred's
anxiety for the event. Other circumstances
also contributed to raise it to the
highest pitch.
Lord Oldborough, surprised at neither
seeing Mr. Temple, nor hearing from
him of his marriage, wrote to inquire
what delayed his promised return to
Clermont-Park. Taking it for granted,
that he was married, his Lordship, in the
most polite manner, begged “that he
would prevail upon his bride, to enliven
the retirement of an old statesman by
her sprightly company—As the friend
of her father he made this request, with
a confidence in her hereditary disposition
to show him kindness.”
In reply to this letter, Mr. Temple
told his friend and master what had delayed
his marriage, and why he had
hitherto forborne to trouble him on the

subject.—Lord Oldborough, astonished
and indignant, uttered once, and but
once, contemptuous exclamations against
the “Inconceivable meanness of Lord
Skrimpshire,” and the “infinitely small
mind of his Grace of Greenwich.”—Then,
without condescending to any
communication with inferior powers, his
Lordship applied directly to the highest
authority. The consequence was, that
a place, double the value of that which
had been promised to his secretary, was
given to Mr. Temple, with apologies for
the delay, which, as “Mr. Secretary
Cole had it in command to assure his
Lordship, had arisen solely from the
anxious desire of Ministers, to mark their
respect for his Lordship's recommendation,
and their sense of Mr. Temple's
merit, by doing more than had been originally
proposed.—An opportunity,
for which they had impatiently waited,
had now put it in their power to evince
the sincerity of their intentions in a
mode, which, they trusted, would prove

to the entire satisfaction of his Lordship.”
The greatest care was taken, both in
substance and manner, to gratify Lord
Oldborough, whose loss had been felt,
and whose value had, upon comparison,
increased in estimation. Mr. Temple
was immediately put in possession of his
place, and he had the additional pleasure
of feeling, that the delicacy with
which he had refrained from complaint,
and the patience with which he endured
suspense, were estimated by his noble
friend and master. Rosamond was rewarded
by seeing the happiness of the
man she loved, and hearing him declare,
that he owed it to her prudence.
“Rosamond's prudence!—Who ever
expected to hear this?” Mr. Percy exclaimed—“And
yet the praise is just
—So, henceforward, none need ever
despair of grafting prudence upon generosity
of disposition and vivacity of
temper.”
Mr. Temple obtained from Rosamond

a promise to be his, as soon as her father
should be released from his prison; 
till then, she could not think of leaving
him.
Alfred heard this promise repeated
with silent agony of mind.—“The happiness
of all who are most dear to me at
stake—How much depends on the event
of this trial!”
Next came letters from Count Altenberg—Briefly—in
the laconic style of
a man who is pressed at once by sudden
events and strong feelings, he relates, that
“at the siege of the city of &wblank;by
the French, early in the morning of
the day on which it was expected that
the enemy would attempt to storm the
town, his Prince, while inspecting the
fortifications, was killed by a cannonball,
on the very spot where the Count
had been standing but a moment before.
—All public affairs were changed in
his country by the death of the Prince—His
successor, of a weak character, was
willing to purchase present ease, and to

secure his low pleasures, at any price—ready
to give up the honor of his country,
and to submit to the conqueror.—That
he had been secretly intriguing with the
enemy had been suspected; and this suspicion
was confirmed by his dastardly
capitulation, when the means of defence
were in his power, and the spirit of his
people eager for resistance.
“With indignation, heightened by
grief, contrast, and despairing patriotism—Count
Altenberg had remonstrated
—in vain—had refused, as minister, to
put his signature to the capitulation—had
been solicited urgently to concede
—offers of wealth and dignities pressed
upon him—These he rejected with scorn
—Released from all his public engagements
by the death of his friend the late
Prince, and by the retiring of the Princess
from Court, Count Altenberg refused
to act as minister under his successor—and
seeing that, under such a
successor to the Government, no means
of serving or saving the country remained,

he at once determined to quit
it for ever. Resolved to live in a free
country, already his own half by birth,
and wholly by inclination, where he has
property sufficient to secure him independence,
sufficient for all his own
wishes, and for the still more moderate
desires of the woman he loves. Where he
can enjoy, better than on any other spot
now in the whole compass of the civilised
world, the blessings of real liberty, and
of domestic tranquillity and happiness.”
His decision made, it was promptly
executed—He left to a friend the transacting
the sale of that part of his German
property, of which he had not
already disposed, and concluded his
letter to Caroline thus,
“Passports obtained!—Every thing
done but to pay my duty to the Princess
before I leave the country—Early next
week I shall set out for England—May
the cloud, which hung over your father
when we parted, my beloved Caroline,

be dissipated! May we meet in perfect
happiness!”
Caroline's eyes involuntarily turned
on Alfred as she read the last words—It
was only by strong effort and habitual
command of mind, that he could preserve
his self-possession under the action
of such desperately strong motive, and
the sense of such deep responsibility.—Many
of his brother lawyers were not
only doubtful, but more inclined to
despond than to encourage him as to
the event of the trial—Several regretted,
that he had not accepted of Mr. Sharpe's
offered compromise. “Half the estate
certain, and his father's release from all
difficulties, they thought was too good
an offer to have been rejected!”—he
might, “as Sharpe had prophesied,
live to repent his rejection of that proposal.”
Others observed, that though Mr.
Alfred Percy was certainly a young man
of great talents, and had been successful
at the Bar, yet still he was a young

lawyer.—It was a bold and hazardous,
not to say rash thing, to take upon himself
the conduct of a suit against such opponents
as Sharpe, and Sir Robert Percy
—practised in law—hardened in iniquity
—and now driven to desperation.
Mr. Friend was the only man, who
stood steadily by Alfred, and never
wavered in his opinion—“Trust to truth
and justice,” said he,—“You did right
not to compromise—Be firm—If you
fail, you will have this consolation, you
will have done all that man could do to
deserve success.”—
—The day of trial approached.—
Mr. Friend had hoped, till very late
in the business, that the object of their adversaries
was only to intimidate, and that
they would never let it go to trial—Now
it was plain they would—But on what
grounds?—Again and again Mr. Friend
and Alfred perused and reperused Sir John
Percy's deed, and examined the opinions
of counsel of the first eminence.—Both
law and right appeared to be clearly on

their side; but it was not likely, that
their experienced opponents should persist
without having some strong resource.
A dread silence was preserved by Sir
Robert Percy and by Mr. Solicitor
Sharpe.—They must have some deep
design; what it could be remained to
be discovered even till the day of trial.