

I HAVE spent so much time, and taken up so much room in my description of London, and the adjacent parts, that I must be the more cautious, at least, as to needless excursions in the country near it. The villages round London partake of the influence of London, so much, that it is observed as London is increased, so they are all increased also, and from the same causes.
Hackney and Bromley are the first villages which begin the county of Middlesex, east; for Bow as reckoned to Stepney, is a part of the great mass. This town of Hackney is of a great extent, containing no less than 12 hamlets or separate villages.
All these, are within a few years so increased in buildings, and so fully inhabited, that there is no comparison to be made between their present and past state. Every separate hamlet is increased, and some of them more than treble as big as formerly; indeed as this whole town is included in the bills of mortality, though no where joining to London, it is in some respects to be called a part of it.
This town is so remarkable for the retreat of wealthy citizens, that there is at this time near a hundred coaches kept in it; though I will not join with a certain satirical author, who said of Hackney, that there were more coaches than Christians in it.
Newington, Tottenham, Edmonton, and Enfield stand all in a line N. from the city; the increase of buildings is so great in them all, that they seem to a traveller to be one continued street; especially Tottenham and Edmunton, and in them all, the new buildings so far exceed the old, especially in the value of them, and figure of the inhabitants, that the fashion of the towns are quite altered.
There is not any thing more fine in their degree, than most of the buildings this way; only with this observation, that they are generally belonging to the middle sort of mankind, grown wealthy by trade, and who still taste of London; some of them live both in the city, and in the country at the same time : yet many of these are immensely rich.
High-gate and Hamstead are next on the north-side. At the first is a very beautiful house built by the late Sir William Ashurst, on the very summit of the hill, and with a view from the very lowest windows over the whole vale, to the city : and that so eminently, that they see the very ships passing up and down the river for 12 or 15 miles below London. The Jews have particularly fixed upon this town for their country retreats, and some of them are very wealthy; they live there in good figure, and have several trades particularly depending upon them, and especially, butchers of their own to supply them with provisions killed their own way; also, I am told, they have a private synagogue here.
In the chase, at Enfield is a fine lodge formerly possessed by the Earl of Denbigh : now we are told that General Pepper is fixed ranger of the chase, and resides there. This chase was once a very beautiful place, and when King James I resided at Theobalds, which he loved for the pleasure of his hunting; it was then very full of deer, and all sorts of game; but it has suffered several depredations since that, and particularly in the late Protector’s usurpation, when it was utterly stripped, both of game, and timber, and let out in farms to tenants, for the use of the public. After the Restoration, it was reassumed, and laid open again. Woods and groves were every where planted, and the whole chase stored with deer. But the young timber which indeed began to thrive, was so continually plundered, and the deer-stealers have so harassed the deer, and both perhaps by those who should have preserved it, as well as by others, that the place was almost ruined for a forest, and little but hares and bushwood was to be found in it. But now we hear, that by the vigilance of General Pepper, the chase is much recovered, and likely to be a place fit for the diversion of a prince, as it has been before.
The Mineral Waters, or Barnet Wells, are on the declivity of a hill; they were formerly in great request, being very much approved by physicians; but of late, they began to decline, and are now almost forgotten: other waters at Islington, and at Hampstead having grown popular in their stead.
Hampstead indeed is risen from a little country village, to a city, not upon the credit only of the waters, though ’tis apparent, its growing greatness began there; but company increasing gradually, and the people liking both the place and the diversions together; it grew suddenly populous, and the concourse of people was incredible. This consequently raised the rate of lodgings, and that increased buildings, till the town grew up from a little village, to a magnitude equal to some cities; nor could the uneven surface, inconvenient for building, uncompact, and unpleasant, check the humour of the town, for even on the very steep of the hill, where there’s no walking twenty yards together, without tugging up a hill, or straddling down a hill, yet ’tis all one, the buildings increased to that degree, that the town almost spreads the whole side of the hill.
On the top of the hill indeed, there is a very pleasant plain, called the Heath, which on the very summit, is a plain of about a mile every way and in good weather ’tis pleasant airing upon it, and some of the streets are extended so far, as that they begin to build, even on the highest part of the hill. But it must be confessed, ’tis so near heaven, that I dare not say it can be a proper situation, for any but a race of mountaineers, whose lungs have been used to a rarified air, nearer the second region, than any ground for 30 miles round it.
Here is a most beautiful prospect indeed, for we see here Hanslop Steeple one way, which is within eight miles of Northampton, N.W. to Landown-Hill in Essex another way, east, at least 66 miles from one another; the prospect to London, and beyond it to Bansted Downs, south; Shooters-Hill, S.E. Red-Hill, S.W. and Windsor-Castle, W. is also uninterrupted. Indeed due north, we see no farther than to Barnet, which is not above six miles; but the rest is sufficient.
At the foot of this hill is an old seat of the Earls of Chesterfields, called Bellsize; which for many years had been neglected, and as it were forgotten. But being taken lately by a certain projector to get a penny, and who knew by what handle to take the gay part of the world, he has made it a true house of pleasure. This brought a wonderful concourse of people to the place, for they were so effectually gratified in all sorts of diversion, that the wicked part at length broke in, till it alarmed the magistrates, and I am told it has been now in a manner suppressed by the hand of justice. Here was a great room fitted up with abundance of dexterity for their balls. One saw pictures and furniture there beyond what was to have been expected in a mere public house; and ’tis hardly credible how it drew company to it. But it could not be, no British government could be supposed to bear long with the liberties taken on such public occasions. So as I have said, they are reduced, at least restrained from liberties which they could not preserve by their prudence.
Yet Hampstead is not much the less frequented for this. But as there is (especially at the Wells) a conflux of all sorts of company, even Hampstead itself has suffered in its good name; and you see sometimes more gallantry than modesty: so that the ladies who value their reputation, have of late more avoided the wells and walks at Hampstead, than they had formerly done.
I could not be at Hampstead, and not make an excursion to Edgworth, a little market town. From Hide-Park Corner, just where Tyburn stands, the road makes one straight line without any turning, even to the very town of St Albans. In this road lies the town of Edgworth, some will have it that it was built by King Edgar the Saxon monarch, and called by his name, and so will have the town called Edgar, and that it was built as a garrison on the said Watling-street, to preserve the high-way from thieves: but all this I take to be fabulous, and without authority.
Near this town, and which is the reason for naming it, the present Duke of Chandos has built a most magnificent palace or mansion house, I might say, the most magnificent in England. This palace is so beautiful in its situation, so lofty, so majestic the appearance of it, that a pen can but ill describe it, the pencil not much better; ’tis only fit to be talked of upon the very spot, when the building is under view, to be considered in all its parts.
The fronts are all of freestone, the columns and pilasters are lofty and beautiful, the windows very high, with all possible ornaments. In a word, the whole structure is built with such a profusion of expense, and all finished with such a brightness of fancy, goodness of judgment; that I can assure you, we see many palaces of sovereign princes abroad, which do not equal it, which yet pass for very fine too either within or without. No ornament is wanting to make it the finest house in England. The plastering and gilding is done by the famous Pargotti an Italian, said to be the finest artist in those particular works now in England. The great salon or hall is painted by Paolucci, for the Duke spared no cost to have every thing as rich as possible. The pillars supporting the building are all of marble: the great staircase is the finest by far of any in England; and the steps are all of marble, every step being of one whole piece, about 22 foot in length.
Nor is the splendour which the present Duke lives in at this place, at all beneath what such a building calls for, and yet, so far is the Duke from having exhausted himself by this prodigy of building; that-we see him since that laying out a scheme, and storing up materials for building another house for his city convenience, on the north side of the new square, called Oxford or Cavendish Square, near Maribone; and if that is discontinued it seems to be so, only because the Duke found an opportunity to purchase another much more to his advantage; namely, the Duke of Ormond’s house in St James’s Square.
It is in vain to attempt to describe the beauties of this building at Cannons; the whole is a beauty, and as the firmament is a glorious mantle filled with, or as it were made up of a concurrence of lesser glories the stars; so every part of this building adds to the beauty of the whole. The avenue is spacious and majestic, and as it gives you the view of two fronts, joined as it were in one, the distance not admitting you to see the angle, which is in the centre; so you are agreeably drawn in, to think the front of the house almost twice as large as it really is. And yet when you come nearer you are again surprised, by seeing the winding passage opening as it were a new front to the eye, of near 120 feet wide, which you had not seen before, so that you are lost a while in looking near hand for what you so evidently saw a great way off.
The great palaces in Italy, are either the work of sovereign princes, or have been ages in their building; one family laying the design, and ten succeeding ages and families being taken up, in carrying on the building. But Cannons had not been three years in the Duke’s possession, before we saw this prodigy rise out of the ground, as if he had been resolved to merit that motto which the French king assumed, He saw, and it was made.
The inside of this house is as glorious, as the outside is fine; the lodgings are indeed most exquisitely finished, and if I may call it so, royally furnished; the chapel is a singularity, not only in its building, and the beauty of its workmanship, but in this also, that the Duke maintains there a full choir, and has the worship performed there with the best music, after the manner of the Chapel Royal, which is not done in any other noble man’s chapel in Britain; no not the Prince of Wales’s, though heir apparent to the crown.
Nor is the chapel only furnished with such excellent music, but the Duke has a set of them to entertain him every day at dinner.
In his gardens and out-houses the Duke keeps a constant night-guard, who take care of the whole place, duly walk the rounds, and constantly give the hour to the family at set appointed places and times; so that the house has some waking eyes about it, to keep out thieves and spoilers night and day. In a word, no nobleman in England, and very few in Europe, lives in greater splendour, or maintains a grandeur and magnificence, equal to the Duke of Chandos. Here are continually maintained, and that in the dearest part of England, as to house expenses, not less than one hundred and twenty in family, and yet a face of plenty appears in every part of it; nothing needful is with-held, nothing pleasant is restrained; every servant in the house is made easy, and his life comfortable; and they have the felicity that it is their lord’s desire and delight that it should be so.
Two mile from hence, we enter a spacious heath or common called Bushy-Heath, where, again, we have a very agreeable prospect.
I cannot but remember, with some satisfaction, that having two foreign gentlemen in my company, in our passing over this heath, I say I could not but then observe, and now remember it with satisfaction, how they were surprised at the beauty of this prospect, and how they looked at one another, and then again turning their eyes every way in a kind of wonder, one of them said to the other, that England was not like other countries, but it was all a planted garden.
They had there on the right hand, the town of St Albans in their view; and all the spaces between, and further beyond it, looked indeed like a garden. The enclosed corn-fields made one grand parterre, the thick planted hedge rows, like a wilderness or labyrinth, divided in espaliers; the villages interspersed, looked like so many several noble seats of gentlemen at a distance. In a word, it was all nature, and yet looked all like art; on the left hand we see the west-end of London, Westminster-Abbey, and the Parliament-House, but the body of the city was cut off by the hill, at which Hampstead intercepted the sight on that side. More to the south we had Hampton Court, and S.W. Windsor, and between both, all those most beautiful parts of Middlesex and Surrey, on the bank of the Thames.
At the farther end of this heath, is the town of Bushy, and at the end of the town, the Earl of Essex has a very good old seat, situate in a pleasant park, at Cashiobery; a little farther, is the town of Hemstead, noted for an extraordinary corn-market, and at Ashridge, near Hemstead, is an ancient mansion house of the Duke of Bridge-water.
St Albans is the capital town, though not the county town of Hertfordshire, it has a great corn market, and is famous for its ancient church, built on the ruins, or part of the ruins of the most famous abbey of Verulam; the greatness of which, is to be judged by the old walls, which one sees for a mile before we come to town.
In this church as some workmen were digging for the repairs of the church, they found some steps which led to a door in a very thick stone wall, which being opened, there was discovered an arched stone vault, and in the middle of it a large coffin near 7 foot long, which being opened, there was in it the corpse of a man, the flesh not consumed, but discoloured; by the arms and other paintings on the wall, it appeared that this must be the body of Humphry Duke of Gloucester, commonly called the good Duke of Gloucester, one of the sons of Henry IV and brother to King Henry V, and by the most indisputable authority, must have lain buried there 277 years.
But I must travel no farther this way, till I have taken a journey west from London, and seen what the country affords that way; the next towns adjacent to London, are, Kensington, Chelsea, Hammersmith, Fulham, Twickenham, &c. all of them near, or adjoining to the river of Thames, and which, by the beauty of their buildings, make good the north shore of the river, answerable, to what I have already described.
Kensington cannot be named without mentioning the king’s palace there; a building which may now be called entirely new, though it was originally an old house of the Earl of Nottingham’s of whom the late King William bought it, and then enlarged it as we see; some of the old building still remaining in the centre of the house.
The house itself fronts to the garden three ways, the gardens being now made exceeding fine, and enlarged to such a degree, as to reach quite from the great road to Kensington town, to the Acton road north, more than a mile. The first laying out of these gardens was the design of the late Queen Mary, who finding the air agreed with, and was necessary to the health of the king, resolved to make it agreeable to her self too, and gave the first orders for enlarging the gardens: the author of this account, having had the honour to attend her majesty, when she first viewed the ground, and directed the doing it, speaks this with the more satisfaction.
But this house has lost much of its pleasantness on one account, namely, that all the princes that ever might be said to single it out for their delight, had the fate to die in it; namely, King William, Prince George of Denmark, and lastly, Queen Anne her self; since which it has not been so much in request, King George having generally kept his summer, when in England, at Hampton Court.
This south wing was burnt down by accident, the king and queen being both there, the queen was a little surprised at first, apprehending some treason, but King William a stranger to fears smiled at the suggestion, cheered her majesty up, and being soon dressed, they both walked out into the garden, and stood there some hours till they perceived the fire by the help that came in, and by the diligence of the foot guards, was gotten under foot.
It is no wonder if the Court being so much at Kensington, that town has increased in buildings, so I do not place that to the same account as of the rest. On the south side of the street over against the palace, is a fair new large street, and a little way down a noble square full of very good houses, but since the Court has so much declined the palace, the buildings have not much increased.
South of this town stands Chelsea, a town of palaces, and which by its new extended buildings seems to promise itself to be made one time or other a part of London, I mean London in its new extended capacity, which if it should once happen, what a monster must London be, extending (to take it in a line) from the farther end of Chelsea, west, to Deptford-Bridge east, which I venture to say, is at least eleven miles.
Here is the noblest building, and the best foundation of its kind in the world, viz. for the entertainment of maimed and old soldiers. If we must except the hospital called Des Invalids at Paris, it must be only that the number is greater there, but I pretend to say that the economy of the invalids there, is not to compare with this at Chelsea; and as for the provisions, the lodging and attendance given, Chelsea infinitely exceeds that at Paris. Here the poor men are lodged, well clothed, well furnished, and well fed, and I dare say there are thousands of poor families in England who are said to live well too, and do not feed as the soldiers there are fed; and as for France, I may add, they know nothing there what it is to live so. The like may be said of the invalid sea men at the hospital of Greenwich.
Near this hospital or college, is a little palace, I had almost called it a paradise, of the late Earl of Ranelagh. It is true that his lordship was envied for the work, but had it been only for the beauties of the building, and such things as these, I should have been hardly able to censure it, the temptation would have been so much. In a word, the situation, the house, the gardens, the pictures, the prospect, and the lady, all is such a charm; who could refrain from coveting his neighbour’s ... &c.
Let it suffice to tell you that there’s an incredible number of fine houses built in all these towns within these few years, and that England never had such a glorious show to make in the world before. In a word, being curious in this part of my enquiry, I find two thousand houses which in other places would pass for palaces, and most, if not all the possessors whereof, keep coaches in the little towns or villages of the county of Middlesex, west of London only; and not reckoning any of the towns within three miles of London. Among all these three thousand houses I reckon none but such, as are built since the year 1666, and most of them since the Revolution.
Among these, that is to say, among the first two thousand new foundations, there are very many houses belonging to the nobility, and to persons of quality, (some of whom) have been in the ministry; which excel all the rest; such as Secretary Johnson’s, and others. This last is a seat so exquisitely finished, that his majesty was pleased to dine there, to view the delightful place, and honour it with his presence, that very day, that I was writing this account of it. The king was pleased to dine in the green house, or rather in a pleasant room which Mr Johnson built, joining to the green house; from whence is a prospect every way into the most delicious gardens. Here is a complete vineyard, and Mr Johnson who is a master of gardening, perhaps the greatest master now in England, has given a testimony that England notwithstanding the changeable air and uncertain climate, will produce most excellent wines, if due care be taken in the gardening or cultivating, as also in the curing and managing part; and without due care in these, not France it self will do it.
In the village of Hammersmith, which was formerly a long scattering place, full of gardeners’ grounds, with here and there an old house of some bulk: I say, in this village we see now not only a wood of great houses and palaces, but a noble square built as it were in the middle of several handsome streets, as if the village seemed inclined to grow up into a city. Here we are told they design to obtain the grant of a market, though it be so near to London, and some talk also of building a fine stone bridge over the Thames; but these things are yet but in embryo, though it is not unlikely but they may be both accomplished in time, and also Hammersmith and Chiswick joining thus, would in time be a city indeed.
I have now ranged the best part of Middlesex, a county made rich, pleasant, and populous by the neighbourhood of London. The borders of, the county indeed have three market towns; which I shall but just mention, Stanes, Colebrook, and Uxbridge. This last, a pleasant large market town, famous in particular, for having abundance of noble seats of gentlemen and persons of quality in the neighbourhood. This town is also famous in story, for being the town where an attempt was in vain made in the late war, to settle the peace of these nations, by a treaty. Some say both sides were sincerely inclined to peace; some say neither side; all I can say of it is, in the words of blessed St Paul, Sathan hindered.
On the right hand as we ride from London to Uxbridge, or to Colebrook, we see Harrow, a little town on a very high hill, and is therefore called Harrow on the Hill. The church of this town standing upon the summit of the hill, and having a very handsome and high spire, they tell us, King Charles, ridiculing the warm disputes among some critical scripturalists of those times, concerning the visible church of Christ upon earth; used to say of it, that if there was e’er a visible church upon earth, he believed this was one.
From hence, we proceeded on the road towards Oxford; but first turned to the right to visit Aylesbury. This is the principal market town in the county of Bucks; though Buckingham a much inferior place, is called the county town. Here also is held the election for Members of Parliament, or knights of the shire for the county, and county gaol, and the assizes. It is a large town, has a very noble market for corn, and is famous for a large tract of the richest land in England, extended for many miles round. It was my hap formerly, to be at Aylesbury, when there was a mighty confluence of noblemen and gentlemen, at a famous horse race at Quainton-Meadow, not far off, where was then the late Duke of Monmouth, and a great many persons of the first rank, and a prodigious concourse of people.
Were there not in every part of England at this time so many fine palaces, and so many curious gardens, that it would but be a repetition of the same thing to describe them; I should enter upon that task with great cheerfulness here, as at Clifden, the Earl of Orkney’s fine seat near Windsor, and at several other places, but I proceed. We went on from Aylesbury to Thame or Tame, a large market town on the River Thames. This brings me to mention the Vale of Aylesbury; which is eminent for the richest land, and perhaps the richest graziers in England. But it is more particularly famous for the head of the River Thame or Thames, which rises in this vale near a market town called Tring, and waters the whole vale either by itself or the several streams which run into it, and when it comes to the town of Tame, is a good large river.
At Tring abovenamed is a most delicious house, built à la moderne, as the French call it, by the late Mr Guy, who was for many years Secretary of the Treasury, and continued it till near his death; when he was succeeded by the late Mr Lowndes. There was an eminent contest here between Mr Guy, and the poor of the parish, about his enclosing part of the common to make him a park; Mr Guy presuming upon his power, set up his pales, and took in a large parcel of open land, called Wiggington-Common; the cottagers and farmers opposed it, by their complaints a great while; but finding he went on with his work, and resolved to do it, they rose upon him, pulled down his banks, and forced up his pales, and carried away the wood, or set it on a heap and burnt it; and this they did several times, till he was obliged to desist. After some time he began again, offering to treat with the people, and to give them any equivalent for it. But that not being satisfactory, they mobbed him again. How they accommodated it at last, I know not: I mention this as an instance of the popular claim in England; which we call right of commonage, which the poor take to be as much their property, as a rich man’s land is his own.
From Thame, a great corn market, the Thame joins the other branch called also the Thames, at a little town called Dorchester. I observe that most of our historians reject the notion that Mr Cambden makes so many flourishes about, of the marriage of Thame and Isis; that this little river was called the Thame, and the other, the Isis; and that being joined, they obtained the united name of Thamisis: I may say they reject it, and so do I.
From hence I came to Oxford, a name known throughout the learned world; a city famous in our English history for several things, besides its being an university.
1. So eminent for the goodness of its air, and healthy situation; that our Courts have no less than three times, if my information is right, retired hither, when London has been visited with the pestilence; and here they have been always safe.
2. It has also several times been the retreat of our princes, when the rest of the kingdom has been embroiled in war and rebellion; and here they have found both safety and support; at least, as long as the loyal inhabitants were able to protect them.
3. It was famous for the noble defence of religion, which our first reformers and martyrs made here, in their learned and bold disputations against the Papists, in behalf of the Protestant religion; and their triumphant closing the debates, by laying down their lives for the truths which they asserted.
4. It was likewise famous for resisting the attacks of arbitrary power, in the affair of Magdalen College, in King James’s time; and the Fellows laying down their fortunes, though not their lives, in defence of liberty and property.
This, to use a scripture elegance, is that city of Oxford; the greatest (if not the most ancient) university in this island of Great-Britain; and perhaps the most flourishing at this time, in men of polite learning, and in the most accomplished masters in all sciences, and in all the parts of acquired knowledge in the world.
I know there is a long contest, and yet undetermined between the two English universities, about the antiquity of their foundation; and as they have not decided it themselves, who am I? and what is this work? that I should pretend to enter upon that important question, in so small a tract?
It is out of question, that in the largeness of the place, the beauty of situation, the number of inhabitants, and of scholars, Oxford has the advantage. But fame tells us, that as great and applauded men, as much recommended, and as much recommending themselves to the world, and as many of them have been produced from Cambridge, as from Oxford.
Oxford has several things as a university, which Cambridge has not; and Cambridge ought not to be so meanly thought of, but that it has several things in it, which cannot be found in Oxford. For example, the theatre, the museum, or chamber of rarities, the Bodleian Library, the number of colleges, and the magnificence of their buildings are on the side of Oxford, yet King’s College Chapel, and College, is in favour of Cambridge; for as it is now edifying, it is likely to be the most admired in a few years of all the colleges of the world.
I have said something of Cambridge; I’ll be as brief about Oxford as I can. It is a noble flourishing city, so possessed of all that can contribute to make the residence of the scholars easy and comfortable, that no spot of ground in England goes beyond it. The situation is in a delightful plain, on the bank of a fine navigable river, in a plentiful country, and at an easy distance from the capital city, the port of the country.
To enter into the detail or description of all the colleges, halls, &c. would be to write a history of Oxford, which in so little a compass as this work can afford, must be so imperfect, so superficial, and so far from giving a stranger a true idea of the place; that it seems ridiculous, even to think it can be to anyone’s satisfaction.
As therefore I did in the speaking of Cambridge, I shall now give a summary of what a traveller may be supposed to observe in Oxford, en passant, and leave the curious inquirer to examine the histories of the place. There are in Oxford 17 colleges, and seven halls, some of these colleges as particularly, Christ Church, Magdalen, New College, Corpus Christi, Trinity and St John’s will be found to be equal, if not superior to some universities abroad; whether we consider the number of the scholars, the greatness of their revenues, or the magnificence of their buildings.
Besides the colleges, some of which are extremely fine and magnificent; there are some public buildings which make a most glorious appearance. The first and greatest of all is the theatre, a building not to be equalled by any thing of its kind in the world; no, not in Italy itself. Not that the building of the theatre here is as large as Vespasian’s or that of Trajan at Rome; neither would any thing of that kind be an ornament at this time, because not at all suited to the occasion, the uses of them being quite different.
We see by the remains that those amphitheatres, as they were for the exercise of their public shows, and to entertain a vast concourse of people, to see the fighting of the gladiators, the throwing criminals to the wild beasts, and the like, were rather great magnificent bear-gardens, than theatres, for the actors of such representations, as entertained the polite part of the world; consequently, those were vast piles of building proper for the uses for which they were built.
The theatre at Oxford prepared for the public exercises of the schools, and for the operations of the learned part of the English world only, is in its grandeur and magnificence, infinitely superior to any thing in the world of its kind; it is a finished piece, as to its building, the front is exquisitely fine, the columns and pilasters regular, and very beautiful; ’tis all built of freestone. The model was approved by the best masters of architecture at that time, in the presence of K. Charles II, who was himself a very curious observer, and a good judge; Sir Christopher Wren was the director of the work, as he was the person that drew the model: Archbishop Sheldon, they tell us, paid for it, and gave it to the university. There is a world of decoration in the front of it, and more beautiful additions, by way of ornament, besides the ancient inscription, than is to be seen any where in Europe; at least, where I have been.
The Bodleian Library is an ornament in it self worthy of Oxford, where its station is fixed, and where it had its birth. The old library, the first public one in Oxford, was afterward joined to another, and both enlarged by the bounty of Humphry Duke of Gloucester, founder of the divinity schools: these libraries being lost, and the books embezzled by the many changes and hurries of the suppressions in the reign of Henry VIII the commissioners appointed by King Edward VI to visit the universities, and establish the Reformation; found very few valuable books or manuscripts left in them.
In this state of things, one Sir Thomas Bodley, a wealthy and learned knight, zealous for the encouragement both of learning and religion, resolved to apply, both his time, and estate, to the erecting and furnishing a new library for the public use of the university.
In this good and charitable undertaking, he went on so successfully, for so many years, and with such a profusion of expense, and obtained such assistances from all the encouragers of learning in his time, that having collected books and manuscripts from all parts of the learned world; he got leave of the university, (and well they might grant it) to place them in the old library room, built as is said, by the good Duke Humphry.
To this great work, great additions have been since made in books, as well as contributions in money, and more are adding every day; and thus the work was brought to a head, the 8th of Nov. 1602, and has continued increasing by the benefactions of great and learned men to this day. To remove the books once more and place them in beauty and splendour suitable to so glorious a collection, the late Dr Radcliff has left a legacy of 40000/. say some, others say not quite so much, to the building a new repository or library for the use of the university. This work is not yet built, but I am told ’tis likely to be such a building as will be greater ornament to the place than any yet standing in it.
Other curious things in Oxford are, the museum, the chamber of rarities, the collection of coins, medals, pictures and ancient inscriptions, the physic-garden, &c.
It is no part of my work to enter into the dispute between the two universities about the antiquity of their foundation. But this I shall observe for the use of those who insist that it was the piety of the Popish times to which we owe the first institution of the university it self, the foundation and endowment of the particular colleges, and the encouragement arising to learning from thence, all which I readily grant; but would have them remember too, that though those foundations stood as they tell us eight hundred years, and that the Reformation as they say, is not yet of 200 years standing, yet learning has more increased and the universities flourished more; more great scholars been produced, greater libraries been raised, and more fine buildings been erected in these 200 years than in the 800 years of Popery; and I might add, as many great benefactions have been given, notwithstanding this very momentous difference; that the Protestant’s gifts are merely acts of charity to the world, and acts of bounty, in reverence to learning and learned men, without the grand excitement of the health of their souls, and of the souls of their fathers, to be prayed out of purgatory and get a ready admission into heaven, and the like.
Oxford, had for many ages the neighbourhood of the Court, while their kings kept up the royal palace at Woodstock; which though perhaps it was much discontinued, for the fate of the fair Rosamond, mistress to Henry Fitz Empress, or Henry II, of which history tells us something, and fable much more; yet we after find that several of the kings of England made the house and park at Woodstock, which was always famed for its pleasant situation, the place of their summer retreat for many years.
It is still a most charming situation, and ’tis still disputable after all that has been laid out, whether the country round gives more lustre to the building, or the building to the country. It has now changed masters, ’tis no more a royal house or palace for the king; but a mark of royal bounty to a great, and at that time powerful subject, the late Duke of Marlborough.

The magnificence of the building does not here as at Canons, at Chatsworth, and at other palaces of the nobility, express the genius and the opulence of the possessor, but it represents the bounty, the gratitude, or what else posterity pleases to call it, of the English nation, to the man whom they delighted to honour. Posterity when they view in this house the trophies of the Duke of Marlborough’s fame, and the glories of his great achievements will not celebrate his name only; but will look on Blenheim House, as a monument of the generous temper of the English nation; who in so glorious a manner rewarded the services of those who acted for them as he did. Nor can any nation in Europe show the like munificence to any general, no nor the greatest in the world.
Again, it is to be considered, that not this house only, built at the nation’s expense, was thus given; but lands and pensions to the value of above one hundred thousand pounds sterl. and honours the greatest England can bestow. These are all honours indeed to the Duke, but infinitely more to the honour of the nation.
The magnificent work then is a national building, and must for ever be called so. Nothing else can justify the vast design, a bridge or ryalto rather, of one arch costing 20000l. and this, like the bridge at the Escurial in Spain, without a river. Gardens of near 100 acres of ground. Offices fit for 300 in family. Out-houses fit for the lodgings of a regiment of guards, rather than of livery servants. Also the extent of the fabric, the avenues, the salons, galleries, and royal apartments; nothing below royalty and a prince, can support an equipage suitable to the living in such a house. And one may without a spirit of prophecy, say, it seems to intimate, that some time or other Blenheim may and will return to be as the old Woodstock once was, the palace of a king.
I shall enter no farther into the description, because ’tis yet a house unfurnished, and it can only be properly said what it is to be, not what it is : but as. the Duke is dead, the Duchess old, and the heir abroad, when and how it shall be all performed, requires more of the gift of prophecy than I am master of.
From Woodstock I could not refrain taking a turn a little northward as high as Banbury to the banks of the Charwell, to see the famous spot of ground where a vigorous rencounter happened between the Royalists in the grand Rebellion, and the Parliament’s forces, under Sir William Waller; I mean at Croprady Bridge, near Banbury. It was a vigorous action, and in which the king’s forces may be said fairly to outgeneral their enemies, which really was not always their fate. I had the plan of that action before me, which I have had some years, and found out every step of the ground as it was disputed on both sides by inches, where the horse engaged and where the foot, where Waller lost his cannon, and where he retired; and it was evident to me the best thing Waller could do, (though superior in number) was to retreat as he did, having lost half his army.
From thence, being within eight miles of Edge-Hill, where the first battle in that war happened, I had the like pleasure of viewing the ground about Keinton, where that bloody battle was fought; it was evident, and one could hardly think of it without regret, the king with his army had an infinite advantage by being posted on the top of the hill, that he knew that the Parliament’s army were under express orders to fight, and must attack him lest his majesty who had got two days’ march of them, should advance to London, where they were out of their wits for fear of him.
The king I say knowing this, ’tis plain he had no business but to have entrenched, to fight upon the eminence where he was posted, or have detached 15000 men for London, while he had fortified himself with a strong body upon the hill. But on the contrary, his majesty scorning to be pursued by his subjects, his army excellently appointed, and full of courage, not only halted, but descended from his advantages and offered them battle in the plain field, which they accepted.
Here I cannot but remark that this action is perhaps the only example in the world, of a battle so furious, so obstinate, managed with such skill, every regiment behaving well, and doing their duty to the utmost, often rallying when disordered, and indeed fighting with the courage and order of veterans; and yet not one regiment of troops that had ever seen the face of an enemy, or so much as been in arms before. It’s true, the king had rather the better of the day; and yet the rebel army though their left wing of horse was entirely defeated, behaved so well, that at best it might be called a drawn battle; and the loss on both sides was so equal, that it was hard to know who lost most men.
But to leave the war, ’tis the place only I am taking notice of. From hence I turned south, for I was here on the edge both of Warwickshire, and Gloucestershire. But I turned south, and coming down by and upon the west side of Oxfordshire, to Chipping-Norton, we were showed Roll-Richt-Stones, a second Stone-Henge; being a ring of great stones standing upright, some of them from 5 to 7 foot high. I leave the debate about the reason and antiquity of this ancient work to the dispute of the learned, who yet cannot agree about them any more than about Stone-Henge in Wiltshire.
We were very merry at passing through a village called Bloxham, on the occasion of a meeting of servants for hire, which the people there call a Mop; ’tis generally in other places vulgarly called a Statute, because founded upon a statute law in Q. Elizabeth’s time for regulating of servants. This I christened by the name of a Jade-Fair, at which some of the poor girls began to be angry, but we appeased them with better words. I have observed at some of these fairs, that the poor servants distinguish themselves by holding something in their hands, to intimate what labour they are particularly qualified to undertake; as the carters a whip, the labourers a shovel, the wood man a bill, the manufacturers a wool comb, and the like. But since the ways and manners of servants are advanced as we now find them to be, those Jade Fairs are not so much frequented as formerly.
Here we saw also the famous parish of Brightwell, of which it was observed, that there had not been an alehouse nor a dissenter from the church, nor any quarrel among the inhabitants that rise so high as to a suit of law within the memory of man. But they could not say it was so still, especially as to the alehouse part; though very much is still preserved, as to the unity and good neighbourhood of the parishioners, and their conformity to the church.
Hence we came to the famous Cotswold-Downs, so eminent for the best of sheep, and finest wool in England : it was of the breed of these sheep. And fame tells us that some were sent by King Richard I into Spain, and that from thence the breed of their sheep was raised, which now produce so fine a wool, that we are obliged to fetch it from thence, for the making our finest broad cloths; and which we buy at so great a price.
Upon these downs we had a clear view of the famous old Roman high-way, called the Fosse, which evidently crosses all the middle part of England, and is to be seen and known (though in no place plainer than here,) quite from the Bath to Warwick, and thence to Leicester, to Newark, to Lincoln, and on to Barton, upon the bank of Humber.
Here it is still the common road, and we followed it over the downs to Cirencester. We observed also how several cross roads as ancient as it self, and perhaps more ancient, joined it, or branched out of it; some of which the people have by ancient usage though corruptly called also Fosses, making the word Fosse as it were a common name for all roads. For example, the Ackemanstreet which is an ancient Saxon road leading from Buckinghamshire through Oxfordshire to the Fosse, and so to the Bath; this joins the Fosse between Burford and Cirencester. It is worth observing how this is said to be called Ackeman’s Street; namely, by the Saxon way of joining their monosyllables into significant words, as thus, ackman or achman, a man of aching limbs, in English a cripple travelling to the Bath for cure. So Achmanstreet was the road or street for diseased people going to the Bath; and the city of Bath was on the same account called Achmanchester, or the city of diseased people; or, Urbs Ægrotorum hominum. Thus much for antiquity.
In passing this way we very remarkably crossed four rivers within the length of about 10 miles, and enquiring their names, the country people called them every one the Thames, which moved me a little to enquire the reason, which is no more than this; namely, that these rivers, which are, the Lech, the Coln, the Churn, and the Isis; all rising in the Cotswold Hills and joining together and making a full stream at Lechlade near this place, they become one river there, and are all called Thames, or vulgarly Temms; also beginning there to be navigable, you see very large barges at the key, taking in goods for London, which makes the town of Lechlade a very populous large place.
On the Churne one of those rivers stands Cirencester, or Ciciter for brevity, a very good town, populous and rich, full of clothiers, and driving a great trade in wool; which as likewise at Tetbury, is brought from the midland counties of Leicester, Northampton, and Lincoln, where the largest sheep in England are found, and where are few manufactures; it is sold here in quantities, so great, that it almost exceeds belief.
As we go on upon the Fosse, we see in the vale on the left hand, the ancient town of Malmsbury, famous for a monastery, and a great church, built out of the ruins of it. We next arrived at Marshfield, a Wiltshire clothing town, very flourishing and in the evening keeping still the Fosse-Way, we arrived at Bath.
My description of this city would be very short, and indeed it would have been a very small city, (if at all a city) were it not for the hot baths here, which give both name and fame to the place.
The antiquity of this place, and of the baths here, is doubtless very great, though I cannot come in to the inscription under the figure, said to be of a British king, placed in that called the King’s Bath, which says that this King Bladud found out the use of these baths, 300 years before our Saviour’s time. I say, I cannot come into this, because even the discovery is ascribed to the magic of the day, not their judgment in the physical virtue of minerals, and mineral-waters.
There remains little to add, but what relates to the modern customs, the gallantry and diversions of that place, in which I shall be very short. It has been observed before, that in former times this was a resort hither for cripples; and we see the crutches hang up at the several baths, as the thank-offerings of those who have come hither lame, and gone away cured. But now we may say it is the resort of the sound, rather than the sick; the bathing is made more a sport and diversion, than a physical prescription for health; and the town is taken up in raffling, gaming, visiting, and in a word, all sorts of gallantry and levity.
The whole time indeed is a round of the utmost diversion. In the morning you (supposing you to be a young lady) are fetched in a close chair, dressed in your bathing clothes, that is, stripped to the smock, to the Cross-Bath. There the music plays you into the bath, and the women that tend you, present you with a little floating wooden dish, like a basin; in which the lady puts a handkerchief, and a nosegay, of late the snuff-box is added, and some patches; though the bath occasioning a little perspiration, the patches do not stick so kindly as they should.
Here the ladies and the gentlemen pretend to keep some distance, and each to their proper side, but frequently mingle here too, as in the King and Queens Bath, though not so often; and the place being but narrow, they converse freely, and talk, rally, make vows, and sometimes love; and having thus amused themselves an hour, or two, they call their chairs and return to their lodgings.
The rest of the diversion here, is the walks in the great church, and at the raffling shops, which are kept (like the cloister at Bartholomew Fair,) in the churchyard, and ground adjoining. In the afternoon there is generally a play, though the decorations are mean, and the performances accordingly; but it answers, for the company here (not the actors) make the play, to say no more. In the evening there is a ball, and dancing at least twice a week, which is commonly in the great town hall, over the market-house; where there never fails in the season to be a great deal of very good company.
There is one thing very observable here, which though it brings abundance of company to the Bath, more than ever used to be there before; yet it seems to have quite inverted the use and virtue of the waters, (viz.) that whereas for seventeen hundred or two thousand years, if you believe King Bladud, the medicinal virtue of these waters had been useful to the diseased people by bathing in them, now they are found to be useful also, taken into the body; and there are many more come to drink the waters, than to bathe in them; nor are the cures they perform this way, less valuable than the outward application; especially in colics, ill digestion, and scorbutic distempers.
This discovery they say, is not yet above fifty years old, and is said to be owing to the famous Dr Radcliff, but I think it must be older, for I have my self drank the waters of the Bath above fifty years ago. But be it so, ’tis certain, ’tis a modern discovery, compared to the former use of these waters.
On the N.W. of this city up a very steep hill, is the King’s Down, where sometimes persons of quality who have coaches go up for the air. But very few people care to have coaches here, it being a place where they have but little room to keep them, and less to make use of them. And the hill up to the Downs is so steep, that the late Queen Anne was extremely frighted in going up, her coachman stopping to give the horses breath, and the coach wanting a dragstaff, run back in spite of all the coachman’s skill; the horses not being brought to strain the harness again, or pull together for a good while, and the coach putting the guards behind it into the utmost confusion, till some of the servants setting their heads and shoulders to the wheels, stopped them by plain force.
Following the course of the river Avon, which runs through Bath, we come in ten miles to the city of Bristol, the greatest, the richest, and the best port of trade in Great Britain, London only excepted. The merchants of this city not only have the greatest trade, but they trade with a more entire independency upon London, than any other town in Britain. And ’tis evident in this particular, (viz.) that whatsoever exportations they make to any part of the world, they are able to bring the full returns back to their own port, and can dispose of it there. This is not the case in any other port in England. But they are often obliged to ship part of the effects in the ports abroad, on the ships bound to London; or to consign their own ships to London, in order both to get freight, as also to dispose of their own cargoes.
But the Bristol merchants as they have a very great trade abroad, so they have always buyers at home, for their returns, and that such buyers that no cargo is too big for them. To this purpose, the shopkeepers in Bristol who in general are all wholesale men, have so great an inland trade among all the western counties, that they maintain carriers just as the London tradesmen do, to all the principal countries and towns from Southampton in the south, even to the banks of the Trent north; and though they have no navigable river that way, yet they drive a very great trade through all those counties.
The greatest inconveniences of Bristol, are, its situation, and the tenacious folly of its inhabitants; who by the general infatuation, the pretence of freedoms and privileges, that corporation-tyranny, which prevents the flourishing and increase of many a good town in England, continue obstinately to forbid any, who are not subjects of their city sovereignty, (that is to say, freemen,) to trade within the chain of their own liberties; were it not for this, the city of Bristol, would before now, have swelled and increased in buildings and inhabitants, perhaps to double the magnitude it was formerly of.
This is evident by this one particular. There is one remarkable part of the city where the liberties extend not at all, or but very little without the city gate. Here and no where else, they have an accession of new inhabitants; and abundance of new houses, nay, some streets are built, and the like ’tis probable would have been at all the rest of the gates, if liberty had been given. As for the city itself, there is hardly room to set another house in it, ’tis so close built, except in the great square, the ground about which is a little too subject to the hazard of inundations: so that people do not so freely enlarge that way.
The Tolsey of this city, (so they call their Exchange where their merchants meet,) has been a place too of great business, yet so straitened, so crowded, and so many ways inconvenient, that the merchants have been obliged to do less business there, than indeed the nature of their great trade requires. They have therefore long solicited, a sufficient authority of Parliament, empowering them to build a Royal Exchange; but there is not much progress yet made in this work, though if finished, it would add much to the beauty of the city of Bristol.
There are in Bristol 21 parish churches, many meeting-houses, especially Quakers, one (very mean) cathedral, the reason of which, may be, that it is but a very modern bishopric. It is supposed they have an hundred thousand inhabitants in the city, and within three miles of its circumference; and they say above three thousand sail of ships belong to that port, but of the last I am not certain.
’Tis very remarkable, that this city is so plentifully supplied with coals though they are all brought by land carriage, that yet they are generally bought by the inhabitants, laid down at their doors, after the rate of from seven to nine shillings per chaldron.
The situation of the city is low, but on the side of a rising hill. The ground plat of it is said very much to resemble that of old Rome, being circular, with something greater diameter one way than another, but not enough to make it oval: and the river cutting off one small part, as it were, a sixth, or less from the rest. They draw all their heavy goods here on sleds, or sledges without wheels, which kills a multitude of horses; and the pavement is worn so smooth by them, that in wet-weather the streets are very slippery, and in frosty-weather ’tis dangerous walking.
From this city I resolved to coast the marshes or border of Wales, especially South-Wales, by tracing the rivers Wye, and Lug, into Monmouth and Herefordshire. But I changed this resolution on the following occasion; namely, the badness and danger of the ferries over the Severn, besides, having formerly traversed these counties, I can without a re-visit, speak to every thing that is considerable in them, and shall do it in a letter by itself. But in the mean time, I resolved to follow the course of the famous River Severn, by which I should necessarily see the richest, most fertile, and most agreeable part of England; the bank of the Thames only excepted.
From Bristol West, you enter the county of Gloucester, and keeping the Avon in view, you see King Road, where the ships generally take their departure. There is also a little farther, an ugly, dangerous, and very inconvenient ferry over the Severn, to the mouth of Wye; namely, at Aust; the badness of the weather, and the sorry boats, at which, deterred us from crossing there.
As we turn north towards Gloucester, we lose the sight of the Avon, and in about two miles exchange it for an open view of the Severn Sea, which you see on the west side, and which is as broad as the ocean there; except, that looking N.W. you see plainly the coast of South Wales; and particularly a little nearer hand, the shore of Monmouthshire. Then as you go on, the shores begin to draw towards one another, and the coasts to lie parallel; so that the Severn appears to be a plain river, or an æstuarium, somewhat like the Humber, or as the Thames is at the Nore, being 4 to 5 and 6 miles over; and to give it no more than its just due, a most raging, turbulent, furious place. This is occasioned by those violent tides called the Bore, which flow here sometimes six or seven foot at once, rolling forward like a mighty wave: so that the stern of a vessel shall on a sudden be lifted up six or seven foot upon the water, when the head of it is fast a ground.
After coasting the shore about 4 miles farther, the road being by the low salt marshes, kept at a distance from the river: we came to the ferry called Aust Ferry, from a little dirty village called Aust; near which you come to take boat.
When we came to Aust, the hither side of the passage, the sea was so broad, the fame of the Bore of the tide so formidable, the wind also made the water so rough, and which was worse, the boats to carry over both man and horse appeared (as I have said above) so very mean, that in short none of us cared to venture: so we came back, and resolved to keep on the road to Gloucester. By the way we visited some friends at a market-town, a little out of the road, called Chipping-Sodbury, a place of note for nothing that I saw, but the greatest cheese market in all that part of England; or, perhaps, any other, except Atherstone, in Warwickshire.
Hence we kept on north, passing by Dursley to Berkley-Castle; the ancient seat of the Earls of Berkley, a noble though ancient building, and a very fine park about it. I say nothing of the dark story of King Edward II of England; who, all our learned writers agree, was murthered in this castle: as Richard II was in that of Pontefract, in Yorkshire; I say I take no more notice of it here, for history is not my present business. ’Tis true, they show the apartments where they say that king was kept prisoner: but they do not admit that he was killed there. The place is rather ancient, than pleasant or healthful, lying low, and near the water; but ’tis honoured by its present owner, known to the world for his many services to his country.
From hence to Gloucester, we see nothing considerable, but a most fertile, rich country, and a fine river, but narrower as you go northward, ’till a little before we come to Gloucester it ceases to be navigable by ships of burthen, but continues to be so, by large barges, above an hundred miles farther; not reckoning the turnings and windings of the river. Besides that, it receives several large and navigable rivers into it.
Gloucester is an ancient middling city, tolerably built, but not fine; was fortified and stood out obstinately against its lord King Charles the 1st, who besieged it to his great loss in the late Rebellion, for which it had all its walls and works demolished; for it was then very strong. Here is a large stone bridge over the Severn, the first next the sea; and this, and the cathedral is all I see worth recording of this place.
The cathedral is an old venerable pile, with very little ornament within or without, yet ’tis well built; and though plain, it makes together, especially the tower, a very handsome appearance. The inhabitants boast much of its antiquity, and tell us, that a bishop and preachers were placed here, in the very infancy of the Christian religion; namely, in the year 189. But this I take ad referendum. The cathedral they tell us has been three times burnt to the ground.
The whispering place in this cathedral, has for many years passed for a kind of wonder; but since, experience has taught us the easily comprehended reason of the thing: and since there is now the like in the church of St Paul, the wonder is much abated. However, the verses written over this whispering place, intimate, that it has really passed for something miraculous; and as the application rather shows religion, than philosophy in the author, the reader may not like them the worse.


Doubt not, that God who sits on high,
   Thy secret prayers can hear;
When a dead wall thus cunningly,
   Conveys soft whispers to thine ear.


From Gloucester we kept the east shore of the Severn, and in twelve miles came to Tewksbury, a large and very populous town situate upon the River Avon, this is called the Warwickshire Avon, to distinguish it from the Avon at Bristol and others, for there are several rivers in England of this name; and some tell us that avona was an old word in the British tongue signifying a river. This town is famous for a great manufacture of stockings, as are also, the towns of Pershore and Evesham, or Esham; on the same river.
The great old church at Tewksbury may indeed be called the largest private parish church in England; I mean, that is not a collegiate or cathedral church. This town is famous for the great, and as may be said, the last battle, fought between the two houses of Lancaster and York, in which Edward IV was conqueror; and in, or rather after which, Prince Edward the only surviving son of the House of Lancaster, was killed by the cruel hands of Richard the king’s brother; the same afterwards Richard III or Crookback Richard. In this place begins that fruitful and plentiful country which was called the Vale of Esham, which runs all along the banks of the Avon, to Stratford upon Avon, and in the south part of Warwickshire; and so far, (viz. to Stratford,) the River Avon is navigable.
At this last town, going into the parish church, we saw the monument of old Shakespear, the famous poet, and whose dramatic performances so justly maintain his character among the British poets; and perhaps will do so to the end of time. The busto of his head is in the wall on the north side of the church, and a flat grave-stone covers the body, in the aisle just under him. On which grave-stone these lines are written.


Good friend, for Jesus’s sake, forbear
   To move the dust that resteth here.
Blest be the man that spares these stones,
   And curst be he, that moves my bones.


The navigation of this River Avon is an exceeding advantage to all this part of the country, and also to the commerce of the city of Bristol. For by this river they drive a very great trade for sugar, oil, wine, tobacco, iron, lead, and in a word, all heavy goods which are carried by water almost as far as Warwick; and in return the corn and especially the cheese, is brought back from Gloucestershire and Warwickshire, to Bristol.
Gloucestershire must not be passed over, without some account of a most pleasant and fruitful vale which crosses part of the country, from east to west on that side of the Cotswold, and which is called Stroud-Water; famous not for the finest cloths only, but for dying those cloths of the finest scarlets, and other grain colours that are any where in England; perhaps in any part of the world. The clothiers lie all along the banks of this river for near 20 miles, and in the town of Stroud, which lies in the middle of it, as also at Paynswick, which is a market-town at a small distance north.
From Tewkesbury we went north 12 miles, to Worcester, all the way still on the bank of the Severn; and here we had the pleasing sight of the hedge-rows, being filled with apple trees and pear trees, and the fruit so common, that any passenger as they travel the road may gather and eat what they please; and here, as well as in Gloucestershire, you meet with cider in the public-houses sold as beer and ale is in other parts of England, and as cheap.
Worcester is a large, populous, old, though not a very well built city; I say not well built because the town is close and old, the houses standing too thick. The north part of the town is more extended and also better built. There is a good old stone bridge over the Severn, which stands exceeding high from the surface of the water. But as the stream of the Severn is contracted here by the buildings on either side, there is evident occasion sometimes for the height of the bridge, the waters rising to an incredible height in the winter-time.
It narrowly escaped burning, but did not escape plundering at the time when the Scots army commanded by King Ch. II in person, was attacked here by Cromwel’s forces; ’twas said some of the Royalist’s officers themselves, proposed setting the city on fire, when they saw it was impossible to avoid a defeat, that they might the better make a retreat; which they proposed to do over the Severn, and so to march into Wales: but that the king, a prince from his youth, of a generous and merciful disposition would by no means consent to it.
I went to see the town-house, which afforded nothing worth taking notice of, unless it be how much it wants to be mended with a new one; which the city, they say, is not so much inclined, as they are able and rich to perform.
The cathedral of this city is an ancient, and indeed, a decayed building; the body of the church is very mean in its aspect, nor did I see the least ornament about it, I mean in the outside. The tower is low, without any spire, only four very small pinnacles on the corners; and yet the tower has some little beauty in it more than the church itself, too; and the upper part has some images in it, but decayed by time.
The inside of the church has several very ancient monuments in it, particularly some royal ones; as that of King John, who lies interred between two sainted bishops, namely, St Oswald, and St Woolstan. Whether he ordered his interment in that manner, believing that they should help him up at the last call, and be serviceable to him for his salvation I know not; it is true they say so, but I can hardly think the king himself so ignorant, whatever the people might be in those days of superstition; nor will I say but that it may be probable, they may all three go together at last (as it is) and yet, without being assistant to, or acquainted with one another at all.
Here is also a monument for that famous Countess of Salisbury, who dancing before, or with K. Edward III in his great hall at Windsor, dropped her garter, which the king taking up, honoured it so much as to make it the denominating ensign of his new order of knighthood, which is grown so famous, and is called the most Noble Order of the Garter. What honour, or that any honour redounds to that most noble order, from its being so derived from the garter of a ... for ’tis generally agreed, she was the king’s mistress, I will not enquire.
There are several other ancient monuments in this church, too many to be set down here. They reckon up 99 bishops of this diocese, beginning at the year 980, out of which catalogue they tell us have been furnished to the world, 1 Pope, 4 Saints, 7 High-Chancellors of England, 11 Arch-Bishops, 2 Lord Treasurers of England, 1 Chancellor to the Queen, 1 Lord President of Wales, and 1 Vice President.
This city is very full of people, and the people generally esteemed very rich, being full of business, occasioned chiefly by the clothing trade, of which the city and the country round carries on a great share, as well for the Turkey trade as for the home trade.
The salt springs in this county which were formerly esteemed as next to miraculous, have since the discovery of the mines of rock salt in Lancashire, Cheshire, &c. lost all of wonder that belonged to them, and much of the use also; the salt made there being found to be much less valuable than what is now made of the other. So I need say little to them.
Near this city are the famous Maulvern Hills, or Mauvern Hills, and they say they are seen from the top of Salisbury steeple, which is above 50 miles. There was a famous monastery at the foot of these hills, on the S.W. side, and the ruins are seen to this day; the old legend of wonders performed by the witches of Mauvern, I suppose they mean the religieuse of both kinds, are too merry, as well as too ancient for this work.
They talk much of mines of gold and silver, which are certainly to be found here, if they were but looked for, and that Mauvern would outdo Potosi for wealth; but ’tis probable if there is such wealth, it lies too deep for this idle generation to find out, and perhaps to search for.
There are three or four especial manufactures carried on in this country, which are peculiar to it self, or at least to this county with the two next adjoining; namely, Chester, and Warwick.
1. Monmouth cups sold chiefly to the Dutch seamen, and made only at Beawdly.
2. Fine stone pots for the glass-makers melting their metal, of which they make their fine flint glass, glass plates, &c. not to be found any where but at Stourbridge in this county, the same clay makes crucibles and other melting pots.
3. The Birmingham iron works: the north indeed claims a share or part of this trade, but it is only a part.
4. Kidderminster stuffs called lindsey woolseys, they are very rarely made any where else.
At Stourbridge also they have a very great manufacture for glass of all sorts.
From Worcester I took a tour into Wales, which though, it was not at the same time with the rest of my journey; my account I hope will be as effectual.
A little below Worcester the Severn receives a river of a long course and deep channel, called the Teme, and going from Worcester we passed this river at a village called Broadways; from whence keeping a little to the north, we come to Ludlow-Castle, on the bank of the same river. On another journey I came from Stourbridge, thence to Kidderminster, and passing the Severn at Bewdley we came to Ludlow, on the side of Shropshire.
The castle of Ludlow shows in its decay, what it was in its flourishing estate. It is the palace of the Princes of Wales, that is, to speak more properly, it is annexed to the principality of Wales; which is the appanage of the heir apparent, and this is his palace in right of his being made Prince of Wales.
The situation of this castle is most beautiful indeed; there is a most spacious plain or lawn in its front, which formerly continued near two miles; but much of it is now enclosed. The country round it is exceeding pleasant, fertile, populous, and the soil rich; nothing can be added by nature to make it a place fit for a royal palace. It only wants the residence of its princes, but that is not now to be expected.
The castle itself is in the very perfection of decay, all the fine courts, the royal apartments, halls, and rooms of state, lie open, abandoned and some of them falling down; for since the Courts of the President and Marches are taken away, here is nothing to do that requires the attendance of any public people; so that time, the great devourer of the works of men, begins to eat into the very stone walls, and to spread the face of royal ruins upon the whole fabric.
The town of Ludlow is a tolerable place, but it decays to be sure with the rest. King Henry VIII established the Court of the President here, and the Council of the Marches and all causes of nisi prius, or of civil right were tried here, before the Lord President and Council; but this Court was entirely taken away by Act of Parliament in our days, and this, as above, tends to the sensible decay of the town as well as of the castle.
From Ludlow we took our course due south to Lemster, or Leominster, a large and good trading town on the River Lug. This river is lately made navigable by Act of Parliament, to the very great profit of the trading part of this country, who have now a very great trade for their corn, wool, and other products of this place, into the river Wye, and from the Wye, into the Severn, and so to Bristol.
Leominster has nothing very remarkable in it, but that it is a well built, well inhabited town. The church which is very large, has been in a manner rebuilt, and is now, especially in the inside, a very beautiful church. This town, besides the fine wool, is noted for the best wheat, and consequently the finest bread; whence Lemster bread, and Weobly ale, is become a proverbial saying.
The country on our right as we came from Ludlow is very fruitful and pleasant, and is called the Hundred of Wigmore, from which the late Earl of Oxford at his creation, took the title of Baron of Wigmore. And here we saw two ancient castles, (viz.) Brampton-Brian, and Wigmore-Castle, both belonging to the Earl’s father, Sir Edward Harley; Brampton is a stately pile, but not kept in full repair, the fate of that ancient family not permitting the rebuilding it as we were told was intended.
We were now on the borders of Wales, properly so called; for from the windows of Brampton-Castle, you have a fair prospect into the county of Radnor, which is, as it were, under its walls; nay, even this whole county of Hereford, was, if we may believe antiquity, a part of Wales, and was so esteemed for many ages. The people of this county too, boast that they were a part of the ancient Silures, who for so many ages withstood the Roman arms, and who could never be entirely conquered. But that’s an affair quite beyond my enquiry. I observed they are a diligent and laborious people, chiefly addicted to husbandry, and they boast, perhaps, not without reason, that they have the finest wool, and the best hops, and the richest cider in all Britain.
Indeed the wool about Leominster, and in the Hundred of Wigmore observed above, and the Golden Vale as ’tis called, for its richness on the banks of the river Dove, (all in this county) is the finest without exception, of any in England, the South Down wool not excepted. As for hops, they plant abundance indeed all over this county, and they are very good. And as for cider, here it was, that several times for 20 miles together, we could get no beer or ale in their public houses, only cider; and that so very good, so fine, and so cheap, that we never found fault with the exchange; great quantities of this cider are sent to London, even by land carriage, though so very remote, which is an evidence for the goodness of it, beyond contradiction.
One would hardly expect so pleasant, and fruitful a country as this, so near the barren mountains of Wales; but ’tis certain, that not any of our southern counties, the neighbourhood of London excepted, comes up to the fertility of this county.
From Lemster it is ten miles to Hereford, the chief city, not of this county only, but of all the counties west of Severn. ’Tis a large and a populous city, and in the time of the late Rebellion, was very strong, and being well fortified, and as well defended, supported a tedious and very severe siege; for besides the Parliament’s forces, who could never reduce it, the Scots army was called to the work, who lay before it, ’till they laid above 4000 of their bones there, and at last, it was rather taken by the fate of the war, than by the attacks of the besiegers.
Coming to Hereford, we could not but enquire into the truth of the story; of the removing the two great stones near Sutton, which the people confirmed to us. The story is thus, between Sutton and Hereford, is a common meadow called the Wergins, where were placed two large stones for a watermark; one erected upright, and the other laid a-thwart. In the late Civil Wars, about the Year 1652, they were removed to about twelve score paces distance, and no body knew how; which gave occasion to a common opinion, that they were carried thither by the Devil. When they were set in their places again, one of them required nine yoke of oxen to draw it.
It is truly an old, mean built, and very dirty city, lying low, and on the bank of Wye, which sometimes incommodes them very much, by the violent freshes that come down from the mountains of Wales; for all the rivers of this county, except the Driffin-Doe, come out of Wales.
The chief thing remarkable next to the cathedral, is the college, which still retains its foundation laws, and where the residentiaries are still obliged to celibacy, but otherwise, live a very happy, easy, and plentiful life; being furnished upon the foot of the foundation, besides their ecclesiastical stipends.
The great church is a magnificent building, however ancient, the spire is not high, but handsome, and there is a fine tower at the west end, over the great door or entrance. The choir is very fine, though plain, and there is a very good organ. The revenues of this bishopric are very considerable, but lie under some abatement at present, on account of necessary repairs.
From Hereford keeping the bank of Wye as near as we could, we came to Ross, a good old town, famous for good cider, a great manufacture of iron ware, and a good trade on the River Wye, and nothing else as I remember, except it was a monstrous fat woman, who they would have had me gone to see. But I had enough of the relation, and so I suppose will the reader, for they told me she was more than three yards about her waist; that when she sat down, she was obliged to have a small stool placed before her, to rest her belly on, and the like.
From hence we came at about 8 miles more into Monmouthshire, and to the town of Monmouth. It is an old town situate at the conflux of the Wye and of Munnow, whence the town has its name; it stands in the angle where the rivers join, and has a bridge over each river, and a third over the River Trothy, which comes in just below the other.
This town shows by its reverend face, that it is a place of great antiquity, and by the remains of walls, lines, curtains, and bastions, that it has been very strong, and by its situation that it may be made so again. This place is made famous, by being the native place of one of our most ancient historians Jeoffry of Monmouth. At present ’tis rather a decayed than a flourishing town, yet, it drives a considerable trade with the city of Bristol, by the navigation of the Wye.
Near Monmouth the Duke of Beaufort has a fine old seat, called Troy; but since the family has had a much finer place at Badminton, near the Bath; this though a most charming situation seems to be much neglected.
Lower down upon the Wye stands Chepstow, the sea port for all the towns seated on the Wye and Lug, and where their commerce seems to centre. Here is a noble bridge over the Wye: to this town ships of good burthen may come up, and the tide runs here with the same impetuous current as at Bristol; the flood rising from six fathom, to six and a half at Chepstow Bridge. This is a place of very good trade, as is also Newport, a town of the like import upon the River Uske, a great river, though not so big as Wye, which runs through the centre of the county, and falls also into the Severn Sea.
This county furnishes great quantities of corn for exportation, and the Bristol merchants frequently load ships here, to go to Portugal, and other foreign countries with wheat; considering the mountainous part of the west of this county, ’tis much they should have such good corn, and so much of it to spare; but the eastern side of the county, and the neighbourhood of Herefordshire, supplies them.
I am now at the utmost extent of England west, and here I must mount the Alps, traverse the mountains of Wales, (and indeed, they are well compared to the Alps in the inmost provinces;) but with this exception, that in abundance of places you have the most pleasant and beautiful valleys imaginable, and some of them, of very great extent, far exceeding the valleys so famed among the mountains of Savoy, and Piedmont.
The two first counties which border west upon Monmouthshire, are Brecknock, and Glamorgan, and as they are very mountainous, so that part of Monmouthshire which joins them, begins the rising of the hills. Kyrton-Beacon, Tumber-low, Blorench, Penvail, and Skirridan, are some of the names of these horrid mountains, and are all in this shire; and I could not but fancy my self in view of Mount Brennus, Little Barnard, and Great Barnard, among the Alps.
We now entered South Wales. We began with Brecknock, being willing to see the highest of the mountains, which are said to be hereabouts; and indeed, except I had still an idea of the height of the Alps, and of those mighty mountains of America, the Andes, which we see very often in the South-Seas, 20 leagues from the shore: I say except that I had still an idea of those countries on my mind, I should have been surprised at the sight of these hills; nay, (as it was) the Andes and the Alps, though immensely high, yet they stand together, and they are as mountains, piled upon mountains, and hills upon hills; whereas sometimes we see these mountains rising up at once, from the lowest valleys, to the highest summits which makes the height look horrid and frightful, even worse than those mountains abroad; which though much higher, rise as it were, one behind another: so that the ascent seems gradual, and consequently less surprising.
Brecknockshire is a mere inland county, as Radnor is; the English jestingly (and I think not very improperly) call it Breakneckshire. ’Tis mountainous to an extremity, except on the side of Radnor, where it is something more low and level. It is well watered by the Wye, and the Uske, two rivers mentioned before; upon the latter stands the town of Brecknock, the capital of the county. The most to be said of this town, is what indeed I have said of many places in Wales, (viz.) that it is very ancient, and indeed to mention it here for all the rest, there are more tokens of antiquity to be seen every where in Wales, than in any particular part of England, except the counties of Cumberland, and Northumberland. Here we saw Brecknock-Mere, a large or long lake of water, two or three miles over. They take abundance of good fish in this lake, so that as is said of the river Thysse in Hungary; they say this lake is two thirds water, and one third fish. The country people affirm, there stood a city once here, but, that by the judgment of Heaven, for the sin of its inhabitants, it sunk into the earth, and the water rose up in the place of it.
It was among the mountains of this county that the famous Glendower sheltered himself, and taking arms on the deposing Richard II proclaimed himself Prince of Wales; and they show us several little refuges of his in the mountains, whither he retreated, and from whence, again, he made such bold excursions into England.
Though this county be so mountainous, provisions are exceeding plentiful, and also very good all over the county; nor are these mountains useless, even to the city of London, as I have noted of other counties; for from hence they send yearly, great herds of black cattle to England, and which are known to fill our fairs and markets, even that of Smithfield it self.
The yellow mountains of Radnorshire are the same, and their product of cattle is the same; nor did I meet with any thing new, and worth noticing, except monuments of antiquity, which are not the subject of my enquiry. The stories of Vortigern, and Roger of Mortimer, are in every old woman’s mouth here. There is a kind of desert too, on that side, which is scarce habitable or passable, so we made it our north boundary for this part of our journey, and turned away to Glamorganshire.
Entering this shire, from Radnor and Brecknock, we were saluted with Monuchdenny-Hill on our left, and the Black-Mountain on the right, and all a ridge of horrid rocks and precipices between, over which, if we had not had trusty guides, we should never have found our way; and indeed, we began to repent our curiosity, as not having met with any thing worth the trouble; and a country looking so full of horror, that we thought to have given over the enterprise, and have left Wales out of our circuit. But after a day and a night conversing thus with rocks and mountains, our guide brought us down into a most agreeable vale, opening to the south, and a pleasant river running through it, called the Taaffe; and following the course of this river, we came in the evening to the ancient city of Landaff, and Caerdiff, standing almost together.
Landaff is the seat of the episcopal see, and a city; but Cardiff which is lower on the river, is the port and town of trade; and has a very good harbour opening into the Severn Sea, about 4 miles below the town. The cathedral is a neat building, but very ancient; they boast that this church was a house of religious worship many years before any church was founded in England, and that the Christian religion flourished here in its primitive purity, from the year 186, till the Pelagian heresy overspread this country; which being afterwards rooted out by the care of the orthodox bishop, they placed St Dobricius as the first bishop in this town of Landaff, then called Launton.
The south part of this country is a pleasant and agreeable place, and is very populous; ’tis also a very good, fertile, and rich soil, and the low grounds are so well covered with grass, and stocked with cattle, that they supply the city of Bristol with butter in very great quantities salted and barrelled up, just as Suffolk does the city of London.
The chief sea port is Swanzey, a very considerable town for trade, and has a very good harbour. Here is also a very great trade for coals, and culm, which they export to all the ports of Sommerset, Devon, and Cornwal, and also to Ireland itself; so that one sometimes sees a hundred sail of ships at a time loading coals here; which greatly enriches the country, and particularly this town of Swanzey, which is really a very thriving place; it stands on the River Tawye, or Taw. ’Tis very remarkable, that most of the rivers in this county chime upon the letters T, and Y, as Taaf, Tawy, Tuy, Towy, Tyevy. Neath is another port, where the coal trade is also considerable, though it stands farther within the land.
Having thus touched at what is most curious on this coast, we passed through the land of Gowre, and going still west, we came to Caermarthen, or Kaer-Vyrdhin, as the Welsh call it, the capital of the county of Kaermardhinshire.
This is an ancient but not a decayed town, pleasantly situated on the River Towy, or Tovy, which is navigable up to the town, for vessels of a moderate burthen. The town indeed is well built, and populous, and the country round it, is the most fruitful, of any part of all Wales, considering that it continues to be so for a great way; namely, through all the middle of the county, and a great way into the next; nor is this county so mountainous and wild, as the rest of this part of Wales: but it abounds in corn, and in fine flourishing meadows, as good as most are in Britain, and in which are fed, a very great number of good cattle.
The chancery, and exchequer of the principality, was usually kept at this town, till the jurisdiction of the Court and Marches of Wales was taken away. This town was also famous for the birth of the old British prophet Merlin, of whom so many things are fabled, that indeed nothing of its kind ever prevailed so far, in the delusion of mankind, and who flourished in the year 480. And here also the old Britains often kept their parliament or assemblies of their wise men, and made their laws. The town was fortified in former times, but the walls are scarcely to be seen now, only the ruins of them.
We found the people of this county more civilised and more courteous, than in the more mountainous parts, where the disposition of the inhabitants seems to be rough, like the country. But here as they seem to converse with the rest of the world, by their commerce, so they are more conversible than their neighbours.
The next county west, is Pembrokeshire, which is the most extreme part of Wales on this side, in a rich, fertile, and plentiful country, lying on the sea coast, where it has the benefit of Milford Haven, one of the greatest and best inlets of water in Britain. Mr Cambden says it contains 16 creeks, 5 great bays, and 13 good roads for shipping, all distinguished as such by their names; and some say, a thousand sail of ships may ride in it, and not the topmast of one be seen from another; but this last, I think, merits confirmation.
Before we quitted the coast, we saw Tenbigh, the most agreeable town on all the sea coast of South Wales, except Pembroke, being a very good road for shipping, and well frequented. Here is a great fishery for herring in its season, a great colliery, or rather export of coals, and they also drive a very considerable trade to Ireland.
From hence, we crossed over the isthmus to Pembroke, which stands on the E. shore of the great haven of Milford. This is the largest and richest, and at this time, the most flourishing town of all S. Wales. Here are a great many English merchants, and some of them men of good business; and they told us, there were near 200 sail of ships belonged to the town, small and great; in a word, all this part of Wales is a rich and flourishing country, but especially this part is so very pleasant, and fertile, and is so well cultivated, that ’tis called by distinction, Little England, beyond Wales.
This is the place also made particularly famous for the landing of King Henry VII, then Duke of Richmond. From hence, being resolved to see the utmost extent of the country west, we ferried over the haven and went to Haverford, or by some called Haverford-West. Haverford is a better town than we expected to find, in this remote angle of Britain; ’tis strong, well built, clean, and populous.
From hence to St Davids, the country begins to look like Wales again, dry, barren, and mountainous; St Davids is not a bishop’s see only, but was formerly an arch-bishop’s, which they tell us, was by the Pope transferred to Dole in Britany, where it still remains.
The venerable aspect of this cathedral church, shows that it has been a beautiful building, but that it is much decayed. The west end or body of the church is tolerably well; the choir is kept neat, and in tolerable repair, the S. aisle without the choir, and the Virgin Mary’s chapel, which makes the E. end of the church, are in a manner demolished, and the roofs of both fallen in.
There are a great many eminent persons buried here, besides such, whose monuments are defaced by time. There is St Davids monument, to whom the church is dedicated, the monument of the Earl of Richmond, as also of the famous Owen Tudor.
This St David they tell us was uncle to King Arthur, that he lived to 146 years of age, that he was bishop of this church 65 years, being born in the year 496, and died ann. 642; that he built 12 monasteries, and did abundance of miracles.
Here the weather being very clear, we had a full view of Ireland, though at a very great distance. The land here is called St Davids Head, and from hence, there has some time ago, gone a passage boat constantly between England and Ireland, but that voiture is at present discontinued.
From hence we turned N. keeping the sea in our W. prospect, and a rugged mountainous country on the E. where the hills even darkened the air with their height; as we went on, we past by Newport, on the River Nevern, a town having a good harbour, and consequently a good trade with Ireland.
Here we left Pembrokeshire, and after about 22 miles, came to the town of Cardigan, an old and well inhabited town, on the River Tivy. ’Tis a very noble river indeed, and famous for its plenty of the best and largest salmon in Britain. The country people told us, that they had beavers here, which bred in the lakes among the mountains, and came down the stream of Tivy to feed; that they destroyed the young fry of salmon, and therefore the country people destroyed them; but they could shew us none of them, or any of their skins, neither could the countrymen describe them, or tell us that they had ever seen them; so that we concluded they only meant the otter, till I found after our return, that Mr Cambden mentions also, that there were beavers seen here formerly.
The town is not large, has been well fortified, but that part is now wholly neglected. It has a good trade with Ireland, and is enriched very much, as is all this part of the country, by the famous lead mines, formerly discovered by Sir Carbery Price, which are the greatest, and perhaps the richest in England; and particularly as they require so little labour and charge to come at the ore, which in many places lies within a fathom or two of the surface, and in some, even bare to the very top.
Going N. from the Tyvy about 25 miles, we came to Abrystwyth, that is to say, the town at the mouth of the River Ystwyth. This town is enriched by the coals and lead which is found in its neighbourhood, and is a populous, but a very dirty, black, smoky place, and we fancied the people looked as if they lived continually in the coal or lead mines. However, they are rich, and the place is very populous.
The whole county of Cardigan is so full of cattle, that ’tis said to be the nursery, or breeding-place for the whole kingdom of England, S. by Trent; but this is not a proof of its fertility, for though the feeding of cattle indeed requires a rich soil, the breeding them does not, the mountains and moors being as proper for that purpose as richer land.
Now we entered N. Wales, only I should add, that as we passed, we had a sight of the famous Plymlymon-Hill, out of the east side of which, rises the Severn, and the Wye; and out of the west side of it, rises the Rydall and the Ystwyth. This mountain is exceeding high, and though it is hard to say which is the highest hill in Wales, yet I think this bids fair for it; nor is the county for 20 miles round it, any thing but a continued ridge of mountains: so that for almost a whole week’s travel, we seemed to be conversing with the upper regions; for we were often above the clouds, I’m sure, a very great way, and the names of some of these hills seemed as barbarous to us, who spoke no Welch, as the hills themselves.
In passing Montgomery-shire, we were so tired with rocks and mountains, that we wished heartily we had kept close to the sea shore, but it not much mended the matter if we had, as I understood afterwards. The River Severn is the only beauty of this country, which rising I say, out of the Plymlymon Mountain, receives instantly so many other rivers into its bosom, that it becomes navigable before it gets out of the county; namely, at Welch Pool, on the edge of Shropshire. This is a good fashionable place, and has many English dwelling in it, and some very good families; but we saw nothing farther worth remarking.
The vales and meadows upon the bank of the Severn, are the best of this county, I had almost said, the only good part of it; some are of opinion, that, the very water of the Severn, like that of Nile, impregnates the valleys, and when it overflows, leaves a virtue behind it, particularly to itself; and this they say is confirmed, because all the country is so fruitful, wherever this river does overflow, and its waters reach. The town, or rather as the natives call it, the city of Montgomery, lies not far from this river, on the outer edge of the country next to Herefordshire. This was, it seems, a great frontier town in the wars between the English and the Welch, and was beautified and fortified by King Henry III; the town is now much decayed.
This county is noted for an excellent breed of Welch horses, which, though not very large, are exceeding valuable, and much esteemed all over England; all the North and West part of the county is mountainous and stony. We saw a great many old monuments in this country, and Roman camps wherever we came, and especially if we met any person curious in such things, we found they had many Roman coins; but this was none of my enquiry, as I have said already.
Merionithshire, or Merionydshire, lies west from Montgomeryshire; it lies on the Irish Sea, or rather the ocean; for St George’s Chanel does not begin till further north, and it is extended on the coast, for near 35 miles in length, all still mountainous and craggy. The principal river is the Tovy, which rises among the unpassable mountains, which range along the centre of this part of Wales, and which we call unpassable, for that even the people themselves called them so; we looked at them indeed with astonishment, for their rugged tops, and the immense height of them. Some particular hills have particular names, but otherwise we called them all the Black Mountains, and they well deserved the name; some think ’tis from the unpassable mountains of this county, that we have an old saying, that the devil lives in the middle of Wales, though I know there is another meaning given to it.
There is but few large towns in all this part, nor is it very populous; indeed much of it is scarce habitable, but ’tis said, there are more sheep in it, than in all the rest of Wales. On the sea shore however, we see Harleigh-Castle, which is still a garrison, and kept for the guard of the coast, but ’tis of no great strength, but by its situation.
Here among innumerable summits, and rising peaks of nameless hills, we saw the famous Kader-Idricks, which some are of opinion, is the highest mountain in Britain, another called Rarauvaur, another called Mowylwynda, and still every hill we saw, we thought was higher than all that ever we saw before.
We enquired here after that strange phenomenon which was not only seen, but fatally experienced by the country round this place, namely, of a livid fire, coming off from the sea; and setting on fire, houses, barns, stacks of hay and corn, and poisoning the herbage in the fields; of which there is a full account given in the Philosophical Transactions.

But to return to the face of things, as they appeared to us, the mountainous country spoken of runs away N. through this county and almost the next, I mean Caernarvonshire, where Snowden Hill is a monstrous height, and according to its name, had snow on the top in the beginning of June; and perhaps had so till the next June, that is to say, all the year. These unpassable heights were doubtless the refuges of the Britains, when they made continual war with the Saxons and Romans, and retreated on occasion of their being over powered, into these parts where, in short, no enemy could pursue them.
That side of the country of Carnarvon, which borders on the sea, is not so mountainous, and is both more fertile and more populous. The principal town in this part, is Carnarvon, a good town, with a castle built by Edward I to curb and reduce the wild people of the mountains, and secure the passage into Anglesea. As this city was built by Edward I so he kept his Court often here, and honoured it with his presence very much; and here his eldest son and successor, though unhappy, (Ed. II) was born, who was therefore called Edward of Caernarvon. This Edward was the first Prince of Wales; that is to say, the first of the Kings of England’s sons, who was vested with the title of Prince of Wales. It is a small, but strong town, clean and well built, and considering the place, the people are very courteous and obliging to strangers. It is seated on the firth or inlet called Menai, parting the isle of Anglesea, or Mona, from the main land; and here is a ferry over to the island called Abermenai Ferry: and from thence a direct road to Holly Head, where we went for no purpose, but to have another view of Ireland, though we were disappointed, the weather being bad and stormy.
Whoever travels critically over these mountains, I mean of S. Wales, and Merionithshire, will think Stone-henge in Wiltshire, and Roll-Rich Stones in Oxfordshire no more a wonder, seeing there are so many such, and such like, in these provinces; that they are not thought strange of at all, nor is it doubted, but they were generally monuments of the dead, as also are the single stones of immense bulk any other, of which we saw so many, that we gave over remarking them; some we saw from 7, 8, to 10, and one 16 foot high, being a whole stone, but so great, that the most of the wonder is, where they were found and how dragged to the place; since, besides the steep ascents to some of the hills on which they stand, it would be impossible to move some of them, now, with 50 yoke of oxen. And yet a great many of these stones are found confusedly lying one upon another on the utmost summit or top of the Glyder, or other hills, in Merionith and Carnarvonshire; to which it is next to impossible, that all the power of art, and strength of man and beast could carry them, and the people make no difficulty of saying the devil set them up there.
One of these monumental stones is to be seen a little way from Harleigh-Castle. It is a large stone lying flat, supported by three other stones at 3 of the 4 angles, though the stone is rather oval than square, it is almost 11 foot long, the breadth unequal, but in some places it’s from 7 to 8 foot broad, and it may be supposed has been both longer and broader; ’tis in some places above 2 foot thick, but in others ’tis worn almost to an edge by time. The three stones that support it, are about 20 inches square, ’tis supposed there has been four, two of which that support the thickest end, are near 8 foot high, the other not above 3 foot, being supposed to be settled in the ground, so that the stone lies sloping, like the roof of a barn. There are also two circles of stones in that island, such as Stone-henge, but the stones much larger.
These mountains are indeed so like the Alps, that except the language of the people, one could hardly avoid thinking he is passing from Grenoble to Susa, or rather passing the country of the Grisons. The lakes also, which are so numerous here, make the similitude the greater, nor are the fables which the country people tell of these lakes, much unlike the stories which we meet with among the Switzers, of the famous lakes in their country.
There is nothing of note to be seen in the Isle of Anglesea but the town, and the castle of Beaumaris, which was also built by King Edward I and called Beau-Marsh, or the Fine Plain; for here the country is very level and plain, and the land is fruitful and pleasant. As we went to Holly Head, by the S. part of the island from Newborough, and came back through the middle to Beaumaris, we saw the whole extent of it, and indeed, it is a much pleasanter country, than any part of N. Wales, that we had yet seen; and particularly is very fruitful for corn and cattle.
Here we crossed the Fretum, or strait of Meneu again ... to Bangor, a town noted for its antiquity, its being a bishop’s see, and an old, mean looking, and almost despicable cathedral church.
This church claims to be one of the most ancient in Britain, the people say, ’tis the most ancient; that St Daniel (to whom this church was dedicated) was first bishop here, in the year 512. They allow that the pagans, perhaps of Anglesea, ruined the church, and possessed the bishopric after it was first built, for above 100 years; nor is there any account of it from the year 512, to 1009. After this, the bishopric was ruined again by dilapidation, by one of its own bishops, whose name was Bulkeley, who, not only sold the revenues, but even the very bells, for which sacrilege he was struck blind; but this last is tradition only.
It is certainly at present a poor bishopric, and has but a poor cathedral; yet the bishops are generally allowed to hold some other good benefice in commendam, and the preferment seems to be a grateful introduction to the clergy, as the bishops are generally translated from hence, to a more profitable bishopric.
From Bangor we went north, (keeping the sea on our left hand) to Conway. This is the poorest but pleasantest town in all this county for the bigness of it; it is seated on the bank of a fine river, which is not only pleasant and beautiful, but is a noble harbour for ships, had they any occasion for them there; the stream is deep and safe, and the river broad, as the Thames at Deptford. It only wants a trade suitable to so good a port, for it infinitely out does Chester or Leverpool itself.
In this passage, we Went over the famous precipice called Penmen-muir, which indeed fame has made abundance more frightful, than it really is; for though the rock is indeed very high, and if any one should fall from it, it would dash them in pieces, yet, on the other hand, there is no danger of their falling; and besides, there is now a wall built all the way, on the edge of the precipice, to secure them.
We have but little remarkable in the road from Conway to Hollywell, but crags and rocks all along the N. shore of Denbeigh, till we come to Denbeigh town. This is the county town, and is a large populous place, which carries something in its countenance of its neighbourhood to England, but that which was most surprising, after such a tiresome and fatiguing journey, over the unhospitable mountains of Merioneth, and Carnarvonshire, was, that descending now from the hills, we came into a most pleasant, fruitful, populous, and delicious vale, full of villages and towns, the fields shining with corn, just ready for the reapers, the meadows green and flowery, and a fine river, with a mild and gentle stream running through it: nor is it a small or casual intermission, but we had a prospect of the country open before us, for above 20 miles in length, and from 5 to 7 miles in breadth, all smiling with the same kind of complexion; which made us think our selves in England again, all on a sudden.
In this pleasant vale, turning N. from Denbeigh, and following the stream of the river, we came to S. Asaph, a small city, with a cathedral, being a bishopric of tolerable good value, though the church is old. It is but a poor town, and ill built, though the country is so pleasant and rich round it. There are some old monuments in this church, but none of any note, nor could we read the Welch inscriptions.
From hence we come to Holly-well. The stories of this Well of S. Winifrid are, that the pious virgin, being ravished and murthered, this healing water sprung out of her body when buried; but this smells too much of the legend, to take up any of my time; the Romanists indeed believe it, as ’tis evident, from their thronging hither to receive the healing sanative virtue of the water, which they do not hope for as it is a medicinal water, but as it is a miraculous water, and heals them by virtue of the intercession and influence of this famous virgin, St Winifrid; of which I believe as much as comes to my share.
There is a little town near the well, which may, indeed, be said to have risen from the confluence of the people hither, for almost all the houses are either public houses, or let into lodgings; and the priests that attend here, and are very numerous, appear in disguise. Sometimes they are physicians, sometimes surgeons, sometimes gentlemen, and sometimes patients, or any thing as occasion presents. No body takes notice of them, as to their profession, though they know them well enough, no not the Roman Catholics themselves; but in private, they have their proper oratories in certain places, whither the votaries resort; and good manners has prevailed so far, that however the Protestants know who and who’s together; no body takes notice of it, or enquires where one another goes, or has been gone.
From hence we passed by Flint-Castle, and then in a few hours we crossed the River Dee, and arrived at the city of West Chester, from whence, I shall give a farther account of my journey in my next.
I am,
SIR,
Yours, &c.
