



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq. 

I have this moment intelligence from Simon Parsons,
one of Lord M.'s stewards, that his Lordship is very
ill. Simon, who is my obsequious servant, in virtue
of my presumptive heirship, gives me a hint in his
letter, that my presence at M.-Hall will not be amiss.
So, I must accelerate, whatever be the course I shall
be allowed or compelled to take. 
No bad prospects for this charming creature, if
the old peer would be so kind as to surrender; and
many a summons has his gout given him. A good
8000l. a year; and perhaps the title reversionary,
would help me up with her. 

Proudly as this lady pretends to be above all pride,
grandeur will have its charms with her; for grandeur
always makes a man's face shine in a woman's eye. 
I have a pretty good, because a clear, estate, as it is: 
But what a noble variety of mischief will 8000l. a
year enable a man to do? 
Perhaps thou'lt say, I do already all that comes into
my head: But that's a mistake—Not one half, I
will assure thee. And even good folks, as I have heard,
love to have the power of doing mischief, whether
they make use of it, or not. The late Queen Anne,
who was a very good woman, was always fond of
prerogative. And her ministers, in her name, in more
instances than one, made a ministerial use of this her
foible. 
* *
But now, at last, am I to be admitted to the
presence of my angry Fair-one: After three denials,
nevertheless; and a peremptory from me, by Dorcas,
that I must see her in her chamber, if I cannot see
her in the dining-room. 
Dorcas, however, tells me, that she says, if she
were at her own liberty, she would never see me more; 
and that she has been asking after the characters and
conditions of the neighbours. I suppose, now she has
found her voice, to call out for help from them, if
there were any to hear her. 
She will have it now, it seems, that I had the
wickedness, from the very beginning, to contrive for
her ruin, a house so convenient for dreadful mischief. 
Dorcas begs of her to be pacified—Intreats her to
see me with patience—Tells her, that I am one of
the most determin'd of men, as she has heard say— 
That gentleness may do with me; but that nothing
else will, she believes. And what, as her ladyship
(as she always stiles her) is married, if I had
broke my oath, or intended to break it!––– 

She hinted plain enough to the honest wench, that
she was not married. —But Dorcas would not understand
her. 
This shews, that she is resolv'd to keep no measures. 
And now is to be a trial of skill, whether she shall or not. 
Dorcas has hinted to her my Lord's illness, as a piece
of intelligence that dropped in conversation from me. 
But here I stop. My Beloved, pursuant to my peremptory
message, is just gone up into the dining-room. 