



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Mrs. Judith Norton. 

Sat. July 29. 
I congratulate you, my dear Mrs. Norton, with
all my heart, on your Son's recovery; which I
pray to God, with your own health, to perfect. 
I write in some hurry, being apprehensive of the
consequence of the hints you give of some method
you propose to try in my favour [With my relations,
I presume, you mean]: But you will not tell me
what, you say, if it prove unsuccessful. 
Now I must beg of you, that you will not take any
step in my favour, with which you do not first acquaint
me. 
I have but one request to make to them, besides
what is contained in my Letter to my Sister; and I
would not, methinks, for the sake of their own future
peace of mind, that they should be teazed so, by
your well-meant kindness, and that of Miss Howe,
as to be put upon denying me that. And why should
more be asked for me than I can partake of? More
than is absolutely necessary for my own peace? 
You suppose I should have my Sister's Answer to
my Letter by the time yours reached my hand. I
have it: And a severe one, a very severe one, it is. 
Yet, considering my fault in their eyes, and the provocations 

I am to suppose they so newly had from my
dear Miss Howe, I am to look upon it as a favour,
that it was answered at all. I will send you a copy
of it soon; as also of mine, to which it is an Answer. 
I have reason to be very thankful, that my Father
has withdrawn that heavy Malediction, which affected
me so much—A Parent's Curse, my dear Mrs. Norton! 
What Child could die in peace under a Parent's
Curse? so literally fulfilled too as this has been in
what relates to this life! 
My heart is too full to touch upon the particulars
of my Sister's Letter. I can make but one atonement
for my fault. May that be accepted! And may it
soon be forgotten, by every dear relation, that there
was such an unhappy Daughter, Sister, or Niece, as
Clarissa Harlowe! 
My Cousin Morden was one of those, who was so
earnest in prayers for my recovery, at Nine and Eleven
years of age, as you mention. My Sister thinks
he will be one of those, who will wish I never had
had a being. But pray, when he does come, let me
hear of it with the first. 
You think, that were it not for that unhappy notion
of my moving talent, my Mother would relent. 
What would I give to see her once more, and, altho'
unknown to her, to kiss but the hem of her garment! 
Could I have thought, that the last time I saw her
would have been the last, with what difficulty should
I have been torn from her embraced feet! —And
when, screened behind the yew-hedge on the 5th of
April last (a) , I saw my Father, and my Uncle Antony,
and my Brother and Sister, how little did I
think, that That would be the last time I should ever
see them; and, in so short a space, that so many
dreadful evils would befal me! 
But I can write nothing but what must give you
trouble. I will therefore, after repeating my desire 

that you will not intercede for me but with my previous
consent, conclude with the assurance, that I
am, and ever will be, 
Your most affectionate and dutiful,
Clarissa Harlowe. 