



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe.
(After her return from her.) 

Harlowe-Place, Feb. 20. 
I beg your excuse for not writing sooner. Alas,
my dear, I have sad prospects before me! My
brother and sister have succeeded in all their views. 
They have found out another lover for me; an hideous
one: —Yet he is encouraged by every-body.— 
No wonder that I was order'd home so suddenly! — 
At an hour's warning! —No other notice, you know,
than what was brought with the chariot that was to
carry me back. —It was for fear, as I have been inform'd
(an unworthy fear!), that I should have enter'd 

into any concert with Mr. Lovelace, had I
known their motive for commanding me home; apprehending,
'tis evident, that I should dislike the man. 
And well might they apprehend so: —For who do
you think he is? —No other than that Solmes! — 
Could you have believed it? —And they are all determined
too; my mamma with the rest! —Dear, dear
excellence! how could she be thus brought over!— 
when I am assured, that, on his first being proposed,
she was pleased to say, That, had Mr. Solmes the Indies
in possession, and would endow me with them,
she should not think him deserving of her Clarissa
Harlowe. 
The reception I met with at my return, so different
from what I used to meet with on every little absence
(and now I had been from them three weeks),
convinced me, that I was to suffer for the happiness
I had had in your company and conversation for that
most agreeable period. I will give you an account
of it. 
My brother met me at the door, and gave me his
hand, when I stepp'd out of the chariot. He bow'd
very low: Pray, Miss, favour me. —I thought it in
good humour; but found it afterwards mock respect: 
And so he led me, in great form, I prattling all the
way, inquiring of every-body's health (altho' I was
so soon to see them, and there was hardly time for
answers), into the great parlour; where were my father,
mother, my two uncles, and my sister. 
I was struck all of a heap as soon as I enter'd, to
see a solemnity which I had been so little used to on the
like occasions, in the countenance of every dear relation. 
They all kept their seats. I ran to my papa, and
kneeled: Then to my mamma: And met from both
a cold salute: From my papa, a blessing but half-pronounced: 
My mamma, indeed, called me, Child; 
but embraced me not with her usual indulgent ardor. 

After I had paid my duty to my uncles, and my
compliments to my sister, which she received with
solemn and stiff form, I was bid to sit down. But my
heart was full: And I said it became me to stand, if
I could stand a reception so awful and unusual. I was
forced to turn my face from them, and pull out my
handkerchief. 
My unbrotherly accuser hereupon stood forth, and
charg'd me with having received no less than five or
six visits at Miss Howe's from the man they had all
so much reason to hate (that was the expression); 
notwithstanding the commands I had received to the
contrary. And he bid me deny it, if I could. 
I had never been used, I said, to deny the truth; 
nor would I now. I owned I had, in the passed three
weeks, seen the person I presumed he meant oftener
than five or six times (Pray hear me out, brother,
said I; for he was going to flame). —But he always
came and asked for Mrs. or Miss Howe. 
I proceeded, That I had reason to believe, that
both Mrs. Howe and Miss, as matters stood, would
much rather have excused his visits; but they had
more than once apologiz'd, that, having not the same
reason my papa had, to forbid him their house, his
rank and fortune intitled him to civility. 
You see, my dear, I made not the pleas I might
have made. 
My brother seem'd ready to give a loose to his passion: 
My papa put on the countenance, which always
portends a gathering storm: My uncles mutteringly
whisper'd: And my sister aggravatingly held up her
hands. While I begg'd to be heard out;—and my
mamma said, Let the child, that was her kind word,
be heard.— 
I hoped, I said, there was no harm done: That
I became not me to prescribe to Mrs. or Miss Howe
who should be their visitors: That Mrs. Howe was
always diverted with the raillery that passed between 

Miss and him: That I had no reason to challenge
her guest for my visitor; as I should seem to have
done, had I refused to go into their company, when
he was with them: That I had never seen him out
of the presence of one or both of those ladies; and
had signify'd to him, once, on his urging for a few
moments private conversation with me, that, unless
a reconciliation were effected between my family and
his, he must not expect, that I would countenance
his visits; much less give him an opportunity of that
sort. 
I told them further, That Miss Howe so well understood
my mind, that she never left me a moment,
while he was there: That, when he came, if I was
not below in the parlour, I would not suffer myself
to be called to him: Altho' I thought it would be an
affectation, which would give him advantage rather
than the contrary, if I had left company when he
came in; or refused to enter into it, when I found
he would stay any time. 
My brother heard me out with such a kind of impatience,
as shew'd he was resolved to be dissatisfy'd
with me, say what I would. The rest, as the event
has proved, behav'd as if they would have been satisfy'd,
had they not further points to carry, by intimidating
me. All this made it evident, as I mention'd
above, that they themselves expected not my voluntary
compliance; and was a tacit confession of the disagreeableness
of the person they had to propose. 
I was no sooner silent, than my brother swore, altho'
in my papa's presence (swore, uncheck'd either
by eye or countenance), That, for his part, he would
never be reconciled to that libertine: And that he would
renounce me for a sister, if I encouraged the addresses
of a man so obnoxious to them all. 
A man who had like to have been my brother's
murderer, my sister said, with a face even bursting
with restraint of passion. 

The poor Bella has, you know, a plump, high-fed
face, if I may be allow'd the expression. —You,
I know, will forgive me for this liberty of speech,
sooner than I can myself: Yet, how can one be such
a reptile, as not to turn when trampled upon!— 
My papa, with vehemence both of action and voice
(my father has, you know, a terrible voice, when
he is angry!), told me, that I had met with too much
indulgence, in being allow'd to refuse this gentleman,
and the other gentleman; and it was now his turn to
be obey'd. 
Very true, my mamma said: —And hoped his will
would not now be disputed by a child so favour'd. 
To shew they were all of a sentiment, my uncle
Harlowe said, He hoped his beloved niece only wanted
to know her papa's will, to obey it. 
And my uncle Antony, in his rougher manner,
That I would not give them reason to apprehend, that
I thought my grandfather's favour to me had made
me independent of them all. —If I did, he could tell
me, the will could be set aside, and should. 
I was astonish'd, you must needs think. —Whose
addresses now, thought I, is this treatment preparative
to! —Mr. Wyerley's again!—or whose? —And
then, as high comparisons, where self is concern'd,
sooner than low, come into young peoples heads; 
be it for whom it will, this is wooing as the English
did for the heiress of Scotland in the time of Edward
the sixth. —But that it could be for Solmes, how should
it enter into my head? 
I did not know, I said, that I had given occasion
for this harshness: I hoped I should always have a just
sense of their favour to me, superadded to the duty I
ow'd as a daughter and a niece: But that I was so
much surprised at a reception so unusual and unexpected,
that I hoped my papa and mamma would
give me leave to retire, in order to recollect myself. 

No one gainsaying, I made my silent compliments,
and withdrew;—leaving my brother and sister, as I
thought, pleased; and as if they wanted to congratulate
each other on having occasioned so severe a beginning
to be made with me. 
I went up to my chamber, and there, with my
faithful Hannah, deplor'd the determin'd face which
the new proposal, it was plain they had to make me,
wore. 
I had not recover'd myself when I was sent for
down to tea. I begg'd, by my maid, to be excus'd
attending: But, on the repeated command, went
down, with as much chearfulness as I could assume; 
and had a new fault to clear myself of: For my brother,
so pregnant a thing is determin'd ill-will, by
intimations equally rude and intelligible, charg'd my
desire of being excus'd coming down, to sullens, because
a certain person had been spoken against, upon
whom, as he supposed, my fancy ran. 
I could easily answer you, Sir, said I, as such a
reflection deserves: But I forbear. If I do not find
a brother in you, you shall have a sister in me. 
Pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly said; looking
at my brother, and lifting up her lip in contempt. 
He, with an imperious air, bid me deserve his love,
and I should be sure to have it. 
As we sat, my mamma, in her admirable manner,
expatiated upon brotherly and sisterly love; indulgently
blam'd my brother and sister upon having taken
up displeasure too lightly against me; and politically,
if I may so say, answer'd for my obedience to my
papa's will. —Then it would be all well, my papa was
pleas'd to say: Then they should dote upon me, was my
brother's expression: Love me as well as ever, was my
sister's: And my uncles, That I should then be the
pride of their hearts. —But, alas! what a forfeiture of
all these must I make! 

This was the reception I had on my return from
you! 
Mr. Solmes came in before we had done tea. My
uncle Antony presented him to me, as a gentleman he
had a particular friendship for. My uncle Harlowe
in terms equally favourable for him. My father said,
Mr. Solmes is my friend, Clarissa Harlowe. My
mamma look'd at him, and look'd at me, now-and-then,
as he sat near me, I thought with concern. —I
at her, with eyes appealing for pity. —At him, when
I could glance at him, with disgust, little short of
affrightment. While my brother and sister Mr. Solmes'd-him,
and Sirr'd-him up, with high favour. So caress'd,
in short, by all;—yet such a wretch! —But
I will at present only add, My humble thanks and
duty to your honour'd mamma (to whom I will particularly
write, to express the grateful sense I have of
her goodness to me); and that I am, 
Your ever obliged
Cl. Harlowe. 