



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Wm. Morden, Esq; 

Thursday, Aug. 31. 
I most heartily congratulate you, dear Sir, on
your return to your native country. 
I heard with much pleasure that you were come; 
but I was both afraid and ashamed, till you encouraged
me by a first notice, to address myself to you. 
How consoling is it to my wounded heart to find,
that you have not been carried away by that tide of
resentment and displeasure with which I have been so
unhappily overwhelmed—But that, while my still
nearer relations have not thought fit to examine into
the truth of vile reports raised against me, you have
informed yourself of my innocence, and generously
credited the information! 
I have not the least reason to doubt Mr. Lovelace's
Sincerity in his offers of Marriage: Nor that all his
relations are heartily desirous of ranking me among
them. I have had noble instances of their esteem for
me, on their apprehending that my Father's displeasure
must have subjected me to difficulties: And this,
after I had absolutely refused their pressing solicitations
in their kinsman's favour, as well as his own. 
Nor think me, my dear Cousin, blameable for refusing
him. I had given Mr. Lovelace no reason to
think me a weak creature. If I had, a man of his
character might have thought himself warranted to
endeavour to make ungenerous advantage of the
weakness he had been able to inspire. The consciousness
of my own weakness (in that case) might have
brought me to a composition with his wickedness. 
I can indeed forgive him. But that is, because I
think his crimes have set me above him. Can I be
above the man, Sir, to whom I shall give my hand
and my vows; and with them a Sanction to the most 

premeditated baseness? No, Sir! Let me say, that
your Cousin Clarissa, were she likely to live many
years, and that (if she married not this man) in penury
or want, despised and forsaken by all her friends,
puts not so high a value upon the conveniencies of
life, nor upon life itself, as to seek to re-obtain the
one, or to preserve the other, by giving such a Sanction: 
A Sanction, which (where she to perform her
duty) would reward the violator. 
Nor is it so much from Pride as from Principle,
that I say this. What, Sir! when Virtue, when
Chastity, is the crown of a woman, and particularly
of a Wife, shall your Cousin stoop to marry the man
who could not form an attempt upon hers, but upon
a presumption, that she was capable of receiving his
offered hand, when he had found himself mistaken in
the vile opinion he had conceived of her? Hitherto
he has not had reason to think me weak. Nor will
I give him an instance so flagrant, that weak I am, in
a point in which it would be criminal to be found weak. 
One day, Sir, you will perhaps know all my Story. 
But, whenever it is known, I beg, that the Author
of my calamities may not be vindictively sought after. 
He could not have been the author of them, but for a
strange concurrence of unhappy causes. As the Law
will not be able to reach him when I am gone, the apprehension
of any other sort of vengeance terrifies me: 
Since, in such a case, should my friends be safe, what
honour would his death bring to my memory? —If
any of them should come to misfortune, how would
my fault be aggravated! 
God long preserve you, my dearest Cousin, and
bless you but in proportion to the consolation you have
given me, in letting me know that you still love me; 
and that I have One near and dear relation who can
pity and forgive me (and then will you be greatly
blessed—); is the prayer of 
Your ever-grateful and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 