


Lady G. To Miss Selby. 


Grandison-hall, Sat. May 5. 
Your complaining Letter (a)  reached me here,
Lucy, but this day. I arrived here on Monday
afternoon. Ungracious Harriet! She chid me for
coming. But I went to Church first. What would
they have? 
My Lord and I are one now: If therefore I say,
I arrived, it is the same as saying, he did: My little
Harriet with us, you may be sure. 
But what does the girl complain for? Maiden
creatures should send us married women two Letters
for one. Establish for me this expectation: You will
soon yourself be the better for the doctrine. 
You tell me, that hardly any of your girls  are satisfied
with my imperial decision on the appeal laid
before me, tho' supported by the opinions of Mrs.
Shirley, Lady D. and every wise woman. I don't
care whether you are or not. Sorry chits! you decide
among yourselves, and then ask for the opinions
of others: What for? In hopes they will confirm
your own; if not, to be saucy, and reject them. 
You want me to tell you a hundred thousand
things, of what's doing, what's done, what's said,
here? Not I. Harriet is writing a long, long Letter
to her grandmamma, she tells me; and journalwise
(b) . –––Let that, when you have it, content
you. She says I must not see it. But I will. Something
saucy about me in it, I suppose. 
My Brother, and his principal Men-guests, are in
town. They went on Monday morning. So I have
not seen them. –––Will not come back till Friday 

next week. Harriet is impatient for his return. O
girls! girls! That a Church-ceremony can so soon
make such a difference in the same person! –––But he
is so generously tender of her, that the wonder, in her
case, is the less. 
Lady Clementina is a noble creature. We are
obliged to call both her and Harriet to order; or they
would never be asunder. The garden and park are
the places in which they most delight to walk. Make
Harriet give you the particulars of their conversations. 
–––Then I shall have them. I have demanded
them; but she only acquaints me in general, that
she is delighted with Lady Clementina's part in
them. The other expresses no less admiration of
Harriet's. But, besides that they rob us of their company
too often, which is ruder in the mistress of the
house than in the guest; Harriet does not enough
consider her own circumstances. Their walks are
too long. She comes in, and throws herself sometimes
into a chair—so tired! –––Yet, chidden for her
long walks, such engaging conversations! she cries
out. –––Heroines both, I suppose; and they are mirrors
to each other; each admiring herself in the other. 
No wonder they are engaged insensibly by a vanity,
which carries with it, to each, so generous an appearance; 
for, all the while, Harriet thinks she is
only admiring Clementina; Clementina, that she's
applauding Harriet. 
Well, Lucy–––But I find you will not be Lucy
long–––Your day, it seems, will soon be fixed: The
day, happy may it be! which will set a coronet on
your head. A foolish kind of bawble, after all; but
it looks not amiss on the outside of one's coach––– 
if the inside contain not–––Did I say a monkey, Lucy? 
But that will not be your case. My Lord
knows your Lord, and esteems him. Lord G's esteem,
(china and shells out of the question) is not contemptible,
I can tell you. His Love for his flippant 

Charlotte made him play monkey-tricks, which lessened
him in my eyes: But now I see he is capable
of forgetting his butterflies, and esteeming me, I remember
my promise, and honour him: Obedience will
come–––when it can. 
Well, but, Lucy, Dr. Bartlett knew your Lord
Reresby abroad, and speaks well of him. He has
wished for this match ever since it was first mentioned; 
nay before it was mentioned–––Ever since he was a
brideman on my brother's happy day: And you are
a good girl, that you have not paraded, as Harriet
did, and Clementina does. 
Have I any more to say? I think not. I will endeavour
to get a sight of what Harriet has written. 
Let her deny me, if she dare. If that suggests to me
a subject which she has not touched upon, well and
good: If not, take it for a conclusion, chits, that I
wish you all well; and to our venerable Mrs. Shirley,
and respectable aunt Selby, and her honest man,
health, happiness, and so-forth. 
Ch. G. 

