



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Afternoon, March 23. 
An unexpected visitor has turned the course of my
thoughts, and changed the subject I had intended
to pursue. The only one for whom I would have
dispensed with my resolution not to see any-body all
the dedicated day: A visitor, whom, according to
Mr. Hickman's report from the expectations of his
Libertine friends, I supposed to be in town. —Now,
my dear, have I saved myself the trouble of telling
you, That it was your too-agreeable Rake. Our Sex
is said to love to trade in surprizes: Yet have I, by
my promptitude, surprised myself out of mine. I
had intended, you must know, to run twice the
length, before I had suffered you so much as to guess
who, and whether man or woman, my visitor was: 
But since you have the discovery at so cheap a rate,
you are welcome to it. 
The end of his coming was, to engage my interest
with my charming friend; and as he was sure that I
knew all your mind, to acquaint him what he had to
trust to. 
He mentioned what had passed in the Interview between
you: But could not be satisfied with the result
of it, and with the little satisfaction he had obtained
from you; the malice of your family to him increasing,
and their cruelty to you not abating. His heart,
he told me, was in tumults, for fear you should be
prevailed upon in favour of a man despised by everybody. 
He gave me fresh instances of indignities cast upon
himself by your Uncles and Brother; and declared,
that if you suffered yourself to be forced into the arms
of the man for whose sake he was loaded with undeserved
abuses, you should be one of the youngest, as 

you would be one of the loveliest Widows in England: 
And that he would moreover call your Brother to
account for the liberties he takes with his character to
every one he meets with. 
He proposed several schemes, for you to chuse some
one of them, in order to enable you to avoid the persecutions
you labour under: One I will mention; 
That you will resume your Estate; and if you find
difficulties that can be no otherwise surmounted, that
you will, either avowedly or privately, as he had proposed
to you, accept of Lady Betty Lawrance's or Lord
M's assistance to instate you in it. He declared, that
if you did, he would leave absolutely to your own
pleasure afterwards, and to the advice which your
Cousin Morden on his arrival should give you,
whether to encourage his address, or not, as you
should be convinced of the sincerity of the reformation
which his enemies make him so much want. 
I had now a good opportunity to sound him, as you
wished Mr. Hickman would Lord M. as to the continued
or diminished favour of the Ladies, and of his
Lordship, towards you, upon their being acquainted
with the animosity of your Relations to them, as
well as to their kinsman. I laid hold of the opportunity; 
and he satisfied me, by reading some passages
of a Letter he had about him, from Lord M. That
an alliance with you, and that on the foot of your
own single merit, would be the most desirable event
to them that could happen: And so far to the purpose
of your wished enquiry does his Lordship go in this
Letter, that he assures him, that whatever you suffer
in fortune from the violence of your Relations on his
account, he and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty will
join to make it up to him. And yet that the reputation
of a family so splendid, would, no doubt, in a
case of such importance to the honour of both, make
them prefer a general consent. 
I told him, as you yourself I knew had done, that 

you were extremely averse to Mr. Solmes; and that,
might you be left to your own choice, it would be
the Single Life. As to himself, I plainly said, That
you had great and just objections to him on the score
of his careless morals: That it was surprising, that
men who gave themselves the liberties he was said to
take, should presume to think, that, whenever they
took it into their heads to marry, the most virtuous
and worthy of the Sex were to fall to their lot: That
as to the Resumption, it had been very strongly urged
by myself, and would be still further urged; tho' you
had been hitherto averse to that measure: That your
chief reliance and hopes were upon your Cousin Morden: 
And that to suspend or gain time till he arrived,
was, as I believed, your principal aim. 
I told him, That with regard to the mischief he
threatened, neither the act nor the menace could serve
any end but theirs who persecuted you; as it would
give them a pretence for carrying into effect their
compulsory projects; and that with the approbation
of all the world; since he must not think the
public would give its voice in favour of a violent
young man, of no extraordinary character as to
morals, who should seek to rob a family of eminence
of a child so valuable; and who threatened, if he
could not obtain her in preference to a man chosen by
themselves, that he would avenge himself upon them
all by acts of violence. 
I added, That he was very much mistaken, if he
thought to intimidate you by such menaces: For that,
tho' your disposition was all sweetness, yet I knew
not a steadier temper in the world than yours; nor
one more inflexible (as your friends had found, and
would still farther find, if they continued to give occasion
for its exertion) whenever you thought yourself
in the right; and that you were ungenerously dealt
with in matters of too much moment to be indifferent
about. Miss Clarissa Harlowe, Mr. Lovelace, let me 

tell you, said I, timid as her foresight and prudence
may make her in some cases, where she apprehends
dangers to those she loves, is above fear, in points
where her Honour, and the true dignity of her Sex,
are concerned. —In short, Sir, you must not think to
frighten Miss Clarissa Harlowe into such a mean or
unworthy conduct as only a weak or unsteady mind
can be guilty of. 
He was so very far from intending to intimidate
you, he said, that he besought me not to mention one
word to you of what had passed between us: That
what he had hinted at, which carried the air of a
menace, was owing to the fervor of his spirits, raised
by his apprehensions of losing all hope of you for
ever; and on a supposition, that you were to be
actually forced into the arms of a man you hated: 
That were this to be the case, he must own, that he
should pay very little regard to the world, or its censures: 
Especially as the menaces of some of your
family now, and their triumph over him afterwards,
would both provoke and warrant all the vengeance
he could take. 
He added, that all the countries in the world were
alike to him, but on your account: So that whatever he
should think fit to do, were you lost to him, he should
have nothing to apprehend from the Laws of This. 
I did not like the determined air he spoke this with: 
He is certainly capable of great rashness. 
He palliated a little this fierceness (which by the
way I warmly censured) by saying, That while you
remain single, he will bear all the indignities that shall
be cast upon him by your family. But would you
throw yourself, if you were still farther driven, into
any other protection, if not Lord M's, or that of the
Ladies of his family, into my Mother's (a) , suppose; 

or would you go to London to private lodgings,
where he would never visit you, unless he had your
leave (and from whence you might make your own
terms with your relations); he would be entirely
satisfied; and would, as he had said before, wait the
effect of your Cousin's arrival, and your free determination
as to his own fate. —Adding, That he knew
the family so well, and how much fixed they were
upon their measures, as well as the absolute dependence
they had upon your temper and principles, that
he could not but apprehend the worst, while you remained
in their power, and under the influence of
their persuasion and menaces. 
We had a great deal of other discourse: But as the
reciting of the rest would be but a repetition of many
of the things that passed between you and him in the
Interview between you in the Woodhouse, I refer
myself to your memory on that occasion (a) . 
And now, my dear, upon the whole, I think it
behoves you to make yourself independent: All then
will fall right. This man is a violent man. I should
wish, methinks, that you should not have either him
or Solmes. You will find, if you get out of your
Brother's and Sister's way, what you can or cannot
do, with regard to either. If your relations persist in
their foolish scheme, I think I will take his hint, and,
at a proper opportunity, sound my Mother. Mean
time, let me have your clear opinion of the Resumption,
which I join with Lovelace in advising. You
can but see how your demand will work. To demand,
is not to litigate. But be your resolution what
it will, do not by any means repeat to them, that 

you will not assert your right. If they go on to give
you provocation, you may have sufficient reason to
change your mind: And let them expect that you
will change it. They have not the generosity to treat
you the better for disclaiming the power they know
you have. That, I think, need not now be told you. 
I am, my dearest friend, and will be ever, 
Your most affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 