



Mr. Brand, To John Harlowe, Esq;
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 

Worthy Sir, my very good Friend and Patron,
I arrived in town yesterday, after a tolerable pleasant
journey (considering the hot weather, and
dusty roads). I put up at the Bull and Gate in Holborn,
and hastened to Covent-garden. I soon found
the house where the unhappy Lady lodgeth. And,
in the back-shop, had a good deal of discourse (a) 
with Mrs. Smith (her Landlady) whom I found to be
so highly prepossessed in her favour, that I saw it would
not answer your desires to take my informations altogether
from her: And being obliged to attend my patron
(who, to my sorrow, 

Miserum est aliena vivere quadra)
I find wanteth much waiting upon, and is another
sort of man than he was at College: For Sir, inter
nos, honours change manners. For the aforesaid causes) 

I thought it would best answer all the ends of the commission
with which you honoured me, to engage, in
the desired scrutiny, the wife of a particular friend,
who liveth almost over-against the house where she
lodgeth, and who is a gentlewoman of character and
sobriety, a mother of children, and one who knoweth
the world well. 
To her I applied myself therefore, and gave her a
short history of the case, and desired she would very
particularly enquire into the conduct of the unhappy
young Lady; her present way of life and subsistence; 
her visitors, her employments, and such-like; for these,
Sir, you know, are the things whereof you wished
to be informed. 
Accordingly, Sir, I waited upon the gentlewoman
aforesaid, this day; and, to my very great trouble (because
I know it will be to yours, and likewise to all
your worthy family's) I must say, that I do find things
look a little more darkly, than I hoped they would. 
For, alas! Sir, the gentlewoman's report turneth not
out so favourable for Miss's reputation, as I wished, as
you wished, and as every one of her friends wished. 
But so it is throughout the world, that one false step
generally brings on another; and peradventure a worse,
and a still worse; till the poor limed soul (a very fit
epithet of the divine Quarles's!) is quite entangled,
and (without infinite mercy) lost for ever. 
It seemeth, Sir, she is, notwithstanding, in a very ill
state of health. In this, both gentlewomen (that is to
say, Mrs. Smith her landlady, and my friend's wife)
agree. Yet she goeth often out in a chair, to
prayers (as it is said). But my friend's wife told me,
that nothing is more common in London, than that
the frequenting of the Church at morning prayers is
made the pretence and cover for private Assignations. 
What a sad thing is this! that what was designed for
wholsome nourishment to the poor Soul, should be turned
into rank poison! But as Mr. Daniel de Foe (an 

ingenious man, tho' a dissenter) observeth (But indeed
it is an old proverb; only I think he was the first that
put it into verse) 

God never had a House of Pray'r,
But Satan had a Chapel there.
Yet to do the Lady justice, nobody cometh home
with her: Nor indeed can they, because she goeth
forward and backward in a Sedan, or Chair (as they
call it). But then there is a gentleman of no good
character (an intimado of Mr. Lovelace) who is a constant
visitor of her, and of the people of the house,
whom he regaleth and treateth, and hath (of consequence)
their high good words. 
I have thereupon taken the trouble (for I love to be
exact in any commission I undertake) to enquire particularly
about this gentleman, as he is called (albeit I
hold no man so but by his actions: For, as Juvenal
faith, 

—Nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus)
And this I did before I would sit down to write to
you. 
His name is Belford. He hath a paternal estate of
upwards of one thousand pounds by the year; and is
now in mourning for an Uncle who left him very considerably
besides. He beareth a very profligate character
as to women (for I enquired particularly about
That) and is Mr. Lovelace's more especial privado,
with whom he holdeth a regular correspondence; and
hath been often seen with Miss (tête à tête) at the window
—In no bad way, indeed: But my friend's wife
is of opinion, that all is not as it should be. And, indeed,
it is mighty strange to me, if Miss be so notable
a penitent (as is represented) and if she have such an
aversion to Mr. Lovelace, that she will admit his privado
into her retirements, and see no other company. 
I understand, from Mrs. Smith, that Mr. Hickman 

was to see her some time ago, from Miss Howe; and
I am told, by another hand (You see, Sir, how diligent
I have been to execute the commissions you gave
me) that he had no extraordinary opinion of this Belford,
at first; tho' they were seen together one morning
by the opposite neighbour, at breakfast: And another
time this Belford was observed to watch Mr.
Hickman's coming from her; so that, as it should
seem, he was mighty zealous to ingratiate himself
with Mr. Hickman; no doubt, to engage him to
make a favourable report to Miss Howe of the intimacy
he was admitted into by her unhappy friend; who (as
she is very ill) may mean no harm in allowing his visits
(for he, it seemeth, brought to her, or recommended,
at least, the Doctor and Apothecary that attend
her): But I think (upon the whole) it looketh not
well. 
I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a better account
of the young Lady's prudence. But, what shall
we say? 

Uvaque conspectâ livorem ducit ab uvâ,
as Juvenal observeth. 
One thing I am afraid of; which is, That Miss
may be under necessities; and that this Belford (who,
as Mrs. Smith owns, hath offered her money, which
she, at the time, refused) may find an opportunity to
take advantage of those necessities: And it is well observed
by the poet, that 

Ægrè formosam poteris servare puellam:
 Nunc prece, nunc pretio, forma petita ruit.
And this Belford (who is a bold man, and hath, as
they say, the look of one) may make good that of Horace
(with whose writings you are so well acquainted; 
nobody better); 

 Audax omnia perpeti,
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.

Forgive me, Sir, for what I am going to write: 
But if you could prevail upon the rest of your family,
to join in the scheme which you, and her virtuous Sister,
Miss Arabella, and the Archdeacon, and I, once
talked of (which is to persuade the unhappy young
Lady to go, in some creditable manner, to some one
of the foreign Colonies) it might save not only her
own credit and reputation, but the reputation and credit
of all her family, and a great deal of vexation moreover. 
For it is my humble opinion, that you will
hardly (any of you) enjoy yourselves while this (once
innocent) young Lady is in the way of being so frequently
heard of by you: And this would put her
out of the way both of this Belford and of that Lovelace,
and it might, peradventure, prevent as much
evil as scandal. 
You will forgive me, Sir, for this my plainness. 
Ovid pleadeth for me, 

—Adulator nullus amicus erit.
And I have no view but that of approving myself
a zealous well-wisher to all your worthy family (whereto
I owe a great number of obligations) and very particularly,
Sir, 
Your obliged and humble Servant,
Elias Brand. 
Wedn. Aug. 9. 
P. S. I shall give you further hints when I come
down (which will be in a few days); and who
my informants were; but by these you will see,
that I have been very assiduous (for the time) in
the task you set me upon. 
The length of my Letter you will excuse; for I
need not tell you, Sir, what narrative, complex,
and conversation Letters (such a one as mine) require. 
Every one to his talent. Letter-writing
is mine, I will be bold to say; and that my
correspondence was much coveted at the University, 

on that account, by Tyro's, and even by
Sophs, when I was hardly a Soph myself. But
this I should not have taken upon me to mention,
but only in defence of the length of my
Letter; for nobody writeth shorter, or pithier,
when the subject requireth common forms only— 
But in apologizing for my prolixity, I am adding
to the fault (if it were one, which however I
cannot think it to be, the subject considered: 
But this I have said before in other words): So,
Sir, if you will excuse my Postscript, I am sure
you will not find fault with my Letter. 
&dotup;One word more, as to a matter of erudition,
which you greatly love to hear me start, and
dwell upon. Dr. Lewen once, in your presence
(as you, my good Patron, cannot but remember)
in a smartish kind of debate between him
and me, took upon him to censure the parenthetical
style, as I call it. He was a very
learned and judicious man, to be sure, and
an ornament to our Function: But yet I must
needs say, that it is a style which I greatly
like; and the good Doctor was then past his
youth, and that time of life, of consequence,
when a fertile imagination, and rich fancy,
pour in ideas so fast upon a writer, that parentheses
are often wanted (and that for the
sake of brevity, as well as perspicuity) to save
the reader the trouble of reading a passage
more than once. Every man to his talent (as I
said before). We are all so apt to set up our
natural byasses for general standards, that I
wondered the less at the worthy Doctor's stiffness
on this occasion. He smiled at me, you
may remember, Sir—And, whether I was
right or not, I am sure I smiled at him. And
you, my worthy Patron (as I had the satisfaction
to observe) seemed to be of my party. But was 

it not strange, that the old gentleman and I
should so widely differ, when the end with
both (that is to say, perspicuity or clearness) was
the same? —But what shall we say?— 

&dotup;Errare est hominis, sed non persistere—&dotup;
I think I have nothing to add until I have the honour
of attending you in person; but that I am
(as above) &c. &c. &c. 
E. B. 