


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Monday, June 5.
My dear Creature!
You must not, you shall not be ill. What signify
your Heroics, child, if they only give you
placid looks, and make an hypocrite of the sincerest
girl in England? In other words, if they are only a
cover for a despairing heart? Be better: Be less
affected; or I can tell you, the Doctor and I, and
Lady L. shall all think it but right to take you at
your first word, and send you no more of my brother's
Letters. Yet we are all of us as greatly affected
by the contents of them, as our dear Harriet can be. 
I am sure you will allow us to be so, for the poor
Lady. But to subjects less interesting. 
The Doctor is with us. Aunt Nell is in love with
him. He ordered his matters, and came to town at
Lady L's request and mine, and Beauchamp's, that
we might the sooner come at my brother's Letters— 
Very obliging! —Beauchamp worships the good man. 
He would have been with him at Grandison-Hall, but
that Sir Harry and Lady Beauchamp knew not how
to part with him: And I fansy another slier reason
with-held him, half unknown to himself. Love
is certainly creeping into his heart. This Emily!
a little rogue! has already (yet suspects it not) made
a conquest. He deserves her better than any man I
know: She him, had she not already a great hole
in her heart, thro' which one may run one's head. 
But does not Beauchamp love the same person as much 

as she can do? And does he not know, that the girl
is innocent, and the man virtuous, even, as I believe,
to chastity? —Dear Harriet! Don't let the Ladies
around you, nor the Gentlemen neither, hear this
grace supposed to be my brother's. Nobody about
us shall for me. I would not have my brother made
the jest of one Sex, and the aversion of the other; and
be thought so singular a young man. 
Beauchamp says nothing to any-body of his regard
to Emily: But he lays himself out in so many unaffected
assiduities to her, that one cannot but see it. 
She likes his company and his conversation. But
why? because he is always launching out in the praises
of his and her beloved friend. He says, there is not,
he believes, such another innocent and undesigning
heart in the world, except one in Northamptonshire
—There's for you, Harriet! —So he praises not mine. 
That is the wickedest thing of these felons of men:
Poverty compels them tho'—Poverty of genius! — 
They cannot praise one woman, but by robbing the
rest. Different, however, from all men, is my brother. 
I will engage he could find attributes for fifty
different women, yet do justice to them all: Because,
tho' he sees every one with favour, he is above flattering
any. 
Well, but, Harriet, I expected Letters six times
as long as these you sent me. Upon my word, if
you are so very heavenly-minded, as you appear to
be in the first (for the second is hardly a Letter) I
will have you to town, and nun you up with aunt
Nell. The Doctor is one of the most pious men in
England: But she will tire him with praying, and
expounding, as she calls it. Do you know that the
good creature was a Methodist in Yorkshire? These
overdoers, my dear, are wicked wretches. What do
they, but make religion look unlovely, and put underdoers
out of heart? My brother is The Man. You
know I must always bring in my brother, tho' I am 

a little out of humour with him, at present: And am
I not justified by the many? Since it is always the
way of those who intend not to mend, to set their
hearts against their correctors—My brother professes
not the one half of what he practises. He uses the
fashion, without abusing it, or himself, by following
it. Some such words in a sacred book rumble in my
mad head; but I know I have not them right. 
It is impossible, say what you will, Harriet, to be
long upon terms with this man—Lord G. I mean. 
He was once half in the right, to be sure; but you
should not have reproached me with that. The bride
was shewn, the jewels were shewn, the whole family
paraded it together; and Emily wrote you all how-and-about
it. But never fear for your poor friend. The
honest man will put himself in the wrong next, to
save her credit. He has been long careless, and now
he is, at times, imperious, as well as careless. Very
true! Nay it was but yesterday, that he attempted to
hum a tune of contempt, upon my warbling an Italian
air. An opera couple, we! Is it not charming to
sing at (I cannot say to) each other, when we have
a mind to be spiteful? But he has a miserable voice. 
He cannot sing so fine a song as I can. He should
not attempt it. Besides, I can play to my song; 
that cannot he. Such a foe to melody, that he hates
the very sight of my harpsichord. He flies out of the
room, if I but move towards it. 
He has every-body of his side; Lord and Lady L.,
Emily, nay, Dr. Bartlett and aunt Nell. This sets
him up. No such thing as managing one's own
husband, when so many wise heads join together, to
uphold him. Ut-ter-ly ruined for a husband, is Lord
G.; I once had some hopes of him. But now, every
good-natur'd jest is turned into earnest by these mediators
and mediatrices. 
A few days ago, in a fond fit, I would have stroked
his cheek; tho' he was not in a very good humour 

neither—So, then! So, then! said I, as I had seen
Beauchamp do an hour before by his prancing nag; 
and it was construed as a contempt, and his bristles
got up upon it. Bless me, thought I, this man is not
so sensible of a favour as Beauchamp's horse; and yet
I have known the time, when he has thought it an
honour to be admitted to press the same fair hand
with his lips, on one knee. 
Hark! He is now, at this very instant, complaining
to aunt Nell. Little do they think, that I am in
her closet. She hears all he has to say, with greedy
ears—These antiquated souls are happy, when they
can find reasons from the disagreement of honest people
in matrimony, to make a virtue of a necessity. “Thank
the Lord, I am not married! If these be the fruits
of matrimony!” —Ah! Lord, my dear! Now these
last words have slipt me—The man—between you
and me, has been a villain to me! Can I forgive him?
could you in my circumstances? Yet I hope it is not
so. If it should, and Lady Gertrude and aunt Nell
(spiteful old souls!) should find their perpetual curiosity
answered as they wish, I will have my own
will in every-thing. 
And how came I, you will wonder, in aunt Nell's
closet? I will tell you. She had got my pen and ink:
And I went to fetch it myself: The scribbling fit was
strong upon me; so I sat down in her closet to write:
And they both came into her chamber together, to
have their own talk—Hark, I say! —They are really
talking of me—Complaining! —Abominable! —This
wicked aunt of mine—“I tell you, nephew, that you
are too ready to make up with her.” —Could you
have believed this of one's own aunt? No wonder
that he is so refractory at times. But, hush! —Why
don't he speak louder? He can't be in earnest hurt,
if he does not raise his voice. Creeping soul, and
whiner! —I can't hear a word he says. I have enough
against her! —But I want something against him— 

Duce take them both! I can't hear more than the
sound of her broken-toothed voice, mumbling; and
his plaintive hum-drum, whimpering. I will go out
in full majesty. I will lighten upon them with airs
imperial. How the poor souls will start at my appearance! 
How will their consciences fly in their
faces! The complainer and adviser both detected in
the very fact, as I may say: And yet perhaps you,
Harriet, will think them less blameable than their conscience-striker. 
Hem! —Three hems in anger! —And now I burst
upon them. 
* *
O harriet! what a triumph was mine! 
Aunt Nell, who has naturally a good blowzing
north-country complexion, turned as pale as ashes. Her
chin, nose, and lips, were all in motion. My nimble
Lord gave a jump, and three leaps, to the other
side of the room. He had not the courage to look
directly at me. His face, as sharp as a new moon
in a frosty night, and his sides so gaunt—As if he
wanted to shrink into himself. They could not in
their hearts but accuse themselves of all they had said,
as if I had heard every word of it. 
While I (what a charming thing is innocence!)
half a foot taller than usual, stalked along between
them, casting a look of indignation upon aunt Nell; 
of haughtiness on Lord G. My with-held breath
raised my complexion, and swelled my features; and
when I got to the door, I pulled it after me with an
air, that I hope made them both tremble. 

