


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Colnebrooke, Tuesday, March 7. 
Here I am, my dear Lucy, returned to this happy
asylum: But with what different emotions from
the first time I enter'd it! How did my heart flutter,
when one of Sir Charles's servants, who attended us on
horseback, pointed out to us, at the command of the
ladies, the very spot where the two chariots met, and
the contest began. The recollection pained me: Yet 

do I not owe to that terrifying incident the friendship I
am admitted into with so amiable a family? 
Miss Grandison, ever obliging, has indulged me in
my choice of having a room to myself. I shall have
the more leisure for writing to you, my dear friends. 
Both she and Lady L. are very urgent with me to
shew them some of the letters in our correspondence; 
and Miss Grandison says, if that will encourage me
to oblige them, they will shew me some of their
brother's. —Who would not be tempted by such an exchange? 
I am more than half-afraid—But surely, in
such an heap of stuff as I have written, there is something
that I can read to them. Shall I be permitted, do
you think, to have my letters returned me for this purpose? 
The remarks of these ladies on what I shall
think fit to shew them, will be of great use in helping
to settle my judgment. I know I have thrown out
many things at random; and, being a young creature,
and not passed the age of fancy, have, in all those sentiments
which are not borrowed, been very superficial. 
How can it be otherwise? 
The conversation in the coach turned upon their
own family (for I put in my claim to Miss Grandison's
former promise on that head); from which I gather'd
the following particulars. 
Sir Thomas Grandison was one of the handsomest
men of his time: He had a great notion of magnificence
in living; and went deep into all the fashionable
diversions, except gaming with cards and dice; tho' he
ran into one as expensive, but which he called a nobler
vice; valuing himself upon his breed of race-horses
and hunters, and upon his kennel; in both which articles
he was extravagant to profusion. 
His father, Sir Charles, was as frugal as Sir Thomas
was profuse. He was a purchaser all his life; and left
his son, besides an estate of 6,000l. a year in England,
and near 2,000l. a year in Ireland, rich in money. 
His Lady was of a noble family; sister to Lord W. 

She was, as you have already been told, the most excellent
of women. I was delighted to see her two daughters
bear testimony to her goodness, and to their own
worth, by their tears. It was impossible, in the character
of so good a woman, not to think of my own
mamma; and I could not help, on the remembrance,
joining my tears with theirs. 
Miss Jervois also wept, not only from tenderness of
nature, and sympathy, but, as she owned, from regret,
that she had not the same reason to rejoice in a
living mother, as we had to remember affectionately
the departed. 
What I have written, and shall farther write, to the
disadvantage of Sir Thomas Grandison, I gather'd
from what was dropt by one lady, and by the other,
at different times; for it was beautiful to observe with
what hesitation and reluctancy they mentioned any
of his failings, with what pleasure his good qualities; 
heightening the one, and extenuating the other. O
my Lucy, how would their hearts have overflowed
in his praises, had they had such a faultless father, and
excellent man, as was my father! Sweet is the remembrance
of good parents to good children! 
Lady Grandison brought a great fortune to Sir Thomas. 
He had a fine poetical vein, which he was fond
of cultivating. Tho' his fortune was so ample, it was
his person, and his verses, that won the lady from several
competitors. He had not, however, her judgment. 
He was a poet; and I have heard my grandfather
say, that to be a poet, requires an heated imagination,
which often runs away with the judgment. 
This lady took the consent of all her friends in her
choice; but here seemed an hint to drop from Lady
L. that they consented, because it was her choice; for
Sir Thomas, from the day he enter'd upon his estate,
set out in a way that every-body concluded would diminish
it. 
He made, however, a kind husband, as it is called. 

His good-sense and his politeness, and the pride he
took to be thought one of the best-bred men in England,
secured her complaisant treatment. But Lady
Grandison had qualities that deserved one of the best
and tenderest of men. Her eye and her ear had certainly
misled her. I believe a woman, who chooses a
man whom every-body admires, if the man be not
good, must expect that he will have calls and inclinations,
that will make him think the character of a domestic
man beneath him. 
She endeavoured, at setting out, to engage his companionableness
—shall I call it? She was fond of her
husband. He had reason to be, and was, proud of his
wife: But when he had shew'd her every-where, and
she began to find herself in circumstances, which ought
to domesticate a wife of a much gayer turn than Lady
Grandison pretended to have, he gave way to his predominant
byas; and after a while, leaving the whole
family-care to her, for her excellence in every branch
of which he was continually praising her (He did her
that justice) he was but little at home in the summer; 
and, in the winter, was generally engaged four
months in the diversions of this great town; and was
the common patron of all the performers, whether at
plays, operas, or concerts. 
At first setting out in this way, he was solicitous to
carry his lady with him to town. She always chearfully
accepted of his invitation, when she saw he was
urgent with her to go. She would not give a pretence
for so gay a man to throw off that regard to appearances,
which pride made him willing to keep up. 
But afterwards, his invitations growing fainter and
fainter, and she finding that her presence lengthened
the time of his stay in town, and added greatly to his
expences (for he never would abate, when they were
together, of that magnificence in which he delighted
to live in the country) she declined going up; And
having by this time her three children, she found it was 

as agreeable to Sir Thomas, as to herself, that she
should turn her thoughts wholly to the domestic duties. 
Lady Grandison, when she found that she could not
bring Sir Thomas to lessen his great expences, supposed
it to be wisdom to endeavour, to the utmost of
her power, to enable him to support them without
discredit to himself, or visible hurt to his family. The
children were young, and were not likely to make demands
upon him for many years to come. 
Here was a mother, my dear! Who will say, that
mothers may not be the most useful persons in the family,
when they do their duty, and their husbands are
defective in theirs? Sir Thomas Grandison's delights
centred in himself, Lady Grandison's in her husband
and children. What a superiority, what an inferiority! 
Yet had this lady, with the best œconomy, no narrowness
in her heart. She was beloved for her generosity
and benevolence. Her poor neighbours adored
her. Her table was plenteous. She was hospitable,
as well from the largeness of her own heart, as to give
credit to her husband; and so far to accommodate herself
to his taste, as that too great a difference might
not be seen between his absence and presence. As occasions
offer'd, she would confer benefits in the name
of an husband, whom, perhaps, she had not seen of
months, and knew not whether she might see for
months to come. She was satisfied, tho' hers was the
first merit, with the second merit reflected from that
she gave him: “I am but Sir Thomas's almoner: I
know I shall please Sir Thomas by doing this: Sir
Thomas would have done thus: Perhaps he would
have been more bountiful had he been present.” 
He had been once absent from this admirable wife
six whole months, when he left her but for one: He
designed only an excursion to Paris, when he set out; 
but, when in company as gay as himself, while he was
there, he extended his tour; and, what was still more 

inexcusable, he let his lady hear from him by second-hand
only. He never wrote one line to her with his
own; yet, on his return, affected to surprise her by a
sudden appearance, when she knew not that he was in
England. 
Was not this intolerably vain in him? The moment
he appeared, so secure was he of his lady's unmerited
love, that he supposed the joy she would break
out into, would banish from her thoughts all memory
of his past unkindness. 
He ask'd her, however, after the first emotions (for
she received him with real joy) If she could easily
forgive him? —Forgive you, Sir? —Yes, if you can
forgive yourself. 
This he called severe. Well he might; for it was
just. Lady Grandison's goodness was founded in principle; 
not in tameness or servility. 
Be not serious, Sir Thomas, said my Lady; and
flung her arms about him. You know, by your question,
you were unkind. Not one line from your own
hand neither—But the seeing you now safe and well,
compensates me for all the anxieties you have given
me in the past six tedious months—Can I say they were
not anxious ones? But I pity you, Sir, for the pleasure
you have lost by so long an absence: Let me lead
you to the nursery; or let the dear prattlers come down
to receive their father's blessing. How delightful is
their dawning reason! Their improvements exceed
my hopes: Of what pleasure do you deprive yourself
by these long absences! 
My dear Miss Grandison, let me write on. I am
upon a sweet subject. Why will you tear me from it? 
Who, Lucy, would not almost wish to be the wife,
the half-slighted wife, of a gay Sir Thomas, to be a
Lady Grandison? 
One reflexion, my dear Miss Grandison, let me
make, before I attend you; lest I should lose it: What
man who now, at one view, takes in the whole gay, 

fluttering life of Sir Thomas Grandison, tho' young,
gay, and fluttering, himself, can propose to be more
happy than Sir Thomas thought himself? What woman,
who, in like manner, can take in the whole, useful,
prudent, serene, benevolent, life of Lady Grandison,
whatever turn to pleasure, less solid, and more
airy, she may have, sees not, from this imperfect
sketch, all that they should wish to be; and the transitory
vanity of the one, and the solid happiness that
must attend the other, as well here as hereafter? 
Dear Lady!—had you not hurried me so, how
much better should I have expressed myself! 
I come. I come. 

