


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Grosvenor-Square, Sunday, Oct. 15.
Can I forgive your pride, your petulance? —No,
Harriet; positively no! I write to scold you; 
and having ordered my Lord to sup abroad, I shall
perhaps oblige you with a long Letter. We honest
folks, who have not abundance of Love-fooling upon
our hands, find ourselves happy in a good deal of
quiet leisure; and I love to chide and correct you
wife ones. —Thus then I begin— 
Ridiculous parade among you! I blame you all. 
Could he not have been Mrs. Shirley's guest, if he
was not to be permitted to repose under the same roof
with his sovereign Lady and Mistress? But must you
let him go to an inn? —What for? Why to shew the
world he was but on a foot, at present, with your
other humble servants; and be thought no more, by
the insolent Greville, and affronted as an invader of
his rights. Our Sex is a foolish Sex: Too little or
too much parade. Lord help us! Were it not that 

we must be afraid to appear over-forward to the man
himself, the world is a contemptible thing, and we
should treat it as such. 
And yet, after all, what with Lady Clementina,
what with the world, and what with our own punctilio,
and palpitating hearts, and-so-forth, and all that,
and more than all that; I own you are pretty nicely
circumstanced. But, my life for yours, you will behave
like a simpleton, on occasion of his next address
to you: And why? Did you ever know that people
did not, who were full of apprehensions, who aimed
at being very delicate, who were solicitous to take
their measures from the judgment of those without
them; pragmatical souls, perhaps, who form their notions
either on what they have read, or by the addresses
to them of their own silly fellows, aukward
and unmeaning, and by no means to be compared,
for integrity, understanding, politeness, to my brother? 
Consider, child, that he having seen, in different
countries, perhaps a hundred women, equally specious
with the present mistress of his destiny, were
form and outward grace to be the attractives, is therefore
fitter to give than take the example. 
But, Harriet, I write to charge you not to increase
your own difficulties by too much parade: Your
frankness of heart is a prime consideration with him. 
He expects not to meet with the girl, but the sensible
woman, in his address to you. He is pursuing a laudable
end—Don't teaze him with pug's tricks—‘What,
your dear Lady G. should you have done!’ —What,
signifies asking me now? Did you not lay your heads
together? And the wisest which ever were set on womens
shoulders? But indeed I never knew consultations
of any kind turn to account. It is only a parcel
of people getting together, proposing doubts, and
puzzling one another, and ending as they began, if
not worse. Doctors differ. So many persons, so
many minds. 

And O how our petulant heart throbbed with indignation,
because he came not to breakfast with you! 
What benefit has a polite man over an unpolite one,
where the latter shall have his rusticity allowed for (O
that is his way!) and when the other has expectations
drawn upon him, which, if not critically answered,
he is not to be forgiven! —He is a prudent man! He
may have overslept himself—Might dream of Clementina. 
Then it was a fault in him, that he stayed to
dine on the road—His horses might want rest, truly! 
—Upon my word, Harriet, a woman in Love, is—a
woman in Love. Wise or foolish before, we are all
equally foolish then: The same froward, petulant,
captious, babies! —I protest, we are very silly creatures,
all of us, in these circumstances; and did not
Love make men as great fools as ourselves, they would
hardly think us worthy of their pursuit. Yet I am so
true to the Free-masonry myself, that I would think
the man who should dare to say half I have written, of
our Dollships, ought not to go away with his life. 
My sister and I are troubled about this Greville. Inform
us, the moment you can, of the particulars of
what passed between my brother and him; pray do. 
We long also to see the Letter he has put into your
hands, from Bologna. It is on the road, we hope. 
Caroline and I are as much concerned for your honour,
your punctilio, as you, or any of you, can be. 
But by the account you give of my brother's address
to you in presence of your grandmother and aunt, as
well as from our knowlege of his politeness, neither
you nor we need to trouble our heads about it: It
may be all left to him. He knows so well what becomes
the character of the woman whom he hopes to
call his wife, that you will be sure of your dignity
being preserved, if you place a confidence in him. 
And yet no man is so much above mere formal regards
as he is. Let me enumerate instances, from your
Letter before me. 

His own intention, in the first place, not to surprise
you by his visits, as you apprehended he would,
which would have made him look like a man of self-imagined
consequence to you—His providing himself
with accommodations at an inn; and not giving way
to the invitation, even of your sagacious uncle Selby
[I must railly him. Does he spare me?] —His singling
you out on Friday from your men-friends, yet giving
you the opportunity of your aunt's and grandmother's
company, to make his personal application to you for
your favour—His requesting the interest of your other
friends with you, as if he presumed not on your former
acquaintance, and this after an application, not
discouraged, made to your friends and you. 
As to his equanimity in his first address to you; 
his retaining your hand, forsooth, before all your
friends, and so-forth; never find fault with that,
Harriet. [Indeed you do make an excuse for the
very freedom you blame—So Lover-like!—] He
is the very man, that a conscious young woman,
as you are, should wish to be addressed by: So
much courage, yet so much true modesty—What, I
warrant, you would have had a man chalked out for
you, who should have stood at distance, bowed,
scraped, trembled; while you had nothing to do, but
bridle, and make stiff courtesies to him, with your
hands before you—Plagued with his doubts, and with
your own diffidences; afraid he would now, and now,
and now, pop out the question; which he had not
the courage to put; and so running on, simpering,
fretting, fearing, two parallel lines, side by side, and
never meeting; till some interposing friends, in pity
to you both, put one's head pointing to the other's
head, and stroking and clapping the shoulders of each,
set you at each other, as men do by other dunghilbred
creatures. 
You own, he took no notice of your emotion,
when he first addressed himself to you; so gave you 

an opportunity to look up, which otherwise you would
have wanted. Now don't you think you know a
man creature or two, who would, on such an occasion,
have grinned you quite out of countenance, and
insulted you with their pity for being modest? —But
you own, that he had emotion too, when he first
opened his mind to you—What a duce would the girl
have? —Orme and Fowler in your head, no doubt! 
The tremblings of rejected men, and the fantasies of
romantic women, were to be a rule to my brother, I
suppose, with your mock-majesty! —Ah, Harriet! Did
I not say that we women are very silly creatures? — 
But my brother is a good man—So we must have something
to find fault with him for. —Hah, hah, hah, hah. 
What do you laugh at, Charlotte? —What do I laugh
at, Harriet? —Why, at the idea of a couple of Loveyers,
taken each with a violent ague-fit, at their first
approach to each other—Hands shaking—Knees trembling
—Lips quivering—Tongue faltring—Teeth
chattering—I had a good mind to present you with an
ague-dialogue between such a trembling couple. —I, I,
I, I, says the Lover—You, you, you, you, says the
girl, if able to speak at all. But, Harriet, you shall
have the whole, on demand. Rave at me, if you
will: But Love, as it is called by boys and girls, shall
ever be the subject of my ridicule. Does it not lead
us girls into all manner of absurdities, inconveniencies,
undutifulness, disgrace? —Villainous Cupidity! — 
It does. 
To be serious—Neither does my brother address
you in a stile that impeaches either his own understanding,
or yours. —Another fault, Harriet, is it not? — 
But sure you are not so very a girl! 
The justice he does to Lady Clementina and her
family [Let me be very serious, when I speak of Clementina]
is a glorious instance as well of his greatness
of mind, as of his sincerity. He has no need to depreciate
one Lady, to help him to exalt (or do justice, 

I should rather say, to) another. By praising her, he
makes noble court to you, in supposing you, as you
are, one of the most generous of women. How great
is his compliment to both Ladies, when he calls Clementina
the Miss Byron of Italy! Who, my dear,
ever courted woman as my brother courts you? Indeed
there can be but very few men who have such a
woman to court. 
He suffers you not to ask for an account of the state
of his heart from the time he knew you first, till now. 
He gives it to you, unasked. And how glorious is
that account, both to you, and himself! 
Let us look back upon his conduct when last in
Italy, and when every step seemed to lead to his being
the husband of another woman. 
The recovery of Clementina, and of her noble
brother, seem to be the consequence of his friendly
goodness. The grateful family all join to reward him
with their darling's hand; her heart supposed to be already
his. He, like the man of honour he is, concludes
himself bound by his former offers. They accept
him upon those terms. The Lady's merits shine
out with transcendent lustre in the eyes of every one,
even of us his sisters, and of you, Harriet, and your
best friends: Must they not in his, to whom Merit
was ever the first, Beauty but the second attractive? 
He had no tie to any other woman on earth: He had
only the tenderness of his own heart, with regard to
Miss Byron, to contend with. Ought he not to have
contended with it? He did; and so far conquered, as
to enable himself to be just to the Lady, whose great
qualities, and the concurrence of her friends in his
favour, had converted Compassion for her into Love. 
And who, that hears her story, can forbear to love
her? But with what tenderness, with what politeness,
does he, in his Letter to his chosen correspondent, express
himself of Miss Byron! He declares, that if she
were not to be happy, it would be a great abatement 

of his own felicity. You, however, remember how
politely he recals his apprehensions that you may not,
on his account, be altogether so happy as he wishes, as
the suggestions of his own presumption; and censures
himself for barely supposing, that he had been of consequence
enough with you to give you pain. 
How much to your honour before he went over,
does he account for your smiles, for your frankness of
heart, in his company! He would not build upon
them: Nor indeed could he know the state of your
heart, as we did: He had not the opportunity. How
silly was your punctilio, that made you sometimes
sansy it was out of mere compassion that he revealed
to you the state of his engagement abroad! You see
he tells you, that such was his opinion of your greatness
of mind, that he thought he had no other way
but to put it in your power to check him, if his Love
for you should stimulate him to an act of neglect to
the Lady to whom (she having never refused him, and
not being then in a condition either to claim him or
set him free) he thought himself under obligation. 
Don't you revere him for his honour to her, the nature
of her malady considered? —What must he have
suffered, in this conflict! 
Well, and now, by a strange turn in the Lady,
but glorious to herself, as he observes, the obstacle removed,
he applies to Miss Byron for her favour. 
How sensible is he of what delicacy requires from her! 
How justly (respecting his Love for you) does he account
for not postponing, for the sake of cold and dull
form, as he justly expresses it, his address to you! 
How greatly does the Letter he delivered to you, favour
his argument! Ah the poor Clementina! Cruel
persuaders her relations! I hate and pity them, in a
breath. Never, before, did hatred and pity meet in the
same bosom, as they do in mine, on this occasion. His
difficulties, my dear, and the uncommon situation he
is in, as if he were offering you but a divided Love, 

enhance your glory. You are reinstated on the Female
throne, to the lowermost footstep of which you
once was afraid you had descended. You are offered
a man, whose perplexities have not proceeded
from the entanglements of intrigue, inconstancy, perfidy; 
but from his own compassionate nature: And
could you, by any other way in the world than by this
supposed divided Love, have had it in your power, by
accepting his humbly-offered hand, to lay him under
obligation to you, which he thinks he never shall be
able to discharge? Lay him—Who? —Sir Charles
Grandison—For whom so many virgin hearts have
sighed in vain! —And what a triumph to our Sex is
this, as well as to my Harriet! 
And now, Harriet, let me tell you, that my sister
and J are both in great expectations of your next Letter. 
It is, it must be, written before you will have this. 
My brother is more than man: You have only to
shew yourself to be superior to the forms of woman. 
If you play the fool with him, now, that you have the
power you and we have so long wished you; if you
give pain to his noble, because sincere heart, by any
the least shadow of Female affectation; you, who
have hitherto been distinguished for so amiable a frankness
of heart; you, who cannot doubt his honour— 
the honour of a man who solicits your favour in
even a great manner, a manner in which no man before
him ever courted a woman, because few men before
him have ever been so particularly circumstanced; a
manner that gives you an opportunity to outshine, in
your acceptance of him, even the noble Clementina in
her refusal; as bigotry must have been, in part, her
motive; if, I say, you act foolishly, weakly, now— 
Look to it—You will depreciate, if not cast away,
your own glory. Remember, you have a man to
deal with, who, from our behaviour to Mrs. Oldham,
at his first return to England, took measure of our
minds, and, without loving us the less for it, looked 

down upon us with pity; and made us, ever since,
look upon ourselves in a diminishing light, and as
sisters who have greater reason to glory in their brother,
than he has in them. Would you not rather,
you who are to stand in a still nearer relation to him,
invite his admiration, than his pity? Till Friday night
last you had it: What Saturday has produced, we
shall soon guess. 
Not either Lord L. or Lord G. not Emily, not
aunt Eleanor, now, either see or hear read what you
write, except here-and-there a passage, which you
yourself would not scruple to hear read to them. Are
you not our third sister? To each of us our next
Self: And, what gives you still more dignity, the
elected wife of our brother! 
Adieu, my love! In longing expectation of your
next, we subscribe 
Your affectionate
Caroline L.
Charlotte G. 

