



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morn. March 2. 
Indeed you would not be in Love with him for the
world! —Your servant, my dear. Nor would I
have you. For I think, with all the advantages of person,
fortune, and family, he is not by any means
worthy of you. And this opinion I give as well from
the reasons you mention (which I cannot but confirm)
as from what I have heard of him but a few hours ago
from Mrs. Fortescue, a favourite of Lady Betty Lawrance,
who knows him well—But let me congratulate
you, however, on your being the first of our Sex that
ever I heard of, who has been able to turn that Lion,
Love, at her own pleasure, into a Lap-dog. 
Well but, if you have not the throbs and the glows,
you have not: And are not in Love; good reason
why—because you would not be in Love; and there's
no more to be said. —Only, my dear, I shall keep a
good look-out upon you; and so I hope you will upon
yourself: For it is no manner of argument that because
you would not be in Love, you therefore are
not. —But before I part entirely with this subject, a
word in your ear, my charming friend—'Tis only by
way of caution, and in pursuance of the general observation,
that a Stander-by is often a better judge of
the game than those that play. —May it not be, that
you have had, and have, such cross creatures and such
odd heads to deal with, as have not allowed you to
attend to the throbs? —Or, if you had them a little
now-and-then, whether, having had two accounts to
place them to, you have not by mistake put them to
the wrong one? 
But whether you have a value for Lovelace or not,
I know you'll be impatient to hear what Mrs. Fortescue
has said of him. Nor will I keep you longer in
suspense. 

An hundred wild stories she tells of him, from
childhood to manhood: For, as she observes, having
never been subject to contradiction, he was always as
mischievous as a monkey. But I shall pass over these
whole hundred of his puerile rogueries (altho' indicative
ones, as I may say) to take notice as well of some
things you are not quite ignorant of, as of others you
know not; and to make a few observations upon him
and his ways. 
Mrs. Fortescue owns, what every-body knows,
‘that he is notoriously, nay, avowedly, a man of pleasure; 
yet says, that in any-thing he sets his heart
upon or undertakes, he is the most industrious and
persevering mortal under the Sun. He rests it seems
not above Six hours in the Twenty-four—any more
than you. He delights in writing. Whether at
Lord M's, or at Lady Betty's, or Lady Sarah's, he
has always a pen in his fingers when he retires. One
of his companions (confirming his love of writing)
has told her, that his thoughts flow rapidly to his
pen:’ And you and I, my dear, have observed, on
more occasions than one, that tho' he writes even a
fine hand, he is one of the readiest and quickest of
writers. He must indeed have had early a very docile
genius; since a person of his pleasurable turn and active
spirit, could never have submitted to take long or great
pains in attaining the qualifications he is master of; 
qualifications so seldom attained by youth of quality
and fortune; by such especially of those of either,
who, like him, have never known what it was to be
controuled. 
‘He had once it seems the vanity, upon being
complimented on these talents (and on his surprising
diligence, for a man of pleasure) to compare himself
to Julius Cæsar; who performed great actions by
day, and wrote them down at night: And valued
himself, that he only wanted Cæsar's out setting, to
make a figure among his cotemporaries.’ 

‘He spoke this indeed, she says, with an air of pleasantry: 
For she observed, and so have we, that he
has the art of acknowleging his vanity with so much
humour, that it sets him above the contempt which
is due to vanity and self-opinion; and at the same
time half-persuades those who hear him, that he
really deserves the exaltation he gives himself.’ 
But supposing it to be true that all his vacant nightly
hours are employed in writing, what can be his subjects? 
If, like Cæsar, his own actions, he must undoubtedly
be a very enterprising and very wicked man; 
since nobody suspects him to have a serious turn: And,
decent as he is in his conversation with us, his writings
are not probably such as would redound either to his
own honour, or to the benefit of others, were they
to be read. He must be conscious of this, since Mrs.
Fortescue says, ‘that in the great correspondence by
Letters which he holds, he is as secret and as careful
as if it were of a treasonable nature;—yet troubles
not his head with Politics, tho' nobody knows the
interests of Princes and Courts better than he is said
to do.’ 
That you and I, my dear, should love to write, is
no wonder. We have always, from the time each
could hold a pen, delighted in epistolary correspondencies. 
Our employments are domestic and sedentary; 
and we can scribble upon twenty innocent subjects,
and take delight in them because they are innocent; 
tho' were they to be seen, they might not much profit
or please others. But that such a gay, lively young
fellow as this, who rides, hunts, travels, frequents the
public entertainments, and has means to pursue his
pleasures, should be able to set himself down to write
for hours together, as you and I have heard him say
he frequently does, that is the strange thing. 
Mrs. Fortescue says, ‘that he is a complete master
of short-hand writing.’ By the way, what inducements
could such a swift writer as he have to learn
short-hand! 

‘She says (and we know it as well as she) that he
has a surprising memory; and a very lively imagination.’ 
Whatever his other vices are, all the world, as well
as Mrs. Fortescue, says, ‘he is a sober man. And
among all his bad qualities, Gaming, that great waster
of time as well as fortune, is not his vice:’ So that
he must have his head as cool, and his reason as clear,
as the prime of youth and his natural gaiety will permit; 
and by his early morning hours, a great portion
of time upon his hands, to employ in writing, or worse. 
Mrs. Fortescue says, ‘he has one gentleman who
is more his intimate and correspondent than any of
the rest.’ You remember what his dismissed Bailiff
said of him and of his associates (a) . I don't find but
that man's character of him was in general pretty just. 
Mrs. Fortescue confirms this part of it, ‘that all his
relations are afraid of him; and that his pride sets
him above owing obligations to them. She believes
he is clear of the world; and that he will continue
so:’ No doubt from the same motive that makes
him avoid being obliged to his relations. 
A person willing to think favourably of him would
hope, that a brave, a learned, and a diligent man,
cannot be naturally a bad man. —But if he be better
than his enemies say he is (and if worse, he is bad indeed)
he is guilty of an inexcusable fault in being so
careless as he is of his reputation. I think a man can
be so but from one of these two reasons: Either that
he is conscious he deserves the evil spoken of him; or,
that he takes a pride in being thought worse than he is. 
Both very bad and threatening indications; since the
first must shew him to be utterly abandoned; and it is
but natural to conclude from the other, that what a
man is not ashamed to have imputed to him, he will
not scruple to be guilty of whenever he has an opportunity. 

Upon the whole, and upon all that I could gather
from Mrs. Fortescue, Mr. Lovelace is a very faulty
man. You and I have thought him too gay, too inconsiderate,
too rash, too little an hypocrite, to be
deep. You see he never would disguise his natural
temper (haughty as it certainly is) with respect to your
Brother's behaviour to him. Where he thinks a contempt
due, he pays it to the uttermost. Nor has he
complaisance enough to spare your Uncles. 
But were he deep, and ever so deep, you would
soon penetrate him, if they would leave you to yourself. 
His vanity would be your clue. Never man had
more: Yet, as Mrs. Fortescue observed, ‘never did
man carry it off so happily.’ There is a strange mixture
in it of humourous vivacity: —Since but for one
half of what he says of himself, when he is in the vein,
any other man would be insufferable. 
* *
Talk of the devil, is an old saying. The lively
wretch has made me a visit, and is but just gone away. 
He is all impatience and resentment at the treatment
you meet with; and full of apprehensions too, that
they will carry their point with you. 
I told him my opinion, that you will never be
brought to think of such a man as Solmes; but that
it will probably end in a composition, never to have
either. 
No man, he said, whose fortunes and alliances are
so considerable, ever had so little favour from a woman
for whose sake he had borne so much. 
I told him my mind as freely as I used to do. But
who ever was in fault, Self being judge? He complained
of spies set upon his conduct, and to pry into
his life and morals, and this by your Brother and
Uncles. 
I told him, that this was very hard upon him; and
the more so, as neither his Life nor Morals perhaps
would stand a fair enquiry. 

He smiled, and called himself my servant. —The
occasion was too fair, he said, for Miss Howe, who
never spared him, to let it pass. —But, Lord help the
shallow souls of the Harlowes! Would I believe it?
they were for turning plotters upon him. They had
best take care he did not pay them in their own coin. 
Their hearts were better turned for such works, than
their heads. 
I asked him, If he valued himself upon having a
head better turned than theirs for such works, as he
called them? 
He drew off: And then ran into the highest professions
of reverence and affection for you. 
The object so meritorious, who can doubt the reality
of his professions? 
Adieu, my dearest, my noble friend! —I love and
admire you for the generous conclusion of your last
more than I can express. Tho' I began this Letter
with impertinent raillery, knowing that you always
loved to indulge my mad vein; yet never was there a
heart that more glowed with friendly Love, than
that of 
Your own
Anna Howe. 