



From Miss Howe. 
Inclosed in the above. 

Thursday, April 27. 
I have been making enquiry, as I told you I
would, whether your Relations had really (before
you left them) resolved upon that change of measures
which your Aunt mentions in her Letter; and by laying
together several pieces of intelligence, some drawn from
my Mother, thro' your Uncle Antony's communications; 
some from Miss Lloyd, by your Sister's; and
some by a third way, that I shall not tell you of; I have
reason to think the following a true State of the Case. 
‘That there was no intention of a change of measures,
till within two or three days of your going
away. On the contrary, your Brother and Sister,
tho' they had no hope of prevailing with you in
Solmes's favour, were resolved never to give over
their persecutions, till they had pushed you upon
taking some step, which, by help of their good offices,
should be deemed inexcuseable by the half-witted souls
they had to play upon. 
‘But that at last your Mother (tired with and perhaps
ashamed of the passive part she had acted) thought 

fit to declare to Miss Bell, that she was determined to
try to put an end to the family-feuds; and to get
your Uncle Harlowe to second her endeavours. 
‘This alarmed your Brother and Sister; and then a
change of measures was resolved upon. Solmes's offers
were however too advantageous to be given up; and
your Father's condescension was now to be their sole
dependence, and (as they give it out) the trying of
what That would do with you, their last effort.’ 
And, indeed, my dear, this must have succeeded, I
verily think, with such a Daughter as they had to deal
with, could that Father, who never, I dare say,
kneeled in his life but to his God, have so far condescended
as your Aunt writes he would. 
But then, my dear, what would this have done? — 
Perhaps you would have given Lovelace the meeting, in
hopes to pacify him, and prevent mischief; supposing
that they had given you time, and not hurried you directly
into the State. But if you had not met him, you
see, that he was resolved to visit them, and well attended
too: And what must have been the consequence? 
So that, upon the whole, we know not but matters
may be best as they are, however disagreeable that best is. 
I hope your considerate and thoughtful mind will
make a good use of this hint. Who would not with patience
sustain even a great evil, if she could persuade
herself, that it was kindly dispensed, in order to prevent
a still greater? —Especially, if she could sit down,
as you can, and acquit her own heart? 
Permit me one further observation—Do we not see,
from the above State of the matter, what might have
been done before, by the worthy person of your family,
had she exerted the Mother, in behalf of a child so meritorious,
yet so much oppressed? 
Adieu, my dear. I will be ever yours. 
Anna Howe. 

Clarissa, in her Answer to the first of the two last
Letters, chides her friend for giving so little weight
to her advice, in relation to her behaviour to her
Mother. It may be proper to insert here the following
extracts from that Answer; tho' a little before
the time. 

&dotup;You assume, my dear, says she, your usual, and ever-agreeable
Style, in what you write of the two Gentlemen (a) ,
and how unaptly you think they have
chosen; Mr. Hickman in addressing you; Mr. Lovelace
me. But I am inclinable to believe, that with a
view to happiness, however two mild tempers might
agree, two high ones would make sad work of it,
both at one time violent and unyielding. You two
might indeed have raqueted the ball betwixt you, as
you say (b) . But Mr. Hickman, by his gentle manners,
seems formed for you, if you go not too far
with him. If you do, it would be a tameness in
him to bear it, which would make a man more contemptible
than Mr. Hickman can ever deserve to be
made. Nor is it a disgrace for even a brave man,
who knows what a woman is to vow to him afterwards,
to be very obsequious beforehand. 
&dotup;Do you think it is to the credit of Mr. Lovelace's
character, that he can be offensive and violent? — 
Does he not, as all such spirits must, subject himself
to the necessity of making submissions for his excesses,
far more mortifying to a proud heart than those condescensions
which the high-spirited are so apt to impute
as a weakness of mind in such a man as Mr.
Hickman? 
&dotup;Let me tell you, my dear, that Mr. Hickman is
such a one, as would rather bear an affront from a
Lady, than offer one to her. He had rather, I dare
say, that she should have occasion to ask his pardon,
than he hers. But, my dear, you have outlived your 

first passion;&dotup; and had the second man been an angel,
he would not have been more than indifferent to you. 
My motives for suspending, proceeds she, were not
merely ceremonious ones. I was really very ill. I could
not hold up my head. The contents of my Sister's
Letters had pierced my heart. Indeed, my dear, I was
very ill. And was I, moreover, to be as ready to accept
his offer, as if I were afraid he never would repeat it? 
&dotup;I see with great regret, that your Mamma is still
immoveably bent against our correspondence. What
shall I do about it? —It goes against me to continue
it, or to wish you to favour me with returns. —Yet
I have so managed my matters, that I have no friend
but you to advise with. It is enough to make one indeed
wish to be married to this man, tho' a man of
errors; as he has worthy Relations of my own Sex; 
and I should have some friends, I hope: —And having
some, I might have more—For as money is said to encrease
money, so does the countenance of persons of
character encrease friends: While the destitute must
be destitute. —It goes against my heart to beg of you
to discontinue corresponding with me; and yet it is
against my conscience to carry it on against parental
prohibition. But I dare not use all the arguments
against it that I could use—And why? —For fear I
should convince you; and you should reject me, as
the rest of my friends have done. I leave therefore
the determination of this point upon you. —I am not,
I find, to be trusted with it. But be mine all the fault,
and all the punishment, if it be punishable! —And
certainly it must, when it can be the cause of those
over-lively sentences wherewith you conclude the
Letter I have before me, and which I must no farther
animadvert upon, because you forbid me to do so.&dotup; 
To the second Letter, among other things, she says, 

So, my dear, you seem to think, that there was a
fate in my error. The cordial, the considerate friend, 

is seen in the observation you make on this occasion. 
Yet since things have happened as they have, would to
Heaven I could hear, that all the world acquitted my
Father, or, at least, my Mother! whose character,
before these family-feuds broke out, was the subject of
every one's admiration. Don't let any-body say from
you, so that it may come to her ear, that she might,
by a timely exertion of her fine talents, have saved her
unhappy child. You will observe, my dear, that in
her own good time, when she saw that there was not
likely to be an end to my Brother's persecutions, she
resolved to exert herself. But the pragmatical Daughter,
by the fatal meeting, precipitated all, and frustrated her
indulgent designs. O my love, I am now convinced,
by dear experience, that while children are so happy as
to have parents or guardians, whom they may consult,
they should not presume (no, not with the best and purest
intentions) to follow their own conceits, in material
cases. 
A ray of hope of future Reconciliation darts in upon
my mind, from the intention you tell me my Mother
had to exert herself in my favour, had I not gone away. 
And my hope is the stronger, as this communication
points out to me, that my Uncle Harlowe's interest is
likely, in my Mother's opinion, to be of weight, if it
could be engaged. It will behove me, perhaps, to apply
to that dear Uncle, if a proper occasion offer. 