



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. 


My dear Pamela,
I have sent you a Present, the completest I
could procure, of every thing that may suit
your approaching happy Circumstance; as I
hope it will be to you, and to us all: But it is
with a Hope annex'd, That altho' both Sexes
are thought of in it, yet that you will not put
us off with a Girl: No, Child, we will not
permit, may we have our Wills, that you shall
think of giving us a Girl, till you have presented
us with half a dozen find Boys. For our Line
is gone so low, that we expect that human
Security from you in your first Seven Years, or
we shall be disappointed, I can tell you that. 
And now, Pamela, I will give you their
Names, if my Brother and you approve of them: 
Your First shall be Billy; my Lord Davers, 

and the Earl of C&wblank;, shall be Godfathers; 
and it must be doubly God-mother'd too, or I
am afraid the Countess and I shall fall out about
it. Your Second shall be Davers; besure remember
that ––– Your Third shall be Charley;
your Fourth, Jemmy; your Fifth, Harry;
your Sixth—Dudley, if you will—and
your Girl, if you had not rather call it Pamela,
shall be Barbara—The rest you must name
as you please. —And so, my Dear, I wish all
Seven happily over with you. 
I am glad you got safe to Town; and long
to hear of Miss Darnford's Arrival, because I
know you'll be out of your Biass in your new
Settlement till then. She is a fine Lady, and
writes the most to my Taste of any one of her
Sex, that I know, next to you. I wish she'd
be so kind as to correspond with me. But besure
don't omit to give me the Sequel of her
Sister's and Murray's Affair, and what you think
will please me in relation to her. You do well
to save yourself the Trouble of describing the
Town, and the publick Places. We are no Strangers
to them; and they are too much our Tabletalk,
when any Country Lady has, for the first
time, been carried to Town, and return'd: 
Besides, what London affords, is nothing that
deserves Mention, compared to what we have
seen at Paris, and at Versailles, and other of
the French Palaces. You exactly, therefore, hit
our Tastes, and answer our Expectations, when
you give us, in your peculiar manner, Sentiments
on what we may call the Soul of Things,
and such Characters as you draw with a Pencil 

borrow'd from the Hand of Nature, intermingled
with those fine Lights and Shades, of Reflections
and Observations, that make your
Pictures glow, and instruct as well as delight. 
There, Pamela, is Encouragement for you
to proceed in obliging us. We are all of one
Mind in this respect; and more than ever,
since we have seen your Actions so well answer
to your Writings; and that Theory and Practice,
with regard to every Excellence that can
adorn a Lady, is the same thing with you. 
We are pleased with your Lawyers Characters. 
There are Life and Nature in them: 
But never avoid giving all the Characters that
occur to you; for that seems to be one of your
Talents; and in the ugliest you can draw, there
will be Matter of Instruction; especially as you
seem naturally to fall upon such as are so general,
that no one who converses, but must see
in them the Picture of one or other he is acquainted with. 
By this Time, perhaps, Miss Darnford will
be with you—Our Respects to her, if so.— 
And you will have been at some of the Theatrical
Entertainments: So will not want Subjects
to oblige us. —'Twas a good Thought of
your dear Man, to carry you to see the several
Houses, and to make you a Judge, by that
Means, of the Disposition and Fashion of every
thing in them. Tell him, I love him better
and better. I am proud of my Brother, and do
nothing but talk of what a charming Husband
he makes. But then, he gives an Example to
all who know him and his uncontroulable 

Temper, (which makes against many of us)
that it is possible for a good Wife to make even
a bad Man a worthy Husband: and this affords
an Instruction, which may stand all our Sex in
good stead. —But then they must have been
cautious first, that they have chosen a Man of
natural good Sense, and good Manners, and
not a brutal or abandon'd Debauchee. 
But hark-ye-me, my sweet Girl, what have
I done to you, that you won't write yourself
Sister to me? I could find in my Heart to be angry
with you on this Account. Before my last Visit,
indeed, I was scrupulous to subscribe myself so
to you. But since I have seen myself so much
surpass'd in all manner of Excellence, that I
would take Pleasure in the Name, you assume
a Pride in your Turn, and think it an undervaluing
of yourself, I suppose, to call me so. 
—Ay, that's the Thing, I doubt—Altho',
I can tell you, I have endeavour'd, by several
Regulations since my Return, (and the Countess,
too, keeps your Example in distant View, as
well as I) to be more worthy of the Appellation. 
If, therefore, you would avoid the Reproaches
of secret Pride, under the Shadow of so remarkable
an Humility, for the future never omit subscribing,
as I do, with great Pleasure, 
Your truly affectionate Sister, and Friend,
B. Davers. 
I always take it for granted, that my worthy
Brother sends his Respects to us; as you
must, that Lord Davers, the good Countess, 

and Jackey, (who, as well as his
Uncle, talks of nothing else but you) send
theirs; and so unnecessary Compliment
will be always excluded our Correspondence. 

