



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

And do I not see that I shall need nothing but
patience, in order to have all power with me? 
For what shall we say, if all these complaints of a
character wounded; these declarations of encreasing
regrets for meeting me; of resentments never to be
got over for my seducing her away; these angry commands
to leave her: —What shall we say, If all were
to mean nothing but Matrimony? And what if
my forbearing to enter upon that subject come out to
be the true cause of her petulance and uneasiness? 
I had once before played about the skirts of the
irrevocable obligation; but though myself obliged to
speak in clouds, and to run away from the subject,
as soon as she took my meaning, lest she should imagine
it to be ungenerously urged, now she was in some
sort in my power, as she had forbid me, beforehand,
to touch upon it, till I were in a state of visible Reformation,
and till a Reconciliation with her friends
were probable. But now, out-argued, out-talented,
and pushed so vehemently to leave one whom I had
no good pretence to hold, if she would go; and who
could so easily, if I had given her cause to doubt,
have thrown herself into other protection, or have
returned to Harlowe-Place and Solmes; I spoke out
upon the subject, and offered reasons, altho' with
infinite doubt and hesitation [lest she should be offended
at me, Belford!] why she should assent to the legal
tie, and make me the happiest of men. And O how
the mantled cheek, the downcast eye, the silent, yet
trembling lip, and the heaving bosom, a sweet collection
of heightened beauties, gave evidence, that the
tender was not mortally offensive! 

Charming creature! thought I [But I charge thee,
that thou let not any of the Sex know my exultation (a) ]
Is it so soon come to this? —Am I already Lord of the
destiny of a Clarissa Harlowe? —Am I already the
reformed man thou resolvedst I should be, before I had
the least encouragement given me? Is it thus, that
the more thou knowest me, the less thou seest reason to
approve of me? —And can Art and Design enter into
a breast so celestial? To banish me from thee, to insist
so rigorously upon my absence, in order to bring me
closer to thee, and make the blessing dear? —Well do
thy Arts justify mine; and encourage me to let loose
my plotting genius upon thee. 
But let me tell thee, charming maid, if thy wishes
are at all to be answered, that thou hast yet to account
to me for thy reluctance to go off with me, at a crisis
when thy going off was necessary to avoid being forced
into the nuptial fetters with a wretch, that were he
not thy aversion, thou wert no more honest to thy
own merit, than to me. 
I am accustomed to be preferred, let me tell thee,
by thy equals in rank too, tho' thy inferiors in merit; 
but who is not so? And shall I marry a woman, who has
given me reason to doubt the preference she has for me? 
No, my dearest Love, I have too sacred a regard
for thy Injunctions, to let them be broken thro, even
by thyself. Nor will I take in thy full meaning by
blushing silence only. Nor shalt thou give me room
to doubt, whether it be Necessity or Love, that inspires
this condescending impulse. 
Upon these principles, what had I to do, but to
construe her silence into contemptuous displeasure? 

And I begged her pardon for making a motion, which
I had so much reason to fear would offend her: For
the future I would pay a sacred regard to her previous
Injunctions, and prove to her by all my conduct the
truth of that observation, That True Love is always
fearful of offending. 
And what could the Lady say to this? methinks
thou askest. 
Say!—Why she looked vexed, disconcerted, teazed; 
was at a loss, as I thought, whether to be more angry
with herself, or with me. She turned about, however,
as if to hide a starting tear; and drew a sigh into two
or three but just audible quavers, trying to suppress it; 
and withdrew—leaving me master of the field. 
Tell me not of Politeness: Tell me not of Generosity: 
Tell me not of Compassion—Is she not a Match
for me? More than a Match? Does she not out-do
me at every fair weapon? Has she not made me doubt
her Love? Has she not taken officious pains to declare,
that she was not averse to Solmes for any respect she had
to me? and her sorrow for putting herself out of his
reach; that is to say, for meeting me? 
Then what a triumph would it be to the Harlowe
pride, were I now to marry this Lady? A family beneath
my own! No one in it worthy of an alliance
with, but her! My own Estate not contemptible! 
Living within the bounds of it, to avoid dependence
upon their betters, and obliged to no man living! My
expectations still so much more considerable! My person,
my talents—not to be despised, surely—Yet rejected
by them with scorn. Obliged to carry on an
underhand address to their Daughter, when two of
the most considerable families in the kingdom have
made overtures, which I have declined, partly for her
sake, and partly because I never will marry, if she be
not the person. To be forced to steal her away; not
only from them, but from herself! And must I be
brought to implore forgiveness and reconciliation from 

the Harlowes? —Beg to be acknowleged as the Son of
a gloomy tyrant; whose only boast is his riches? As
a Brother to a wretch, who has conceived immortal
hatred to me; and to a Sister who was beneath my
attempts, or I would have had her in my own way (and
that with a tenth part of the trouble and pains that
her Sister has cost me)? And, finally, as a Nephew to
Uncles, who valuing themselves upon their acquired
fortunes, would insult me, as creeping to them on that
account? —Forbid it the Blood of the Lovelaces, that
your last, and, let me say, not the meanest of your
stock, should thus creep, thus fawn, thus lick the dust,
for a Wife!— 
Proceed anon. 