



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. Sept. 20. 
I write to demand back again my last letter. I own it
was my mind at the different times I wrote it; and,
whatever ailed me, I could not help writing it. Such a
gloomy impulse came upon me, and increased as I wrote,
that, for my soul, I could not forbear running into the
Miserable. 
'Tis strange, very strange, that a man's conscience should
be able to force his fingers to write whether he will or
not; and to run him into a subject he more than once,
at the very time, resolved not to think of. 
Nor is it less strange, that (no new reason occurring)
he should, in a day or two more, so totally change his
mind; have his mind, I should rather say, so wholly
illuminated by gay hopes, and rising prospects, as to be
ashamed of what he had written. 
For, on reperusal of a copy of my letter, which fell into
my hands by accidents, in the hand-writing of my cousin 

Charlotte, who, unknown to me, had transcribed it, I find
it to be such a letter as an enemy would rejoice to see. 
This I know, that were I to have continued but one
week more in the way I was in when I wrote the latter
part of it, I should have been confined, and in straw,
the next: For I now recollect, that all my distemper was
returning upon me with irresistible violence–––and that in
spite of water-gruel and soupe maigre. 
I own, that I am still excessively grieved at the disappointment
this admirable woman made it so much her
whimsical choice to give me. But, since it has thus fallen
out; since she was determined to leave the world; and
since she actually ceases to be; ought I, who have such a
share of life and health in hand, to indulge gloomy reflections
upon an event that is passed; and being passed,
cannot be recalled? —Have I not had a specimen of what
will be my case, if I do? 
For, Belford ('tis a folly to deny it) I have been, to
use an old word, quite bestraught. 
Why, why, did my mother bring me up to bear no
controul? Why was I so educated, as that to my very
tutors it was a request, that I should not know what contradiction
or disappointment was? —Ought she not to
have known what cruelty there was in her kindness? 
What a punishment, to have my first very great disappointment
touch my intellect! —And intellects once
touched—But that I cannot bear to think of—Only thus
far; The very repentance and amendment wished me so
heartily by my kind and cross dear, have been invalidated
and postponed, who knows for how long? the
amendment at least: —Can a madman be capable of either? 
Once touch'd therefore, I must endeavour to banish
those gloomy reflections, which might otherwise have
brought on the right turn of mind; and this, to express
myself in Lord M.'s style, that my wits may not be sent
a wooll-gathering. 
For, let me moreover own to thee, that Dr. Hale, who
was my good Astolfo [You read Ariosto, Jack] and has
brought me back my wit-jar, had much ado, by starving
diet, by profuse phlebotomy, by flaying blisters, eylethole-cupping,
a dark room, a midnight solitude in a mid-day 

sun, to effect my recovery. And now, for my comfort,
he tells me, that I may still have returns upon full
moons—Horrible! most horrible!—and must be as careful
of myself at both Equinoctials, as Cæsar was warned
to be of the ides of March. 
How my heart sickens at looking back upon what
I was. Denied the Sun, and all comfort: All my
visiters, low-born, tiptoe attendants: Even those tiptoe
slaves never approaching me but periodically, armed with
gallipots, bolus's, and cephalic draughts; delivering their
orders to me in hated whispers; and answering other curtain-holding
impertinents, inquiring how I was, and how
I took their execrable potions, whisperingly too! What
a cursed still-life this! —Nothing active in me, or about
me, but the worm that never dies. 
Again I hasten from the recollection of scenes, which
will, at times, obtrude themselves upon me. 
Adieu, Belford! 
But return me my last letter—and build nothing upon
its contents. I must, I will, I have already, overcome
these fruitless gloominesses. Every hour my constitution
rises stronger and stronger to befriend me; and, except
a tributary sigh now and then to the memory of my heart's
beloved, it gives me hope, that I shall quickly be what I
was,—Life, spirit, gaiety, and once more the plague of a
Sex, that has been my plague, and will be every man's
plague, at one time or other of his life. 
I repeat my desire, however, that you will write to me
as usual. I hope you have good store of particulars by
you to communicate, when I can better bear to hear of
the dispositions that were made for all that was mortal of
my beloved Clarissa. 
But it will be the joy of my heart to be told, that her
implacable friends are plagued with remorse. Such things
as those you may now send me: For company in misery
is some relief; especially when a man can think those he
hates as miserable as himself. 
Once more adieu, Jack! 