


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday Night. 
My cousins and I, by invitation, supp'd with Lady
G. this afternoon. Lord and Lady L. were
there; Lady Olivia also, and Lady Maffei. 
I have set them all into a consternation, as they expressed
themselves, by my declaration of leaving London
on my return home early on Friday morning next. 
I knew, that were I to pass the whole summer here, I
must be peremptory at last. The two sisters vow, 

that I shall not go so soon. They say, that I have
seen so few of the town-diversions—Town-diversions,
Lucy! —I have had diversion enough, of one sort! — 
But in your arms, my dear friends, I shall have consolation
—And I want it. 
I have great regrets, and shall have hourly more, as
the day approaches, on the leaving of such dear and
obliging friends: But I am determined. 
My cousin's coach will convey me to Dunstable; 
and there, I know, I shall meet with my indulgent
uncle, or your brother. I would not have it publicly
known, because of the officious gentlemen in the
neighbourhood. 
Dr. Bartlett intended to set out for Grandison-hall
to morrow: But from the natural kindness of his heart
he has suspended his journey to Thursday next. No
consideration, therefore, shall detain me, if I am
well. 
My cousins are grieved: They did not expect that
I would be a word and a blow, as they phrase it. 
Lady Olivia expressed herself concerned, that she, in
particular, was to lose me. She had proposed great
pleasure, she said, in the parties she should make in
my company. But, after what Emily told me, she
appears to me as a Medusa; and were I to be thought
by her a formidable rival, I might have as much reason
to be afraid of the potion, as the man she loves of the
poniard. Emily has kept the secret from every-body
but me. And I rely on the inviolable secrecy of all
you, my friends. 
Lord and Lady L. had designed to go to Colnebrooke
to-morrow, or at my day, having hopes of
getting me with them: But now, they say, they will
stay in town till they can see whether I am to be prevailed
upon, or will be obdurate. 
Lady Olivia enquired after the distance of Northhamptonshire. 
She will make the tour of England, she
says, and visit me there. I was obliged to say I should
take her visit as an honour. 

Wicked Politeness! Of how many falshoods dost
thou make the people, who are called polite, guilty! 
But there is one man in the world, who is remarkable
for his truth, yet is unquestionably polite. He
censures not others for complying with fashions established
by custom; but he gives not in to them. He
never perverts the meaning of words. He never, for
instance, suffers his servants to deny him, when he
is at home. If he is busy, he just finds time to say he
is, to unexpected visiters; and if they will stay, he
turns them over to his Sisters, to Dr. Bartlett, to
Emily, till he can attend them. But then he has always
done so. Every one knows that he lives to his
own heart, and they expect it of him; and when they
can have his company, they have double joy in the ease
and chearfulness that attend his leisure: They then
have him wholly. And he can be the more polite, as
the company then is all his business. 
Sir Charles might the better do so, as he came over
so few months ago, after so long an absence; and his
reputation for politeness was so well established, that
people rather looked for rules from him, than a conformity
to theirs. 
His denials of complimenting Lady Olivia (tho' she
was but just arrived in his native country, where she
never was before) with the suspending of his departure
for one week, or but for one day—Who but he could
have given them? But he was convinced, that it was
right to hasten away, for the sake of Clementina and
his Jeronymo; and that it would have been wrong to
shew Olivia, even for her own sake, that in such a
competition she had consequence with him; and all
her entreaties, all her menaces, the detested poniard in
her hand, could not shake his steady soul, and make
him delay his well-settled purpose. 

