

Having thus brought this little History to a
happy Period, the Reader will indulge us in
a few brief Observations, which naturally result from
it; and which will serve as so many Applications, of
its most material Incidents, to the Minds of the Youth
of both Sexes. 
First, then, in the Character of the Gentleman,
may be seen that of a fashionable Libertine, who
allow'd himself in the free Indulgence of his Passions,
especially as to the Fair Sex; and found himself supported
in his daring Attempts, by an affluent Fortune
in Possession, a personal Bravery, as it is called,
readier to give than take Offence, and an imperious
Will; yet as he betimes sees his Errors, and reforms
in the Bloom of Youth, an edifying Lesson may be
drawn from it, for the Use of such as are born to
large Fortunes; and who may be taught, by his
Example, the inexpressible Difference between the
Hazards and Remorse which attend a profligate
Course of Life; and the Pleasures which flow from
virtuous Love, and virtuous Actions. 
The Generosity of his Mind; his Sobriety, as to
Wine and Hours; his prudent Oeconomy and Hospitality; 
the Purity and Constancy of his Affection,
after his Change; his polite Behaviour to his Pamela; his generous Provision for her, in case he had
died; his Bounty to her Parents, attended with such
Marks of Prudence as made them useful to himself,
as well as render'd them happy; and shew'd he was
not acted merely by a blind and partial Passion; are
so many Instances worthy of being remember'd in
his Favour, and of being imitated, in Degree, by all
such as are circumstanced as he was. 
In the Character of Lady Davers, let the Proud
and the High-born see the Deformity of unreafonable
Passion, and how weak and ridiculous such
Persons must appear, who suffer themselves, as is
usually the Case, to be hurried from one Extreme
to another; from the Height of Violence, to the
most abject Submission; and subject themselves to
be out-done by the humble Virtue they so much despise. 
Let good Clergymen, in Mr. Williams, see
that whatever Displeasure the doing of their Duty
may give, for a Time, to their proud Patrons, Providence
will, at last, reward their Piety, and turn
their Distresses to Triumph; and make them even
more valued for a Conduct that gave Offence
while the Violence of Passion lasted, than if they
had meanly stoop'd to flatter or sooth the Vices of
the Great. 
In the Examples of good old Andrews, and his
Wife, let those, who are reduced to a low Estate,
see, that Providence never fails to reward their Honesty
and Integrity; and that God will, in his own
good Time, extricate them, by means unforeseen,
out of their present Difficulties, and reward them
with Benefits unhop'd-for. 
The Upper Servants of great Families may,
from the odious Character of Mrs Jewkes, and the
amiable ones of Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Longman, &c. learn
what to avoid, and what to chuse, to make themselves
valued and esteem'd by all who know them. 
And, from the double Conduct of poor John, the
Lower Servants may learn Fidelity, and how to 
distinguish between the lawful and unlawful Commands of a Superior. 
The poor deluded Female, who, like the once
unhappy Miss Godfrey, has given up her Honour,
and yielded to the Allurements of her designing
Lover, may learn from her Story, to stop at the
first Fault; and, by resolving to repent and amend,
see the Pardon and Blessing which await her Penitence,
and a kind Providence ready to extend the
Arms of its Mercy to receive and reward her returning
Duty. While the abandon'd Prostitute, pursuing
the wicked Courses, into which, perhaps, she
was at first inadvertently drawn, hurries herself into
filthy Diseases, and an untimely Death; and, too
probably, into everlasting Perdition afterwards. 
Let the desponding Heart be comforted by the
happy Issue which the Troubles and Trials of the
lovely Pamela met with, when they see, in her
Case, that no Danger nor Distress, however inevitable
or deep to their Apprehensions, can be out of
the Power of Providence to obviate or relieve; 
and which, as in various Instances in her Story, can
turn the most seemingly grievous Things to its own
Glory, and the Reward of suffering Innocence; and
that, too, at a Time when all human Prospects
seem to fail. 
Let the Rich, and those who are exalted from a
low to a high Estate, learn from her, that they are
not promoted only for a single Good; but that Providence
has raised them, that they should dispense
to all within their Reach, the Blessings it has heaped
upon them; and that the greater the Power is to
which God has raised them, the greater is the Good
that will be expected from them. 
From the low Opinion she every-where shews of
herself, and her attributing all her Excellencies to her
pious Education, and her Lady's virtuous Instructions
and Bounty; let Persons, even of Genius
and Piety, learn, not to arrogate to themselves those
Gists and Graces, which they owe least of all to
themselves: Since the Beauties of Person are frail,
and it is not in our Power to give them to ourselves,
or to be either prudent, wise, or good, without the
Assistance of Divine Grace. 
From the same good Example, let Children see
what a Blessing awaits their Duty to their Parents,
tho' ever so low in the World: And that the only
Disgrace is to be dishonest; but none at all to be
poor. 
From the Oeconomy she purposes to observe in
her Elevation, let even Ladies of Condition learn,
that there are Family Employments in which they
may, and ought to, make themselves useful, and give
good Examples to their Inferiors, as well as Equals. 
And that their Duty to God, Charity to the Poor
and Sick, and the different Branches of Houshold
Management, ought to take up the most considerable
Portions of their Time. 
From her signal Veracity, which she never forfeited,
in all the Hardships she was try'd with, tho'
her Answers, as she had Reason to apprehend, would
often make against her; and the Innocence she preserved
throughout all her Stratagems and Contrivances
to save herself from Violation; Persons, even
sorely tempted, may learn to preserve a sacred Regard
to Truth; which always begets a Reverence for
them, even in the corruptest Minds. 
In short, 
Her obliging Behaviour to her Equals, before her
Exaltation; her Kindness to them afterwards; 
her forgiving Spirit, and her Generosity; 
Her Meekness, in every Circumstance where her
Virtue was not concern'd; 
Her charitable Allowances for others, as in the
Case of Miss Godfrey, for Faults she would not
have forgiven in herself. 
Her Kindness and Prudence to the Offspring of
that melancholy Adventure; 
Her Maiden and Bridal Purity, which extended
as well to her Thoughts as to her Words and
Actions; 
Her signal Affiance in God; 
Her thankful Spirit; 
Her grateful Heart; 
Her diffusive Charity to the Poor, which made
her blessed by them whenever she appear'd
abroad; 
The chearful Ease and Freedom of her Deportment; 
Her Parental, Conjugal and Maternal Duty; 
Her Social Virtues; 
Are all so many signal Instances of the Excellency
of her Mind; which may make her Character worthy
of the Imitation of her Sex, from low to high
Life. And the Editor of these Sheets will have his
End, if it inspires a laudable Emulation in the Minds
of any worthy Persons, who may thereby intitle
themselves to the Rewards, the Praises, and the
Blessings, by which she was so deservedly distinguished. 