



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Mrs. Judith Norton. 

Thursday, June 29. 
My dear Mrs. Norton,
I address myself to you after a very long silence
(which, however, was not owing either to want
of Love or Duty) principally to desire you to satisfy
me in two or three points, which it behoves me to
know. 
My Father, and all the family, I am informed, are
to be at my Uncle Harlowe's this day, as usual. Pray
acquaint me, if they have been there? And if they
were chearful on the anniversary occasion? And also,
if you have heard of any journey, or intended journey,
of my Brother, in company with Captain Singleton
and Mr. Solmes? 
Strange things have happened to me, my dear worthy
and maternal friend—Very strange things! —Mr.
Lovelace has proved a very barbarous and ungrateful
man to me. But, God be praised, I have escaped
from him. Being among absolute strangers (tho' I
think worthy folks) I have written to Hannah Burton
to come and be with me. If the good creature fall
in your way, pray encourage her to come to me. I
always intended to have her, she knows: But hoped
to be in happier circumstances. 
Say nothing to any of my friends that you have
heard from me. 
Pray—Do you think my Father would be prevailed
upon, if I were to supplicate him by Letter, to
take off the heavy curse he laid upon me at my going
from Harlowe-Place? I can expect no other favour
from him: But that being literally fulfilled as to my
prospects in this life, I hope it will be thought to have
operated far enough; and my heart is so weak! —It
is very weak! —But for my Father's own sake—What 

should I say? —Indeed I hardly know how I ought to
express myself on this sad subject! —But it will give
ease to my mind to be released from it. 
I am afraid my Poor, as I used to call the good creatures
to whose necessities I was wont to administer by
your faithful hands, have missed me of late. But now,
alas! I am poor myself. It is not the least aggravation
of my fault, nor of my regrets, that with such
inclinations as God had given me, I have put it out of
my power to do the good I once pleased myself to think
I was born to do. It is a sad thing, my dearest Mrs.
Norton, to render useless to ourselves and the world,
by our own rashness, the Talents which Providence
has entrusted to us, for the service of both. 
But these reflections are now too late; and perhaps
I ought to have kept them to myself. Let me, however,
hope, that you love me still. Let me, however,
hope, that you love me still. Pray let me
hope that you do. And then, notwithstanding my
misfortunes, which have made me seem ungrateful to
the kind and truly-maternal pains you have taken with
me from my cradle, I shall have the happiness to think
that there is One worthy person, who hates not 
The unfortunate
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Pray remember me to my foster-brother. I hope
he continues dutiful and good to you. 
Be pleased to direct for Rachel Clark, at Mr.
Smith's in King-street, Covent-garden. But
keep the direction an absolute secret. 