


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Selby-house, July 24.
You write, my dear Lady G. with intent to
make me smile. I thank you for your intention:
It is not wholly lost. My friends and I are
one; and my uncle and cousin James laughed out at
several places in your lively Letter. Lucy, Nancy,
smiled. My cousins Kitty and Patty Holles said, You
were a charming Lady: But shall I tell you what my
grandmamma and aunt said? —I will not—Now will
your curiosity be excited—To say the truth, they
spoke not; they only shook their heads. I saw, my
dear, greatly as they love and admire you, that if they
had smiled, it would have been at, not with, the poor
Charlotte (Let me pity you, my dear!) who, in some
places of her Letter, could sport with the infirmities
of age, to which we are all advancing, and even wish
to arrive at; and in others treat lightly a man, to
whom she owes respect, and has vowed duty; and
who almost adores her. 
You ask, my dear, which of a certain pair has
most understanding? And you bid me not mortify
you with giving it on the man's side. I will not. 

Lord G. is far from being wanting in understanding; 
but Lady G. has undoubtedly more than thousands,
even of sensible women: But in her treatment of certain
subjects, she by no means shews it. There's for
you, my dear! I hope you will be angry with your
Harriet. You ought to take one of us to task. Methinks
I would not have you be angry with yourself. 
But, my dear, I am not well: This therefore may
make me the less capable of relishing your raillery. 
These men vex me. Greville's obstinate perseverance,
and so near a neighbour, that I cannot avoid seeing
him often: Poor Mr. Orme's ill health: Another
Letter from Sir Rowland Meredith, its contents so
extremely kind and generous, that they afflict me. — 
Lady D. urging me (I am afraid I must say) with such
strength of reason, and with an affection so truly maternal,
that I know not how to answer her: And just
now I have received a Letter, unknown to that good
Lady, from the Earl of D.—laying in a claim, on a
certain supposition, that—O my dear! how cruel is
all this to your Harriet! My grandmamma by her
eyes, I see, wishes me to think of marriage, and with
Lord D.—as all thoughts—I need not say of what,
are over—My aunt Selby's eyes are ready to second
my grandmamma's—My uncle speaks out on the same
side of the question: So do you: So does Lucy. 
Nancy is silent: She sees my disturbance when I am
looked at, and talked to, on this subject: So ought
Lucy, I think. Sir Rowland says, Mr. Fowler has
almost pined himself to death. —My Soul, my dear,
is fretted. I have begged leave to pass a fortnight or
three weeks with my good Mr. Deane, who rejoiced
at the motion; but my grandmother heard my request
with tears: She could not spare her Harriet,
she told me. My aunt also dried her eyes—How, my
Charlotte, could I think of leaving them? —Yet
could they have parted with me, I should surely have
been more composed with Mr. Deane than at present 

I can be any-where else. He is more delicate (Shall I
be excused to say?) than my uncle. 
Were but the news come that the solemnity is
over—I am greatly mistaken in myself, if I should not
be more easy than I am at present—But then I should
be more teazed, more importuned, than before. You
tell me, the Countess of D. would come down: The
very thought of that visit hurts me. 
I have no doubt but by this time the knot is tied. 
God Almighty shower on the heads of both, the
choicest of his blessings! I should be quite out of humour
with myself, if I were not able to offer up this
prayer as often as I pray for myself. 
I beg of you, my dear, to speed to me the next
Letters from Italy, be the contents what they will. 
You know I am armed. Shall the event I wish to be
over, either surprise or grieve me? I hope not. 
I will not pity Lady Olivia, because she threatened
and raved. True Love rages not; threatens not. 
Yet a disappointment in Love is a dreadful thing; and
may operate, in different minds, different ways, as I
have read somewhere. 
I shall write to all my friends in town, and at Colnebrooke:
I trouble you not, therefore, with particular
compliments to them. 
How could you mention the names of Mr. and
Mrs. Reeves, and say no more of them? I thought
you loved them both. They are deserving of your
love, and love you. 
Never, I believe, did any young creature suffer in
her mind by suspense as I have done for some months
past. In the present situation of things I know not
what further to write. What can I, my Charlotte? — 
Conjectural topics are reserved for my closet and
pillow. 
Adieu, and adieu, my beloved friend, my dear
Lady G. Be good, and be happy! What a blessing,
that both are in your power! May they ever be 

so! And may you make a good use of that power,
prays 
Your Harriet Byron. 

