


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Thursday morn. March 29. 
Now for particulars of what passed yesterday. 
Sir Charles is gone to Grosvenor-Square, to enquire
after the health and composure of his noble
guests there. 
When I called upon Lady Clementina yesterday,
five o'clock, I found her greatly distressed with her 

own apprehensions. I must, said she to me, be a
guiltier creature than I had allowed myself to think
I was: Why else am I so ashamed, so afraid, to see
parents whom I ever-honoured, brothers and friends
whom I ever loved? —O Lady Grandison! What a
dispiriting thing is the consciousness of having done
amiss! And to a proud heart too! 
Then looking upon the written plan, Let me see,
said she, what I am to sign. These were the remarks
she made upon them, as she read: 
(1.) Hard, hard article, the first! But your Grandison,
madam, my fourth brother, my friend, my
protector, tells me, that I shall discharge all the obligations
he ever laid upon me, if I will sign it. —I
submit. 
(2.) How flattering to my pride; to my hopes of
doing good to the indigent and unhappy! 
(3.) Nominating my attendants—my confessor— 
Kind, considerate Grandison! If I give up the first
wish of my heart, I shall not insist upon these stipulations
in my favour. My parents shall have, in
these cases, affirmative and negative too. Indeed I
desire not in any article to be independent of them. 
(4.) A grateful article! I acknowlege, Chevalier,
your protection with gratitude, in this stipulation. 
(5.) If my friends promise, they will perform. Ours
is a family of untainted honour. I hope my Brother
Giacomo will be answered for by his Brothers in these
articles: But he will hate me, I fear. 
Generous Grandison! what tempting proposals do
you conclude with! And you, Lady Grandison, are
so good as to say, that my happiness is wanting to
complete yours—That is a motive, I assure you. 
Lead me, madam, and do you, my dear Lady L.
(my hospitable other protectress) oblige me with your
countenance too. A woman of your honour and
goodness, Sister of the Chevalier Grandison, acknowleging
me your guest, and answering for my behaviour, 

will credit the abject Clementina in the eyes of her
forgiving relations. —Sir Charles Grandison there before
me, to prepare them to receive graciously the fugitive! 
—Lead me on, while I can be led: I will attend
you. 
She looked wild and disordered; and, giving each
of us a hand, we led her to the coach. But, at stepping
in, she trembled, faltered, and seemed greatly
disturbed. We consoled her all we could; and the
coach drove to Grosvenor Square. When it stopt,
she threw her arms about Lady L. and, hiding her
face in her bosom, called upon the Blessed Virgin to
support her—How, how, said she, can I look my Father,
my Mother, in the face! 
Sir Charles, on the coach stopping, appeared. He
saw her emotion. It is kind, my Harriet! It is kind,
Lady L.! to accompany Lady Clementina. —Your
goodness will be rewarded in being eye-witnesses of
the most gracious reception that ever indulgent parents
gave to a long absent daughter. 
Ah, Chevalier! was all she could say. 
Let me conduct you, dearest Lady Clementina, into
a drawing-room, where you will see no other person
but whom you now see, till your recovered spirits
shall rejoice the dearest of friends. 
I was afraid she was too much discomposed to attend
to this considerate expedient. I repeated, therefore,
what Sir Charles last said. She was visibly encouraged
by it. She gave him her trembling hand; 
and he led her into the prepared drawing-room. Lady
L. and I followed, and took out seats on each hand
of her; Sir Charles his over-against her. Our offered
salts, and soothing, with difficulty kept her from
fainting. 
When she was a little revived—Hush! said she,
with her finger held up, and wildness in her looks,
casting her eyes to the doors and windows in turn:
They will hear us! —Further recovering herself—O 

Chevalier! said she, what shall I say? How shall I
look? What shall I do? —And am I, am I, indeed,
in the same house with my Father, Mother, Jeronymo? 
Who else? Who else? with quickness. 
It is so ordered, my dearest Clementina, said Sir
Charles, in love and tenderness to you, that you shall
only see your Mother first; then your Father—At
your own pleasure, your Brothers, Mrs. Beaumont,
Father Marescotti. 
Sir Charles was sent for out—Don't, don't leave
me, Sir. Then looking to Lady L. and then to me— 
You are all goodness, Ladies—Don't leave me. 
Sir Charles instantly returned: Your Mamma, madam,
all indulgence, is impatient to fold you to her
heart. What joy will you give her? 
He offered his hand. She gave him hers; motioning
for our attendance. Sir Charles led her, we
following, into the room where was her expecting
Mother. The moment each saw the other, they ran
with open arms to each other. O my Mamma! — 
My Clementina!—was all that either could say. 
They sunk down on the floor, the Mother's arms
about the Daughter's neck; the Daughter's about the
Mother's waist. 
Sir Charles lifted them up, and seated them close
to each other—Pardon! Pardon! Pardon! said the
dear Lady, hands and eyes lifted up, sliding out of
her Mother's arms on her knees—But at that moment
could say no more. 
The Marquis, not being able longer to contain himself,
rushed in—My Daughter! my Child! my Clementina! 
Once more do I see my Child! 
Sir Charles had half-lifted her up, when her Father
entered. She sunk down again, prostrate on the
floor, her arms extended: O my Father! Forgive! — 
Forgive me, O my Father! 
He raised her up, by Sir Charles's assistance; and,
seating her between himself and his Lady, both again 

wrapt their arms about her. She repeated prayers for
forgiveness, in broken accents: Blessings, in accents
as broken, flowed from their hearts to their lips. 
After the first emotions, when they could speak,
and she now-and then could look up, which she did
by snatches, as it were, her eyes presently falling under
theirs, Behold, madam, Behold, my Lord, said
she, the hospitable Lady to whom—Looking at Lady L.
Behold, looking at me, a more than woman; an
Angel—More she would have said; but seemed at a
loss for words. 
We have before seen and admired, said the Marquis,
in Lady Grandison, the noblest of all women. 
He arose to approach us: Sir Charles led us both
to them. 
Lady Clementina snatched first my hand, and
eagerly pressed it with her lips; then Lady L's: Her
heart was full: She seemed to want to speak; but
could not: And Lady L. and I, with overflowing
eyes, congratulated the Father, Mother, Daughter; 
and were blessed in speech by the two former; by
hands and eyes lifted up, by Lady Clementina. 
Sir Charles then withdrawing, returned with the
Bishop, and Signor Jeronymo. It is hard to say,
whether these two Lords shewed more joy, than Clementina
did shame and confusion. She offered at
begging pardon: But the Bishop said, Not one word
of past afflictions! Nobody is in fault. We are all
happy once more; and happy on the conditions prescribed
to both by this friend of mankind in general,
and of our family in particular. 
My ever noble, my venerable brother, said Jeronymo
(who had clasped his Sister to his fond heart,
his eyes running over) how I love you for this uncalled-for
assurance to the dear Clementina! Every
article of my Grandison's plan shall be carried into
execution. We will rejoice with the Chevalier in his
England—And he, and all who are dear to him, shall
accompany us to Italy. We will be all one family. 

Sir Charles then introduced to the Lady his greatly
and justly esteemed Mrs. Beaumont. Clementina
threw herself into her arms. Forgive me, my dear
Mrs. Beaumont! If you forgive me, Virtue will. 
Pardon the poor creature, who never, never, would
have so much disgraced your lessons, and her mamma's
example, as she has done, had not a heavy
cloud darkened her unhappy mind. Say you forgive
me, as the best and most indulgent of parents, and
the kindest of brothers, have done. 
It was not your fault, my dear Lady Clementina,
but your misfortune. You never was so much to be
blamed as pitied. All here are of one sentiment. 
We came over to heal your wounded mind: Be it
healed, and every one will be happy; yes, more happy
perhaps (for now we all understand one another)
than if you had not left us to mourn your absence. 
Blessed be my Comforter, my Friend, my beloved
Mrs. Beaumont! You always knew how to blunt the
keen edge of calamity: What a superior woman are
you! 
Father Marescotti was introduced by the Marquis
himself, with a respect worthy of his piety and goodness. 
I submit, Father, said Lady Clementina, before
he could speak, to any penance you shall inflict. 
His voice would not befriend him: His action,
however, shewed him to be all joy and congratulation. 
I have been wicked, very wicked, continued she— 
But Mrs. Beaumont says, and she says justly, that I
merited pity, rather than blame. Yet if you think
not so, you, who are the keeper of my conscience,
spare me not. 
Who, who, said the good man, recovering speech,
shall condemn, when father, mother, and brothers,
so zealous for the honour of their family, acquit? 
God forgive you, my dearest Lady! And God forgive
us all! 
My dearest Chevalier Grandison, said Jeronymo, 

what gratitude, what obligations, do we owe to you,
and your admirable Lady and Sisters! Again I acknowlege
the obligation for a whole family, from
this hour a happy one, I hope. 
It had been agreed between the family and Sir
Charles, that not a word should be mentioned to
Lady Clementina of the Count of Belvedere. They
requested Sir Charles to take upon himself the breaking
to her, that he was in England, in his own manner,
as opportunity should offer. 
Every one having been greatly affected, Sir Charles
proposed to take leave; and that Lady Clementina
thould return to Lady L's for that night, as preparation
might not have been made for her stay in
Grosvenor-Square: But all the family, with one voice,
declared they could not part with the restored daughter
and sister of their hopes: And she herself chearfully
consented to stay; gratefully, however, with a bent
knee, thanking Lady L. for her sisterly treatment. 
Who, in the general joy, said Sir Charles, has
remembred the good Camilla? Let Camilla congratulate
her Lady and all of us, on this happy occasion. 
Every-one called out for Camilla. In ran the
worthy creature. On her knees she embraced her
young Lady's, and wept for joy. Ah! my Camilla,
my friend Camilla! said Clementina, clasping her arms
about her neck, I have been cruel to you: But it
was not I—Alas! alas! I was not always myself—I
will endeavour to repair your wrongs. 
Thank God that I once more clasp my dear young
Lady to my heart! —I have no wrongs to complain of. 
Yes, yes, you have, kind Camilla: I wanted to
elude your watchful duty; and was too cunning to be
just to my Camilla. 
Sir Charles forgot not to commend Laura to forgiveness
and favour. Laura, said Lady Clementina,
is blameless. She obeyed me with reluctance. If I am
myself forgiven, forgive Laura. 

My dearest Love, said the Marchioness, we have
agreed, that you shall choose your own servants. The
Chevalier, we have no doubt, had Laura in his
thoughts, when he made that stipulation; the English
youth too. You, my Clementina, must have it in
your power to do with these as you please. 
May I be permitted, my Lords, said Sir Charles,
to make one request for myself to Lady Clementina; 
a request which shall be consistent with the articles
you will all sign? 
I will agree to a request of yours, Chevalier, said
the Lady, be it almost what it will. 
I will not, madam, make it to-day, nor to-morrow. 
After the hurry of spirits we have all sustained, let to-morrow
be a day of composure. Permit me to expect
you all at dinner with me on Friday. The articles
then may be signed: And then, but not before, I will
mention my request, and hope it will be granted. 
Sir Charles's invitation was politely accepted; and
to-morrow— 
Lady Clementina and Mrs. Beaumont below! — 
Agreeable surprize! 
* *
Sir Charles had been out, and was just come in
when the two Ladies alighted. I was overjoyed to see
them, and to see Lady Clementina serene, and seemingly
not unhappy. We are come, said Mrs. Beaumont,
to make our earliest acknowlegements for the
happiness restored to a whole family. Lady Clementina
could not be easy till she had paid her personal
thanks to Lady Grandison, for the support her presence
gave her yesterday. 
Gratitude, said the Lady, fills my heart: But how,
Chevalier, shall I express it? I beseech you, let me
know your request. Tell me, dear Lady Grandison,
wherein I can oblige my fourth brother? 
My dearest Lady Clementina, said Sir Charles, fortify
your heart against a gentle (I hope it will then be 

but a gentle) surprize. You have not yet signed, your
Relations have not, I presume, the articles to which
you have mutually agreed. 
Sir! Chevalier! Sir! 
Let me not alarm you, madam. 
He put one of her hands in mine; and took the
other, in a very tender manner, in his. 
You intend to sign them? —They do, I am sure. 
To-morrow, when we are all together, they will be
signed on both sides. 
I hope so—They will not, Chevalier, be receded
from? 
They will not, madam: And hence you will be
assured, that the Count of Belvedere will never be
proposed to you with any degree of urgency. 
I hope not, I hope not, said she with quickness. 
Should you, madam, on your return to Italy, be
unwilling to see the Count as a friend of your family,
as a respecter of your great qualities, as a country-man? 
I shall always regard the Count of Belvedere as a
man of honour, as a friend of my Brother Giacomo,
of all our family—But I cannot place him in any
other light. What means the Chevalier Grandison? 
Keep not my mind in suspense. 
I will not. Your father, your mother, your brothers,
came over in hopes, that you might be prevailed
upon in the Count's favour. They have given
up that hope— 
They have, Sir! 
And will absolutely leave you to your own will, to
your own wishes, on the condition to which you
have agreed to sign—But shall I ask you—Were the
Count to be in France, would you allow him to come
over, and take leave of your family and you, before
he sets out for the court of Madrid? 
What, Sir! as a man who had hopes from me of
more than my good wishes? 

No, madam; only as a friend to the whole family— 
not requesting any other favour, now he sees you so
determined, than your good wishes, your prayers, for
him, as you will ever have his for you. 
I can consent in that view: But were any other
favour to be hoped from me; were my generosity
to be expected to be prevailed upon—O Chevalier! 
Lady Grandison! Mrs. Beaumont! Let me not be
attempted in this way: The articles would be broken:
This would be persuasion, and that compulsion. 
Nothing, madam, of this kind is intended. The
articles will be inviolably observed on the part of your
relations. But here Mrs. Beaumont, who never intended
to set her foot on the English shore, to oblige
and comfort your mother, is come to England:
And in the general grief that was occasioned by your
absenting yourself, if the man, who was always deservedly
esteemed by your family, had accompanied,
had attended, your father, your brothers— 
Sir Charles stopt, and looked at the apprehensive
Lady with such a sweet benignity, and, on her eye
meeting his, with such tender and downcast modesty
(all the graces of gentle persuasion are his!)— 
O Chevalier! your request! your request! Tell
me in what I can oblige the most obliging of friends,
of men! 
I will tell you, madam—bowing on the hand he
held—Consent, if it be not with too much pain to
yourself, to see the Count of Belvedere. 
See him, Sir! How? When? Where? As what? 
As a friend to your family—a well-wisher to your
glory, your happiness; and as a man ready and desirous
to promote the latter at the expence of his own. 
He wishes but, while he stays here— 
“Stays here,” Sir! 
To be allowed to visit your family, and to see you
once, twice, thrice, as you please—but entirely under
the conditions of the articles to be signed to-morrow. 

And is then the Count in England? 
He is, madam. He attended his and your friends
over. He has not once desired to appear in your presence:
He keeps himself close in private lodgings. 
Hence judge of his resolution not to disturb or offend
you. He will depart the kingdom without an interview,
if you will have it so: But I could not bear,
that so good a man should be obliged to depart disgracefully,
as I may say, and as if he were undeserving
of pity, tho' he could not obtain favour. 
O Chevalier! 
Secured, madam, by the articles, tho' his emotion
may be apprehended to be great, yours cannot
—There is not the same reason for the one as for
the other: I make it my request, that the Count of
Belvedere may be allowed, as one of the chosen friends
of your house, but as no more (more the articles forbid)
a place at my table to-morrow. 
To-morrow, Sir! and I at it!— 
He bowed affirmatively. 
O how the penetrating man looked into the heart
of the Lady at her eyes! —As sure as you are alive,
madam, he thought of guessing by her then emotion,
whether any hopes could distantly lie for the Count,
by the consequence his presence or absence would give
him with her. 
She paused—At last—And is this, Chevalier, the
request you had to make me? 
It is, madam; and if my Harriet had not had the
honour of this visit, I should have made the same request
for his admission in the evening to-morrow—as
now I do to dinner. 
Well, Sir; I can suspect no double-dealing from
Sir Charles Grandison. 
I ask for no favour for the Count more than I have
mentioned, madam: I am bound by the articles I
have drawn, as if I were a party to them. 
Well, Sir, I consent to see the Count. He will 

be prudent. I hope I shall be so. In Italy, more
than once, after you had left it, I saw him: And I
always wished him happy. 
Now, my dearest Sister, said Sir Charles, my ever-to-be-respected
friend, I am easy in my mind. I
could not bear in my thoughts, that any-thing I knew,
which it concerned you to know, should be concealed
from you. 
Tears stood in her eyes. O madam, said she to
me, God and you only can reward this excellent man
for his goodness to me, and all the world that know
him. —You see your influence, Chevalier. In every
way do I wish to shew my gratitude. But never,
never, ask me to give my hand in marriage. 
Ah! my dear Lady! thought I; a tear stealing
involuntarily down my cheek; the less, the less, I
doubt, must you be asked, for having before you a
man, who having no equal, you cannot think of any
other. 
The two Ladies hurried away to Lady L's. How
sincerely has the friendly heart of dear Lady L. been
affected in all these tender scenes! 

