


The following History is given in
a Series of Letters written principally
in a double yet separate correspondence; 
Between two young Ladies of virtue and
honour, bearing an inviolable friendship for each
other, and writing not merely for amusement,
but upon the most interesting subjects; in which
every private family, more or less, may find
itself concerned: And, 
Between two Gentlemen of free lives; one of
them glorying in his talents for Stratagem and
Invention, and communicating to the other, in
confidence, all the secret purposes of an intriguing
head and resolute heart. 
But here it will be proper to observe, for the
sake of such as may apprehend hurt to the morals
of Youth, from the more freely written Letters,
that the Gentlemen, tho' professed Libertines as
to the Female Sex, and making it one of their
wicked maxims, to keep no faith with any of the
individuals of it, who are thrown into their power,
are not, however, either Infidels or Scoffers; nor
yet such as think themselves freed from the observance
of those other moral duties which bind
man to man. 

On the contrary, it will be found, in the progress
of the Work, that they very often make
such reflections upon each other, and each upon
himself and his own actions, as reasonable beings
must make, who disbelieve not a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments, and who one day propose
to reform—One of them actually reforming,
and by that means giving an opportunity to
censure the freedoms which fall from the gayer
pen and lighter heart of the other. 
And yet that other, altho' in unbosoming himself
to a select friend, he discover wickedness
enough to entitle him to general detestation, preserves
a decency, as well in his images, as in his
language, which is not always to be found in the
works of some of the most celebrated modern
Writers, whose subjects and characters have less
warranted the liberties they have taken. 
In the Letters of the two young Ladies, it is
presumed will be found not only the highest exercise
of a reasonable and practicable Friendship,
between minds endowed with the noblest principles
of Virtue and Religion, but occasionally
interspersed, such Delicacy of Sentiments, particularly
with regard to the other Sex; such instances
of Impartiality, each freely, as a fundamental
principle of their friendship, blaming,
praising, and setting right the other, as are
strongly to be recommended to the observation
of the younger part (more especially) of the
Female Readers. 
The principal of these two young Ladies is
proposed as an Exemplar to her Sex. Nor is it 

any objection to her being so, that she is not in
all respects a perfect character. It was not only
natural, but it was necessary, that she should
have some faults, were it only to shew the Reader,
how laudably she could mistrust and blame
herself, and carry to her own heart, divested of
self-partiality, the censure which arose from her
own convictions, and that even to the acquittal
of those, because revered characters, whom no
one else would acquit, and to whose much greater
faults her errors were owing, and not to a weak or
reproachable heart. As far as is consistent with
human frailty, and as far as she could be perfect,
considering the people she had to deal with, and
those with whom she was inseparably connected,
she is perfect. To have been impeccable, must
have left nothing for the Divine Grace and a Purified
State to do, and carried our idea of her from
woman to angel. As such is she often esteemed
by the man whose heart was so corrupt, that he
could hardly believe human nature capable of the
purity, which, on every trial or temptation,
shone out in hers. 
Besides the four principal persons, several
others are introduced, whose Letters are characteristic: 
And it is presumed that there will
be found in some of them, but more especially
in those of the chief character among the men,
and the second character among the women,
such strokes of Gaiety, Fancy, and Humour,
as will entertain and divert; and at the same time
both warn and instruct. 

All the Letters are written while the hearts of
the writers must be supposed to be wholly engaged
in their subjects (The events at the time
generally dubious): So that they abound not
only with critical Situations, but with what may
be called instantaneous Descriptions and Reflections
(proper to be brought home to the breast
of the youthful Reader); as also with affecting
Conversations; many of them written in the
dialogue or dramatic way. 
“Much more lively and affecting, says one of
the principal characters (Vol. VII. p. 73.) must
be the Style of those who write in the height
of a present distress; the mind tortured by the
pangs of uncertainty (the Events then hidden
in the womb of Fate); than the dry, narrative,
unanimated Style of a person relating
difficulties and dangers surmounted, can be; 
the relater perfectly at ease; and if himself
unmoved by his own Story, not likely greatly
to affect the Reader.” 
What will be found to be more particularly
aimed at in the following Work, is—To warn
the Inconsiderate and Thoughtless of the one Sex,
against the base arts and designs of specious
Contrivers of the other—To caution Parents
against the undue exercise of their natural authority
over their Children in the great article of
Marriage—To warn Children against preferring
a Man of Pleasure to a Man of Probity, upon
that dangerous but too commonly-received notion,
That a reformed Rake makes the best Husband
—But above all, To investigate the highest 

and most important Doctrines not only of Morality,
but of Christianity, by shewing them
thrown into action in the conduct of the worthy
characters; while the unworthy, who set those
Doctrines at defiance, are condignly, and, as
may be said, consequentially, punished. 
From what has been said, considerate Readers
will not enter upon the perusal of the Piece before
them, as if it were designed only to divert
and amuse. It will probably be thought tedious
to all such as dip into it, expecting a light Novel,
or transitory Romance; and look upon Story in
it (interesting as that is generally allowed to be)
as its sole end, rather than as a vehicle to the
Instruction. 
It is proper to observe, with regard to the present
Edition, that it has been thought fit to restore
many Passages, and several Letters, which
were omitted in the former merely for shortening-sake; 
and which some Friends to the Work
thought equally necessary and entertaining. These
are distinguished by Dots or inverted Full-points. 
And will be printed separately, in justice to the
Purchasers of the former Editions. 
Fault having been found, particularly by
elderly Readers, and by some who have weak
Eyes, with the Smallness of the Type, on which
some Parts of the Three last Volumes were
printed (which was done in order to bring the
Work, that had extended to an undesirable
Length, into as small a Compass as possible)
the present Edition is uniformly printed on the 

larger-sized Letter of the three made use of before. 
But the doing this, together with the
Additions above-mentioned, has unavoidably
run the Seven Volumes into Eight. 
The Work having been originally published
at three different times; and a greater distance
than was intended having passed between the first
publication and the second; a Preface was thought
proper to be affixed to the third and fourth volumes; 
being the second publication. A very
learned and eminent Hand was so kind as to favour
the Editor, at his request, with one. But
the occasion of inserting it being temporary, and
the Editor having been left at liberty to do with
it as he pleased, it was omitted in the Second
Edition, when the whole Work came to be
printed together; as was, for the same reason,
the Preface to the first Volume; and a short
Advertisement to the Reader inserted instead of
both. That Advertisement being also temporary,
the present Address to the Reader is substituted
in its place. 
In the Second Edition an ample Table of Contents
to the whole Work was prefixed to the first
volume: But that having in some measure anticipated
the Catastrophe, and been thought to detain
the Reader too long from entering upon the
History, it has been judged adviseable to add
(and that rather than prefix) to each Volume its
particular Contents; which will serve not only
as an Index, but as a brief Recapitulation of
the most material passages contained in it; and
which will enable the Reader to connect in his 

mind the perused volume with that which follows; 
and more clearly shew the characters and
views of the particular correspondents. 
An ingenious Gentleman having made a Collection
of many of the Moral and Instructive
Sentiments in this History, and presented it to
the Editor, he thought the design and usefulness
of the Work could not be more strikingly
exhibited, than by inserting it (greatly enlarged)
at the end of the last volume. The Reader
will accordingly find it there, digested under
proper Heads, with References to the Pages
where each Caution, Aphorism, Reflection, or
Observation, is to be found, either wrought
into the practice of the respective correspondents,
or recommended by them as useful theory
to the Youth of both Sexes. 
Different persons, as might be expected, have
been of different opinions, in relation to the conduct
of the Heroine in particular Situations; and
several worthy persons have objected to the general
Catastrophe, and other parts of the History. 
Whatever is thought material of these shall be
taken notice of by way of Postscript, at the
conclusion of the History; for this Work being
addressed to the Public as a History of Life and
Manners, those parts of it which are proposed to
carry with them the force of an Example, ought
to be as unobjectible as is consistent with the design
of the whole, and with human nature. 


NAMES of the Principal Persons.
Miss Clarissa Harlowe,A young Lady of great Beauty and Merit.
Robert Lovelace, Esq;Her Admirer.
James Harlowe, Esq;Father of Clarissa.
Mrs. Harlowe,His Lady.
James Harlowe,Their only Son.
Arabella,Their elder Daughter.
John Harlowe, Esq;Elder Brother of James Harlowe, sen.
Antony Harlowe,Third Brother.
Roger Solmes, Esq;An Admirer of Clarissa, favoured by her
Friends.
Mrs. Hervey,Half-sister of Mrs. Harlowe.
Miss Dolly Hervey,Her Daughter.
Mrs. Judith Norton,A Woman of great Piety and Discretion, who
had had a principal Share in the Education
of Clarissa.
Col. Wm. Morden,A near Relation of the Harlowes.
Miss Howe,The most intimate Friend, Companion, and
Correspondent of Clarissa.
Mrs. Howe,Her Mother.
Charles Hickman, Esq;An Admirer of Miss Howe.
Lord M.Uncle to Mr. Lovelace.
Lady Sarah Sadleir,Half-sister of Lord M.
Lady Betty Lawrance,Half-sister of Lord M.
Miss Charl. Montague,Niece of the same Nobleman.
Miss Patty Montague,Niece of the same Nobleman.
Dr. Lewen,A worthy Divine.
Mr. Elias Brand,A pedantic young Clergyman.
Dr. H.An humane Physician.
Mr. Goddard,An honest and skilful Apothecary.
John Belford, Esq;Mr. Lovelace's principal Intimate and Confidant.
Richard Mowbray,Esq; Libertine Friend of Mr. Lovelace.
Thomas Doleman,Esq; Libertine Friend of Mr. Lovelace.
James Tourville,Esq; Libertine Friend of Mr. Lovelace.
Thomas Belton,Esq; Libertine Friend of Mr. Lovelace.
Mrs. Moore,A Widow, keeping a Lodging-house at Hamstead.
Miss Rawlins,A notable young Gentlewoman there.
Mrs. Bevis,A lively young Widow of the same Place.
Mrs. Sinclair,The pretended Name of a private Brothel-keeper
in London.
Capt. Tomlinson,The assumed Name of a vile Pander to the Debaucheries
of Mr. Lovelace.
Sally Martin,Assistant of, and Partner with, the infamous
Sinclair.
Polly Horton,Assistant of, and Partner with, the infamous
Sinclair.
Dorcas Wykes,An artful Servant at the vile House.