


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday Morning, Feb. 15. 
Mr. Greville took leave of us yesterday evening,
in order to set out this morning, on his return
home. He would fain have engaged me for half an
hour, alone. But I would not oblige him. 
He left London, he said, with some regret, because
of the fluttering Sir Hargrave, and the creeping Mr.
Fowler: But depended upon my declaration that I
had not in either of them seen the man I could encourage. 
Either of them were the words he chose to
use; for, in compliment to himself, he would not repeat
my very words, that I had not yet seen any man to
whom I could give my hand. Shall I give you a few
particulars of what passed between me and this very
whimsical man? I will. 
He had been enquiring, he said, into the character
and pretensions of my brother Fowler; and intended,
if he could bring Orme and him together, to make
a match between them, who should out-whine the
other. 

Heroes, I told him, ought not to make a jest of
those, who, on comparison, gave them all their advantages. 
He bowed, and called himself my servant—And
with an affected laugh, Yet, madam, yet, madam, I
am not afraid of those piping men: Tho' you have
compassion for such watry-headed fellows, yet you
have only compassion. 
Respectful love, Mr. Greville, is not always the
indication either of a weak head, or a faint heart; 
any more, than the contrary is of a true spirit. 
Perhaps so, madam. But yet I am not afraid of
these two men. 
You have no reason to be afraid of any-body, on
my account, Mr. Greville. 
I hope not. 
You will find, Sir, at last, that you had better take
my meaning. It is obvious enough. 
But I have no mind to hang, drown, or pistol myself. 
Mr. Greville still! —Yet it would be well if there
were not many Mr. Greville's. 
I take your meaning, madam. You have explained
it heretofore. It is, That I am a libertine; that we
have all one dialect; and that I can say nothing new,
or that is worthy of your attention—There, madam! 
May I not be always sure of your meaning, when I
construe it against myself? 
I wish, Sir, that my neighbour would give me leave
to behave to him as to my neighbour— 
And could you, madam, supposing love out of the
question (which it cannot be) could you, in that case,
regard me as your neighbour? 
Why not, Sir? 
Because I believe you hate me; and I only want
you to tell me that you do. 
I hope, Sir, I shall never have reason given me to
hate any man. 

But if you hate any one man more than another,
is it not me? [I was silent] Strange, Mrs. Reeves,
turning to her, that Miss Byron is not susceptible either
of love or hatred! 
She is too good to hate any-body; and as for
love,
her time seems not to be yet come. 
When it is come, It will come with a vengeance, I
hope. 
Uncharitable man! said I, smiling. 
Don't smile: I can't bear to see you smile: Why
don't you be angry at me? —Angel of a creature! 
With his teeth again closed, don't smile: I cannot bear
your bewitching smiles! 
The man is out of his right mind, Mrs. Reeves. 
I don't choose to stay in his company. 
I would have withdrawn. He besought me to stay; 
and stood between me and the door. I was angry. 
He whimsically stamped—Obliging creature! — 
I besought you to forbear smiling—You frown—Do,
God for-ever bless you, my dear Miss Byron, let me
be favoured with another frown. 
Strange man! and bold as strange! —I would have
pressed to the door; but he set his back against it. 
These are the airs, you know, Lucy, for which I
used to shun him. 
Pish! said I, vex'd to be hindered from withdrawing. 
Another, another such a frown, said the confident
man, and I am happy! —The last has left no trace
upon your features: It vanished before I could well
behold it. Another frown, I beseech you; another
pish— 
I was really angry. —Bear witness [looking around
him] Bear witness! Once did Miss Byron endeavour
to frown: And, to oblige whom? —Her Greville! 
Mr. Greville, you had better—I stopt. I was vexed. 
I knew not what I was going to say. 
How better, madam! Am I not desperate? —But 

had I better? Say, repeat that again—Had I better— 
Better what? 
The man's mad. O my cousins, let me never again
be called to this man. 
Mad! —And so I am. Mad for you. I care not
who knows it. Why don't you hate me? He snatch'd
at my hand; but I started back. You own that you
never yet loved the man who loved you. Such is
your gratitude! —Say, you hate me. 
I was silent, and turned from him peevishly. 
Why then (as if I had said I did not hate him) say
you love me; and I will look down with contempt
upon the greatest prince on earth. 
We should have had more of this—But the rap of
consequence gave notice of the visit of a person of
consideration. It was the Baronet. 
The devil pick his bones, said the shocking Greville. 
I shall not be eivil to him. 
He is not your guest, Mr. Greville, said I—afraid
that something affronting might pass between two
spirits so unmanageable; the one in an humour so whimsical,
the other very likely to be moody. 
True, true, replied he. I will be all silence and
observation. —But I hope you will not now be for retiring. 
It would be too particular, thought I, if I am. Yet
I should have been glad to do so. 
The Baronet paid his respects to every one in a very
set and formal manner; nor distinguish'd me. 
Silly, as vain! thought I: Handsome fop! to imagine
this displeasure of consequence to me! 
Mr. Greville, said Sir Hargrave, the town I understand
is going to lose you. 
The town, Sir Hargrave, cannot be said to have
found me. 
How can a man of your gallantry and fortune find
himself employment in the country, in the winter, I
wonder?— 

Very easily, when he has used himself to it, Sir
Hargrave, and has seen abroad in greater perfection
than you can have them here, the kind of diversions you
all run after, with so keen an appetite. 
In greater perfection! I question that, Mr. Greville:
And I have been abroad, tho' too early, I own, to
make critical observations. 
You may question it, Sir Hargrave; but I don't. 
Have we not from Italy the most famous singers,
Mr. Greville, and from thence and from France, for
our money, the most famous dancers in the world? 
No, Sir. They set too great a value in Italy, let
me tell you, upon their finest voices, and upon their
finest composers too, to let them turn strollers. 
Strollers do you call them? Ha, ha, ha, hah! — 
Princely strollers, as we reward them! And as to composers,
have we not Handel? 
There you say something, Sir Hargrave. But you
have but one Handel in England. They have several
in Italy. 
Is it possible? said every one. 
Let me die, said the Baronet, with a forced laugh,
if I am not ready to think that Mr. Greville has run
into the fault of people of less genius than himself. He
has got such a taste for foreign diversions, that he cannot
think tolerably of those of his own country, be they
ever so excellent. 
Handel, Sir Hargrave, is not an Englishman. But
I must say, that of every person present, I least expected
from Sir Hargrave Pollexfen this observation. 
He then returned the Baronet's laugh, and not
without an air of mingled anger and contempt. 
Nor I this taste for foreign performances and compositions
from Mr. Greville; for so long time as thou
hast been a downright country gentleman. 
Indeed, thought I to myself, you seem both to have
changed characters. But I know how it comes about:
Let one advance what he will, in the present humour 

of both, the other will contradict it. Mr. Greville
knows nothing of music: What he said was from
hearsay: And Sir Hargrave is no better grounded in it. 
A downright country gentleman! repeated Mr. Greville,
measuring Sir Hargrave with his eye, and putting
up his lip. 
Why, pr'ythee now, Greville, thou what shall I
call thee; thou art not offended, I hope, that we are
not all of one mind; Ha, ha, ha, hah! 
I am offended at nothing you say, Sir Hargrave. 
Nor I at any-thing you look, my dear; Ha, ha, ha,
hah. 
Yet his looks shewed as much contempt for Mr.
Greville as Mr. Greville's did for him. How easily
might these combustible spirits have blown each other
up! Mr. Reeves was once a little apprehensive of consequences
from the airs of both. 
Mr. Greville turned from Sir Hargrave to me: Well,
Miss Byron, said he; but as to what we were talking
about. 
This he seemed to say, on purpose, as I thought
by his air, to alarm the Baronet. 
I beg pardon, said Sir Hargrave; turning with a
stiff air to me; I beg pardon, Miss Byron, if I have
intruded— 
We were talking of indifferent things, Sir Hargrave,
answered I—Mere matters of pleasantry. 
I was more in earnest than in jest, Miss Byron, replied
Mr. Greville. 
We all, I believe, thought you very whimsical,
Mr. Greville, returned I. 
What was sport to you, madam, is death to me. 
Poor Greville! Ha, ha, ha, hah, affectedly laughed
the Baronet. But I know you are a joker. You are
a man of wit [this a little softened Mr. Greville, who
had begun to look grave upon Sir Hargrave] Come,
pr'ythee man, give thyself up to me for this night; 
and I will carry thee to a private concert, where none 

but choice spirits are admitted; and let us see if music
will not divert these gloomy airs, that sit so ill upon
the face of one of the liveliest men in the kingdom. 
Music! Ay, if Miss Byron will give us a song,
and accompany it with the harpsichord, I will despise
all other harmony. 
Every one joined in his request: And I was not
backward to oblige them, as I thought the conversation
bore a little too rough a cast, and was not likely
to take a smoother turn. 
Mr. Greville, who always enjoys any jest that tends
to reflect on our sex, begged me to sing that whimsical
song set by Galliard, which once my uncle made me
sing at Selby-House, in Mr. Greville's hearing. You
were not there that day, and perhaps may not have the
book, as Galliard is not a favourite with you. 

Chloe, by all the pow'rs above,
To Damon vow'd eternal love:
A rose adorn'd her sweeter breast;
She on a leaf the vow imprest:
But Zephyr, by her side at play,
Love, vow, and leaf, blew quite away.

The gentlemen were very lively on the occasion; 
and encored it: But I told them, That as they must
be better pleased with the just on our sex contained in
it, than they could be with the music, I would not,
for the sake of their own politeness, oblige them. 
You will favour us, however, with your Discreet
Lover, Miss Byron, said Mr. Greville. That is a
song written entirely upon your own principles. 
Well then I will give you, said I, set by the same
hand, 

The Discreet Lover.

Ye fair, that would be blest in love,
 Take your pride a little lower;
Let the swain whom you approve,
 Rather like you, than adore.



Love, that rises into passion,
 Soon will end in hate or strife:
But from tender inclination,
 Flow the lasting joys of life.


These two light pieces put the gentlemen into good
humour; and a deal of silly stuff was said to me, by
way of compliment, on the occasion, by Sir Hargrave
and Mr. Greville; not one word of which I believed. 
The Baronet went away first, to go to his concert. 
He was very cold in his behaviour to me at taking
leave, as he had been all the time. 
Mr. Greville soon after left us, intending to set out
this morning. 
He snatch'd my hand at going. I was afraid of a
second savage freedom, and would have withdrawn it. 
—Only one sigh over it; but one sigh. Oh—! said
he, an Oh, half a yard long—and pressed it with his
lips—But remember, madam, you are watched: I
have half a dozen spies upon you; and the moment
you find the man you can favour, up comes your Greville,
cuts a throat, and flies his country. 
He stopt at the parlour-door—One letter, Miss
Byron—Receive but one letter from me. 
No, Mr. Greville: But I wish you well. 
Wishes! that, like the Bishop's blessing, cost you
nothing. I was going to say No, for you: But you
were too quick. It had been some pleasure to have
denied myself, and prevented the mortification of a
denial from you. 
He went away; every one wishing him a good
journey, and speaking favourably of the odd creature. 
Mrs. Reeves, in particular, thought fit to say, that
he was the most entertaining of all my lovers: But
if so, what is it they call entertaining? And what are
those others, whom they call my lovers? 
The man, said I, is an immoral man: And had
he not got above blushes, and above being hurt by 

love, he could not have been so gay, and so entertaining,
as you call it. 
Miss Byron says true, said Mr. Reeves. I never
knew a man who could make a jesting-matter of the
passion in the presence of the object, so very deeply
in love, as to be hurt by a disappointment. There sits
my saucebox. Did I ever make a jest of my love to
you, madam? 
No indeed, Sir: Had I not thought you most deplorably
in earnest, you had not had any of my pity. 
Why look you there, now! That's a declaration
in point. Either Mr. Orme, or Mr. Fowler, must
be the happy man, Miss Byron. 
Indeed, neither. 
But why? They have both good estates. They
both adore you. Sir Hargrave I see you cannot have. 
Mr. Greville dies not for you, tho' he would be glad
to live with you. Mr. Fenwick is a still less eligible
man, I think. Where can you be better than with
one of the two I have named? 
You speak seriously, cousin: I will not answer
lightly: But neither of those gentlemen can be the
man: Yet I esteem them both because they are good
men. 
Well, but don't you pity them? 
I don't know what to say to that: You hold, that pity
is but one remove from love: And to say I pity a man
who professes to love me, because I cannot consent to
be his, carries with it, I think, an air of arrogance,
and looks as if I believed he must be unhappy without
me, when possibly there may be hundreds of women,
with any one of whom he might be more truly
happy. 
Well, this is in character from you, Miss Byron:
But may I ask you now, Which of the two gentlemen,
Mr. Orme, or Mr. Fowler, were you obliged
to have one of them, would you choose? 
Mr. Orme, I frankly answer. Have I not told
Mr. Fowler so? 

Well, then, what are your objections, may I ask,
to Mr. Orme? He is not a disagreeable man in his
person. You own that you think him a good man. 
His sister loves you; and you love her. What is your
objection to Mr. Orme? 
I don't know what to say. I hope I should perform
my duty to the man to whom I shall give my vows, be
he who he will: But I am not in haste to marry. If
a single woman knows her own happiness, she will find
that the time from eighteen to twenty-four is the happiest
part of her life. If she stay till she is twenty-four,
she has time to look about her, and if she has
more lovers than one, is enabled to choose without
having reason, on looking back, to reproach herself
for hastiness. Her fluttering, her romantic age (we
all know something of it, I doubt) is over by twenty-four,
or it will hold too long; and she is then sit to
take her resolutions, and to settle. I have more than
once hinted, that I should be afraid to engage with one
who thinks too highly of me beforehand. Nothing
violent can be lasting, and I could not bear when I
had given a man my heart with my hand (and they
never shall be separated) that he should behave to me
with less affection than he shewed to me before I was
his. As I wish not now to be made an idol of, I may
the more reasonably expect the constancy due to friendship,
and not to be affronted with his indifference after
I have given him my whole self. In other words, I could
not bear to have my love slighted; or to be despised
for it, instead of being encouraged to shew it. And
how shall extravagant passion warrant hopes of this
nature—if the man be not a man of gratitude, of
principle, and a man whose love is founded in reason,
and whose object is mind, rather than person? 
But Mr. Orme, interrupted Mr. Reeves, is all this. 
Such, I believe, is his love. 
Be it so. But if I cannot love him so well as to
wish to be his (a man, I have heard my uncle, as 

well as Sir Hargrave, say, is his own; a woman is a
man's); if I cannot take delight in the thought of bearing
my part of the yoke with him; in the belief,
that, in case of a contrariety of sentiments, I cannot
give up my judgment, in points indifferent, from the
good opinion, I have of his; what but a fondness for
the state, and an irksomeness in my present situation,
could byass me in favour of any man? Indeed, my
cousin, I must love the man to whom I would give
my hand, well enough to be able, on cool deliberation,
to wish to be his wife; and for his sake (with my
whole heart) choose to quit the single state, in which
I am very happy. 
And you are sure that your indifference to Mr.
Orme is not either directly or indirectly owing to his
obsequious love for you; and to the milkiness of his
nature, as Shakespeare calls it? 
Very sure! All the leaning towards him that I have, in
preference, as I think, to every other man who has beheld
me with partiality, is, on the contrary, owing to
the grateful sense I have of his respect to me, and to
the gentleness of his nature. Does not my behaviour
to Mr. Greville, to Mr. Fenwick, to Sir Hargrave,
compared with my treatment of Mr. Orme and Mr.
Fowler, confirm what I say? 
Then you are, as indeed I have always thought
you, a nonsuch of a woman. 
Not so; your own lady, whom you first brought
to pity you, as I have heard you say, is an instance that
I am not. 
Well, that's true. But is she not at the same time
an example, that pity melts the soul to love? 
I have no doubt, said Mrs. Reeves, but Miss Byron
may be brought to love the man she can pity. 
But, madam, said I, did you not let pity grow into
love, before you married Mr. Reeves? 
I believe I did; smiling. 
Well then I promise you, Mr. Reeves, that when 

that comes to be the case with me, I will not give pain
to a man I can like to marry. 
Very well, reply'd Mr. Reeves: And I dare say,
that at last Mr. Orme will be the man. And yet how
you will get off with Sir Hargrave, I cannot tell. For
Lady Betty Williams, this very day, told me, That he
declared to her, he was resolved you should be his. 
And she has promised him all her interest with you,
and with us; and is astonished that you can refuse a
man of his fortune and address, and who has many,
very many, admirers, among people of the first rank. 
The Baronet is at the door. I suppose he will expect
to see me. 
Wednesday Afternoon. 
Sir Hargrave is just gone. He desired to talk with
me alone. I thought I might very well decline obliging
him, as he had never scrupled to say to me all he
had a mind to say before my cousins; and as he had
thought himself of consequence enough to behave
moodily; and even made this request rather with an
air of expectation, than of respect; and I accordingly
desired to be excused. He stalk'd about. My cousins,
first one, then the other, withdrew. His behaviour
had not been so agreeable, as to deserve this compliance:
I was vex'd they did. 
He offer'd, as soon as they were gone, to take my
hand. 
I withdrew it. 
Madam (said he, very impertinently angry) you
would not do thus to Mr. Greville: You would not
do thus to any man but me. 
Indeed, Sir, I would, were I left alone with him. 
You see, madam, that I cannot forbear visiting
you. My heart and soul are devoted to you. I own I
have pride. Forgive me; it is piqued. I did not believe
I should have been rejected by any lady, who
had no dislike to a change of condition; and was disengaged. 
You declare that you are so; and I am 

willing, I am desirous, to believe you. —And yet that
Greville— 
There he stopt, as expecting me to speak. 
To what purpose, Sir Hargrave, do you expect an
answer to what you hint about Mr. Greville? It is
not my way to behave with incivility to any man who
professes a regard for me— 
Except to me, madam— 
Self-partiality, Sir, and nothing else, could cause
you to make this exception. 
Well, madam, but as to Mr. Greville— 
Pray, Sir Hargrave— 
And pray, Miss Byron— 
I have never yet seen the man who is to be my husband. 
By G&wblank; said the wretch, fiercely (almost in the language
of Mr. Greville on the like occasion) but you
have—And if you are not engaged in your affections,
the man is before you. 
If this, Sir Hargrave, is all you wanted to say to
me, and would not be denied saying it, it might have
been said before my cousins. I was for leaving him. 
You shall not go. I beg, madam—Putting himself
between me and the door. 
What further would Sir Hargrave say [Standing still,
and angry] What further would Sir Hargrave say? 
Have you, madam, a dislike to matrimony? 
What right have you, Sir, to ask me this question? 
Do you ever intend to enter into the state? 
Perhaps I may, if I meet with a man to whom I
can give my whole heart. 
And cannot that man be I? —Let me implore you,
madam. I will kneel to you [And down he dropt
on his knees]. I cannot live without you. For God's
sake, madam! Your pity, your mercy, your gratitude,
your love! I could not do this before any-body,
unless assured of favour. I implore your favour. 

Foolish man! It was plain, that this kneeling supplication
was premeditated. 
O Sir, what undue humility! —Could I have received
your address, none of this had been necessary. 
Your pity, madam, once more, your gratitude,
your mercy, your love! 
Pray, Sir, rise—He swore by his God, that he
would not, till I had given him hope— 
No hope can I give you, Sir. It would be cheating,
it would be deluding you, it would not be honest, to
give you hope. 
You objected to my morals, madam: Have you
any other objection? 
Need there any other? 
But I can clear myself. 
To God, and to your conscience, then do it, Sir. 
I want you not to clear yourself to me. 
But, madam, the clearing myself to you, would
be clearing myself to God, and my conscience. 
What language is this, Sir? But you can be nothing
to me: Indeed you can be nothing to me— 
Rise, Sir, rise, or I leave you. 
I made an effort to go. He caught my hand; and
arose—Then kissed it, and held it between both his. 
For God's sake, madam— 
Pray, Sir Hargrave— 
Your objections? I insist upon knowing your objections. 
My person, madam—Forgive me, I am not
used to boast—My person, madam— 
Pray, Sir Hargrave. 
—Is not contemptible. My fortune— 
God bless you, Sir, with your fortune. 
—Is not inconsiderable. My morals— 
Pray, Sir Hargrave! Why this enumeration to
me? 
—Are as unexceptionable as those of most young
men of fashion in the present age. 
I am sorry if this be true, thought I to myself. 

You have reason I hope, Sir, to be glad of that. 
My descent— 
Is honourable, Sir, no doubt. 
My temper is not bad. I am thought to be a man
of vivacity, and of chearfulness. —I have courage, madam
—And this should have been seen, had I found reason
to dread a competitor in your favour. 
I thought you were enumerating your good qualities,
Sir Hargrave. 
Courage, madam, magnanimity in a man, madam— 
Are great qualities, Sir. Courage in a right cause,
I mean. Magnanimity, you know, Sir, is greatness
of mind. 
And so it is; and I hope— 
And I, Sir Hargrave, hope you have great reason
to be satisfied with your-self. But it would be very
grievous to me, if I had not the liberty so to act, so
to govern myself, in essential points, as should leave
me as well satisfied with my-self. 
This, I hope, may be the case, madam, if you
encourage my passion: And let me assure you, that
no man breathing ever loved a woman as I love you. 
My person, my fortune, my morals, my descent, my
temper (a man in such a case as this may be allowed
to do himself justice) all unexceptionable; let me die
if I can account for your—your—your refusal of me
in so peremptory, in so unceremonious a manner,
slap-dash, as I may say, and not one objection to
make, or which you will condescend to make! 
You say, Sir, that you love me above all women:
Would you, can you, be so little nice, as to wish to
marry a woman who does not prefer you to all men? 
—If you are, let me tell you, Sir, that you have
assigned a reason against yourself, which I think I
ought to look upon as conclusive. 
I make no doubt, madam, that my behaviour to
you after marriage, will induce you in gratitude as
well as justice, to prefer me to all men. 

Your behaviour after marriage, Sir!—Never will
I trust to that, where— 
Where what, madam? 
No need of entering into particulars, Sir. You
see that we cannot be of the same mind. You, Sir
Hargrave, have no doubt of your merit.— 
I know, madam, that I should make it the business
as well as pleasure of my life, to deserve you. 
You value yourself upon your fortune, Sir— 
Only, as it gives me power to make you happy. 
Riches never yet, of themselves, made any-body
happy. I have already as great a fortune as I wish
for. You think yourself polite— 
Polite, madam! —And I hope— 
The whole of what I mean, Sir Hargrave, is this:
You have a very high opinion of yourself: You may
have reason for it; since you must know yourself, and
your own heart, better than I can pretend to do. But
would you, let me ask you, make choice of a woman
for a wife, who frankly owns, that she cannot
think so highly, as you imagine she ought to think of
you? —In justice to yourself, Sir— 
By my soul, madam, haughtily, you are the only
woman who could thus— 
Well, Sir, perhaps I am. But will not this singularity
convince you, that I can never make you happy,
nor you me? You tell me, that you think highly of
me; but if I cannot think so highly of you, pray,
Sir, let me be intitled to the same freedom in my
refusal that governs you in your choice. 
He walked about the room; and gave himself airs
that shewed greater inward than even outward emotion. 
I had a mind to leave him; yet was not willing to
withdraw abruptly, intending, and hoping, to put an
end to all his expectations for the future. I therefore
in a manner ask'd for leave to withdraw. 
I presume, Sir, that nothing remains to be said but 

what may be said before my cousins. And, courtesying,
was going. 
He told me, with a passionate air, that he was halfdistracted; 
and complained of the use I made of the
power I had over him. And as I had near open'd the
door, he threw himself on his knees to me against it,
and undesignedly hurt my finger with the lock. 
He was grieved. I made light of it, tho' in pain,
that he might not have an opportunity to flourish
upon it, and to shew a tenderness which I doubt is not
very natural to him. 
How little was I affected with his kneeling, to what
I was with the same posture in Sir Rowland! He supplicated
me as before. I was forced in answer to
repeat some of the same things that I had said before. 
I would fain have parted civilly. He would not
permit me to do so. Though he was on his knees, he
mingled passion, and even indirect menaces, with his
supplications. I was forced to declare, that I never
more would receive his visits. 
This declaration he vowed would make him desperate,
and he cared not what became of him. 
I often begg'd him to rise; but to no purpose, till
I declared that I would stay no longer with him: And
then he arose, rapt out an oath or two; again called me
proud and ungrateful; and followed me into the other
room to my cousins. He could hardly be polite to
them: He walk'd two or three turns about the room:
At last, Forgive me, Mr. Reeves, forgive me, Mrs.
Reeves, said he, bowing to them; more stiffly to
me—And you forbid my future visits, madam, said
he, with a face of malice. 
I do, Sir; and that for both our sakes. You have
greatly discomposed me. 
Next time, madam, I have the honour of attending
you, it will be, I hope—[He stopt a moment, but
still looking fiercely] to an happier purpose. And away
he went. 

Mr. Reeves was offended with him, and discourag'd
me not in my resolution to avoid receiving his future
visits. You will now therefore hear very little farther
in my letters of this Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 
And yet I wish I do not see him very soon. But
it will be in company enough, if I do: At the Masquerade,
I mean, to-morrow night; for he never misses
going to such entertainments. 
* *
Our dresses are ready. Mr. Reeves is to be an
Hermit; Mrs. Reeves a Nun; Lady Betty a Lady
Abbess: But I by no means like mine, because of its
gaudiness: The very thing I was afraid of. 
They call it the dress of an Arcadian Princess: But
it falls not in with any of my notions of the Pastoral
dress of Arcadia. 
A white Paris net sort of cap, glittering with spangles,
and incircled by a chaplet of artificial flowers,
with a little white feather perking from the left ear,
is to be my head-dess. 
My masque is Venetian. 
My hair is to be complimented with an appearance,
because of its natural ringlets, as they call my curls,
and to shade my neck. 
Tucker and ruffles blond lace. 
My shape is also said to be consulted in this dress. 
A kind of waistcoat of blue satten trimm'd with silver
Point d'Espagne, the skirts edged with silver fringe,
is made to sit close to my waist by double clasps, a
small silver tassel at the ends of each clasp; all set off,
with bugles and spangles, which make a mighty
glitter. 
But I am to be allow'd a kind of scarf of white
Persian silk; which, gathered at the top, is to be
fastened to my shoulders, and to fly loose behind me. 
Bracelets on my arms. 
They would have given me a crook; but I would
not submit to that. It would give me, I said, an air 

of confidence to aim to manage it with any tolerable
freedom; and I was apprehensive, that I should not
be thought to want that from the dress itself. A large
Indian fan was not improper for the supposed warmth
of the place; and that contented me. 
My petticoat is of blue satten, trimm'd and fring'd
as my waistcoat. I am not to have an hoop that is
perceivable. They wore not hoops in Arcadia. 
What a sparkling figure shall I make! Had the Ball
been what they call a Subscription Ball, at which people
dress with more glare, than at a common one,
this dress would have been more tolerable. 
But they all say, that I shall be kept in countenance
by masques as extravagant, and even more ridiculous. 
Be that as it may, I wish the night were over. I
dare say, it will be the last diversion of this kind I
ever shall be at; for I never had any notion of Masquerades. 
Expect particulars of all in my next. I reckon you
will be impatient for them. But pray, my Lucy, be
fanciful, as I sometimes am, and let me know how
you think every-thing will be before hand; and how
many Pretty-fellows you imagine, in this dress, will
be slain by 
Your Harriet Byron. 

