



Mrs. Howe. In Answer. 

Sat. July 22. 
Dear Madam,
I am highly offended with my Daughter's Letters
to Miss Harlowe. I knew nothing at all of her
having taken such a liberty. These young creatures
have such romantic notions, some of Love, some of
Friendship, that there is no governing them in either. 
Nothing but time, and dear experience, will convince
them of their absurdities in both. I have chidden
Miss Howe very severely. I had before so just a notion
of what your whole family's distress must be,
that, as I told your Brother, Mr. Antony Harlowe,
I had often forbid her corresponding with the poor
fallen Angel—For surely never did young Lady more
resemble what we imagine of Angels, both in person
and mind. But, tired out with her headstrong ways
[I am sorry to say this of my own child] I was forced
to give way to it again. And, indeed, so sturdy was
she in her will, that I was afraid it would end in a Fit
of Sickness, as too often it did in Fits of Sullens. 
None but parents know the trouble that children
give: They are happiest, I have often thought, who
have none. And these women-grown girls, bless my
heart! how ungovernable! 
I believe, however, you will have no more such
Letters from my Nancy. I have been forced to use
compulsion with her, upon Miss Clary's illness [and
it seems she is very bad] or she would have run away
to London, to attend upon her: And this she calls
doing the duty of a Friend; forgetting, that she sacrifices
to her romantic friendship her duty to her
fond indulgent Mother. 
There are a thousand excellencies in the poor Sufferer,
notwithstanding her fault: And, if the hints
she has given to my Daughter be true, she has been 

most grievously abused. But I think your forgiveness
and her Father's forgiveness of her ought to be
all at your own choice; and nobody should intermeddle
in that, for the sake of due authority in parents: 
And besides, as Miss Harlowe writes, it was
what every-body expected, tho' Miss Clary would
not believe it, till she smarted for her credulity. 
And, for these reasons, I offer not to plead any-thing
in alleviation of her fault, which is aggravated by her
admirable sense, and a judgment above her years. 
I am, Madam, with compliments to good Mr.
Harlowe, and all your afflicted family, 
Your most humble Servant,
Annabella Howe. 
I shall set out for the Isle of Wight in a few days,
with my Daughter. I will hasten our setting
out, on purpose to break her mind from her
friend's distresses; which afflict us as much,
nearly, as Miss Clary's rashness has done you. 