



My good Lady,
I now come to your Ladyship's Remarks on
my Conduct to Mrs. Jewkes; which you
are pleased to think too kind and forgiving, considering
the poor Woman's Baseness. 
Your Ladyship says, “That I ought not to
have borne her in my Sight, after the impudent
Assistance she gave to his lewd Attempts; 
much less to have left her in her Place, and rewarded
her.” Alas! my dear Lady, what could
I do; a poor Prisoner, as I was made, for Weeks
together, in Breach of all the Laws of Civil
Society; without a Soul who durst be my
Friend; and every Day expecting to be ruin'd and
undone, by one of the haughtiest and most determin'd
Spirits in the World? —And when it
pleased God to turn his Heart, and incline him
to abandon his wicked Attempts, and to profess
honourable Love to me, his poor Servant, can
it be thought I was to insist upon Conditions
with such a Gentleman, who had me in his
Power; and who, if I had provoked him, might
have resumed all his wicked Purposes against
me? 
Indeed, I was too much overjoy'd, after all
my Dangers past, (which were so great, that I
could not go to Rest, nor rise, but with such
Apprehensions, that I wish'd for Death rather
than Life) to think of refusing any Terms that
I could yield to, and keep my Honour. 

And tho' such noble Ladies, as your Ladyship
and Lady Betty, who are born to Independency,
and are hereditarily, as I may say, on a
Foot with the highest-descended Gentleman in
the Land, might have exerted a Spirit, and
would have had a Right to have chosen your own
Servants, and to have distributed Rewards and
Punishments to the Deserving and Undeserving,
at your own good Pleasure; yet what had I, a
poor Girl, who ow'd even my Title to common
Notice to the Bounty of my late good Lady,
and had only a kind of imputed Sightliness of
Person, tho' enough to make me the Subject of
vile Attempts; who, from a Situation of Terror
and Apprehension, was listed up to an Hope,
beyond my highest Ambition, and was bid to
pardon the bad Woman, as an Instance, that I
could forgive his own hard Usage of me; who
had experienced so often the Violence and Impetuosity
of his Temper, which even his beloved
Mother never ventur'd to oppose till it began to
subside; and then, indeed, he was all Goodness
and Acknowlegement (of which I could
give your Ladyship more than one Instance); 
what, I say, had I to do, to take upon me Lady-Airs,
and to resent? 
But, my dear Ladies, (let me, in this Instance,
bespeak both your Attention) I should
be inexcusable, if I did not tell you all the Truth; 
and that is, that I not only forgave the poor
Wretch, in regard to his Commands, but from
my own Inclination also. 

If I am wrong in saying this, I must submit it
to your Ladyships; and, as I pretend not to Perfection,
am ready to take the Blame I shall be
found to deserve in your Ladyships Judgment:
But, indeed, were it to do again, I verily think,
I could not help forgiving her. And were I not
able to say this, I should be thought to have made
a mean Court to my Master's Passions, and to
have done a wrong thing with my Eyes open:
Which, I humbly conceive, no one should do. 
When full Power was given me over this
poor Creature, (seemingly at least, tho' it might
possibly have been resum'd, and I might have
been re-committed to hers, had I given him
Reason to think I made an arrogant Use of it)
you cannot imagine what a Triumph I had in
my Mind over the mortify'd Guilt, which (from
the highest Degree of Insolence and Impericusness,
that before had harden'd her masculine
Features) appear'd in her Countenance, when
she found the Tables likely to be soon turn'd
upon her. 
This Change of Behaviour, which at first
discover'd itself in a sullen Awe, and afterwards
in a kind of silent Respect, shew'd me, what an
Influence Power had over her; and that when
she could treat her late Prisoner, when taken
into Favour, so obsequiously, it was the less
Wonder the bad Woman could think it her Duty
to obey Commands so unjust, when her Obedience
to them was required from her Master. 
To be sure, if a Look could have kill'd her,
after some of her bad Treatment, she had been 

slain over and over, as I may say; but to me,
who was always taught to distinguish between
the Person and the Action, I could not hold
my Resentment against the poor passive Machine
of Mischief, one Day together, tho' her Actions
were so odious to me. 
I Should indeed except that Time of my
grand Trial, when she appear'd so much a Wretch
to me, that I saw her not (even after*  Two Days
that she was kept from me) without great Flutter
and Emotion of Heart; and I had represented
to your Brother before, how hard a Condition
it was for me to forgive so much unwomanly
Wickedness†  . 
But, my dear Ladies, when I consider'd the
Matter in one particular Light, I could the more
easily forgive her; and, having forgiven her, bear
her in my Sight, and act by her (as a Consequence
of that Forgiveness) as if she had not so
horridly offended. —Else, how would it have
been Forgiveness? Especially as she was ashamed
of her Crime, and there was no Fear of her
repeating it. 
Thus, then, I thought on the Occasion:
Poor wretched Agent, for Purposes little less
than infernal! I will forgive thee, since thy
Master and my Master will have it so. And indeed
thou art beneath the Resentment even of
such a poor Girl as I. I will pity thee, base
and abject as thou art. And she who is the Object
of my Pity, is surely beneath my Anger. 

My Eye, that used to quiver and tremble at thy
haughty Eye, shall now, with conscious Worthiness,
take a superior Steadiness, and look
down thy scouling guilty one into Self-condemnation,
the State thou couldst never cast
mine into, nor from it wilt be able to raise
thine own! Bear the Reproach of thine own
wicked Heart, low, vile Woman, unworthy as
thou art of the Name; and chosen, as it should
seem, for a Foil to the Innocent, and to make
Purity shine forth the brighter, the only good
Use such Wretches as thou can be of to others
(except for Examples of Penitence and Mercy); 
This will be Punishment enough for thee, without
my exposing myself to the Imputation of
descending so near to a Level with thee, as to
resent thy Baseness, when thou hast no Power
to hurt me! 
Such were then my Thoughts, my proud
Thoughts; so far was I from being guilty of
intentional Meanness, in forgiving, at Mr. B.'s
Interposition, the poor, low, creeping, abject,
Self-mortify'd, and Master-mortify'd Mrs.
Jewkes. 
And do you think, Ladies, when you revolve
in your Thoughts, who I was, and what
I was, and what I had been designed for; when
you revolve the amazing Turn in my Favour,
and the Prospects before me (Prospects so much
above my Hopes, that I left them intirely to
Providence to direct for me, as it pleased, without
daring to look forward to what those Prospects
seemed naturally to tend); when I could 

see my haughty Persecutor become my repentant
Protector; the lofty Spirit that used to make
me tremble, and to which I never could look up
without Awe, except in those animating Cases,
where his guilty Attempts, and the Concern
had to preserve my Innocence, gave a Courage,
more than natural to my otherwise
dastardly Heart: When this impetuous Spirit
could stoop to request one whom he had sunk
beneath even her usual low Character of his
Servant, who was his Prisoner, under Sentence
of a Ruin worse than Death, as he had intended
it, and had seiz'd her for that very Purpose; 
could stoop to acknowlege the Vileness of that
Purpose: Could say, at one time, “That my
Forgiveness of Mrs. Jewkes should stand me
in greater Stead than I was aware of.” Could
tell her, before me, “That she must, for the
future, shew me all the Respect that was due
to one he must love*  :” At another, acknowlege,
before her, “That he had been stark naught,
and that I was very forgiving†  :” Again‡  ,
to Mrs. Jewkes, putting himself on a Level
with her, as to Guilt, “We are both in generous
Hands: And, indeed, if Pamela did not
pardon you, I should think she but half forgave
me, because you acted by my Instructions:” 
Another time to the same§  , “We
have been both Sinners, and must be both
included in one Act of Grace.” 

When, I say, I was thus listed up to the
State of a sovereign Forgiver, and my lordly
Master became a Petitioner for himself, and for
the guilty Creature, whom he put under my
Feet; what a Triumph was here for the poor
Pamela! And could I have been guilty of so
mean a Pride, as to trample upon the poor abject
Creature, when I found her thus lowly,
thus mortify'd, and wholly in my Power? For
so she seemed actually to be, while I really
thought so: And would it have been good Manners,
with regard to my Master, or Policy, with
respect to myself, to doubt it, after he had so
declared? 
Then, my dear Ladies, while I was enjoying
the Soul-charming Fruits of that Innocence
which the Divine Grace had enabled me to
preserve, in spite of so many Plots and Contrivances
on my Master's Side, and such wicked
Instigations and Assistances on hers, and all
my Prospects were improving upon me beyond
my Wishes; when all was Sunshine, unclouded
Sunshine, and I possessed my Mind in Peace,
and had nothing to do but to be thankful to
Providence, which had been so gracious to my
Unworthiness; when I saw, as I said above,
my Persecutor become my Protector, my active
Enemy no longer my Enemy, but creeping with
slow, doubtful Feet, and speaking to me, with
awful, hesitating Doubt of my Acceptance; a
Stamp of an insolent Foot, turn'd into courtesying
half-bent Knees; threatening Hands into
supplicating Folds; and the Eye unpitying to Innocence, 

running over with the Sense of her
own Guilt; a faltering Accent on her late menacing
Tongue, and uplifted Handkerchief— 
“I see she will be my Lady: And then I know
how it will go with me*  ;”—Was not this,
my Ladies, a Triumph of Triumphs to the late
miserable, now exalted Pamela? —Could I
do less than pardon her? And having declared,
that I did so, was I not to shew the Sincerity of
my Deelaration? 
Indeed, indeed, my dear good Ladies, I
found such a Subject for Exultation in this providential
Change of my Condition, that I had
much ado to subdue my rising Pride, and thought
there was more Danger of being lifted up, (every
Moment, to see such improving Contrition on
the poor Creature's Part) than to be supposed
guilty of a Meanness of Heart, in stooping (yes,
Madam, that was then the proudly proper Word,
in the Elevation wherein I found myself) to forgive
her! —And, what! should I not forgive a
Creature for that very Baseness, which, happily
withstood, had so largely contributed to exalt
me? Indeed, my dear good Ladies, permit me
to repeat, I could not chuse but to forgive her! 
How could I? —And would it not have been
out of Character in me, and against all Expectation
of my high soul'd (tho' sometimes, as in
my Case, for a great while together, meanlyacting)
Master, if I had not? 
Would it not have shewn him, that the
low-born Pamela was incapable of a generous 

Action, had she refused the only Request her
humble Condition had given her the Opportunity
of granting, at that time, with Innocence; 
Would he not have thought the humble Cottager
as capable of Insolence, and Vengeance
too, in her Turn, as the better-born? And that
she wanted but the Power, to shew the like unrelenting
Temper, by which she had so grievously
suffer'd? —And might not this have given him
Room to think me (and to have resumed and
prosecuted his Purposes accordingly) fitter for
an arrogant kept Mistress, than an humble and
obliged Wife? 
I see, (might he not have said?) the Girl
has strong Passions and Resentments; and she
that has, will be acted, and sometimes govern'd,
by them. —I will improve upon the Hint she
herself has now given me, by her inexorable
Temper:—I will gratify her Revenge, till I
turn it upon herself: I will indulge her Pride,
till I make it administer to her Fall: For a Wife
I cannot think of in the low-born Cottager; 
especially when she has lurking in her all the
Pride and Arrogance (you know, my Ladies,
his haughty way of speaking of our Sex)
of the better-descended. —And by a little
Perseverance, and watching her unguarded
Hours, and applying Temptations to her Passions,
I shall first discover them, and then make
my Advantage of them. 
Might not this have been the Language,
and this the Resolution, of such a dear wicked
Intriguer? —For, my Lady, you can hardly 

conceive the Struggles he apparently had to
bring down his high Spirit to so low a Level. 
And tho', I hope, all would have been, even
in this worst Case, ineffectual, thro' Divine
Grace, yet how do I know what lurking Vileness
might have appeared by degrees, in this
frail Heart, to have encouraged his Designs, and
to have augmented my Trials and my Dangers? 
And perhaps downright Violence might have
been used, if he could not on one hand have
subdued his Passion, nor on the other have overcome
his Pride. A Pride, that every one, reflecting
upon the Disparity of Birth and Condition
between us, would have dignify'd with
the Name of Decency: A Pride that was become
such an essential Part of the dear Gentleman's
Character, in this Instance of a Wife, that altho'
he knew he could not keep it up, if he made
me happy, yet it was no small Motive in his
chusing me, in one respect, because he expected
from me more Humility, more Submission,
than he thought he had Reason to flatter himself
would be paid him by a Lady equally born
and educated: And of this I will send your Ladyship
an Instance, in a Transcription from that
Part of*  my Journal you have not seen, of his
Lessons to me, on the Occasion your Ladyship
so well remembers, of my incurring his Displeasure
by interposing between yourself and him†  ,
in your Misunderstanding at the Hall, for, Madam,
I intend to send, at times, any thing I 

think worthy of your Ladyship's Attention, out
of those Papers you were so kind as to excuse
me from sending you in the Lump, and many
of which must needs have appeared very impertinent
to such Judges. 
Thus, could your Ladyship have thought
it? have I ventur'd upon a strange Paradox,
that even this strongest Instance of his Debasing
himself, is not the weakest of his Pride; and he
ventured once at Sir Simon Darnford's to say,
in your Ladyship's hearing, as you may remember,
That in his Conscience he thought he should
hardly have made a tolerable Husband to any
body but Pamela*  : And why? For the Reasons
you will see in the inclosed Papers, which give
an Account of the noblest and earliest Curtain-Lecture
that ever Girl had: One of which is,
That he expects to be borne with, (comply'd
with, he meant) even when in the wrong: Another,
That a Wife should never so much as
expostulate with him, altho' he was in the wrong,
till, by complying with all he insisted upon, she
should have shewn him, she designed rather to
convince him for his own sake, than for Contradiction's
sake: And then, another time, perhaps,
he might take better Resolutions†  . 
I hope, from what I have said, it will appear
to your Ladyship, and to Lady Betty too, that
I am justify'd, or at least excused, in pardoning
Mrs. Jewkes: And I have yet another Reason behind
for doing so, had she been as absolutely in
my Power, as the Wish of the most resenting Person 

in the World could have made her; and that
is, the Hope I had, that the poor Creature, by being
continued in a Family where the Gentleman
gave Hopes of so desirable a Reformation, and
where the Example of the Person he was about
to honour in so eminent a Degree, beyond all
that could have been hoped for by her a few
Days before, might, possibly, contribute to
make her change her Manner of Thinking, as
well as Acting. 
I looked upon the poor Wretch, in all
her Deportment to me, in my Days of Trial,
as one devoted to Perdition; as one who had
no Regard to a future State; but while she
could live in Ease and Plenty for a poor Remainder
of Years, cared not what she did, and was
ready to undertake any thing, which Persons of
Power and Riches would put her upon; and
who, were she to be turned off disgracefully,
at my Desire, besides that I should thereby shew
myself to be of an implacable Spirit, might
have been entertained by some profligate Persons,
to whose Baseness such a Woman might
be useful; and that then her Power to do Mischief
would have been augmented, and she
would have gone on more successfully to do
the Devil's Work; and several innocent Creatures
might have been intangled, like so many
thoughtless Flies, in the insnaring Web of this
venomous-hearted Spider, which I had so happily
escaped. Is it not better then, thought I, if
I can imprint Conviction upon the poor Wretch,
whom its hopeful Forerunner Shame had already 

taken hold of, and add the delightful Hope of
Mischiefs prevented, to that of a Soul reclaimed? 
And may not I, who have been so hardly used
by her, for that very Reason, have more Influence
upon her, than any other Person, even
the best of Divines, could have? 
Nay, would not this Behaviour of mine,
very probably, operate on a much higher and
nobler Subject, her dear naughty Master, and
let him see the Force and Amiableness of conquering
one's self? that there must be something
in that Duty which could make so young a Creature
regard it, in an Instance so difficult to
some Minds, (and especially to the Passionate
and High-born) that of forgiving Injuries, where
there is a Power to revenge, and of returning
Good for Evil? 
And then, when no sullen Behaviour to
the poor Wretch, on my Side, took Place; no
distant Airs were affected, no angry Brow put
on, nor Sharpness of Speech, towards one who
might expect all these from me; would it not
shew him, that I was sincere in my Forgiveness?
that I was not able to bear Malice? was a
Stranger to Revenge? had truly that Softness of
Nature, and Placableness of Disposition, which
he holds to be the greatest Merit in our Sex; 
and which, I dare say, your Ladyship will join
with me in Opinion, is indispensably necessary
to the happy Life of the Person who is his
Wife? 
Then I have no Notion of that slight Distinction
I have so often heard, between forgive 

and forget, when Persons have a mind to split
Hairs, and to distinguish away their Christian
Duties by a Word, and say, I must forgive such
an Action, but I will never forget it: When
I would rather say, I will remember such an
Action, in order for my future Guard; but I
will forgive it as aften as I remember it: or
else I will try to forget it for ever, if it will
occasion a Breach in my Christian Charity. 
I will only add, That I thought it would
not be wrong to keep her, as, besides what I have
mention'd, it would induce the World to think,
that Mr. B. had not gone such very wicked
Lengths, as would have been imagin'd, if she
had not been supportable to me in the same
House? And who knows, besides, what she
might have reported of both, had she been dismissed? 
How then, dearest Ladies, if these Considerations
have any Weight, could I act otherwise
than I did, either with respect to your honoured
Brother, myself, or the poor Woman? And
when I tell your Ladyships, that I have all the
Reason in the world to be pleas'd with this manner
of Acting, when I consider the Confidence
it hath given me with Mr. B. and (what I was
very desirous of) the good Effects it hath had
upon the Woman herself, I dare say, both your
Ladyships Opinions will be in my Favour on
this Head. 
But your dear Brother has just sent me Word,
that Supper waits for me; and the Post being
ready to go off, I defer till the next Opportunity 

what I have to say, as to these good Effects; and
am, in the mean time, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged
and faithful Servant,
P. B. 

