


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


After Sir Charles had inspected into everything
in this house, and taken minutes of papers,
letters, writings, &c. and lock'd up the plate, and
other valuables, in one room, he order'd his servants
to carry into Mrs. Oldham's apartment all that belonged
to her; and gave her the key of that; and directed
the housekeeper to be assisting to her in the removal
of them, at her own time and pleasure, and to
suffer her to come and go, at all times, with freedom
and civility, as if she had never left the house, were
his words. 
How the poor woman courtesied and wept, I warrant! 
The dear girls, I am afraid, then envied her— 
and perhaps expressed a grudging spirit; for they
said, This was their brother's address to them at
the time: 
You may look upon the justice I aim at doing to 

persons who can claim only justice from me, as an
earnest, that I will do more than justice to my beloved
sisters: And you should have been the first to have
found the fruits of the love I bear you, had I not
been afraid, that prudence would have narrowed my
intentions. The moment I know what I can do, I
will do it; and I request you to hope, largely: If I
have ability, I will exceed your hopes. 
My dear sisters, continued he, and took one hand
of each, I am sorry, for your spirits sake, that you
are left in my power. The best of women was always
afraid it would be so. But the moment I can,
I will give you an absolute independence on your
brother, that your actions and conduct may be all
your own. 
Surely, Sir, said Caroline (and they both wept)
we must think it the highest felicity, that we are in
the power of such a brother. As to our spirits, Sir— 
She would have said more; but could not; and
Charlotte took it up where her sister left off: Best of
brothers, said she—Our spirits shall, as much as
possible (I can answer for both) be guided hereafter
 by yours. Forgive what you have seen amiss in us— 
But we desire to depend upon our good behaviour. 
We cannot, we will not, be independent of you. 
We will talk of these matters, replied he, when
we can do more than talk. I will ask you, Caroline,
after your inclinations; and you, Charlotte, after
yours, in the same hour that I know what I can do
for you both, in the way of promoting them. Enter,
mean time, upon your measures: Reckon upon my
best assistance: Banish suspense. One of my first
pleasures will be, to see you both happily married. 
They did not say, when they related this to me,
that they threw themselves at his feet, as to their
better father, as well as brother: But I fancy they
did. 
He afterwards, at parting with Mrs. Oldham, said, 

I would be glad to know, madam, how you dispose
of yourself: Every unhappy person has a right to the
good offices of those who are less embarrass'd. When
you are settled, pray let me know the manner: And
if you acquaint me with the state of your affairs,
and what you propose to do for and with those who
are intitled to your first care, your confidence in me
will not be misplaced. 
And pray, and pray, ask'd I of the ladies, what
said Mrs. Oldham? How did she behave upon
this?— 
Our Harriet is strangely taken with Mrs. Oldham's
story, said Miss Grandison—Why, she wept plentifully,
you may be sure. She clasped her hands, and
kneeled to pray to God to bless him, and all that— 
She could not do otherwise. 
See, Lucy! —But am I, my grandmamma; am I,
my aunt, to blame? Is it inconsistent with the
strictest virtue to be charmed with such a story? — 
May not virtue itself pity the lapsed? —O yes, it
may! I am sure, you, and Sir Charles Grandison,
will say it may. A while ago, I thought myself a
poor creature, compared to these two ladies: But
now I believe I am as good as they in some things. — 
But they had not such a grandmamma and aunt as I
am bless'd with: They lost their excellent mother,
while they were young; and their brother is but lately
come over: And his superior excellence, like sunshine,
breaking out on a sudden, finds out, and
brings to sight, those spots and freckles, that were
hardly before discoverable. 
Sir Charles desired Mrs. Oldham would give in
writing what she proposed to do for herself, and for
those who were under her care. She did, at her first
opportunity. It was, That she purposed going to
London, for the sake of the young people's education:
Of turning into money what jewels, cloaths, and
plate, she should think above her then situation in life: 

Of living retired in a little genteel house: And she
gave in an estimate of her worth: To what amount
the ladies know not: But this they know, that their
brother allows her an annuity, for the sake of her sons
by his father: And they doubt not but he will be still
kinder to them, when they are old enough to be put
into the world. 
This the ladies think an encouragement to a guilty
life. I will not dare to pronounce upon it, because I
may be thought partial to the generous man: But
should be glad of my uncle's opinion. This, however,
may be said, That Sir Charles Grandison has
no vices of his own to cover by the extensiveness of
his charity and beneficence; and if it be not goodness
in him to do thus, it is greatness; and this, if it
be not praise-worthy, is the first instance that I have
known goodness and greatness of soul separable. 
The brother and sisters went down, after this, to
Grandison-hall; and Sir Charles had reason to be
pleased with the good order in which he found
every-thing there. 

