



Mr.Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Sept. 26. 
Fate, I believe in my conscience, spins threads
for Tragedies, on purpose for thee to weave with. 
—Thy Watford Uncle, poor Belton, the fair Inimitable
[Exalted creature! and is she to be found in such
a lift!] the accursed woman, and Tomlinson, seem to
have been all doomed to give thee a theme for the Dismal
and the Horrible: —And, by my soul, thou dost
work it going, as Lord M. would phrase it. 
That's the horrid thing: A man cannot begin to
think, but causes for thought croud in upon him: The
gloomy takes place, and mirth and gaiety abandon his
heart for ever! 
Poor M'Donald! —I am really sorry for the fellow. — 
He was an useful, faithful, solemn varlet, who could
act incomparably any part given him, and knew not
what a blush was. —He really took honest pains for me
in the last affair; which has cost him and me so dearly
in reflection. Often gravell'd, as we both were, yet
was he never daunted. —Poor M'Donald, I must once
more say! —For carrying on a solemn piece of roguery,
he had no equal. 
I was so solicitous to know if he were really as bad
as thou hast a knack of painting every-body whom
thou singlest out to exercise thy murdering pen upon,
that I dispatched a man and horse to Maidstone, as
soon as I had thine; and had word brought me, that
he died in two hours after he had received thy five guineas. 
And all thou wrotest of his concern in relation
to the ever-dear Miss Harlowe, it seems, was true. 
I can't help it, Belford! —I have only to add, that
it is happy that the poor fellow lived not to be hanged; 
as it seems he would have been: For who knows, as
he had got into such a penitential strain, what might
have been in his dying speech? 

When a man has not great good to comfort himself
with, it is right to make the best of the little that may
offer. There never was any discomfort happened to
mortal man, but some little ray of consolation would
dart in, if the wretch was not so much a wretch, as to
draw, instead of undraw, the curtain, to keep it out. 
And so much, at this time, and for ever, for poor
Capt. Tomlinson, as I called him. 
Your solicitude to get me out of this heavy changeable
climate exactly tallies with every-body's here. 
They all believe that travelling will establish me. Yet
I think I am quite well. Only these plaguy New's
and Full's, and the Equinoctials, fright me a little when
I think of them; and that is always: For the whole
family are continually ringing these changes in my
ears, and are more sedulously intent, than I can well
account for, to get me out of the kingdom. 
But wilt thou write often, when I am gone? Wilt
thou then piece the thread where thou brokest it off? 
Wilt thou give me the particulars of their distress, who
were my auxiliaries in bringing on the event that affects
me? —Nay, principals rather: Since, say what
thou wilt, what did I do worth a woman's breaking
her heart for? 
Faith and troth, Jack, I have had very hard usage,
as I have often said: —To have such a plaguy ill name
given me, pointed at, screamed out upon, run away
from, as a mad dog would be; all my own friends
ready to renounce me!— 
Yet I think I deserve it all: For have I not been
as ready to give up myself, as others are to condemn
me? 
What madness, what folly, this! —Who will take
the part of a man that condemns himself? —Who can? 
He that pleads guilty to an indictment, leaves no room
for aught but the sentence. Out upon me, for an impolitic
wretch! I have not the Art of the least artful of
any of our Christian princes; who every day are guilty 

of ten times worse breaches of faith; and yet, issuing
out a manifesto, they wipe their mouths, and go on
from infraction to infraction, from robbery to robbery; 
commit devastation upon devastation; and destroy— 
for their glory! And are rewarded with the names of
Conquerors, and are dubb'd Le Grand; praised, and
even deified, by orators and poets, for their butcheries
and depredations. 
While I, a poor, single, harmless prowler; at least
comparatively harmless; in order to satisfy my hunger,
steal but one poor lamb; and every mouth is opened,
every hand is lifted up, against me. 
Nay, as I have just now heard, I am to be manifestoed
against, tho' no prince: For Miss Howe threatens
to have the case published to the whole world. 
I have a good mind not to oppose it; and to write
an answer to it, as soon as it comes forth, and exculpate
myself, by throwing all the fault upon the old ones. 
And this I have to plead, supposing all that my worst
enemies can allege against me were true,—That I am
not answerable for all the extravagant consequences
that this affair has been attended with; and which
could not possibly be foreseen. 
And this I will prove demonstrably by a Case,
which, but a few hours ago, I put to Lord M. and
the two Misses Montague. This it is: 
Suppose A, a Miser, had hid a parcel of gold in a
secret place, in order to keep it there, till he could
lend it out at extravagant interest. 
Suppose B in such great want of this treasure, as to
be unable to live without it. 
And suppose A, the Miser, has such an opinion of
B, the Wanter, that he would rather lend it to
him, than to any mortal living; but yet, tho'
he has no other use in the world for it, insists upon
very unconscionable terms. 
B would gladly pay common interest for it; but would 

be undone (in his own opinion, at least, and that
is every-thing to him) if he complied with the
Miser's terms; since he would be sure to be soon
thrown into gaol for the debt, and made a prisoner
for life. Wherefore guessing (being an arch,
penetrating fellow) where the sweet hoard lies, he
searches for it, when the Miser is in a profound
sleep, finds it, and runs away with it. 
B, in this case, can be only a Thief, that's plain,
Jack. 
Here Miss Montague put in very smartly. —A
Thief, Sir, said she, that steals what is and ought to be
dearer to me than my life, deserves less to be forgiven
than he who murders me. 
But what it this, Cousin Charlotte, said I, that is
dearer to you, than your life? Your honour, you'll
say—I will not talk to a Lady (I never did) in a way
she cannot answer me—But in the instance for which
I put my Case (allowing all you attribute to the phantom)
what honour is lost, where the will is not violated,
and the person cannot help it? But, with respect
to the case put, how knew we, till the theft was committed,
that the Miser did actually set so romantic a
value upon the treasure? 
Both my Cousins were silent; and my Lord, because
he could not answer me, cursed me; and I proceeded. 
Well then, the result is, that B can only be a
Thief; that's plain—To pursue, therefore, my Case— 
Suppose this same miserly A, on awaking, and
searching for, and finding his treasure gone, takes
it so much to heart, that he starves himself; 
Who but himself is to blame for that? —Would
either Equity, Law, or Conscience, hang B for
a Murder? 
And now to apply, said I— 

None of your applications, cried my Cousins, both
in a breath. 
None of your applications, and be d&wblank;n'd to you,
the passionate Peer. 
Well then, returned I, I am to conclude it to be a
Case so plain, that it needs none; looking at the two
girls, who tried for a blush apiece. And I hold myself,
of consequence, acquitted of the death. 
Not so, cried my Lord [Peers are judges, thou
knowest, Jack, in the last resort]: For if, by committing
an unlawful act, a capital crime is the consequence,
you are answerable for both. 
Say you so, my good Lord? —But will you take
upon you to say, supposing (as in the present case) a
Rape (saving your presence, Cousin Charlotte, saving
your presence, Cousin Patty); Is death the natural
consequence of a Rape? —Did you ever hear, my
Lord, or did you, Ladies, that it was? —And if not
the natural consequence, and a Lady will destroy herself,
whether by a lingering death, as of grief; or by
the dagger, as Lucretia did; Is there more than one
fault the man's? —Is not the other her's? —Were it not
so, let me tell you, my dears, chucking each of my
blushing Cousins under the chin, we either have had
no men so wicked as young Tarquin was, or no women
so virtuous as Lucretia, in the space of—How
many thousand years, my Lord? —And so Lucretia is
recorded as a single wonder! 
You may believe I was cry'd out upon. People who
cannot answer, will rave: And this they all did. But
I insisted upon it to them, and so I do to you, Jack,
that I ought to be acquitted of every-thing but a Common
Theft, a Private Larceny, as the Lawyers call it,
in this point. And were my life to be a forfeit to the
Law, it would not be for Murder. 
Besides, as I told them, there was a circumstance
strongly in my favour in this Case: For I would have
been glad, with all my soul, to have purchased my forgiveness 

by a compliance with the terms I first boggled
at. And this, you all know, I offered; and my Lord,
and Lady Betty, and Lady Sarah, and my two Cousins,
and all my Cousins Cousins, to the fourteenth
generation, would have been bound for me—But it
would not do: The sweet Miser would break her
heart, and die; and how could I help it? 
Upon the whole, Jack, had not the Lady died,
would there have been half so much said of it, as there
is? Was I the cause of her death? or could I help it? 
And have there not been, in a Million of Cases like
this, Nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand that have
not ended as this has ended? —How hard, then, is my
fate! —Upon my soul, I won't bear it as I have done; 
but, instead of taking guilt to myself, claim pity. And
this (since yesterday cannot be recalled) is the only
course I can pursue to make myself easy. Proceed anon. 