



From Lady Davers to Mr. B. 


My dearest Brother,
Altho' I believe it is needless to put a Gentleman
of your generous Spirit in mind of
doing a worthy Action; yet, as I do not know
whether you have thought of what I am going to
hint to you, I cannot forbear a Line or two with
regard to the good old Couple in Kent. 
I am sure, if, for our Sins, God Almighty should
take from us my incomparable Sister, (forgive me,
my dear Brother, but to intimate what may be,
altho' I hourly pray, as her trying Minute approaches,
that it will not) you will, for her sake, take care
that her honest Parents have not the Loss of your
Favour, to deepen the inconsolable one, they will
have, in such a Case, of the best of Daughters. 
I say, I am sure you will do as generously by
them as ever: And I dare say, your sweet Pamela
doubts it not: Yet as you know how sensible she is
of every Favour done to them, it is the Countess's
Opinion, and mine, and Lady Betty's too, that you
give her this Assurance in some legal Way; for, as
she is naturally apprehensive, and thinks more of
her present Circumstances, than, for your sake, she
chuses to express to you, it will be like a Cordial
to her dutiful and grateful Heart; and I do not
know, if it will not contribute, more than any
one Thing, to make her go thro' her Task with
Ease and Safety. 
I know how much your Heart is wrapp'd up in
the dear Creature: And you are a worthy Brother, 

to let it be so! —You will excuse me therefore, I
am sure, for this my Officiousness. 
I have no Doubt, that God will spare her to
us, because, altho' we may not be worthy of so
much Excellence, yet we now all unite so gratefully
to thank Him for such a worthy Relation,
that I hope we shall not be deprived of an Example
so necessary to us all. 
I can have but one Fear; and that is, that,
young as she is, she seems ripen'd for Glory; she
seems to have liv'd long enough for Herself. But
for You, and for Us, that God will still spare her,
shall be the hourly Prayer of, 
My dear worthy Brother,
Your ever-affectionate Sister,
B. Davers. 
Have you got her Mother with you? I hope you
have. God give you a Son and Heir, if it be
his blessed Will! But however that be, preserve
your Pamela to you! For you never
can have such another Wife. 

