



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Upper-Flask, Hamstead, Fri. morn. 7 o'clock. (June 9.). 
I am now here, and here have been this hour and
half. What an industrious spirit have I! —Nobody
can say, that I eat the Bread of idleness. I take
true pains for all the pleasure I enjoy. I cannot but
admire myself strangely; for, certainly, with this
active soul, I should have made a very great figure in
whatever station I had filled. But had I been a Prince! 
To be sure I should have made a most noble Prince! I
should have led up a military dance equal to that of
the great Macedonian. I should have added kingdom
to kingdom, and despoiled all my neighbour-sovereigns,
in order to have obtained the name of Robert
the Great. And I would have gone to war with the
Great Turk, and the Persian, and Mogholl, for their
Seraglios; for not one of those Eastern Monarchs should
have had a pretty woman to bless himself with, till I
had done with her. 
And now I have so much leisure upon my hands,
that, after having informed myself of all necessary particulars,
I am set to my short-hand writing in order to
keep up with time as well as I can: For the subject is
now become worthy of me; and it is yet too soon, I
doubt, to pay my compliments to my Charmer, after
all her fatigues for two or three days past: And, moreover,
I have abundance of matters preparative to my
future proceedings to recount, in order to connect and
render all intelligible. 
I parted with the Captain at the foot of the hill,
trebly instructed; that is to say, as to the Fact, to the
Probable, and to the Possible. If my Beloved and I can
meet and make up without the mediation of this worthy
gentleman, it will be so much the better. As little
foreign aid as possible in my amorous conflicts has 

always been a rule with me; tho' here I have been
obliged to call in so much. And who knows but it
may be the better for the Lady the less she makes necessary? 
I cannot bear, that she should sit so indifferent
to me as to be in earnest to part with me for
ever upon so slight, or even upon any occasion. If I
find she is—But no more threatenings till she is in my
power—Thou knowest what I have vowed. 
All Will's account, from the Lady's flight to his
finding her again, all the accounts of the people of the
house, the coachman's information to Will, and so
forth, collected together, stand thus. 
‘The Hamstead Coach, when the dear Fugitive
came to it, had but two passengers in it. But she
made the fellow go off directly, paying for the vacant
places. 
‘The two passengers directing the coachman to set
them down at the Upper-Flask, she bid him set her
down there also. 
‘They took leave of her [Very respectfully no
doubt]; and she went into the house, and asked, if she
could not have a dish of Tea, and a room to herself
for half an hour. 
‘They shewed her up to the very room where I
now am. She sat at the very table I now write upon; 
and, I believe, the chair I sit in was hers.’ O Belford,
if thou knowest what Love is, thou wilt be able
to account for these minutiæ. 
‘She seemed spiritless and fatigued. The gentlewoman
herself chose to attend so genteel and lovely
a guest. She asked her, If she would have bread
and butter to her tea? 
‘No. She could not eat. 
‘They had very good biscuits. 
‘As she pleased. 
‘The gentlewoman stept out for some; and returning
on a sudden, she observed the sweet Fugitive endeavouring
to restrain a violent burst of grief to
which she had given way in that little interval. 

‘However, when the Tea came, she made the
landlady sit down with her, and asked her abundance
of questions about the villages and roads in that
neighbourhood. 
‘The gentlewoman took notice to her, that she
seemed to be troubled in mind. 
‘Tender Spirits, she replied, could not part with
dear friends without concern.’ 
She meant me, no doubt. 
‘She made no enquiry about a lodging, tho' by the
sequel, thou'lt observe, that she seemed to intend to
go no farther that night than Hamstead. But after
she had drank two dishes, and put a Biscuit in her
pocket—[Sweet soul! to serve for her supper perhaps]
she laid down half-a-crown; and refusing change,
sighing, took leave, saying, she would proceed towards
Hendon; the distance to which had been one
of her questions. 
‘They offered to send to know, if a Hamstead
Coach were not to go to Hendon that evening. 
‘No matter, she said—Perhaps she might meet the
chariot.’ 
Another of her feints, I suppose; for how, or with
whom, could any-thing of this sort have been concerted
since yesterday morning? 
‘She had, as the people took notice to one another,
something so uncommonly noble in her air, and in
her person and behaviour, that they were sure she
was of quality. And having no servant with her of
either Sex, her eyes [Her fine eyes, the gentlewoman
called them, stranger as she was, and a woman!]
being swelled and red, they were sure there
was an Elopement in the case, either from parents
or guardians; for they supposed her too young and
too maidenly to be a married Lady: And were she
married, no husband would let such a fine young
creature be unattended and alone; nor give her
cause for so much grief, as seemed to be settled in 

her countenance. Then, at times, she seemed to
be so bewildered, they said, that they were afraid
she had it in her head to make away with herself. 
‘All these things put together, excited their curiosity; 
and they engaged a peery servant, as they
called a footman who was drinking with Kit the
hostler at the taphouse, to watch all her motions. 
This fellow reported the following particulars, as
they were re-reported to me. 
‘She indeed went towards Hendon, passing by the
sign of the Castle on the Heath; then, stopping,
looked about her, and down into the valley before
her. Then, turning her face towards London, she
seemed, by the motion of her handkerchief to her
eyes, to weep; repenting [Who knows?] the rash
step she had taken, and wishing herself back again.’ 
Better for her, if she do, Jack, once more I say! 
—Woe be to the girl who could think of marrying
me, yet be able to run away from me, and renounce
me for ever! 
‘Then, continuing on a few paces, she stopt again; 
and, as if disliking her road, again seeming to weep,
directed her course back towards Hamstead.’ 
I am glad she wept so much, because no heart bursts
(be the occasion for the sorrow what it will) which
has that kindly relief. Hence I hardly ever am moved
at the sight of these pellucid fugitives in a fine woman. 
How often, in the past twelve hours, have I
wished, that I could cry most confoundedly! 
‘She then saw a Coach-and-four driving towards
her empty. She crossed the path she was in, as if to
meet it; and seemed to intend to speak to the coachman,
had he stopt or spoken first. He as earnestly
looked at her. Every one did so, who passed her
(so the man who dogged her was the less suspected)’ 
—Happy rogue of a coachman, hadst thou known
whose notice thou didst engage, and whom thou
mightest have obliged! —It was the divine Clarissa 

Harlowe at whom thou gazedst! —Mine own Clarissa
Harlowe! —But it was well for me that thou wert as
undistinguishing as the beasts thou drovest; otherwise,
what a wild-goose chace had I been led? 
‘The Lady as well as the Coachman, in short,
seemed to want resolution; the horses kept on [The
fellow's head and eyes, no doubt, turned behind
him]; and the distance soon lengthened beyond recall. 
With a wistful eye she looked after him; 
sighed and wept again; as the servant, who then
silly passed her, observed. 
‘By this time she had reached the houses. She
looked up at every one, as she passed; now-and-then
breathing upon her bared hand, and applying it to
her swelled eyes, to abate the redness, and dry the
tears. At last, seeing a bill up for letting lodgings,
she walked backwards and forwards half a dozen
times, as if unable to determine what to do. And
then went farther into the town; and there the fellow,
being spoken to by one of his familiars, lost
her for a few minutes: But he soon saw her come
out of a linen-drapery shop, attended with a servant-maid,
having, as he believed, bought some little
matters, and, as it proved, got that maid servant to
go with her to the house she is now at (a) . 
‘The fellow, after waiting about an hour, and not
seeing her come out, returned, concluding that she
had taken lodgings there.’ 
And here, supporting my narrative of the dramatic
kind, ends Act the First. And now begins, 
ACT II.
Scene, Hamstead Heath continued.
Enter my Rascal.
Will, having got at all these particulars, by exchanging
others as frankly against them, with
which I had formerly prepared him both verbally and in 

writing; I found the people already of my party, and
full of good wishes for my success, repeating to me all
they told him. 
But he had first acquainted me with the accounts he
had given them of his Lady and me. It is necessary
that I give thee the particulars of his tale—And I have
a little time upon my hands; for the maid of the house,
who had been out of an errand, tells us, that she saw
Mrs. Moore [with whom must be my first business] go
into the house of a young gentleman, within a few
doors of her, who has a maiden Sister, Miss Rawlins
by name, so notify'd for prudence, that none of her
acquaintance undertake any-thing of consequence,
without consulting her. 
Mean while my honest coachman is walking about
Miss Rawlins's door, in order to bring me notice of
Mrs. Moore's return to her own house. I hope her
gossip's-tale will be as soon told as mine. Which take
as follows. 
Will. told them, before I came, ‘That his Lady
was but lately married to one of the finest gentlemen
in the world. But that, he being very gay and lively,
she was mortal jealous of him; and in a fit of that
sort, had eloped from him. For altho' she loved
him dearly, and he doated upon her (as well be
might, since, as they had seen, she was the finest
creature that ever the sun shone upon); yet she was apt
to be very wilful and sullen, if he might take the
liberty to say so—but truth was truth;—and if she
could not have her own way in every-thing, would
be for leaving him. That she had three or four times
played his master such tricks; but with all the virtue
and innocence in the world; running away to an intimate
friend of hers, who, tho' a young Lady of
honour, was but too indulgent to her in this her
only failing; for which reason his master had brought
her to London-lodgings; their usual residence being
in the country: And that, on his refusing to 

satisfy her about a Lady he had been seen with in
St. James's Part, she had, for the first time since she
came to town, served his master thus: Whom he
had left half-distracted on that account.’ 
And truly well he might, poor gentleman! cried
the honest folks, pitying me before they saw me. 
‘He told them how he came by his intelligence of
her; and made himself such an interest with them,
that they helped him to a change of cloaths for himself; 
and the landlord, at his request, privately enquired,
if the Lady actually remained at Mrs.
Moore's; and for how long she had taken the lodgings: 
Which he found only to be for a week certain: 
But she had said, that she believed she should
hardly stay so long. And then it was that he wrote
his Letter, and sent it by honest Peter Partrick, as
thou hast heard.’ 
When I came, my person and dress having answered
Will's description, the people were ready to
worship me. I now-and-then sighed, now-and-then
put on a lighter air; which, however, I designed should
shew more of vexation ill-disguised, than of real chearfulness: 
And they told Will, It was a thousand pities
so fine a Lady should have such skittish tricks; adding,
that she might expose herself to great dangers by them; 
for that there were Rakes every-where [Lovelace's in
every corner, Jack!] and many about that town, who
would leave nothing unattempted to get into her company: 
And altho' they might not prevail upon her,
yet might they nevertheless hurt her reputation; and,
in time, estrange the affections of so fine a gentleman
from her. 
Good sensible people, these! —Hay, Jack! 
Here, Landlord; one word with you. —My servant,
I find, has acquainted you with the reason of my coming
this way. An unhappy affair, Landlord! A very
unhappy affair! But never was there a more virtuous
woman. 

So, Sir, she seems to be. A thousand pities her
Ladyship has such ways—And to so good-humoured
a gentleman as you seem to be, Sir. 
Mother-spoilt, Landlord! —Mother-spoilt! that's
the thing! —But, sighing, I must make the best of it. 
What I want you to do for me, is to lend me a great
coat. I care not what it is. If my spouse should see
me at a distance, she would make it very difficult for
me to get at her speech. A great coat with a cape,
if you have one. I must come upon her before she
is aware. 
I am afraid, Sir, I have none sit for such a gentleman
as you. 
O, any-thing will do! —The worse the better. 
Exit Landlord. Re-enter with two great coats.
Ay, Landlord, This will be best; for I can button
the cape over the lower part of my face. Don't I
look devilishly down and concerned, Landlord? 
I never saw a gentleman with a better-natured look,
'Tis pity you should have such trials, Sir. 
I must be very unhappy, no doubt of it, Landlord. 
And yet I am a little pleased, you must needs think,
that I have found her out before any great inconvenience
has arisen to her. However, if I cannot break
her of these freaks, she'll break my heart; for I do
love her with all her failings. 
The good woman, who was within hearing of all
this, pitied me much. 
Pray, your Honour, said she, if I may be so bold,
was Madam ever a mamma? 
No!—and I sighed—We have been but a little
while married; and, as I may say to you, it is her own
fault that she is not in that way [Not a word of a lye
in this, Jack]. But to tell you truth, Madam, she
may be compared to the dog in the manger— 
I understand you, Sir [simpering]—She is but
young, Sir. I have heard of one or two such skittish 

young Ladies in my time, Sir—But when Madam is
in that way, I dare say, as she loves you (and it would
be strange if she did not!) all this will be over, and
she may make the best of wives. 
That's all my hope. 
She is as fine a Lady as I ever beheld. I hope, Sir,
you won't be too severe. She'll get over all these
freaks, if once she be a mamma, I warrant. 
I can't be severe to her; she knows that. The moment
I see her, all resentment is over with me, if she
give me but one kind look. 
All this time, I was adjusting my horseman's coat,
and Will. was putting in the ties of my wig (a) , and
buttoning the cape over my chin. 
I asked the gentlewoman for a little powder. She
brought me a powder-box, and I lightly shook the
puff over my hat, and flapt one side of it, tho' the
lace looked a little too gay for my covering; and
slouching it over my eyes, Shall I be known, think
you, Madam? 
Your Honour is so expert, Sir! —I wish, if I may be
so bold, your Lady has not some cause to be jealous. 
But it will be impossible, if you keep your laced cloaths
covered, that any-body should know you in that dress
to be the same gentleman—Except they find you out
by your clocked stockens. 
Well observ'd—Can't you, Landlord, lend or sell
me a pair of stockens, that will draw over these? I can
cut off the feet, if they won't go into my shoes. 
He could let me have a pair of coarse, but clean,
stirrup-stockens, if I pleased. 
The best in the world for the purpose. 
He fetch'd them. Will. drew them on; and my
legs then made a good gouty appearance. 
The good woman, smiling, wished me success; and
so did the landlord: And as thou knowest that I am
not a bad mimic, I took a cane, which I borrowed of 

the landlord, and stooped in the shoulders to a quarter
of a foot of less height, and stumped away cross to the
Bowling green, to practise a little the hobbling gaite
of a gouty man. The landlady whispered her husband,
as Will. tells me, He's a good one, I warrant him— 
I dare say the fault lies not all of one side. While
mine host replied, that I was so lively and so good-natured
a gentleman, that he did not know who could
be angry with me, do what I would. A sensible fellow! 
—I wish my Charmer were of the same opinion. 
And now I am going to try, if I can't agree with
goody Moore for lodgings and other conveniencies for
my sick wife. 
‘Wife, Lovelace!’ methinks thou interrogatest. 
Yes, wife; for who knows what cautions the dear
Fugitive may have given in apprehension of me? 
‘But has goody Moore any other lodgings to lett?’ 
Yes, yes; I have taken care of that; and find that
she has just such conveniencies as I want. And I
know that my wife will like them. For, altho' married,
I can do every-thing I please; and that's a bold
word, you know. But had she only a garret to let, I
would have liked it; and been a poor author afraid of
arrests, and made that my place of refuge; yet would
have made shift to pay beforehand for what I had. I
can suit myself to any condition, that's my comfort. 
* *
The widow Moore return'd! say you—Down,
down, flutterer! —This impertinent heart is more
troublesome to me than my conscience, I think. —I
shall be obliged to hoarsen my voice, and roughen my
character, to keep up with its puppily dancings. 
But let me see, Shall I be angry or pleased, when
I am admitted to my Beloved's presence? 
Angry, to be sure. —Has she not broken her word
with me? —At a time too when I was meditating to do
her grateful justice? —And is not breach of word a
dreadful crime in good folks? I have ever been for 

forming my judgment of the nature of things and
actions, not so much from what they are in themselves,
as from the character of the actors. Thus it
would be as odd a thing in such as we to keep our
words with a woman, as it would be wicked in her to
break hers to us. 
Seest thou not, that this unseasonable gravity is admitted
to quell the palpitations of this unmanageable
heart? But still it will go on with its boundings. I'll
try as I ride in my chariot to tranquillize. 
‘Ride, Bob! so little a way?’ 
Yes, ride, Jack; for am I not lame? And will it
not look well to have a lodger who keeps his chariot? 
What widow, what servant, asks questions of a man
with an equipage? 
My coachman, as well as my other servant, is under
Will's tuition. 
Never was there such a hideous rascal as he has
made himself. The devil only and his other master
can know him. They both have set their marks upon
him. As to my Honour's mark, it will never be
out of his damn'd wide mothe, as he calls it. For the
dog will be hanged before he can lose the rest of his
teeth by age. 
I am gone. 