



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Morn. March 9. 
I have another Letter from Mr. Lovelace, altho' I
had not answered his former. 
This man, some how or other, knows every-thing
that passes in our family. My confinement; Hannah's
dismission; and more of the resentments and resolutions
of my Father, Uncles, and Brother, than I can 

possibly know, and almost as soon as the things happen,
which he tells me of. He cannot come at these
intelligences fairly. 
He is excessively uneasy upon what he hears; and
his expressions both of Love to me, and Resentment to
them, are very fervent. He solicits me, ‘To engage
my honour to him, Never to have Mr. Solmes.’ 
I think I may fairly promise him that I will not. 
He begs, ‘That I will not think he is endeavouring
to make to himself a merit at any man's expence,
since he hopes to obtain my favour on the
foot of his own; nor that he seeks to intimidate me
into a consideration for him. But declares, that the
treatment he meets with from my family is of such
a nature, that he is perpetually reproached for not
resenting it; and that as well by Lord M. and Lady
Sarah, and Lady Betty, as by all his other friends: 
And if he must have no hope from me, he cannot
answer for what his despair will make him do.’ 
Indeed, he says, ‘his Relations, the Ladies particularly,
advise him to have recourse to a legal remedy: 
But how, he asks, can a man of honour go to Law
for verbal abuses given by people entitled to wear
swords?’ 
You see, my dear, that my Mother seems as apprehensive
of mischief as myself; and has indirectly offered
to let Shorey carry my Answer to the Letter he
sent me before. 
He is full of the favour of the Ladies of his family
to me: To whom, nevertheless, I am personally a
stranger; except, that once I saw Miss Patty Montague
at Mrs. Knollys's. 
It is natural, I believe, for a person to be the more
desirous of making new friends, in proportion as she
loses the favour of old ones: Yet had I rather appear
amiable in the eyes of my own Relations, and in your
eyes, than in those of all the world besides. —But these
four Ladies of his family have such excellent characters, 

that one cannot but wish to be thought well
of by them. Cannot there be a way to find out by
Mrs. Fortescue's means, or by Mr. Hickman, who has
some knowlege of Lord M. [covertly, however] what
their opinions are of the present situation of things in
our family; and of the little likelihood there is, that
ever the alliance once approved of by them, can take
effect? 
I cannot, for my own part, think so well of myself,
as to imagine, that they can wish their Kinsman
to persevere in his views with regard to me, through
such contempts and discouragements. —Not that it
would concern me, should they advise him to the contrary. 
By my Lord's signing Mr. Lovelace's former
Letter; by Mr. Lovelace's assurances of the continued
favour of all his Relations; and by the report of others; 
I seem still to stand high in their favour: But, methinks,
I should be glad to have this confirmed to
me, as from themselves, by the lips of an indifferent
person; and the rather, as they are known to put a
value upon their alliance, because of their fortunes and
family; and take it amiss (as they have reason) to be
included by ours in the contempt thrown upon their
Kinsman. 
Curiosity at present is all my motive: Nor will
there ever, I hope, be a stronger, notwithstanding
your questionable throbs—Even were the merits of
Mr. Lovelace much greater than they are. 
* *
I have answered his Letters. If he take me at my
word, I shall need to be the less solicitous for the opinions
of his Relations in my favour: And yet one
would be glad to be well thought of by the worthy. 
This is the substance of my Letter: 
‘I express my surprize at his knowing (and so
early) all that passes here.’ 
I assure him, ‘That were there not such a man in
the world as himself, I would not have Mr. Solmes.’ 

I tell him, ‘That to return, as I understand he does,
defiances for defiances, to my Relations, is far from
being a proof with me, either of his politeness, or of
the consideration he pretends to have for me.’ 
‘That the moment I hear he visits any of my
friends without their consent, I will make a resolution
never to see him more, if I can help it.’ 
I apprise him, ‘That I am connived at in sending
this Letter (altho' no one has seen the contents) provided
it shall be the last I will ever write to him: 
That I had more than once told him, that the Single
Life was my choice; and this before Mr. Solmes
was introduced as a visitor in our family: That Mr.
Wyerley, and other gentlemen, knew it to be my
choice, before himself was acquainted with any of
us: That I had never been induced to receive a line
from him on the subject, but that I thought he had
not acted ungenerously by my Brother; and yet had
not been so handsomely treated by my friends, as he
might have expected: But that had he even my
friends on his side, I should have very great objections
to him, were I to get over my choice of a Single
Life, so really preferable to me as it is; and that I
should have declared as much to him, had I regarded
him as more than a common visiter. On all these
accounts, I desire, that the one more Letter, which
I will allow him to deposit in the usual place, may
be the very last; and That only, to acquaint me
with his acquiescence that it shall be so; at least till
happier times.’ 
This last I put in, that he may not be quite desperate. 
But if he take me at my word, I shall be rid of
one of my tormentors. 
I have promised to lay before you all his Letters,
and my Answers: I repeat that promise: And am the
less solicitous for that reason, to amplify upon the contents
of either. But I cannot too often express my
vexation, to be driven to such streights and difficulties, 

here at home, as oblige me to answer Letters (from
a man I had not absolutely intended to encourage, and
to whom I had really great objections) filled as his are
with such warm protestations, and written to me with
a spirit of expectation. 
For, my dear, you never knew so bold a supposer. 
As commentators find beauties in an author, to which
the author perhaps was a stranger; so he sometimes
compliments me in high strains of gratitude for favours,
and for a consideration, which I never designed him; 
insomuch that I am frequently under a necessity of explaining
away the attributed goodness to him, which if
I shewed, I should have the less opinion of myself. 
In short, my dear, like a restiff horse (as I have
heard described by sportsmen) he pains one's hands,
and half disjoints one's arms, to rein him in. And,
when you see his Letters, you must form no judgment
upon them, till you have read my Answers. If you
do, you will indeed think you have cause to attribute
self deceit, and throbs, and glows to your friend—And
yet, at other times, the contradictory creature complains,
that I shew him as little favour, and my friends
as much inveteracy, as if in the Rencounter betwixt
my Brother and him, he had been the aggressor; and
as if the catastrophe had been as fatal, as it might
have been. 
If he has a design by this conduct (sometimes complaining
of my shyness, at others exulting in my imaginary
favours) to induce me at one time to acquiesce
with his compliments; at another to be more complaisant
for his complaints; and if the contradiction
be not the effect of his inattention and giddiness; I
shall think him as deep and as artful (too probably, as
practised) a creature, as ever lived; and were I to be
sure of it, should hate him, if possible, worse than I
do Solmes. 
But enough for the present of a creature so very various. 