



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Evening, March 2. 
On Hannah's depositing my long Letter (begun
yesterday, but by reason of several interruptions
not finished till within this hour) she found and brought
me yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for this
kind expedition. These few lines will perhaps be time
enough deposited, to be taken away by your servant
with the other Letter: Yet they are only to thank
you, and to tell you my increasing apprehensions. 
I must take or seek the occasion to apply to my
Mother for her mediation;—for I am in danger of
having a day fixed, and antipathy taken for bashfulness. 
—Should not Sisters be Sisters to each other? 
Should they not make a common cause of it, as I
may say, a cause of Sex, on such occasions as the
present? Yet mine, in support of my Brother's selfishness,
and, no doubt, in concert with him, has
been urging in full assembly it seems (and that with
an earnestness peculiar to herself when she sets upon
any-thing) that an absolute day be given me; and if
I comply not, to be told, that it shall be to the forfeiture
of all my Fortunes, and of all their Love. 
She need not be so officious: My Brother's interest,
without hers, is strong enough; for he has found means
to confederate all the family against me. Upon some
fresh provocation, or new intelligence concerning Mr.
Lovelace (I know not what it is) they have bound
themselves, or are to bind themselves, by a signed
paper, to one another [The Lord bless me, my dear,
what shall I do!] to carry their point in favour of
Mr. Solmes, in support of my Father's Authority, as
it is called, and against Mr. Lovelace, as a Libertine,
and an Enemy to the family: And if so, I am sure,
I may say against me. —How impolitic in them all, to 

join two people in one interest, whom they wish for
ever to keep asunder! 
What the discharged Steward reported of him is
surely bad enough: What Mrs. Fortescue said, not
only confirms that bad, but gives room to think him
still worse: —And yet the something further which my
friends have come at, is of so heinous a nature (as
Betty Barnes tells Hannah) that it proves him to be the
worst of men. —But, hang the man, I had almost said
—What is he to me? What would he be—were not
this Mr. Sol—O my dear, how I hate the man in
the light he is proposed to me! 
All of them at the same time are afraid of Mr.
Lovelace; yet not afraid to provoke him! —How am
I entangled!—to be obliged to go on corresponding
with him for their sakes—Heaven forbid, that their
persisted-in violence should so drive me, as to make it
necessary for my own! 
But surely they will yield—Indeed I cannot. 
I believe the gentlest spirits when provoked (causelesly
and cruelly provoked) are the most determined. 
The reason may be, That not taking up resolutions
lightly—their very deliberation makes them the more
immoveable. —And then when a point is clear and
self-evident, how can one with patience think of entering
into an argument or contention upon it?— 
An interruption obliges me to conclude myself, in
some hurry, as well as fright, what I must ever be, 
Yours more than my own,
Clarissa Harlowe. 