


My dear, dear—Master (I am sure I should
still say; but I will learn to rise to a softer
Title, now-and-then) is not yet come. I hope
he is safe and well! —So Mrs. Jewkes and I
went to Breakfast. But I can do nothing but talk
and think of him, and of all his Kindhess to me,
and to you, which is still me, more intimately. 
I have just receiv'd a Letter from him, which
he wrote over-night, as I find by it, and sent
carly this Morning. This is a Copy of it. 


To Mrs. Andrews.
Sunday Night. 
My dearest Pamela,
I hope my not coming home this Night
will not frighten you. You may believe I
can't help it. My poor Friend is so very ill,
that I doubt he can't recover. His Desires to
have me stay with him are so strong, that I
shall sit up all Night with him, as it is now
near One o'Clock in the Morning; for he
can't bear me out of his Sight: And I have
made him and his distressed Wife and Children
so easy, in the kindest Assurances I could
give him of my Consideration for him and
them, that I am look'd upon (as the poor disconsolate
Widow, as she, I doubt, will soon
be, tells me) as their good Angel. I could
have wish'd we had not engaged to the good
Neighbourhood at Sir Siman's for to-morrow
Night; but I am so desirous to set out on
Wednesday for the other House, that, as well
as in Return for the Civilities of so many
good Friends, who will be there on purpose,
I would not put it off. What I beg of you,
therefore, my Dear, is, that you would go in
the Chariot to Sir Simon's, the sooner in the
Day, the better, because you will be diverted
with the Company, who all so much admire
you; and I hope to join you there by your
Tea-time in the Afternoon, which will be
better than going home, and returning with 

you, as it will be Six Miles Difference to me; 
and I know the good Company will excuse
my Dress, on the Occasion. I count every
Hour of this little Absence for a Day; for I
am, with the utmost Sincerity, 
“My dearest Love,
For ever Yours, &c. 
“If you could go to dine with them, it
will be a Freedom that would be very
pleasing to them, and the more, as
they don't expect it.” 

I began to have a little Concern, lest his
Fatigue should be too great, and for the poor sick
Gentleman and Family; but told Mrs. Jewkes,
That the least Intimation of his Choice should
be a Command to me, and so I would go to
Dinner there; and order'd the Chariot to be
got ready to carry me; when a Messenger came
up, just as I was dress'd, to tell her, she must
come down immediately. I see at the Window,
that Visitors are come; for there is a Chariot
and Six Horses, the Company gone out of it,
and Three Footmen on Horseback; and I think
the Chariot has Coronets. Who can it be, I
wonder! —But here I will stop; for I suppose
I shall soon know. 
Good Sirs! how unlucky this is! What
shall I do! —Here is Lady Davers come; her 

own Self! And my kind Protector a great, great
many Miles off. —Mrs. Jewkes out of Breath
comes and tells me this, and says, she is inquiring
for my Master and me. She ask'd her,
it seems, naughty Lady as she is, if I was whor'd
yet? There's a Word for a Lady's Mouth! Mrs.
Jewkes says, she knew not what to answer. 
And my Lady said, She is not marry'd, I hope! 
And, said she, I said, No; because you have
not own'd it yet publickly. My Lady said, That
was well enough. Said I, I will run away,
Mrs. Jewkes; and let the Chariot go to the Bottom
of the Elm-walk, and I will steal out of
the Door unperceiv'd—But she is inquiring for
you, Madam, reply'd she, and I said you were
within, but going out; and she said, she would
see you presently, as soon as she could have
Patience. What did she call me? said I. The
Creature, Madam: I will see the Creature, said
she, as soon as I can have Patience. Ay, but,
said I, the Creature won't let her, if she can
help it. 
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, favour my Escape for
this once; for I am sadly frighted. —Said she,
I'll bid the Chariot go down as you order, and
wait till you come; and I'll step down, and shut
the Hall-door, that you may pass unobserv'd; for
she sits cooling herself in the Parlour over-against
the Stair-case. That's a good Mrs. Jewkes! said I: 
But who has she with her? Her Woman, answer'd
she, and her Nephew; but he came on Horseback,
and is gone into the Stables; and they
have Three Footmen. —And I wish, said I, 

they were all Three hundred Miles off! — 
What shall I do! —So I wrote thus far, and
wait impatiently to hear the Coast is clear. 
Mrs. Jewkes tells me, I must come down,
or she will come up. What does she call me
now? said I. Wench, Madam. Bid the Wench
come down to me. And her Nephew and her
Woman are with her. 
Said I, I can't go, and that's enough! — 
You might contrive it, that I might get out, if
you would. —Indeed, Madam, said she, I cannot; 
for I went to shut the Door, and she bid
me let it stand open; and there she sits overagainst
the Stair-case. Then, said I, I'll get out
of the Window, I think!—(and fann'd myself)
for I am sadly frighted. Laud! Madam, said
she, I wonder you so much disturb yourself! — 
You're on the right Side of the Hedge, I'm sure; 
and I would not be so discompos'd for any body. 
Ay, said I, but who can help Constitution? I
dare say, you would no more be so discompos'd,
than I can help it. —Said she, Indeed, Madam,
if it was to me, I would put on an Air as Mistress
of the House, as you are, and go and salute her
Ladyship, and bid her welcome. Ay, ay, reply'd
I, fine Talking! —But how unlucky this
is, your good Master is not at home! 
What Answer shall I give her, said she, to
her desiring to see you? —Tell her, said I, I
am sick a-bed; I'm dying, and must not be disturb'd: 
I'm gone out,—or any thing! 

But her Woman came up to me, just as I had
utter'd this, and said, How do you do, Mrs.
Pamela? My Lady desires to speak with you. 
So I must go. —Sure she won't beat me!— 
Oh that my dear Protector was at home! 
Well, now I will tell you all that happen'd
in this frightful Interview. —And very bad it
was. 
I went down, dress'd as I was, and my Gloves
on, and my Fan in my Hand, to be just ready to
step into the Chariot, when I could get away; 
and I thought all my trembling Fits had been
over now; but I was mistaken, for I trembled
sadly; yet resolv'd to put on as good an Air as
I could. 
So I went to the Parlour, and said, making a
very low Court'sy, Your Servant, my good Lady. 
And your Servant again, said she, my Lady;
for I think you are dress'd out like one. 
A charming Girl tho'! said her rakish Nephew,
and swore a great Oath: Dear Aunt, forgive
me, but I must kiss her; and was coming to
me. And I said, Forbear, uncivil Gentleman! 
I won't be us'd freely. Jackey, said my Lady,
sit down, and don't touch the Creature! — 
She's proud enough already. There's a great
Difference in her Air, I'll assure you, since I saw
her last. 
Well, Child, said she, sneeringly, how
dost find thyself? —Thou'rt mightily come on
of late! —I hear strange Reports about thee! 

Thou'rt almost got into Fool's Paradise, I doubt! 
—And wilt find thyself terribly mistaken, in a
little while, if thou thinkest my Brother will
disgrace his Family to humour thy Baby-face! 
I see, said I, sadly vex'd, (her Woman and
Nephew smiling by) your Ladyship has no very
important Commands for me, and I beg Leave
to withdraw. Beck, said she to her Woman,
shut the Door; my young Lady and I must not
have done so soon. 
Where's your well manner'd Deceiver gone,
Child? says she. —Said I, When your Ladyship
is pleased to speak intelligibly, I shall know how
to answer. 
Well, but my dear Child, said she in Drollery,
don't be too pert neither, I beseech thee. 
Thou wilt not find thy Master's Sister half so
ready to take thy Freedoms, as thy mannerly
Master is! —So, a little more of that Modesty
and Humility, that my Mother's Waitingmaid
used to shew, will become thee better
than the Airs thou givest thyself, since my Mother's
Son has taught thee to forget thyself. 
I would beg, said I, one Favour of your
Ladyship that if you would have me keep my
Distance, you will not forget your own Degree. 
—Why, suppose, Miss Pert, I should forget
my Degree, wouldst thou not keep thy Distance
then? 
If you, Madam, said I, lessen the Distance
yourself, you will descend to my Level, and
make an Equality, which I don't presume to 

think of; for I can't descend lower than I am,
—at least in your Ladyship's Esteem! 
Did I not tell you, Jackey, said she, that I
should have a Wit to talk to? —He, who swears
like a fine Gentleman, at every Word, rapp'd
out an Oath, and said, drolling, I think, Mrs.
Pamela, if I may be so bold as to say so, you
should know you are speaking to Lady Davers! 
—Sir, said I, I hope there was no need of your
Information, and so I can't thank you for it; and
am sorry you seem to think it wants an Oath to
convince me of the Truth of it. 
He look'd more foolish than I at this, if possible,
not expecting such a Reprimand:—And
said at last, Why, Mrs. Pamela, you put me
half out of Countenance with your witty Reproof. 
—Sir, said I, you seem quite a fine
Gentleman, and it will not be easily done, I
dare say. 
How now, Pert-one, said my Lady, do you
know whom you talk to? —I think I do not,
Madam, reply'd I: And, for fear I should forget
myself more, I'll withdraw. Your Ladyship's
Servant, said I; and was going: But she rose,
and gave me a Push, and pull'd a Chair, and
setting the Back against the Door, sat down in
it. 
Well, said I, I can bear any thing at your
Ladyship's Hands. But I was ready to cry tho'. 
And I went and sat down, and fann'd myself at
the other End of the Room. 
Her Woman, who stood all the Time, said
softly, Mrs. Pamela, you should not sit in my 

Lady's Presence. And my Lady, tho' she did not
hear her, said, You shall sit down, Child, in
the Room where I am, when I give you Leave. 
So I stood up, and said, When your Ladyship
will hardly permit me to stand, one might be
indulg'd to sit down. But I ask'd you, said she,
Whither your Master is gone? To one Mr. Carlton,
Madam, about Eighteen Miles off, who is
very sick. And when does he come home? — 
This Evening, Madam. And whither are you
going? To a Gentleman's House in the Town,
Madam. And how were you to go? —In the
Chariot, Madam. —Why, you must be a Lady
in time, to be sure! —I believe you'd become
a Chariot mighty well, Child! —Were you ever
out in it, with your Master? 
Pray your Ladyship, said I, be pleased to
ask half a Dozen such Questions together; because
one Answer may do for all! —Why, Boldface,
said she, you'll forget your Distance, and
bring me to your Level before my Time. 
So I could no longer refrain Tears, but said,
Pray your Ladyship, let me ask, What I have
done to be thus severely treated? I never did
your Ladyship any Harm. And if you think I am
deceived, as you were pleased to hint, I should be
more intitled to your Pity, than your Anger. 
She arose, and took me by the Hand, and
led me to her Chair, and then sat down, and
still holding my Hand, said, Why, Pamela, I
did indeed pity you, while I thought you innocent; 
and when my Brother seiz'd you, and,
brought you down hither, without your Consent, 

I was concern'd for you; and I was still
more concern'd for you, and lov'd you, when I
heard of your Virtue and Resistance, and your
laudable Efforts to get away from him. But
when, as I fear, you have suffer'd yourself to be
prevail'd upon, and have lost your Innocence,
and added another to the Number of the Fools
he has ruin'd, (This shock'd me a little) I cannot
help shewing my Displeasure to you. 
Madam, reply'd I, I must beg no hasty
Judgment; I have not lost my Innocence. — 
Take care, take care, Pamela, said she: Don't
lose your Veracity, as well as your Honour. — 
Why are you here, when you are at full Liberty
to go whither you please? —I will make one
Proposal to you, and if you are innocent, I am
sure you'll accept it. Will you go and live with
me? —I will instantly set out with you in my
Chariot, and not stay half an Hour longer in this
House, if you'll go with me. —Now, if you're
innocent, and willing to keep so, deny me, if
you can. 
I am innocent, Madam, reply'd I, and willing
to keep so; and yet I cannot consent to this. 
Then said she, very mannerly, Thou lyest, Child,
that's all; and I give thee up. 
And so she arose, and walk'd about the
Room in great Wrath. Her Nephew and her
Woman said, Your Ladyship's very good; 'tis a
plain Case; a very plain Case. 
I would have remov'd the Chair, to have
gone out, but her Nephew came and sat in it. 
This provok'd me; for I thought I should be 

unworthy of the Honour I was raised to, tho' I
was afraid to own it, if I did not shew some Spirit,
and I said, What, Sir, is your Pretence in this
House, to keep me a Prisoner here? Because,
said he,—I like it. —Do you so, Sir? reply'd
I: If that is the Answer of a Gentleman to such
an one as I, it would not, I dare say, be the
Answer of a Gentleman to a Gentleman. — 
My Lady! my Lady! said he, a Challenge, a
Challenge, by Gad! No, Sir, said I, I am of
a Sex that gives no Challenges; and you think
so too, or you would not give this Occasion
for the Word. 
Said my Lady, Don't be surpris'd, Nephew; 
the Wench could not talk thus, if she had not
been her Master's Bedfellow. —Pamela, Pamela,
said, she, and tapp'd me on the Shoulder, two
or three times, in Anger, thou hast lost thy Innocence,
Girl; and thou hast got some of thy
bold Master's Assurance, and art fit to go anywhither. 
—Then, and please your Ladyship,
said I, I am unworthy of your Presence, and
desire I may quit it. 
No, reply'd she, I will know first, What Reason
you can give for not accepting my Proposal,
if you are innocent? I can give, said I, a very
good one: but I beg to be excused. I will hear
it, said she. Why then, answer'd I, I should
perhaps have less Reason to like this Gentleman,
than where I am. 
Well then, said she, I'll put you to another
Trial. I'll set out this Moment with
you to your Father and Mother, and give you 

up safe to them, What do you say to that? — 
Ay, Mrs. Pamela, said her Nephew, Now what
does your Innocence say to that? —'Fore Gad,
Madam, you have puzzled her now. 
Be pleased, Madam, said I, to call off this
fine Gentleman. Your Kindness in these Proposals
makes me think you would not have me
baited. I'll be d&wblank;, said he, if she does not make
me a Bull-dog! Why she'll toss us all by-and-by! 
Sir, said I, you indeed behave as if you were in
a Bear-garden. 
Jackey, be quiet, said my Lady. You only
give her a Pretence to cvade my Questions. 
Come, answer me, Pamela. I will, Madam,
said I, and it is thus: I have no Occasion to be
beholden to your Ladyship for this Honour; for
I am to set out to-morrow Morning on the
Way to my Parents. —Now, again, thou lyest,
Wench. —I am not of Quality, said I, to answer
such Language. —Once again, said she, provoke
me not by these Reflections, and this Pertness: 
If thou dost, I shall do something by thee, unworthy
of myself. That, thought I, you have done
already; but I ventur'd not to say so. But who is
to carry you, said she, to your Father and Mother? 
Who my Master pleases, Madam, said I. 
Ay, said she, I doubt not, thou wilt do every
thing he pleases, if thou hast not already. Why
now tell me, Pamela, from thy Heart, Hast thou
not been in Bed with thy Master? Ha, Wench! 
—I was quite shock'd at this, and said, I wonder
how your Ladyship can use me thus! —I
am sure you can expect no Answer; and my 

Sex, and my tender Years, might exempt me from
such Treatment, from a Person of your Ladyship's
Birth and Quality, and who, be the Distance
ever so great, is of the same Sex with me. 
Thou art a confident Wench, said she, I see! 
—Pray, Madam, said I, let me beg you to
permit me to go. I am waited for in the Town
to Dinner: No, reply'd she, I can't spare you; 
and whomever you are to go to, will excuse you,
when they are told 'tis I that command you not
to go;—and you may excuse it too, young Lady
Wou'd-be, if you consider, that 'tis the unexpected
coming of your late Lady's Daughter, and your
Master's Sister, that commands your Stay. 
But a Pre-ingagement, your Ladyship will
consider, is something! —Ay, so it is; but I know
not what Reason Waiting-maids have to assume
these Airs of Pre-ingagements! Oh, Pamela,
Pamela, I am sorry thou givest thyself such Airs,
and triest to ape thy Betters: I see thou art quite
spoil'd: Of a modest, innocent Girl, that thou
wast, and humble too, thou now art fit for nothing
in the World, but what, I fear, thou art. 
Why, please your Ladyship, said her Kinsman,
what signifies all you say? The Matter's
over with her, no Doubt; and she likes it; and
she is in a Fairy-dream, and 'tis pity to awaken
her before her Dream's out. —Bad as you take
me to be, Madam, said I, I am not used to such
Language or Reflections as this Gentleman
bestows upon me; and I won't bear it. 
Well, Jackey, return'd she, be silent; and,
shaking her Head, Poor Girl! said she. —What 

a sweet Innocence is here destroy'd! —A thousand
Pities! —I could weep over her, if that
would do her Good! But she is quite lost, quite
undone; and then has assum'd a Carriage upon it,
that all those Creatures are distinguish'd by! 
I cry'd sadly for Vexation; and said, Say
what you please, Madam: If I can help it, I will
not answer another Word. 
Mrs. Jewkes came in, and ask'd, If her
Ladyship was ready for Dinner? She said, Yes. 
I would have gone out with her; but my Lady
said, taking my Hand, She could not spare me. 
And, Miss, said she, you may pull off your
Gloves, and lay your Fan by; for you shan't go: 
And if you behave well, you shall wait upon
me at Dinner, and then I shall have a little further
Talk with you. 
Mrs. Jewkes said to me, Madam, may I
speak one Word with you? —I can't tell, Mrs.
Jewkes, said I; for my Lady holds my Hand,
and you see I am a kind of Prisoner. 
What you have to say, Woman, said my
Lady, you may speak before me. But she went
out, and seem'd vex'd for me; and she says, I
look'd like the very Scarlet. 
The Cloth was laid in another Parlour, and
for Three Persons, and she led me in: Come,
my little Dear, said she, with a Sneer, I'll hand
you in, and I would have you think it as well as
if it was my Brother. 
What a sad Case, thought I, should I be in,
if I were as naughty as she thinks me! It was bad
enough as it was? 

Jackey, said my Lady, come, let us go to
Dinner. She said to her Woman, Do you, Beck,
help Pamela to 'tend us; we will have no Menfellows. 
Come, my young Lady, shall I help you
off with your white Gloves? I have not, Madam,
said I, deserv'd this at your Ladyship's Hands. 
Mrs. Jewkes coming in with the first Dish,
she said, Do you expect any body else, Mrs.
Jewkes, that you lay the Cloth for Three? Said
she, I hoped your Ladyship and Madam would
have been so well reconcil'd, that she would have
sat down too. —What means the clownish Woman?
said my Lady, in great Disdain: Could
you think the Creature should sit down with
me? She does, Madam, and please your Ladyship,
with my Master. —I doubt it not, good
Woman, said she, and lies with him too, does
she not? Answer me, Fat-face! —How these
Ladies are privileg'd! 
If she does, Madam, said she, there may be
a Reason for it, perhaps! And went out. — 
So! said she, has the Wench got thee over too! 
Come, my little Dear, pull off thy Gloves, I
say; and off she pull'd my Left Glove herself,
and spy'd my Ring. O my dear God! said she,
if the Wench has not got a Ring! —Well,
this is a pretty Piece of Foolery, indeed! Dost
know, my Friend, that thou art miserably trick'd? 
—And so, poor Innocent! thou hast made a
fine Exchange, hast thou not? thy Honesty for
this Bauble! And, I'll warrant, my little Dear has
topp'd her Part, and paraded it like any real
Wife; and so mimicks still the Condition! — 

Why, said she, and turn'd me round, thou art
as mincing as any Bride! No wonder thou are
thus trick'd out, and talkest of thy Pre-ingagements! 
Pr'ythee, Child, walk before me to that
Glass, survey thyself, and come back to me,
that I may see how finely thou canst act the
Theatrical Part given thee! 
I was then resolv'd to try to be silent; altho'
most sadly vex'd. —So I went and sat me
down in the Window, and she took her Place at
the upper End of the Table; and her saucy
Jackey, fleering at me most provokingly, sat
down by her. —Said he, Shall not the Bride
sit down by us, Madam? Ay, well thought of,
said my Lady: Pray, Mrs. Bride, your Pardon
for sitting down in your Place! —I said nothing. 
Said she, with a poor Pun, Thou hast some
Modesty, however, Child! For thou canst not
stand it, so must sit down, tho' in my Presence! 
—I still kept my Seat, and said nothing. — 
Thought I, this is a sad thing, and I am hinder'd
also from shewing my Duty where it is most due,
and shall have Anger there too, may-be, if
my dear Master should arrive before me! —So
she eat some Soup, as did her Kinsman; and
then, as she was cutting up a Fowl, said, If thou
long'st, my little Dear, I will help thee to a
Pinion, or Breast, or any thing. But may-be,
Child, said he, thou likest the Rump; Shall I
bring it thee? And then laugh'd like an Idiot,
for all he is a Lord's Son, and may be a Lord
himself. —For he is the Son of the Lord—; 



and his Mother, who was Lord Davers's Sister,
being dead, he has receiv'd what Education he
has, from Lord Davers's Direction. Poor
Wretch! for all his Greatness! he'll ne'er die for
a Plot!—at least of his own hatching. If I
could then have gone up, I would have given
you his Picture. But for one of 25 or 26 Years
of Age, much about the Age of my dear Master,
he is a most odd Mortal. 
Pamela, said my Lady, help me to a Glass
of Wine. No, Beck, said she, you shan't; for
she was offering to do it. I will have my Lady
Bride confer that Honour upon me; and then I
shall see if she can stand up. I was silent, and
never stirr'd. 
Dost hear, Chastity? said she: Wilt thou help
me to a Glass of Wine, when I bid thee? —What!
not stir! Then I'll come and help thee to one. 
Still stirr'd not, and, fanning myself, continu'd
silent. Said she, When I have ask'd thee, Meek-one,
half a dozen Questions together, I suppose
thou wilt answer them all at once. Pretty Creature,
is not that it? 
I was so vex'd, I bit a Piece of my Fan out,
not knowing what I did; but still I said nothing,
and did nothing but flutter it, and fan myself. 
I believe, said she, my next Question will
make up half a dozen; and then, Modest-one,
I shall be intitled to an Answer. 
He arose, and brought the Bottle and Glass: 
Come, said he, Mrs. Bride, be pleased to help
my Lady, and I will be your Deputy. Sir, reply'd
I, 'tis in a good Hand; help my Lady yourself. 

—Why, Creature, said she, dost thou
think thyself above it? —And then flew into
a Passion; Insolence! continued she, this Moment,
when I bid you, know your Duty, and
give me a Glass of Wine; or— 
So I took a little Spirit then—thought I, I
can but be beaten. —If, said I, to attend your
Ladyship at Table, or even kneel at your Feet,
was requir'd of me, I would most gladly do it,
were I only the Person you think me; but if it
be to triumph over one who has received Honours,
that she thinks require her to act another
Part, not to be utterly unworthy of them, I
must say, I cannot do it. 
She seem'd quite surpris'd, and look'd now
upon her Kinsman, and then upon her Woman. 
—I'm astonish'd! quite astonish'd! —Well
then, I suppose you would have me conclude
you my Brother's Wife; would you not? 
Your Ladyship, said I, compels me to say
this. —Well, reply'd she, but dost thou thyself
think thou art so? —Silence, said her
Kinsman, gives Consent. 'Tis plain enough
she does. Shall I rise, Madam, and pay my
Duty to my new Aunt? 
Tell me, said my Lady, What, in the
Name of Impudence, possesses thee, to dare to
look upon thyself as my Sister? Madam, reply'd
I, that is a Question will better become your
most worthy Brother to answer, than me. 
She was rising in great Wrath; but her
Woman said, Good your Ladyship, you'll do
yourself more Harm than her; and if the poor 

Girl has been deluded so, as you have heard,
with the Sham-marriage, she'll be more deserving
of your Ladyship's Pity than Anger. True,
Beck, very true, said my Lady; but there's no
bearing the Impudence of the Creature in the
mean time. 
I would have gone out at the Door; but
her Kinsman ran and set his Back against it. I
expected bad Treatment from her Pride, and
violent Temper; but this was worse than I
could have thought of. And I said to him,
Sir, when my Master comes to know your rude
Behaviour, you will, may-be, have Cause to
repent it. And went and sat down in the
Window again. 
Another Challenge, by Gad! said he; 
but I am glad she says her Master! —You
see, Madam, she herself does not believe she is
marry'd, and so has not been so much deluded
as you think for. And coming to me with a
most barbarous Air of Insult, he said, kneeling
on one Knee before me; My new Aunt, your
Blessing, or your Curse, I care not which; but
quickly give me one or other, that I may not
lose my Dinner! 
I gave him a most contemptuous Look: 
Tinsel'd Toy! said I, (for he was laced all over)
Twenty or Thirty Years hence, when you are
at Age, I shall know how to answer you better; 
mean time, sport with your Footmen, and
not with me! And so I removed to another
Window nearer the Door, and he look'd like a
sad Foolish, as he is. 

Beck, Beck, said my Lady, this is not to be
borne! Was ever the like heard! Is my Kinsman
and Lord Davers's to be thus used by such a
Slut? And was coming to me: And indeed I
began to be afraid; for I have but a poor Heart,
after all. But Mrs. Jewkes, hearing high Words,
came in again, with the second Course, and
said Pray your Ladyship, don't so discompose
yourself. I am afraid this Day's Business will
make Matters wider than ever between your
good Ladyship and your Brother: For my Master
doats upon Madam. 
Woman, said she, do thou be silent! Sure,
I, that was born in this House, may have some
Privilege in it, without being talk'd to by the
saucy Servants in it! 
I beg Pardon, Madam, reply'd Mrs.
Jewkes; and turning to me, said, Madam, my
Master will take it very ill, if you make him
wait for you thus. So I rose to go out; but
my Lady said, If it was only for that Reason,
she shan't go. —And went to the Door, and
shut it, and said to Mrs. Jewkes, Woman,
don't come again till I call you; and stepping to
me, took my Hand, and said, Find your Legs,
Miss, if you please. 
I stood up, and she tapp'd my Cheek; Oh!
said she, that scarlet Glow shews what a rancorous
little Heart thou hast, if thou durst shew
it; but come this way. And so led me to her
Chair: Stand there, said she, and answer me a
few Questions, while I dine, and I'll dismiss
thee, till I call thy impudent Master to Account; 

and then I'll have you Face to Face, and all this
Mystery of Iniquity shall be unravell'd; for,
between you, I will come to the Bottom of
it. 
When she had sat down, I mov'd to the
Window on the other Side the Parlour, looking
into the private Garden; and her Woman said,
Mrs. Pamela, don't make my Lady angry; stand
by her Ladyship, as she bids you. Said I, Pray,
good now, let it suffice you to attend your Lady's
Commands, and don't lay yours upon me. — 
Your Pardon, sweet Mrs. Pamela, reply'd she: 
Times are much alter'd with you, I'll assure you! 
Said I, Her Ladyship has a very good Plea to be
free in the House that she was born in: But you
may as well confine your Freedoms to the
House in which you had your Breeding. Why,
how now, Mrs. Pamela! said she: Since you
provoke me to it, I'll tell you a Piece of my
Mind. Hush, hush! good Woman, said I, alluding
to my Lady's Language to Mrs. Jewkes;
my Lady wants not your Assistance! —Besides,
I can't scold! 
The Woman was ready to stutter with Vexation; 
and Lord Jackey laugh'd as if he would
burst his Sides: G&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;d&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; me, Beck, said he,
you'd better let her alone to my Lady here; for
she'll be too many for Twenty such as you and
I. —And then he laugh'd again, and repeated
—I can't scold, quoth-a! but by Gad, Miss,
you can speak d—d spiteful Words, I can
tell you that! —Poor Beck! poor Beck— 
'Fore Gad, she's quite dumb-founder'd! 

Well, but, Pamela, said my Lady, come
hither, and tell me truly: Dost thou think thyself
really marry'd? —Said I, and approach'd
her Chair, My good Lady, I'll answer all your
Commands, if you'll have Patience with me,
and not be so angry as you are; but I can't
bear to be used thus by this Gentleman, and
your Ladyship's Woman. Child, said she,
thou art very impertinent to my Kinsman; thou
canst not be civil to me; and my Ladyship's
Woman is much thy Betters. But that's not
the Thing! —Dost thou think thou art
really marry'd? 
I see, Madam, said I, you are resolv'd not
to be pleas'd with any Answer I shall return: If
I should say, I am not, then your Ladyship will
call me hard Names, and perhaps I should tell
a Fib. If I should say, I am, your Ladyship
will ask me how I have the Impudence to be
so,—and will call it a Sham-marriage. I will,
said she, be answer'd more directly. Why,
what, and please your Ladyship, does it signify
what I think? Your Ladyship will believe
as you please. 
But canst thou have the Vanity, the Pride,
the Folly, said she, to think thyself actually
marry'd to my Brother? He is no Fool, Child; 
and Libertine enough of Conscience; and thou
art not the first in the List of his credulous
Harlots. —Well, well, said I, (and was in a
sad Flutter) as I am easy and pleas'd with my
Lot, pray your Ladyship let me continue so, as
long as I can. It will be Time enough for me 

to know the worst, when the worst comes. 
And if it should be so bad, your Ladyship
should pity me, rather than thus torment me
before my Time. 
Well, said she, but dost not think I am
concern'd, that a young Wench, whom my poor
dear Mother lov'd so well, should thus cast
herself away, and suffer herself to be deluded
and undone, after such a noble Stand as thou
mad'st for so long a Time? 
I think myself far from being deluded
and undone, and please your Ladyship; and am
as innocent and virtuous as ever I was in my
Life. Thou ly'st, Child, said she. 
So your Ladyship told me twice before! 
She gave me a Slap on the Hand for this
and I made a low Court'sy, and said, I humbly
thank your Ladyship! —But I could not
refrain Tears; and added, Your dear Brother,
Madam, however, won't thank your Ladyship
for this Usage of me, tho' I do. Come a little
nearer me, my Dear, said she, and thou shalt
have a little more than that to tell him of, if
thou think'st thou hast not made Mischief
enough already between a Sister and Brother. 
But, Child, if he was here, I would serve thee
worse, and him too. I wish he was, said I. — 
Dost thou threaten me, Mischief-maker, and
insolent as thou art? 
Now, pray your Ladyship, said I, (but got
to a little Distance) be pleased to reflect upon
all that you have said to me, since I have had
the Honour, or rather Misfortune, to come 

into your Presence; whether you have said one
Thing befitting your Ladyship's Degree to me,
even supposing I was the Wench, and the Creature
you take me to be? —Come hither,
my pert Dear, reply'd she, come but within my
Reach for one Moment, and I'll answer thee as
thou deservest. 
To be sure she meant to box my Ears. But
I should be unworthy of my happy Lot, if I
could not shew some Spirit. 
When the Cloth was taken away, I said, I
suppose I may now depart your Presence, Madam? 
I suppose not, said she. Why, I'll lay
thee a Wager, Child, thy Stomach's too full
to eat, and so thou may'st fast till thy mannerly
Master comes home. 
Pray your Ladyship, said her Woman,
let the poor Girl sit down at Table with Mrs.
Jewkes and me. —Said I, You are very kind,
Mrs. Worden; but Times, as you said, are
much alter'd with me; and I have been of late
so much honour'd by better Company, that I
can't stoop to yours. 
Was ever such Confidence! said my Lady. 
—Poor Beck! poor Beck! said her Kinsman; 
why, she beats you quite out of the Pit! — 
Will your Ladyship, said I, be so good as to
tell me how long I am to tarry? For you'll
please to see by that Letter, that I am obliged
to attend my Master's Commands. And so I
gave her the dear Gentleman's Letter from Mr.
Carlton's, which I thought would make her use
me better, as she might judge by it of the 

Honour done me by him. Ay, said she, this
is my worthy Brother's Hand: It is directed to
Mrs. Andrews. That's to you, I suppose, Child! 
And so she read on, making Remarks as she
went along, in this manner: 
My dearest Pamela,—“Mighty well!” 
—I hope my not coming home this Night
will not frighten you! —“Vastly tender,
indeed! —And did it frighten you, Child?” 
—You may believe I can't help it. “No, to
be sure! —A Person in thy way of Life is
more tenderly used than an honest Wife. 
But mark the End of it!” —I could have
wish'd, “Pr'ythee, Jackey, mind this;” we
“mind the significant We,” had not ingaged to
the good Neighbourhood, at Sir Simon' s, for
to-morrow Night. —“Why, does the good
Neighbourhood, and does Sir Simon, permit
thy Visits, Child? They shall have none
of mine then, I'll assure them!” But I am
so desirous to set out on Wednesday for the
other House,—“So, Jackey, we but just
nick'd it, I find.”—that, as well as in
Return for the Civilities of so many good
Friends, who will be there on purpose, I would
not put it off. —“Now mind, Jackey,”— 
What I beg of you;—“Mind the Wretch,
that could use me and your Uncle, as he has
done; he is turn'd Beggar to this Creature! ” 
I beg of you, therefore, my Dear, “My
Dear! there's for you! —I wish I may not
be quite sick before I get thro'.” —What I 

beg of you, therefore, my Dear, [and then she
look'd me full in the Face] is, that you will
go in the Chariot to Sir Simon's, the sooner in
the Day, the better;—“Dear Heart! and
why so, when We were not expected till
Night? Why, pray observe the Reason— 
Hem!” [said she] Because you will be diverted
with the Company; “Mighty kind
indeed!”—who all, “Jackey, Jackey,
mind this,”—who all so much admire you. 
Now he'd ha' been hang'd before he would
have said so complaisant a thing, had he
been marry'd, I'm sure!” —“Very true, Aunt,
[said he]: A plain Case that!” —[Thought I,
that's hard upon poor Matrimony tho': I hope
my Lady don't find it so. But I durst not speak
out.]. Who all so much admire you, [said she]
“I must repeat that—Pretty Miss—I wish
thou wast as admirable for thy Virtue, as for
that Baby-face of thine!” —And I hope to
join you there by your Tea-time, in the
Afternoon;—“So, you're in very good
time, Child, an Hour or Two hence, to
answer all your important Pre-ingagements!” 
—which will be better than going home, and
returning with you; as it will be Six Miles
Difference to me; and I know the good Company
will excuse my Dress on the Occasion. 
“Very true: Any Dress is good enough, I'm
sure, for such Company as admire thee,
Child, for a Companion in thy ruin'd State! 
—Jackey, Jackey, mind, mind again!
more fine things still!” I count every Hour 

of this little Absence for a Day! —“There's
for you! Let me repeat it:” I count every
Hour of this little Absence for a Day! — 
“Mind too the Wit of the good Man! One
may see Love is a new thing to him. Here
is a very tedious Time gone since he saw his
Deary; no less than, according to his amorous
Calculation, a Dozen Days and Nights,
at least! and yet, tedious as it is, it is but
a little Absence. Well said, my
good, accurate, and consistent Brother. — 
But wife Men in Love, are always the greatest
Simpletons! —But now comes the Reason
why this little Absence, which, at the
same time, is so great an Absence, is
so tedious:” For I am, “Ay, now for it!” 
—with the utmost Sincerity, My dearest
Love, “Out upon dearest Love! I shall
never love the Word again! Pray bid your
Uncle never call me Dearest Love, Jackey!” 
—For ever Yours! —“But, Brother, thou
ly'st! —Thou knowst thou dost. —And
so, my good Lady Andrews, or what shall I
call you? Your dearest Love will be for
ever Yours! And hast thou the Vanity to
believe this? —But stay, here is a Postscript. 
The poor Man knew not when to have done
to his dearest Love. —He's sadly in for't, truly! 
Why, his dearest Love, you are mighty
happy in such a Lover!” —If you could go
to dine with them,—“Cry your Mercy,
my dearest Love, now comes the Pre-in-gagement!” 
it will be a Freedom that will 

be very pleasing to them, and the more, as they
don't expect it. 
Well, so much for this kind Letter! But
you see you cannot honour this admiring Company
with this little-expected, and, but in
Complaisance to his Folly, I dare say, little-desired
Freedom. And I cannot forbear admiring
you so much myself, my dearest Love,
that I will not spare you at all, this whole
Evening. For 'tis a little hard, if thy Master's
Sister may not be bless'd a little bit with thy
charming Company. 
So I found I had shewn her my Letter to
very little Purpose, and repented it several
times, as she read on. —Well then, said I, I
hope your Ladyship will give me Leave to send
my Excuses to your good Brother, and say,
that your Ladyship is come, and is so fond of
me, that you will not let me leave you. — 
Pretty Creature! said she; and wantest thou thy
good Master to come, and quarrel with his Sister
on thy Account? —But thou shalt not stir
from my Presence; and I would now ask thee,
What it is thou meanest by shewing me this
Letter? —Why, Madam, said I, to shew
your Ladyship how I was ingaged for this Day
and Evening. —And for nothing else? said she. 
Why, I can't tell, Madam, said I: But if you
can collect from it any other Circumstances, I
might hope I should not be the worse treated. 
I saw her Eyes began to sparkle with Passion; 
and she took my Hand, and said, grasping it 

very hard, I know, confident Creature, that
you shew'd it me to insult me:—You shew'd
it me, to let me see, that he could be civiller
to a Beggar-born, than to me, or to my good
Lord Davers:—You shew'd it me, as if
you'd have me be as credulous a Fool as yourself,
to believe your Marriage true, when I
know the whole Trick of it, and have Reason
to believe you do too; and you shew'd it me,
to upbraid me with his stooping to such painted
Dirt, to the Disgrace of a Family, antient and
untainted beyond most in the Kingdom. And
now will I give thee One hundred Guineas for
one bold Word, that I may fell thee at my Foot. 
Was not this very dreadful! To be sure, I
had better have kept the Letter from her. I
was quite frighten'd:—And this fearful Menace,
and her fiery Eyes, and rageful Countenance,
made me lose all my Courage. —So I
said, weeping, Good your Ladyship, pity me! — 
Indeed I am honest; indeed I am virtuous; indeed
I would not do a bad thing for the World. 
Tho' I know, said she, the whole Trick of
thy pretended Marriage, and thy foolish Ring
here, and all the rest of the wicked Nonsense; 
yet I should not have Patience with thee, if
thou shouldst but offer to let me know thy
Vanity prompts thee to believe thou art marry'd
to my Brother! —I could not bear the Thought! 
—So take care, Pamela; take care, beggarly
Brat; take care. 
Good your Ladyship, said I, spare my dear
Parents. They are honest and industrious: 

They were once in a very creditable Way, and
never were Beggars. Misfortunes may attend
any body: And I can bear the cruellest Imputations
on myself, because I know my Innocence; 
but upon such honest, industrious Parents, who
went thro' the greatest Trials, without being
beholden to any thing but God's Blessing, and
their own hard Labour; I cannot bear Reflection. 
What! art thou setting up for a Family,
Creature as thou art? God give me Patience
with thee! I suppose my Brother's Folly, and
his Wickedness together, will, in a little
while, occasion a Search at the Herald's Office,
to set out thy wretched Obscurity. Provoke
me; I desire thou wilt. One hundred Guineas
will I give thee, to say but thou thinkest thou
art marry'd to my Brother. 
Your Ladyship, I hope, won't kill me. 
And since nothing I can say will please you; 
but your Ladyship is resolved to quarrel with
me; since I must not say what I think, on one
hand nor another, whatever your Ladyship designs
by me, be pleased to do, and let me
depart your Presence! 
She gave me a Slap on the Hand, and
reach'd to box my Ear; but Mrs. Jewkes
hearkening without, and her Woman too,
they both came in at that Instant; and Mrs.
Jewkes said, pushing herself in between us,
Your Ladyship knows not what you do: Indeed
you don't. My Master would never forgive me,
if I suffer'd, in his House, one he so dearly 

loves, to be so used; and it must not be, tho'
you are Lady Davers. Her Woman too interposed,
and told her, I was not worth her
Ladyship's Anger. But she was like a Person
beside herself. 
I offered to go out, and Mrs. Jewkes
took my Hand, to lead me out: But her Kinsman
set his Back against the Door, and put his
Hand to his Sword, and said, I should not go,
till his Aunt permitted it. He drew it halfway,
and I was so terrified, that I cry'd out,
Oh the Sword! the Sword! And, not knowing
what I did, I ran to my Lady herself, and
clasp'd my Arms about her, forgetting, just
then, how much she was my Enemy; and said,
sinking on my Knees, Defend me, good your
Ladyship! The Sword! the Sword! —Mrs.
Jewkes said, Oh! my Lady will fall into Fits; 
but Lady Davers was herself so startled at the
Matter being carry'd so far, that she did not
mind her Words, and said, Jackey, don't
draw your Sword! —You see, as great as her
Spirit is, she can't bear that. 
Come, said she, be comforted; he shan't
fright you! —I'll try to overcome my Anger,
and will pity you. So, Wench, rise up, and
don't be foolish. Mrs. Jewkes held her Salts to
my Nose, and I did not faint. And my Lady
said, Mrs. Jewkes, if you would be forgiven,
leave Pamela and me by ourselves; and,
Jackey, do you withdraw; only you, Beck, stay. 
So I sat down in the Window, all in a sad
Fluster; for, to be sure, I was sadly frighted. 

—Said her Woman, You should not sit in
my Lady's Presence, Mrs. Pamela. Yes, let
her sit till she is a little recover'd of her Fright,
said my Lady, and do you set my Chair by her. 
And so she sat over-against me, and said, To
be sure, Pamela, you have been very provoking
with your Tongue, to be sure you have, as well
upon my Nephew, (who is a Man of Quality
too) as me. And, palliating her cruel Usage,
and beginning, I suppose, to think, herself, she
had carry'd it further than she could answer it
to her Brother, she wanted to lay the Fault
upon me: Own, said she, you have been very
saucy; and beg my Pardon, and beg Jackey's
Pardon; and I will try to pity you: For you
are a sweet Girl, after all, if you had but held
out, and been honest. 
'Tis injurious to me, Madam, said I, to
imagine I am not honest! —Said she, Have
you not been a-bed with my Brother? Tell me
that. —Your Ladyship, reply'd I, asks your
Questions in a strange Way, and in strange
Words. 
Oh! your Delicacy is wounded, I suppose,
by my plain Question! —This Niceness will
soon leave you, Wench: It will indeed. But
answer me directly. Then your Ladyship's next
Question, said I, will be, Am I marry'd? And
you won't bear my Answer to that,—and will
beat me again. 
I han't beat you yet; have I, Beck? said
she. So you want to make out a Story, do
you? —But, indeed, I can't bear thou shouldst 

so much as think thou art my Sister. I know
the whole Trick of it; and so, 'tis my Opinion,
dost thou. It is only thy little Cunning, that
it may look like a Cloak to thy Yielding, and
get better Terms from him. Pr'ythee, pr'ythee,
Wench, thou seest I know the World a little; 
—almost as much at Thirty-two, as thou dost
at Sixteen. —Remember that! 
I rose from the Window, and walking to
the other End of the Room, Beat me again, if
you please, said I; but I must tell your Ladyship,
I scorn your Words, and am as much
marry'd as your Ladyship! 
At that she ran to me, but her Woman
interposed again; Let the vain wicked Creature
go from your Presence, Madam, said she. 
She is not worthy to be in it. She will but
vex your Ladyship. Stand away, Beck, said
she. That's an Assertion that I would not take
from my Brother. I can't bear it. As much
marry'd as I? —Is that to be borne? But if
the Creature believes she is, Madam, said her
Woman, she is to be as much pity'd for her
Credulity, as despis'd for her Vanity. 
I was in hopes to have slipp'd out at the
Door; but she caught hold of my Gown, and
pulled me back. Pray your Ladyship, said I,
don't kill me! —I have done no Harm. — 
But she locked the Door, and put the Key in
her Pocket. So seeing Mrs. Jewkes before the
Window, I lifted up the Sash, and said, Mrs.
Jewkes, I believe it would be best for the Chariot
to go to your Master, and let him know, 

that Lady Davers is here; and I cannot leave
her Ladyship. 
She was resolv'd to be displeas'd, let me say
what I would. Said she, No, no; he'll then
think, that I make the Creature my Companion,
and know not how to part with her. I thought
your Ladyship, reply'd I, could not have taken
Exceptions at this Message. Thou knowest
nothing, Wench, said she, of what belongs to
People of Condition: How shouldst thou? 
Nor, thought I, do I desire it, at this Rate. 
What shall I say, Madam? said I. Nothing
at all, reply'd she; let him expect his Dearest
Love, and be disappointed; it is but adding a
few more Hours, and he will make every one
a Day, in his amorous Account. —Mrs.
Jewkes coming nearer me, and my Lady walking
about the Room, being then at the End, I
whisper'd, Let Robert stay at the Elms; I'll
have a Struggle for't by-and-by. 
As much marry'd as I! repeated she. — 
The Insolence of the Creature! —And so she
walk'd about the Room, talking to herself, to
her Woman, and now-and-then to me; but
seeing I could not please her, I thought I had
better be silent. And then it was, Am I not
worthy an Answer? If I speak, said I, your
Ladyship is angry at me, tho' ever so respectfully; 
if I do not, I cannot please: Would
your Ladyship tell me but how I shall oblige
you, and I would do it with all my Heart? 
Confess the Truth, said she, that thour't
an undone Creature; hast been in Bed with thy 



Master; and art sorry for it, and for the Mischief
thou hast occasion'd between him and me; 
and then I'll pity thee, and persuade him to pack
thee off, with a Hundred or Two of Guineas; 
and some honest Farmer may take pity of thee,
and patch up thy Shame, for the sake of the
Money: and if nobody will have thee, thou
must vow Penitence, and be as humble as I
once thought thee. 
I was quite sick at Heart, at all this passionate
Extravagance, and to be hinder'd from
being where was the Desire of my Soul, and
afraid too of incurring my dear Master's Displeasure; 
and, as I sat, I saw it was no hard
matter to get out of the Window, into the
Front-yard, the Parlour being even with the
Yard, and so have a fair Run for it; and after
I had seen my Lady at the other End of the
Room again, in her Walks, having not pulled
down the Sash, when I spoke to Mrs. Jewkes,
I got upon the Seat, and whipp'd out in a
Minute, and ran away as hard as I could drive,
my Lady calling after me to return, and her
Woman at the other Window: But Two of
her Servants appearing at her crying out, and
she bidding them stop me, I said, Touch me at
your Peril, Fellows: But their Lady's Commands
would have prevailed on them, had
not Mr. Colbrand, who, it seems, had been
kindly order'd, by Mrs. Jewkes, to be within
Call, when she saw how I was treated, come
up, and put on one of his deadly fierce Looks,
the only time, I thought, it ever became him, 

and said, He would chine the Man, (that was
his Word) who offer'd to touch his Lady; and
so he ran along side of me; and I heard my
Lady say, The Creature flies like a Bird. And,
indeed, Mr. Colbrand, with his huge Strides,
could hardly keep pace with me; and I never
stopp'd till I got to the Chariot, and Robert
had got down, seeing me running at a Distance,
and held the Door in his Hand, with the Step
ready down; and in I jump'd, without touching
the Step, saying, Drive me, drive me, as fast
as you can, out of my Lady's Reach! And he
mounted, and Colbrand said, Don't be frighten'd,
Madam; nobody shall hurt you. —And
shut the Door, and away Robert drove; but I
was quite out of Breath, and did not recover
it, and my Fright, all the way. 
Mr. Colbrand was so kind, but I did not
know it till the Chariot stopp'd at Sir Simon's,
to step up behind the Coach, lest, as he said,
my Lady should send after me; and he told
Mrs. Jewkes, when he got home, that he
never saw such a Runner as me, in his Life. 
When the Chariot stopp'd, which was not
till Six o'Clock, so long did this cruel Lady
keep me, Miss Darnford ran out to me; O,
Madam, said she, Ten times welcome! but
you'll be beat, I can tell you; for here has been
Mr. B. come these Two Hours, and is very
angry with you. 
That's hard indeed! said I:—Indeed I
can't afford it!—for I hardly knew what I
said, having not recover'd my Fright. Let me 

sit down, Miss, any-where, said I; for I have
been sadly off. So I sat down, and was quite
sick with the Hurry of my Spirits, and lean'd
upon her Arm. 
Said she, Your Lord and Master came in
very moody; and when he had staid an Hour,
and you not come, he began to fret, and said,
He did not expect so little Complaisance from
you. And he is now sat down, with great
Persuasions, to a Game at Loo. —Come, you
must make your Appearance, Lady fair; for
he's too sullen to attend you, I doubt. 
You have no Strangers, have you, Miss?
said I. —Only Two Women Relations from
Stamford, reply'd she, and an humble Servant
of one of them. —Only all the World, Miss!
said I:—What shall I do, if he be angry? I
can't bear that. 
Just as I had said so, came in Lady Darnford
and Lady Jones, to chide me, as they
said; for not coming sooner. And before I
could speak, came in my dear Master. I ran to
him. How d'ye, Pamela? said he, and saluted
me, with a little more Formality than I could
well bear. —I expected half a Word from
me, when I was so complaisant to your Choice,
would have determined you, and that you'd
have been here to Dinner;—and the rather,
as I made my Request a reasonable one, and
what, I thought, would be agreeable to you. 
O dear Sir, said I, pray, pray, hear me, and
you'll pity me, and not be displeased: Mrs.
Jewkes will tell you, that as soon as I had your 

kind Commands, I said, I would obey you,
and come to Dinner with these good Ladies; 
and so prepared myself instantly, with all the
Pleasure in the World. Lady Darnford and
Miss said, I was their Dear! —Look you, said
Miss, did I not tell you, Stately-one, that
something must have happen'd? But O these
Tyrants! these Men! 
Why, what hinder'd it, my Dear? said he: 
Give yourself Time; you seem out of Breath. 
—O Sir, said I, Out of Breath! well I may: 
—For, just as I was ready to come away, who
should drive into the Court-yard, but Lady
Davers! —Lady Davers! Nay, then, my
sweet Dear, said he, and saluted me more tenderly,
hast thou had a worse Trial than I wish
thee, from one of the haughtiest Women in
England, tho' my Sister? —For she, too, my
Pamela, was spoil'd by my good Mother! — 
But have you seen her? 
Yes, Sir, said I, and more than seen her! 
—Why, sure, said he, she has not had the
Insolence to strike my Girl! —Sir, said I, but
tell me you forgive me; for indeed I could not
come sooner; and these good Ladies but excuse
me; and I'll tell you all another time: for to
take up the good Company's Attention now,
will spoil their Pleasantry, and be to them,
tho' more important to me, like the Lady's
broken China, you caution'd me about. 
That's a dear Girl! said he; I see my Hints
are not thrown away upon you; and I beg
Pardon for being angry at you; and, for the 

future, will stay till I hear your Defence, before
I judge you. Said Miss Darnford, This is a
little better! To own a Fault is some Reparation; 
and what every lordly Husband will not
do. He said, But tell me, my Dear, Did
Lady Davers offer you any Incivility? O Sir,
reply'd I, she is your Sister, and I must not tell
you all; but she has used me very severely. Did
you tell her, said he, you were marry'd? —Yes,
Sir, I did at last: But she will have it, 'tis a
Sham-marriage, and that I am a vile Creature: 
And she was ready to beat me, when I said so; 
for she could not have Patience, that I should
be deem'd her Sister, as she said. 
How unlucky it was, reply'd he, I was not
at home! —Why did you not send to me
here? Send, Sir! I was kept Prisoner by Force. 
They would not let me stir, or do you think I
would have been hinder'd from obeying you? 
Nay, I told them, that I had a Pre-ingagement; 
but she ridiculed me, and said, Waiting-maids
talk of Pre-ingagements! and then I shew'd
her your kind Letter; and she made a Thousand
Remarks upon it, and made me wish I had not. 
In short, whatever I could do or say, there was
no pleasing her; and I was a Creature, a Wench,
and all that was naught. But you must not
be angry with her on my Account. 
Well, but, said he, I suppose she hardly
ask'd you to dine with her; for she came before
Dinner, I presume, if it was soon after you had
receiv'd my Letter? No, Sir; Dine with my
Lady! no indeed! Why, she would make me 

wait at Table upon her, with her Woman, because
she would not expose herself and me
before the Men-servants; which, you know,
Sir, was very good of her Ladyship. 
Well, said he, but did you wait at Table
upon her? Would you have had me, Sir? said
I. —Only, Pamela, reply'd he, if you did,
and knew not what belong'd to your Character,
as my Wife, I shall be very angry with you. 
Sir, said I, I did not; but refus'd it, out of
Consideration of the Dignity you have raised
me to; else, Sir, I could have waited on my
Knees upon your Sister. 
Now, said he, you confirm my Opinion of
your Prudence and Judgment. She is an insolent
Woman, and shall dearly repent it. But,
Sir, she is to be excus'd, because she won't
believe I am indeed marry'd; so don't be too
angry at her Ladyship. 
He said, Ladies, pray don't let us keep you
from the Company; I'll only ask a Question or
Two more, and attend you. Said Lady Jones,
I so much long to hear the Story of poor Madam's
Persecution, that if it was not improper, I
should be glad to stay. Miss Darnford would
stay for the same Reason; my Master saying, he
had no Secrets to ask, and that it was kind of
them to interest themselves in my Grievances. 
But Lady Darnford went into the Company,
and told them the Cause of my Detention; 
for, it seems, my dear Master lov'd
me too well, to keep to himself the Disappointment
my not being here to receive him, was 

to him; and they had all given the Two Miss
Boroughs's, and Mr. Perry, the Stamford
Guests, such a Character of me, that they said,
they were impatient to see me. 
Said my Master, But, Pamela, you said
They and Them: Who had my Sister with her,
besides her Woman? Her Nephew, Sir, and
Three Footmen on Horseback; and she and
her Woman were in her Chariot and Six. 
That's a sad Coxcomb, said he: How did
he behave to you? —Not extraordinarily, Sir:
but I should not complain; for I was even with
him; because I thought I ought not to bear
with him as with my Lady. 
By Heaven! said he, if I knew he behaved
unhandsomely to my Jewel, I'd send him home
to his Uncle without his Ears. Indeed, Sir,
returned I, I was as hard upon him, as he was
upon me. Said he, 'Tis kind to say so: But I
believe I shall make them dearly repent their
Visit, if I find their Behaviour to call for my
Resentment. 
But, sure, my Dear, you might have got
away, when you went to your own Dinner? 
Indeed, Sir, her Ladyship lock'd me in, and
would not let me stir. —So you han't eat any
Dinner? No, indeed, Sir, nor had a Stomach
to any. My poor Dear! said he. But then,
how got you away at last? —O Sir, reply'd
I, I jump'd out of the Parlour Window, and
ran away to the Chariot, which had waited for
me several Hours, by the Elm-walk, from the
Time of my Lady's coming (for I was just going, 

as I said); and Mr. Colbrand guarded me thro' her
Servants, whom she call'd to, to stop me; and
was so kind to step behind the Chariot, unknown
to me, and saw me safe here. 
I'm sure, said he, these insolent Creatures
must have treated you vilely. But tell me,
What Part did Mrs. Jewkes act in this Affair? 
A very kind Part, Sir, said I, in my Behalf; 
and I shall thank her for it. Sweet Creature!
said he, thou lov'st to speak well of every body; 
but I hope she deserves it; for she knew you
were marry'd. —But come, we'll now join
the Company, and try to forget all you have
suffer'd, for two or three Hours, that we may
not tire the Company with our Concerns; and
resume the Subject as we go home. And you
shall find, I will do you Justice, as I ought. 
But you forgive me, Sir, said I, and are not
angry? Forgive you, my Dear! return'd he— 
I hope you forgive me! —I shall never make
you Satisfaction for what you have suffer'd from
me, and for me! And with those Words he led
me in to the Company. 
He very kindly presented me to the Two
Stranger Ladies, and the Gentleman; and them
to me; and Sir Simon, who was at Cards, rose
from Table, and saluted me: Adad! Madam,
said he, I'm glad to see you here. What, it
seems, you have been a Prisoner! 'Tis well you
was, or your Spouse and I should have sat in
Judgment upon you, and condemned you to
a fearful Punishment for your first Crime of
Læsæ Majestatis (I had this explain'd to me 

afterwards, as a sort of Treason against' my
Liege Lord and Husband). For we Husbands,
hereabouts, said he, are resolv'd to turn over a
new Leaf with our Wives, and your Lord and
Master shall shew us the Way, I can tell you
that. But I see by your Eyes, my sweet Culprit,
added he, and your Complexion, you
have had sour Sauce to your sweet Meat. 
Miss Darnford said, I think we are oblig'd
to our sweet Guest, at last; for she was forc'd
to jump out at a Window to come to us. Indeed!
said Mrs. Peters;—and my Master's
Back being turn'd, says she, Lady Davers,
when a Maiden, was always vastly passionate; 
but a very good Lady when her Passion was
over. And she'd make nothing of slapping her
Maids about, and begging their Pardons afterwards,
if they took it patiently; otherwise she
used to say, The Creatures were even with
her. 
Ay, said I, I have been a many Creatures
and Wenches, and I know not what; for these
were the Names she gave me. And I thought
I ought to act up to the Part her dear Brother
has given me; and so, truly, I have but just
escaped a good Cuffing. 
Miss Boroughs said to her Sister, as I overheard,
but she did not design I should, What
a sweet Creature is this! And then she takes
so little upon her, is so free, so easy, and owns
the Honour done her so obligingly! Said Mr.
Perry, softly, The loveliest Person I ever saw! 

Who could have the Heart to be angry with
her one Moment? 
Says Miss Darnford, Here, my dearest
Neighbour, these Gentry are admiring you
strangely; and Mr. Perry says, you are the
loveliest Lady he ever saw; and says it to his
own Mistress's Face too, I'll assure you! — 
Or else, says Miss Boroughs, I should think he
much flatter'd me. 
O Miss, return'd I, you are exceedingly
obliging; but your kind Opinion ought to
teach me Humility, and to reverence so generous
a Worth as can give a Preference against
yourself, where it is so little due. Indeed,
Madam, said Miss Nanny Boroughs, I love
my Sister well; but it would be a high Compliment
to any Lady, to be deem'd worthy of a
second or third Place after you. 
There is no answering such Politeness,
said I: I am sure, Lady Davers was very cruel
to keep me from such Company. 'Twas our
Loss, Madam, said Miss Darnford. I'll allow
it, said I, in Degree, Miss; for you have all
been deprived, several Hours, of an humble
Admirer. 
Mr. Perry said, I never before saw so young
a Lady shine forth with such Graces of Mind
and Person. Alas! Sir, said I, my Master
coming up, mine is but a borrow'd Shine, like
that of the Moon: Here is the Sun, to whose
fervent Glow of Generosity I owe all the faint
Lustre that your Goodness is pleased to look
upon with so much kind Distinction. 

Mr. Perry was pleased to hold up his Hands; 
and the Ladies look'd one upon another. And
my Master said, hearing Part of the last Sentence,
What's the pretty Subject, that my Pamela
is displaying, so sweetly, her Talents
upon? 
Oh! Sir, said Mr Perry, I will pronounce
you the happiest Gentleman in England. And
I, said Miss Boroughs. And I, said Miss
Darnford. And I, said each of the others. 
My Master said, most generously, Thank
ye, Thank ye, Thank ye, all round, my dear
Friends: I know not your Subject; but if you
believe me so, for a single Instance of this dear
Girl's Goodness, what must I think myself,
when bless'd with a thousand Instances, and
experiencing it in every single Act and Word! 
I do assure you, my Pamela's Person, all lovely
as you see it, is far short of her Mind: That
indeed first attracted my Admiration, and made
me her Lover: But they were the Beauties of
her Mind, that made me her Husband: And
proud, my sweet Dear, said he, pressing my
Hand, am I of that Title. 
Well, said Mr. Perry, very kindly and
politely, Excellent as your Lady is, I know
not the Gentleman that could deserve her, but
that one, who could say such just and such fine
things. 
I was all abash'd; and took Miss Darnford's
Hand, and said, Save me, dear Miss, by
your sweet Example, from my rising Pride. 
But could I deserve half these kind things, 

what a happy Creature should I be! Said Miss
Darnford, You deserve them all; indeed you
do. 
The greatest Part of the Company having
sat down to Loo, my Master, being press'd, said,
He would take one Game at Whist; but had
rather be excused too, having been up all
Night. And I ask'd how his Friend did. We'll
talk of that, said he, another time; which,
and his Seriousness, made me fear the poor
Gentleman was dead, as it proved. 
We cast in, and Miss Boroughs and my
Master were together, and Mr. Perry and I; 
and I had all Four Honours the first time, and
we were up at one Deal. Said my Master, An
honourable Hand, Pamela, should go with an
honourable Heart; but you'd not have been up,
if a Knave had not been one. Whist, Sir,
said Mr. Perry, you know, was a Court Game
originally; and the Knave, I suppose, signified
always the prime Minister. 
'Tis well, said my Master, if now there is
but One Knave in a Court, out of Four Persons,
take the Court through. 
The King and Queen, Sir, said Mr. Perry,
can do no Wrong, you know. So there are
Two that must be good out of Four; and the
Ace seems too plain a Card to mean much
Hurt. 
We compliment the King, said my Master,
in that manner; and 'tis well to do so, because
there is something sacred in the Character. 
But yet, if Force of Example be consider'd, it 

is going a great way; for certainly a good
Master makes a good Servant, generally speaking. 
One thing, added he, I will say, in regard
to the Ace; I have always look'd upon that
plain and honest-looking Card, in the Light
you do. And have consider'd Whist as an
English Game in its Original; which has made
me fonder of it than of any other. For, by
the Ace, I have always thought the Laws of the
Land denoted; and, as the Ace is above the
King or Queen, and wins them; I think the
Law should be thought so too; tho', may-be,
I shall be deem'd a Whig for my Opinion. 
I shall never play at Whist, said Mr.
Perry, without thinking of this, and shall love
the Game the better for the Thought; tho' I
am no Party-man. Nor I, said my Master; 
for I think the Distinctions of Whig and Tory
odious; and love the one or the other, only as
they are honest and worthy Men; and have
never (nor ever shall, I hope) given a Vote,
but according to what I thought was for the
publick Good, whether Whig or Tory proposed
it. 
I wish, Sir, reply'd Mr. Perry, all Gentlemen,
in your Station, would act so. If there
was no undue Influence, said my Master, I am
willing to think so well of all Mankind, that I
believe they generally would. 
But you see, said he, by my Pamela's
Hand, when all the Court-cards get together,
and are acted by one Mind, the Game is usually 

turned accordingly. Tho' now-and then, too,
it may be so circumstanced, that Honours will
do them no Good; and they are forced to
depend altogether upon Tricks. 
I thought this way of Talking prettier
than the Game itself. But I said, Tho' I have
won the Game, I hope, Sirs, I am no Trickster. 
No, said my Master, God forbid but
Court-cards should sometimes win with Honour! 
But you see, for all that, your Game
is as much owing to the Knave as the King;
and you my Fair-one, lost no Advantage,
when it was put into your Power. 
Else, Sir, said I, I should not have done
Justice to my Partner: You are certainly right,
Pamela, reply'd he; tho' you thereby beat
your Husband. Sir, said I, you may be my
Partner next, and I must do Justice, you know. 
Well, said he, always chuse so worthy a Friend,
as Chance has given you for a Partner, and I
shall never find Fault with you, do what you
will. 
Mr. Perry said, You are very good to me,
Sir. And Miss Boroughs, I observ'd, seem'd
pleas'd with the Compliment to her humble
Servant; by which I saw she esteem'd him, as
he seems to deserve. Dear Sirs! said I, how
much better is this, than to be lock'd in by
Lady Davers? 
The Supper was brought in sooner on my
Account, because I had had no Dinner; and
there pass'd very agreeable Compliments on
the Occasion. Lady Darnford would help me 

first, because I had so long fasted, as she said. 
Sir Simon would have placed himself next me:
And my Master said, He thought it was best,
where there was an equal Number of Ladies
and Gentlemen, that they should sit intermingled,
that the Gentlemen might be imploy'd
in helping and serving the Ladies. Lady
Darnford said, She hoped Sir Simon would not
sit above any Ladies, at his own Table especially. 
Well, said he, I shall fit over-against
her however, and that's as well. 
My dearest Sir could not keep his Eye off
me, and seem'd generously to be delighted
with all I did, and all I said; and every one
was pleased to see his kind and affectionate
Behaviour to me. 
Lady Jones brought up the Discourse about
Lady Davers again; and my Master said, I
fear, Pamela, you have been hardly used,
more than you'll say. I know my Sister's
passionate Temper too well, to believe she
could be over-civil to you, especially as it happen'd
so unluckily, that I was out. If, added
he, she had no Pique to you, my Dear, yet
what has pass'd between her and me, has so
exasperated her, that I know she would have
quarrell'd with my Horse, if she had thought I
valued it, and nothing else was in her way. 
Dear Sir, said I, don't say so of good Lady
Davers. 
Said he, Why, my Dear, I know she came
on purpose to quarrel; and had she not found
herself under a violent Uneasiness, after what 

had pass'd between us, and my Treatment of
her Lord's Letter, she would not have offer'd to
come near me. What fort of Language had
she for me, Pamela? O Sir, very good; only
her well-manner'd Brother, and such as that! 
Only, said he, 'tis taking up the Attention
of the Company disagreeably, or I could tell
you almost every Word she said. Lady Jones
wished to hear a further Account of my Lady's
Conduct, and most of the Company join'd
with her, particularly Mrs. Peters; who said,
That as they knew the Story, and Lady Davers's
Temper, tho' she was very good in the
main, they could wish to be so agreeably entertain'd,
if he and I pleas'd; because they imagined
I should have no Difficulties after this. 
Tell me then, Pamela, said he, Did she
list up her Hand at you? Did she strike you? 
But I hope not! —A little Slap of the Hand,
said I, or so! —Insolent Woman! She did
not, I hope, offer to strike your Face? Why,
said I, I was a little saucy once or twice, and
she would have given me a Cuff on the Ear, if
her Woman and Mrs. Jewkes had not interposed. 
Why did you not come out at the
Door? Because, said I, her Ladyship sat her
Chair against it, one while, and another while
lock'd it; else I offer'd several times to get
away. 
She knew I expected you here: You say,
you shew'd her my Letter to you? Yes, Sir,
said I; but I had better not; for she was then
more exasperated, and made strange Comments 

upon it. I doubt it not, said he; but, did she
not see, by the kind Epithets in it, that there
was room to think we were marry'd? O, Sir,
reply'd I, and made the Company smile, she
said, For that very Reason, she was sure I was
not marry'd. 
That's like my Sister! said he, exactly like
her; and yet she lives very happily herself. For
her poor Lord never contradicts her. Indeed
he dares not. 
You were a great many Wenches, were you
not, my Dear? For that's a great Word with her. 
—Yes, Sir, said I, Wenches and Creatures out of
Number; and worse than all that. What? Tell
me, my Dear. Sir, said I, I must not have
you angry with Lady Davers. While you are
so good to me, 'tis all nothing; only the Trouble
I have, that I cannot be suffer'd to shew how
much I honour her Lady ship, as your Sister. 
Well, said he, you need not be afraid to
tell me: I must love her, after all; tho' I shall
not be pleas'd with her on this Occasion. I
know it is her Love for me, tho' thus oddly
express'd, that makes her so uneasy; and, after
all, she comes, I am sure, to be reconciled to me
tho' it must be thro' a good hearty Quarrel first. 
For she can shew a deal of Sun-shine; but it
must be always after a Storm. And I'll love
her dearly, if she has not been, and will not
be, too hard upon my Dearest. 
Mr. Peters said, Sir, you are very good,
and very kind. I love to see this Complaisance
to your Sister, tho' she be in Faul, so long as 

you can shew it with so much Justice to the
sweetest Innocence and Merit in the World. 
By all that's good, Mr. Peters, said he, I would
present my Sister with a thousand Pounds, if
she would kindly take my dear Pamela by the
Hand, and wish her Joy, and call her Sister! 
—And yet I should be unworthy of the dear
Creature that smiles upon me there, if it was
not principally for her sake, and the Pleasure
it would give her, that I say this: For I will
never be thoroughly reconciled to my Sister,
till she does; because I most sincerely think, as to
myself, that my dear Spouse, there she sits, does
me more Honour in her new Relation, than
she receives from me. 
Sir, said I, I am overwhelm'd with your
Goodness! —And my Eyes were fill'd with
Tears of Joy and Gratitude. And all the Company,
with one Voice, blessed him. And
Lady Jones was pleased to say, The Behaviour
of you Two Happy-ones to each other, is the
most edifying I ever knew. I am always improved
when I see you. How happy would
every good Lady be with such a Gentleman, and
every good Gentleman with such a Lady! — 
In short, you seem made for one another. 
O Madam, said I, you are so kind, so
good to me, that I know not how to thank you
enough. Said she, You deserve more than I
can express; for, to all who know your Story,
you are a matchless Person. You are an Ornament
to our Sex; and your Virtue, tho' your
dear Spouse is so excellent and generous, as he 

is, has met with no more than its due Reward. 
And God long bless you together! 
You are, said my dearest Sir, very good to
me, Madam, I am sure. I have taken Liberties
in my former Life, that deferved not so much
Excellence. I have offended extremely, by
Trials glorious to my Pamela, but disgraceful
to me, against a Virtue that I now consider as
almost sacred; and I shall not think I deserve
her, till I can bring my Manners, my Sentiments,
and my Actions, to a Conformity with
her own. In short, my Pamela, continued
he, I want you to be nothing but what you are,
and have been. You cannot be better; and if
you could, it would be but filling me with
Despair to attain the awful Heights of Virtue,
at which you are arriv'd. Perhaps, added the
dear Gentleman, the Scene I have beheld within
these Twelve Hours, has made me more
serious than otherwise I should have been; but
I'll assure you, before all this good Company,
I speak the Sentiments of my Heart, and those
not of this Day only. 
What a happy Daughter is yours, O my
dear Father and Mother! I owe it all to God's
Grace, and to yours and my good Lady's Instructions. 
And to these let me always look
back with grateful Acknowlegements, that I
may not impute to myself, and be proud, my
inexpressible Happiness. 
The Company were so kindly pleas'd with
our Concern, and my dear Master's Goodness,
that he, observing their Indulgence, and being 

himself curious to know the further Particulars
of what had passed between my Lady and me,
repeated his Question, What she had called me,
besides Wench and Creature? And I said, My
Lady, supposing I was wicked, lamented over
me, very kindly, my Depravity and Fall; and
said, What a thousand Pities it was, so much
Virtue, as she was pleased to say, was so destroyed,
and that I had yielded, after so noble a
Stand, as she said! 
Excuse me, Gentlemen and Ladies, said I; 
you know my Story, it seems; and I am commanded
by one, who has a Title to all my Obedience,
to proceed. 
They gave all of them Bows of Approbation,
that they might not interrupt me; and I continued
my Story. 
I told her Ladyship, proceeded I, that I was
still innocent, and would be so, and it was injurious
to suppose me otherwise. Why, tell me,
Wench, said she—But I think I must not tell
you what she said. Yes, do, said my Master, to
clear my Sister; we shall think it very bad else. 
I held my Hand before my Face, and said,
Why, she said, Tell me, Wench, hast thou not
been abed with thy Master? That she said. — 
And when I told her, She ask'd strange Questions,
and in strange Words, she ridicul'd my Delicacy,
as she call'd it, and said my Niceness would not
last long. She said, I must know I was not
really marry'd, that my Ring was only a Sham,
and all was my Cunning to cloak my Yielding,
and get better Terms: She said, She knew the 

World as much at Thirty-two, as I did at Sixteen; 
and bid me remember that. 
I took the Liberty to say, (but I got a good
way off) That I scorn'd her Ladyship's Words,
and was as much marry'd as her Ladyship. And
then, good Sirs! I had certainly been cuffed, if
her Woman had not interposed, and told her,
I was not worth her Anger; and that I was as
much to be pitied for my Credulity, as despised
for my Vanity. 
My poor Pamela! said my Master; this was
too, too hard upon you! O Sir, said I, how
much easier it was to me, than if it had been so! 
—That would have broken my Heart quite; 
For then I should have deserv'd it all, and worse; 
and these Reproaches, added to my own Guilt,
would have made me truly wretched! 
Lady Darnford, at whose Right-hand I sat,
kissed me with a kind of Rapture; and called
me, a sweet Exemplar for all my Sex. Mr.
Peters said very handsome Things: So did Mr.
Perry; and Sir Simon, with Tears in his Eyes,
said to my Master, Why, Neighbour, Neighbour,
this is excellent, by my Troth. I believe
there is something in Virtue, that we had not
well consider'd. On my Soul, there has been
but one Angel come down for these Thousand
Years, and you have got her. 
Well, my Dearest, said my Master, pray
proceed with your Story till we have done Supper,
since the Ladies seem pleas'd with it. Why,
Sir, said I, her Ladyship went on in the same
manner; but said, one time, (and held me by 

the Hand) she would give me an Hundred Guineas
for One Provoking Word, or if I would
but say, I believ'd myself married, that she might
fell me at her Foot: But, Sir, you must not be
angry with her Ladyship. She call'd me Painted
Dirt, Baby-face, Waiting-maid, Beggar's
Brat, and Beggar-born. But I said, as long as
I knew my Innocence, I was easy in every thing,
but to have my poor Parents abused. I said,
They were never Beggars, nor beholden to any
body, nor to any thing, but God's Grace, and
their own Labour: That they once lived in Credit; 
that Misfortunes might befal any body; and
that I could not bear they should be treated so
undeservedly. 
Then her Ladyship said, Ay, she supposed
my Master's Folly would make us set up for a
Family; and that the Herald's Office would
shortly be search'd to make it out. 
Exactly my Sister again! said he. So you
could not please her any way? 
No, indeed, Sir. When she commanded
me to fill her a Glass of Wine, and would not
let her Woman do it, she ask'd, If I was above
it? I then said, If, to attend your Ladyship at
Table, or even kneel at your Feet, was requir'd
of me, I would most gladly do it, were I only
the Person you think me: But, if it be to triumph
over one who has receiv'd Honours, that
she thinks require from her another Part, that
she may not be utterly unworthy of them, I
must say, I cannot do it. This quite astonish'd
her Ladyship: And a little before, her Kinsman 

brought me the Bottle and Glass, and requir'd
me to fill it for my Lady, at her Command, calling
himself my Deputy. And I said, 'Tis in a good
Hand; help my Lady yourself. So, Sir, added I,
you see I could be a little saucy, upon Occasion. 
You please me well, my Pamela, said he. 
This was quite right. But proceed. 
Her Ladyship said, She was astonished; adding,
She suppos'd, I would have her look upon,
me as her Brother's Wife: And ask'd me, What,
in the Name of Impudence, possessed me, to dare
to look upon myself as her Sister? And I said,
That was a Question better became her most worthy
Brother to answer than me. And then I
thought I should have had her Ladyship upon
me: But her Woman interposed. 
I afterwards told Mrs. Jewkes, at the
Window, That since I was hinder'd from going
to you, I believ'd it was best to let Robert go
with the Chariot, and say, Lady Davers was
come, and I could not leave her Ladyship. But
this did not please; and I thought it would too; 
for she said, No, no, he'll think I make the
Creature my Companion, and know not how
to part with her. 
Exactly, said he, my Sister again! 
And she said, I knew nothing what belong'd to People of Condition, how should I— 
What shall I say, Madam said I. Nothing at
all, answer'd she; let him expect his dearest
Love, alluding to your kind Epither in your
Letter, and be disappointed; it is but adding a
few more Hours to this heavy Absence, and 

every one will become a Day in his amorous
Account. 
So, to be short, I saw nothing was to be done; 
and I fear'd, Sir, you would wonder at my Stay,
and be angry; and I wach'd my Opportunity,
till my Lady, who was walking about the
Room, was at the further End; and the Parlour
being a Ground-floor in a manner, I jump'd
out of the Window, and ran for it. 
Her Ladyship call'd after me; so did her
Woman; and I heard her say, I flew like a
Bird; and she call'd to Two of her Servants, in
Sight, to stop me; but I said, Touch me at your
Peril, Fellows: And Mr. Colbrand, having been
planted at hand by Mrs. Jewkes, (who was very
good in the whole Affair, and incurr'd her Ladyship's
Displeasure, once or twice, by taking my
Part, seeing how I was us'd) put on a fierce
Look, cock'd his Hat with one Hand, and put
t'other on his Sword, and said, He would chine
the Man who offer'd to touch his Lady. And
so he ran along-side of me, and could hardly
keep Pace with me:—And here, my dear
Sir, concluded I, I am, at yours and the good
Company's Service. 
They seem'd highly pleas'd with my Relation; 
and my Master said, He was glad Mrs.
Jewkes behav'd so well; as also Mr. Colbrand. 
Yes, Sir, said I, when Mrs. Jewkes interposed
once, her Ladyship said, It was hard, she, who
was born in that House, could not have some
Privilege in it, without being talk'd to by the 

saucy Servants. And she called her, another time,
Fat-face; and woman'd her most violently. 
Well, said my Master, I am glad, my Dear,
you have had such an Escape. My Sister was
always passionate, as Mrs. Peters knows: And
my poor Mother had enough to do with us both. 
For we neither of us wanted Spirit; and when I
was a Boy, I never came home from School or
College for a few Days, but tho' we longed to
see one another before, yet ere the first Day was
over, we had a Quarrel: For she, being Seven
Years older than me, was always for domineering
over me, and I could not bear it. And I used,
on her frequently quarrelling with the Maids,
and being always at a Word and a Blow, to call
her Captain Bab; for her Name is Barbara. 
And when my Lord Davers courted her, my
poor Mother has made up Quarrels between
them three times in a Day; and I used to tell her,
she would certainly beat her Husband, marry
whom she would, if he did not beat her first,
and break her Spirit. 
Yet has she, continued he, very good Qualities. 
She was a dutiful Daughter, is a good
Wife; she is bountiful to her Servants, firm in
her Friendships, charitable to the Poor, and, I
believe, never any Sister better loved a Brother,
than she me: And yet, she always loved to vex
and teize me; and as I would bear a Resentment
longer than she, she would be one Moment the
most provoking Creature in the World, and the
next would do any thing to be forgiven: And
I have made her, when she was the Aggressor, 

follow me all over the House and Garden to be
upon good Terms with me. 
But this Case piques her more, because she
had found out a Match for me, in the Family of
a Person of Quality, and had set her Heart upon
bringing it to Effect: and had even proceeded
far in it, without my Knowlege, and brought
me into the Lady's Company, unknowing of
her Design: But I was then averse to Matrimony,
upon any Terms; and was angry at her proceeding
in it so far without my Privity or Incouragement:
And she cannot, for this Reason, bear
the Thoughts of my being now marry'd, and to
her Mother's Waiting-maid too, as she reminds
my dear Pamela, when I had declin'd her Proposal
with the Daughter of a noble Earl. 
This is the whole Case, said he; and allowing
for the Pride and Violence of her Spirit, and
that she knows not, as I do, the transcendent
Excellencies of my dear Spouse, and that all her
View, in her own Conception, is mine and my
Family's Honour, she is a little to be allow'd for:
Tho' never fear, my Pamela, but that I, who
never had a Struggle with her, wherein I did not
get the better, will do you Justice, and myself
too. 
This Account of Lady Davers pleas'd every
body; and was far from being to her Ladyship's
Disad vantage in the main: And I would do any
thing in the World to have the Honour to be in
her Ladyship's good Graces. Yet I fear it will
not be easily, if at all, effected. But I will proceed. 

After Supper, nothing would serve Miss
Darnford, and Miss Boroughs, but we must
have a Dance; and Mr. Peters, who plays a
good Fiddle, urged it forward. My dear Master,
tho' in a Riding-dress, danc'd (and danc'd sweetly)
with Miss Boroughs. 
Sir Simon, for a Gentleman of his Years,
danc'd well, and took me out; but put on one
of his free Jokes, that I was fitter to dance with
a younger Gentleman; and he would have it,
tho' I had not danc'd since my dear Lady's Death,
to signify, except once or twice to please Mrs.
Jervis, and indeed believed all my dancing Days
over, that as my Master and I were the best
Dancers, we should dance once together before
Folks, as the odd Gentleman said; and my dear Sir
was pleased to oblige him; and after wards danc'd
with Miss Darnford, who, I think, has much
more Skill and Judgment than I; tho' they compliment
me with an easier Shape and Air. 
We left the Company with great Difficulty,
at about Eleven, my dear Master having been up
all Night before, and we being at the greatest
Distance from Home; tho' they seemed inclineable
not to break up so soon, as they were Neighbours; 
and the Ladies said, They longed to hear
what would be the End of Lady Davers's Interview
with her Brother. 
My Master said, He fear'd we must not now
think of going next Day to Bedfordshire, as we
had intended; and perhaps might see them again. 
And so we took Leave, and set out for Home; 
where we arrived not till Twelve o'Clock; and 

found Lady Davers had gone to Bed about Eleven,
wanting sadly that we should come home
first; but so did not I. 
Mrs. Jewkes told us, That my Lady was
sadly fretted, that I had got away so; and seem'd
a little apprehensive of what I would say of the
Usage I had receiv'd from her. She ask'd Mrs
Jewkes, If she thought I was really marry'd? 
And Mrs. Jewkes telling her, Yes; she fell into
a Passion; and said, Begone, bold Woman; I
cannot bear thee: See not my Face till I send for
thee. Thou hast been very impudent to me
once or twice To-day already, and art now worse
than ever. She said, She would not have told
her Ladyship, if she had not asked her; and was
sorry she had offended. 
She sent for her at Supper-time: Said she, I
have another Question to ask thee, Woman, and
tell me, Yes, if thou darest. Was ever any thing
so odd! —Why then, said Mrs. Jewkes, I will
say, No, before your Ladyship speaks. —My
Master laugh'd: Poor Woman! said he. —She
called her insolent, and Assurance; and said,
Begone, bold Woman, as thou art;—but
come hither: Dost thou know if that young
Harlot is to lie with my Brother To-night? 
She said, she knew not what to answer, because
she had threaten'd her, if she said, Yes. But
at last, my Lady said, I will know the Bottom
of this Iniquity. I suppose they won't have so
much Impudence to lie together, while I am in
the House; but I dare say they have been Bedfellows. 

Said she, I will lie To-night in the Room I
was born in; so get that Bed ready. That Room
being our Bed-chamber, Mrs. Jewkes, after
some Hesitation, reply'd, Madam, my Master
lies there, and has the Key. I believe, Woman,
said she, thou tellest me a Story. Indeed, Madam,
return'd she, he does; and has some Papers
there he will let nobody see. For Mrs. Jewkes
said, She fear'd she would beat her, if she went
up, and found, by my Cloaths, and some of my
Master's, how it was. 
So she said, I will then lie in the best Room,
as it is called; and Jackey shall lie in the little
green Room adjoining to it. Has thy Master
got the Key of those? —No, Madam, said
Mrs. Jewkes: I will order them to be made
ready for your Ladyship. 
And where dost thou lay thy pursy Sides?
said she. Up Two Pair of Stairs, Madam, next
the Garden. And where lies the young Harlotry?
continued she. Sometimes with me, Madam,
said she. And sometimes with thy virtuous
Master, I suppose, said my Lady. —Ha,
Woman! what sayest thou? I must not speak,
reply'd Mrs. Jewkes. Well, thou may'st go,
said she; but thou hast the Air of a Secret-keeper
of that sort: I dare say thou'lt set the good Work
forward most cordially. Poor Mrs. Jewkes!
said my Master, and laugh'd most heartily. 
This Talk we had whilst we were undressing. 
So she and her Woman lay together in the Room
my Master lay in before I was happy. 

I said, Dear Sir, pray, in the Morning let
me lock myself up in the Closet, as soon as you
rise; and not be call'd down for ever so much; 
for I am afraid to see her Ladyship: And I will
imploy myself about my Journal, while these
Things are in my Head. Don't be afraid, my
Dear, said he: Am not I with you? 
Mrs. Jewkes pitied me for what I had undergone
in the Day; and I said, We won't make
the worst of it to my dear Master, because we
will not exasperate, where we would reconcile:
But, added I, I am much obliged to you, Mrs.
Jewkes, and I thank you. Said my Master, I
hope she did not beat your Lady, Mrs. Jewkes? 
Not much, Sir, said she; but I believe I saved
my Lady once: Yet, added she, I was most vexed
at the young Lord. Ay, Mrs. Jewkes! said
my Master, let me know his Behaviour. I can
chastize him, tho' I cannot my Sister, who is a
Woman; let me therefore know the Part he
acted? 
Nothing, my dear Sir, said I, but Impertinence,
if I may so say, and Foolishness, that
was very provoking: But I spared him not; and
so there is no Room, Sir, for your Anger. 
No, Sir, said Mrs. Jewkes, nothing else indeed. 
How was her Woman? said my Master. 
Pretty impertinent, reply'd Mrs. Jewkes, as
Ladies Women will be. But, said I, you know
she saved me once or twice. Very true, Madam,
returned Mrs. Jewkes. And she said to me at
Table, continued she, that you were a sweet 

Creature; she never saw your Equal; but that
you had a Spirit, and she was sorry you answer'd
her Lady so, who never bore so much Contradiction
before. I told her, added Mrs. Jewkes,
That if I was in your Ladyship's Place, I should
have taken much more upon me, and that you
were all Sweetness. And she said, I was got
over, she saw. 
