



Mr. Lovelace; In Continuation. 

Never was there such a pair of scribbling
lovers as we; —Yet perhaps whom it so much
concerns to keep from each other what each writes. 
She won't have any thing else to do. I would, if
she'd let me. I am not reform'd enough for a husband. 

—Patience is a virtue, Lord M. says. Slow and
sure, is another of his sentences. If I had not a great
deal of that virtue, I should not have waited the Harlowes
own time of ripening into execution my plots
upon Themselves, and upon their Goddess-daughter. 
My beloved has been writing to her saucy friend,
I believe, all that has befallen her, and what has pass'd
between us hitherto. She will possibly have fine subjects
for her pen, if she be as minute as I am to thee. 
I would not be so barbarous, as to permit old Antony
to set Goody Howe against her, did I not dread
the consequences of the correspondence between the
two young ladies. So lively the one, so vigilant, so
prudent both, who would not wish to outwit such
girls, and to be able to twirl them round his finger? 
My charmer has written to her sister for her
cloaths, for some gold, and for some of her books. 
What books can tell her more than she knows? But
I can. So she had better study me. 
She may write. She must be obliged to me at last,
with all her pride. Miss Howe will be ready enough,
indeed, to supply her; but I question, whether she
can do it without her mother, who is as covetous
as the grave. And my agent's agent Antony has already
given the mother a hint, which will make her
jealous of pecuniaries. 
Besides, if Miss Howe has money by her, I can
put her mother upon borrowing it of her. —Nor blame
me, Jack, for contrivances that have their foundation
in generosity. Thou knowest my spirit; and
that I should be proud to lay an obligation upon my
charmer, to the amount of half my estate. Lord M.
has more for me than I can ever wish for. My predominant
passion is Girl, not Gold; nor value I This,
but as it helps me to That, and gives me independence. 
I was forced to put it into the sweet novice's head,
as well for my sake as for hers (lest we should be traceable 

by her direction), whither to direct the sending
of her cloaths, if they incline to do her that small
piece of justice. 
If they do, I shall begin to dread a reconciliation; 
and must be forced to muse for a contrivance or two,
to prevent it; and to avoid mischief. For that (as I
have told honest Joseph Leman) is a great point with
me. 
Thou wilt think me a sad fellow, I doubt. —But
are not all rakes sad fellows? —And thou, to thy little
power, as bad as any? If thou dost all that's in thy
head and in thy heart to do, thou art worse than me; 
for I do not, I assure thee. 
I proposed, and she consented, that her cloaths, or
whatever else her relations should think fit to send her,
should be directed to thee, at thy cousin Osgood's. — 
Let a special messenger, at my charge, bring me any
letter, or portable parcel, that shall come. —If not
portable, give me notice of it. But thou'lt have no
trouble of this sort from her relations, I dare be sworn. 
And, in this assurance, I will leave them, I think, to
act upon their own heads. A man would have no
more to answer for than needs must. 
But one thing, while I think of it [It is of great
importance to be attended to]—You must hereafter
write to me in character, as I shall do to you. How
know we into whose hands our letters may fall? It
would be a confounded thing to be blown up by a
train of one's own laying. 
Another thing remember; I have chang'd my
name: Chang'd it without an act of parliament. 
“Robert Huntingford” it is now. Continue Esquire. 
It is a respectable addition, altho' every sorry fellow
assumes it, almost to the banishment of the usual travelling
one of Captain. “To be left till called for
at the posthouse at Hertford.” 
Upon naming thee, she asked thy character. I gave
thee a better than thou deservest, in order to do 

credit to myself. Yet I told her, that thou wert an
aukward puppy; and This to do credit to Thee, that
she may not, if ever she is to see thee, expect a cleverer
fellow than she'll find; yet thy apparent aukwardness
befriends thee not a little: For wert thou a
sightly varlet, people would discover nothing extraordinary
in thee, when they convers'd with thee: 
Whereas seeing a bear, they are surpriz'd to find in
thee any thing that is like a man. Felicitate thyself
then upon thy defects; which are so evidently thy
principal perfections, and which occasion thee a distinction
thou wouldst otherwise never have. 
The lodgings we are in at present are not convenient. 
I was so delicate as to find fault with them, as
communicating with each other, because I knew the
lady would; and told her, That were I sure she was safe
from pursuit, I would leave her in them, since such
was her earnest desire. The devil's in't, if I don't
banish even the shadow of mistrust from her heart. She
must be an infidel against all reason and appearances,
if I don't. 
Here are two young likely girls, daughters of the
widow Sorlings; that's the name of our landlady. 
I have only, at present, admir'd them in their dairy-works. 
How greedily do the whole Sex swallow
praise! —So pleas'd was I with the youngest, for the
elegance of her works, that I kiss'd her, and she made
me a courtesy for my condescension; and blush'd,
and seem'd sensible all over: Encouragingly, yet innocently,
she adjusted her handkerchief, and looked
towards the door, as much as to say, She would not
tell, were I to kiss her again. 
Her elder sister popt upon her. The conscious girl
blush'd again, and look'd so confounded, that I made
an excuse for her, which gratify'd both. Mrs. Betty,
said I, I have been so much pleas'd with the neatness
of your dairy-works, that I could not help saluting 

your sister: You have your share of merit in them, I
am sure—Give me leave— 
Good souls! —I like them both. —She courtesied
too! —How I love a grateful temper! O that my
Miss Harlowe were but half so acknowleging! 
I think I must get one of them to attend my
charmer, when she removes. —The mother seems to
be a notable woman. She had not best, however, be
too notable: For, were she by suspicion to give a face
of difficulty to the matter, it would prepare me for a
tryal with one or both the daughters. 
Allow me a little rhodomontade, Jack! —But really
and truly, my heart is fix'd. I can think of no creature
breathing of the sex, but my Gloriana. 