



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

I thank you and Mr. Hickman for his Letter,
sent me with such kind expedition; and proceed
to obey my dear menacing tyranness. 
She then gives the particulars of what passed between
herself and Mr. Lovelace on Tuesday morning, in
relation to his four friends, and to Miss Partington, 

pretty much to the same effect as in Mr. Lovelace's
Letter, No i. And then proceeds: 
He is constantly accusing me of over-scrupulousness. 
He says, ‘I am always out of humour with him: 
That I could not have behaved more reservedly to
Mr. Solmes: And that it is contrary to all his hopes
and notions, that he should not, in so long a time,
find himself able to inspire the person whom he
hoped so soon to have the honour to call his, with
the least distinguishing tenderness for him beforehand.’ 
Silly and partial encroacher! not to know to what
to attribute the reserve I am forced to treat him with! 
But his Pride has eaten up his Prudence. It is indeed
a dirty low pride, that has swallowed up the true
pride, which should have set him above the vanity
that has over-run him. 
&dotup;Yet he pretends, that he has no pride but in
obliging me: And is always talking of his reverence
and humility, and such sort of stuff: But of this
I am sure, that he has, as I observed the first time
I saw him (a) , too much regard to his own person,
greatly to value that of his Wife, marry he whom
he will: And I must be blind, if I did not see, that
he is exceedingly vain of his external advantages,
and of that Address, which, if it has any merit in
it to an outward eye, is perhaps owing more to his
confidence, than to any-thing else.&dotup; 
Have you not beheld the man, when I was your
happy guest, as he walked to his chariot, looking
about him, as if to observe what eyes his specious person
and air had attracted? 
But indeed we have seen homely coxcombs as proud
as if they had persons to be proud of; at the same time
that it was apparent, that the pains they took about
themselves but the more exposed their defects. 

The man who is fond of being thought more or better
than he is, as I have often observed, but provokes
a scrutiny into his pretensions; and that generally produces
contempt. For pride, as I believe I have heretofore
said, is an infallible sign of weakness; of something
wrong in the head or heart, or in both. He that exalts
himself, insults his neighbour; who is provoked to
question in him even that merit, which, were he modest,
would perhaps be allowed to be his due. 
You will say, that I am very grave: And so I am. 
Mr. Lovelace is extremely sunk in my opinion since
Monday night: Nor see I before me any-thing that
can afford me a pleasing hope. For what, with a
mind so unequal as his, can be my best hope? 
I think I mentioned to you, in my former, that my
cloaths were brought me. You fluttered me so, that
I am not sure I did. But I know I designed to mention
that they were. They were brought me on
Thursday; but neither my few guineas with them,
nor any of my books, except a Drexelius on Eternity,
the good old Practice of Piety, and a Francis Spira. 
My Brother's wit, I suppose. He thinks he does
well to point out death and despair to me. I wish
for the one, and every now-and-then am on the brink
of the other. 
You will the less wonder at my being so very solemn,
when, added to the above, and to my uncertain
situation, I tell you, that they have sent me with
these books a Letter from my Cousin Morden. It
has set my heart against Mr. Lovelace. Against Myself
too. I send it inclosed. If you please, my dear,
you may read it here. 

Col. Morden, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.

Florence, April 13. 
I am extremely concerned to hear of a difference
betwixt the rest of a family so near and dear to
me, and You still dearer to me than any of the rest. 

My Cousin James has acquainted me with the offers
you have had, and with your refusals. I wonder not
at either. Such charming promises at so early an age
as when I left England; and those promises, as I
have often heard, so greatly exceeded, as well in your
person as mind; how much must you be admired! 
How few must there be worthy of you! 
Your Parents, the most indulgent in the world, to
a Child the most deserving, have given way it seems
to your refusals of several gentlemen. They have
contented themselves at last to name One with earnestness
to you, because of the address of another
whom they cannot approve. 
They had not reason it seems from your behaviour
to think you greatly averse: So they proceeded: Perhaps
too hastily for a delicacy like yours. But when
all was fixed on their parts, and most extraordinary
terms concluded in your favour; terms, which abundantly
shew the gentleman's just value for you; you
flew off with a warmth and vehemence little suited to
that sweetness which gave grace to all your actions. 
I know very little of either of the gentlemen: But
of Mr. Lovelace I know more than of Mr. Solmes. I
wish I could say more to his advantage than I can. 
As to every qualification but one, your Brother owns
there is no comparison. But that one outweighs all the
rest together. It cannot be thought, that Miss Clarissa
Harlowe will dispense with Morals in a husband. 
What, my dearest Cousin, shall I first plead to you
on this occasion? Your duty, your interest, your
temporal, and your eternal welfare, do, and may all,
depend upon this single point, The morality of a husband. 
A woman who hath a wicked husband may
find it difficult to be good, and out of her power to
do good; and is therefore in a worse situation than the
man can be in, who hath a bad wife. You preserve
all your religious regards, I understand. I wonder
not that you do. I should have wondered, had you 

not. But what can you promise yourself, as to perseverance
in them, with an immoral husband? 
If your parents and you differ in sentiment on this
important occasion, let me ask you, my dear Cousin,
who ought to give way? I own to you, that I should
have thought there could not any-where have been a
more suitable match for you, than with Mr. Lovelace,
had he been a moral man. I should have very little
to say against a man, of whose actions I am not to set
up myself as a judge, did he not address my Cousin. 
But, on this occasion, let me tell you, my dear Clarissa,
that Mr. Lovelace cannot possibly deserve you. 
He may reform, you'll say: But he may not. Habit
is not soon or easily shaken off. Libertines, who are
Libertines in defiance of talents, of superior lights, of
conviction, hardly ever reform but by miracle, or by
incapacity. Well do I know mine own Sex. Well
am I able to judge of the probability of the reformation
of a licentious young man, who has not been
fastened upon by sickness, by affliction, by calamity: 
Who has a prosperous run of fortune before him: His
spirits high: His will uncontroulable: The company
he keeps, perhaps such as himself, confirming him in
all his courses, assisting him in all his enterprizes. 
As to the other gentleman, suppose, my dear Cousin,
you do not like him at present, it is far from being
unlikely, that you will hereafter: Perhaps the
more, for not liking him now. He can hardly sink
lower in your opinion: He may rise. Very seldom
is it, that high expectations are so much as tolerably
answered. How indeed can they, when a fine and
extensive imagination carries its expectation infinitely
beyond reality, in the highest of our sublunary enjoyments? 
A woman adorned with such an imagination
sees no defect in a favoured object (the less,
if she be not conscious of any wilful fault in herself)
till it is too late to rectify the mistakes occasioned by
her generous credulity. 

But suppose a person of your talents were to marry
a man of inferior talents; who, in this case, can be so
happy in herself, as Miss Clarissa Harlowe? What
delight do you take in doing good! How happily do
you devote the several portions of the day to your
own improvement, and to the advantage of all that
move within your sphere! —And then such is your
taste, such are your acquirements in the politer studies,
and in the politer amusements; such your
excellence in all the different parts of oeconomy
fit for a young Lady's inspection and practice; that
your friends would wish you to be taken off as little
as possible by regards that may be called merely personal. 
But as to what may be the consequence respecting
yourself, respecting a young Lady of your talents,
from the preference you are suspected to give to a Libertine,
I would have you, my dear Cousin, consider
what That may be. A mind so pure, to mingle with
a mind impure! And will not such a man as This engross
all your solicitudes? Will he not perpetually fill
you with anxieties for him and for yourself? —The
Divine and Civil powers defied, and their sanctions
broken thro' by him, on every not merely accidental,
but meditated occasion. To be agreeable to him, and
to hope to preserve an interest in his affections, you
must probably be obliged to abandon all your own
laudable pursuits. You must enter into his pleasures
and distastes. You must give up your own virtuous
companions for his profligate ones—Perhaps be forsaken
by yours, because of the scandal he daily gives. 
Can you hope, Cousin, with such a man as This, to
be long so good as you now are? If not, consider
which of your present laudable delights you would
chuse to give up? Which of his culpable ones to follow
him in? How could you brook to go backward,
instead of forward, in those duties which you now so
exemplarily perform? And how do you know, if you 

once give way, where you shall be suffered, where
you shall be able, to stop? 
Your Brother acknowleges, that Mr. Solmes is not
near so agreeable in person as Mr. Lovelace. But
what is person, with such a Lady as I have the honour
to be now writing to? He owns likewise, that he has
not the address of Mr. Lovelace: But what a mere
personal advantage is a plausible address, without morals? 
A woman had better take a husband whose
manners she were to fashion, than to find them ready-fashioned
to her hand, at the price of his morality; 
a price that is often paid for travelling accomplishments. 
O my dear Cousin, were you but with us
here at Florence, or at Rome, or at Paris (where also
I resided for many months) to see the gentlemen
whose supposed rough English manners at setting out
are to be polished, and what their improvements are
in their return thro' the same places, you would infinitely
prefer the man in his first stage to the same
man in his last. You find the difference on their return
—A fondness for foreign fashion, an attachment
to foreign vices, a supercilious contempt of his own
country and countrymen (himself more despicable than
the most despicable of those he despises); these, with
an unblushing effrontery, are too generally the attainments
that concur to finish the travelled gentleman! 
Mr. Lovelace, I know, deserves to have an exception
made in his favour; for he is really a man of
parts and learning: He was esteemed so both here and
at Rome; and a fine person, and a generous turn of
mind, gave him great advantages. But you need not
be told, that a Libertine man of sense does infinitely
more mischief, than a Libertine of weak parts is able
to do. And this I will tell you farther, that it was
Mr. Lovelace's own fault that he was not still more
respected than he was, among the Literati here. There
were, in short, some liberties in which he indulged
himself, that endangered his person and his liberty; 

and made the best and most worthy of those who honoured
him with their notice, give him up; and his
stay both at Florence and at Rome shorter than he
designed. 
This is all I chuse to say of Mr. Lovelace. I had
much rather have had reason to give him a quite contrary
character. But as to Rakes or Libertines in general,
I, who know them well, must be allowed, because
of the mischiefs they have always in their hearts,
and too often in their power, to do your Sex, to add
still a few more words upon this topic. 
A Libertine, my dear Cousin, a plotting, an intriguing
Libertine, must be generally remorseless— 
Unjust he must always be. The noble rule, of doing
to others what he would have done to himself, is the
first rule he breaks; and every day he breaks it; the
oftener, the greater his triumph. He has great contempt
for your Sex. He believes no woman chaste,
because he is a profligate. Every woman who favours
him, confirms him in his wicked incredulity. He is always
plotting to extend the mischiefs he delights in. 
If a woman loves such a man, how can she bear the
thought of dividing her interest in his affections, with
half the town, and that perhaps the dregs of it? Then
so sensual! —How will a young Lady of your delicacy
bear with so sensual a man? A man who makes a jest
of his vows; and who perhaps will break your spirit
by the most unmanly insults. To be a Libertine, at
setting out, all compunction, all humanity, must be
overcome. To continue to be a Libertine, is to continue
to be every-thing vile and inhuman. Prayers,
tears, and the most abject submission, are but fuel to
his pride: Wagering perhaps with lewd companions,
and, not improbably, with lewder women, upon instances
which he boasts of to them of your patient
sufferings, and broken spirit, and bringing them home
to witness to both. 
I write what I know has been. 

I mention not fortunes squandered, estates mortgaged
or sold, and posterity robbed—Nor yet a multitude
of other evils, too gross, too shocking, to be
mentioned to a person of your delicacy. 
All these, my dear Cousin, to be shunned, all the
evils I have named to be avoided; the power of doing
all the good you have been accustomed to do, preserved,
nay, encreased, by the separate provision that
will be made for you: Your charming diversions, and
exemplary employments, all maintained; and every
good habit perpetuated: And all by one sacrifice, the
fading pleasure of the Eye! Who would not (since
every-thing is not to be met with in one man; who
would not) to preserve so many essentials, give up so
light, so unpermanent a pleasure? 
Weigh all these things, which I might insist upon
to more advantage, did I think it needful to one of
your prudence—Weigh them well, my beloved Cousin; 
and if it be not the will of your Parents that you
should continue single, resolve to oblige them; and
let it not be said, that the powers of fancy shall (as
in many others of your Sex) be too hard for your
duty and your prudence. The less agreeable the man,
the more obliging the compliance. Remember, that
he is a sober man—A man who has reputation to
lose, and whose reputation therefore is a security for
his good behaviour to you. 
You have an opportunity offered you to give the
highest instance that can be given, of filial duty. 
Embrace it. It is worthy of you. It is expected from
you; however, for your inclination-sake, we may be
sorry that you are called upon to give it. Let it be
said, that you have been able to lay an obligation upon
your Parents (a proud word, my Cousin!); which you
could not do, were it not laid against your inclination! 
—Upon Parents, who have laid a thousand upon you: 
Who are set upon this point: Who will not give it
up: Who have given up many points to you, even of 

this very nature: And in their turn, for the sake of
their own Authority, as well as Judgment, expect to
be obliged. 
I hope I shall soon, in person, congratulate you
upon This your meritorious compliance. To settle
and give up my Trusteeship, is one of the principal
motives of my leaving these parts. I shall be glad to
settle it to every one's satisfaction; to Yours particularly. 
If on my arrival I find a happy union, as formerly,
reign in a family so dear to me, it will be an unspeakable
pleasure to me; and I shall perhaps so dispose my
affairs, as to be near you for ever. 
I have written a very long Letter, and will add no
more, than that I am, with the greatest respect, my
dearest Cousin, 
Your most affectionate and faithful Servant,
Wm. Morden. 
I will suppose, my dear Miss Howe, that you have
read my Cousin's Letter. It is now in vain to wish it
had come sooner. But if it had, I might perhaps
have been so rash as to give Mr. Lovelace the fatal
meeting, as I little thought of going away with him. 
But I should hardly have given him the expectation
of so doing, previous to the meeting, which made him
come prepared; and the revocation of which he so
artfully made ineffectual. 
Persecuted as I was, and little expecting so much
condescension, as my Aunt, to my great mortification,
has told me (and you confirm) I should have
met with, it is, however, hard to say, what I should
or should not have done as to meeting him, had it
come in time: But this effect I verily believe it would
have had—To have made me insist with all my
might, on going over, out of all their ways, to the
kind writer of the instructive Letter, and on making a 

Father (a Protector, as well as a Friend) of a Kinsman,
who is one of my Trustees. This, circumstanced
as I was, would have been a natural, at least
an unexceptionable protection. —But I was to be unhappy! 
And how it cuts me to the heart to think,
that I can already subscribe to my Cousin's character
of a Libertine, so well drawn in the Letter which I
suppose you now to have read! 
That a man of a character, which ever was my abhorrence,
should fall to my lot! —But depending on
my own strength; having no reason to apprehend
danger from headstrong and disgraceful impulses; I
too little perhaps cast up my eyes to the Supreme Director: 
In whom, mistrusting myself, I ought to have
placed my whole confidence—And the more, when
I saw myself so perseveringly addressed by a man of
this character. 
Inexperience and presumption, with the help of a
Brother and Sister who have low ends to answer in my
disgrace, have been my Ruin! —A hard word, my
dear! But I repeat it upon deliberation: Since, let
the best happen which now can happen, my Reputation
is destroyed; a Rake is my portion: And what
That portion is, my Cousin Morden's Letter has acquainted
you. 
Pray keep it by you, till called for. I saw it not
myself (having not the heart to inspect my trunks) till
this morning. I would not for the world This man
should see it; because it might occasion mischief between
the most violent spirit, and the most settled
brave one in the world, as my Cousin's is said to be. 
This Letter was inclosed (opened) in a blank cover. 
Scorn and detest me as they will, I wonder that one
line was not sent with it—were it but to have more
particularly pointed the design of it, in the same generous
spirit, that sent me the Spira. 
The sealing of the cover was with black wax. I
hope there is no new occasion in the family to give 

reason for black wax. But if there were, it would, to
be sure, have been mentioned, and laid at my door— 
perhaps too justly! 
I had begun a Letter to my Cousin; but laid it by,
because of the uncertainty of my situation, and expecting
every day for several days past to be at a greater
certainty. You bid me write to him some time ago,
you know. Then it was I began it: For I have great
pleasure in obeying you in all I may. So I ought to
have; for you are the only friend left me. And moreover,
you generally honour me with your own observance
of the advice I take the liberty to offer you: 
For I pretend to say, I give better advice than I have
taken. And so I had need. For, I know not how it
comes about, but I am, in my own opinion, a poor
lost creature: And yet cannot charge myself with one
criminal or faulty inclination. Do you know, my
dear, how This can be? 
Yet I can tell you how, I believe—One devious
step at setting out! —That must be it: —Which pursued,
has led me so far out of my path, that I am in
a wilderness of doubt and error; and never, never,
shall find my way out of it: For, altho' but one pace
awry at first, it has led me hundreds and hundreds of
miles out of my path: And the poor Estray has not
one kind friend, nor has met with one directing passenger,
to help her to recover it. 
But I, presumptuous creature! must rely so much
upon my own knowledge of the right path!—little apprehending
that an ignis fatuus with its false fires (and
yet I had heard enough of such) would arise to mislead
me! And now, in the midst of fens and quagmires,
it plays around me, and around me, throwing
me back again, whenever I think myself in the
right track. But there is one common point, in
which all shall meet, err widely as they may. In
That I shall be laid quietly down at last: And then
will all my calamities be at an end. 

But how I stray again; stray from my intention! 
I would only have said, that I had begun a Letter to
my Cousin Morden some time ago: But that now
I can never end it. You will believe I cannot: For
how shall I tell him, that all his compliments are misbestowed? 
That all his advice is thrown away? All
his warnings vain? And that even my highest expectation
is to be the wife of that free liver, whom he so
pathetically warns me to shun? 
Let me, however, have your prayers joined with
my own (my fate depending, as it seems, upon the
lips of such a man) ‘That, whatever shall be my
destiny, That dreadful part of my Father's malediction,
That I may be punished by the man in
whom he supposes I put my confidence, may not
take place! That This for Mr. Lovelace's own sake,
and for the sake of human nature, may not be! Or,
if it be necessary, in support of the parental authority,
that I should be punished by him, that it may
not be by his premeditated or wilful baseness; but
that I may be able to acquit his intention, if not
his action!’ Otherwise, my fault will appear to be
doubled in the eye of the event-judging world. And
yet, methinks, I would be glad, that the unkindness
of my Father and Uncles, whose hearts have already
been too much wounded by my error, may be justified
in every article, excepting in this heavy curse: 
And that my Father will be pleased to withdraw
That before it be generally known; at least that most
dreadful part of it which regards Futurity! 
I must lay down my pen. I must brood over these
reflections. Once more, before I inclose my Cousin's
Letter, I will peruse It: And then I shall have it by
heart. 