



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Six Sat. morning, July 8. 
Have I nothing new, nothing diverting, in my
whimsical way, thou askest, in one of thy three
letters before me, to entertain thee with? —And thou
tellest me, that, when I have least to narrate, to speak in
the Scotish phrase, I am most diverting. A pretty compliment,
either to thyself, or to me. To both indeed! —A
sign that thou hast as frothy a heart as I a head. But
canst thou suppose, that this admirable woman is not All,
is not Every-thing, with me? Yet I dread to think of her
too; for detection of all my contrivances, I doubt, must
come next. 
The old Peer is also full of Miss Harlowe; and so are
my cousins. He hopes I will not be such a dog [There's
a specimen of his peer-like dialect], as to think of doing
dishonourably by a woman of so much merit, beauty, and
fortune; and, he says, of so good a family. But I tell
him, that this is a string he must not touch: That it
is a very tender point: In short, is my sore place; and
that I am afraid he would handle it too roughly, were I
to put myself into the power of so ungentle an operator. 
He shakes his crazy head. He thinks all is not as it
should be between us; longs to have me present her to
him, as my wife; and often tells me what great things
he will do, additional to his former proposals; and
what presents he will make on the birth of the first child. 

But I hope the whole will be in my hands before such an
event take place. No harm in hoping, Jack! My uncle
says, Were it not for hope, the heart would break. 
* *
Eight o'clock at Mid-summer, and these lazy varletesses
(in full health) not come down yet to breakfast! —What
a confounded indecency in young ladies, to let a Rake
know that they love their beds so dearly, and, at the same
time, where to have them! But I'll punish them: They
shall breakfast with their old uncle, and yawn at one another,
as if for a wager: While I drive my Phaeton to
Col. Ambrose's, who yesterday gave me invitation both
to breakfast and dine, on account of two Yorkshire
nieces, celebrated toasts, who have been with him this
fortnight past; and who, he says, want to see me. So,
Jack, all women do not run away from me, thank Heaven! 
—I wish I could have leave of my heart, since the
dear fugitive is so ingrateful, to drive her out of it with
another Beauty. But who can supplant her? Who can be
admitted to a place in it, after Miss Clarissa Harlowe? 
At my return, if I can find a subject, I will scribble
on, to oblige thee. 
My Phaeton's ready: My cousins send me word they
are just coming down: So in spite I'll be gone.— 
Saturday afternoon. 
I did stay to dine with the Colonel, and his Lady and
Nieces: But I could not pass the afternoon with them, for
the heart of me. There was enough in the persons and
faces of the two young ladies to set me upon comparisons. 
Particular features held my attention for a few moments: 
But those served but to whet my impatience to find
the charmer of my soul; who, for person, for air, for
mind, had never any equal. My heart recoil'd and sicken'd
upon comparing minds and conversation. Pert wit, a
too studied-for desire to please; each in high good humour
with herself; an open-mouth affectation in both, to
shew white teeth, as if the principal excellence; and to
invite amorous familiarity, by the promise of a sweet
breath; at the same time reflecting tacitly upon breaths
arrogantly implied to be less pure. 

Once I could have borne them. 
They seemed to be disappointed, that I was so soon
able to leave them. Yet have I not at present so much
vanity (My Clarissa has cured me of my vanity!), as to attribute
their disappointment so much to particular liking
of me, as to their own self-admiration. They looked
upon me, as a connoisseur in beauty. They would have
been proud of engaging my attention, as such: But so
affected, so flimsy-witted, mere skin-deep beauties! 
—They had looked no further into themselves than what
their glasses had enabled them to see: And their glasses
were flattering-glasses too; for I thought them passive-faced,
and spiritless; with eyes, however, upon the hunt
for conquests, and bespeaking the attention of others, in
order to countenance their own. —I believe I could, with
a little pains, have given them life and soul, and to every
feature of their faces sparkling information–––But my
Clarissa! –––O Belford, my Clarissa has made me eyeless
and senseless to every other Beauty! –––Do thou find her
for me, as a subject worthy of my pen, or This shall be
the last from 
Thy Lovelace. 