



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Afternoon. 
I detain your messenger while I write in answer to
yours; the poor old man not being very well. 
You dishearten me a good deal about Mr. Lovelace. 
I may be too willing from my sad circumstances,
to think the best of him. If his pretences to Reformation
are but pretences, what must be his intent? 
But can the heart of man be so very vile? Can he,
dare he, mock the Almighty? But may I not, from
one very sad reflection, think better of him; That I
am thrown too much into his power, to make it necessary
for him (except he were to intend the very utmost
villainy by me) to be such a shocking hypocrite? 
He must, at least, be in earnest, at the time he gives
the better hopes. Surely he must. You yourself must
join with me in this hope, or you could not wish me
to be so dreadfully yoked. 
But after all, I had rather, much rather, be independent
of him, and of his family, altho' I have an
high opinion of them; at least till I see what my own
may be brought to. —Otherwise, I think, it were best
for me, at once, to cast myself into Lady Betty's protection. 
All would then be conducted with decency,
and perhaps many mortifications would be spared me. 
But then I must be his, at all adventures, and be
thought to defy my own family. And shall I not first
see the issue of one application? And yet I cannot make
this, till I am settled somewhere, and at a distance
from him. 
Mrs. Sorlings shewed me a Letter this morning,
which she had received from her Sister Greme last
night; in which Mrs. Greme (hoping I will forgive
her forward zeal, if her Sister thinks fit to shew her
Letter to me) ‘wishes (and that for all the noble family's 

sake, and she hopes she may say for my own)
that I will be pleased to yield to make his Honour,
as she calls him, happy.’ She grounds her officiousness,
as she calls it, upon what he was so condescending
[her word also] to say to her yesterday, in his way to
Windsor, on her presuming to ask, If she might soon
give him joy? ‘That no man ever loved a woman as
he loves me: That no woman ever so well deserved
to be beloved: That in every conversation, he admires
me still more: That he loves me with such a
purity, as he had never believed himself capable of,
or that a mortal creature could have inspired him
with, looking upon me as all soul; as an angel sent
down to save his;’ and a great deal more of this
sort: ‘But that he apprehends, my consent to make
him happy is at a greater distance than he wishes. 
And complained of the too severe restrictions I had
laid upon him before I honoured him with my confidence: 
Which restrictions must be as sacred to him,
as if they were parts of the marriage contract, &c.’ 
What, my dear, shall I say to this? How shall I take
it? Mrs. Greme is a good woman. Mrs. Sorlings is
a good woman. And this Letter agrees with the conversation
between Mr. Lovelace and me, which I
thought, and still think, so agreeable (a) . Yet what
means the man by foregoing the opportunities he has
had to declare himself? —What mean his complaints of
my restrictions to Mrs. Greme? He is not a bashful
man. —But you say, I inspire people with an awe of
me. —An awe, my dear! —As how? 
I am quite petulant, fretful, and peevish, with myself,
at times, to find, that I am bound to see the
workings of this subtle, or this giddy spirit; which
shall I call it? 
How am I punished, as I frequently think, for my 

vanity, in hoping to be an Example to young persons
of my Sex! Let me be but a Warning, and I will now
be contented. For, be my destiny what it may, I
shall never be able to hold up my head again among
my best friends and worthiest companions. 
It is one of the cruellest circumstances that attends
the faults of the Inconsiderate, that she makes all who
love her unhappy, and gives joy only to her own enemies,
and to the enemies of her family. 
What an useful lesson would this afford, were it
properly inculcated at the time that the tempted mind
was balancing upon a doubtful adventure? 
You know not, my dear, the worth of a virtuous
man; and, noble-minded as you are in most particulars,
you partake of the common weakness of human
nature, in being apt to slight what is in your own
power. 
You would not think of using Mr. Lovelace, were
he your suitor, as you do the much worthier Mr.
Hickman—Would you? —You know who says in my
Mother's case, ‘Much will bear, much shall bear, all
the world through (a) .’ Mr. Hickman, I fansy,
would be glad to know the Lady's Name, who made
such an observation. He would think it hardly possible,
but such a one should benefit by her own remark; 
and would be apt to wish his Miss Howe acquainted
with her. 
Gentleness of heart, surely, is not despicable in a
man. Why, if it be, is the highest distinction a man
can arrive at, that of a Gentleman? —A distinction
which a Prince may not deserve. For Manners, more
than Birth, Fortune, or Title, are requisite in this
character. Manners are indeed the essence of it. And
shall it be generally said, and Miss Howe not be an
exception to it (as once you wrote) that our Sex are
best dealt with by boisterous and unruly spirits (b) ? 
Forgive me, my dear; and love me as you used to 

do. For altho' my Fortunes are changed, my Heart
is not: Nor ever will, while it bids my pen tell you,
that it must cease to beat, when it is not as much
yours, as 
Your
Clarissa Harlowe's. 