



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sunday, May 21. 
I am too much disturbed in my mind, to think of
any-thing but Revenge; or I did intend to give
thee an account of Miss Harlowe's observations on
the Play. Miss Harlowe's I say. Thou knowest
that I hate the name of Harlowe; and I am exceedingly
out of humour with her, and with her saucy
friend. 
What's the matter now, thou'lt ask? 
Matter enough; for while we were at the Play,
Dorcas, who had her orders, and a key to her Lady's
chamber, as well as a master-key to her drawers and
mahogany chest, closet-key and all, found means to
come at some of Miss Howe's last-written Letters. 
The vigilant wench was directed to them by seeing
her Lady take a Letter out of her stays, and put it to
the others, before she went out with me—Afraid, as
the women upbraidingly tell me, that I should find
it there. 
Dorcas no sooner found them, than she assembled
three ready writers of the Non-apparents; and Sally,
and she, and they employed themselves with the utmost
diligence, in making Extracts, according to
former directions, from these cursed Letters, for my 

use. Cursed, I may well call them—Such abuses! 
Such virulence! —O this little fury Miss Howe! — 
Well might her saucy friend (who has been equally
free with me, or the occasion could not have been
given) be so violent as she lately was, at my endeavouring
to come at one of these Letters. 
I was sure, that this Fair-one, at so early an age,
with a Constitution so firm, Health so blooming,
Eyes so sparkling, Expectations therefore so lively,
and Hope so predominating, could not be absolutely,
and from her own vigilance, so guarded, and so apprehensive,
as I have found her to be. 
Sparkling eyes, Jack, when the poetical tribe have
said all they can for them, are an infallible sign of a
Rogue, or room for a Rogue, in the heart. 
Thou may'st go on with thy Preachments, and
Lord M. with his Wisdom of Nations, I am now more
assured of her than ever. And now my Revenge is
up, and joined with my Love, all resistance must fall
before it. And most solemnly do I swear, that Miss
Howe shall come in for her snack. 
And here, just now, is another Letter brought
from the same little virulent devil. I hope to procure
Transcripts from that too, very speedily, if it
be put to the rest; for the saucy Fair-one is resolved
to go to Church this morning; not so much from a
spirit of Devotion, I have reason to think, as to try
whether she can go out without check, controul, or
my attendance. 
* *
I have been denied breakfasting with her. Indeed
she was a little displeased with me last night; 
because, on our return from the Play, I obliged her
to pass the rest of the night with the women and me,
in their parlour, and to stay till near One. She told
me at parting, that she expected to have the whole
next day to herself. I had not read the Extracts then; 
so was all affectionate respect, awe, and distance; for 

I had resolved to begin a new course, and, if possible,
to banish all jealousy and suspicion from her heart: 
And yet I had no reason to be much troubled at her
past suspicions; since, if a woman will continue
with a man whom she suspects, when she can get
from him, or thinks she can, I am sure it is a very
hopeful sign. 
* *
She is gone. Slipt down before I was aware. 
She had ordered a chair, on purpose to exclude my
personal attendance. But I had taken proper precautions. 
Will. attended her by consent; Peter, the
house-servant, was within Will's call. 
I had, by Dorcas, represented her danger from
Singleton, in order to dissuade her from going at all,
unless she allowed me to attend her; but I was answered,
with her usual saucy smartness, That if there
were no cause of fear of being met with at the Playhouse,
when there were but two Playhouses, surely
there was less at Church, when there were so many
Churches. The chairmen were ordered to carry her
to St. James's Church. 
But she would not be so careless of obliging me, if
she knew what I have already come at, and how the
women urge me on; for they are continually complaining
of the restraint they lie under, in their behaviour; 
in their attendance; neglecting all their
concerns in the front-house; and keeping this elegant
back one entirely free from company, that she may have
no suspicion of them. They doubt not my generosity,
they say: But why for my own sake, in Lord
M's style, should I make so long a harvest of so little
corn? 
Women, ye reason well. I think I will begin my
operations the moment she comes in. 
* *
I have come at the Letter brought her from Miss
Howe to-day. Plot, Conjuration, Sorcery, Witchcraft, 

all going forward! I shall not be able to see
this Miss Harlowe with patience. As the Nymphs
below ask, so do I, Why is night necessary? And
Sally and Polly upbraidingly remind me of my first
attempts upon themselves. Yet force answers not my
end—And yet it may, if there be truth in that part
of the Libertine's Creed, That once subdued, is always
subdued! And what woman answers affirmatively to
the question? 
* *
She is returned: But refuses to admit me; and
insists upon having the day to herself. Dorcas tells
me, that she believes her denial is from motives of
Piety—Oons, Jack, is there Impiety in seeing me! — 
Would it not be the highest Act of Piety, to reclaim
me? And is this to be done by her refusing to see me,
when she is in a devouter frame than usual? —But I
hate her, hate her heartily! She is old, ugly, and
deformed. —But O the blasphemy! Yet she is an
Harlowe: And I do and can hate her for that. 
But since I must not see her [She will be mistress
of her own will, and of her time, truly!] let me fill
up my time, by telling thee what I have come at. 
The first Letter the Women met with, is dated
April 27 (a) . Where can she have put the preceding
ones! —It mentions Mr. Hickman as a busy fellow
between them. Hickman had best take care of himself. 
She says in it, I hope you have no cause to repent
returning my Norris—It is forthcoming on demand. 
Now, what the devil can this mean! —Her Norris
forthcoming on demand! —The devil take me, if I
am out-Norris'd! —If such innocents can allow themselves
to plot (to Norris) well may I. 
She is sorry, that her Hannah can't be with her— 
And what if she could? —What could Hannah do for
her in such a house as this? 

The women in the house are to be found out in one
breakfasting. The women are enraged at both the
correspondents for this; and more than ever make a
point of my subduing her. I had a good mind to give
Miss Howe to them in full property. Say but the
word, Jack, and it shall be done. 
She is glad that Miss Harlowe had thoughts of taking
me at my word. She wondered I did not offer
again. Advises her, if I don't soon, not to stay with
me. Cautions her to keep me at distance; not to permit
the least familiarity—See, Jack! See, Belford! — 
Exactly as I thought! —Her vigilance all owing to a
cool friend; who can sit down quietly, and give that
advice, which in her own case she could not take. 
&dotup;What an encouragement to me to proceed in my
devices, when I have reason to think, that my Beloved's
reserves are owing more to Miss Howe's
cautions, than to her own inclinations!&dotup; But it is
my Interest to be honest, Miss Howe tells her—Interest,
fools! —I thought these girls knew, that my Interest
was ever subservient to my Pleasure. 
What would I give to come at the Copies of the
Letters to which those of Miss Howe are Answers! 
The next Letter is dated May 3 (a) . In this the
little Termagant expresses her astonishment, that her
Mother should write to Miss Harlowe, to forbid her
to correspond with her Daughter. Mr. Hickman,
she says, is of opinion, that she ought not to obey her
Mother. How the creeping fellow trims between
both! I am afraid, that I must punish him, as well as
this virago; and I have a scheme rumbling in my
head, that wants but half an hour's musing to bring
into form, that will do my business upon both. I
cannot bear, that the parental authority should be
thus despised, thus trampled under foot—But observe
the vixen, 'Tis well he is of her opinion; for her Mother
having set her up, she must have somebody to quarrel 

with. —Could a Lovelace have allowed himself a
greater licence? This girl's a devilish Rake in her
heart. Had she been a man, and one of us, she'd
have outdone us all in Enterprize and Spirit. 
She wants but very little farther provocation, she
says, to fly privately to London. And if she does, she
will not leave her till she sees her either honourably
married, or quit of the wretch. Here, Jack, the transcriber
Sally has added a prayer—‘For the Lord's
sake, dear Mr. Lovelace, get this fury to London!’ 
—Her fate, I can tell thee, Jack, if we had
her among us, should not be so long deciding as
her friend's. What a gantlope would she run, when
I had done with her, among a dozen of her own pitiless
Sex, whom my Charmer shall never see! —But
more of this anon. 
I find by this Letter, that my saucy captive had
been drawing the characters of every varlet of ye. 
Nor am I spared in it more than you. The man's a
fool, to be sure, my dear. Let me perish, if they
either of them find me one! A silly fellow, at least. 
Cursed contemptible! —I see not but they are a set of
Infernals—There's for thee, Belford—and he the Beelzebub
—There's for thee, Lovelace! —And yet she
would have her friend marry a Beelzebub. —And
what have any of us done (within the knowlege of
Miss Harlowe) that she should give such an account
of us, as should excuse so much abuse from Miss
Howe? —But the occasion that shall warrant this
abuse is to come! 
She blames her, for not admitting Miss Partington
to her bed—Watchful as you are, what could have happened? 
—If violence were intended, he would not stay
for the night. I am ashamed to have this hinted to
me by this virago. Sally writes upon this hint— 
‘See, Sir, what is expected from you. An hundred
and an hundred times have we told you of this.’ — 
And so they have. But, to be sure, the advice from 

them was not of half the efficacy as it will be from
Miss Howe. —You might have sat up after her, or not
gone to bed, proceeds she. 
But can there be such apprehensions between them,
yet the one advise her to stay, and the other resolve
to wait my imperial motion for marriage? I am glad
I know that. 
She approves of my proposal of Mrs. Fretchville's
house. She puts her upon expecting Settlements; 
upon naming a Day: And concludes with insisting
upon her writing, notwithstanding her Mother's prohibition; 
or bids her take the consequence. Undutiful
wretches! &dotup;How I long to vindicate against them
both, the insulted parental character!&dotup; 
Thou wilt say to thyself, by this time, And can
this proud and insolent girl be the same Miss Howe,
who sighed for honest Sir George Colmar; and who,
but for this her beloved friend, would have followed
him in all his broken fortunes, when he was obliged
to quit the kingdom? 
Yes, she is the very same. And I always found
in others, as well as in myself, that a first passion
thoroughly subdued, made the Conqueror of it a
Rover; the Conqueress a Tyrant. 
Well, but now comes mincing in a Letter from
one who has the honour of dear Miss Howe's commands
(a) , to acquaint Miss Harlowe, that Miss Howe is
excessively concerned for the concern she has given her. 
I have great temptations, on this occasion, says the
prim Gothamite, to express my own resentments upon
your present state. 
My own resentments! —And why did he not fall
into this temptation? —Why, truly, because he knew
not what that State was which gave him so tempting
a subject—Only by a conjecture, and so forth. 
He then dances in his style, as he does in his gaite! 

To be sure, to be sure, he must have made the grand
Tour, and come home by the way of Tipperary. 
And being moreover forbid, says the prancer, to
enter into the cruel subject—This prohibition was a
mercy to thee, friend Hickman! —But why cruel subject,
if thou knowest not what it is, but conjecturest
only from the disturbance it gives to a girl, that is
her Mother's disturbance, will be thy disturbance, and
the disturbance, in turn, of every-body with whom
she is intimately acquainted, unless I have the humbling
of her? 
&dotup;In another Letter (a) , the little Fury professes,
that she will write, and that no man shall write for
her, as if some medium of that kind had been proposed. 
She approves of her fair friend's intention
to leave me, if she can be received by her relations. 
I am a wretch, a foolish wretch. She hates me for
my teazing ways. She has just made an acquaintance
with one who knows a vast deal of my private history. 
A curse upon her, and upon her historiographer! 
—The man is really a villain, an execrable one. 
Devil take her!&dotup; Had I a dozen lives, I might have
forfeited them all twenty crimes ago. An odd way of
reckoning, Jack! 
Miss Betterton, Miss Lockyer, are named—The
man (she irreverently repeats) she again calls a villain. 
Let me perish, I repeat, if I am called a villain for
nothing! —She will have her Uncle (as Miss Harlowe
requests) sounded about receiving her. Dorcas is to be
attached to her interest: My Letters are to be come at
by surprize or trick— 
What thinkest thou of this, Jack? 
Miss Howe is alarmed at my attempt to come at a
Letter of hers. 
Were I to come at the knowlege of her freedoms with
my character, she says, she should be afraid to stir out
without a guard. I would advise the vixen to get her
guard ready. 

I am at the head of a gang of wretches [Thee, Jack,
and thy brother varlets, she owns she means] who
join together to betray innocent creatures, and to support
one another in their villainies–––What sayst thou
to this, Belford? 
She wonders not at her melancholy reflections for
meeting me, for being forced upon me, and tricked by
me. —I hope, Jack, thou'lt have done preaching after
this! 
But she comforts her, that she will be both a Warning
and Example to all her Sex. I hope the Sex will
thank me for this. 
The Nymphs had not time, they say, to transcribe
all that was worthy of my resentment in this Letter: 
So I must find an opportunity to come at it myself. 
Noble Rant, they say, it contains. —But I am a seducer,
and a hundred vile fellows, in it. —And the
devil, it seems, took possession of my heart, and of the
hearts of all her friends, in the same dark hour, in order
to provoke her to meet me. Again, There is a fate
in her error, she says—Why then should she grieve? — 
Adversity is her shining-time, and I can't tell what— 
Yet never to thank the man to whom she owes the
shine! 
In the next Letter (a) , Wicked as I am, she fears
I must be her Lord and Master. 
I hope so. 
She retracts what she said against me in her last. — 
My behaviour to my Rosebud; Miss Harlowe to take
possession of Mrs. Fretchville's house; I to stay at
Mrs. Sinclair's; the Stake I have in my Country; my
Reversions; my Oeconomy; my Person; my Address
[Something like in all this!]; are brought in my
favour, to induce her now not to leave me. How do
I love to puzzle these long-sighted girls! 
Yet my teazing ways, it seems, are intolerable. — 
Are women only to teaze, I trow? —The Sex may 

thank themselves for teaching me to out-teaze them. 
So the headstrong Charles XII. of Sweden taught
the Czar Peter to beat him, by continuing a war with
the Muscovites against the antient maxims of his
kingdom. 
May eternal vengeance PURSUE the villain [Thank
heaven, she does not say overtake] if he give room to
doubt his honour! —Women can't swear, Jack— 
Sweet souls! they can only curse. 
I am said, to doubt her Love—Have I not reason? 
And she, to doubt my Ardor. —Ardor, Jack! —Why,
'tis very right—Women, as Miss Howe says, and as
every Rake knows, love Ardors! 
She apprises her of the Ill Success of the Application
made to her Uncle—By Hickman, no doubt! —I must
have this fellow's ears in my pocket, very quickly, I
believe. 
She says, She is equally shocked and enraged against
all her family: Mrs. Norton's weight has been tried
upon Mrs. Harlowe, as well as Mr. Hickman's upon
the Uncle: But never were there, says the vixen, such
determined brutes in the world. Her Uncle concludes
her ruined already. –––Is not that a call upon me, as
well as a reproach? –––They all expected applications
from her when in distress–––but were resolved not to stir
an inch to save her life. She was accused of premeditation
and contrivance. Miss Howe is concerned,
she tells her, for the revenge my pride may put me upon
taking for the distance she has kept me at. –––And well
she may. –––It is now evident to her, that she must be
mine (for her Cousin Morden, it seems, is set against
her too)–––An act of Necessity, of Convenience! ––– 
Thy friend, Jack, to be already made a Woman's
Convenience! –––Is this to be borne by a Lovelace? 
I shall make great use of this Letter. From Miss
Howe's hints of what passed between her Uncle Harlowe
and Hickman [It must be Hickman] I can give
room for my invention to play; for she tells her, that 

she will not reveal all. I must endeavour to come at
this Letter myself. I must have the very words: 
Extracts will not do. This Letter, when I have it,
must be my Compass to steer by. 
The fire of friendship then blazes out and crackles. 
I never before imagined, that so fervent a friendship
could subsist between two Sister-beauties, both Toasts. 
But even here it may be inflamed by Opposition, and
by that Contradiction which gives vigour to female
spirits of a warm and romantic turn. 
She raves about coming up, if by so doing she could
prevent so noble a creature from stooping too low, or
save her from ruin–––One Reed to support another! 
I think I will contrive to bring her up. 
How comes it to pass, that I cannot help being
pleased with this virago's spirit, tho' I suffer by it? 
Had I her but here, I'd engage in a week's time, to
teach her submission without reserve. What pleasure
should I have in breaking such a spirit! I should wish
for her but for one month, in all, I think. She would
be too tame and spiritless for me after that. How
sweetly pretty to see the two lovely friends, when
humbled and tame, both sitting in the darkest corner
of a room, arm in arm, weeping and sobbing for each
other! –––And I their Emperor, their then acknowleged
Emperor, reclined at my ease in the same room, uncertain
to which I should first, Grand Signor like,
throw out my handkerchief? 
Again mind the girl: She is enraged at the Harlowes: 
She is angry at her own Mother; she is exasperated
against her foolish and low-vanity'd Lovelace. 
Foolish, a little toad! [God forgive me for calling
a virtuous girl a toad!] Let us stoop to lift the wretch
out of his dirt, tho' we soil our fingers in doing it! He
has not been guilty of direct indecency to you. –––It seems
extraordinary to Miss Howe that I have not. –––Nor
dare he. –––She should be sure of that. If women have
such things in their heads, why should not I in my 

heart? –––Not so much of a devil as that comes to neither. 
Such villainous intentions would have shewn themselves
before now if I had them. –––Lord help them!––– 
She then puts her friend upon urging for Settlements,
Licence, and so forth. –––No room for delicacy now, she
says; and tells her what she shall say, to bring all
forward from me. –––Is it not as clear to thee, Jack, as
it is to me, that I should have carried my point long
ago, but for this vixen? She reproaches her for having
MODESTY'D away, as she calls it, more than one opportunity,
that she ought not to have slipt. –––Thus thou
seest, that the noblest of the Sex mean nothing in the
world by their shyness and distance, but to pound the
poor fellow they dislike not, when he comes into their
purlieus. 
&dotup;Tho' tricked into this man's power, she tells her,
she is not meanly subjugated to it. There are hopes
of my Reformation, it seems, from my reverence
for her; since before her I never had any reverence
for what was good! I am a great, a specious deceiver. 
I thank her for this, however. A good
moral use she says, may be made of my having prevailed
upon her to swerve. I am glad that any good
may flow from my actions.&dotup; 
Annexed to this Letter is a Paper the most saucy
that ever was written of a Mother by a Daughter. 
There are in it such free reflections upon Widows and
Bachelors, that I cannot but wonder how Miss Howe
came by her Learning. Sir George Colmar, I can
tell thee, was a greater fool than thy friend, if she
had it all for nothing. 
The contents of this paper acquaint Miss Harlowe,
that her Uncle Antony has been making proposals of
marriage to her Mother. 
The old fellow's heart ought to be a tough one, if
he succeed; or she who broke that of a much worthier
man, the late Mr. Howe, will soon get rid of him. 
But be this as it may, the stupid family is made 

more irreconcileable than ever to their goddess-daughter
for old Antony's thoughts of marrying: So I am
more secure of her than ever. And yet I believe at
last, that my tender heart will be moved in her favour. 
For I did not wish, that she should have nothing but
persecution and distress. –––But why loves she the
Brutes, as Miss Howe justly calls them, so much; 
me so little? 
I have still more unpardonable Transcripts from
other Letters. 