



Mr. Belford, To Colonel Morden. 

Thursday, Sept. 21. 
Give me leave, dear Sir, to address myself to you
in a very serious and solemn manner on a subject
that I must not, cannot dispense with; as I promised the
divine lady, that I would do every-thing in my power to
prevent that further mischief which she was so very apprehensive
of. 
I will not content myself with distant hints. It is
with very great concern that I have just now heard of a
declaration which you are said to have made to your relations
at Harlowe-Place, That you will not rest till you
have avenged your cousin's wrongs upon Mr. Lovelace. 
Far be it from me to offer to defend the unhappy man,
or even unduly to extenuate his crime: But yet I must say,
that the family, by their persecutions of the dear lady at
first, and by their implacableness afterwards, ought, at
least, to share the blame with him. There is even great
reason to believe, that a lady of such a religious turn, her
virtue neither to be surprised nor corrupted, her will inviolate,
would have got over a mere personal injury; especially
as he would have done all that was in his power to
repair it; and as, from the application of all his family in
his favour, and other circumstances attending his sincere 

and voluntary offer, the lady might have condescended,
with greater glory to herself, than if he had never offended. 
When I have the pleasure of seeing you next, I will
acquaint you, Sir, with all the circumstances of this melancholy
story; from which you will see, that Mr. Lovelace
was extremely ill-treated, at first, by the whole family,
this admirable lady excepted. This exception, I
know, heightens his crime: But as his principal intention
was but to try her virtue; and that he became so earnest
a suppliant to her for marriage; and as he has suffered so
deplorably in the loss of his reason, for not having it in
his power to repair her wrongs; I presume to hope, that
much is to be pleaded against such a resolution as you are
said to have made. 
I will read to you at the same time some passages from
letters of his; two of which (one but this moment received)
will convince you, that the unhappy man, who
is but now recovering his intellects, needs no greater punishment
than what he has from his own reflections. 
I have just now read over the copies of the dear lady's
posthumous letters. I send them all to you, except that
directed for Mr. Lovelace; which I reserve till I have the
pleasure of seeing you. Let me intreat you to read once
more that to yourself; and that to her brother (a) ; which
latter I now send you; as they are in point to the present
subject. 
I think, Sir, they are unanswerable. Such, at least, is
the effect they have upon me, that I hope I shall never be
provoked to draw my sword again in a private quarrel. 
To the weight these must needs have upon you, let me
add, that the unhappy man has given no new occasion of
offence, since your visit to him at Lord M's, when you
were so well satisfied of his intention to repair his crimes,
that you yourself urged to your dear cousin her forgiveness
of him. 
Let me also (tho' I presume to hope there is no need,
when you coolly consider every-thing) remind you of your
own promise to your departing cousin; relying upon
which, her last moments were the easier. 

My dear colonel Morden, the highest injury was to her: 
Her family all have a share in the cause: She forgives it: 
Why should we not endeavour to imitate what we admire? 
You asked me, Sir, when in town, If a brave man could
be a premeditatedly base one? —Generally speaking, I believe
Bravery and Baseness are incompatible. But Mr.
Lovelace's character, in the instance before us, affords a
proof of the truth of the common observation, That there
is no general rule but has its exceptions: For England, I
believe, as gallant a nation as it is deemed to be, has not
in it a braver spirit than his; nor a man who has greater
skill at his weapons; nor more calmness with his skill. 
I mention not this with a thought that it can affect Col.
Morden; who, if he be not with-held by SUPERIOR Motives,
as well as influenced by those I have reminded him
of, will tell me, That this skill, and this bravery, will
make him the more worthy of being called upon by him. 
To these SUPERIOR motives then I refer myself: And
with the greater confidence; as a pursuit ending in blood
would not, at this time, have the plea lie for it with anybody,
which sudden passion might have with some: But
would be construed by all, to be a cool and deliberate act
of revenge for an evil absolutely irretrievable: An act,
which a brave and noble spirit, such as the gentleman's to
whom I now write, is not capable of. 
Excuse me, Sir, for the sake of my executorial duty and
promise, keeping in eye the dear lady's personal injunctions,
as well as written will, inforced by letters posthumous. 
Every article of which (solicitous as we both are to see it
duly performed) she would have dispensed with, rather
than farther mischief should happen on her account. I
am, 
Dear Sir,
Your affectionate and faithful Servant,
John Belford. 
The following is the posthumous letter to Col. Morden, referred
to in the above. 