



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday, Four o'Clock in the Afternoon. 
I am just returned from depositing the letter I so
lately finished, and such of Mr. Lovelace's letters
as I had sent you. My long letter, I found remaining
there. —So you'll have both together. 
I am concerned, methinks, it is not with you. —But
your servant cannot always be at leisure. However,
I'll deposite as fast as I write: I must keep nothing
by me now; and when I write, lock myself in, that
I may not be surprised, now they think I have no pen
and ink. 
I found, in the usual place, another letter from this
diligent man: And by its contents, a confirmation,
that nothing passes in this house, but he knows it; 
and that, as soon as it passes. For this letter must
have been written before he could have received my 

billet; and deposited, I suppose, when that was taken
away; yet, he compliments me in it, upon asserting
myself, as he calls it, on that occasion, to my uncle
and to Mr. Solmes. 
‘He assures me, however, that they are more and
more determin'd to subdue me. 
‘He sends me the compliments of his family; and
acquaints me with their earnest desire to see me
amongst them. Most vehemently does he press for
my quitting This house, while it is in my power
to get away: And again craves leave to order his
uncle's chariot-and-six to attend my orders at the
style leading to the coppice, adjoining to the paddock. 
‘Settlements to my own will, he again offers. Lord
M. and both his aunts to be guaranties of his honour
and justice. But, if I choose not to go to either
of his aunts, nor yet to make him the happiest
of men so soon, as it is nevertheless his hope that I
will, he urges me to withdraw to my own house; 
and to accept of my Lord M. for my guardian and
protector, till my cousin Morden arrives. He can
contrive, he says, to give me easy possession of it,
and will fill it with his female relations, on the first
invitation from me; and Mrs. Norton, or Miss Howe,
may be undoubtedly prevailed upon to be with me
for a time. There can be no pretence for litigation,
he says, when I am once in it. Nor, if I choose to
have it so, will he appear to visit me; nor presume to
mention marriage to me till all is quiet and easy; 
till every method I shall prescribe for a reconciliation
with my friends, is try'd; till my cousin comes; 
till such settlements are drawn, as he shall approve
of for me; and that I have unexceptionable proofs
of his own good behaviour.’ 
As to the disgrace a person of my character may
be apprehensive of, upon quitting my father's house,
he observes, too truly, I doubt, ‘That the treatment 

I meet with, is in every one's mouth: Yet, he says,
that the public voice is in my favour: My friends
themselves, he says, expect that I will do myself,
what he calls, this justice; why else do they confine
me? He urges, that, thus treated, the independence
I have a right to, will be my sufficient excuse, going
but from their house to my own, if I choose that
measure; or, in order to take possession of my own,
if I do not: That all the disgrace I can receive,
they have already given me: That his concern, and
his family's concern, in my honour, will be equal to
my own, if he may be so happy ever to call me his: 
And he presumes to aver, that no family can better
supply the loss of my own friends to me, than his,
in whatever way I do them the honour to accept of
his and their protection. 
‘But he repeats, that, in all events, he will oppose
my being carried to my uncle's; being well assured,
that I shall be lost to him for ever, if once I enter
into that house.’ He tells me, ‘That my brother
and sister, and Mr. Solmes, design to be there to receive
me: That my father and mother will not
come near me, till the ceremony is actually over: 
And that then they will appear, in order to try to reconcile
me to my odious husband, by urging upon
me the obligations I shall be supposed to be under,
from a double duty.’ 
How, my dear, am I driven between both! —This
last intimation is but a too probable one. All the
steps they take, seem to tend to this! And, indeed,
they have declared almost as much. 
He owns, ‘That he has already taken his measures
upon this intelligence: —But that he is so desirous,
for my sake [I must suppose, he says, that he owes
them no forbearance for their own], to avoid coming
to extremities, that he has suffer'd a person, whom
they do not suspect, to acquaint them, as if unknown
to himself, with his resolutions, if they persist 

in their design to carry me by violence to my
uncle's; in hopes, that they may be induced, from
fear of mischief, to change their measures: Altho'
he runs a risque, if he cannot be benefited by their
fears, from their doubly guarding themselves against
him on this intimation!’ 
What a dangerous enterprizer, however, is this
man! 
‘He begs a few lines from me, by way of answer
to this letter, either This evening, or to-morrow
morning. —If he be not so favour'd, he shall conclude,
from what he knows of their fixed determination,
that I shall be under a closer restraint than
before: And he shall be obliged to take his measures
according to that presumption.’ 
You will see by this abstract, as well as by his
letter preceding This (for both run in the same
strain); how strangely forward the difficulty of my
situation has brought him in his declarations and proposals; 
and in his threatenings too: Which, but for
That, I would not take from him. 
Something, however, I must speedily resolve upon,
or it will be out of my power to help myself. 
Now I think of it, I will inclose his letter (so might
have spared the abstract of it), that you may the better
judge of all his proposals, and intelligence; and
lest it should fall into other hands. I cannot forget
the contents, altho' I am at a loss what answer to
return. 
I cannot bear the thoughts of throwing myself upon
the protection of his friends: —But I will not examine
his proposals closely, till I hear from you. Indeed,
I have no eligible hope, but in your mamma's
goodness. Hers is a protection I could more reputably
fly to, than to That of any other person: And
from hers should be ready to return to my father's
(for the breach then would not be irreparable, as it
would be, if I fled to his family): To return, I repeat, 

on such terms as shall secure but my negative; 
not my independence: I do not aim at That (so shall
lay your mamma under the less difficulty); altho' I
have a right to it, if I were to insist upon it: —Such
a right, I mean, as my brother exerts in the estate,
left him; and which no-body disputes. —God forbid,
that I should ever think myself freed from my father's
reasonable controul, whatever right my grandfather's
will has given me! He, good gentleman, left me
that estate, as a reward of my duty, and not to set
me above it, as has been justly hinted to me: And this
reflection makes me more fearful of not answering the
intention of so valuable a bequest. —O that my friends
knew but my heart! —Would but think of it, as
they used to do—For once more, I say, If it deceive
me not, it is not altered, altho' theirs are! 
Would but your mamma permit you to send her
chariot, or chaise, to the bye-place where Mr. Lovelace
proposes his uncle's shall come (provoked, intimidated,
and apprehensive, as I am), I would not hesitate
a moment what to do! —Place me any-where,
as I have said before! —In a cott, in a garret; anywhere
—Disguised as a servant—or let me pass as a
servant's sister—So that I may but escape Mr. Solmes
on one hand, and the disgrace of refuging with the
family of a man at enmity with my own, on the other; 
and I shall be in some measure happy! —Should your
good mamma refuse me, what refuge, or whose, can
I fly to? —Dearest creature, advise your distressed
friend. 
* *
I broke off here—I was so excessively uneasy,
that I durst not trust myself with my own reflections: 
So went down to the garden, to try to calm my
mind, by shifting the scene. I took but one turn upon
the filbeard walk, when Betty came to me. Here
Miss, is your Papa! —Here is your uncle Antony! — 

Here is my young master—and my young mistress,
coming, to take a walk in the garden; and your papa
sends me to see where you are, for fear he should meet
you. 
I struck into an oblique path, and got behind the
yew-hedge, feeling my sister appear; and there concealed
myself till they were gone past me. 
My mamma, it seems, is not well. My poor
mamma keeps her chamber! —Should she be worse,
I should have an additional unhappiness, in apprehension,
that my reputed undutifulness has touched
her heart! 
You cannot imagine what my emotions were behind
the yew-hedge, on seeing my papa so near me. 
—I was glad to look at him thro' the hedge, as he
passed by: But I trembled in every joint, when I
heard him utter these words: Son James, To you,
and to Bella, and to You, brother, do I wholly commit
this matter. —For that I was meant, I cannot
doubt. And yet, why was I so affected; since I may
be said to have been given up to their cruelty, for
many days past? 
* *
While my papa remained in the garden, I sent
my dutiful compliments to my mamma, with inquiry
after her health, by Shorey, whom I met accidentally
upon the stairs; for none of the servants, except
my gaoleress, dare to throw themselves in my way. 
I had the mortification of such a return, as made
me repent my message, tho' not my concern for her
health. Let her not inquire after the disorders she
occasions, was the harsh answer. I will not receive
any compliments from her! 
Very, very, hard, my dear! Indeed it is very
hard! 
* *

I have the pleasure to hear my mamma is already
better, however. A colicky disorder, to which she
is too subject: —And it is hoped is gone off. —God
send it may! —Every evil that happens in this house is
owing to me! 
This good news was told me, with a circumstance
very unacceptable; for Betty said, she had orders to
let me know, that my garden-walks, and poultry-visits
were suspected; and that both will be prohibited, if I
stay here till Saturday or Monday. 
Possibly this is said by order, to make me go with
less reluctance to my uncle's. 
My mamma bid her say, if I expostulated about
these orders, and about my pen and ink, ‘That reading
was more to the purpose, at present, than writeing: 
That by the one, I might be taught my duty; 
That the other, considering whom I was believed
to write to, only stiffen'd my will: That my needleworks
had better be pursued, than my airings; which
were observed to be taken in all weathers.’ 
So, my dear, if I do not resolve upon something
soon, I shall neither be able to avoid the intended evil,
nor have it in my power to correspond with you. 
Wednesday Night. 
All is in a hurry below-stairs. Betty is in and
out like a spy. Something is working, I know not
what. I am really a good deal disorder'd in body as
well as mind. Indeed I am quite heart-sick! 
I will go down, tho' 'tis almost dark, on pretence of
getting a little air and composure. Robert has my two
former, I hope, before now: And I will deposite This,
with Lovelace's inclosed, if I can, for fear of another
search. 
I know not what I shall do! —All is so strangely
busy! —Doors clapt to: Going-out of one apartment,
hurryingly, as I may say, into another. Betty in her
alarming way, staring, as if of frighted importance; 

twice with me in half an hour; called down in
haste, by Shorey, the last time; leaving me with still
more meaning in her looks and gestures! —Yet
possibly nothing in all This, worthy of my apprehensions. 
—Here, again, comes the creature, with her
deep-drawn affected sighs, and her O dear's! O
dear's! 
* *
More dark hints thrown out by this saucy creature. 
But she will not explain herself. ‘Suppose
this pretty business ends in murder, she says. I may
rue my opposition, as long as I live, for aught she
knows. Parents will not be baffled out of their
children by impudent gentlemen; nor is it fit they
should. It may come home to me, when I least
expect it.’ 
These are the gloomy and perplexing hints this impertinent
throws out. Probably they arise from the
information Mr. Lovelace says he has secretly permitted
them to have [From his vile double-faced
agent, I suppose!] of his resolution to prevent my being
carried to my uncle's. 
How justly, if so, may This exasperate them! — 
How am I driven to and fro, like a feather in the
wind, at the pleasure of the rash, the selfish, and the
headstrong! and when I am as averse to the proceedings
of the one, as I am to those of the other! But
being forced into a clandestine correspondence, indiscreet
measures are fallen upon by the rash man,
before I can be consulted: And between them, I
have not an option, altho' my ruin [For is not the
loss of reputation a ruin?] may be the dreadful consequence
of the steps taken. What a perverse fate is
mine! 
If I am prevented depositing this, and the inclosed,
as I intend to try to do, late as it is, I will add to 

it, as occasion shall offer. Mean time, believe me
to be 
Your ever affectionate and grateful
Cl. Harlowe. 
Under the superscription, written with a pensil, after
she went down. 
‘My two former not taken away! —I am surprised! 
—I hope you are well—I hope All is right betwixt
your mamma and you.’ 
