


Lady Clementina, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


Bologna, Monday, Sept. 15. N. S.
How welcome to me was your Letter from Lyons! 
My good Chevalier Grandison, my heart
thanks you for it: Yet it was possible that heart could
have been still more thankful, had I not observed in
your Letter an air of pensiveness, tho' it is endeavoured
to be concealed. What pain would it give
me to know, that you suffer on my account! —But no
more in this strain: A complaining one must take
place. 
O Chevalier, I am persecuted! And by whom? 
By my dearest, my nearest friends. I was afraid it
would be so. Why, why, would you deny me your
influence, when I importuned you for it? Why
would you not stay among us, till you saw me professed? 
Then had I been happy—In time, I should
have been happy! —Now am I beset with entreaties,
with supplications, from those who ought to command; 
—yet unlawfully, if they did: I presume to
think so: Since parents, tho' they ought to be consulted
in the change of condition, as to the person;
yet surely should not oblige the child to marry, who
chooses to be single all her life. A more cogent reason
may be pleaded, and I do plead it to my relations,
as Catholics, as I wish for nothing so much as to assume
the veil. —But you are a Protestant: You favour
not a Divine dedication, and would not plead for me. 
On the contrary, you have strengthened their hands! — 
O Chevalier! how could you do so, and ever love
me! Did you not know, there was but one way to 

escape the grievous consequences of the importunities
of those who justly lay claim to my obedience? —And
they do claim it. 
And in what forcible manner, claim it! —Shall I
tell you? Thus, then: My father, with tears in his
eyes, beseeches me! My mother gently reminds me
of what she has suffered for me in my illness; and
declares, that it is in my power to make the rest of her
days happy: Nor shall she think my own tranquillity
of mind secured, till I oblige her! —O Chevalier!
what pleas are these from a father, whose eyes plead
more strongly than words; and from a mother, on
whose bright days I cast a cloud! —The Bishop pleads:
How can a Catholic Bishop plead, and not for me? 
The General declares, that he never wooed his beloved
wife for her consent with more fervour than he does me
for mine, to oblige them all. Nay, Jeronymo! Blush,
sisterly love! to say it—Jeronymo, your friend Jeronymo,
is solicitous on the same side—Even Father
Marescotti is carried away by the example of the Bishop. 
—Mrs. Beaumont argues with me in their favour. 
—And Camilla, who was ever full of your
praises, teazes me continually. 
They name not the man: They pretend to leave
me free to choose through the world. They plead,
that, zealous as they are in the Catholic faith, they
were so earnest for me to enter into the state, that
they were desirous to see me the wife even of a Protestant,
rather than I should remain single: And they
remind me, that it was owing to my scruple only, that
this was not effected. —But why, why will they
weaken, rather than strengthen my scruple? Could I
have got over three points—The sense of my own
unworthiness, after my mind had been disturbed; 
The insuperable apprehension, that, drawn aside by
your Love, I should probably have ensnared my own
Soul; and that I should be perpetually lamenting the
certainty of the loss of his whom it would be my 

duty to love as my own; their importunity would
hardly have been wanted. 
Tell me, advise me, my good Chevalier, my fourth
brother (You are not Now interested in the debate) if
I may not lawfully stand out? Tell me, as I know
that I cannot answer their views, except I marry, and
yet cannot consent to marry, whether I may not as
well sequester myself from the world, and insist upon
so doing? 
What, what can I do? —I am distressed—O thou,
my Brother, my Friend, whom my heart ever must
hold dear, advise me! To you I have told them I
will appeal. They are so good as to promise to suspend
their solicitations, if I will hold suspended my thoughts
of the veil till I have your advice. —But give it not
against me—If you ever valued Clementina, 
Give it not against her! 

