


Well, where this will end, I can't say. 
But here I am, at a little poor Village,
almost such an one as yours; I shall
learn the Name of it by-and by. And Robin
assures me he has Orders to carry me to you, my
dear Father and Mother. O that he may say Truth,
and not deceive me again! But having nothing
else to do, and I am sure I shall not sleep a Wink
To-night, if I was to go to-bed, I will write my
Time away, and take up my Story where I left
off, on Sunday Afternoon. 

Mrs. Jewkes came up to me, with this Answer
about my Papers: My Master says, he will
not read them yet, lest he should be mov'd by
any thing in them to alter his Resolution. But,
if he shall think it worth while to read them, he
will send them to you afterwards to your Father's. 
But, said she, here are your Guineas, that I borrow'd:
For all is over now with you, I find. 
She saw me cry; and said, Do you repent? 
—Of what? said I. —Nay, I can't tell, reply'd
she; but to be sure he has had a Taste of your
satirical Flings, or he would not be so angry. 
Oh! continu'd she, and held up her Hand, Thou
hast a Spirit! —But I hope it will now be brought
down. —I hope so too, said I. 
Well, added I, I am ready. She lifted up
the Window, and said, I'll call Robin to take
your Portmanteau: Bag and Baggage! said she,
I'm glad you're going. I have no Words, reply'd
I, to throw away upon you, Mrs. Jewkes; but,
making her a very low Court'sy, I most heartily
thank you for all your virtuous Civilities to me. 
And so, Adieu; for I'll have no Portmanteau,
I'll assure you, nor any thing but these few Things
that I brought with me in my Handkerchief,
besides what I have on. For I had all this Time
worn my own bought Cloaths, tho' my Master
would have had it otherwise often: But I had
put up Paper, Ink, and Pens, however. 
So down I went, and as I pass'd by the Parlour,
she stepp'd in, and said, Sir, you have
nothing to say to the Girl, before she goes? I 

heard him reply, tho' I did not see him, Who
bid you say the Girl, Mrs. Jewkes, in that
manner? She has offended only me! 
I beg your Honour's Pardon, said the Wretch; 
but if I was your Honour, she should not, for all
the Trouble she has cost you, go away scot-free. 
No more of this! as I told you before, said he:
What! when I have such Proof, that her Virtue
is all her Pride, shall I rob her of that? —No,
added he, let her go, perverse, and foolish, as
she is; but she deserves to go honest, and she
shall go so. 
I was so transported with this unexpected
Goodness, that I open'd the Door before I knew
what I did, and I said, falling on my Knees at
the Door, with my Hands folded and lifted up,
O thank you, thank your Honour, a Million of
times! —May God bless you for this Instance
of your Goodness to me! I will pray for you as
long as I live, and so shall my dear Father and
Mother. And, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, I will
pray for you too, poor wicked Wretch that
you are! 
He turn'd from me, and went into his Closet,
and shut the Door. He need not to have
done so; for I would not have gone nearer
to him! 
Surely I did not say so much, to incur
all this Displeasure! 
I think I was loth to leave the House. 
Can you believe it? —What could be the
Matter with me, I wonder! —I felt something
so strange, and my Heart was so lumpish!— 

I wonder what ail'd me! —But this was so
unexpected! —I believe that was all! —Yet I
am very strange still. Surely, surely, I cannot
be like the old murmuring Israelites, to long
after the Onions and Garlick of Egypt, when
they had suffer'd there such heavy Bondage? — 
I'll take thee, O lumpish, contradictory, ungovernable
Heart, to severe Task for this thy
strange Impulse, when I get to my dear Father's
and Mother's; and if I find any thing in thee
that should not be, depend upon it, thou shalt
be humbled, if strict Abstinence, Prayer and
Mortification, will do it! 
But yet, after all, this last Goodness of his
has touch'd me too sensibly: I wish I had not
heard it, almost; and yet, methinks I am glad
I did; for I should rejoice to think the best of
him, for his own sake. 
Well, and so I went out to the Chariot,
the same that brought me down. So, Mr.
Robert, said I, here I am again! a pure Sporting-piece
for the Great, a mere Tennis-ball of
Fortune! You have your Orders, I hope. Yes,
Madam, said he. Pray now, said I, don't Madam
me, nor stand with your Hat off to such an
one as I. Had not my Master, said he, order'd
me not to be wanting in Respects to you, I
would have shewn you all I could. Well, said
I, with my Heart full, That's very kind, Mr.
Robert. 
Mr. Colbrand, mounted on Horseback,
with Pistols before him, came up to me, as
soon as I got in, with his Hat off too. What, 

Monsieur! said I, are you to go with me? — 
Part of the Way, he said, to see me safe. I hope
that's kind, too, in you, Mr. Colbrand, said I. 
I had nobody to wave my Handkerchief to
now, nor to take leave of; and so I resign'd
myself to my Contemplations, with this strange
way ward Heart of mine, that I never found so
ungovernable and aukward before. 
So away drove the Chariot! —And when I had
got out of the Elm-walk, and into the great Road,
I could hardly think but I was in a Dream all the
Time: A few Hours before in my Master's Arms
almost, with Twenty kind Things said to me, and
a generous Concern for the Misfortunes he had
brought upon me; and only by one rash Halfword
exasperated against me, and turn'd out
of Doors, at an Hour's Warning; and all his
Kindness chang'd to Hate! And I now, from
Three o'Clock to Five, several Miles off! But
if I am going to you, all will be well again, I
hope. 
Alack-a-day, what strange Creatures are
Men! Gentlemen, I should say rather! For my
dear deserving good Mother, altho' Poverty
be both your Lots, has had better Hap; and
you are, and have always been, blest in one
another! —Yet this pleases me too, he was so
good, he would not let Mrs. Jewkes speak ill
of me, and scorn'd to take her odious unwomanly
Advice. O what a black Heart has this
poor Wretch! So I need not rail against Men
so much; for my Master, bad as I have thought
him, is not half so bad as this Woman! —To 

be sure she must be an Atheist! —Do you think
she is not?— 
We could not reach further than this little
poor Place, and sad Alehouse, rather than Inn; 
for it began to be dark, and Robin did not
make so much Haste as he might have done: And
he was forced to make hard shift for his Horses. 
Mr. Colbrand, and Robert too, are very
civil. I see he has got my Portmanteau leash'd
behind the Coach. I did not desire it; but I
shall not come quite empty. 
A thorough Riddance of me, I see! — 
Bag and Baggage! as Mrs. Jewkes says. Well,
my Story, surely, would furnish out a surprising
kind of Novel, if it was to be well told. 
Mr. Robert came up to me, just now, and
begg'd me to eat something. I thank'd him; 
but said I could not eat. I bid him ask Mr.
Colbrand to walk up; and he came; but neither
of them would sit, nor put their Hats on. 
What Mockado is this to such a poor Soul as
I! I ask'd them, If they were at Liberty to tell
me the Truth of what they were to do with
me? If not, I would not desire it. —They
both said, Robin was order'd to carry me to my
Father's; and Mr. Colbrand was to leave me
within Ten Miles, and then strike off for the
other House, and wait till my Master arriv'd
there. They both spoke so solemnly, that I
could not but believe them. 
But when Robin went down, the other
said, he had a Letter to give me next Day at 

Noon, when we baited, as we were to do, at
Mrs. Jewkes's Relations. —May I not, said I,
beg the Favour to see it To-night? He seem'd
so loth to deny me, that I have Hopes I shall
prevail on him by-and-by. 
Well, my dear Father and Mother, I have
got the Letter, on great Promises of Secrecy,
and making no Use of it. I will try if I can
open it, without breaking the Seal, and will
take a Copy of it by-and-by: For Robin is in
and out, there being hardly and Room in this
little House for one to be long alone. Well,
this is the Letter: 

“When these Lines are deliver'd to you,
you will be far on your Way to your
Father and Mother, where you have so long
desired to be: And, I hope, I shall forbear
thinking of you with the least Shadow of
that Fondness my foolish Heart had entertain'd
for you. I bear you, however, no
Ill-will; but the End of my detaining you
being over, I would not that you should
tarry with me an Hour more than needed,
after the ungenerous Preference you gave,
at a Time when I was inclin'd to pass over
all other Considerations, for an honourable
Address to you; for well I found the Tables
intirely turn'd upon me, and that I was in
far more Danger from you, than you were
from me; for I was just upon resolving to
defy all the Censures of the World, and to
make you my Wife. 

“I will acknowledge another Truth; 
That had I not parted with you as I did, but
permitted you to stay till I had read your
Journal, (reflecting, as I doubt not I shall
find it) and till I had heard your bewitching
Pleas in your own Behalf, I fear'd I could
not trust myself with my own Resolution. 
And this is the Reason, I frankly own, that
I have determin'd not to see you, nor hear
you speak; for well I know my Weakness
in your Favour. 
“But I will get the better of this fond
Folly: Nay, I hope I have already done it,
since it was likely to cost me so dear. And
I write this to tell you, that I wish you well
with all my Heart, tho you have spread such
Mischiefs thro' my Family. —And yet, I
cannot but say, that I could wish you would
not think of marrying in haste; and particularly,
that you would not have this cursed
Williams. —But what is all this to me now? 
—Only, my Weakness makes me say, That
as I had already look'd upon you as mine,
and you have so soon got rid of your first
Husband, so you will not refuse, to my
Memory, the Decency that every common
Person observes, to pay a Twelve-month's
Compliment, tho' but a mere Compliment,
to my Ashes. 
“Your Papers shall be faithfully return'd
you, and I have paid so dear for my Curiosity
in the Affection they have rivetted upon me
for you, that you would look upon yourself 

amply reveng'd, if you knew what they have
cost me: 
“I thought of writing only a few Lines; 
but I have run into Length. I will now try
to recollect my scatter'd Thoughts, and resume
my Reason; and shall find Trouble
enough to replace my Affairs, and my own
Family, and to supply the Chasms you have
made in it: For, let me tell you, tho' I can
forgive you, I never can my Sister, nor my
Domesticks; for my Vengeance must be
wreaked somewhere. 
“I doubt not your Prudence in forbearing
to expose me any more than is necessary for
your own Justification; and for that, I will
suffer myself to be accused by you, and will
also accuse myself, if it be needful. For I
am, and will ever be, 
“Your affectionate Well-wisher.” 

This Letter, when I expected some new
Plot, has affected me more than any thing of
that sort could have done. For here is plainly
his great Value for me confess'd, and his rigorous
Behaviour accounted for in such a manner,
as tortures me much. And all this wicked
Gypsey-story is, as it seems, a Forgery upon us
both, and has quite ruin'd me! For, O my dear
Parents, forgive me! but I found, to my Grief,
before, that my Heart was too partial in his
Favour; but now, with so much Openness, so
much Affection, nay, so much Honour too, 

(which was all I before doubted, and kept me
on the Reserve) I am quite overcome. This
was a Happiness, however, I had no Reason to
expect. But to be sure, I must own to you,
that I shall never be able to think of any body
in the World but him! —Presumption! you
will fay; and so it is: But Love is not a voluntary
Thing—Love, did I say! —But come
I hope not:—At least it is not, I hope, gone
so far, as to make me very uneasy: For I know
not how it came, nor when it began; but
crept, crept, it has, like a Thief, upon me; and
before I knew what was the Matter, it look'd
like Love. 
I wish, since it is too late, and my Lot
determin'd, that I had not had this Letter, nor
heard him take my Part to that vile Woman; 
for then I should have bless'd myself, in having
escap'd so happily his designing Arts upon my
Virtue; but now, my poor Mind is all topsyturvy'd,
and I have made an Escape to be more a
Prisoner. 
But, I hope, since thus it is, that All will
be for the best; and I shall, with your prudent
Advice, and pious Prayers, be able to overcome
this Weakness. —But, to be sure, my dear
Sir, I will keep a longer Time than a Twelvemonth,
as a true Widow, for a Compliment,
and more than a Compliment, to your Ashes! 
—O the dear Word! —How kind, how
moving, how affectionate is the Word! O why
was I not a Duchess, to shew my Gratitude for
it? But must labour under the Weight of an 

Obligation, even had this Happiness befallen
me, that would have press'd me to Death, and
which I never could return by a whole Life of
faithful Love, and chearful Obedience! 
O forgive your poor Daughter! —I am
sorry to find this Trial so sore upon me; and
that all the Weakness of my weak Sex, and
tender Years, who never before knew what it
was to be so touched, is come upon me, and
too mighty to be withstood by me. —But
Time, Prayer, and Resignation to God's Will,
and the Benefits of your good Lessons and Examples,
I hope, will enable me to get over
this so heavy a Trial. 
O my treacherous, treacherous Heart! to
serve me thus! And give no Notice to me of
the Mischiefs thou wast about to bring upon me! 
—But thus foolishly to give thyself up to the
proud Invader, without ever consulting thy
poor Mistress in the least! But thy Punishment
will be the first and the greatest; and well deservest
thou to smart, O perfidious Traitor! for
giving up so weakly, thy whole Self, before a
Summons came, and to one too, who had us'd
me so hardly; and when likewise thou hadst so
well maintain'd thy Post against the most violent
and avowed, and therefore, as I thought, more
dangerous Attacks! 
After all, I must either not shew you this
my Weakness, or tear it out of my Writing. 
—Memorandum, to consider of this, when I
get home. 

