



My dear Father and Mother,
I Did not send my last Letters so soon as I would,
because John (whether my Master mistrusts or
no, I can't say) had been sent to Lady Davers's, instead
of Isaac, who used to go; and I could not be
so free with, nor so well trust Isaac; tho' he is very
civil to me too. So I was forced to stay till John
return'd. 
As I may not have Opportunity to send again soon; 
and yet as I know you keep my Letters, and read
them over and over (so John told me) when you
have done Work, so much does your Kindness make
you love all that comes from your poor Daughter; 
and as it may be some little Pleasure to me, may-hap,
to read them myself, when I am come to you, to remind
me what I have gone thro', and how great God's
Goodness has been to me (which, I hope, will rather
strengthen my good Resolutions, that I may not
hereafter, from my bad Conduct, have Reason to
condemn myself from my own Hand, as it were):
For all these Reasons, I say, I will write as I have
Time, and as Matters happen, and send the Scribble
to you as I have Opportunity; and if I don't every
time, in Form, subscribe as I ought, I am sure you
will always believe that it is not for want of Duty. So 

I will begin where I left off about the Talk between
Mrs. Jervis and me, for me to ask to stay. 
Unknown to Mrs. Jervis, I put a Project, as I
may call it, in Practice. I thought with myself
some Days ago, Here I shall go home to my poor
Father and Mother, and have nothing on my Back,
that will be fit for my Condition; for how should
your poor Daughter look with a Silk Night-gown,
Silken Petticoats, Cambrick Head-cloaths, fine Holland
Linen, lac'd Shoes, that were my Lady's, and
fine Stockens! And how in a little while must they
have look'd, like old Cast-offs indeed, and I look'd
so for wearing them! And People would have said,
(for poor Folks are envious, as well as rich) See
there Goody Andrews's Daughter, turn'd home from
her fine Place! What a tawdry Figure she makes! And
how well that Garb becomes her poor Parents Circumstances! 
—And how would they look upon me,
thought I to myself, when they come to be in Tatters,
and worn out? And how should I look, even
if I could get homespun Cloths, to dwindle into
them one by one, as I could get them? —May-be, an
old Silk Gown, and a new Linsey-woolsey Petticoat,
and so on. So, thinks I, I had better get myself at
once 'quipt in the Dress that would become my
Condition; and tho' it might look but poor to what I
was us'd to wear of late Days, yet it would serve me,
when I came to you, for a good Holiday and Sunday
Suit, and what by God's Blessing on my Industry,
I might, may-be, make shift to keep up to. 
So, as I was saying, unknown to any body, I
bought of Farmer Nichols's Wife and Daughters, a
good sad-colour'd Stuff, of their own Spinning,
enough to make me a Gown and two Petticoats; 
and I made Robings and Facings of a pretty Bit of
printed Calicoe, I had by me. 

I had a pretty good Camlet quilted Coat, that I
thought might do tolerably well; and I bought two
Flannel Under-coats, not so good as my Swan-skin
and fine Linen ones; but what would keep me
warm, if any Neighbour should get me to go out to
help 'em to milk, now-and-then, as sometimes I us'd
to do formerly; for I am resolv'd to do all your good
Neighbours what Kindness I can; and hope to
make myself as much belov'd about you, as I am
here. 
I got some pretty good Scots Cloth, and made
me at Mornings and Nights, when nobody saw me,
two Shifts, and I have enough left for two Shirts,
and two Shifts, for you, my dear Father and Mother. 
When I come home, I'll make 'em for you, and
desire your Acceptance as my first Present. 
Then I bought of a Pedlar, two pretty enough
round-ear'd Caps, a little Straw Hat, and a Pair
of knit Mittens, turn'd up with white Calicoe; and
two Pair of ordinary blue Worsted Hose, that make
a smartish Appearance, with white Clocks, I'll assure
you; and two Yards of black Ribbon for my Shift
Sleeves, and to serve as a Necklace; and when I had
'em all come home, I went and look'd upon them
once in two Hours, for two Days together: For,
you must know, tho' I lay with Mrs. Jervis, I kept
my own little Apartment still for my Cloaths; 
and nobody went thither but myself. You'll say,
I was no bad Housewife to have say'd so much
Money; but my dear good Lady was always giving
me something. 
I believ'd myself the more oblig'd to do this, because
as I was turn'd away for what my good Master
thought Want of Duty; and, as he expected other
Returns for his Presents, than I intended, I bless
God, to make him; so I thought it was but just
to leave his Presents behind me when I went away: 

for, you know, if I would not earn his Wages, why
should I have them? 
Don't trouble yourself, now I think of it, about the
Four Guineas, nor borrow to make them up; for
they were given me, with some Silver, as I told you,
as a Perquisite, being what my Lady had about her
when she dy'd; and, as I hope for no other Wages,
I am so vain as to think I have deserv'd them in the
fourteen Months, since my Lady's Death: For she,
good Soul! overpaid me before in Learning and
other Kindnesses. —O had she liv'd, none of these
Things might have happen'd! —But God be prais'd,
'tis no worse. Every thing turns about for the best,
that's my Confidence. 
So, as I was saying, I have provided a new and
more suitable Dress, and I long to appear in my new
Cloaths, more than ever I did in any new Cloaths in
my Life; for then I shall be soon after with you,
and at Ease in my Mind. —But mum—I am, &c. 

