


I had a good deal of Imployment in chusing
Patterns for my new Cloaths. He thought
nothing too good; but I thought every thing
I saw was: And he was so kind to pick out Six
of the richest, for me to chuse Three Suits out of,
saying, We would furnish ourselves with more in
Town, when we went thither. One was white,
flower'd with Gold most richly: And he was
pleased to say, that, as I was a Bride, I should make
my Appearance in that, the following Sunday. 
And so we shall have, in two or three Days, from
several Places, nothing but Manteau-makers and
Taylors at Work. Bless me! what a chargeable,
and what a worthless Hussy I am, to the dear
Gentleman! —But his Fortune and Station require
a great deal of it; and his Value for me will not
let him do less, than if he had marry'd a Fortune
equal to his own: And then, as he says, it would
be a Reflection upon him, if he did. —And
so I doubt it will be as it is: For, either way, 

the World will have something to say. He
made me also chuse some very fine Laces and
Linen: and has sent a Message on purpose, with
his Orders, to hasten all down; what can be
done in Town, as the Milanery Matters, &c.
to be completed there, and sent by particular
Messengers, as done. All to be here, and finish'd
by Saturday Afternoon without fail. 
I send away John this Morning, with some
more of my Papers, to you, and with the few
he will give you, separate. My Desire is, that you
will send me all the Papers you have done with,
that I may keep my Word with Lady Davers;
to beg the Continuance of your Prayers and
Blessings; to hope you will give me your Answer
about my dear Benefactor's Proposal of the
Kentish Farm; to beg you to buy Two Suits of
Cloaths, each, of the finest Cloth for you, my
dear Father, and of a creditable Silk for my dear
Mother; and good Linen, and every thing answerable:
And that you will, as my best Friend
bid me say, let us see you here, as soon as possible; 
and he will have his Chariot come for you,
when you tell John the Day. Oh! how I long
to see you both, my dear good Parents, and to
share with you my Felicities! 
You will have, I am sure, the Goodness to
go to all your Creditors, which are chiefly those
of my poor unhappy Brothers, and get an Account
of all you are bound for; and every one shall be
paid to the utmost Farthing, and Interest besides; 
tho' some of them have been very cruel and unrelenting. 

—But they are all intitled to their own,
and shall be thankfully paid. 
Now I think of it, John shall take my Papers
down to this Place; that you may have something
to amuse you of your dear Child's, instead of those
you part with; and I will continue writing till
I am settled, and you are determined; and then
I shall apply myself to the Duties of the Family,
in order to become as useful to my dear Benefactor,
as my small Abilities will let me. 
If you think a Couple of Guineas will be of
Use to Mrs. Mumford, who I doubt has not
much aforehand, pray give them to her, from
me, (and I will return them to you) as for a Pair
of Gloves on my Nuptials: And look among
your poor Acquaintance, and Neighbours, and
let me have a List of such honest, industrious
Poor, as may be true Objects of Charity, and
have no other Assistance; particularly such as
are blind, lame, or sickly, with their several
Cases; and also such poor Families and House
keepers as are reduced by Misfortunes, as ours
was, and where a great Number of Children
may keep them from rising to a State of tolerable
Comfort: And I will chuse as well as I can; 
for I long to be making a Beginning, with the
kind quarterly Benevolence my dear good Benefactor
has bestowed upon me for such good Purposes. 
I am resolved to keep Account of all these
Matters: And Mr. Longman has already furnish'd
me with a Vellom Book of white Paper; 
some Sides of which I hope soon to fill, with 

the Names of proper Objects. And tho' my
dear Master has given me all this without Account,
yet shall he see, (but nobody else) how I lay it
out, from Quarter to Quarter; and I will, if any
be left, carry it on, like an Accomptant, to the
next Quarter, and strike a Balance four times a
Year, and a general Balance at every Year's End. 
—And I have written in it, Humble Returns
for Divine Mercies; and lock it up safe in my
newly presented Cabinet. 
I intend to let Lady Davers see no further
of my Papers, than to her own angry Letter
to her Brother; for I would not have her see
my Reflections upon it; and she'll know, down
to that Place, all that's necessary for her Curiosity,
as to my Sufferings, and the Stratagems
used against me, and the honest Part I have
been inabled to act: And I hope, when she
has read them all, she will be quite reconcil'd; 
for she will see it is all God Almighty's Doings; 
and that a Gentleman of his Parts and Knowlege
was not to be drawn in by such a poor young
Body as me. 
I will detain John no longer. He will tell
you to read this last Part first, and while he stays. 
And so, with my humble Duty to you both,
and my dear Spouse's kind Remembrance, I
rest, 
Your ever dutiful and
gratefully happy Daughter. 
