



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[In answer to Letter XV.] 

Sat. March 4. 12 o'clock. 
Hannah has just now brought me from the
usual place your favour of yesterday. The contents
of it have made me very thoughtful; and you
will have an answer in my gravest style. —I to have
that Mr. Solmes! —No indeed! —I will sooner—But
I will write first to those passages in your Letter which
are less concerning, that I may touch upon this part
with more patience. 
As to what you mention of my Sister's value for Mr.
Lovelace, I am not very much surprised at it. She 

takes such officious pains, and it is so much her subject,
to have it thought that she never did, and never
could like him, that she gives but too much room to
suspect that she does. She never tells the story of
their parting, and of her refusal of him, but her colour
rises, she looks with disdain upon me, and mingles
anger with the airs she gives herself: —Anger as well
as Airs, demonstrating, that she refused a man whom
she thought worth accepting: Where else is the reason
either for anger or boast? —Poor Bella! She is
to be pitied—She cannot either like or dislike with
temper! —Would to heaven she had been mistress of
all her wishes! —Would to heaven she had! 
As to what you say of my giving up to my Father's
controul the Estate devised me, my motives at the
time, as you acknowlege, were not blameable. Your
advice to me on the subject was grounded, as I remember,
on your good opinion of me; believing that
I should not make a bad use of the power willed me: 
Neither you nor I, my dear, altho' you now assume
the air of a diviner [Pardon me] could have believed
That would have happened which has happened, as
to my Father's part particularly. You were indeed
jealous of my Brother's views against me; or rather
of his predominant Love of himself; but I did not
think so hardly of my Brother and Sister as you always
did. You never loved them; and Ill-will has eyes ever
open to the faulty side; as Good-will or Love is blind
even to real imperfections. I will briefly recollect my
motives. 
I found Jealousies and Uneasiness rising in every
breast, where all before was Unity and Love: The
honoured Testator was reflected upon: A second childhood
was attributed to him; and I was censured, as
having taken advantage of it. All young creatures,
thought I, more or less, covet independency; but
those who wish most for it, are seldom the fittest to
be trusted either with the government of themselves, 

or with power over others. This is certainly a very
high and unusual devise to so young a creature. We
should not aim at all we have power to do. To take
all that good-nature, or indulgence, or good opinion
confers, shews a want of moderation, and a graspingness
that is unworthy of that indulgence; and are bad
indications of the use that may be made of the power
bequeathed. It is true, thought I, that I have formed
agreeable schemes of making others as happy as myself,
by the proper discharge of the Stewardship entrusted
to me [Are not all Estates Stewardships, my
dear?]. But let me examine myself: Is not Vanity,
or secret Love of praise, a principal motive with me
at the bottom? —Ought I not to suspect my own
heart? If I set up for myself, puffed up with every
one's good opinion, may I not be left to myself? — 
Every one's eyes are upon the conduct, upon the
visits, upon the visitors, of a young creature of our
Sex, made independent: And are not such subjected,
more than any others, to the attempts of Enterprisers
and Fortune-seekers? —And then, left to myself,
should I take a wrong step, tho' with ever so good an
intention, how many should I have to triumph over
me, how few to pity me! —The more of the one,
and the fewer of the other, for having aimed at excelling. 
These were some of my reflections at the time: 
And I have no doubt, but that in the same situation I
should do the very same thing; and that upon the
maturest deliberation. Who can command or foresee
events? To act up to our best judgments at the time,
is all we can do. If I have erred, 'tis to worldly wisdom
only that I have erred. If we suffer by an act
of duty, or even by an act of generosity, is it not
pleasurable on reflection, that the fault is in others,
rather than in ourselves? —I had much rather have
reason to think others unkind, than that they should
have any to think me undutiful. 

And so, my dear, I am sure had you. 
And now for the most concerning part of your
Letter. 
You think I must of necessity, as matters are circumstanced,
be Solmes's Wife. I will not be very
rash, my dear, in protesting to the contrary: But I
think it never can, and, what is still more, never
ought to be! —My temper, I know, is depended upon. 
But I have heretofore said (a) , that I have something
in me of my Father's family, as well as of my Mother's. 
And have I any encouragement to follow too
implicitly the example which my Mother sets of
meekness, and resignedness to the wills of others? Is
she not for ever obliged (as she was pleased to hint to
me) to be of the forbearing side? In my Mother's
case, your observation I must own is verified, that
those who will bear much, shall have much to bear (b) . 
What is it, as she says, that she has not sacrificed to
peace? —Yet, has she by her sacrifices always found
the peace she has deserved to find? Indeed No! 
—I am afraid the very contrary. And often and
often have I had reason (on her account) to reflect,
that we poor mortals, by our over-solicitude to preserve
undisturbed the qualities we are constitutionally
fond of, frequently lose the benefits we propose to
ourselves from them: Since the designing and encroaching
(finding out what we most fear to forfeit)
direct their batteries against these our weaker places,
and, making an artillery (if I may so phrase it) of our
hopes and fears, play it upon us at their pleasure. 
Steadiness of mind (a quality which the ill-bred
and censorious deny to any of our Sex) when we are
absolutely convinced of being in the right [Otherwise
it is not steadiness, but obstinacy] and when it is exerted
in material cases, is a quality, which, as my
good Dr. Lewen was wont to say, brings great credit
to the possessor of it; at the same time that it usually, 

when tried and known, raises such above the attempts
of the meanly machinating. He used therefore to
inculcate upon me this steadiness, upon laudable convictions. 
And why may I not think that I am now
put upon a proper exercise of it? 
I said above, that I never can be, that I never
ought to be, Mrs. Solmes. —I repeat, that I ought
not: For surely, my dear, I should not give up to
my Brother's ambition the happiness of my future
life. Surely I ought not to be the instrument of
depriving Mr. Solmes's Relations of their natural
rights and reversionary prospects, for the sake of further
aggrandizing a family (altho' that I am of) which
already lives in great affluence and splendor; and
which might be as justly dissatisfied, were all that
some of it aim at, to be obtained, that they were not
Princes, as now they are, that they are not Peers [For
when ever was an ambitious mind, as you observe in
the case of avarice (a) , satisfied by acquisition?]. 
The less, surely, ought I to give into these grasping
views of my Brother, as I myself heartily despise the
end aimed at; as I wish not either to change my
State, or better my Fortunes; and as I am fully persuaded,
that Happiness and Riches are two things,
and very seldom meet together. 
Yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflicts I
know I must encounter with. It is possible, that I
may be more unhappy from the due observation of
the good Doctor's general precept, than were I to
yield the point; since what I call Steadiness is deemed
stubbornness, obstinacy, prepossession, by those who
have a right to put what interpretation they please
upon my conduct. 
So, my dear, were we perfect (which no one can
be) we could not be happy in this life, unless those
with whom we have to deal (those more especially
who have any controul upon us) were governed by 

the same principles. But then does not the good
Doctor's conclusion recur,—That we have nothing
to do, but to chuse what is right; to be steady in the
pursuit of it; and to leave the issue to Providence? 
This, if you approve of my motives (and if you
don't, pray inform me) must be my aim in the present
case. 
But what then can I plead for a palliation to myself
of my Mother's sufferings on my account? Perhaps
This consideration will carry some force with it— 
That her difficulties cannot last long; only till this
great struggle shall be one way or other determined— 
Whereas my unhappiness, if I comply, will (from an
aversion not to be overcome) be for life. To which
let me add, That as I have reason to think that the
present measures are not entered upon with her own
natural liking, she will have the less pain, should they
want the success which I think in my heart they ought
to want. 
I have run a great length in a very little time. The
subject touched me to the quick. My reflections upon
it will give you reason to expect from me a perhaps
too steady behaviour in a new conference, which, I
find, I must have with my Mother. My Father and
Brother, as she was pleased to tell me, dine at my
Uncle Antony's; and that, as I have reason to believe,
on purpose to give an opportunity for it. 
Hannah informs me, that she heard my Father
high and angry with my Mother, at taking leave of
her: I suppose for being too favourable to me; for
Hannah heard her say, as in tears, ‘Indeed, Mr.
Harlowe, you greatly distress me! —The poor girl
does not deserve—’ Hannah heard no more, but
that he said, he would break somebody's heart—Mine,
I suppose—Not my Mother's, I hope. 
As only my Sister dines with my Mother, I thought
I should have been commanded down: But she sent
me up a plate from her table. I continued my writeing. 

I could not touch a morsel. I ordered Hannah
however to eat of it, that I might not be thought
sullen. 
Before I conclude this, I will see whether any-thing
offers from either of my private correspondencies, that
will make it proper to add to it; and will take a turn
in the wood-yard and garden for that purpose. 
* *
I am stopped. Hannah shall deposit this. She was
ordered by my Mother (who asked where I was) to
tell me, that she would come up and talk with me in
my own closet. —She is coming! Adieu, my dear. 