


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Clementina
della Porretta. 


Florence, July 13-24.
I Begin, dear and admirable Lady Clementina, the
permitted correspondence, with a due sense of
the favour done me in it: Yet, can I say, that it is
not a painful favour? Was ever man before circumstanced
as I am? —Permitted to admire the noblest
and most amiable of women, and even generously allowed
to look upon himself as a man esteemed, perhaps
more than esteemed, by her, and her illustrious
family; yet in honour forbidden to solicit for a blessing
that once was designed for him; and which he is
not accused of demeriting by misbehaviour, or by assuming
an appearance that he made not good—Excellent
Lady! Am I other than you ever had reason
to think me, in my manners, in my principles? Did
I ever endeavour to unsettle you in your attachments
to the religion of your country? No, madam: Invincibly
attached as I knew you were to that religion,
I contented myself with avowing my own; and indeed
should have thought it an ill requital for the protection
I enjoyed from the civil and ecclesiastical powers, and
a breach of the Laws of hospitality, had I attempted
to unsettle the beloved daughter of a house so firmly
likewise attached, as they always were, to their principles. 
From such a conduct, could this beloved
daughter doubt the free exercise of her religion, had
she— 
But, hushed be the complainings, that my expostulating 

heart will hardly be denied to dictate to my
pen! Have I not said, that I will be all you wish me
to be—All hope, or all acquiescence—Forgive me, madam,
forgive me, dear and ever-to-be respected family,
that yet I use the word hope. Such a prize almost
in possession—can I forbear to say hope? —Yet
do I not at the same time promise acquiescence? — 
Painful as it is to me, and impossible as it would be,
were not all-commanding conscience pleaded, most
excellent of women! I will, I do, acquiesce. If you
persevere, dear to my soul as you ever must be, I resign
to your will. 
The disappointed heart, not given up to unmanly
despair, in a world so subject to disappointments, will
catch at the next good to that it has lost—Shall I not
hope, madam, that a correspondence so allowably begun,
whatever be the issue in the greater event, will
for ever last? That a friendship so pure will ever be
allowed? That the disappointed man may be considered
as the Son, the Brother, of a family, which must,
in all the branches of it, be ever dear to him? —I will
hope it. I will even demand the continuance of its
esteem; why should I not say, of its affection? But
so long only, as my own impartial heart, and my
zeal for the glory and happiness of your whole house,
shall tell me I deserve this; and so long as I can make
out my pretensions, to the satisfaction of every one of
it. It cannot be on my side, nor will I allow it on
yours, that the man who once, by the favour of your
whole family, was likely to be happy in a near alliance
to it, should, and perhaps for that reason, as it
often happens, in like instances, be looked upon as
the most remote from its friendly Love. 
Never, madam, could the heart of man boast a
more disinterested passion for an object, whose mind
was dearer to it, than even her person; or a more sincere
affection to every one of her family, than mine
does. I am unhappily called upon to the proof. The 

proof is unquestionable. And—To the last hour of
my life, you and they, madam, will be dear to me. 
Adieu, most excellent of women! —Circumstanced
as I am, what more can I say? —Adieu, most excellent
of women! —May every good, temporal and
eternal, be yours, and every one's of your beloved family,
prays 
Your and their most grateful,
most affectionate, and
most obedient,
Grandison. 

