


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


When Sir Charles and his sisters had look'd
over every other place in his father's apartment,
they followed Mrs. Oldham to hers. 
A very handsome apartment, upon my word! 
How could Miss Grandison—She knew the situation
the unhappy woman had been in: Mistress of that
house. 
Her brother look'd at her. 
Mrs. Oldham shewed them which of the furniture
and pictures (some of the latter valuable ones) she
had brought into the house, saved, as she said, from
the wreck of her husband's fortune—But, said she,
with the consent of creditors. I, for my part, did
not wrong any-body. 
In that closet, Sir, continued she, pointing to it, is
all that I account myself worth in the world. Mr.
Grandison was pleased to put his seal upon the door. 
I besought him to let me take 50l. out of it; having
but very little money about me: But he would not:
His refusal, besides the disgrace, has put me to
some shifts. But, weeping, I throw myself upon
your mercy, Sir. 
The sisters frankly owned, that they harden'd each
other by fault-finding. They whisper'd, that she expected
no mercy from them, it was plain. O what a
glory belongs to goodness, as well in its influences, as
in itself! Not even these two amiable sisters, as Miss
Charlotte once acknowleged, were so noble in themselves
before their brother's arrival, as they are now. 
Assure yourself of justice, madam, said Sir Charles. 
Mr. Grandison is hasty: But he would have done
you justice, I dare say. He thought he was acting for
a trust. —You may have letters, you may have things, 

here in this closet, that we have no business with. — 
Then, beaking the seal; I leave it to you, to shew us
any-thing proper for us to take account of. The rest
I wish not to see. 
My Ladies, Sir—They will be pleased to— 
Yes, Mrs. Oldham, said Caroline: And was putting
herself before her brother, and so was her sister,
while Sir Charles was withdrawing from the closet:
But he took each by her hand, interrupting Caroline— 
No, Mrs. Oldham—Do you lay out things as you
please: We will step into the next apartment. 
He accordingly led them both out. 
You are very generous, Sir, said Miss Grandison. 
I would be so, Charlotte. Ought not the private
drawers of women to be sacred? 
But such a creature, Sir—said Miss Caroline— 
Every creature is intitled to justice—Can ladies forget
decorum? You see she was surprised by Mr. Grandison. 
She has suffer'd disgrace: Has been put to
shifts. 
Well, Sir, if she will do justice— 
Remember (with looks of meaning) whose housekeeper
she was. 
They owned they were daunted [And so, dear ladies,
you ought to have been] but not convinced at
that instant. It is generous to own this; because the
acknowlegement makes not for your glory, ladies. 
Mrs. Oldham, with tears in her eyes, came courtesying
to the ladies and their brother, offering to
conduct them into her closet. They found, that she
had spread on her table in it, and in the two windows,
and in the chairs, letters, papers, laces, fine
linen, &c. 
These papers, Sir, said she, belong to you. I was
bid to keep them safe [Poor woman! she knew not
how to say, by whom bid]. You will see, Sir, the
seals are whole. 
Perhaps a will, said he. 

No, Sir, I believe not. I was told they belonged
to the Irish estate. Alas! and she wiped her eyes, I
have reason to think, there was not time for a will— 
I suppose, Mrs. Oldham, you urged for a will— 
said Miss Charlotte. 
Indeed, ladies, I often did; I own it. 
I don't doubt it, said Miss Caroline. 
And very prudently, said Sir Charles. I myself have
always had a will by me. I should think it a kind of
presumption to be a week without one. 
In this drawer, Sir, are the money, and notes,
and securities, that I have been getting together. I do
assure you, Sir, very honestly—pulling out a drawer
in the cabinet. 
To what amount, Mrs. Oldham, if I may be so
bold? ask'd Caroline. 
No matter, sister Caroline, to what amount, said
Sir Charles. You hear Mrs. Oldham say, they are
honestly got together. I dare say, that my father's
bounty enabled even his meanest servants to save money. 
I would not keep one, that I thought did not. 
I make no comparisons, Mrs. Oldham: You are a
gentlewoman. 
The two ladies only whisper'd to each other, as
they owned, So we think! —Were there ever such perverse
girls? I am afraid my uncle will think himself
justified by them on this occasion, when he asserts,
that it is one of the most difficult things in the world
to put a woman right, when she sets out wrong. If
it be generally so with us, I am sure we ought to be
very careful of prepossession. —And has he not said,
Lucy, that the best women, when wrong, are most
tenacious? It may be so: But then I hope, he will
allow, that at the time they think themselves right. 
I believe there is near 1200l. said Mrs. Oldham,
and look'd, the ladies observed, as if she was afraid
of their censures. 
Near 1200l. Mrs. Oldham! said Miss Charlotte. 

—Lord, sister, how glad would we have been sometimes
of as many shillings between us! 
And what, Caroline, what Charlotte, young ladies
as you were, but growing up into women, and in your
father's house, would you have done with more than
current money? Now you have a claim to independency,
I hope that 1200l. will not be the sum
of either of your stores. 
They courtesied, they said; but yet thought 1200l.
a great saving. —Dear ladies! how could you forget,
and what a pain would it have been for your brother
to have reminded you, that Mrs. Oldham had two
children; to say nothing of a third! 
Trembling, as they owned, Here, said she, in this
private drawer, are some presents—I disclaim them. 
If you believe me, ladies, I never wish'd for them. 
I never was seen in them but once. I never shall
wear them—offering to pull out the drawer. 
Forbear, Mrs. Oldham. Presents are yours. The
money in that drawer is yours. Never will I either
disparage or diminish my father's bounty. He had a
right to do as he pleased. Have not we, to do as we
please? Had he made a will, would they not have
been yours? —If you, Mrs. Oldham, if you, my
sisters, can tell me of any-thing he but intended or inclined
to do by any one of his people, that intention
will I execute with as much exactness, as if he had
made a will, and it was part of it. Shall we do nothing
but legal justice? —The law was not made for
a man of conscience. 
Lord bless me, my Lucy! what shall I do about
this man? 
* *
Here (would you believe it?) I laid down my
pen; ponder'd, and wept, for joy; I think, it was
for joy, that there is such a young man in the world; 
for what else could it be? —And now, with a watry eye,
twinkle, twinkle, do I resume it. 

His sisters owned, they were confounded; but
that still the time was to come when they were to approve,
from their hearts, of what he said and did. 
Mrs. Oldham wept at his goodness. She wept, I
make no doubt also, as a penitent. —If my ladies,
said she, will be pleased to—And seemed to be about
making an offer to them—of the jewels, as I suppose. 
My sisters, Mrs. Oldham, said Sir Charles, interrupting
her, are Grandisons. Pray, madam—holding
in her hand, which was extended to the drawer— 
She took out of another drawer 40l. and some
silver. This, Sir, is money that belongs to you. I
received it in Sir Thomas's illness. I have some
other moneys; and my accounts wanted but a few
hours of being perfected, when I was dismissed. 
They shall be completed, and laid before you. 
Let this money, Mrs. Oldham, be a part of those
accounts; declining, then, to take it. 
There are letters, Sir, said she. I would withhold
nothing from you. I know not, if, among some
things, that I wish not any-body to see, there are
not concerns, that you ought to be made acquainted
with, relating to persons and things, particularly to
Mr. Bever and Mr. Filmer, and their accounts. I
hope they are good men. —You must see these letters,
I believe. 
Let me desire you, Mrs. Oldham, to make such
extracts from those letters, or any others, as you
think will concern me; and as soon as you can: For
those gentlemen have written to me to sign their accounts,
which, they hint, had my father's approbation. 
She then told Sir Charles (as I have already related)
how earnest Mr. Bever was to get to the speech of
Sir Thomas; and how mortified Mr. Filmer was to
find him incapable of writing his name; which both
said was all that was wanted. 
An honest man, said Sir Charles, fears not inspection. 

They shall want no favour from me. I
hope nothing but justice from them. 
She then shewed him some other papers; and
while he was turning them over, the ladies and she
withdrew to another apartment, in which, in two
mahogany chests, was her wardrobe. They owned
they were curious to inspect it, as she had always
made a great figure. She was intending to oblige
them; and had actually open'd one of the chests,
and, tho' reluctantly, taken out a gown, when Sir
Charles enter'd. 
He seemed displeased; and, taking his sisters aside,
Tell me, said he, can what this poor woman seems
to be about, proceed from her own motion? I beg
of you to say, you put her upon it. I would not
have reason to imagine, that any woman, in such circumstances,
could make a display of her apparel. 
Why, the motion is partly mine, I must needs
say, answer'd Charlotte. 
Wholly, I hope; and the compliance owing to the
poor woman's mortified situation. You are young
women. You may not have consider'd this matter. 
Do you imagine, that your curiosity will yield you
pleasure? Don't you know what to expect from the
magnificent and bountiful spirit of him, to whose memory
you owe duty? 
They recollected themselves, blushed, and desired
Mrs. Oldham to lock up the chest. She did; 
and seemed pleased to be excused from the mortifying
task. 
Ah, my Lucy, one thing I am afraid of; and that
is, that Sir Charles Grandison, politely as he behaves
to us all, thinks us women in general very pitiable
creatures. I wish I knew that he did; and that for
two reasons: That I might have something to think
him blameable for: And to have the pride of assuring
myself, that he would be convinced of that fault, were
he to be acquainted with my grandmamma, and aunt. 

But, do you wonder, that the sisters, whose minds
were thus open'd and enlarged by the example of
such a brother, blazing upon them all at once, as
I may say, in manly goodness, on his return from
abroad, whither he set out a stripling, should, on all
occasions, break out into raptures, whenever they
mention THEIR brother? —Well may Miss Grandison
despise her lovers, when she thinks of him and of
them at the same time. 
Sunday. Sir Charles is in town we hear: Came thither
but last night—Nay, for that matter, his sisters
are more vexed at him than I am. —But what pretence
have I to be disturbed? But I say of him, as
I do of Lady D.: He is so good, that one would
be willing to stand well with him. —Then he is my
Brother, you know. 

