



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. March 25. 
What can I advise you, my noble creature? 
Your merit is your crime. You can no more
change your nature, than your persecutors can theirs. 
Your distress is owing to the vast disparity between
you and them. What would you have of them? 
Do they not act in character? —And to whom? To
an Alien. You are not one of them. —They have
two dependencies—Upon their own impenetrableness,
one (I'd give it a properer name, if I dared); the
other, on the regard you have always had for your
character (Have they not heretofore own'd as much?)
and upon your apprehensions from that of Lovelace,
which would discredit you, should you take any step
by his means to extricate yourself. Then they know,
that resentment and unpersuadableness are not natural
to you; and that the anger they have wrought you
up to, will subside, as all extraordinaries soon do; 
and that one marry'd, you'll make the best of it. 
But surely your father's eldest son and eldest daughter
have a view to intail unhappiness for life upon you,
were you to have the man who is already more nearly
related to them, than ever he can be to you, should
the shocking compulsion take place; by communicating
to so narrow a soul all they know of your
just aversion to him. 

As to that wretch's perseverance, those only, who
know not the man, will wonder at it. He has not
the least delicacy. When-ever he shall marry, his
view will not be for mind. How should it? He has
not a mind: And does not Like seek its Like? —And
if it finds something beyond itself, how shall that be
valued, which cannot be comprehended? Were you
to be his, and shew a visible want of tenderness to
him; it is my opinion, he would not be much concerned
at it; since that would leave him the more at
liberty to pursue those sordid attachments which are
predominant in him. I have heard you well observe,
from your Mrs. Norton, That a person who has any
over-ruling passion, will compound by giving up
twenty secondary or under-satisfactions, tho' more laudable
ones, in order to have that gratify'd. 
I'll give you the substance of a conversation (no
fear you can be made to like him worse than you do
already) that passed between Sir Harry Downeton and
this Solmes, but three days ago, as Sir Harry told it
but yesterday to my mamma and me. It will confirm
to you that what your sister's insolent Betty reported
he should say, of governing by fear, was not
of her own head. 
Sir Harry told him, he wonder'd he should hope
to carry you so much against your inclination, as
every-body knew it would be, if he did. 
He matter'd not That, he said: Coy maids made
fond wives (A sorry fellow!) It would not at all
grieve him to see a pretty woman make wry faces, if
she gave him cause to vex her. And your estate, by
the convenience of its situation, would richly pay
him, for all he could bear with your shyness. 
He should be sure, after a while, of your complaisance,
at least, it not of your love: And in That
should be happier than nine parts in ten of his marry'd
acquaintance. 
What a wretch is this! 

For the rest, your known virtue would be as great
a security to him as he could wish for. 
She will look upon you, said Sir Harry (who is a
reader), if she be forced to marry you, as Elizabeth of
France did upon Philip II. of Spain, when he received
her on his frontiers, as her husband, who was to have
been but her father-in-law: That is, with fear and
terror, rather than with complaisance and love: And
you will, perhaps, be as surly to her, as That old
Monarch was to his bride. 
Terror and Fear, the wretch, the horrid wretch,
said, looked pretty in a bride, as well as in a wife: 
And, laughing (yes, my dear, the hideous fellow
laughed immoderately, as Sir Harry told us, when he
said it), It should be his care, to perpetuate the occasion
for that fear, if he could not think he had the
love. And, for his part, he was of opinion, that if
Love and Fear must be separated in matrimony,
the man who made himself feared, fared best! 
If my eyes would carry with them the execution
which the eyes of the Basilisk are said to do, I would
make it my first business to see this creature. 
My mamma, however, says, it would be a prodigious
merit in you, if you could get over your aversion
to him. Where, asks she, as you have been
ask'd before, is the praise-worthiness of obedience, if
it be only paid in instances where we give up nothing? 
What a fatality, that you have no better an option! 
—Either a Scylla or a Charybdis! 
Were it not You, I should know how (barbarously
used, as you are used) to advise you in a moment. 
But such a noble character to suffer from a (supposed)
rashness and indiscretion of such a nature, would be a
wound to the Sex, as I have heretofore observed. 
While I was in hope, that the asserting of your
own independence would have helped you, I was
pleased, that you had one resource, as I thought: But 

now that you have so well proved, that such a step
would not avail you, I am entirely at a loss what to
say. I will lay down my pen, and think. 
* *
I have considered, and considered again; but, I
protest, I know no more what to say, than before. 
Only this: That I am young, like yourself; and
have a much weaker judgment, and stronger passions,
than you have. 
I have heretofore said, that you have offer'd as
much as you ought to offer in living single. If you
were never to marry, the estate they are so loth
should go out of their name, would, in time, I suppose,
revert to your brother: And he or his would
have it, perhaps, much more certainly this way, than
by the precarious reversions Solmes makes them hope
for. Have you put this into their odd heads, my
dear? —The tyrant word Authority, as they use
it, can be the only objection against this offer. 
One thing you must consider, that, if you leave
your parents, your duty and love to them will not
suffer you to appeal against them, to justify yourself
for so doing; and so you'll have the world against
you. And should Lovelace continue his wild life,
and behave ungratefully to you, how will That justify
their conduct to you (which nothing else can), as well
as their resentments against him? 
May heaven direct you for the best! I can only say,
that, for my own part, I would do any-thing, go
any-whither, rather than be compelled to marry the
man I hate; and, were he such a man as Solmes,
must always hate. Nor could I have borne, what
you have borne, if from father and uncles, not from
brother and sister. 
My mamma will have it, that after they have try'd
their utmost efforts to bring you into their measures,
and find them ineffectual, they will recede. But 

cannot say I am of her mind. She does not own,
she has any other authority for this, but her own conjecture. 
I should otherwise have hoped, that your
uncle Antony and she had been in one secret, and
that favourable to you: —Woe be to one of them at
least (your uncle I mean), if they should be in any
other!— 
You must, if possible, avoid being carried to that
uncle's. The man, the parson, the chapel, your
brother and sister present! —they'll certainly there
marry you to Solmes. Nor will your newly-raised
spirit support you in your resistance on such an occasion. 
Your meekness will return; and you will
have nothing for it but tears (tears despised by them
all), and ineffectual appeals and lamentations: —And
these, when the ceremony is profaned, as I may say,
you must suddenly put a stop to, and dry up: And
endeavour to dispose yourself to such an humble frame
of mind, as may induce your new-made Lord to forgive
all your past declarations of aversion. 
In short, my dear, you must then blandish him
over with a confession, that all your past behaviour
was maidenly reserve only: And it will be your part
to convince him of the truth of his impudent sarcasm,
That the coyest maids make the fondest wives. Thus
will you begin the state with a high sense of obligation
to his forgiving goodness! And if you will not
be kept to it by that fear he proposes to govern by, I
am much mistaken. 
Yet, after all, I must leave the point undetermin'd,
and only to be determin'd, as you find they recede
from their avowed purpose, or resolve to remove you
to your uncle Antony's. But I must repeat my wishes,
that something may fall out, that neither of these men
may call you his! And may you live single, my
dearest friend, till some man shall offer, that may be
as worthy of you, as man can be. 
But yet, methinks, I would not, that you, who 

are so admirably qualify'd to adorn the matrimonial
state, should be always single. You know I am incapable
of flattery; and that I always speak and write
the sincere dictates of my heart. Nor can you, from
what you must know of your own merit (taken in a
comparative light with others), doubt my sincerity. 
For why should a person who delights to find out
and admire every thing that is praise-worthy in another,
be supposed ignorant of like perfections in herself,
when she could not so much admire them in
another, if she had them not herself? And why may
not one give her those praises, which she would give
to any other, who had but half of her own excellencies? 
—Especially when she is incapable of pride
and vainglory; and neither despises others for the
want of her fine qualities, nor over-values herself upon
them? —Over-values, did I say! —How can
that be?— 
Forgive me, my beloved friend. My admiration
of you (increased, as it is, by every letter you write)
will not always be held down in silence; altho' in
order to avoid offending you, I generally endeavour
to keep it from flowing to my pen, when I write to
you, or to my lips, whenever I have the happiness to
be in your company. 
I will add nothing, tho' I could an hundred things,
on occasion of your latest communications, but that
I am, 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful,
Anna Howe. 
I hope I have pleased you with my dispatch. I wish
I had been able to please you with my requested
advice. 
You have given new beauties to the charming Ode
which you have transmitted to me. What pity
that the wretches you have to deal with, put 

you out of your admirable course; in the pursuit
of which, like the sun, you was wont to chear
and illuminate all you shone upon. 
