



But now, my dear Mr. B. if you will indulge
me in a Letter or two more, preparative to my
little Book, that I mention'd, I will take the Liberty
to touch upon one or two other Places, wherein
I differ from this learned Gentleman. But, first,
permit me to observe, that if Parents are, above all 

things, to avoid giving bad Examples to their Children,
they will be no less careful to shun the Practice
of such fond Fathers and Mothers, as are wont
to indulge their Children in bad Habits, and give
them their Head, at a time when, like Wax, their
tender Minds may be moulded into what Shape they
please. This is a Point, that, if it please God, I
will carefully attend to, because it is the Foundation,
on which the Superstructure of the whole future
Man is to be erected. For, according as he is indulg'd
or check'd in his childish Follies, a Ground
is laid for his future Happiness or Misery; and if
once they are suffer'd to become habitual to him, it
cannot but be expected, that they will grow up with
him, and that they will hardly ever be eradicated. 
“Try it,” says Mr. Locke, speaking to this very
Point, “in a Dog, or an Horse, or any other
Creature, and see whether the ill and resty Tricks
they have learn'd when young, are easily to be
mended, when they are knit: And yet none of
these Creatures are half so wilful and proud, or
half so desirous to be Masters of themselves, as
Men.” 
And this brings me, dear Sir, to the Head of
Punishments, in which, as well as in the Article of
Rewards, which I have touch'd upon, I have a little
Objection to somewhat advanc'd by Mr. Locke. 
But permit me, Sir, however, to premise, that
I am exceedingly pleas'd with the Method laid down
by this excellent Writer, rather to shame the Child
out of his Fault, than beat him; which latter serves
generally for nothing but to harden his Mind. 
Obstinacy, and telling a Lye, and committing a
wilful Fault, and then persisting in it, are, I agree
with this Gentleman, the only Causes for which
the Child should be punish'd with Stripes: And I 

admire the Reasons he gives against a too rigorous
and severe Treatment of Children. 
But I will give Mr. Locke's Words, to which I
have some Objection. 
“It may be doubted,” says he, “concerning
Whipping, when, as the last Remedy, it comes
to be necessary, at what time, and by whom, it
should be done; whether presently, upon the
committing the Fault, whilst it is yet fresh and
hot–––I think it should not be done presently,” 
adds he, “lest Passion mingle with it; and so, tho'
it exceed the just Proportion, yet it lose of its
due Weight. For even Children discern whenever
we do things in a Passion.” 
I must beg Leave, dear Sir, to differ from Mr.
Locke in this Point; for I think it ought rather to
be a Rule with Parents, who shall chastize their
Children, to conquer what would be extreme in
their own Passion on this Occasion, (for those Parents,
who cannot do it, are very unfit to be Punishers
of the wayward Passions of their Children)
than to defer the Punishment, especially if the Child
knows its Fault has reach'd its Parent's Ear. It is
otherwise, methinks, giving the Child, if of an obstinate
Disposition, so much more Time to harden
its Mind, and bid Defiance to its Punishment. 
Just now, dear Sir, your Billy is brought into my
Presence, all smiling, crowing to come to me, and
full of heart-chearing Promises; and the Subject I am
upon goes to my Heart. Surely, surely, I can never
beat your Billy!–––Dear little Life of my Life! how
can I think thou canst ever deserve it, or I can ever
inflict it? –––No, my Baby, that shall be thy Papa's
Task, if ever thou art so heinously naughty; and
whatever he does, must be right. –––Pardon my foolish
Fondness, dear Sir! –––I will proceed. 

If then, I humbly presume to advise, the Fault
be so atrocious as to deserve Whipping, and the Parent
be resolv'd on this exemplary Punishment, by
no means, I should imagine, ought the Child,–––poor
dear little Soul!–––to come into one's Presence without
meeting his due Reward. For else, I should
think, a Fondness too natural to be resisted, will
get the Upper-hand of one's Resentment, and how
shall one be able to whip the dear Creature one cannot
be angry with? Then after he has once seen
one without meeting his Punishment, will he not
be inclin'd to hope for Connivance at his Fault? 
And may he not be apt (for Childrens Resentments
are strong) to impute to Cruelty, a Correction, that
should always appear to be inflicted with Reluctance,
and thro' Motives of Love? 
If, from Anger at his Fault, one should go above
the due Proportion, (I am sure I might be trusted
for this!) let it take its Course! –––How barbarously,
methinks, I speak! –––He ought to feel the Lash,
first, Because he deserves it, poor little Creature! 
Next, Because it is propos'd to be exemplary. And
lastly, Because it is not intended to be often us'd: 
And the very Passion or Displeasure one expresses,
(if it be not enormous) will shew one is in Earnest,
and inspire him with a necessary Awe, and make
him be afraid to offend again. The End of the
Correction is to shew him the Difference betwixt a
kind Parent, and a provok'd one: And as it is proper
to take him at his first Offer of a full Submission
and Repentance, (and not before) and instantly dispassionate
one's self, and shew him the Difference
by Acts of Pardon and Kindness, (which will let
him see, that one punishes him out of Necessity rather
than Choice) so one would not be afraid to
make him smart so sufficiently, that he should not 

soon forget the Severity of the Discipline, nor the
Disgrace of it. There's a cruel Mamma for you,
Mr. B.! What my Practice may be, I can't tell; 
but this Theory, I presume to think, is right. 
As to the Act itself, I much approve Mr. Locke's
Advice, to do it by Pauses, mingling Stripes and
Expostulations together, to shame and terrify the
more; and the rather, as the Parent, by this slow
manner of inflicting the Punishment, will less need
to be afraid of giving too violent a Correction; for
those Pauses will afford him, as well as the Child,
Opportunities for Consideration and Reflection. 
But as to the Person, by whom the Discipline
should be perform'd, I humbly conceive, that
this excellent Author is here also to be objected to. 
“If you have a discreet Servant,” says he,
“capable of it, and has the Place of governing
your Child, (for if you have a Tutor, there is
no Doubt) I think it is best the Smart should
come immediately from another's Hand, tho' by
the Parent's Order, who should see it done; 
whereby the Parent's Authority will be preserv'd,
and the Child's Aversion for the Pain it suffers,
rather be turn'd on the Person that immediately
inflicts it. For I would have a Father seldom
strike the Child, but upon very urgent Necessity,
and as the last Remedy.” 
'Tis in such an urgent Case, dear Sir, that we
are supposing it should be done at all. If there be
not a Reason strong enough for the Father's whipping
the Child himself, there cannot be any sufficient
for his ordering any other to do it, and standing
by to see it done: But, I humbly presume to
think, that if there be a Necessity for it, no one can
be so fit as the Father himself to do it. The Child
cannot dispute his Authority to punish, from whom 

he receives and expects all the good Things of this
Life: He cannot question his Love to him, and,
after the Smart is over, and his Obedience secur'd,
must believe that so tender, so indulgent a Father,
could have no other End in whipping him, but his
Good. Against him, he knows, he has no Remedy,
but must passively submit; and when he is
convinc'd he must, he will in time conclude, that
he ought. 
But to have this severe Office perform'd by a
Servant, tho' at the Father's Command; and that
professedly, that the Aversion of the Child for the
Pain it suffers, should be turn'd on the Person who
immediately inflicts it, is, I am humbly of Opinion,
the Reverse of what ought to be done. And
more so, if this Servant has any Direction of the
Child's Education; and still much more so, if it be
his Tutor, notwithstanding Mr. Locke says, there
is no Doubt, if there be a Tutor, that it should be
done by him. 
For, dear Sir, is there no Doubt, that the Tutor
should lay himself open to the Aversion of the Child,
whose Morals he is to direct, whose Manners he is
to form? Is it not the best Method a Tutor can
take, in order to inforce the Lessons he would inculcate,
to endeavour to attract the Love and Attention
of his Pupil by the most winning, mild, and inviting
Ways that he can possibly think of? And yet is he,
this very Tutor, out of all Doubt, to be the Instrument
of doing an harsh and disgraceful thing, and
that in the last Resort, when all other Methods are
found ineffectual; and that too, because he ought
to incur the Child's Resentment and Aversion, rather
than the Father? No, surely, Sir, it is not
reasonable it should be so: Quite contrary, in my 

humble Notion, there can be no Doubt, that it
should be otberwise. 
It should, methinks, be enough for a Tutor, in
case of a Fault in the Child, to threaten to complain
to his Father; but yet not to make such Complaint,
without the Child obstinately persists in his
Error, which, too, should be of a Nature to merit
such an Appeal: And this, methinks, would highly
contribute to preserve the Parent's Authority; who,
on this Occasion, should never fail of extorting a
Promise of Amendment, or of instantly punishing
him with his own Hands. And, to heighten the
Esteem of the Child to his Tutor, and to reconcile
him to him for complaining of him, it might not,
possibly, be amiss, that his Interposition in the
Child's Favour, if the Fault were not too flagrant,
should be permitted to save him once or twice from
the impending Discipline. 
'Tis certain, that the Passions, if I may so call
them, of Affection and Aversion are very early discoverable
in Children; insomuch that they will,
even before they can speak, afford us Marks for
the Detection of an hypocritical Appearance of
Love to it before the Parents Faces. For the Fondness
or Averseness of the Child to some Servants, as
I have observ'd in other Families, will at any time
let one know, whether their Love to the Baby is
uniform and the same, when one is absent, as present. 
For in one Case the Child will reject with
Sullenness all the little Sycophancies, that are made
to it in one's Sight; while, on the other, its Fondness
of one, who generally obliges it, is an infallible
Rule to judge of such an one's Sincerity behind one's
Back. This little Instance shews the Strength of a
Child's Resentments, and its Sagacity, at the earliest
Age, in discovering who obliges, and who disobliges 

it: And hence one may infer, how improper
a Person he is, whom we would have a Child to
love and respect, or by whose Precepts we would
have it directed, to be the Punisher of his Faults, or
to do any harsh or disagreeable Office to it. 
For my own Part, dear Sir, I must take the Liberty
to declare, that if the Parent were not to inflict
the Punishment himself, I think it much better
it should be given him, in the Parent's Presence, by
the Servant of the lowest Consideration in the Family,
and one whose Manners and Example one
would be the least willing of any other he should
follow. Just as the common Executioner, who is
the lowest and most flagitious Officer of the Commonwealth,
and who frequently deserves, as much
as the Criminal, the Punishment he is chosen to inflict,
is pitch'd upon to perform, as a Mark of
greater Ignominy, those Sentences which are intended
as Examples to deter others from the Commission
of heinous Crimes. And this was the Method
the Almighty took, when he was dispos'd to
correct severely his chosen People: For in that Case
He generally did it by the Hands of the most profligate
Nations around them, as we read in many
Places of the Old Testament. 
But the following Rule, among a thousand others,
equally excellent, I admire in Mr. Locke: “When,” 
says he, “(for any Misdemeanour) the Father or
Mother looks sour on the Child, every one else
should put on the same Coldness to him, and nobody
give him Countenance till Forgiveness ask'd,
and a Reformation of his Fault has set him right
again, and restor'd him to his former Credit. If
this were constantly observ'd,” adds he, “I
guess there would be little Need of Blows or
Chiding: Their own Ease or Satisfaction would 

quickly teach Children to court Commendation,
and avoid doing that which they found every
body condemn'd, and they were sure to suffer
for, without being chid or beaten. This would
teach them Modesty and Shame, and they would
quickly come to have a natural Abhorrence for
that which they found made them slighted and
neglected by every body.” 
This affords me, dear Sir, a pretty Hint: For if
ever your charming Billy should be naughty, what
would I do, but proclaim throughout your worthy
Family, that the little Dear was in Disgrace! And
one should shun him, another should decline answering
him, a third should say, No, Master, I
cannot obey you, till your Mamma is pleas'd with
you: A fourth, Who should mind what little Masters
bid them do, when little Masters won't mind
what their Mamma's say to them? And when the
dear little Soul found this, he would come in my
Way, and I see (pardon me, my dear Mr. B.) he
has some of his Papa's Spirit already, indeed he has!
and I will direct myself with double Kindness to
your beloved Davers, and to my Miss Goodwin, and
take no Notice at all of the dear Creature, if I can
help it, till I see his Papa (forgive my Boldness, Sir)
banish'd from his little sullen Brow, and all his
Mamma rise to his Eyes: And when his musical
Tongue shall be unlock'd to own his Fault, and
promise Amendment–––O then! how shall I clasp
him to my Bosom! and Tears of Joy, I know,
will meet his Tears of Penitence! –––How these
Flights, dear Sir, please a body! –––What Delights
have those Mamma's, (which some fashionable Ladies
are quite unacquainted with) who can make
their dear Babies, and their first Educations, their
Entertainment and Diversion! To watch the beamy 

Dawnings of Reason in them, to direct their little
Passions, as they shew themselves, to this or that
particular Point of Benefit and Use; and to prepare
the sweet Virgin Soil of their Minds to receive the
Seeds of Virtue and Goodness so early, that as they
grow up, one need only now a little Pruning, and
now a little Watering, to make them the Ornaments
and Delights of the Garden of this Life! And
then their pretty Ways, their fond and grateful Endearments,
some new Beauty every Day rising to
Observation–––O my dearest Mr. B. whose Enjoyments
and Pleasures are so great, as those of such
Mamma's as can bend their Minds, two or three
Hours every Day, to the Duties of the Nursery? 
I have a few other things to observe upon Mr.
Locke's Treatise, which when I have done, I shall
read, admire, and improve by the rest, as my Years
and Experiences advance; of which, in my propos'd
little Book, I shall give you better Proofs than
I am able to do at present; raw, crude, and indigested
as the Notions of so young a Mamma must
needs be. But these shall be the Subjects of another
Letter; for now I am come to the Pride and the
Pleasure I always have, when I subscribe myself,
dearest Sir, 
Your ever dutiful and grateful
P. B. 

