


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Thursday, April 27. 
Every one of the Dunstable party say, that you
are a grateful and good girl. Beauchamp can
talk of nobody else of our Sex: I believe in my conscience
he is in Love with you. I think all the unprovided-for
young women where-ever you come
must hate you. Was you never by surprize carried
into the chamber of a friend labouring with the Smallpox,
in the infectious stage of it? —O but I think you
once said you had had that distemper. But your
mind, Harriet, were your face to be ruined, would
make you admirers. The fellows who could think
of preferring even such a face to such a heart, may be
turned over to the class of insignificants. 
Is not your aunt Selby, you ask, an excellent woman? 
—She is. I admire her. But I am very angry
with you for deferring to another time, acquainting
me with what she said of me. When we are taken
with any-body, we love they should be taken with us. 
Teazing Harriet! You know what an immoderate
quantity of curiosity I have. Never serve me so
again! 
I am in Love with your cousin Lucy. Were either
Fenwick or Greville good enough—But they are not. 

I think she shall have Mr. Orme. Nancy, you say,
is such another good girl. I don't doubt it. Is she
not your cousin, and Lucy's sister? But I cannot undertake
for every good girl who wants a husband. I
wish I had seen Lucy a fortnight ago: Then Nancy
might have had Mr. Orme, and Lucy should have
had Lord G. He admires her greatly. And do you
think that a man who at that time professed for me so
much Love and Service, and all that, would have
scrupled to oblige me, had I (as I easily should) proved
to him, that he would have been a much happier
man than he could hope to be with Somebody else? 
Your uncle is a pleasant man: But tell him I say,
that the man would be out of his wits, that did not
make the preference he does in favour of his Dame
Selby, as he calls her. Tell him also, if you please,
in return for his plain dealing, that I say, he studies
too much for his pleasantries: He is continually hunting
for occasions to be smart. I have heard my father
say, that this was the fault of some wits of his acquaintance,
whom he ranked among the wit-lings for
it. If you think it will mortify him more, you may
tell him (for I am very revengeful when I think myself
affronted) that were I at liberty, which, God help me,
I am not! I would sooner choose for a husband the
man I have (poor soul, as I now-and-then think
him) than such a teazing creature as himself, were
both in my power, and both of an age. And I should
have this good reason for my preference: Your uncle
and I should have been too much alike, and so been
jealous of each other's wit; whereas I can make my
honest Lord G. look about him, and admire me
strangely, whenever I please. 
But I am, it seems, a person of a particular character. 
Every one, you say, loves me, yet blames
me. Odd characters, my dear, are needful to make
even characters shine. You good girls would not be
valued as you are, if there were not bad ones. Have 

you not heard it said, That all human excellence is
but comparative? Pray allow of the contrast. You,
I am sure, ought. You are an ungrateful creature, if,
whenever you think of my over-livelinesses, as you
call 'em, you don't drop a courtesy, and say, You are
obliged to me. 
But still the attack made upon you in your dressingroom
at Colnebrooke, by my sister and me, sticks in
your stomach—And why so? We were willing to
shew you, that we were not the silly people you must
have thought us, had we not been able to distinguish
light from darkness. You, who ever were, I believe,
one of the frankest-hearted girls in Britain, and admired
for the ease and dignity given you by that frankness,
were growing aukward, nay dishonest. Your
gratitude! your gratitude! was the dust you wanted
to throw into our eyes, that we might not see that
you were governed by a stronger motive. You called
us your friends, your sisters, but treated us not as
either; and this man, and that, and t'other, you could
refuse; and why? No reason given for it; and we
were to be popt off with your gratitude, truly! —We
were to believe just what you said, and no more; 
nay, not so much as you said. But we were not so
implicit. Nor would you, in our case, have been
so. 
But ‘you, perhaps, would not have violently
broken in upon a poor thing, who thought we were
blind, because she was not willing we should see.’ — 
May be not: But then, in that case, we were honester
than you would have been; that's all. Here, said I,
Lady L. is this poor girl aukwardly struggling to conceal
what every-body sees; and, seeing, applauds her
for, the man considered (Yes, Harriet, the man considered; 
be pleased to take that in): Let us, in pity,
relieve her. She is thought to be frank, open-hearted,
communicative; nay, she passes herself upon us in
those characters: She sees we keep nothing from her. 

She has been acquainted with your Love before Wedlock; 
with my Folly, in relation to Anderson: She has
carried her head above a score or two of men not contemptible. 
She sits enthroned among us, while we
make but common figures at her footstool: She calls
us sisters, friends, and twenty pretty names. Let us
acquaint her, that we see into her heart; and why
Lord D. and others are so indifferent with her. If she
is ingenuous, let us spare her; if not, leave me to
punish her—Yet we will keep up her punctilio as to
our brother; we will leave him to make his own discoveries. 
She may confide in his politeness; and the
result will be happier for her; because she will then
be under no restraint to us, and her native freedom of
heart may again take its course. 
Agreed, agreed, said Lady L.—And arm in arm,
we entered your dressing-room, dismissed the maid,
and began the attack—And, O Harriet! how you hesitated,
paraded, fooled on with us, before you came
to confession! Indeed you deserved not the mercy we
shewed you—So, child, you had better to have let
this part of your story sleep in peace. 
You bid me not tell Emily that your cousin is in
Love with her: But I think I will. Girls begin very
early to look out for admirers. It is better, in order
to stay her stomach, to find out one for her, than that
she should find out one for herself; especially when
the man is among ourselves, as I may say, and both
are in our own management, and at distance from each
other. Emily is a good girl; but she has susceptibilities
already: And tho' I would not encourage her, as
yet, to look out of herself for happiness; yet I would
give her consequence with berself, and at the same
time let her see, that there could be no mention made
of any-thing that related to her, but what she should
be acquainted with. Dear girl! I love her as well as
you; and I pity her too: For she, as well as Somebody
else, will have difficulties to contend with, 

which she will not know easily how to get over; tho'
she can, in a flame so young, generously prefer the
interest of a more excellent woman to her own. — 
There, Harriet, is a grave paragraph: You'll like me
for it. 
You are a very reflecting girl, in mentioning to me
so particularly, your behaviour to your Grevilles, Fenwicks,
and Ormes. What is that but saying, See,
Charlotte! I am a much more complaisant creature to
the men, no one of which I intend to have, than you
are to your husband! 
What a pious woman, indeed, must be your grandmamma,
that she could suspend her joy, her longabsent
darling at her feet, till she had first thank'd
God for restoring her to her arms! But, in this instance,
we see the force of habitual piety. Tho' not
so good as I should be myself, I revere those who are
so; and that I hope you will own is no bad sign. 
Well, but now for ourselves, and those about us. 
Lady Olivia has written Lady L. a Letter from
Windfor. It is in French; extremely polite. She
promises to write to me from Oxford. 
Lady Anne S. Made me a visit this morning. She
was more concerned than I wished to see her, on my
confirming the report she had heard of my brother's
being gone abroad. I raillied her a little too freely,
as it was before Lord G. and Lord L. I never was
better rebuked than by her; for she took out her pencil,
and on the cover of a Letter wrote these lines
from Shakespeare, and slid them into my hand: 

And will you rend our ancient Love asunder,
To join with Men, in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly; 'tis not maidenly:
Our Sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Tho' I alone do feel the injury.

I never, my dear, told you how freely this Lady
and I had talked of Love: But freely as we had talked, 

I was not aware that the matter lay so deep in her
heart. I knew not how to tell her that my brother
had said, It could not be. I could have wept over her
when I read this paper; and I owned myself by a
whisper justly rebuked. She charged me not to let
any man see this; particularly not either of those
present: And do you, Harriet, keep what I have written
of Lady Anne to yourself. 
My aunt Eleanor has written a congratulatory Letter
to me from York. Sir Charles, it seems, had acquainted
her with Lord G.'s day [Not my day, Harriet!
that is not the phrase, I hope!] as soon as he
knew it himself; and she writes, supposing that I was
actually offered on it. Women are victims on these
occasions: I hope you'll allow me that. My brother
has made it a point of duty to acquaint his father's
sister with every matter of consequence to the family; 
and now, she says, that both her nieces are so well
disposed of, she will come to town very quickly to see
her new relations and us; and desires we will make
room for her. And yet she owns, that my brother
has informed her of his being obliged to go abroad; 
and she supposes him gone. As he is the beloved of
her heart, I wonder she thinks of making this visit
now he is absent: But we shall all be glad to see my
aunt Nell. She is a good creature, tho' an old maid. 
I hope the old Lady has not utterly lost either her invention,
or memory; and then, between both, I shall
be entertained with a great number of Love-stories of
the lastage; and perhaps of some dangers and escapes; 
which may serve for warnings for Emily. Alas! alas!
they will come too late for your Charlotte! 
I have written already the longest Letter that I ever
wrote in my life: Yet it is prating; and to you, to
whom I love to prate. I have not near done. 
You bid me be good; and you threaten me, if I
am not, with the ill opinion of all your friends: But I
have such an unaccountable biass for roguery, or what 

shall I call it? that I believe it is impossible for me to
take your advice. I have been examining myself. 
What a duce is the matter with me, that I cannot see
my honest man in the same advantageous light in
which he appears to every-body else? Yet I do not,
in my heart, dislike him. On the contrary, I know
not, were I to look about me, far and wide, the man
I would have wished to have called mine, rather than
him. But he is so important about trifles; so nimble,
yet so slow: He is so sensible of his own intention to
please, and has so many antic motions in his obligingness; 
that I cannot forbear laughing at the very time
that I ought perhaps to reward him with a gracious approbation. 
I must fool on a little while longer, I believe: Permit
me, Harriet, so to do, as occasions arise. 
* *
An instance, an instance in point, Harriet. Let
me laugh as I write. I did at the time. —What do
you laugh at, Charlotte? —Why this poor man, or,
as I should rather say, this Lord and Master of mine,
has just left me. He has been making me both a
compliment, and a present. And what do you think
the compliment is? Why, if I please, he will give
away to a virtuoso friend, his collection of Moths and
Butterflies: I once, he remembered, raillied him upon
them. And by what study, thought I, wilt thou,
honest man, supply their place? If thou hast a talent
this way, pursue it; since perhaps thou wilt not shine
in any other. And the best any-thing, you know,
Harriet, carries with it the appearance of excellence. 
Nay, he would also part with his collection of Shells,
if I had no objection. 
To whom my Lord? —He had not resolved. —Why
then, only as Emily is too little of a child, or you
might give them to her. ‘Too little of a child,
‘madam!’ and a great deal of bustle and importance
took possession of his features—Let me tell you,
madam—I won't let you, my Lord; and I laughed. 

Well, madam, I hope here is something coming
up that you will not disdain to accept of yourself. 
Up came groaning under the weight, or rather
under the care, two servants with baskets: A fine set
of old Japan China with brown edges, believe me. 
They sat down their baskets, and withdrew. 
Would you not have been delighted, Harriet, to
see my Lord busying himself with taking out, and putting
in the windows, one at a time, the cups, plates,
jars, and saucers, rejoicing and parading over them,
and shewing his connoisseurship to his motionless admiring
wife, in commending this and the other piece
as a beauty? And, when he had done, taking the liberty,
as he phrased it, half fearful, half resolute, to
salute his bride for his reward; and then pacing backwards
several steps, with such a strut and a crow—I
see him yet! —Indulge me, Harriet! —I burst into a
hearty laugh; I could not help it: And he, reddening,
looked round himself, and round himself, to see if anything
was amiss in his garb. The man, the man!
honest friend, I could have said, but had too much
reverence for my husband, is the oddity! Nothing
amiss in the garb. 
O Harriet! Why did you beseech me to be good? 
I think in my heart I have the stronger inclination to
be bad for it! You call me perverse: If you think me
so, bid me be saucy, bid me be bad; and I may then,
like other good wives, take the contrary course for the
sake of dear contradiction. 
Shew not, however, (I in turn beseech you) to your
grandmamma and aunt, such parts of this Letter as
would make them despise me. You say, you stand up
for me; I have need of your advocateship: Never let
me want it. And do I not, after all, do a greater
credit to my good man, when I can so heartily laugh in
the wedded state, than if I were to sit down with my
finger in my eye? 
I have taken your advice, and presented my sister 

with my half of the jewels. I desired her to accept
them, as they were my mother's, and for her sake. 
This gave them a value with her, more than equal
with their worth: But Lord L. is uneasy, and declares
he will not suffer Lady L. long to lie under the obligation. 
Were every one of family in South Britain
and North Britain to be as generous and disinterested
as Lord L. and our family, the union of the two parts
of the island would be complete. 
* *
Lord help this poor obliging man! I wish I don't
love him, at last. He has taken my hint, and has
presented his collection of Shells (a very fine one, he
says, it is) to Emily; and they two are actually busied
(and will be for an hour or two, I doubt not) in
admiring them; the one strutting over the beauties, in
order to enhance the value of the present; the other
courtesying ten times in a minute, to shew her gratitude. 
Poor man! When his virtuoso friend has got
his Butterflies and Moths, I am afraid he must set up a
turner's shop, for employment. If he loved reading,
I could, when our visiting hurries are over, set him to
read to me the new things that come out, while I knot
or work; and, if he loved writing, to copy the Letters
which pass between you and me, and those for you
which I expect with so much impatience from my brother
by means of Dr. Bartlett. I think he spells
pretty well, for a Lord. 
I have no more to say, at present, but compliments,
without number or measure, to all you so deservedly
love and honour; as well those I have not seen, as
those I have. 
Only one thing: Reveal to me all the secrets of
your heart, and how that heart is from time to time
affected; that I may know whether you are capable of
that greatness of mind in a Love-case, that you shew
in all others. We will all allow you to love Sir
Charles Grandison. Those who do, give honour to 

themselves, if their eyes stop not at person, his having
so many advantages. For the same reason, I make
no apologies, and never did, for praising my brother,
as any other lover of him might do. 
Let me know every thing how and about your fellows,
too. Ah! Harriet, you make not the use of
power that I would have done in your situation. I
was half-sorry when my hurrying brother made me
dismiss Sir Walter; and yet, to have but two danglers
after one, are poor doings for a fine Lady. Poorer
still, to have but one! 
Here's a Letter as long as my arm. Adieu. I was
loth to come to the name: But defer it ever so long, I
must subscribe, at last, 
Charlotte G. 

