


I am invited to the Villa of a Spanish Don,
where we meet with an English gentleman,
and make a very interesting discovery— 
we leave Buenos Ayres, and arrive at Jamaica. 
Our ship being freed from the disagreeable
lading of Negroes, to whom indeed I had
been a miserable slave, since our leaving the coast
of Guinea, I began to enjoy myself, and breathe
with pleasure the pure air of Paraguay, this part
of which is reckoned the Montpelier of South
America, and has obtained, on account of its
climate, the name of Buenos Ayres. —It was in
this delicious place, that I gave myself entirely
up to the thoughts of my dear Narcissa, whose
image still kept full possession of my breast, and
whose charms, enhanced by absence, appeared to
my imagination, if possible, more engaging than
ever! I calculated the profits of my voyage,
which even exceeded my expectation; resolved
to purchase a handsome fine-cure upon my arrival
in England, and if I should find the Squire
as averse to me as ever, marry his sister by stealth; 
and in case our family should encrease, rely upon
the generosity of my uncle, who was by this
time worth a considerable sum. 
While I amused myself with these agreeable
projects, and the transporting hopes of enjoying 

Narcissa, we were very much caressed by the
Spanish gentlemen, who frequently formed parties
of pleasure for our entertainment, in which
we made excursions a good way into the country. 
Among those who signalized themselves by their
civility to us, there was one Don Antonio de
Ribera, a very polite young gentleman, with
whom I had contracted an intimate friendship,
who invited us one day to his country-house, and
as a further inducement to our compliance, promised
to procure for us the company of an English
signor, who had been settled in these parts
many years, and acquired the love and esteem of
the whole province by his affability, good sense,
and honourable behaviour. 
We accepted his invitation, and set out for his
Villa, where we had not been longer than an
hour, when the person arrived, in whose favour
I had been so much prepossessed. —He was a tall
man, remarkably well shaped, of a fine mein
and appearance commanding respect, and seemed
to be turned of forty; the features of his face
were saddened with a reserve and gravity, which in
other countries would have been thought the effect
of melancholy; but here, appeared to have
been contracted by his commerce with the Spaniards,
who are remarkable for that severity of
countenance: Understanding from Don Antonio,
that we were his countrymen, he saluted us all
round very complaisantly, and fixing his eyes
attentively on me, uttered a deep sigh. —I had
been struck with a profound veneration for him
at his first coming into the room; and no sooner
observed this expression of his sorrow, directed, as
it were, in a particular manner to me, than my
heart took part in his grief, I sympathized involuntarily, 

and sighed in my turn. —Having asked
leave of our entertainer, he accosted us in English,
professed his satisfaction at seeing so many
of his countrymen in such a remote place, and
asked the captain, who went by the name of
Signor Thoma, from what part of Britain he
sailed, and whither he was bound. —My uncle
told him that we had sailed from the river Thames,
and were bound for the same place, by the way
of Jamaica, where we intended to take in a
lading of sugar. 
Having satisfied himself in these and other particulars
about the state of the war, he gave us
to understand, that he had a longing desire to
revisit his native country, in consequence of which,
he had already transmitted to Europe the greatest
part of his fortune in neutral bottoms, and would
willingly embark the rest of it, with himself, in
our ship, provided the captain had no objection
to such a passenger. —My uncle very prudently
replied, that for his part, he should be glad of
his company, if he could procure the consent of
the governor, without which he durst not admit
him on board, whatever inclination he had to
oblige him. —The gentleman approved of his discretion,
and telling him, that there would be no
difficulty in obtaining the connivance of the governor,
who was his good friend, shifted the conversation
to another subject. 
I was overjoyed to hear his intention, and already
interested myself so much in his favour,
that had he been disappointed, I should have been
very unhappy: In the course of our entertainment,
he eyed me with uncommon attachment; I
felt a surprizing attraction towards him; when he
spoke, I listened with attention and reverence; 

the dignity of his deportment filled me with affection
and awe; and in short, the emotions of
my soul, in presence of this stranger, were strong
and unaccountable. 
Having spent the best part of the day with us,
he took his leave, telling captain Thoma, that
he would hear from him in a short time: He was
no sooner gone, than I asked a thousand questions
about him, of Don Antonio, who could give
me no other satisfaction, than that his name was
Don Rodriguez, that he had lived fifteen or sixteen
years in these parts, was reputed rich, and
supposed to have been unfortunate in his younger
years, because he was observed to nourish a pensive
melancholy, even from the time of his first
settlement among them but that no body had
ventured to enquire into the cause of his sorrow,
in consideration of his peace, which might suffer
in the recapitulation of his misfortunes. 
I was seized with an irresistible desire of knowing
the particulars of his fate, and enjoyed not
one hour of repose during the whole night, by
reason of the eager conceptions that inspired me,
with regard to history, which I resolved (if possible)
to learn. —Next morning, while we were at breakfast,
three mules richly caparisoned arrived, with a
message from Don Rodriguez, desiring our company,
and that of Don Antonio, at his house,
which was situated about ten miles further up in
the country. —I was pleased with this invitation,
in consequence of which we mounted the mules
which he had provided for us, and alighted at his
house before noon. —Here we were splendidly
entertained by the generous stranger, who still
seemed to shew a particular regard for me, and after
dinner, made me a present of a ring set with 

a beautiful amethyst, the production of that
country, saying at the same time, that he was
once blessed with a son, who, had he lived, would
have been nearly of my age. This observation,
delivered with a profound sigh, made my heart
throb with violence; a crowd of confused ideas
rushed upon my imagination, which, while I endeavoured
to unravel, my uncle perceived my
absence of thought, and tapping me on the
shoulder, said, “Oons! are you asleep, Rory!” 
Before I had time to reply, Don Rodriguez, with
an uncommon eagerness of voice and look, pronounced,
“Pray, captain, what is the young gentleman's
name?” —“His name (said my uncle)
is Roderick Random.” —“Gracious Powers!” 
(cried the stranger, starting up)—“And his
mother's—His mother (answered the captain,
amazed) was called Charlotte Bowling.” — 
“O bounteous heaven! (exclaimed Don Rodriguez,
springing across the table, and clasping
me in his arms) my son! my son! have I
found thee again? do I hold thee in my embrace,
after having lost and despaired of seeing
thee, so long?” So saying, he fell upon
my neck and wept aloud with joy; while the
power of nature operating strongly in my breast,
I was lost in rapture, and while he pressed me
to his heart, let fall a shower of tears into his
bosom. —His utterance was choaked up a good
while, by the agitation of his soul; at length he
broke out into “Mysterious Providence! —O
my dear Charlotte! there yet remains a pledge
of our love! and such a pledge!—so found! 
—O infinite goodness! let me adore thy all-wise
decrees!” Having thus expressed himself,
he kneeled upon the floor, lifted up his eyes 

and hands to heaven, and remained some minutes
in a silent exstacy of devotion: I put myself
in the same posture, adored the all-good Disposer
in a prayer of mental thanksgiving; and
when his ejaculation was ended, did homage to
my father, and craved his parental blessing. He
hugged me again with unutterable fondness, and
having implored the protection of heaven upon
my head, raised me from the ground, and presented
me as his son to the company, who wept
in concert over this affecting scene. —Among the
rest my uncle did not fail of discovering the goodness
and joy of his heart, albeit unused to the melting
mood; he blubbered with great tenderness,
and wringing my father's hand, cry'd, “Brother
Random, I'm rejoiced to see you—God be
praised for this happy meeting.” —Don Rodriguez,
understanding that he was his brother-in-law,
embraced him affectionately, saying, “Are you my
Charlotte's brother?—alas! unhappy Charlotte!
—but why should I repine? we shall meet again,
never more to part! —Brother, you are truly welcome
—Dear son, I am transported with unspeakable
joy! —This day is a jubilee—my
friends and servants shall share my satisfaction.” 
While he dispatched messengers to the gentlemen
in the neighbourhood, to annonce this event,
and gave orders for a grand entertainment, I was
so much affected with the tumults of passion,
which assailed me on this great, sudden, and unexpected
occasion, that I fell sick, fevered, and
in less than three hours, became quite delirious; 
so that the preparations were countermanded,
and the joy of the family converted
into grief and despair. —Physicians were 

instantly called, I was plentifully blooded in the
foot, my lower extremities were bathed in a decoction
of salutiferous herbs; in ten hours after
I was taken ill, I enjoyed a critical sweat, and
next day, felt no remains of the distemper, but
an agreeable lassitude, which did not hinder me
from getting up—During the progress of this
fever, which, from the term of its duration, is
called Ephemera, my father never once quitted my
bed-side, but administred the prescriptions of the
physicians with the most pious care; while Captain
Bowling manifested his concern by the like attendance. 
—I no sooner found myself delivered from the
disease, than I bethought myself of my honest
friend Strap; and resolving to make him happy
forthwith, in the knowledge of my good fortune,
told my father, in general, that I had been
infinitely obliged to this faithful adherent; and
begged he would indulge me so far as to send
for him, without letting him know my happiness,
until he could receive an account of it from my
own mouth. 
My request was instantly complied with, and
a messenger with a spare mule detached to the
ship, carrying orders from the captain to the mate
to send the steward by the bearer. —My health
being, in the mean time, re-established, and my
mind composed, I began to relish this important
turn of my fortune, in reflecting upon the advantages
with which it must be attended; and as the
idea of my lovely Narcissa always joined itself to
every scene of happiness I could imagine, I entertained
myself now, with the prospect of possessing
her in that distinguished sphere, to which
she was intitled by her birth and qualifications. 
—Having often mentioned her name while I was 

deprived of my senses, my father guessed that
there was an intimate connexion between us,
and discovering the picture which hung in my
bosom by a ribbon, did not doubt that it was
the resemblance of my amiable mistress: In
this belief he was confirmed by my uncle, who
told him that it was the picture of a young woman,
to whom I was under promise of marriage. 
—Alarmed at this piece of information, Don
Rodriguez took the first opportunity of questioning
me about the circumstances of this affair,
which when I had candidly recounted, he approved
of my passion, and promised to contribute
all in his power towards its success: though
I never doubted his generosity, I was transported
on this occasion, and throwing myself at his feet,
told him, he had now compleated my happiness; 
for without the possession of Narcissa, I should
be miserable among all the pleasures of life. —He
raised me with a smile of paternal fondness; 
said, he knew what it was to be in love; and observed,
that if he had been as tenderly beloved
by his father, as I was by mine, he would not
now, perhaps, have cause—Here he was interrupted
by a sigh, the tear stood collected in
his eye, he suppressed the dictates of his grief,
and the time being opportune, desired me to relate
the passages of my life, which my uncle had
told him were manifold and surprizing. —I recounted
the most material circumstances of my
fortune, to which he listened with wonder and
attention, manifesting from time to time those
different emotions, which my different situations
may be supposed to have raised in a parent's
breast; and when my detail was ended, blessed
God for the adversity I had undergone, which, 

he said, enlarged the understanding, improved
the heart, steeled the constitution, and qualified
a young man for all the duties and enjoyments
of life, much better than any education which
affluence could bestow. 
When I had thus satisfied his curiosity, I discovered
an inclination to hear the particulars
of his story, which he gratified, by beginning
with his marriage, and proceeding to the day of
his disappearing, as I have related in the first
part of my memoirs, “Careless of life (continued
he) and unable to live in a place where
every object recalled the memory of my dear
Charlotte, whom I had lost through the barbarity
of an unnatural parent, I took my
leave of you, my child, then an infant, with
an heart full of unutterable woe, but little
suspecting that my father's unkindness would
have descended to my innocent orphan; and
setting out alone, at midnight, for the nearest
sea-port, early next morning got on board a
ship, bound, as I had heard, for France,
and bargaining with the master for my passage,
bid a long adieu to my native country,
and put to sea with the first fair wind. The
place of our destination was Granville, but we
had the misfortune to run upon a ridge of rocks
near the island of Alderney called the Gaskets,
where the sea running high, the ship went to
pieces, the boat sunk along-side, and every soul
on board perished, except myself, who by
the assistance of a grating, got ashore on
the coast of Normandy: I went directly to
Caen, where I was so lucky as to meet with a
Count, whom I had formerly known in my
travels: With this gentleman, I set out for 

Paris, where I was recommended by him and
other friends, as a tutor to a young nobleman,
whom I accompanied to the court of
Spain. —There we remained a whole year,
at the end of which my pupil being recalled by
his father, I quitted my office and staid behind,
by the advice of a certain Spanish grandee
who took me into his protection, and introduced
me to another nobleman, who was
afterwards created Viceroy of Peru. —He insisted
on my attending him to his government in
the Indies, where, however, by reason of my
religion, it was not in his power to make
my fortune any other way than by encouraging
me to trade, which I had not long prosecuted
when my patron died, and I found myself in
the midst of strangers, without one friend to
support or protect me; urged by this consideration,
I sold my effects and removed to
this country, the governour of which having
been appointed by the Vice-roy, was my intimate
acquaintance. —Here has heaven prospered
my endeavours, during a residence of
sixteen years, in which my tranquillity was
never invaded, but by the remembrance of
your mother, whose death I have in secret
mourned without ceasing; and the reflection
of you, whose fate I could never learn, notwithstanding
all my inquiries, by means of
my friends in France, who, after the most
strict examination, could give me no other
account, than that you went abroad six years
ago, and was never after heard of. —I could
not rest satisfied with this imperfect information,
and though my hope of finding you was 

but languid, resolved to go in quest of you
in person; for which purpose, I have remitted
to Holland the value of twenty thousand pound,
and am in possession of fifteen thousand more,
with which I intended to embark myself on
board of captain Bowling, before I discovered
this amazing stroke of providence, which you
may be sure has not altered my intention.” 
My father having entertained us with this agreeable
sketch of his life, withdrew in order to
relieve Don Antonio, who in his absence, had
done the honours of his house; and I was just
dressed for my appearance among the guests,
when Strap arrived from the ship. 
He no sooner entered the grand apartment, in
which I was, and saw the magnificence of my apparel,
than his speech was lost in amazement,
and he gaped in silence at the objects that surrounded
him. —I took him by the hand, observed
that I had sent for him to be a witness and
sharer of my happiness, and told him I had found
a father. —At these words he started, and after
having continued some minutes with his mouth
and eyes wide open, cried, “Aha!—odd, I
know what! go thy ways, poor Narcissa, and
go thy ways somebody else—well—Lord,
what a thing is love? —God help us! are all
our mad pranks and protestations come to this?
what! and you have fixed your habitation in
this distant land! God prosper you—I find
we must part at last—for I would not leave
my poor carcass so far from my native home,
for all the wealth of the universe!” With these
ejaculations, he began to sob and make wry
faces; upon which I assured him of his mistake, 

both in regard to Narcissa, and my staying in
Paraguay, and informed him as briefly as I could,
of the great event which had happened. —Never
was rapture more ludicrously expressed, than in
the behaviour of this worthy creature, who cried,
laughed, whistled, sung and danced, all in a
breath; his transport was scarce over, when
my father entered, who no sooner understood
that this was Strap, than he took him by the
hand, saying, “Is this the honest man, who befriended
you so much in your distress? your are
welcome to my house, and I shall soon put it
in the power of my son to reward you for
your good offices in his behalf; in the mean
time, go with us and partake of the repast
that is provided.” Strap, wild as he was
with joy, would by no means accept of the
profered honour, crying, “God forbid! I know
my distance—your worship shall excuse me.” 
And Don Rodriguez finding his modesty invincible,
recommended him to his Major Domo,
to be treated with the utmost respect; while he
carried me into a large saloon, where I was presented
to a numerous company, who loaded me
with compliments and caresses, and congratulated
my father in terms not proper for me to repeat. 
Without specifying the particulars of our entertainment,
let it suffice to say, it was at the
same time elegant and sumptuous, and the rejoicing
lasted two days: After which, Don Rodriguez
settled his affairs, converted his effects
into silver and gold, visited and took leave of
all his friends, who were grieved at his departure,
and honoured me with considerable presents; and 

coming on board of my uncle's ship, with the
first favourable wind we sailed from the Rio de
la Plato, and in two months came safe to an
anchor in the harbour of Kingston in the island
of Jamaica. 