


DEAR DICK,
YOU cannot imagine what pleasure I have in
seeing your hand writing, after such a long cessation
on your side of our correspondence —Yet
Heaven knows, I have often seen your hand—writing
with disgust —I mean, when it appeared in abbreviations
of apothecary's Latin —I like your hint of
making interest for the reversica of the collector's
place, for Mr. Lismahago, who is much pleased
with the scheme, and presents you with his compliments
and best thanks for thinking so kind of his
concerns —The man seems to mend, upon further
acquaintance. That harsh reserve, which formed
a disagreeable huik about his character, begins to
peel off in the course of our communication — 
I have great hopes that he and Tabby will be as
happily paired as any two draught animals in the
kingdom; and I make no doubt, but that he will
prove a valuable acquisition to our little society, in
the article of conversation, by the fire-side in
winter 

Your objection to my passing this season of the
year at such a distance from home would have
more weight if I did not find myself perfectly at
my ease where I am, and my health so much improved,
that I am disposed to bid defiance to gout
and rheumatism —I begin to think I have put my
self on the superannuated list too soon, and absurdly
sought for health in the retreats of laziness —I
am persuaded that all valetudinarians are too sedentary,
too regular, and too cautious—we
should sometimes increase the motion of the machine,
to unclog the wheels of life; and now and
then take a plunge amidst the waves of excess, in
order to case-harden the constitution. I have even
found a change of company as necessary as a change
of air, to promote a vigorous circulation of the
spirits, which is the very essence and critertion of
good health. 
Since my last, I have been performing the duties
of friendship, that required a great deal of exercise,
from which I hope to derive some benefit — 
Understanding, by the greatest accident in the
world, that Mr. Baynard's wife was dangerously
ill of a pleuritic fever, I borrowed Dennison's postchaise,
and went a-cross the country to his habitation,
attended only by Loyd (quondam Clinker)
on horseback. —As the distance is not above thirty miles, I arrived about four in the afternoon, and
meeting the physician at the door, was informed
that his patient had just expired —I was instantly.
seized with a violent emotion, but it was not grief 
—The family being in confusion, I ran up stairs
into the chamber, where, indeed, they were all
assembled —The aunt stood wringing her hands in
a kind of stupefaction of sorrow, but my friend
acted all the extravagancies of affliction —He
held the body in his arms, and poured forth such a
lamentation, that one would have thought he had 

lost the most amiable consort and valuable companion
upon earth. 
Affection may certainly exist independant of
esteem; nay, the same object may be lovely in one
respect, and detestable in another —The mind has
a surprising faculty of accommodating, and even
attaching itself, in such a manner, by dint of use
to things that are in their own nature disagreeable
and even pernicious, that it cannot bear to be delivered
from them without reluctance and regret. 
Baynard was so absorbed in his delirium, that he
did not perceive me when I entered, and desired
one of the women to conduct the aunt into her
own chamber —At the same time, I begged the
tutor to withdraw the boy, who stood gaping in a
corner, very little affected with the distress of the
scene —These steps being taken. I waited till the
first violence of my friend's transport was abated,
then disengaged him gently from the melancholy
object, and led him by the hand into another apartment; 
though he struggled so hard, that I was
obliged to have recourse to the assistance of his
valet de chambre —In a few minutes, however,
he recollected himself, and folding me in his arms,
“This (cried he) is a friendly office, indeed! — 
I know not how you came hither; but, I think,
Heaven sent you to prevent my going distracted 
—O Matthew! I have lost my dear Harriet!— 
my poor, gentle, tender creature, that loved
me with such warmth and purity of affection
—my constant companion of twenty years! 
—She's gone—she's gone for ever! Heaven and
earth! where is she? —Death shall not part us!” 
So saying, he started up, and could hardly be
with-held from returning to the scene we had
quitted —You will perceive it would have been
very absurd for me to argue with a man that talked
so madly. —On all such occasions, the first torrent 

of passion must be allowed to subside gradually. — 
I endeavoured to beguile his attention by starting
little hints and insinuating other objects of discourse
imperceptably; and being exceedingly pleased in
my own mind at this event, I exerted myself with
such an extraordinary flow of spirits as was attended
with success. —In a few hours, he was calm
enough to hear reason, and even own that Heaven
could not have interposed more effectually to
rescue him from disgrace and ruin —That he might
not, however, relapse into weaknesses for want of
company, I passed the night in his chamber, in a
little tent bed brought thither on purpose; and
well it was I took this precaution, for he started
up in bed several times, and would have played the
fool, if I had not been present. 
Next day he was in a condition to talk of business,
and vested me with full authority over his
household, which I began to exercise without loss
of time, tho' not before he knew and approved of
the scheme I had projected for his advantage. —He
would have quitted the house immediately; but
this retreat I opposed. —Far from encouraging a
temporary disgust, which might degenerate into an
habitual aversion, I resolved, if possible, to attach
him more than ever to his Household Gods —I gave
directions for the funeral to be as private as was
consistent with decency; I wrote to London, that
an inventory and estimate might be made of the
furniture and effects in his town-house, and gave
notice to the landlord, that Mr. Baynard should
quit the premises at Lady-day; I set a person at
work to take account of every thing in the country-house,
including horses, carriages, and harness; I
settled the young gentleman at a boarding-school,
kept by a clergyman in the neighbourhood, and
thither he went without reluctance, as soon as he
knew that he was to be troubled no more with his 

tutor, whom we dismissed. —The aunt continued
very sullen, and never appeared at table, though
Mr. Baynard payed his respects to her every day in
her own chamber; there also she held conferences
with the waiting-woman and other servants of the
family: but, the moment her niece was interred,
she went away in a post-chase prepared for that
purpose: she did not leave the house, however,
without giving Mr. Baynard to understand, that
the wardrobe of her niece was the perquisite of her
woman; accordingly that worthless drab received
all the clothes, laces, and linen of her deceased
mistress, to the value of five hundred pounds, at a
moderate computation. 
The next step I took was to disband that legion
of supernumerary domestics, who had preyed so
long upon the vitals of my friend: a parcel of idle
drones, so intolerably insolent, that they even
treated their own master with the most contemptuous
neglect. They had been generally hired by
his wife, according to the recommendation of her
woman, and these were the only patrons to whom
they payed the least deference. I had therefore
uncommon satisfaction in clearing the house of
those vermin. The woman of the deceased, and
a chambermaid, a valet de chambre, a butler, a
French cook, a master gardener, two footmen, and
a coachman, I payed off, and turned out of the
house immediately, paying to each a month's
wages in lieu of warning. Those whom I retained,
consisted of a female cook, who had been assistant
to the Frenchman, a house-maid, an old lacquey,
a postilion, and under-gardener. Thus I removed
at once a huge mountain of expence and care from
the shoulders of my friend, who could hardly believe
the evidence of his own senses, when he found
himself so suddenly and effectually relieved. His
heart, however, was still subject to vibrations of 

tenderness, which returned at certain intervals, extorting
sighs, and tears, and exclamations of
grief and impatience but these sits grew every
day less violent and less frequent, till at length his
reason obtained a complete victory over the infirmities
of his nature. 
Upon an accurate inquiry into the state of his
affairs, I find his debts amount to twenty thousand
pounds, for eighteen thousand pounds of which
sum his estate is mortgaged; and as he pays five percent.
interest, and some of his farms are unoccupied,
he does not receive above two hundred pounds
a year clear from his lands, over and above the
interest of his wife's fortune, which produce eight
hundred pounds annually. For lightening this
heavy burden, I devised the following expedient. 
—His wife's jewels, together with his superfluous
plate and furniture in both houses, his horses and
carriages, which are already advertised to be sold
by auction, will, according to the estimate, produce
two thousand five hundred pounds in ready
money, with which the debt will be immediately
reduced to eighteen thousand pounds —I have undertaken
to find him ten thousand pounds at four per
cent. by which means he will save one hundred
a-year in the article of interest, and perhaps we
shall be able to borrow the other eight thousand on
the same terms. According to his own scheme of
a country life, he says he can live comfortably for
three hundred pounds a year; but, as he has a son
to educate, he will allow him five hundred; then
there will be an accumulating fund of seven hundred
a-year, principal and interest, to pay off the
incumbrance; and, I think, we may modestly add
three hundred, on the presumption of new-leasing
and improving the vacant farms: so that, in a
couple of years, I suppose there will be above a
thousand a-year appropriated to liquidate a debt of
sixteen thousand. 

We forthwith began to class and set apart the
articles designed for sale, under the direction of an
upholder from London; and, that nobody in the
house might be idle, commenced our reformation
without doors, as well as within. With Baynard's
good leave, I ordered the gardener to turn the rivulet
into its old channel to refresh the fainting
Naiads, who had so long languished among
mouldring roots, withered leaves, and dry pebbles. 
—The shrubbery is condemned to extirpation; 
and the pleasure ground will be restored to its original
use of corn-field and pasture. —Orders are
given for rebuilding the walls of the garden at the
back of the house, and for planting clumps of firs,
intermingled with beech and chestnut, at the east
end, which is now quite exposed to the surly blasts
that come from that quarter. All these works
being actually begun, and the house and auction
left to the care and management of a reputable
attorney, I brought Baynard along with me in the
chaise, and made him acquainted with Dennison,
whose goodness of heart would not fail to engage
his esteem and affection. —He is indeed charmed
with our society in general, and declares that he
never saw the theory of true pleasure reduced to
practice before. —I really believe it would not be
an easy task to find such a number of individuals
assembled under one roof, more happy than we are
at present. 
I must tell you, however, in confidence, I suspect
Tabby of tergiversation. —I have been so long
accustomed to that original, that I know all the
caprices of her heart, and can often perceive her
designs while they are yet in embrio —She attached
herself to Lismahago for no other reason but that
she despaired of making a more agreeable conquest. 
—At present, if I am not much mistaken in my
observation, she would gladly convert the widowhood 

of Baynard to her own advantage —Since he
arrived, she has behaved very coldly to the captain,
and strove to fasten on the other's heart, with the
hooks of overstrained civility. —These must be the
instinctive efforts of her constitution, rather than
the effects of any deliberate design; for matters
are carried to such a length with the lieutenant,
that she could not retract with any regard to conscience
or reputation. Besides, she will meet with
nothing but indifference or aversion on the side of
Baynard, who has too much sense to think of such
a partner at any time, and too much delicacy to
admit a thought of any such connexion at the present
juncture —Meanwhile, I have prevailed upon
her to let him have four thousand pounds at four
per cent. towards paying of his mortgage. Young
Dennison has agreed that Liddy's fortune shall be
appropriated to the same purpose, on the same
terms. —His father will fell out three thousand
pounds stock for his accommodation. —Farmer
Bland has, at the desire of Wilson, undertaken for
two thousand; and I must make an effort to
advance what further will be required to take my
friend out of the hands of the Philistines. He is
so pleased with the improvements made on his
estate, which is all cultivated like a garden, that
he has entered himself as a pupil in farming to Mr.
Dennison, and resolved to attach himself wholly
to the practice of husbandry. 
Every thing is now prepared for our double
wedding. The marriage-articles for both couples
are drawn and executed; and the ceremony only
waits until the parties shall have been resident in
the parish the term prescribed by law. Young
Dennison betrays some symptoms of impatience; 
but, Lismahago bears this necessary delay with the
temper of a philosopher. —You must know, the
captain does not stand altogether on the foundation 

of personal merit. Besides his half-pay, amounting
to two and forty pounds a year, this
indefatigable œconomist has amassed eight hundred
pounds which he has secured in the funds. This
sum arises partly from his pay's running up while
he remained among the indians; partly from what
he received as a consideration for the difference between
his full appointment and the half-pay, to
which he is now restricted; and partly from the
profits of a little traffic he drove in peltry, during
his fachemship among the Miamis. 
Liddy's fears and perplexities have been much
assuaged by the company of one Miss Willis, who
had been her intimate companion at the boarding-school. 
Her parents had been earnestly solicited
to allow her making this friendly visit on such an
extraordinary occasion; and two days ago she arrived
with her mother, who did not choose that she
should come without a proper governante. The
young lady is very sprightly, handsome, and agreeable,
and the mother a mighty good sort of a
woman; so that their coming adds considerably to
our enjoyment. But we shall have a third couple
yoked in the matrimonial chain. Mr. Clinker Loyd
has made humble remonstrance, through the canal
of my nephew, setting forth the sincere love and
affection mutually subsisting between him and Mrs.
Winifred Jenkins, and praying my consent to their
coming together for life. I would have wished that
Mr. Clinker had kept out of this scrape; but as the
nymph's happiness is at stake, and she has had already
some fits in the way of despondence, I, in order to
prevent any tragical catastrophe, has given him
leave to play the fool, in imitation of his betters; 
and I suppose we shall in time have a whole litter
of his progeny at Brambleton-hall. The fellow is
stout and lusty, very sober and conscientious; and
the wench seems to be as great an enthusiast in
love as in religion. 

I wish you would think of employing him some
other way, that the parish may not be overstocked
—you know he has been bred a farrier, consequently
belongs to the faculty; and as he is very docile,
I make no doubt but, with your good instruction,
he may be, in a little time, qualified to act as a
Welch apothecary. Tabby who never did a favour
with a good grace, has consented, with great
reluctance, to this match. Perhaps it hurts her
pride, as she now considers Clinker, in the light of
a relation; but, I believe, her objections are of a
more selfish nature. She declares she cannot think
of retaining the wife of Mathew Loyd in the
character of a servant; and she foresees, that on
such an occasion the woman will expect some gratification
for her past services. As for Clinker, exclusive
of other considerations, he is so trusty, brave,
affectionate, and alert, and I owe him such personal
obligations, that he merits more than all the
indulgence that can possibly be shewn him, by 
yours,
Matt. Bramble. 
Oct. 26. 