


ONCE more dear doctor, I resume the pen
for your amusement —It was on the morning after
our arrival that, walking out with my friend, Mr.
Dennison, I could not help breaking forth into the
warmest expressions of applause at the beauty of
the scence, which is really inchanting; and I signified,
in particular, how much I was pleased with
the disposition of some detached groves, that afforded
at once shelter and ornament to his habitation. 
“When I took possession of these lands, about
two and twenty years ago, (said he) there was
not a tree standing within a mile of the house,
except those of an old neglected orchard, which
produced nothing but leaves and moss. —It was
in the gloomy month of November, when I arrived,
and found the house in such a condition,
that it might have been justly stiled the tower of
desolution. —The court-yard was covered with
nettles and docks, and the garden exhibited such 

a rank plantation of weeds as I had never seen
before;—the window-shutters were falling in
pieces;—the sashes broken;—and owls and
jack-daws had taken possession of the chimnies. 
—The prospect within was still more dreary. — 
All was dark, and damp and dirty beyond description; 
—the rain penetrated in several parts
of the roof;—in some apartments the very
floors had given way;—the hangings were
parted from the walls, and shaking in mouldy
remnants;—the glasses were dropping out of
their frames;—the family-pictures were covered
with dust;—and all the chairs and tables
worm-eaten and crazy. —There was not a bed
in the house that could be used, except one old-fashioned machine, with a high gilt tester, and
fringed curtains of yellow mohair, which had
been, for aught I know, two centuries in the
family. —In short, there was no furniture but
the utensils of the kitchen; and the cellar afforded
nothing but a few empty butts and barrels,
that stunk so abominably, that I would
not suffer any body to enter it until I had slashed
a considerable quanity of gun-powder to
qualify the foul air within. 
“An old cottager and his wife, who were hired
to lie in the house, had left it with precipitation,
alledging, among other causes of retreat,
that they could not sleep for frightful noises,
and that my poor brother certainly walked after
his death. —In a word, the house appeared uninhabitable; 
the barn, stable, and our houses
were in ruins; all the fences broken down, and
the fields lying waste. 
“The farmer who kept the key never dreamed
I had any intention to live upon the spot. —He
rented a farm of sixty pounds, and his lease was
just expiring. —He had formed a scheme of 

being appointed bailiff to the estate, and of
converting the house and the adjacent grounds
to his own use. —A hint of his intention I received
from the curate at my first arrival; I
therefore did not pay much regard to what he
said by way of discouraging me from coming to
settle in the country; but I was a little startled
when he gave me warning that he should quit
the farm at the expiration of his lease, unless I
would abate considerably in the rent. 
“At this period I accidentally became acquainted
with a person, whose friendship laid the foundation
of all my prosperity. In the next market-town,
I chanced to dine at an inn with a Mr.
Wilson, who was lately come to settle in the
neighbourhood. —He had been lieutenant of a
man of war; but quitted the sea in some disgust,
and married the only daughter of farmer Bland,
who lives in this parish, and has acquired a good
fortune in the way of husbandry. —Wilson is one
of the best natured men I ever knew; brave,
frank, obliging, and ingenous. —He liked my
conversation, I was charmed with his liberal
manner; an acquaintance immediately commenced,
and this was soon improved into a
frendship without reserve —There are characters
which, like similar particulars of matter
strongly attract each other —He forthwith introduced
me to his father-in-law, farmer Bland,
who was well acquainted with every acre of my
estate, of consequence well qualified to advise
me on this occasion. —Finding I was inclined to
embrace a country life, and even to amuse myself
with the occupations of farming, he approved
of my design —He gave me to understand
that all my farms were underlet; that the
estate was capable of great improvement; that
there was plenty of chalk in the neighbourhood; 

and that my own ground produced excellent
marle for manure. —With respect to the farm,
which was like to fall into my hands, he said he
would willingly take it at the present rent; but
at the same time owned, that if I would expend
two hundred pounds in enclosures, it would be
worth more than double the sum. 
“Thus encouraged, I began the execution of
my scheme without further delay, and plunged
into a sea of expence, though I had no fund in
reserve, and the whole produce of the estate did
not exceed three hundred pounds a year —In one
week, my house was made weather tight, and
thoroughly cleansed from top to bottom; then
it was well ventilated by throwing all the doors
and windows open, and making blazing fires of
wood in every chimney from the kitchen to the
garrets —The floors were repaired, the sashes
new glazed, and out of the old furniture of the
whole house, I made a shift to fit up a parlour
and three chambers in a plain yet decent manner. 
—The court yard was cleared of weeds and
rubbish, and my friend Wilson charged himself
with the dressing of the garden; bricklayers
were set at work upon the barn and stable; and
labourers engaged to restore the fences, and
begin the work of hedging and ditching, under
the direction of farmer Bland, at whose recommendation
I hired a careful hind to lie in the
house, and keep constant fires in the apartment. 
“Having taken these measures, I returned to
London, where I forthwith sold off my houshold-furniture,
and, in three weeks from my first
visit, brought my wife hither to keep her Christmas. 
—Considering the gloomy season of
the year, the dreariness of the place, and the
decayed aspect of our habitation, I was afraid
that her resolution would sink under the sudden 

translation from a town-life to such a melancholy
state of rustication; but I was agreeably disappointed 
—She found the reality less uncomfortable
than the picture I had drawn. —By this
time, indeed, things were mended in appearance. 
—The out-houses had risen out of their
ruins; the pigeon-house was re-built, and replenished
by Wilson, who also put my garden
in decent order, and provided a good stock of
poultry, which made an agreeable figure in my
yard; and the house, on the whole, looked like
the habitation of human creatures —Farmer
Bland spared me a milch-cow for my family,
and an ordinary saddle-horse for my servant to
go to market at the next town. —I hired a country
lad for a footman; the hind's daughter was
my house-maid, and my wife had brought a
cook-maid from London. 
“Such was my family when I began housekeeping
in this place, with three hundred pounds
in my pocket, raised from the sale of my superfluous
furniture —I knew we should find occupation
enough through the day to employ our
time; but I dreaded the long winter evenings; 
yet for these too we found a remedy. —The
curate who was a single man, soon became so
naturalized to the family, that he generally lay
in the house; and his company was equally agreeable
and useful. —He was a modest man, a
good scholar, and perfectly well qualified to
instruct me in such country matters as I wanted
to know. —Mr. Wilson brought his wife to see
us, and she became so fond of Mrs. Dennison,
that she said she never was so happy as when she
enjoyed the benefit of her conversation. —She
was then a fine buxom country lass, exceedingly
docile, and as good-natured as her husband Jack
Wilson; so that a friendship ensued among the
women, which hath continued to this day. 

“As for Jack, he hath been my constant companion,
counseller, and commissary —I would
not for a hundred pounds you should leave my
house without seeing him. —Jack is an universal
genius—his talent are really astonishing 
—He is an excellent carpenter, joiner, and turner,
and a cunning artist in iron and brass. — 
He not only superintended my œconomy, but
also presided over my pastimes. —He taught me
to brew beer, to make cyder, perry, mead,
usquebaugh, and plague-water; to cook several
outlandish delicacies, such as ollas, pepper-pots,
pillaws, corys, chabobs, and stufatas. —He understands
all manner of games from chess down to
chuck-farthing, sings a good song, plays upon
the violin, and dances a hornpipe with surprising
agility. —He and I walked, and rode, and
hunted, and fished together, without minding
the vicissitudes of the weather; and I am persuaded
that in a raw, moist climate, like this
of England, continual exercise is as necessary as
food to the preservation of the individual. —In
the course of two and twenty years, there has
not been one hour's interruption or abatement
in the friendship subsisting between Wilson's
family and mine; and, what is a rare instance
of good fortune, that friendship is continued to
our children. —His son and mine are nearly of
the same age and the same disposition; they
have been bred up together at the same school
and college, and love each other with the
warmest affection. 
“By Wilson's means, I likewise formed an
acquaintance with a sensible physician, who
lives in the next market-town; and his sister, an
agreeable old maiden, passed the Christmas
holydays at our house. —Mean while I began my
farming with great eagerness, and that very 

winter planted these groves that please you so
much. —As for the nighbouring gentry, I had
no trouble from that quarter during my first
campaign; they were all gone to town before I
settled in the country; and by the summer I had
taken measure to defend myself from their attacks. 
—When a gay equipage came to my gates,
I was never at home; those who visited me in a
modest way, I received; and according to the
remarks I made on their characters and conversation,
either rejected their advances, or returned
their civility —I was in general despised
among the fashionable company, as a low fellow,
both in breeding and circumstances; nevertheless,
I found a few individuals of moderate fortune,
who gladly adopted my stile of living; and
many others would have acceeded to our society,
had they not been prevented by the pride, envy,
and ambition of their wives and daughters. — 
Those, in times of luxury and dissipation, are
the rocks upon which all the small estates in the
country are wrecked. 
“I reserved in my own hands, some acres of
ground adjacent to the house, for making experiments
in agriculture, according to the directions
of Lyle, Tull, Hart, Duhamel, and others who
have written on this subject; and qualified their
theory with the practical observations of farmer
Bland, who was my great master in the art of
Husbandry. —In short, I became enamoured of
a country life; and my success greatly exceeded
my expectation. —I drained bogs, burned
heath, grubbed up furze and fern; I planted
copse and willows where nothing else would
grow; I gradually inclosed all my farms and made
such improvements, that my estate now yields
me clear twelve hundred pounds a year. —All
this time my wife and I have enjoyed uninterrupted 

health, and regular flow of spirits, except
on a very few occasions, when our chearfulness
was invaded by such accidents as are inseparable
from the condition of life. —I lost two
children in their infancy, by the small-pox, so
that I have one son only, in whom all our hopes
are centered. —He went yesterday to visit a
friend, with whom he has stayed all night, but
he will be here to dinner. —I shall this day have
the pleasure of presenting him to you and your
family; and I flatter myself you will find him
not altogether unworthy of your affection. 
“The truth is, either I am blinded by the partiality
of a parent, or he is a boy of a very amiable
character; and yet his conduct has given us
unspeakable disquiet. —You must know we had
projected a match between him and a gentleman's
daughter in the next county, who will in
all probability be heiress to a considerable fortune; 
but, it seems, he had a personal disgust
to the alliance. —He was then at Cambridge,
and tried to gain time on various pretences; but
being pressed in letters by his mother and me to
give a definitive answer, he fairly gave his tutor
the slip, and disappeared about eight months
ago. —Before he took this rash step, he wrote
me a letter, explaining his objections to the
match, and declaring, that he would keep himself
concealed until he would understand that his
parents would dispense with his contracting an
engagement that must make him miserable for
life, and he prescribed the form of advertising
in a certain news-paper, by which he might be
apprized of our sentiments on this subject. 
“You may easily conceive how much we were
alarmed and afflicted by this elopement, which
he had made without droping the least hint to
his companion Charles Wilson, who belonged to 

the same college. —We resolved to punish him
with the appearance of neglect, in hopes that
he would return of his own accord; but he
maintained his purpose till the young lady chose
a partner for herself; then he produced himself,
and made his peace by the mediation of Wilson. 
—Suppose we should unite our families by joining
him with your niece, who is one of the most
lovely creatures I ever beheld. —My wife is already
as fond of her as if she were her own
child, and I have a presentiment that my son
will be captivated by her at first sight.” “Nothing
could be more agreeable to all our family
(said I) then such an alliance; but, my dear
friend, candour obliges me to tell you, that I
am afraid Liddy's heart is not wholly disengaged
—there is a cursed obstacle—” “You
mean the young stroler at Gloucester (said he) — 
You are surprised that I should know this circumstance; 
but you will be more surprised when I tell
you that stroller is no other than my son George
Dennison —That was the character he assumed
in his eclipse.” “I am, indeed, astonished and
overjoyed, (cried I) and shall be happy beyond
expression to see your proposal take effect.” 
He then gave me to understand that the young
gentleman, at his emerging from concealment, had
disclosed his passion for Miss Melford, the niece of
Mr. Bramble of Monmouthshire. Though Mr.
Dennison little dreamed that this was his old friend
Matthew Loyd, he nevertheless furnished his son
with proper credentials, and he had been at Bath,
London, and many other places in quest of us, to
make himself and his pretensions known —The
bad success of his inquiry had such an effect upon
his spirits, that immediately at his return he was
seized with a dangerous fever, which overwhelmed
his parents with terror and affliction; but he was 

now happily recovered, though still weak and disconsolate. 
My nephew joining us in our walk, I
informed him of these circumstances, with which
he was wonderfully pleased. He declared he would
promote the match to the utmost of his power, and
that he longed to embrace young Mr. Dennison as
his friend and brother. —Mean while, the father
went to desire his wife to communicate this discovery
gradually to Liddy, that her delicate nerves
might not suffer too sudden a shock; and I imparted
the particulars to my sister Tabby, who expressed
some surprize, not altogether unmixed, I
believe, with an emotion of envy; for, though
she could have no objection to an alliance at once
so honourable and advantageous, she hesitated in
giving her consent, on pretence of the youth and
inexperience of the parties: at length, however,
she acquiesced, in consequence of having consulted
with captain Lismahago. 
Mr. Dennison took care to be in the way when
his son arrived at the gate, and, without giving
him time or opportunity to make an enquiry about
the strangers, brought him up stairs to be presented
to Mr. Loyd and his family —The first person
he saw, when he entered the room, was Liddy,
who, notwithstanding all her preparation, stood
trembling in the utmost confusion —At sight of this
object he was fixed motionless to the floor, and,
gazing at her with the utmost eagerness of astonishment,
exclaimed, “Sacred heaven! what is this!
—ha! wherefore—.” Here his speech failing he
stood straining his eyes, in the most emphatic
silence —“George (said his father) this is my
friend Mr. Loyd.” Roused at this intimation,
he turned and received my salute, when I said,
“Young gentleman, if you had trusted me with
your secret at our last meeting, we should have
parted upon better terms.” Before he could 

make any answer, Jery came round and stood before
him with open arms. —At first, he started and
changed colour; but after a short pause, he rushed
into his embrace, and they hugged one another as
if they had been intimate friends from their infancy:
then he payed his respects to Mrs. Tabitha,
and advancing to Liddy, “Is it possible,
(cried he) that my senses do not play me false! 
—That I see Miss Melford under my father's
roof—that I am permitted to speak to her without
giving offence—and that her relations
have honoured me with their countenance and
protection.” Liddy blushed, and trembled, and
faultered —“To be sure, sir, (said she) it is a
very surprising circumstance—a great— 
a providential —I really know not what I say
—but I beg you will think I have said what's
agreeable.” 
Mrs. Dennison interposing said, “Compose
yourselves, my dear children. —Your mutual
happiness shall be our peculiar care.” The son
going up to his mother, kissed one hand; my
niece bathed the other with her tears; and the
good old lady pressed them both in their turns to
her breast —The lovers were too much affected
to get rid of their embarrassment for one day; but
the scene was much enlivened by the arrival of
Jack Wilson, who brought, as usual, some game
of his own killing —His honest countenance was a
good letter of recommendation. —I received him
like a dear friend after a long separation; and I
could not help wondering to see him shake Jery by
the hand as an old acquaintance. —They had, indeed,
been acquainted some days, in consequence
of a diverting incident, which I shall explain at
meeting. —That same night a consultation was
held upon the concerns of the lovers, when the
match was formally agreed to, and all the marriage-articles 

were settled without the least dispute. 
—My nephew and I promised to make Liddy's
fortune five thousand pounds. Mr. Dennison declared,
he would make over one half of his estate
immediately to his son, and that his daughter-in-law
should be secured in a jointure of four hundred. 
—Tabby proposed, that, considering their
youth, they should undergo one year at least of probation
before the indissoluble knot should be tied; 
but the young gentleman being very impatient and
importunate, and the scheme implying that the
young couple should live in the house, under the
wings of his parents, we resolved to make them
happy without further delay. 
As the law requires that the parties should be
some weeks resident in the parish, we shall stay
here till the ceremony is performed —Mr. Lismahago
requests that he may take the benefit of the
same occasion; so that next Sunday the banns will
be published for all four together. —I doubt, I shall
not be able to pass my Christmas with you at
Brambleton-hall. —Indeed, I am so agreeably situated
in this place, that I have no desire to shift my
quarters; and I foresee, that when the day of separation
comes, there will be abundance of sorrow
on all sides. —In the mean time, we must make
the most of those blessings which Heaven bestows. 
—Considering how you are tethered by your profession,
I cannot hope to see you so far from home; 
yet the distance does not exceed a summer's-day's
journey, and Charles Dennison, who desires to be
remembered to you, would be rejoiced to see his
old compotator; but as I am now stationary, I expected
regular answers to the epistles of 
Yours invariably,
Matt. Bramble. 
Oct. 11. 