


He endeavours to reconcile himself to his mistress,
and expostulates with the uncle, who forbids him
the house. 
In this state of division, he went home to his
own lodgings in a chair; and while he deliberated
with himself, whether he should relinquish
the pursuit, and endeavour to banish her
idea from his breast, or go immediately and
humble himself before his exasperated mistress,
and offer his hand as an atonement for his crime,
his servant put in his hand a packet, which had
been delivered by a ticket-porter at the door. 
He no sooner perceived that the superscription
was in Emilia's hand-writing, than he guessed the
nature of the contents; and opening the seal
with disordered eagerness, found the jewels he
had given to her, inclosed in a billet couched in
these words. 

“That I may have no cause to reproach
myself with having retained the least memorial
of a wretch whom I equally despise and
abhor, I take this opportunity of restoring these 

ineffectual instruments of his infamous design
upon the honour of 
Emilia.” 
His chagrin was so much galled and inflamed
by the bitterness of this contemptuous message,
that he gnawed his fingers till the blood ran over
his nails, and even wept with vexation. Sometimes
he vowed revenge against her haughty virtue,
and reviled himself for his precipitate declaration,
before his scheme was brought to maturity; 
then he would consider her behaviour with
reverence and regard, and bow before the irresistible
power of her attractions. In short, his
breast was torn by conflicting passions; love,
shame, and remorse contended with vanity, ambition,
and revenge; and the superiority was still
doubtful, when headstrong desire interposed, and
decided in favour of an attempt towards a reconciliation
with the offended fair. 
Impelled by this motive, he set out in the afternoon
for the house of her uncle, not without
hopes of that tender enjoyment, which never
fails to attend an accommodation betwixt two lovers
of taste and sensibility. Though the consciousness
of his trespass encumbered him with an
air of awkward confusion, he was too confident
of his own qualifications and address to despair of
forgiveness; and by that time he arrived at the
citizen's gate, he had conned a very artful and
pathetic harangue, which he proposed to utter
in his own behalf, laying the blame of his conduct
on the impetuosity of his passion, incensed by the
Burgundy, which he had too liberally drank:
but he did not meet with an opportunity to avail
himself of this preparation. Emilia, suspecting that
he would take some step of this kind to retrieve 

her favour, had gone abroad on pretence of visiting,
after having signified to her kinsman, her
resolution to avoid the company of Peregrine, on
account of some ambiguities which (she said)
were last night remarkable in his demeanour, at
the masquerade. She chose to insinuate her suspicions
in these hints, rather than give an explicit
detail of the young man's dishonourable contrivance,
which might have kindled the resentment
of the family to some dangerous pitch of
animosity and revenge. 
Our adventurer, finding himself baffled in his
expectation of seeing her, inquired for the old
gentleman, with whom he thought he had influence
enough to make his apology good, in case
he should find him prepossessed by the young lady's
information. But here too he was disappointed; 
the uncle had gone to dine in the country,
and his wife was indisposed; so that he had
no pretext for staying in the house, till the return
of his charmer. Being, however, fruitful of expedients,
he dismissed his chariot, and took possession
of a room in a tavern, the windows of
which fronted the merchant's gate; and there
he proposed to watch until he should see her approach. 
This scheme he put in practice with
indefatigable patience, though it was not attended
with the expected success. 
Emilia, whose caution was equally vigilant and
commendable, foreseeing that she might be exposed
to the fertility of his invention, came home
by a private passage, and entered by a postern,
which was altogether unknown to her admirer; 
and her uncle did not arrive, until it was so late,
that he could not with any decency demand a
conference. 

Next morning, he did not fail to present himself
at the door, and his mistress being denied by
her own express direction, insisted upon seeing
the master of the house, who received him with
such coldness of civility, as plainly gave him to
understand, that he was acquainted with the displeasure
of his niece. He therefore, with an air
of candour, told the citizen, he could easily perceive,
by his behaviour, that he was the confidant
of Miss Emily, of whom he was come to
ask pardon for the offence he had given; and did
not doubt, if he could be admitted to her presence,
that he should be able to convince her,
that he had not erred intentionally, or at least
propose such reparation, as would effectually
atone for his fault. 
To this remonstrance the merchant, without
any ceremony or circumlocution, answered, that
though he was ignorant of the nature of his offence,
he was very certain, that it must have
been something very flagrant, that could irritate
his niece to such a degree, against a person for
whom she had formerly a most particular regard. 
He owned, she had declared her intention to renounce
his acquaintance for ever, and, doubtless,
she had good reason for so doing; neither would
he undertake to promote an accommodation, unless
he would give him full power to treat on the
score of matrimony, which he supposed would be
the only means of evincing his own sincerity, and
obtaining Emilia's forgiveness. 
Peregrine's pride was kindled by this blunt declaration,
which he could not help considering as
the result of a scheme concerted betwixt the
young lady and her uncle, in order to take the advantage
of his heat. He therefore replied, with 

manifest signs of disgust, that he did not apprehend
there was any occasion for a mediator to
reconcile the difference betwixt Emilia and him; 
and that all he desired, was an opportunity of
pleading in his own behalf. 
The citizen frankly told him, that as his niece
had expressed an earnest desire of avoiding his
company, he would not put the least constraint
upon her inclination; and in the mean time gave
him to know, that he was particularly engaged. 
Our hero glowing with indignation at this supercilious
treatment; “I was in the wrong (said
he) to look for good manners, so far on this side
of Temple-bar: but, you must give me leave to
tell you, Sir, that unless I am favoured with an
interview with Miss Gauntlet, I shall conclude,
that you have actually laid a constraint upon her
inclination, for some sinister purposes of your
own.” “Sir, (replied the old gentleman) you
are welcome to make what conclusions shall seem
good unto your own imagination; but, pray be
so good as to allow me the privilege of being
master in my own house.” So saying, he very
complaisantly shewed him to the door; and our
lover, being diffident of his own temper, as well
as afraid of being used with greater indignity, in
a place where his personal prowess would only
serve to heighten his disgrace, quitted the house
in a transport of rage which he could not wholly
suppress, telling the landlord, that if his age did
not protect him, he would have chastised him for
his insolent behaviour. 