


YOU ask me, why I don't take the air a-horseback,
during this fine weather? —In which of the
avenues of this paradise would you have me take
that exercise? Shall I commit myself to the highroads
of London or Bristol, to be stifled with dust,
or pressed to death in the midst of post-chaises,
flying machines, waggons, and coal horses; besides
the troops of fine gentlemen that take to the highway
to shew their horsemanship! and the coaches
of fine ladies, who go thither to shew their equipages? 
Shall I attempt the Downs, and fatigue
myself to death in climbing up an eternal ascent,
without any hopes of reaching the summit? Know
then, I have made divers desperate leaps at those
upper regions; but always fell backward into this
vapour-pit, exhausted and dispirited by those ineffectual
efforts; and here we poor valetudinatians
pant and struggle, like so many Chinese gudgeons,
gasping in the bottom of a punch bowl. By Heaven
it is a kind of inchantment! If I do not speedily
break the spell, and escape, I may chance to give
up the ghost in this nauseous stew of corruption—It
was but two nights ago, that I had like to have
made my public exit, at a minute's warning. One
of my greatest weaknesses is that of suffering myself 

to be over-ruled by the opinion of people, whose
judgment I despise—I own, with shame and confusion
of face, that importunity of any kind I cannot
resist. This want of courage and constancy is an
original flaw in my nature, which you must have
often observed with compassion, if not with contempt. 
I am afraid some of our boasted virtues
may be traced up to this defect.— 
Without further preamble, I was persuaded to
go to a ball, on purpose to see Liddy dance a minuet
with a young petulant jackanapes, the only son of a
wealthy undertaker from London, whose mother
lodges in our neighbourhood, and has contracted
an acquaintance with Tabby. I sat a couple of
long hours, half stifled, in the midst of a noysome
crowd; and could not help wondering, that so
many hundred of those that rank as rational creatures,
could find entertainment in seeing a succession
of insipid animals, describing the same dull
figure for a whole evening, on an area, not much
bigger than a taylor's shop-board. If there had
been any beauty, grace, activity, magnificent dress,
or variety of any kind, howsoever absurd, to engage
the attention, and amuse the fancy, I should not
have been surprised; but there was no such object:
it was a tiresome repetition of the same languid,
frivolous scene, performed by actors that seemed
to sleep in all their motions—The continual
swimming of those phantoms before my eyes, gave
me a swimming of the head; which was also
affected by the fouled air, circulating through such
a number of rotten human bellows—I therefore
retreated towards the door, and stood in the passage
to the next room, talking to my friend Quin; 
when an end being put to the minuets, the benches
were removed to make way for the country-dances; 
and the multitude rising at once, the 

whole atmosphere was put in commotion. Then,
all of a sudden, came rushing upon me, an Egyptian
gale, so impregnated with pestilential vapours,
that my nerves were overpowered, and I dropt
sensess upon the floor. 
You may easily conceive what a clamour and
confusion this accident must have produced, in
such an assembly—I soon recovered, however,
and found myself in an easy chair, supported by
my own people—Sister Tabby, in her great tenderness,
had put me to the torture, squeezing my
head under her arm, and stuffing my nose with
spirit of hartshorn, till the whole inside was excoriated. 
I no sooner got home, than I sent for doctor
Ch&wblank;, who assured me, I needed not be alarmed,
for my swooning was entirely occasioned by
an accidental impression of fetid effluvia upon
nerves of uncommon sensibility. I know not how
other people's nerves are constructed; but one
would imagine they must be made of very coarse
materials to stand the shock of such a horrid assault. 
It was, indeed, a compound of villanous smells,
in which the most violent stinks, and the most
powerful perfumes, contended for the mastery. 
Imagine to yourself a high exalted essence of mingled
odours, arising from putrid gums, impost-humated
lungs, sour flatulencies, rank arm-pits,
sweating feet, running sores and issues; plasters,
ointments, and embrocations, hungary-water,
spirit of lavander, assasœtida drops, musk, hartshorn,
and sal volatile; besides a thousand frowzy
steams, which I could not analyse. Such, O
Dick! is the fragrant æther we breathe in the polite
assemblies of Bath—Such is the atmosphere I
have exchanged for the pure, elastic, animating
air of the Welsh mountains—O Rus, quando te
aspiciam! —I wonder what the devil possessed me— 

But few words are best: I have taken my resolution
—You may well suppose I don't intend to
entertain the company with a second exhibition— 
I have promised, in an evil hour, to proceed to
London, and that promise shall be performed; but
my stay in the metropolis shall be brief. I have,
for the benefit of my health, projected an expedition
to the North, which, I hope, will afford some
agreable pastime. I have never travelled farther
that way than Scarborough; and, I think it is a
reproach upon me, as a British freeholder, to have
lived so long without making an excursion to the
other side of the Tweed. Besides, I have some
relations settled in Yorkshire, to whom it may not
be improper to introduce my nephew and his sister
—At present, I have nothing to add, but that
Tabby is happily disentangled from the Irish Baronet; 
and that I will not fail to make you acquainted,
from time to time, with the sequel of our adventures:
a mark of consideration, which, perhaps,
you would willingly dispense with in 
Your humble servant,
Matt. Bramble. 
Bath, May 8. 