


DEAR MADAM,
Though I was not so fortunate as to be
favoured with an answer to the letter with which
I troubled you in the spring, I still flatter myself
that you retain some regard for me and my concerns. 
I am sure the care and tenderness with
which I was treated, under your roof and tuition,
demand the warmest returns of gratitude and affection
on my part, and these sentiments, I hope,
I shall cherish to my dying day —At present, I
think it my duty to make you acquainted with the
happy issue of that indiscretion by which I incurred
your displeasure. —Ah! madam, the slighted
Wilson is metamorphosed into George Dennison,
only son and heir of a gentleman, whose character
is second to none in England, as you may understand 

upon inquiry. My guardians, my brother
and I, are now in his house; and an immediate
union of the two families is to take place in the
persons of the young gentlemen and your poor
Lydia Melford. —You will easily conceive how imbarrassing
this situation must be to a young inexperienced
creature like me, of weak nerves and strong
apprehensions; and how much the presence of a
friend and confidante would encourage and support
me on this occasion. You know, that of all the
young ladies, Miss Willis was she that possessed the
greatest share of my confidence and affection; and,
therefore, I fervently wish to have the happiness of
her company at this interesting crisis. 
Mrs. Dennison, who is the object of universal
love and esteem, has, at my request, written to
you on this subject, and I now beg leave to reinforce
her solicitation. —My dear Mrs. Jermyn!
my ever honoured governess! let me conjure you
by that fondness which once distinguished your
favourate Liddy! by that benevolence of heart
which disposes you to promote the happiness of
your fellow-creatures in general! lend a favourable
ear to my petition, and use your influence with
Letty's mamma, that my most earnest desire may
be gratified. Should I be indulged in this particular,
I will engage to return her safe, and even to
accompany her to Gloucester, where, if you will
give me leave, I will present to you, under another
name, 
Dear madam,
Your most affectionate
humble servant,
and penitent,
Lydia Melford. 
Oct. 14. 