


Peregrine has an interview with his sister Julia. 
Is interrupted and attacked by his mother, and
relieved by his friend Gauntlet. Julia is settled
in the garison, and Trunnion affronted by his
old friend Gamaliel Pickle. 
Two days after this atchievement was so
happily accomplished, our hero received
an intimation from his sister, that she should be
overjoyed to meet him next day, at five o'clock
in the afternoon, at the house of her nurse, who
lived in a cottage hard by her father's habitation,
she being debarred from all opportunity of seeing
him in any other place by the severity of her mother,
who suspected her inclination. 

He accordingly obeyed the summons, and went
at the time appointed to the place of rendezvous,
where he met this affectionate young lady, who
when he entered the room, ran towards him with
all the eagerness of transport; flung her arms
about his neck, and shed a flood of tears in his
bosom before she could utter one word, except a
repetition of my dear, dear brother! He embraced
her with all the piety of fraternal tenderness,
wept over her in his turn, assured her that
this was one of the happiest moments of his life,
and kindly thanked her for having resisted the
example, and disobeyed the injunctions of his
mother's unnatural aversion. 
He was ravished to find by her conversation,
that she possessed a great share of sensibility and
prudent reflexion; for she lamented the infatuation
of her parents with the most filial regret, and
expressed such abhorrence and concern at the villainous
disposition of her younger brother, as a
humane sister may be supposed to have entertained. 
He made her acquainted with all the circumstances
of his own fortune, and as he supposed
she spent her time very disagreeably at
home, among characters which must be shockingly
interesting, professed a desire of moving her
into some other sphere, where she could live with
more tranquillity and satisfaction. 
She objected to this proposal as an expedient
that would infallibly subject her to the implacable
resentment of her mother, whose favour and affection
she at present enjoyed but in a very inconsiderable
degree; and they had canvassed divers
schemes of corresponding for the future when
the voice of Mrs. Pickle was heard at the door. 
Miss July (that was the young lady's name)
finding herself betrayed, was seized with a violent 

agitation of fear, and Peregrine scarce had
time to encourage her with a promise of protection,
before the door of the apartment being flung
open, this irreconcileable parent rushed in, and
with a furious aspect flew directly at her trembling
daughter, when the son interposing, received
the first discharge of her fury. 
Her eyes gleamed with all the rage of indignation,
which choaked up her utterance, and seemed
to convulse her whole frame; she twisted her left
hand in his hair, and with the other buffeted him
about the face, till the blood gushed from his nostrils
and mouth; while he defended his sister
from the cruelty of Gam, who assaulted her
from another quarter, seeing his brother engaged. 
This attack lasted several minutes with
great violence, till at length Peregrine finding
himself in danger of being overpowered, if he
should remain any longer on the defensive, laid
his brother on his back; and before he could get
up again, disentangled his mother's hand from his
own hair, and having pushed her gently out of
the room, bolted the door on the inside; then
turning to Gam, threw him out at the window,
among a parcel of hogs that fed under it. By
this time, Julia was almost quite distracted with
terror; she knew she had offended beyond all
hope of forgiveness, and from that moment considered herself
as an exile from her father's house; 
in vain did her brother strive to console her with
fresh protestations of love and protection, she
counted herself extremely miserable in being
obliged to endure the eternal resentment of a parent
with whom she had hitherto lived, and
dreaded the censure of the world, which from
her mother's misrepresentation she was sensible
would condemn her unheard. That she might not 

however neglect any means in her power of averting
this storm, she resolved to appease, if possible,
her mother's wrath with humiliation, and
even appeal to the influence of her father, weak
as it was, before she would despair of being forgiven. 
But the good lady spared her this unnecessary
application, by telling her through the
key-hole, that she must never expect to come
within her father's door again; for from that hour
she renounced her as unworthy of her affection
and regard. Julia weeping bitterly, endeavoured
to soften the rigour of this sentence, by the most
submissive and reasonable remonstrances; but as in
her vindication she of necessity espoused her elder
brother's cause, her endeavours instead of soothing,
served only to exasperate her mother to an higher
pitch of indignation, which discharged itself in invectives
against Peregrine, whom she reviled with
the epithets of a worthless abandoned reprobate. 
The youth hearing these unjust aspersions,
trembled with resentment through every limb,
assuring the upbraider that he considered her as an
object of compassion; “for without all doubt,
said he, your diabolic rancour must be severely
punished by the thorns of your own conscience,
which this very instant taxes you with the malice
and falsehood of your reproaches. As for my
sister, I bless God that you have not been able to
infect her with your unnatural prejudice, which
because she is too just, too virtuous, too humane
to imbibe, you reject her as an alien to your
blood, and turn her out unprovided into a barbarous
world. But even there your vitious purpose
shall be defeated; that same providence that
screened me from the cruelty of your hate shall extend
its protection to her, until I shall find it convenient
to assert by law that right of maintenance 

which nature, it seems, hath bestowed upon us in
vain. In the mean time, you will enjoy the satisfaction
of paying an undivided attention to that darling
son, whose amiable qualities have so long engaged
and engrossed your love and esteem.” 
This freedom of expostulation exalted his
mother's ire to meer frenzy; she cursed him with
the bitterest imprecations, and raved like a Bedlamite
at the door, which she attempted to burst
open. Her efforts were seconded by her favourite
son, who denounced vengeance against Peregrine,
made furious assaults against the lock, which resisted
all their applications, until our hero espying
his friend Gauntlet and Pipes stepping over a
style that stood about a furlong from the window,
called them to his assistance; and giving them to
understand how he was besieged, desired they
would keep off his mother, that he might the
more easily secure his sister Julia's retreat. The
young soldier entered accordingly, and posting
himself between Mrs. Pickle and the door, gave
the signal to his friend, who lifting up his sister
in his arms, carried her safe without the clutches
of this she-dragon, while Pipes with his cudgel
kept young master at bay. 
The mother being thus deprived of her prey,
sprung upon Gauntlet like a lioness robbed of her
whelps, and he must have suffered sorely in the
flesh, had he not prevented her mischievous intent
by seizing both her wrists, and so keeping
her at due distance. In attempting to disengage
herself from his grasp, she struggled with such
exertion, and suffered such agony of passion at
the same time, that she actually fell into a severe
fit, during which she was put to bed, and the
confederates retired without further molestation. 

In the mean time, Peregrine was not a little
perplexed about the disposal of his sister whom he
had rescued. He could not endure the thoughts
of saddling the commodore with a new expence; 
and he was afraid of undertaking the charge of
Julia, without his benefactor's advice and direction:
for the present, however, he carried her
to the house of a gentleman in the neighbourhood,
whose lady was her godmother, where she
was received with great tenderness and condolance; 
and he proposed to inquire for some creditable
house, where she might be genteelly boarded
in his absence, resolving to maintain her from the
savings of his own allowance, which he thought
might very well bear such deduction. But this
intention was frustrated by the publication of the
whole affair, which was divulged next day, and
soon reached the ears of Trunnion, who chid
his godson for having concealed the adventure; 
and, with the approbation of his wife, ordered
him to bring Julia forthwith to the garison. The
young gentleman, with tears of gratitude in his
eyes, explained his design of maintaining her at
his own expence, and earnestly begged that he
might not be deprived of that satisfaction. But
his uncle was deaf to all his intreaties, and insisted
upon her living in the garison, though for
no other reason than that of being company to
her aunt, who, he observed, was lost for want
of conversation. 
Julia was accordingly brought home, and setled
under the tuition of Mrs. Trunnion, who,
whatever face she might put on the matter, could
have dispensed with the society of her niece; 
though she was not without hope of gratifying
her pique at Mrs. Pickle, by the intelligence she
would receive from the daughter, of that lady's 

œconomy and domestic behaviour. The mother
herself seemed conscious of this advantage which
her sister-in-law had now gained over her, being
as much chagrined at the news of Julia's reception
at the garison, as if she had heard of her
own husband's death. She even tortured her invention
to propagate calumnies against the reputation
of her own daughter, whom she slandered
in all companies; she exclaimed against the commodore
as an old ruffian who spirited up a rebellion
among her children, and imputed the hospitality
of his wife, in countenancing them, to nothing
else but her inveterate enmity to their mother,
whom they had disobliged. She now insisted,
in the most peremptory terms, upon her
husband's renouncing all commerce with the old
lad of the castle and his adherents; and Mr. Gamaliel
having by this time contracted other friendships,
readily submitted to her will, and even refused
to communicate with the commodore one
night, when they happened to meet by accident
at the public house. 