



The Author studious to learn the Language, the
Houyhnhnm his Master assists in teaching him. 
The Language described. Several Houyhnhnms.
of Quality come out of Curiosity to see the Author. 
He gives his Master a short Account of his
Voyage. 

My principal Endeavour was to learn the
Language, which my Master (for so
I shall henceforth call him) and his
Children, and every Servant of his
House were desirous to teach me. 
For they looked upon it as a Prodigy, that a brute
Animal should discover such Marks of a rational
Creature. I pointed to every thing, and enquired
the Name of it, which I wrote down in my Journal
Book when I was alone, and corrected my bad
Accent, by desiring those of the Family to pronounce
it often. In this Employment, a Sorrel
Nag, one of the under Servants, was very ready to
assist me. 
In speaking, they pronounce through the Nose
and Throat, and their Language approaches nearest 

to the High Dutch or German, of any I know
in Europe; but is much more graceful and significant. 
The Emperor Charles V. made almost the
same Observation, when he said, That if he were
to speak to his Horse, it should be in High
Dutch. 
The Curiosity and Impatience of my Master
were so great, that he spent many Hours of his
Leisure to instruct me. He was convinced (as he
afterwards told me) that I must be a Yahoo, but my
Teachableness, Civility and Cleanliness astonished
him; which were Qualities altogether so opposite to
those Animals. He was most perplexed about my
Cloaths, reasoning sometimes with himself, whether
they were a Part of my Body; for I never
pulled them off till the Family were asleep, and got
them on before they waked in the Morning. My
Master was eager to learn from whence I came; 
how I acquired those Appearances of Reason,
which I discovered in all my Actions; and to know
my Story from my own Mouth, which he hoped
he should soon do by the great Proficiency I made
in learning and pronouncing their Words and Sentences. 
To help my Memory, I formed all I learned
into the English Alphabet, and writ the Words
down with the Translations. This last, after some
time, I ventured to do in my Master's Presence. It
cost me much Trouble to explain to him what I
was doing; for the Inhabitants have not the least
Idea of Books or Literature. 
In about ten Weeks time I was able to understand
most of his Questions; and in three Months
could give him some tolerable Answers. He was
extremely curious to know from what Part of the 

Country I came, and how I was taught to imitate
a rational Creature; because the Yahoos, (whom he
saw I exactly resembled in my Head, Hands and
Face, that were only visible,) with some Appearance
of Cunning, and the strongest Disposition to
Mischief, were observed to be the most unteachable
of all Brutes. I answered; that I came over
the Sea, from a far Place, with many others of my
own Kind, in a great hollow Vessel made of the
Bodies of Trees: That, my Companions forced me
to land on this Coast, and then lest me to shift for
myself. It was with some Difficulty, and by the
Help of many Signs, that I brought him to understand
me. He replied, That I must needs be mistaken,
or that I said the thing which was not. 
(For they have no Word in their Language to express
Lying or Falshood.) He knew it was impossible
that there could be a Country beyond the
Sea, or that a Parcel of Brutes could move a wooden
Vessel whither they pleased upon Water. He was
sure no Houyhnhnm alive could make such a Vessel,
or would trust Yahoos to manage it. 
The Word Houyhnhnm, in their Tongue, signifies
a Horse; and in its Etymology, the Perfection
of Nature. I told my Master, that I was at a Loss
for Expression, but would improve as fast as I could; 
and hoped in a short time I should be able to tell
him Wonders: He was pleased to direct his own
Mare, his Colt and Fole, and the Servants of the
Family to take all Opportunities of instructing me; 
and every Day for two or three Hours, he was at
the same Pains himself: Several Horses and Mares
of Quality in the Neighbourhood came often to our
House, upon the Report spread of a wonderful 

Yahoo, that could speak like a Houyhnhnm, and
seemed in his Words and Actions to discover some
Glimmerings of Reason. These delighted to converse
with me; they put many Questions, and received
such Answers, as I was able to return. By
all which Advantages, I made so great a Progress,
that in five Months from my Arrival, I understood
whatever was spoke, and could express myself tolerably
well. 
The Houyhnhnms who came to visit my Master,
out of a Design of seeing and talking with me,
could hardly believe me to be a right Yahoo, because
my Body had a different Covering from others of my
Kind. They were astonished to observe me without
the usual Hair or Skin, except on my Head,
Face and Hands: But I discovered that Secret to
my Master, upon an Accident, which happened
about a Fortnight before. 
I have already told the Reader, that every
Night when the Family were gone to Bed, it was
my Custom to strip and cover myself with my
Cloaths: It happened one Morning early, that my
Master sent for me, by the Sorrel Nag, who was
his Valet; when he came, I was fast asleep, my
Cloaths fallen off on one Side, and my Shirt above
my Waste. I awaked at the Noise he made, and
observed him to deliver his Message in some Disorder; 
after which he went to my Master, and in
a great Fright gave him a very confused Account of
what he had seen: This I presently discovered; 
for going as soon as I was dressed, to pay my Attendance
upon his Honour, he asked me the Meaning
of what his Servant had reported; that I was
not the same Thing when I slept as I appeared to 

be at other times; that his Valet assured him, some
Part of me was white, some yellow, at least not so
white, and some brown. 
I had hitherto concealed the Secret of my Dress,
in order to distinguish myself as much as possible,
from that cursed Race of Yahoos; but now I found
it in vain to do so any longer. Besides, I considered
that my Cloaths and Shoes would soon wear out,
which already were in a declining Condition, and
must be supplied by some Contrivance from the
Hides of Yahoos, or other Brutes; whereby the
whole Secret would be known. I therefore told
my Master, that in the Country from whence I
came, those of my Kind always covered their Bodies
with the Hairs of certain Animals prepared by
Art, as well for Decency, as to avoid Inclemencies
of Air both hot and cold; of which, as to my own
Person I would give him immediate Conviction, if
he pleased to command me; only desiring his Excuse,
if I did not expose those Parts that Nature
taught us to conceal. He said, my Discourse was
all very strange, but especially the last Part; for
he could not understand why Nature should teach
us to conceal what Nature had given. That neither
himself nor Family were ashamed of any Parts
of their Bodies; but however I might do as I
pleased. Whereupon, I first unbottoned my Coat,
and pulled it off. I did the same with my Wastecoat; 
I drew off my Shoes, Stockings and Breeches. 
I let my Shirt down to my Waste, and
drew up the Bottom, fastening it like a Girdle
about my Middle to hide my Nakedness. 

My Master observed the whole Performance
with great Signs of Curiosity and Admiration. He
took up all my Cloaths in his Pastern, one Piece
after another, and examined them diligently; he
then stroaked my Body very gently, and looked
round me several Times; after which he said, it
was plain I must be a perfect Yahoo; but that I differed
very much from the rest of my Species, in the
Whiteness, and Smoothness of my Skin, my want
of Hair in several Parts of my Body, the Shape and
Shortness of my Claws behind and before, and my
Affectation of walking continually on my two hinder
Feet. He desired to see no more; and gave me
leave to put on my Cloaths again, for I was shuddering
with Cold. 
I expressed my Uneasiness at his giving me so
often the Appellation of Yahoo, and odious Animal,
for which I had so utter an Hatred and Contempt. 
I begged he would forbear applying that Word to
me, and take the same Order in his Family, and
among his Friends whom he suffered to see me. I
requested likewise, that the Secret of my having a
false Covering to my Body might be known to none
but himself, at least as long as my present Cloathing
should last: For as to what the Sorrel Nag his
Valet had observed, his Honour might command
him to conceal it. 
All this my Master very graciously consented
to; and thus the Secret was kept till my Cloaths
began to wear out, which I was forced to supply
by several Contrivances, that shall hereafter be
mentioned. In the mean Time, he desired I would
go on with my utmost Diligence to learn their
Language, because he was more astonished at my 

Capacity for Speech and Reason, than at the Figure
of my Body, whether it were covered or no; adding,
that he waited with some Impatience to hear
the Wonders which I promised to tell him. 
From thenceforward he doubled the Pains he
had been at to instruct me; he brought me into all
Company, and made them treat me with Civility,
because, as he told them privately, this would put
me into good Humour, and make me more diverting 
Every Day when I waited on him, beside the
Trouble he was at in teaching, he would ask me
several Questions concerning my self, which I answered
as well as I could; and by those Means he
had already received some general Ideas, although
very imperfect. It would be tedious to relate the
several Steps, by which I advanced to a more regular
Conversation: But the first Account I gave of
my self in any Order and Length, was to this Purpose: 
That, I came from a very far Country, as I already
had attempted to tell him, with about fifty more
of my own Species; that we travelled upon the
Seas, in a great hollow Vessel made of Wood, and
larger than his Honour's House. I described the
Ship to him in the best Terms I could; and explained
by the Help of my Handkerchief displayed,
how it was driven forward by the Wind. That,
upon a Quarrel among us, I was set on Shoar on this
Coast, where I walked forward without knowing
whither, till he delivered me from the Persecution
of those execrable Yahoos. He asked me, Who
made the Ship, and how it was pussible that the
Houynhnhnms of my Country would leave it to 

the Management of Brutes? My Answer was, that
I durst proceed no farther in my Relation, unless
he would give me his Word and Honour that he
would not be offended; and then I would tell him
the Wonders I had so often promised. He agreed; 
and I went on by assuring him, that the Ship was
made by Creatures like myself, who in all the Countries
I had travelled, as well as in my own, were the
only governing, rational Animals; and that upon
my Arrival hither, I was as much astonished to
see the Houyhnhnms act like rational Beings, as
he or his Friends could be in finding some Marks
of Reason in a Creature he was pleased to call a
Yahoo; to which I owned my Resemblance in every
Part, but could not account for their degenerate
and brutal Nature. I said farther, That if good
Fortune ever restored me to my native Country, to
relate my Travels hither, as I resolved to do; every
Body would believe that I said the Thing which
was not; that I invented the Story out of my own
Head: And with all possible Respect to Himself,
his Family, and Friends, and under his Promise of
not being offended, our Countrymen would hardly
think it probable, that a Houynhnhnm should be
the presiding Creature of a Nation, and a Yahoo the
Brute. 
