



The Country described. A Proposal for correcting
modern Maps. The King's Palace, and some
Account of the Metropolis. The Author's Way
of travelling. The chief Temple described. 

I now intend to give the Reader a
short Description of this Country, as
far as I travelled in it, which was not
above two thousand Miles round Lorbrulgrud
the Metropolis. For, the
Queen, whom I always attended, never went further
when she accompanied the King in his Progresses; 
and there staid till his Majesty returned
from viewing his Frontiers. The whole Extent of
of this Prince's Dominions reacheth about six
thousand Miles in Length, and from three to five
in Breadth. From whence I cannot but conclude,
that our Geographers of Europe are in a great Error,
by supposing nothing but Sea between Japan 

and Califormia: For it was ever my Opinion, that
there must be a Balance of Earth to counterpoise
the great Continent of Tartary; and therefore they
ought to correct their Maps and Charts, by joining
this vast Tract of Land to the North-west Parts of
America; wherein I shall be ready to lend them my
Assistance. 
The Kingdom is a Peninsula, terminated to the
North-east by a Ridge of Mountains thirty Miles
high which are altogether impassable by Reason of
the Volcanoes upon the Tops. Neither do the
most Learned know what sort of Mortals inhabit
beyond those Mountains, or whether they be inhabited
at all. On the three other Sides it is bounded
by the Ocean. There is not one Sea-port in the
whole Kingdom; and those Parts of the Coasts into
which the Rivers issue, are so full of pointed
Rocks, and the Sea generally so rough, that there
is no venturing with the smallest of their Boats; so
that these People are wholly excluded from any
Commerce with the rest of the World. But the
large Rivers are full of Vessels, and abound with
excellent Fish; for they seldom get any from the
Sea, because the Sea-fish are of the same Size with
those in Europe, and consequently not worth catching; 
whereby it is manifest, that Nature in the
Production of Plants and Animals of so extraordinary
a Bulk, is wholly confined to this Continent; 
of which I leave the Reasons to be determined by
Philosophers. However, now and then they take
a Whale that happens to be dashed against the
Rocks, which the common People feed on heartily. 
These Whales I have known so large that a Man
could hardly carry one upon his Shoulders; and 

sometimes for Curiosity they are brought in Hampers
to Lorbrulgrud: I saw one of them in a Dish
at the King's Table, which passed for a Rarity; but
I did not observe he was fond of it; for I think
indeed the Bigness disgusted him, although I have
seen one somewhat larger in Greenland. 
The Country is well inhabited, for it contains
fifty one Cities, near an hundred walled Towns,
and a great Number of Villages. To satisfy my
curious Reader, it may be sufficient to describe
Lorbrulgrud. This City stands upon almost two
equal Parts on each Side the River that passes
through. It contains above eighty thousand
Houses. It is in Length three Glonglungs (which
make about fifty four English Miles) and two and
a half in Breadth, as I measured it myself in the
Royal Map made by the King's Order, which was
laid on the Ground on purpose for me, and extended
an hundred Feet; I paced the Diameter and
Circumference several times Bare-foot, and computing
by the Scale, measured it pretty exactly. 
The King's Palace is no regular Edifice, but an
Heap of Buildings about seven Miles round: The
chief Rooms are generally two hundred and forty
Foot high, and broad and long in Proportion. A
Coach was allowed to Glumdalclitch and me, where-in
her Governess frequently took her out to see the
Town, or go among the Shops; and I was always
of the Party, carried in my Box; although the
Girl at my own Desire would often take me out,
and hold me in her Hand, that I might more conveniently
view the Houses and the People as we
passed along the Streets. I reckoned our Coach to
be about a Square of Westminster Hall, but not altogether 

so High; however, I cannot be very exact. 
One Day the Governess ordered our Coachman
to stop at several Shops; where the Beggars
watching their Opportunity, crouded to the Sides
of the Coach, and gave me the most horrible Spectacles
that ever an European Eye beheld. There
was a Woman with a Cancer in her Breast, swelled
to a monstrous Size, full of Holes, in two or three
of which I could have easily crept, and covered
my whole Body. There was a Fellow with a Wen
in his Neck, larger than five Woolpacks; and another
with a couple of wooden Legs, each about
twenty Foot high. But, the most hateful Sight of
all was the Lice crawling on their Cloaths: I could
see distinctly the Limbs of these Vermin with my
naked Eye, much better than those of an European
Louse through a Microscope; and their Snouts
with which they rooted like Swine. They were
the first I had ever beheld; and I should have been
curious enough to dissect one of them, if I had
proper Instruments (which I unluckily left behind
me in the Ship) although indeed the Sight was so
nauseous, that it perfectly turned my Stomach. 
Beside the large Box in which I was usually
carried, the Queen ordered a smaller one to be made
for me, of about twelve Foot Square, and ten high,
for the Convenience of Travelling; because the other
was somewhat too large for Glumdalclitch's
Lap, and cumbersom in the Coach; it was made
by the same Artist, whom I directed in the whole
Contrivance. This travelling Closet was an exact
Square with a Window in the Middle of three of
the Squares, and each Window was latticed with
Iron Wire on the outside, to prevent Accidents in 

long Journeys. On the fourth Side, which had no
Window, two strong Staples were fixed, through
which the Person that carried me, when I had a
Mind to be on Horseback, put in a Leathern Belt,
and buckled it about his Waist. This was always
the Office of some grave trusty Servant in whom
I could confide, whether I attended the King and
Queen in their Progresses, or were disposed to see
the Gardens, or pay a Visit to some great Lady or
Minister of State in the Court, when Glumdalclitch
happened to be out of Order: For I soon began to
be known and esteemed among the greatest Officers,
I suppose more upon Account of their Majesty's
Favour, than any Merit of my own. In Journeys,
when I was weary of the Coach, a Servant on
Horseback would buckle my Box, and place it on
a Cushion before him; and there I had a full Prospect
of the Country on three Sides from my three
Windows. I had in this Closet a Field-Bed and a
Hammock hung from the Ceiling, two Chairs and
a Table, neatly screwed to the Floor, to prevent
being tossed about by the Agitation of the
Horse or the Coach. And having been long used
to Sea-Voyages, those Motions, although sometimes
very violent, did not much discompose me. 
Whenever I had a Mind to see the Town,
it was always in my Travelling-Closet; which
Glumdalclitch held in her Lap in a kind of open
Sedan, after the Fashion of the Country, born by
four Men, and attended by two others in the Queen's
Livery. The People who had often heard of me,
were very curious to croud about the Sedan; and
the Girl was complaisant enough to make the Bearers 

stop, and to take me in her Hand that I might be
more conveniently seen. 
I was very desirous to see the chief Temple,
and particularly the Tower belonging to it, which
is reckoned the highest in the Kingdom. Accordingly
one Day my Nurse carried me thither, but I
may truly say I came back disappointed; for, the
Height is not above three thousand Foot, reckoning
from the Ground to the highest Pinnacle top; which
allowing for the Difference between the Size of
those People, and us in Europe, is no great matter
for Admiration, nor at all equal in Proportion, (if I
rightly remember) to Salisbury Steeple. But, not
to detract from a Nation to which during my Life I
shall acknowledge myself extremely obliged; it must
be allowed, that whatever this famous Tower wants
in Height, is amply made up in Beauty and Strength. 
For the Walls are near an hundred Foot thick,
built of hewn Stone, whereof each is about forty
Foot square, and adorned on all Sides with Statues
of Gods and Emperors cut in Marble larger than
the Life, placed in their several Niches. I measured
a little Finger which had fallen down from one of
these Statues, and lay unperceived among some Rubbish; 
and found it exactly four Foot and an Inch
in Length. Glumdalclitch wrapped it up in a
Handkerchief, and carried it home in her Pocket
to keep among other Trinkets, of which the Girl
was very fond, as Children at her Age usually are. 
The King's Kitchen is indeed a noble Building,
vaulted at Top, and about six hundred Foot high. 
The great Oven is not so wide by ten Paces as the
Cupola at St. Paul's: For I measured the latter on
purpose after my Return. But if I should describe 

the Kitchen-grate, the prodigious Pots and Kettles,
the Joints of Meat turning on the Spits, with many
other Particulars; perhaps I should be hardly believed; 
at least a severe Critick would be apt to
think I enlarged a little, as Travellers are often suspected
to do. To avoid which Censure, I fear I
have run too much into the other Extream; and that
if this Treatise should happen to be translated into
the Language of Brobdingnag, (which is the general
Name of that Kingdom) and transmitted thither; 
the King and his People would have Reason
to complain; that I had done them an Injury by a
false and diminutive Representation. 
His Majesty seldom keeps above six hundred
Horses in his Stables: They are generally from fifty
four to sixty Foot high. But, when he goes abroad
on solemn Days, he is attended for State by a Militia
Guard of five hundred Horse, which indeed I
thought was the most splendid Sight that could be
ever beheld, till I saw part of his Army in Battalia; 
whereof I shall find another Occasion to speak. 
