



The Emperor of Lilliput, attended by several of the
Nobility, comes to see the Author in his Confinement. 
The Emperor's Person and Habit described. 
Learned Men appointed to teach the Author
their Language. He gains Favour by his mild
Disposition. His Pockets are searched, and his
Sword and Pistols taken from him. 

When I found myself on my Feet, I
looked about me, and must confess I
never beheld a more entertaining Prospect. 
The Country round appeared
like a continued Garden; and the inclosed
Fields, which were generally Forty Foot
square, resembled so many Beds of Flowers. These
Fields were intermingled with Woods of half a
Stang, and the tallest Trees, as I could judge, appeared
to be seven Foot high. I viewed the Town
on my left Hand, which looked like the painted
Scene of a City in a Theatre. 
I had been for some Hours extremely pressed by
the Necessities of Nature; which was no Wonder,
it being almost two Days since I had last disburthened
myself. I was under great Difficulties between 

Urgency and Shame. The best Expedient
I could think on, was to creep into my House,
which I accordingly did; and shutting the Gate
after me, I went as far as the Length of my Chain
would suffer; and discharged my Body of that uneasy
Load. But this was the only Time I was ever
guilty of so uncleanly an Action; for which I cannot
but hope the candid Reader will give some Allowance,
after he hath maturely and impartially considered
my Case, and the Distress I was in. From
this Time my constant Practice was, as soon as I
rose, to perform that Business in open Air, at the
full Extent of my Chain; and due Care was taken
every Morning before company came, that the offensive
Matter should be carried off in Wheel-barrows,
by two Servants appointed for that Purpose. 
I would not have dwelt so long upon a Circumstance,
that perhaps at first Sight may appear not
very momentous; if I had not thought it necessary
to justify my Character in Point of Cleanliness to
the World; which I am told, some of my Maligners
have been pleased, upon this and other Occasions,
to call in Question. 
When this Adventure was at an End, I came
back out of my House, having Occasion for fresh
Air. The Emperor was already descended from
the Tower, and advancing on Horseback towards
me, which had like to have cost him
dear; for the Beast, although very well trained
yet wholly unused to such a Sight, which appeared
as if a Mountain moved before him,
reared up on his hinder Feet: But that Prince,
who is an excellent Horseman, kept his Seat,
until his Attendants ran in, and held the Bridle, 

while his Majesty had Time to dismount. When
he alighted, he surveyed me round with great
Admiration, but kept beyond the Length of my
Chains. He ordered his Cooks and Butlers, who
were already prepared, to give me Victuals and
Drink, which they pushed forward in a sort of
Vehicles upon Wheels until I could reach them. 
I took these Vehicles, and soon emptied them all; 
twenty of them were filled with Meat, and ten
with Liquor; each of the former afforded me two
or three good Mouthfuls, and I emptied the Liquor
of ten Vessels, which was contained in earthen
Vials, into one Vehicle, drinking it off at a
Draught; and so I did with the rest. The Empress,
and young Princes of the Blood, of both
Sexes, attended by many Ladies, sate at some Distance
in their Chairs; but upon the Accident
that happened to the Emperor's Horse, they alighted,
and came near his Person; which I am
now going to describe. He is taller by almost
the Breadth of my Nail, than any of his Court; 
which alone is enough to strike an Awe into the
Beholders. His Features are strong and masculine,
with an Austrian Lip, and arched Nose, his Complexion
olive, his Countenance erect, his Body and
Limbs well proportioned, all his Motions graceful,
and his Deportment majestick. He was then
past his Prime, being twenty-eight Years and three
Quarters old, of which he had reigned about seven,
in great Felicity, and generally victorious. 
For the better Convenience of beholding him, I
lay on my Side, so that my Face was parallel to
his, and he stood but three Yards off: However,
I have had him since many Times in my Hand, 

and therefore cannot be deceived in the Description. 
His Dress was very plain and simple, the
Fashion of it between the Asiatick and the European;
but he had on his Head a light Helmet
of Gold, adorned with Jewels, and a Plume on the
Crest. He held his Sword drawn in his Hand; 
to defend himself, if I should happen to break
loose; it was almost three Inches long, the Hilt
and Scabbard were Gold enriched with Diamonds. 
His Voice was shrill, but very clear and articulate,
and I could distinctly hear it when I stood
up. The Ladies and Courtiers were all most magnificently
clad, so that the Spot they stood upon
seemed to resemble a Petticoat spread on the
Ground, embroidered with Figures of Gold and
Silver. His Imperial Majesty spoke often to me,
and I returned Answers, but neither of us could
understand a Syllable. There were several of his
Priests and Lawyers present (as I conjectured by
their Habits) who were commanded to address
themselves to me, and I spoke to them in as
many Languages as I had the least Smattering
of, which were High and Low Dutch, Latin
French, Spanish, Italian, and Lingua Franca; but
all to no purpose. After about two Hours the
Court retired, and I was left with a strong Guard,
to prevent the Impertinence, and probably the Malice
of the Rabble, who were very impatient to
croud about me as near as they durst; and some
of them had the Impudence to shoot their Arrow; 
at me as I sate on the Ground by the Door of
my House; whereof one very narrowly missed my
left Eye. But the Colonel ordered six of the Ringleaders
to be seized, and thought no Punishment 

so proper as to deliver them bound into my
Hands, which some of his Soldiers accordingly did,
pushing them forwards with the But-ends of their
Pikes into my Reach: I took them all in my
right Hand, put five of them into my Coat-pocket; 
and as to the sixth, I made a Countenance as
if I would eat him alive. The poor Man squalled
terribly, and the Colonel and his Officers
were in much Pain, especially when they saw me
take out my Penknife: But I soon put them out
of Fear; for, looking mildly, and immediately cutting
the Strings he was bound with, I set him
gently on the Ground, and away he ran. I treated
the rest in the same Manner, taking them one by
one out of my Pocket; and I observed, both the
Soldiers and People were highly obliged at this
Mark of my Clemency, which was represented
very much to my Advantage at Court. 
Towards night I got with some Difficulty
into my House, where I lay on the Ground, and
continued to do so about a Fortnight; during which
time the Emperor gave Orders to have a Bed
prepared for me. Six Hundred Beds of the common
Measure were brought in Carriages, and
worked up in my House; an Hundred and Fifty
of their Beds sown together made up the Breadth
and Length, and these were four double, which
however kept me but very indifferently from the
Hardness of the Floor, that was of smooth Stone. 
By the same Computation they provided me with
Sheets, Blankets, and Coverlets, tolerable enough
for one who had been so long enured to Hardships
as I. 

As the News of my Arrival spread through
the Kingdom, it brought prodigious Numbers of
rich, idle, and curious People to see me; so that
the Villages were almost emptied, and great Neglect
of Tillage and Houshold Affairs must have
ensued, if his Imperial Majesty had not provided
by several Proclamations and Orders of State against
this Inconveniency. He directed that those, who
had already beheld me, should return home, and
not presume to come within fifty Yards of my
House, without Licence from Court; whereby
the Secretaries of State got considerable Fees. 
In the mean time, the Emperor held frequent
Councils to debate what Course should be taken
with me; and I was afterwards assured by a particular
Friend, a Person of great Quality, who was
as much in the Secret as any; that the Court was
under many Difficulties concerning me. They
apprehended my breaking loose; that my Diet
would be very expensive, and might cause a Famine. 
Sometimes they determined to starve me,
or at least to shoot me in the Face and Hands
with poisoned Arrows, which would soon dispatch
me: But again they considered, that the Stench
of so large a Carcase might produce a Plague in the
Metropolis, and probably spread through the whole
Kingdom. In the midst of these Consultations,
several Officers of the Army went to the Door of
the great Council-Chamber; and two of them being
admitted, gave an Account of my Behaviour
to the six Criminals above-mentioned; which made
so favourable an Impression in the Breast of his
Majesty, and the whole Board, in my Behalf, that
an Imperial Commission was issued out, obliging all 

the Villages nine hundred Yards round the City,
to deliver in every Morning six Beeves, forty
Sheep, and other Victuals for my Sustenance; together
with a proportionable Quantity of Bread
and Wine, and other Liquors: For the due Payment
of which his Majesty gave Assignments
upon his Treasury. For this Prince lives chiefly
upon his own Demesnes; seldom, except upon
great Occasions raising any Subsidies upon his
Subjects, who are bound to attend him in his
Wars at their own Expence. An Establishment
was also made of Six Hundred Persons to be my
Domesticks, who had Board-Wages allowed for
their Maintenance, and Tents built for them very
conveniently on each side of my Door. It was
likewise ordered, that three hundred Taylors should
make me a Suit of Cloaths after the Fashion of
the Country: That, six of his Majesty's greatest
Scholars should be employed to instruct me in
their Language: And, lastly, that the Emperor's
Horses, and those of the Nobility, and Troops
of Guards, should be exercised in my Sight, to accustom
themselves to me. All these Orders were
duly put in Execution; and in about three Weeks
I made a great Progress in Learning their Language; 
during which Time, the Emperor frequently
honoured me with his Visits, and was pleased to assist
my Masters in teaching me. We began already to
converse together in some Sort; and the first Words
I learnt, were to express my Desire, that he would
please to give me my Liberty; which I every
Day repeated on my Knees. His Answer, as I
could apprehend, was, that this must be a Work 

of Time, not to be thought on without the Advice
of his Council; and that first I must Lumos
Kelmin pesso desmar lon Emposo; that is, Swear a
peace with him and his Kingdom. However,
that I should be used with all Kindness; and he
advised me to acquire by my Patience and discreet
Behaviour, the good Opinion of himself and his
Subjects. He desired I would not take it ill, if he
gave Orders to certain proper Officers to search me; 
for probably I might carry about me several Weapons,
which must needs be dangerous Things, if
they answered the Bulk of so prodigious a Person. 
I said, his Majesty should be satisfied, for I was
ready to strip my self, and turn up my Pockets before
him. This I delivered, part in Words, and part
in Signs. He replied, that by the Laws of the
Kingdom, I must be searched by two of his Officers:
That he knew this could not be done without
my Consent and Assistance; that he had so
good an Opinion of my Generosity and Justice,
as to trust their Persons in my Hands: That
whatever they took from me should be returned
when I left the Country, or paid for at the Rate
which I would set upon them. I took up the
two Officers in my Hands, put them first into my
Coat-Pockets, and then into every other Pocket
about me, except my two Fobs, and another secret
Pocket which I had no Mind should be searched,
wherein I had some little Necessaries of no Consequence
to any but my self. In one of my Fobs
there was a Silver Watch, and in the other a small
Quantity of Gold in a Purse. These Gentlemen,
having Pen, Ink, and Paper about them, made an
exact Inventory of every thing they saw; and when 

they had done, desired I would set them down,
that they might deliver it to the Emperor. This
Inventory I afterwards translated into English, and
is Word for Word as follows. 
Imprimis, In the right Coat-Pocket of the
Great Man Mountain (for so I interpret the Words
Quinbus Flestrin) after the strictest Search, we
found only one great Piece of coarse Cloth, large
enough to be a Foot-Cloth for your Majesty's
chief Room of State. In the left Pocket, we saw
a huge Silver Chest, with a Cover of the same
Metal, which we, the Searchers, were not able to
lift. We desired it should be opened; and one of
us stepping into it, found himself up to the mid
Leg in a sort of Dust, some part whereof flying up
to our Faces, set us both a sneezing for several
Times together. In his right Waistcoat-Pocket, we
sound a prodigious Bundle of white thin Substances,
folded one over another, about the Bigness of
three Men, tied with a strong Cable, and marked
with black Figures; which we humbly conceive
to be Writings; every Letter almost half as large
as the Palm of our Hands. In the left there was a
sort of Engine, from the Back of which were extended
twenty long Poles, resembling the Pallisado's
before your Majesty's Court; wherewith we conjecture
the Man Mountain combs his Head; for
we did not always trouble him with Questions, because
we found it a great Difficulty to make him
understand us. In the large Pocket on the right
Side of his middle Cover, (so I translate the Word
Ranfu-Lo, by which they meant my Breeches) we
saw a hollow Pillar of Iron, about the Length of 

a Man, fastened to a strong Piece of Timber, larger
than the Pillar; and upon one side of the Pillar
were huge Pieces of Iron sticking out, cut into
strange Figures; which we know not what to make
of. In the left Pocket, another Engine of the
same kind. In the smaller Pocket on the right
Side, were several round flat Pieces of white and
red Metal, of different Bulk: Some of the white,
which seemed to be Silver, were so large and heavy,
that my Comrade and I could hardly lift them. 
In the left Pocket were two black Pillars irregularly
shaped: we could not, without Difficulty, reach
the Top of them as we stood at the Bottom of his
Pocket: One of them was covered, and seemed all
of a Piece; but at the upper End of the other,
there appeared a white round Substance, about twice
the bigness of our Heads. Within each of these was
inclosed a prodigious Plate of Steel; which, by our
Orders, we obliged him to shew us, because we
apprehended they might be dangerous Engines. He
took them out of their Cases, and told us, that in
his own Country his Practice was to shave his
Beard with one of these, and to cut his Meat with
the other. There were two Pockets which we
could not enter: These he called his Fobs; they
were two large Slits cut into the Top of his middle
Cover, but squeezed close by the Pressure of his
Belly. Out of the right Fob hung a great Silver
Chain, with a wonderful kind of Engine at the
Bottom. We directed him to draw out whatever
was at the End of that Chain; which appeared to
be a Globe, half Silver, and half of some transparent
Metal: For on the transparent Side we saw 

certain strange Figures circularly drawn, and thought
we could touch them, until we found our Fingers
stopped with that lucid Substance. He put
this Engine to our Ears, which made an incessant
Noise like that of a Water-Mill. And we conjecture
it is either some unknown Animal, or the
God that he worships: But we are more inclined
to the latter Opinion, because he assured us
(if we understood him right, for he expressed
himself very imperfectly) that he seldom did any
Thing without consulting it. He called it his
Oracle, and said it pointed out the Time for every
Action of his Life. From the left Fob he
took out a Net almost large enough for a Fisherman,
but contrived to open and shut like a Purse,
and served him for the same Use: We found
therein several massy Pieces of yellow Metal,
which if they be of real Gold, must be of immense
Value. 
Having thus, in Obedience to your Majesty's
Commands, diligently searched all his Pockets; 
we observed a Girdle about his Waist made of
the Hyde of some prodigious Animal; from which,
on the left Side, hung a Sword of the Length of
five Men; and on the right. a Bag or Pouch divided
into two Cells; each Cell capable of holding
three of your Majesty's Subjects. In one of
these Cells were several Globes or Balls of a most
ponderous Metal, about the Bigness of our Heads,
and required a strong Hand to lift them: The other
Cell contained a Heap of certain black Grains,
but of no great Bulk or Weight, for we could
hold above fifty of them in the Palms of our
Hands. 

This is an exact Inventory of what we found
about the Body of the Man Mountain; who used
us with great Civility, and due Respect to your
Majesty's Commission. Signed and Sealed on the
fourth Day of the eighty ninth Moon of your Majesty's
auspicious Reign. 
Clefren Frelock; Marsi Frelock. 
When this Inventory was read over to the
Emperor, he directed me to deliver up the several
Particulars. He first called for my Scymiter,
which I took out, Scabbard and all. In the mean
time he ordered three thousand of his choicest
Troops, who then attended him, to surround me
at a Distance, with their Bows and Arrows just ready
to discharge: But I did not observe it; for mine
Eyes were wholly fixed upon his Majesty. He
then desired me to draw my Scymiter, which, although
it had got some Rust by the Sea-Water,
was in most Parts exceeding bright. I did so, and
immediately all the Troops gave a Shout between
Terror and Surprize; for the Sun shone clear,
and the Reflexion dazzled their Eyes, as I waved
the Scymiter to and fro in my Hand. His Majesty,
who is a most magnanimous Prince, was less
daunted than I could expect; he ordered me to
return it into the Scabbard, and cast it on the
Ground as gently as I could, about six Foot from
the End of my Chain. The next Thing he demanded
was one of the hollow Iron Pillars, by
which he meant my Pocket-Pistols. I drew it 

out, and at his Desire, as well as I could, expressed
to him the Use of it, and charging it only with
Powder, which by the Closeness of my Pouch,
happened to escape wetting in the Sea, (an Inconvenience
that all prudent Mariners take special
Care to provide against) I first cautioned the
Emperor not to be afraid; and then I let it off in
the Air. The Astonishment here was much greater
than at the Sight of my Scymiter. Hundreds
fell down as if they had been struck dead; and
even the Emperor, although he stood his Ground,
could not recover himself in some time. I delivered
up both my Pistols in the same Manner as
I had done my Scymiter, and then my Pouch of
Powder and Bullets; begging him that the former
might be kept from Fire; for it would kindle with
the smallest Spark, and blow up his Imperial Palace
into the Air. I likewise delivered up my
Watch, which the Emperor was very curious to
see; and commanded two of his tallest Yeomen of
the Guards to bear it on a Pole upon their Shoulders,
as Dray-men in England do a Barrel of Ale. 
He was amazed at the continual Noise it made, and
the Motion of the Minute-hand, which he could
easily discern; for their Sight is much more acute
than ours: He asked the Opinions of his learned
Men about him, which were various and remote,
as the Reader may well imagine without my repeating; 
although indeed I could not very perfectly
understand them. I then gave up my Silver and
Copper Money, my Purse with nine large Pieces
of Gold, and some smaller ones; my Knife and
Razor, my Comb and Silver Snuff-Box, my Handkerchief 

and Journal Book. My Scymiter, Pistols,
and Pouch, were conveyed in Carriages to his Majesty's
Stores; but the rest of my Goods were returned
me. 
I had, as I before observed, one private Pocket
which escaped their Search, wherein there was
a Pair of Spectacles (which I sometimes use for
the Weakness of mine Eyes) a Pocket Perspective,
and several other little Conveniences; which being
of no Consequence to the Emperor, I did not
think my self bound in Honour to discover; and
I apprehended they might be lost or spoiled if I
ventured them out of my Possession. 
