



The Author being informed of a Design to accuse
him of High Treason, makes his Escape to Blefuscu. 
His Reception there. 

Before I proceed to give an Account
of my leaving this Kingdom, it may
be proper to inform the Reader of a
private Intrigue which had been for
two Months forming against me. 
I had been hitherto all my Life a Stranger to
Courts, for which I was unqualified by the Meanness
of my Condition. I had indeed heard and
read enough of the Dispositions of great Princes
and Ministers; but never expected to have found
such terrible Effects of them in so remote a Country,
governed, as I thought, by very different Maxims
from those in Europe. 
When I was just preparing to pay my Attendance
on the Emperor of Blefuscu; a considerable
Person at Court (to whom I had been very serviceable
at a time when he lay under the highest Displeasure 

of his Imperial Majesty) came to my House
very privately at Night in a close Chair, and without
sending his Name, desired Admittance: The
Chair men were dismissed; I put the Chair, with
his Lordship in it, into my Coat-Pocket; and giving
Orders to a trusty Servant to say I was indisposed
and gone to sleep, I fastened the Door of my House,
placed the Chair on the Table, according to my
usual Custom, and sat down by it. After the common
Salutations were over, observing his Lordship's
Countenance full of Concern; and enquiring into
the Reason, he desired I would hear him with Patience,
in a Matter that highly concerned my Honour
and my Life. His Speech was to the following
Effect, for I took Notes of it as soon as he left
me. 
You are to know, said he, that several Committees
of Council have been lately called in the most
private Manner on your Account: And it is but
two Days since his Majesty came to a full Resolution. 
You are very sensible that Skyris Bolgolam (Galbet,
or High Admiral) hath been your mortal Enemy
almost ever since your Arrival. His original
Reasons I know not; but his Hatred is much encreased
since your great Success against Blefuscu,
by which his Glory, as Admiral, is obscured. This
Lord, in Conjunction with Flimnap the High Treasurer,
whose Enmity against you is notorious on
Account of his Lady; Limtoc the General, Lalcon
the Chamberlain, and Balmuff the grand Justiciary,
have prepared Articles of Impeachment against you,
for Treason, and other capital Crimes. 

This Preface made me so impatient, being conscious
of my own Merits and Innocence, that I was
going to interrupt; when he intreated me to be silent; 
and thus proceeded. 
Out of Gratitude for the Favours you have done
me, I procured Information of the whole Proceedings,
and a Copy of the Articles, wherein I venture
my Head for your Service. 
Articles of Impeachment against Quinbus Flestrin,
(the Man-Mountain.)
ARTICLE I.
Whereas, by a Statute made in the Reign
of his Imperial Majesty Calin Deffar
Plune, it is enacted, That whoever shall make water
within the Precincts of the Royal Palace, shall
be liable to the Pains and Penalties of High Treason:
Notwithstanding, the said Quinbus Flestrin, in
open Breach of the said Law, under Colour of extinguishing
the Fire kindled in the Apartment of
his Majesty's most dear Imperial Consort, did maliciously,
traitorously, and devilishly, by discharge
of his Urine, put out the said Fire kindled in the
said Apartment, lying and being within the Precincts
of the said Royal Palace; against the Statute in
that Case provided, &c. against the Duty, &c. 
ARTICLE II.
That the said Quinbus Flestrin having brought
the Imperial Fleet of Blefuscu into the Royal Port, 

and being afterwards commanded by his Imperial
Majesty to seize all the other Ships of the said Empire
of Blefuscu, and reduce that Empire to a Province,
to be governed by a Vice-Roy from hence; 
and to destroy and put to death not only all the Big-Endian
Exiles, but likewise all the People of that
Empire, who would not immediately forsake the
Big-Endian Heresy: He the said Flestrin, like a
false Traitor against his most Auspicious, Serene,
Imperial Majesty, did petition to be excused from
the said Service, upon Pretence of Unwillingness to
force the Consciences, or destroy the Liberties and
Lives of an innocent People. 
ARTICLE III.
That, whereas certain Embassadors arrived from
the Court of Blefuscu to sue for Peace in his Majesty's
Court: He the said Flestrin did, like a false
Traitor, aid, abet, comfort, and divert the said
Embassadors; although he knew them to be Servants
to a Prince who was lately an open Enemy to
his Imperial Majesty, and in open War against his
said Majesty. 
ARTICLE IV.
That the said Quinbus Flestrin, contrary to the
Duty of a faithful Subject, is now preparing to make
a Voyage to the Court and Empire of Blefuscu, for
which he hath received only verbal Licence from
his Imperial Majesty; and under Colour of the said
Licence, doth falsly and traitorously intend to take
the said Voyage, and thereby to aid, comfort, and 

abet the Emperor of Blefuscu, so late an Enemy,
and in open War with his Imperial Majesty aforesaid. 
There are some other Articles, but these are
the most important, of which I have read you an
Abstract. 
In the several Debates upon this Impeachment,
it must be confessed that his Majesty gave many
Marks of his great Lenity; often urging the Services
you had done him, and endeavouring to extenuate
your Crimes. The Treasurer and Admiral
insisted that you should be put to the most painful
and ignominious Death, by setting Fire on your
House at Night; and the General was to attend
with Twenty Thousand Men armed with poisoned
Arrows, to shoot you on the Face and Hands. 
Some of your Servants were to have private Orders
to strew a poisonous Juice on your Shirts and Sheets,
which would soon make you tear your own Flesh,
and die in the utmost Torture. The General came
into the same Opinion; so that for a long time there
was a Majority against you. But his Majesty resolving,
if possible, to spare your Life, at last
brought off the Chamberlain. 
Upon this Incident, Reldresal, principal Secretary
for private Affairs, who always approved himself
your true Friend, was commanded by the Emperor
to deliver his Opinion, which he accordingly did; 
and therein justified the good Thoughts you have
of him. He allowed your Crimes to be great; but
that still there was room for Mercy, the most commendable
Virtue in a Prince, and for which his 

Majesty was so justly celebrated. He said, the
Friendship between you and him was so well known
to the World, that perhaps the most honourable
Board might think him partial: However, in Obedience
to the Command he had received, he would
freely offer his Sentiments. That if his Majesty,
in Consideration of your Services, and pursuant to
his own merciful Disposition, would please to spare
your Life, and only give order to put out both your
Eyes; he humbly conceived, that by this Expedient,
Justice might in some measure be satisfied, and all
the World would applaud the Lenity of the Emperor,
as well as the fair and generous Proceedings of
those who have the Honour to be his Counsellors. 
That the Loss of your Eyes would be no Impediment
to your bodily Strength, by which you might
still be useful to his Majesty. That Blindness is an
Addition to Courage, by concealing Dangers from
us; that the Fear you had for your Eyes, was the
greatest Difficulty in bringing over the Enemy's
Fleet; and it would be sufficient for you to see by
the Eyes of the Ministers, since the greatest Princes
do no more. 
This Proposal was received with the utmost
Disapprobation by the whole Board. Bolgolam, the
Admiral, could not preserve his Temper; but rising
up in Fury, said, he wondered how the Secretary
durst presume to give his Opinion for preserving
the Life of a Traytor: That the Services you had
performed, were, by all true Reasons of State, the
great Aggravation of your Crimes; that you, who
were able to extinguish the Fire, by discharge of
Urine in her Majesty's Apartment (which he mentioned 

with Horror) might, at another time, raise
an Inundation by the same Means, to drown the
whole Palace; and the same Strength which enabled
you to bring over the Enemy's Fleet, might
serve, upon the first Discontent, to carry it back:
That he had good Reasons to think you were a
Big-Endian in your Heart; and as Treason begins
in the Heart before it appears in Overt-Acts; so he
accused you as a Traytor on that Account, and
therefore insisted you should be put to death. 
The Treasurer was of the same Opinion; he
shewed to what Streights his Majesty's Revenue
was reduced by the Charge of maintaining you,
which would soon grow insupportable: That the
Secretary's Expedient of putting out your Eyes, was
so far from being a Remedy against this Evil, that
it would probably increase it; as it is manifest from
the common Practice of blinding some Kind of
Fowl, after which they fed the faster, and grew
sooner fat: That his sacred Majesty, and the
Council, who are your Judges, were in their own
Consciences fully convinced of your Guilt; which
was a sufficient Argument to condemn you to
death, without the formal Proofs required by the
strict Letter of the Law. 
But his Imperial Majesty fully determined
against capital Punishment, was graciously pleased
to say, that since the Council thought the Loss of
your Eyes too easy a Censure, some other may be
inflicted hereafter. And your Friend the Secretary
humbly desiring to be heard again, in Answer to
what the Treasurer had objected concerning the
great Charge his Majesty was at in maintaining you; 
said, that his Excellency, who had the sole Disposal 

of the Emperor's Revenue, might easily provide
against this Evil, by gradually lessening your Establishment; 
by which, for want of sufficient Food,
you would grow weak and faint, and lose your
Appetite, and consequently decay and consume in
a few Months; neither would the Stench of your
Carcass be then so dangerous, when it should become
more than half diminished; and immediately
upon your Death, five or six Thousand of his
Majesty's Subjects might, in two or three Days,
cut your Flesh from your Bones, take it away by
Cart-loads, and bury it in distant Parts to prevent
Infection; leaving the Skeleton as a Monument of
Admiration to Posterity. 
Thus by the great Friendship of the Secretary,
the whole Affair was compromised. It was strictly
enjoined, that the Project of starving you by Degrees
should be kept a Secret; but the Sentence of
putting out your Eyes was entered on the Books; 
none dissenting except Bolgolam the Admiral, who
being a Creature of the Empress, was perpetually
instigated by her Majesty to insist upon your Death; 
she having born perpetual Malice against you, on
Account of that infamous and illegal Method you
took to extinguish the Fire in her Apartment. 
In three Days your Friend the Secretary will be
directed to come to your House, and read before
you the Articles of Impeachment; and then to signify
the great Lenity and Favour of his Majesty and
Council; whereby you are only condemned to the
Loss of your Eyes, which his Majesty doth not
question you will gratefully and humbly submit to; 
and Twenty of his Majesty's Surgeons will attend, 

in order to see the Operation well performed, by
discharging very sharp pointed Arrows into the Balls
of your Eyes, as you lie on the Ground. 
I leave to your Prudence what Measures you
will take; and to avoid Suspicion, I must immediately
return in as private a Manner as I came. 
His Lordship did so, and I remained alone, under
many Doubts and Perplexities of Mind. 
It was a Custom introduced by this Prince and
his Ministry, (very different, as I have been assured,
from the Practices of former Times) that after the
Court had decreed any cruel Execution, either to
gratify the Monarch's Resentment, or the Malice
of a Favourite; the Emperor always made a Speech
to his whole Council, expressing his great Lenity
and Tenderness, as Qualities known and confessed
by all the World. This Speech was immediately
published through the Kingdom; nor did any thing
terrify the People so much as those Encomiums on
his Majesty's Mercy; because it was observed, that
the more these Praises were enlarged and insisted
on, the more inhuman was the Punishment, and
the Sufferer more innocent. Yet, as to myself, I
must confess, having never been designed for a
Courtier, either by my Birth or Education, I was
so ill a Judge of Things, that I could not discover
the Lenity and Favour of this Sentence; but conceived
it (perhaps erroneously) rather to be rigorous
than gentle. I sometimes thought of standing my
Tryal; for although I could not deny the Facts alledged
in the several Articles, yet I hoped they
would admit of some Extenuations. But having in
my Life perused many State-Tryals, which I ever 

observed to terminate as the Judges thought fit to
direct; I durst not rely on so dangerous a Decision,
in so critical a Juncture, and against such powerful
Enemies. Once I was strongly bent upon Resistance:
For while I had Liberty, the whole
Strength of that Empire could hardly subdue me,
and I might easily with Stones pelt the Metropolis
to Pieces: But I soon rejected that Project with
Horror, by remembering the Oath I had made to
the Emperor, the Favours I received from him,
and the high Title of Nardac he conferred upon
me. Neither had I so soon learned the Gratitude
of Courtiers, to persuade myself that his Majesty's
present Severities acquitted me of all past Obligations. 
At last I fixed upon a Resolution, for which it
is probable I may incur some Censure, and not unjustly; 
for I confess I owe the preserving mine
Eyes, and consequently my Liberty, to my own
great Rashness and Want of Experience: Because
if I had then known the Nature of Princes and
Ministers, which I have since observed in many
other Courts, and their Methods of treating Criminals
less obnoxious than myself; I should with great
Alacrity and Readiness have submitted to so easy a
Punishment. But hurried on by the Precipitancy
of Youth; and having his Imperial Majesty's Licence
to pay my Attendance upon the Emperor of
Blefuscu; I took this Opportunity, before the three
Days were elapsed, to send a Letter to my Friend
the Secretary, signifying my Resolution of setting
out that Morning for Blefuscu, pursuant to the
Leave I had got; and without waiting for an Answer, 

I went to that Side of the Island where our
Fleet lay. I seized a large Man of War, tied a
Cable to the Prow, and lifting up the Anchors, I
stript myself, put my Cloaths (together with my
Coverlet, which I carryed under my Arm) into
the Vessel; and drawing it after me, between wading
and swimming, arrived at the Royal Port of Blefuscu,
where the People had long expected me:
They lent me two Guides to direct me to the Capital
City, which is of the same Name; I held them
in my Hands until I came within two Hundred
Yards of the Gate; and desired them to signify my
Arrival to one of the Secretaries, and let him
know, I there waited his Majesty's Commands. I
had an Answer in about an Hour, that his Majesty,
attended by the Royal Family, and great Officers of
the Court, was coming out to receive me. I advanced
a Hundred Yards; the Emperor, and his
Train, alighted from their Horses, the Empress and
Ladies from their Coaches; and I did not perceive
they were in any Fright or Concern. I lay on the
Ground to kiss his Majesty's and the Empress's
Hand. I told his Majesty, that I was come according
to my Promise, and with the Licence of the
Emperor my Master, to have the Honour of seeing
so mighty a Monarch, and to offer him any
Service in my Power, consistent with my Duty to
my own Prince; not mentioning a Word of my
Disgrace, because I had hitherto no regular Information
of it, and might suppose myself wholly ignorant
of any such Design; neither could I reasonably
conceive that the Emperor would discover 

the Secret while I was out of his Power: Wherein, 
however, it soon appeared I was deceived. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with the particular
Account of my Reception at this Court,
which was suitable to the Generosity of so great a
Prince; nor of the Difficulties I was in for want of
a House and Bed, being forced to lie on the Ground,
wrapt up in my Coverlet. 
