



The Luggnuggians commended. A particular Description
of the Struldbrugs, with many Conversations
between the Author and some eminent
Persons upon that Subject. 

The Luggnuggians are a polite and generous
People, and although they are
not without some Share of that Pride
which is peculiar to all Eastern Countries,
yet they shew themselves courteous
to Strangers, especially such who are countenanced
by the Court. I had many Acquaintance
among Persons of the best Fashion, and being always
attended by my Interpreter, the Conversation
we had was not disagreeable. 
One Day in much good Company, I was asked
by a Person of Quality, whether I had seen any of
their Struldbrugs or Immortals. I said I had not; 
and desired he would explain to me what he meant
by such an Appellation, applyed to a mortal Creature. 
He told me, that sometimes, although very
rarely, a Child happened to be born in a Family
with a red circular Spot in the Forehead, directly
over the left Eye-brow, which was an infallible 

Mark that it should never dye. The Spot, as he
described it, was about the Compass of a Silver
Threepence, but in the Course of Time grew
larger, and changed its Colour; for at Twelve
Years old it became green, so continued till Five
and Twenty, then turned to a deep blue; at Five
and Forty it grew coal black, and as large as an
English Shilling; but never admitted any farther
Alteration. He said these Births were so rare, that
he did not believe there could be above Eleven
Hundred Struldbrugs of both Sexes in the whole
Kingdom, of which he computed about Fifty in
the Metropolis, and among the rest a young Girl
born about three Years ago. That, these Productions
were not peculiar to any Family, but a meer
Effect of Chance; and the Children of the Struldbruggs
themselves, were equally mortal with the
rest of the People. 
I freely own myself to have been struck with
inexpressible Delight upon hearing this Account:
And the Person who gave it me happening to understand
the Balnibarbian Language, which I spoke
very well, I could not forbear breaking out into
Expressions perhaps a little too extravagant. I cryed
out as in a Rapture; Happy Nation, where every
Child hath at least a Chance for being immortal! 
Happy People who enjoy so many living Examples
of antient Virtue, and have Masters ready to instruct
them in the Wisdom of all former Ages! 
But, happiest beyond all Comparison are those excellent
Struldbruggs, who being born exempt from
that universal Calamity of human Nature, have
their Minds free and disingaged, without the
Weight and Depression of Spirits caused by the 

continual Apprehension of Death. I discovered
my Admiration that I had not observed any of these
illustrious Persons at Court; the black Spot on the
Fore-head, being so remarkable a Distinction, that
I could not have easily overlooked it: And it was
impossible that his Majesty, a most judicious Prince,
should not provide himself with a good Number
of such wise and able Counsellors. Yet perhaps
the Virtue of those Reverend Sages was too strict
for the corrupt and libertine Manners of a Court. 
And we often find by Experience, that young Men
are too opinionative and volatile to be guided by the
sober Dictates of their Seniors. However, since
the King was pleased to allow me Access to his
Royal Person, I was resolved upon the very first
Occasion to deliver my Opinion to him on this
Matter freely, and at large by the Help of my Interpreter; 
and whether he would please to take my
Advice or no, yet in one Thing I was determined,
that his Majesty having frequently offered me an
Establishment in this Country, I would with great
Thankfulness accept the Favour, and pass my Life
here in the Conversation of those superiour Beings
the Struldbruggs, if they would please to admit
me. 
The Gentleman to whom I addressed my Discourse,
because (as I have already observed) he
spoke the Language of Balnibarbi, said to me with
a Sort of a Smile, which usually ariseth from Pity
to the Ignorant, that he was glad of any Occasion
to keep me among them, and desired my Permission
to explain to the Company what I had spoke. He
did so; and they talked together for some time in 

their own Language, whereof I understood not a
Syllable, neither could I observe by their Countenances
what Impression my Discourse had made on
them. After a short Silence, the same Person told
me, that his Friends and mine (so he thought fit to
express himself) were very much pleased with the
judicious Remarks I had made on the great Happiness
and Advantages of immortal Life; and they
were desirous to know in a particular Manner, what
Scheme of Living I should have formed to myself,
if it had fallen to my Lot to have been born a
Struldbrugg. 
I answered, it was easy to be eloquent on so
copious and delightful a Subject, especially to me
who have been often apt to amuse myself with Visions
of what I should do if I were a King, a General,
or a great Lord: And upon this very Case I
had frequently run over the whole System how I
should employ myself, and pass the Time if I were
sure to live for ever. 
That, if it had been my good Fortune to come
into the World a Struldbrugg; as soon as I could
discover my own Happiness by understanding the
Difference between Life and Death, I would first
resolve by all Arts and Methods whatsoever to procure
myself Riches: In the Pursuit of which, by
Thrift and Management, I might reasonably expect
in about two Hundred Years, to be the wealthiest
Man in the Kingdom. In the second Place, I
would from my earliest Youth apply myself to the
Study of Arts and Sciences, by which I should arrive
in time to excel all others in Learning. Lastly,
I would carefully record every Action and Event of
Consequence that happened in the Publick, impartially 

draw the Characters of the several Successions
of Princes, and great Ministers of State; with my
own Observations on every Point. I would exactly
set down the several Changes in Customs, Languages,
Fashions, Dress, Dyet and Diversions. By
all which Acquirements, I should be a living Treasury
of Knowledge and Wisdom, and certainly become
the Oracle of the Nation. 
I would never marry after Threescore, but live
in an hospitable Manner, yet still on the saving
Side. I would entertain myself in forming and directing
the Minds of hopeful young Men, by convincing
them from my own Remembrance, Experience
and Observation, fortified by numerous Examples,
of the Usefulness of Virtue in publick and
private Life. But, my choise and constant Companions
should be a Sett of my own immortal Brotherhood,
among whom I would elect a Dozen
from the most ancient down to my own Contemporaries. 
Where any of these wanted Fortunes, I
would provide them with convenient Lodges round
my own Estate, and have some of them always at
my Table, only mingling a few of the most valuable
among you Mortals, whom Length of Time
would harden me to lose with little or no Reluctance,
and treat your Posterity after the same Manner; 
just as a Man diverts himself with the annual
Succession of Pinks and Tulips in his Garden, without
regretting the Loss of those which withered
the preceding Year. 
These Struldbruggs and I would mutually communicate
our Observations and Memorials through
the Course of Time; remark the several Gradations
by which Corruption steals into the World, 

and oppose it in every Step, by giving perpetual
Warning and Instruction to Mankind; which, added
to the strong Influence of our own Example,
would probably prevent that continual Degeneracy
of human Nature, so justly complained of in all
Ages. 
Add to all this, the Pleasure of seeing the various
Revolutions of States and Empires; the Changes
in the lower and upper World; antient Cities in
Ruins, and obscure Villages become the Seats of
Kings. Famous Rivers lessening into shallow
Brooks; the Ocean leaving one Coast dry, and
overwhelming another: The Discovery of many
Countries yet unknown. Barbarity over running the
politest Nations, and the most barbarous becoming
civilized. I should then see the Discovery of the
Longitude, the perpetual Motion, the universal Medicine,
and many other great Inventions brought to
the utmost Perfection. 
What wonderful Discoveries should we make
in Astronomy, by outliving and confirming our
own Predictions; by observing the Progress and
Returns of Comets, with the Changes of Motion
in the Sun, Moon and Stars. 
I enlarged upon many other Topicks, which
the natural Desire of endless Life and sublunary
Happiness could easily furnish me with. When I
had ended, and the Sum of my Discourse had been
interpreted as before, to the rest of the Company,
there was a good Deal of Talk among them in the
Language of the Country, not without some Laughter
at my Expence. At last the same Gentleman
who had been my Interpreter, said, he was desired
by the rest to set me right in a few Mistakes, which 

I had fallen into through the common Imbecility of
human Nature, and upon that Allowance was less
answerable for them. That, this Breed of Struldbruggs
was peculiar to their Country, for there were
no such People either in Balnibarbi or Japan,
where he had the Honour to be Embassador from
his Majesty, and found the Natives in both those
Kingdoms very hard to believe that the Fact was
possible; and it appeared from my Astonishment
when he first mentioned the Matter to me, that I
received it as a Thing wholly new, and scarcely to
be credited. That in the two Kingdoms above-mentioned,
where during his Residence he had conversed
very much, he observed long Life to be the
universal Desire and Wish of Mankind. That,
whoever had one Foot in the Grave, was sure to
hold back the other as strongly as he could. That
the oldest had still Hopes of living one Day longer,
and looked on Death as the greatest Evil, from
which Nature always prompted him to retreat; only
in this Island of Luggnagg, the Appetite for living
was not so eager, from the continual Example of
the Struldbruggs before their Eyes. 
That the System of Living contrived by me
was unreasonable and unjust, because it supposed a
Perpetuity of Youth, Health, and Vigour, which
no Man could be so foolish to hope, however extravagant
he might be in his Wishes. That, the
Question therefore was not whether a Man would
chuse to be always in the Prime of Youth, attended
with Prosperity and Health; but how he would pass
a perpetual Life under all the usual Disadvantages
which old Age brings along with it. For although
few Men will avow their Desires of being immortal 

upon such hard Conditions, yet in the two Kingdoms
beforementioned of Balnibarbi and Japan,
he observed that every Man desired to put off
Death for sometime longer, let it approach ever so
late; and he rarely heard of any Man who died
willingly, except he were incited by the Extremity
of Grief or Torture. And he appealed to me whether
in those Countries I had travelled as well as my
own, I had not observed the same general Disposition. 
After this Preface, he gave me a particular Account
of the Struldbruggs among them. He said
they commonly acted like Mortals, till about Thirty
Years old, after which by Degrees they grew melancholy
and dejected, increasing in both till they
came to Fourscore. This he learned from their
own Confession; for otherwise there not being
above two or three of that Species born in an Age,
they were too few to form a general Observation
by. When they came to Fourscore Years, which
is reckoned the Extremity of living in this Country,
they had not only all the Follies and Infirmities of
other old Men, but many more which arose from
the dreadful Prospect of never dying. They were
not only opinionative, peevish, covetous, morose,
vain, talkative; but uncapable of Friendship, and
dead to all natural Affection, which never descended
below their Grand-children. Envy and impotent
Desires, are their prevailing Passions. But those
Objects against which their Envy seems principally
directed, are the Vices of the younger Sort, and
the Deaths of the old. By reflecting on the former,
they find themselves cut off from all Possibility of
Pleasure; and whenever they see a Funeral, they 

lament and repine that others are gone to an Harbour
of Rest, to which they themselves never can
hope to arrive. They have no Remembrance of
any thing but what they learned and observed in
their Youth and middle Age, and even that is very
imperfect: And for the Truth or Particulars of any
Fact, it is safer to depend on common Traditions
than upon their best Recollections. The least miserable
among them, appear to be those who turn
to Dotage, and entirely lose their Memories; these
meet with more Pity and Assistance, because they
want many bad Qualities which abound in others. 
If a Struldbrugg happen to marry one of his
own Kind, the Marriage is dissolved of Course by
the Courtesy of the Kingdom, as soon as the younger
of the two comes to be Fourscore. For the
Law thinks it a reasonable Indulgence, that those
who are condemned without any Fault of their
own to a perpetual Continuance in the World,
should not have their Misery doubled by the Load
of a Wife. 
As soon as they have compleated the Term of
Eighty Years, they are looked on as dead in Law; 
their Heirs immediately succeed to their Estates,
only a small Pittance is reserved for their Support; 
and the poor ones are maintained at the publick
Charge. After that Period they are held incapable
of any Employment of Trust or Profit; they cannot
purchase Lands, or take Leases, neither are they
allowed to be Witnesses in any Cause, either Civil
or Criminal, not even for the Decision of Meers and
Bounds. 
At Ninety they lose their Teeth and Hair; they
have at that Age no Distinction of Taste, but eat 

and drink whatever they can get, without Relish
or Appetite. The Diseases they were subject to,
still continue without encreasing or diminishing. 
In talking they forget the common Appellation of
Things, and the Names of Persons, even of those
who are their nearest Friends and Relations. For
the same Reason they never can amuse themselves
with reading, because their Memory will not serve
to carry them from the Beginning of a Sentence to
the End; and by this Defect they are deprived of
the only Entertainment whereof they might otherwise
be capable. 
The Language of this Country being always
upon the Flux, the Struldbruggs of one Age do not
understand those of another; neither are they able
after two Hundred Years to hold any Conversation
(farther than by a few general Words) with their
Neighbours the Mortals; and thus they lye under
the Disadvantage of living like Foreigners in their
own Country. 
This was the Account given me of the Struldbruggs,
as near as I can remember. I afterwards
saw five or six of different Ages, the youngest not
above two Hundred Years old, who were brought
to me at several Times by some of my Friends; but
although they were told that I was a great Traveller,
and had seen all the World, they had not the least
Curiosity to ask me a Question; only desired I
would give them Slumskudask, or a Token of Remembrance; 
which is a modest Way of begging, to
avoid the Law that strictiy forbids it, because they
are provided for by the Publick, although indeed
with a very scanty Allowance. 

They are despised and hated by all Sorts of People:
When one of them is born, it is reckoned ominous,
and their Birth is recorded very particularly; 
so that you may know their Age by consulting the
Registry, which however hath not been kept above
a Thousand Years past, or at least hath been destroyed
by Time or publick Disturbances. But the
usual Way of computing how old they are, is, by
asking them what Kings or great Persons they can
remember, and then consulting History; for infallibly
the last Prince in their Mind did not begin his
Reign after they were Fourscore Years old. 
They were the most mortifying Sight I ever
beheld; and the Women more horrible than the
Men. Besides the usual Deformities in extreme
old Age, they acquired an additional Ghastliness
in Proportion to their Number of Years, which is
not to be described; and among half a Dozen I
soon distinguished which was the eldest, although
there were not above a Century or two between
them. 
The Reader will easily believe, that from what
I had heard and seen, my keen Appetite for Perpetuity
of Life was much abated. I grew heartily
ashamed of the pleasing Visions I had formed; and
thought no Tyrant could invent a Death into which
I would not run with Pleasure from such a Life. 
The King heard of all that had passed between me
and my Friends upon this Occasion, and raillied me
very pleasantly; wishing I would send a Couple of
Struldbruggs to my own Country, to arm our People
against the Fear of Death; but this it seems is
forbidden by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; 

or else I should have been well content with
the Trouble and Expence of transporting them. 
I could not but agree, that the Laws of this
Kingdom relating to the Struldbruggs, were
founded upon the strongest Reasons, and such as
any other Country would be under the Necessity of
enacting in the like Circumstances. Otherwise, as
Avarice is the necessary Consequent of old Age,
those Immortals would in time become Proprietors
of the whole Nation, and engross the Civil Power; 
which, for want of Abilities to manage, must end
in the Ruin of the Publick. 
