



The Author leaves Laputa, is conveyed to Balnibarbi,
arrives at the Metropolis. A Description
of the Metropolis and the Country adjoining. 
The Author hospitably received by a great Lord. 
His Conversation with that Lord. 


Although I cannot say that I was ill
treated in this Island, yet I must confess
I thought my self too much neglected,
not without some Degree of
Contempt. For neither Prince nor
People appeared to be curious in any Part of Knowledge,
except Mathematicks and Musick, wherein
I was far their inferior, and upon that Account very
little regarded. 
On the other Side, after having seen all the Curiosities
of the Island, I was very desirous to leave
it, being heartily weary of those People. They
were indeed excellent in two Sciences for which
I have great Esteem, and wherein I am not unversed; 
but at the same time so abstracted and involved
in Speculation, that I never met with such disagreeable
Companions. I conversed only with
Woman Tradesmen, Flappers, and Court-Pages,
during two Months of my Abode there; by which 

at last I rendered my self extremely contemptible; 
yet these were the only People from whom I could
ever receive a reasonable Answer. 
I had obtained by hard Study a good Degree of
Knowledge in their Language: I was weary of being
confined to an Island where I received so little
Countenance; and resolved to leave it with the first
Opportunity. 
There was a great Lord at Court, nearly related
to the King, and for that Reason alone used with
Respect. He was universally reckoned the most
ignorant and stupid Person among them. He had
performed many eminent Services for the Crown,
had great natural and acquired Parts, adorned with
Integrity and Honour; but so ill an Ear for Musick,
that his Detractors reported he had been often
known to beat Time in the wrong Place; neither
could his Tutors without extreme Difficulty teach
him to demonstrate the most easy Proposition in the
Mathematicks. He was pleased to shew me many
Marks of Favour, often did me the Honour of a
Visit, desired to be informed in the Affairs of Europe,
the Laws and Customs, the Manners and
Learning of the several Countries where I had
travelled. He listened to me with great Attention,
and made very wise Observations on all I spoke. 
He had two Flappers attending him for State, but
never made use of them except at Court, and in
Visits of Ceremony; and would always command
them to withdraw when we were alone together. 
I intreated this illustrious Person to intercede
in my Behalf with his Majesty for Leave to depart; 
which he accordingly did, as he was pleased to tell
me, with Regret: For, indeed he had made me 

several Offers very advantageous, which however I
refused with Expressions of the highest Acknowledgment. 
On the 16th Day of February, I took Leave of
his Majesty and the Court. The King made me a
Present to the Value of about two Hundred Pounds
English; and my Protector his Kinsman as much
more, together with a Letter of Recommendation to
a Friend of his in Lagado, the Metropolis: The
Island being then hovering over a Mountain about
two Miles from it, I was let down from the lowest
Gallery, in the same Manner as I had been taken
up. 
The Continent, as far as it is subject to the Monarch
of the Flying Island, passeth under the general
Name of Balnibarbi; and the Metropolis, as I said
before, is called Lagado. I felt some little Satisfaction
in finding my self on firm Ground. I walked
to the City without any Concern, being clad like
one of the Natives, and sufficiently instructed to
converse with them. I soon found out the Person's
House to whom I was recommended; presented my
Letter from his Friend the Grandee in the Island,
and was received with much Kindness. This great
Lord, whose Name was Munodi, ordered me an
Apartment in his own House, where I continued
during my Stay, and was entertained in a most hospitable
Manner. 
The next Morning after my Arrival he took me
in his Chariot to see the Town, which is about half
the Bigness of London; but the Houses very strangely
built, and most of them out of Repair. The
People in the Streets walked fast, looked wild, their
Eyes fixed, and were generally in Rags. We passed 

through one of the Town Gates, and went about
three Miles into the Country, where I saw many
Labourers working with several Sorts of Tools in
the Ground, but was not able to conjecture what
they were about; neither did I observe any Expectation
either of Corn or Grass, although the Soil appeared
to be excellent. I could not forbear admiring
at these odd Appearances both in Town and
Country; and I made bold to desire my Conductor,
that he would be pleased to explain to me what
could be meant by so many busy Heads, Hands and
Faces, both in the Streets and the Fields, because I
did not discover any good Effects they produced; 
but on the contrary, I never knew a Soil so unhappily
cultivated, Houses so ill contrived and so ruinous,
or a People whose Countenances and Habit expressed
so much Misery and Want. 
This Lord Munodi was a Person of the first
Rank, and had been some Years Governor of Lagado;
but by a Cabal of Ministers was discharged
for Insufficiency. However the King treated him
with Tenderness, as a well-meaning Man, but of a
low contemptible Understanding. 
When I gave that free Censure of the Country
and its Inhabitants, he made no further Answer than
by telling me, that I had not been long enough among
them to form a Judgment; and that the different
Nations of the World had different Customs; 
with other common Topicks to the same Purpose. 
But when we returned to his Palace, he asked me
how I liked the Building, what Absurdities I observed,
and what Quarrel I had with the Dress and
Looks of his Domesticks. This he might safely 

do; because every Thing about him was magnificent,
regular and polite. I answered, that his Excellency's
Prudence, Quality, and Fortune, had
exempted him from those Defects which Folly and
Beggary had produced in others. He said, if I
would go with him to his Country House about
Twenty Miles distant, where his Estate lay, there
would be more Leisure for this Kind of Conversation. 
I told his Excellency, that I was entirely at
his Disposal; and accordingly we set out next
Morning. 
During our Journey, he made me observe the
several Methods used by Farmers in managing their
Lands; which to me were wholly unaccountable:
For except in some very few Places, I could not
discover one Ear of Corn, or Blade of Grass. But,
in three Hours travelling, the Scene was wholly altered; 
we came into a most beautiful Country; 
Farmers Houses at small Distances, neatly built, the
Fields enclosed, containing Vineyards, Corngrounds
and Meadows. Neither do I remember to
have seen a more delightful Prospect. His Excellency
observed my Countenance to clear up; he
told me with a Sigh, that there his Estate began,
and would continue the same till we should come
to his House. That his Countrymen ridiculed and
despised him for managing his Affairs no better, and
for setting so ill an Example to the Kingdom; which
however was followed by very few, such as were
old and wilful, and weak like himself. 
We came at length to the House, which was
indeed a noble Structure, built according to the best
Rules of ancient Architecture. The Fountains,
Gardens, Walks, Avenues, and Groves were all 

disposed with exact Judgment and Taste. I gave
due Praises to every Thing I saw, whereof his Excellency
took not the least Notice till after Supper; 
when, there being no third Companion, he told
me with a very melancholy Air, that he doubted he
must throw down his Houses in Town and Country,
to rebuild them after the present Mode; destroy
all his Plantations, and cast others into such a
Form as modern Usage required; and give the same
Directions to all his Tenants, unless he would submit
to incur the Censure of Pride, Singularity, Affectation,
Ignorance, Caprice; and perhaps encrease
his Majesty's Displeasure. 
That the Admiration I appeared to be under,
would cease or diminish when he had informed me
of some Particulars, which probably I never heard
of at Court, the People there being too much taken
up in their own Speculations, to have Regard to
what passed here below. 
The Sum of his Discourse was to this Effect. 
That about Forty Years ago, certain Persons went
up to Laputa, either upon Business or Diversion; 
and after five Months Continuance, came back with
a very little Smattering in Mathematicks, but full
of Volatile Spirits acquired in that Airy Region. 
That these Persons upon their Return, began to
dislike the Management of every Thing below; and
fell into Schemes of putting all Arts, Sciences,
Languages, and Mechanicks upon a new Foot. To
this End they procured a Royal Patent for erecting
an Academy of Projectors in Lagado: And the
Humour prevailed so strongly among the People,
that there is not a Town of any Consequence in the
Kingdom without such an Academy. In these 

Colleges, the Professors contrive new Rules and
Methods of Agriculture and Building, and new Instruments
and Tools for all Trades and Manufactures,
whereby, as they undertake, one Man shall do the
Work of Ten; a Palace may be built in a Week,
of Materials so durable as to last for ever without
repairing. All the Fruits of the Earth shall come
to Maturity at whatever Season we think fit to
chuse, and increase an Hundred Fold more than
they do at present; with innumerable other happy
Proposals. The only Inconvenience is, that none
of these Projects are yet brought to Perfection; and
in the mean time, the whole Country lies miserably
waste, the Houses in Ruins, and the People without
Food or Cloaths. By all which, instead of being
discouraged, they are Fifty Times more violently
bent upon prosecuting their Schemes, driven
equally on by Hope and Despair: That, as for
himself, being not of an enterprizing Spirit, he was
content to go on in the old Forms; to live in the
Houses his Ancestors had built, and act as they did
in every Part of Life without Innovation. That,
some few other Persons of Quality and Gentry had
done the same; but were looked on with an Eye of
Contempt and ill Will, as Enemies to Art, ignorant,
and ill Commonwealths-men, preferring their own
Ease and Sloth before the general Improvement of
their Country. 
His Lordship added, that he would not by any
further Particulars prevent the Pleasure I should
certainly take in viewing the grand Academy, whither
he was resolved I should go. He only desired
me to observe a ruined Building upon the Side of a 

Mountain about three Miles distant, of which he
gave me this Account. That he had a very convenient
Mill within Half a Mile of his House,
turned by a Current from a large River, and sufficient
for his own Family as well as a great Number
of his Tenants. That, about seven Years ago, a
Club of those Projectors came to him with Proposals
to destroy this Mill, and build another on the
Side of that Mountain, on the long Ridge whereof
a long Canal must be cut for a Repository of Water,
to be conveyed up by Pipes and Engines to supply
the Mill: Because the Wind and Air upon a
Height agitated the Water, and thereby made it fitter
for Motion: And because the Water descending
down a Declivity would turn the Mill with
half the Current of a River whose Course is more
upon a Level. He said, that being then not very
well with the Court, and pressed by many of his
Friends, he complyed with the Proposal; and after
employing an Hundred Men for two Years, the
Work miscarryed, the Projectors went off, laying
the Blame intirely upon him; railing at him ever
since, and putting others upon the same Experiment,
with equal Assurance of Success, as well as equal
Disappointment. 
In a few Days we came back to Town; and
his Excellency, considering the bad Character he
had in the Academy, would not go with me himself,
but recommended me to a Friend of his to
bear me Company thither. My Lord was pleased
to represent me as a great Admirer of Projects, and
a Person of much Curiosity and easy Belief; which
indeed was not without Truth; for I had my self
been a Sort of Projector in my younger Days. 
