



A further Account of the Academy. The Author
proposeth some Improvements, which are honourably
received. 

In the School of political Projectors I
was but ill entertained; the Professors
appearing in my Judgment wholly out
of their Senses; which is a Scene that
never fails to make me melancholy. 
These unhappy People were proposing Schemes
for persuading Monarchs to chuse Favourites upon
the Score of their Wisdom, Capacity and Virtue; 
of teaching Ministers to consult the publick Good; 
of rewarding Merit, great Abilities, and eminent
Services; of instructing Princes to know their true
Interest, by placing it on the same Foundation with
that of their People: Of chusing for Employments
Persons qualisied to exercise them; with many other
wild impossible Chimæras, that never entered before
into the Heart of Man to conceive; and confirmed
in me the old Observation, that there is nothing so
extravagant and irrational which some Philosophers
have not maintained for Truth. 

But, however I shall so far do Justice to this
Part of the Academy, as to acknowledge that all of
them were not so visionary. There was a most
ingenious Doctor who seemed to be perfectly versed
in the whole Nature and System of Government. 
This illustrious Person had very usefully employed
his Studies in finding out effectual Remedies for all
Diseases and Corruptions, to which the several
Kinds of publick Administration are subject by the
Vices or Infirmities of those who govern, as well
as by the Licentiousness of those who are to obey. 
For Instance: Whereas all Writers and Reasoners
have agreed, that there is a strict universal Resemblance
between the natural and the political Body; 
can there be any thing more evident, than that
the Health of both must be preserved, and the Diseases
cured by the same Prescriptions? It is allowed,
that Senates and great Councils are often troubled
with redundant, ebullient, and other peccant Humours; 
with many Diseases of the Head, and more
of the Heart; with strong Convulsions, with grievous
Contractions of the Nerves and Sinews in
both Hands, but especially the Right: With
Spleen, Flatus, Vertigoes and Deliriums; with scrophulous
Tumours full of foetid purulent Matter; 
with sower frothy Ructations; with Canine Appetites
and Crudeness of Digestion; besides many
others needless to mention. This Doctor therefore
proposed, that upon the meeting of a Senate, certain
Physicians should attend at the three first Days
of their sitting, and at the Close of each Day's Debate,
feel the Pulses of every Senator; after which
having maturely considered, and consulted upon the
Nature of the several Maladies, and the Methods 

of Cure; they should on the fourth Day return to
the Senate-House, attended by their Apothecaries
stored with proper Medicines; and before the Members
sat, administer to each of them Lenitives, Aperitives,
Abstersives, Corrosives, Restringents, Palliatives,
Laxatives, Cephalalgicks, Ictericks, Apophlegmaticks,
Acousticks, as their several Cases
required; and according as these Medicines should
operate, repeat, alter, or omit them at the next
Meeting. 
This Project could not be of any great Expence
to the Publick; and might in my poor Opinion,
be of much Use for the Dispatch of Business in
those Countries where Senates have any Share in
the legislative Power; beget Unanimity, shorten
Debates, open a few Mouths which are now closed,
and close many more which are now open; curb
the Petulancy of the Young, and correct the Positiveness
of the Old; rouze the Stupid, and damp
the Pert. 
Again; Because it is a general Complaint that
the Favourites of Princes are troubled with short
and weak Memories; the same Doctor proposed,
that whoever attended a first Minister, after having
told his Business with the utmost Brevity, and in the
plainest Words; should at his Departure give the
said Minister a Tweak by the Nose, or a Kick in
the Belly, or tread on his Corns, or lug him thrice
by both Ears, or run a Pin into his Breech, or pinch
his Arm black and blue; to prevent Forgetfulness:
And at every Levee Day repeat the same Operation,
till the Business were done or absolutely refused. 

He likewise directed, that every Senator in the
great Council of a Nation, after he had delivered
his Opinion, and argued in the Defence of it,
should be obliged to give his Vote directly contrary; 
because if that were done, the Result would
infallibly terminate in the Good of the Publick. 
When Parties in a State are violent, he offered
a wonderful Contrivance to reconcile them. The
Method is this. You take an Hundred Leaders of
each Party; you dispose them into Couples of such
whose Heads are nearest of a Size; then let two
nice Operators saw off the Occiput of each Couple
at the same Time, in such a Manner that the Brain
may be equally divided. Let the Occiputs thus cut
off be interchanged, applying each to the Head of
his opposite Party-man. It seems indeed to be a
Work that requireth some Exactness; but the Professor
assured us, that if it were dextrously performed,
the Cure would be infallible. For he argued thus; 
that the two half Brains being left to debate the
Matter between themselves within the Space of one
Scull, would soon come to a good Understanding,
and produce that Moderation as well as Regularity
of Thinking, so much to be wished for in the
Heads of those, who imagine they came into the
World only to watch and govern its Motion: And
as to the Difference of Brains in Quantity or Quality,
among those who are Directors in Faction; the
Doctor assured us from his own Knowledge, that it
was a perfect Trifle. 
I heard a very warm Debate between two Professors,
about the most commodious and effectual
Ways and Means of raising Money without grieving
the Subject. The first affirmed, the justest Method 

would be to lay a certain Tax upon Vices and Folly; 
and the Sum fixed upon every Man, to be rated
after the fairest Manner by a Jury of his Neighbours. 
The second was of an Opinion directly contrary; 
to tax those Qualities of Body and Mind for which
Men chiefly value themselves; the Rate to be more
or less according to the Degrees of excelling; the
Decision whereof should be left entirely to their
own Breast. The highest Tax was upon Men,
who are the greatest Favourites of the other Sex; 
and the Assessments according to the Number and
Natures of the Favours they have received; for
which they are allowed to be their own Vouchers,
Wit, Valour, and Politeness were likewise proposed
to be largely taxed, and collected in the same Manner,
by every Person giving his own Word for the
Quantum of what he possessed. But, as to Honour,
Justice, Wisdom and Learning, they should not be
taxed at all; because, they are Qualifications of so
singular a Kind, that no Man will either allow them
in his Neighbour, or value them in himself. 
The Women were proposed to be taxed according
to their Beauty and Skill in Dressing; wherein
they had the same Privilege with the Men, to be
determined by their own Judgment. But Constancy,
Chastity, good Sense, and good Nature were
not rated, because they would not bear the Charge
of Collecting. 
To keep Senators in the Interest of the Crown,
it was proposed that the Members should raffle for
Employments; every Man first taking an Oath,
and giving Security that he would vote for the Court,
whether he won or no; after which the Losers had
in their Turn the Liberty of raffling upon the next 

Vacancy. Thus, Hope and Expectation would be
kept alive; none would complain of broken Promises,
but impute their Disappointments wholly to
Fortune, whose Shoulders are broader and stronger
than those of a Ministry. 
Another Professor shewed me a large Paper of
Instructions for discovering Plots and Conspiracies
against the Government. He advised great Statesmen
to examine into the Dyet of all suspected Persons; 
their Times of eating; upon which Side they
lay in Bed; with which Hand they wiped their Posteriors; 
to take a strict View of their Excrements,
and from the Colour, the Odour, the Taste, the
Consistence, the Crudeness, or Maturity of Digestion,
form a Judgment of their Thoughts and Designs:
Because Men are never so serious, thoughtful,
and intent, as when they are at Stool; which
he found by frequent Experiment: For in such
Conjunctures, when he used merely as a Trial to consider
which was the best Way of murdering the King,
his Ordure would have a Tincture of Green; but
quite different when he thought only of raising an
Insurrection, or burning the Metropolis. 
The whole Discourse was written with great Acuteness,
containing many Observations both curious
and useful for Politicians, but as I conceived
not altogether compleat. This I ventured to tell the
Author, and offered if he pleased to supply him with
some Additions. He received my Proposition with
more Compliance than is usual among Writers, especially
those of the Projecting Species; professing he
would be glad to receive farther Information. 
I told him, that in the Kingdom of Tribnia,
by the Natives called Langden, where I had long sojourned, 

the Bulk of the People consisted wholly of
Discoverers, Witnesses, Informers, Accusers, Prosecutors,
Evidences, Swearers; together with their
several subservient and subaltern Instruments; all
under the Colours, the Conduct, and pay of Ministers
and their Deputies. The Plots in that Kingdom
are usually the Workmanship of those Persons
who desire to raise their own Characters of profound
Politicians; to restore new Vigour to a crazy Administration; 
to stifle or divert general Discontents; 
to fill their Coffers with Forfeitures; and raise or
sink the Opinion of publick Credit, as either shall
best answer their private Advantage. It is first
agreed and settled among them, what suspected Persons
shall be accused of a Plot: Then, effectual Care
is taken to secure all their Letters and other Papers,
and put the Owners in Chains. These Papers are
delivered to a Set of Artists very dextrous in finding
out the mysterious Meanings of Words, Syllables
and Letters. For Instance, they can decypher a
Close-stool to signify a Privy-Council; a Flock of
Geese, a Senate; a lame Dog, an Invader; the
Plague, a standing Army; a Buzard, a Minister; 
the Gout, a High Priest; a Gibbet, a Secretary of
State; a Chamber pot, a Committee of Grandees; 
a Sieve a Court Lady; a Broom, a Revolution; a
Mouse-trap, an Employment; a bottomless Pit, the
Treasury; a Sink, a C&wblank;t; a Cap and Bells, a Favourite; 
a broken Reed, a Court of Justice; an
empty Tun, a General; a running Sore, the Administration. 
When this Method fails, they have two others
more effectual; which the Learned among them
call Acrosticks, and Anagrams. First, they can 

decypher all initial Letters into political Meanings:
Thus, N, shall signify a Plot; B, a Regiment of
Horse; L, a Fleet at Sea. Or, secondly, by transposing
the Letters of the Alphabet, in any suspected
Paper, they can lay open the deepest Designs of a
discontented Party. So for Example, if I should say
in a Letter to a Friend, Our Brother Tom hath just
got the Piles; a Man of Skill in this Art would
discover how the same Letters which compose that
Sentence, may be analysed into the following
Words; Resist,—a Plot is brought home— 
The Tour. And this is the Anagramnatick Method. 
The Professor made me great Acknowledgments
for communicating these Observations, and promised
to make honourable mention of me in his
Treatise. 
I saw nothing in this Country that could invite
me to a longer Continuance; and began to think of
returning home to England. 
