



The King and Queen make a Progress to the Frontiers. 
The Author attends them. The Manner
in which be leaves the Country very particularly
related. He returns to England. 

I Had always a strong Impulse that I
should some time recover my Liberty,
although it were impossible to conjecture
by what Means, or to form
any Project with the least Hope of
succeeding. The Ship in which I sailed was the
first ever known to be driven within Sight of that
Coast; and the King had given strict Orders, that
if at any Time another appeared, it should be taken
ashore, and with all its Crew and Passengers brought
in a Tumbril to Lorbrulgrud. He was strongly bent
to get me a Woman of my own Size, by whom I
might propagate the Breed: But I think I should
rather have died than undergone the Disgrace of 

leaving a Posterity to be kept in Cages like tame
Canary Birds; and perhaps in time sold about the
Kingdom to Persons of Quality for Curiosities. I
was indeed treated with much Kindness; I was the
Favourite of a great King and Queen, and the Delight
of the whole Court; but it was upon such a
Foot as ill became the Dignity of human Kind. I
could never forget those domestick Pledges I had
left behind me. I wanted to be among People with
whom I could converse upon even Terms; and
walk about the Streets and Fields without Fear of
being trod to Death like a Frog or young Puppy. 
But, my Deliverance came sooner than I expected,
and in a Manner not very common: The whole
Story and Circumstances of which I shall faithfully
relate. 
I had now been two Years in this Country; and,
about the Beginning of the third, Glumdalclitch and
I attended the King and Queen in Progress to the
South Coast of the Kingdom. I was carried as usual
in my Travelling-Box, which, as I have already described,
was a very convenient Closet of twelve
Foot wide. I had ordered a Hammock to be fixed
by silken Ropes from the four Corners at the Top; 
to break the Jolts, when a Servant carried me before
him on Horseback, as I sometimes desired; and
would often sleep in my Hammock while we were
upon the Road. On the Roof of my Closet, set
not directly over the Middle of the Hammock, I
order the Joyner to cut out a Hole of a Foot square
to give me Air in hot Weather as I slept; which
Hole I shut at pleasure with a Board that drew backwards
and forwards through a Groove. 

When we came to our Journey's End, the King
thought proper to pass a few Days at a Palace he
hath near Flanflasnic, a City within eighteen English
Miles of the Sea-side. Glumdalclitch and I
were much fatigued: I had gotten a small Cold; but
the poor Girl was so ill as to be confined to her
Chamber. I longed to see the Ocean, which must
be the only Scene of my Escape, if ever it should
happen. I pretended to be worse than I really was; 
and desired leave to take the fresh Air of the Sea,
with a Page whom I was very fond of, and who had
sometimes been trusted with me. I shall never forget
with what Unwillingness Glumdalclitch consented; 
nor the strict Charge she gave the Page to
be careful of me; bursting at the same time into a
Flood of Tears, as if she had some Foreboding of
what was to happen. The Boy took me out in my
Box about Half and Hour's Walk from the Palace, towards
the Rocks on the Sea-shore. I ordered him
to set me down; and lifting up one of my Sashes,
cast many a wistful melancholy Look towards the
Sea. I found myself not very well; and told the
Page that I had a Mind to take a Nap in my Hammock,
which I hoped would do me good. I got
in, and the Boy shut the Window close down, to
keep out the Cold. I soon fell asleep: And all I
can conjecture is, that while I slept, the Page thinking
no Danger could happen, went among the Rocks
to look for Birds Eggs; having before observed him
from my Window searching about, and picking up
one or two in the Clefts. Be that as it will; I found
my self suddenly awaked with a violent Pull upon
the Ring which was fastned at the Top of my Box,
for the Conveniency of Carriage. I felt the Box 

raised very high in the Air, and then born forward
with prodigious Speed. The first Jolt had like to
have shaken me out of my Hammock; but afterwards
the Motion was easy enough. I called out several
times as loud as I could raise my Voice, but all to
no purpose. I looked towards my Windows, and
could see nothing but the Clouds and Sky. I heard
a Noise just over my Head like the clapping of
Wings; and then began to perceive the woful Condition
I was in; that some Eagle had got the Ring
of my Box in his Beak, with an Intent to let it fall
on a Rock, like a Tortoise in a Shell, and then pick
out my Body and devour it. For the Sagacity and
Smell of this Bird enable him to discover his Quarry
at a great Distance, although better concealed than
I could be within a two Inch Board. 
In a little time I observed the Noise and flutter
of Wings to encrease very fast; and my Box was
tossed up and down like a Sign-post in a windy Day. 
I heard several Bangs or Buffets, as I thought, given
to the Eagle (for such I am certain it must have
been that held the Ring of my Box in his Beak)
and then all on a sudden felt my self falling perpendiculary
down for above a Minute; but with such
incredible Swiftness that I almost lost my Breath. 
My Fall was stopped by a terrible Squash, that
sounded louder to mine Ears than the Cataract of
Niagara; after which I was quite in the Dark for
another Minute, and then my Box began to rise so
high that I could see Light from the Tops of my
Windows. I now perceived that I was fallen into
the Sea. My Box, by the Weight of my Body,
the Goods that were in, and the broad Plates of Iron
fixed for Strength at the four Corners of the Top 

and Bottom, floated about five Foot deep in Watter. 
I did then, and do now suppose, that the Eagle which
flew away with my Box was pursued by two or three
others, and forced to let me drop while he was defending
himself against the Rest, who hoped to share
in the Prey. The Plates of Iron fastned at the
Bottom of the Box, (for those were the strongest)
preserved the Balance while it fell; and hindred it
from being broken on the Surface of the Water. 
Every Joint of it was well grooved, and the Door
did not move on Hinges, but up and down like a
Sash; which kept my Closet so tight that very little
Water came in. I got with much Difficulty out
of my Hammock, having first ventured to draw
back the Slip board on the Roof already mentioned,
contrived on purpose to let in Air; for want of which
I found my self almost stifled. 
How often did I then wish my self with my dear
Glumdalclitch, from whom one single Hour had so
far divided me! And I may say with Truth, that
in the midst of my own Misfortune, I could not
forbear lamenting my poor Nurse, the Grief she
would suffer for my Loss, the Displeasure of the
Queen, and the Ruin of her Fortune. Perhaps many
Travellers have not been under greater Difficulties
and Distress than I was at this Juncture; expecting
every Moment to see my Box dashed in Pieces, or
at least overset by the first violent Blast, or a rising
Wave. A Breach in one single Pane of Glass would
have been immediate Death: Nor could any thing
have preserved the Windows but the strong Lattice
Wires placed on the outside against Accidents in
Travelling. I saw the Water ooze in at several
Crannies, although the Leaks were not considerable; 

and I endeavoured to stop them as well as I could. 
I was not able to lift up the Roof of my Closet,
which otherwise I certainly should have done, and
sat on the Top of it, where I might at least preserve
myself from being shut up, as I may call it, in the Hold. 
Or, if I escaped these Dangers for a Day or two,
what could I expect but a miserable Death of Cold
and Hunger! I was four Hours under these Circumstances,
expecting and indeed wishing every
Moment to be my last. 
I have already told the Reader, that there were
two strong Staples fixed upon the Side of my Box
which had no Window, and into which the Servant,
who used to carry me on Horseback, would
put a Leathern Belt, and buckle it about his Waist. 
Being in this disconsolate State, I heard, or at least
thought I heard some kind of grating Noise on that
Side of my Box where the Staples were fixed; and
soon after I began to fancy that the Box was pulled,
or towed along in the Sea; for I now and then felt
a sort of tugging, which made the Waves rise near
the Tops of my Windows, leaving me almost in the
Dark. This gave me some faint Hopes of Relief,
although I were not able to imagine how it could be
brought about. I ventured to unscrew one of my
Chairs, which were always fastned to the Floor; 
and having made a hard shift to screw it down again
directly under the Slipping-board that I had lately
opened; I mounted on the Chair, and putting my
Mouth as near as I could to the Hole, I called for
Help in a loud Voice, and in all the Languages I
understood. I then fastned my Handkerchief to a
Stick I usually carried, and thrusting it up the Hole,
waved it several times in the Air; that if any Boat 

or Ship were near, the Seamen might conjecture some
unhappy Mortal to be shut up in the Box. 
I found no Effect from all I could do, but plainly
perceived my Closet to be moved along; and in
the Space of an Hour, or better, that Side of the
Box where the Staples were, and had no Window,
struck against something that was hard. I apprehended
it to be a Rock, and found my self tossed
more than ever. I plainly heard a Noise upon the
Cover of my Closet, like that of a Cable, and the
grating of it as it passed through the Ring. I then
found my self hoisted up by Degrees at least three
Foot higher than I was before. Whereupon, I again
thrust up my Stick and Handkerchief, calling for
Help till I was almost hoarse. In return to which,
I heard a great Shout repeated three times, giving
me such Transports of Joy as are not to be conceived
but by those who feel them. I now heard a
trampling over my Head; and somebody calling
through the Hole with a loud Voice in the English
Tongue: If there be any Body below, let them speak. 
I answered, I was an Englishman, drawn by ill Fortune
into the greatest Calamity that ever any Creature
underwent; and begged, by all that was moving,
to be delivered out of the Dungeon I was in. The
Voice replied, I was safe, for my Box was fastned
to their Ship; and the Carpenter should immediately
come, and saw an Hole in the Cover, large enough
to pull me out. I answered, that was needless,
and would take up too much Time; for there
was no more to be done, but let one of the Crew
put his Finger into the Ring, and take the Box out
of the Sea into the Ship, and so into the Captain's
Cabbin. Some of them upon hearing me talk so 

wildly, thought I was mad; others laughed: for
indeed it never came into my Head, that I was now
got among People of my own Stature and Strength. 
The Carpenter came, and in a few Minutes sawed
a Passage about four Foot square; then let down a
small Ladder, upon which I mounted, and from
thence was taken into the Ship in a very weak Condition. 
The Sailors were all in Amazement, and asked
me a thousand Questions, which I had no Inclination
to answer. I was equally confounded at the
Sight of so many Pigmies; for such I took them to
be, after having so long accustomed mine Eyes to
the monstrous Objects I had left. But the Captain,
Mr. Thomas Wilcocks, an honest worthy Shropshire
Man, observing I was ready to faint, took me into
his Cabbin, gave me a Cordial to comfort me, and
made me turn in upon his own Bed; advising me
to take a little Rest, of which I had great need. 
Before I went to sleep I gave him to understand,
that I had some valuable Furniture in my Box too good
to be lost; a fine Hammock, an handsome Field-Bed,
two Chairs, a Table and a Cabinet: That my
Closet was hung on all Sides, or rather quilted with
Silk and Cotton: That if he would let one of the
Crew bring my Closet into his Cabbin, I would
open it before him, and shew him my Goods. The
Captain hearing me utter these Absurdities, concluded
I was raving: However, (I suppose to pacify
me) he promised to give Order as I desired; and
going upon Deck, sent some of his Men down into
my Closet, from whence (as I afterwards found)
they drew up all my Goods, and stripped off the
Quilting; but the Chairs, Cabinet and Bed-sted being 

screwed to the Floor, were much damaged by
the Ignorance of the Seamen, who tore them up
by Force. Then they knocked off some of the
Boards for the Use of the Ship; and when they
had got all they had a Mind for, let the Hulk drop
into the Sea, which by Reason of many Breaches
made in the Bottom and Sides, sunk to rights. And
indeed I was glad not to have been a Spectator of
the Havock they made; because I am confident it
would have sensibly touched me, by bringing former
Passages into my Mind, which I had rather
forget. 
I slept some Hours, but perpetually disturbed
with Dreams of the Place I had left, and the Dangers
I had escaped. However, upon waking I found
my self much recovered It was now about eight
a Clock at Night, and the Captain ordered Supper
immediately, thinking I had already fasted too long. 
He entertained me with great Kindness, observing
me not to look wildly, or talk inconsistently; and
when we were left alone, desired I would give him
a Relation of my Travels, and by what Accident I
came to be set adrift in that monstrous wooden Chest. 
He said, that about twelve a Clock at Noon, as he
was looking through his Glass, he spied it at a
Distance, and thought it was a Sail, which he had a
Mind to make; being not much out of his Course,
in hopes of buying some Biscuit, his own beginning
to fall short. That, upon coming nearer, and finding
his Error, he sent out his Long-boat to discover
what I was; that his Men came back in a Fright
swearing they had seen a swimming House. That
he laughed at their Folly, and went himself in the
Boat, ordering his Men to take a strong Cable along 

with them. That the Weather being calm, he
rowed round me several times, observed my Windows,
and the Wire Lattices that defended them. 
That he discovered two Staples upon one Side, which
was all of Boards, without any Passage for Light. 
He then commanded his Men to row up to that Side; 
and fastning a Cable to one of the Staples, ordered
his Men to tow my Chest (as he called it) towards
the Ship. When it was there, he gave Directions
to fasten another Cable to the Ring fixed in the
Cover, and to raise up my Chest with Pullies, which
all the Sailors were not able to do above two or
three Foot. He said, they saw my Stick and
Handkerchief thrust out of the Hole, and concluded,
that some unhappy Man must be shut up
in the Cavity. I asked whether he or the Crew had
seen any prodigious Birds in the Air about the Time
he first discovered me: To which he answered.
that discoursing this Matter with the Sailors while
I was asleep, one of them said he had observed three
Eagles flying towards the North; but remarked nothing
of their being larger than the usual Size; 
which I suppose must be imputed to the great Height
they were at: And he could not guess the Reason
of my Question. I then asked the Captain how far
he reckoned we might be from Land; he said, by
the best Computation he could make, we were at
least an hundred Leagues. I assured him, that he
must be mistaken by almost half; for I had not left
the Country from whence I came, above two Hours
before I dropt into the Sea. Whereupon he began
again to think that my Brain was disturbed,
of which he gave me a Hint, and advised me to
go to Bed in a Cabin he had provided. I assured 

him I was well refreshed with his good Entertainment
and Company, and as much in my Senses as
ever I was in my Life. He then grew serious, and
desired to ask me freely whether I were not troubled
in Mind by the Consciousness of some enormous
Crime, for which I was punished at the Command
of some Prince, by exposing me in that Chest; as
great Criminals in other Countries have been forced
to Sea in a leaky Vessel without Provisions: For,
although he should be sorry to have taken so ill a
Man into his Ship, yet he would engage his Word
to set me safe on Shore in the first Port where we
arrived. He added, that his Suspicions were much
increased by some very absurd Speeches I had delivered
at first to the Sailors, and afterwards to himself,
in relation to my Closet or Chest, as well as by
my odd Looks and Behaviour while I was at
Supper. 
I begged his Patience to hear me tell my Story; 
which I faithfully did from the last Time I left
England, to the Moment he first discovered me. 
And, as Truth always forceth its Way into rational
Minds; so, this honest worthy Gentleman, who
had some Tincture of Learning, and very good
Sense, was immediately convinced of my Candor
and Veracity. But, further to confirm all I had
said, I entreated him to give Order that my Cabinet
should be brought, of which I kept the Key in my
Pocket, (for he had already informed me how the
Seamen disposed of my Closet) I opened it in his
Presence, and shewed him the small Collection of
Rarities I made in the Country from whence I had
been so strangely delivered. There was the Comb
I had contrived out of the Stumps of the King's 

Beard; and another of the same Materials, but fixed
into a paring of her Majesty's Thumb-nail, which
served for the Back. There was a Collection of
Needles and Pins from a Foot to half a Yard long. 
Four Wasp-Stings, like Joyners Tacks: Some
Combings of the Queen's Hair: A Gold Ring
which one Day she made me a Present of in a most
obliging Manner, taking it from her little Finger,
and throwing it over my Head like a Collar. I
desired the Captain would please to accept this Ring
in Return of his Civilities; which he absolutely refused. 
I shewed him a Corn that I had cut off
with my own Hand from a Maid of Honour's Toe; 
it was about the Bigness of a Kentish Pippin, and
grown so hard, that when I returned to England, I
got it hollowed into a Cup and set in Silver. Lastly,
I desired him to see the Breeches I had then on,
which were made of a Mouse's Skin. 
I could force nothing on him but a Footman's
Tooth, which I observed him to examine with
great Curiosity, and found he had a Fancy for it. 
He received it with abundance of Thanks, more
than such a Trifle could deserve. It was drawn by
an unskilful Surgeon in a Mistake from one of
Glumdalclitch's Men, who was afflicted with the
Tooth-ach; but it was as sound as any in his Head. 
I got it cleaned, and put it into my Cabinet. It
was about a Foot long, and four Inches in Diameter. 
The Captain was very well satisfied with this
plain Relation I had given him; and said, he hoped
when we returned to England, I would oblige the
World by putting it in Paper, and making it publick. 
My Answer was, that I thought we were 

already over-stocked with Books of Travels: That
nothing could now pass which was not extraordinary; 
wherein I doubted, some Authors less consulted
Truth than their own Vanity or Interest, or
the Diversion of ignorant Readers. That my Story
could contain little besides common Events, without
those ornamental Descriptions of strange Plants,
Trees, Birds, and other Animals; or the barbarous
Customs and Idolatry of savage People, with
which most Writers abound. However, I thanked
him for his good Opinion, and promised to take
the Matter into my Thoughts. 
He said, he wondered at one Thing very much; 
which was, to hear me speak so loud; asking me
whether the King or Queen of that Country were
thick of Hearing. I told him it was what I had
been used to for above two Years past; and that I
admired as much at the Voices of him and his Men,
who seemed to me only to whisper, and yet I could
hear them well enough. But, when I spoke in
that Country, it was like a Man talking in the
Street to another looking out from the Top of a
Steeple, unless when I was placed on a Table, or
held in any Person's Hand. I told him, I had likewise
observed another Thing; that when I first got
into the Ship, and the Sailors stood all about me, I
thought they were the most little contemptible
Creatures I had ever beheld. For, indeed, while I
was in that Prince's Country, I could never endure
to look in a Glass after mine Eyes had been accustomed
to such prodigious Objects; because the
Comparison gave me so despicable a Conceit of my
self. The Captain said, that while we were at
Supper, he observed me to look at every thing with 

a Sort of Wonder; and that I often seemed hardly
able to contain my Laughter; which he knew not
well how to take, but imputed it to some Disorder
in my Brain. I answered, it was very true; and I
wondered how I could forbear, when I saw his
Dishes of the Size of a Silver Three-pence, a Leg
of Pork hardly a Mouthful, a Cup not so big as a
Nutshell: And so I went on, describing the rest
of his Houshold stuff and Provisions after the same
Manner. For although the Queen had ordered a
little Equipage of all Things necessary for me while
I was in her Service; yet my Ideas were wholly
taken up with what I saw on every Side of me; 
and I winked at my own Littleness, as People do at
their own Faults. The Captain understood my
Raillery very well, and merrily replied with the old
English Proverb, that he doubted, mine Eyes were
bigger than my Belly; for he did not observe my
Stomach so good, although I had fasted all Day:
And continuing in his Mirth, protested he would
have gladly given an Hundred Pounds to have seen
my Closet in the Eagle's Bill, and afterwards in its
Fall from so great an Height into the Sea; which
would certainly have been a most astonishing Object,
worthy to have the Description of it transmitted
to future Ages: And the Comparison of Phaeton
was so obvious, that he could not forbear applying
it, although I did not much admire the
Conceit. 
The Captain having been at Tonquin, was in his
Return to England driven North Eastward to the
Latitude of 44 Degrees, and of Longitude 143. 
But meeting a Trade Wind two Days after I came
on board him, we sailed Southward a long Time, 

and coasting New-Holland, kept our Course West-south-west,
and then South-south-west till we
doubled the Cape of Good-hope. Our Voyage was
very prosperous, but I shall not trouble the Reader
with a Journal of it. The Captain called in at one
or two Ports, and sent in his Long-boat for Provisions
and fresh Water; but I never went out of the
Ship till we came into the Downs, which was on
the 3d Day of June 1706, about nine Months after
my Escape. I offered to leave my Goods in Security
for Payment of my Freight; but the Captain
protested he would not receive one Farthing. We
took kind Leave of each other; and I made him
promise he would come to see me at my House in
Redriff. I hired a Horse and Guide for five Shillings,
which I borrowed of the Captain. 
As I was on the Road; observing the Littleness
of the Houses, the Trees, the Cattle and the People,
I began to think my self in Lilliput. I was
afraid of trampling on every Traveller I met; and
often called aloud to have them stand out of the
Way; so that I had like to have gotten one or two
broken Heads for my Impertinence. 
When I came to my own House, for which I
was forced to enquire, one of the Servants opening
the Door, I bent down to go in (like a Goose under
a Gate) for fear of striking my Head. My
Wife ran out to embrace me, but I stooped lower
than her Knees, thinking she could otherwise never
be able to reach my Mouth. My Daughter
kneeled to ask me Blessing, but I could not see her
till she arose; having been so long used to stand
with my Head and Eyes erect to above Sixty Foot; 
and then I went to take her up with one Hand, by 

the Waist. I looked down upon the Servants, and
one or two Friends who were in the House, as if
they had been Pigmies, and I a Giant. I told my
Wife, she had been too thrifty; for I found she
had starved herself and her Daughter to nothing. 
In short, I behaved my self so unaccountably, that
they were all of the Captain's Opinion when he
first saw me; and concluded I had lost my Wits. 
This I mention as an Instance of the great Power
of Habit and Prejudice. 
In a little Time I and my Family and Friends
came to a right Understanding: But my Wife protested
I should never go to Sea any more; although
my evil Destiny so ordered, that she had not Power
to hinder me; as the Reader may know hereafter. 
In the mean Time, I here conclude the second
Part of my unfortunate Voyages. 
