



Several Contrivances of the Author to please the
King and Queen. He shews his Skill in Musick. 
The King enquires into the State of Europe,
which the Author relates to him. The
King's Observations thereon. 

I Used to attend the King's Levee once
or twice a Week, and had often seen
him under the Barber's Hand, which
indeed was at first very terrible to behold. 
For, the Razor was almost
twice as long as an ordinary Scythe. 
His Majesty, according to the Custom of the
Country, was only shaved twice a Week. I once
prevailed on the Barber to give me some of the
Suds or Lather, out of which I picked Forty or
Fifty of the strongest Stumps of Hair. I then took
a Piece of fine Wood, and cut it like the Back of
a Comb, making several Holes in it at equal Distance,
with as small a Needle as I could get from
Glumdalclitch. I fixed in the Stumps so artificially, 

scraping and sloping them with my Knife towards
the Points, that I made a very tolerable
Comb; which was a seasonable Supply, my own
being so much broken in the Teeth, that it was almost
useless: Neither did I know any Artist in
that Country so nice and exact, as would undertake
to make me another. 
And this puts me in mind of an Amusement
wherein I spent many of my leisure Hours. I desired
the Queen's Woman to save for me the Combings
of her Majesty's Hair, whereof in time I got a
good Quantity; and consulting with my Friend the
Cabinet-maker, who had received general Orders to
do little Jobbs for me; I directed him to make two
Chair-frames, no larger than those I had in my Box,
and then to bore little Holes with a fine Awl round
those Parts where I designed the Backs and Seats; 
through these Holes I wove the strongest Hairs I
could pick out, just after the Manner of Cane-chairs
in England. When they were finished, I made a
Present of them to her Majesty, who kept them in
her Cabinet, and used to shew them for Curiosities; 
as indeed they were the Wonder of every one who
beheld them. The Queen would have had me sit
upon one of these Chairs, but I absolutely refused
to obey her; protesting I would rather dye a Thousand
Deaths than place a dishonourable Part of my
Body on those precious Hairs that once adorned her
Majesty's Head. Of these Hairs (as I had always
a Mechanical Genius) I likewise made a neat little
Purse about five Foot long, with her Majesty's
Name decyphered in Gold Letters; which I gave
to Glumdalclitch, by the Queen's Consent. To 

say the Truth, it was more for Shew than Use, being
not of Strength to bear the Weight of the larger
Coins; and therefore she kept nothing in it, but
some little Toys that Girls are fond of. 
The King, who delighted in Musick, had frequent
Consorts at Court, to which I was sometimes
carried, and set in my Box on a Table to hear them:
But, the Noise was so great, that I could hardly
distinguish the Tunes. I am confident, that all the
Drums and Trumpets of a Royal Army, beating and
sounding together just at your Ears, could not equal
it. My Practice was to have my Box removed from
the Places where the Performers sat, as far as I
could; then to shut the Doors and Windows of it,
and draw the Window-Curtains; after which I
found their Musick not disagreeable. 
I Had learned in my Youth to play a little upon
the Spinet; Glumdalclitch kept one in her Chamber,
and a Master attended twice a Week to teach
her: I call it a Spinet, because it somewhat resembled
that Instrument, and was play'd upon in the
same Manner. A Fancy came into my Head, that I
would entertain the King and Queen with an English
Tune upon this Instrument. But this appeared
extremely difficult: For, the Spinet was near
sixty Foot long, each Key being almost a Foot
wide; so that, with my Arms extended, I could
not reach to above five Keys; and to press them
down required a good smart stroak with my Fist,
which would be too great a Labour, and to no purpose. 
The Method I contrived was this. I prepared
two round Sticks about the Bigness of common
Cudgels; they were thicker at one End than the
other; and I covered the thicker End with a 

Piece of a Mouse's Skin, that by rapping on them,
I might neither Damage the Tops of the Keys, nor
interrupt the Sound. Before the Spinet, a Bench
was placed about four Foot below the Keys, and I
was put upon the Bench. I ran sideling upon it
that way and this, as fast as I could, banging the
proper Keys with my two Sticks; and made a shift
to play a Jigg to the great Satisfaction of both their
Majesties: But, it was the most violent Exercise I
ever underwent, and yet I could not strike above
sixteen Keys, nor, consequently, play the Bass and
Treble together, as other Artists do; which was a
great Disadvantage to my Performance. 
The King, who as I before observed, was a
Prince of excellent Understanding, would frequently
order that I should be brought in my Box, and
set upon the Table in his Closet. He would then
command me to bring one of my Chairs out of the
Box, and sit down within three Yards Distance upon
the Top of the Cabinet; which brought me almost
to a Level with his Face. In this Manner I had
several Conversations with him. I one Day took
the Freedom to tell his Majesty, that the Contempt
he discovered towards Europe, and the rest of the
World, did not seem answerable to those excellent
Qualities of Mind, that he was Master of. That,
Reason did not extend itself with the Bulk of the
Body: On the contrary, we observed in our Country,
that the tallest Persons were usually least provided
with it. That among other Animals, Bees and
Ants had the Reputation of more Industry, Art,
and Sagacity than many of the larger Kinds. And
that, as inconsiderable as he took me to be, I hoped
I might live to do his Majesty some signal Service. 

The King heard me with Attention; and began to
conceive a much better Opinion of me than he
had ever before. He desired I would give him as
exact an Account of the Government of England
as I possibly could; because, as fond as Princes commonly
are of their own Customs (for so he conjectured
of other Monarchs by my former Discourses)
he should be glad to hear of any thing that might deserve
Imitation. 
Imagine with thy self, courteous Reader,
how often I then wished for the Tongue of Demosthenes
or Cicero, that might have enabled me to
celebrate the Praise of my own dear native Country
in a Style equal to its Merits and Felicity. 
I began my Discourse by informing his Majesty,
that our Dominions consisted of two Islands,
which composed three mighty Kingdoms under one
Sovereign, besides our Plantations in America. I
dwelt long upon the Fertility of our Soil, and the
Temperature of our Climate. I then spoke at large
upon the Constitution of an English Parliament,
partly made up of an illustrious Body called the
House of Peers, Persons of the noblest Blood, and
of the most ancient and ample Patrimonies. I described
that extraordinary Care always taken of their
Education in Arts and Arms, to qualify them for
being Counsellors born to the King and Kingdom; 
to have a Share in the Legislature; to be Members
of the highest Court of Judicature from whence
there could be no Appeal; and to be Champions always
ready for the Defence of their Prince and
Country by their Valour, Conduct and Fidelity. 
That these were the Ornament and Bulwark of the
Kingdom; worthy Followers of their most renowned 

Ancestors, whose Honour had been the Reward
of their Virtue; from which their Posterity were
never once known to degenerate. To these were
joined several holy Persons, as part of that Assembly,
under the Title of Bishops; whose peculiar
Business it is, to take care of Religion, and of those
who instruct the People therein. These were searched
and sought out through the whole Nation, by
the Prince and wisest Counsellors, among such of
the Priesthood, as were most deservedly distinguished
by the Sanctity of their Lives, and the Depth
of their Erudition; who were indeed the spiritual
Fathers of the Clergy and the People. 
That, the other Part of the Parliament consisted
of an Assembly called the House of Commons; 
who were all principal Gentlemen, freely
picked and culled out by the People themselves, for
their great Abilities, and Love of their Country, to
represent the Wisdom of the whole Nation. And,
these two Bodies make up the most august Assembly
in Europe; to whom, in Conjunction with the
Prince, the whole Legislature is committed. 
I Then descended to the Courts of Justice,
over which the Judges, those venerable Sages and
Interpreters of the Law, presided, for determining
the disputed Rights and Properties of Men, as well
as for the Punishment of Vice, and Protection of
Innocence. I mentioned the prudent Management
of our Treasury; the Valour and Atchievements of
our Forces by Sea and Land. I computed the Number
of our People, by reckoning how many Millions
there might be of each Religious Sect, or Political
Party among us. I did not omit even our
Sports and Pastimes, or any other Particular which 

I thought might redound to the Honour of my
Country. And, I finished all with a brief historical
Account of Affairs and Events in England for
about an hundred Years past. 
This Conversation was not ended under five
Audiences, each of several Hours; and the King
heard the whole with great Attention; frequently
taking Notes of what I spoke, as well as Memorandums
of what Questions he intended to ask
me. 
When I had put an End to these long Discourses,
his Majesty in a sixth Audience consulting
his Notes, proposed many Doubts, Queries, and
Objections, upon every Article. He asked, what
Methods were used to cultivate the Minds and
Bodies of our young Nobility; and in what kind
of Business they commonly spent the first and
teachable Part of their Lives. What Course was
taken to supply that Assembly, when any noble
Family became extinct. What Qualifications were
necessary in those who are to be created new Lords:
Whether the Humour of the Prince, a Sum of Money
to a Court-Lady, or a Prime Minister; or a
Design of strengthening a Party opposite to the publick
Interest, ever happened to be Motives in those
Advancements. What Share of Knowledge these
Lords had in the Laws of their Country, and how
they came by it, so as to enable them to decide the
Properties of their Fellow-Subjects in the last Resort. 
Whether they were always so free from
Avarice, Partialities, or Want, that a Bribe, or some
other sinister View, could have no Place among
them. Whether those holy Lords I spoke of, were constantly
promoted to that Rank upon Account of their 

Knowledge in religious Matters, and the Sanctity
of their Lives, had never been Compliers with the
Times, while they were common Priests; or slavish
prostitute Chaplains to some Nobleman, whose
Opinions they continued servilely to follow after
they were admitted into that Assembly. 
He then desired to know, what Arts were practised
in electing those whom I called Commoners. 
Whether, a Stranger with a strong Purse might not
influence the vulgar Voters to chuse him before
their own Landlords, or the most considerable Gentleman
in the Neighbourhood. How it came to
pass, that People were so violently bent upon getting
into this Assembly, which I allowed to be a great
Trouble and Expence, often to the Ruin of their
Families, without any Salary or Pension: Because
this appeared such an exalted Strain of Virtue and
publick Spirit, that his Majesty seemed to doubt it
might possibly not be always sincere: And he desired
to know, whether such zealous Gentlemen
could have any Views of refunding themselves for
the Charges and Trouble they were at, by sacrificing
the publick Good to the Designs of a weak and vicious
Prince, in Conjunction with a corrupted Ministry. 
He multiplied his Questions, and sifted me
thoroughly upon every Part of this Head; proposing
numberless Enquiries and Objections, which I think
it not prudent or convenient to repeat. 
Upon what I said in relation to our Courts of
Justice, his Majesty desired to be satisfied in several
Points: And, this I was the better able to do, having
been formerly almost ruined by a long Suit in
Chancery, which was decreed for me with Costs. 
He asked, what Time was usually spent in determining 

between Right and Wrong; and what Degree
of Expence. Whether Advocates and Orators
had Liberty to plead in Causes manifestly known to
be unjust, vexatious, or oppressive. Whether Party
in Religion or Politicks were observed to be of
any Weight in the Scale of Justice. Whether
those pleading Orators were Persons educated in the
general Knowledge of Equity; or only in provincial,
national, and other local Customs. Whether
they or their Judges had any part in penning those
Laws, which they assumed the Liberty of interpreting
and glossing upon at their Pleasure. Whether
they had ever at different Times pleaded for and
against the same Cause, and cited Precedents to
prove contrary Opinions. Whether they were a
rich or a poor Corporation. Whether they received
any pecuniary Reward for pleading or delivering
their Opinions. And particularly whether they
were ever admitted as Members in the lower Senate. 
He fell next upon the Management of our Treasury; 
and said, he thought my Memory had failed
me, because I computed our Taxes at about five or
six Millions a Year; and when I came to mention
the Issues, he found they sometimes amounted to
more than double; for, the Notes he had taken
were very particular in this Point; because he hoped,
as he told me, that the Knowledge of our Conduct
might be useful to him; and he could not be deceived
in his Calculations. But, if what I told him
were true, he was still at a Loss how a Kingdom
could run out of its Estate like a private Person. 
He asked me, who were our Creditors? and, where
we found Money to pay them? He wondered to 

hear me talk of such chargeable and extensive
Wars; that, certainly we must be a quarrelsome
People, or live among very bad Neighbours; and
that our Generals must needs be richer than our
Kings. He asked, what Business we had out of our
own Islands, unless upon the Score of Trade or
Treaty, or to defend the Coasts with our Fleet. 
Above all, he was amazed to hear me talk of a mercenary
standing Army in the Midst of Peace, and
among a free People. He said, if we were governed
by our own Consent in the Persons of our Representatives,
he could not imagine of whom we
were afraid, or against whom we were to fight; 
and would hear my Opinion, whether a private
Man's House might not better be defended by himself,
his Children, and Family; than by half a Dozen
Rascals picked up at a Venture in the Streets,
for small Wages, who might get an Hundred Times
more by cutting their Throats. 
He laughed at my odd Kind of Arithmetick
(as he was pleased to call it) in reckoning the
Numbers of our People by a Computation drawn
from the several Sects among us in Religion and
Politicks. He said, he knew no Reason, why
those who entertain Opinions prejudicial to the
Publick, should be obliged to change, or should
not be obliged to conceal them. And, as it was
Tyranny in any Government to require the first, so
it was Weakness not to enforce the second: For, a
Man may be allowed to keep Poisons in his Closet,
but not to vend them about as Cordials. 
He observed, that among the Diversions of our
Nobility and Gentry, I had mentioned Gaming. 
He desired to know at what Age this Entertainment 

was usually taken up, and when it was laid down
How much of their Time it employed; whether it
ever went so high as to affect their Fortunes. 
Whether mean vicious People, by their Dexterity in
that Art, might not arrive at great Riches, and
sometimes keep our very Nobles in Dependance, as
well as habituate them to vile Companions; wholly
take them from the Improvement of their Minds,
and force them by the Losses they received, to
learn and practice that infamous Dexterity upon
others. 
He was perfectly astonished with the historical
Account I gave him of our Affairs during the last
Century; protesting it was only an Heap of Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Murders, Massacres, Revolutions,
Banishments; the very worst Effects that Avarice,
Faction, Hypocrisy, Perfidiousness, Cruelty,
Rage, Madness, Hatred, Envy, Lust, Malice, and
Ambition could produce. 
His Majesty in another Audience, was at the
Pains to recapitulate the Sum of all I had spoken; 
compared the Questions he made, with the Answers
I had given; then taking me into his Hands, and
stroaking me gently, delivered himself in these
Words, which I shall never forget, nor the Manner
he spoke them in. My little Friend Grildrig;
you have made a most admirable Panegyrick upon
your Country. You have clearly proved that Ignorance,
Idleness, and Vice are the proper Ingredients
for qualifying a Legislator. That Laws are
best explained, interpreted, and applied by those
whose Interest and Abilities lie in perverting, confounding,
and eluding them. I observe among you
some Lines of an Institution, which in its Original 

might have been tolerable; but these half erased,
and the rest wholly blurred and blotted by Corruptions. 
It doth not appear from all you have said,
how any one Perfection is required towards the
Procurement of any one Station among you; much
less that Men are ennobled on Account of their
Virtue, that Priests are advanced for their Piety or
Learning, Soldiers for their Conduct or Valour,
Judges for their Integrity, Senators for the Love of
their Country, or Counsellors for their Wisdom. 
As for yourself (continued the King) who have
spent the greatest Part of your Life in travelling; I
am well disposed to hope you may hitherto have
escaped many Vices of your Country. But, by
what I have gathered from your own Relation, and
the Answers I have with much Pains wringed and
extorted from you; I cannot but conclude the Bulk
of your Natives, to be the most pernicious Race of
little odious Vermin that Nature ever suffered to
crawl upon the Surface of the Earth. 
