



The Author's Love of his Country. He makes a
Proposal of much Advantage to the King; which
is rejected. The King's great Ignorance in Politicks. 
The Learning of that Country very imperfect
and confined. Their Laws, and military
Affairs, and Parties in the State. 

Nothing but an extreme Love of Truth
could have hindered me from concealing
this Part of my Story. It was in
vain to discover my Resentments,
which were always turned into Ridicule:
And I was forced to rest with patience, while
my noble and most beloved Country was so injuriously
treated. I am heartily sorry as any of my
Readers can possibly be, that such an Occasion was
given: But this Prince happened to be so curious
and inquisitive upon every Particular, that it could
not consist either with Gratitude or good Manners
to refuse giving him what Satisfaction I was able. 

Yet thus much I may be allowed to say in my own
Vindication; that I artfully eluded many of his
Questions; and gave to every Point a more favourable
turn by many Degrees than the, strictness of
Truth would allow. For, I have always born that
laudable Partiality to my own Country, which Dionystus
Halicarnassensis with so much Justice recommends
to an Historian. I would hide the Frailties
and Deformities of my Political Mother, and place
her Virtues and Beauties in the most advantageous
Light. This was my sincere Endeavour in those
many Discourses I had with that Monarch, although
it unfortunately failed of Success. 
But, great Allowances should be given to a
King who lives wholly secluded from the rest of
the World, and must therefore be altogether unacquainted
with the Manners and Customs that most
prevail in other Nations: The want of which
Knowledge will ever produce many Prejudices, and
a certain Narrowness of Thinking; from which we
and the politer Countries of Europe are wholly exempted. 
And it would be hard indeed, if so remote
a Prince's Notions of Virtue and Vice were
to be offered as a Standard for all Mankind. 
To confirm what I have now said, and further
to shew the miserable Effects of a confined Education;
I shall here insert a Passage which will hardly
obtain Belief. In hopes to ingratiate my self farther
into his Majesty's Favour, I told him of an Invention
discovered between three and four hundred
Years ago, to make a certain Powder; into an heap
of which the smallest Spark of Fire falling, would
kindle the whole in a Moment, although it were as
big as a Mountain; and make it all fly up in the 

Air together, with a Noise and Agitation greater
than Thunder. That, a proper Quantity of this
Powder rammed into an hollow Tube of Brass or
Iron, according to its Bigness, would drive a Ball
of Iron or Lead with such Violence and Speed, as
nothing was able to sustain its Force. That, the
largest Balls thus discharged, would not only Destroy
whole Ranks of an Army at once; but batter
the strongest Walls to the Ground; sink down
Ships with a thousand Men in each, to the Bottom
of the Sea; and when linked together by a
Chain, would cut through Masts and Rigging; divide
Hundreds of Bodies in the Middle, and lay all
Waste before them. That we often put this Powder
into large hollow Balls of Iron, and discharged
them by an Engine into some City we were besieging; 
which would rip up the Pavement, tear the
Houses to Pieces, burst and throw Splinters on every
Side, dashing out the Brains of all who came near. 
That I knew the Ingredients very well, which were
Cheap, and common; I understood the Manner of
compounding them, and could direct his Workmen
how to make those Tubes of a Size proportionable
to all other Things in his Majesty's Kingdom; and
the largest need not be above two hundred Foot long; 
twenty or thirty of which Tubes, charged with the
proper Quantity of Powder and Balls, would batter
down the Walls of the strongest Town in his
Dominions in a few Hours; or destroy the whole
Metropolis, if ever it should pretend to dispute his
absolute Commands. This I humbly offered to his
Majesty, as a small Tribute of Acknowledgment in
return of so many Marks that I had received of his
Royal Favour and Protection. 

The King was struck with Horror at the Description
I had given of those terrible Engines, and
the Proposal I had made. He was amazed how so
impotent and groveling an Insect as I (these were
his Expressions) could entertain such inhuman Ideas,
and in so familiar a Manner as to appear wholly unmoved
at all the Scenes of Blood and Desolation,
which I had painted as the common Effects of those
destructive Machines; whereof he said, some evil
Genius, Enemy to Mankind, must have been the
first Contriver. As for himself, he protested, that
although few Things delighted him so much as new
Discoveries in Art or in Nature; yet he would rather
lose Half his Kingdom than be privy to such
a Secret; which he commanded me, as I valued my
Life, never to mention any more. 
A strange Effect of narrow Principles and
short Views! that a Prince possessed of every Quality
which procures Veneration, Love and Esteem; of
strong Parts, great Wisdom and profound Learning; 
endued with admirable Talents for Government,
and almost adored by his Subjects; should
from a nice unnecessary Scruple, whereof in Europe
we can have no Conception, let slip an Opportunity
put into his Hands, that would have made
him absolute Master of the Lives, the Liberties,
and the Fortunes of his People. Neither do I say
this with the least Intention to detract from the
many Virtues of that excellent King; whose Character
I am sensible will on this Account be very
much lessened in the Opinion of an English Reader:
But, I take this Defect among them to have
risen from their Ignorance; by not having hitherto
reduced Politicks into a Science, as the more 

acute Wits of Europe have done. For, I remember
very well, in a Discourse one Day with the
King; when I happened to say, there were several
thousand Books among us written upon the Art
of Government; it gave him (directly contrary to
my Intention) a very mean Opinion of our Understandings. 
He professed both to abominate and despise
all Mystery, Refinement, and Intrigue, either in
a Prince or a Minister. He could not tell what I
meant by Secrets of State, where an Enemy or some
Rival Nation were not in the Case. He confined
the Knowledge of governing within very narrow
Bounds; to common Sense and Reason, to Justice
and Lenity, to the Speedy Determination of Civil
and criminal Causes; with some other obvious Topicks
which are not worth considering. And, he
gave it for his Opinion; that whoever could make
two Ears of Corn, or two Blades of Grass to grow
upon a Spot of Ground where only one grew before; 
would deserve better of Mankind, and do
more essential Service to his Country, than the
whole Race of Politicians put together. 
The Learning of this People is very defective; 
consisting only in Morality, History, Poetry and
Mathematicks; wherein they must be allowed to
excel. But, the last of these is wholly applied to
what may be useful in Life; to the Improvement of
Agriculture and all mechanical Arts; so that among
us it would be little esteemed. And as to Ideas,
Entities, Abstractions and Transcendentals, I could
never drive the least Conception into their Heads. 
No Law of that Country must exceed in Words
the Number of Letters in their Alphabet; which
consists only of two and twenty. But indeed, few 

of them extend even to that Length. They are
expressed in the most plain and simple Terms, wherein
those People are not Mercurial enough to discover
above one Interpretation. And to write a
Comment upon any Law, is a capital Crime. As
to the Decision of civil Causes, or Proceedings against
Criminals, their Precedents are so few, that
they have little Reason to boast of any extraordinary
Skill in either. 
They have had the Art of Printing, as well as
the Chinese, Time out of Mind. But their Libraries
are not very large; for that of the King's, which
is reckoned the largest, doth not amount to above
a thousand Volumes; placed in a Gallery of twelve
hundred Foot long; from whence I had Liberty to
borrow what Books I pleased. The Queen's Joyner
had contrived in one of Glumdalclitch's Rooms
a Kind of wooden Machine five and twenty Foot
high, formed like a standing Ladder; the Steps were
each fifty Foot long: It was indeed a moveable
Pair of Stairs, the lowest End placed at ten Foot
Distance from the Wall of the Chamber. The
Book I had a Mind to read was put up leaning against
the Wall. I first mounted to the upper Step of the
Ladder, and turning my Face towards the Book, began
at the Top of the Page, and so walking to the
Right and Left about eight or ten Paces according to
the Length of the Lines, till I had gotten a little below
the Level of mine Eyes; and then descending
gradually till I came to the Bottom: After which
I mounted again, and began the other Page in the
same Manner, and so turned over the Leaf, which
I could easily do with both my Hands, for it was as 

thick and stiff as a Paste-board, and in the largest
Folio's not above eighteen or twenty Foot long. 
Their Stile is clear, masculine, and smooth,
but not Florid; for they avoid nothing more than
multiplying unnecessary Words, or using various
Expressions, I have perused many of their Books,
especially those in History and Morality. Among
the latter I was much diverted with a little old
Treatise, which always lay in Glumdalclitch's Bed-chamber,
and belonged to her Governess, a grave
elderly Gentlewomen, who dealt in Writings of
Morality and Devotion. The Book treats of the
Weakness of Human kind; and is in little Esteem
except among Women and the Vulgar. However,
I was curious to see what an Author of that
Country could say upon such a Subject. This
Writer went through all the usual Topicks of
European Moralists; shewing how diminutive, contemptible,
and helpless an Animal was Man in his
own Nature; how unable to defend himself from
Inclemencies of the Air, or the Fury of wild Beasts:
How much he was excelled by one Creature
in Strength, by another in Speed, by a third in
Foresight, by a fourth in Industry. He added, that
Nature was degenerated in these latter declining Ages
of the World, and could now produce only small
abortive Births in Comparison of those in ancient
Times. He said, it was very reasonable to think,
not only that the Species of Man were originally
much larger, but also that there must have been
Giants in former Ages; which, as it is asserted by
History and Tradition, so it hath been confirmed
by huge Bones and Sculls casually dug up in several
Parts of the Kingdom, far exceeding the common 

dwindled Race of Man in our Days. He argued,
that the very Laws of Nature absolutely required
we should have been made in the Beginning, of a
Size more large and robust, not so liable to Destruction
from every little Accident of a Tile falling
from an House, or a Stone cast from the Hand
of a Boy, or of being drowned in a little Brook. 
From this Way of Reasoning the Author drew several
moral Applications useful in the Conduct of
Life, but needless here to repeat. For my own
Part, I could not avoid reflecting, how universally
this Talent was spread of drawing Lectures in Morality,
or indeed rather Matter of Discontent and repining,
from the Quarrels we raise with Nature. 
And, I believe upon a strict Enquiry, those Quarrels
might be shewn as ill-grounded among us, as
they are among that People. 
As to their military Affairs; they boast that the
King's Army consists of an hundred and seventy
six thousand Foot, and thirty two thousand Horse:
If that may be called an Army which is made up
of Tradesmen in the several Cities, and Farmers in
the Country, whose Commanders are only the Nobility
and Gentry, without Pay or Reward. They
are indeed perfect enough in their Exercises; and
under very good Discipline, wherein I saw no great
Merit: For, how should it be otherwise, where
every Farmer is under the Command of his own
Landlord, and every Citizen under that of the principal
Men in his own City, chosen after the Manner
of Venice by Ballot? 
I have often seen the Militia of Lorbrulgrud
drawn out to Exercise in a great Field near the City,
of twenty Miles Square. They were in all not above 

twenty five thousand Foot, and six thousand
Horse; but it was impossible for me to compute
their Number, considering the Space of Ground
they took up. A Cavalier mounted on a large Steed
might be about Ninety Foot high. I have seen
this whole Body of Horse upon the Word of Command
draw their Swords at once, and brandish them
in the Air. Imagination can Figure nothing so
Grand, so surprising and so astonishing. It looked
as if ten thousand Flashes of Lightning were darting
at the same time from every Quarter of the Sky. 
I was curious to know how this Prince, to
whose Dominions there is no Access from any other
Country, came to think of Armies, or to
teach his People the Practice of military Discipline. 
But I was soon informed, both by Conversation, and
Reading their Histories. For, in the Course of
many Ages they have been troubled with the same
Disease, to which the whole Race of Mankind is
Subject; the Nobility often contending for Power,
the People for Liberty, and the King for absolute
Dominion. All which, however happily tempered
by the Laws of that Kingdom, have been sometimes
violated by each of the three Parties; and have
more than once occasioned Civil Wars, the last whereof
was happily put an End to by this Prince's Grandfather
in a general Composition; and the Militia
then settled with common Consent hath been ever
since kept in the strictest Duty. 
