






CHAP. I.
The Author sets out on his third
Voyage; is taken by Pirates: 
The Malice of a Dutchman. His Arrival
at an Island. He is received into
Laputa. Page 1.
CHAP. II.
The Humours and Dispositions of the
Laputians described. An Account of 

their Learning. Of the King and his
Court. The Author's Reception there. 
The Inhabitants subject to Fears and
Disquietudes. An Account of the Women. p. 15.
CHAP. III.
A Phænomenon solved by modern
Philosophy and Astronomy. The Laputians
great Improvements in the latter. 
The King's Method of suppressing Insurrections. p. 35.
CHAP. IV.
The Author leaves Laputa, is conveyed
to Balnibarbi, arrives at the Metropolis. 
A Description of the Metropolis,
and the Country adjoining. The Author
hospitably received by a great
Lord. His Conversation with that
Lord. p. 48.

CHAP. V.
The author permitted to see the grand
Academy of Lagado. The Academy
largely described. The Arts wherein
the Professors employ themselves. p. 62.
CHAP. VI.
A farther Account of the Academy. 
The Author proposes some Improvements,
which are honourably received. p. 80.
CHAP. VII.
The Author leaves Lagado, arrives at
Maldonada. No Ship ready. He takes
a short Voyage to Glubbdubdrib. His
Reception by the Governor. p. 94.
CHAP. VIII.
A farther Account of Glubbdubdrib. 
Antient and Modern History corrected. p. 104.

CHAP. IX.
The Author's Return to Maldonada,
sails to the Kingdom of Luggnagg. The
Author confined. He is sent for to
Court. The Manner of his Admittance. 
The King's great Lenity to his Subjects. p. 118.
CHAP. X.
The Luggnaggians commended. A particular
Description of the Struldbruggs,
with many. Conversations between the
Author and some eminent Persons upon
that Subject. p. 127.
CHAP. XI.
The Author leaves Luggnagg, and
sails to Japan. From thence he returns
in a Dutch Ship to Amsterdam, and
from Amsterdam to England. p. 147.



TRAVELS. PART III. A VOYAGE to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Luggnagg, Glubbdubdribb, and Japan.




The Author sets out on his Third Voyage; 
is taken by Pyrates. The Malice of a
Dutchman. His Arrival at an Island. 
He is received into Laputa. 
I had not been at Home above
ten Days, when Captain
William Robinson, a
Cornish Man, Commander
of the Hopewell, a stout Ship of Three 

Hundred Tuns, came to my House. I had
formerly been Surgeon of another Ship
where he was Master, and a fourth
Part Owner, in a Voyage to the Levant; 
He had always treated me more like a
Brother than an inferior Officer, and
hearing of my Arrival made me a Visit,
as I apprehended only out of Friendship,
for nothing passed more than what
is usual after long Absences. But repeating
his Visits often, expressing his Joy
to find me in good Health, asking
whether I were now settled for Life,
adding that he intended a Voyage to
the East-Indies, in two Months. At last
he plainly invited me, though with some
Apologies, to be Surgeon of the Ship; 
that I should have another Surgeon under
me besides our two Mates; that my
Sallary should be double to the usual
Pay; and that having experienced my
Knowledge in Sea-Affairs to be at least
equal to his, he would enter into any
Engagement to follow my Advice, as
much as if I had share in the Command. 

He said so many other obliging
Things, and I knew him to be so honest
a Man, that I could not reject his Proposal; 
the Thirst I had of seeing the
World, notwithstanding my past Misfortunes,
continuing as violent as ever. 
The only Difficulty that remained, was
to persuade my Wife, whose Consent,
however, I at last obtained by the Prospect
of Advantage she proposed to her
Children. 
We set out the 5th Day of August,
1706. and arrived at Fort St. George
the 11th of April, 1707. stayed there
three Weeks to refresh our Crew, many
of whom were sick. From thence we
went to Tonquin, where the Captain resolved
to continue some Time, because
many of the Goods he intended to buy
were not ready, nor could he expect to
be dispatched in some Months. Therefore
in hopes to defray some of the
Charges he must be at, he bought a
Sloop, loaded it with several sorts of 

Goods, wherewith the Tonquinese usually
trade to the neighbouring Islands, and
putting fourteen Men on Board, whereof
three were of the Country, he appointed
me Master of the Sloop, and
gave me Power to traffick for two
Months, while he transacted his Affairs
at Tonquin. 
We had not sailed above three Days,
when a great Storm arising, we were
driven five Days to the North-North-East,
and then to the East; after which we
had fair Weather, but still with a pretty
strong Gale from the West. Upon the
tenth Day we were chased by two
Pyrates, who soon overtook us; for my
Sloop was so deep loaden, that she
sailed very slow, neither were we in a
Condition to defend our selves. 
We were boarded about the same
Time by both the Pyrates, who enter'd
furiously at the Head of their Men, but
finding us all prostrate upon our Faces, 

(for so I gave order,) they pinioned us
with strong Ropes, and setting a Guard
upon us, went to search the Sloop. 
I observed among them a Dutchman,
who seemed to be of some Authority,
though he was not Commander of
either Ship. He knew us by our Countenances
to be Englishmen, and jabbering
to us in his own Language, swore
we should be tied Back to Back, and
thrown into the Sea. I spoke Dutch
tolerably well; I told him who we were,
and begged him, in consideration of our
being Christians and Protestants, of
neighbouring Countries, in strict Alliance,
that he would move the Captains
to take some Pity on us. This inflamed
his Rage; he repeated his Threatnings,
and, turning to his Companions, spoke
with great Vehemence, in the Japanese
Language, as I suppose, often using the
Word Christianos. 
The largest of the two Pyrate Ships
was commanded by a Japanese Captain, 

who spoke a little Dutch, but very imperfectly. 
He came up to me, and after
several Questions, which I answered in
great Humility, he said we should not
die. I made the Captain a very low
Bow, and then turning to the Dutchman,
said, I was sorry to find more
Mercy in a Heathen, than in a Brother
Christian. But I had soon Reason to repent
those foolish Words, for that malicious
Reprobate, having often endeavoured
in vain to persuade both the
Captains that I might be thrown into
the Sea, (which they would not yield to
after the Promise made me, that I should
not die,) however prevailed so far as to
have a Punishment inflicted on me,
worse in all human Appearance than
Death it self. My Men were sent by an
equal Division into both the Pirate-Ships,
and my Sloop new manned. As
to my self, it was determined that I
should be set a drift in a small Canoe,
with Paddles and a Sail, and four Days
Provisions, which last the Japanese Captain 

was so kind to double out of his
own Stores, and would permit no Man
to search me. I got down into the
Canoe, while the Dutchman standing
upon the Deck, loaded me with all the
Curses and injurious Terms his Language
could afford. 
About an Hour before we saw the
Pirates, I had taken an Observation, and
found we were in the Latitude of 46 N.
and of Longitude 183. When I was
at some Distance from the Pirates, I discovered
by my Pocket-Glass several Islands
to the South-East. I set up my Sail,
the Wind being fair, with a Design to
reach the nearest of those Islands, which
I made a Shift to do in about three
Hours. It was all rocky; however, I got
many Birds Eggs, and striking Fire I
kindled some Heath and dry Sea-Weed,
by which I roasted my Eggs. I eat no
other Supper, being resolved to spare my
Provisions as much as I could. I passed
the Night under the Shelter of a Rock, 

strowing some Heath under me, and
slept pretty well. 
The next Day I sailed to another
Island, and thence to a third and fourth,
sometimes using my Sail, and sometimes
my Paddles. But not to trouble the
Reader with a particular Account of my
Distresses, let it suffice, that on the 5th
Day I arrived at the last Island in my
Sight, which lay South-South-East to
the former. 
This Island was at a greater Distance
than I expected, and I did not reach it
in less than five Hours. I encompassed
it almost round before I could find
a convenient Place to land in, which
was a small Creek, about three Times
the Wideness of my Canoe. I found
the Island to be all rocky, only a little
intermingled with Tufts of Grass, and
sweet-smelling Herbs. I took out my
small Provisions, and after having refreshed
my self, I secured the Remainder 

in a Cave, whereof there were great
Numbers. I gathered plenty of Eggs
upon the Rocks, and got a Quantity of
dry Sea-Weed and parched Grass, which
I designed to kindle the next Day, and
roast my Eggs as well as I could. (For
I had about me my Flint, Steel, Match,
and Burning-Glass.) I lay all Night in
the Cave where I had lodged my Provisions. 
My Bed was the same dry
Grass and Sea-weed which I intended
for Fewel. I slept very little, for the
Disquiets of my Mind prevailed over
my Weariness, and kept me awake. I
considered how impossible it was to preserve
my Life in so desolate a Place, and
how miserable my End must be. Yet I
found my self so listless and desponding,
that I had not the Heart to rise, and before
I could get Spirits enough to creep
out of my Cave, the Day was far advanced. 
I walked a while among the
Rocks; the Sky was perfectly clear, and
the Sun so hot, that I was forced to turn
my Face from it: When all on a sudden 

it became obscured, as I thought,
in a Manner very different from what
happens by the Interposition of a Cloud. 
I turned back, and perceived a vast Opake
Body between me and the Sun, moving
forwards towards the Island: It seemed
to be about two Miles high, and hid
the Sun six or seven Minutes; but I did
not observe the Air to be much colder,
or the Sky more darkned, than if I had
stood under the Shade of a Mountain. 
As it approached nearer over the Place
where I was, it appeared to be a firm
Substance, the Bottom flat, smooth, and
shining very bright from the Reflection
of the Sea below. I stood upon a Height
about two hundred Yards from the
Shoar, and saw this vast Body descending
almost to a Parallel with me, at less
than an English Mile distance. I took
out my Pocket-Perspective, and could
plainly discover Numbers of People
moving up and down the Sides of it,
which appeared to be sloping, but 

what those People were doing, I was
not able to distinguish. 
The natural Love of Life gave me
some inward Motions of Joy, and I was
ready to entertain a Hope, that this
Adventure might some Way or other
help to deliver me from the desolate
Place and Condition I was in. But at
the same Time the Reader can hardly
conceive my Astonishment, to behold an
Island in the Air, inhabited by Men,
who were able, (as it should seem,) to
raise, or sink, or put it into a Progressive
Motion, as they pleased. But
not being at that Time in a Disposition
to philosophise upon this Phænomenon,
I rather chose to observe what Course
the Island would take, because it seemed
for a while to stand still. Yet soon after
it advanced nearer, and I could see
the Sides of it encompassed with several
Gradations of Galleries and Stairs, at
certain Intervals, to descend from one
to the other. In the lowest Gallery I 

beheld some People fishing with long
Angling Rods, and others looking on. 
I waved my Cap, (for my Hat was
long since worn out,) and my Handkerchief
towards the Island; and, upon
its nearer Approach, I called and shouted
with the utmost Strength of my Voice,
and then looking circumspectly, I beheld
a Crowd gathered to that Side which
was most in my View. I found by their
pointing towards me, and to each other,
that they plainly discovered me, although
they made no Return to my Shouting. 
But I could see four or five Men running
in great Haste up the Stairs to the Top
of the Island, who then disappeared. I
happened rightly to conjecture, that
these were sent for Orders to some Person
in Authority upon this Occasion. 
The Number of People increased,
and in less than half an Hour the Island
was moved and raised in such a Manner,
that the lowest Gallery appeared in
a Parallel of less than an Hundred Yards 

distance from the Height where I stood. 
I then put my self into the most supplicating
Postures, and spoke in the humblest
Accent, but received no Answer. 
Those who stood nearest over-against
me, seemed to be Persons of Distinction,
as I supposed by their Habit. They conferred
earnestly with each other, looking
often upon me. At length one of them
called out in a clear, polite, smooth Dialect,
not unlike in Sound to the Italian; 
and therefore I returned an Answer in
that Language, hoping at least that the
Cadence might be more agreeable to
his Ears. Although neither of us understood
the other, yet my Meaning was
easily known, for the People saw the
Distress I was in. 
They made Signs for me to come
down from the Rock, and go towards the
Shoar, which I accordingly did; and the
flying Island being raised to a convenient
Height, the Verge directly over me, 

a Chain was let down from the lowest
Gallery, with a Seat fasten'd to the Bottom,
to which I fixed my self, and was
drawn up by Pullies. 





The Humours and Dispositions of the
Laputians described. An Account
of their Learning. Of the King and
his Court. The Authors Reception
there. The Inhabitants subject to
Fears and Disquietudes. An Account
of the Women. 
At my alighting I was surrounded
by a Crowd of
People; but those who stood
nearest seemed to be of
better Quality. They beheld me with
all the Marks and Circumstances of
Wonder; neither, indeed, was I much in
their Debt, having never till then seen a
Race of Mortals so singular in their 

Shapes, Habits, and Countenances. Their
Heads were all reclined either to the
Right, or the Left; one of their Eyes
turned inward, and the other directly up
to the Zenith. Their outward Garments
were adorned with the Figures of Suns,
Moons, and Stars, interwoven with those
of Fiddles, Flutes, Harps, Trumpets,
Guittars, Harpsicords, and many more
Instruments of Musick, unknown to us in
Europe. I observed here and there many in
the Habit of Servants, with a blown Bladder
fasten'd like a Flail to the End of a
short Stick, which they carried in their
Hands. In each Bladder was a small
Quantity of dried Pease, or little Pebbles,
(as I was afterwards informed.) With
these Bladders they now and then flapped
the Mouths and Ears of those who
stood near them, of which Practice I
could not then conceive the Meaning: 
It seems, the Minds of these People are
so taken up with intense Speculations,
that they neither can speak, nor attend
to the Discourses of others, without being 

rouzed by some external Taction
upon the Organs of Speech and Hearing; 
for which Reason, those Persons
who are able to afford it always keep
a Flapper (the Original is Climenole) in
their Family, as one of their Domesticks,
nor ever walk abroad or make Visits
without him. And the Business of this
Officer is, when two or three more
Persons are in Company, gently to strike
with his Bladder the Mouth of him
who is to speak, and the right Ear of
him or them to whom the Speaker
addresseth himself. This Flapper is likewise
employed diligently to attend his
Master in his Walks, and, upon occasion,
to give him a soft Flap on his Eyes, because
he is always so wrapped up in
Cogitation, that he is in manifest Danger
of falling down every Precipice, and
bouncing his Head against every Post,
and in the Streets of justling others,
or being justled himself into the Kennel. 

It was necessary to give the Reader
this Information, without which he
would be at the same Loss with me, to
understand the Proceedings of these People,
as they conducted me up the Stairs,
to the Top of the Island, and from
thence to the Royal Palace. While we
were ascending, they forgot several
Times what they were about, and left
me to my self, till their Memories were
again rouzed by their Flappers; for
they appeared altogether unmoved by
the Sight of my foreign Habit and
Countenance, and by the Shouts of the
Vulgar, whose Thoughts and Minds were
more disengaged. 
At last we enter'd the Palace, and
proceeded into the Chamber of Presence,
where I saw the King seated on his
Throne, attended on each Side by Persons
of Prime Quality. Before the
Throne, was a large Table filled with
Globes and Spheres, and Mathematical
Instruments of all Kinds. His Majesty 

took not the least Notice of us, although
our Entrance was not without sufficient
Noise, by the Concourse of all Persons
belonging to the Court. But he
was then deep in a Problem, and we attended
at least an Hour, before he could
solve it. There stood by him on each
Side, a young Page, with Flaps in their
Hands, and when they saw he was at
Leisure, one of them gently struck his
Mouth, and the other his right Ear,
at which he started like one awaked on
the sudden, and looking towards me,
and the Company I was in, recollected
the Occasion of our coming, whereof he
had been informed before. He spoke some
Words, whereupon immediately a young
Man with a Flap came up to my Side,
and flapt me gently on the right Ear,
but I made Signs, as well as I could,
that I had no Occasion for such an Instrument; 
which as I afterwards found
gave his Majesty and the whole Court
a very mean Opinion of my Understanding. 
The King, as far as I could conjecture, 

asked me several Questions, and I
addressed my self to him in all the Languages
I had. When it was found, that
I could neither understand, nor be understood,
I was conducted, by the King's
Order, to an Apartment in his Palace,
(this Prince being distinguished above
all his Predecessors for his Hospitality
to Strangers,) where two Servants were
appointed to attend me. My Dinner
was brought, and four Persons of Quality,
whom I remember'd to have seen
very near the King's Person, did me the
Honour to dine with me. We had two
Courses, of three Dishes each. In the
first Course there was a Shoulder of Mutton,
cut into an Æquilateral Triangle, a
Piece of Beef into a Rhomboides, and a
Pudding into a Cycloid. The second
Course was two Ducks, trussed up into
the Form of Fiddles, Sausages and Puddings
resembling Flutes and Hautboys,
and a Breast of Veal in the Shape of a
Harp. The Servants cut our Bread into 

Cones, Cylinders, Parallelograms, and
several other mathematical Figures. 
While we were at Dinner, I
made bold to ask the Names of several
Things in their Language, and those
noble Persons, by the Assistance of their
Flappers, delighted to give me Answers,
hoping to raise my Admiration of their
great Abilities, if I could be brought to
converse with them. I was soon able to
call for Bread, and Drink, or whatever
else I wanted. 
After Dinner my Company withdrew,
and a Person was sent to me by the
King's Order, attended by a Flapper. He
brought with him Pen, Ink, and Paper,
and three or four Books, giving me to
understand by Signs, that he was sent to
teach me the Language. We sat together
four Hours, in which Time I wrote down
a great Number of Words in Columns,
with the Translations over against them. 
I likewise made a Shift to learn several 

short Sentences. For my Tutor would
order one of my Servants to fetch something,
or turn about, to make a Bow,
to sit, or stand, or walk, and the like. 
Then I took down the Sentence in writing. 
He shewed me also in one of his
Books, the Figures of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, the Zodiack, the Tropics, and
Polar Circles, together with the Denominations
of many Figures of Planes
and Solids. He gave me the Names
and Descriptions of all the musical Instruments,
and the general Terms of
Art in playing on each of them. After
he had left me, I placed all my Words
with their Interpretations in Alphabetical
Order. And thus in a few Days,
by the help of a very faithful Memory,
I got some Insight into their Language. 
The Word, which I interpret the
Flying or Floating Island, is in the Original
Laputa, whereof I could never
learn the true Etymology. Lap in the
old obsolete Language signifieth High, 

and Untuh, a Governor, from which, they
say, by Corruption was derived Laputa
from Lapuntuh. But I do not approve
of this Derivation, which seems to be a
little strained. I ventured to offer to the
Learned among them a Conjecture of
my own, that Laputa was quasi Lap
outed, Lap signifying properly the Dancing
of the Sun-Beams in the Sea, and
outed a Wing; which, however, I shall
not obtrude, but submit to the judicious
Reader. 
Those to whom the King had entrusted
me, observing how ill I was clad,
ordered a Taylor to come next Morning,
and take my Measure for a Suit of Clothes. 
This Operator did his Office after a different
manner from those of his Trade
in Europe. He first took my Altitude
by a Quadrant, and then with Rule and
Compasses, described the Dimensions and
Out-lines of my whole Body, all which
he enter'd upon Paper, and in six Days
brought my Clothes very ill made, and 

quite out of shape, by happening to
mistake a Figure in the Calculation. But
my Comfort was, that I observed such
Accidents very frequent, and little regarded. 
During my Confinement for want
of Clothes, and by an Indisposition that
held me some Days longer, I much enlarged
my Dictionary; and when I went
next to Court, was able to understand
many Things the King spoke, and to return
him some kind of Answers. His
Majesty had given Orders that the
Island should move North-East and by
East, to the Vertical Point over Lagado,
the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom
below upon the firm Earth. It was about
ninety Leagues distant, and our
Voyage lasted four Days and an half. 
I was not in the least sensible of the
progressive Motion made in the Air by
the Island. On the second Morning,
about Eleven a-Clock, the King himself
in Person, attended by his Nobility, 

Courtiers, and Officers, having prepared
all their musical Instruments,
played on them for three Hours without
Intermission, so that I was quite
stunned with the Noise; neither could I
possibly guess the Meaning till my Tutor
informed me. He said that the People
of their Island had their Ears adapted to
hear the Musick of the Spheres, which
always played at certain Periods, and
the Court was now prepared to bear
their Part in what ever Instrument they
most excelled. 
In our Journey towards Lagado the
capital City, his Majesty ordered that the
Island should stop over certain Towns
and Villages, from whence he might receive
the Petitions of his Subjects. And to
this Purpose several Packthreads were let
down with small Weights at the Bottom. 
On these Packthreads the People strung
their Petitions, which mounted up directly
like the Scraps of Paper fastned by
School-Boys at the End of the String 

that holds their Kite. Sometimes we
received Wine and Victuals from below,
which were drawn up by Pullies. 
The Knowledge I had in Mathematicks
gave me great Assistance in acquiring
their Phraseology, which depended
much upon that Science and
Musick; and in the latter I was not
unskilled. Their Ideas are perpetually
conversant in Lines and Figures. If they
would, for Example, praise the Beauty
of a Woman, or any other Animal, they
describe it by Rhombs, Circles, Parallelograms,
Ellipses, and other Geometrical
Terms, or by Words of Art drawn
from Musick, needless here to repeat. 
I observed in the King's Kitchen all
Sorts of mathematical and musical Instruments,
after the Figures of which
they cut up the Joints that were served
to his Majesty's Table. 
Their Houses are very ill built,
the Walls bevil, without one Right 

Angle in any Apartment; and this Defect
ariseth from the Contempt they
bear to practical Geometry, which
they despise, as Vulgar and Mechanick,
those Instructions they give being too refined
for the Intellectuals of their Workmen; 
which occasions perpetual Mistakes. 
And although they are dextrous enough
upon a Piece of Paper in the Management
of the Rule, the Pencil, and the
Divider, yet in the common Actions and
Behaviour of Life, I have not seen a
more clumsy, awkward, and unhandy
People, nor so slow and perplexed in
their Conceptions upon all other Subjects,
except those of Mathematicks and
Musick. They are very bad Reasoners,
and vehemently given to Opposition,
unless when they happen to be of the
right Opinion, which is seldom their
Case. Imagination, Fancy, and Invention,
they are wholly Strangers to,
nor have any Words in their Language
by which those Ideas can be expressed; 
the whole Compass of their Thoughts 

and Mind being shut up within the two
forementioned Sciences. 
Most of them, and especially those
who deal in the Astronomical Part, have
great Faith in judicial Astrology, although
they are ashamed to own it
publickly. But what I chiefly admired,
and thought altogether unaccountable,
was the strong Disposition I observed in
them towards News and Politicks, perpetually
enquiring into publick Affairs,
giving their Judgments in Matters of
State, and passionately disputing every
Inch of a Party Opinion. I have indeed
observed the same Disposition among
most of the Mathematicians I have
known in Europe, although I could never
discover the least Analogy between the
two Sciences, unless those People suppose,
that because the smallest Circle
hath as many Degrees as the largest,
therefore the Regulation and Management
of the World require no more
Abilities than the handling and turning 

of a Globe. But, I rather take
this Quality to spring from a very common
Infirmity of human Nature, inclining
us to be more curious and conceited
in Matters where we have least
Concern, and for which we are least
adapted either by Study or Nature. 
These People are under continual
Disquietudes, never enjoying a Minute's
Peace of Mind; and their Disturbances
proceed from Causes which very little
affect the rest of Mortals. Their Apprehensions
arise from several Changes they
dread in the celestial Bodies. For Instance; 
That the Earth by the continual
Approaches of the Sun towards it, must
in Course of Time be absorbed or swallowed
up. That the Face of the Sun
will, by degrees, be encrusted with its
own Effluvia, and give no more Light
to the World. That the Earth very
narrowly escaped a Brush from the Tail
of the last Comet, which would have
infallibly reduced it to Ashes; and that 

the next, which they have calculated
for one and thirty Years hence, will
probably destroy us. For, if in its Perihelion
it should approach within a
certain Degree of the Sun, (as by their
Calculations they have Reason to dread,
it will conceive a Degree of Heat ten
thousand times more intense than that
of red-hot glowing Iron; and in its
Absence from the Sun, carry a blazing
Tail ten hundred thousand and fourteen
Miles long; through which, if the Earth
should pass at the Distance of one hundred
thousand Miles from the Nucleus
or main Body of the Comet, it must in
its Passage be set on fire, and reduced
to Ashes. That the Sun daily spending
its Rays without any Nutriment to supply
them, will at last be wholly consumed
and annihilated; which must be
attended with the Destruction of this
Earth, and of all the Planets that receive
their Light from it. 

They are so perpetually alarmed
with the Apprehensions of these and
the like impending Dangers, that they
can neither sleep quietly in their Beds,
nor have any Relish for the common
Pleasures or Amusements of Life. When
they meet an Acquaintance in the Morning,
the first Question is about the Sun's
Health, how he looked at his Setting
and Rising, and what Hopes they have
to avoid the Stroke of the approaching
Comet. This Conversation they are apt
to run into with the same Temper that
Boys discover, in delighting to hear terrible
Stories of Spirits and Hobgoblins,
which they greedily listen to, and dare
not go to Bed for fear. 
The Women of the Island have
Abundance of Vivacity; they contemn
their Husbands, and are exceedingly
fond of Strangers, whereof there is always
a considerable Number from the
Continent below, attending at Court,
either upon Affairs of the several Towns 

and Corporations, or their own particular
Occasions, but are much despised, because
they want the same Endowments. 
Among these the Ladies chuse their Gallants: 
But the Vexation is, that they
act with too much Ease and Security,
for the Husband is always so wrapt in
Speculation, that the Mistress and Lover
may proceed to the greatest Familiarities
before his Face, if he be but provided
with Paper and Implements, and without
his Flapper at his Side. 
The Wives and Daughters lament
their Confinement to the Island, although
I think it the most delicious Spot of
Ground in the World; and although
they live here in the greatest Plenty and
Magnificence, and are allowed to do
whatever they please, they long to see
the World, and take the Diversions of
the Metropolis, which they are not allowed
to do without a particular Licence
from the King; and this is not easy to
be obtained, because the People of Quality 

have found, by frequent Experience,
how hard it is to persuade their Women
to return from below. I was told
that a great Court-Lady, who had several
Children, is married to the Prime
Minister, the richest Subject in the
Kingdom, a very graceful Person, extremely
fond of her, and lives in the
finest Palace of the Island, went down
to Lagado, on the Pretence of Health,
there hid her self for several Months,
till the King sent a Warrant to search
for her, and she was found in an obscure
Eating-house all in Rags, having
pawned her Clothes to maintain an old
deformed Footman, who beat her every
Day, and in whose Company she was
taken much against her Will. And although
her Husband received her with
all possible Kindness, and without the
least Reproach, she soon after contrived
to steal down again, with all her Jewels,
to the same Gallant, and hath not been
heard of since. 

This may, perhaps, pass with the
Reader rather for an European or English
Story, than for one of a Country
so remote: But he may please to consider,
that the Caprices of Womenkind
are not limited by any Climate or
Nation, and that they are much more
uniform than can be easily imagined. 
In about a Month's Time I had made
a tolerable Proficiency in their Language,
and was able to answer most of
the King's Questions, when I had the
Honour to attend him. His Majesty
discovered not the least Curiosity to enquire
into the Laws, Government,
History, Religion, or Manners of the
Countries where I had been, but confined
his Questions to the State of Mathematicks,
and received the Account
I gave him, with great Contempt and
Indifference, though often rouzed by
his Flapper on each Side. 





A Phænomenon solved by modern Philosophy
and Astronomy. The Laputians
great Improvements in the
latter. The King's Method of suppressing
Insurrections. 
I desired leave of this Prince to
see the Curiosities of the Island,
which he was graciously pleased
to grant, and ordered my Tutor to
attend me. I chiefly wanted to know
to what Cause in Art, or in Nature, it
owed its several Motions, whereof I
will now give a Philosophical Account
to the Reader. 
The Flying or Floating Island is
exactly circular, its Diameter 7837
Yards, or about four Miles and an 

half, and consequently contains ten
thousand Acres. It is three hundred
Yards thick. The Bottom or under
Surface, which appears to those who
view it from below, is one even regular
Plate of Adamant, shooting up to
the Height of about two hundred Yards. 
Above it lie the several Minerals in
their usual Order, and over all is a Coat
of rich Mould ten or twelve Foot deep. 
This Declivity of the upper Surface, from
the Circumference to the Center, is the
natural Cause why all the Dews and
Rains which fall upon the Island, are
conveyed in small Rivulets towards the
Middle, where they are emptied into
four large Basons, each of about half
a Mile in Circuit, and two hundred
Yards distant from the Center. From
these Basons the Water is continually
exhaled by the Sun in the Day-time,
which effectually prevents their overflowing. 
Besides, as it is in the Power
of the Monarch to raise the Island
above the Region of Clouds and Vapours, 

he can prevent the falling of Dews
and Rains when ever he pleases: For
the highest Clouds cannot rise above
two Miles, as Naturalists agree, at least
they were never known to do in that
Country. 
At the Center of the Island there is
a Chasm about fifty Yards in Diameter,
from whence the Astronomers descend
into a large Dome, which is therefore
called Flandona Gagnole, or the Astronomers
Cave, situated at the Depth of a
hundred Yards beneath the upper Surface
of the Adamant. In this Cave are
twenty Lamps continually burning,
which from the Reflection of the Adamant
cast a strong Light into every Part. 
The Place is stored with great Variety
of Sextants, Quadrants, Telescopes, Astrolabes,
and other Astronomical Instruments. 
But the greatest Curiosity, upon
which the Fate of the Island depends,
is a Load-stone of a prodigious Size, in
Shape resembling a Weaver's Shuttle. It 

is in Length six Yards, and in the thickest
Part at least three Yards over. This
Magnet is sustained by a very strong
Axle of Adamant passing through its
Middle, upon which it plays, and is
poized so exactly, that the weakest
Hand can turn it. It is hooped round
with an hollow Cylinder of Adamant,
four Foot deep, as many thick, and
twelve Yards in Diameter, placed Horizontally,
and supported by eight Adamantine
Feet, each six Yards high. In
the middle of the Concave Side there is
a Groove twelve Inches deep, in which
the Extremities of the Axle are lodged,
and turned round as therr is Occasion. 
The Stone cannot be moved from
its Place by any Force, because the
Hoop and its Feet are one continued
Piece with that Body of Adamant,
which constitutes the Bottom of the
Island. 



By Means of this Load-stone, the
Island is made to rise and fall, and move
from one Place to another. For, with
Respect to that Part of the Earth over
which the Monarch presides, the Stone
is endued at one of its Sides with an attractive
Power, and at the other with a
repulsive. Upon placing the Magnet
erect with its attracting End towards
the Earth, the Island descends; but when
the repelling Extremity points downwards,
the Island mounts directly upwards. 
When the Position of the Stone
is oblique, the Motion of the Island is
so too. For in this Magnet the Forces
always act in Lines parallel to its Direction. 
By this oblique Motion the Island
is conveyed to different Parts of the Monarch's
Dominions. To explain the
manner of its Progress, let A B represent
a Line drawn cross the Dominions
of Balnibarbi, let the Line c d represent 

the Load-stone, of which let d be the repelling
End, and c the attracting End; 
the Island being over C, let the Stone be
placed in the Position c d, with its repelling
End downwards, then the Island
will be driven upwards obliquely towards
D. When it is arrived at D, let the
Stone be turned upon its Axle till its attracting
End points towards E, and then
the Island will be carried obliquely towards
E; where, if the Stone be again
turned upon its Axle till it stands in the
Position E F, with its repelling Point
downwards, the Island will rise obliquely
towards F; where, by directing the attracting
End towards G, the Island may be
carried to G, and from G to H, by
turning the Stone, so as to make its repelling
Extremity point directly downwards. 
And thus by changing the Situation
of the Stone as often as there
is Occasion, the Island is made to rise
and fall by Turns in an oblique Direction; 
and by those alternate Risings and Fallings
(the Obliquity being not considerable) 

is conveyed from one Part of the
Dominions to the other. 
But it must be observed, that this
Island cannot move beyond the Extent
of the Dominions below, nor can it
rise above the Height of four Miles. For
which the Astronomers (who have written
large Systems concerning the Stone)
assign the following Reason; That the
magnetick Virtue does not extend beyond
the Distance of four Miles, and
that the Mineral which acts upon the
Stone in the Bowels of the Earth, and
in the Sea about six Leagues distant
from the Shoar, is not diffused through
the whole Globe, but terminated with
the Limits of the King's Dominions; 
and it was easy from the great Advantage
of such a superior Situation, for a
Prince to bring under his Obedience
whatever Country lay within the Attraction
of that Magnet. 

When the Stone is put parallel to the
Plane of the Horizon, the Island standeth
still; for in that Case, the Extremities
of it being at equal Distance from
the Earth, act with equal Force, the
one in drawing downwards, the other in
pushing upwards, and consequently no
Motion can ensue. 
This Load-stone is under the Care of
certain Astronomers, who from Time to
Time give it such Positions as the Monarch
directs. They spend the greatest
Part of their Lives in observing the
celestial Bodies, which they do by the
Assistance of Glasses far excelling ours
in Goodness. For this Advantage hath
enabled them to extend the Discoveries
much farther than our Astronomers in
Europe; for they have made a Catalogue
of ten thousand fixed Stars; whereas the
largest of ours do not contain above one
third Part of that Number. They have
likewise discovered two lesser Stars, or 

Satellites, which revolve about Mars,
whereof the innermost is distant from
the Center of the primary Planet exactly
three of his Diameters, and the outermost
five; the former revolves in the
Space of ten Hours, and the latter in
twenty one and an half; so that the
Squares of their periodical Times are
very near in the same Proportion with
the Cubes of their Distance from the
Center of Mars, which evidently shews
them to be governed by the same Law
of Gravitation, that influences the other
Heavenly Bodies. 
They have observed ninety three
different Comets, and settled their Periods
with great Exactness. If this be
true, (and they affirm it with great
Confidence,) it is much to be wished
that their Observations were made
publick, whereby the Theory of Comets,
which at present is very lame and defective,
might be brought to the same 

Perfection with other Parts of Astronomy. 
The King would be the most absolute
Prince in the Universe, if he could but
prevail on a Ministry to join with him; 
but these having their Estates below on
the Continent, and considering that the
Office of a Favourite hath a very uncertain
Tenure, would never consent to
the enslaving their Country. 
If any Town should engage in Rebellion
or Mutiny, fall into violent
Factions, or refuse to pay the usual
Tribute, the King hath two Methods
of reducing them to Obedience. The
first and the mildest Course is by keeping
the Island hovering over such a Town,
and the Lands about it, whereby he can
deprive them of the Benefit of the Sun
and the Rain, and consequently afflict
the Inhabitants with Death and Diseases. 
And if the Crime deserve it, they
are at the same Time pelted from above 

with great Stones, against which they
have no Defence but by creeping into
Cellars or Caves, while the Roofs of
their Houses are beaten to Pieces. But
if they still continue obstinate, or offer
to raise Insurrections, he proceeds to
the last Remedy, by letting the Island
drop directly upon their Heads, which
makes a universal Destruction both of
Houses and Men. However, this is an
Extremity to which the Prince is seldom
driven, neither indeed is he willing to
put it in Execution, nor dare his Ministers
advise him to an Action, which, as
it would render them odious to the
People, so it would be a great Damage to
their own Estates, which lie all below,
for the Island is the King's Demesn. 
But there is still indeed a more
weighty Reason, why the Kings of this
Country have been always averse from
executing so terrible an Action, unless
upon the utmost Necessity. For if the
Town intended to be destroyed should 

have in it any tall Rocks, as it generally
falls out in the larger Cities, a Situation
probably chosen at first with a View to
prevent such a Catastrophe; or if it
abound in high Spires or Pillars of
Stone, a sudden Fall might endanger the
Bottom or Under-surface of the Island,
which, although it consists, as I have said,
of one entire Adamant two hundred Yards
thick, might happen to crack by too
great a Choque, or burst by approaching
too near the Fires from the Houses
below, as the Backs both of Iron and
Stone will often do in our Chimneys. 
Of all this the People are well apprized,
and understand how far to carry their
Obstinacy, where their Liberty or Property
is concerned. And the King, when
he is highest provoked, and most determined
to press a City to Rubbish, orders
the Island to descend with great Gentleness,
out of a Pretence of Tenderness
to his People, but indeed for fear of
breaking the Adamantine Bottom; in
which Case, it is the Opinion of all their 

Philosophers, that the Load-stone could
no longer hold it up, and the whole Mass
would fall to the Ground. 
By a fundamental Law of this Realm,
neither the King, nor either of his two
elder Sons, are permitted to leave the
Island; nor the Queen, till she is past
Child-bearing. 





The Author leaves Laputa, is conveyed
to Balnibarbi, arrives at the Metropolis. 
A Description of the Metropolis,
and the Country adjoining. 
The Author hospitably received by a
great Lord. His Conversation with
that Lord. 
Although I cannot say
that I was ill-treated in this
Island, yet I must confess I
thought my self too much
neglected, not without some Degree of
Contempt. For neither Prince nor People
appeared to be curious in any Part
of Knowledge, except Mathematicks and
Musick, wherein I was far their Inferior,
and upon that Account very little regarded. 

On the other Side, after having seen
all the Curiosities of the Island, I was
very desirous to leave it, being heartily
weary of those People. They were indeed
excellent for two Sciences for which
I have great Esteem, and wherein I am
not unversed; but at the same Time, so
abstracted and involved in Speculation,
that I never met with such disagreeable
Companions. I convers'd only with
Women, Tradesmen, Flappers, and
Court-Pages, during two Months of my
Abode here, by which, at last, I render'd
my self extremely contemptible; yet these
were the only People from whom I could
ever receive a reasonable Answer. 
I had obtained, by hard Study, a good
Degree of Knowledge in their Language; 
I was weary of being confined
to an Island where I received so little
Countenance, and resolved to leave it
with the first Opportunity. 
There was a great Lord at Court,
nearly related to the King, and for that 

Reason alone used with Respect. He
was universally reckoned the most ignorant
and stupid Person among them. 
He had performed many eminent Services
for the Crown, had great natural
and acquired Parts, adorned with Integrity
and Honour, but so ill an Ear
for Musick, that his Detractors reported
he had been often known to beat Time
in the wrong Place; neither could his
Tutors, without extreme Difficulty, teach
him to demonstrate the most easy Proposition
in the Mathematicks. He was
pleased to shew me many Marks of
Favour, often did me the Honour of a
Visit, desired to be informed in the
Affairs of Europe, the Laws and Customs,
the Manners and Learning, of the several
Countries where I had travelled. He
listned to me with great Attention, and
made very wise Observations on all I
spoke. He had two Flappers attending
him for State, but never made use of
them except at Court, and in Visits of
Ceremony, and would always command 

them to withdraw when we were alone
together. 
I intreated this illustrious Person to
intercede in my Behalf with his Majesty
for Leave to depart, which he accordingly
did, as he was pleased to tell me,
with Regret: For, indeed he had made
me several Offers very advantageous,
which however I refused with Expressions
of the highest Acknowledgment. 
On the 16th Day of February I took
Leave of his Majesty and the Court. The
King made me a Present to the Value of
about two hundred Pounds English, and
my Protector his Kinsman as much more,
together with a Letter of Recommendation
to a Friend of his in Lagado, the
Metropolis: The Island being then hovering
over a Mountain about two
Miles from it, I was let down from
the lowest Gallery, in the same manner
as I had been taken up. 

The Continent, as far as it is subject
to the Monarch of the Flying Island,
passes under the general Name of Balnibarbi,
and the Metropolis, as I said
before, is called Lagado. I felt some
little Satisfaction in finding my self on
firm Ground. I walked to the City
without any Concern, being clad like
one of the Natives, and sufficiently instructed
to converse with them. I soon
found out the Person's House to whom
I was recommended, presented my Letter
from his Friend the Grandee in the
Island, and was received with much
Kindness. This great Lord, whose Name
was Munodi, ordered me an Apartment
in his own House, where I continued
during my Stay, and was entertained
in a most hospitable Manner. 
The next Morning after my Arrival,
he took me in his Chariot to see the
Town, which is about half the Bigness
of London, but the Houses very strangely
built, and most of them out of Repair. 

The People in the Streets walked fast,
looked wild, their Eyes fixed, and were
generally in Rags. We passed through
one of the Town-Gates, and went about
three Miles into the Country, where I
saw many Labourers working with several
sorts of Tools in the Ground, but
was not able to conjecture what they
were about; neither did I observe any
Expectation either of Corn or Grass, although
the Soil appeared to be excellent. 
I could not forbear admiring at these
odd Appearances both in Town and
Country, and I made bold to desire my
Conductor, that he would be pleased
to explain to me what could be meant
by so many busy Heads, Hands, and
Faces, both in the Streets and the Fields,
because I did not discover any good
Effects they produced; but on the contrary,
I never knew a Soil so unhappily
cultivated, Houses so ill contrived, and
so ruinous, or a People whose Countenances
and Habit expressed so much
Misery and Want. 

This Lord Munodi was a Person of
the first Rank, and had been some Years
Governor of Lagado; but by a Cabal of
Ministers was discharged for Insufficiency. 
However, the King treated him
with Tenderness, as a well-meaning
Man, but of a low contemptible Understanding. 
When I gave that free Censure of
the Country, and its Inhabitants, he made
no further Answer than by telling me,
that I had not been long enough among
them to form a Judgment; and
that the different Nations of the World
had different Customs, with other common
Topicks to the same Purpose. But
when we returned to his Palace, he
asked me how I liked the Building,
what Absurdities I observed, and what
Quarrel I had with the Dress and Looks
of his Domesticks. This he might safely
do, because every Thing about him was
magnificent, regular, and polite. I answered, 

that his Excellency's Prudence,
Quality, and Fortune, had exempted
him from those Defects which Folly and
Beggary had produced in others. He
said, if I would go with him to his
Country House about twenty Miles
distant, where his Estate lay, there
would be more Leisure for this kind of
Conversation. I told his Excellency that
I was entirely at his Disposal; and accordingly
we set out next Morning. 
During our Journey, he made me
observe the several Methods used by
Farmers in managing their Lands, which
to me were wholly unaccountable; for,
except in some very few Places, I could
not discover one Ear of Corn or Blade
of Grass. But, in three Hours travelling,
the Scene was wholly altered; we
came into a most beautiful Country; 
Farmers Houses at small Distances, neatly
built; the Fields enclosed, containing
Vineyards, Corn-grounds and Meadows. 
Neither do I remember to have seen a 

more delightful Prospect. His Excellency
observed my Countenance to clear
up; he told me, with a Sigh, that there
his Estate began, and would continue
the same till we should come to his
House; that his Countrymen ridicul'd
and despis'd him for managing his Affairs
no better, and for setting so ill an Example
to the Kingdom, which however
was followed by very few, such as were
old, and wilful, and weak, like himself. 
We came at length to the House; 
which was indeed a noble Structure,
built according to the best Rules of Ancient
Architecture. The Fountains,
Gardens, Walks, Avenues, and Groves,
were all disposed with exact Judgment
and Taste. I gave due Praises to every
Thing I saw; whereof his Excellency
took not the least Notice till after Supper,
when, there being no third Companion,
he told me, with a very melancholy
Air, that he doubted he must
throw down his Houses in Town and 

Country, to rebuild them after the present
Mode, destroy all his Plantations, and
cast others in such a Form as modern
Usage required, and give the same Directions
to all his Tenants, unless he
would submit to incur the Censure of
Pride, Singularity, Affectation, Ignorance,
Caprice, and perhaps increase
his Majesty's Displeasure. 
That the Admiration I appeared
to be under, would cease or diminish,
when he had informed me of some Particulars
which, probably, I never heard
of at Court, the People there being too
much taken up in their own Speculations,
to have Regard to what passed
here below. 
The Sum of his Discourse was to this
Effect. That about forty Years ago,
certain Persons went up to Laputa, either
upon Business or Diversion, and after
five Months Continuance, came back
with a very little Smattering in Mathematicks, 

but full of Volatile Spirits acquired
in that airy Region. That these
Persons upon their Return began to
dislike the Management of every Thing
below, and fell into Schemes of putting
all Arts, Sciences, Languages, and Mechanicks
upon a new Foot. To this
End, they procured a Royal Patent for
erecting an Academy of Projectors
in Lagado and the Humour prevailed
so strongly among the People, that there
is not a Town of any Consequence in
the Kingdom without such an Academy. 
In these Colleges, the Professors contrive
new Rules and Methods of Agriculture
and Building, and new Instruments
and Tools for all Trades and
Manufactures, whereby, as they undertake,
one Man shall do the Work of
ten a Palace may be built in a Week,
of Materials so durable as to last for
ever, without repairing; all the Fruits
of the Earth shall come to Maturity at
whatever Season we think fit to chuse,
and increase an hundred Fold more than 

they do at present, with innumerable
other happy Proposals. The only Inconvenience
is, that none of these Projects
are yet brought to Perfection, and
in the mean time the whole Country
lies miserably waste, the Houses in
Ruins, and the People without Food or
Clothes. By all which, instead of being
discouraged, they are fifty times more
violently bent upon prosecuting their
Schemes, driven equally on by Hope
and Despair: That as for himself, being
not of an enterprizing Spirit, he was
content to go on in the old Forms, to
live in the Houses his Ancestors had
built, and act as they did in every Part
of Life without Innovation: That, some
few other Persons of Quality and Gentry
had done the same, but were looked
on with an Eye of Contempt and ill
Will, as Enemies to Art, ignorant and
ill Commonwealthsmen, preferring their
own Ease and Sloth before the general
Improvement of their Country. 

His Lordship added, that he would
not by any further Particulars prevent the
Pleasure I should certainly take in viewing
the Grand Academy, whither he
was resolved I should go. He only desired
me to observe a ruined Building
upon the Side of a Mountain about three
Miles distant, of which he gave me
this Account: That he had a very convenient
Mill within half a Mile of his
House, turned by a Current from a large
River, and sufficient for his own Family,
as well as a great Number of his Tenants: 
That, about seven Years ago, a Club
of those Projectors came to him with
Proposals to destroy this Mill, and
build another on the Side of that
Mountain, on the long Ridge whereof
a long Canal must be cut for a Repository
of Water, to be conveyed up by
Pipes and Engines to supply the Mill: 
Because the Wind and Air upon a Height
agitated the Water, and thereby made
it fitter for Motion: And because the
Water descending down a Declivity,
would turn the Mill with half the Current 

of a River whose Course is more
upon a Level. He said, that being then
not very well with the Court, and
pressed by many of his Friends, he complied
with the Proposal; and, after employing
an hundred Men for two Years,
the Work miscarried, the Projectors
went off, laying the Blame entirely upon
him, railing at him ever since, and putting
others upon the same Experiment,
with equal Assurance of Success, as well
as equal Disappointment. 
In a few Days we came back to
Town, and his Excellency, considering
the bad Character he had in the Academy,
would not go with me himself,
but recommended me to a Friend of his
to bear me Company thither. My Lord
was pleased to represent me as a great
Admirer of Projects, and a Person of
much Curiosity and easy Belief; which,
indeed, was not without Truth, for I
had my self been a sort of a Projector in
my younger Days. 





The Author permitted to see the Grand
Academy of Lagado. The Academy
largely described. The Arts wherein
the Professors employ themselves. 
This Academy is not an entire
single Building, but a
Continuation of several Houses
on both Sides of a Street, which
growing waste was purchased and applied
to that Use. 
I was received very kindly by the
Warden, and went for many Days to
the Academy. Every Room hath in it
one or more Projectors, and I believe I
could not be in fewer than five hundred
Rooms. 

The first Man I saw was of a meager
Aspect, with sooty Hands and Face,
his Hair and Beard long, ragged and
singed in several Places: His Clothes,
Shirt, and Skin, were all of the same
Colour. He had been eight Years upon
a Project for extracting Sun-Beams out
of Cucumbers, which were to be put
into Vials hermetically sealed, and let
out to warm the Air in raw inclement
Summers. He told me, he did not
doubt in eight Years more, he should
be able to supply the Governor's Gardens
with Sun-shine at a reasonable Rate; 
but he complained that his Stock was
low, and entreated me to give him
something as an Encouragement to Ingenuity,
especially since this had been
a very dear Season for Cucumbers. I
made him a small Present, for my Lord
had furnished me with Money on purpose,
because he knew their Practice
of begging from all who go to see
them. 

I went into another Chamber, but
was ready to hasten back, being almost
overcome with a horrible Stink. My
Conductor pressed me forward, conjuring
me, in a Whisper, to give no Offence,
which would be highly resented, and
therefore I durst not so much as stop
my Nose. The Projector of this Cell
was the most ancient Student of the
Academy: His Face and Beard were of
a pale Yellow; his Hands and Clothes
dawbed over with Filth. When I was
presented to him, he gave me a very
close Embrace, (a Compliment I could
well have excused.) His Employment
from his first coming into the Academy,
was an Operation to reduce human Excrement
to its original Food, by separating
the several Parts, removing the
Tincture which it receives from the
Gall, making the Odour exhale, and
scumming off the Saliva. He had a
weekly Allowance from the Society, of
a Vessel filled with Human Ordure, about
the Bigness of a Bristol Barrel. 

I saw another at work to calcine Ice
into Gun-Powder, who likewise shewed
me a Treatise he had written concerning
the Malleability of Fire, which he
intended to publish. 
There was a most ingenious Architect
who had contrived a new Method
for building Houses, by beginning at the
Roof and working downwards to the
Foundation, which he justified to me by
the like Practice of those two prudent
Insects the Bee and the Spider. 
There was a Man born blind, who
had several Apprentices in his own Condition: 
Their Employment was to mix
Colours for Painters, which their Master
taught them to distinguish by feeling and
smelling. It was indeed my Misfortune
to find them at that time not very perfect
in their Lessons, and the Professor
himself happened to be generally mistaken: 
This Artist is much encouraged and
esteemed by the whole Fraternity. 

In another Apartment I was highly
pleased with a Projector, who had
found a Device of Plowing the Ground
with Hogs, to save the Charges of
Plows, Cattle and Labour. The Method
is this; In an Acre of Ground you
bury at six Inches distance, and eight
deep, a quantity of Acorns, Dates,
Chesnuts, and other Maste or Vegetables
whereof these Animals are fondest: then
you drive six hundred or more of them
into the Field, where in a few Days they
will root up the whole Ground in search
of their Food, and make it fit for Sowing,
at the same time manuring it with
their Dung; it is true upon Experiment
they found the Charge and Trouble
very great, and they had little or no
Crop. However, it is not doubted
that this Invention may be capable of
great Improvement. 
I went into another Room, where the
Walls and Ceiling were all hung round
with Cobwebs, except a narrow Passage 

for the Artist to go in and out. At
my Entrance he called aloud to me not to
disturb his Webs. He lamented the fatal
Mistake the World had been so long in
of using Silk-Worms, while we had such
plenty of Domestick Insects, who infinitely
excelled the former, because they
understood how to weave as well as
spin. And he proposed farther, that by
employing Spiders, the Charge of dying
Silks should be wholly saved, whereof I
was fully convinced when he shewed me
a vast number of Flies most beautifully
coloured, wherewith he fed his Spiders,
assuring us, that the Webs would take a
Tincture from them; and as he had them
of all Hues, he hoped to fit every body's
Fancy, as soon as he could find proper
Food for the Flys of certain Gums, Oyls,
and other glutinous Matter to give
a Strength and Consistence to the
Threads. 
There was an Astronomer who had
undertaken to place a Sun-Dial upon 

the great Weather-cock on the Town-House
by adjusting the annual and diurnal
Motions of the Earth and Sun, so
as to answer and coincide with all accidental
Turnings by the Wind. 
I was complaining of a small Fit of
the Cholick, upon which my Conductor
led me into a Room, where a great Physician
resided, who was famous for curing
that Disease by contrary Operations
from the same Instrument. He had a
large pair of Bellows with a long slender
Muzzle of Ivory. This he conveyed
eight Inches up the Anus, and drawing
in the Wind, he affirmed he could make
the Guts as lank as a dried Bladder. But
when the Disease was more stubborn and
violent, he let in the Muzzle while the
Bellows were full of Wind, which he
discharged into the Body of the Patient,
then withdrew the Instrument to replenish
it, clapping his Thumb strongly
against the Orifice of the Fundament; 
and this being repeated three or four 

times, the adventitious Wind would rush
out, bringing the noxious along with it
(like Water put into a Pump) and the
Patient recover. I saw him try both
Experiments upon a Dog, but could not
discern any Effect from the former. After
the latter, the Animal was ready to
burst, and made so violent a Discharge,
as was very offensive to me and my
Companions. The Dog died on the
Spot, and we left the Doctor endeavouring
to recover him by the same Operation. 
I visited many other Apartments, but
shall not trouble my Reader with all the
Curiosities I observed, being studious of
Brevity. 
I had hitherto seen only one side of
the Academy, the other being appropriated
to the Advancers of speculative
Learning, of whom I shall say something
when I have mentioned one illustrious
Person more, who is called among 

them the universal Artist. He told us he
had been thirty Years employing his
Thoughts for the Improvement of human
Life. He had two large Rooms
full of wonderful Curiosities, and fifty
Men at work. Some were condensing
Air into a dry tangible Substance, by extracting
the Nitre, and letting the Aqueous
or fluid Particles percolate; others
softening Marble for Pillows and Pincushions; 
others petrifying the Hoofs of
a living Horse to preserve them from
foundring. The Artist himself was at
that time busy upon two great Designs; 
the first to sow Land with Chaff, where
in he affirmed the true seminal Virtue to
be contained, as he demonstrated by several
Experiments which I was not
skilful enough to comprehend. The other
was, by a certain Composition of
Gums, Minerals, and Vegetables outwardly
applied, to prevent the Growth
of Wool upon two young Lambs; and
he hoped in a reasonable time to propagate
the Breed of naked Sheep all over
the Kingdom. 

We crossed a Walk to the other part
of the Academy, where, as I have
already said, the Projector in speculative
Learning resided. 
The first Professor I saw was in a
very large Room, with forty Pupils about
him. After Salutation, observing
me to look earnestly upon a Frame, which
took up the greatest part of both the
Length and Breadth of the Room, he
said perhaps I might wonder to see him
employed in a Project for improving
speculative Knowledge by practical and
mechanical Operations. But the World
would soon be sensible of its Usefulness,
and he flattered himself that a more noble
exalted Thought never sprung in
any other Man's Head. Every one
knew how laborious the usual Method is
of attaining to Arts and Sciences; whereas
by his Contrivance, the most ignorant
Person at a reasonable Charge, and with
a little bodily Labour, may write both
in Philosophy, Poetry, Politicks, Law, 

Mathematicks and Theology, without
the least Assistance from Genius or
Study. He then led me to the Frame,
about the sides whereof all his Pupils
stood in Ranks. It was twenty Foot
Square, placed in the middle of the
Room. The Superficies was composed
of several bits of Wood, about the bigness
of a Dye, but some larger than others. 
They were all linked together
by slender Wires. These bits of Wood
were covered on every Square with
Paper pasted on them, and on these
Papers were written all the Words of
their Language in their several Moods,
Tenses, and Declensions, but without
any Order. The Professor then desired
me to observe, for he was going to set
his Engine at Work. The Pupils at his
Command took each of them hold of
an Iron Handle, whereof there were
fourty fixed round the Edges of the
Frame, and giving them a sudden turn,
the whole Disposition of the Words was
entirely changed. He then commanded 

six and thirty of the Lads to read the several
Lines softly as they appeared upon the
Frame; and where they found three or
four Words together that might make
part of a Sentence, they dictated to the
four remaining Boys who were Scribes. 
This Work was repeated three or four
times, and at every turn the Engine was
so contrived, that the Words shifted into
new Places, or the square bits of
Wood moved upside down. 
Six Hours a-day the young Students
were employed in this Labour, and the
Professor shewed me several Volumes
in large Folio already collected, of
broken Sentences, which he intended
to piece together, and out of those rich
Materials to give the World a compleat
Body of all Arts and Sciences; which
however might be still improved, and
much expedited, if the Publick would
raise a Fund for making and employing
five hundred such Frames in Lagado,
and oblige the Managers to contribute 

in common their several Collections. 
He assured me, that this Invention
had employed all his Thoughts from his
Youth, that he had employed the whole
Vocabulary into his Frame, and made
the strictest Computation of the general
Proportion there is in the Book between
the Numbers of Particles, Nouns, and
Verbs, and other Parts of Speech. 
I made my humblest Acknowledgment
to this illustrious Person for his
great Communicativeness, and promised
if ever I had the good Fortune
to return to my Native Country, that I
would do him Justice, as the sole Inventer
of this wonderful Machine; the
Form and Contrivance of which I desired
leave to delineate upon Paper
as in the Figure here annexed. I told
him, although it were the Custom of our
Learned in Europe to steal Inventions
from each other, who had thereby at 



least this Advantage, that it became a
Controversy which was the right Owner,
yet I would take such Caution, that he
should have the Honour entire without a
Rival. 
We next went to the School of
Language, where three Professors sate
in Consultation upon improving that of
their own Country. 
The first Project was to shorten
Discourse by cutting Polysyllables into
one, and leaving out Verbs and Participles,
because in reality all things imaginable
are but Nouns. 
The other was a Scheme for entirely
abolishing all Words whatsoever; 
and this was urged as a great Advantage
in point of Health as well as Brevity. 
For it is plain, that every Word we
speak is in some Degree a Diminution of
our Lungs by Corrosion, and consequently
contributes to the shortning of 

our Lives. An Expedient was therefore
offered, that since Words are only
Names for Things, it would be more
convenient for all Men to carry about
them, such Things as were necessary to
express the particular Business they are
to discourse on. And this Invention
would certainly have taken Place, to
the great Ease as well as Health of the
Subject, if the Women in conjunction
with the Vulgar and Illiterate had not
threatned to raise a Rebellion, unless
they might be allowed the Liberty to
speak with their Tongues, after the
manner of their Ancestors; such constant
irreconcilable Enemies to Science
are the common People. However,
many of the most Learned and Wise
adhere to the New Scheme of expressing
themselves by Things, which hath only
this Inconvenience attending it, that if
a Man's Business be very great, and of
various kinds, he must be obliged in
Proportion to carry a great Bundle of
Things upon his Back, unless he can 

afford one or two strong Servants to attend
him. I have often beheld two of
those Sages almost sinking under the
Weight of their Packs, like Pedlers among
us; who when they meet in the
Streets would lay down their Loads, open
their Saddles, and hold Conversation
for an Hour together; then put up their
Implements, help each other to resume
their Burthens, and take their Leave. 
But for short Conversations a Man
may carry Implements in his Pockets
and under his Arms, enough to supply
him, and in his House he cannot be
at a loss: Therefore the Room where
Company meet who practise this Art,
is full of all Things ready at Hand, requisite
to furnish Matter of this kind of
artificial Converse. 
Another great Advantage proposed
by this Invention, was that it
would serve as an Universal Language
to be understood in all civilized Nations, 

whose Goods and Utensils are generally
of the same kind, or nearly resembling,
so that their Uses might easily
be comprehended. And the Embassadors
would be qualified to treat with
foreign Princes or Ministers of State to
whose Tongues they were utter Strangers. 
I was at the Mathematical School,
where the Master taught his Pupils
after a Method scarce imaginable to
us in Europe. The Proposition and
Demonstration were fairly written on
a thin Wafer, with Ink composed of a
Cephalick Tincture. This the Student
was to swallow upon a fasting Stomach,
and for three Days following eat nothing
but Bread and Water. As the
Wafer digested, the Tincture mounted to
his Brain, bearing the Proposition along
with it. But the Success hath not hitherto
been answerable, partly by some
Error in the Quantum or Composition,
and partly by the Perverseness of Lads, 

to whom this Bolus is so nauseous that
they generally steal aside, and discharge
it upwards before it can operate, neither
have they been yet persuaded to use so
long an Abstience as the Prescription
requires. 





A further Account of the Academy. 
The Author proposes some Improvements
which are honourably received. 
In the School of Political Projectors
I was but ill entertained,
the Professors appearing
in my Judgment wholly out of their
Senses, which is a Scene that never
fails to make me melancholy. These
unhappy People were proposing Schemes
for persuading Monarchs to chuse Favourites
upon the Score of their Wisdom,
Capacity and Virtue; of teaching
Ministers to consult the Publick Good; 
of rewarding Merit, great Abilities, and
eminent Services; of instructing Princes
to know their true Interest by placing 

it on the same Foundation with that of
their People: Of chusing for Employments
Persons qualified to exercise them; 
with many other wild impossible Chimæras,
that never entred before into the
heart of Man to conceive, and confirmed
in me the old Observation, that
there is nothing so extravagant and irrational
which some Philosophers have
not maintained for Truth. 
But, however I shall so far do
Justice to this Part of the Academy, as
to acknowledge that all of them were
not so visionary. There was a most
Ingenious Doctor who seemed to be
perfectly versed in the whole Nature
and System of Government. This illustrious
Person had very usefully employed
his Studies in finding out effectual
Remedys for all Diseases and Corruptions,
to which the several kinds of
publick Administration are subject by
the Vices or Infirmities of those who
govern, as well as by the Licentiousness 

of those who are to obey. For
instance; whereas all Writers and Reasoners
have agreed, that there is a strict
universal Resemblance between the Natural
and the Political Body; can there
be any thing more evident, than that
the Health of both must be preserved,
and the Diseases cured by the same Prescription? 
It is allowed, that Senates
and great Councils are often troubled
with redundent, ebullient, and other
pecant Humours, with many Diseases
of the Head and more of the Heart; 
with strong Convulsions, with grievous
Contractions of the Nerves and
Sinews in both Hands, but especially
the Right: With Spleen, Flatus, Vertigos
and Deliriums; with Scrophulous
Tumours full of fœtid purulent Matter; 
with sower frothy Ructations, with
Canine Appetites and crudeness of Digestion,
besides many others needless
to mention. This Doctor therefore
proposed, that upon the meeting of a
Senate, certain Physicians should attend 

at the three first Days of their sitting,
and at the Close of each day's Debate,
feel the Pulses of every Senator; after
which having maturely considered, and
consulted upon the Nature of the several
Maladies, and the method of Cure,
they should on the fourth Day return
to the Senate House, attended by their
Apothecaries stored with proper Medicines,
and before the Members sate,
administer to each of them Lenatives,
Aperitives, Abstersives, Currosives, Restringents,
Palliatives, Laxatives, Cephalalgicks,
Ictericks, Apophlegmaticks, Acousticks,
as their several Cases required,
and according as these Medicines should
operate, repeat, alter, or omit them at
the next Meeting. 
This Project could not be of any
great Expence to the Publick, and would
in my poor Opinion, be of much Use
for the dispatch of Business in those
Countries where Senates have any share
in the Legislative Power, beget Unanimity,
shorten Debates, open a few Mouths 

which are now closed, and close many
more which are now open; curb the
Petulancy of the Young, and correct the
Positivenss of the Old; rouze the Stupid,
and damp the Pert. 
Again, Because it is a general Complaint
that the Favourites of Princes are
troubled with short and weak Memories; 
the same Doctor proposed, that whoever
attended a First Minister, after having
told his business with the utmost
Brevity, and in the plainest Words; 
should at his Departure give the said
Minister a Tweak by the Nose, or a
kick in the Belly, or tread on his Corns,
or lug him thrice by both Ears, or run
a Pin into his Breech, or pinch his Arm
black and blew, to prevent Forgetfulness:
and at every Levee Day repeat
the same Operation, till the Business
were done or absolutely refused. 
He likewise directed, that every Senator
in the great Council of a Nation, 

after he had delivered his Opinion, and
argued in the Defence of it, should be
obliged to give his Vote directly contrary; 
because if that were done, the
Result would infallibly terminate in the
Good of the Publick. 
When Parties in a State are violent,
he offered a wonderful Contrivance to
reconcile them. The Method is this. 
You take an Hundred Leaders of each
Party, you dispose of them into Couples
of such whose Heads are nearest of a
size; then let two nice Operators saw
off the Occiput of each Couple at the
same time, in such a manner that the
Brain may be equally divided. Let the
Occiputs thus cut off be interchanged,
applying each to the Head of his opposite
Party-man. It seems indeed to be a
Work that requireth some exactness, but
the Professor assured us, that if it were
dextrously performed, the Cure would
be infallible. For he argued thus; that
the two half Brains being left to debate 

the Matter between themselves within
the space of one Scull, would soon come
to a good Understanding, and produce
that Moderation as well as Regularity
of Thinking, so much to be wished for
in the Heads of those, who imagine they
come into the World only to watch
and govern its Motion: And as to the
difference of Brains in Quantity or Quality,
among those who are Directors
in Faction; the Doctor assured us from
his own knowledge, that it was a perfect
Trifle. 
I heard a very warm Debate between
two Professors, about the most commodious
and effectual Ways and Means
of raising Money without grieving the
Subject. The first affirmed the justest
Method would be to lay a certain Tax
upon Vices and Folly, and the Sum
fixed upon every Man, to be rated after
the fairest manner by a Jury of his
Neighbours. The second was of an
Opinion directly contrary, to tax those 

Qualities of Body and Mind for which
Men chiefly value themselves, the Rate
to be more or less according to the
Degrees of excelling, the Decision whereof
should be left entirely to their own
Breast, The highest Tax was upon
Men, who are the greatest Favourites
of the other Sex, and the Assessments
according to the Number and Natures
of the Favours they have received; for
which they are allowed to be their own
Vouchers, Wit, Valour, and Politeness
were likewise proposed to be largely
taxed and collected in the same manner,
by every Persons giving his own
Word for the Quantum of what he
possessed. But as to Honour, Justice,
Wisdom and Learning, they should not
to taxed at all, because they are Qualifications
of so singular a kind, that no Man
will either allow them in his Neighbour,
or value them in himself. 
The Women were proposed to be
taxed according to their Beauty and 

skill in Dressing, wherein they had the
same Priviledge with the Men, to be
determined by their own Judgment. 
But Constancy, Chastity, good Sense,
and good Nature were not rated, because
they would not bear the Charge
of Collecting. 
To keep Senators in the Interest of the
Crown, it was proposed that the Members
should raffle for Employments,
every Man first taking an Oath, and
giving Security that he would Vote for
the Court, whether he won or no, after
which the Losers had in their Turn
the liberty of Raffling upon the next
Vacancy. Thus Hope and Expectation
would be kept alive, none would complain
of broken Promises, but impute
their Disappointments wholly to Fortune,
whose Shoulders are broader and
stronger than those of a Ministry. 
Another Professor shewed me a
large Paper of Instructions for discovering 

Plots and Conspiracies against the
Governments. He advised great Statesmen
to examine into the Dyet of all
suspected Persons; their times of eating; 
upon which side they lay in Bed; with
which Hand they wiped their Posteriors; 
take a strick View of their Excrements,
and from the Colour, the Odour, the
Taste, the Consistence, the Crudeness,
or Maturity of Digestion from a Judgment
of their Thoughts and Designs. 
Because Men are never so Serious,
Thoughtful, and Intent, as when they
are at Stool, which he found by frequent
Experiment: For in such Conjunctures,
when he used meerly as a
Trial to consider which was the best
way of murdering the King, his Ordure
would have a Tinture of Green, but
quite different when he thought only of
raising an Insurrection or burning the
Metropolis. 
The whole Discourse was written
with great Acuteness, containing many 

Observations both curious and useful
for Politicians, but as I conceived not
altogether compleat. This I ventured to
tell the Author, and offered if he pleased
to supply him with some Additions. 
He received my Proposition with more
Compliance than is usual among Writers,
especially those of the projecting Species,
professing he would be glad to receive
farther Information. 
I told him, that should I happen to live
in a Kingdom where Plots and Conspiracies
were either in vogue from the turbulency
of the meaner People, or could
be turned to the use and service of the
higher Rank of them, I first would take
care to cherish and encourage the breed
of Discoverers, Witnesses, Informers, Accusers,
Prosecutors, Evidences, Swearers,
together with their several subservient
and subaltern Instruments; and when I
had got a competent Number of them of
all sorts and Capacities, I would put them
under the Colour and conduct of some 

dextrous Persons in sufficient power
both to protect and reward them. Men
thus qualified and thus empowered
might make a most excellent use and
advantage of Plots, they might raise
their own Characters and pass for most
profound Politicians, they might restore
new Vigor to a crazy Administration,
they might stifle or divert general Discontents; 
fill their Pockets with Forfeitures,
and advance or sink the Opinion
of Publick Credit, as either might
answer their private Advantage. This
might be done by first agreeing and settling
among themselves what suspected
Persons should be accused of a Plot. 
Then effectual care is taken to secure all
their Letters and Papers, and put the
Criminal in safe and secure Custody. 
These Papers might be delivered to a
Sett of Artists of Dexterity sufficient to
find out the mysterious Meanings of
Words, Syllables, and Letters. They
should be allowed to put what Interpretation
they pleased upon them, giving 

them a Sense not only which has
no relation at all to them, but even
what is quite contrary to their true
Intent and real Meaning; thus for Instance,
they may, if they so fancy, interpret
a Sieve to signify a Court-Lady,
a lame Dog an Invader, the Plague a Standing
Army, a Buzzard a great Statesman,
the Gout a High Priest, a Chamber-pot a
Committee of Grandees, a Broom a Revolution,
a Mouse-trap an Employment, a
Bottomless-pit a Treasury, a Sink a Court,
a Cap and Bells a Favourite, a broken
Reed a Court of Justice, an empty Tun
a General, a running Sore an Administration. 
But should this Method fail, recourse
might be had to others more
effectual, by Learned Men called Acrosticks
and Anagrams. First, might be
found Men of Skill and Penetration who
can discern that all initial Letters have political
Meanings. Thus N shall signify a 

Plot, B a Regiment of Horse, L a Fleet
at Sea. Or secondly, by transposing the
Letters of the Alphabet in any suspected
Paper, who can discover the deepest
Designs of a discontented Party. So for
Example, if I should say in a Letter to a
Friend, Our Brother Tom has just got the
Piles, a Man of Skill in this Art would
discover how the same Letters which
compose that Sentence, may be analysed
into the following Words; Resist— 
a Plot is brought Home—The Tour
And this is the Anagrammatick Method. 
The Professor made me great Acknowledgments
for communicating these Observations,
and promised to make honourable
mention of me in his Treatise. 
I saw nothing in this Country that
could invite me to a longer Continuance,
and began to think of returning
home to England. 





The Author leaves Lagado. arrives at
Maldonada. No Ship ready. He
takes a short Voyage to Glubbdubdrib. 
His Reception by the Governor. 
The Continent of which this
Kingdom was a part, extend
itself, as I have reason to believe,
Eastward to that unknown
Tract of America, Westward of
California, and North to the Pacifick
Ocean, which is not above a hundred
and fifty Miles from Lagado, where
there is a good Port and much Commerce
with the great Island of Luggnagg,
situated to the North-West about 29 Degrees
North Latitude, and 140 Longitude. 
This Island of Luggnagg stands 

South-Eastwards of Japan, about an
hundred Leagues distant. There is a
strict Alliance between the Japanese
Emperor and the King of Luggnagg,
which affords frequent Opportunities of
sailing from one Island to the other. I
determined therefore to direct my Course
this Way, in order to my return to
Europe. I hired two Mules with a Guide
to shew me the way, and carry my
small Baggage. I took leave of my noble
Protector, who had shewn me so
much Favour, and made me a generous
Present at my Departure. 
My Journey was without any Accident
or Adventure worth relating. 
When I arrived at the Port of Maldonada,
(for so it is called) there was no
Ship in the Habour bound for Luggnagg,
nor like to be in some time. The
Town is about as large as Portsmouth. 
I soon fell into some Acquaintance,
and was very hospitably received. A
Gentlemen of Distinction said to me 

that since the Ships bound for Luggnagg
could not be ready in less than a Month,
it might be no disagreeable Amusement
for me to take a Trip to the little Island
of Glubbdubdrib, about five Leagues off
to the South-West. He offered himself
and a Friend to accompany me, and that
I should be provided with a small convenient
Barque for the Voyage. 
GLUBBDUBDRIB, as nearly as
I can interpret the Word, signifies the
Island of Sorcerers or Magicians. It is
about one third as large as the Isle of
Wight, and extremely Fruitful: It is
governed by the Head of a certain Tribe,
who are all Magicians. This Tribe
marries only among each other, and the
eldest in Succession is Prince or Governor. 
He hath a noble Palace and a
Park of about three thousand Acres,
surrounded by a Wall of hewn Stone
twenty Foot high. In this Park are several
smaller Inclosures for Cattle, Corn,
and Gardening. 

The Governor and his Family are
served and attended by Domesticks of
a kind somewhat unusual. By his skill
in Necromancy, he hath a Power of
calling whom he pleaseth from the Dead,
and commanding their Service for twenty-four
Hours, but no longer; nor can
he call the same Persons up again in
less than three Months, except upon very
extraordinary Occasions. 
When we arrived at the Island,
which was about Eleven in the Morning,
one of the Gentlemen who accompanied
me, went to the Governour, and
desired admittance for a Stranger, who
came on purpose to have the Honour
of attending on his Highness. This
was immediately granted, and we all
three entered the Gate of the Palace
between two Rows of Guards, armed
and dressed after a very antick manner,
and something in their Countenances
that made my Flesh creep with a
Horror I cannot express. We passed 

through several Apartments between
Servants of the same sort, ranked on each
side as before, till we came to the Chamber
of Presence, where after three profound
Obeysances, and a few general
Questions, we were permitted to sit on
three Stools near the lowest Step of his
Highness's Throne. He understood the
Language of Balnibarbi, although it were
different from that of his Island. He
desired me to give him some account of
my Travels; and to let me see that I
should be treated without Ceremony, he
dismissed all his Attendants with a turn
of his Finger, at which to my great
Astonishment they vanished in an Instant,
like Visions in a Dream, when
we awake on a sudden. I could not
recover my self in some time, till the
Governor assured me that I should receive
no hurt; and observing my two
Companions to be under no Concern,
who had been often entertained in the
same manner, I began to take Courage,
and related to his Highness a short History 

of my several Adventures, yet not
without some Hesitation, and frequently
looking behind me to the Place where I
had seen those Domestick Spectres. 
I had the Honour to dine with the Governor,
where a new Set of Ghosts
served up the Meat, and waited at Table. 
I now observed myself to be less terrified
than I had been in the Morning. 
I staid till Sun-set, but humbly desired
his Highness to excuse me for not acceping
of his Invitation of lodging in the
Palace. My two Friends and I lay at a
private House in the Town adjoining,
which is the Capital of this little Island; 
and the next Morning we returned to
pay our Duty to the Governor, as he was
pleased to command us. 
After this manner we continued in
the Island for ten Days, most part of every
Day with the Governor, and at
Night in our Lodging. I soon grew so
familiariz'd to the sight of Spirits, that
after the third or fourth time they gave 

me no Emotion at all; or if I had any
Apprehensions left, my Curiosity prevailed
over them. For his Highness the
Governor ordered me to call up whatever
Persons I would chuse to name, and in
whatever Numbers among all the
Dead from the beginning of the World
to the present time, and command them
to answer any Questions I should think
fit to ask; with this condition, that my
Questions must be confined within the
compass of the times they lived in. And
one thing I might depend upon, that
they would certainly tell me truth, for
Lying was a Talent of no use in the
lower World. 
I made my humble Acknowledgements
to his Highness for so great a
Favour. We were in a Chamber, from
whence there was a fair Prospect into
the Park. And because my first Inclination
was to be entertained with Scenes
of Pomp and Magnificence, I desired to
see Alexander the Great, at the Head of 

his Army just after the Battle of Arbela,
which upon a Motion of the Governors
Finger immediately appeared in a large
Field under the Window, where we
stood. Alexander was called up in the
Room: It was with great difficulty that
I understood his Greek, and had but
little of my own. He assured me upon
his Honour that he was not Poisoned,
but dyed of a Fever by excessive
Drinking. 
Next I saw Hanibal passing the Alps,
who told me he had not a drop of
Vinegar in his Camp. 
I saw Cæsar and Pompey at the Head
of their Troops just ready to engage. 
I saw the former in his last great
Triumph. I desired that the Senate of
Rome might appear before me in one
large Chamber, and an Assembly of
somewhat a latter Age, in Counterview
in another. The first seemed to be an
Assembly of Heroes and Demy-Gods; 

the other a Knot of Pedlars, Pick-pockets,
High-way-men and Bullies. 
The Governor at my Request gave
the Sign for Cæsar and Brutus to advance
towards us. I was struck with
a profound Veneration at the sight of
Brutus, and could easily discover the
most consummate Virtue, the greatest
Intrepidity, and firmness of Mind, the
truest Love of his Country, and general
Benevolence for Mankind in every Lineament
of his Countenance. I observed
with much pleasure, that these two Persons
were in good Intelligence with
each other, and Cæsar freely confessed
to me, that the greatest Actions of his
own Life were not equal by many
Degrees to the Glory of taking it away. 
I had the Honour to have much Conversation
with Brutus; and was told
that his Ancestors Junius, Socrates, Epaminondas,
Cato the Younger, Sir Thomas
More and himself, were perpetually together:
a Sextumvirate to which all the 

Ages of the World cannot add a Seventh. 
It would be tedious to trouble the
Reader with relating what vast numbers
of illustrious Persons were called up, to
gratify that insatiable Desire I had to
see the World in every Period of Antiquity
placed before me. I chiefly fed
mine Eyes with beholding the Destroyers
of Tyrants and Usurpers, and the
Restorers of Liberty to oppressed and
injured Nations. But it is impossible
to express the Satisfaction I received in
my own Mind, after such a manner as
to make it a suitable Entertainment to
the Reader. 





A further Account of Glubbdubdrib. 
Antient and Modern History corrected. 
Having a desire to see
those Antients, who were
most renowned for Wit and
Learning, I set apart one
day on purpose. I proposed that Homer
and Aristotle might appear at the Head of
all their Commentators; but these were
so numerous that some hundreds were
forced to attend in the Court and outward
Rooms of the Palace. I knew and
could distinguish those two Heroes at 

first sight, not only from the Croud, but
from each other. Homer was the taller
and comelier Person of the two, walked
very erect for one of his Age, and his
Eyes were the most quick and piercing
I ever beheld. Aristotle stooped much,
and made use of a staff. His Visage
was meager, his Hair lank and thin,
and his Voice hollow. I soon discovered
that both of them were perfect
Strangers to the rest of the Company,
and had never seen or heard of them
before. And I had a Whisper from a
Ghost, who shall be nameless, that these
Commentators always kept in the most
distant Quarters from their Principals in
the lower World, through a Consciousness
of Shame and Guilt, because they
had so horribly misrepresented the meaning
of those Authors to Posterity. I
introduced Didymus and Eustathius to
Homer, and prevailed on him to treat
them better than perhaps they deserved,
for he soon found they wanted a Genius
to enter into the Spirit of a Poet. 

But Aristotle was out of all Patience
with the account I gave him of Scotus
and Ramus, as I presented them to him,
and he asked them whether the rest of
the Tribe were as great Dunces as themselves. 
I then desired the Governor to call
up Descartes and Gassendi, with whom
I prevailed to explain their Systems to
Aristotle. This great Philosopher freely
acknowledged his own Mistakes in
Natural Philosophy, because he proceeded
in many things upon Conjecture, as all
Men must do; and he found, that
Gassendi, who had made the Doctrine of
Epicurus as palatable as he could, and the
Vortices of Descartes were equally exploded. 
He predicted the same Fate
to Attraction, whereof the present Learned
are such zealous Asserters. He said,
that new Systems of Nature were but
new Fashions, which would vary in
every Age; and even those who pretend
to demonstrate them from Mathematical 

Principles, would flourish but a short
Period of time, and be out of Vogue
when that was determined. 
I spent five Days in conversing with
many others of the antient Learned. 
I saw most of the first Roman Emperors. 
I prevailed on the Governor to call up
Eliogabulus's Cooks to dress us a Dinner,
but they could not shew us much of
their Skill, for want of Materials. A
Helot of Agesilaus made us a Dish of
Spartan Broth, but I was not able to get
down a second Spoonful. 
The two Gentlemen who conducted
me to the Island, were pressed by their
private Affairs to return in three Days,
which I employed in seeing some of the
modern Dead, who had made the greatest
Figure for two or three hundred
Years past in our own and other Countries
of Europe; and having been always
a great Admirer of old illustrious Families,
I desired the Governor would call 

up a dozen or two of Kings with their
Ancestors in order for eight or nine Generations. 
But my Disappointment was
grievous and unexpected. For instead
of a long train with Royal Diadems, I
saw in one Family two Fidlers, three
spruce Courtiers, and an Italian Prelate. 
In another a Barber, an Abbot, and two
Cardinals. I have too great a Veneration
for Crowned Heads to dwell any
longer on so nice a Subject. But as to
Counts, Marquesses, Dukes, Earls, and
the like I was not so scrupulous. And
I confess it was not without some Pleasure
that I found my self able to trace
the particular Features, by which certain
Families are distinguished up to their
Originals. I could plainly discover from
whence one Family derives a long Chin,
why a second hath abounded with
Knaves for two Generations, and Fools
for two more; why a third happened to
be crack-brained, and a fourth to be
Sharpers. Whence it came what Polydore
Virgil says of a certain great House, 

Nec Vir fortis, nec Fæmina Casta. How
Cruelty, Falshood, and Cowardice grew
to be Characteristicks by which certain
Families are distinguished as much as
by their Coat of Arms. Who first
brought the Pox into a noble House,
which hath lineally descended in scrophulous
Tumours to their Posterity. Neither
could I wonder at all this, when I
saw such an Interruption of Lineages
by Pages, Lacqueys, Valets, Coachmen,
Gamesters, Captains, and Pick-pockets. 
I was chiefly disgusted with modern
History. For having strictly examined
all the Persons of greatest Name in the
Courts of Princes for an hundred Years
past, I found how the World had been
misled by prostitute Writers, to ascribe
the greatest Exploits in War to Cowards,
the Wisest Counsel to Fools, Sincerity
to Flatterers, Roman Virtue to Betrayers
of their Country, Piety to Atheists, Chastity
to Sodomites, Truth to Informers. 
How many innocent and excellent Persons 

had been condemned to Death or
Banishment, by the practising of great
Ministers upon the Corruption of Judges,
and the Malice of Faction. How many
Villains had been exalted to the highest
Places of Trust, Power, Dignity, and
Profit: How great a share in the Motions
and Events of Courts, Councils,
and Senates might be challenged by
Bawds, Whores, Pimps, Parisites, and
Buffoons: How low an Opinion I had
of human Wisdom and Integrity, when
I was truly informed of the Springs and
Motives of great Enterprizes and Revolutions
in the World, and of the contemptible
Accidents to which they owed
their Success. 
Here I discovered the Roguery and
Ignorance of those who pretend to
write Anecdotes, or secret History who
send so many Kings to their Graves
with a Cup of Poison; will repeat the
Discourse between a Prince and Chief
Minister, where no Witness was by; 

unlock the Thoughts and Cabinets of
Embassadors and Secretaries of State,
and have the perpetual Misfortune to
be mistaken. Here I discovered the secret
Causes of many great Events that
have surprized the World, how a Whore
can govern the Back-stairs, the Back-stairs
a Council, and the Council a
Senate. A General confessed in my
Presence, that he got a Victory purely
by the force of Cowardice and ill Conduct:
and an Admiral that for want
of proper Intelligence, he beat the Enemy
to whom he intended to betray
the Fleet. Three Kings protested to me,
that in their whole Reigns they did never
once prefer any Person of Merit, unless
by Mistake or Treachery of some Minister
in whom they confided: Neither would
they do it if they were to live again; 
and they shewed with great strength of
Reason, that the Royal Throne could not
be supported without Corruption, because
that possitive, confident restive Temper, 

which Virtue infused into Man, was a
perpetual Clog to publick Business. 
I had the Curiosity to enquire in a
particular manner, by what Method
great Numbers had procured to themselves
high Titles of Honour, and prodigious
Estates; and I confined my Enquiry
to a very modern Period: however
without grating upon present times, because
I would be sure to give no Offence
even to Foreigners (for I hope the
Reader need not be told that I do not
in the least intend my own Country in
what I say upon this occasion) a great
number of Persons concerned were called
up, and upon a very slight Examination,
discovered such a Scene of Infamy, that
I cannot reflect upon it without some
Seriousness. Perjury, Oppression, Subornation,
Fraud, Pandarism, and the like
Infirmities were amongst the most excusable
Arts they had to mention, and for
these I gave, as it was reasonable, great
Allowance. But when some confessed 

they owed their Greatness and Wealth to
Sodomy or Incest, others to the prostituting
of their own Wives and Daughters; 
others to the betraying their
Country or their Prince; some to Poisoning,
more to the perverting of Justce
in order to destroy the innocent: I hope
I may be pardoned if these Discoveries
inclined me a little to abate of that profound
Veneration which I am naturally
apt to pay to Persons of high Rank,
who ought to be treated with the utmost
Respect due to their sublime Dignity,
by us their Inferiors. 
I had often read of some great Services
done to Princes and States, and desired
to see the Persons by whom those Services
were performed. Upon enquiry I was
told that their Names were to be found
on no Record, except a few of them
whom History hath represented as the vilest
Rogues and Traitors. As to the rest,
I had never once heard of them. They
all appeared with dejected Looks, and 

in the meanest Habit, most of them telling
me they died in Poverty and Disgrace,
and the rest on a Scaffold or a
Gibbet. 
Among the rest there was one Person
whose Case appeared a little ngular. 
He had a Youth about eighteen
Years old standing by his side. He told
me he had for many Years been Commander
of a Ship, and in the Sea Fight
at Actium, had the good Fortune to
break through the Enemy's great Line
of Battle, sink three of their Capital
Ships, and take a fourth, which was
the sole Cause of Anthony's Flight, and
of the Victory that ensued; that the
Youth standing by him, his only Son,
was killed in the Action. He added, that
upon the Confidence of some Merit,
this War being at an end, he went to
Rome, and solicited at the Court of Augustus
to be preferred to a greater Ship,
whose Commander had been killed; but
without any regard to his Pretensions, 

it was given to a Youth who had never
seen the Sea, the Son of Libertina, who
waited on one of the Emperor's Mistresses. 
Returning back to his own Vessels,
he was charged with neglect of Duty,
and the Ship given to a Favourite Page
of Publicola the Vice-Admiral; whereupon
he retired to a poor Farm, at a
great distance from Rome, and there ened
his Life. I was so curious to know
the truth of this Story, that I desired Agrippa
might be called, who was Admiral
in that Fight. He appeared and confirmed
the whole Account, but with
much more Advantage to the Captain,
whose Modesty had extenuated or concealed
a great part of his Merit. 
I was surprized to find Corruption
grown so high and so quick in that Empire,
by the force of Luxury so lately introduced,
which made me less wonder at
many parallel Cases in other Countries,
where Vices of all kinds have reigned
so much longer, and where the whole 

Praise as well as Pillage hath been engrossed
by the chief Commander, who
perhaps had the least Title to either. 
As every Person called up made exactly
the same appearance he had done
in the World, it gave me melancholy
Reflections to observe how much the
Race of human kind was degenerate
among us, within these hundred Years
past. How the Pox under all its Consequences
and Denominations had altered
every Lineament of an English Countenance,
shortned the size of Bodies, unbraced
the Nerves, relaxed the Sinews
and Muscles, introduced a sallow Complexion,
and rendered the Flesh loose and
Rancid. 
I descended so low as to desire that
some English Yeomen of the old stamp,
might be summoned to appear, once so
famous for the Simplicity of their Manners,
Dyet and Dress, for Justice in their
Dealings, for their true Spirit of Liberty, 

for their Valour and Love of their Country. 
Neither could I be wholly unmov'd
after comparing the Living with the
Dead, when I considered how all these
pure native Virtues were prostituted for
a piece of Money by their Grand-children,
who in selling their Votes, and
managing at Elections have acquired
every Vice and Corruption that can
possibly be learned in a Court. 





The Author's Return to Maldonada. 
Sails to the Kingdom of Luggnagg. 
The Author confined. He is sent
for to Court. The manner of his
Admittance. The King's great
Lenity to his Subjects. 
The Day of our Departure being
come, I took leave of his
Highness the Governor of Glubbdubdribb,
and returned with my two
Companions to Maldonada, where after
a Fortnight's waiting, a Ship was ready
to sail for Luggnagg. The two Gentlemen
and some others were so generous
and kind as to furnish me with Provisions,
and see me on board. I was a
Month in this Voyage. We had one
violent Storm, and were under a necessity 

of steering Westward to get in to the
Trade-Wind which holds for above sixty
Leagues. On the 21st of April, 1711.
we sailed in the River Clumegnig, which
is a Sea-port Town, at the South-East
Point of Luggnagg. We cast Anchor
within a League of the Town, and made
a Signal for a Pilot. Two of them came
on board in less than half an Hour, by
whom we were guided between certain
Shoals and Rocks which are very dangerous
in a Passage to a large Basin,
where a Fleet may ride in safety within
a Cable's Length of the Town Wall. 
Some of our Sailors, whether out of
Treachery or Inadvertence, had informed
the Pilots that I was a Stranger and a
great Traveller, whereof these gave notice
to a Custom-House Officer, by whom
I was examined very strictly upon my
landing. This Officer spoke to me in
the Language of Balnibarbi, which by
the force of much Commerce is generally
understood in that Town, especially 

by Sea-men, and those employed in
the Customs. I gave him a short Account
of some Particulars, and made my
Story as plausible and consistent as I
could; but I thought it necessary to disguise
my Country, and call my self an
Hollander, because my Intentions were
for Japan, and I knew the Dutch were
the only Europeans permitted to enter
into that Kingdom. I therefore told the
Officer, that having been Shipwrecked
on the Coast of Balnibarbi, and cast
on a Rock, I was received up into Laputa,
or the flying Island (of which he
had often heard) and was now endeavouring
to get to Japan, from whence
I might find a Convenience of returning
to my own Country. The Officer said I
must be confined till he could receive
Orders from Court, for which he would
write immediately, and hoped to receive
an Answer in a fortnight. I was carried
to a convenient Lodging, with a Centry
placed at the Door; however I had the
Liberty of a large Garden, and was treated 

with Humanity enough, being maintained
all the time at the King's Charge. 
I was invited by several Persons, chiefly
out of Curiosity, because it was reported
that I came from Countries very remote
of which they never heard. 
I hired a young Man who came in
the same Ship to be an Interpreter; he
was a Native of Luggnagg, but had lived
some Years at Maldonada, and was a perfect
Master of both Languages. By his
Assistance I was able to hold a Conversation
with those who came to visit me; 
but this consisted only of their Questions,
and my Answers. 
The Dispatch came from Court about
the time we expected. It contain'd
a Warrant for conducting me and my Retinue
to Traldragdubh or Trildrogdrib,
for it is pronounced both ways as near
as I can remember, by a party of Ten
Horse. All my Retinue was that poor
Lad for an Interpreter, whom I persuaded 

into my Service, and at my humble
Request, we had each of us a Mule to
ride on. A Messenger was dispatch'd
half a day's Journey before us, to give the
King notice of my Approach, and to desire
that his Majesty would please to appoint
a Day and Hour, when it would be his
gracious Pleasure that I might have the
Honour to lick the Dust before his Footstool. 
This is the Court Style, and I
found it to be more than matter of form. 
For upon my Admittance two Days after
my arrival, I was commanded to crawl
on my Belly, and lick the Floor as I advanced; 
but on account of my being a
Stranger, care was taken to have it
swept so clean that the Dust was not
offensive. However, this was a peculiar
Grace, not allowed to any but Persons
of the highest Rank, when they desire
an Admittance. Nay, sometimes the
Floor is strewed with Dust on purpose,
when the Person to be admitted happens
to have powerful Enemies at Court. 
And I have seen a great Lord with his 

Mouth so crammed, that when he had
crept to the proper Distance from the
Throne, he was not able to speak a
Word. Neither is there any Remedy,
because it is Capital for those who receive
an Audience to spit or wipe their
Mouths in his Majesty's Presence. There
is indeed another Custom, which I cannot
altogether approve of. When the
King hath a mind to put any of his
Nobles to Death in a gentle indulgent
manner, he commands to have the
Floor strowed with a certain brown
Powder, of a deadly Composition, which
being licked up infallibly kills him in
twenty-four Hours. But in Justice to
this Prince's great Clemency, and the
care he hath of his Subjects. Lives,
(wherein it were much to be wished that
the Monarchs of Europe would imitate
him) it must be mentioned for his Honour,
that strict orders are given to have the
infected parts of the Floor well washed
after every such Execution, which if his
Domesticks neglect, they are in danger 

of incurring his Royal Displeasure. I
my self heard him give Directions, that
one of his Pages should be whipt, whose
turn it was to give notice about washing
the Floor after an Execution, but maliciously
had omitted it, by which Neglect
a young Lord of great Hopes coming to
an Audience, was unfortunately poisoned,
although the King at that time had
no design against his Life. But this
good Prince was so gracious, as to forgive
the poor Page his Whipping, upon
promise that he would do so no more,
without special Orders. 
To return from this Digression; 
when I had crept within four Yards of
the Throne, I raised my self gently upon
my Knees, and then striking my Forehead
seven times on the Ground, I pronounced
the following Words, as they
had been taught me the Night before,
Ickpling Gloffthrobb Squutserumm blhiop
Mlashnalt, Zwin tnodbalkguffh Slhiophad
Gurdlubb Asht. This is the Compliment 

established by the Laws of the
Land for all Persons admitted to the
King's Presence. It may be rendered
into English thus: May your cœlestial Majesty
out-live the Sun, eleven Moons and an
half. To this the King returned some
Answer, which although I could not understand,
yet I replied as I had been directed; 
Fluft drin Yalerick Dwuldom
prastrad mirpush, which properly signifies,
My Tongue is in the Mouth of my
Friend, and by this Expression was meant
that I desired leave to bring my Interpreter; 
whereupon the young Man already
mentioned was accordingly introduced,
by whose Intervention I answer'd
as many Questons as his Majesty could
put in above an Hour. I spoke in the
Balnibarnian Tongue, and my Interpreter
delivered my Meaning in that of
Luggnagg. 
The King was much delighted with
my Company, and ordered his Bliffmarklub
or high Chamberlain to appoint 

a Lodging in the Court for me and my
Interpreter, with a daily Allowance for
my Table, and a large Purse of Gold for
my common Expences. 
I stayed three Months in this Country
out of perfect Obedience to his Majesty,
who was pleased highly to favour me,
and made me very honourable Offers. 
But, I thought it more consistent with
Prudence and Justice to pass the remainder
of my Days with my Wife and
Family. 





The Luggnuggians commended. A
particular Description of the Struldbrugs,
with many Conversations between
the Author and some eminent
Persons upon that Subject. 
The Luggnuggians are a polite
and generous People, and
although they are not without
some share of that Pride
which is peculiar to all Eastern Countries,
yet they shew themselves courteous
to Strangers, especially such who are
countenanced by the Court. I had
many Acquaintance among Persons of
the best Fashion, and being always attended
by my Interpreter, the Conversation
we had was not disagreeable. 

One Day in much good Company
I was asked by a Person of Quality,
whether I had seen any of their Struldbrugs
or Immortals. I said I had not, and
desired he would explain to me what
he meant by such an Appellation applyed
to a mortal Creature. He told
me, that sometimes, though very rarely,
a Child happened to be born in a
Family with a red circular Spot in the
Forehead, directly over the left Eyebrow,
which was an infallible Mark
that it should never dye. The Spot, as
he described it, was about the compass
of a Silver Threepence, but in the course
of Time grew larger, and changed its
Colour; for at twelve Years old it became
Green, so continued till five and
Twenty, then turned to a deep Blue; 
at Five and Forty it grew coal Black,
and as large as an English Shilling, but
never admitted any farther Alteration. 
He said these Births were so rare, that
he did not believe there could be above
Eleven Hundred Struldbrugs of both 

Sexes in the whole Kingdom, of which
he computed about fifty in the Metropolis,
and among the rest a young
Girl born about three Years ago. That
these Productions were not peculiar to
any Family but a meer effect of Chance,
and the Children of the Struldbruggs
themselves, were equally mortal with
the rest of the People. 
I freely own my self to have been
struck with inexpressible Delight upon
hearing this Account: And the Person
who gave it me happening to understand
the Balnibarbian Language,
which I spoke very well, I could not
forbear breaking out into expressions
perhaps a little too Extravagant. I cryed
out as in a Rapture; Happy Nation
where every Child hath at least a chance
for being immortal! Happy People who
enjoy so many living Examples of antient
Virtue, and have Masters ready
to instruct them in the Wisdom of all
former Ages! But, happiest beyond all 

comparison are those excellent Struldbruggs,
who born exempt from that universal
Calamity of human Nature, have
their Minds free and disingaged, without
the weight and depression of Spirits caused
by the continual Apprehension of Death. 
I discovered my Admiration that I had
not observed any of these illustrious Persons
at Court: the black Spot on the
Fore-head, being so remarkable a Distinction,
that I could not have easily
overlooked it: And it was impossible
that his Majesty, a most Judicious Prince,
should not provide himself with a good
number of such wise and able Councellours. 
Yet perhaps the Virtue of those
Reverend Sages was too strict for the
Corrupt and Libertine Manners of a
Court. And we often find by Experience
that young Men are too opinionative
and volatile to be guided by the
sober Dictates of their Seniors. However,
since the King was pleased to allow
me Access to his Royal Person, I
was resolved upon the very first occasion 

to deliver my Opinion to him on this
Matter freely, and at large by the help
of my Interpreter; and whether he
would please to take my Advice or no,
yet in one thing I was determined,
that his Majesty having frequently offered
me an Establishment in this Country,
I would with great thankfulness accept
the Favour, and pass my Life here in
the Conversation of those superiour Beings
the Struldbruggs, if they would
please to admit me. 
The Gentleman to whom I addressed
my Discourse, because (as I
have already observed) he spoke the
Language of Balnibarbi, said to me
with a sort of a Smile, which usually
ariseth from Pity to the Ignorant, that
he was glad of any occasion to keep
me among them, and desired my Permission
to explain to the Company what
I had spoke. He did so, and they talked
together for some time in their own
Language, whereof I understood not a 

Syllable, neither could I observe by
their Countenances what impression my
Discourse had made on them. After
a short Silence the same Person told me,
that his Friends and mine (so he thought
fit to express himself) were very much
pleased with the judicious Remarks I
had made on the great Happiness and
Advantages of immortal Life, and they
were desirous to know in a particular
manner, what Scheme of Living I
should have formed to my self, if it
had fallen to my Lot to have been
born a Struldbrugg. 
I answered, it was easy to be Eloquent
on so copious and delightful a
Subject, especially to me who have
been often apt to amuse my self with
Visions of what I should do if I were
a King, a General, or a great Lord: 
And upon this very Case I had frequently
run over the whole System how I
should employ my self, and pass the
time if I were sure to live for ever. 

That, if it had been my good
Fortune to come into the World a
Struldbrugg, as soon as I could discover
my own Happiness by understanding
the difference between Life and Death,
I would first resolve by all Arts and
Methods whatsoever to procure my self
Riches. In the pursuit of which by
Thrift and Management, I might reasonably
expect in about two Hundred
Years, to be the Wealthiest Man in
the Kingdom. In the second place, I
would from my earliest Youth apply
myself to the study of Arts and Sciences,
by which I should arrive in time to excel
all others in Learning. Lastly I
would carefully record every Action and
Event of Consequence that happened in
the Publick, impartially draw the Characters
of the several Successions of
Princes, and great Ministers of State,
with my own Observations on every
Point. I would exactly set down the
several changes in Customs, Languages,
Fashions, Dress, Dyet and Diversions. 

By all which Acquirements, I should
be a living Treasury of Knowledge and
Wisdom, and certainly become the Oracle
of the Nation. 
I would never marry after threescore,
but live in an hospitable manner, yet still
on the saving side. I would entertain
myself in forming and directing the
Minds of hopeful young Men, by convincing
them from my own Remembrance,
Experience and Observation,
fortified by numerous Examples, of the
usefulness of Virtue in publick and private
Life. But, my Choice and constant
Companions should be a sett of
my own immortal Brother-hood, among
whom I would elect a dozen from the
most Ancient down to my own Contemporaries. 
Where any of these wanted
Fortunes, I would provide them
with convenient Lodges round my own
Estate, and have some of them always
at my Table, only mingling a few of
the most valuable among you Mortals, 

whom length of Time would harden
me to lose with little or no Reluctance,
and treat your Posterity after the same
manner, just as a Man diverts himself
with the Annual Succession of Pinks and
Tulips in his Garden, without regretting
the loss of those which withered the
preceeding Year. 
These Struldbruggs and I would
mutually communicate our Observations
and Memorials through the Course of
Time, remark the several Gradations by
which Corruption steals into the World,
and oppose it in every step, by giving
perpetual Warning and Instruction to
Mankind; which, added to the strong
Influence of our own Example, would
probably prevent that continual Degeneracy
of Human Nature so justly
complained of in all Ages. 
Add to all this the pleasure of seeing
the various Revolutions of States
and Empires, the Changes in the lower 

and upper World, antient Cities in Ruins,
and obscure Villages become the Seats
of Kings. Famous Rivers lessening into
shallow Brooks, the Ocean leaving one
Coast dry, and overwhelming another: 
The Discovery of many Countries yet
unknown. Barbarity over-running the
politest Nations, and the most barbarous
become civilized. I should then
see the Discovery of the Longitude, the
perpetual Motion, the Universal Medicine,
and many other great Inventions
brought to the utmost Perfection. 
What wonderful Discoveries should
we make in Astronomy, by outliving
and confirming our own Predictions,
by observing the Progress and Returns
of Comets, with the changes of Motion
in the Sun, Moon and Stars. 
I enlarged upon many other Topicks
which the natural desire of endless Life
and sublunary Happiness could easily
furnish me with. When I had ended, 

and the Sum of my Discourse had been
interpreted as before, to the rest of the
Company, there was a good deal of Talk
among them in the Language of the
Country, not without some Laughter at
my Expence. At last the same Gentleman
who had been my Interpreter
said, he was desired by the rest to
set me right in a few Mistakes, which
I had fallen into through the common
Imbecillity of human Nature, and upon
that allowance was less answerable for
them. That, this Breed of Struldbruggs
was peculiar to their County, for there
were no such People either in Balnibarbi
or Japan, where he had the Honour to
be Embassador from his Majesty, and
found the Natives in both these Kingdoms
very hard to believe that the Fact was
possible, and it appeared from my Astonishment
when he first mentioned the
matter to me, that I received it as a thing
wholly new, and scarcely to be credited. 
That in the two Kingdoms above mentioned,
where during his Residence he had 

converse very much, he observed long
Life to be the universal Desire and Wish
of Mankind. That whoever had one
Foot in the Grave, was sure to hold back
the other as strongly as he could. That
the eldest had still hopes of living one
Day longer, and looked on Death as
the greatest Evil, from which Nature
always prompted him to retreat; only in
this Island of Luggnagg, the Appetite for
living was not so eager, from the continual
Example of the Struldbruggs before
their Eyes. 
That the System of Living contrived
by me was unreasonable and unjust, because
it supposed a Perpetuity of Youth,
Health, and Vigour, which no Man
could be so foolish to hope, however
extravagant he may be in his Wishes. 
That the Question therefore was not
whether a Man would chuse to be always
in the Prime of Youth, attended
with Prosperity and Health, but how
he would pass a perpetual Life under all 

the usual Disadvantages which old Age
brings along with it. For although few
Men will avow their Desires of being
immortal upon such hard Conditions,
yet in the two Kingdoms before-mentied
of Balnibarbi and Japan, he observed
that every Man desired to put off Death
for sometime longer, let it approach ever
so late, and he rarely heard of any Man
who died willingly, except he were incited
by the Extremity of Grief or Torture. 
And he appealed to me whether
in those Countries I had travelled as well
as my own, I had not observed the same
general Disposition. 
After this Preface he gave me a
particular Account of the Struldbruggs
among them. He said they commonly
acted like Mortals, till about thirty
Years old, after which by degrees they
grew melancholy and dejected, encreasing
in both till they came to four-score. This
he learned from their own Confession; 
for otherwise there not being above two 

or three of that Species born in an Age,
were too few to form a general Observation
by. When they came to fourscore
Years, which is reckoned the Extremity
of living in this Country, they
had not only all the Follies and Infirmities
of other old Men, but many
more which arose from the dreadful Prospects
of never dying. They were not
only Opinionative, Peevish, Covetous,
Morose, Vain, Talkative, but uncapable
of Friendship, and dead to all natural
Affection, which never descended below
their Grand-children. Envy and
impotent Desires are their prevailing
Passions. But those Objects against
which their Envy seems principally directed,
are the Vices of the younger sort,
and the Deaths of the old. By reflecting
on the former, they find themselves
cut off from all possibility of Pleasure; 
and whenever they see a Funeral, they
lament and repine that others are gone
to an Harbour of Rest, to which they
themselves never can hope to arrive. 

They have no Remembrance of any
thing but what they learned and observed
in their Youth and middle Age, and
even that is very imperfect. And for the
Truth or Particulars of any Fact, it is
safer to depend on common Traditions
than upon their best Recollections. The
least miserable among them appear
to be those who turn to Dotage, and
entirely lose their Memories; these meet
with more Pity and Assistance, because
they want many bad Qualities which
abound in others. 
If a Struldbrugg happen to marry one
of his own kind, the Marriage is dissolved
of course by the Courtesy of the
Kingdom, as soon as the younger of the
two come to be four-score. For the
Law thinks it a reasonable Indulgence,
that those who are condemned without
any Fault of their own to a perpetual
Continuance in the World, should not
have their Misery doubled by the Load
of a Wife. 

As soon as they have compleated the
the term of eighty Years, they are look'd
on as dead in Law; their Heirs immediately
succeed to their Estates, only a
small Pittance is reserved for their Support,
and the poor ones are maintained
at the publick Charge. After that Period
they are held incapable of any
Employment of Trust or Profit, they
cannot purchase Lands or take Leases,
neither are they allowed to be Witnesses
in any Cause, either Civil or Criminal,
not even for the Decision of Meers and
Bounds. 
At Ninety they lose their Teeth and
Hair, they have at the age no Distinction
of Taste, but eat and drink
whatever they can get, without Relish
or Appetite. The Diseases they were
subject to still continuing without encreasing
or diminishing. In talking
they forgot the common Appellation of
things, and the Names of Persons, even
of those who are their nearest Friends 

and Relations. For the same reason
they never can amuse themselves with
reading, because their Memory will not
serve to carry them from the beginning
of a Sentence to the end; and by this
Defect they are deprived of the only
Entertainment whereof they might otherwise
be capable. 
The Language of this Country being
always upon the Flux, the Struldbruggs
of one Age do not understand
those of another, neither are they able
after two hundred Years to hold any
Conversation (farther than by a few
general Words) with their Neighbours
the Mortals, and thus they lye under the
Disadvantage of living like Foreigners in
their own Country. 
This was the Account given me of
the Struldbruggs, as near as I can remember. 
I afterwards saw five or six of
different Ages, the youngest not above
two hundred Years old, who were 

brought me at several times by some of
my Friends; but although they were
told that I was a great Traveller, and had
seen all the World, they had not the least
Curiosity to ask me a Question; only
desired I would give them Slumskudask,
or a Token of Remembrance, which is
a modest way of begging, to avoid the
Law that strictly forbids it, because
they are provided for by the Publick,
although indeed with a very scanty Allowance. 
They are deprived and hated by
all sort of People; when one of them
is born, it is reckoned ominous, and their
Birth is recorded very particularly; so
that you may know their Age by consulting
the Registry, which however hath
not been kept above a thousand Years
past, or at least hath been destroyed by
time or publick Disturbances. But the
usual way of computing how old they
are is by asking them what Kings or
great Persons they can remember, and 

then consulting History, for infallibly
the last Prince, in their Mind, did not
begin his Reign after they were fourscore
Years old. 
They were the most mortifying
Sight I ever beheld, and the Women
more horrible than the Men. Besides
the usual Deformities in extreme old
Age, they acquired an additional Ghastliness
in Proportion to their Number of
Years, which is not to be described, and
among half a Dozen I soon distinguished
which was the eldest, although there
was not above a Century or two between
them. 
The Reader will easily believe, that
from what I had heard and seen, my
keen Appetite for Perpetuity of Life
was much abated. I grew heartily
ashamed of the pleasing Visions I
had formed, and thought no Tyrant
could invent a Death into which I
would not run with Pleasure from such 

a Life. The King heard of all that had
passed between me and my Friends upon
this Occasion, and rallied me very
pleasantly, wishing I would send a Couple
of Struldbruggs to my own Country,
to arm our People against the Fear of
Death; but this it seems is forbidden by
the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
or else I should have been well content
with the Trouble and Expence of transporting
them. 
I could not but agree that the
Laws of this Kingdom, relating to the
Struldbruggs, were founded upon the
strongest Reasons, and such as any other
Country would be under the Necessity
of enacting in the like Circumstances. 
Otherwise, as Avarice is the necessary
Consequent of old Age, those Immortals
would in time become Proprietors of
the whole Nation, and engross the Civil
Power, which, for want of Abilities
to manage, must end in the Ruin of
the Publick. 





The Author leaves Luggnagg, and sails
to Japan. From thence he returns
in a Dutch Ship to Amsterdam,
and from Amsterdam to England. 
I thought this Account
of the Struldbruggs might be
some Entertainment to the
Reader, because it seems to
be a little out of the common Way, at
least, I do not remember to have met the
like in any Book of Travels that hath
come to my Hands: And if I am deceived,
my Excuse must be, that it is necessary
for Travellers, who describe the same
Country, very often to agree in dwelling
on the same Particulars, without deserving
the Censure of having borrowed or transcribed
from those who wrote before them. 
There is indeed a perpetual Commerce
between this Kingdom and the 

great Empire of Japan, and it is
very probable that the Japanese Authors
may have given some Account of
the Struldbruggs; but my Stay in Japan
was so short, and I was so intirely
a Stranger to that Language, that
I was not qualified to make any Enquiries. 
But I hope the Dutch, upon
this Notice, will be curious and able
enough to supply my Defects. 
His Majesty having often pressed
me to accept some Employment in his
Court, and finding me absolutely determined
to return to my Native
Country, was pleased to give me his
Licence to depart, and honoured me
with a Letter of Recommendation under
his own Hand to the Emperor of
Japan. He likewise presented me with
four hundred forty four large Pieces of
Gold (this Nation delighting in even Numbers)
and a red Diamond, which I sold in
England for eleven hundred Pounds. 
On the sixth Day of May, 1709,
I took a solemn Leave of his Majesty, 

and all my Friends. This Prince was
so gracious, as to order a Guard to
conduct me to Glanguenstald, which is
a Royal Port to the South-West Part
of the Island. In six Days I found a
Vessel ready to carry me to Japan,
and spent fifteen Days in the Voyage. 
We landed at a small Port-Town called
Xamoschi, situated on the South-East
Part of Japan; the Town lies on
the Western Point, where there is a narrow
Streight, leading Northward into
a long Arm of the Sea, upon the North-West
Part of which Yedo, the Metropolis,
stands. At Landing, I shewed the
Custom-house Officers my Letter from
the King of Luggnagg to his Imperial
Majesty. They knew the Seal perfectly
well; it was as broad as the Palm
of my Hand. The Impression was, A
King lifting up a Lame Beggar from
the Earth. The Magistrates of the
Town hearing of my Letter, received
me as a Publick Minister; they provided
me with Carriages and Servants,
and bore my Charges to Yedo, where
I was admitted to an Audience, and 

delivered my Letter, which was
opened with great Ceremony, and
explained to the Emperor by an
Interpreter, who then gave me notice,
by his Majesty's Order, that I should
signify my Request, and whatever it
were, it should be granted for the sake
of his Royal Brother of Luggnagg. 
This Interpreter was a Person employed
to transact Affairs with the Hollanders; 
he soon conjectured by my Countenance
that I was an European, and
therefore repeated his Majesty's Commands
in Low-Dutch, which he spoke
perfectly well. I answered, (as I had
before determined,) that I was a Dutch
Merchant, shipwrecked in a very remote
Country, from whence I travelled
by Sea and Land to Luggnagg, and then
took Shipping for Japan, where I knew
my Countrymen often traded, and with
some of these I hoped to get an Opportunity
of returning into Europe: 
I therefore most humbly entreated his
Royal Favour to give Order, that I
should be conducted in Safety to Nangasac: 
To this I added another Petition, 

that for the sake of my Patron
the King of Luggnagg, his Majesty
would condescend to excuse my performing
the Ceremony imposed on my
Countrymen of trampling upon the
Crucifix, because I had been thrown into
his Kingdom by my Misfortunes,
without any Intention of Trading. When
this latter Petition was interpreted to
the Emperor, he seemed a little surprized,
and said, he believed I was the
first of my Countrymen who ever made
any Scruple in this Point, and that he
began to doubt whether I was a real
Hollander, or no, but rather suspected I
must be a Christian. However, for
the Reasons I had offered, but chiefly
to gratify the King of Luggnagg, by
an uncommon Mark of his Favour, he
would comply with the Singularity of
my Humour; but the Affair must be
managed with Dexterity, and his Officers
should be commanded to let me
pass, as it were, by Forgetfulness. For
he assured me, that if the Secret should
be discovered by my Countrymen, the
Dutch, they would cut my Throat in 

the Voyage. I returned my Thanks
by the Interpreter, for so unusual a Favour,
and some Troops being at that
Time on their March to Nangasac, the
Commanding Officer had Orders to
convey me safe thither, with particular
Instructions about the Business of the
Crucifix. 
On the 9th Day of June, 1709. I
arrived at Nangasac, after a very long
and troublesome Journey. I soon fell
into Company of some Dutch Sailors,
belonging to the Amboyna of Amsterdam,
a stout Ship of 450 Tuns. I had
lived long in Holland, pursuing my Studies
at Leyden, and I spoke Dutch well. 
The Seamen soon knew from whence I
came last; they were curious to enquire
into my Voyages and Course of
Life. I made up a Story as short and
probable as I could, but concealed the
greatest Part. I knew many Persons
in Holland; I was able to invent Names
for my Parents, whom I pretended to
be obscure People in the Province of
Gelderland. I would have given the 

Captain (one Theodorus Vangrult) what
he pleased to ask for my Voyage to
Holland; but understanding I was a
Surgeon, he was contented to take half
the usual Rate, on Condition that I
would serve him in the way of my Calling. 
Before we took Shipping, I was
often asked by some of the Crew, whether
I had performed the Ceremony
above-mentioned: I evaded the Question
by general Answers, that I had
satisfied the Emperor and Court in all
Particulars. However, a malicious
Rogue of a Skipper went to an Officer,
and pointing to me, told him, I had not
yet trampled on the Crucifix: But the
other, who had received Instructions to
let me pass, gave the Rascal twenty
Strokes on the Shoulders with a Bamboo,
after which I was no more troubled
with such Questions. 
Nothing happened worth mentioning
in this Voyage. We sailed with
a fair Wind to the Cape of Good Hope,
where we staid only to take in fresh
Water. On the 16th of April we arrived 

safe to Amsterdam, having lost
only three Men by Sickness in the Voyage,
and a fourth who fell from the
Fore-mast into the Sea, not far from
the Coast of Guinea. From Amsterdam
I soon after set sail for England, in a
small Vessel belonging to that City. 
On the 10th of April, 1710, we put
in at the Downs. I landed the next
Morning, and saw once more my native
Country, after an Absence of five
Years and six Months compleat. I went
strait to Redriff, where I arrived the
same Day at Two in the Afternoon, and
found my Wife and Family in good
Health. 

The End of the Third Part.