



A Description of the Farmer's Daughter. The
Author carried to a Market-Town, and then to
the Metropolis. The Particulars of his Journey. 

My Mistress had a Daughter of nine
Years old, a Child of towardly Parts
for her Age, very dextrous at her
Needle, and skilful in dressing her
Baby. Her Mother and she contrived
to fit up the Baby's Cradle for me against
Night: The Cradle was put into a small Drawer of
a Cabinet, and the Drawer placed upon a hanging
Shelf for fear of the Rats. This was my Bed all
the Time I stayed with those People, although made
more convenient by Degrees, as I began to learn
their Language, and make my Wants known. 
This young Girl was so handy, that after I had
once or twice pulled off my Cloaths before her,
she was able to dress and undress me, although I
never gave her that Trouble when she would let
me do either my self. She made me seven Shirts,
and some other Linnen of as fine Cloth as could be
got, which indeed was coarser than Sackcloth; and
these she constantly washed for me with her own 

Hands. She was likewise my School-Mistress to
teach me the Language: When I pointed to any
thing, she told me the Name of it in her own
Tongue, so that in a few Days I was able to call
for whatever I had a mind to. She was very good
natured, and not above forty Foot high, being little
for her Age. She gave me the Name of Grildrig,
which the Family took up, and afterwards the
whole Kingdom. The Word imports what the
Latins call Nanunculus, the Italians Homunceletino,
and the English Mannikin. To her I chiefly
owe my Preservation in that Country: We never
parted while I was there; I called her my Glumdalclitch,
or little Nurse: And I should be guilty of
great Ingratitude if I omitted this honourable Mention
of her Care and Affection towards me, which
I heartily wish it lay in my Power to requite as she
deserves, instead of being the innocent but unhappy
Instrument of her Disgrace, as I have too much
Reason to fear. 
It now began to be known and talked of in the
Neighbourhood, that my Master had found a
strange Animal in the Field, about the Bigness of
a Splacknuck, but exactly shaped in every Part like
a human Creature; which it likewise imitated in all
its Actions; seemed to speak in a little Language of
its own, had already learned several Words of
theirs, went erect upon two Legs, was tame and
gentle, would come when it was called, do whatever
it was bid, had the finest Limbs in the World,
and a Complexion fairer than a Nobleman's Daughter
of three Years old. Another Farmer who lived
hard by, and was a particular Friend of my Master, 

came on a Visit on Purpose to enquire into the
Truth of this Story. I was immediately produced,
and placed upon a Table; where I walked as I was
commanded, drew my Hanger, put it up again,
made my Reverence to my Master's Guest, asked
him in his own Language how he did, and told
him he was welcome; just as my little Nurse had
instructed me. This Man, who was old and dimsighted,
put on his Spectacles to behold me better,
at which I could not forbear laughing very heartily; 
for his Eyes appeared like the Full-Moon shining
into a Chamber at two Windows. Our People,
who discovered the Cause of my Mirth, bore me
Company in Laughing; at which the old Fellow
was Fool enough to be angry and out of Countenance. 
He had the Character of a great Miser; 
and to my Misfortune he well deserved it by the
cursed Advice he gave my Master, to shew me as a
Sight upon a Market-Day in the next Town,
which was half an Hour's Riding, about two and
twenty Miles from our House. I guessed there was
some Mischief contriving, when I observed my
Master and his Friend whispering long together,
sometimes pointing at me; and my Fears made me
fancy that I overheard and understood some of their
Words. But, the next Morning Glumdalclitch my
little Nurse told me the whole Matter, which she
had cunningly picked out from her Mother. The
poor Girl laid me on her Bosom, and fell a weeping
with Shame and Grief. She apprehended some
Mischief would happen to me from rude vulgar
Folks, who might squeeze me to Death, or break
one of my Limbs by taking me in their Hands. 
She had also observed how modest I was in my 

Nature, how nicely I regarded my Honour; and
what an Indignity I should conceive to be exposed
for Money as a publick Spectacle to the meanest of
the People. She said, her Papa and Mamma had
promised that Grildrig should be hers; but now she
found they meant to serve her as they did last Year,
when they pretended to give her a Lamb; and yet,
as soon it was fat, sold it to a Butcher. For my
own Part, I may truly affirm that I was less concerned
than my Nurse. I had a strong Hope which
never left me, that I should one Day recover my
Liberty; and as to the Ignominy of being carried
about for a Monster, I considered my self to be a
perfect Stranger in the Country; and that such a
Misfortune could never be charged upon me as a
Reproach if ever I should return to England; since
the King of Great Britain himself, in my Condition,
must have undergone the same Distress. 
My Master, pursuant to the Advice of his
Friend, carried me in a Box the next Market-Day
to the neighbouring Town; and took along with
him his little Daughter my Nurse upon a Pillion
behind me. The Box was close on every Side,
with a little Door for me to go in and out, and a few
Gimlet-holes to let in Air. The Girl had been so
careful to put the Quilt of her Baby's Bed into it,
for me to lye down on. However, I was terribly
shaken and discomposed in this Journey, although
it were but of half an Hour. For the Horse went
about forty Foot at every Step; and trotted so high,
that the Agitation was equal to the rising and falling
of a Ship in a great Storm, but much more frequent:
Our Journey was somewhat further than 

from London to St. Albans. My Master alighted at
an Inn which he used to frequent; and after consulting
a while with the Inn-keeper, and making
some necessary Preparations, he hired the Grultrud,
or Cryer, to give Notice through the Town, of a
strange Creature to be seen at the Sign of the
Green Eagle, not so big as a Splacnuck, (an Animal
in that Country very finely shaped, about six
Foot long) and in every Part of the Body resembling
an human Creature; could speak several
Words, and perform an Hundred diverting
Tricks. 
I was placed upon a Table in the largest Room
of the Inn, which might be near three Hundred
Foot square. My little Nurse stood on a low Stool
close to the Table, to take care of me, and direct
what I should do. My Master, to avoid a Croud,
would suffer only Thirty People at a Time to see
me. I walked about on the Table as the Girl
commanded; she asked me Questions as far as she
knew my Understanding of the Language reached,
and I answered them as loud as I could. I turned
about several Times to the Company, paid my humble
Respects, said they were welcome; and used
some other Speeches I had been taught. I took up
a Thimble filled with Liquor, which Glumdalclitch
had given me for a Cup, and drank their
Health. I drew out my Hanger, and flourished
with it after the Manner of Fencers in England. 
My Nurse gave me Part of a Straw, which I exercised
as a Pike, having learned the Art in my Youth. 
I was that Day shewn to twelve Sets of Company; 
and as often forced to go over again with the same
Fopperies, till I was half dead with Weariness 

and Vexation. For, those who had seen me, made
such wonderful Reports, that the People were ready
to break down the Doors to come in. My Master
for his own Interest would not suffer any one
to touch me, except my Nurse; and, to prevent
Danger, Benches were set round the Table at such
a Distance, as put me out of every Body's Reach. 
However, an unlucky School-Boy aimed a Hazel
Nut directly at my Head, which very narrowly
missed me; otherwise, it came with so much Violence,
that it would have infallibly knocked out my
Brains; for it was almost as large as a small Pumpion:
But I had the Satisfaction to see the young Rogue
well beaten, and turned out of the Room. 
My Master gave publick Notice, that he would
shew me again the next Market-Day: And in the
mean time, he prepared a more convenient Vehicle
for me, which he had Reason enough to do; 
for I was so tired with my first Journey, and with
entertaining Company eight Hours together, that I
could hardly stand upon my Legs, or speak a Word. 
It was at least three Days before I recovered my
Strength; and that I might have no rest at home,
all the neighbouring Gentlemen from an Hundred
Miles round, hearing of my Fame, came to see
me at my Master's own House. There could not
be fewer than thirty Persons with their Wives and
Children; (for the Country is very populous;)
and my Master demanded the Rate of a full Room
whenever he shewed me at Home, although it were
only to a single Family. So that for some time I had
but little Ease every Day of the Week, (except
Wednesday, which is their Sabbath) although I
were not carried to the Town. 

My Master finding how profitable I was like to
be, resolved to carry me to the most considerable
Cities of the Kingdom. Having therefore provided
himself with all things necessary for a long Journey,
and settled his Affairs at Home; he took
Leave of his Wife; and upon the 17th of August
1703, about two Months after my Arrival, we set
out for the Metropolis, situated near the Middle of
that Empire, and about three Thousand Miles distance
from our House: My Master made his
Daughter Glumdalclitch ride behind him. She carried
me on her Lap in a Box tied about her Waist. 
The Girl had lined it on all Sides with the softest
Cloth she could get, well quilted underneath; furnished
it with her Baby's Bed, provided me with
Linnen and other Necessaries; and made every
thing as convenient as she could. We had no
other Company but a Boy of the House, who rode
after us with the Luggage. 
My Master's Design was to shew me in all the
Towns by the Way, and to step out of the Road
for Fifty or an Hundred Miles, to any Village or
Person of Quality's House where he might expect
Custom. We made easy Journies of not above
seven or eight Score Miles a Day: For Glumdalclitch,
on Purpose to spare me, complained she was
tired with the trotting of the Horse. She often
took me out of my Box at my own Desire, to give
me Air, and shew me the Country; but always held
me fast by Leading-strings. We passed over five
or six Rivers many Degrees broader and deeper than
the Nile or the Ganges; and there was hardly a
Rivulet so small as the Thames at London-Bridge. 
We were ten Weeks in our Journey; and I was 

shewn in Eighteen large Towns, besides many Villages
and private Families. 
On the 26th Day of October, we arrived at the
Metropolis, called in their Language Lorbrulgrad,
or Pride of the Universe. My Master took a
Lodging in the principal Street of the City, not
far from the Royal Palace; and put out Bills in the
usual Form, containing an exact Description of my
Person and Parts. He hired a large Room between
three and four Hundred Foot wide. He provided
a Table sixty Foot in Diameter, upon which I was
to act my Part; and pallisadoed it round three Foot
from the Edge, and as many high, to prevent my
falling over. I was shewn ten Times a Day to the
Wonder and Satisfaction of all People. I could
now speak the Language tolerably well; and perfectly
understood every Word that was spoken to
me. Besides, I had learned their Alphabet, and
could make a shift to explain a Sentence here and
there; for Glumdalclitch had been my Instructer
while we were at home, and at leisure Hours during
our Journey. She carried a little Book in her
Pocket, not much larger than a Sanson's Atlas; it
was a common Treatise for the use of young Girls,
giving a short Account of their Religion; out of
this she taught me my Letters, and interpreted the
Words. 
