



A Phænomenon solved by modern Philosophy and
Astronomy. The Laputians great Improvements
in the latter. The King's Method of suppressing
Insurrections. 

I Desired Leave of this Prince to
see the Curiosities of the Island; 
which he was graciously pleased to
grant, and ordered my Tutor to attend
me. I chiefly wanted to know
to what Cause in Art or in Nature,
it owed its several Motions; whereof I will now
give a philosophical Account to the Reader. 
The flying or floating Island is exactly circular; 
its Diameter 7837 Yards, or about four Miles and an
Half, and consequently contains ten Thousand
Acres. It is three Hundred Yards thick. The Bottom,
or under Surface, which appears to those who
view it from below, is one even regular Plate of
Adamant, shooting up to the Height of about two 

Hundred Yards. Above it lye the several Minerals
in their usual Order; and over all is a Coat of rich
Mould ten or twelve Foot deep. The Declivity of
the upper Surface, from the Circumference to the
Center, is the natural Cause why all the Dews and
Rains which fall upon the Island, are conveyed in
small Rivulets towards the Middle, where they are
emptyed into four large Basons, each of about Half
a Mile in Circuit, and two Hundred Yards distant
from the Center. From these Basons the Water is
continually exhaled by the Sun in the Day-time,
which effectually prevents their overflowing. Besides,
as it is in the Power of the Monarch to raise
the Island above the Region of Clouds and Vapours,
he can prevent the falling of Dews and Rains
whenever he pleases. For the highest Clouds cannot
rise above two Miles, as Naturalists agree, at
least they were never known to do so in that
Country. 
At the Center of the Island there is a Chasm
about fifty Yards in Diameter, from whence the
Astronomers descend into a large Dome, which is
therefore called Flandona Gagnole, or the Astronomers
Cave; situated at the Depth of an Hundred
Yards beneath the upper Surface of the Adamant. 
In this Cave are Twenty Lamps continually burning,
which from the Reflection of the Adamant cast a
strong Light into every Part. The Place is stored
with great Variety of Sextants, Quadrants, Telescopes,
Astrolabes, and other Astronomical Instruments. 
But the greatest Curiosity, upon which the
Fate of the Island depends, is a Load-stone of a
prodigious Size, in Shape resembling a Weaver's
Shuttle. It is in Length six Yards, and in the thickest 

Part at least three Yards over. This Magnet is
sustained by a very strong Axle of Adamant, passing
through its Middle, upon which it plays, and is
poized so exactly that the weakest Hand can turn it. 
It is hooped round with an hollow Cylinder of Adamant,
four Foot deep, as many thick, and twelve
Yards in Diameter, placed horizontally, and supported
by Eight Adamantine Feet, each Six Yards
high. In the Middle of the Concave Side there is
a Groove Twelve Inches deep, in which the Extremities
of the Axle are lodged, and turned round
as there is Occasion. 
This Stone cannot be moved from its Place by
any Force, because the Hoop and its Feet are one
continued Piece with that Body of Adamant which
constitutes the Bottom of the Island. 
By Means of this Load stone, the Island is made
to rise and fall, and move from one Place to another. 
For, with respect to that Part of the Earth over
which the Monarch presides, the Stone is endued
at one of its Sides with an attractive Power, and at
the other with a repulsive. Upon placing the Magnet
erect with its attracting End towards the Earth,
the Island descends; but when the repelling Extremity
points downwards, the Island mounts directly
upwards. When the Position of the Stone is oblique,
the Motion of the Island is so too. For in
this Magnet the Forces always act in Lines parallel
to its Direction. 
By this oblique Motion the Island is conveyed to
different Parts of the Monarch's Dominions. To
explain the Manner of its Progress, let A B represent
a Line drawn cross the Dominions of Balnibaibi;
let the Line c d represent the Load-stone, 

of which let d be the repelling End, and c the attracting
End, the Island being over C; let the Stone
be placed in the Position c d with its repelling End
downwards; then the Island will be driven upwards
obliquely towards D. When it is arrived at D,
let the Stone be turned upon its Axle till its attracting
End points towards E, and then the Island will
be carried obliquely towards E; where if the Stone
be again turned upon its Axle till it stands in the
Position E F, with its repelling Point downwards,
the Island will rise obliquely towards F, where by
directing the attracting End towards G, the Island
may be carried to G, and from G to H, by turning
the Stone, so as to make its repelling Extremity
point directly downwards. And thus by changing
the Situation of the Stone as often as there is Occasion,
the Island is made to rise and fall by Turns in
an oblique Direction; and by those alternate Risings
and Fallings (the Obliquity being not considerable)
is conveyed from one Part of the Dominions to the
other. 
But it must be observed, that this Island cannot
move beyond the Extent of the Dominions below; 
nor can it rise above the Height of four Miles. 
For which the Astronomers (who have written
large Systems concerning the Stone) assign the following
Reason: That the Magnetick Virtue does
not extend beyond the Distance of four Miles, and
that the Mineral which acts upon the Stone in the
Bowels of the Earth, and in the Sea about six
Leagues distant from the Shoar, is not diffused
through the whole Globe, but terminated with the
Limits of the King's Dominions: And it was easy
from the great Advantage of such a superior Situation, 

for a Prince to bring under his Obedience
whatever Country lay within the Attraction of that
Magnet. 
When the Stone is put parallel to the Plane of
the Horizon, the Island standeth still; for in that
Case, the Extremities of it being at equal Distance
from the Earth, act with equal Force, the one in
drawing downwards, the other in pushing upwards; 
and consequently no Motion can ensue. 
This Load-stone is under the Care of certain
Astronomers, who from Time to Time give it such
Positions as the Monarch directs. They spend the
greatest Part of their Lives in observing the celestial
Bodies, which they do by the Assistance of
Glasses, far excelling ours in Goodness. For, although
their largest Telescopes do not exceed three
Feet, they magnify much more than those of a
Hundred with us, and shew the Stars with greater
Clearness. This Advantage hath enabled them to
extend their Discoveries much farther than our
Astronomers in Europe. They have made a Catalogue
of ten Thousand fixed Stars, whereas the
largest of ours do not contain above one third Part
of that Number. They have likewise discovered
two lesser Stars, or Satellites, which revolve about
Mars; whereof the innermost is distant from the
Center of the primary Planet exactly three of his
Diameters, and the outermost five; the former revolves
in the Space of ten Hours, and the latter in
Twenty-one and an Half; so that the Squares of
their periodical Times, are very near in the same
Proportion with the Cubes of their Distance from
the Center of Mars; which evidently shews them 

to be governed by the same Law of Gravitation,
that influences the other heavenly Bodies. 
They have observed Ninety-three different Comets,
and settled their Periods with great Exactness. 
If this be true, (and they affirm it with great Confidence)
it is much to be wished that their Observations
were made publick; whereby the Theory of
Comets, which at present is very lame and defective,
might be brought to the same Perfection with
other Parts of Astronomy. 
The King would be the most absolute Prince in
the Universe, if he could but prevail on a Ministry
to join with him; but these having their Estates
below on the Continent, and considering that the
Office of a Favourite hath a very uncertain Tenure,
would never consent to the enslaving their
Country. 
If any Town should engage in Rebellion or Mutiny,
fall into violent Factions, or refuse to pay the
usual Tribute; the King hath two Methods of reducing
them to Obedience. The first and the
mildest Course is by keeping the Island hovering
over such a Town, and the Lands about it; whereby
he can deprive them of the Benefit of the Sun
and the Rain, and consequently afflict the Inhabitants
with Dearth and Diseases. And if the Crime
deserve it, they are at the same time pelted from
above with great Stones, against which they have
no Defence, but by creeping into Cellars or Caves,
while the Roofs of their Houses are beaten to
Pieces. But if they still continue obstinate, or offer
to raise Insurrections; he proceeds to the last
Remedy, by letting the Island drop directly upon 

their Heads, which makes a universal Destruction
both of Houses and Men. However, this is an
Extremity to which the Prince is seldom driven,
neither indeed is he willing to put it in Execution; 
nor dare his Ministers advise him to an Action,
which as it would render them odious to the People,
so it would be a great Damage to their own
Estates that lie all below; for the Island is the King's
Demesn. 
But there is still indeed a more weighty Reason,
why the Kings of this Country have been always
averse from executing so terrible an Action, unless
upon the utmost Necessity. For if the Town intended
to be destroyed should have in it any tall
Rocks, as it generally falls out in the larger Cities; 
a Situation probably chosen at first with a View to
prevent such a Catastrophe: Or if it abound in
high Spires or Pillars of Stone, a sudden Fall might
endanger the Bottom or under Surface of the
Island, which although it consist as I have said, of
one entire Adamant two hundred Yards thick,
might happen to crack by too great a Choque, or
burst by approaching too near the Fires from the
Houses below; as the Backs both of Iron and Stone
will often do in our Chimneys. Of all this the
People are well apprized, and understand how far
to carry their Obstinacy, where their Liberty or
Property is concerned. And the King, when he
is highest provoked, and most determined to press
a City to Rubbish, orders the Island to descend
with great Gentleness, out of a Pretence of Tenderness
to his People, but indeed for fear of breaking
the Adamantine Bottom; in which Case it is 

the Opinion of all their Philosophers, that the
Load-stone could no longer hold it up, and the
whole Mass would fall to the Ground. 
By a fundamental Law of this Realm, neither
the King nor either of his two elder Sons, are permitted
to leave the Island; nor the Queen till she is
past Child-bearing. 
