



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, June 12. 
Didst ever see a Licence, Jack? 
Edmund, by divine permission, Lord Bishop of
London, To our well-beloved in Christ, Robert Lovelace
[Your servant, my good Lord! What have I
done to merit so much goodness, who never saw your
Lordship in my life?] of the parish of St. Martin's in
the Fields, Bachelor, and Clarissa Harlowe of the
same parish, Spinster, sendeth greeting. —WHEREAS
ye are, as is alleged, determined to enter into the holy
State of Matrimony [This is only alleged, thou observest]
by and with the consent of, &c. &c. &c. and
are very desirous of obtaining your Marriage to be solemnized
in the face of the Church: We are willing
that such your honest desires [Honest desires, Jack!]
may more speedily have their due effect: And therefore,
that ye may be able to procure such Marriage to be freely
and lawfully solemnized in the parish-church of St. Martin
in the Fields, or St. Giles's in the Fields in the
County of Middlesex, by the Rector, Vicar, or Curate
thereof, at any time of the year [At ANY time of the
year, Jack!] without publication of banes: Provided, 

that by reason of any precontract [I verily think that I
have had three or four precontracts in my time; but
the good girls have not claimed upon them of a long
while] consanguinity, affinity, or any other lawful
cause whatsoever, there be no lawful impediment in this
behalf; and that there be not at this time any action,
suit, plaint, quarrel, or demand, moved or depending
before any judge ecclesiastical or temporal, for or concerning
any Marriage contracted by or with either of
you; and that the said Marriage be openly solemnized
in the Church above-mentioned, between the hours of
eight and twelve in the forenoon; and without prejudice
to the Minister of the place where the said woman
is a parishioner: We do hereby, for good causes
[It cost me—Let me see, Jack—What did it cost
me?] give and grant our Licence, or Faculty, as well
to you the parties contracting, as to the Rector, Vicar,
or Curate of the said church, where the said Marriage
is intended to be solemnized, to solemnize the same, in
manner and form above-specified, according to the rites
and ceremonies prescribed in the Book of Common-prayer
in that behalf published by authority of Parliament. 
Provided always, That if hereafter any fraud shall appear
to have been committed, at the time of granting
this Licence, either by false suggestions, or concealment
of the truth [Now this, Belford, is a little hard upon
us: For I cannot say, that every one of our suggestions
is literally true: —So, in good conscience, I
ought not to marry under this Licence] the Licence
shall be void to all intents and purposes, as if the same
had not been granted. And in that case, we do inhibit
all Ministers whatsoever, if any-thing of the premises
shall come to their knowlege, from proceeding to the celebration
of the said Marriage, without first consulting
Us, or our Vicar-general. Given, &c. 
Then follow the Register's name, and a large pendent
seal, with these words round it—Seal of the 

Vicar-General and Official-Principal of
the diocese of London. 
A good whimsical instrument, take it all together! 
But what, thinkest thou, are the arms to this matrimonial
Harbinger? —Why, in the first place, Two
crossed Swords; to shew that Marriage is a State of
offence as well as defence: Three Lions; to denote,
that those who enter into the State, ought to have a
triple proportion of courage. And [Couldst thou
have imagined that these priestly fellows, in so solemn
a case, would cut their jokes upon poor souls who
come to have their honest desires put in a way to be
gratified?] there are three crooked horns, smartly top-knotted
with ribbands; which being the Ladies wear,
seem to indicate that they may very probably adorn,
as well as bestow, the Bull's feather. 
To describe it according to Heraldry-art, if I am
not mistaken—Gules, two Swords, saltire-wise, Or; 
second coat, a chevron sable between three bugle-horns,
OR [So it ought to be]: On a chief of the second,
three Lions rampant of the first—But the devil
take them for their hieroglyphics, should I say, if
I were determined in good earnest to marry! 
And determined to marry I would be, were it not
for this consideration, That once married, and I am
married for life. 
That's the plague of it! —Could a man do as the
Birds do, change every Valentine's day [A natural
appointment! for Birds have not the sense, forsooth,
to fetter themselves, as we wiseacre men take great
and solemn pains to do] there would be nothing at
all in it. And what a glorious time would the Lawyers
have, on the one hand, with their Noverint Universi's,
and suits commenceable on restitution of
goods and chattels; and the Parsons, on the other,
with their indulgences (renewable annually, as other
Licences) to the honest desires of their clients? 
Then, were a stated mulct, according to Rank or 

Fortune, to be paid on every Change, towards the
Exigencies of the State [But none on Renewals with
the old Loves, for the sake of encouraging constancy,
especially among the minores] the Change would be
made sufficiently difficult, and the whole Public
would be the better for it; while those Children,
which the Parents could not agree about maintaining,
might be considered as the Children of the Public, and
provided for like the Children of the antient Spartans; 
who were (as ours would in this case be) a nation of
heroes. How, Jack, could I have improved upon
Lycurgus's Institutions, had I been a Lawgiver? 
Did I never shew thee a Scheme, which I drew
up on such a notion as this? —In which I demonstrated
the conveniencies, and obviated the inconveniencies,
of changing the present mode to this? I believe
I never did. 
I remember I proved, to a demonstration, that
such a Change would be a means of annihilating, absolutely
annihilating, four or five very atrocious and
capital sins. —Rapes, vulgarly so called; Adultery,
and Fornication; nor would Polygamy be panted after. 
Frequently would it prevent Murders and Duelling: 
Hardly any such thing as Jealousy (the cause of shocking
violences) would be heard of: And Hypocrisy
between man and wife be banished the bosoms of
each. Nor, probably, would the reproach of Barrenness
rest, as now it too often does, where it is least
deserved. —Nor would there possibly be such a person
as a barren woman. 
Moreover, what a multitude of domestic quarrels
would be avoided, were such a Scheme carried into
execution? Since both Sexes would bear with each
other, in the view that they could help themselves in
a few months. 
And then what a charming subject for conversation
would be the gallant and generous last partings between
man and wife! Each, perhaps, a new mate in 

eye, and rejoicing secretly in the manumission, could
afford to be complaisantly-sorrowful in appearance. 
“He presented her with this jewel, it will be said by
the reporter, for Example sake: She him with
that: How he wept! How she sobb'd! How they
looked after one another!” Yet, that's the jest of
it, neither of them wishing to stand another twelve-month's
trial. 
And if giddy fellows, or giddy girls, misbehave in
a first Marriage, whether from noviceship, having expected
to find more in the matter than can be found; 
or from perverseness on her part, or positiveness on
his, each being mistaken in the other [A mighty difference,
Jack, in the same person, an inmate, or a
visitor]; what a fine opportunity will each have, by
this Scheme, of recovering a lost character, and of
setting all right in the next adventure? 
And, O Jack, with what joy, with what rapture,
would the changelings (or changeables, if thou like
that word better) number the weeks, the days, the
hours, as the annual obligation approached to its desirable
period! 
As for the Spleen or Vapours, no such malady
would be known or heard of. The Physical tribe
would, indeed, be the sufferers, and the only sufferers; 
since fresh health and fresh spirits, the consequences
of sweet blood and sweet humours (the mind
and body continually pleased with each other) would
perpetually flow in; and the joys of Expectation, the
highest of all our joys, would invigorate and keep all
alive. 
But, that no Body of men might suffer, the Physicians,
I thought, might turn Parsons, as there would
be a great demand for Parsons. Besides, as they
would be partakers in the general benefit, they must
be sorry fellows indeed, if they preferred Themselves
to the Public. 
Every one would be married a dozen times, at 

least. Both men and women would be careful of
their characters, and polite in their behaviour, as
well as delicate in their persons, and elegant in their
dress [A great matter each of these, let me tell thee,
to keep passion alive] either to induce a Renewal with
the old Love, or to recommend themselves to a new. 
While the News-papers would be crouded with paragraphs; 
all the world their readers, as all the world
would be concerned to see who and who's together— 
“Yesterday, for instance, entered into the Holy
State of Matrimony” [We should all speak reverently
of matrimony then] “the Right Honourable
Robert Earl Lovelace” [I shall be an Earl by that
time] “with her Grace the Duchess Dowager of
Fifty-manors; his Lordship's one-and-thirtieth
wife.” —I shall then be contented, perhaps, to
take up, as it is called, with a widow. But she
must not have had more than one husband neither. 
Thou knowest, that I am nice in these particulars. 
I know, Jack, that thou, for thy part, wilt approve
of my Scheme. 
As Lord M. and I, between us, have three or
four Boroughs at command, I think I will get into
Parliament, in order to bring in a Bill for this good
purpose. 
Neither will the Houses of Parliament, nor the
Houses of Convocation, have reason to object to it. 
And all the Courts, whether spiritual or sensual, civil
or uncivil, will find their account in it, when passed
into a Law. 
By my soul, Jack, I should be apprehensive of a
general insurrection, and that incited by the Women,
were such a Bill to be thrown out. —For here is the
Excellency of the Scheme: The Women will have
equal reason with the Men to be pleased with it. 
Dost think, that old prerogative Harlowe, for example,
must not, if such a Law were in being, have
pulled in his horns? —So excellent a wife as he has, 

would never else have renewed with such a gloomy
tyrant: Who, as well as all other married tyrants,
must have been upon good behaviour from year to
year. 
A termagant wife, if such a Law were to pass,
would be a phœnix. 
The Churches would be the only market-places for
the Fair Sex; and Domestic Excellence the capital recommendation. 
Nor would there be an Old Maid in Great Britain,
and all its territories. For what an odd soul must she
be, who could not have her twelvemonth's trial? 
In short, a total alteration for the better, in the
morals and way of life in both Sexes, must, in a very
few years, be the consequence of such a salutary Law. 
Who would have expected such a one from me? I
wish the devil owe me not a spite for it. 
Then would not the distinction be very pretty,
Jack? as in Flowers;—Such a Gentleman, or such
a Lady, is an Annual—Such a one a Perennial. 
One difficulty, however, as I remember, occurred
to me, upon the probability that a wife might be
enceinte, as the Lawyers call it. But thus I obviated
it. 
That no man should be allowed to marry another
woman without his then wife's consent, till she were
brought-to-bed, and he had defrayed all incident
charges; and till it was agreed upon between them,
whether the Child should be his, hers, or the public's. 
The women in this case, to have what I call the coercive
option: For I would not have it in the man's
power to be a dog neither. 
And indeed, I gave the turn of the scale in every
part of my Scheme in the womens favour: For dearly
do I love the sweet rogues. 
How infinitely more preferable this my Scheme to
the Polygamy one of the old Patriarchs; who had
wives and concubines without number! —I believe 

David and Solomon had their hundreds at a time. 
Had they not, Jack? 
Let me add, That Annual Parliaments, and Annual
Marriages, are the projects next my heart. 
How could I expatiate upon the benefits that would
arise from both! 