


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday Morning, Mar. 2. 
I Should have told you, that Miss Grandison did the
honours of the table; and I will go round it; for
I know you expect I should. But I have not yet done
with Lord G. —Poor man! he is excessively in love,
I see that. Well he may. What man would not
with Miss Grandison? Yet is she too superior, I
think. 

What can a woman do, who is addressed by a man
of talents inferior to her own? Must she throw away
her talents? Must she hide her light under a bushel,
purely to do credit to the man? She cannot pick and
choose, as men can. She has only her negative; and,
if she is desirous to oblige her friends, not always that. 
Yet it is said, Women must not encourage Fops and
Fools. They must encourage Men of Sense only. 
And it is well said. But what will they do, if their lot
be cast only among Foplings? If the Men of Sense
do not offer themselves? And pray, may I not ask, If
the taste of the age, among the Men, is not Dress, Equipage,
and Foppery? Is the cultivation of the mind
any part of their study? The men, in short, are sunk,
my dear; and the Women but barely swim. 
Lord G. seems a little too finical in his dress. And
yet I am told, that Sir Walter Watkyns outdoes him
in Foppery. What can they mean by it, when Sir
Charles Grandison is before them? He scruples not to
modernize a little; but then you see, that it is in compliance
with the fashion, and to avoid singularity; a
fault to which great minds are perhaps too often subject,
tho' he is so much above it. 
I want to know, methinks, whether Sir Charles is
very much in earnest in his favour to Lord G. with regard
to Miss Grandison. I doubt not, if he be, but he
has good reasons for it. 
Were this vile Sir Hargrave out of my head, I could
satisfy myself about twenty and twenty things, that
now-and-then I want to know. 
Miss Jervois behaved very discreetly. With what
pleasure did she hang on every word that fell from the
lips of her guardian! I thought more than once of
Swift's Cadenus and Vanessa. Poor girl! how I
should pity her, were she insensibly to suffer her gratitude
to lead her to be in love with her benefactor! Indeed,
I pity every-body who is hopelesly in love. 
Now don't shake your head, my Uncle! Did I not 

always pity Mr. Orme, and Mr. Fowler? —You
know I did, Lucy. 
Miss Jervois had a smile ready for every one; but
it was not an implicit, a childish smile. It had distinction
in it; and shewed intelligence. Upon the
whole, she said little, and heard all that was said with
attention: And hence I pronounce her a very discreet
young lady. 
But I thought to have done with the Men first; 
and here is Mr. Grandison, hardly mentioned; who,
yet, in his own opinion, was not the last of the men
at table. 
Mr. Grandison is a man of middling stature; not
handsome in my eyes; but so near being handsome,
that he may be excused, when one knows him, for
thinking himself so; because he is liable to make
greater mistakes than that. 
He dresses very gaily too. He is at the head of the
fashion, as, it seems, he thinks; but, however, is
one of the first in it, be it what it will. He is a great
frequenter of the drawing-room; of all manner of
public spectacles; a leader of the taste at a new Play,
or Opera. He dances, he sings, he laughs; and values
himself on all three qualifications: And yet certainly
has sense; but is not likely to improve it much; 
since he seems to be so much afraid of suffering in the
consequence he thinks himself of, that whenever Sir
Charles applies himself to him, upon any of his levities,
tho' but by the eye, his consciousness, however
mild the look, makes him shew an uneasiness at the
instant. He reddens, sits in pain; calls for favour by
his eyes, and his quivering lips; and has, notwithstanding,
a smile ready to turn into a laugh, in order to
lessen his own sensibility, should he be likely to suffer
in the opinion of the company: But every motion
shews his consciousness of inferiority to the man, of
whose smiles or animadversions he is so very apprehensive. 

What a captious, what a supercilious husband, to
a woman who should happen to have a stronger mind
than his, would Mr. Grandison make! But he values
himself upon his having preserved his liberty. 
I believe there are more bachelors now in England,
by many thousands, than were a few years ago: And,
probably, the numbers of them (and of single women,
of course) will every year increase. The luxury of
the age will account a good deal for this; and the turn
our Sex take in un-domesticating themselves, for a
good deal more. But let not those worthy young
women, who may think themselves destined to a
single life, repine over-much at their lot; since, possibly,
if they have had no lovers, or having had one,
two, or three, have not found an husband, they have
had rather a miss than a loss, as men go. And let me
here add, that I think, as matters stand in this age,
or indeed ever did stand, that those women who have
joined with the men in their insolent ridicule of Old
Maids, ought never to be forgiven: No, tho' Miss
Grandison should be one of the ridiculers. An Old
Maid may be an odious character, if they will tell us,
that the bad qualities of the persons, not the maiden
State, are what they mean to expose. But then they
must allow, that there are Old Maids of Twenty; 
and even that there are Widows and Wives of all
ages and complexions, who, in the abusive sense of
the words, are as much Old Maids, as the most particular
of that class of females. 
But a word or two more concerning Mr. Grandison. 
He is about Thirty-two. He has had the glory of
ruining two or three women. Sir Charles has restored
him to a sense of shame [All men, I hope, are
born with it]; which, a few months ago, he had
got above. And he does not now entertain ladies
with instances of the frailty of individuals of their
Sex; which many are too apt, encouragingly, to 

smile at; when I am very much mistaken, if every
woman would not find her account, if she wishes herself
to be thought well of, in discouraging every reflection
that may have a tendency to debase or expose
the Sex in general. How can a man be suffered to
boast of his vileness to one woman, in the presence of
another, without a rebuke, that should put it to the
proof, whether the boaster was, or was not, past blushing? 
Mr. Grandison is thought to have hurt his fortune,
which was very considerable, by his free living, and
an itch of gaming; to cure him of which, Sir Charles
encourages him to give him his company at all opportunities. 
He certainly has understanding enough to
know how to value the favour; for he owns to Miss
Grandison, that he both loves and fears him; and
now and-then tells her, that he would give the world,
if he had it, to be able to be just what Sir Charles is! 
Good God! at other times he has broke out, What
an odious creature is a Rake! How I hate myself,
when I contemplate the excellencies of this divine
Brother of yours! 
I shall say nothing of Sir Charles in this place. 
You, I know, my Lucy, will admire me for my forbearance. 
Lady L. and Miss Grandison were the Graces of
the Table. So lively, so sensible, so frank, so polite,
so good humour'd, what honour do they and their
Brother reflect back on the memory of their Mother! 
Lady Grandison, it seems, was an excellent
woman. Sir Thomas was not, I have heard, quite
unexceptionable. How useful, if so, are the women
in the greater, as well as in the lesser, parts of domestic
duty, where they perform their duty! And
what have those, who do not, to answer for, to God,
to their Children, and even to their whole Sex, for the
contempts they bring upon it by their uselesness, and 

perhaps extravagance; since, if the human mind is
not actively good, it will generally be actively evil! 
Dr. Bartlett I have already spoken of. How did he
enliven the conversation, whenever he bore a part in
it! So happy an elocution, so clear, so just, so solid,
his reasoning. I wish I could remember every word
he said. 
Sir Charles observed to us, before we saw him, that
he was not forward to speak. But, as I hinted, he
threw the occasions in his way, on purpose to draw
him out: And at such times, what he said was easy,
free, and unaffected: And whenever a subject was
concluded, he had done with it. His modesty, in
short, made him always follow rather than lead a subject,
as he very well might do, be it what it would. 
I was charmed with the Brachman's prayer; which
he, occasionally, gave us on the antient Persians being
talked of. 
Looking up to the rising Sun, which it was supposed
they worshiped, these were the words of the
Brachman: 
“O Thou (meaning the Almighty) by whom
Thou (meaning the Sun) art enlightened, illuminate
my mind, that my actions may be agreeable
to Thy Will.” 
And this I will think of, my Lucy, as often as my
early hour, for the future, shall be irradiated by that
glorious orb. 
Every-body was pleased with Mr. and Mrs. Reeves. 
Their modesty, good sense, and amiable tempers, and
the kind, yet not ostentatious regard which they express
to each other (a regard so creditable to the married
state) cause them to be always treated and spoken
of with distinction. 
But I believe, as I am in a scribbling vein, I must
give you the particulars of one conversation; in which
farther honour was done to Dr. Bartlett. 

After dinner, the Countess, drawing me on one side,
by both my hands, said; Well, our other Sister, our
new-found Sister, let me know how you like us? I
am in pain lest you should not love us as well as you
do our Northamptonshire relations. 
You overcome me, Madam, with your goodness. 
Miss Grandison then coming towards us, Dear
Miss Grandison, said I, help me to words— 
No, indeed, I'll help you to nothing. I am jealous. 
Lady L. don't think to rob me of my Harriet's preferable
love, as you have of Sir Charles's. I will be
best Sister here. But what was your subject? —Yet I
will answer my own question. Some pretty compliment,
I suppose; Women to women. Women
hunger and thirst after compliments. Rather than be
without them, if no men are at hand to flatter us, we
love to say handsome things to one another; and so
teach the men to find us out. 
You need not be jealous, Charlotte, said the Countess:
You may be sure. This saucy girl, Miss Byron,
is ever frustrating her own pretensions. Can flattery,
Charlotte, say what we will, have place here? —But
tell me, Miss Byron, how you like Dr. Bartlett? 
Ay, tell us, Harriet, said Miss Grandison, how
you like Dr. Bartlett? Pray, Lady L. don't anticipate
me: I propose to give our new Sister the history
of us all. And is not Dr. Bartlett one of us? She
has already given me the history of all her friends,
and of herself: And I have communicated to you,
like a good Sister, all she has told me. 
I considered Dr. Bartlett, I said, as a Saint; and,
at the same time, as a man of true politeness. 
He is indeed, said the Countess, all that is worthy
and amiable in man. Don't you see how Sir Charles
admires him? 
Pray, Lady L. keep clear of my province. Here is
Sir Charles. He will not let us break into parties. 
Sir Charles heard this last sentence—Yet I wonder 

not, said he, joining us, that three such women get
together: Goodness to goodness is a natural attraction. 
We men, however, will not be excluded. — 
Dr. Bartlett, if you please— 
The Doctor approached in a most graceful manner
—Let me again, Miss Byron, present Dr. Bartlett
to you, as a man that is an honour to his cloth; 
and that is the same thing, as if I said, to human
nature [The good man bowed in silence]; and
Miss Byron, to you, my good Doctor, taking my
hand, as a lady most worthy your distinguished regard. 
You do me too much honour, Sir, said I. I shall
hope, good Doctor Bartlett, by your instructions, to
be enabled to deserve such a recommendation. 
My dear Harriet, said the Countess, snatching my
other hand, you are a good girl; and that is more to
your honour than Beauty. 
Be quiet, Lady L. said Miss Grandison. 
Mr. Grandison came up—What! Is there not another
hand for me? 
I was vexed at his interruption. It prevented Dr.
Bartlett from saying something that his lips were opening
to speak with a smile of benignity. 
How the World, said Sir Charles, smiling, will push
itself in! Heart, not Hand, my dear Mr. Grandison,
was the subject. 
Whenever You, Sir Charles, and the Doctor, and
these Ladies, are got together, I know I must be unseasonable:
But if you exclude me such company,
how shall I ever be what you and the Doctor would
have me to be? 
Lady L. and Lord G.  were coming up to us: See
your attraction, Miss Byron! said the Countess. 
But, joined in Miss Grandison, we will not leave
our little Jervois by herself, expecting and longing! — 
Our Cousins Reeves—only that when they are together,
they cannot want company—should not be thus 

left. Is there more than one heart among us? —This
Man's excepted, humourously pushing Mr. Grandison,
as if from the company—Let us be orderly, and
take our seats. 
How cruel is this! said Mr. Grandison, appealing
to Sir Charles. 
Indeed I think it is a little cruel, Charlotte. 
Not so: Let him be good then. —Till when, may
all our Sex say, to such men as my Cousin has been— 
“Thus let it be done by the man, whom, if he
were good, good persons would delight to honour.” 
Shame, if not principle, said Lord L. smiling,
would effect the cure, if all ladies were to act thus. 
Don't you think so, Cousin Everard? 
Well, well, said Mr. Grandison, I will be good, as
fast as I can: But, Doctor, what say you? —Rome
was not built in a day. 
I have great hopes of Mr. Grandison, said the
Doctor. But, Ladies, you must not, as Mr. Grandison
observed, exclude from the benefit of your conversation,
the man whom you wish to be good. 
What! Not till he is good? said Miss Grandison. 
Did I not say, We should delight to honour him when
he was? 
But, what, Sir Charles? (come, I had rather take
my cue from you, than any-body: what) are the
signs which I am to give to be allowed— 
Only these, my Cousin—When you can be serious
on serious subjects; yet so chearful in your seriousness,
as if it sat easy upon you; when you can, at times,
prefer the company and conversation of Dr. Bartlett,
who is not a solemn or severe man, to any other; and,
in general, had rather stand well in his opinion, than
in that of the gayest man or woman in the world. 
Provided yours, Sir Charles, may be added to the
Doctor's— 
Command me, Mr. Grandison, whenever you two
are together. We will not oppress you with our subjects. 

Our conversation shall be that of Men, of chearful
Men. You shall lead them and change them at
pleasure. The first moment (and I will watch for it)
that I shall imagine you to be tired or uneasy, I will
break off the conversation; and you shall leave us, and
pursue your own diversions, without a question. 
You were always indulgent to me, Sir Charles, said
Mr. Grandison; and I have retired, and blushed to
myself, sometimes, for wanting your indulgence. 
Tea was preparing. Sir Charles took his own seat
next Lord L. whom he set into talk of Scotland. He
enjoyed the account my Lord gave of the pleasure
which the Countess, on that her first journey into those
parts, gave to all his family and friends; as Lady L.
on her part, acknowleged she had a grateful sense of
their goodness to her. 
I rejoice, said Sir Charles, that the sea divides us
not from such worthy people, as you, my Lord, have
given us a relation to. Next visit you make (Charlotte,
I hope, will accompany me) I intend to make
one in your train, as I have told your Lordship before. 
You will add to our pleasure, Sir Charles. All my
relations are prepared to do you honour. 
But, my Lord, did not the Ladies think a little
hardly of your Lordship's engagement? that a man of
your merit should go from Scotland for a wife? I
do assure you, my Lord, that, in all the countries I
have been in, I never saw finer women than I have
seen in Scotland; and in very few nations, tho' six
times as large, greater numbers of them. 
I was to be the happiest of men, Sir Charles, in a
Grandison—I thank you, bowing. 
It is one of my felicities, my Lord, that my Sister
calls herself yours. 
Lady L. whispering me, as I sat between her and
Miss Grandison, The two worthiest hearts in the
world, Miss Byron! my Lord L's, and my Brother's! 

With joy I congratulate your Ladyship on both, rewhispered
I. May God long continue to you two
such blessings! 
I thought of the vile Sir Hargrave at the time. 
I can tell you how, said Mr. Grandison, to repay
that nation—You, Sir Charles, shall go down, and
bring up with you a Scotish lady. 
I was vexed with myself for starting. I could not
help it. 
Don't you think, Lucy, that Sir Charles made a
very fine compliment to the Scotish ladies? —I own,
that I have heard the women of our Northern counties
praised also. But are there not, think you, as pretty
women in England? 
My Sister Harriet, applied Sir Charles to me, you
need not, I hope, be told that I am a great admirer
of fine women. 
I had like to have bowed—I should not have been
able to recover myself, had I so seemed to apply his
compliment. 
I the less wonder that you are, Sir Charles, because,
in the word fine, you include mind as well as
person. 
That's my good girl! said Miss Grandison, as she
poured out the tea: and so he does. 
My dear Charlotte, whispered I—Pray, say something
encouraging to Lord G. He is pleased with
every-body; but no-body says any-thing to him; and
he, I see, both loves and fears you. 
Hush, child! whispered she again. The man's
best when he is silent. If it be his day to love, it is his
day to fear. What a duce! shall a woman's time be
Never? 
That's good news for my Lord: Shall I hint to
him, that his time will come? 
Do, if you dare. I want you to provoke me. She
spoke aloud. 
I have done, said I. 

My Lord, What do you think Miss Byron says? 
For Heaven's sake, dear Miss Grandison! 
Nay, I will speak it. 
Pray, Madam, let me know, said my Lord. 
You will know Miss Grandison in time, said Sir
Charles. I trust her not with any of my secrets, Miss
Byron. 
The more ungenerous you, Sir Charles; for you
get out of me all mine. I complained of you, Sir, to
Miss Byron, for your reserves at Colnbrooke. 
Be so good, Madam, said my Lord— 
Nay, nothing but the Mountain and the Mouse. 
Miss Byron only wanted to see your collection of
insects. 
Miss Byron will do me great honour— 
If Charlotte won't attend you, Madam, said the
Countess, to my Lord G's, I will. 
Have I not brought you off, Harriet? whispered
Miss Grandison—Trust me another time. —She will
let you know the day before, my Lord. 
Miss Grandison, my Lord, said I, loves to alarm. 
But I will with pleasure wait on her, and on the
Countess, whenever they please. 
You will see many things worth your notice,
Madam, in Lord G.'s collection, said Sir Charles to
me. But Charlotte thinks nothing less than men and
women worthy of her notice; her parrot and squirrel,
the one for its prattle, the other for its vivacity, excepted. 
Thank you, Sir Charles—But pray do you be quiet! 
I fear nobody else. 
Miss Byron, said the Countess, pray spare her not:
I see you can make Charlotte afraid of two. 
Then it must be of three, Lady L. —You know
my reverence for my elder Sister. 
No, no, but I don't. I know only, that nobody
can better tell, what she should do, than my Charlotte: 

But I have always taken too much delight in your vivacity,
either to wish or expect you to rein it in. 
You acted by me like an indolent parent, Lady L.
who miscalls herself indulgent. You gave me my
head for your own pleasure; and when I had got it,
tho' you found the inconvenience, you chose rather to
bear it, than to take the pains to restrain me—But Sir
Charles, whatever faults he might have had when he
was from us, came over to us finished. He grew not
up with us, from year to year: His blaze dazled me; 
and I have tried over and over, but cannot yet get
the better of my reverence for him. 
If I have not my Sister's love, rather than what she
pleasantly calls her reverence, I shall have a much
worse opinion of my own outward behaviour, than of
her merit. 
Your outward behaviour, Sir Charles, cannot be in
fault, said Lord L. But I join with my Sister Charlotte,
in her opinion of what is. 
And I too, said the Countess—for I am a party— 
This is it, Sir Charles—Who that lies under obligations,
which they cannot return, can view the obliger
but with the most delicate sensibilities? 
Give me leave, said Miss Emily, her face crimsoned
over with modest gratitude, to say, that I am one,
that shall ever have a reverence, superior to my love,
for the best of guardians. 
Blushes overspread my face, and gave a tacit acknowlegement,
on my part, of the same sensibility,
from the same motives. 
Who is it, joined in Dr. Bartlett, that knows my
patron, but must acknowlege— 
My dear Dr. Bartlett, interrupted Sir Charles, from
you, and from my good Lord L. these fine things are
not to be borne. From my three Sisters, looking at
me for one, and from my dear Ward, I cannot be so
uneasy, when they will not be restrained from acknowleging, 

that I have succeeded in my endeavours to
perform my duty to them. 
I long to know, as I said once before, the particulars
of what Sir Charles has done, to oblige everybody
in so high a manner. Don't you, Lucy? Bless
me! what a deal of time have I wasted since I came
to town? I feel as if I had wings, and had soared to
so great an height, that every thing and person that
I before beheld without dissatisfaction, in this great
town, looks diminutive and little under my aking eye. 
Thus, my dear, it must be in a better world, if we
are permitted to look back upon the highest of our satisfactions
in this. 
I was asked to give them a lesson on the harpsichord
after tea. Miss Grandison said, Come, come,
to prevent all excuses, I will shew you the way. 
Let it then be, said Mr. Grandison, Shakespeare's
Cuckow. You have made me enter with so much
comparative shame into myself, that I must have something
lively to raise my spirits. 
Well, so it shall, replied Miss Grandison. Our poor
Cousin does not know what to do with himself when
you are got a little out of his reach. 
That is not fair, Charlotte, said Sir Charles. It is
not that graceful manner of obliging, in which you
generally excel. Compliance and Reflection are not
to be coupled. 
Well, well, but I will give the good man his
Cuckow, to make him amends. 
Accordingly she sung that ballad from Shakespeare; 
and with so much spirit and humour, as delighted
every-body. 
Sir Charles being a judge of music, I looked a little
sillier than common, when I was again called upon. 
Come, my dear, said the kind Countess, I will prepare
you a little further. When you see your two
elder Sisters go before you, you will have more courage. 

She sat down, and play'd one of Scarlatti's lessons; 
which, you know, are made to shew a fine hand. 
And surely, for the swiftness of her fingers, and the
elegance of her manner, she could not be equalled. 
It is referred to you, my third Sister, said Sir
Charles (who had been taken aside by Mr. Reeves; 
some whispering talk having passed between them)
to favour us with some of Handel's music: Mrs.
Reeves says, she has heard you sing several songs out
of the Pastoral, and out of some of his finest Oratorio's. 
Come hither, come hither, my sweet Harriet— 
Here's his Alexander's Feast: My Brother admires
that, I know; and says it is the noblest composition
that ever was produced by man; and is as finely set,
as written. 
She made me sit down to the instrument. 
As you know, said I, that great part of the beauty
of this performance arises from the proper transitions
from one different strain to another, any one song
must lose greatly, by being taken out of its place; and
I fear— 
Fear nothing, Miss Byron, said Sir Charles: Your
obligingness, as well as your observation, intitle you
to all allowances. 
I then turned to that fine piece of accompanied
recitative: 

Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
Soon he sooth'd his soul to pleasures.

Which not being set so full with accompanying
symphonies, as most of Mr. Handel's are, I performed
with the more ease to myself, tho' I had never but
once before play'd it over. 
They all, with more compliments than I dare repeat,
requested me to play and sing it once more. 
Dare repeat! methinks I hear my Uncle Selby say. 
The girl that does nothing else but repeat her own
praises, comes with her If I dare repeat. 

Yes, Sir, I answer; for compliments that do not
elevate, that do not touch me, run glibly off my pen:
But such as indeed raise one's vanity; how can one
avow that vanity by writing them down? —But they
were resolved to be pleased before I began. 
One compliment, however, from Sir Charles, I
cannot, I find, pass over in silence. He whispered
Miss Grandison, as he leaned upon my chair, How
could Sir Hargrave Pollexfen have the heart to endeavour
to stop such a mouth as that! 
And now, having last night, and this morning,
written so many sides, it is time to break off. Yet I
could give you many more particulars of agreeable conversation
that passed, were I sure you would not think
me insufferably tedious; and did not the unkind reserve
of my Cousin Reeves, as to the business of that
Bagenhall, rush upon my memory with fresh force,
and Help to tire my fingers. I am the more concerned,
as my Cousin himself seems not easy; but is in expectation
of hearing something, that will either give
him relief, or add to his pain. 
Why, Lucy, should our friends take upon themselves
to keep us in the dark, as to those matters which
it concerns us more to know, than perhaps any-body
else? There is a tenderness sometimes shewn on
arduous occasions in this respect, that gives as much
pain, as we could receive from the most explicit communication. 
And then, all the while, there is so
much strength of mind, and discretion, supposed in
the person that knows an event, and such weakness in
her that is to be kept in ignorance, that—But I grow
as saucy as impatient. Let me conclude, before I expose
myself to reproof for a petulance, that I hope is
not natural to 
Your Harriet Byron. 

