



the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st Days of my Distress. 

And Distress indeed! For here I am still! 
And every thing has been worse and worse! 
Oh! the poor unhappy Pamela! —Without
any Hope left, and ruin'd in all my Contriveances! 
But, Oh! my dear Parents, rejoice
with me, even in this low Plunge of my Distress; 
for your poor Pamela has escap'd from
an Enemy worse than any she ever met with; an
Enemy she never thought of before, and was
hardly able to stand against: I mean, the Weakness
and Presumption, both in one, of her
own Mind; which had well nigh, had not
the Divine Grace interposed, sunk her into the
lowest, last Abyss of Misery and Perdition! 
I will proceed, as I have Opportunity, with
my sad Relation: For my Pen and Ink (in my
now doubly-secur'd Closet) is all I have to employ
myself with: And indeed I have been so
weak, that till yesterday Evening, I have not
been able to hold a Pen. 
I took with me but one Shift, besides what
I had on, and Two Handkerchiefs, and Two
Caps, which my Pocket held, (for it was not
for me to encumber myself) and all my Stock
of Money, which was but Five or Six Shillings,
to set out for I knew not where; and got out
of the Window, not without some Difficulty, 

sticking a little at my Shoulders and Hips; but
I was resolved to get out, if possible. And it
was further from the Leads than I thought, and
I was afraid I had sprain'd my Ancle; and when
I had dropp'd from the Leads to the Ground, it
was still further off; but I did pretty well there; 
at least, I got no Hurt to hinder me from pursuing
my Intentions. So, being now on the
Ground, I hid my Papers under a Rose bush,
and cover'd them over with Mould, and
there they still lie, as I hope. Then I
hy'd away to the Pond: The Clock struck
Twelve, just as I got out; and it was a dark
misty Night, and very cold; but I felt it not
then. 
When I came to the Pond-side, I flung in
my Upper-coat, as I had design'd, and my
Neck-handkerchief, and a round-ear'd Cap, with
a Knot; and then with great Speed ran to the
Door, and took the Key out of my Pocket, my
poor Heart beating all the Time against my Bosom,
as if it would have forc'd its way thro' it:
And beat it well might! For I then, too late,
found, that I was most miserably disappointed; 
for the wicked Woman had taken off that Lock,
and put another on; so that my Key would not
open it. I try'd and try'd, and feeling about,
I found a Padlock besides, on another Part of
the Door. O then how my Heart sunk! —I
dropp'd down with Grief and Confusion, unable
to stir, or support myself, for a while. 
But my Fears awakening my Resolution, and 

knowing that my Attempt would be as terrible
for me, as any other Danger I could then encounter,
I clamber'd up upon the Ledges of the
Door, and upon the Lock, which was a great
wooden one; and reached the Top of the Door
with my Hands; then, little thinking I could
climb so well, I made shift to lay hold on the
Top of the Wall with my Hands; but, alas for
me! nothing but ill Luck!—no Escape for
poor Pamela! The Wall being old, the Bricks
I held by, gave way, just as I was taking a
Spring to get up; and down came I, and received
such a Blow upon my Head, with one
of the Bricks, that it quite stunn'd me; and I
broke my Shins and my Ancle besides, and
beat off the Heel of one of my Shoes. 
In this dreadful way, flat upon the Ground,
lay poor I, for I believe Five or Six Minutes; 
and then trying to get up, I sunk down again
two or three times; and my left Hip and Shoulder
were very stiff and full of Pain, with Bruises; 
and besides my Head bled, and ak'd grievously
with the Blow I had with the Brick. —Yet
these Hurts I valued not; but crept a good way,
upon my Feet and Hands, in Search of a Ladder
I just recollected to have seen against the
Wall Two Days before, on which the Gardener
was nailing a Nectarine Branch, that was
loosen'd from the Wall: But no Ladder could
I find, and the Wall was very high. What,
now, thought I, must become of the miserable
Pamela! —Then I began to wish myself
most heartily again in my Closet, and to repent 

of my Attempt, which I now censured as rash,
because it did not succeed. 
God forgive me! but a sad Thought came
just then into my Head! —I tremble to think
of it! Indeed my Apprehensions of the Usage
I should meet with, had like to have made me
miserable for ever! O my dear, dear Parents,
forgive your poor Child; but being then quite
desperate, I crept along, till I could raise myself
on my staggering Feet; and away limp'd I! 
—What to do, but to throw myself into the
Pond, and so put a Period to all my Griefs in this
World! —But, Oh! to find them infinitely aggravated
(had I not, by the Divine Grace, been
with-held) in a miserable Eternity! As I have
escap'd this Temptation, (blessed be God for it!) 
I will tell you my Conflicts on this dreadful
Occasion, that the Divine Mercies may be magnified
in my Deliverance; that I am yet on
this Side the dreadful Gulph, from which there
could have been no Return. 
It was well for me, as I have since thought,
that I was so maim'd, as made me the longer
before I got to the Water; for this gave me
Time to consider, and abated that Impetuousness
of my Passions, which possibly might otherwise
have hurry'd me, in my first Transport of
Grief, (on my seeing no way to escape, and the
hard Usage I had Reason to expect from my
dreadful Keepers) to throw myself in; but my
Weakness of Body made me move so slowly,
that it gave Time, as I said, for a little Reflection, 

a Ray of Grace, to dart in upon my
benighted Mind; and so, when I came to the
Pond-side, I sat myself down on the sloping
Bank, and began to ponder my wretched Condition; 
and thus I reason'd with myself: 
Pause here a little, Pamela, on what thou
art about, before thou takest the dreadful Leap; 
and consider whether there be no Way yet left,
no Hope, if not to escape from this wicked
House, yet from the Mischiefs threatened thee
in it. 
I then consider'd, and after I had cast about
in my Mind, every thing that could make me
hope, and saw no Probability; a wicked Woman,
devoid of all Compassion! a horrid Helper,
just arriv'd in this dreadful Colbrand! an angry
and resenting Master, who now hated me, and
threaten'd the most afflicting Evils! and, that I
should, in all Probability, be depriv'd even of
the Opportunity I now had before me, to free
myself from all their Persecutions! —What
hast thou to do, distressed Creature, said I to
myself, but throw thyself upon a merciful God,
(who knows how innocently I suffer) to avoid
the merciless Wickedness of those who are determin'd
on my Ruin? 
And then thought I, (and Oh! that Thought
was surely of the Devil's Instigation; for it was
very soothing and powerful with me) these
wicked Wretches, who now have no Remorse,
no Pity on me, will then be mov'd to
lament their Misdoings; and when they see the
dead Corpse of the unhappy Pamela dragg'd 

out to these dewy Banks, and lying breathless at
their Feet, they will find that Remorse to soften
their obdurate Hearts, which, now, has no Place
there! —And my Master, my angry Master,
will then forget his Resentments, and say, O
this is the unhappy Pamela! that I have so causlesly
persecuted and destroy'd! Now do I see she
preferr'd her Honesty to her Life, will he say,
and is no Hypocrite, nor Deceiver; but really
was the innocent Creature she pretended to be! 
Then, thought I, will he perhaps shed a few
Tears over the poor Corpse of his persecuted Servant; 
and, tho' he may give out, it was Love
and Disappointment, and that perhaps (in order
to hide his own Guilt) for the unfortunate Mr.
Williams; yet will he be inwardly griev'd, and
order me a decent Funeral, and save me, or rather
this Part of me, from the dreadful Stake,
and the Highway Interrment; and the young
Men and Maidens around my dear Father's will
pity poor Pamela! But O! I hope I shall not
be the Subject of their Ballads and Elegies, but
that my Memory, for the sake of my dear
Father and Mother, may quickly slide into
Oblivion! 
I was once rising, so indulgent was I to this
sad way of Thinking, to throw myself in: But
again, my Bruises made me slow; and I thought,
What art thou about to do, wretched Pamela? 
How knowest thou, tho' the Prospect be all dark
to thy short-sighted Eye, what God may do for
thee, even when all human Means fail? God
Almighty would not lay me under these sore 

Afflictions, if he had not given me Strength to
grapple with them, if I will exert it as I ought:
And who knows, but that the very Presence I
so much dread, of my angry and designing Master,
(for he has had me in his Power before, and
yet I have escaped) may be better for me, than
these persecuting Emissaries of his, who, for his
Money, are true to their wicked Trust, and are
harden'd by that, and a long Habit of Wickedness,
against Compunction of Heart? God can
touch his Heart in an Instant; and if this should
not be done, I can then but put an End to my
Life by some other Means, if I am so resolved. 
But how do I know, thought I, that even
these Bruises and Maims that I have gotten,
while I pursued only the laudable Escape I
had meditated, may not kindly have furnish'd
me with the Opportunity I now am tempted
with to precipitate myself, and of surrendering
up my Life, spotless and unguilty, to that merciful
Being who gave it! 
Then, thought I, who gave thee, presumptuous
as thou art, a Power over thy Life? Who
authoriz'd thee to put an End to it, when the
Weakness of thy Mind suggests not to thee a
way to preserve it with Honour? How knowest
thou what Purposes God may have to serve,
by the Trials with which thou art now exercised? 
Art thou to put a Bound to the Divine Will,
and to say, Thus much will I bear, and no more? 
And wilt thou dare to say, That if the Trial be
augmented and continued, thou wilt sooner
die, than bear it? 

This Act of Despondency, thought I, is a
Sin, that, if I pursue it, admits of no Repentance,
and can therefore hope no Forgiveness. 
—And wilt thou, to shorten thy transitory
Griefs, heavy as they are, and weak as thou
fansiest thyself, plunge both Body and Soul into
everlasting Misery! Hitherto, Pamela,
thought I, thou art the innocent, the suffering
Pamela; and wilt thou, to avoid thy Sufferings,
be the guilty Aggressor? And, because
wicked Men persecute thee, wilt thou fly in
the Face of the Almighty, and distrust his Grace
and Goodness, who can still turn all these Sufferings
to Benefits? And how do I know, but that
God, who sees all the lurking Vileness of my
Heart, may have permitted these Sufferings on
that very score, and to make me rely solely on
his Grace and Assistance, who perhaps have too
much prided myself in a vain Dependence on
my own foolish Contrivances? 
Then again, thought I, wilt thou suffer in
one Moment all the good Lessons of thy poor
honest Parents, and the Benefit of their Example,
(who have persisted in doing their Duty
with Resignation to the Divine Will, amidst the
extreme Degrees of Disappointment, Poverty,
and Distress, and the Persecutions of an ingrateful
World, and merciless Creditors) to be
thrown away upon thee; and bring down, as
in all Probability this thy Rashness will, their
grey Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave, when
they shall understand, that their beloved Daughter,
slighting the Tenders of Divine Grace, despairing 

of the Mercies of a protecting God, has
blemish'd, in this last Act, a whole Life, which
they had hitherto approv'd and delighted in? 
What then, presumptuous Pamela, dost
thou here? thought I: Quit with Speed these
perilous Banks, and fly from these curling Waters,
that seem in their meaning Murmurs, this
still Night, to reproach thy Rashness! Tempt
not God's Goodness on the mossy Banks, that
have been Witnesses of thy guilty Purpose; and
while thou hast Power left thee, avoid the
tempting Evil, lest thy grand Enemy, now repuls'd
by Divine Grace, and due Reflection, return
to the Assault with a Force that thy Weakness
may not be able to resist! And lest one rash
Moment destroy all the Convictions, which
now have aw'd thy rebellious Mind into Duty
and Resignation to the Divine Will! 
And so saying, I arose; but was so stiff with
my Hurts, so cold with the moist Dew of the
Night, and the wet Grass on which I had sat,
as also with the Damps arising from so large a
Piece of Water, that with great Pain I got
from this Pond, which now I think of with
Terror; and bending my limping Steps towards
the House, took Refuge in the Corner
of an Out-house, where Wood and Coals are
laid up for Family Use, till I should be found
by my cruel Keepers, and consign'd to a more
wretched Confinement, and worse Usage, than
I had hitherto experienc'd; and there behind a
Pile of Fire-wood I crept, and lay down, as you 



may imagine, with a Mind just broken, and a
Heart sensible to nothing but the extremest Woe
and Dejection. 
This, my dear Father and Mother, is the
Issue of your poor Pamela's fruitless Enterprize; 
and who knows, if I had got out at the Back-door,
whether I had been at all in a better Case,
moneyless, friendless, as I am, and in a strange
Place! —But blame not your poor Daughter
too much: Nay, if ever you see this miserable
Scribble, all bathed and blotted with my Tears,
let your Pity get the better of your Reprehension! 
But I know it will. —And I must leave
off for the present. —For, Oh! my Strength
and my Will are at this time far unequal to one
another. —But yet, I will add, that tho' I
should have prais'd God for my Deliverance,
had I been freed from my wicked Keepers, and
my designing Master; yet I have more abundant
Reason to praise Him, that I have been deliver'd
from a worse Enemy, myself! 
I will continue my sad Relation. 
It seems, Mrs. Jewkes awaked not till Daybreak; 
and not finding me in Bed, she call'd
me; and no Answer being return'd, she relates,
that she got out of Bed, and ran to my Closet; 
and missing me, searched under the Bed, and in
another Closet, finding the Chamber-door, as
she had left it, quite fast, and the Key, as usual,
about her Wrist. For if I could have got out 

at the Chamber-door, there were two or three
Passages, and Doors to them all, double-lock'd
and barr'd, to go thro', into the great Garden; 
so that, to escape, there was no Way, but out
of the Window; and of that Window, because
of the Summer-parlour under it; for the other
Windows are a great way from the Ground. 
She says, she was excessively frighted, and
instantly rais'd the Swiss, and the two Maids,
who lay not far off; and finding every Door
fast, she said, I must be carry'd away, as St.
Peter was out of Prison, by some Angel. It
is a Wonder she had not a worse Thought! 
She says, she wept and wrung her Hands,
and took on sadly, running about like a mad
Woman, little thinking I could have got out
of the Closet Window, between the Iron Bars; 
and indeed I don't know whether I could do so
again. But at last finding that Casement open,
they concluded it must be so; and ran out into
the Garden, and found my Footsteps in the
Mould of the Bed which I dropp'd down upon
from the Leads: And so speeded away, all of
them, that is to say, Mrs. Jewkes, Colbrand,
and Nan, towards the Back-door, to see if that
was fast, while the Cook was sent to the Out-offices
to raise the Men, and make them get
Horses ready, to take each a several Way to pursue
me. 
But it seems, finding that Door double-lock'd
and padlock'd, and the Heel of my Shoe,
and the broken Bricks, they verily concluded I
was got away by some Means over the Wall; 

and then, they say, Mrs. Jewkes seem'd like a
distracted Woman: Till at last Nan had the
Thought to go towards the Pond, and there
seeing my Coat, and Cap and Handkerchief in
the Water, cast almost to the Banks by the Agitation
of the Waves, she thought it was me,
and screaming out, ran to Mrs. Jewkes, and
said, O Madam, Madam! here's a piteous
thing! —Mrs. Pamela lies drown'd in the
Pond. —Thither they all ran; and finding
my Cloaths, doubted not I was at the Bottom; 
and they all, Swiss among the rest, beat their
Breasts, and made most dismal Lamentations; 
and Mrs. Jewkes sent Nan to the Men, to bid
them get the Drag-net ready, and leave the
Horses, and come to try to find the poor Innocent,
as she, it seems, then call'd me, beating
her Breast, and lamenting my hard Hap; but
most what would become of them, and what
Account they should give to my Master. 
While every one was thus differently employ'd,
some weeping and wailing, some running
here and there, Nan came into the Wood-house; 
and there lay poor I, so weak, so low,
and so dejected, and withal so stiff with my
Bruises, that I could not stir nor help myself
to get upon my Feet. And I said, with a low
Voice, (for I could hardly speak) Mrs. Ann,
Mrs. Ann! —The Creature was sadly frighted,
but was taking up a Billet to knock me on the
Head, believing I was some Thief, as she said; 
but I cry'd out, O Mrs. Ann, Mrs. Ann, help
me, for Pity's sake, to Mrs. Jewkes! for I cannot 

get up. —Bless me! said she, what! you,
Madam! —Why our Hearts are almost broken,
and we were going to drag the Pond for you,
believing you had drown'd yourself. Now, said
she, you'll make us all alive again! 
And without helping me, she ran away to
the Pond, and brought all the Crew to the
Wood-house. —The wicked Woman, as she
entered, said, Where is she? —Plague of her
Spells, and her Witchcrafts! She shall dearly
repent of this Trick, if my Name be Jewkes; 
and coming to me, took hold of my Arm so
roughly, and gave me such a Pull, as made me
squeal out, (my Shoulder being bruis'd on that
Side) and drew me on my Face. O cruel Creature!
said I, if you knew what I have suffer'd,
it would move you to pity me! 
Even Colbrand seem'd to be concern'd, and
said, Fie, Madam, fie! you see she is almost
dead! You must not be so rough with her. 
The Coachman Robin seem'd to be sorry for me
too, and said, with Sobs, What a Scene is here! 
Don't you see she is all bloody in her Head, and
cannot stir? —Curse of her Contrivances! said
the horrid Creature; she has frighted me out of
my Wits, I'm sure. How the D&wblank;l came you
here? —O! said I, ask me now no Questions,
but let the Maids carry me up to my Prison; 
and there let me die decently, and in Peace! For
indeed I thought I could not live two Hours. 
The still more inhuman Tygress said, I suppose
you want Mr. Williams to pray by you,
don't you? Well, I'll send for my Master this 

Minute; let him come and watch you himself,
for me; for there's no such thing as holding
you, I'm sure. 
So the Maids took me up between them,
and carry'd me to my Chamber; and when the
Wretch saw how bad I was, she began a little
to relent—while every one wonder'd, (at
what I had neither Strength nor Inclination to
tell them) how all this came to pass, which
they imputed to Sorcery and Witchcraft. 
I was so weak, when I had got up-stairs,
that I fainted away, with Dejection, Pain and
Fatigue; and they undress'd me, and got me
to-bed, and Mrs. Jewkes order'd Nan to bathe
my Shoulder, and Arm, and Ancle, with some
old Rum warm'd; and they cut the Hair a little
from the back Part of my Head, and wash'd
that; for it was clotted with Blood, from a
pretty long, but not deep Gash; and put a Family
Plaster upon it; for if this Woman has
any good Quality, it is, it seems, in a Readiness
and Skill to manage in Cases, where sudden
Misfortunes happen in a Family. 
After this, I fell into a pretty sound and
refreshing Sleep, and lay till Twelve o'Clock,
tolerably easy, considering I was very feverish,
and aguishly inclin'd; and she took a deal of
Care to fit me to undergo more Trials, which
I had hop'd would have been more happily
ended: But Providence did not see fit. 
She would make me rise about Twelve; 
but I was so weak, I could only sit up till the Bed
was made, and went into it again; and was, as 

they said, delirious some Part of the Afternoon. 
But having a tolerable Night on Thursday, I
was a good deal better on Friday, and on Saturday
got up, and eat a little Spoon-meat, and
my Feverishness seem'd to be gone, and I was
so mended by Evening, that I begg'd her Indulgence
in my Closet, to be left to myself; which
she consented to, it being double-barr'd the
Day before, and I assuring her, that all my Contrivances,
as she call'd them, were at an End. 
But first she made me tell her the whole Story
of my Enterprize; which I did very faithfully,
knowing now that nothing could stand me in
any stead, or contribute to my Safety and Escape:
And she seem'd to wonder at my Resolution
and Venturesomeness, but told me frankly,
that I should have found a hard Matter to get
quite off; for that she was provided with a
Warrant from my Master, (who is a Justice of
Peace in this County, as well as the other) to
get me apprehended, if I had got away, on
Suspicion of wronging him, let me have been
where I would. 
O how deep-laid are the Mischiefs design'd
to fall on my devoted Head! —Surely, surely,
I cannot be worthy of all this Contrivance! — 
This too well shews me the Truth of what was
hinted to me formerly at the other House, that
my Master swore he would have me! O preserve
me, Heaven! from being his, in his own wicked
Sense of the Adjuration! 
I must add, that now this Woman sees me
pick up so fast, she uses me worse, and has 

abridg'd me of Paper all but one Sheet, which
I am to shew her, written or unwritten, on
Demand; and has reduced me to one Pen; yet
my hidden Stores stand me in stead. But she is
more and more snappish and cross; and tauntingly
calls me Mrs. Williams, and any thing
that she thinks will vex me. 
