



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Morning, April 26. 
Your Letter, my beloved Miss Howe, gives me
great comfort. How sweetly do I experience the
truth of the Wise man's observation, That a faithful
friend is the medicine of life! 
Your messenger finds me just setting out for London: 
The chaise at the door. Already I have taken leave of
the good Widow, who has obliged me with the company
of her eldest Daughter, at Mr. Lovelace's request,
while he rides by us. The young gentlewoman is to
return in two or three days with the chaise, in its way
to my Lord M's Hertfordshire Seat. 
I received my Sister's dreadful Letter on Sunday,
when Mr. Lovelace was out. He saw, on his return,
my extreme anguish and dejection; and he was told how
much worse I had been: For I had fainted away more
than once. 
I think the contents of it have touched my head as
well as my heart. 
He would fain have seen it. But I would not permit
that, because of the threatenings he would have
found in it against himself. As it was, the effect it had
upon me, made him break out into execrations and
menaces. I was so ill, that he himself advised me to
delay going to town on Monday, as I proposed to do. 

He is extremely regardful and tender of me. All that
you supposed would follow this violent Letter, from him,
has followed it. He has offered himself to my acceptance,
in so unreserved a manner, that I am concerned I have
written so freely and so diffidently of him. Pray, my
dearest friend, keep to yourself every-thing that may
appear disreputable of him from me. 
I must acquaint you, that his kind behaviour, and
my low-spiritedness, co-operating with your former advice,
and my unhappy situation, made me that very
Sunday evening receive unreservedly his declarations: 
And now indeed I am more in his power than ever. 
He presses me every hour [Indeed as needlessly, as unkindly]
for fresh tokens of my esteem for him, and confidence
in him. And, as I have been brought to some
verbal concessions, if he should prove unworthy, I am
sure, I shall have great reason to blame this violent
Letter: For I have no resolution at all. Abandoned thus
of all my natural friends, of whose returning favour I
have now no hopes, and only you to pity me, and you
restrained, as I may say, I have been forced to turn my
desolate heart to such protection as I could find. 
All my comfort is, that your advice repeatedly given
to the same purpose, in your kind Letter before me,
warrants me. I now set out the more chearfully to
London on that account: For before, a heavy weight
hung upon my heart; and, altho' I thought it best and
safest to go, yet my spirits sunk, I know not why, at
every motion I made towards a preparation for it. 
I hope no mischief will happen on the road. —I hope
these violent spirits will not meet. 
Every one is waiting for me. —Pardon me, my best,
my kindest friend, that I return your Norris. In these
more promising prospects, I cannot have occasion for
your favour. Besides, I have some hope, that with my
cloaths they will send me the money I wrote for, altho'
it is denied me in the Letter. If they do not, and if I
should have occasion, I can but signify my want to so 

ready a friend. And I have promised to be obliged only
to you. But I had rather methinks you should have it
still to say, if challenged, that nothing of this nature
has been either requested or done. I say This, with a
view entirely to my future hopes of recovering your
Mother's favour, which, next to that of my own Father
and Mother, I am most solicitous to recover. 
I must acquaint you with one thing more, notwithstanding
my hurry; and that is, that Mr. Lovelace
offered either to attend me to Lord M's, or to send for
his Chaplain, yesterday. He pressed me to consent to
this proposal, most earnestly; and even seemed desirous
rather to have the Ceremony pass here, than in London: 
For when there, I had told him, it was time
enough to consider of so weighty and important a matter. 
Now, upon the receipt of your kind, your consolatory
Letter, methinks I could almost wish it had
been in my power to comply with his earnest solicitations. 
But this dreadful Letter has unhinged my whole
frame. Then some little Punctilio surely is necessary. 
No Preparation made. No Articles drawn. No Licence
ready. Grief so extreme: No Pleasure in prospect,
nor so much as in wish—O my dear, who could
think of entering into so solemn an Engagement! Who,
so unprepared, could seem to be so ready! 
If I could flatter myself, that my indifference to all
the joys of this life proceeded from proper motives, and
not rather from the disappointments and mortifications
my pride has met with, how much rather, I think,
should I chuse to be wedded to my shroud, than to any
man on earth! 
Indeed I have at present no pleasure, but in your
friendship. Continue That to me, I beseech you. If
my heart rises hereafter to a capacity of more, it must
be built on that foundation. 
My spirits sink again, on setting out. Excuse this
depth of vapourish dejection, which forbids me even
Hope, the cordial that keeps life from stagnating, and 

which never was denied me till within these eight-and-forty
hours. 
But 'tis time to relieve you. 
Adieu, my best beloved and kindest friend! Pray
for your 
Clarissa. 