



Dear Mother,
You and my good Father may wonder you
have not had a Letter from me in so many
Weeks; but a sad, sad Scene has been the Occasion
of it. For, to be sure, now it is too
plain, that all your Cautions were well-grounded. 
O my dear Mother, I am miserable!
truly miserable! —But yet, don't be
frighted, I am honest! —God, of his Goodness,
keep me so! 
O this Angel of a Master! this fine Gentleman!
this gracious Benefactor to your poor
Pamela! who was to take care of me at the
Prayer of his good dying Mother; who was
so apprehensive for me, lest I should be drawn
in by Lord Davers's Nephew, that he would
not let me go to Lady Davers's: This very
Gentleman (yes, I must call him Gentleman, 

tho' he has fallen from the Merit of that Title)
has degraded himself to offer Freedoms to his
poor Servant: He has now shewed himself in
his true Colours, and, to me, nothing appears
so black and so frightful. 
I have not been idle; but had writ from
time to time, how he, by sly mean Degrees,
exposed his wicked Views: But somebody stole
my Letter, and I know not what is become
of it. It was a very long one. I fear, he
that was mean enough to do bad things
in one respect, did not stick at this. But
be it as it will, all the Use he can make of it
will be, that he may be ashamed of his Part; 
I not of mine: For he will see I was resolved
to be virtuous, and glory'd in the Honesty of
my poor Parents. 
I will tell you all, the next Opportunity; 
for I am watched very narrowly; and he says to
Mrs. Jervis, This Girl is always scribbling; I
think she may be better employed. And yet I
work all Hours with my Needle, upon his
Linen, and the fine Linen of the Family; and
am, besides, about flowering him a Waistcoat. 
—But, Oh! my Heart's broken almost; for
what am I likely to have for my Reward, but
Shame and Disgrace, or else ill Words, and
hard Treatment! I'll tell you all soon, and
hope I shall find my long Letter. 
Your most afflicted Daughter. 

May-be I he and him him too much: But it
is his own Fault, if I do. For why did he
lose all his Dignity with me? 

