



Mr. Belford. In Continuation. 

The Colonel tells me, That he has written to Mr.
John Harlowe, by his servant, “That they might
spare themselves the trouble of debating about a reconciliation; 
for that his dear cousin would probably be
no more, before they could resolve.” 
He asked me after his cousin's means of subsisting; and
whether she had accepted of any favour from me: He was
sure, he said, she would not from you. 
I acquainted him with the truth of her parting with some
of her apparel. This wrung his heart; and bitterly did
he exclaim as well against you, as against her implacable
relations. 
He wished he had not come to England at all, or had
come time enough; and hoped I would apprize him of
the whole mournful story, at a proper season. He added,
that he had thoughts when he came over, of fixing here
for the remainder of his days: But now, as it was impossible
his cousin could recover, he would go abroad again,
and resettle himself at Florence or Leghorn. 
* *
The lady has been giving orders, with great presence
of mind, about her body: directing her nurse and the
maid of the house to put her into her coffin as soon as
she was cold. Mr. Belford, she said, would know that rest
by her will. 
* *
She has just now given from her bosom, where she always
wore it, a miniature picture, set in gold, of Miss
Howe: She gave it to Mrs. Lovick, desiring her to fold
it up in white paper, and direct it, To Charles Hickman,
Esq; and to give it to me, when she was departed, for
that gentleman. 
She looked upon the picture, before she gave it her— 
Sweet and ever-amiable friend—companion—sister—lover!
said she. —And kissed it four several times, once at each
tender appellation. 

* *
Your other servant is come. —Well may you be impatient! —Well may you! —But do you think I can leave
off in the middle of a conversation, to run and set down
what offers, and send it away piecemeal as I write? —If I
could, must I not lose one half, while I put down the other? 
This event is nearly as interesting to me as it is to you. 
If you are more grieved than I, there can be but one reason
for it; and that's at your heart! I had rather lose all
the friends I have in the world (yourself included,) than
this divine lady; and shall be unhappy when ever I think
of her sufferings, and her merit; tho' I have nothing to
reproach myself upon the former. 
I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon you, as
to express my own grief; tho' your conscience, I suppose,
will make you think otherwise. 
Your poor fellow, who says, that he begs for his life,
in desiring to be dispatched back with a letter, tears this
from me. Else, perhaps, (for I am just sent for down) a
quarter of an hour would make you—not easy indeed— 
but certain—And that, in a state like yours, to a mind
like yours, is a relief. 
Thursday afternoon, 4 o'Clock. 