


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


O my Lucy! What think you—But it is easy to
guess what you must think. I will, without
saying one word more, inclose 

Dr. Bartlett's tenth Letter.
The next day (proceeds my patron) I went to
make my visit to the family. I had nothing to
reproach myself with, and therefore had no other
concern upon me but what arose from the unhappiness
of the noble Clementina: That indeed was
enough. I thought I should have some difficulty to
manage my own spirit, if I were to find myself insulted,
especially by the General. Soldiers are so apt
to value themselves on their knowlege of what, after
all, one may call but their trade, that a private gentleman
is often thought too slightly of by them. Insolence
in a great man, a rich man, or a soldier, is a
call upon a man of spirit to exert himself. But I hope,
thought I, I shall not have this call from any one of
a family I so greatly respect. 
I was received by the Bishop; who politely, after
I had paid my compliments to the Marquis and his
Lady, presented me to those of the Urbino family to
whom I was a stranger. Every one of those named
by Signor Jeronymo, in his last Letter, was present. 
The Marquis, after he had returned my compliment,
looked another way, to hide his emotion:
The Marchioness put her handkerchief to her eyes,
and looked upon me with tenderness; and I read in
them her concern for her Clementina. 
I paid my respects to the General with an air of
freedom, yet of regard; to my Jeronymo, with the
tenderness due to our friendship, and congratulated 

him on seeing him out of his chamber. His kind
eyes glistened with pleasure; yet it was easy to read a
mixture of pain in them; which grew stronger as the
first emotions at seeing me enter, gave way to reflection. 
The Conte della Porretta seemed to measure me
with his eye. 
I addressed myself to Father Marescotti, and made
my particular acknowlegements to him for the favour
of his visit, and what had passed in it. He looked
upon me with pleasure; probably with the more, as
this was a farewel visit. 
The two Ladies whispered, and looked upon me,
and seemed to bespeak each other's attention to what
passed. 
Signor Sebastiano placed himself next to Jeronymo,
and often whispered him, and as often cast his eye
upon me. He was partial to me, I believe, because
my generous friend seemed pleased with what he said. 
His brother, Signor Juliano, sat on the other hand
of me. They are agreeable and polite young gentlemen. 
A profound silence succeeded the general compliments. 
I addressed myself to the Marquis: Your Lordship,
and you, madam, turning to the Marchioness, I hope
will excuse me for having requested of you the honour
of being once more admitted to your presence,
and to that of three brothers, for whom I shall ever
retain the highest veneration and respect. I could
not think of leaving a city, where one of the first families
in it has done me the highest honour, without
taking such a leave as might shew my gratitude. —Accept,
my Lords, bowing to each; Accept, madam,
more profoundly bowing to the Marchioness, my respectful
thanks for all your goodness to me. I shall,
to the end of my life, number most of the days that
I have passed at Bologna among its happiest, even 

were the remainder to be as happy as man ever
knew. 
The Marquis said, We wish you, Chevalier, very
happy; happier than—He sighed, and was silent. 
His Lady only bowed. Her face spoke distress. 
Her voice was lost in sighs, tho' she struggled to suppress
them. 
Chevalier, said the Bishop, with an air of solemnity,
you have given us many happy hours: For them we
thank you. Jeronymo, for himself, will say more:
He is the most grateful of men. We thank you also
for what you have done for him. 
I cannot, said Jeronymo, express suitably my gratitude:
My prayers, my vows, shall follow you whithersoever
you go, best of friends, and best of men! 
The General, with an air and a smile that might
have been dispensed with, oddly said, High pleasure
and high pain are very near neighbours: They are
often guilty of excesses, and then are apt to mistake
each other's house. I am one of those who think our
whole house obliged to the Chevalier for the seasonable
assistance he gave to our Jeronymo. But— 
Dear General, said Lady Juliana, bear with an interruption:
The intent of this meeting is amicable. 
The Chevalier is a man of honour. Things may have
fallen out unhappily; yet nobody to blame. 
As to blame, or otherwise, said the Conte della
Porretta, that is not now to be talked of; else, I
know where it lies: In short, among ourselves. The
Chevalier acted greatly by Signor Jeronymo: We
were all obliged to him: But to let such a man as this
have free admission to our daughter—She ought to have
had no eyes. 
Pray, my Lord, Pray, brother, said the Marquis,
Are we not enough sufferers? 
The Chevalier, said the General, cannot but be
gratified by so high a compliment; and smiled indignantly. 

My Lord, replied I to the General, you know very
little of the man before you, if you don't believe him
to be the most afflicted man present. 
Impossible! said the Marquis, with a sigh. 
The Marchioness arose from her seat, motioning
to go; and turning round to the two Ladies, and the
Count, I have resigned my will to the will of you all,
my dearest friends, and shall be permitted to withdraw. 
This testimony, however, before I go, I
cannot but bear: Where-ever the fault lay, it lay not
with the Chevalier. He has, from the first to the
last, acted with the nicest honour. He is intitled to
our respect. The unhappiness lies no-where but in
the difference of religion. 
Well, and that now is absolutely out of the question,
said the General: It is indeed, Chevalier. 
I hope, my Lord, from a descendant of a family
so illustrious, to find an equal exemption from wounding
words, and wounding looks; and that, Sir, as well
from your generosity, as from your justice. 
My looks give you offence, Chevalier! —Do they? 
I attended to the Marchioness. She came towards
me. I arose, and respectfully took her hand. —Chevalier,
said she, I could not withdraw without bearing
the testimony I have borne to your merits. I
wish you happy. —God protect you, whithersoever
you go. Adieu. 
She wept. I bowed on her hand with profound
respect. She retired with precipitation. It was with
difficulty that I suppressed the rising tear. I took my
seat. 
I made no answer to the General's last question,
tho' it was spoken in such a way (I saw by their eyes)
as took every other person's notice. 
Lady Sforza, when her sister was retired, hinted,
that the last interview between the young Lady and
me was an unadvised permission, tho' intended for the
best. 

I then took upon me to defend that step. Lady
Clementina, said I, had declared, That if she were
allowed to speak her whole mind to me, she should be
easy. I had for some time given myself up to absolute
despair. The Marchioness intended not favour
to me in allowing of the interview: It was the most
affecting one to me I had ever known. But let me
say, That, far from having bad effects on the young
Lady's mind, it had good ones. I hardly knew how
to talk upon a subject so very interesting to every one
present, but not more so to any one than to myself. 
I thought of avoiding it; and have been led into it,
but did not lead. And since it is before us, let me
recommend, as the most effectual way to restore every
one to peace and happiness, gentle treatment. The
most generous of human minds, the most meek, the
most dutiful, requires not harsh methods.— 
How do you know, Sir, said the General, and
looked at Jeronymo, the methods now taken— 
And are they then harsh, my Lord? said I. 
He was offended. 
I had heard, proceeded I, that a change of measures
was resolved on. I knew that the treatment before
had been all gentle, condescending, indulgent. I
received but yesterday Letters from my father, signifying
his intention of speedily recalling me to my native
country. I shall set out very soon for Paris,
where I hope to meet with his more direct commands
for this long-desired end. What may be my destiny,
I know not; but I shall carry with me a heart burdened
with the woes of this family, and distressed for
the beloved daughter of it. But let me bespeak you
all, for your own sakes (Mine is out of the question:
I presume not upon any hope on my own account)
that you will treat this Angelic-minded Lady with
tenderness. I pretend to say, that I know that harsh
or severe methods will not do. 
The General arose from his seat, and, with a countenance 

of fervor, next to fierceness—Let me tell
you, Grandison, said he— 
I arose from mine, and going to Lady Sforza, who
sat next him, he stopt, supposing me going to him,
and seemed surprised, and attentive to my motions:
But, disregarding him, I addressed myself to that Lady. 
You, madam, are the aunt of Lady Clementina:
The tender, the indulgent mother is absent, and has
declared, that she resigns her will to the will of her
friends present—Allow me to supplicate, that former
measures may not be changed with her. Great dawnings
of returning reason did I discover in our last interview. 
Her delicacy (Never was there a more delicate
mind) wanted but to be satisfied. It was satisfied,
and she began to be easy. Were her mind but
once composed, the sense she has of her duty, and
what she owes to her religion, would restore her to
your wishes: But if she should be treated harshly (tho'
I am sure, if she should, it would be with the best intention)
Clementina will be lost. 
The General sat down. They all looked upon
one another. The two Ladies dried their eyes. The
starting tear would accompany my fervor. And then
stepping to Jeronymo, who was extremely affected; 
My dear Jeronymo, said I, my friend, my beloved
friend, cherish in your noble heart the memory of
your Grandison: Would to God I could attend you
to England! We have baths there of sovereign efficacy. 
The balm of a friendly and grateful heart
would promote the cure. I have urged it before. 
Consider of it. 
My Grandison, my dear Grandison, my friend,
my preserver! You are not going!— 
I am, my Jeronymo, and embraced him. Love me
in absence, as I shall you. 
Chevalier, said the Bishop, you don't go? We
hope for your company at a small collation. —We
must not part with you yet. 

I cannot, my Lord, accept the favour. Altho' I
had given myself up to despair of obtaining the happiness
to which I once aspired; yet I was not willing
to quit a city that this family had made dear to me,
with the precipitation of a man conscious of misbehaviour. 
I thank you for the permission I had to attend
you all in full assembly. May God prosper you,
my Lord; and may you be invested with the first honours
of that church which must be adorned by so
worthy a heart! It will be my glory, when I am in
my native place, or where-ever I am, to remember
that I was once thought not unworthy of a rank in
a family so respectable. Let me, my Lord, be intitled
to your kind remembrance. 
He pulled out his handkerchief. My Lord, said he,
to his father; My Lord, to the General; Grandison
must not go!—and sat down with emotion. 
Lady Sforza wept: Laurana seemed moved: The
two young Lords, Sebastiano and Juliano, were greatly
affected. 
I then addressed myself to the Marquis, who sat
undetermined, as to speech: My venerable Lord,
forgive me, that my address was not first paid here. 
My heart overflows with gratitude for your goodness
in permitting me to throw myself at your feet, before
I took a last farewel of a city favoured with your residence. 
Best of fathers, of friends, of men, let me
entreat the continuance of your paternal indulgence
to the child nearest, and deserving to be nearest, to
your heart. She is all you and her mother. Restore
her to yourself, and to her, by your indulgence:
That alone, and a blessing on your prayers, can restore
her. Adieu, my good Lord: Repeated thanks
for all your hospitable goodness to a man that will
ever retain a grateful sense of your favour. 
You will not yet go, was all he said—he seemed in
agitation. He could not say more. 
I then, turning to the Count his brother, who sat 

next him, said, I have not the honour to be fully
known to your Lordship: Some prejudices from differences
in opinion may have been conceived: But if
you ever hear any-thing of the man before you unworthy
of his name, and of the favour once designed
him; then, my Lord, blame, as well as wonder
at, the condescension of your noble brother and
sister in my favour. 
Who, I! Who, I! said that Lord, in some hurry. — 
I think very well of you. I never saw a man, in my
life, that I liked so well! 
Your Lordship does me honour. I say this the
rather, as I may, on this solemn occasion, taking
leave of such honourable friends, charge my future
life with resolutions to behave worthy of the favour I
have met with in this family. 
I passed from him to the General—Forgive, my
Lord, said I, the seeming formality of my behaviour
in this parting scene: It is a very solemn one to me. 
You have expressed yourself of me, and to me, my
Lord, with more passion (Forgive me, I mean not to
offend you) than perhaps you will approve in yourself
when I am far removed from Italy. For have
you not a noble mind? And are you not a son of
the Marquis della Porretta? Permit me to observe,
that passion will make a man exalt himself, and degrade
another; and the just medium will be then
forgot. I am afraid I have been thought more
lightly of, than I ought to be, either in justice, or
for the honour of a person who is dear to every one
present. My country was once mentioned with disdain:
Think not my vanity so much concerned in
what I am going to say, as my honour: I am proud
to be thought an Englishman: Yet I think as highly
of every worthy man of every nation under the sun,
as I do of the worthy men of my own. I am not
of a contemptible race in my own country. My
father lives in it with the magnificence of a prince. 

He loves his son; yet I presume to add, that that son
deems his good name his riches; his integrity his grandeur. 
Princes, tho' they are intitled by their rank to
respect, are princes to him only as they act. 
A few words more, my Lord. 
I have been of the hearing, not of the speaking
side of the question, in the two last conferences I had
the honour to hold with your Lordship. Once you
unkindly mentioned the word triumph. The word at
the time went to my heart. When I can subdue the
natural warmth of my temper, then, and then only,
I have a triumph. I should not have remembered
this, had I not now, my Lord, on this solemn occasion,
been received by you with an indignant eye. I
respect your Lordship too much, not to take notice
of this angry reception. My silence upon it, perhaps,
would look like subscribing before this illustrious company
to the justice of your contempt: Yet I mean
no other notice than this; and this to demonstrate
that I was not, in my own opinion at least, absolutely
unworthy of the favour I met with from the
father, the mother, the brothers, you so justly honour,
and which I wished to stand in with you. 
And now, my Lord, allow me the honour of your
hand; and, as I have given you no cause for displeasure,
say, that you will remember me with kindness,
as I shall honour you and your whole family to the last
day of my life. 
The General heard me out; but it was with great
emotion. He accepted not my hand; he returned
not any answer: The Bishop arose, and, taking him
aside, endeavoured to calm him. 
I addressed myself to the two young Lords, and
said, That if ever their curiosity led them to visit
England, where I hoped to be in a few months, I
should be extremely glad of cultivating their esteem
and favour, by the best offices I could do them. 
They received my civility with politeness. 

I addressed myself next to Lady Laurana—May
you, madam, the friend, the intimate, the chosen
companion of Lady Clementina, never know the
hundredth part of the woe that fills the breast of the
man before you, for the calamity that has befallen
your admirable cousin, and, because of that, a
whole excellent family. Let me recommend to you,
that tender and soothing treatment to her, which her
tender heart would shew to you, in any calamity that
should befal you. I am not a bad man, madam, tho'
of a different communion from yours. Think but
half so charitably of me, as I do of every one of your
religion who lives up to his professions, and I shall
be happy in your favourable thoughts when you hear
me spoken of. 
It is easy to imagine, Dr. Bartlett, that I addressed
myself in this manner to this Lady whom I had never
before seen, that she might not think the harder of
her cousin's prepossessions in favour of a Protestant. 
I re-commended myself to the favour of Father
Marescotti. He assured me of his esteem, in very
warm terms. 
And just as I was again applying to my Jeronymo,
the General came to me: You cannot think, Sir,
said he, nor did you design it, I suppose, that I should
be pleased with your address to me. I have only
this question to ask, When do you quit Bologna? 
Let me ask your Lordship, said I, When do you
return to Naples? 
Why that question, Sir? haughtily. 
I will answer you frankly. Your Lordship, at the
first of my acquaintance with you, invited me to
Naples. I promised to pay my respects to you there. 
If you think of being there in a week, I will attend
you at your own palace in that city; and there, my
Lord, I hope, no cause to the contrary having arisen
from me, to be received by you with the same kindness
and favour that you shewed when you gave me
the invitation. I think to leave Bologna to-morrow. 

O brother! said the Bishop, Are you not now overcome? 
And are you in earnest? said the General. 
I am, my Lord. I have many valuable friends, at
different courts and cities in Italy, to take leave of. 
I never intend to see it again. I would look upon your
Lordship as one of those friends: But you seem still
displeased with me. You accepted not my offered
hand before: Once more I tender it. A man of
spirit cannot be offended at a man of spirit, without
lessening himself. I call upon your dignity, my Lord. 
He held out his hand, just as I was withdrawing
mine. I have pride, you know, Dr. Bartlett; and I
was conscious of a superiority in this instance: I took
his hand, however, at his offer; yet pitied him,
that his motion was made at all, as it wanted that
grace which generally accompanies all he does, and
says. 
The Bishop embraced me. —Your moderation,
thus exerted, said he, must ever make you triumph. 
O Grandison! you are a Prince of the Almighty's
creation. 
The noble Jeronymo dried his eyes, and held out his
arms to embrace me. 
The General said, I shall certainly be at Naples
in a week. I am too much affected by the woes of
my family, to behave as perhaps I ought on this occasion. 
Indeed, Grandison, it is difficult for sufferers
to act with spirit and temper at the same time. 
It is, my Lord; I have found it so. My hopes
raised, as once they were, now sunk, and absolute
despair having taken place of them—Would to God
I had never returned to Italy! —But I reproach not
any-body. 
Yet, said Jeronymo, you have some reason—To
be sent for as you were—He was going on—Pray,
brother, said the General—And turning to me, I may
expect you, Sir, at Naples? 

You may, my Lord. But one favour I have to
beg of you mean time. It is, That you will not
treat harshly your dear Clementina. Would to Heaven
I might have had the honour to say, my Clementina! 
And permit me to make one other request on
my own account: And that is, That you will tell
her, that I took my leave of your whole family, by
their kind permission; and that, at my departure, I
wished her, from my soul, all the happiness that the
best and tenderest of her friends can wish her! I
make this request to you, my Lord, rather than to
Signor Jeronymo, because the tenderness which he
has for me might induce him to mention me to her in
a manner which might, at this time, affect her too
sensibly for her peace. 
Be pleased, my dear Signor Jeronymo, to make
my devotion known to the Marchioness. Would to
Heaven—But Adieu, and once more Adieu, my Jeronymo. 
I shall hear from you when I get to Naples,
if not before. —God restore your sister, and heal
you! 
I bowed to the Marquis, to the Ladies, to the
General, to the Bishop, particularly; to the rest in
general; and was obliged, in order to conceal my
emotion, to hurry out of the door. The servants
had planted themselves in a row; not for selfish motives,
as in England: They bowed to the ground,
and blessed me, as I went through them. I had ready
a purse of ducats. One hand and another declined
it: I dropt it in their sight. God be with you, my
honest friends! said I; and departed—O, Dr. Bartlett,
with a heart how much distressed! 
And now, my good Miss Byron, Have I not reason,
from the deep concern which you take in the
woes of Lady Clementina, to regret the task you have
put me upon? And do you, my good Lord and Lady
L. and Miss Grandison, now wonder that your brother 

has not been forward to give you the particulars
of this melancholy tale? Yet you all say, I must
proceed. 

See, Lucy, the greatness of this man's behaviour! 
What a presumption was it in your Harriet, ever to
aspire to call such a one hers! 

