



From Lady Davers, in Reply. 


My dear Pamela,
You have given us all a great Disappointment,
in declining to oblige me with the Sequel of
your Papers. I was a little out of Humour with you
at first;–––I must own I was:–––For I cannot bear Denial,
when my Heart is set upon any thing. But
Lady Betty became your Advocate, and said, She
thought you very excusable; since, no doubt,
there might be many tender Things, circumstanced
as you was, which might be well enough for your
Parents to see, but for nobody else; and Relations
of our Side least of all, whose future Intimacy and
frequent Visits, might give Occasions for Raillery and
Remarks, that might not be always agreeable. I regarded
her Apology for you the more, because I
knew it was a great Balk to her, that you did not comply
with my Request. But now, Child, when you
know me more, you'll find, that if I am oblig'd to
give up one Point, I always insist upon another, as
near it as I can, in order to see if it be only one thing
I am to be refused, or every thing; in which last
Case I know how to take my Measures, and resent. 
Now then, this is what I insist on; That you correspond
with me in the same manner you did with
your Parents, and acquaint me with every Passage
that is of Concern to you; beginning with your Accounts
how you spent your Time, both of you,
when you were in Kent; for, you must know, we
are all taken with your Duty to your Parents, and
the Discretion of the good Couple, and think you
have given a very edifying Example of filial Piety to
all who shall hear your Story; for if so much Duty
is owing to Parents, where nothing can be done for
one, how much more is it to be expected, where there 

is a Power to add to the natural Obligation, all the
Comforts and Conveniencies of Life? We People in
upper Life, you must know, love to hear how Gratitude
and unexpected Benefits operate upon honest
Minds, who have little more than plain artless Nature
for their Guide; and we flatter ourselves with
the Hopes of many a delightful Hour, by your Means,
in this our solitary Situation, as it will be, if we
are obliged to pass the next Winter in it, as my Lord
and the Earl threaten me, and the Countess, and
Lady Betty, that we shall. Then let us hear of
every thing that gives you Joy and Trouble: And if
my Brother carries you to Town, for the Winter,
while he attends Parliament, the Advices you will be
able to give us of what passes in London, and of the
public Entertainments and Diversions he will take
you to, as you will relate them from your own artless
and natural Observations, will be as diverting to us,
as if we were at them ourselves. For a young Creature,
of your good Understanding, to whom all
these Things will be quite new, will give us, perhaps,
a better Taste of them, their Beauties and Defects,
than we might have before. For we People of
Quality go to those Places, dress'd out and adorn'd,
in such Manner, outvying one another, as if we considered
ourselves as so many Parts of the public Entertainment,
and are too much pleased with ourselves
to be able so to attend to what we see, as to form a
right Judgment of it: And, indeed, we, some of us,
behave with so much Indifference to the Entertainment,
as if we thought ourselves above being diverted
by what we come to see, and as if our View
was rather to trifle away our Time, than to improve
ourselves, by attending to the Story or the Action. 
See, Pamela, I shall not make an unworthy Correspondent
altogether; for I can get into thy grave
Way, and moralize a little now-and-then: And if 

you'll promise to oblige me by your constant Correspondence
in this way, and divest yourself of all
Restraint, as if you was writing to your Parents,
(and I can tell you, you'll write to one who will be
as candid and as favourable to you as they can be)
then I am sure we shall have Truth and Nature from
you; and these are Things which we are generally so
much lifted above, by our Conditions, that we
hardly know what they are. 
But I have written enough for one Letter: And yet,
having more to say, I will, after this, send another,
without waiting for your Answer, which you may
give to both together; and am, mean time, 
Yours, &c.
Davers. 

