


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Bologna, Thursday, July 13-24.
I Had a visit early this morning from the Count of
Belvedere. He found me very much indisposed. 
He had heard that I met with some difficulties, and
attributed my indisposition to them. 
I owned that it might be so. My life, my Lord,
said I, has not been so happy as might have been
hoped for, by a man, who has made it his study to
avoid giving offence, either to man or woman; and
has endeavoured to restrain passions, that otherwise
might have been as unruly as those of other young
men, in my circumstances. But, I bless God, I have
resolution. I may bend beneath a weight, when it is
first laid upon me: But if I find I cannot shake it off,
I will endeavour to collect my strength, and make
myself easy under it. Pardon me, my Lord: I do
not often allow my mind to break out thus into words. 
But I hold the Count of Belvedere for my friend. 
You do me honour, said he: And I came with a
heart disposed to cultivate your friendship. I thank
you for your last goodness to me. Your advice and
gentle behaviour, when I was not fit to be trusted
with myself, have saved me, as far as I know, from 

final destruction. To the last day of my life, I shall
confess obligation to you. But, dear Chevalier, if
some account of the difficulties you meet with will not
be a renewal of grief, now you are not very well— 
It will not be so, my Lord, interrupted I, since at
present I can think of nothing else. Yet putting myself
in the place of every one of the family of Porretta,
I have nobody to blame; but the contrary. And I
must admire Lady Clementina as one of the noblest of
women. 
He was all impatience for further particulars. 
What may yet be the event, I cannot tell, proceeded
I: Therefore will only say, that difference in
religion is the difficulty with the Lady. I am willing
to allow her the full and free exercise of hers. She
insists upon a change of mine. For the rest, you, my
Lord, want not friends among the principals of the
family; let them give you what account they think
fit. I would not scruple to gratify your curiosity, could
I give you a conclusive one. 
I am curious, Chevalier, said he. I loved Clementina
above all women, before her illness. I loved her
not the less for her illness; for then my Pity joined
with my Love, and added a tenderness to it, of which
I had not, in equal degree, been before sensible. The
treatment she met with, and the self-interested cruelty
of Lady Laurana, heightened her illness, and that
(I did not think it possible) my Love. In order to
free her from that treatment; and in hopes that a different
one (my hopes you see were not ill founded)
would restore her reason; and that the happy result
might be the defeating of the cruel Laurana's expectations; 
I tender'd myself in marriage to her, notwithstanding
her illness. But I must say, that I never
knew how much I loved her, till I was apprehensive
that, not only I, but Italy, and her Religion, were
likely to lose her for ever. And will you not allow of
my curiosity now? God give you, Chevalier, health 

and happiness here and hereafter! But may you never
be the husband of Clementina, but of some woman of
your own country, if there be one in it that can deserve you! 
The Count left me with this wish, pronounced
with earnestness: And I suppose will visit the Bishop
and Father Marescotti, in order to gratify his curiosity. 
My indisposition requiring indulgence, I sent a billet
to the Marchioness, excusing my attendance till the
afternoon, on the score of an unexpected engagement. 
I was loth to mention that I was not very
well, lest it should be thought a lover-like artifice, to
move compassion. I will not owe my success, even
with a Clementina, to mean contrivances. You
know I have pride, my dear friend—Pride which
your example has not been able to subdue, tho' it has
sometimes made me ashamed of it. 
One o'Clock.
Camilla, by direction of her two Ladies, made
me a visit about two hours ago. They were alarmed
at my postponing my attendance on Lady Clementina
till the afternoon; suspecting that the Count of Belvedere
had unwelcomely engaged me; and therefore
sent the worthy woman to know the true cause. Camilla
observing that I looked ill, I desired her to take
no notice of it to any-body: But she could not help
acquainting the Marchioness with it; who, ordering
her to forbear mentioning it to Clementina and Jeronymo,
was so good, attended by Father Marescotti,
to make me a visit in person. 
Never was mother more tender to her own son,
than she was to me. The Father expressed a paternal
affection for me. I made light of the illness, being
resolved, if possible, to attend them in the afternoon. 
My mind, my dear friend, is disturbed. I want to
be at a certainty: Yet, from what the Marchioness
hinted, I believe I have no reason to doubt. The 

Father and the Bishop have spared no pains, I dare
say, to strengthen the Lady's scruples. Their whole
study (the Marchioness intimated) is now, in what
manner to acknowlege their obligations to me. 
They owe me none. 
My dear Chevalier, said she, at parting, take care
of your health: She put her hand on mine—Your precious
health. Don't think of coming out. We will
in turn attend you here. 
* *
Notwithstanding the advice of the Marchioness,
I went to the palace of Porretta, as soon as I
thought their dinner-time was over. Signor Jeronymo
desired to be alone with me for a few minutes; and
when he was, began upon the subject of the unexpected
turn which his sister had taken. I found, that
he had been acquainted with the truth of every-thing:
Not a single circumstance was omitted, that might enable
him to judge fairly of the whole. 
And will you, Grandison, can you, my dear friend,
said he, have the goodness to attend with patience
the event of this dear girl's heroism, or what shall I
call it? 
I assured him, that the restoration of his sister's health
of mind was the dearest to me of all considerations; 
and that I came over at first with no other hopes than
his recovery and hers; resolved to leave to Providence
all the rest. 
The Marchioness came in soon after, and taking
me aside, chid me with tenderness even maternal, for
coming abroad. The Marquis, the Count, the Bishop,
and Father Marescotti, joined us; and then they all,
as with one voice, offered to use their interests with
Clementina in my favour, if either my peace of mind,
or my health, were likely to be affected by her present
resolution. 
While there was conscience in it, I answered, I would
not, for the world, that she should be urged to change 

it. Nothing now, as I believed, remained to be done,
but to try the firmness of her resolution, by first short,
and then longer absences: And those I would propose
to herself, if they thought fit, when I was next
admitted to her presence. 
Jeronymo, and all the family, I saw were of one
mind. Tell me, say, my dear Dr. Bartlett, is it excusable
in a man, who has been so long favoured by
your conversation, and should have been benefited by
your example, who have behaved so greatly in disappointments,
and even persecutions, to find in himself
a pride that, at the instant, had almost carried him
into petulance, when he saw every one of this family
appear to be more pleased than displeased, that he was
not likely to be allied to them? —Who yet, when he
coolly considers, and puts himself in the case of each
individual of it, must acknowlege, that they might well
be allowed to rejoice (the great article religion out of
the question) in the hope of keeping her among them
in her native country; and the more, because of the
unhappy disorder of her mind; and out of a distant
one, obnoxious to them all, as England is? Would
not my own father and mother, would not I myself,
have equally rejoiced in such a turn in the affections
of a sister of my own; especially if we had complied
with her principally from motives of compassion, and
contrary to the interests of our family? 
The Marchioness conducted me to the young Lady. 
She received me with a blush, as a person would do
another whom she was sensible she had causelesly disappointed. 
She took notice, after the first emotion,
that I seemed not to be well, and cast an eye of compassion
on me. A slight indisposition, I said, that
might, perhaps, be owing to my late inactivity, and
want of exercise. I had thoughts of once more making
the tour of Italy, in order to visit the many kind
friends at different courts, who had honoured me with
their notice during my former abode in Italy. 

How long do you propose to be absent, Sir? 
Perhaps a month, madam. 
A month, Sir! —She sighed, and looked down. 
Signor Jeronymo, I hope, said I, will correspond
with me. 
I could almost wish, said she—Pardon me, madam,
to her mother—and looked bashfully down. 
What would my child wish? 
That I might correspond with the Chevalier in his
absence—As his sister, as his pupil, I think I might— 
You will do me, madam, the highest honour— 
Dear madam, to the Marchioness, may I not have
your interest with Lady Clementina, to engage her to
pursue her kind hint? 
By all means. My dearest Love, it will not misbecome
you in any character, whether as pupil, as
sister, or friend, to write to such a man as the Chevalier
Grandison. 
Perhaps then I may, said she. You, madam, shall
see all that passes in this correspondence. 
That shall be as you please, my Love. I can absolutely
depend upon the Chevalier's generosity, and
your prudence. 
I should choose, madam, said I, that you should see
all that passes. As amusement is principally my view
in this tour, I can be punctual to place and time. 
But shall you be gone a month, Sir? 
As much less, madam, as you shall command. 
Nay, as things are circumstanced, it is not for me— 
She stopt, sighed, and looked down. 
You, madam, are above unnecessary reserve. I never
yet abused a confidence. I am proud of your good
opinion. I never will do any-thing to forfeit it. Whatever
shall be your pleasure, that signify to me in the
Letters you will favour me with. I will be all grateful
obedience. 
Whither, Sir, do you intend to go first? 
To Florence, madam— 

To Florence, Sir? —But Lady Olivia, I think, is
not there—To Mrs. Beaumont, I suppose? 
I will send you, madam, from Florence, the beginning
Letter of the hoped-for correspondence. I
will be careful to be within distance of receiving your
favour in a very short space, by means of a servant,
whom I will leave at Florence, to attend to our correspondence. 
And when, Sir, do you leave Bologna? 
I will now take Leave of my new correspondent,
and my dear friends here; and dispose myself for my
little route. 
She looked at her mother; then at me—again sighed,
blushed, and looked down—Well, Sir, was all she
said. 
Will you not drink chocolate with us to-morrow?
said the Marchioness. 
I excused myself. As I was not well, I thought I
might be obliged to keep my chamber for two or three
days; and that therefore it was better to take leave of
her then, that I might not give them anxiety, for their
own sakes, on a supposal, that I owed my indisposition
to my disappointment. And yet, Dr. Bartlett—But
you know my heart, and all its imperfections: And
will you not, on this extraordinary occasion, allow me
to give way to my native pride, for my own sake? 
Who but must admire the exalted mind of this young
Lady? What man would not wish her to be his? — 
But to covet a relation to a family, however illustrious,
however worthy, every one of which wishes, and with
reason on his side, that it may not take place—I must,
if possible—But a few weeks will now determine my
fate—I will not leave them or myself, if I can help it,
any cause of regret. 
I took a solemn leave of Clementina. She wept
at parting; and dropping down on one knee, prayed
for a blessing to attend me where-ever I went. 
Even had not my indisposition lowered my spirits, 

I should have been affected at the solemnity and grace
of her manner. The Marchioness was. 
I went from her to Jeronymo. I left it to his mother
to tell him all that had passed; and took almost
as ardent a leave of him. I desired a visit from Mr.
Lowther: And left my compliments for the rest of a
family that I ever must highly respect. 
Thursday, July 13-24.
I took, by advice, a medicine over-night, that
composed me. I had wanted rest. I am much better,
and preparing for my journey to Florence. I have returned
answer that I am, to enquiries made after my
health by the whole family. The Bishop excused his
personal attendance, on the Count's sudden resolution
to set out for Urbino; and insisting on his and Father
Marescotti's accompanying him thither for a few days. 
Camilla came to me from her two Ladies, and the
Marquis. All three, she told me, were indisposed. 
Their enquiries after my health were very tender:
The Marquis bid her tell me, that he hoped to be well
enough to make me a visit before I set out. Jeronymo
wished to see me first, if I had opportunity. But, as
I probably must, if I go, see Lady Clementina, and
another solemn parting will follow, I think it will be
best, for both our sakes, as well as for Jeronymo's, not
to obey him; and so I hinted by Camilla. 
The Count of Belvedere has made me a visit. He
is setting out for Parma. Not one word passed his
lips about Lady Clementina, or her family. He was
very earnest with me, to promise him a visit at his
palace. I gave him room to expect me. By his
silence on a subject so near his heart, as well as by the
very great respect he paid me, I have no reason to doubt
but he knows the situation I am in with Clementina:
She will have his prayers, I dare say, for perseverance
in her present way of thinking. Indeed now, everybody's
of her family—for who can doubt the General's? 

She would have had mine to the same purpose,
the more sincerely, had not they all joined to indulge
my hopes; and had she not given such instances of
the noblest of female minds. 
But, how great soever may be the occasion given
me for fortitude, by a resolution so unexpected by every-body
from Lady Clementina, I cannot be deprived
of all pleasure; since the contents of my last pacquets,
as well those from Paris as from England, afford me
a great deal. 
Every-thing is done at Paris, that I could have
wished, in relation to Mr. Danby's legacy. 
Lord W. lets me know, that he thinks himself
every day happier than in the past with his Lady; 
who also subscribes to the same acknowlegement. 
Our Beauchamp tells me, that he wants only my
company to make him the happiest of men. He requests
me to write a Letter of thanks, in my own
name, to Lady Beauchamp, on his dutiful acknowlegement
to me of her kindness to him. I will with
pleasure comply; and the sooner, as I am sure that
gratitude for past benefits, and not expectation of new
ones, is his motive. 
He laments in postscript, that his father is taken
with a threatening disorder. I am sorry for it. Methinks
I am interested in the life and health of Sir
Harry Beauchamp. I hope he will long enjoy the
happiness, of which his son says he is extremely sensible. 
Should he die, the Lady will be a great deal
in my Beauchamp's power, large as her jointure is. 
If he be not, on such an event, as obliging to her,
as he now is, and forget not all past disobligations, I
shall not have the opinion of his heart that I now have. 
Our Beauchamp wants but the trial of prosperity (a
much more arduous one than that of adversity) to be
upon full proof an excellent man. 
Lady Mansfield, with equal joy and gratitude, acquaints
me, that my presence in England is only 

wanting to bring to a decision every point that now
remains in debate with her adversaries, the Keelings; 
they having shewn themselves inclinable, by the mediation
of Sir John Lambton, to compromise on the
terms I had advised she should get proposed, as from
me; and the wicked Bolton having also made proposals,
that perhaps ought to be accepted if he cannot
be brought to amend them. 
Two of Emily's Letters of distant date are come
together. I will write to the dear girl by the next
mail, and let her know how much absence endears to
me my friends. 
You give me joy, my dear Dr. Bartlett, in acquainting
me with the happiness of Lord and Lady G. I
will write to my Charlotte upon it, and thank her
for the credit she does me by her affectionate behaviour
to that honest and obliging man. 
How happy are you, my dear friend, and Lord and
Lady G. and Emily, at Miss Byron's! I am charmed
with the characters you give me of her family. 
But I have Letters brought by the same mail, that are
not so agreeable as those I have taken notice of. They
are from Lady Olivia, and my poor cousin Grandison. 
That unhappy woman is to be my disturbance! 
She is preparing, she says, to come back to Italy. She
execrates: She threatens. Poor woman! But no
more of her at present. 
My cousin is by this time, I suppose, at Paris. He
writes, that he was on the point of setting out, in pursuance
of my advice; and will wait there for my
direction to proceed to Italy, or not. I shall write to
him to continue there till he hears further from me; 
and, at the same time, to some of my friends there,
to make France agreeable to him. 
I shall not perhaps write again very soon. Letters
from England will, however, find an easy access, directed
to me, under cover, to Mrs. Beaumont at
Florence, as you know how. 

I shall be pretty much in motion, if health permit. 
I shall take a view of the works projecting by the duke
of Modena, in order to render his little Signory considerable. 
I shall visit the Count of Belvedere at
Parma. Mrs. Beaumont and her friends will have
more of my company than any other persons. Perhaps
I may make a long-requested visit to the Altieri
family, at Urbino. If I do, I must not put a slight
on the Conte della Porretta, who pressingly invited
me thither. I think to pass a few days at Rome. If
I go from thence to Naples, I shall perhaps once more,
in the General's company, visit Portici, in order to
make more accurate observations than I have hitherto
done, on those treasures of antiquity which have been
discovered in the antient Herculaneum. 
I have a private intimation from Milan, that a visit
there would be a welcome one to Lady Sforza. I
may possibly take that city in my way, when I quit
Italy. But how can I, without indignation, see the
cruel Laurana? 
Thus, my dear and reverend friend, have I given
you an imperfect sketch of my present intentions, as
to passing the month that I think of absenting myself
from Bologna. 
It is a long time since I have been able to tell you
aforehand, with regard to some of the most material
articles of my life, what I will or will not do. Yet,
knowing my own motives, I cannot say, that were
the last three or four years of it to come over again,
I should have acted otherwise than I have done. Do
you, my reverend friend, with that freedom which has
been of inexpressible use to me, remind me, if I am
too ready to acquit myself. You know (I repeat) all
the secrets of my heart. Be not partial to your sincere
friend. I write not to be praised, but corrected. 
Don't flatter my vanity; I am yet but a young man! 
You have not blamed me a great while: I am for
this reason a little diffident of the ground I stand upon: 

But if you have no material fault to recollect, spare
yourself the trouble of telling me so: Having thus renewed
my call upon you, for your friendly admonition,
I will look upon your silence as an acquittal, so
far as I have gone. And we will begin, from the date
of your next, a new account. In the mean time, be
not concerned for my health. I am much better than I
was. My mind was weakened by suspense. I long since
thought the crisis near. If it be not already overpast, a
few weeks must surely determine it. I am not in haste
to send this pacquet. A week hence Sir Alexander
Nesbitt will set out directly for England. He has a great
desire of being acquainted with my dear Dr. Bartlett,
and requests me to give him a commission, that may
introduce him to you. Were my future destiny in
this country absolutely determined, I would not, however,
have delayed sending you these Letters by a
speedier conveyance. 
Sir Alexander is a worthy man: As such, wants
not a recommendation to my dear and reverend friend,
from his 
Charles Grandison. 

