



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday, July 23. 
What pain, my dearest friend, does your kind
solicitude for my welfare give me! How much
more binding and tender are the Ties of pure Friendship,
and the Union of Like minds, than the Ties
of Nature! Well might the Sweet-Singer of Israel,
when he was carrying to the utmost extent the praises
of the friendship between him and his beloved friend,
say, that the Love of Jonathan to him was wonderful; 
that it surpassed the Love of women! What an
exalted idea does it give of the Soul of Jonathan,
sweetly attempered for the sacred band, if we may
suppose it but equal to that of my Anna Howe for her
fallen Clarissa! —But, altho' I can glory in your kind
Love for me, think, my dear, what concern must
fill a mind, not ungenerous, when the obligation lies
all on one side: And when, at the same time that
your Light is the brighter for my Darkness, I must
give pain to a dear friend, to whom I delighted to give
pleasure; and not pain only, but discredit, for supporting
my blighted fame against the busy tongues of
uncharitable censurers! 
This it is that makes me, in the words of my admired
exclaimer, very little altered, often repeat: 
“O! that I were as in months past! as in the days
when God preserved me! When his candle shined
upon my head, and when by his light I walked
through darkness! As I was in the days of my
childhood—when the Almighty was yet with me; 
when I was in my Father's house: When I washed 

my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out
rivers of oil!” 
You set before me your reasons, enforced by the
opinion of your honoured Mother, why I should think
of Mr. Lovelace for a Husband (a) . 
And I have before me your Letter of the 13th (b) ,
containing the account of the visit and proposals, and
kind interposition of the two Misses Montague, in the
names of the good Ladies Sarah Sadleir and Betty
Lawrance, and in that of Lord M. 
Also yours of the 18th (c)  demanding me, as I may
say, of those Ladies, and of that family, when I was
so infamously and cruelly arrested, and you knew not
what was become of me. 
The Answer likewise of those Ladies, signed in so
full and so generous a manner by themselves (d) , and
by that Nobleman, and those two venerable Ladies; 
and, in his light way, by the wretch himself. 
These, my dearest Miss Howe; and your Letter of
the 16th (e) ,
which came when I was under Arrest,
and which I received not till some days after; 
Are all before me. 
And I have as well weighed the whole matter, and
your arguments in support of your advice, as at present
my head and my heart will let me weighed them. 
I am, moreover, willing to believe, not only from
your own opinion, but from the assurances of one of
Mr. Lovelace's friends, Mr. Belford, a good-natured
and humane man, who spares not to censure the author
of my calamities (I think, with undissembled and
undesigning sincerity) that that man is innocent of the
disgraceful Arrest: 
And even, if you please, in sincere compliment to
your opinion, and to that of Mr. Hickman, that (over-persuaded
by his friends, and ashamed of his unmerited 

baseness to me) he would in earnest marry me,
if I would have him. 
“ (a)  Well, and now, what is the result of all? — 
It is this—That I must abide by what I have already
declared—And that is [Don't be angry at me, my
best friend] That I have much more pleasure in
thinking of death, than of such a Husband. In
short, as I declared in my last, that I cannot [Forgive
me, if I say, I will not] Ever be his. 
“But you will expect my reasons: I know you
will: And if I give them not, will conclude me
either obstinate, or implacable, or both: And
those would be sad imputations, if just, to be laid
to the charge of a person who thinks and talks of
dying. And yet, to say, that resentment and disappointment
have no part in my determination,
would be saying a thing hardly to be credited. For,
I own I have resentments, strong resentments, but
not unreasonable ones, as you will be convinced,
if already you are not so, when you know all my
Story—If ever you do know it—For I begin to fear
(so many things more necessary to be thought of,
than either this man, or my own vindication, have
I to do) that I shall not have time to compass what I
have intended, and, in a manner, promised you (b) . 
“I have one reason to give in support of my resolution,
that, I believe, yourself will allow of: But having
owned, that I have resentments, I will begin with
those considerations, in which anger and disappointment
have too great a share; in hopes, that having
once disburdened my mind upon paper, and to my
Anna Howe, of those corroding uneasy passions, I
shall prevent them for ever from returning to my 

heart, and to have their place supplied by better,
milder, and more agreeable ones. 
“My Pride, then, my dearest friend, altho' a
great deal mortified, is not sufficiently mortified, if
it be necessary for me to submit to make that man
my choice, whose actions are, and ought to be,
my abhorrence! —What! —Shall I, who have been
treated with such premeditated and perfidious barbarity,
as is painful to be thought of, and cannot
with modesty be described, think of taking the violator
to my heart? Can I vow duty to one so wicked,
and hazard my salvation by joining myself to so great
a profligate, now I know him to be so? Do you
think your Clarissa Harlowe so lost, so sunk, at least,
as that she could, for the sake of patching up, in
the world's eye, a broken reputation, meanly appear
indebted to the generosity, or perhaps compassion,
of a man, who has, by means so inhuman,
robbed her of it? Indeed, my dear, I should not
think my penitence for the rash step I took, anything
better than a specious delusion, if I had not
got above the least wish to have Mr. Lovelace for
my Husband. 
“Yes, I warrant, I must creep to the violator, and
be thankful to him for doing me poor justice! 
“Do you not already see me (pursuing the advice
you give) with a downcast eye, appear before his
friends, and before my own (supposing the latter
would at last condescend to own me) divested of
that noble confidence, which arises from a mind unconscious
of having deserved reproach? 
“Do you not see me creep about mine own house,
preferring all my honest maidens to myself—as if
afraid, too, to open my lips, either by way of
reproof or admonition, lest their bolder eyes should
bid me look inward, and not expect perfection from
them? 

“And shall I entitle the wretch to upbraid me with
his generosity, and his pity; and, perhaps to reproach
me, for having been capable of forgiving
crimes of such a nature? 
“I once indeed hoped, little thinking him so premeditatedly
vile a man, that I might have the happiness
to reclaim him: I vainly believed, that he
loved me well enough to suffer my advice for his
good, and the example I humbly presumed I should
be enabled to set him, to have weight with him; 
and the rather, as he had no mean opinion of my
morals and understanding: But now, what hope is
there left for this my prime hope? —Were I to marry
him, what a figure should I make, preaching virtue
and morality to a man whom I had trusted with opportunities
to seduce me from all my own duties? — 
And then, supposing I were to have Children by
such a Husband, must it not, think you, cut a
thoughtful person to the heart, to look round upon
her little family, and think she had given them a
Father destined, without a miracle, to perdition; 
and whose immoralities, propagated among them
by his vile example, might, too probably, bring
down a curse upon them? And, after all, who
knows but that my own sinful compliances with a
man, who would think himself entitled to my obedience,
might-taint my own morals, and make me,
instead of a reformer, an imitator of him? —For
who can touch pitch, and not be defiled? 
“Let me then repeat, that I truly despise this man! 
If I know my own heart, indeed I do! —I pity
him! —Beneath my very pity as he is, I nevertheless
pity him! —But this I could not do, if I still
loved him: For, my dear, one must be greatly sensible
of the baseness and ingratitude of those we
love. I love him not, therefore! My soul disdains
communion with him. 

“But altho' thus much is due to resentment, yet
have I not been so far carried away by its angry effects,
as to be rendered incapable of casting about
what I ought to do, and what could be done, if the
Almighty, in order to lengthen the time of my penitence,
were to bid me to live. 
“The Single-life, at such times, has offered to me,
as the life, the only life, to be chosen. But in that,
must I not now sit brooding over my past afflictions,
and mourning my faults till the hour of my release? 
And would not every one be able to assign the reason,
why Clarissa Harlowe chose solitude, and to
sequester herself from the world? Would not the
look of every creature, who beheld me, appear as
a reproach to me? And would not my conscious
eye confess my fault, whether the eyes of others
accused me or not? One of my delights was, to enter
the cots of my poor neighbours, to leave lessons to
the boys, and cautions to the elder girls: And how
should I be able, unconscious, and without pain, to
say to the latter, Fly the delusions of men, who
had been supposed to have run away with one? 
“What then, my dear and only friend, can I wish
for but death? —And what, after all, is Death? 
'Tis but a cessation from mortal life: 'Tis but the
finishing of an appointed course: The refreshing Inn
after a fatiguing journey: The end of a life of cares
and troubles; and, if happy, the beginning of a
life of immortal happiness. 
“If I die not now, it may possibly happen, that I may
be taken when I am less prepared. Had I escaped
the evils I labour under, it might have been in the
midst of some gay promising hope; when my heart
had beat high with the desire of life; and when the
vanity of this earth had taken hold of me. 
“But now, my dear, for your satisfaction let me
say, that altho' I wish not for life, yet would I
not, like a poor coward, desert my post when I 

can maintain it, and when it is my duty to maintain it. 
“More than once, indeed, was I urged by thoughts
so sinful: But then it was in the height of my distress: 
And once, particularly, I have reason to believe,
I saved myself by my desperation from the
most shocking personal insults; from a repetition,
as far as I know, of his vileness; the base women
(with so much reason dreaded by me) present, to
intimidate me, if not to assist him! —O my dear, you
know not what I suffered on that occasion! —Nor
do I what I escaped at the time, if the wicked man
had approached me to execute the horrid purposes
of his vile heart.” 
As I am of opinion, that it would have manifested
more of Revenge and Despair, than of Principle, had
I committed a violence upon myself, when the villainy
was perpetrated; so I should think it equally criminal,
were I now wilfully to neglect myself; were I purposely
to run into the arms of death (as that man supposes
I shall do) when I might avoid it. 
Nor, my dear, whatever are the suppositions of such
a short-sighted, such a low-souled man, must you impute
to gloom, to melancholy, to despondency, nor
yet to a spirit of faulty pride, or still more faulty
revenge, the resolution I have taken never to marry
this; and if not this, any man. So far from deserving
this imputation, I do assure you (my dear and only
Love) that I will do every-thing I can to prolong my
life, till God, in mercy to me, shall be pleased to call
for it. I have reason to think my punishment is but
the due consequence of my fault, and I will not run
away from it; but beg of Heaven to sanctify it to me. 
When appetite serves, I will eat and drink what is
sufficient to support nature. A very little, you know,
will do for that. And whatever my physicians shall
think fit to prescribe, I will take, though ever so disagreeable. 
In short, I will do every-thing I can do, 

to convince all my friends, who hereafter may think
it worth their while to enquire after my last behaviour,
that I possessed my soul with tolerable patience; and
endeavoured to bear with a lot of my own drawing: 
For thus, in humble imitation of the sublimest Exemplar,
I often say: —Lord, it is thy will; and it shall
be mine. Thou art just in all thy dealings with the
children of men; and I know thou wilt not afflict
me beyond what I can bear: And, if I can bear it,
I ought to bear it; and (thy grace assisting me) I will
bear it. 
“But here, my dear, is another reason; a reason
that will convince you yourself, that I ought not
to think of Wedlock; but of a preparation for a
quite different event. I am persuaded, as much as
that I am now alive, that I shall not long live. 
The strong sense I have ever had of my fault, the
loss of my reputation, my disappointments, the determined
resentment of my friends, aiding the barbarous
usage I have met with where I least deserved
it, have seized upon my heart: Seized upon it, before
it was so well fortified by religious considerations
as I hope it now is. Don't be concerned, my
dear—But I am sure, if I may say it with as little
presumption as grief, That God will soon dissolve
my substance; and bring me to death, and to the
house appointed for all living.” 
And now, my dearest friend, you know all my
mind. And you will be pleased to write to the Ladies
of Mr. Lovelace's family, That I think myself
infinitely obliged to them, for their good opinion of
me; and that it has given me greater pleasure than I
thought I had to come in this life, that, upon the little
knowlege they have of me, and that not personal, I
was thought worthy (after the ill usage I have received)
of an alliance with their honourable family: But that
I can by no means think of their Kinsman for a Husband: 
And do you, my dear, extract from the 

above, such reasons as you think have any weight in
them. 
I would write myself to acknowlege their favour,
had I not more employment for my head, my heart,
and my fingers, than I doubt they will be able to go
through. 
I should be glad to know when you set out on your
journey; as also your little stages; and your time of
stay at your Aunt Harman's; that my prayers may
locally attend you, whithersoever you go, and wherever
you are. 
Clarissa Harlowe. 