



My dear Lady,
I read with Pleasure your Commands, in
your last kind and obliging Letter, and you
may be sure of a ready Obedience in every one
of them that is in my Power. 
That which I can most easily do, I will first
do; and that is, to transcribe the Answer I sent
to Miss Darnford,*  and that to Mrs. Jewkes,
the former of which (and a long one it is) is as
follows: 

‘Dear Miss,
I begin now to be afraid I shall not have
the Pleasure and Benefit I promised myself,
of passing a Fortnight or Three Weeks at the
Hall, in your sweet Conversation, and that
of your worthy Family, as well as those others
in your agreeable Neighbourhood, whom I
must always remember with equal Honour and
Delight. 
‘The Occasion will be principally, that we
expect very soon a Visit from Lord and Lady
Davers, who propose to tarry here a Fortnight
at least; and after that, the advanc'd
Season will carry us to London, where Mr.
B. has taken a House for his Winter Residence,
and in order to attend Parliament: A Service,
he says, which he has been more deficient in 

hitherto, than he can either answer to his Constituents,
or to his own Conscience; for tho',
he says, he is but One, yet if any good Motion
should be lost by One, every absent Member,
who is independent, has it to reproach
himself with the Consequences that may follow,
on the Loss of that Good which might
otherwise redound to the Common wealth. 
And besides, he says, such Excuses as he could
make, every one might plead, and then publick
Affairs might as well be left to the Administration,
and no Parliament be chosen. 
‘He observed further on this Subject, that
every absent Member, in such Cases, indirectly
abets the Minister, be he who he will,
in all his Designs, be they what they will; 
and is even less excusable to his Country,
than the Man, who, for a transitory Benefit
to his private Family, takes a Pension or Reward
for his Vote; since the Difference is only,
that the one passively ruins his Country by
Neglect and Indolence, which can do nobody
good, and the other more actively for a Bribe; 
which Practice, tho' ruinous in the End to the
whole Publick, in which his own Private is
included, yet serves to answer some present
Turn or Benefit to himself or Family. 
‘See you, my dear Miss, from the humble
Cottager, what a publick Person your favour'd
Friend is grown! And behold how easy it is
for a bold Mind, to look forward; and, perhaps,
forgetting what she was, now she imagines
she has a Stake in the Country, takes 

upon herself to be as important, as significant,
as if, like my dear Miss Darnford, she had
been born to it! But if, nevertheless, I am censur'd
for troubling my Head with Politicks, let
me answer, That I am at Liberty, I hope, to
tell you Mr. B.'s Sentiments of these high
Matters; and that is all I have done. 
‘Well, but, my dearest Miss, may I not
presume to ask, Whether, if the Mountain
cannot come to Mahomet, Mahomet will not
come to the Mountain? Since Lady Davers's
Visit is so uncertain as to its Beginning and
Duration, and so great a Favour, as I am to
look upon it, and really shall, it being her
first Visit to me;—and since we must go and
take Possession of our London Residence; 
why can't Sir Simon spare to us the dear Lady,
whom he could use so hardly; and whose
Attendance (tho' he is indeed intitled to all
her Duty) he did not, just in that Instance,
quite so much deserve? 
“Well, but, after all, Sir Simon,” would
I say, if I had been in Presence at his peevish
Hour, “you are a fine Gentleman, are you
not? to take such a Method to shew your good
Daughter, that because she did not come soon
enough to you, she came too soon! And did
ever Papa, before you, put a good Book (for
such I doubt not it was, because you were in
Affliction, tho' so little affected by its Precepts)
to such a bad Use? As Parents Examples
are so prevalent, suppose Miss had taken
this very Book, and flung it at her Sister; 

Miss Nanny at her Waiting-maid; and so it
had gone thro' the Family; would it not
have been an Excuse for every one, to say,
that the Father and Head of the Family had
set the Example? 
“But, again, Sir Simon, Suppose you had
hurt the sweet Dove-like Eyes of my dear
Miss Darnford! —Suppose you had bruis'd
or broken the fine Skin of any Part of that
fine Face, which gives, at first Sight, so bright a
Promise of her still finer Mind, What, let me
ask you, Sir, could you have said for yourself? 
How would the dear Miss's Appearance, with
one sweet Eye, perhaps, muffled up; with a
plaister'd Forehead, or a veiled Cheek, hiding
herself from every body but you, and
her griev'd Mamma, and pitying Sister, reproach'd
you for so rash an Act;—nay, reproach'd
you the more, by her unreproaching
Obligingness, and chearful Duty, than if
(were she capable of it) she could have spoken
in sharp Complaints, and expostulatory Wailings? 
“You almost wish, my dear Miss tells me,
that I would undertake you! —This is very
good of you, Sir Simon,” ‘might I (would
his Patience have suffer'd me to run on thus)
have added—“But I hope, since you are
so sensible, that you want to be undertaken,
and since this peevish Rashness convinces me,
that you do, that you will undertake yourself: 
That you will not, when your Indisposition
makes the Attendance and Duty of my dear 

Lady and Misses necessary, make it more uncomfortable
to them, by adding a Difficulty
of being pleas'd, and an Impatience of Spirit,
to the Concern their Duty and Affection
make them have for you; and, at least, resolve
never to take a Book into your Hand
again, if you cannot make a better Use of it,
than you did then.” 
‘Pray, my dear Miss, tell your Papa, that
I beg the Favour of him, to present me with
this Book, and I will put a Mark upon it, and
it shall never more either give or receive such
Disgrace, I warrant it! Be it what it will, I
will present him with as good an one. 
‘I will write in it, “Memorandum, This
Book, reversing the Author's good Intention,
had like to have done Mischief next to unpardonable.” 
—‘Or, “This Book, instead of
subduing the Reader's Passions, (I take it for
granted, you see, Miss, it was Seneca's Morals,
or some such good Book) had like to have
been the Cause of a violent Evil. —Henceforth,
unavailing Instructor, be thou condemned
to stand by thyself, on a lone Shelf,
in my Closet; a Shelf most out of mine or
any other Person's Reach, for pretending to
prescribe Rules for subduing the Passions in
so inefficacious a Manner! And, consign'd to
Dust and Cobwebs, not once presume (in
hope to hide thy conscious Guilt) to squeeze
thyself into Rank with better, or, at least,
with more convincing Teachers.” 

‘But do you think, my dear Miss, Sir
Simon would be angry, if Opportunity had
offer'd, and I had been thus bold? If you think
so, don't let him see I had such Thoughts in
my Head. But, after all, if he were to have
been thus freely treated by me, and if he should
have blush'd with Anger at my Freedom, 'tis
but what he ought to bear from me; for, more
than once, he has made me blush for Shame, at
much greater on his Part; nay, and that too,
in Presence of his virtuous Daughters: So that
I have but half my Revenge upon him yet. — 
And will you bear Malice, will he say, Mrs.
B.? —Yes, Sir Simon, I will; and nothing
but your amending the Evil can make me forgive
a Gentleman, that is really a Gentleman,
who can so sadly forego his Character, and,
before any Company, not scruple to expose a
modest Virgin to the forward Leer, and loud
Laugh, of younger Gentlemen, who durst not
take such Liberties of Speech, as they would
saucily chuckle at, when coming from the
Mouth of one of Sir Simon's authenticating,
but better promising Time of Life. 
‘But Sir Simon will say, I have already
undertaken him, were he to see this. Yet my
Lady Darnford once begg'd I would give him
a Hint or two on this Subject; which, she was
pleased to say, would be better received from
me than from any body: And if it be a little
too severe, it is but a just Reprisal made by
one, whose Ears, he knows, he has cruelly
wounded more than once, or twice, or three 

times; besides by what he calls his innocent
double Entendres—and who, if she had not
resented it, when an Opportunity offer'd, must
have been believed by him, to be neither more
nor less than an Hypocrite. —There's for
you, Sir Simon; And so here ends all my Malice; 
for now I have spoken my Mind. 
‘Yet I hope, your dear Papa will not be so
angry with me neither, as to deny me, for
this my Freedom, the Request I make to him,
to your honoured Mamma, and to your dear
Self, for your beloved Company, for a Month
or two, in Bedfordshire, and at London: And
if you might be permitted to winter with-us
at the latter, how happy should I be! It will
be half done the Moment you desire it. Sir
Simon loves you too well to refuse you, if you
are earnest in it. Your honoured Mamma is
always indulgent to your Requests: And
Mr. B. as well in Kindness to me, as for the
great Respect he bears you, joins with me to
beg this Favour of you, and of Sir Simon, and
my Lady. 
‘If it can be obtain'd, what Pleasure and
Improvement may I not propose to myself,
with so polite a Companion, when we are
carried by Mr. B. to the Play, to the Opera,
and other of the Town Diversions! We will
work together, visit together, read together,
sing together; and improve one another; you
me, in every Word you shall speak, in every
thing you shall do; I you, by my Questions,
and Desire of Information, which will make 

you open all your Breast to me; and so, unlocking
that dear Storehouse of virtuous Knowlege,
improve your own Notions the more for
communicating them. O my dear Miss Darnford,
how happy is it in your Power to make
me! 
‘I am much affected with the Account you
give me of Mrs. Jewkes's Reformation. I could
have wished, had I not other and stronger Inducements,
(in the Pleasure of so agreeable a
Neighbourhood, and so sweet a Companion)
that on her Account, I could have been down
at the Hall, in hopes to have confirm'd the
poor Woman in her newly-assum'd Penitence. 
God give her Grace to persevere in it! —To
be an humble Means of saving a Soul from
Perdition! O my dear Miss Darnford, let me
enjoy that Heart-ravishing Hope! —To pluck
such a Brand as this out of the Fire, and to
assist to quench its flaming Susceptibility for
Mischief, and make it useful to edifying Purposes!
what a Pleasure does this afford one! 
How does it encourage one to proceed in the
Way one has been guided to pursue! How
does it make me hope, that I am raised to my
present Condition, in order to be an humble
Instrument in the Hand of Providence to communicate
great Good to others, and so extend
to many those Benefits I have receiv'd; which
were they to go no further than myself, what
a vile, what an ingrateful Creature should I
be! 

‘I see, my dearest Miss Darnford, how
useful in every Condition of Life a virtuous
and a serious Turn of Mind may be! 
‘How have I seen some Ladies in Upper Life
behave as if they thought good Actions, and
a pious Demeanour, would be so unfashionable,
as to make them the Subjects of Ridicule
to the lighter-dispos'd World, and so they
are shamed out of their Duty! But let me
make it my boast, that here is such a poor
Girl as I, raised from the Cottage to the Palace,
as I may say, persevering in the good
Purposes which had been instilled into her,
by worthy, tho' poor Parents, and the best of
Ladies, her Mistress; and resolving to be obstinate
in Goodness, having stood the Tests of
Libertinism; has brought the World to expect
good Actions from her, to respect her for
doing them, and has even found her Example
efficacious, thro' Divine Grace, to bring over
to Penitence and Imitation a poor Creature,
who used to ridicule her for nothing so
much as for her Innocence and Virtue, which,
Word and Thing, were the constant Subjects
of her Scorn, as well as the Cause of her Persecution. 
‘But let me not too much dwell upon the
dear Thought, lest I fall into the Snare that,
of all others, Persons meaning well, have Reason
to dread; that of Spiritual Pride, the most
dangerous of all Pride. 
‘In hopes of seeing you with us, I will not
inlarge on several agreeable Subjects, which I 

could touch upon with Pleasure, besides what
I gave you in my former (of my Reception
here, and of the Kindness of our genteel Neighbours); 
such, particularly, as the Arrival here
of my dear Father and Mother, and the kind,
the generous Entertainment they met with from
my best Friend: His Condescension in not only
permitting me to attend them to Kent, but
accompanying us thither, and settling them
in a most happy manner, beyond their Wishes
and my own; but yet so much in Character,
as I may say, that every one must approve his
judicious Benevolence: The Favours of my
good Lady Davers to me, who, pleas'd with
my Letters, has vouchsaf'd to become my Correspondent; 
and a thousand, thousand Things
which I want personally to communicate to
my dear Miss Darnford. 
‘Be pleased to present my humble Respects
to Lady Darnford, and to Miss Nanny; to
good Madam Jones, and to your kind Friends
at Stamford; to Mr. and Mrs. Peters likewise,
and their Kinswoman: And beg of that
good Gentleman from me, to encourage his
new Proselyte all he can; and I doubt not,
she will do Credit, poor Woman! to the
Pains he shall take with her. In hopes of your
kind Compliance with my Wishes for your
Company, I remain, dearest Miss, 
Your faithful and obliged Friend
and Servant,
P. B.’ 


This, my good Lady Davers, is the long
Letter I sent to Miss Darnford, who, at parting,
engag'd me to keep up a Correspondence with
her, and put me in hopes of passing a Month or
two with us, at the Hall, if we came down, and
if she could persuade Sir Simon and her Mamma
to spare her to my Wishes. Your Ladyship will
excuse me for so faintly mentioning the Honours
you confer upon me; but I would not either add
or diminish in the Communications I make to
you. 
The following is a Copy of what I wrote to
Mrs. Jewkes. 

You give me, Mrs. Jewkes, very great
Pleasure, to find that at length God
Almighty has touch'd your Heart, and let you
see, while Health and Strength lasted, the
Error of your Ways. —Many an unhappy
one has not been so graciously touched, till
they have smarted under some heavy Afflictions,
or till they have been confined to the
Bed of Sickness, when, perhaps, they have
made Vows and Resolutions, that have held
them no longer than the Discipline lasted:
But you give me much better Hopes of the
Sincerity of your Conversion; as you are so
well convinced, before some sore Evil has
overtaken you: And it ought to be an Earnest
to you of the Divine Favour, and should
keep you from Despondency. 
“As for me, it became me to forgive you,
as I most cordially did, since your Usage of 

me, as it prov'd, was but a necessary Means
in the Hand of Providence, to exalt me to
that State of Happiness, in which I have every
Day more and more Cause given me to rejoice,
by the kindest and most generous of
Gentlemen. 
“As I have often pray'd for you, even when
you used me the most unkindly, I now praise
God for having heard my Prayers, and with
high Delight look upon you as a reclaimed
Soul given to my Supplications. May the Divine
Goodness enable you to persevere in the
Course you have entered upon! And when
you can taste the all-surpassing Pleasure that
fills the worthy Breast, on being placed in a
Station, where your Example may be of Advantage
to the Souls of others, as well as to
your own; a Pleasure that every good Mind
glories in, and none else can truly relish; then
may you be assured, that nothing but your
Perseverance, and the consequential Improvement
resulting from it, is wanted, to convince
you, that you are in a right Way, and
that the Woe, that is pronounced against the
presumptuous Sinner, belongs not to you. 
“Let me, therefore, dear Mrs. Jewkes,
(for now indeed you are dear to me) caution
you against Two Things; the one, that you
return not to your former Ways, and wilfully
err after this Repentance; for, in this
Case, the Divine Goodness will look upon
itself as mocked by you, and will withdraw
itself from you, and more dreadful will your 

State then be, than if you had never rep ented
The other, that you don't despair of the Divine
Mercy, which has so evidently manifested
itself in your Favour, and has awakened you
out of your deplorable Lethargy, without
those sharp Medicines and Operations which
others, and perhaps not more faulty Persons,
have suffer'd. But go on chearfully in the
happy Path which you have begun to tread. 
Depend upon it, you are now in the right
Way, and turn not either to the Right-hand
or to the Left: For the Reward is before you,
in Reputation and a good Fame in this Life,
and everlasting Felicity beyond it. 
“Your Letter is that of a sensible Woman,
as I always thought you, and of a truly contrite
one, as I hope you will approve yourself
to be; and I the rather hope it, because I shall
be always desirous then of taking every Opportunity
that offers to me of doing you real
Service, as well with regard to your present
as future Life; for I am, good Mrs. Jewkes,
as I now hope I may call you, 
“Your loving Friend to serve you,
P. B. 
“Whatever good Books the worthy Mr.
Peters will be so kind as to recommend
to you, and for those under your Direction,
send for them either to Lincoln,
or Stamford, or Grantham, as you
can get them, and place them to my Account:
And may they be the effectual 

Means of confirming you and them in
the good Way you are in! I have done as
much for all here before; and I hope to
no bad Effect: For I shall now tell them
by Mrs. Jervis, if there be Occasion, that
I hope they will not let me be out-done
in Bedfordshire by Mrs. Jewkes in Lincolnshire;
but that the Servants of both
Houses may do Credit to the best of
Masters. Adieu, good Woman! as once
more I take Pleasure to style you.” 

Thus, my good Lady, have I obey'd you,
in transcribing these Two Letters. I will now
proceed to your Ladyship's Twelve Articles. As
to the 
1. I will oblige your Ladyship, as I have
Opportunity, in my future Letters, with such
Accounts of my dear Lady's Favour and Goodness
to me, as I think will be acceptable to you,
and to the noble Ladies you mention. 
2. I am extremely delighted, that your Ladyship
thinks so well of my dear honest Parents:
Indeed they are good People, and ever had
Minds that set them above low and sordid
Actions; and God and your good Brother has
rewarded them most amply in this World; 
which is more than they ever expected, after a
Series of Unprosperousness in all they undertook. 
Your Ladyship is pleased to say, that People
in Upper Life love to see how plain Nature
operates in honest Minds, who have hardly any 

thing else for their Guide; and if I might not
be thought to descend too low for your Ladyship's
Attention, (for as to myself, I shall, I
hope, always look back with Pleasure to what I
was, in order to increase my Thankfulness for
what I am) I would give you a Scene of Resignation,
and contented Poverty, of which otherwise
your Ladyship can hardly have a Notion. I will
give it, because it will be a Scene of Nature, however
low, which your Ladyship loves, and it
shall not tire you by its Length. 
It was upon Occasion of a great Loss and
Disappointment which happened to my dear
Parents (for tho' they were never high in Life,
yet they were not always so low as my honour'd
Lady found them, when she took me): My
poor Father came home; and as the Loss was
of such a Nature, as that he could not keep it
from my Mother, he took her Hand, I remember
well, and said, after he had acquainted her
with it, “Come, my Dear, let us take Comfort,
that we did for the best. We left the
Issue to Providence, as we ought, and that
has turned it as it pleased; and we must be
content, tho' not favoured as we wished. 
All the Business is, our Lot is not cast for this
Life. Let us resign ourselves to the Divine
Will, and continue to do our Duty, and this
short Life will soon be past. Our Troubles
will be quickly overblown and we shall be
happy in a better, I make no Doubt.” 
Then my dear Mother threw her kind Arms
about his Neck, and said, with Tears, “God's 

Will be done, my dear Love! —All cannot
be rich and happy. I am contented; and
had rather say, I have a poor honest Husband,
than a guilty rich one. What signifies repineing? 
Let the World go as it will, we shall
have our Length and our Breadth at last. And
Providence, I make no Doubt, will be a better
Friend to our good Girl here, because she
is good, than we could be, if this had not
happened,”—pointing to me, who, then
about Eleven Years old, (for it was before my
Lady took me) sat weeping in the Chimney
Corner, over a few dying Embers of a Fire, at
their moving Expressions. 
I arose, and kissing both their Hands, and
blessing them, said, “And this Length and
Breadth, my dear Parents, will be, one Day,
all the Rich and the Great can possess; and,
it may be, their ungracious Heirs will trample
upon their Ashes, and rejoice they are
gone: While such a poor Girl as I, am honouring
the Memories of mine, who in their
good Names, and good Lessons, will have
left me the best of Portions.” 
And then they both hugg'd their prating
Girl to their fond Bosoms, by Turns; and all
Three were so filled with Comfort in one another,
that after joining in a grateful Hymn, we
went to Bed (what tho' supperless, perhaps?)
with such true Joy, that very few of the Rich
and Great can have any Idea of it; I to my Loft,
and they to their Rush-floor'd cleanly Bed-Room. 
And we have had sweet Sleep, and Dreams so 

pleasant, that we have reaped greater Pleasures,
in repeating them one to another, at our next
Leisure-Hour, than, possibly, we should have
received, had we enjoy'd the Comforts we
wanted. 
And, truly, my Lady, I must needs say, that
while the virtuous Poor can be bless'd with such
sweet Enjoyments as these, in contented Minds
all Day, and in sound Sleep at Night, I don't
know whether they have not more, even of
this World's Pleasures, than the abounding
Rich: And while the Hours of Night bear so
near a Proportion to those of the Day, may
not such be said, even at the worst, to pass at
least half their Lives with more Comfort than
many times the voluptuous and distemper'd
Great can pretend to know? 
For a further Proof, that honest Poverty is
not such a deplorable thing as some People imagine,
let me ask, what Pleasure can those overhappy
Persons know, who, from the Luxury of
their Tastes, and their affluent Circumstances, always
eat before they are hungry, and drink before
they are thirsty? This may be illustrated by the
Instance of a certain Eastern Monarch, who, as I
have read, marching at the Head of a vast Army,
through a wide-extended Desert, which afforded
neither River not Spring, for the first time
found himself (in common with his Soldiers)
overtaken by a craving Thirst, which made him
wish for and pant after a Cup of Water. And
when at last, after diligent and distant Search,
one of his Soldiers found out a little dirty 

Puddle, and carry'd him some of the filthy
Water in his nasty Helmet; the Monarch,
greedily swallowing it, cry'd out, That in all
his Life he never tasted so sweet a Draught! 
But when I talk or write of my dear worthy
Parents, how I run on! —Excuse me, my
good Lady; and don't think me, in this respect,
too much like the Cat in*  the Fable, turn'd
into a fine Lady; for, methinks, though I
would never forget what I was, yet I would be
thought to know how, gratefully to enjoy my
present Happiness, as well with regard to my
Obligations to God, as to your dear Brother. 
But let me proceed to your Ladyship's Third
Particular. 
3. And you cannot imagine, Madam, how
much you have set my Heart at Rest, when you
tell me, that my dear Mr. B. gave me a just
Narrative of his Affair with Miss Godfrey: For,
when your Ladyship desir'd to know, how he
had recounted that Story, lest you should make
a Misunderstanding between us unawares, I did
not know what to think. I was afraid some
Blood had been shed on the Occasion by the
dear Gentleman: For Miss was ruin'd, and, as
to her, nothing could have happened worse. 
And the Regard I have for his future Happiness,
which, in my constant Supplications for
him in private, costs me many a Tear, gave
me great Apprehensions, and not a little Uneasiness. 

But as your Ladyship tells me, that
he gave me a just Account, I am very happy
again. 
What makes one, my dear Lady, in our
most prosperous Condition, be always intermingling
one's Fears of what may be; whereby
one robs one's self of the Pleasure of one's
best worldly Enjoyments? —Is this Apprehensiveness,
does your Ladyship think, implanted
in our Natures for wise and good Ends, that
we may not think ourselves so happy here, as
to cause us to forget, that there is a better and
more perfectly happy State, which we ought
to aspire after? I believe it is: And if so, what
an useful Monitor do we carry about us, that
shall make us consider and reflect, when in
Prosperity; and in Adversity teach us to bear
up to Hopes of a happier Lot! Thus it is said
by Mr. Norris, in his Translation of one of
Horace's Odes; 

Be Life and Spirit when Fortune proves unkind,
And summon up the Vigour of thy Mind,
But when thou'rt driv'n by too officious Gales,
Be wise, and gather in the swelling Sails.

I now come to your Ladyship's fourth Particular. 
And highly delighted I am for having obtained
your Approbation of my Conduct to the
Child, as well as of my Behaviour towards the
dear Gentleman on the unhappy Lady's Score. 
Your Ladyship's wise Intimations about having 

the Child with me, make due Impression upon
me; and I see in them, with grateful Pleasure,
your kind and unmerited Regard for me. Yet
I don't know how it is, but I have conceived
a strange Passion for this dear Baby: I cannot
but look upon her poor Mamma as my Sister
in point of Trial: And shall not the prosperous
Sister pity and love the poor dear Sister, that,
in so slippery a Path, has fallen, while she had
the Happiness to keep her Feet? 
No doubt, Miss Godfrey loved Virtue, and
preferred it to all Considerations: Tis plain she
did even after her Fall—when, as I have
observed in the Papers*  I sent your Ladyship,
she could leave Country, Parents, Friends, and
the Man of all others she loved best, and seek
a new Fortune, run the Danger of the Seas,
and perhaps the Hazards of meeting with worse
Men, rather than trust to her own Strength,
where it had once so unhappily failed her. — 
What a Love of Virtue for Virtue's sake is this! 
I know not who could have acted up to this
Part of her Character. 
The rest of your Ladyship's Articles give
me the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction; and if
I can but continue myself in the Favour of
your dear Brother, and improve in that of his
noble Sister, how happy shall I be! I will do
all I can to deserve both. And I hope your
Ladyship will take as an Instance that I will,
the chearful Obedience which I pay to your
Commands, in writing to so fine a Judge, such 

crude and indigested Stuff, as otherwise I ought
to be ashamed to lay before you. 
I am impatient for the Honour, which your
Ladyship makes me hope for, of your Presence
here: And yet I perplex myself with the
Fear of appearing so unworthy in your Eyes,
when near you, as to suffer in your Opinion; 
but I promise myself, that however this may
be the Case on your first Visit, I shall be so
much improved by the Benefits I shall reap
from your Lessons and good Example, that
whenever I shall be favour'd with a Second,
you shall have fewer Faults to find with me; 
till, as I shall be more and more favoured, I
shall in time be just what your Ladyship will
wish me to be, and of Consequence more
worthy than I am of the Honour of styling
myself 
Your Ladyship's most humble
and obedient Servant,
P. B. 

