



Dear Sir,
Mr. Locke gives a great many very pretty Instructions
relating to the Play-games of Children; 

but I humbly presume to think what he says,
in one or two Places, a little objectionable. 
He would not indulge them in any Playthings,
but what they make themselves, or endeavour to
make. “A smooth Pebble, a Piece of Paper, the
Mother's Bunch of Keys, or any thing they cannot
hurt themselves with,” he rightly says,
“serves as much to divert little Children, as those
more chargeable and curious Toys from the Shops,
which are presently put out of Order, and
broken.” 
These Playthings may certainly do well enough,
as he observes, for little ones: But, methinks, to a
Person of easy Circumstances, as the making these
Toys imploys the industrious Poor, the buying them
for the Child might be dispens'd with, tho' they
were easily broken; and especially as they are of all
Prices, and some less costly, and more durable,
than others. 
“Tops, Gigs, Battledors,” Mr. Locke observes,
“which are to be used with Labour, should
indeed be procur'd them–––not for Variety, but
Exercise: But if they had a Top, the Scourge-stick
and Leather-strap should be left to their own
making and sitting.” 
But may I presume to say, That whatever be the
Good Mr. Locke proposes by this, it cannot be
equal to the Mischief Children may do themselves
in making these Playthings? For must they not
have Implements to work with? And is not a
Knife, or other edg'd Tool, without which it is
impossible they can make or shape a Scourge-stick,
or any of their Playthings, a fine Instrument in a
Child's Hands? This Advice is the Reverse of the
Caution warranted from all Antiquity, That 'tis
dangerous to meddle with edg'd Tools: And I am 

afraid, the Tutor must often act the Surgeon, and
follow the Indulgence with a Styptick and a Plaister; 
and the young Gentleman's Hands might be so often
bound up, that it might indeed perhaps be one way
to cure him of his earnest Desire to play; but I can
hardly imagine any other Good that it can do him:
For I doubt, the excellent Consequences propos'd
by our Author from this Doctrine, such as to teach
the Child Moderation in his Desires, Application,
Industry, Thought, Contrivance, and good Husbandry,
Qualities that, as he observes, will be useful
to him when he is a Man, are too remote to be
ingrafted upon such Beginnings: Altho' it must be
confess'd, that, as Mr. Locke wisely observes, good
Habits and Industry cannot be too early inculcated. 
But then, Sir, may I ask, Are not the very Play
and Sports, to which Children accustom themselves,
whether they make their own Playthings or
not, equivalent to the Work or Labour of grown
Persons? Yes, Sir, I will venture to say, they are,
and more than equivalent to the Exercises and Labour
of many. 
Mr. Locke advises, that the Child's Playthings
should be as few as possible, which I intirely agree
with: That they should be in his Tutor's Power,
who is to give him but one at once: But as it is
the Nature of the human Mind to court most what
is prohibited, and to set light by what is in its own
Power; so I am half doubtful, (only that Mr. Locke
says it, and the Matter may not be so very important,
as other Points, in which I have taken the Liberty
to differ from that Gentleman) Whether the
Child's absolute Possession of his own Playthings in
some little Repository, of which he may be permitted
to keep the Key, especially if he make no
bad Use of the Privilege, would not make him 

more indifferent to them; while the contrary Conduct
might possibly inhance his Value of them. And
if, when he had done with any Plaything, he were
oblig'd to put it into its allotted Place, and was accustom'd
to keep Account of the Number and Places
of them severally, this would teach him Order, and
at the same time instruct him to make a proper Account
of them, and to avoid being a Squanderer or
Waster: And if he should omit to put them in their
Places, or be careless of his Playthings, the Command
of them taken away for a time, or threatening
to give them away to others, would make him be
more heedful. 
Mr. Locke says, “That he has known a Child
so distracted with the Number and Variety of his
Play-games, that he tired his Maid every Day to
look them over: And was so accustom'd to
Abundance, that he never thought he had enough,
but was always asking, What more? What new
thing shall I have? A good Introduction,” adds
he, “to moderate Desires, and the ready way to
make a contented happy Man!” 
All that I shall offer to this, is, that there are few
Men so philosophical as one would wish them to
be; much less Children. But no Doubt, that this
Variety engag'd the Child's Activity; which, of
the two, might be turn'd to better Purposes, than
Sloth or Indolence; and if the Maid was tired, it
might be, because she was not so much alive, as the
Child; and perhaps the Grievance might not be so
great, because, if she was his Attendant, 'tis probable
she had nothing else to do. 
However, in the main, as Mr. Locke says, it is
no matter how few Playthings the Child is indulg'd
with: But yet I can hardly persuade myself, that
Plenty of them can have such bad Consequences, as 

the Gentleman apprehends; and the rather, because
they will excite his Attention, and keep alive his Industry
and Activity. His Inquiry after new Things,
let him have few or many, is to be expected as a
Branch of those natural Desires, which are implanted
in him, and will every Day increase: But
this may be observ'd, That as he grows in Years,
he will be above some Playthings, and so the Number
of the old ones will be always reducible, perhaps,
in a greater Proportion, than the new ones
will increase. 
Mr. Locke observes, on the Head of good Breeding,
That “There are two Sorts of ill Breeding; 
the one a sheepish Bashfulness, and the other a
misbecoming Negligence and Disrespect in our
Carriage; both which, says he, are avoided by
duly observing this one Rule, Not to think
meanly of ourselves, and not to think meanly of
others.” I think, as Mr. Locke explains this
Rule, it is an excellent one. But on this Head I
would beg Leave to observe, that however discommendable
a bashful Temper is, in some Instances,
where it must be deem'd a Weakness of the Mind,
yet, in my humble Opinion, it is generally the
Mark of an ingenuous one, and is always to be
preferr'd to an undistinguishing and hardy Confidence,
which is, as it seems to me, the genuine
Production of unfeeling Ignorance. 
What is faulty in it, which Mr. Locke calls
Sheepishness, should indeed be shaken off as soon as
possible, because it is an Enemy to Merit in its Advancement
in the World: But were I to chuse a
Companion for your Billy, as he grows up, I
should not think the worse of the Youth, who, not
having had the Opportunities of knowing Men, or
seeing the World, had this Defect. On the contrary, 

I should be apt to look upon it as an outward Fence
or Inclosure, as I may say, to his Virtue, which
might keep off the lighter Attacks of Immorality,
the Hussars of Vice, as I may say, who are not
able to carry on a formal Siege against his Morals; 
and I should expect such an one to be docile, humane,
good-humour'd, diffident of himself, and so
most likely to improve as well in Mind as Behaviour: 
While an harden'd Mind, that never doubts
itself, must be a Stranger to its own Infirmities,
and, suspecting none, is impetuous, over-bearing,
incorrigible; and if rich, a Tyrant; if not, possibly
an Invader of other Mens Properties. 
Mr. Locke proposes (§ 148.) a very pretty Method
to cheat Children, as it were, into Learning: 
But then, he adds, “There may be Dice and
Playthings with the Letters on them to teach
Children the Alphabet by playing.” And in another
Place, (§ 151.) “I know a Person of great
Quality–––who by pasting on the six Vowels (for
in our Language y is one) on the six Sides of a
Die, and the remaining eighteen Consonants on
the Sides of three other Dice, has made this a
Play for his Children, that he shall win, who at
one Cast throws most Words on these four Dice; 
whereby his eldest Son, yet in Coats, has play'd
himself into Spelling with great Eagerness, and
without once having been chid for it, or forced
to it.” 
I must needs say, my dear Mr. B. that I should
rather your Billy should be a Twelvemonth backwarder
for want of this Method, than forwarded by
it. For what may not be apprehended from so early
inculcating the Use of Dice and Gaming upon the
Minds of Children? Let Mr. Locke himselt speak
for this in his § 208. and I should be glad to be able 

to reconcile the two Passages in this excellent Author. 
–––“As to Cards and Dice,” says he, “I
think the safest and best way is never to learn
any Play upon them, and so to be incapacitated
for these dangerous Temptations, and incroaching
Wasters of useful Time”–––and, he might
have added, of the noblest Estates and Fortunes; 
while Sharpers and Scoundrels have been lifted into
Distinction upon their Ruins. Yet, in § 153. Mr.
Locke proceeds to give particular Directions in relation
to the Dice he recommends. 
But, after all, if some innocent Plays were fix'd
upon to cheat Children into Reading, that, as he
says, should look as little like a Task as possible, it
must needs be of Use for that Purpose. But let
every Gentleman, who has a Fortune to lose, and
who, if he games, is on a foot with the vilest Company,
who generally have nothing at all to risque,
tremble at the Thoughts of teaching his Son, tho'
for the most laudable Purposes, the early Use of
Dice and Gaming. 
But, dear Sir, permit me to say, how much I
am charm'd with an Hint in Mr. Locke, which
makes your Pamela hope, she may be of greater
Use to your Children, even as they grow up, than
she could ever have flatter'd herself to be. –––'Tis a
charming, charming Paragraph; I must not skip
one Word of it. Thus it begins, and I will observe
upon it as I go along. “§ 177. But under
whose Care soever a Child is put to be taught,” 
says Mr. Locke, “during the tender and flexible
Years of his Life, this is certain, it should be
one, who thinks Latin and Language the least
Part of Education.” 
How agreeable is this to my Notions; which I
durst not have avow'd, but after so excellent a Scholar: 

For I have long had the Thought, that a deal
of precious Time is wasted to little Purpose in the
Attaining of Latin. Mr. H. I think, says, he was
Ten Years in endeavouring to learn it, and, as far
as I can find, knows nothing at all of the Matter
neither! –––Indeed he lays that to the wicked Picture
in his Grammar, which he took for granted, as he
has said several times, as well as once*  written,
was put there to teach Boys to rob Orchards, instead
of improving their Minds in Learning, or
common Honesty. 
But (for this is too light an Instance for the Subject)
Mr. Locke proceeds–––“One who, knowing
how much Virtue and a well-temper'd Soul is
to be preferr'd to any sort of Learning or Language,” 
[What a noble Writer is this!] “makes
it his chief Business to form the Mind of his
Scholars, and give that a right Disposition:” 
[Ay there, dear Sir, is the Thing!] “Which if
once got, tho' all the rest should be neglected,” 
[charmingly observ'd!] “would in due time” 
[without wicked Dice, I hope!] “produce all the
rest; and which if it be not got and settled, so
as to keep out ill and vicious Habits, Languages
and Sciences, and all the other Accomplishments
of Education, will be to no Purpose, but to
make the worse or more dangerous Man.” 
[Now comes the Place I am so much delighted
with!] “And indeed, whatever Stir there is made
about getting of Latin, as the great and difficult
Business, his Mother” [O thank you, thank
you, dear Sir, for putting this excellent Author into
my Hands!] “may teach it him herself, if she
will but spend two or three Hours in a Day with 

him,” [–––If she will? Never fear, dear Sir, but
I will, with the highest Pleasure in the World!]
“and make him read the Evangelists in Latin to
her.” [How I long to be five or six Years older,
as well as my dearest Babies, that I may enter upon
this charming Scheme!] “For she need but
buy a Latin Testament, and having got somebody
to mark the last Syllable but one, where it
is long, in Words above two Syllables, (which is
enough to regulate her Pronunciation and Accenting
the Words) read daily in the Gospels,
and then let her avoid understanding them in
Latin, if she can.” [Why, dearest, dear Sir,
you have taught me almost all this already; and you,
my best and most beloved Tutor, have told me
often, I read and pronounce Latin more than tolerably,
tho' I don't understand it: But this Method
will teach me, as well as your dear Children. But
thus the good Gentleman proceeds:] “And when
she understands the Evangelists in Latin, let her
in the same manner read Æsop's Fables, and so
proceed on to Eutropius, Justin, and such other
Books. I do not mention this,” adds Mr.
Locke, “as an Imagination of what I fansy may
do, but as of a thing I have known done, and
the Latin Tongue got with Ease this way.” 
Mr. Locke proceeds to mention other Advantages,
which the Child may receive from his Mother's Instruction,
which I will endeavour more and more to
qualify myself for: Particularly, after he has intimated,
That “At the same time the Child is learning
French and Latin, he may be enter'd also in
Arithmetick, Geography, Chronology, History,
and Geometry too; for if,” says he, “these be
taught him in French or Latin, when he begins
once to understand either of these Tongues, he 

will get a Knowlege in these Sciences, and the
Language to boot:” After he has intimated
this, I say, he proceeds: “Geography, I think,
should be begun with: For the learning of the
Figure of the Globe, the Situation and Boundaries
of the Four Parts of the World, and that of
particular Kingdoms and Countries, being only
an Exercise of the Eyes and Memory, a Child
with Pleasure will learn and retain them. And
this is so certain, that I now live in an House
with a Child, whom his Mother has so well
instructed this way in Geography,” [But had she
not, do you think, dear Sir, some of this good
Gentleman's kind Assistance, as he liv'd in the
House with the Child?] “that he knew the Limits
of the Four Parts of the World; would readily
point, being ask'd, to any Country upon
the Globe, or any County in the Map of England;
knew all the great Rivers, Promontories,
Streights, and Bays in the World, and could
find the Longitude and Latitude of any Place,
before he was six Years old.” 
There's for you, dear Sir! –––See what a Mother
can do, if she pleases! 
I remember, Sir, formerly, in that sweet*  Chariot
Conference, at the Dawning of my Hopes,
when all my Dangers were over; a Conference I
still think of with Pleasure; that you ask'd me, how
I would bestow my Time, supposing the neighbouring
Ladies would be above being seen in my Company; 
when I should have no Visits to receive or
return; no Parties of Pleasure to join in; no Card-tables
to imploy my Winter Evenings? 

I then, Sir, transported with my opening Prospects,
prattled to you, how well I would endeavour to
pass my Time in the Family Management and Accounts,
in Visits now-and-then to the indigent and
worthy Poor; in Musick sometimes; in Reading,
in Writing, in my superior Duties–––And I hope I
have not behaved quite unworthily of my Promises. 
But I also remember, dear Sir, what now, that
the fair Prospect is no longer distant, and that I
have been so long your happy, thrice happy Wife,
I may speak without those Blushes which then cover'd
my Face, that you said, (with a modest
Grace, and with that virtuous Endearment, that is
so beautiful in your Sex, as well as becoming in ours,
whether in the Character of Lover or Husband,
Maiden or Wife) “And I hope, my Pamela, to
have superadded to all these, such an Imployment” 
—as–––in short, Sir, I am now bless'd
with, and writing of! no less than the useful Part
I may be able to take in the first Education of your
lovely Babies! 
And now I must add, That this pleasing Hope
sets me above all other Diversions: I wish for no
Parties of Pleasure but with you, my dearest Mr. B.
and these are Parties that will improve me, and
make me more capable of the other, and more
worthy of your Conversation, and of the Time you
pass (beyond what I could ever have promised to my
utmost Wishes) in such poor Company as mine, for
no other Reason but because I love to be instructed,
and take my Lessons well, as you are pleas'd to say:
And indeed I must be a sad Dunce, if I did not,
from so beloved a Master. 
I want no Card-table Amusements: For I hope,
(there's a proud Hope!) in a few Years, to be able
to teach my dear Little-ones the First Rudiments, 

as Mr. Locke points the Way, of Latin, of French,
and of Geography, and Arithmetick. 
O my dear Mr. B. by your Help and Countenance,
what may I not be able to teach them! and
how may I prepare the Way for a Tutor's Instructions,
and give them up Minds half cultivated to
their Hands! –––And all this time improve myself too,
not only in Science, but in Nature, by tracing in
the little Babes what all Mankind are, and have
been, from Infancy to riper Years, and watching the
sweet Dawnings of Reason, and delighting in every
bright Emanation of that Ray of Divinity lent to
the human Mind, for great and happy Purposes,
when rightly pointed and directed! 
There is no going further in this Letter after these
charming Recollections and Hopes: For they bring
me to that grateful Remembrance, to whom, under
God, I owe them all, and also what I have been
for so happy a Period, and what I am, which is,
what will be ever my Pride and my Glory; and
well it may, when I look back to my Beginning,
which I ever shall, with humble Acknowlegement,
and can call myself, dearest Mr. B. 
Your honoured and honouring,
and, I hope I may say,
in time, useful Wife,
P. B. 

