


M. Colbrand being return'd, my Master came
up to me to my Closet, and brought me the
Licence. O how my Heart flutter'd at the Sight
of it! Now, Pamela, said he, tell me, If you can
oblige me with the Day. Your Word is all that's
wanting! I made bold to kiss his dear Hand; and
tho' unable to look up, said,—I know not what
to say, Sir, to all your Goodness! I would not, for
any Consideration, that you should believe me capable
of receiving negligently an Honour, that all
the Duty of a long Life, were it to be lent me,
will not be sufficient to enable me to be grateful
for. I ought to resign myself, in every thing I may
or can, implicitly to your Will. But—But what?
said he, with a kind Impatience!––– Why, Sir, said
I, when from last Thursday you mention'd Fourteen
Days, I had Reason to think that Term your
Choice; and my Heart is so wholly yours, that I
am afraid of nothing, but that I may be forwarder
than you wish. Impossible, my dear Creature, said
he, and folded me in his Arms; impossible! If this
be all, it shall be set about this Moment, and this
happy Day shall make you mine! ––– I'll send away
instantly, said the dear Gentleman, and was going. 
I said, No, pray, Sir, pray, Sir, hear me! ––– Indeed
it cannot be to-day!––– Cannot! said he. ––– No, 

indeed, Sir! said I. ––– And was ready to sink to see
his generous Impatience! Why flatter'd you then,
my fond Heart, said he, with the Hope that it might! 
––– Sir, said I, I will tell you what I had thought,
if you'll vouchsafe me your Attention. Do then,
said he! 
I have, Sir, proceeded I, a great Desire, that whenever
the Day is, it may be of a Thursday: Of a
Thursday my dear Father and Mother were marry'd,
and tho' poor, they are a very happy Pair.––– Of a
Thursday your poor Pamela was born: Of a Thursday
my dear good Lady took me from my Parents
into her Protection: Of a Thursday, Sir, you
caus'd me to be carry'd away to this Place, to which
I now, by God's Goodness and your Favour, owe
so amazingly all my present Prospects; and of a
Thursday it was, you nam'd to me that Fourteen Days
from that, you would confirm my Happiness. Now,
Sir, if you please to indulge my superstitious Folly,
you will greatly oblige me: I was sorry, Sir, for this
Reason, when you bid me not defer till the last Day
of the Fourteen, that Thursday in next Week was
that last Day. 
This, Pamela, is a little superstitious, I must needs
say; and I think you should begin now to make another
Day in the Week a happy one; as for Example,
On a Monday, may you say, my Father and Mother
concluded to be marry'd on the Thursday following. 
Of a Monday, so many Years ago, my Mother was
preparing all her Matters, to be brought to-bed
on the Thursday following. Of a Monday, several
Weeks ago, it was that you had but two Days more
to stay, till you was carry'd away on Thursday. On a
Monday, I myself, said he, well remember, it was,
that I wrote you the Letter, that prevail'd on you so
kindly to return to me; and, on the same Day, you
did return to my House here; which I hope, my 

Girl, will be as propitious an Æra as any you have
nam'd: And now, lastly, will you say, which will
crown the Work; And, on a Monday I was marry'd. 
––– Come, come, my Dear, added he, Thursday has
reign'd long enough o' Conscience; let us now set
Monday in its Place, or at least on an Equality with
it, since you see it has a very good Title, and as we
now stand in the Week before us, claims Priority; 
and then, I hope, we shall make Tuesday, Wednesday,
Friday, Saturday and Sunday, as happy Days, as
Monday and Thursday; and so, by God's Blessing,
move round as the Days move, in a delightful Circle,
till we are at a Loss what Day to prefer to the
rest. 
O how charmingly was this said! ––– And how
sweetly kind! 
Indeed, Sir, said I, you rally my Folly very agreeably; 
but don't let a little Matter stand in the way,
when you are so generously obliging in greater! 
Indeed I like Thursday best, if I may chuse. 
Well then, said he, if you can say, you have a
better Reason than this, I will oblige you; else I'll
send away for the Parson this Moment! 
And so, I protest, he was going! ––– Dear Sirs, how
I trembled! ––– Stay, stay, Sir, said I: We have a
great deal to say first; I have a deal of silly Prate
to trouble you with! ––– Well, say then, in a Minute,
reply'd he, the most material; for all we have to
say may be talk'd of while the Parson is coming! 
––– O but indeed, and indeed, said I, it cannot be today! 
––– Well then, shall it be to-morrow? said he. 
––– Why, Sir, if it must not be of a Thursday,
you have given so many pleasant Distinctions for a
Monday, that let it then be next Monday! ––– What! a
Week still? said he. Sir, answer'd I, if you please; 
for that will be, as you injoin'd, within the second
Seven Days. Why, Girl, said he, 'twill be Seven 

Months till next Monday. Let it, said he, if not tomorrow,
be on Wednesday; I protest I will stay no
longer. 
Then, Sir, return'd I, please to defer it, however, for
one Day more, and it will be my beloved Thursday! 
If I consent to defer it till then, may I hope, my
Pamela, said he, that next Thursday shall certainly
be the happy Day? ––– Yes, Sir, said I; and I am sure
I look'd very foolishly! 
And yet, my dear Father and Mother, why should
I, with such a fine Gentleman! And whom I so dearly
love! And so much to my Honour too? But there
is something greatly awful upon my Mind, in the
solemn Circumstance, and a Change of Condition
never to be recall'd, tho' all the Prospects are so desirable. 
And I can but wonder, at the thoughtless
Precipitancy with which most young Folks run into
this important Change of Life! 
So now, my dear Parents, have I been brought to
fix so near a Day as next Thursday; and this is Monday. 
O dear, it makes one out of Breath almost to
think of it. This, tho', was a great Cut-off; a
whole Week out of ten Days. I hope I am not
too forward! I'm sure, if it obliges my dear Master,
I am justify'd; for he deserves all things of me, in
my poor Power. 
After this, he rode out on Horse-back, attended
by Abraham, and did not return till Night. How
by degrees, Things steal upon one! I thought even
this small Absence tedious, and the more as we expected
him home to Dinner. ––– I wish I may not be
too fond, and make him indifferent: But yet, my
dear Father and Mother, you were always fond of
one another, and never indifferent, let the World
run as it would.––– 
When he returned, he said, he had had a pleasant
Ride, and was led out to a greater Distance than he 

intended. At Supper he told me, that he had a great
mind Mr. Williams should marry us; because, he said,
it should shew a thorough Reconcilation of his Part:
But, said he, most generously, I am apprehensive on
what passed between you, that the poor Man will
take it hardly, and as a sort of Insult, which I am
not capable of. What says my Girl?  ––– Do you
think he would? I hope not, Sir, said I: For, as to
what he may think, I can't answer; but as to any
Reason for his Thoughts, I could. But indeed, Sir,
said I, you have been already so generous, that he
cannot, I think, mistake your Goodness. 
He then spoke with some Resentment of Lady
Davers's Behaviour, and I ask'd, If any thing new had
occurr'd? Yes, said he; I have had a Letter deliver'd
me from her impertinent Husband, professedly
at her Instigation, that amounted to little less than
a Piece of insolent Bravery, on supposing I was about
to marry you. I was so provok'd, added he, that
after I had read it, I tore it into a hundred Pieces,
and scatter'd them in the Air, and bid the Man who
brought it, let his Master know what I had done
with his Letter; and so would not permit him to
speak to me, as he would fain have done. ––– I think
the Fellow talk'd somewhat of his Lady coming hither; 
but she shall not set her Foot within my Doors; 
and I suppose this Treatment will hinder her. 
I was much concern'd at this: And he said, Had
I an hundred Sisters, Pamela, their Opposition should
have no Weight with me; and I did not intend you
should know it; but you can't but expect a little
Difficulty from the Pride of my Sister, who have
suffer'd so much from that of her Brother; and we
are too nearly ally'd in Mind as well as Blood, I find. 
––– But this is not her Business. And if she would
have made it so, she should have done it with more
Decency. Little Occasion had she to boast of her 

Birth, that knows not what belongs to good Manners. 
I said, I am very sorry, Sir, to be the unhappy
Occasion of a Misunderstanding between so good
a Brother, and so worthy a Sister. Don't say so,
Pamela, because this is an indispensable Consequence
of the happy Prospect before us. Only,
bear it well yourself, because she is my Sister, and
leave it to me to make her sensible of her own
Rashness. 
If, Sir, said I, the most lowly Behaviour, and
humble Deportment, and in every thing shewing a
dutiful Regard to good Lady Davers, will have any
Weight with her Ladyship, assure yourself of all in
my Power to mollify her. No, Pamela, return'd he,
don't imagine, when you are my Wife, I will suffer
you to do any thing unworthy of that Character. 
I know the Duty of a Husband, and will protect
your Gentleness to the utmost, as if you were a
Princess by Descent. 
You are inexpressibly good, Sir, said I; but I am
far from taking a gentle Disposition, to shew a
Meanness of Spirit: And this is a Trial I ought to
expect; and well I may bear it, that have so many
Benefits to set against it, which all spring from the
same Cause. 
Well, said he, all the Matter shall be this: We
will talk of our Marriage as a Thing to be done next
Week. I find I have Spies upon me where-ever I
go, and whatever I do. But now, I am on so
laudable a Pursuit, that I value them not, nor their
Employers. I have already order'd my Servants to
communicate with nobody for ten or twelve Days
to come. And Mrs. Jewkes tells me, every one
names Thursday come Sev'nnight for our Nuptials. 
So I will get Mr. Peters, who wants to see my little
Chapel, to assist Mr. Williams, under the Notion of 

breakfasting with me, next Thursday Morning, since
you won't have it sooner; and there will want nobody
else; and I will beg of Mr. Peters to keep
it private, even from his own Family, for a few
Days. Has my Girl any Objection? 
O Sir, answer'd I, you are so generous in all your
Ways, I can have no Objections! ––– But I hope Lady
Davers and you will not proceed to irreconcileable
Lengths; and when her Ladyship comes to see you,
and to tarry with you, two or three Weeks, as she
us'd to do, I will keep close up, so as not to disgust
her with my Sight. Well, Pamela, said he, we will
talk of that afterwards. You must do then as I shall
think fit: And I shall be able to judge what both
you and I ought to do. But what still aggravates
the Matter is, that she should instigate the titled Ape
her Husband to write to me, after she had so little
succeeded herself. I wish I had kept his Letter,
that I might shew you how a Man that acts generally
like a Fool, can take upon him to write like a Lord. 
But, I suppose it is of my Sister's Penning, and he,
poor Man, is the humble Copier. 