


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Monday Night, Mar. 20. 
I Am very much dissatisfied with myself, my dear
Dr. Bartlett. What pains have I taken, to conquer
those sudden gusts of passion, to which, from my
early youth, I have been subject, as you have often
heard me confess! yet to find, at times, that I am
unequal—to myself, shall I say? —To myself, I will
say; since I have been so much amended by your precepts,
and example. But I will give you the occasion. 
My guests, and you, had but just left me, when
the wretched Jervois, and her O Hara, and another
bullying man, desired to speak with me. 
I bid the servant shew the woman into the drawing-room
next my study, and the men into the adjoining
parlour; but they both followed her into the drawing-room. 
I went to her, and, after a little stiff civility
(I could not help it) asked, If these gentlemen
had business with me? 

That gentleman is Major O-Hara, Sir: He is my
husband. That gentleman is Captain Salmonet: He
is the Major's brother-in-law. He is an officer, of
equal worth and bravery. 
They gave themselves airs of importance and familiarity; 
and the Major motioned, as if he would
have taken my hand. 
I encouraged not the motion. Will you, gentlemen,
walk this way? 
I led the way to my study. The woman arose, and
would have come with them. 
If you please to stay where you are, madam, I will
attend you presently. 
They entered; and, as if they would have me
think them connoisseurs, began to admire the globes,
the orrery, the pictures, and busts. 
I took off that sort of attention—Pray, gentlemen,
what are your commands with me? 
I am called Major O-Hara, Sir: I am the husband
of the Lady in the next room, as she told you. 
And what, pray, Sir, have I to do, either with you,
or your marriage? I pay that Lady, as the widow of
Mr. Jervois, 200l. a year: I am not obliged to pay
her more than one. She has no demands upon me; 
much less has her husband. 
The men had so much the air of bullies, and the
woman is so very wicked, that my departed friend,
and the name by which she so lately called the poor
Emily, were in my head, and I had too little command
of my temper. 
Look ye, Sir Charles Grandison, I would have you
to know— 
And he put his left hand upon his sword-handle,
pressing it down, which tilted up the point with an air
extremely insolent. 
What am I to understand by that motion, Sir? 
Nothing at all, Sir Charles—D&wblank;n me, if I mean
any-thing by it— 

You are called Major, you say, Sir—Do you bear
the king's commission, Sir? 
I have borne it, Sir, if I do not now. 
That, and the house you are in, give you a title to
civility. But, Sir, I cannot allow, that your marriage
with the Lady in the next room gives you pretence
to business with me. If you have, on any
other account, pray let me know what it is? 
The man seemed at a loss what to say; but not
from bashfulness. He looked about him, as if for his
woman; set his teeth; bit his lip; and took snuff,
with an air so like defiance, that, for fear I should not
be able to forbear taking notice of it, I turned to the
other: Pray, Captain Salmonet, said I, what are your
commands with me? 
He spoke in broken English; and said, He had the
honour to be Major O-Hara's brother: He had married
the Major's sister. 
And why, Sir, might you not have favoured me
with the company of all your relations? —Have you
any business with me, Sir, on your own account? 
I come, I come, said he, to see my brother righted,
Sir— 
Who has wronged him? —Take care, gentlemen,
how—But Mr. O-Hara, what are your pretensions? 
Why look-ye, Sir Charles Grandison (throwing
open his coat, and sticking one hand in his side, the
other thrown out with a flourish) Look-ye, Sir, repeated
he— 
I found my choler rising. I was afraid of myself. 
When I treat you familiarly, Sir, then treat me so:
Till when, please to withdraw— 
I rang: Frederick came in. 
Shew these gentlemen into the little parlour—You
will excuse me, Sirs; I attend the Lady. 
They muttered, and gave themselves brisk and
angry airs; nodding their heads at each other; but
followed the servant into that parlour. 

I went to Mrs. O-Hara, as she calls herself. 
Well, madam, what is your business with me,
now? 
Where are the gentlemen, Sir? Where is my
husband? 
They are both in the next room, and within hearing
of all that shall pass between you and me. 
And do you hold them unworthy of your presence,
Sir? 
Not, madam, while you are before me, and if they
had any business with me, or I with them. 
Has not an husband business where his wife is? 
Neither wife nor husband has business with me. 
Yes, Sir, I am come to demand my daughter. I
come to demand a mother's right. 
I answer not to such a demand: You know you
have no right to make it. 
I have been at Colnebrooke: She was kept from
me: My child was carried out of the house, that I
might not see her. 
And have you then terrified the poor girl? 
I have left a Letter for her; and I expect to see her
upon it. —Her new father, as worthy and as brave a
man as yourself, Sir, longs to see her— 
Her new father! madam. —You expect to see her!
madam. —What was your behaviour to her, unnatural
woman! the last time you saw her? But if you
do see her, it must be in my presence, and without
your man, if he form pretensions, on your account,
that may give either her or me disturbance. 
You are only, Sir, to take care of her fortune; so
I am advised: I, as her mother, have the natural
right over her person. The Chancery will give it to
me. 
Then seek your remedy in Chancery: Let me
never hear of you again, but by the officers of that
court. 
I opened the door leading into the room where the
two men were. 

They are not officers, I dare say: Common men
of the town, I doubt not, new-dressed for the occasion. 
O-Hara, as she calls him, is, probably, one
of her temporary husbands, only. 
Pray walk in, gentlemen, said I. This Lady intimates
to me, that she will apply to Chancery against
me. The Chancery, if she have any grievance, will
be a proper recourse. She can have no business with
me, after such a declaration—Much less can either of
you. 
And opening the drawing-room door that led to the
hall, Frederick, said I, attend the lady and the gentlemen
to their coach. 
And I turned from them, to go into my study. 
The Major, as he was called, asked me, with a
fierce air, his hand on his sword, If this were treatment
due to gentlemen? 
This house, in which, however, you are an intruder,
Sir, is your protection; or that motion, and
that air, if you mean any-thing by either, would cost
you dear. 
I am, Sir, the protector of my wife: You have insulted
her, Sir— 
Have I insulted-your wife, Sir? —And I stepped up
to him; but just in time recovered myself, remembering
where I was—Take care, Sir—But you are
safe, here. —Frederick, wait upon the gentlemen to the
door— 
Frederick was not in hearing: The well-meaning
man, apprehending consequences, went, it seems, into
the offices, to get together some of his fellow-servants. 
Salmonet, putting himself into violent motion,
swore, that he would stand by his friend, his brother,
to the last drop of his blood; and, in a posture of
offence, drew his sword half way. 
I wish, friend, said I, (but could hardly contain
myself) that I were in your house, instead of your 

being in mine. —But if you would have your sword
broken over your head, draw it quite. 
He did, with a vapour. D&wblank;n him, he said, if he
bore that! My own house, on such an insult as this,
should not be my protection; and, retreating, he put
himself into a posture of defence. 
Now, Major! Now, Major! said the wicked
woman. 
Her Major also drew, making wretched grimaces. 
I was dressed. I knew not but the men were assassins. 
I drew, put by Salmonet's sword, closed
with him, disarmed him, and, by the same effort,
laid him on the floor. 
O-Hara, skipping about, as if he watched for an
opportunity to make a push with safety to himself,
lost his sword, by the usual trick whereby a man, anything
skilled in his weapons, knows how sometimes to
disarm a less skilful adversary. 
The woman screamed, and ran into the hall. 
I turned the two men, first one, then the other, out
of the room, with a contempt that they deserved; 
and Frederick, Richard, and Jerry, who, by that time,
were got together in the hall, a little too roughly perhaps,
turned them into the Square. 
They limped into the coach they came in: The
woman, in terror, was already in it. When they were
also in it, they cursed, swore, and threatened. 
The pretended Captain, putting his body half-way
out of the coach, bid my servants tell me, That I
was—That I was—And avoiding a worse name, as it
seemed—No Gentleman; and that he would find an
opportunity to make me repent the treatment I had
given to men of honour, and to a Lady. 
The Major, in eagerness to say something, by way
of resentment and menace likewise—(beginning with
damning his blood)—had his intended threatening cut
short, by meeting the Captain's head with his, as the
other, in a rage, withdrew it, after his speech to the 

servant: And each cursing the other, one rubbing his
forehead, the other putting his hand to his head, away
drove the coach. 
They forgot to ask for their swords; and one of
them left his hat behind him. 
You cannot imagine, my dear Dr. Bartlett, how
much this idle affair has disturbed me: I cannot forgive
myself—To suffer myself to be provoked by two
such men, to violate the sanction of my own house! 
Yet they came, no doubt, to bully and provoke me; 
or to lay a foundation for a demand, that they knew,
if personally made, must do it. 
My only excuse to myself is, That there were two
of them; and that, tho' I drew, yet I had the command
of myself so far as only to defend myself, when
I might have done any-thing with them. I have generally
found, that those who are the readiest to give
offence, are the unfittest, when brought to the test,
to support their own insolence. 
But my Emily! my poor Emily! How must she
be terrified! —I will be with you very soon. Let not
her know any-thing of this idle affair; nor any-body
but Lord L. 
Tuesday Morning. 
I Have just parted with one Blagrave, an attorney,
who already had been ordered to proceed against me:
But, out of regard to my character, and having, as he
owned, no great opinion of his clients, he thought fit
to come to me in person, to acquaint me of it, and to
inform himself, from me, of the whole affair. 
The gentleman's civility intitled him to expect an
account of it: I gave it him. 
He told me, That if I pleased to restore the swords
and the hat, by him, and would promise not to stop
the future quarterly payments of the 200l. a year,
about which they were very apprehensive; he dared
to say, that, after such an exertion of spirit, as he
called a choleric excess, I should not hear any more 

of them for one while; since, he believed, they had
only been trying an experiment; which had been carried
farther, he dared to say, than they had designed
it should. 
He hinted his opinion, that the men were common
men of the town; and that they had never been honoured
with commissions in any service. 
The woman (I know not by what name to call her,
since it is very probable, that she has not a real title to
that of O-Hara) was taken out of the coach in violent
hysterics, as O-Hara told him; who, in consulting
Mr. Blagrave, may be supposed to aggravate matters,
in order to lay a foundation for an action of damages. 
She accused the men of cowardice, before Mr. Blagrave; 
and that in very opprobrious terms. 
They excused themselves, as being loth to hurt
me; which, they said, they easily could have done; 
especially before I drew. 
They both pretended, to Mr. Blagrave, personal
damages; but I hope their hurts are magnified. 
I am (however that be) most hurt; for I am not at
all pleased with myself. They, possibly, tho' they
have no cause to be satisfied with their parts in the
fray, have been more accustomed to such scuffles,
than I; and are above, or rather beneath, all punctilio. 
Mr. Blagrave took the swords and the hat with him
in the coach that waited for him. 
If I thought it would not have looked like a compromise,
and encouraged their insolence, I could freely
have sent them more than what belonged to them. I
am really greatly hurt by the part I acted to such men. 
As to the annuity; I bid Mr. Blagrave tell the
woman, that the payment of that, depended upon her
future good behaviour; and yet, that I was not sure,
that she was intitled to it, but as the widow of my
friend. 
However, I told this gentleman, That no provocation 

should hinder me from doing strict justice, tho'
I were sure that they would go to law with the money
I should cause to be paid to them quarterly. You will
therefore know, Sir, added I, that the fund which
they have to depend upon, to support a law-suit,
should they commence one, and think fit to employ
in it so honest a man as you seem to be, is 100l. a
year. It would be madness, if not injustice, to pay
the other 100l. for such a purpose, when it was left
to my discretion to pay it, or not, with a view to discourage
that litigious spirit which is one, of an hundred,
of this poor woman's bad qualities. 
And thus, for the present, stands this affair. I look
upon my trouble from this woman as over, till some
new scheme arises, either among these people, or from
others whom she may consult or employ. You and
I, when I have the happiness to attend you and my
other friends, will not renew the subject. 
I am, &c.
Charles Grandison. 

