



Miss Anna Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Jan. 10. 
I am extremely concerned, my dearest
Friend, for the disturbances that have
happened in your Family. I know how
it must hurt you to become the subject
of the public talk: And yet upon an
occasion so generally known, it is impossible but that
whatever relates to a young Lady whose distinguished
merits have made her the public care, should engage
every-body's attention. I long to have the particulars
from yourself; and of the usage I am told you receive
upon an accident you could not help; and in which,
as far as I can learn, the Sufferer was the Aggressor. 
Mr. Diggs the Surgeon, whom I sent for at the
first hearing of the Rencounter, to enquire, for your 

sake, how your Brother was, told me, That there
was no danger from the Wound, if there were none
from the Fever; which it seems has been increased by
the perturbation of his spirits. 
Mr. Wyerley drank Tea with us yesterday; and
tho' he is far from being partial to Mr. Lovelace, as
it may be well supposed, yet both he and Mr. Symmes
blame your family for the treatment they gave him
when he went in person to enquire after your Brother's
health, and to express his concern for what had
happened. 
They say, That Mr. Lovelace could not avoid
drawing his Sword: And that either your Brother's
unskilfulness or passion left him from the very first
pass entirely in his power. 
This, I am told, was what Mr. Lovelace said
upon it; retreating as he spoke: ‘Have a care,
Mr. Harlowe—Your violence puts you out of
your defence. You give me too much advantage. 
For your Sister's sake, I will pass by every
thing:—if—’ 
But this the more provoked his rashness, to lay
himself open to the advantage of his adversary—Who,
after a slight wound given him in the arm, took away
his Sword. 
There are people who love not your Brother, because
of his natural imperiousness and fierce and uncontroulable
temper: These say, That the young
gentleman's passion was abated on seeing his blood
gush plentifully down his arm; and that he received
the generous offices of his adversary (who helped him
off with his coat and waistcoat, and bound up his
arm, till the Surgeon could come) with such patience,
as was far from making a visit afterwards from that
adversary to enquire after his health, appear either insulting
or improper. 
Be this as it may, every-body pities you. So steady,
so uniform in your conduct: So desirous, as you always 

said, of sliding through life to the end of it unnoted; 
and, as I may add, not wishing to be observed
even for your silent benevolence; sufficiently happy in
the noble consciousness which attends it: Rather useful
than glaring, your deserved motto; tho' now, to
your regret, pushed into blaze, as I may say: and
yet blamed at home for the faults of others—How
must such a virtue suffer on every hand! —Yet it must
be allowed, that your present trial is but proportioned
to your prudence. 
As all your friends without-doors are apprehensive
that some other unhappy event may result from so violent
a contention, in which it seems the Families on
both sides are now engaged, I must desire you to enable
me, on the authority of your own information,
to do you occasional justice. 
My Mother, and all of us, like the rest of the world,
talk of nobody but you on this occasion, and of the
consequences which may follow from the resentments
of a man of Mr. Lovelace's spirit; who, as he gives
out, has been treated with high indignity by your
Uncles. My Mother will have it, that you cannot
now, with any decency, either see him, or correspond
with him. She is a good deal prepossessed by your
Uncle Antony; who occasionally calls upon us, as
you know; and on this Rencounter, has represented
to her the crime which it would be in a Sister to encourage
a man who is to wade into her favour (this
was his expression) thro' the blood of her Brother. 
Write to me therefore, my dear, the whole of your
Story from the time that Mr. Lovelace was first introduced
into your family; and particularly an account
of all that passed between him and your Sister; about
which there are different reports; some people scrupling
not to insinuate that the younger Sister has stolen
a Lover from the elder: And pray write in so full a
manner as may satisfy those who know not so much of
your affairs as I do. If any-thing unhappy should 

fall out from the violence of such spirits as you have
to deal with, your account of all things previous to it
will be your best justification. 
You see what you draw upon yourself by excelling
all your Sex. Every individual of it who knows you,
or has heard of you, seems to think you answerable
to her for your conduct in points so very delicate and
concerning. 
Every eye, in short, is upon you with the expectation
of an example. I wish to heaven you were at
liberty to pursue your own methods: All would then,
I dare say, be easy, and honourably ended. But I
dread your directors and directresses; for your Mother,
admirably well qualified as she is to lead, must submit
to be led. Your Sister and Brother will certainly put
you out of your course. 
But this is a point you will not permit me to expatiate
upon: Pardon me therefore, and I have done. — 
Yet, why should I say, Pardon me? When your
Concerns are my Concerns? When your Honour is
my Honour? When I love you, as never woman
loved another? And when you have allowed of that
Concern and of that Love; and have for years, which
in persons so young may be called many, ranked in
the first class of your friends, 
Your ever grateful and affectionate
Anna Howe? 
Will you oblige me with a copy of the Preamble
to the clauses in your Grandfather's Will in your
favour; and allow me to send it to my Aunt
Harman? —She is very desirous to see it. Yet
your character has so charmed her, that, tho' a
stranger to you personally, she assents to the preference
given you in that Will, before she knows
the Testator's reasons for giving you that preference. 