



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dear Lady,
We are just return'd from accompanying the
worthy Miss Darnford as far as Bedford, in
her Way home, where her Papa and Mamma met
her in their Coach. Sir Simon put on his pleasant
Airs, and school'd Mr. B. for persuading his Daughter
to stay so long from him; me for putting her
upon asking to stay longer; and Miss for being persuaded
by us. 
I think he is worse than ever, in his Way of
Talk, and for my Rebukes to him; for he ran on
a deal of Stuff about me, and my late Lying-in; 
and would have it, that I am so much improved,
that I ought to make a Court'sy to Mr. B. once an
Hour. He said, when I was angry at him, and his
Lady blam'd him, that it was all pure Revenge for
my Letter* , and for keeping Miss so long from
him. 
We tarry'd Two Days together at Bedford; for
we knew not how to part; and then we took a
most affectionate Leave of each other. 
We struck out of the Road a little, to make
a Visit to the dear House, where we tarry'd one
Night; and next Morning, before any body could
come to congratulate us, (designing to be incog.)
we proceeded on our Journey to London, and
found my dearest, dear Boy, in charming Health. 
What a new Pleasure has God Almighty's
Goodness bestow'd upon me; which, after every 

little Absence, rises upon me, in a true maternal
Tenderness, every Step I move toward the dear
little Blessing! —Yet sometimes I think your dear
Brother is not so fond of him, as I wish him to be. 
He says, it is time enough for him to mind him,
when he can return his Notice, and be grateful! 
—A negligent Word, i'n't it, Madam? —Considering— 
My dear Father came to Town, to accompany
my good Mother down to Kent, and they set out
three or four Days after your Ladyship left us. It
is impossible to describe the Joy with which his
worthy Heart overflow'd, when he congratulated
us on the happy Event. And as he had been apprehensive
for his Daughter's Safety, judge, my
Lady, what his Transports must be, to see us all
safe, and well, and happy, and a Son given to Mr. B.
by his greatly honoured Daughter. 
I was in the Nursery when he came. So was
my Mother. Miss Darnford also was there. And
Mr. B. who was in his Closet at his Arrival, after
having receiv'd his most respectful Congratulations
himself, brought him up (tho' he has not been
there since: indeed he han't!): Pamela, said the
dear Gentleman, see who's here! 
I sprang to him, and kneel'd for his Blessing:
O my Father! said I, see (pointing to the dear
Baby at the Nurse's Breast) how God Almighty has
answer'd all our Prayers! 
He dropp'd down on his reverend Knees by me,
clasping me in his indulgent Arms: O my Daughter! 
—My blessed Daughter! —And do I once more see
you! And see you safe and well! —I do! I do!— 
Blessed be thy Name, O gracious God, for these thy
Mercies! 



While we were thus join'd, happy Father and
happy Daughter, in one Thanksgiving, the sweet
Baby having fallen asleep, the Nurse had put it into
the Cradle; and when my Father rose from me,
he went to my Mother: God bless my dear Betty,
said he: I long'd to see you, after this Separation. 
Here's Joy! Here's Pleasure! O how happy are we! 
And taking her Hand, he kneel'd down on one
Side the Cradle, and my Mother on the other,
both looking at the dear Baby, with Eyes running
over; and, Hand in Hand, he pray'd, in the most
fervent manner, for a Blessing upon the dear Infant; 
and that God Almighty would make him
an Honour to his Father's Family, and to his Mother's
Virtue (that was his Word); and that, in
the Words of Scripture, he might grow on, and be
in Favour both with the Lord, and with Men! 
They both rose, and Mr. B. taking my Hand,
and Miss Darnford's (your Ladyship may guess
how we were moved! for Miss is a sweet-natur'd
Lady, you know, Madam); My dear Pamela! 
How these kind, these grateful Hearts affect one! 
—Do you often, my dear Miss Darnford, see
Scenes wrought up by the Poets to this moving
Height? —Here we behold and admire that noble
Simplicity, in which Nature always triumphs over
her Hand-maid Art! —And which makes a Scene
of Joy as affecting to a noble Mind, as that of the
deepest Distress: Else, how could it display its
Force thus sweetly on your lovely Check! And he
saluted Miss, and me too. 
Mr. B. has just put into my Hands Mr. Locke's
Treatise on Education, and he commands me to 

give him my Thoughts upon it in Writing. He
has a very high Regard for this Author, and tells
me, That my Tenderness for Billy will make me
think some of the first Advice given in it, a little
harsh, perhaps; but altho' he has not read it through,
only having dipp'd into it here and there, he believes,
from the Name of the Author, I cannot have a
better Directory: And my Opinion of it, after I
have well consider'd it, will inform him, he says,
of my own Capacity and Prudence, and how far
he may rely upon both in the Point of a first Education. 
I asked, If I might not be excus'd Writing,
only making my Observations here and there, to
himself, as I found Occasion? But he said, You will
yourself, my Dear, better consider the Subject, and
be more a Mistress of it, and I shall the better
attend to your Reasonings, when they are put into
Writing: And surely, Pamela, added he, you
may, in such an important Point as this, as well
oblige me with a little of your Penmanship, as your
other dear Friends. 
After this, your Ladyship will judge I had not
another Word to say. He cuts one to the Heart,
when he speaks so seriously. 
I have look'd a little into it. It is a Book quite
accommodated to my Case, being written to a Gentleman,
the Author's Friend, for the Regulation of his
Conduct towards his Children. But how shall I do,
Madam, if in such a renowned Author, I see already
some few things, which I think want clearing up? 
Won't it look like intolerable Vanity, in such a one as
me, to find Fault with such a Genius as Mr. Locke? 

But I will consider of the Matter thoroughly,
before I set Pen to Paper; for, altho' he writes in a
very familiar and intelligible Style, perhaps I may
not understand him at once reading. 
I must, on this Occasion, give your Ladyship
the Particulars of a short Conversation between
your Brother and me; which, however, perhaps,
will not be to my Advantage, because it will shew
you what a teizing Body I can be, if I am indulged. 
—But Mr. B. will not spoil me neither in that
way: No fear of that, I dare say! —Your Ladyship
will see this in the very Dialogue I shall give
you. 
Thus it was. I had been reading in Mr. Locke's
Book, and Mr. B. ask'd me, How I lik'd it? Exceedingly
well, Sir. But I have a Proposal to
make, which if you will be pleased to comply
with, will give me a charming Opportunity of understanding
Mr. Locke. 
What is your Proposal, my Dear? I see it is
some very particular one, by that sweet Earnestness
in your Look. 
Why so it is, Sir: And I must know, whether
you are in high good Humour, before I make it. I
think you look grave upon me; and my Proposal
will not then do, I'm sure. 
You have all the amusing Ways of your Sex,
my dear Pamela. But tell me what you would
say? You know I don't love Suspense. 
May-be you're busy, Sir. Perhaps I break in
upon you. I believe you were going into your
Closet. 
True Woman! —How you love to put one
upon the Tenters! Yet, my Life for yours, by 

your Parade, what I just now thought important,
is some pretty Trifle. —Speak it at once, or I'll
be angry with you; and tapp'd my Cheek. 
Well, I wish I had not come just now!— I
see you are not in a quite good Humour enough
for my Proposal. —So, pray, Sir, excuse me till
To-morrow. 
He took my Hand, and led me to his Closet,
calling me his pretty Impertinent; and then urging
me, I said—You know, Sir, I have not been
us'd to the Company of Children. Your dear
Billy will not make me fit, for a long time, to
judge of any Part of Education. I can learn of the
charming Boy nothing but the Baby Conduct: But
now, if you would permit me to take into the
House some little Master of Three or Four Years
old, or Miss of Five or Six, I should watch over
all their little Ways; and now reading a Chapter
in the Child, and now a Chapter in the Book, I
shall be enabled to look forward, and with Advantage,
into the Subject; and to go thro' all the Parts
of Education tolerably, for one of my Capacity; 
for, Sir, I can, by my own Defects, and what I
have wished to mend, know how to judge of, and
supply that Part of Life, which carries a Child up
to Eleven or Twelve Years of Age, which was
mine, when my Lady took me. 
A pretty Thought, Pamela! But tell me,
Who will part with their Child, think you? Would
you do it, if it were your own Case, altho' you
were ever so well assur'd of the Advantages your
Little-one would reap by it? —For, don't you consider,
my Dear, that the Child ought to be wholly
subjected to your Authority? That its Father or 

Mother ought seldom to see it; because it should
think itself absolutely dependent upon you?— 
And where, my Dear, will you meet with Parents
so resign'd? —Besides, one would have the Child
descended of genteel Parents, and not such as could
do nothing for it; otherwise the Turn of Mind
and Education you would give it, might do it more
Harm than Good. 
All this is true, Sir, very true. But have you
no other Objection, if one could find a genteelly
descended young Master? And would you join to
persuade his Papa to give me up his Power, only
from Three Months to Three Months, as I lik'd,
and the Child lik'd, and as the Papa approv'd of
my Proceedings? 
This is so reasonable, with these last Conditions,
Pamela, that I should be pleased with your
Notion, if it could be put in Practice, because the
Child would be benefited by your Instruction, and
you would be improv'd in an Art, which I could
wish to see you an Adept in. 
But, perhaps, Sir, you had rather it were a
Miss, than a Master? 
I had, my Dear, if a Miss could be found,
whose Parents would give her up to you: But I
suppose you have some Master in your Head, by
your putting it upon that Sex at first. 
Let me see, Sir, You say you are in a good
Humour! Let me see, if you be! —Looking
boldly in his Face. 
What now, with some little Impatience, would
the pretty Fool be at? 
Only, Sir, that you have nothing to do, but
to speak the Word, and there is a Miss, whose Papa, 

and Mamma too, I am sure, would consent to give
up to me, for my own Instruction, as well as for
her sake; and if, to speak in the Scripture Phrase,
I have found Grace in your Sight, kind Sir, speak
this Word to the dear Miss's Papa. 
And have you thus come over with me, Pamela! 
—Go, I am half angry with you, for leading me
on in this manner against myself. This looks so
artful, that I won't love you! —Dear Sir!— 
And dear Madam, too! Begone! I say:—You
have surpris'd me by Art, when your Talent is Nature,
and you should keep to that! 
I was sadly balk'd, and had neither Power to
go nor stay! —At last, seeing I had put him into
a kind of Flutter, as now he had put me, I moved
my unwilling Feet to wards the Door. —He took
a Turn about the Closet mean time. —Yet stay,
said he, there is something so generous in your Art,
that, on Recollection, I cannot part with you. 
He took Notice of the starting Tear—I am to
blame! —You had surpris'd me so, that my hasty
Temper got the better of my Consideration. Let
me kiss away this pearly Fugitive. Forgive me, my
dearest Love! What an inconsiderate Brute am I,
when compar'd to such an Angel as my Pamela! I
see, at once now, all the Force, and all the Merit, of
your amiable Generosity: And to make you amends
for this my Hastiness, I will coolly consider of the
Matter, and will either satisfy you by my Compliance,
or by the Reasons which I will give for the
contrary. 
But say, my Pamela; can you forgive my
Harshness? —Can I! Yes, indeed, Sir, pressing
his Hand to my Lips; and bid me Go, and Begone, 

Twenty times a Day, if I am to be thus kindly
call'd back to you, thus nobly and condescendingly
treated, in the same Breath! —I see, dear Sir,
continued I, that I must be in Fault, if ever you
are lastingly displeased with me. —For, as soon as
you turn yourself about, your Anger vanishes, and
you make me rich Amends for a few harsh Words. 
Only One thing, dear Sir, let me add: If I have
dealt artfully with you, impute it to my Fear of
offending you, thro' the Nature of my Petition,
and not to Design; and that I took the Example
of the Prophet, to King David, in the Parable of
the Ewe-Lamb. 
I remember it, my Dear—and you have
well pointed your Parable, and had nothing to do,
but to say, Thou art the Man! 
I am called upon by my dear Benefactor for a
little Airing; and he suffers me only to conclude
this long Letter, knowing to whom I have the
Honour to write, this being Post-day. And so I
am obliged, with greater Abruptness than I had
designed, to mention thankfully your Ladyship's
Goodness to me; particularly in that kind, kind
Letter* , in behalf of my dear Parents, had a certain
Event taken place. Mr. B. shew'd it to me
this Morning, and not before—I believe, for fear
I should have been so much oppress'd by the Sense
of your Ladyship's unmerited Goodness to me, had
he let me know of it before your Departure from
us, that I should not have been able to look up at
you, heaping Favours and Blessings upon me, as 

you hourly were doing besides. What a happy Creature
am I! —But my Gratitude runs me into
Length; and sorry I am, that I cannot have time
just now to indulge it. 
But yet I am apt sometimes to doubt, whether
I ought to think myself so very happy; and whether
it is not an Argument of a mean Spirit; because I
am under Obligations, unreturnable Obligations, to
every living Soul, as well as to your Ladyship; and
yet can rejoice in them, as if it was such a glorious
Thing to be obliged, when it is not in one's Power
to oblige again. 
Is there nothing, my dear Lord and Lady Davers,
is there nothing my dear Lady Countess, and my
good Lord C. that I can do, to shew, at least, that
I have a Will, and am not an ingrateful, and a sordid
Creature? 
And yet, if you give me Power to do any
thing that will have the Appearance of a Return,
even that Power will be laying a fresh Obligation
upon me—Which, however, I should be very
proud of, because I should thereby convince you,
by something more than Words, how much I am
(most particularly, my dearest Lady Davers, my
Sister, my Friend, my Patroness) 
Your most obliged and faithful Servant,
P. B. 
Your dear Brother joins in respectful Thankfulness
to his Four noble Gossips: And I made
my Billy, by his Lips, subscribe his. I hope
so to direct his earliest Notions, as to make
him sensible of his dutiful Obligations to such
noble and good God-papa's and Mamma's. 

