



Mr. Belford, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Aug. 3, 4. 
Madam,
You have engaged me to communicate to you,
upon honour (making neither better nor worse
of the matter) what Mr. Lovelace has written to me,
in relation to yourself, in the period preceding your
going to Hamstead, and in that between the 11th and
19th of June: And you assure me, you have no view
in this request, but to see if it be necessary for you,
from the account he gives, to touch the painful subjects
yourself, for the sake of your own character. 
Your commands, Madam, are of a very delicate
nature, as they may seem to affect the Secrets of private
friendship: But as I know you are not capable of a
view, the motives to which you will not own; and
as I think the communication may do some credit to
my unhappy friend's character, as an ingenuous man; 
tho' his actions by the most excellent woman in the
world have lost him all title to that of an honourable
one; I obey you with the greater chearfulness. 

He then proceeds with his Extracts, and concludes
them with an address to her in his friend's behalf,
in the following words; 
‘And now, Madam, I have fulfilled your commands; 
and, I hope, have not dis-served my
friend with you; since you will hereby see the justice
he does to your virtue in every line he writes. 
He does the same in all his Letters, tho' to his own
condemnation: And give me leave to add, that if
this ever-amiable Sufferer can think it in any manner
consistent with her honour to receive his Vows
at the Altar, on his truly penitent turn of mind, I
have not the least doubt, but that he will make her
the best and tenderest of Husbands. What obligation
will not the admirable Lady hereby lay upon
all his noble family, who so greatly admire her!
and, I will presume to say, upon her own, when
the unhappy family aversion (which certainly has
been carried to an unreasonable height against him)
shall be got over, and a general Reconciliation takes
place! For who is it, that would not give these
two admirable persons to each other, were not his
morals an objection?’ 
However this be, I would humbly refer to you,
Madam, whether, as you will be mistress of very delicate
particulars from me his friend, you should not
in honour think yourself concerned to pass them by,
as if you had never seen them; and not to take any
advantage of the communication, not even in argument,
as some perhaps might lie, with respect to the
premeditated design he seems to have had, not against
You, as You; but as against the Sex; over whom
(I am sorry I can bear witness myself) it is the villainous
aim of all Libertines to triumph: And I would
not, if any misunderstanding should arise between
him and me, give him room to reproach me, that
his losing of you, and (through his usage of you) 

of his own friends, were owing to what perhaps he
would call Breach of Trust, were he to judge rather
by the event than by my intention. 
I am, Madam, with the most profound veneration, 
Your most faithful humble Servant,
J. Belford. 