


Miss Byron, To Sir Rowland Meredith. 


Wedn. Apr. 19. 
It was with great pleasure that I received, this day,
the kindest Letter that ever was written by a real
Father to his dearest Child. I was resolved that I
would not go to rest till I had acknowleged the favour. 
How sweet is the name of father to a young person
who, out of near one-and-twenty years of life, has
for more than half the time been bereaved of hers; 
and who was also one of the best of men! 
You gave me an additional pleasure in causing this
remembrance of your promised paternal goodness to
be given me by Mr. Fowler in person. Till I knew
you and him, I had no father, no brother. 
How good you are in your apprehensions that there
may be a man on whom your daughter has cast her
eye, and who cannot look upon her with the same
distinction—O that I had been near you when you
wrote that sweetly-compassionating, that indulgent
passage! I would have wiped the tears from your eyes
myself, and reverenced you as my true father. 
You demand of me, as my father, a hint, or half
a hint, as you call it, to be given to my brother
Fowler; or if not to him, to you. To him, whom
I call father, I mean all the duty of a child. I call
him not father nominally only: I will, irksome as the
subject is, own, without reserve, the truth to you (In
tenderness to my brother, how could I to him?) — 
There is a man whom, and whom only, I could love
as a good wife ought to love her husband. He is the
best of men. O my good Sir Rowland Meredith! if
you knew him, you would love him yourself, and own
him for your son. I will not conceal his name from 

my Father: Sir Charles Grandison is the man. Enquire
about him. His character will rise upon you
from every mouth. He engaged first all your daughter's
gratitude, by rescuing her from a great danger and
oppression; for he is as brave as he is good: And
how could she help suffering a tenderness to spring up
from her gratitude, of which she was never before
sensible to any man in the world? There is something
in the way, my good Sir; but not that proceeds
from his slights or contempts. Your daughter
could not live, if it were so. A glorious creature is
in the way! who has suffered for him, who does
suffer for him: He ought to be hers, and only hers; 
and if she can be recovered from a fearful malady
that has seized her mind, he probably will. My
daily prayers are, that God will restore her! 
But yet, my dear Sir, my Friend, my Father! my
esteem for this noblest of men is of such a nature,
that I cannot give my hand to any other: My Father
Meredith would not wish me to give a hand without
a heart. 
This, Sir, is the case. Let it, I beseech you, rest
within your own breast, and my brother Fowler's. 
How few minds are there delicate and candid enough
to see circumstances of this kind in the light they ought
to appear in! And pray for me, my good Sir Rowland; 
not that the way may be smoothed to what once
would have crowned my wishes as to this life; but
that Sir Charles Grandison may be happy with the
Lady that is, and ought to be, dearest to his heart; 
and that your daughter may be enabled to rejoice in
their felicity. What, my good Sir, is this span of
life, that a passenger through it should seek to overturn
the interests of others to establish her own? And can
the single life be a grievance? Can it be destitute of
the noblest tendernesses? No, Sir. You that have
lived to an advanced age, in a fair fame, surrounded
with comforts, and as tencer to a worthy nephew, as 

the most indulgent father could be to the worthiest of
sons, can testify for me, that it is not. 
But now, Sir, one word—I disclaim, but yet in all
thankfulness, the acceptance of the favour signified to
be intended me in the latter part of the paternal Letter
before me. Our acquaintance began with a hope,
on your side, that I could not encourage. As I could
not, Shall I accept of the benefit from you, to which I
could only have been entitled (and that as I had behaved)
had I been able to oblige you? —No, Sir! I
will not, in this case, be benefited, when I cannot benefit. 
Put me not therefore, I beseech you, Sir, if
such an event (deplored by me, as it would be!) should
happen, upon the necessity of enquiring after your
other relations and friends. Sir Rowland Meredith
my Father, and Mr. Fowler my Brother, are all to
me of the family they distinguish by their relation,
that I know at present. Let me not be made known
to the rest by a distinction that would be unjust to
them, and to yourself, as it must deprive you of the
grace of obliging those who have more than a stranger's
claim; and must, in the event, lay them under
the appearance of an obligation to that stranger for
doing them common justice. 
I use the word stranger with reference to those of
your family and friends to whom I must really appear
in that light. But, laying these considerations aside,
in which I am determined not to intersere with them,
I am, with the tenderest regard, dear and good Sir, 
Your ever-dutiful and
affectionate Daughter,
Harriet Byron. 

