



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday Morn. Aug. 29. 
Now, Jack, will I give thee an account of what
passed on occasion of the visit made us by Col.
Morden. 
He came on horseback, attended by one servant; 
and Lord M. received him as a relation of Miss
Harlowe's, with the highest marks of civility and
respect. 
After some general talk of the times, and of the
weather, and such nonsense as Englishmen generally
make their introductory topics to conversation, the
Colonel addressed himself to Lord M. and to me, as
follows: 
I need not, my Lord, and Mr. Lovelace, as you
know the relation I bear to the Harlowe family,
make any apology for entering upon a subject, which,
on account of that relation, you must think is the
principal reason of the honour I have done myself in
this visit. 
Miss Harlowe, Miss Clarissa Harlowe's affair, said
Lord M. with his usual forward bluntness. That,
Sir, is what you mean. She is, by all accounts, the
most excellent woman in the world. 
I am glad to hear that is your Lordship's opinion of
her. It is every one's. 

It is not only my opinion, Col. Morden (proceeded
the prating Peer) but it is the opinion of all my family. 
Of my Sisters, of my Nieces, and of Mr.
Lovelace himself. 
Col. Would to Heaven it had been always Mr.
Lovelace's opinion of her! 
Lovel. You have been out of England, Colonel,
a good many years. Perhaps you are not yet fully
apprised of all the particulars of this case. 
Col. I have been out of England, Sir, about Seven
years. My Cousin Clary was then about Twelve years
of age: But never was there at Twenty so discreet, so
prudent, and so excellent a creature. All that knew
her, or saw her, admired her. Mind and Person,
never did I see such promises of perfection in any
young Lady: And I am told, nor is it to be wondered
at, that as she advanced to maturity, she more
than justified and made good those promises. —Then,
as to Fortune—what her Father, what her Uncles,
and what I myself, intended to do for her, besides
what he Grandfather had done—There is not a finer
Fortune in the County. 
Lovel. All this, Colonel, and more than this, is
Miss Clarissa Harlowe; and had it not been for the
implacableness and violence of her family (all resolved
to push her upon a match as unworthy of her, as hateful
to her) she had still been happy. 
Col. I own, Mr. Lovelace, the truth of what you
observed just now, that I am not thoroughly acquainted
with all that has passed between you and my
Cousin. But permit me to say, that when I first
heard that you made your addresses to her, I knew
but of one objection against you. That, indeed, a
very great one: And upon a Letter sent me, I gave
her my free opinion upon the subject (a) . But had
it not been for that, I own, that my private mind,
there could not have been a more suitable match: 

For you are a gallant gentleman, graceful in your
person, easy and genteel in your deportment, and in
your family, fortunes, and expectations, happy as a
man can wish to be. Then the knowlege I had of
you in Italy (altho', give me leave to say, your conduct
there was not wholly unexceptionable) convinces
me, that you are brave: And few gentlemen come
up to you in wit and vivacity. Your education has
given you great advantages; your manners are engaging,
and you have travelled; and I know, if
you'll excuse me, you make better observations than
you are governed by. All these qualifications make
it not at all surprising, that a young Lady should love
you: And that this Love, joined to that indiscreet
warmth wherewith my Cousin's friends would have
forced her inclinations in favour of men who are far
your inferiors in the qualities I have named, should
throw her upon your protection. But then, if there
were these two strong motives, the one to induce,
the other to impel her, let me ask you, Sir, If she
were not doubly entitled to generous usage from a
man whom she chose for her protector; and whom,
let me take the liberty to say, she could so amply reward
for the protection he was to afford her? 
Lovel. Miss Clarissa Harlowe was entitled, Sir, to
the best usage that man could give her. I have no
scruple to own it. I will always do her the justice
she so well deserves. I know what will be your inference; 
and have only to say, That time past cannot
be recalled. Perhaps I wish it could. 
The Colonel then in a very manly strain set forth
the wickedness of attempting a woman of virtue and
character. He said, that men had generally too
many advantages from the weakness, credulity, and
inexperience of the fair Sex: That their early Learning,
which chiefly consisted in inflaming Novels, and
idle and improbable romances, contributed to enervate
and weaken their minds: That his Cousin 

however, he was sure, was above the reach of common
seduction, and not to be influenced to the rashness
her parents accused her of, by weaker motives than
their violence, and the most solemn promises on my
part: But, nevertheless, having those motives, and
her prudence (eminent as it was) being rather the
effect of constitution than experience (a fine advantage,
however, he said, to ground an unblameable future
life upon) she might not be apprehensive of bad designs,
in a man she loved: It was, therefore, a very
heinous thing to abuse the confidence of such a woman. 
He was going on in this trite manner; when, interrupting
him, I said; These general observations,
Colonel, suit not perhaps this particular case. But
you yourself are a man of gallantry; and, possibly,
were you to be put to the question, might not be
able to vindicate every action of your life, any more
than I. 
Col. You are welcome, Sir, to put what questions
you please to me. And, I thank God, I can both
own and be ashamed of my errors. 
Lord M. looked at me; but as the Colonel did not
by his manner seem to intend a reflection, I had no
occasion to take it for one; especially as I can as
readily own my errors, as he, or any man, can his,
whether ashamed of them or not. 
He proceeded. As you seem to call upon me, Mr.
Lovelace, I will tell you (without boasting of it) what
has been my general practice, till lately, that I hope I
have reformed it a good deal. 
I have taken liberties, which the Laws of Morality
will by no means justify; and once I should have
thought myself warranted to cut the throat of any
young fellow, who should make as free with a Sister
of mine, as I have made with the Sisters and Daughters
of others. But then I took care never to promise
any-thing I intended not to perform. A modest ear 

should as soon have heard downright Obscenity from
my lips, as Matrimony, if I had not intended it. 
Young Ladies are generally ready enough to believe
we mean honourably, if they love us; and it would
look like a strange affront to their virtue and charms,
that it should be supposed needful to put the question
whether in your address you mean a wife. But
when once a man makes a promise, I think it ought
to be performed; and a woman is well warranted
to appeal to every one against the perfidy of a
deceiver; and is always sure to have the world of
her side. 
Now, Sir, continued he, I believe you have so
much honour as to own, that you could not have
made way to so eminent a virtue, without promising
marriage; and that very explicitly and solemnly— 
I know very well, Colonel, interrupted I, all you
would say. You will excuse me, I am sure, that I
break in upon you, when you find it is to answer the
end you drive at. 
I own to you then, that I have acted very unworthily
by Miss Clarissa Harlowe; and I'll tell you
further, that I heartily repent of my ingratitude and
baseness to her. Nay, I will say still further, that I
am so grosly culpable as to her, that even to plead,
that the abuses and affronts I daily received from her
implacable relations, were in any manner a provocation
to me to act vilely by her, would be a mean and
low attempt to excuse myself—So low and so mean,
that it would doubly condemn me. And if you can
say worse, speak it. 
He looked upon Lord M. and then upon me, two
or three times. And my Lord said, My kinsman
speaks what he thinks, I'll answer for him. 
Lovel. I do, Sir; and what can I say more? And
what further, in your opinion, can be done? 
Col. Done! Sir? Why, Sir, [in a haughty tone
he spoke] I need not tell you that Reparation follows 

Repentance. And I hope you make no scruple of
justifying your sincerity as to the one, by the other. 
I hesitated (for I relished not the manner of his
speech, and his haughty accent) as undetermined whether
to take proper notice of it, or not. 
Col. Let me put this question to you, Mr. Lovelace: 
Is it true, as I have heard it is, That you
would marry my Cousin, if she would have you? — 
What say you, Sir?— 
This wound me up a peg higher. 
Lovel. Some questions, as they may be put, imply
commands, Colonel. I would be glad to know how
I am to take yours? And what is to be the end of
your interrogatories? 
Col. My questions are not meant by me as commands,
Mr. Lovelace. The end is, to prevail upon
a gentleman to act like a gentleman, and a man of
honour. 
Lovel. (briskly) And by what arguments, Sir, do
you propose to prevail upon me? 
Col. By what arguments, Sir, prevail upon a gentleman
to act like a gentleman! —I am surprised at
That question from Mr. Lovelace. 
Lovel. Why so, Sir? 
Col. Why so, Sir! (angrily)—Let me— 
Lovel. (interrupting) I don't chuse, Colonel, to be
repeated upon, in that accent. 
Lord M. Come, come, gentlemen, I beg of you
to be willing to understand one another. You young
gentlemen are so warm— 
Col. Not I, my Lord—I am neither very young,
nor unduly warm. Your Nephew, my Lord, can
make me be every-thing he would have me to be. 
Lovel. And that shall be, whatever you please to
be Colonel. 
Col. (fiercely) The choice be yours, Mr. Lovelace. 
Friend or Foe! as you do or are willing to do justice
to one of the finest women in the world. 

Lord M. I guessed from both your characters,
what would be the case when you met. Let me interpose,
gentlemen, and beg you but to understand
one another. You both shoot at one mark; and if you
are patient, will both hit it. Let me beg of you,
Colonel, to give no challenges— 
Col. Challenges, my Lord! —They are things I
ever was readier to accept than to offer. But does
your Lordship think, that a man so nearly related as
I have the honour to be to the most accomplished
woman on earth— 
Lord M. (interrupting) We all allow the excellencies
of the Lady—And we shall all take it as the
greatest honour to be allied to her that can be conferred
upon us. 
Col. So you ought, my Lord!— 
A perfect Chamont! thought I (a) . 
Lord M. So we ought, Colonel! And so we do! 
—And pray let every one do as he ought!—and no
more than he ought; and you, Colonel, let me tell
you, will not be so hasty. 
Lovel. (coolly) Come, come, Col. Morden, don't
let this dispute, whatever you intend to make of it,
go farther than with you and me. You deliver yourself
in very high terms. Higher than ever I was
talked to in my life. But here, beneath this roof,
'twould be inexcuseable for me to take that notice
of it, which perhaps it would become me to take
elsewhere. 
Col. This is spoken as I wish the man to speak,
whom I should be pleased to call my Friend, if all
his actions were of a piece; and as I would have the
man speak, whom I would think it worth my while
to call my Foe. I love a man of Spirit, as I love
my Soul. But, Mr. Lovelace, as my Lord thinks
we aim at one mark, let me say, that were we permitted
to be alone for six minutes, I dare say, we 

should soon understand one another perfectly well. 
—And he moved to the door. 
Lovel. I am entirely of your opinion, Sir; and will
attend you. 
My Lord rung, and stept between us: Colonel,
return, I beseech you return, said he: For he had
stept out of the room, while my Lord held me—Nephew,
you shall not go out. 
The Bell and my Lord's raised voice brought in
Mowbray, and Clements, my Lord's gentleman; 
the former in his careless way, with his hands behind
him, What's the matter, Bobby? What's the matter,
my Lord? 
Only, only, only, stammered the agitated Peer,
these young gentlemen are, are, are—are young gentlemen,
that's all. —Pray, Colonel Morden [who
again entered the room with a sedater aspect] let this
cause have a fair tryal, I beseech you. 
Col. With all my heart, my Lord. 
Mowbray whispered me, What is the cause,
Bobby? —Shall I take the gentleman to task for thee,
my boy? 
Not for the world, whispered I. The Colonel is
a gentleman, and I desire you'll not say one word. 
Well, well, well, Bobby, I have done. I can
turn thee loose to the best man upon God's earth; 
that's all, Bobby; strutting off to the other end of
the room. 
Col. I am sorry, my Lord, I should give your
Lordship the least uneasiness. I came not with such
a design. 
Lord M. Indeed, Colonel, I thought you did, by
your taking fire so quickly. I am glad to hear you
say you did not. How soon a little spark kindles into
a flame; especially when it meets with such combustible
spirits! 
Col. If I had had the least thought of proceeding
to extremities, I am sure Mr. Lovelace would have 

given me the honour of a meeting where I should
have been less an intruder: But I came with an amicable
intention;—To reconcile differences, rather
than to widen them. 
Lovel. Well then, Col. Morden, let us enter upon
the subject in your own way. I don't know the
man I should sooner chuse to be upon terms with,
than one whom Miss Clarissa Harlowe so much respects. 
But I cannot bear to be treated, either in
word or accent, in a menacing way. 
Lord M. Well, well, well, well, gentlemen, this
is somewhat like. Angry men make to themselves beds
of nettles, and when they lie down in them, are uneasy
with every-body. But I hope you are friends. 
Let me hear you say you are. I am persuaded, Colonel,
that you don't know all this unhappy Story. 
You don't know how desirous my kinsman is, as
well as all of us, to have this matter end happily. 
You don't know, do you, Colonel, that Mr. Lovelace,
at all our requests, is disposed to marry the
Lady? 
Col. At all your requests, my Lord? —I should have
hoped, that Mr. Lovelace was disposed to do justice
for the sake of justice; and when at the same time
the doing of justice was doing himself the highest
honour. 
Mowbray lifted up his before half-closed eyes to
the Colonel, and glanced them upon me. 
Lovel. This is in very high language, Colonel. 
Mowbr. By my Soul, I thought so. 
Col. High language, Mr. Lovelace? Is it not just
language? 
Lovel. It is, Colonel. And I think, the man that
does honour to Miss Clarissa Harlowe, does me honour. 
But, nevertheless, there is a manner in speaking,
that may be liable to exception, where the words,
without that manner, can bear none. 
Col. Your observation in the general is undoubtedly 

just: But if you have the value for my Cousin, that
you say you have, you must needs think— 
Lovel. You must allow me, Sir, to interrupt you
—If I have the value I say I have—I hope, Sir,
when I say I have that value, there is no room for
that if, pronounced as you pronounced it with an
emphasis. 
Col. You have broken in upon me twice, Mr.
Lovelace. I am as little accustomed to be broken in
upon, as you are to be repeated upon. 
Lord M. Two barrels of gunpowder, by my conscience! 
What a devil will it signify talking, if thus
you are to blow one another up at every wry word? 
Lovel. No man of honour, my Lord, will be easy
to have his veracity called in question, though but by
implication. 
Col. Had you heard me out, Mr. Lovelace, you
would have found, that my if was rather an if of inference,
than of doubt. But 'tis, really, a strange
liberty gentlemen of free principles take; who at the
same time that they would resent unto death the imputation
of being capable of telling an untruth to a
Man, will not scruple to break thro' the most solemn
oaths and promises to a Woman. I must assure you,
Mr. Lovelace, that I always made a conscience of
my vows and promises. 
Lovel. You did right, Colonel. But let me tell
you, Sir, that you know not the man you talk to, if
you imagine he is not able to rise to a proper resentment,
when he sees his generous confessions taken for
a mark of base-spiritedness. 
Col. (warmly, and with a sneer) Far be it from
me, Mr. Lovelace, to impute to you the baseness of
spirit you speak of; for what would that be, but
to imagine, that a man who has done a very flagrant
injury, is not ready to shew his bravery in defending
it— 
Mowbr. This is damn'd severe, Colonel. It is, 

by Jove. I could not take so much at the hands of
any man breathing as Mr. Lovelace before this took
at yours. 
Col. Who are You, Sir? What pretence have you
to interpose in a cause where there is an acknowleged
guilt on one side, and the honour of a considerable family
wounded in the tenderest part by that guilt on
the other? 
Mowbr. (whispering to the Colonel) My dear child,
you will oblige me highly, if you will give me the
opportunity of answering your question. And was
going out. 
The Colonel was held in by my Lord. And I
brought in Mowbray. 
Col. Pray, my good Lord, let me attend this officious
gentleman, I beseech you do. I will wait
upon your Lordship in three minutes, depend upon
it. 
Lovel. Mowbray, is this acting like a friend by
me, to suppose me incapable of answering for myself? 
And shall a man of honour and bravery, as I know
Colonel Morden to be (rash as perhaps in this visit
he has shewn himself) have it to say, that he comes
to my Lord M's house, in a manner naked as to attendants
and friends, and shall not for That reason be
rather borne with, than insulted? This moment, my
dear Mowbray, leave us. You have really no concern
in this business; and if you are my friend, I
desire you'll ask the Colonel pardon for interfering in
it in the manner you have done. 
Mowbr. Well, well, Bob; thou shalt be arbiter
in this matter. I know I have no business in it— 
And, Colonel, (holding out his hand) I leave you to
one who knows how to defend his own cause as well
as any man in England. 
Col. (taking Mowbray's hand, at Lord M's request)
You need not tell me that, Mr. Mowbray. I have
no doubt of Mr. Lovelace's ability to defend his own 

cause, were it a cause to be defended. And let me
tell you, Mr. Lovelace, that I am astonished to think,
that a brave man, and a generous man, as you have
appeared to be in two or three instances that you have
given in the little knowlege I have of you, should be
capable of acting as you have done by the most excellent
of her Sex. 
Lord M. Well, but, gentlemen, now Mr. Mowbray
is gone, and you have both shewn instances of
courage and generosity to boot, let me desire you to
lay your heads together amicably, and think whether
there be any-thing to be done to make all end happily
for the Lady? 
Lovel. But hold, my Lord, let me say one thing,
now Mowbray is gone; and that is, that I think a
gentleman ought not to put up tamely one or two severe
things that the Colonel has said. 
Lord M. What the devil canst thou mean? I
thought all had been over. Why, thou hast nothing
to do, but to confirm to the Colonel, that thou art
willing to marry Miss Harlowe, if she will have thee. 
Col. Mr. Lovelace will not scruple to say That, I
suppose, notwithstanding all that has passed: But if
you think, Mr. Lovelace, I have said any-thing I
should not have said, I suppose it is this, That the
man who has shewn so little of the Thing Honour, to
a defenceless unprotected woman, ought not to stand
so nicely upon the empty Name of it, with a man who
is expostulating with him upon it. I am sorry to have
cause to say this, Mr. Lovelace; but I would on the
same occasion repeat it to a King upon his throne,
and surrounded by all his guards. 
Lord M. But what is all this, but more sacks upon
the mill? more coals upon the fire? You have a mind
to quarrel both of you, I see that. Are you not
willing, Nephew, are you not most willing, to marry
this Lady, if she can be prevailed upon to have you? 
Lovel. Damn me, my Lord, if I'd marry my Empress
upon such treatment as this. 

Lord M. Why now, Bob, thou art more choleric
than the Colonel. It was his turn just now. And
now you see he is cool, you are all gunpowder. 
Lovel. I own the Colonel has many advantages
over me; but, perhaps, there is one advantage he
has not, if it were put to the trial. 
Col. I came not hither, as I said before, to seek
the occasion: But if it be offered me, I won't
refuse it—And since we find we disturb my good
Lord M. I'll take my leave, and will go home by the
way of St. Alban's. 
Lovel. I'll see you part of the way, with all my
heart, Colonel. 
Col. I accept your civility very chearfully, Mr.
Lovelace. 
Lord M. (interposing again, as we were both for
going out) And what will this do, gentlemen? Suppose
you kill one another, will the matter be bettered
or worsted by that? Will the Lady be made happier
or unhappier, do you think by either or both of your
deaths? Your characters are too well known to
make fresh instances of the courage of either needful. 
And, I think, if the honour of the Lady is your view,
Colonel, it can be no other way so effectually promoted,
as by Marriage. And, Sir, if you would use
your interest with her, it is very probable, that you
may succeed, tho' nobody else can. 
Lovel. I think, my Lord, I have said all that a
man can say (since what is passed cannot be recalled); 
and you see Col. Morden rises in proportion to my
coolness, till it is necessary for me to assert myself, or
even he would despise me. 
Lord M. Let me ask you, Colonel; Have you
any way, any method, that you think reasonable and
honourable to propose, to bring about a Reconciliation
with the Lady? That is what we all wish for. 
And I can tell you, Sir, it is not a little owing to
her family, and to their implacable usage of her, that 

her resentments are heightened against my kinsman; 
who, however, has used her vilely; but is willing
to repair her wrongs.— 
Lovel. Not, my Lord, for the sake of her family; 
nor for this gentleman's haughty behaviour; but for
her own sake, and in full sense of the wrongs I have
done her. 
Col. As to my haughty behaviour, as you call it,
Sir, I am mistaken if you would not have gone beyond
it in the like case, of a relation so meritorious,
and so unworthily injured. And, Sir, let me tell
you, that if your motives are not Love, Honour,
and Justice, and if they have the least tincture of
mean Compassion for her, or of an unchearful assent
on your part, I am sure it will neither be desired or
accepted by a person of my Cousin's merit and sense; 
nor shall I wish that it should. 
Lovel. Don't think, Colonel, that I am meanly
compounding off a debate, that I should as willingly
go thro' with you as to eat or drink, if I have the occasion
given me for it: But thus much I will tell you,
That my Lord, that Lady Sarah Sadleir, Lady Betty
Lawrance, my two Cousins Montague, and myself,
have written to her in the most solemn and sincere
manner, to offer her such terms, as no one but herself
would refuse, and this long enough before Col.
Morden's arrival was dreamt of. 
Col. What reason, Sir, may I ask, does she give,
against listening to so powerful a mediation, and to
such offers? 
Lovel. It looks like capitulating, or else— 
Col. It looks not like any such thing to me, Mr.
Lovelace, who have as good an opinion of your spirit
as man can have. And what, pray, is the part I
act, and my motives for it? Are they not, in desiring
that justice may be done to my Cousin Clarissa
Harlowe, that I seek to establish the honour of
Mrs. Lovelace, if matters can once be brought to
bear? 

Lovel. Were she to honour me with her acceptance
of That name, Mr. Morden, I should not want you
or any man to assert the honour of Mrs. Lovelace. 
Col. I believe it. But till she has honoured you
with that acceptance, she is nearer to me than to you,
Mr. Lovelace. And I speak this, only to shew you,
that in the part I take, I mean rather to deserve your
thanks than your displeasure, tho' against yourself,
were there occasion. Nor ought you to take it amiss,
if you rightly weigh the matter: For, Sir, whom
does a Lady want protection against, but her injurers? 
And who has been her greatest injurer? — 
Till, therefore, she becomes entitled to your protection,
as your Wife, you yourself cannot refuse me
some merit in wishing to have justice done my Cousin. 
But, Sir, you going to say, that if it were not to
look like capitulating, you would hint the reasons my
Cousin gives against accepting such an honourable
mediation? 
I then told him of my sincere offers of Marriage: 
‘I made no difficulty, I said, to own my apprehensions,
that my unhappy behaviour to her had greatly
affected her: But that it was the implacableness
of her friends that had thrown her into despair, and
given her a contempt for life.’ I told him, ‘That
she had been so good, as to send me a Letter to
divert me from a visit my heart was set upon making
her: A Letter, on which I built great hopes,
because she assured me in it, that she was going to
her Father's; and that I might see her there, when
she was received, if it were not my own fault.’ 
Col. Is it possible? And were you, Sir, thus earnest? 
And did she send you such a Letter? 
Lord M. confirmed both; and also, that, in obedience
to her desires, and that intimation, I had come
down without the satisfaction I had proposed to myself
in seeing her. 
It is very true, Colonel, said I: And I should have 

told you This before: But your heat made me decline
it; for, as I said, it had an appearance of meanly capitulating
with you. An abjectness of heart, of which
had I been capable, I should have despised myself as
much as I might have expected you would despise
me. 
Lord M. proposed to enter into the proof of all this: 
He said, in his phraseological way, That one Story was
good, till another was heard: That the Harlowe family
and I, 'twas true, had behaved like so many Orsons to
one another; and that they had been very free with
all our family besides: That nevertheless, for the Lady's
sake, more than for theirs, or even for mine (he
could tell me) he would do greater things for me,
than they could ask, if she could be brought to have
me: And that this he wanted to declare, and would
sooner have declared, if he could have brought us
sooner to patience, and a good understanding. 
The Colonel made excuses for his warmth, on the
score of his affection to his Cousin. 
My regard for her made me readily admit them: 
And so a fresh bottle of Burgundy, and another of
Champagne, being put upon the table, we sat down
in good humour, after all this blustering, in order to
enter closer into the particulars of the case: Which I
undertook, at both their desires, to do. 
But these things must be the subject of another
Letter, which shall immediately follow this, if it do
not accompany it. 
Mean time you will observe, That a bad cause
gives a man great disadvantages: For I myself
think, that the interrogatories put to me with so much
spirit by the Colonel, made me look cursedly mean; 
at the same time that it gave him a superiority which
I know not how to allow to the best man in Europe. 
So that, literally speaking, as a good man would infer,
guilt is its own punisher; in that it makes the most
lofty spirit look like the miscreant he is—A good man, 

I say: So, Jack proleptically I add, Thou hast no
right to make the observation. 