


So, Mrs. Jewkes is return'd from her Visit: 
Well, said she, I would have you set your
Heart at Rest; for Mr. Williams will do very
well again. He is not half so bad as he fansy'd. 
O these Scholars! said she; they have not the
Hearts of Mice! He has only a few Scratches
on his Face; which, said she, I suppose he got
by grabbling among the Gravel, at the Bottom
of the Dam, to try to find a Hole in the Ground,
to hide himself from the Robbers. His Shin
and his Knee are hardly to be seen to ail any
thing. He says in his Letter, he was a frightful
Spectacle: He might be so indeed, when he first
came in-a-doors; but he looks well enough
now; and, only for a few Groans now-and-then,
when he thinks of his Danger, I see
nothing is the matter with him. So, Mrs.
Pamela, said she, I would have you be very
easy about it. I am glad of it, said I, for all
your Jokes, Mrs. Jewkes. 
Well, said she, he talks of nothing but
you; and when I told him, I would fain have
persuaded you to come with me, the Man was
out of his Wits, with his Gratitude to me: 
And so has laid open all his Heart to me, and
told me all that has pass'd, and was contriving
between you two. This alarm'd me prodigiously; 

and the rather, as I saw, by two or
three Instances, that his honest Heart could keep
nothing, believing every one as undesigning as
himself. I said, but yet with a heavy Heart,
Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, Mrs. Jewkes, this might
have done with me, had he had any thing that he
could have told you of. But you know well
enough, that had we been disposed, we had no
Opportunity for it, from your watchful Care
and Circumspection. No, said she, that's very
true, Mrs. Pamela; not so much as for that
Declaration that he own'd before me, he had
found Opportunity, for all my Watchfulness,
to make you. Come, come, said she, no more
of these Shams with me! You have an excellent
Head-piece for your Years; but may-be I am as
cunning as you. &wblank;However, said she, all is
well now; because my Watchments are now
over, by my Master's Direction. How have
you employ'd yourself in my Absence? 
I was so troubled at what might have pass'd
between Mr. Williams and her, that I could
not hide it; and she said, Well, Mrs. Pamela,
since all Matters are likely to be so soon and so
happily ended, let me advise you to be a little less
concern'd at his Discoveries: And make me
your Confident, as he has done, and I shall
think you have some Favour for me, and
Reliance upon me, and perhaps you would not
repent it. 
She was so earnest, that I mistrusted she did
this to pump me; and I knew how, now, to
account for her Kindness to Mr. Williams in 

her Visit to him; which was only to get out of
him what she could. Why, Mrs. Jewkes, said
I, is all this Fishing about for something, where
there is nothing, if there be an End of your
Watchments, as you call them! Nothing, said
she, but Womanish Curiosity, I'll assure you; 
for one is naturally led to find out Matters,
where there is such Privacy intended. Well,
said I, pray let me know what he has said; and
then I'll give you an Answer to your Curiosity. 
I don't care, said she, whether you do or not; 
for I have as much as I wanted from him; and I
despair of getting out of you any thing you
han't a mind I should know, my little cunning
Dear!––– Well, said I, let him have said what he
would, I care not: For I am sure he can say
no Harm of me; and so let us change the
Talk. 
I was the easier indeed, because, for all her
Pumps, she gave me no Hint of the Key and
the Door, &c. which had he communicated to
her, she would not have forborn giving me a
Touch of. —And so we gave up one another,
as despairing to gain our Ends of each other. 
But I am sure he must have said more than he
should. —And I am the more apprehensive all
is not right, because she has now been actually,
these two Hours, shut up a writing; tho' she
pretended she had given me up all her Stores of
Paper, &c. and that I should write for her. I
begin to wish I had ventur'd every thing, and
gone off, when I might. O when will this
State of Doubt and Uneasiness end! 

She has just been with me, and says she shall
send a Messenger to Bedfordshire; and he shall
carry a Letter of Thanks for me, if I will write
it, for my Master's Favour to me. Indeed, said
I, I have no Thanks to give, till I am with my
Father and Mother: And, besides, I sent a Letter,
as you know, but have had no Answer to it. She
said, she thought his Letter to Mr. Williams
was sufficient; and the least I could do, was to
thank him, if but in two Lines. No need of
it, said I; for I don't intend to have Mr. Williams: 
What then is that Letter to me? Well, said she,
I see thou art quite unfathomable! 
I don't like all this. O my foolish Fears
of Bulls and Robbers! —For now all my Uneasiness
begins to double upon me. O what
has this uncautious Man said! That, no doubt,
is the Subject of her long Letter. 
I will close this Day's writing, with just saying,
that she is mighty silent and reserv'd, to what
she was, and says nothing but No, or Yes, to
what I ask. Something must be hatching, I
doubt! I the rather think so, because I find she
does not keep her Word with me, about lying
by myself, and my Money; to both which Points,
she return'd suspicious Answers, saying, as to the
one, Why, you are mighty earnest for your Money! 
I shan't run away with it: And to the other,
Goodlack! you need not be so willing, as I know
of, to part with me for a Bed-fellow, till you
are sure of one you like better. This cut me to the
Heart–––And at the same time stopp'd my Mouth. 
