



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

Sat. Sunday, Monday. 
He gives, in several letters, the substance of
what is contained in the last of the Lady's. 
He tells his friend, that calling at the Lawn, in his
way to M. Hall (for he owns that he went not to
Windsor), he found the letters from Lady Betty
Lawrance, and his cousin Montague, which Mrs.
Greme was about sending to him by a special messenger. 

He gives the particulars from Mrs. Greme's report,
of what passed between the Lady and her, as
in p. 48, 49. and makes such declarations to Mrs.
Greme of his honour and affection to the Lady, as
put her upon writing the letter to her sister Sorlings,
the contents of which are given by the Lady,
in p. 152, 153. 
He then accounts, as follows, for the serious humour
he found her in, on his return. 
Upon such good terms when we parted, I was surpriz'd
to find so solemn a brow upon my return, and
her charming eyes red with weeping. But when I had
understood she had received letters from Miss Howe,
it was easy to imagine, that that little devil had put her
out of humour with me. 
This gives me infinite curiosity to find out the subject
of their letters. But this must not be attempted
yet. An invasion in an article so sacred, would ruin
me beyond retrieve. Yet it vexes me to the heart to
think, that she is hourly writing her whole mind, on
all that passes between her and me;—I under the same
roof with her;—yet kept at such awful distance, that
I dare not break into a correspondence, that may perhaps
be a means to blow me, and all my devices, up
together! 
Would it be very wicked, Jack, to knock her
messenger o'the head, as he is carrying my beloved's
letters, or returning with Miss Howe's? To attempt
to bribe him, and not succeed, would utterly ruin
me. And the man seems to be one used to poverty,
oce who can sit down satisfy'd with it, and enjoy
it; contented with hand-to-mouth conveniencies, and
not aiming to live better to-morrow, than he does today,
and than he did yesterday. Such a one is above
temptation, unless it could come cloath'd in the guise
of truth and trust. What likelihood of corrupting a
man who has no hope, no ambition? 

Yet the rascal has but half-life, and groans under
that. —Should I be answerable in his case for a whole
one? —But hang the fellow! —Let him live. —Were I
a king, or a minister of state, an Antonio Perez (a) ,
it were another thing. And yet, on second thoughts,
am not I a Rake, as it is called? And who ever knew
a Rake to stick at any thing? But thou knowest, Jack,
that the greatest half of my wickedness is vapour, to
shew my invention; and that I could be mischievous if
I would. 
He collects the Lady's expressions, which his pride
cannot bear: —Such as, That he is a stranger to
the decorums which she thought inseparable from a
man of birth and education; and that he is not the
accomplish'd man he imagines himself to be; and
threatens to remember them against her. 
He values himself upon his proposals and speeches,
which he gives to his friend pretty much to the same
purpose that the Lady does in her four last letters. 
When he recites his endeavouring to put her upon borrowing
a servant from Miss Howe, till Hannah
could come, he writes as follows: 
Thou seest, Belford, that my charmer has no notion,
that Miss Howe herself is but a puppet danc'd
upon my wires, at second or third hand. To outwit,
and impel, as one pleases, two such girls as these, who
think they know every thing; and, by taking advantage
of the pride and ill-nature of the old ones of
both families, to play them off likewise, at the very
time that they think they are doing me spiteful displeasure; 
what charming revenge! —Then the sweet
Lady, when I wished, that her brother was not at the
bottom of Mrs. Howe's resentment, to tell me, That 

she was afraid he was, or her uncle would not have
appear'd against her to that lady. —Pretty dear! how
innocent! 
But don't think me the cause neither of her family's
malice and resentment. It is all in their hearts. I
work but with their materials. They, if left to their
own wicked direction, would perhaps express their
revenge by fire and fagot; that is to say, by the private
dagger, or by Lord Chief Justices warrants, by
Law, and so forth: I only point the lightning, and
teach it where to dart, without the thunder: In other
words, I only guide the effects: The cause is in their
malignant hearts: And, while I am doing a little
mischief, I prevent a great deal. 
Thus he exults on her mentioning London. 
I wanted her to propose London herself. This
made me again mention Windsor. If you would
have a woman do one thing, you must always propose
another! —The Sex! the very Sex! as I hope to be
saved! —Why, they lay one under a necessity to deal
doubly with them: And, when they find themselves
outwitted, they cry out upon an honest fellow, who
has been too hard for them at their own weapons. 
I could hardly contain myself. My heart was at
my throat—Down, down, said I to myself, exuberant
exultation! —A sudden cough befriended me: I again
turned to her, all as indifferenced-over, as a girl at the
first long-expected question, who waits for two more. 
I heard out the rest of her speech: And when she had
done, instead of saying any thing of London, I proposed
to her to send for her Mrs. Norton. 
As I knew she would be afraid of lying under obligations,
had she accepted of my offer, I could have
proposed to do so much for the good woman and her
son, as would have made her resolve, that I should do
nothing. —This, however, not merely to avoid expence: 
But there was no such thing as allowing of 

the presence of Mrs. Norton. I might as well have
had her mother, or aunt Hervey with her. Hannah,
had she been able to come, and had she come, I could
have done well enough with. What do I keep fellows
idling in the country for, but to fall in love, and
even to marry, whom I would have them marry? 
How unequal is a modest woman to the adventure,
when she throws herself into the power of a rake! — 
Punctilio will, at any time, stand for reasons with
such a one. She cannot break thro' a well-tested
modesty. None but the impudent little rogues, who
can name the parson and the church before you can
ask them for either, and undress and go to bed before
you the next hour, should think of running away with
a man. * * * 
I am in the right train now. Every hour, I doubt
not, will give me an increasing interest in the affections
of this proud beauty! —I have just carried
un-politeness far enough to make her afraid of me; 
and to shew her, that I am no whiner: Every instance
of politeness, now, will give me double credit
with her! My next point will be to make her acknowlege
a lambent flame, a preference of me to all
other men, at least: And then my happy hour is not
far off. An acknowleged love sanctifies every freedom: 
And one freedom begets another. And if she
call me ungenerous, I can call her cruel. The sex
love to be called cruel. Many a time have I complained
of cruelty, even in the act of yielding, because
I knew it gratified their pride. 
Mentioning that he had only hinted at Mr. Belford's
lodgings, as an instance to confirm what he had
said, that he knew of none in London fit for her,
he says, 
I had a mind to alarm her with something furthest
from my purpose; for (as much as she disliked my 

motion) I intended nothing by it: Mrs. Osgood is too
pious a woman; and would have been more her friend
than mine. 
I had a view, moreover, to give her an high opinion
of her own sagacity. I love, when I dig a pit,
to have my prey tumble in with secure feet, and open
eyes: Then a man can look down upon her, with an
O-ho, charmer! how came you there! 
Monday, April 17. 
I have just now received a fresh piece of intelligence
from my agent, honest Joseph Leman. Thou knowest
the history of poor Miss Betterton of Nottingham. 
James Harlowe is plotting to revive the resentments
of that family against me. The Harlowes took great
pains, some time ago, to get to the bottom of that
story. But now the foolish devils are resolved to do
something in it, if they can. My head is working to
make this booby 'Squire a plotter, and a clever fellow,
in order to turn his plots to my advantage, supposing
the Lady shall aim to keep me at arm's length
when in town, and to send me from her. —But I will,
in proper time, let thee see Joseph's letter, and what
I shall answer to it (a)  To know, in time, a designed
mischief, is, with me, to disappoint it, and to
turn it upon the contriver's head. 
Joseph is plaguy squeamish again; but, I know, he
only intends, by his qualms, to swell his merits with
me. O Belford, Belford! what a vile corruptible
rogue, whether in poor or in rich, is human nature! 