



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Morning, April 9. 
Nobody, it seems, will go to church this day. 
No blessing to be expected perhaps upon views
so worldly, and in some so cruel. 
They have a mistrust that I have some device in
my head. Betty has been looking among my cloaths. 
I found her, on coming up from depositing my letter
to Lovelace [for I have written!] peering among them,
the key being in the lock. She colour'd, and was 

confounded to be caught. But I only said, I should
be accustom'd to any sort of treatment in time! — 
If she had her orders—those were enough for her. 
She own'd, in her confusion, that a motion had
been made to abridge me of my airings; and the report
she should make, would be no disadvantage to
me. One of my friends, she told me, urged in my
behalf, That there was no need of laying me under
greater restraint, since Mr. Lovelace's threatening to
rescue me by violence, were I to have been carry'd
to my uncle's, was a conviction that I had no design
to go off to him voluntarily; and that if I had, I
should have made preparations of that kind before now; 
and, most probably, been detected in them. —Hence,
it was also inferr'd, that there was no room to doubt,
but I would at last comply. And, added the bold
creature, if you don't intend to do so, Your conduct,
Miss, seems strange to me. —Only thus she reconciled it; 
That I had gone so far, I knew not how to come off
genteelly: And she fancy'd I should, in full congregation,
on Wednesday, give Mr. Solmes my hand. 
And then, said the confident wench, as the learned
Dr. Brand took his text last Sunday, There will be
joy in heaven— 
This is the substance of my letter to Mr. Lovelace: 
‘That I have reasons, of the greatest consequence
to myself, and which, when known, must satisfy
him, to suspend, for the present, my intention of
leaving my father's house: That I have hopes that
matters may be brought to an happy conclusion,
without taking a step, which nothing but the last necessity
could justify: And that he may depend upon
promise, that I will die, rather than consent to
marry Mr. Solmes.’ 
And so, I am preparing myself to stand the shock
of his exclamatory reply. But be that what it will,
it cannot affect me so much, as the apprehensions of
what may happen to me next Tuesday or Wednesday; 

day; for now those apprehensions engage my whole
attention, and make me sick at the very heart. 
Sunday, Four o'Clock, P. M. 
My letter is not yet taken away! —If he should
not send for it, or take it, and come hither on my
not meeting him to-morrow, in doubt of what may
have befallen me, what shall I do? Why had I any
concerns with this Sex! —I, that was so happy till I
knew This man! 
I din'd in the Ivy summer-house. It was comply'd
with at the first word. To shew I meant nothing, I
went again into the house with Betty, as soon as I
had dined. I thought it was not amiss to ask this
liberty; the weather seeming to be set in fine. One
does not know what Tuesday or Wednesday may
produce. 
Sunday Evening, Seven o'Clock. 
There remains my letter still! —He is busied, I
suppose, in his preparations for to-morrow. But then
he has servants. Does the man think he is so secure
of me, that having appointed, he need not give himself
any further concern about me, till the very moment! 
—He knows how I am beset. He knows not
what may happen. I might be ill, or still more closely
watched or confined, than before. The correspondence
might be discovered. It might be necessary to
vary the scheme. I might be forced into measures,
which might intirely frustrate my purpose. I might
have new doubts: I might suggest something more
convenient, for any thing he knew. What can the
man mean, I wonder! —Yet it shall lie; for if he has
it any time before the appointed hour, it will save me
declaring to him personally my changed purpose, and
the trouble of contending with him on that score. If
he send for it at all, he will see by the date, that he
might have had it in time; and if he be put to any 

inconvenience from shortness of notice, let him take
it for his pains. 
Sunday Night, Nine o'Clock. 
It is determined, it seems, to send to Mrs. Norton,
to be here on Tuesday to dinner; and she is to stay
with me for a whole week. 
So she is first to endeavour to persuade me to comply,
and, when the violence is done, she is to comfort
me, and try to reconcile me to my fate. They expect
fits and fetches, Betty insolently tells me, and expostulations,
and exclamations, without number: But
every-body will be prepared for them: And when
it's over, it's over; and I shall be easy and pacified,
when I find I cannot help it. 
Mond. Morn. April 10, Seven o'Clock. 
O my dear! There yet lies the letter, just as I
left it! 
Does he think he is so sure of me! —Perhaps he
imagines that I dare not alter my purpose. I wish I
had never known him! —I begin now to see this rashness
in the light every-one else would have seen it in,
had I been guilty of it. —But what can I do, if he
come to-day at the appointed time! —If he receive
not the letter, I must see him, or he will think something
has befallen me; and certainly will come to the
house. As certainly he will be insulted. And what,
in that case, may be the consequence! —Then I as
good as promised, that I would take the first opportunity
to see him, if I changed my mind, and to give
him my reasons for it. I have no doubt but he will
be out of humour upon it: But better he meet me,
and go away dissatisfied with me, than that I should
go away dissatisfied with myself. 
Yet, short as the time is, he may still perhaps send,
and get the letter. Something may have happened to
prevent him, which, when known, will excuse him. 

After I have disappointed him more than once before,
on a requested interview only, it is impossible he
should not have curiosity, at least, to know if something
has not happened; and if my mind hold in this
more important case. And yet, as I rashly confirm'd
my resolution by a second letter, I begin now to
doubt it. 
Nine o'Clock. 
My cousin Dolly Hervey slid the inclosed letter
into my hand, as I passed by her, coming out of the
garden. 

Dearest Madam, 
I have got intelligence from one as says she knows,
that you must be married on Wednesday morning
to Mr. Solmes. May-be, howsoever, only to vex me; 
for it is Betty Barnes: A saucy creature, I'm sure. 
A license is got, as she says: And so far she went as to
tell me (bidding me say nothing; but she knew as that
I would) that Mr. Brand the young Oxford Clergyman,
and fine scholar, is to marry you. For Dr.
Lewin, I hear, refuses, unless you consent; and they
have heard that he does not like over-well their proceedings
against you; and says, as that you don't deserve
to be treated so cruelly as you are treated: But
Mr. Brand, I am told, is to have his fortune made by
uncle Harlowe, and among them. 
You will know better than I what to make of all
these matters; for sometimes I think Betty tells me
things as if I should not tell you, and yet expects
as that I will. She, and all the world knows how I
love you: And so I would have them. It is an honour
to me to love such a dear young Lady, who is
an honour to all her family, let them say what they
will. But there is such whispering between this Betty,
and Miss Harlowe, as you can't imagine; and when
that is done, Betty comes and tells me something. 
This seems to be sure (and that is why I write: But 

pray burn it) you are to be searched once more for
letters, and for pen and ink; for they know you
write. Something they pretend to have betray'd out
of one of Mr. Lovelace's servants, as they hope to
make something of; I know not what. That must be
a very vilde and wicked man, who would brag of
Lady's goodness to him, and tell secrets. Mr. Lovelace
is too much of a gentleman for that, I dare say. 
If not, who can be safe of young innocent creatures,
such as we be? 
Then they have a notion, from that false Betty, I
beliefe, as that you intend to take something to make
yourself sick, or some such thing; and so they will
search for phials and powders, and such-like. 
Strange searching among them! God bless us young
creatures, when we come among such suspicious relations. 
But, thank God, my mamma is not such
a one, at the present. 
If nothing be found, you are to be used kindlier
for that, by your papa, at the grand judgment, as I
may call it. 
Yet, sick or well, alas, my dear cousin! you must
be married, belike. So says this same creature; and
I don't doubt it: But your husband is to go home
every night, till you are reconciled to go to him. 
And so illness can be no pretence to save you. 
They are sure you will make a good wife, when
you be one. So would not I, unless I liked my husband. 
And Mr. Solmes is always telling them how
he will purchase your love and all that, by jewels and
fine things. —A siccofant of a man! —I wish he and
Betty Barnes were to come together; and he would
beat her every-day till she was good. —So, in brief,
secure every thing you would not have seen: And
burn This, I beg you. And, pray, dearest Madam,
do not take nothing as may hurt your health: For
that will not do. I am, 
Your truly loving Cousin,
D. H. 


When I first read my cousin's letter, I was half
inclin'd to resume my former intention; especially as
my countermanding letter is not taken away: And
as my heart akes at the thoughts of the conflict I
must expect to have with him on my refusal. For,
see him for a few moments I doubt I must, lest he
should take some rash resolutions; especially, as he
has reason to expect I will. But here your words,
That all punctilio is at an end, the moment I am out of
my father's house, added to the still more cogent considerations
of Duty and Reputation, determin'd me
once more against taking the rash step. And it will
be very hard (altho' no seasonable fainting, or wish'd-for
fit, should stand my friend) if I cannot gain one
month, or fortnight, or week. And I have still more
hopes that I shall prevail for some delay, from my
cousin's intimation, that the good Doctor Lewin refuses
to give his assistance to their projects, if they have not
my consent, and thinks me cruelly used: Since, without
taking notice that I am apprized of this, I can plead
a scruple of conscience, and insist upon having that
worthy Divine's opinion upon it: Which, inforced as
I shall inforce it, my mamma will surely second me
in: My aunt Hervey, and my Mrs. Norton, will
support her: The suspension must follow: And I can
but get away afterwards. 
But, if they will compel me: If they will give me
no time: If no-body will be moved: If it be resolved
that the ceremony shall be read over my constrained
hand—Why then—Alas! What then! —I
can but—But what? O my dear! This Solmes shall
never have my vows I am resolved! And I will say
nothing but No, as long as I shall be able to speak. 
And who will presume to look upon such an act of
violence, as a marriage? —It is impossible, surely,
that a father and mother can see such a dreadful compulsion
offer'd to their child—But if mine found 

withdraw, and leave the task to my brother and sister,
they will have no mercy! 
I am griev'd to be driven to have recourse to the
following artifices. 
I have given them a clue, by the feather of a pen
sticking out, where they will find such of my hidden
stores, as I intend they shall find. 
Two or three little essays I have left easy to be seen,
of my own writing. 
About a dozen lines also of a letter begun to you, in
which I express my hopes, (altho' I say, that appearances
are against me) that my friends will relent. 
They know from your mamma, by my uncle Antony,
that, some how or other, I now and then get a
letter to you. In this piece of a letter, I declare renewedly
my firm resolution to give up the man so obnoxious
to my family, on their releasing me from the
address of the other. 
Near the essays, I have left a copy of my letter to
Lady Drayton (a) ; which, affording arguments suitable
to my case, may chance (thus accidentally to be
fallen upon) to incline them to favour me. 
I have reserves of pens and ink you may believe; 
and one or two in the Ivy summer-house; with which
I shall amuse myself in order to lighten, if possible,
those apprehensions which more and more affect me
as Wednesday the day of trial approaches. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
