



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

And now will I favour thee with a brief account
of our present situation. 
From the highest to the lowest we are all extremely
happy. —Dorcas stands well in her Lady's graces. 
Polly has asked her advice in relation to a Courtship-affair
of her own. No oracle ever gave better. Sally
has had a quarrel with her Woolen-draper; and
made my Charmer Lady-chancellor in it. She blamed
Sally for behaving tyrannically to a man who loves 

her. Dear creature! to stand against a glass, and to
shut her eyes because she will not see her face in it! — 
Mrs. Sinclair has paid her court to so unerring a
judge, by requesting her advice with regard to both
Nieces. 
This the way we have been in for several days with
the people below. Yet sola generally at her meals,
and seldom at other times in their company. They
now, used to her ways [Perseverance must conquer]
never press her; so when they meet, all is civility on
both sides. Even married people, I believe, Jack,
prevent abundance of quarrels, by seeing one another
but seldom. 
But how stands it between Thyself and the Lady,
methinks thou askest, since her abrupt departure from
thee, and undutiful repulse of Wednesday morning? 
Why, pretty well in the main. Nay, very well. 
For why? The dear saucy-face knows not how to
help herself. Can fly to no other protection. And
has, besides, overheard a conversation [Who would
have thought she had been so near?] which passed between
Mrs. Sinclair, Miss Martin, and myself, that
very Wednesday afternoon; which has set her heart
at ease with respect to several doubtful points. 
Such as, particularly, ‘Mrs. Fretchville's unhappy
state of mind—Most humanely pitied by Miss Martin,
who knows her very well—The husband she
has lost, and herself (as Sally says) Lovers from
their cradles. Pity from one begets pity from another,
be the occasion for it either strong or weak; 
and so many circumstances were given to poor Mrs.
Fretchville's distress, that it was impossible but my
Beloved must extremely pity her whom the less tender-hearted
Miss Martin greatly pitied. 
‘My Lord M's gout his only hindrance from
visiting my spouse. Lady Betty and Miss Montague
soon expected in town. 
‘My earnest desire signified to have my spouse 

receive those Ladies in her own house, if Mrs.
Fretchville would but know her own mind; and I
pathetically lamented the delay occasioned by her
not knowing it. 
‘My intention to stay at Mrs. Sinclair's, as I said
I had told them before, while my spouse resides in
her own house (when Mrs. Fretchville could be
brought to quit it) in order to gratify her utmost
punctilio. 
‘My passion for my Beloved (which as I told them
in a high and fervent accent, was the truest that
man could have for woman) I boasted of. It was,
in short, I said, of the true Platonic kind; or I
had no notion of what Platonic Love was.’ 
So it is, Jack; and must end as Platonic Love generally
does end. 
‘Sally and Mrs. Sinclair next praised, but not
grosly, my Beloved. Sally particularly admired her
purity; called it exemplary; yet (to avoid suspicion)
expressed her thoughts, that she was rather
over-nice, if she might presume to say so before me. 
But nevertheless she applauded me for the strict
observation I made of my vow. 
‘I more freely blamed her reserves to me; called
her cruel; inveighed against her relations; doubted
her Love. Every favour I asked of her denied me. 
Yet my behaviour to her as pure and delicate when
alone, as when before them—Hinted at something
that had passed between us that very day, that
shewed her indifference to me in so strong a light,
that I could not bear it. But that I would ask her
for her company to the Play of Venice preserved,
given out for Saturday night as a Benefit-play; the
prime actors to be in it; and this, to see if I were
to be denied every favour. —Yet, for my own part,
I loved not Tragedies; tho' she did, for the sake of
the Instruction, the Warning, and the Example
generally given in them. 

‘I had too much feeling, I said. There was enough
in the world to make our hearts sad, without carrying
grief into our diversions, and making the
distresses of others our own.’ 
True enough, Belford; and I believe, generally
speaking, that all the men of our cast are of my mind
—They love not any Tragedies but those in which
they themselves act the parts of tyrants and executioners; 
and, afraid to trust themselves with serious
and solemn reflections, run to Comedies, in order
to laugh away compunction on the distresses they have
occasioned, and to find examples of men as immoral
as themselves. For very few of our comic performances,
as thou knowest, give us good ones. —I
answer, however, for myself—Yet thou, I think,
on recollection, lovest to deal in the Lamentable. 
Sally answered for Polly, who was absent, Mrs.
Sinclair for herself, and for all her acquaintance, even
for Miss Partington, in preferring the comic to the
tragic scenes. —And I believe they are right; for the
devil's in it, if a confided-in Rake does not give a girl
enough of Tragedy in his Comedy. 
‘I asked Sally to oblige my Fair-one with her
company. She was engaged [That was right,
thou'lt suppose]. I asked Mrs. Sinclair's leave for
Polly. To be sure, she answered, Polly would
think it an honour to attend Mrs. Lovelace: But
the poor thing was tender-hearted; and as the
Tragedy was deep, would weep herself blind. 
‘Sally, mean time, objected Singleton, that I
might answer the objection, and save my Beloved
the trouble of making it, or debating the point
with me; and on this occasion I regretted that her
Brother's projects were not laid aside; since, if
they had been given up, I would have gone in
person to bring up the Ladies of my family to attend
my spouse. 
‘I then, from a Letter just before received from 

one in her Father's family, warned them of a person
who had undertaken to find us out, and whom
I thus in writing [having called for pen and ink]
described, that they might arm all the family
against him’ —“A sun-burnt, pock-fretten sailor,
ill-looking, big-boned; his stature about six foot; 
an heavy eye, an over-hanging brow, a deck-treading
stride in his walk; a couteau generally
by his side; lips parched from his gums, as if by
staring at the sun in hot climates; a brown coat; 
a coloured handkerchief about his neck; an oaken
plant in his hand, near as long as himself, and proportionably
thick. 
‘No questions asked by this fellow must be answered. 
They should call me to him. But not
let my Beloved know a tittle of this, so long as
it could be helped. And I added, that if her Brother
or Singleton came, and if they behaved civilly,
I would, for her sake, be civil to them: And in
this case, she had nothing to do, but to own her
Marriage, and there could be no pretence for violence
on either side. But most fervently I swore,
that if she were conveyed away, either by persuasion
or force, I would directly, on missing her but one
day, go to demand her at Harlowe-Place, whether
she were there or not; and if I recovered not a
Sister, I would have a Brother; and should find
out a captain of a ship as well as he.’ 
And now, Jack, dost thou think she'll attempt to
get from me, do what I will? 
‘Mrs. Sinclair began to be afraid of mischief in
her house—I was apprehensive that she would over-do
the matter, and be out of character. I therefore
winked at her. She primmed; nodded, to
shew she took me; twanged out a high-ho thro'
her nose, lapped one horse-lip over the other, and
was silent.’ 
Here's preparation, Belford! —Dost think I will 

throw it all away for any-thing thou canst say, or
Lord M. write? —No indeed!—as my Charmer says,
when she bridles. 
* *
And what must necessarily be the consequence of
all this, with regard to my Beloved's behaviour to
me? —Canst thou doubt, that it was all complaisance
next time she admitted me into her presence? 
Thursday we were very happy. All the morning
extremely happy. I kissed her charming hand. —I
need not describe to thee her hand and arm. When
thou sawest her, I took notice that thy eyes dwelt
upon them whenever thou couldst spare them from
that beauty-spot of wonders, her face—Fifty-times
kissed her hand, I believe. —Once her cheek, intending
her lip, but so rapturously, that she could not
help seeming angry. 
Had she not thus kept me at arms-length; had
she not denied me those innocent liberties which our
Sex, from step to step, aspire to; could I but have
gained access to her in her hours of heedlessness and
dishabille [For full dress creates dignity, augments
consciousness, and compels distance]; we had been
familiarized to each other long ago. But keep her
up ever so late; meet her ever so early; by breakfast-time
she is dressed for the day; and at her earliest
hour, as nice as others dressed. All her forms thus
kept up, wonder not that I have made so little progress
in the proposed trial. —But how must all this
distance stimulate! 
Thursday morning, as I said, we were extremely
happy—About noon, she numbered the hours she had
been with me; all of them to me but as one minute; 
and desired to be left to herself. I was loth to comply: 
But observing the Sun-shine begin to shut in, I
yielded. 
I dined out. Returning, I talked of the house,
and of Mrs. Fretchville—Had seen Mennell—Had 

pressed him to get the widow to quit. She pitied Mrs.
Fretchville [Another good effect of the overheard
conversation]—Had written to Lord M; expected
an answer soon from him. I was admitted to sup
with her. I urged for her approbation or correction
of my written terms. She again promised an answer
as soon as she had heard from Miss Howe. 
Then I pressed for her company to the Play on Saturday
night. She made objections, as I had foreseen:
Her Brother's projects, warmth of the weather,
&c. But in such a manner, as if half-afraid
to disoblige me [Another happy effect of the overheard
conversation]. I soon got over these therefore; 
and she consented to favour me. 
Friday passed as the day before. 
Here were two happy days to both. Why cannot
I make every day equally happy? It looks as if it
were in my power to do so. Strange, I should thus delight
in teazing a woman I so dearly love! I must, I
doubt, have something in my temper like Miss
Howe, who loves to plague the man who puts himself
in her power. —But I could not do thus by such
an angel as this, did I not believe, that after her probation-time
shall be expired, and if she be not to be
brought to cohabitation (my darling view) I shall reward
her as she wishes. 
Saturday is half-over. We are equally happy— 
Preparing for the Play. Polly has offered her company,
and is accepted. I have directed her where to
weep: And this not only to shew her humanity [A
weeping eye indicates a gentle heart] but to have a
pretence to hide her face with her fan or handkerchief. 
—Yet Polly is far from being every man's girl; and
we shall sit in the Gallery Green-Box. 
The woes of others, so well represented as those of
Belvidera particularly will be, must, I hope, unlock
and open my Charmer's heart. Whenever I have
been able to prevail upon a girl to permit me to attend 

her to a Play, I have thought myself sure of her. 
The female heart (all gentleness and harmony by nature)
expands, and forgets its forms, when its attention
is carried out of itself at an agreeable or affecting
entertainment—Music, and perhaps a Collation
afterwards, co-operating. 
Indeed, I have no hope of such an effect here; 
but I have more than one end to answer by getting
her to a Play. To name but one—Dorcas has a
master-key, as I have told thee. —But it were worth
while to carry her to the Play of Venice preserved,
were it but to shew her, that there have been, and
may be, much deeper distresses than she can possibly
know. 
Thus exceedingly happy are we at present. I
hope we shall not find any of Nat. Lee's left-handed
gods at work, to dash our bowl of joy with worm-wood. 
R. Lovelace. 