



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, April 20. 
I should think myself utterly unworthy of your
friendship, did my own concerns, heavy as they
are, so engross me, that I could not find leisure for a
few lines to declare to my beloved friend my sincere
disapprobation of her conduct, in an instance where
she is so generously faulty, that the consciousness of
that very generosity may hide from her the fault,
which I, more than any other, have reason to deplore,
as being the unhappy occasion of it. 
You know, you say, that your account of the contentions
between your Mother and you will trouble
me; and so you bid me spare myself the pains to tell
you that they do. 

You did not use, my dear, to forbid me thus beforehand. 
You were wont to say, you loved me the
better for my expostulations with you on that acknowleged
warmth and quickness of your temper which
your own good sense taught you to be apprehensive
of. What tho' I have so miserably fallen, and am
unhappy? If ever I had any judgment worth regarding,
it is now as much worth as ever, because I can
give it as freely against myself as against any-body
else. And shall I not, when there seems to be an infection
in my fault, and that it leads you likewise to
resolve to carry on a correspondence against prohibition,
expostulate with you upon it; when whatever
consequences flow from your disobedience, they but
widen my error, which is as the evil root, from which
such sad branches spring? 
The mind that can glory in being capable of so
noble, so firm, so unshaken a friendship, as that of my
dear Miss Howe; a friendship which no casualty or
distress can lessen, but which encreases with the misfortunes
of its friend—Such a mind must be above
taking amiss the well-meant admonitions of that distinguished
friend. I will not therefore apologize for
my freedom on this subject: And the less need I,
when that freedom is the result of an affection, in the
very instance, so absolutely disinterested, that it tends
to deprive myself of the only comfort left me. 
Your acknowleged Sullens; Your tearing from
your Mother's hands the Letter she thought she had a
right to see; and burning it, as you own, before her
face; Your refusal to see the man, who is so willing
to obey you for the sake of your unhappy friend; and
this purely to vex your Mother; Can you think, my
dear, upon this brief recapitulation of hardly one half
of the faulty particulars you give, that these faults are
excuseable in one who so well knows her duty? 
Your Mother had a good opinion of me once: Is
not that a reason why she should be more regarded 

now, when I have, as she believes, so deservedly forfeited
it? A prejudice in favour is as hard to be totally
overcome, as a prejudice in disfavour. In what a
strong light, then, must that error appear to her, that
should so totally turn her heart against me, herself not
a principal in the case? 
There are other duties, you say, besides the filial
duty: But That, my dear, must be a duty prior to
all other duties; a duty anterior, as I may say, to your
very birth: And what duty ought not to give way to
That, when they come in competition? 
You are persuaded, that the duty to your friend, and
the filial duty, may be performed without derogating
from either. Your Mother thinks otherwise. What
is the conclusion to be drawn from these premises? 
When your Mother sees, how much I suffer in my
reputation from the step I have taken, from whom
she and all the world expected better things, how
much reason has she to be watchful over you! One
evil draws another after it; and how knows she, or
any-body, where it may stop? 
Does not the person who will vindicate, or seek to
extenuate, a faulty step in another [In this light must
your Mother look upon the matter in question between
her and you] give an indication either of a culpable
will, or a weak judgment? And may not she apprehend,
that the censorious will think, that such a one
might probably have equally failed, under the same inducements
and provocations, to use your own words, as
applied to me in a former Letter? 
Can there be a stronger instance in human life than
mine has so early furnished within a few months past
(not to mention the uncommon provocations to it,
which I have met with) of the necessity of the continuance
of a watchful Parent's care over a Daughter; 
let that Daughter have obtained ever so great a reputation
for her prudence? 
Is not the space from Sixteen to Twenty-one, that 

which requires this care, more than any time of a
young woman's life? For in That period, do we not
generally attract the eyes of the other Sex, and become
the subject of their addresses, and not seldom of
their attempts? And is not That the period in which
our conduct or misconduct gives us a reputation or
disreputation, that almost inseparably accompanies us
throughout our whole future lives? 
Are we not likewise then most in danger from ourselves,
because of the distinction with which we are
apt to behold particulars of that Sex? 
And when our dangers multiply, both from within
and without, do not our Parents know, that their
vigilance ought to be doubled? And shall that necessary
encrease of care sit uneasy upon us, because we
are grown up to Stature and Womanhood? 
Will you tell me, if so, what is the precise Stature
and Age, at which a good child shall conclude herself
absolved from the duty she owes to a Parent? —And
at which a Parent, after the example of the dams of
the brute creation, is to lay aside all care and tenderness
for her offspring? 
Is it so hard for you, my dear, to be treated like
a child? And can you not think it as hard for a good
Parent to imagine herself under the unhappy necessity
of so treating her woman-grown Daughter? 
Do you think, if your Mother had been you, and
you your Mother, and your Daughter had struggled
with you, as you did with her, that you would not
have been as apt as your Mother was to have slapt
your Daughter's hands, to have made her quit her
hold, and give up the prohibited Letter? 
Your Mother told you with great truth, that you
provoked her to this harshness; and it was a great condescension
in her (and not taken notice of by you as
it deserved) to say, that she was sorry for it. 
At every Age on this side Matrimony (for then we
come under another sort of protection, tho' that is far 

from abrogating the Filial duty) it will be found, that
the wings of our parents are our most necessary and
most effectual safeguard from the vulturs, the hawks,
the kites, and other villainous birds of prey, that hover
over us with a view to seize and destroy us the first
time we are caught wandering out of the eye or
care of our watchful and natural guardians and protectors. 
Hard as you may suppose it, to be denied the continuance
of a correspondence once so much approved,
even by the venerable denier; yet, if your Mother
think my fault to be of such a nature, as that a correspondence
with me will cast a shade upon your reputation; 
all my own friends having given me up— 
that hardship is to be submitted to. And must it not
make her the more strenuous to support her own opinion,
when she sees the first-fruits of this tenaciousness
on your side, is to be gloriously in the Sullens, as you
call it; and in a disobedient opposition? 
I know that you have an humorous meaning in
that expression, and that this turn, in most cases, gives
a delightful poignancy both to your conversation and
correspondence; but indeed, my dear, this case will
not bear humour. 
Will you give me leave to add to this tedious expostulation,
that I by no means approve of some of the
things you write, in relation to the manner in which
your Father and Mother lived?—at times lived—Only
at times, I dare say; tho' perhaps too often. 
Your Mother is answerable to any-body, rather than
to her child, for whatever was wrong in her conduct,
if any-thing was wrong, towards Mr. Howe: A gentleman,
of whose memory I will only say, that it ought
to be revered by you—But yet, should you not examine
yourself, whether your displeasure at your Mother
had no part in your revived reverence for your
Father, at the time you wrote? 
No one is perfect: And altho' your Mother may 

not be so right to remember disagreeablenesses against
the departed, yet should you not want to be reminded,
on whose account, and on what occasion, she remembred
them. You cannot judge, nor ought you to attempt
to judge, of what might have passed between
both, to embitter and keep awake disagreeable remembrances
in the survivor. 