


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Grandison. 


St. James's Square, Thursday Feb. 15. 
My dearest Life,
On my arrival here last night I found a long Letter,
dated Sunday last, from the unhappy Lady,
whom we both so much admire and pity. The contents
too well confirm her wandering state of mind,
and account for the steps she has taken. I will send
you the Letter itself as soon as I have seen her, and
can prevail upon her to put herself into my protection. 
Till the hope of a happier state of mind shall dawn
upon us, the contents of it will afflict you. 
She has been ten days in England: I wrote to her
last night, to beg her to admit me to her presence. 
She expresses in her Letter a generous joy in our
happiness, and in the excellent character which she
has heard of the beloved of my heart; of every
heart. In the midst of her affecting wanderings, she
preserves the greatness of mind that ever distinguished
her. She wishes to see you; but unknown to us both. 
It would not be difficult perhaps to find out the place
of her abode; but she depends on my honour, that
I will not attempt it: Clementina loves to be punctiliously
observed. In the way she is in, she must be
soothed, and as little opposed as possible. She thinks
too highly of my character, and apprehends that the
step she has taken, has lowered her own. She has
great sensibility, and only sometimes wanders into minutenesses
that her circumstances, which I find are not
happy, oblige her to attend to. I have great hopes,
that I shall be able to sooth, conciliate, and restore
her; her mind seems not to be deeply wounded. God
enable me to quiet the heart of the noblest of your
Sisters! Forgive me for my two beloved Sisters. They
will, if you do. 

I hope our dear friends will make themselves and
you happy, at Grandison-hall. This cloud passed
away, if God preserve us to each other, and our
friends to us, all our future days must be serene: At
least as far as it is in my power, they shall be so to my
Harriet. Professions would disgrace my Love, and
your merits. All that your own heart can wish me
to be, that, if I know it, will I be; for am I not
the happy husband of the best and most generous of
women; and, as such, 
Wholly Yours,
Charles Grandison? 

